

REPORT
AND
MINUTAS OF PROCEEDINGS
OF THE COMMITTEE
COLONY OF MAURITIUS.
APPOINTED
For the purpose of inquiring into the desirability of conducting the Proceedings
and Pleadings before the Supreme Court either in French or in English.
The Honorable SIR V. NAZ, K.C.M.G.
- C. F. H. ADAM,
- J. FRASER,
- V. GEFFROY.
The Honorable SIR C. ANTELME, K.C.M.G.,—Chairman.
The Honorable The PROCUREUR-GENERAL,
- G. GUIBERT,
- H. LECLEZIO,
- W. NEWTON.
M. YARDIN,— Secretary.
1890.


REPORT
Of the Oommittee of Inquiry into the desirability of
conducting the proceedings and pleadings before
the Suprême Court either in French or in English.
PRESENT :
The Honorable Sir C. Antelme, K.C.M.G-— Chairman.
Sir V. Naz, K.C.M.G-.
the Procureur General.
H. Adam.
V. Geffroy.
G. Guibert.
H. Leclézio.
W. Newton.
1. Read Minute of Councîl dated the 30th day of April 1889.
2. The Committee met seventeen times and heard thirty four
witnesses, among whom were the Barristers, Attorneys and
Journalists who hâve been most conspicuous in their constant op-
position to a return to the French Lauguage before the Court of
Assizes and the Suprême Court. It is a remarkable fact that
they ail gave their evidence in French.
3. The Committee would hâve been glad to hear the Judges
of the Suprême Court, but they requested to be allowed to give
their opinion in writiog only without having to submit to an
interrogatory. The Committee complied with their request and
their respective memorials on the question are annexed to this
report.
4. A certain number of the witnesses summoned did not
attend and the Committee had to do without them as they had
not the power to enforce their attendance.
5. Mauritius, formerly, the " Isle of France” belongs to
England since 1810, that is to say since 79 years. It was hauded
over to General Abercrombie by General Decaen, the Governor
of Mauritius, in execution of a capitulation signel by these fcwo
officers in tbe name of their respective Governments.
6. Article 8 of this capitulation is thus recorded
VIII. The Inhabitants shall preserve their religion, laws,
and customs.
Answer : —The Inhabitanfcs shall preserve their religion,
laws, and customs.
7. Agreeably to the engagement contained in the above-men-
tioned act of capitulation, the use of the French Language was
maintained before our Courts uutil the promulgation of an Order
in Council dated the 13th. of September 1845 which directed
“ that ail proceedings and ail the records of proceedings in the
“ Suprême Tribunals of Justice shall be had and made in the
" English Language only.”—This decision was taken without
Consulting the Legislative Council.
8. The execution of this Order in Counoil, on account of the
necessity to translate into English every document produced in a
lawsuit, gave rise to cosfcs which proved so excessive that after
more than ten years’ expérience an Ordinance No. 18 of 1856
enacted that “In any case where any-document is produced in


“ evidenca before the Court or before tho Master and such docu-
et mentis in a language which the Judga or Judges then sitting,
"or the Master, as the case may be, understand, it shall not be
“ necessary to translate such document, unless either of the
<{ parties to the suit or other proceedings require the same.”
No translation has ever been required by a party or a Judge.
9. The Order in Council of 1845 reudering obligatory the use
of the English Language before the Suprême Court only, it has
been optional for parties till now to use French or English before
the District Courts.
10. It may seem strange, after forty years silence, thafc one
ehould wish tore-open a question settled by an Order in Council ;
but tliis is explained by the fact that it is considered that the
Colonial Policy of England has now become a Policy of Justice
and E’quity.
11. Although Mauritius has been an English Possession for the
last fieventy years, yet the customs and language hâve not
changed. It is always Frencli which is spoken arnong the
higher classes, and the creole dialect, derived from the Frencb,
among the lower classes of our community. *
12. Oneof themost notoriousadversaries of theFrenchlanguage,
when requested by the Committee to poiût out a single Mauri-
tian family whose members liad adopted the English language
has not been able to do so. b '
13. In support of the assertion that theFrench language is now
as furmerl y the language of the Island, the Committee cannot
do betber than to reproduce the dépositions of the Chairmen orof
tha Secretaries of ail tho scientific, agricultural, commercial and
literary associations of fchis Colony.
Déposition oe Dr. Charles Podpinel de Valence.
“ 1 have been President of the Royal Society of Arts and
Sciences for several years. Since the beginning of 1889 I
“ am Vice-President of the General Board of Health." '
“ The speeches mada at the Royal Society of Arts and
Sciences are delivered in French, excépt on verv rare occa-
<t sIOUSé At the General Board of Health, French and English
are spoken ; but the debatestake place principally in French.”
The Honorable Louis de Rochecouste.
“ 1 President of the Chamber of Agriculture. The
“ debates of our Society are carried on invariably in French
" Since I have been President, the English Members of the
“ Chamber have spoken French. Ail our minutes are drawn ud
“ m French. r
The Honorable Hamilton Stein.
“lamthe President of the Chamber of Commerce. The
" .majonty of tho Members are French and English. Tho discus-
" f. 1 ? 118 are chiefi y carried on in English, but the Members are at
liberty to speak.either French or English."


Mb. Edouard Môntocchio.
“ I was Syndic of the Chamber o£ Brokers in 1887 and in
“ 1888. The Chamber of Brokers meet offcen and the discussions
“ are carried on in French exclusively; it is not forbidden to
“ speak English but the English brokers themselves use the
“ French language. The Bordereaux are always drawn up in
“ French even when they refer to transactions made with English
“ Merchants.
De. Léon Drouin.
“ I am President of the Medical Society. Our discussions
“are always carried on in French. The English Doctors who
“ belong toit speak French.
Me. Alfred Montocchio.
“ I am President of the Chamber of Notariés. The member-
cf meet from time to time when some question concerning No-
" taries is submitted for their considération. Our deliberations
“ take place in French and our Minutes are drawn up in that
“ language. Ail Notarial deeds in Mauritius, with very rare ex-
“ ceptions, are drawn up in French.
Me. Amédée Poupard.
“I am the Senior Auctioneer. Ail auction sales, either in
“ town or in the’country, are carried on in French exclusively.
“ Messrs. Edgar and Oswald Mayer, though they are English-
“ men, speak French at their sales.”
Ml?; A. Daruty de Geandpré.
“ I am President of the “ Société d’Acclimatation.” We
“ meet pretfcy often and speak French atour meetings. When it
“ happens, which is very rare, that one of the members speaks
tf English, then one of the other members présent who knows
“ English translates what bas been said for those who do not
“ understand English.”
Me. Walter Acton.
" I am Secretary to the “ Société d’Emulation Intellectuelle”
“ of which Sir Virgile Nazis President.”
“ Atour meetings ail speeches and discussions are in French.
“ Our minutes are also drawn upin French. Wehave, however,
“ one rnember, Dr. Meldrum, who beiog English, speaks in that'
“ language.”
At the Municipality of Port Louis, it is also the French
language which piedominates. Mr. Duponsel, the Deputy-
Mayor spoke as follows on this point 2
e< The deliberations and discussions always take place in
“ French. There are two Municipal Councillors who are English,
“ and who, not knowing French well, prefer speaking English.
“We are eighteen at the Municipal Board. Our Minutes and
“ ail our books are written in the French language.”


His Grâce the Archbishop, Meïïrin stated.:
<f There are about eighty Roman Catholic. Churchea and
(t Chapels in Mauritius, and, preaching in tfaem is exçlusively in
“French. We hâve a dozen Irish priesta, but they also speak
" French.” 3 V
Ail the abo.ve dépositions, with the exception of that of
Mr. Stein, hâve been made in french.
14. Out of ten or twelye Newspapers or reviews which are pu-
blished in the Colony, there are only two which hâve an English
part, ail the others are written in French. At the Tbeatre only
French plays are represented. At ail Banquets given in the Co-
lony it is always the French language which prédominâtes.
15. If, in the Norman Islands of the English Channel, the En-
glish language has not yet entirely superseded the French lan-
guage in 6pite of the close neighbourhood of England and of a
constant immigration of English people for centuries past, such
a transformation could not take place in a distant Islând like
ours where English immigration is represented by a few English
merchants who refcurn to England when they hâve made money
and a few officiais who leave us, as a rule, when they hâve ob-
tained their pension.
16. The Committee have considered whether the exclusive use
of the English language before the Higher Courts gives rise,
with regard to the gooi administration of Justice, to disadvan-
tages sufficienty serious to iuduce Grovernment to give its consent
to a change.
17. With regard to the trial of Oriminal cases, it has been
proved to the satisfaction of tli© Commutée that the necessary
conséquences of the use of the' English language before the
Court of Assizes are the following :
10. Absence of publioity.
20. The impossibility for the great majority of tho accused
to understand the proceediogs.
30. The frequent admission infco the jury of persons who do
not know English or who understand it insnfficiently.
40. The necessity for the great majority of the persons
qualified to be jurors to hâve their names erased on account
of their imperfect knowledge of English.
50. The dîscontent of jurors too often summoned to servo-
on the .jury on account of their small number.
60. The length of the proceedings which résulta from the
interprétation of the evidence.
18. The absence of publicity of the proceedings is admitted by
the Chief Judge himself. He expresses his opinion in his memo-
rial in the following terms :
< ei With the exception of the lawyers and a few other per-
“ sons, the audience does not understand what is said during the
fe trial by the Judge and the Counsel. ”
19. What the Chief Judge says of the audience muet naturally


apply to the accused who, in the majority of cases, belong to the
lower classes.
20. It cannot be denied that the majority of the accused, when
of Mauritian origin, does not understand the evidence which is
given in English or Indian ; and when the accused are of Indian
origin, they do not understand those Indian witnesses who speak
a dialect different from their own or the witnesses who speak
English. If the dépositions were made in French or translated
into French, nearly ail the accused wonld understand them.
21. His Grâce the Àrchbishop Meurin in his evidence says :
“ Illiterate men often address me in the creole dialect, and not
“ having had time since my arrivai here to learn it, I answer
** them in French and they understand me perfectly.”
22. With regard to the Indians, Mr. Galéa well defiued the
position :
“It happens that Indians who are brought before the
“ Court of Âssizes do not ail understand French, but there is
“ not one among them who understands English, so that in
“ order to preserve the use of a language which is useless to
“that class of accused, you deprive some of their number, at
u least, of a language which they understand. 1 must say tbat
“ since I began practising at the Bar, I hâve had to defend
*■ many Indians before the Court of Assizes and I never needed
ff an Interpréter to communicate with them. I' always spoke
“ creole, except in two instances.”
23. Like the Àfrican Labourers in the past, the Indians in-
troduced into oui* French-speaking Colony for the wants of. our
agriculture will adopt gradually the language of the Colony. It
would be impossible now-a-days to find a single man of African
descent speaking or understanding one of the languages of
Africa.
24. Wo were told by Archbishop Meurin that there is in
the Colony a great number of Indian Roman Catholics and ho
added ; “ When I speak to them in their own language they pre-
“ fer aDswering me in “ creole.” I hâve had occasion to observe
“ that the Indians who had lived long in Mauritius forgot their
“ language or rather spoke more fluently the creole dialect than
u their own language.”
25. Mr. Attorney F. Robert who in practice for the
last 34 years says i
“ The Arab and Indian traders, with very few exceptions,
“do not understand a word of English but they understand
“ French and it is in that language that they communicate with
“ their legal advisers”.—lhave a large practice in-the Colony,
“ more especially among the Asiatic merchants and traders. I
“ always speak to them in French.”
26. Another Attorney Mr. E. Ganachaud, who has been prac-
tising for the last twenty years- before the Suprême Court has
confirmed the opinion exprossed by Mr. Galéa :
“ AU the Indians or nearly ail the Indians who are brought
“ before. the Court of : Assizes, he said, understand French,”


27, Mr. A. Lhoste, also an Attorney of many years standing,
spoke as follows :
" The great majority o£ the accused, even o£ those who are
“ Indiacs, understand French and do not understand English.
" Wheu we speak French to cur Indian servants and
“ to the generality of the Indian labourera on Estâtes, tbey
" understand us but when we talk english to them, they do not
(t understand a word. ”
Other witnesses hâve corroborated the above facts.
28. The question of knowing if the présent use of English has
for resuit to cause accused parties to be tried by jurymen who
do not understand English is so serious, that the Committee
consider it necessary to reproduce the statements made before
them on this point :
Déposition of Me. Duponsel, Deptjty Mayor op Port Louis :
“Itisto my knowledge that. many persons who do not
" know English sufficiently to understand the pleadings before
“ the Court of Assizes, hâve nevertheless formed part of the
tc Jury ”,
Me. Amédée Poüpard.
“I am the Senior Auctioneer. For the last thirty years my
“ name has been on the Jury List and each time that I havo
“ been on the Jury, I hâve observed that of the nine Jurors
" then sitting, three or four, at least, did not know English
" sufficiently to understand the prooeedings.
“ What led me to this conclusion is that when the Jurors
“ had retired to the deliberation room, I saw, by the questions
“ put bv some of them, that thev had not understood the case
“atall”.
“ With regard to the deliberations of the Jurors when they
" retire and the discussions which follow as a oonsequence, they
“ are alvvays carried on in French. ”
Me. Feedeeio Tennant.
ee lam a Broker. I hâve served on juries for more than
“ thirty years. My father was an Englishman and my mother
<e was born in Mauritius of French parents.
“My conviction is that y out of the number of persons ins-
“ cribed on the List of Jurors, a good fourth do not know En-
", glish sufficiently to follow the proceedings in an Assize case
“ and cannot return a proper verdict.
“ I hâve often been foreman of Juries and I havo been able
(t often to verify the fact that a great number of Jurors do not
" know English. When after the trial, we retired to our deli-
" beration room, I ascertained by the questions put by them that
" they had not understood the debates. I must add that I hâve
<e often had occasion to hear interprétations of evidence given
" by witnesses which were completely. wrong, and wero very
“ often corrected by the Counsel for the accused, or by the Pro-


“ cureur 'General or by the presiding Judge and sometimes by
“ myself in my capacity of foreman.
“ In my opinion I consider that the use of the French lan-
“ guage before the Court of Assizes is a necessity which forces
“ itsélf upôn us.”
Mr. Fitzrot Ricb.
“ I am now a journalist and hâve been previously Editor of
“ the “ Commercial Gazette” and also of the “Merchants and
“ Plantera Gazette These two papers are drown up partly in
“ French and partly in English. It is within my knowledge that
“ some Jurymen do not understand English. I hâve on more
“ than one occasion met gentlemen of the Jury who did not un-
“ derstand me distinctly when I spoke very plain English. I had
“ occasion to make that remark when I was myself a member of
“ the Jury. After we had retired in Chamber to discuss about
“ the merits of. the case, it was then that I discovered that the
“ gentlemen did not understindme. I. concluded from that fact
“ that they had not understood the debates as I speak very plain
“ and distinct English and still they gave their vote.”
Mr. P. D’Agnel.
“ I am the Chief Editor of the Merchants and Plantera Gct-
“ zette. I hâve served on Juries for the last fifteen years.”
“ I very often noticed that there were among us, Jurymen
“ who did not know English sufficiently to sit as such. I made
“ that remark during our deliberations in Chamber. Not later
lt than îast week, in a case of arson, I havo had occasion to as-
“ certain-that two jurymen had not understood the debates. In
" general, when tbe jurymen do not know English sufficiently
“ and do not understand the debates, they give their verdict in
“ favor of the accused, even when the proof madeis most con-
clusive”
“ The discussions among Jurymen in the deliberation room
u are invariably carried on in French, and lately I hâve had
“ again an opportunity of seeing an Knglishman, Mr. Haddon,
“ who had been appointed Foreman, conduct the deliberations
“ in French.”
Mr. Arthur Pitot.
“ I becamo an Attorney in 1863 and lam therefore one of
“ the seniors of the profession.”
“ It-is to my knowledge that since the Institution of the
“Jury, many persans who do not know English sufficiently to
“ understand the debates in a criminal cise, hâve, a
“ feeling of pride, served on the Jury.” °
“ On one occasion having asked a jurytnan if he had really
“ understood the argument of the Counsel, he answered in the
,e affirmative. I then quotei to him a phrase which the Counsel
had made use of : “ the fate of my client will be in jeopardy ”
“ and he found it impossible to translatait to me in French.”
Mr. Gabriel Bouic.
“ I am the Manager of the Merchants and Plantera Gazette.


“ I hâve been summoned several times to serve as a juryman
et and I hâve been able to see that many jurymen do not under-
“ stand English sufficiently to be on the jury. It is when tlie
“ jurymen retired to délibérât© thatlfound out that many among
u them had not understood the debates by the interprétation
e< they put upon theni. Those who know English were then
“ obliged to explain to those who did not know that language
“ what had been said and it is on these explanations that they
“ based their verdict and they allowed themselves to be guided
“in that respect by those who had understood. the debatea. In
ff my opinion the verdicts given in these cases were a mockery.
“ I hâve served on juries for the last ten years and the facts o£
u which I speak happened at least once out of two cases.
Such facts need no commentary.
29. In a letter addressed to the Committee by Mr. Julius G-ui-
bert, Crown Attorney, (See Aunexure F), this learned lawyer
expresses the opinion that nine-tenths of the jurors in this Colony
<e are imperfectly acquafnted with the English language and the
“ meaning of a great many words nsed ©ither by the Judge or
u Counsel or English witnesses is not well understood by most
" of them.’'
One of the paragrapbs of his lettir is tbus recorded :
<e I may veature to say, without fearing any contradiction,
« thay one wbo calmly and carefully considers the question
{i under considération will easily confess that the présent System
“ is really opeu to the atlacks which liave been made upon it
« and that the French language being understood in Mauritius
“by ail those who live in this country, Euglisbraen, Creoles,
“ Indians, &c., and those who tborougbly understand the En-
*< glishlanguage being few and farbetween, the exclusive use of
“ the French language, before the Court of Assizes, should be
“ allowed.”
30. The Chief Judge lias very well explaiued why so many
young men who hâve learnt English at ochool are unable- to
allow their names to be put on the Jury list.
In the fifth paragraph of his Memorial he says :
(t In criminal cases, if the faculty be left to the accused to
u choose the language in which the proceedings in Court sbould
« be conducted, I hâve no doubt that there would be a much
te greater number of jurors incribed on the list, and the sanie
« jurors would not liave to be called so of ten before the Court of
te Assizes. A great many young men after they hâve left school
“ hâve no opportunity of speaking English in a community in
« which French or French creole is the language of social and
“ business relations for the great mass of the population, and
“ throngh want of practice, they forget the little which they
" hâve learnt, and are quite unable to understand the English
“ language whenspokec. ”
31. As very few persons in this Colony can give their time to
their public duties without causing serious préjudice to their
private interest, it naturally follows, owing to the small number
of qualiâed persons, that the raajority of Jurors whose names
appear od the Jury List are very much aunoyed at being called
upon so often to attend the Court of Assizes.


32. People who live in tHe country and who hâve to travel long
distances to reach town hâve complained so bitterly that Gov-
ernment was obliged to do something for them. Tbey are
granted free Railway tickets and ,it ofteu happens that their
hôtel expenses are paid during their stay in Port Louis.
33. The présent Jùrors cannot enterfcain thehope of seeingthis
state of things improve, for the annexed statement furnished by
the Registrar of the Suprême Court (See Annexure G) shows
that the number of available Jurors which was 993 in 1875 bas
fallen to 736 in 1880 and is only 776 for the présent year.
34. It also résulta from this statement that in 1880 the number
of persons who were exemptedfrom serving on the Jury because
they did not know English amounted to 1176.
35. It must not be inferred, however, from the above facts that
the study of English is neglected ; on the contrary, ail the Mau-
ritian families are anxious that their children should learn it and
there is no School large or small, in which the teaching of English
doe? not occupy the foremost place. Yet one cannot too often
repeat with the Chief Judge that in a population in which the
family and business language is French, young men gradually
forget more or less the English wliich they hâve learnt at School
and shrink from the responsibility of giving a verdict in a criminal
trial. Naturally, the more noble and generous the nature of a
man is, the greater his diffidence in such a case.
36. Mr. Galéa in his evidence says : “ Many Jurors who un-
“ derstand English in the every day relations of life do not
u know it sufficiently to comprehend the speechesof Counseland
<f the summing up of the Judge. There are certain legal sub-
“ tilities which it would be very difficult to make jurors grasp
“ evenwhen speaking their language and which it would neces-
“ sarily be more difficult to make them understand wben addres-
“ sing them in English. ”
37. The System has other defects which are no less serious
and which cannot be ignored.
28. The Inquiry has shown that good interpreters are rare in
this Colony, and the Honorable John Rouillard, third Puisne
Judge of the Suprême Court, after asserting that ifc was neces-
eary both in Criminal trials and in civil suite to do away with
interprétations, says :
“ The inconvenance of the présent System is increased at
" présent by the lack of good interpreters. ”
39. Mr. L. Chastellier, whois of opinion that the use of the
English languâge ought to be maintained in Civil suits as well
as in Criminal trials added :
a I tbink, however, that it would be necessary to hâve good
“ interpreters, which has not been the case up to the présent
“ time.”
40. The Honorable L. V. Delafaye, who is Acting Puisne Judge
of the Suprême Court, expressed his views on this point as
follows
“ It is difficult, not to say impossible, to seoure in Mauritius


ft the services of good interprétera, and I often ask myself if,
“ with those we hâve at présent, the meaning of the witnesses
" has always been rigorously rendered.”
41. “ Interprétations, says Mr. Attorney F. Robert, cost very
“ dear and are often very bad.”
42. It is scarcely necessary to add to ail that précédés that
the use of French in the Court of Assizes would be a great
saving of tirae for Jurors and of money for the Treasury.
43. It i 3 probably the loss of tirae and the costs incurred that
induced the Government to confer on the Procureur General the
right, in certain determiued cases, of sending the acctised
before a Bench of Magistrates. This power is defined
by Ordinance 22 of 1888. Trials before the Bench of
Magistrates occupy much less time because the evidence given
in French has not to be translated and the accused hâve also the
right, at their option, of having their defence subroitted to the
Court by their Counsel in French or English.
44. Why not then follow the same rule before the Court of
Aisizes ? Is it not singular that men charged with offences of
the same nature shoul l be trie! some in a language which they
understand and others in a language which they do not under-
stand ?
45. The exclusive use of the English language before the Su-
prême Court in Civil suits is also a source of serious inconve-
nance.
46. Mr. Galéa, the distinguished Barrister, whose evidence we
hâve already qnotel, has described in striking terms what takes
place in the Suprême Court wlien the judges hâve to décidé a
witness case.
“ Very often, he says, the Interpreters cannot translate the
“dépositions so well as the judges themselves and this is what
“ happens then : —Scarcely has an answerbeen givea and trans-
“ lated when a discussion takes place between Counsels as to the
,r cerrectness of the translation, and.it is the Judges for whose
u benefit the answ6r has been translated, who setfcle the difficulty,
ff and tell the Interpréter the correct interprétation. One sees
“ every day Counsel whose language is French, examining
f< French—speaking witnesses with the help of Interprétera who
“ generally speak bad Eoglîsh, before Judges whose language is
“ French, who order the answers to be transcribed by a Regis-
“ trar whose language is also French.
“ I call this a comedy.”
47. After mentioning in his <e memorial” that the Government
had modiôed in 1856 the Order in Council of 1845 and relieved
parties from the obligation,of translating into English documents
drawn updn French, the Chief Judge says :
“After many years’ expérience at the Bar and on the
“ Bench, 1 am of opinion that an enacbment of a similar nature,
“ regardiog the interprétation of dépositions, would, in a large
“ measure, diminish the costs of suits before the Suprême Court.
e< The great majority of witnesses, ia most of the cases which
(l are heard by the Court, do not speak English, bnb speak


“ French or French Creole and a considérable time is wasted by
“ tbe interprétation of tbe questions put and the answers made,
<e whereas the Judges, tbe Counsel, and the parties generally
,e understand the language spoken by these witnesses. ”
48. One of the Puisne Judges, the Honorable Rouillàrd, sup-
ports the same opinion in tfce following terms.
“ One change ie, in my mind, absolutely necessary. The
“ Suprême Court should bave power to hear and take down evi-
“ dence given in French or in creole dialect, without tbe forma-
u lity of an interprétation. This would prevent the time of
" the Court from being wasted asit is at présent. ”
49. To give an idea of the time a witness case may occupy
under the présent rule, the Comtnittee hâve only to quota two
recent lawsuits before the Suprême Court. One of the cases,
Canal and wife vs. Philippini, ended in a judgment of 50 Ru-
pees damages for (< diffumation ” and occupied 23 sittings,
twenty-one of wbich were employed in hearing thirty-two
witnesses of whom thirty were examined by rneans of an inter-
préter.
50. In the second case, Ulcocq nnd ors. v. Mauritius S«gar
Estate Company, the question to be decided waa to know if the
land of the plaintiff had a right of way out through the land of
the défendants? The hearing of 19 witnesses were examined
with the help of an interpréter. The case is not yet over.
51. It is sufficient to mention sucb instances to give an idea of
the possible costs of law suits before tbe Suprême Court.
52. Ail that has been already said about tbe difficulty of secur-
ing the services of good interpreters in the colony applies naturally
as well to Civil suits- as to Criminal trials. The persons we
hâve heard made no distinction in this respect.
53. The question of knowing whether it woald not be equally
just and advantageous to leave it to the option of Counsel to
argue in French or English in Civil suits lias been examined
with care.
54. On this point the Chief Judge expresses himself as follows
in his u memorial ” :
«I see no objection to the faculty being left to Counsel to argue
“ either in English or in French. There is no doubt that mosfc of
“ the litigants do uot understand English, especially when
" Bpoken, and are therefore unable to follow what their counsel
“ say. This impossibility was often a cause of great vexation at
“ the time when I was practising at the Bar.”
55. The Honorable Rouillard is not in favor of tbe optional use
of the two languages. He is startled at the possibility of an
incident begun in English being closed in French. It would be,
in his opinion, a sight préjudiciai to the dignity of the Suprême
Court.
56. The majority of the Committee, on the contrary, are iu-
clined to think that sucb a spectacle which would be in con-
formity with the feelings and opinions of the litigants and also
with their interest; would, in whatever lighb it might be viewed,


be a cause of rejoicing, and would incroase the affection of the
inhabitants of this Colony for Her Majesty the Quesn.
57. Before the Honorable Rouillard, no one in the Colony bas
expressed the opinion that the optional use of the two languages,
would be contrary to the dignity of the Court. This rule which
is followed at the Legislative Council, before the District Ma-
gistrates and the Bench of Magistrate 3 and also at the délibéra-*
tions of the Municipal, Sauitary, Agricultural, Commercial and
Scientific bodies of the Island and which gives general satisfac-
tion, would not, if adopted before the Suprême Court, offer
the spectacle of anything contrary to ou." usages and habits.
58. Àfter the promulgation of the Order in Council of 1845,
several Members of our Bar, especially the H onorable Henry
Koenig and his brother Félix Kœnig, who were exempted, on
account of their long standing at the Bar, from the obligation
of arguing in English, continuod during many yeai’B to speak
French before the Court and this fact bas never been denounced
as being préjudiciai to the dignity of the Suprême Court.
59. Under the Government of Sir Arthur Gordon, Mr. Nemours
Arnaud having stated in a pétition that the Order in Council
which compelled liitn to argue in english had deprived him of
his profession and condemned him to poverty, the Governor
allowed an Ordinance to be introduced and passed authorizing
him to argue in Freucli. The Ordinance was approved by Her
Majesty.
60. Whafc startles the Honorable Rouillard has often caused the
admiration of foreigners. A French writer of great merit, not
long ago, in an article published by a La Revue des Deux-
Mondes congratulated the inhabitants of Jersey and Gu.emesey,
on being under so liberal a Government as that of England, by
which their laoguage and customs had been respected.
61. The Honorable Rouillard objects to the use of the French
language before the Court of Assises.
He States fn his Memorial :
“ The question whether it is désirable in the interest of
<l Justice, that the proceedings and pleadings before the Court
“ of Assizes should be carried on in French is far more import-
“ ant and serious, inasmuch as it implies the praotical exclusion
of Judges, Procureurs General, and Substitute Procureurs
u General of English origin, with this somewhat curious resulfc,
,c that evidence given in English would hâve to be interpreted
“ into French in. order to become legally admissible.”
Having stated this as a positive fact he concludes
“ After careful considération, I hâve corne to the opinion
“ that the Suprême Court would not dérivé any serious beneflt
“ frora the proposed change.”
62. The answer to be made to the Honorable Judge is to be
found in the fact that from 1810 to 1845, the use of French in
the Court has not prevented the Governmeut of the mother-
country from sending here several English Judges and a Pro-
cureur General of great ability.


63. Without disparagementto our présent English Judges and
the Honorable Rouillard himself, one ean assert that tbeir pre-
decessors wbo reckoned among their members, before 1845, men
like Chief Judge Blackburn, the Procureur General Jeremie and
Sir Villiers Surtees, were not inferior to them either in talent,
intellect or expérience.
64. Moreover, tbe Colony possesses a Bar wbich forms a rich
nursery frotn which it would always be more advantageous
to select our Judges than to obtain them frotn the ioferior
Members of the Eoglisli or Scotch Bar.
65. If the use of theFrenchlanguage before the Court of Assizes
must, accordtng to the Honorable Rouillard, place the Govern-
ment in the impossibility of securing, when wante 1, English
Judges and Procureurs Général, how is it then that he re-
commends at the same time to do away with the interprétation
of evidence given in French, for this can only be done when the
Judges on the Bench understand french thoroughly ? The Hono-
rable Puisné Judge hus, without noticing it, made contradictory
statements.
66. With regard to the translation into French of a déposition
made in English, it seeras, in the opinion of the Committee, as
natural as to translate iuto English a déposition made in French,
and this according to the choice made by the accused of French
or English. The Committee do not see in this anyfcliing strange.
67. The Honorable Rouillard does not trouble himself with the
difficultés which hâve been pointed out with regard to the Jury,
and he expresses himself on this important question in the
followiog terms :
“ An argument which lias been frequently put forward is
" the difficulty of forming Juries out of the English speaking
(t part of tbe population. I do not think that the proposed
,{ change would improve matters much, for, if on the one b and
l( the Jury lisfc would ba increased by names drawn from the
“ French-speaking part of the population, which has hitherto
“ pleaded its ignorance of the English language as an excuse
“ for not serving as jurors, on the other hand the services as
“ jurors would be lost of ail the colonists of English origin who
<l would, in their tom, allégé their ignorance of the French. ”
68. And afterstating in another paragraph that the youngmen
who hâve been brought up at tbe Royal College know English,
he adds:
“ It is from the class of peuple that sends their sons to the
“ Royal College, that jurors are recruited ; that class is becoming
(c every day more numerous.”
69. It is évident that the Honorable Ju dge when he wrote these
lioes was not in presence of the Jury Book. A careful exami-
nation of this document would hâve showa him, as it has been
explained already, tbat the number of jurors instead of increasing
Lad greatly dimiuished since 1875. He, no doubt, was also
ignorant of the fact that among the jurors inscribed on the list,
there are many who do not understand English sufficiently to
follow debates in a crîminal cas 9.
70. The Committee has drawn up a sfcateraent of tho English
born outside the Colony, whose names appear on the Jury List.,


The number is 107. With regard to those who were born in the
Colony and who havereaohed the âge required to serve as jurors,
nobody will question the fact that tbey know French as well as
the Mauritians who are of French origin.
71. Thus.the Jury list, on the hypotheJs that ail Englishmen
born outside Mauritius asked to be exempted from serving,
would lose only 107 names, while it would be incrcased by 117 b
new naraes taken from among those of the Jurors who were
exempted on aocount of their in9ufficieut kuowledge of English.
72. But the Committee cannotadmit that ail tho English born
out of Mauritius, would ask to be exempted as the greater part
of them know French well.
73. If young Mauritians, as tbe Ohief Judge has explained it in
his memorial, hâve few opportunités of speaking English after
tbey hâve left the Royal College, it cannot be said that the
English who corne to Mauritius hâve no opportunities of speak-
ing French, siDce it is French which is spoken in families and in
business.
74. Before the Committee, Mr. Fitaroy Rice statel that
“ There are very few Englishmen in this colony, who do not
“ understand and do not speak French. One acquire3 a good
<f knowledge of French in living in this Colony. ”
75. The Honorable Rouillard himself acknowledg's the fact, for
in his memorial, in support of his opinion that interprétations
should be abolished, he says :
u The cases in which a Juror, although English, would not
“ understand an examiuation of witneßses conducted in French
“ or in the Creole dialect would be, I think, extremely rare. ”
76. This is so true that by Consulting the records of the Àseize
Court before 1845, when Criminal cases were tried in the French
language by a Court composed of four Judges and three “ as-
sesseurs ” or jurors, one finds that almost ail the marchants,
brokers, auctioneers, aud other business men, who were English
by birtb, were then among the “ assesseurs. ”
77. The Committee hâve too high an opinion of the English
residing in this Colony, to admit that, to avoid serving as
Jurors, tbey would take a false oath and would perjure them-
selves.
78. The Honorable "Williams agréés with the Honorable Rouil-
lard in thinking that the use of the French language before the
Court of Assizes would hâve for resuit to eliminate Englishmen
from Juries. We bave already explained that soch an hypothe-
sis is altogether unlikely, and moreover that it could not hâve
any serions conséquences owingto the smsll number of English-
men whose names appear on the Jury list.
79. The Honorable Judge adds :
“ If the plan were adopted of conducting trials in either the
“ English or the French language, at the prisoner’s option, its
“ operation would involve the préparation and maintenance of
“ separate French and English Jury Lists ; and the summoning
,f of duplicate panels of Jurors for the purpose of each and
“ eyerÿ trial, a complicated, costly and troqblesome proceeding,


u to be surely avoided unless proved to be imperatively neces-
u sary in the Suprême iuterest of Justice.”
80. As it will be easy according as the prisoner elects before
the District Magistrale to be tried in French or English, to
classify cases in order to form two distinct categories of Jurors
and to fix spécial days for the trial of these cases, your Committee
do not think tbat such an arrangement could give rise to any
difficulty.
81. After examining very superficially tbis question with regard
to the administration of Justice, the Honorablo Williams enters
into a rather long dissertation te inform us that Englisb is
the language spoken in the principal countries which buy our
produce, especially Australia and the Cape, that the value
of our exports to English-speaking countries exceeds that of
our exports to French-speaking countries, that the En-
glish race is more expansive than the French race and finally
that an eminent pbilologist of our days, Mr. Max Müîler holds
that at the end of the next century out of every hundred inhabi»
tant-s of this Earth, 69 will speak English against 3 French.
Your Committee admire the érudition of the learned Judge and
do not challenge the correctness of his assertions but do not draw
from tbem the same conclusions os the Honorable Judge. They
are convinced that at the end of the next century, as now, Mau-
ritians will continue to speak French, and they do not see there*
fore why they should be indefiuitely forced to submit to a Judi-
cial System which wounds the feelings of the présent génération
and injures their material interests wibhout securing with cer-
tainty any corrtsponding advantago for the future.
82. The Committee hâve read the memorial of the Honorablo
Mure.
83. The facts proved by the enquiry are a conclusive answer
tothe remarks made by the Honorable Judge. In one of the
paragraphs of his memorial he states :
“ It is hero to bé remarked that the accused has thechargn
tc always read to him in his own language and the evidence of
witnesses is almost invariably given in the language he un-
u understands before it is interpreted to the Jury and the Court.”
In what language ? the Honorable Judge does not say. If it is
in French or Creole which is only a broken form of French, why
does he assert in another part of his memorial that if English
were discarded it would be necessary to adopt one of the dialects
of India instead of French ? It is évident that the accused whon
he is a Calcutta man, does not understand witnesses speaking
Tamil and vice versa and that those accused who are Mauritians
do not understand the Indian dialects more tban they do
English.
84. Your Committee read with regrot the following remarks of
the Honorable Judge.
“In truth this proposai.— The proposai to use the French
“ language in the manner suggested— is nearly getting in the
€< thin end of the wedge so as to nécessitât© greater changes.
" It would be absurd for a Court conducting its proceedings in
" French to interpret laws, proclamations and Government
“ notices the authoritative version of which is in English. The


<e Order in Council of 1841 must follow the fateof that of 1845
tf If these go the teaching of the whole classes in the English
(t language in the Royal College would also become unnecess&ry
“ and an option would then be demanded and given also. By
“ and by tlie Eoglish language would gradnally disappear
f< merely to gratify a few sentimental lovers of their maternai
u tongue. ”,
85. It is impossible not to see in the preceding Unes the express-
ion of that narrow, selfish and suspicious patriotism wkich public
functionaries too often bring with them to Colonies, and wliich,
unfortuDately, too often also contributes to create iu the heatts of
the colonists doubts of the liberalism of England and of her
wish te treat with equal justice, wit'hout auy distinction of races,
ail those who are placed under her rulo.
BG. No Member of Councilhas asked that the written proceed-
ings should be in French nor that Freneh should be substituted
to English in drawing up our laws. Still less do people think
of excluding English from the teachiug in schools. The ad-
vantage of understanding and of speaking English is admitted
by ail, but should not obscure our reason and lead us to maintain
in its entirety the présent judicial System, when it is proved that
in criminal cases it entails conséquences which offend against
morality and humanity and that in civil cases it rentiers lawsuits
unnecessarily long and ruinous for parties.
87. Your Committee cannot conclure this report without again
affirming that they hâve examioed this question solely in con-
nexion with the good administration of Justice and they feel
convincfld that there is not one Englishman, with noble feelings,
who will not underatand that in matters like the one under dis-
cussion the suprême interest of Justice must prevail over ail
other considérations.
88. What can bethe advantage, even in a political point of
view, to perpetuate a state of things like the présent one, when
it is proved that in the absence of an English Immigration, the
French language is and shall continue to be the language of the
country ?
89. There is certainly no incompatibility between the use of the
French language and the loyalty due to our Sovereign, and if it
was necessary to furnish a proof, the Committee would find it iu
the réception given to the Représentatives of HerMajesty by the
Mauritians in the very Capital of France j in those “ Banquets ”
offered in Paris successively to Sir Georges Bowen, Sir John Pope
Hennessy and Sir Charles Camer. n Lees, during which the men-
tion of the Queen’s name ha s always been received in a manner
which caused the admiration of French Statesmen.
90. In conclusion four members of the Committee, includrng
the Chairman, are of opinion:—
10. That it is désirable that no change be made with regard
to the written proceédings. ‘
20. That it is désirable that the debates, in the Asaize
Court, be conducted either in French or in English at the option
of the accused.
K


80. That when a witness speaks a language which is known
to the Judges, the Member of tbe “ Ministère Public ” and tbe
Counsel engaged in a case, the examination of tbe wilneas may
take place in such language, and it sball not be necessary, ex-
cept when his answers hâve to be taken down by the Registrar,
to translate his déposition into English.
And 40. That it should be optional to argue in English or
in French before the Suprême Court sitting on the Civil Side.-
The Honorable the Procureur General objecta in toto both
to the considérations set forth in the body of the Report and to
its conclusions.
The dissents of several members, -with regard to some parts
of the Report and of its conclusions, are hereto annexed.
C. ANTELME,
Chairman.


ANNEXURES TO THE REPORT.
X
I dissent from almost evory statement and reasoning in the
body of the report and from the 4th. resolution.— I, however,
concnr in resolution 1 which does not change anything so far as
written proceedings are concarned in the preseDt practice.
I also concur in resolution 2 ; but only for this reason : I
consider that an aceused person is entitled, in fair justice and
equity, to bo tried by persons knowing well the language in which
the proceedings are carried on ; and I believe that atnongsb the
persons who sit as jurymen, there are some who do not possess a
sufficient knowledge and practice of the English language to
understand everything which is said in English in the course of a
trial at the Assizes.
I also concur in tho principle involved in resolution 3.
G. GUIRERT.
11.
Withoufc agreeing to ail the considorations set forth in tho
Report and to ail its scveral paragraphs.
I concur.
10. In Resolution 1 which recoramends that no change be
made in the présent practice of written proceedings before tho
Suprême Court.
20. Partly in Re-olution 2 which I propose to qualify and
restrict as follows :
/
“ As a rule the debates before the Court of Assizes should
“ be conducted in English ; but when an accused, on being com-
“ mille 1 by the District Magistrale to the Court of Assizes, sliall
<l personally make application that the debates for his trial be
“ conducted in the French instead of tho Englisli language, and
“ shall, in support cf his application, make oath or solemn
(t affirmation before the Magistrats that he cannot understand
“ the English language, but understands tho french language
" well ; —it is desirab'o that his application be granted.”
30. I concnr in the third Resolution.
4\ I dissent fnin the fourth Resolution.
V. NAZ.
111.
Of the four rrcomtnenda ions made at the end of the report,
there are two in which I fully concur, and which,l am sure, can
hardly giverise to any controversy, viz : —Recommendations l &3*


As regards fcbe other two, I ara nofc prepared to give rüy
asseot to thera, though I admit s me of the grouads up n which
they are based are of very great-weight and eotitled to the raost
serious considération,
However, without going into the merits of the question
involved, it seems to me that the change proposed is of such a
character that ; it should not be adopted unless there was a gene-
ral consensus of opini nin favor of it. Instead of this being the
case, the matter is one as to which the Judges, the Bar, the
Attornies, and the community at large, are ail dmded, and
pretty sharply divided.
Looking to this fact alone, I think it would be unadvisablo
to aker the existing state of things.
W. NEWTON.
24th, October 1890.


No. 1.
MINUTES
Of theproceedings of the Committee of Inquiry into the desirahility
of conducting the proceedings and pîeadings before the
Suprême Court either in French or in English.
Présent :
The Honorable C. Antelme, C.M.G. — Chairman.
The Procureur General.
# Sir Y. Naz, K.C.M.G.
* W. Newton.
C. F. H. Adam.
G. Guibert.
J. A. Ferguson.
Dr. O. Beaugeard.
Y. Geffroy.
Absent :
The Honorable J. Fraser.
H. Leclézio.
At a Meeting held at Government House, Port Louis, on
the 29th. day of May 1889, it was resolved to apply for the
opinion of the Judges of the Suprême Court on the questions
referred to the Committee, and the Chairman was requested to
see the Chief Judge and ask hitn whether he and his colleagues
would kiadly attend the Committee to give their opinion thereon.
The Committee adjourned at 2 p.m. to Thursday the lst.
August 1889.
M. YARDIN,
Secretary.


No. 2.
MINUTES
Of the proceedings of the Cummittee oflnquiry inlo the desiralility
of conducting the proceedings and pleadings btfore the
Suprême Court either in French or in English.
PRESENT :
The Honorable C. Antelme, C-M-G., — Ohainnan.
The Procureur General.
H. Leclêzio.
Absent :
The Elonorablo Sir Y. Naz, K.C.M.G.,
W. Newton.
C. F. H. Adam.
G. Guibert.
V. Geffroy.
J. A. Fergusun.
Dr. O. Beaugeard.
—■ J. Fraser.
At a meeting held at Government House, Port Louis, on
the lst. day of August 1889, the Ohairman informed the Com-
mifctee thaï be had seen the Chief Judge who told hitn thït the
Judges would prefer to give their opinion in writiug rather than
attend the Committee.
The Committee, accordingly, rosolvcd to addross to the Chief
Judge a copy of lhe motion and of the amendaient referred t » the
Committee and to request him and Lis colleagues to favour the
Committee with their opinion thereon.
The Committee further resolved that Messrs. E. Dnvirier,
G. Ritter, E. Laurent, P. Chastellier, H. Galéa and G. V- K[vern
be reqrmsted to attend the next Meeting to tako place on
Wednesday, the 7th. instant, at noon.
M. YARDIN,
S'ecreéary.


No. 3.
MINUTES
Of the proceedings ofthe Commiitee oflnquiry into the desirability
of conducting lhe proceedings andpleadings before the Suprême
Court either in French or in English, at a Meeting held ai
Government Eousc, Fort Louis, on the Ith. day of August
1889.
, PRESENT :
The Honorable C. Anfcelino, C.M.G'. — Chairman.
The Procureur General.
W. Newton.
C. F. H. Adam.
G. Guibert.
V. Geffroy.
J. A. Ferguson.
J. Fraser.
H. Leclézio.
ABSENT :
The Honorable Sir V. Naz, K.G.M.G.
Dr. O. Beaugeard.
Tho Minutes of the last meetings were readand confirmed.
Me. E. Düvivier, Attorney-at-Law : —After having taken
cognizance of tho motion an 1 of the amendment mado
before the Couucil of Government, emitted tho following opi-
nions :
By the Chairman : —ll y a 42 ans que le système de procé-
der en anglais a été établi à Maurice et si, à cette époque, la
question m’avait été posée, j’aurais été certainement d’opinion
qu’il valait mieux continuer comme pu? le passé à fniro usage de
la langue française devant les Tribunaux; mais comme depuis,
on a procédé dans tous les actes d’après le système anglais, je
pense qu’aujourd’hui on peut continuer le même système en y
apportant de légères modifications.
Je ne pense pas que l’on puisse procéder en français et en
anglais àla fois, cela doit être tout l’un.ou tout l’autre.
Je suggérerais que les questions, lorsqu’il s’agirait d’un
témoin qui parlerait le français, fussent posées directement en
français par l’avocat au témoin et que l’interprête traduisit la
réponse au juge. Dans les cas soumis à appel, les dépositions
seraient transcrites par le Greffier.
Il serait nécessaire, afin de mettre mes suggestions en pra


tique, qu’nn interprète spécial sachant parfaitement les deux
langues fût attaché à la Cour.
L’ancienne pratique de traduire en anglais les documents a
été mise de côté et les documents en fraoçais ne sont plus tra-
duits.
Je suis d’opinion que les Juges de la Cour Suprême doivent
connaître le français, partant de ce principe, je considère qu’il
n’est pas nécessaire de traduire les dépositions faites en français,
quand 1 affaire n’est pas sujette à appel devant le Conseil privé.
Je ne puis dire combien il y a d’appels devant le Conseil
privé par an, mais le nombre en est très restreint.
Je ne suis pas d’opinion que, dans le 3 affaires sujettes à
appel devant le Conseil privé, l’on s’abstienne de traduire les
dépositions des témoins parce que je suis d’avis que ce qui com-
pose le record restant au Greffe doit être rédigé dans une seule
langue.
Les opinions que je vienî d’exprimer ont principalement
trait aux affaires en matière civile. En matière criminelle, les
accusés comprenant généralement mieux' le français que l’an-
glais, il serait à désirer que l’on adoptât pour ces sortes d’affaires
l’usage de la langue française.
By Mr. W. Newton. —Je conseillerai de procéder en fran-
çais, en principe devant la Cour d’Assises laissant, toutefois, à
l’accusé la faculté de demander que l’affaire soit conduite en
anglais.
Je propose que toute la procédure devant la Cour d’Assise3
soit commencée et faite en français, libre à l’accusé de demander
avant ou pendant l’instruction de l’affaire, que celle-ci et la pro-
cédure soient conduitrs en anglais.
Le devoir de la poursuite serait alors de commencer en
français. L’information et l’enquête préparatoire devant le Ma-
gistrat devraient être faites en français.
Je crois que l’on devrait laisser à l’accusé le choix de la
langue au moment de l’enquête préliminaire.
Je u’admeis pas qu’à Maurice un juge puisse rendre la jus-
tice criminelle ou civile, à moins qu’il ue connaisse parfaitement
le français.
Je considère qu’à l’heure actuelle les interprétations faites à
la Cour laissent beaucoup à désirer.
Mon expérience, en général, a trait aux matières civiles, je
ne m’occupe pas du tout de celles qui sont criminelles.
Les affaires à témoin dans lesquelles on peut se passer d’un
interprête à la Cour pour le français sont très rares.
Dans la plupart des affaires les témoins s’expriment en
français ou en créole,


Î1 y a des affaires dans lesquelles on obligé devoir ro-
coars à des interprètes Indiens ; mais je crois que ces affaires
sont beaucoup plus rares que celles dans lesquelles les témoins
s’expriment en.français, en anglais, ou en créole.
*
Les affaires, en généi a l , marcheraient beaucoup plus vite si
l’on pouvait prendre les dépositionsèn français.
Le Créole s’interprète facilement en français et pourrait être
traduit en cette langue par le Greffier s’il comprenait bien le
Créole.
Tous les Greffiers actuels de la Cour Suprême, sauf Mr.
Bennett, pourraient très facilement traduire le Créole en fran-
çais.
Il est évident que, si l’on était dispensé de traduire le
français et le créole à la Cour Suprême, il y aurait pour les jus-
ticiables une grande économie de temps. Je ne suis pas assez
bon juge et ne connais pas assez l’anglais pour pouvoir dire que
tous les Avocats qui pratiquent devant la Cour Suprême parlent
parfaitement cette langue. En ce qui concerne les Avoués, je puis
dire qu’il y en a quelques-uns qui connaissent bien l’Anglais.
Quand an Avoué ou un Avocat se présente en Chambre
devant un Juge Créole, il parle presque toujours en français.
By Mr. Quibert : —Si l’on adoptait le système de la langue
française devant la Cour d’Assises, il serait à désirer que les
Juges de la Cour Suprême connussent parfaitement le français,
vu les documents et les Autorités qui sont cités en cette langue.
Je crois que les juges de la Cour Supeême pourraient très
bien comprendre une enquête faite en français.
* J’ai rarement causé avec eux moi-même en français, mais,
d’après ce que j’ai vu en Cour, je n’irai pas jusqu’à affirmer que
ces Messieurs puissent faire un résumé en français à la Cour.
d’Assises.
Je suis d’avis qu’aucun des Juges anglais qui ont siégé, de-
puis 25 ans à la Cour d’Assises, n’aurait pu faire un résumé en
français ; mais avant eux, Mr. Surtees, qui était juge, parlait
parfaitement cette langue.
Je ne saurais dire si lès Juges actuels comprendraient par-
faitement une plaidoirie faite en français.
By Mr. Newton :—Chaque fois que je m’entretiens avec un
avocat ou avec un de mes collègues d’une affaire quelconque,
nous nous exprimons en français.
By Mr. Lecîez\o : —Il est évident que, si l’on évitait de tra-
duire les dépositions faites en français et en créole, les frais des
procès diminueraient.
Mr. G. A. Ritter. —After having taken cognizance of the
motibifand of thè amèndment tbereto rnade before the Council
of Government, stated as follows :
Je suis entré dans la profession comme Clerc d’avoué, puis


j’ai été attaché, en 1858, àla Cour Suprême comme Secrétaire
des Juges et Interprête et depuis 1864 je suis Avoué.
By the Chairman : —Lorsque je suis entré dans la profes-
sion, j’ai trouvé un ordre de choses établi auquel je me suis ha-
bitué, et je me demande si le nouveau système qui le remplacerait
n’offrirait pas les mêmes inconvénients.
Oui, je pense qu’il y aurait une amélioration si l’on per-
mettait à l’avocat de poser ses questions directement en français
ou en créolo.
Si les questions sont posées lentement, elles pourront tou-
jouis être comprises d’un Juge ayant une countussa'ce suffisante
de ces langues.
Je crois que les réponses du témoin devraient être traduites,
parce que les juges pourraient ni pas comprendre suffisamment
le français ou le créole.
Il est facile de comprendre une question lorsqu’elle est
posée, mais beaucoup plus difficile de saisir et de transcrire une
réponse faite dans une langue qui ne vous est pas parfaitement
familière. En Cour d’Assises, ce n’est pas le Greffier qui trans-
crit les dépositions, mais bien le Juge qui préside.
Les changements proposés dans la motion et l’amendement
nécessiteraient la présence sur le siège de Juges comprenant
parfaitement la langue française et la langue créole.
En matière criminelle, devant la Cour d’Assises, quand les
accusés sont des créoles ils comprendraient mieux les débats en
français qu’en anglais ; mais je crois que la plupart des accusés
sont des Indiens qui, quoique comprenant pour la plupart le
créole, trouveraient aussi difficile de suivre les débats en français
qu’en anglais. •
By Mr. Newton : —Je suis pour le maintien de l’état des
choses actuelles aux Assises.
Je ne vois pas, de prime abord, quels avantages résulte-
raient de l’administration de la Justice aux Assises en faisant
usage de la langue française.
Si l’on pouvait éviter l’interprétation des témoignages à la
Cour d’Assises, ce serait une économie de temps considérable,
mais je doute qu’on y parvienne jamais.
Si l’on pouvait avoir des juges, des membres du Parquet et
des jurés, comprenant parfaitemeut le français et le créole, le
but serait accompli, mais je crains fort que l’on n’y arrive jamais.
Les membres actuels du Ministère Public ont l’avantage de
connaître le français, l’anglais et le créole.
Oui, la grande majorité de ceux qui composent actuellement
'le jury comprend parfaitement le français et le créole ; mais il
arrive souvent que des anglais sont appelés comme jurés lesquels,
ne comprennent pas bien le français, encore moins le créole et
si le système actuel est changé, il y a tout lieu de penser qu’ils
se feront exempter.


Je ne puis dire que, si les débats avaient lieu en français à
la Cour d’Assises, Ton aurait un nombre plus considérable de
jurés parceque mon attention ne s’est pas portée sur ce point;
mais je crois qu’aujourd’hui le système de récusation est poussé
un peu loin.
Je sais qu’il n’y a que sept récusations d’après la loi de part
et d’autre.
Je ne suis pas.prêt à donner une opinion sur la question de
savoir s’il serait convenable ou non de réduire le nombre de ré-
cusations, mais on pourrait n’admettre la récusation que pour
cause.
Je crois qu’on aurait plus de jurés siégeant, si l’on ne pou-
vait récuser que pour cause.
Je ne saurais dire si, parmi les jurés qui siègent actuelle-
ment, il y en a beaucoup qui ne connaissent qu’imparfaitement
l’anglais.
Je crois que la grande majorité de ceux qui siègent comme
jurés connaît beaucoup mieux le français que l’anglais.
Je ne puis dire, n’ayant aucune raison pour le faire, que les
jurés actuels comprendraient mieux les débats en français qu’en
anglais. Les jurés sont pris au sein même de la commanauté
mauricienne, mais il y a à Maurice beaucoup de personnes qui
sont parfaitement capables de comprendre et de suivre les débats
en Cour d’Assises en anglais.
J’admets qu’il n’y a que la minorité de la population éclairée
de Maurice qui connaisse assez l’anglais pour pouvoir comprendre
des débats en cette langue devant la Cour d’Assises.
Je ne puis admettre que la majorité des jurés qui siègent
actuellement ne connaît pas assez l’anglais pour suivre les débats
dans cette langue en Cour d’Assises.
Je ne puis dire si, parmi ceux qui siègent, il y en a qui no
connaissent pas assez l’anglais pour suivre les débats. Somme
toute, je ne crois pas qu’il y aurait avantage à modifier, devant'
la Cour d’Assises, l’état aotuel des choses.
Je crois que la justice est rendue d’une façon convenable
devant la Cour d’Assises sous le présent système.
Si l’on avait des juges connaissant le français et le créole, il
y aurait avantage à se dispenser de l’interprétation des dépo-
sitions, parce qu’alors la justice serait plus expéditive et moins
coûteuse.
Uy Mr. Leclézio Il serait par conséquent utile, s’il était
possible d’en arriver là, de ne pas traduire les réponses des
témoins, le seul obstacle serait la présence sur le siège de Juges
ne comprenant pas suffisamment le français et le créole.
Il n’y aurait aucun inconvénient que les plaidoiries eussent
lieu eu français ou en anglais, si les Juges comprenaient suffi-
samment ces deux langues, quoiqu’à mon point de vue, il serait
assez bizarre de voir dans la même affaire un avocat se servir
de la langue française, et un autre, de la langue anglaise.


Nous avons aujourd’hui t beaucoup de plaideurs appartenant
à-îla race asiatique, qui, je crois, suivraient aussi difficilement les
débats en-français qu’en anglais.
Les enfants du sol comprennent lo'créole, mais daus les
rapports d’affaires que j’ai avec eux, je vois qu’ils entendent dif-
ficilement le français. —Pas plus tard que la semiine dernière, il
y avait en Gour une affaire sérieuse entre asiatiques d’une cer-
taine position, habitant notre colonie depuis longtemps, et ceux
d’entr’eux qui étaient mes clients, comprenaient très difficilement
lorsqu# je leur parlais le français.
*Parmi les plaideurs de la population- générale la majorité
comprend mieux le français que l’anglais.
By Mr. Guibert :—Je crois que la ; connaissancei.de l’anglais
à Maurice a fait beaucoup de progrès depuis une trentaine d’an-
nées.
Je pense que le nombre des personnes qui ne comprennent
pas l’anglais diminue tous les jours et que la jeune génération
pourra-fournir beaucoup de jurés.
Si l’usage de la langue française était adopté devant les
tribunaux, l’étude de la langue anglaise serait'beaucoup moins
suivie.
Si l’usage des deux langues était facultatif, il y aurait, en
ce qui coacerne'l’étude do U langue anglaise, moins d’émulation
parmi les jeunes gen3 qui se préparent à entrer dans îë Barreau,
et il y a lieu de craindre que ce manque d’émulation se rebron-
J vera chez.les jeunes gens se destinant à d’autres carrières.
Je crois que l’étude de l’anglais est d’une granle impor-
tance pour cette colonie.
•Mr. after haying taken cognizaoce of the mo-
tion and of the amendment thereto made before the Council of
Government, stated as foîlows :
By-the Chairman : —Je'isnis'depuis 43 ans avoué. Je ne
trouverais pas>d’-inconvénienb à permettre l’usage facultatif de la
langue française et de la langue 'anglaise- dans les plaidoiries
des défenseurs devant la Cour d’Asrises, si les Juges et tous les
. .membres du Jury..connaissent parfaitement la langue française.
J’entends par ce que je viens de dire que, dans mon opinion,
il:devrait devant-la Conrad’ Assis-s, d’employer la
française s’il D’y a vaitpàs 1 d’objection de la part du Juge
...président'et du Jury.
Devant la Cour Suprême l’adoption de la langue française
..me.paraît plus-difficile.
« -Devant cette Cour on ne pourrait pas, il me semble, se pré-
valoir des mêmes raisons qui font que, devant la Cour d’Assises,
l’on désire que toute l’affaire soit exposée dans une langne qui
- est connue-de là grande* majorité- des Mauriciens. Dans une
-•affaire-civile, il n’y aque des intérêts privés qui divisent deux
-parties,.et celles-cn sont rëprésontéas par des'défenseurs de leur
•choix, taudis que devant la-Cour d’Assises'oh l’on juge des ques-


tions où la vie et l’honneur des homme 3 sont en jeu, une plus
grande publicité que celle qui existe présentement serait plutôt
avantageuse.
Si les Juges qui siègent.à la Cour Suprême ou Civile con-
naissaient parfaitement la'langue française, il n’y aurait aucuoè 1
nécessité à faire la traduction des dépositions, qui prend beaucoup
de temps, aussi je pense que les Magistrats qui siègent à la Cour,
devraient être très familiers avec la langue française. «
Presque toutes les conventions, notariées ou sous-seing privé,
sont faites en français.
Dans mes rapports avec la grande majorité de mes clients,
c’est toujours la langue française que j’emploie ; c’est toujours
aussi en cette langu'eiqu» je confère avec :les avocats et avec m'es
collègues.
Il n’est pas douteux que la langue- française est la mieux
connue par la grande majorité des Mauricien®; Je dois ajouter
que, depuis une trentaine d’années, l’étude de la langue anglaise
a fait beaucoup de progrès à Maurice. L’instruction, en général,
s’y est bien répandue. Le Gouvernement y a beaucoup aidé en
se montrant libéral quant à‘la somme affectée si l’instruction
publique non-seulement pour le Collège Royal, mais aussi pour
les Ecoles primaires.
By Mr. Guibert. —Je n’admets pas que la-procédure, qui se
fait en anglais depuis quaranto-deux 'an*, ait aujourd’hui besoin
d’être changée. Bien que j’aie die que la grande majorité des
habitants de cette Colonie comprenait mieux le français que
l’anglais, je ne suis pas d’opinion de changer‘à la Cour -Suprême
l’état actuel des choses.
Si je me suis prononcé autrement en ce qui concerne la Cour
d’Assises, c’est qu’il s’agit là de l’honneur et de la liberté des
accusés et non d’intérêts purement privés.
J’ai signé, à l’époque, une pétition pour le rétablissement de
la langue française à Maurice, c’était peu de temp? après que
l’usage exclusif de l’anglais avait été ordonné-dans cet e
mais le travail et la nécessité' ent forcé la plupart dei personne-*,
appartenant à la profession légale, qui avaient signé cette pétition
à apprendre l’anglais. Elles se sont trouvées, par conséquent,
fort heureuses d’être en possession d’une nouvelle langue et elles
n’ont pas manqué de la faire également apprendre à leurs enfants
dès leur plus bas âge.
Le très grand avantage que je trouve au maintien de la
langue anglaise devant la Cour Suprême, en matière civile, c’esfc ;
que cela contribue beaucoup à l’étude de la langue anglaise dans
la Colonie, et la connaissance de cette langue est très préoieuse
pour les Mauriciens.
Je crois que si l’on rendait l’usage de l’anglais et du français
facultatif de vaut la Cour Suprême, eu matière civile, les jeunes
gens s’appliqueraient moins T à l’étude de l’anglais ; mais l’usage 1
facultatif restreint à la Cour d’Assisës, n’aurait’pas ce 'mauvais
résultat.
The Committee, aftfcr having resolved to request the attend-
anceat their next meeting, of-Mr. Barrister-at-law L. V. Delafaye,
adjourned at noon, to Wednesday, the 2lst. instant.
M. YARDIN,
Secretaiy.


No. 4.
MINUTES
Of the proceedings of the Committee of Inquiry into the desirabïlity
of conducting the proceedings and pleadîngs before the Suprême
Court either in French or in Fnglish, at a meeting held at the
Instituts, on the 2\st, day of August 1889.
PRESENT :
The Honorable O. Antelme, CM.G.—Ohairman.
V. Geffroy.
O. F. H. Adam.
J. A. Ferguson.
J. Fraser.
ABSENT :
The Honorable The Procureur General.
Sir V. Naz, K.C.M.G.
W. Newton.
G. Guiberfc.
H. Leclézio.
Dr. O. Beaugeard.
Mr. H. G aléa, Barrister-at-law, stated as follows :
By the Chairman : —J’exerce depuis 22 ans devant les Tri-
bunaux de la Colonie. Je connais la motion qui a été faite au
Conseil du Gouvernement.
J'ai toujours été partisan du rétablissement de la langue
française, et ces 22 années d’exercice de ma profession n’ont fait
que fortifier cette opinion. Quant aux deux parties de U motion
dont le Conseil est saisi, je serai d’avis d’en renverser les deux
termes ; c’est-à-dire :de rendre l’usage de la langue française
ou de la langue anglaise facultatif, et au choix de l’accusé devant
la Coar d’Assises, et celui de la langue française obligatoire devant
la Cour Suprême en matière civile.
Le français est la seule langue européenne qui soit comprise
par la grande majorité de la population ; je ne dis pas parlée, je
dis comprise, parceque tous ceux qui parlent le créole compren-
nent le français et le comprennent généralement bien.
Le français ou tout au moins le patois créole est la langue
dans laquelle se traite la grande majorité sinon la totalité des
affaires.


Lorsqu’une de ces affaires donne naissance à un procès, et
qu’il s’agit très souvent de savoir au juste ce qui s’est passé entre
les parties, il ne me semble pas rationnel que cette question soit
examinée, plaidée et jugée dans une langue que l’une des parties'
et presque toujours les deux parties n’entendent nullement.
L’usage de ia langue anglaise expose la partie qui ne com-
prend pas cette langue à perdre son procès faute, par elle, de pou-
voir contrôler la marche de son affaire attendu qu’elle ne com-
prend rien à ce qui se passe et de pouvoir, par conséquent, com-
muniquer à ses Conseils un renseignement ou une idée d’une
importance peut être capital. Si vous rendez l’usage de la
langue française facultatif seulement en matière civile, vous ne
parez pas à ce danger là, parce qu’il dépendra toujours de celle
des parties qui connaîtra l’anglais, et dont les témoins connaîtront
l’anglais de faire déposer ses témoins en anglais, et pourvu que
son avocat plaide également en cette langue, son adversaire ne
saura rien de ce qui se passera.
A la Cour d’Assises j’ai dit tout à-l’heure que je n’aurais
pas d’objection à ce que l’usage de l’une ou de l’autre langue fût
facultatif, parce qu’il pourrait arriver dans quelques cas très-rares
que l’accusé ne comprît pas le français ; mais je n’insisterai pas
particulièrement là-dessus, parce que çes cas dont je viens de
parler ne peuvent être que des cas exceptionnels, et qu’on ne
doit pas légiférer pour des exceptions.
Je n’ai pas le moindre doute que l’interprétation des té-
moignages ne soit une cause de délai considérable et de frais inu-
tiles ; j’ajoute qu’elle est une source de danger. Il est très-
difficile d’être bon interprête. O’en sais quelque chose ayant
moi-même servi d’interprête pour l’ltalien à la Cour Suprême»
dans une affaire qui a été jugée il y a quelques années. Il
arrive parfois à l’interprëte da dénaturer le sens d’une phrase
dite par le témoin. Très souvent les interprètes traduisent moins
bien que les Juges eux-mêmes, et il arrive ceci: à peine une
réponse a-t-elle été traduite qu’une discussion s’engage entre les
deux avocats sur l’exactitude de l’interprétation, et c’est le Juge
pour qui la réponse avait été .traduite qui tranche la question en
disant à l’interprête comment il aurait dû traduire. On voit
journellement des avocats dont le français est la langue mater-
nelle interrogeant des témoins par l’intermédiaire d’un interprète
qui parle généralement mal l’anglais devant des Juges dont le
français est la langue maternelle et qui font consigner les ré-
ponses par un greffier dont le français est également la langue
maternelle.—J’appelle cela une véritable comédie.—Grâce à
l’usage de l’anglais, la publicité d-s audiences devient presque
un vâiu mot, attendu qu’en dehors du personnel de la Cour,
des membres de la profession légale et de quelques rares
auditeurs, personne ne comprend un mot de ce qui se
passe. En matière criminelle l’usage de la langue anglaise
ale désavantage de restreindre le choix des jurés à un petit
nombre de personnes, et les jurés ainsi choisis n’offrent pas
toutes les garanties désirables. S’il y a tant de verd'Cts
étranges et quelquefois injustes rendus par des jurys mauriciens,
je ne crois pas qu’oa doivo l’attribuer uniquement a un manque
d’intelligence de la part des jurés ; je crois qu’il faut
l’attribuer surtout au manque de connaissance suffisante de
la langue anglaise. Beaucoup de jurés qui comprennent l’an-
glais, lorsqu’il s’agit de choses usuelles, ne le connaissent pas
assez pour bien comprendre les plaidoiries et le résumé du juge.
Il y a certaines subtilités dn droit qu’il serait déjà très difficile


de faire comprendre aux jurés, en leur parlant leur propre
langue, et qu’il est nécessairement encore plus difficile de leur
faire comprendre, quand on leur parle anglais. Enfin il y- a
un intérêt que-j’appellerai un intérêt littéraire en jeu ; la langue
que nous parlons au Barreau est loin d'être pure et brillante; la
vérité est que nous ne parlons presque plus français, et que nous
ne parlons pas encore anglais. Voilà les considérations générales
que l’examen de cette question m'a suggérées.
Quand je confère-avec mes clients, avec les avoués, ou avec
mes confrères, c’est toujours eu français que nous nous entre-'
tenons. Quand j’ai affaire àun capitaine ou àua anglais qui ne
connaît pas le français, je lui parle nécessairement anglais.
Il nVst pas douteux que la connaissance de l’anglais n’ait
augmenté et augmente chaque jour à Maurice, grâce aux> progrès
des études, et aussi à l’extinction du préjugé qui existait autre-
fois contre cette langue. Ce progrès, du reste, se fait, sentir
partout, mais ne provient nullement ici de ce que l’on impose
l’usago de la langue.auglaise devant la Cour Suprême.
By Mr. Geffroy : —Je n’admets pas qu'il y ait un père de
famille qui ait jamais dit à son fils : “ Je veux que tu «apprennes
l’anglai3 afin que tu comprennes les débats d'un procès si jamais
tu en as un,” de sorte que l’usage de la langue française à la Cour
Suprême n’enrayerait nullement l’étude de la langue anglaise.
By the Chairman: —Je pense que si l’on rétablissait l’usage
de la langue française devant la Cour Suprême, l’Angleterre'n’en
serait pas moins assurée de la loyauté et de l’attachement J de la
population ; bien au contraire, car ce serait un grand acte de
justice. Je déclare que, pour ma part, je ne fais de cette ques--
tion ni une question de politique ni une question de sentiment, et
que je l'envisage au poiut de vue pratique et au point de vue de
la bonne administration de la justice.
By Mr. Adam : —J’entends toujours se plaindre que le cercle’
dans lequel on choisit Irs jurés ne s’étend guère malgré les pro-
grès de la langue anglaise; mais je dois dire que c’est un point
de fait que je n’ai pas vérifié moi-même.
By the Chairman:—Je crois qu’il y a des personnes cons-
ciencieuses qui, comprenant assez l’anglais pour les affaires
courantes et pouvant exprimer leurs idées dans cette langue,
considèrent qu’elles n’en ont pas une connaissance suffisante
pour pouvoir siéger comme jurés et juger un de leurs semblables.
Plusieurs personnes m’ont déclaré le fait que je viens d’a-
vancer.
Je crois que le jury fonctionnerait mieux si les débats
avaient lieu en français, mais je trouverais juste qu’un anglais
accusé devant la Cour d’assises eut le drjit d’etre juon anglais
devant cette Cour.
Si les juges comprenaient les dialectes Indiens, je trouverais
juste qu’on accordât à un ludion la faculté d’être juge dans sa
propre langue.
J’ai été un lauréat du Collège Royal en. 1863.


On m'a fait l'objection suivante :—On m'a dit mais les In-
diens qui forment la majorité de la population ne comprennent
pas le français. Je crois cependant que les Indiens qui ont des
procès devant la Cour Suprême, comprennent bien le français, il
n'y a que des engagé_s sur sucrières ne com-
prennentpas tous le-français, et ceux-là n’ont pas de procès devant
la Cour Civile. Maintenant il arrive quels Indiens qui sont
traduits devant la .Cour^d',Assises ne.comprennent -pas-tous le
■«français, mais il n’y en a ] as un seul qui comprenne. l’Anglais.
De sorte que, pour conserver; l’usage d'une languo qui-.est inutile
à cette catégorie d’accusés, on prive au moins un certain nombre
de ces accusés de l’usage d’une langue qu’ils comprennent; et je
dois dire que depuis que j’exerce, j’ai défendu beaucoup d’in-
diens aux Assises; je n’ai jamais eu besoin d’un interprête pour
m’entretenir avec eux. Je me suis toujours exprimé en patois
créole, excepté dans deux cas : il s’agissait de deux Indiens de
Calcutta qui parlaient imparfaitement,le créole; comme je parle
l’Hindoustani, nous atons causé ensemble en cette langue.
Devant les Magistrats de District, bien que la loi soit muette
sur la question de langue, la langue française est devenue, par
la force des choses, d’un usage presque invariable. Les témoins
déposent en français, les avocats plaident tantôt en anglais et
tantôt en français, et il arrive presque toujours que le Magistrat
lui-même rend son jugement en.français.
Devant les Juges en chambre de la Cour Snprême, on parle
presque toujours également français. Cela m’est même arrivé
devant M. Mure qui est un juge anglais, et qui parle bien le
français.
The Committee adjourned at Noon, to Wednesday, the 4th.
proximo.
M. YARDIN,
Secretary.


No. 5.
MINUTES
Of the proceedings of the Committee of Inquiry into the desirabiiity
of conducting the proceedings and pleadings before the Suprême
Court either in French or in English, at a Meeting held at the
Institute , on the 4ih. day of Septernber 1889.
PRESENT :
The Honorable C. Antelme, C.M.G.— Chairman.
The Procureur General;
W. Newton.
C. F. H, Adam.
G. Guibert.
J. A. Ferguson.
H. Leclézio.
ABSENT :
The Honorable Sir V. Naz, K.C.M.G.
J. Fraser.
Y. Geffroy.
Dr. O. Beaugeard.
Mr. P. L. Chastellier, Barrister-at-law, stafced as fol-
lows :
By the Chairman J’exerce depuis 25 ans devant les Tri-
bunaux de la Colonie. Je connais les motions qui ont été faites
au Conseil du Gouvernement.
Je crois que la grande majorité des accusés devant la Cour
d’Assises est composée d’indiens ne comprenant que le Créole et
bien souvent ne comprenant que les dialectes indiens. • Quant
aux accusés appartenant à la population générale, j’admets qu’ila
comprennent mieux le français que l’anglais.
Quant aux témoins, ils déposent généralement en français
eu en créole, lorsqu’ils appartiennent à la population générale,
et souvent en indien, lorsque ce sont des Indiens. J’ai même
remarqué que les Indiens connaissant le créole demandaient
souvent à s’exprimer en indien et qu’on était obligé de leur dire
de parler en créole.
Le créole est un patois local dérivé du français, mais com-
pris de tous les habitants de Maurice.
Je ne vois pas la nécessité de permettre à un accusé d’ori


gine française et ne connaissant pas l’anglais, d’être juge en
français.
Une des raisons pour lesquelles je [ne vois pas la nécessité
d’un changement, c’est que je ne crois pas qu’un accusé innocent
ait jamais été condamné parce qu’il était jugé en Anglais, et je
ne peux pas dire que sa défense en ait jamais souffert.
Je [reconnais, néanmoins, qu’en stricte justice, un accusé
devrait, autant que possible, être jugé dans sa propre langue,
mais je pense qu’on doit maintenir l’anglais parce que nous pos-
sédons et posséderons toujours tous le français ; tandis qu’il est
de notre intérêt et de notre) devoir de connaître l’anglais aussi
bien que le français.
C’est une question excessivement complexe, et il y a une
foule d’autres considérations qu’il me serait impossible de déve-
lopper dans uue réunion comme celle-ci.
Je crois que les jurés, en général, à Maurice, comprennent
mieux le français que l’anglais, mais je crois en même temps
qu’ils comprennent suffisamment l’auglais pour pouvoir juger les
affaires qui sont portées devant eux. Je suis convaincu que
l’insuffisance de la connaissance de la langue anglaise par les
jurés n’a jamais été cause d’une injustice.
Quant à la Cour Suprême, en matière civile, je suis partisan
du statû quô.
Je pense toutefois qu’il faudrait avoir de bons interprètes,
chose que nous n’avons pas eue jusqu’à présent.
? SBr J’espère que nous arriverons bientôt à connaître parfaite-
ment les deux langues, et qu’on n’aura plus besoin aussi souvent
d’un interprête que maintenant.
By Mr. Adam : —J’admets qu’il y aurait plus de jurés si la
langue française était en usage devant la Cour d’Assises, mais
je préfère laisser las choses en leur état actuel pour permettre,
comme je l’ai déjà dit, que tout le monde arrive à parler les
deux langues.
By Mr. Newton :—Je crois qu’on arrivera à parler à Maurice
aussi bien Jes deux langues; mois n’y arriverait-on pas, que, je -,
crois, l’on devrait tout faire pour y arriver.
Je crois que jusqu’à présent, on n’a pas tout fait pour y
arriver.
Je ne suis pas prêt à dire ce qu’il faudrait faire pour arriver
à ce résultat.
Je ne crois pas qu’au jourd’hui on parle moins bien le fran-
çais qu’autrefois.
J’admets que, par suite de l’usage simultané des deux
langues dans cette Colonie*, beaucoup d’anglicismes ont été
introduits dans le français, et beaucoup de gallicismes dans
l’anglais.
Il n’y a pas de doute que l’on gagnerait beaucoup de temps


à la Cour, si l’on ne se servait pas d’interprète ; mais ce n’est pas
une raison suffisante pour que je puisse recommander un chan-
gement,
Je suis également pour le maintien de l’état de choses exis-
tant devant les Cours de District : c'est-à-dire qu’on puisse con-
tinuer à plaider en français. En fait, on plaide presque toujours
en anglais.
Mon expérience, en ce qui a trait à la Magistrature de
District, concerne principalement le Magistrat de District de
Port Louis chargé de juger les affaires civiles.
La question suivante est posée au témoin
Vous savez qu’on parle français et anglais devant le Corps
Législatif, à la Municipalité, à la Commission Générale de Santé,
et dans les autres Institutions publiques. Etes-vous d’avis qu’on
doive conserver cet état de choses ?
Le témoin répond que dans son opinion, il vaudrait mieux
qu’on n’y parlât qu’anglais; et il espère qu’il arrivera un jour
où l’on ne s’exprimera que dans cette langue.
Je ne suis pas d’avis qu’on rende l’usage de l’anglais obli-
gatoire dans les Institutions auxquelles on vient de faire allusion.
. Mon opinion est que l’usage exclusif de la langae anglaise
doit être maintenu seulement à la Cour Suprême.
Je ne vais pas jusqu’à dire qu’en maintenant seulement
l’usage exclusif de la langue anglaise devant la Cour Suprême,
cela aurait pour effet d’amener les habitants de cette colonie à
parler l’anglais devant les Institutions déjà mentionnées; mais,
je suis d’opinion que l’usage facultatif des deux langues àla
Cour Suprême aurait pour résultat de diminuer la connaissance
de l’anglais à Maurice.
•
Je crois sans pouvoir le dire d’une manière précise, qu’il y
a une trentaine d’avocat 3 à Maurice, mais pas plus d’une dizaine
qui exercent d’une manière suivie devant la Cour Suprême.
La question suivante est posée au témoin
Prenant le chiffre de 30 si vous voulez, pensez-vous que
l’obligation faite à 30 personnes de parler l’anglais devant la
Cour Suprême puisse avoir pour résultat de répandre suffisam-
ment cette langue ppur que ' tous les habitants de cette colonie
arrivent à parler également bien les deux langues ?
Cela comtribuera incontestablement dans une certaine me-
sure à amener ce résultat.
Je ne crois pas qu’il y ait beaucoup de personnes à Maurice
qui écrivent l’anglais aussi bien que le français; il y en a pour-'
taut quelques unes : Je crois que pirmi les lauréats du College
Royal, il yen a qui se trouvent dans cette catégorie, quelle que
soit la profession qu’ils adoptent.-
Je reconnais que la grande majorité des Mauriciens parle et
écrit le français beaucoup mieux que l’anglais.


On considère à Maurice le français comme la langue natu-
relle, et l’anglais comme une langue étrangère apprise. J’ajou-
terai que je désire qu’on ne fasse rien qui puisse tendre à
diminuer la connaissance de l’anglais.
By Mr. Guibert : —Je crois qu’il sera admis par tout le
monde qu’il est désirable que l’on parle les deux langues, à
Maurice, plus que partout ailleurs. Il est très utile de parler
les deux langues.
By Mr. Ferguson : —Depuis une trentaine d’années la
connaissance de l’anglais s’est beaucoup répandue à Maurice.
By Mr. Guibert : —Je crois que l’usage de la langue anglaise
devant la Cour Suprême a contribué à ce résultat. Avec le
système actuel, ce ne sont pas seulement les trente avocats qui
pratiquent devant la Cour qui sont obligés de connaître l’anglais ;
mais aussi tout le personnel judiciaire et tout le personnel
ministériel.
Je n’approuverais pas le changement qui consisterait à
permettre de prendre les dépositions, parce que je considère quo
c’est un pas dans une voie qui me semble mauvaise.
Mr. L. V. Dœlafaye, Barrister-at-Law, stated as follows :
By the Chairman: —ll y a 25 ans que j’exerce devant les
Tribunaux de la Colonie. Je connais les motions qui ont été
faites au Conseil du Gouvernement. Je coDsidèro qu’il est
désirable que l’on ait,- devant la Cour d’Assises, l’usage facul-
tatif des deux langues. Je suis d’avis qu’il est juste qu’un
accusé soit jugé dans une langue qu’il comprend. Je crois
que le nombre des jurés serait considérablement augmenté,
que les débats seraient beaucoup moins longs, et qu’au bout de
quelque temps, les Avocats qui plaident devant la Cour d’Assises
arriveraient à faire de meilleures plaidoiries en français que dans
ce mauvais anglais dont la plupart se servent. Il y aurait aussi
économie pour le Gouvernaient, attendu que les affaires qui
durent quelquefois 5 jours et plus, à cause de la nécessité de
l’interprétation des' dépositions, interprétation généralement
défectueuse, seraient terminées beaucoup plus vite.
Il est difficile, pour ne pas dire impossible, de se procurer, à
Maurice, de bons interprètes, et je me suis souvent demandé si,
avec ceux que nous avons, la pensée des témoins était toujours
rigoureusement reproduite.
Je suis convaincu que dans le nombre des Jurés qui confen-
teut à siéger, il y en a qui ne comprennent qu’imparfaitement
l’anglais, et je trouve absolument anormal que, dans un pays
dont la langue est, sans contredit, la langue française, un juge
créole préside une Cour d’Assises dont il est obligé de diriger
le 3 débats en anglais, devant des jurés qui comprennent surtout
le français, et en présence des dépositions de témoins presque
tous parlant le français ou le patois créole, lesquelles dépositions
sont traduites par des interprètes créoles connaissant eux-mêmes
le français et très peu [l’anglais.
Je ne vois pas quelle objection 3’on pont faire valoir contre
l’usage facultatif des deux langues à la Cour Suprême en matière
civile ; mais je suis d’opinion qu’il est essentiel que les dépositions,


au moins des témoins, faites dans une langue comprise par les
Juges et les avocats, soient dispensées d’interprétation : le 3 af-
faires marcheraient sûrement avec plus de célérité, et à moins
de frais par conséquent.
Lorsque dt>ns les affaires orome celles d’Ulcocq vs. "Le
Mauritius Sugar Estât© Company ”, par exemple, où des experts
déposent en français, et quo leurs dépositions, bien que comprises
dos Juges et des Avocats, ont besoin d’êtro traduites ; la traduc-
tion généralement défectueuse donne lieu à des discussions entre
res avocats dont le résultat est de prolonger indéfiniment les
affaires, et d’augmenter considérablement les frais.
By Mr. 'Newton : —Il y a très peu de personnes, à Maurice,
qui connaissent bien l’anglais, et très peu d’avocats qui le parlent
correctement. Il ya, à Maurice, une trentaine d’Avocats. J’es-
time qu’il y en a cinq ou six qui parlent correctement l’anglais ;
quatre ou cinq qui le parlent assez bien ; et les autres l’écorchent.
Depuis 25 ans quo je su ; s au barreau, la situation est à peu prè3
la même, et le nombre des avocats parlant bien l’anglais n’a
guère augmenté. Je pense que les avoués seraient beaucoup plus
à leur aise, si l’on parlait français à la Cour. Il est un fait
certain, c’est que les avoués qui font de la procédure en anglais,
et les avocats qui plaident en anglais, s’entretiennent entre eux
et avec leurs clients toujours en français.
Le personnel judiciaire de la Cour Suprême, à l’exceptiou
du Greffier, connaît très peu l’anglais.
J’ai exercé longtemps devant les Magistrats de Districts.
Je parais encore assez souvent devant eux et surtout devant les
Magistrats de Port Louis. Devant M. G. C. Mayer, on parle
indifféremment anglais ou français, mais plutôt anglais ; devant
MM. A. Esnouf et E. de Lapeyre, on parle autant le français que
l’anglais, et je dois dire que ces trois Magistrats parlent mieux
le français que l’anglais. Les clercs de District de Port Louis
ne connaissent l’anglais que très imparfaitement. Je plaide gé-
néralement enfrançais devant les Magistrats de Districts ruraux.
By Mr Guihert : —Quant aux dépositions qui seraient faites
en créole dans les affaires non sujettes à appol, on ne les tra-
duirait pas si les Juges comprenaient le créole. Mais dans les
affaires sujettes à appel, et lorsque les Juges ne comprendraient
pas le créole, on traduirait ces dépositions en anglais. Je ne
puis pas dire si le 3 Juges actuels de la Cour Suprême connaissent
suffisamment le français pour pouvoir comprendre les dépositions
faites en cette langue ; tuais je suis d’avis que des juges appe-
lés à appliquer le Code Civil, le Code de Procédure, le Code
Pénal français, devraient connaître assez le français pour com-
prendre les dépositions faites dans Citte langue.
By Mr Adam : —L’usage exclusif de l’anglais, devant la
Cour Suprême, est un facteur qui no contribue, quo dan* uue
faible mesure, à encourager l’étude de l’anglais parmi la popu-
lation en général.
By Mr. Leclêzio: —Naturellement l’usage facultatif de l’aQ-
glais et du français nécessiterait l’étude de l’anglais, comme à
présent, de la part de ceux qui se destineraient à des professions
les mettant en rapport avec la Cour Suprême.


By Mr. Quibert : Je suis d’opinion que l’usage facultatif
des deux langues amènerait à la longue l’usage prépondérant de
la langue française, mais pas l’usage exclusif de cette langue.
Je ne pense pas que l’usage de la langue française devienne
exclusif, parce que les avocats à grande clientèle, et les avoués
ayant des bureaux importants, seraient toujours obligés de savoir
l’anglais pour les affaires de leurs clients anglais et des maisons
de commerce, et des grandes compagnies anglaises de ce pays-ci.
Je crois que les directeurs de ces maisons et de ces compagnies
verraient avec plaisir les procès qu’ils pourraient avoir devant
la Cour Suprême instruits en anglais.
By Mr, Adam : —Je crois que tous les directeurs de maisons
de commerce et de compagnies anglaises comprennent et parlent
le français.
Me. G-, Y. Barrister-at-law, stated as follows. —
By the Chairman : J’exerce depuis 9 ans devant les tri-
bunaux de la colonie. Je connais les motions qui ont été faites
au Conseil du Gouvernement.
Je crois, qu’au point de vue de la bonne administration de
la justice, le rétablissement de la langue française devant la
Cour d’Assises serait désirable. Le principal motif, sur lequel
je base cette opinion, est qu’il y aurait un plus grand nombre de
jurés. L’usage facultatif de la langue française et de la langue
anglaise devant la Cour d’Assises serait selon moi entouré de
très grandes difficultés.
D’abord, il y aurait à fixer le délai dans lequel l’accusé
devra opter, délai qui sera considérable, et qui devra précéder de
plusieurs semaines la date fixée pour l’audition de l’affaire, puis-
qu’il faudra prépareras tableau des jurés à l’avance. Ensuite
il faudrait un texte de loi défendant à l’accusé de revenir sur
son choix ; puis, serait-il juste d’obliger un avocat qui aurait été
nommé d’office pour défendre un accusé de parler le français
plutôt que l’anglais au choix de sou client ? Je ne crois pas,
qu’au point de vue de l’intérêt do l’accusé lui-même, il y ait un
avantage considérable que le français soit employé devant la
Cour d’Assises ; mes principales raisons sont : que la plupart des
affaires d'Assises sont précédées d’une enquête faite en français
ou en créole et que les dépositions ont, du reste, à être traduites
h l’accusé dans la langue qu’il comprend, le mieux. Je dois
ajouter qu’il est très rare que la Couronne appelle, lors des
débats, des témoins qui n’ont pas été entendus à l’enquête, et
que les témoins déposent généralement en français, en créole, ou
en indien, langues qui sont généralement comprises des accusés.
By Mr. Newton : Les difficultés que j’ai signalées comme
se rattachant au rétablissement facultatif de la langue française,
devant la Cour d’Assises, ne sont pas insurmontables.
Malgré ce que je viens de dire, à savoir : que l’accusé
n’aurait peut-être pas un avantage considérable à ce que le fran-
çais soit employé devant la Cour d’Assises, je crois, ainsi que
j’en ai fait l’observation précédemment, que le rétablissement
de la langue française, devant la Cour d’Assises, augmenterait
le nombre des jurés, ce qui serait un grand avantage pour
l’accusé et pour la Société en d’autres termes, au point de vue
de la bonne administration de la justice.


Il y a actuellement sur la liste des jurés beaucoup de per-
sonnes qui n’ont pas les qualités requises par la loi pour siéger
comme tels.
Il est à ma connaissance qu’il y a des personnes dont le
nom figurait sur la liste des jurés et qui, quoique ayant siégé
comme tels, ont fait pourtant rayer leur nom ensuite sur le motif'
qu’elles ne connaissaient pas suffisamment l’anglais.
Mon impression est que ces personnes agissaient ainsi rien
que pour s’épargner l’ennui de siéger comme jurés et leur désir
de se débarrasser de cette corvée provenait probablement du fait
que, vu le nombre restreint de 3 jurés, elles avaient été appelées
trop souvent dans la même année.
Je suis absolument opposé au changement suggéré en ce
qui concerne la Cour Suprême en matière civile. Je n’y vois
aucun avantage ; j’y vois au contraire des .désavantages.
10. Le changement ferait du tort à l’étude de la langue
anglaise sans faire de bien à l’étude de la langue française. S’il
y a peu de personnes qui parlent correctement l’anglais, le
nombre de celles qui parlent parfaitement le français n’est pas
considérable. Je ne crois pas que, s’il existe, cet état de choses
soit dû à la nécessité où l’on est actuellement d’apprendre les
.deux langues. Le fait que je signale provient de ce que l’ensei-
gnement du français est négligé dans la plupart des écoles.
20. Nous avons actuellement uu état de choses établi, et y
apporter un changement sans aucun avantage appréciable, ne
serait qu’un bouleversement inutile. Je dois dire que, devant
les Cours de District, l’idée ne m’est jamais venue de m’exprimer
en français. Je suis heureux de profiter des rares occasions que
j’ai de parler anglais.
Je suis d’avis que l’on supprime l’interprétation quand la
langue dans laquelle le témoin dépose est comprise des Avocats
et des Juges. Ainsi je pense qu’on pourrait la supprimer quand
le témoin s’exprime en français, et que les Avocats et les Juges
comprennent bien cette langue. A la rigueur, on pourrait éga-
lement la supprimer quand le témoin s’exprime en créole pourvu,
bien entendu, que les Avocats et les Juges comprennent bien
cette langue.
«
By Mr. Guibert : Jo ne crois pas que les deux Juges An-
glais que nous avons actuellement à la Cour Suprême, compren-
nent suffisamment le français pour qu’on puisse se passer d’in-
terprétations devant eux j je crois encore moins qu’ils puissent
suivre une plaidoirie faite en français.
Pour que le rétablissement de la langue française devant la
Cour d’Assises fût possible, il faudrait que les Juges appelés à
siéger dans les affaires criminelles connussent parfaitement le
français.
Je suis d’opinion qu’il y a sûrement avantage àce que la
connaissance de l’anglais se répande à Maurice. Les impor-
tantes colonies anglaises, où l’on parle l’anglais, l’Australie et le
Cap par exemple, ouvrent leurs portes à nos compatriotes (Mé-


decins, Administrateurs, etc.,) mais réclament d'eux une connais -
anco suffisante de la langue anglaise.
Mr. Gruibert having proposed to take the opinion of Messrs.
O. Laurent, D. Jenkins, E. Serret and E. Vaudagne, Barristers-
at-law, tîio Committîe res dved that the Secretary will Write to
the three first of these gentlemen to request them te appear
before the Committee at their next sitting. After hearing them,
the Committee will décidé whether it is necessary or not to hear
Mr. Yaudagne.
The Committee adjourned at noon, to Thursday, the lÔth
instant.
M. YARDIN,
Secretary.


No. 6.
MINUTES
Of the proceedings o( the Committee of Inquiry into the desirability
of conducting the proceedings andpleadings before the Suprême
Court either in French or in English.
PRESENT :
The Honorable C. Antelme, C. M.G.— Chairman.
—. G. Guibert.
Messrs Jenkins, Laurent and Serret having not appeared,
the Committee adjourned, at noon, to Wednesday, the 25th.
instant.
M. YARDIN,
Secretary.
Government House, Port Louis,
19th. September 1889.


No. 7.
MINUTES
Of the proceedings ofthe Committee of Inquiry into the deairàbility
of conducting the proceedings and pleadings before the Suprême
Court either in French or in English, at a meeting held at
Government Rouse, Port Louis , on the 25th day of September
1889.
PRESENT :
The Honorable C. Antelme, C.M.G ,—Chairman.
J. A. Ferguson.
V. Geffroy.
The Honorable Hàmilton Stein stated as follows
By the Chairman lam the President of the Chamber of
Commerce.
We meet, as a rule, about once a month.
There are altogether 30 members of the Chamber of Com-
merce.
The majority of the members are French and English.
There are two members belongiog to the asiatic population, one
arab and onechinaman.
Mr. Domergue is the Secretary to the Chamber of Commerce.
The discussions are chiefly carried on in English; but the
Members are at liberty to sneak either French or English.
By Mr. Gefroy The Minutes are drawn up in English.
By the Chairman :—I see no inconvenience in allowing the
facultative use of the two languages at the Chamber.
The Committee, after having resolved to request the atten-
dance, at their next Meeting, of His Worship the Mayor of Port
Louis, the Honorable L. de Rochecouste, Dr. Poupinel de Yà-
lencé, Messrs A. Montocchio, E. Montocchio, and F. Robert,
adjourned, at Doon, to Wednesday the 2nd proximo.
M. YARDIN,
Secrelary.


No. 8;
MINUTES
Of theprocèedings ofthe Committee of Inquiry into the disirability
of conducting the proceedings and pleadings before the Suprême
Court either in French or English, at a meeting held at
Government House , Port Louis , on the 2nd. day of October
1889.
PRESENT :
The Honorable 0. Antelrae, C.M.G.— Chairman.
C. F. H. Adam.
H. Leclézio.
The Honorable Louis de Rochecouste stated as follows
By the Chairman :—Je suis Président de là- Chambre d’A-
gricnlture.
Les débats à la Chambre d’Agriculture ont toujours lieu en
Français.
Depuis que je suis Président, les Anglais qui font partie de
la Chambre se sont toujours exprimés en Français.
Tous nos procès-verbaux sont rédigés en cette langue.
Il n’y a pas de doute que la langue française est la langue
delà grande majorité des agriculteurs de ce pays-ci.
A Maurice, toutes les familles tiennent à faire apprendre
l'Anglais à leurs enfants*comme complément d'éducation.
Je ne pense pas que les familles fassent enseigner l’anglais
à leurs enfants parce qu’on plaide en cette langue à la. Cour
Suprême ; y plaiderait-on en français, qu'on tiendrait également
à faire enseigner l’Anglais.
Je considère que l’usage de l’anglais à la Cour d’Assises est
un obstacle à la fonction d’un bon Jury.
Je crois qu’un grand nombre de personnes appartenant à
l’élite de la population ne peuvent- faire partie du Jury, parce
qu’elles ne connaissent pas assez l’anglais. Mon nom n’est pas
sur la liste des Jurés, parce que je ne sais pas assez l’Anglais
pour siéger comme tel.


Loin de croire que l'usage du français à la.Cour Suprême
n oue rendrait moins loyaux sujets de Sa Majesté, je suis d’opi-
nion que cela ne pourrait qu’augmenter notre respect et notre
attachement à la Couronne Britannique.
Dans toutes les Eglises Catholiques, les sermons se font
toujours en français, même par tous les Prêtres anglais.
A la Commission Générale de Santé dont je suis un des
membres, les débats se font principalement en français.
By Mr. Adam : —On ne pourra jamais détruire la langue
française à Maurice, et la meilleure preuve, c’est que les anglais
arrivant en cette île et 11e sachant pas le français apprennent
cette langue et l’emploient ensuite dans le commerce ordinaire
de la vie.
By the Chairman : —Toutes les dames et les demoiselles de
la population générale, à Maurice, parlent français. Il yen a
fort peu qui sachent un peu l’anglais.
Tous les journaux de la Colonie, sauf une ou deux excep-
tions, sont rédigés en français.
Il y en a deux qui ont une partie française et une partie
anglaise ; et je crois que s’ils étaient rédigés entièrement en
anglais, ils n’auraient presque pas d’abonnés.
Dr. Charles Poupinel de Yalencé stated as follows
By the Chairman Je suis, depuis plusieurs années, Pré-
sident de la Société Royale des Arts et des Sciences et, depuis
le commencement de 1889, Yice-Président de la Commission
Générale de Santé.
Il y a 25 aos que j’exerce, dans la Colonie, comme médecin.
A la Société Royale des Arts et des Sciences, les discours
ont lieu en français ; ce n’est qu’à de rares exceptions que le
contraire a lieu.
La langue française est la langue générale de ce pays-ci.
J’affirme que non-seulement on ne réussira, jamais à détruire
la langue française dans cette Colonie ; mais que le fait d’avoir
imposé l’usage de l’anglais, devant la Cour Suprême, a toujours
été considéré comme une infamie par la majorité de la popu-
lation.
Je ne considère pas que le fait d’avoir imposé l’usage de la
langue anglaise, devant la Cour Suprême, exerce une grande
influence sur les familles pour les porter à faire apprendre l’an-
glais à leurs enfants. Je crois que cela n’a pu produire que des
effets contraires.
Je suis, en principe, très favorable à l’étude de la langue,
anglaise au point de vue de l’instruction générale.
Je ne crois pas que l’usage de l’anglais, devant la Cour Su-
prême, exerce une itjfluence quelconque pour porter les familles
à faire enseigner l’anglais à leurs enfants, a moins qu’ils ne se
destinent an Barreau où l’anglais est exclusivement demandé.


Il est évident qu'on aurait pareillement intérêt à faire ap-
prendre l'anglais aux enfants, du moment que l’usage facultatif
do l’anglais et du français serait permis à la Cour.
Je trouve souverainement injuste qu’on fasse juger un ha-
bitant de cette Colonie à la Cour d’Assises dans une langue qu’il
ne comprend pas. Il arrive presque toujours que l’accusé
apprend sa condamnation sans avoir compris un mot aux débats.
Je ne fais pas partie du Jury, parceque les médecins en sont
exemptés.
Je crois que le Jury fonctionnerait mieux parce qu’un grand
nombre de personnes respectables pourraient alors en faire partie,
A la Commission Générale de Santé, les débats ont lieu dans
les deux langues ; mais priucipalemeut en français.
Mr. F. Robe et stated os follows :
By the Chairman :—Je suis depuis 34 ans Avoué et par
conséquent l’un des plus anciens.
Je connais les motions qui ont été faites au Conseil du
Gouvernement et les ai lues avec beaucoup d’intérêt dans les
journaux.
Q. "Voulez-vous nous dire ce que vous en pensez ?
R. Je suis d’opinion que la langue française devrait être
rétablie tant*à la Cour d’Assises qu’à la Cour Civile..
Je considère qu’en matière civile, il est indispensable qu’un
justiciable puisse suivre et comprendre tous les débats dans son
araire. Il est vraiment inique de contraindre un homme dont
l’honneur et la fortune sont en jeu à ne pouvoir suivre toutes les
phases de son affaire et fournir de temps en temps des renseigne-
ments à son Avoué ou à son Avocat ; car, dans beaucoup d’affai-
res, les plaideurs ne comprennent pas l’anglais, c’est un fait que
je puis affirmer positivement. Pour faciliter la marche des
affaires devant la Cour Suprême, et pour rendre justice à toutes
les parties intéressées, il est nécessaire de permettre l’usage de
la langue française. Les affaires marcheraient beaucoup plus
vite, et les témoins surtout pourraient bien mieux exprimer leurs
pensées. Beaucoup de gens qui sont placés dans une cer-
taine sphère, ii Maurice, par amour-propre, veulent s’exprimer
en anglais et les juges voyant la difficulté avec laquelle ils veu-
lent manifester certainesopinions leur disent : “You better speak
French ” et alors on fait venir un interprête et c’est uno
perte de temps pour la Cour. Quant à la Cour d’Assises, je suis
aussi complètement d’opinion d’y rétablir au plus tôt l’usage fa-
cultatif de la langue française.
Je considère que ce serait un grand acte de justice d’accor-
der l’usage facultatif des deux langues à la Cour d’Assises et à
la Cour Suprême en matière civile. Dans mon opinion, l’état
actuel des choses constitue une grande iniquité.
Au point de vue de l’économie, l’usage facultatif des deux
langues aurait un résultat considérable. Point d’interprêtes, pas
de temps perdu, justice plus prompte et par conséquent moins
dispendieuse.


Les interprétations coûtent très-cher, et sont très-souvent
mal faites.
Il fut un temps où il était obligatoire de faire traduire les
documents en A nglais, et c’était aussi une source de frais consi-
dérables.
On a renoncé àce système, ce qui a été un grand bienfait
pour la colonie.
e
Il me semble qu’il n’y a pas de raison pour ne pas fair
pour la preuve orale ce qui a été fait pour la preuve écrite.
L’usage obligatoire de l’Anglais devant la Cour d’Assises
et devant la Cour Suprême n’a d’autres résultats, selon moi,
que d’aigrir la population. Le fait est que tous ceux qui sortent
de la Cour et.qui n’ont pas compris les débats des affaires qui
les concernent, sont très-irrités contre le gouvernement.
C’est une plaisanterie de mauvais goût que de croire que
l’usage exclusif de la langue Anglaise peut avoir pour effet
d’augmenter les sympathies des habitants de ce pays pour l’An-
gleterre. C’est le contraire qui a lieu.
Le Jury actuellement est une farce ; ce sont presque tou-
jours les mêmes hommes qui sont appelés à en faire partie et à
leur grand mécontentement.
Le petit nombre de jurés est dû au petit nombre de per-
sonnes qui connaissent assez l’anglais pour siéger comme tels
Tous les Arabes et Indiens, commerçants de ce pays-ci, à
de bien rares exceptions, ne comprennent pas un n\ot d’Anglais ;
mais ils comprennent tous le français, et o’est dans cette langue
qu’ils communiquent avec leurs hommes de loi, avoués ou avocats.
J’ai une grande clientèle comme avoué dans ce pays et sur-
tout beaucoup d’Asiatiques, négociants et marchands. C’est
toojours en français que je communique avec eux, et quand ils
reçoivent un acte en Anglais, ils courent chez moi pour m’en
demander la traduction en français. Il est à ma connaissance
qu’ils sont très malheureux quand ils ont une affaire à la Cour de
ne pas comprendre ce qui se passe.
Je con sidère que ce serait un très-grand malheur pour le
pays d’avoir à la Cour des Juges ne connaissant pas parfaitement
le français.
Mr. Edouard Montocchio stated as follows •
By the Ghairman : —Je suis Courtier-juré et Propriétaire. Je
suis également membre de la Chambre d’Agriculture et de la
Commission Générale de Santé.
Le Syndic de la Chambre des Courtiers pour 1889 est rnortt,
il y a quelque temps, et n’a été remplacé que hier seulement par
Monsieur Hourquebie. J’ai été Syndic de la Chambre des Cour-
tiers pour les années 1887-1888.
Nous avons souvent des réunions à la Chambre des Courtiers.


On y parle exclusivement le français. Il n’est pas, toute-
fois, interdit de parler l’anglais ; mais les Courtiers anglais eux-
rnemes parlent français aux réunions.
Je considère que la langue française est la langue de ce
pays-ci—en général, les affaires se traitent en français.
Les Bordereaux sont presque toujours faits en français,
même quand il s’agit de transactions faites avec ou pour des
négociants anglais.
J’ai des relations journalières avec des maisons Asiatiques,
et tous les chefs de ces Maisons, à l’exception d’un seul, ne
s’expriment qu’en Créole—qui est uu patois dérivé du français —
Ils ne parlent pas le français correctement comme nous ; mais
ils le parlent suffisamment pour se faire parfaitement compren-
dre.
Je suis le délégué de la Chambre d’Agriculture à la Com-
mission Générale de Santé. Ala Chambre d’Agricultare, nous
parlons toujours le français.
Je considère que l’usage obligatoire do l’Anglais, tant àla
Cour Civile qu’à la Cour Criminelle, est un grand malheur pour
ce pays-ci. Cela n’a d’autres résultats que d’irriter la popula-
tion. Les Jurés particulièrement sont très-mécontents, vu leur
petit nombre, d’être constamment appelés à siéger dans les
affaires criminelles, et cet état de choses étant très-nuisible à
leurs iutérêts, ils cherchent par tous les moyens possibles à se
faire récuser ou à se faire exempter.
Je siège comme Juré depuis plusieurs années, efc je remarque
que je suis appelé’maintenant plus souvent qu’autrefois.
By Mr Leclézio : —Il me paraît de toute justice qu’on devrait
permettre à un accusé qui ne comprend pas l’anglais d’être jugé
en français.
The Chairman informed tho Committee that, in regard to a
former decision taken at a Meeting held at the Institut© on the
4th day of September 1889, Messrs. Lauront, Jenkins and Serret,
hâve been requested, on two occasions, to attend the Committee
and they hâve not, as yet, made their appearance.
The Chairman asked tlie Committee whether it was consi-
dered necessavy to write a third time to them and the Committee
resolved that it was not advisable to do so.
The Committee, after having further resolved to request the
attendance, at their next' meeting, of the Depnty-Mayor of Port
A. l’itot, E. Ganachaud, A. Lhoste, and G. Chail-
let, noon, to Wednesday, the 16th. instant.
M. YARDIN,
Secretary.


48
MINUTES
Of the proceedings of the Committee of Inquiry into the desirability
of conducting the proceedings and pleadings before the Suprême
Court either in French or in English, at a Meeting held at
Government House , Port Louis , on the 1 Gth. day of October
188 U.
PRESENT :
The Honorable C. An tel me, C.M.G-.— Chairman.
Sir V. Naz, K.C.M.G.
*— The Procureur General.
H. Leclézio.
Mr. Alfred Montocchio stated as follows :
By the Chairman : —■ Je suis le Président de la Chambre des
Notaires.
Tous les actes notariés, à Maurice, à de rares exceptions,
sont faits en français ; mais noas les faisons en anglais quand on
nous le demande; cela n’arrive pas souvent.
Les principaux actes notariés sont des contrats de vente,
d’échange, des partages de successions, des inventaires, des baux,
&c., &c.
'La Chambre se réunit de temps à autre quand elle est saisie
d’une question concernant le notariat.
Nos délibérations ont toujours iieu en français. Lesrégistres
des procès-verbaux sont rédigés dans cette langue.
Nos communications avec nos clients, ont toujours lieu en
français. Il arrive rarement que les anglais me parlent anglais,
le plus souvent ils s’expriment en français eux-mêmes.
Mr. Eugène de la Haye Düponsel stated as follows
By the Chairman :—Je suis le Député-Maire de la ville de
Port-Louis.
Les délibérations et les discussions ont toujours lieu en'fran-
çais.
Il y a, à la Municipalité, deux Conseillers Municipaux


anglais qui, parlant mal le français, préfèrent s’exprimer en
anglais ; nous sommes 18 Conseillers Municipaux,
Nos procès-verbaux et tous nos livres sont tenus unique-
ment en français ; les correspondances entre la Municipalité et le
Gouvernement se font toujours en anglais.
Je suis d’opinion qu’on ne changera jamais de langue à
Maurice.
Il n’y a pas d’immigration anglaise. Les Anglais de la
hauts société se marient entre eux, et quittent la Colonie quand
ils ont gagné de l’argent ; tandis qu’il nous vient beaucoup de
français de Paris, de Bordeaux, et de différentes ville de France,
qui se marient dans la Colonie et y restent. Les Anglais de
basse classe restent quelquefois dan 3 la Colonie ; mais ceux-là,
se marient avec les femmes du pays, adoptent leur langue, et
leurs enfanta ne parlent que le français qui est la langue de
leur mère.
Quand, par exception, un homme de la société anglaise,
épouse une Mauricienne, les enfants parlent également la langue
de leur mère. Je puis citer un exemple:—Un écossais qui a
épousé une de mes tantes, ne savait pas un mot de français à
son arrivée à Manrice ; il a appris depuis cette langue, et sur
ses trois fils et une fille, un seul, employé du gouvernement, sait
l’anglais, les autres ne parlent que le' français.
Il m’a dit lui-même qu’il s’était tellement habitué à la langue
française qu’il pensait et rêvait en cette langue.
Les jeunes gens, dans ce pays, qui apprennent l’Auglais au
Collège, l’oublient généralement après leur sortie, faute d’oc-
casion de parler cette langue, à moins qu’ils ne travaillent dans
une maison anglaise ou dans le gouvernement.
Il est àma connaissance que beaucoup d’hommes qui ne
savent pas suffisamment l’anglais, pour comprendre les plaidoi-
ries devant la Cour d’Assises, font partie du Jury j d’autres, qui
savent l’anglais, se font récuser, prétextant ne pas le connaître,
d’autres enfin, n’entrent dans le Jury que pour faire une pro-
menade et un bon dîner aux frais du Gouvernement.
Dans mon opinion, l’administration de la justice, en matière
criminelle, est déplorable, et bien dangereuse pour les accusés j
car les jurés, ne comprenant pas suffisamment l’anglais, ne
peuvent suivre la plaidoirie du défenseur qui souvent leur fait
apercevoir des contradictions dans les dépositions des témoins,
contradictions qui pourraient sauver un accusé d’une condamna-
tion.
Mr. Evsnor Ganachaüd stated as follows
By the Chairman: —Je suis avoué et Conseiller Municipal.
J’exerce depuis 1871 et j’ai une moyenne clientèle j je con-
nais les motions qui ont lté faites au Conseil du Gouvernement.
By Mr. Leclézio Je suis partisan d’un 'changement im-
médiat, en ce qui concerne la Cour d’Assises ; c’est-à-dire : du
retour à l’usage exclusif de la langue française.


Mes raisons-sont 5 10. qu'il n’est-pas ajusté'que
jugé dans une langue qu’il ne comprend pas, car la-plupart*des» l
accusés ne comprennent pas l’Anglais, tandis qu’ils comprennent
le français.
20. Les indiens mêmes qui sont traduits-«devanb’sla'^Cour M ‘
d’Assises, comprennent tous ou à peu près touslesirançais}' pour-
pouvoir suivre les débats qui auraient lieu* en-cette langues
Le retour à l’usage exclusif de la langue française devant
la Cour d’Assises, augmenterait, dans une large proportion, le
nombre de jurés, et épargnerait aussi aux jurés actuels lé désa-***
grément d’être appelés à siéger plusieurs fois dans la' même*
année.
La mojorité des jurés actuels comprend assez l’anglais pour
suivre les affaires ; mais il y en a un certain nombre qui, dans
mon opinion, ne savent pas assez l’anglais pour siéger ; le
résultat est, que dans la salle des délibérations, ils subissent
infailliblement l’influence des autres ; cela me fait dire que
l’administration delà justice, en matière criminelle, laisse beau-
coup à désirer.
Je ne suis pas opposé, en principe, à l’usage facultatif de
la langue française devant la Cour civile $ mais je voudrais
d’abord attendre le résultat de l’expérience qui serait faite à la.*
Cour d’Assises.
Mb. Adrien. Lhoste stated as follows
By Mr. Leclézio :—J’exerce depuis 1877 et j’ai une bonne
clientèle. Je connais les motions qui ont été faites au Conseil
du Gouvernement.
Q. Qu’en pensez-vous ?
R. Je dis que l’usage facultatif des deux langues devrait
être permis, à la cour d’assises, à l’option de l’accusé, pour plu-
sieurs raisons ; La première raison est que l’aocusé devrait pou-
voir'comprendre les débats de son affaire, et comme les débats
ont lieu- en anglais; il: n’y comprend rien. La grande'majorité
des accusés, même les Indiens, comprend le français et ne com- -
prend pas l’Anglais.
Quand nous parlons français à nos domestiques indiens, et à
la généralité de 3 indiens employés sur les propriétés, ils nous
comprennent ; et quand nous leur parlons anglais, ils n’y
entendent rien*
La seconde raison, c’est le temps considérable que l’on perd
dans l’interprétation des dépositions.
La troisième raison, c’est que cela amènerait une augmenta-
tion dans le nombre des jurés, qui est aujourd’hui restreint; à
cauße du peu de personnes connaissant l’anglais et pouvant siéger
comme tels. Par conséquent le système du jury fonctionnerait
mieux' qu’actuellement.
Je connais des personnes qui ont siégé comme jurés, et
qui certes ne savaient pas assez l’anglais pour pouvoir comprendre
les débats.
Je suis d’opinion que l’usage de la langue française doit


également être facultatif, àla Cour Civile, pour les plaidoiries et
les dépositions.
Il y aurait un très grand avantage à cela pour le plaideur,
car il pourrait suivre les débats de son affaire ; et dans les
questions de faits surtout, il aurait l’occasion de les rectifier ou
de les préciser, s’ils n’égaient pas énoncés assez clairement par
son avocat, ou s’ils étaient énoncés d’une façon erronée par
l’avocat de la partie adverse.
L’abolition de l’interprétation sauverait beaucoup de temps,
et l’enregistrement des dépositions, dans la langue même dans
laquelle elles seraient faites, ne donnerait lieu à aucune discussion
snr le sens de ces dépositions.
Aujourd’hui l’interprétation des dépositions occasionne une
grande perte de temps car il arrive fréquemment que la traduc-
tion d’une phrase ou d’un mot donne lieu à des discussions,
même entre les avocats les plus capables, discussions auxquelles
les Juges eux-mêmes prennent souvent part.
Mr. Arthur Pitot stated as follows :
By thê Ch'iirman : —Je suis avoué depuis 1863 et, par
conséquent, l’un des plus anciens avoués. J’exerce ma profes-
sion dans tous les districts de l’lle ; mais principalement dans
celui des Plaines Wilhems.
Je connais les motions qui ont été faites au Conseil du Gou-
vernement au sujet de l’usage facultatif de la langue française
et de la langue anglaise à la Cour Suprême.
Je ne vois aucun inconvénient à introduire l’usage facul-
tatif des deux langues devant la Cour d’Assises, à l’option de
l’accusé, pourvu qu’il fasse son choix au début de l’affaire avant
l’assignation des jurés.
Il n’est pas douteux, qu’au point de vue de l’humanité, et
à celui de l’intérêt de l’accusé lui-même, on doive le mettre
autant que possible en mesure de comprendre les débats de
son affaire.
Presque tous les accusés dans ce pays-ci, seraient à même
de suivre les débats de leurs affaires en français, parce qu’ils
comprennent cette langue ; même les indiens qui s’y familiarisent
avec une rapidité remarquable.
Les indiens, sauf quelques caractères dangereux qui nous
viennent de l’lnde, ne comprennent pas l’anglais.
Il est à ma connaissance que, depuis l’établissement du jury,
beaucoup de personnes ne connaissant pas suffisamment l’anglais
pour comprendre les débats d’une affaire criminelle, ont siégé
par pur orgueil. J
Dans une occasion, ayant demandé à un juré s’il avait
réellement compris la plaidoirie de l’avocat, il me répondit affir-
mativement. Je lui citai alors une phrase de cette plaidoirie :
“ The fate of my client will be in jeopardy” et il se trouva dans
l’impossibilité de me traduire cette phrase en français.
Dans ma longue pratique devant les cours de districts, je
n’ai jamais trouvé aucun inconvénient résultant de l’usage des


deux langues quant aux plaidoiries. Le seul inconvénient que
j’aie remarqué devant les Cours de districts resuite de ce fait que
les dépositions faites en français sont traduites mentalement
et écrites en anglais par le Greffier. Il vaudrait mieux que
les dépositions faites en français fussent prises en cette langue
même. J’ai maintes et maintes fois découvert subséquemment
des errours commises par les greffiers dans la traduction des
dépositions.
Je considère que l’usage facultatif du français et de l’an-
glais, a la Cour Suprême, dans les affaires civiles, serait egale-
ment d’un grand avantage pour la Colonie, à la condition,
toutefois, que les Juges désignés par la Métropole connussent par-
faitement les deux langues.
J’exige cette condition, parce que je ne voudrais pas que
l’on fermât la porte à la nomination do Juges anglais distingués,
vu, qu’avec le courant démocratique qui depuis la Réforme nous
conduit vers l’abîme, nous sommes exposés à voir un jour
monter sur les sièges de la Cour Suprême, des juges choisis ici
même qui seraient portés par la politique, et qui pas
l’indépendaDce, l’éducation, la conscience et les lumières neces-
saires pour remplir leurs délicates fonctions convenablement,
The Committee, after having resolved to request the atten-
dance-, at their next meeting, of Dr. L. Drouin, Messrs. O. D’Em-
merez de Cnarmoy—Registrar of the Suprême Court, —A. Daruty
de Grandpré, R. A. Rohan, and W. Acton, adjourned at noon,
t ) "Wednesday, the 30th. instant.
M. YAKDIN,
Secretary,


No. 10.
MINUTES
Of the proceedings of the Committee of Inquiry into desirability
„ ofconducting the proceedings and pleaddngs before the Suprême
Court eithor in t'rench or in Ënglish, at a Meeiing..held at
Government Souse, Port Louis , on the 3Qth. day of October
4889.
PRESENT:
-The Honorable C.-ADtelme, C.H.G., — Chairman.
the Procureur General.
* C. F. H. Adam.
Y. Gefiroy.
, Dr. ; L.. Drouin stated as follows :
By the Chairman Je suis le Président ,do la-» Société
..Médicale.
La Société se compose d’une quarantaine de Membres. Le
nombre des Médecins dans la Colonie est d’environ 64; quand il
s’agit d’une question importante, et spécialement lorsqu’il s’agit
da la nomination de deux Médecins délégués à la Commission
Générale de Santé par le Corps Médical, nous invitons tous les
Médecins à assister aux réunions.
A la Société Médicale, nous nous exprimons toujours en
français; les Médecins anglais mêmes qui en font partie, s’ex-
priment en français.
By Mr. Gefroy Nous publions tous les trois mois un
bulletin contenant les procès-verbaux des séances de la Société.
Le Bulletin contenant ces procès-verbaux ainsi que les observa-
tions communiquées par les Médecins à la Société, sont rédigés
en français; mais lorsqu’il arrive qu’un Médecin désire que la
communication faite par lui soit publiée en anglais, nous faisons
droit à sa demande.
Quand je reçois une communication du Gouvernement, en
ma qualité de Président, j’en accuse réception en français. La
Société Médicale n’a pas été incorporée jusqu’à présent,
Mr. Robert A. Rohan, stated as follows.—
By the Chairman J’ai été élevé à Maurice, et j’ai été faire
mes études commo Pharmacien-Dentiste en Ecosse.


Je déclare que je désire faire ma déposition en français.
Je pense que dans l’intérêt général de la Colonie, il y a
avantage à ce que la langue anglaise devienne la langue du
pays.
J’admets qu’il y a fort peu d’anglais qui viennent se fixer, à
Maurice.
Bien qu’il n’y ait pas d’immigration anglaise dans le pays,
je crois qu’on peut arriver à changer la langue nationale des
(habitants de la Colonie. Ce que je considère être une des meil-
leures méthodes, en vue d’obtenir ce changement de langue, ce
serait d’amener les femmes à parler l’anglais. L’influence de la
femme est toute-puissante pour établir la langue ; j’en ai moi-
même la preuve dans ma famille. Mon frère est allé comme
moi faire ses études professionnelles en Europe. Il a épousé une
Anglaise, et la conséquence est que l’Anglais est le langage de
son intérieur, et il n’est pas douteux que ses enfants parleront un
jour l’Anglais. Pour le moment, ils sont encore bien jeunes, et
parlent tant bien que mal le Créole qu’ils ont appris avec les
domestiques. Moi, m’étant marié avec une mauricienne, ma fem-
me et moi parlons le français dans Dotre intérieur, conséquem-
ment mes enfants aussi parleront cette langue.
Pour arriver à faire les filles parler l’anglais, je suggère la
création d’un pensionnat de filles convenablement installé où
l’on donnera en même temps qu’une instruction solide, une
éducation tout-à-fait anglaise. Un pareil établissement ne
peut manquer de réussir, car le Gouvernement pourra y attirer
un très-grand nombre de jeunes filles, tant comme pension-
naires que comme externes, en délivrant chaque année à
celles qui se distingueront, non-seulement dos certificats de com-
pétence, mais encore une ou plusieurs bourses d’une certaine
valeur, qui pourront leur servir de dot et alors en une seule
génération, ou deux, au plus, la langue anglaise sera vraiment la
langue du pays ; car tarit qu’elle ne sera pas généralement parlée
par les femmes et les enfants, elle restera une langue étrangère
parmi nous.
il est possible que dans les commencements, ce pensionnat
soit mis à l’index par ceux qui ne désireraient pas voir l’exten-
sion de la langue anglaise ; mais le Gouvernement aurait toujours
les filles qui se distingueraient le plus dans ses propres écoles,
et qui pourraient être envoyées.comme boursières .à ce pension-
nat, en sus des enfants de la population générale qui n’auraient
■pas d’objection .à y, aller.
Pour le début on ferait venir les Institutrices d’Angleterre j
l’enseignement se ferait entièrement en Anglais. On n’y en-
seignerait pas la Religion, mais on permettrait aux prêtres de
chaque culte de venir donner l’instruction religieuse, comme ça
se fait au Collège Royal. Le prêtre serait libro d’employer la
langue qu’il voudrait pour,enseigner la religion. L’école ne serait
pasjgratuite, sauf toutefois pour les jeunes filles qui se seraient
distinguées dans les Ecoles du Gouvernement et qui y seraient
envoyées comme boursières, ainsi que je l’ai déjà dit. On ne
fixerait ancnn âge pour l’admission des jeunes filles ; cela
-.serait Jaisse à la discrétion des parents.
Le pensionnat serait ouvert aux jeunes filles de toutes les
classes et de toutes v les raçes.- -Je .crois que.les chrétiennes vien-


draient à une école pareille, d’autaub plus que le nombre des
Mahométanes ou des filles appartenant à tout autre culte non
chrétien ne serait pas considérable au début et que même s’il en
était autrement, cela n’empêcherait pas les chrétiens de venir.
J’entends qu’on n’enseignerait que très peu lo français dans
ce pensionnat ; que tout se ferait en anglais, et qu’on exigerait
même que les jeunes filles parlassent anglais entre elles pendant
les récréations. Au Collège Roya 1 , on a essayé ce système d’o-
bliger les enfants à parler l’anglais pendant les récréations ; mais
on n’a pas réussi, parce qu’il n’y a que des externes; mais je
crois qu’on n’a pas assez insisté. Je crois qu’on obtiendrait ce
résultat plus facilement aveo des jeunes filles dans un pensionnat
où un grand nombre d’entre elles resteraient jour et nuit.
Mon opinion est que, quand l’anglais sera parlé par les
femmes des classes supérieures et des classes moyennes, il se
généralisera, et que les classes inférieures suivront l’exemple.
Je crois qu’une pareille école, en raison de la diversité des
races qui y seraient admises, n'attirerait pas au début les jeunes
filles des classes élevées, mais qu’ à la longue elles y entreraient
parce qu’elles finiraient par comprendre les avantages que cette
école offrirait. Quant aux classes moyeuues, je suis persuadé
qu’elles y enverraient leurs jeunes filles.
Les avantages que les jeunes filles trouveraient dans un
pareil pensionnat seraient une bonne élucationet une instruc-
tion solides sans compter la perspective d’avoir les récompenses
que le Gouvernement pourrait donner à celles qui se distingue-
raient d’une façon spéciale.
Je crois que le Clergé Catholique ne conseillerait pas aux
mères de famille d’envoyer leurs enfants dans un pareil pension-
nat, mais je suis convaincu que les Ministres Protestants le
feraient.
By the Procureur General Je suis d’opinion que la lan-
gue anglaise doit être maintenue comme la langue Officielle à
Maurice devant les Tribunaux comme dans les autres branches
de l’administration.
Je crois qu’il est de l’intérêt des habitants de ce pays de
maintenir l’anglais comme la langue officielle.
Je ne crois pas que la majorité des habitants de ce pays
accepterait un changement à l’ébat des choses, c’est-à-dire à
l’abolition de la langue anglaise comme langue officielle ; je
pense même qu’elle ne laisserait pas faire ce changement sans
protester.
Jo crois qu’il y a un certain nombre d’hommes connaissant
assez l’anglais pour siéger comme Jurés et qui se font exempter
parce qu’ils ne sont pas rétribués. Si l’on réduisait le cens qui
sert de base pour l’admission des Jurés on en obtiendrait un
pins graud nombre.
Je pense que cette réduction peut se faire sans danger pour
l’administration de la justice, et qu’on obtiendrait une classe
d’hommes suffisamment éclairés pour être jurés ; mais qu’à moins
de rétribuer les jurés, on n’en aura jamais beaucoup.


By the Chairman : —Je sais que pour se faire exempter
comme Juré, il faut prêter serment qu’on ne sait pas assez l’an-
glais pour siéger.
Je n’oserai pas dire que tous ceux qui se font exempter prê-
tent de faux-serments ; mais je crois qu’il y a des accomode*
ments avec le ciel.
Je ne crois pas qu’en abaissant le cens du jury, on s’exposera
à avoir prochainement un jury composé en grand partie d’in-
diens. Je crois qu’il s’écoulera encore beaucoup de temps avant
que cela ait lieu, et en admettant même que cela ait lieu bientôt,
je ne vois pas pourquoi un Indien, qui se trouverait dans les
conditions exigées par la loi pour être juré ne siégerait pas
comme tel.
Si les Etats Européens ont fait des traités pour empêcher
que leurs nationaux ne soient jugés, dans certains pays, tels que
la Turquie, Madagascar, l’Egypte &c. par les Juges indigènes,
c’est que l’on considère, je crois, ces états comme des Etats peu
civilisés.
Je n’aurais pas d’objection pour ma part, à être jugé par
un jury composé d’indiens Mahométans possédant les qualifi-
cations nécessaires pour être jurés : c’est-à-dire possédant le
cens requis, plus la connaissance de la langue anglaise.—
By the Procureur General :—Je considère, dans l’état actuel
des choses, la connaissance de l’anglais comme une preuve d’ins-
truction.
By the Chairman : —Je ne pense pas que les accusés, de-
vant la Cour d’Aasises, soient satisfaits d’être jugés et condam-
nés en anglais quand ils ne comprennent pas cette langue; mais
ils ne seraient pas plus satisfaits d’être jugés et condamnés en
français, s’ils ne comprenaient pas cette langue.
Je ne puis citer aucun cas dans l’histoire du monde où la
languo nationale d’un pays aurait été changée et remplacée par
celle du conquérant, alors qu’il n’y a pas eu d’immigration du
peuple conquérant dans le pays conquis ; il est possible qu’il y
ait des cas qu’on pourrait citer, mais je ne les connais pas.
By the Procureur General : —Je ne compte pas à Maurice
sur l’immigration des Anglais pour changer la langue du pays ;
mais bien sur le désir que les habitants de cette colonie éprou-
vent d’adopter la langue anglaise.
By the Chairman : —Je ne puis pas non plus citer un cas
dans l’histoire où un peuple conquis n’ait point protesté contre
l’imposition de la langue du conquérant. Je ne me donne pas
pour être fort en histoire.
Il est à ma connaissance que les peuples civilisés, tels que,
la Hongrie, la Pologne, l’Alsace et la Lorraine, etc. ont protesté.
Je ne puis citer aucun peuple qui ait demandé à chsnger sa
langue maternelle.
Si l’île Maurice était habitée par les Anglais et qu’elle fut
conquise par les français, je ne crois pas que les Anglais deman-
deraient à ce qu’on leur imposât la langue française*


Je ne crois pas que toutes ces questions' de conquérants*et
de peuple conquis puissent avoir aucun rapport avec'les mauri-
ciens d’aujourd’hui et les anglais d’aujourd’hui. Les Mauriciens
d’aujourd’hui sont presque tous sujets anglais de naissance et la
majorité d’entre eux desire voir la langue anglaise devenir la
langue du pays.
Mr. Walter Acton stated as follows :
By the Chairman :—Je suis'le Secrétaire de la Société d’E»
mulation Intellectuelle, dont Sir V. Naz est le Président.
Aux réunions de cette Société, tous les discours etr toutes les
délibérations se font en français. Nos procès-verbaux sont
également rédigés en cette langue. Nous avons un membre, le
Dr. Meldrum, qui étant Anglais s’exprime en cette langue.
En d’autres termes l’usage du français et de l’anglais est
facultatif.
The Committee, after having resolved to request the at
tendance, at their next meeting, of Messrs. Julius Gui ber tj O’
D’Emmerez de Gharmoy, Clara Bernard and Daruty de Grandpré,
adjourned,-at noon, to Wednesday, the 6th. proximo.
M. YARDIN,
Secrefcary.


No. 11.
MINUTES
Of the proceedings of the Committee of Inquiry into the desirabiiity
of conducting the proceedings and pleadings before the Su-
prême Court either in French or in English , at a Meeting
held at Government House, Port Louis, on the Qth. day of
November 1889.
PRESENT:
The Honorable C. Antelme, C.M.G.,—-C/iaîVrafm.
V. Geffroy.
Mr. Clare Bernard stated as follows ■
By the Chairman : —Je suis le Rédacteur en chef du journal
le “ Cerßeen.”
Le “ Cernéen ” est le plus ancien des journaux de la Colonie.
Il est rédigé entièrement en français.
Je connais les motions qui ont été faites au Conseil du Gou-
vernement au sujet de l’usage facultatif de la langue française
devant la Cour Suprême.
J’ai énoncé dans mon journal ce fait qu’il y avait souvent
dans le jury des personnes qui ne savaient pas suffisamment
l’anglais pour comprendre les débats.
Le premier des faits que j’ai mentionnés dans le “Cernéen,”
m’a été raconté par M. Isnard, un des Greffiers de la Cour Sa-
prême. M. F. Tennant étant foreman dans un jury, s’est aperçu
par les questions qui lui avaient été posées par l’un des jurés, en
Chambre, qu’il ne paraissait pas avoir compris ce qui s’était dit
en Cour. Il interrogea alors ce juré qui lui avoua n’avoir rien
compris des débats.
Le second cas que j’ai mentionné, m’a été raconté par M.
Thatcher, avoué. M. Thatcher ayant vu, siégeant dans le jury,
deux personnes habitant la campagne, qu’il s’avait ne pas con-
naître l’aüglais, leur demanda après l’audience comment elles
avaient pu siéger. Ces deux personnes lui répondirent qu’ayant
négligé de se faire rayer de la liste du Jury, pour cause d’igno-
rance de la langue anglaise, elles étaient venues en ville, étant
assignées, et qu’elles avaient préféré siéger pour s’épargner les
ennuis auxquels elles auraient été exposées, si elles avaient dé-
claré, à ce monent, ne pas savoir l’anglais.
La troisième personne a été M. Fitz-Roy Rice, rédacteur, à
cette époque, de la partie anglaise du “ Commercial Gazette,”
qui m’a dit avoir siégé en compagnie d’un juré qui ne corupre


naib pas ce qu/on lui disait en anglais, et qui, interrogé pa* lui
en chambre, a fini par avouer qu'il ne savait pas l’anglais.
Le dernier cas que j’ai cité, m’a été raconté, je crois, par
M. A. Poupard qui le tenait d’un employé de la Banque Orien-
tale,.lequel s’était trouvé également en compagnie d’un juré ne
sachant pas,l’anglais.
Je crois que,'- si ces -quelques faits sont parvenus à ma con-
naissance, dansi un espace de temps très court, postérieurement
àla motion faite au Conseil, il a dû s’en produire un nombre
bien plus considérable qui sont restés ignorés.
Il est évident, en présence de pareils faits, que la justice
criminelle serait bien mieux administrée, si l’on employait la
langue française, devant la Cour d’Assises.
Q. Etant prié de faire savoir au .Comité s'il a le désir de
faire des observations, le témoin répond.
Je considère que les Mauriciens ont le droit, dans leur pays,
d’être jugés par leur pairs, dans leur langue maternelle, et que
ce droit leur a étéTndûment ravi à une époque-ôù la .politique
coloniale de l’Angleterre n’était pas basée, comme elle l’est au-
jourd’hui; sur .la justice et sur. l’équité. Avec les nouveaux pria-
cipes qui régissent maintenant cette politique, je crois le moment
venu de réclamer le redressement de cette injustice.
Maintenant je trouve, sans être moi-même un légiste, qu’il
n’est pas conforme à la logique et au bon sens de faire rendre la
justice, en. ..anglajs, alors que les,lois de la Colonie sont basées
sur.le.droit français, et que pour.les appliquer, les juges et les
avocats ont constamment recours aux écrits des commentateurs
français ou belges.
Je,ne crois pas que l’usago exclusif de la langue anglaise*
àla Cour Suprême, tant au Criminel qu’au Civil, ait eu pour
effet de beaucoup propager la connaissance de cette langue dans
la Colonie.
Pour produire cet effet, il aurait fallu que les parties fussent
obligées-de plaider elles-mêmes j.mais du moment qu’elles sont
représentées par des Avocats, l’emploi delà langue anglaise,
devant les tribunaux, ne peut guère porter àla diffusion de
cette langue, en dehors du nombre très restreint des personnes
qui, par profession, ont affaire aux Tribunaux supérieurs, telles
que. les avocats, les avoués, les huissiers, &c.
By Mr. Geffroy Je pense, d’après ce que j’ai pu observer
pendant.les' débats devant la Cour d’Assises, que la plus grande
partit» de .l’Auditoire était impuissante à comprendre ce qui se
disati et se faisait, et que cela ôte aux débats une partie impor-
tante, de la publicité qu’ils doivent avoir.
Mr. Albert Dàruty de Grandpeé stated as follows
By the Chairman : —Je suis le Président de la Société d’Ac-
climatation.’ -
Cette Sociéb&a été fondéo,depuis le. 4 Octobre 1876.


Nous avons des réunions assez fréquentes.
est celle qui compte, je crois, le plus de Membres.
A nos réunions, on parle- toujours français. Quand il arrive
ce qui est bien rare, qu’un Membre s’exprime en Anglais, alors
un des Membres présents connaissant l’anglafestèâduifrpott&cetix
qui ne comprennent pas cette langue.
IL est à ma connaissance jtiUrhàl7 r rêcljgè exclusive-
ment en Anglais n’a pu durer à Maurice. À" l'Heure"*'actuelle,
les Journaux sont rédigés en~‘français ; il y en a, toutefois, quel-
ques-uns qui ont une partie française et une partie anglaise.
The Committee, after having resolved to request the attend-
ance, at their-nexfc Meeting, o£ Messrs. F. -Tennant, A. 'Poupard,
H. Thatcher, P. d’Agnel and B. -Hitié, adjourned, at noon, to
Wednesday, the 13th, instant.
M. YARDIN,
Secretary»


No. 12.
MINUTES
Ofihe proceedings of the Committee of Inquiry into the desiràbi-
lity of conducting the proceedings and pleadings before the
Suprême Court either in French or in English, at a Meeting
held at Government Ho use, Port Louis, on the 13 th. day of
Hovember 1889.
PRESENT :
The Honorable C. Antelme, C. M. G.— Chairman.
C. F. H. Adam.
H. Leclézio.
Mr. Améiée Poufàrd sfcated as follows
By the Chairman :—Je suis le plus ancien des Commissaires
Priseurs.
Depuis trente ans je fais partie du Jury, et à chaque fois que
j’ai siégé, j’ai remarqué que sur les 9 jurés siégeant, 3 ou 4 au
moins ne savaient pas suffisamment l’anglais pour comprendre les
débats.
Les ventes à l’encan aussi bien en ville qu’à la campagne se
font exclusivement en Français.
Tous mes collègues font également leurs ventes en cette lan-
gue, et s’ils s’exprimaient en Anglais, ils ne seraient certes pas
compris par la plupart des acheteurs.
Messrs. Edgard et Oswald Mayer, Commissaires-Priseurs,
quoique anglais d’origine, font également leurs ventes en Français.
By Mr. Leclézio :—Je puis dire que, parmi les Jurés actuels,
il y en a un certain nombre qui ne comprennent pas suffisamment
l’anglais pour siéger comme tels, et ce qui m’a fait arriver à cette
conclusion c’est qu’après les débats lorsque nous nous retirions
en Chambre pour délibérer, je me suis aperçu par les questions
que se posaient les jurés qu’ils n’avaient pas du tout compris
l’affaire.
Quant aux délibérations en Chambre et aux discussions qui
en sont la conséquence entre Jurés, elles ont toujours lieu en
français.
A toutes les ventes à l’encan, surtout lorsque ce sont des
ventes d’animaux, il y a beaucoup d’indiens qui y assistent et
ceux-ci arrivent de toutes les parties de Pile. Ils comprennent
très bien tout ce qui ee dit en français et je suis convaincu qu’il
n’en serait pas de même si les encanteurs s’exprimaient en An-
glais.
J’ai la ferme conviction que le Commissaire-Priseur qui ferait
toutes ses ventes à l’encan, en s’adressant au Public en Anglais
seulement, ne gagnerait pas son existence.


Mr. Frederick Tennànt stated as follows
By the Chairman Jè suis Courtier-Juré et Agent de
Change.
Je siège, depuis plus de trente ans, comme Juré. Mon père
était Anglais et ma mère Créole do Maurice de descendance
française.
Ma conviction est que, sur le nombre de personnes inscrites
sur la liste des Jurés, il y en a un bon quart qui ne comprennent
pas suffisamment l’anglais pour suivre les débats d’une affaire en
Cour d’Assises et rendre un verdict sérieux. J’ai été bien souvent
foreman d’un jury et j’ai eu à constater l’ignorance de bon nom-
bre de jurés. Lorsqu’aprè3 les débats nous nous retirions eu
chambre, j’ai vu par les questions qu’ils me posaient, qu’ils
n’avaient rien compris aux débats. Je dois ajouter j’ai eu sou-
vent occasion d’entendre les interprétations des dépositions des
témoins tout-à-fait infidèles, corrigées très souvent par les Avo-
cats de la défense, ou par le Ministère Public, ou par le Juge pré-
sident et quelquefois par moi-même en ma qualité de foreman.
Dans mon opinion, je considère que l’usage de la langue
française est une nécessité qui s’impose devant la Cour d’Assises,
Mr. H. Thatcher, attorney-at-law, stated as follows :
By the Chairman : —Il est à ma connaissance personnelle
qu’un de mes amis a siégé comme juré, à la Cour d’Assises, et
qui certes ne savait pas suffisamment l’anglais pour siéger comme
tel ; et sur l’observation que je lui en ai faite le lendemain de
cette affaire, il m’a déclaré qu’il avait oublié de faire rayer son
nom sur la liste des jurés, et s’il avait consenti à siéger, c’était
afin de ne pas s’exposer à subir une amende; C’est le seul cas à
ma connaissance.
Je crois que ce serait un très grand acte de justice de laisser
à l’accusé la faculté de se faire défendre en anglais ou en français
à son option.
Généralement les accusés qui passent en Cour d’Assises,
étant des Créoles eu des Indiens, auraient le plus grand intérêt
à ce que les débats fussent conduits en français, pareequ’ils
seraient à même de suivre les moindres détails de leur affaire et
de transmettre à leur défenseur les observations qu’ils croiraient
nécessaires, chose qu’ils ne peuvent pas faire actuellement. Je
puis même déclarer que les interprétations se font d’une manière
déplorable anssi bien à la Cour Criminelle qu’à la Cour Civile.
Je suis d’avis que les témoins soient interrogés, tant au
Criminel qu’au Civil, en français à moins que l’accusé n’ait
choisi l’anglais. Il y aurait en cela pour le plaideur moins de
perte de temps, et pour les parties une grande économie dans les
frais qu’elles auraient à supporter (en écartant les frais d’inter-
prétations qui sont de 15 à R-s. 20 par audience au Civil).
Ces interprétations font perdre un temps considérable à la
Cour, et, si, comme je l’ai déjà dit, les témoins étaient interrogés
en français, on pourrait alors en entendre un plus grand nombre
par jour et les affaires ne s’éterniseraient pas, comme elles le sont
aujourd'hui, devant la Cour.


Mr. P. D’agnel stated as follows-:
By the Chairman Je suis le rédacteur en chef? do la
Merchants and Plantera Gazette.
Je siège comme juré depuis 15 ans.
Je me suis aperçu bien souvent qu’il y avait des jurés qui
ne savaient certainement pas assez l’anglais pour siéger comme
tels et j’ai constaté ce fait pendant les délibérations ; à leur ma-
nière de parler de l’affaire, je voyais qu’ils ne l’avaient pas com-
prise.
Pas plus tard que la semaine dernière, dans une affaire
d’incendie, j’ai eu l’occasion de constater que deux jurés n’avaient
pas compris les débats. En général, quand les jurés ne connais-
sent pas suffisamment l’anglais et ne comprennent pas les débats,
ils se prononcent pour l’acquittement de l’accusé, alors même
que les preuves fournies, sont ori ne peut plus concluantes.
Selon moi, l’usage de l’anglais, à la' Cour d’Assies, a pour
résultat d’abaiseer considérablement le niveau moral et intel-
lectuel de cette Institution. Les avocats récusent invariablement
les Anglais } d’un autre côté, beaucoup d’hommes éclairés et
formant l’élite de la population ne siègent pas, faute de savoir
l’anglais, et d’autres également respectables se font exempter
parce que, dans leur opinion, ils ne savent pas suffisamment
l’anglais pour assumer la responsabilité d’une décision en matière
criminelle. Il en résulte que d’une part les mêmes, jurés sont
presque toujours appelés, parce que le nombre des Jurés sur le
" Jury List ” n’est pas considérable, et ensuite que l’on voir
souvent dans le Jury des hommes qui, par la nature de leut
éducation, ne sont pas à la hauteur de remplir de pareilles
fonctions.
L’usage de l’anglais a aussi pour résultat de faire durer une
affaire criminelle, plus longtemps qu’elle ne devrait durer, par
suite de la nécessité d’interprêter les témoignages ; ainsi une
affaire qui devrait se terminer quelques heures dure quelque-
fois deux jours, ce qui est un grand inconvénient pour les jurés
et une source de grandes dépenses .pour la Colonie.
Les délibérations en chambre entre jurés së font invariable-
ment en français, et dernièrement encore j’ai eu occasion de voir
un Anglais, Mr. Haddon, nommé foreman , diriger'lui-même
toutes les délibérations en français.
The Chairman laid before the Committee a statement signëd
by the Registrar of the Suprême Court showing the number of
jurors borne on the Jury Books from 1875 —lBB9, and the
Committee resolved that it be printed and annexed to the
Minutés.
The Committee, after having further resolved to.request the
attendance, at their next Meeting, of His Grâce the Archbishop
Meurin, the Venerable Archdeacon Mathews, Messrâ. C. Newton,
Fitzroy Rice, J. W. Kidson, G. Bouic, and E. Vanmeerbeck,
adjourned at noon, to Thursday the 21st. instant.
M. YARDIN,
Secretary.


No. 13.
MINUTES
Of the proceedings of the Committee of Inquiry into the desirability .
of conducting the proceedings and pleadings before the Suprême
Court either in French or in English, at a Meeting held at
Government Eouse, Port Louis, on the 21 st. day of November
1889.
PRESENT:
The Honorable C. Antelme, C.M.G.— Chairman.
The Procureur General.
C. F. H, Adam.
Y. Geffroy.
Hi Leclézio.
The Venerable Archdeacon Mathews answered as follows
By the Chairman lam at présent the représentative of
the Bishop of Mauritius'
I am not in a position to give the number of protestants of
English and of Mauritian origin respectively, the Census being
due in about a year.
We hâve 20 Ministers in ail. Wo hâve one of Mauritian
origin, one in Mauritius and 2 in Seychelles of French origin,
and also sor 6 Indian speaking Ministère, some born here. "We
hâve besides a native of Reunion Island as a French speaking
Minister.
We hâve about 10 Ministersof British extraction, including
a native of the Channel Islands and a West Indian.
Some of our Ministera make aso of the French and English
languîges, some of one only. I use both.
We hâve services in English, in French and in the Indian
dialects.
The language which most Mauritian?, with the exception of
the Asiatics, best understand, for ecclesiastical purposes, is no
doubt French ; but the less educated classes prefer creole.
I often preach in creole in the rural districts.
I do not think that, in general, the Indians understand
French better than English, but they understand creole.
I meau by creole the patois of thé Island.
By'Mr. Leclézio The majority of our congrégations are
probably of English ori n in setting asido the ludiaus. Tho French
part of our congrégation in the Cathédral représenta about pue


third o£ the wliole. This is only approximate and does not
necessarily apply to the Church of England as a whole. I
should like to add that it is to my knowledge that the congré-
gation attached to Mr. Lebrun’s Chapel is largely French, and
in the country the Church of England has also considérable
French congrégations.
By French, I mean Frenoh speaking people.
My knowledge of the French language has of course consi-
derably increased, since my arrivai in this Colony, twenty-six
years ago.
I cannot say that this commuuity is a French-speaking
community. I consider that the corn mon tongues are either
creole or asiatic.
Q. Which is the language most spoken by the enlightened
portion of the community ?
A. The language most spoken by the majority of the en-
enlightened portion of the community is, in my opinion, French.
Mb. Thomas Fitzroy Rice stated as follows :
By the Chairman : —I am now a Journalist and hâve been
previously Editor of the “ Commercial Gazette >} and also of the
,e Merchants and Planters Gazette ”.
These two papers are drawn up partly in French and partly
in English. I used to write the English part in these papers.
It is within my knowledge that some jurymen do not unders-
tand English. I hâve on more than one occasion met gentlemen
of the Jury who did not understaod me distinctly when I spoke
very plaiu English.
I had occasion to make that remark when I was myself a
member of the jury.
I often sat as Juryman and hâve invariably be n foreman
on these occasions.
By Mr. Leclézio After we had retired in Chamber to dis-
cuss about the merits of the case, it was then that I discovered
that the gentlemen did not understaod me. Iconcluded from
tbat fact that they had not understood the debates, as I speak
very plain and distinct English, and still they gave their vote.
By Mr. Gejfroy : —TLose Jurors spoke French to me and
generally thë discussions nmong Jurors take p'ace iu French. I
may say that almcst invaiiably the jurors diseuss in French.
By Mr. Leclézio : —I think that thero are many Englishmen,
in Mauritius, understanding French enough tofollow the debates
in the Assise Court, and who are or would be entitled to serve
as Jurors, were such debates conducted in French.
There are very few Englishmen in this Colony who do not
understand-and do not speak French.


Thore is no doubt that the language mostspoken bythe
enlightened portion of tliis community is French ; and one
acquires a good knowledge of French in living in thisColony.
Tbis community would seem to a- foreigner an essentially
French one.
By Mr. Qeffroy lam of opinion tbat the majority of the
persons attending the Suprême Court do not understand Eugliah,
whereas if the debates were conducted in French they would do so.
By the Chairman : —I hâve been in this Colony siuce 1862,
with the exception of 3 absences which amounted to 7 years.
The French patois is the language employed by ail Asiatics
as meana of communication between the different races.
Me. John Pexell William Kidson stated as follows :•
By the Chairman : —Je suis journaliste. Je puis déposer en
anglais ou en français à votre option. Je connais les deux langues.
Je suis né d’un père anglais et d’une mère d’origine française.
Je possède bien la langue française parce que je parle c'éttë
langue depuis mou enfance. J’ai été élevé par manière qui par-
lait le français ; ce sont les mères qui ‘font la langue d’un pays ;
très peu de dames parlent l’anglais et alors môme qu’elles con.
naissent cette langue, elles ne s’expriment pas dans cette langue.
J’ai souvent fait partie du jury, nos délibérations ont presque
toujours lieu eu français ; je n’ai pas eu occasion de constater
qu’il y avait des jurés qui ne savaient pas l’anglais. Lorsque le
jury était composé partie d’anglais et partie de français on discu-
tait dans les deux langues. Je suis rédacteur de la Commercial
Gazette. Ce journal ayant une partie anglaise et une partie fran-
çaise, nos employés connaissent les deux langues. Si j’étais tra-
duit devant une Cour d’Assises, je tiendrais à être jugé dans la
langue que je comprends, de façon à suivre tous les débats de
mon affaire. Je considère que la langue française est la langue
du pays. Les anglais qui débarquent ici m’oDt souvent dit qu’ils
ne S6j croyaient pas dans une colonie anglaise.
His Grâce the Aechbishop Léon Meurin, Bishop of Port
Louis, stated as follows ;
By the Chairman ;—Il y a environ quatre-vingts Eglises et
Chapelles Catholiques à Maurice.
On prêche' dans ces Eglises et Chapelles exclusivement en
français. Nous avons une douzaine de prêtres irlandais et ces
prêtres eux-mêmes prêchent en français.
D’après le dernier recensement de 1881, il y aurait dans la
Colonie 108,000 Catholiques, et je crois aujourd’hui que ce
nombre s’élève à 120,000.
La langue de tous les Catholiques, à l’exception des soldats
catholiques, c’est le français et le créole.
Je ne crois pas qu’on puisse jamais changer la langue de ce
pays.
Il n’y a pas d'immigration anglaise dans cette Colonie à
l’exception de quelques fonctionnaires publics et de quelques
négociants.


Je suis d'avis que l’usage de la langue française devant les
Tribunaux ne pourrait que raffermir au lieu de diminuer la
loyauté des habitants de cette Colonie envers l’Angleterre. Ce
n'est jamais par des moyens violents et en privant un peuple de
sa langue maternelle qu’on peut obtenir sa loyauté.
Je considère que c’est une mauvaise politique d’imposer une
langue étrangère à un peuple, surtout dans ses tribunaux, les
Gouvernements sont faits pour les peuples et non pas les peuples
pour les Gouvernements.
By Mr. Adam : —Les Catholiques des classes illettrées s’a-
dressent souvent à moi en patois créole et n’ayant pas encore eu
le temps, depuis mon arrivée, d’appendre cette langue, je leur
réponds en français et ils me comprennent très bien.
Il y a dans la Colonie un très grand nombre d’indiens
Catholiques.
Les Indiens, quand je leur parle dans leur propre langue,
préfèrent me répondre en créole ; j’ai eu occasion de remarquer
que les Indiens, après avoir fait un long séjour dans la Colonie,
oubliaient leur langue ou plutôt arrivaient à parler plus facile-
ment le créole que leur propre langue.
Je suis d’opinion, d’après la connaissance que j’ai de ce pays,
qne les habitants d’origine française sont loyaux envers sa
Majesté.
Je considère que les diverses langues que parlent les sujets
de Sa Majesté dans les différentes parties de l’Empire constituent
les plus glorieux joyaux de la Couronne d’Angleterre.
By Mr. Ledézio :—Je n 6 ferais pas prêcher en anglais dans
les Eglises parce que les assistants ne comprendraient pas. Je
fais, toutefois, prêcher en anglais à Port-Louis et à Curepipe
pour les soldats catholiques.
Je considère que Maurice, quoique possession anglaise, est
une Colonie française.
The Committee, after having resolved to request the attend-
ant, at their next meeting, of Messrs. E. Vanmeerbeck, C.
Newton, G. Bouic and E. Hitié adjourned at noon, to Wednesday
the 27th. instant.
M. YARDIN,
Secretary.


No. 14.
MINUTES
0f the proceedings of the Committee of Inquiry into the desirability
of conducting the proceedings and pleadings before the Su •
preme Cov/rt either in French or in English, at a meeting
held at Government Bouse, Port Louis, on the 27th, day of
November 1889.
PRESENT :
The Honorable C. Antelme, QM.,G.,Chairman,
V. Geff r oy.
O. P. H. Adam.
H. Leclézio.
Me. Evariste Vakmeebbeck sfcated as follows
By the Chairman :—Je suis le Rédacteur du Bien Public,
Je connais les motions qui ont été faites au Conseil du Gou-
vernement au sujet de l’usage facultatif de la langue française
devant la Cour Suprême.
The witness asked leave to read his opinion on the question
and the Committee having acceded to his request, he read as
follows : ,
u L’usage facultatif du français dans la procédure et les
débats devant les Assises et la Cour Suprême n’est pas selon
moi commandé par les circonstances. Il y a une quarantaine
d’années, lorsque l’usage officiel de l’anglais fut rendu obligatoire
dans la colonie, les protestations qu’on éleva contre cette mesure
avaient une raison d’être, car très peu de mauriciens parlaient
ou même comprenaient l’anglais ; mais de nos jours, après les
efforts et les sacrifices que la colonie a faits pour acquérir la con-
naissance de l’anglais, les protestations qu’on veut faire entendre
de nouveau ne sont pas selon moi justifiées. L’Aogleterre ce
peut pas être privée de l’usage officiel le plus étendu possible de
sa langue dans la colonie. On ne peut point dire cependant
qu’elle a violenté la population en quoi que ce soit à cet égard.
Ce n’est en effet qu’en 1845, trente cinq ans après sa conquête
de l’île, qu’elle décréta l’usage officiel de l’anglais.
Je me rappelle parfaitement cet événement. J’avais alora
15 ans. Mes parents m’envoyèrent en cette année même à


l’école des casernes. La population en général se prépara de
même à faire bonne figure devant la mesure et ne s’en plaignit
guère ou pas ; mais les politiciens s’en mêlèrent et il y eut des
pétitions et des contre.pétitions. La population pour sa part était
pénétrée qn’il y allait de son intérêt le plus grand de se familia-
riser, dans les affaires publiques, avec la langue de sa métropole.
J’ai toujours cru voir que ceux qui se mettaient àla tête de
ces campagnes contre la langue anglaise obéissait bien plus à
.leur ancien esprit national qu’au sentiment de 3 véritables in-
térêts de la colonie. Chaque peuple tient du reste à conserver et
-à propager sa langue et même à lui assurer une prépondé-
rance dans le monde. .Mais il y a déjà longtemps que notre
colonie a perdu en general l’ancien esprit national dont je
parle et que les masses chez nous considèrent qu’il est avant tout
de leur intérêt de s’accommoder des institutions si éminemment
civilisatrices et de la langue de l’Angleterre. La population de
couleur par exemple, n’est pas disposée à amoindrir l’usage officiel
de l’anglais parmi nous. Elle voudrait au contraire assurer à
cette langue un plus grand développement que par le passé, et
elle croit que l’enseignement scolaire peut encore être amélioré
dans ce but. Si l’on disait qu’elle veut flatter les auglais en
professant de pareilles opinions, on aurait tort. Elle veille sim-
plement par là à ses véritables intérêts.
L’idée qu’on a de laisser aux justiciables des tribunaux su-
périeurs la faculté de faire leur procédure et de plaider en
français ou en anglais est bien' compromettante pour l’avenir.
Lorsque les indiens, qui forment la grande majorité de la colo-
nie, auront une certaine influence dans les affaires publiques,
ils seront sans doute entraînés par l’exemple à demander l’usage
facultatif de leurs différents dialectes devant les tribunaux.
L’adoption d’une langue officielle, comme cela existe, peut seule
permettre d’éviter un pareil chaos.
i L’usage,facultatif du français devant les tribunaux supé-
rieurs, serait le plus grand obstacle qui puisse être porté àla
propagation de l’anglais dans la colonie. Loin de se prêter à
cela, on doit plutôt se préparer à faire disparaître le 3 obstacles
moins grands qui existent, tels que l’usage facultatif du français
devant les tribunaux inférieurs. IL était juste d’accorder cette
dernière faculté aux justiciables lorsqu’on considérait que l’an-
glais était une langue à peu près étrangère à la population ; mais
on constate aujourd’hui que depuis plus de trois-quarts do siècle
de règne anglais la population s’est assez familiarisée avec la
langue anglaise, ou le. sera bientôt assez, pour pouvoir renoncer
ou pour se préparer à renoncer à la faculté dont je parle. Loin
donc de trouver avantageux que cette faculté s’étende aux tri-
bunaux supérieurs, je suis d’opinion qu’on doit se préparer àla
faire disparaître des tribunaux inférieurs.
On peut être sûr d’une chose, c’est que la masse de la popu-
lation mauricienne s’opposerait à toute nouvelle atteinte qu’on
voudrait porter à. la propagation de la langue anglaise dans la
colonie. -Elle désire.au contraire que tout soit oi’ganisé, dans nos
.écoles et nos institutions, pour faciliter cette propagation.
On s’illusionne>en croyant que la liste des jurés'serait sensi-
blement plus loDgue qu’actuellement si l’on avait la.faculté de
conduire en français les débats de cour d’assises. La pénurie des
jurés, si.elle existe, vient surtout de ce que leur privilège est un


privilège censitaire et de ce que le cens établi est trop élevé.
Qu'on abaisse plus ou moins ce cens et l’on aura un surplus
plus ou moins grand de jurés. C’est, du reste, une mesure
qui s’impose ou qui va s’imposer, car la grande majorité des
accusés en cour d’assises est composée d’indiens et ces accusés ne
sont jamais jugés par leurs pairs, à proprement parler. Les
indiens ferout quelque jour des réclamations à ce sujet et il fau-
dra qu’ou leur donne satisfaction. Mieux vaut devancer ces
réclamations en facilitant progressivement leur inscription parmi
les jurés, au moyen d’un abaissement progressif du cens. Le
cens actuel est aussi trop élevé pour les anciens mauriciens. Une
foule de jeunes hommes qui ont fait convenablement leurs classes
et qui savent suffisamment l’anglais pour faire de bons jurés sont
exclus de l’institution par ce cens élevé.
Je me résume en disant qu’aucun changement de langue
n’est réclamé par les besoins véritables de la colonie et que
notre intérêt à tous, sans distinction de caste, est de propager
aussi rapidement que possible parmi nous la connaissance de
l’anglais.
Qu’on ne dise pas qu’on ne porterait pas atteinte à cette
propagation par l’usage facultatif du français devant les tribu-
naux supérieurs. Je soutiens au contraire que ce serait porter à
l'anglais.le coup le plus funeste qui soit.
By the Chairman :—J’admets que la langue française est le
plus généralement parlée et comprise dans ce pays et je puis
même ajouter que c’est la langue du pays.
Je ne crois pas que l’usage de l’anglais devant les tribunaux
puisse jamais changer la langue de ce pays ; mais il crée pour la
population un besoin d’apprendre l’anglais, c’est-à-dire : la lan-
gue officielle du pays.
J’admets qu’il n’y a pas d’immigration anglaise à‘Maurice et
que fort peu d’Anglais viennent s’établir parmi nous.
La connaissance de l’anglais a fait des progrès à 'Maurice
parmi les hommes depuis que'l’anglais est la langue officielle de
la Colonie; mais je ne puis pas dire que le même progrès puisse
être constaté à l’égard des femmes. J'admets que dans leurs
familles les plus grands partisans de la langue anglaisa parlent
français. Dans ma famille, par exemple, nous parlons français.
Je suis un des partisans le plus en évidence de la langue anglaise
comme langue d’Etat.
Je ne puis citer aucun grand propriétaire de la Colonie
appartenant à la population de couleur qui soit hostile à l’usage
facultatif de l’anglais et du français devant les tribunaux, et je
ne puis pas non plus en citer qui soit partisan de cette mesure.
J’ajouterai cependant qu’à ma connaissance la population de
couleur, en général, tient à voir maintenir l’usage officiel de
l’anglais et même à voir se propager le plus possible cet usage.
J’admets qu’il arrive quelquefois que les hommes de couleur
ayant fait fortune à Maurice vont s’établir plutôt dans les pays de
langue française que dans les pays de langue anglaise.
J’ai connu ici l’honorable Auguste Louts, membre du Con-
seil Législatif, appartenant àla population de couleur. Je. crois
qu’il est allé s’établir en France avec sa famille.


J’ai également connu l’honorable Alcide Cayrou, membre
du Conseil Législatif, appartenant à la population de couleur. I!
est a'ié s’établir en France avec sa famille.
M. Brown-Séquard, le célèbre phisiologiste, est aussi un
homme de couleur qui est allé également s’établir en France.
J’ai connu M. Auguste Icery, membre du Conseil Législatif
et riche capitaliste. Il était également fixé à Paris.
Il est également à ma connaissance que le Dr. Pellereaü,
appartenant à la population de couleur et qui était anciennement
Médecin des Prisons à Maurice, a quitté la Colonie et est allé
s’établir à Paris. Ce sont là ces quelques exceptions dont je
parlais tout-à-l’heure ; mais j’ajouterai qu’en général les hommes
de couleur, même ceux qui ont fait fortune, terminent leur car-
rière à Maurice.
J’admets que Monsieur Mercier, Conseiller Municipal, homme
de couleur, qui a quitté la Colonie il y a 2 ou 3 ans, est allô s’éta-
blir en France.
Je ne connais pas d’hommes de couleur qui aient quitté
Maurice pour aller en Angleterre ; mais je crois qu’il y en a.
J’admets que Monsieur Paul Cayrou homme de couleur
ancien riche négociant de Maurice, a été se fixer à Paris.
Je crois que les accusés, hommes de couleur, qui ne savent pas
l’anglais aimeraient mieux être jugés dans la langue qu’ils com-
prennent, qui est le français ; mais en général ils ne se plaignent
pas d'être jugés dans la langue anglaise, qui est la langue offi-
cielle du pays.
Au point de vue de l’intérêt qu’il y a pour toute la Colonie
à voir se répandre le plus possible l’usage de l’anglais, qui est la
langue officielle du pays, je suis d’avis que l’on pourrait revenir
sur l’adoption de l’anglais devant les Cours inférieures pour
adopter là l’usage de l’anglais comme devant les tribunaux
snpérieurs.
La question suivaute est posée au témoin ;
Q. Etes-vous d’opinion qu’on doive rendre l’usage de l’an-
glais obligatoire au Conseil Législatif ?
R. Non j mais je suis d’opinion que l’usage de l’anglais au
Conseil Législatif contribuerait pour une très large part à la
diffusion rapide de l’anglais daDS la Colonie.
Il est à ma connaissance que l’on parle généralement le fran-
çais dans les différentes Institutions de la Colonie ; mais je suis
d’opinion que si l’usage de l’anglais y était adopté cela serait
avantageux à la Colonie.
Le Bien Public est rédigé exclusivement en français.
La question suivante est posée au témoin :
Q. Ne pensez-vous pas que si votre journal était rédigé on
Anglais cela contribuerait à la diffusion de cette langue ?


R. Certainement ; mais comme cette langue n’est pas suffi-
samment répandue dans la colonie pour assurer une bonne clien-
tèle àun journal qui serait rédigé exclusivement en Anglais, je
ne voudrais pas changer la rédaction française pour la rédaction
anglaise.
La question suivante 89t posée au témoin :
Q. N’admettez-vous pas que les hommes delà population de
couleur les plus hostiles à l’usage de la langue française dans ce
pays sont les adversaires du catholicisme.
R. Je ne l’admets pas par la raison que moi-même qui ne
suis pas partisan de l’adoption de l’usage du français devant les
tribunaux supérieurs, je suis loin d’être un adversaire du catho-
licisme. Je suis cependant l’adversaire d’une école qui existe
dans le catholicisme et qui a la prétention d’exercer une influence
sur les affaires d’Etat.
Je suis protestant.
La question suivante est posée au témoin :
M. Robert Rohan est-il protostant ?
Je ne peux pas répondre pour lui à cet égard.
Je connais le plan de M. Robert Rohan dans le but de pous-
ser à la propagation de l’anglais par l’établissement d’un pen-
sionnat de demoiselles recevant du Gouveroement une dotation
sous diverses formes.
Je sais que d’après son plan ce pensionnat recevrait des de-
moiselles de toutr s les classes de la société sans distinction de
race, de rang et de religion.
V
Q. Pensez-vous que les familles chrétiennes enverraient leurs
enfants dans un pareil pensionnat ?
R. Je ne puis pas le dire ; mais je crois qu’il serait de leur
intérêt de le faire. En tout cas je juge que cette institution
serait établie sur les memes bases que le Collège Royal. Je
considère que l’enseignement religieux aurait à être banni de ce
pensionnat et être réservé seulement pour les familles et les
églises.
J’ai des filles et je les enverrais dans un pareil pensionnat vo-
lontiers. Je pense qu’elles pourraient, grâce aux principes qu’elles
recevraient dans la famille, se maintenir dans un semblable milieu.
Q. Excluriez-vous comme M. Rohau l’usage du français
entre les jeunes filles même pendant les récréations ?
R. Si les maîtres jugeaient alors nécessaire, en vue d’atteindre
rapidement l’objet de la fondation, de faire cette exclusion, je ne
le trouverais pas mauvais pour ma part.
Q. Comment des jeunes filles ne connaissant pas l’anglais
pourraient-elles ne parler que cette langue dans les classes et pen-
dant les récréations ?


R. Le Président me permettra de répondre à cette question
par une autre :
Comment réussissent à apprendre une langue étrangère ceux
qui, sans en connaître même les éléments, s’établissent dans un
pays où cette iaDgue est parlée ?
By Mr. Geffroy : —Je suis d’opinion que les débats judi-
ciaires doivent avoir lieu publiquement.
J’ai été souvent juré et j’admets que le public qui assiste
aux audiences de la Cour d’Assises comprendrait mieux les
débats s’ils avaient lieu en français, étant donné que l’auditoire
parle le plus généralement le français.
La langue française est la langue la plus généralement
parlée par les classes élevées de la population.
Mb. Charles Newton stated as follows :
By the Chairman : —Je suis le Rédacteur en chef du Joûrnal
de Maurice,
Ce journal est rédigé exclusivement en français.
Je désire faire ma déposition eu français.
J’ai fait mes études au Collège Royal dont j’ai été Lauréat
en 1877 et je suis allé ensuite étudier le Droit à Londres.
Je connais les deux motions qui ont été faites au Conseil
Législatif au sujet de l’usage facultatif de la langue française et
de la langue anglaise devant la Cour Suprême.
Q. Voulez-vous nous donner votre opinion sur ce que vous
en pensez ?
R. Permettez-moi d’envisager la question à trois points
de vue.
1. Au point dewue littéraire, il est évident que le dualisme
qui existe à l’heure actuelle ne peut que nuire à l’une et à l’autre
langue. Le résultat est manifeste, la langue anglaise et la langue
française ne sont parlées d’une manière correcte que par très peu
de personnes à Maurice. Qu*on assiste aux débats de nos assem-
blées délibérantes, aux débats qui ont lieu devant les différentes
cours de justice de la Colonie et l’on en acquerra la preuve.
Donc au pi int de vue de la pureté de la forme, l’unité de langue
est nécessaire et comme la langue française est parlée et écrite
d’une manière correcte par un plus giand nombre de personnes,
comme elle est comprise de presque tout le monde, cette unité
doit se faire, selon moi, au profit de la langue française. Je suis
convaiucu que, si au lieu de deux langues, il n’y avait à Maurice
qu’une seule langue et que cette langue fût la langue française,
la forme du langage serait bien supérieure à ce qu’elle est à
l’heure actuelle.
2. Envisagée au point de vue de 1* motion, c’est-à-dire au
point de vue strictement judiciaire, je suis en principe partisan'de
l’usage facultatif du français devant la Cour d’Assises ; mais, si
je mets cette mesure en pratique, je me trouve en présence de


deux difficultés. J’ignore si ces difficultés sont insurmontables ;
si l’on réussissait à les vaincre, j’approuverais alors sans restric-
tion aucune l’usage facultatif de la langue française devant la
Cour d’Assises.
Il faudra d’abord que tous les juges parlent et comprennent
le français, parce que, du moment que les débats pourront se
faire dans l’une ou dans l’autre langue, il faut supposer que l’on
sc servira de l’une aussi bien que l’autre langue devant la Cour
d’Assisesil sera donc nécessaire que les juges parlent et com-
prennent les deux langues. La difficulté serait moindre si l’on
supprimait le résumé du Juge Président. Cette mesure a été
adoptée en France, il y a quelques années.
La seconde difficulté est celle-ci : si l’usage des deux langues
est facultatif, à qui sera attribuée cette faculté ? Si c’est à
l’accusé, il est à craindre que là mesure n’ait un effet contraire à
celui que l’auteur de la motion en attend. J’ai assisté aux
débats qui ont eu lieu au Conseil. Législatif sur cette ques-
tion et si j’ai bien compris l’auteur de la motion, à l’heure
actuelle un certain nombre de jurés siègent qui ne comprennent
pas bien l’anglais, et dans l’ignorance relative où ils se trouvent
de ce qui s’est passé ils donnent le bénéfice du doute à l’accusé;
par conséquent le système-actuel offre à l’accusé un avantage:
la chance qu’il a que les jurés ne comprendront pas bien les
débats et qu’ils lui dooneront le bénéfice de l’ignorance où ils
se trouveront. Donc si c’est à l’accusé qu’on so propose de lais-
ser la faculté de choisir, il est à craindre qu’en vue de cet avan-
tage, il ne choisisse toujours l’anglais et rien alors ne serait
changé à l’état de choses actuel.
3. On a -dit que la question doit être aussi envisagée au
point de vue “politique.” Je m’occupe de ce point de vue parce
qu’il s’est trouvé des publicistes pour soutenir que l’usage facul-
tatif du français devant la Cour d’Assises aurait des “ consé-
quences politiques ; ” ce que je n’admets pas pour ma part, et
cela pour une raison que je considère bien simple.
Il est certain qu’avec l’usage facultatif du français devant la
Cour d’Assises, toutes autres çhoses restant dans l’état actuel,
la langue française ne sera guère plus parlée, ne sera guère plus
répandue qu’elle ne l’est à l’heure actuelle, et son influence ne
sera certes pas plus grande. Que peut-on alors redouter ?
The Committee, after having resolved to request the at-
tendancé, at their next meeting, of Messrs. 0. Bouic, Léoville
L’Homme, A. Dardanne and E. Hitié, adjourned at noon, to
Wednesday, the 4th proximo^
M. YARDIN,
Secretary,


No. 15.
MINUTES
Of the proceedings of the Gommittee of Inquiry into the desirability
of conducting the 'proceedings aud pleadings before the Su-
prême. Court either in French or in English , at a Meeting
held at Government House , Fort Louis, on the 4th, day of
December 1889.
PRESENT :
The Honorable 0. Antelme, C.M.G-.,— Chairman.
Y. Geffroy.
H. Adam.
Me. Elmour Hitié stated as follows :
By the Chairman : —Je suis l’Administrateur et l’un des
principaux rédacteurs du Journal Le Progrès Colonial.
Je puis faire ma déposition en français ou en anglais ; mais
pour être agréable au comité, je la ferai en français.
->
Le Progrès Colonial est rédigé en français. Nous publions
quelquefois des articles en anglais qui sont des traductions de
nos articles français. Nous recevons également des lettres ré-
digées en anglais et nous les publions.
Notre journal est particulièrement lu par la classe moyenne.
J’entends par classe moyenne, la classe nouvellement
initiée à la vie politique, et par classe dirigeante, la classe
riche et celle qui occupe, hiérarchiquement parlant, des positions
sociales plus élevées que celles qui sont occupées par la classe
moyenne.
Q. Au point de vue d’une juste et bonne administration de
la justice, en matière criminelle, trouveriez-vous mauvais qu’on
adoptât, à la Cour d’Assises, l’usage du français ou de l’anglais
à l’option de l’accusé ?
R. Je considère que l’uniformité est nécessaire pour une
justice impartiale ; j’ai été appelé bien souvent comme juré
et je ne peuse pas qu’un accusé ait souffert le moindre-
ment des débats qui se font en Anglais. La plupart de ceux
qui sont appelés devant la Cour d’Assises comprennent peu
ou point le français ou l’anglais. Par conséquent, je ne vois pas
quel serait l’avantage que l’on donnerait à l’accusé si l’on parlait
le français. Lorsqu’un crime est découvert, il y a une procé-
dure préliminaire qui se fait en Anglais et qui présente toutes


les garanties possibles à l’accusé. Les dépositions qui sont faites
devant cette cour préliminaire sont généralement faites en fran-
çais et ensuite interprétées et transcrites en anglais. Les témoi-
gnages qui sont reçus par les Magistrats dans des langues
étrangères sont traduits également en anglais par un interprête
accrédité. Quand l’affaire de l’accusé arrive devant la Cour
d’Assises, les dépositions sont encore prises de la même façon
et les plaidoiries et le résumé du Juge sont faits eu anglais. Il y
a une parfaite harmonie dans le fonctionnement du présent-
système, et, jusqu’à ce jour, (je parle de plus de trente" ans)
jamais on n’a eu à enrégistrer qu’un tort ait été faifc'à uu accuse.
Il y a une chose qu’il faudrait commencer à faire si l’on
demandait l’usage facultatif des deux langues devant les Cours
Supérieures, ce serait de commencer à changer tout le système
judiciaire dans les Cours inférieures. Mon opinion donc est de ne
pas rétrograder et comme on n’a eu à faire aucun reproche au
système actuel, je considère qu’il doit être maintenu.
Q. Dois-je conclure de ce que vous venez de dire, que vous
considérez que les jurés comprennent parfaitement les débats qui
ont lieu en anglais ?
B. Je n’ai jamais eu occasion de m’apercevoir qu’un juré ne
comprenait pas les débats. J’ai été souvent nommé foreman d’un
jury et lorsque nous nous retirions en chamhre pour délibérer et
lorsqu’il se trouvait des Anglais qui ne parlaient pas le français*-
surtout dans les affaires importantes, les discussions se faisaient en
français ou en anglais. J’ai été appelé plus souvent à traduire
on anglais les discussions faites en français par les jurés que je
n’ai été appelé à traduire en français les réflexions faites par les
jurés anglais.
En demandant l’usage facultatif du français et de l’anglais
devant la Cour d’Assises, ce serait virtuellement empêcher les
Anglais de servir comme jurés. De plus, je crains que ce ne
soit un obstacle à l’admission de Juges et de Membres du Parquet
Anglais à la Cour Suprême.
Q. Avez-vous souvent traduit en français les réflexions
faites en anglais par des jurés ?
B. Je ne me rappelle pas avoir été appelé à faire de sem-
blables traductions j eo conséquence, je rectifie ma déposition ci-
dessus.
Q. À quelles classes appartiennent les accusés en général ?
R. Ils appartiennent à la classe créole et à la classe indienne,
surtout aux classes inférieures ; mais il arrive quelquefois aussi
qu’il y en a qui appartiennent aux classes dirigeantes et
moyennes,
Q. Ne croyez-vous pas que les accusés qui appartiennent
aux classes dirigeantes et moyennes quand ils ne savent pas
l’anglais aimeraient mieux être jugés en français ?
R. Il n’y a pas le.moindre doute que ceux qui occupent une
certaine position dans la société et qui ont reçu une certaine
instruction préfèrent comprendre les débats pour connaîtré.leur


sort ; mis par lé,'fait des témoignages ils sont au courant de tout
ce qui se fait.
Q. Yous dites que par les témoignages ils comprennent tout
ce qui se fait. Comment peuvent-ils comprendre si les témoigna-
ges sont faits en Indien et traduits en Anglais ?
R. Il est. rare qu’un témoin indien qui a été quelque temps
dans la Colonie s'exprime dans sa propre langue, généralement
il s’exprime en créole qui est un patois compris par toutes les
classes'.
Q. Les accusés créoles, même ceux de la basse classe, quelle
langue comprennent-ils, le français ou l’anglais ?
Le Créole de la basse classe ne comprend, en général, ni le
français ni l’anglais,
Q. Considérez-vous les domestiques comme faisant partie de
la basse classe ?
R. En général oui ; mais il y a des exceptions. Il y en a qui
savent lire et écrire.
Q. Les domestiques dans ce pays-ci comprennent-ils oui ou
non quand on leur parle français ?
R. Dans le langage.usuel beaucoup d’entre eux le compren-
nent;
Q. Les ouvriers mécaniciens, maçons, charpentiers,, compren-.
nent-ils le français ? v
R. Certaiuement.ils le comprennent ; mais c’est une classe
exceptionnelle que celle des ouvriers à Maurice ; ce sont des.
jeunes gens qui ont.reçu une certaine instruction dans les.écoles
du Gouvernement.
Q; Yous ne les considérez pas alors comme faisant partie de
la basse classe ?
R. Non. Il est bien rare de voir des accusés de cette classe
devant la Cour d’Assises.,
Q. Les cochers et les carrioleurs comprennent-ils le français ?
R. Parmi les cochers, il y en a beaucoup qui comprennent
le français ; mais la plupart des carrioleurs sont des Indiens qui
comprennent fort peu le français.
Q. N’admettez-vous pas qu’en général la classe ouvrière à
Maurice comprend mieux le français que l’anglais ?
R. Certainement elle comprend mieux le français.; mais
dans cette classe il yeh a beaucoup qui, sortis des écoles du
Gouvernement, sont habitués à entendre parler l’anglais et qui
par conséquent le comprennent.
■' Les classes ouvrières parlent généralement le patois créole
dans leurs familles.


Q. Connaissez-vous des familles daus lesquelles on parle
l’anglais ?
R. J’ai rencontré aujourd’hui au coin de la rue deux créoles
indiens qui causaient en anglais; mais c’est une exception.
J’écris plus facilement le français que l’anglais. Quelquefois
j’écris même des articles dans mon journal en anglais.
J’admets que dans les familles on ne parle que le français.
Je rencontre quelquefois dans ma société des jeunes filles qui,
ayant appris l’anglais, peuvent converser avec moi dans cette
langue.
Q. Pensez-vous qu’un pensionnat de demoiselles dans les
conditions proposées par M. Robert Rohan aurait,pour résultat
de changer la langue de ce pays.?
R. Je ne sais pas ce qui doit arriver d’ici cinquante ans ;
mais je puis parler par expérience que depuis cinquante ans,
nous avons fait de très grands progrès dans la langue anglaise.
A l’époque où j’étais au Collège Royal, oû parlait moins l’anglais
qu’on le parle aujourd’hui; et plus nous avançons, plus nous
progressons dans la connaissance de cette langue.
La langue que nous parlons est notre langue naturelle, la
langue française, elle ne cessera jamais d’être- parlée à Maurice.
By Mr. Geffroy Q. Vous avez dit que la langue anglaise
avait fait de grands progrès à Maurice depuis cinquante ans,
comment expliquez-vous que dans cet intervalle le nombre des
jurés ait diminué au lieu d’augmenter ?
R. C’est très fucile à expliquer et sans entrer dans aucune
personnalité, je dirai que je connais beaucoup jde personnes sa-
chant parfaitement l’anglais qui s’abstiennent dè se faire inscrire
comme jurés et'-d’autres qui ont été sur la Liste des Jurés et qui
connaissent l’anglais ont juré ne pas savoir cette langue.—Si l’au-
torité chargée de surveiller à la préparation de la liste des jurés
faisait sou devoir il n’y aurait pas cent noms par année sur cette
liste mais des milliers, et je ne crains pas de dire que je suis prêt
à faire connaître les noms.
Q. Si l’on se servait de la langue française devant la Cour
d’Assises, ne pensez-vous pas que les abus dont vous venez de
parler disparaîtraient ?
R. Non, parce qu’on trouverait toujours moyen de se faire
récuser.
Q. Vous m’avez bien compris n’est-ce-pas ? Je demande si,
dans le cas où on se servirait de la langue française, on.n’aurait
. pas un plus grand nombre de Jurés;
R. Je pense que le nombre serait augmenté ; mais alors
ceux qui parlent l’anglais et qui comprennent peu ou point le
français se feraient récuser.
By the Ghairman : —Q. Croyez-vous qu’il y ait beaucoup
d’Anglais sur la Liste des Jurés qui ne comprennent pas le'fran-
çais ?


E. N’ayant pas la liste sous les yeux, il me serait difficile de
faire une réponse à cette question; mais je puis déclarer que les
Anglais qui se trouvent sur cette liste feraient probablement ce
que font les Mauriciens c’est-à-dire : —déclareraient qu’ils ne
savent pas assez le français pour servir comme jurés.
Q. Pensez-vous que la généralité du Public en Cour d’As-
sises comprend les débats ?
-•
E. J’ignore si le Public des Cours d’Àssises connait suffi-
samment ou non l’Anglais pour comprendre ce qui se passe;
tout ce que je puis dire c’est que dans mou opinion ceux qui
assistent aux débats de la Cour d’Assises appartiennent généra-
lement à la plus infime classe de la Société, et qu’ils envahissent
les bancs; mais si les débats avaient lieu en français, je crois
qu’ils seraient mieux compris par une partie de ceux qui assis-
tent aux audiences; les autres ne comprenant propablement pas
mieux le français que l’anglais.
Q. Quelle est la langue la plus généralement répandue dans
la classe dirigeante et dans la classe moyenne ?
E. Je crois que le français est la laogue la plus généra-
lement répandue dans la classe dirigeante et dans la classe
moyenne, parce que c’est, comme je l’ai déjà dit, la langue
naturelle du pays.
Q. Quel avantage trouvez-vous à ce qu’on se serve, à la
Cour d’Assisea, de l’Anglais qui est une langue moins répandue
que le français ?
E. Je trouve que les avantages que nous retirerons de voir
les débats devant la Cour d’Assises en Anglais sont immenses
pour l’avenir de notre Colonie. Il ne faut pas se faire illusion
que le changement que l’on réclame est d’une très grande im-
portance au point de vue politique. On a ces temps derniers
beaucoup parlé de la capitulation et des conditions dans les-
quelles- elle a été faite. Naturellement on s’accroche à ces
articles de la capitulation garantissant à la population coloniale
entre autres conditions de’conserver sa langue, qui est la langue
française ; mais on oublie que le Traité de 1815 est venu détruire
ces stipulations, car s’il avait fallu conserver aussi les lois, on
doit se rappeler combien les lois françaises même sous le gou-
vernement anglais avant l’émancipation étaient draconiennes,
tyranniques et ignobles pour cette partie de la population qui a
vu avec joie l’Angleterre lui donner son émancipation politique.
En 1841, par un Ordre en Conseil, la langue anglaise fut décré*
tée comme langue officielle. Si aujourd’hui, après quarante ans
depuis que cette langue en usage devant nos Cours de Justice n’a
été cause d’aucune erreur judiciaire, ou voulait retourner à l’an-
cien système ; ce serait rétrograder. La connaissance de la
langue anglaise est d’une très grande importance surtout pour
les membres de la classe moyenne qui, ne trouvant pas à s’em-
ployer dans la Colonie, sont obligés d’émigrer. Ils ne peuvent
donc aller que dans les colonies anglaises qui sont près de.nous
et naturellement ces membres de la classe moyenne sont obligés
d’apprendre la langue anglaise, car aujourd’hui cette langue est
la langue parlée par un grand nombre d’habitants du globe, et,
comme je l’ai déjà dit, les avantages pour nous autres sont consi-
dérables.


Demander l’usage facultatif de la langue française, ce serait
arrêter, à mon point de vue, l’étude de la langue anglaise, de
plus, ce serait un acheminement pour n’avoir rien que des Juges
créoles, et empêcher que la Métropole nous envoie des Juges
anglais, lorsqu’au contraire les tendances de la grande majorité
de la population coloniale sont d’avoir des Juges anglais sur l’im-
partialité et la neutralité desquels nous pouvons compter, car les
changements politiques dans notre constitution ont produit des
dissensions qui ne s’effaceront pas de longtemps. Les Juges
créoles qui appartiennent presque tous à la classe dirigeante et
qui sont des hommes ont les mêmes faiblesses que le reste de
l’humanité. Ainsi, aujourd’hui, toutes les Colonies françaises,
qui sont sous la domination anglaise, où les populations ont
conservé leur sentiment de nationalité, acceptent avec plaisir de
voir l’uniformité dans leurs Cours de Justice. A Ottawa, le
gouvernement local a décidé que le dualisme des langues ces-
sera pour l’avenir et que désormais la langue anglaise seule sera
la langue officielle et qu’elle sera enseignée dans toutes les
Ecoles de l’Etat. A Manitoba, au Canada, la même décision a
été prise.
Q. Avez-vous autre chose à ajouter à ces considérations
politiques ?
R. Je considère que le Gouvernément doit conserver l’usage
exclusif de la langue anglaise dans nos Cours de Justice comme
langue officielle, car alors il forcerait l’étude de cette langue.
Lorsqu’en 1840, le Gouvernement Métropolitain avec une
grande libéralité et en même temps un grand libéralisme a
décrété qu’il enverrait à la Métropole le laure.it du Collège
Royal, il a peDsé que c’était un moyen d’assimiler nos jeunes
créoles aux usages et aux mœurs du peuple anglais. A l’heure
actuelle, si un changement était produit, ce serait détruire les
bienfaits qui résultent de cette mesure si libérale ; les lauréats
du Collège Royal ne seraient plus obligés d’aller compléter leur
éducation anglaise dans la Métropole anglaise, ceux qui se des-
tinent au Barreau iraient en France pour faire leur droit puis-
qu’il ne serait plus nécessaire de se perfectionner dans l’étude de
la langue anglaise. C’est là une mesure que le Gouvernement
anglais ne sanctionnera jamais.
The Cummittee adjourned at noon to Wednesday, the sth.
February 1890.
M. YARDIN,
Secretary.


No. 16.
MINUTES
Of the proceedings of the Committee of Inquiry into the desirability
of conducting the proceedings and pleadings before the
Suprême Court either in French or in English, at a Meeting
held .at Government House, Port 'Louis, on the bth, day of
February 1890.
PRESENT :
The Honorable Sir 0. Antelme, K.C.M,G.— Chairman.
„ H. Leclézio.
„ H. Adam.
Me. Elmour Hitié’s évidence continued.
By the Chairman Q. Vous avez dit que l'uniformité des
langues était nécessaire pour une justice impartiale, persistez-
vous dans cette opinion ?
R. Oui.
Q, Est-ce que l’impartialité en matière de justice ne dépend
pas beaucoup plus du caractère moral des juges que de la langue
parlée devant eux ?
R. Il n’y a pas le moindre doute que le caractère moral des
juges est nécessaire à une justice impartiale ; mais à côté de cela
si l’on permettait à l’avocat de la défense de parler le français et
à son adversaire de parler l’anglais, ce serait un chaos.
Q. Vous avez dit que les accu-rés n’avaient jamais souffert
du système actuel ; mais s’il vous était prouvé qu’il est arrivé
souvent que les jurés n’avaient pas réellement compris les débats
d’une affaire criminelle, ce fait ne modifierait-il pas votre opinion ?
R. Je m’aperçois M. le Président qu’au lieu d’entendre mes
observations, vous me faites subir un contre-interrogatoire ; si
j’avais été prévenu, je me serais préparé à vous fournir toutes
les explications que vous m’auriez demandées pour vous éclairer
sur ma dernière déposition ; mais malgré tout je vous répondrai.
Non, ce fait ne pourrait pas modifier mon opinion, car ce
ne serait qu’une exception qui ne pourrait pas détruire les bons
résultats de la règle actuelle.
Q. Mais s’il vous était prouvé que cela arrive souvent, cela
ne modifierait-il pas votre opinion ? j


R; S’il y a un mal qui se perpétue, on peut parfaitement y
porter remède. S’il y a des Jurés qui ne comprennent pas l’an-
glais, c’est aux autorités supérieures à prendre des mesures
nécessaires pour qu’un pareil fait ne se reproduise pas.
Je puis citer des personnes qui étaient sur la liste des jurés
connaissant l’Anglais, et qui se sont fait récuser parcequ’elles
considéraient que c’était un ennui pour elles d’aller siéger et de
perdre leur temps.
Q. Quelles sont les mesures que vous suggéreriez pour obvier
à ce mal ?
R. Je ne suis pas prêt à repondre à» cette question ; j’aurais
voulu avoir le temps d’y réfléchir ; mais je puis dire, dès à présent,
qu’il me semble que si l’on augmentait le nombre des Jures, et la
chose est facile, l’inconvénient signalé disparaîtrait.
Q. Yous avez dit qu’avant d’accorder l’usage facultatif des
deux langues devant la Cour Suprême, il faudrait commencer par
changer tout le système judiciaire dans les Cours inférieures,
pourquoi cela ?
R. Je suis d’opinion qu’on ne doit faire aucun changement,
parce que je considère que le système actuel n’a produit aucune
erreur; mais ce que j’ai voulu dire, c’est que si l’on rétablissait
l’usage facultatif des deux langues devant les Cours Supérieures
il faudrait le faire en même temps devant les Tribunaux inférieurs.
Q. Yous avez dit que la connaissance de l’Anglais était spé-
cialement nécessaire pour les membres de la classe moyenne qui,
ne trouvant pas à s’employer dans la Colonie, étaient obligés
d’émigrer, est-ca que vous considérez que les membres apparte-
nant à cette classe apprennent l’Anglais parce qu’on se sert de
cette langue à la Cour d’Assises et à la Cour Civile ?
R. Je n’ai pas de raison pour croire le contraire; mais, lors-
que j’ai dit qu’il était nécessaire pour les membres de la classe
moyenne d’apprendre l’anglais, j’ai allégué un fait que j’avais pu
constater personnellement ; c’est-à-dire : que les Membres de
cette classe trouvaient de l’emploi plus facilement dans les diffé-
rentes colonies anglaises quand ils connaissaient l’anglais.
Ainsi dans mes voyages, j’ai pu constater le fait que ceux
des Mauriciens qui parlaient l’Anglais trouvaient plus facilement
à s’employer que ceux qui l’ignoraient.
J’ajouterai que M. Max Millier, un des plus éminents philo-
logistes de notre siècle et qui n’est pas un Anglais, déclare qu’a-
vant la fin du siècle prochain, sur cent personnes qui se serviront
des principales langues européennes, soixante-neuf parleront la
grande langue Anglo-Saxonne contre vingt qui parleront l’Es-
pagnol, six Allemand et trois seulement le français. Je tiens
aussi à ajouter qu’au Congrès de Berlin en 1878, on a parlé l’an-
glais à l’exclusion des autres langues, ce qui prouve que la lan-
gue de la diplomatie européenne est minée à l’heure actuelle par
la langue anglaise.
Q. En réalité les Membres de la classe moyenne n’appren-
nent-ils pas l’anglais plutôt dans les écoles que devant les
Tribunaux ?


H. Il n'y a pas le moindre doute à cela. En résumé mon
opinion’est que, sil!ou permet l’usage facultatif du français et de
l’anglais à la Cour Civile et à la Cour d’Assises, cela porterait un
coup fatal à l’enseignement de l’anglais dans la Colonie.
Le français deviendrait au bout d’un certain temps, en fait,
la langue de l’administration de la justice et pour tous ceux qui
veulent voir prospérer la.Colonie, ce n’est pas le but que l’on'
doit avoir en vue,
The Chairman Nous n’avons plus rien à vous demander.
Mr. Hitié : —Pardon M. le Président, j’aurais bien d’autres
observaticns à vous faire, surtout au point de vue politique pour
démontrer que l’usage facultatif de la languè françaif.e dans nos
tribunaux ne peut que produire des résultats fâcheux r pour la
marche régulière du Gouvernement, comme pour l’harmonie qui
doit régner au sein de notre population.
Mr. Gabriel Bouic stated-as follows :
By the Chairman Je suis le Directeur de la Merchants and■
Planters Gazette.
By Mr. Leclézio : —Je trouve qu’il est nécessaire que l’usage
du français soit facultatif devant la Cour Civile et surtout devant
la Cour d’Assises. J’ai été appelé plusieurs fois comme juré et
j’ai pu constater que beaucoup de jurés ne connaissaient pas
suffisamment'l’anglais pour siéger.
C’est lorsque les jurés se retiraient en Chambre pour délibérer
que je me suis aperçu que beaucoup d’entre eux n’avaient pas
compris les'débats par.l’interprétation qu’ils eu donnaient. C9ux j
qui savaient l’.anglais étaient alors obligés d’expliquer à ceux
qui ne connaissaient pas, cette langue ce qui s’était dit et c’est
sur ces explications qu’ils basaient leurs jugements et se lais-
saient guider par ceux qui avaient compris.
A mon point'de vue, les jugements rendus dans ces cas*la
n’étaient que»dea moqueries.
Je siège depuis-uné d’années comme juré, et les faits
dont je parlé se présentaient au moins une fois sur deux.
Je'pense que ces’faits ne se présenteraient pas s’il yavait
deux 1 Jurys; un français'et un anglais.
Je connais personnellement un juré qui ne connaît pas du
tout l’anglais.
Je ne pense pas que.l’usage facultatif du français' devant
les Cours supérieures inuise à'l’étude de l’anglais dans la colonie.
Je ne crois pasmon-plus que le retour à la langue française
devant les Cours,supérieures diminuerait notre affection pour la
Reine d’Angleterre ; je crois au contraire que cela ne pourrait
que l’augmenter.
Je publie un journal. Il a une partie française et une partie
anglaise et, s’il.était rédigé exclusivement' en anglais, je n’aurais
certes pas le nombre d’abonnés que j’ai actuellement. Je n’en
aurais guère que le cinquième.


À Maurice, tout le monde parle français, les Anglais eux-
mêmes qui viennent ici sont obligés d’apprendre cette langue.
Il y a quelques années de cela, il y avait un journal rédigé
exclusivement en anglais ; il a duré tout au plus un mois et j’at-
tribûe sa non-réussite au fait qu’il était rédigé exclusivement en
anglais.
Je voudrais aussi ajouter que la plupart des accusés qui sont
traduits devant la Cour d’Assises sont des Indiens qui ne com-
prennent pas un traître mot d’anglais et qui tous, ou à peu près
tous, comprennent le français, et je me demande comment la
Société des Aborigènes à Londres qui s’intéresse beaucoup à eux
ne s’est pas jusqu’ici occupée de cette question,
The Comraittee adjourned, at noon, to Wednesday, the
12th instant.
M. YARDIN,
Secretary.


No. 17.
MINUTES
Ofthe proceedings of the Committee of Inquiry into the desiràbility
of conducting the proceedings and pleadings before the
Suprême Court either in French or in English.
PRESENT :
The Honorable Sir 0. Antelme, K.O.M.G -.f—Chairman.
C. P. H. Adam.
V. Geffroy.
At a Meeting held at Government House, Port Louis, on the
12th. day of February 1890, the Committee resolvèd 10. that the
Inquiry be closed ; 20. that a complété set ofthe Minutes of
Proceediugs be sent to ail Members ; and 30. that they be ail
convened at a Meeting to take place on Wedoesday, the 26th.
instant, at noon.
M. YARDIN,
Secretary.


No. 18.
MINUTES
Of the proceedings of the Committee of Inquiry into the desirability
of conducting the proceedings and pleadings hefore the
Suprême Court either in French or in English.
PRESENT :
The Honorable Sir C. Antelme, K.GM.Gr. ) ‘—Chai/rman.
Sir Y. Naz, K.C.M.G.
C. F. H. Adam.-
Y. Geflroy.
H. Leclézio.
At a Meeting held at Government House, Port Louis, ontho
26th. day of February 1890, it was resolved tbat tbe Chairman
would draw up a report embodying the views of the Members on
the question and that he would submit the aame to the Com-
mittee at their next aitting.
The Committee adjourned sine die.
M. TARDIN,
secretary,


No. 19.
MINUTES
Of the proceedings ofthe Committee of Inquiry into thedesirability
of conducting the proceedings and pleadings before the
Suprême Court eitheriinJPrench or in English, at a meeting
held at Government Èouse, Port Louis, on the 9 th. day of
>'October 1590.
PRESENT :
The Honorable Sir 0. Antelme, K.C. M.G. ,—Ghairman,
Sir Y. Naz, K.C.M.G.
• The Procureur General.
,H. Adam.
Y. Geffroy. _
G. Guiberfc.
H. Leclézio.
W. Newton.
1. ,Tbe Chairman read to the Committee the Report he had
prepared and it was approved by the Honorables H. Adam,
Y. Geffroy and H. Leclézio.
2. The Honorable the Procureur General objected in toto
both to the considérations set forth in the body of the report and
toits conclusions. _
3. The-Honorables Sir Y. Naz, K.C.M.G., W. Newton and
G. Guibert expressed the desire to give their opinion separately.
TheirjdigSents will be found annexed to the Report.
M. YARDIN,
Secretary,


ANNEXURES TO MINUTES No. 2.
J. L
Y 3rd Angust'1889.
His Honor Sir B. P. J. Leclezio, Ohief Judge of the
Suprême Court.
&c., &c., &c.
Sir,
, a meeting of' thé tf Committeé of Inquiry into the desir-
ability of conducting the proceediugs and pleadings bofôrè‘the
bupreme Court either iu French or in English, ” held at Go-
vernment House, Port Louis, on the lst instant, it was resolved
to address to Tour Honor a copy of the motion and of the
amendment thereto made before the Council of Government on
the above subject for the favor of your opinion and that of
your colleagues.
1 bave, accordingly, the honor to forward 4 copies of such
motion and amendment and to respectfully request their Honors
the Judges of the Suprême Court to favor the Committèè with
their views on the subject.
I hâve the houor to be,
Sir,
Tour most obedient servant’,
C. ANTELME,
Chairman,
IB
Chambers,.
Suprême Court,
15th October 1889,
To
The Chairman of the Committee of Inquiry into the desirability
of conducting the proceedings’ and pleadings before the
Suprême Court either in French or in English.
&c., &c., &c.,
Sir,
I hâve the honor to ncknowledge the receipt of your letter
dated 3rd August last, forwarding to me 4 copies of the motion
and of the amendment thereto made before the Council of Go-
vernment, on the subject of conducting th© proceedings-and
pleadings before the Suprême Court either in French or in
English, and asking for my views and those of my colleagues
on that question.


I hâve handed over to my colleagaes the copies destined to
them, and each of the Judges will send to you his observations
separately.
With regard to the language iu which the written proce-
dure Bbouid be drawn up, I think tbat it is advisable that the
English language should continue to be the only written lan-
guage of the Court ; it is désirable that the records should not
be kept in two different languages. Some allusion was made in
Council to the difficulty which the great majority of litigants
had to understand the procedure served upon them ; this is quite
true, but at the eame time I believe that even those who unders-
tand the English language do not fait to apply to a lawyer, ia
order to obtain explanations and advice when tbey are sum-
moned to appear before a Court of Justice ; and more especially so
■when fchey bave a lawsuit before the Suprême Court.
I see, however, no objection, to the faculty being left to
Counsel to argue eitber in English or in French. There is no
doubt that most of the litigants do not understand English, es-
pecially when spoken, and are therefore unable to follow what
their counsel say. This impossibilifcy was often a cause of great
vexation at the tirne when I was practising at the Bar.
In criminal cases, if the faculty be left „to the accused to
choose the lauguage in which the proceedings in Court should
be conducted, I hâve no doubt that there would be a mncb
greater number of Jurors inscribod on the liât, and the same
Jnrors would not hâve to be called so often before the Court of
Assizes ; and a great many young men, after they hâve left School,
hâve no opportunity ofspeaking English iu a comxnunity in which
French or French creole, is the language of social and business
relations for the great mass of the population, and through want
of practice they forget the little which tbey hâve learnt, and are
quite unable to understand the English language when spoken.
Another conséquence of such a measure would be a greater
publicity given to what takes place iu Court ; with the exception
of the lawyers and a few other persons, the audience does not
understand what is said during the trial by the judge and the
counsel.
Whatever may be the resuit of the motions made with
regard to the language in which the argument is to be deliv«red,
I beg to draw your spécial attention to the following observa-
tions ;
In virtuo of the terms of the Royal Order in Council of the
13th September 1845 ail documents produced before the Suprême
Court had to be translated into the English lauguage, and ail
the dépositions of witnesses made in French, French creole or
other languages, had also to be interpreted to the Court in the
English language. By Ordinance No. 18 of 1856 it has been
enacted that u in any case where any document is produced in
“ evidence before the Court or before the Master, and such
" document is in a language which the Judge or Judges then
u sitting, or the Master, as the case may be, understand, it shall
" nofc be necessary to translate such documeot, unless either of
f< the parties to the suit or other proceedings requirethe aune/’
This enactment has had for its effect to diminish the
costs of suifcs before this Court, as almosfc ali the docu-
ments produced are written iu the French language ; and


I believe thafc tbero is nofc a single instance on.record.since.1856,
thafc anyof the Judges, orany party tô a suit has’required a
document written in French to be translated into English.
After many years* expérience attbe Bar and on the Bencli, I am
of opinion that an enactment of a similar nature, regardiog the
interprétation of dépositions, would, in a large.measure, diminish
the costs of suits before the Suprême Court.
of witnesses, in mosb of the cases which are heard by. the Court,
do not speak English but speak French or Fyçnch çreole, and a.
considérable amount of time is wasted by thê mierpretation of the
questions put and of the answers made, whereas the Jûdges, the
Counsel and the parties generally understand the language
spoken by those witnesses.
I hâve no doubt that an enactment, in the sense indicated
above, would contribute to a more speedy and less costly admi-
nistration of justice, and prove a great benefit to the litigants of
this Colony.
I hâve the honor to be,
Sir,
Your most obedient servant,
E. J. LECLÉZIO,
Chief Judge.
O
The Honorable Me. Anielme’s Motion.
Remaries of His Honor Mr. Justice Williams.
The proposai of the Honorable Célicourt Antelmeis, virtual-
ly, in the direction of abolishing the practice of .nearly half a,
cèntury, and reversing the policy of the Orders in Couocil of
February 1841 and September 1845, establishing English as.the
official language of this Colony and of its Suprême Court, of
Justice.
It lies with those who propose this radical change, to justify
it.
•
The most serious of the arguments—because the most im-
portant from the humanitarian point of view—upon which the
honorable and learned Member of Council for Plaines Wilhems
bases his motion, is that, as things stand, accused persons are
frequeutly condemned in our Assize Courts without understand-
ing the procedure or the language employed. I do not think
that this is the case, or that, if it is in any measure the case,
that measure would be diminished by altering the official lan-
guage of the Court from English to French. The essentially im-
portant parts of the proceedings for a prisoner to understand
are, of course, the charge to which he pleads, which is always
read to him here in his own language, whatever that may be ;
and the evidence, which is generally given here in French, or
in “ creole,” or in an Indian dialect, and which is always tran-
slated into English. The speeches and the summing up, with
which. he has no right to interfère, it is not of nearly sucb


©ssential importance for a prisoner to comprehend as the evi-
dance ; because it is upon the evidence that his case stands or
falls with Judge and jury, and it is upon ib tliafc, in the course
of its delivery, it is esseutial that he diould be able to communi-
cate with his counsel in order to make suggestions for the exa-
mination or for the cross-examination of witnesses. Now, if it be
true, as Mr. Antelme believes, that the Indians and creole3 who
corne generally before the Court of Assizos hâve a knowledge of
French, they, in most cases, do, as a matter of fact, hear the
evidence given in French or French creole before it is translated.
But, if the honorable member’s beîief on this point be only par-
tially well based (as I am inclined to think it, seeing that the
Indians coming before us are generally nofc of the ' domestic-
servant class, who piok up a smattering of French or Euglish in
their employment, but of the field labourer class, who speak
their own Indian dialects, or a very inferior creole patois which
would certaiuly be uniotelligible to a Frenchman), then, and
indeed in any case, the reform to be desirod from the humani-
tarian point of view i«, surely, not the reduciog of ail things to
the deal level of any ono European language, but the transla-
tion of ail the evidence by an interpréter standing beside the dock
to the prisoner in his own language or dialect , whatever that
language or dialect may be- This, at présent, is not done. But
this, I repeat, is what ought to be done iu our criminal Courts,
as a genuine measure of hurrianitarian reform. The alteration of.
the official language of the Àssize Court from English to French,
would not, I submit, assist this at ail.
As regards the jury System, the substitution, as the lan-
guage used officialty in Court, of French for English, would, of
course, rid the Jury List, of tho large proportion of its English
element, doubtless to the great content and satisfaction of that
element, until one ofits own members happenedhimself to stand
in the dock. It may safely be asserted that a far larger propor-
tion of Mauritian members of our Jury List English, than
English members kuow French, sufficiently well to discbarge
their duties duly and conscientiously. If the plan were a'dopted
of conducting trials in eitber tho English or the French lan-
guàge, at the prisoner’s option, its operation would in volve the
préparation and maintenance of separate French and English
Jury Lists, and the summoning of duplicata panels of jurors for
the purpose of each and every trial—a complicated costly, and
troublesome proceeding, to be surely avoidedunless proved to be
imperâtively necessary in the suprême intorests of justice.
To myself, *the impérative necessity for such a radical
change seems not sufficiently apparent to justify the practical
inconvenience involved. lam one of th'-se who believe that,
upon the whole, the existent jury System of this Colony has
worked satisfaotorily and well ; and that ifc présents as good
guarautees for satisfactory working in the future as auy yet
proposed modification of it, short, possibly, (but on this point I
offer no opinion here) of its total abolition.
The honorable member of Council who was so eager to ex-
tend the scope of the motion, of the honorable Mr. Antelme, drew
a facetious picture of the practical working of our présent pro-
cédure iu the Süpreme Court of this Colony. It is possible that
the honorable member’s expérience of Courts of Justice, Colonial
and otherewise, may be wider than my own. Butto me, the honor-
able Gentleman’s description appeared a mere travesty of .our


procedure in Mauritius, which lias never struck me (making due
allowance, of course, for the polyglot cbaracter of this commu-
nity) as ridiculous or undigniôed, in comparison with that of
other superior Courts of Justice in other Colonies, or even iu
Bngland and in France. There might, no doubt, be a considér-
able saving of time in civil actions brought before our Suprême
Court, if the evidence given by witnesses were not translated
unless the Judges desired it. But this, of course, présupposés a
general capacity upon the part of the Bench, not only to under-
staûd the uninterpieted evidence, but to take it down iu writing,
whether given in English, in French, or in “ Creole.”
Having glanced at the question involved in Mr. Antelme’s
motion as it affects the administration of justice in this Colony,
I beg to be permitted, in conclusion, to travel somewhat out of
the record in order to ventare a word upon the question in its
more general aspect.
French and English are, both of them, the languages. of
tninorities in this community. French, no more than English, is
the original language of Mauritius, nor is it the langua'ge-
most generally spoken in Mauritius now. If the language of
the majority is to be encouraged here, it must be Hindustani or
Tamil, or, at ail events, the hybrid “creole ” patois, upon which
th© various races of India, the Arabs, the Africans, Malays,
Malagasys and Chinese find a common platform in Mauritius.
Within Mauritius, those who desire the perpétuation, or to use
a term of commercial politics, the- “ protection ” of the French
language here, are mainly creoles of unmixed blood—a probably
not increasing race—who inherit a very natural penchant for the
tonguè of their more or less distantly removed French Ancestors.
Within Mauritius, and amongst so called “ creoles ” of the Is-
land, this sentiment is, however, by no means universal. Indeed/
there are many here claiming, sometimes rather noisily, to be
the exponents of “ creole ” views, who, in fact, represeot only a
particular and limited section of thera. Since Mr. Antelme
brought his motion forward in Council, Mr. Rohan, a Mauritian
member of the Civil Service Commission of Mauritius, over
which Commission I hâve the honour to présidé, argued strong-
îy atour board in favour of the eniire élimination of French
from the Civil Service examinations of this Colony, on the grouûd,
principally, that, Mauritius being a British Possession, if any
language is to be cultivated and encouraged here, that language
should be the English ; and I hâve no doubt that Mr. Rohan is
the mou th piece of a considérable section of the Mauritian cre-
ole community. Within Mauritius, if the French language and
the English language (both I repeat the languages of minorities
here), are onco again to compete for the leadiDg position, it v
seems strange that the disqualification of English should be that
it is the language of our flag—that it has been fairly useful and
successlul as an official laDguage for nearly half a century
that it is the longue, most assuredly, of our customers. Our ex-
tended future trade lies with Australia and witli India. But
English-speaking Australia and the South Afrioan Colonies
of England already take six times more of our produce
than Madagascar and France. In fact, our total exports to En-
glisli-speakiug countiies are upwards of twelve times greater
than those to ail French-speaking countries combined. So
much for Mauritius in the présent. But what of the future ?
To what pitch of congestion in our professional ranks, as in ail
other ranks, are wo to attain in this little island before our sous
discover that they must look to the already expanded flag of.


England for their future, and not to the non-expansive flag-of
France ? With a sincere regard for this island, and with an
honest sympathy for her sms and daughters, I pass from within
Mauritius to -without Mauritius. And I learn from the mosb
eminent philologist of our era. Mr. Max Müller— not an English-
man—that, according to bis estimate, out of every hundred per-
sons who speak one of tbo five chief European languages at the
end ofnexfc century, sixty nine will employ lhe language of tbo
gréât Anglo-Saxon race to three who will use the beautiful but
improgressive language of our ever dear but ever self-contained
and unexpanding France. Verbum sapienti satis. But., from the
wisdom, or unwisdom, of reactioDary politicians iu this mattor,
I.wouldmake a most respectful appeal to the wisdom, and to
the maternai and patriotic instiocts, of the women of Mauritius.
If the future well being of their sons and of their sons' sons ia
dear to.these ladies, let them overcome ali préjudices of the past,
such as from tbe stock-iri-tra le of self-seeking and professional
politicians, and look to it that the future mothers of Mauritius
are able to speak English to their children. For a good son
will.always love best the language in which his mother talked to
him as a child.
Frédéric Condé WILLIAMS.
3D
Chambere, Court House,
17th, October 1889.
To
TheChairman of the Committee of Inquiry into the desirability
of conducting the proceeding3 and pleadings before
tbo Suprême Court either in French or in Fnglish.
&c., &c., &c.
Sir,
I havé the hoïïourto forward my report on certain suggested
changes in the mode of proceediug before the Suprême Court.
I hâve, at the outset, to point out that, from the ténor of
the résolutions in the Legislative Council, the changes in the
proceedings and pleadings before the Suprême Court hâve to be
considered by tbe Judges “ in so far only as the interests of
“"justice may require them”.
In the observations wbich I propose to offer, I sball there-
fore leave ontirely aside the political aspect of the question,
although it is probably, in the eyes of many, the most important.
One change is, in my miod, absolutely necessary.
The Suprême Court sbould hâve power to liear and take
down évidence given in French or in the Creole dialect, without
theformality of an Interprétation.
Tliis wouîd preveht the lime of th Court from béirig wasted
as itis'at-present.


It is not even “ in the interest of justice” that the System
now in force should continue.—ln many cases 1 , the frencli spdak»
ing witnesses who insist on questions being interpreted to them,
are sufficiently acquainted with the English language to' under-
stand the questions put.—The delay winch résulta from an inter-
prétation euables the witness to préparé his answer. The
examination in Court loses in conséquence much of its usefulness.
A question never surprises this class of witnesses.
The inconvenience of the présent System is increased at
présent by the lack of good interprèters. In important mabters,
when the answers of witnesses hâve to be carefully weighed,
the interprétation made in -Court gives frequently rise to un-
pleasant incidents. The Counsel, when dissatisfied with the
way in which a particular expression bas been conveyed in
English, appeals to tho Court fco hâve matters set right. A
long and desultory’discussion follows and eventually the Court
has to décidé on the merits of the interprétation itself.
I do not see why the change suggested by me with refer-
ence to the examination of witnesses, should not extend to cri-
minal cases trie! in the Court of Assizés. The cases in which a
juror, although English, would not understand an examination
of witnesses conducced in French or in the Creole dialeet would
be, I think, extremely rare. Of course, it would be tho duty of
the Judge to ascertain if the jûror has a proper knowledge of
French or Creole.
I may here remark that, during tho years which followed
the change introduced by the Order in Council of 13th Sep-
tember 1845 in the constitution of the Suprême Court, docu-
ments written in French, when tendered in evidence, had to-be
translated into English, but the inconvenience of the System
was soon felt, and by Ordinance 18 of 1856 ib became lawful
to produce in evidence, without a translation, documents origin-
ally written in French.
The change introduced with reference, to written evidence
might therefore be safely extended to oral evidence.
The question whether it is désirable “ in the interest of
justice ” that the prooeedings and pleadings before the Court
of Assizes should be carried on in French is far more important
and serious, in as much as it implies the practical exclusion of
Judges, Procureurs General, and Substitute Procureurs General
of English origin,—with this qfcher somevvbat curious resuit, that
evidence given in English would bave to be interpreted into
French, in order to become legally admissible.—
After careful considération, I hâve corne to the opinion that
the Suprême Court will not dérivé any serious benefit from the
proposed change.
An argument which has been frequently put forward is
the difficulty of forming juries out of the English speakiug part
of the population. I do not think that the proposed change
would improve matters much, for, if, on the one hand, the jury
List would ba increased by names drawn from the French speak-
ing part of tho population;, which has hitherto pleaded its igno-
rance of 'the English languago as an excuse for not serviug as
jurors, on theother hand, the services, as jarors, would be lost,


of ail the Colonists of English origin who would, in their turo,
allégé their ignorance of French.
Due accouDt must be taken of the fact that the number of
pecp’e with a sufihcient knowledge of English to understand the
proceedings of a Law Court, must necessarilv increase in the
Colony.
So long as the Royal College remains with its présent orga-
nization, the English language wiîl become more and more
familiar to Mauritians. The Royal College is the main educational
establishment in Mauritius, and every one of the pnpils who has
been trained in it for a cértnn number of years, has a fair know-
ledge of English. It is from the class of people that seads its
sons to the Royal College that jurors are recruited. That class
is becoming every day more numerous.
Ànother objection does not appear to me to be very sorious.
It is said that under the présent System many of the accused
do not understand what is going on in Court.
This reasoning caonot apply to the evidence of witnesses,
which the accused are free to hear and understaud before it is
interpreted into English. As for the address of Counsel, when
delivered in English, the prisoner, if Creole, lndian, or
Chinese, does not, it is true, understand it in the generality
of cases, but, as a barrister does not reçoive instructions in the
course of his speech from his client who is in the dock, the ac-
cused does not practically suffer any injustice. I am afraid that
if the jury was addressed in pure élégant French, the accused,
being of the class alluded to, would not fare tnuch better.
To the proposai that the proceedings and pleadings in Civil
cases should be carried on iu French or English at the option of
the parties, I strongly object. Lit us hâve a Court in which pro-
cesdings are conducted exclusively in French, or a Court which
will be an English Court. But a Court in which one of the
Counselwill be at liberty to speak French and the other English,
where an incident begun in French may terminate in English,
or “ vice versa,” would soon, I imagine, présent an aspect
hardly compatible with its dignity.
I do not see, if the change proposed is carried out, on what
ground tlie procedure may not also be, at the option of suitors,
partly French and partly English.
I think therefore that, with the exception of the modifica-
tion I hâve propose:! as to the mode of receiving evidence, it
will be far better to leave things as they are.
I hâve the honor to be,
Sir,
'Your moet obedient Servant,
John ROTJIIÀjARD,
Judge.


IEEj
Observations of Justice Mure on the question whether the pro-
ceedings and pleadings before the Court of Assizes
should le made in French, and on the Civil side of the
Suprême Court in French or in English at the option of
the parties.
By the Order in Council of 25th. Februavy 1841 (5 Rouillard’s
Collection P. 1) English was declared to be the language in
which the Ordinances, Proclamations and Notices of the Govern-
ment of Mauritius were to be made and promulgated. By the
Order in Council of 13th. September 1845 (5 Rouillard P. 342)
on the preamble that it is désirable that the exclusive use of the
English Language in ail Judicial and public proceedings and
records in the said Island should be further extended it was or-
dered that ail proceedings and ail the records of proceedings
in the superior tribunals of Justice shall be had and made in
the English language only. After upwards of forty years usage
in coDformity with the last order it is now proposed to return
to the former System in the Court of Assizes, and optionally in
the Civil side of the Court. This therefore is a retrogade and
reactionary step, and proposed to be taken in opposition to the
expediency declared more than once of fler Majesty’s Coun-
cil that it is désirable to extend the exclusive use of the English
Language. The promoters of this change must prove that u in
the interests of justice” the former usage ought to be resorted
to, and that the présent System is a failure. I think that no
such proof can be made, and I am against any change whatever.
The chief argument used by the Honorable Proposer of the
motion that I saw reported in the Newspapers was that some
convicted coloured Creole had said that he did not understand
what took place at his trial. As a visitiug Justice for mahÿ
years of a Prison in Great Britain I can say that no Convicted
Prisoner I hâve ever seen thinks he has had a fair and proper
trial, and he is always of opinion that if soraething had taken
place at his trial different frorn what actually did occur, he
woüld hâve been acquitted. Of course convicted prisoners in
Great Britain cannot prétend tliey do not understand the lan-
guage used in Court. My remarks go to this that what a con-
victed prisoner says about his case and trial ought in the gene-
ral case to hâve no weight whatever. Further it is not correct
in point of fact to say, as I tbink the honorable gentleman
argued, that if the proceedings were in pure French not only ail
the natives who speak the Creole Patois, but also ail tbe IndiaDS
wôuld understand the proceedings. It is true that after some
years, mosfc Indians pick up a little of the Creole Patois, but it
is as much only as enables them to say a few necessary sen-
tences to the Natives or to Chinese shop-keepers, or to an
Indian who does not speak the same language, and noto-
riously Indians always among themselves speak in their own
dialect. The creole Patois itself is a poor meagre language
wanting in mariy worda and ideas that would occur ia a Court
of Justice, and from my own expérience I can say that good
French is understood neither by those who speak this Patois nor
by Indians. But the question is in what language should the
business of a Criminal Court be carried on in an English Colony,
in wbich approximately speaking two thirds of the population
are Indians speaking their own languages, the other tbird eon-
sistiog chiefly of those who s steak the spécial Patois only, with a


few thousand Chinese or Malays, a few thousand Mauritians of
pure French descent, and a thousand or thereabout of pure En.
glieh, the French, if I may so call them for shortness sake, though
outnumbering the English heing a mere fraction of the whole
coramunity. It seems to me that in such a State of matters, the
language of the Metropolitan authority should be the language
of the-Suprême Criminal Court. Certainly to reverse tbe usage
of upwardm of forty years, there should be a strong case of failure
of the Administration of Justice made out under the présent
System. But I take it that this is not even alleged on the other
side, and certainly it could notbe proved. The Administration of
Justice in Mauritius may hâve now and then some defects as is
the case everywhere, but these do not in the least degree
arise from the use of the English Language. If there is
to be a change, why should the French hâve a preference ?
It should be the laDguage of the majority, and that would be an
Indian dialect.
Itishere to be remarked that the accused has the charge
always read to him in his own language and the evidence of
witnesses is almost invariably given in the language be under-
stands before it is interpreted to the Jury and the Court He
can always make any suggestion to his Couosel, as the trial
goes on ; and it is of no conséquence that he does not understand
the summing np and thé pleadings of Counsel for he never in-
terfères with them. Of course if French was the Official lan-
guage of the Court, as a rule ail Englishmen would cease to be
competent for the Offices of Judge or Prosecutor, and-Frenchmen
of Mauritius who know French and the Creole Patois would he
alone able to do the work required.
It is also said that the evidence of French and Creole
witnesses should be given without the intervention of an Inter-
préter, and that the time of the Court would be thereby saved,
I cannot help thinking that the advantage to be thus gained is
not nearly-so great as has been imagined. Interprétation would
still hâve to be resorted to in thé case of ail Indian and many
Chinese witnesses, and only in the case of. a rainority of the
witnesses examined would any relief be given. It is not worth
while for such a partial advantage to make a change of System,
For in such a Court as Mauritius, there must always be a
choice of difficulties and advantages. If the evidence of French
and Creole witnesses were taken in their respective languages,
radical changes in the Jury Ordinances must be made. At
présent those are exempted from serviDg on the Jury who do not
understand English ; in the case supposed the English who do
not understand French ‘would hâve to be c-xempted, and every
Englishman would claim the exemption. There being little
intercourse between those who speak French and English, living
in Mauritius even for many years does not enable the aveiage
Englishman to speak French or to understand the language
when spoken. To exclude ail Englishmen from the Jury list
would not be expédient, even though in practice it is the
custom to challenge as many of them as possible. Nor are
the suggestions practical or capable of being worked, either
that the Judge should at the beginning of a Trial ascertain if
the English on the Jury can understand French, or that there
should be two Jury Lists, one for French speaking, the other for
English speaking Jurors. In the first case, the Judge would
exercise’a kind of challenge which would be ân invidious right,
and to beexercised when probably the Jury would be
exhausted, in the second caseras a limited number of Jurymen


are always summoned for the spécial case, it would corne to the
same resuit, as if ail tlie names were onone list.
The proposai that; the Suprême Court should take the
evidence of French and- Creole speaking wituesses without
in’terpretâtion is derived from the practice of the District Courts,
where it is usual for the Magistrate to translate the evidence
for himself, and writè down- his own interprétation of' the
words used. I doubt whether tbis mode of procedure would
wôrk well iu the Sùpreme Court. There the cases are more
iotricate, and it is generally in some technical case of survey-
ing, engineering, or of Patent Law or in some other difficult
question that discussions arise as to the proper translation of
certain answers.
I do not think it expédient that each Judge should put his
own interprétation on such questions and answers', and it seems
to me that very different notes ôf the evidence might in the
enpposed case be made by different Judges. I further ask how
this System is to be worked out in cases that are appealable to
the Privy Couocil and other cases in which the Registrar bas
to record the evidence. The Registrar, I suppose, for the sake
of a Utile speed would put his own interprétation on the evi-
dence and record it in English. This procedure would be utterly
unsatisfactory, and the proposai to my ihind is impracticable.
Little need be said on the optional choice of carrying on
the proceedings and pleadings on the Civil Side of the Suprême
Court in French or English. As to the pleadings uniformity
requires that the déclarations should not be in French and the
Plea *on defence in English, or the reverse ; and that the
Counsel for the plaintiff should speak the one laoguage while
the defendant’s advocate speak in another. If the proposai
were acceded to the proceedings of the Suprême Court would bave
a non descript character attached to them, and would become
anomalous and informai, and scarcely consistant withits dignifcy.
Moreover the pleadings are now framed on an English model
taken from an English Statute, and as French would be prefer-
red by the Attorneys of the Court there would follow a desire
for a French System of pleading and radical changes would be
necessary in the whole procedure and constitution of the Court.
Besides, if you give au option, it would be scarcely possible in a
Colony in which so many nationalities exist to lirait the choice to-
two languages and, by and by, you would be bound to extend it
to parties, wbo belong to the majority in the Island, and wkose
cases corne before tbe Court more frequently than any others.
In truth this proposai is merely getting in the thin end of
Wedge so as to necessitate greater changes. It would bé absurd
for a Court conducting its proceedings in French to ÎDterpret
Laws, Proclamations, and Government Notices, the authoritative
version of which is in English. The order in Oouncil of 1841
must follow the fate of that of 1845. If these go, the teaching
of the whole classes in the English languàge in the Royal Colle-
ge would also become nnnecessary, and on option would be then
demanded and given also. By and by the English language would
gradually disappear merely to gratify a few sentimental lovera
of their maternai tongue.
lam glad to think that the prospect at présent opens an
entirely opposite vista for the future. In the World generally
the English is making enormous progress ; and will soon be the


language spoken over the largest portion of the globe. In this
Island it is also making progress. The Royal College is doing
excellent work, and sends forbh each year an increasing number
of young men well trained to understand and speak English.
These will add to the number of the Jury Lists and they will
gradually become better qualified to do the work of juryman.
Éven in the Government Schools, English is now taught side by
side with French to the children of the middle and working
classes, and I hâve met several boys lately from these schools
whose knowledge of English surprised me. I look forward
hopefully to the time, when the power of reading and speaking
English will be much more widespread than at présent, and
when there will no longer exist anywhere the supposition that it
is désirable to revert to Freoch as tbe official language of the
Island.
Andkew MITRE.
21st. October 1889.
ANNEXURE TO MINUTES No. 10.
IF 1
To
The Honorable C. Antelme C.M.G.
Member of the Council of Government,
etc. etc.
1. I conscientiously believe, affcer having attended, since
1852, a great many criminal cases tried by juries in Mauritius,
that the trial by jury cannot be of any real utility to Society at
large in Mauritius, unless the debates before the Court of Assizes
are exclusively conducted in the French language.
2. The nine-tenths of the jury men are «imperfectly ac-
quaintei with the English language, and the meaning of a great
many words used either by the Judge or Counsel, or English
witnesses is not well understood by most of them.
3. I, for one, think that in most of those cases tried by juries
in Mauritius, in which verdicts hâve been considered as miscar-
riages of justice and hâve been wrongly attributed to feelings
and caprices, which hâve distovted or disturbed the judgmonts of.
juries and distracted their minds from the simple operation of-
ascertaining whether the facts proved brought the case within
the law as they were bound to take it, such verdicts hâve been
the effects of an improper knowledge of the English language by
the jury men that sat in such cases.
4. But I think that I ought to go further and to say that
the Home Government cannot continue to shub their eyes to
such a state of things and are bound in order to give to this
country a sound administration of criminal Justice, to decree
that the debates should take place exclusively in the French
language before the Court of Assizes.
5. I may venture to say, without feaiing any contradiction,
that any one who calmly and carefully considéra the question
under considération will easily confess that the présent system
is really open to the attacks which hâve been made upon it and
tbat the French language being understood in Mauritius by ail
those who live in tbis country, Englishmeu, creoles, indians &c.,
and those who thoroughly understand the English lauguage


being few and far between, the exclusive use of the French
language,, before the Court of Àssizes, should be allowed.
6. I am also of opinion that those who are appointed Judges of
the Suprême Court of Mauritius should be conversant
with the English and French languages, and that ail witnesses
heard, before the Suprême Court of Mauritius should be allowed
to give their oral evidenee either in the English or the Frencli
language ; and that the use of an interpréter to translate into
the English language the dépositions of witnesses given in the
French language., ought to be abolished.
I do not think that the adoption of my suggestions might
dater young men from studying in Mauritius the English lan-
guage ; those who wish to compete for the English Scholarship
and who intend to enter into the Civil Service will continue to
study the English language which cannôt be ac'quired in any
perfection but by long and continued practice.
Port Louis, Mauritius, this seventeenth day of October 1889,
Julius GUIBERT,
Crown Attorney.


Ÿear.
Number
of
Jurors.
Remarks.
1&75 ...
993
1876 ....
944
1877 ...
840
1878 ...
808
1879 ...
775
1880 ...
736*
* In 1880, 1176 Jurors, who had been
1881 ...
817
excused five years previous, were by me
1882 ...
718
again placed on the provisioual Jury
1883 ...
796
List, under Art. 14 of Ordinauce No. 3
1884 ...
846
of 1874 (sinoe repealed) but ali their
1885 ...
813
names were again erased, they having
1886 ...
804
deolared, 'de novo, that they were not
1887 ...
776
sufficiently acquainted wifch the English
1888 ...
756
Language to serre as Jurors.
1889 ...
766
ANNEXURE TO MINUTES No. 12.
G-
Stqtemenl showing thenumber of Jurors borne on tKe Jury Books,
from 1875 to 1889.
sth November 1889.
Oscar D’emmirez de CHARMOY,
Registrar, Suprême Court.
