

p ■ pm
;i - IP
REPORT
ON THE
I I
VEGETABLE PRODUCTS
EXHIBITED IN THE
J NTERCOLONIAL
I
OF
1866-67.
DE. FEED. MUELLEE, F.E.S.
||el bourne:
BLUNDELL & CO,, PRINTERS, 51 & 53 FLINDERS LANE WEST.
MDCCCLXVII.




REPORT
VEGETABLE PEODUCTS.
DR. FERD. MUELLER, F. R. S.
BLUNDELL & CO., PRINTERS, 51 & 53 FLINDERS LANE WEST.
MDCCCLXVII*




JURORS’ REPORT
ON THE
VEGETABLE PRODUCTS
IN THE
INTERCOLONIAL EXHIBITION OF 1866.
INTRODUCTORY NOTES TO THE VICTORIAN COLLECTION
OF TIMBER AT THE INTERCOLONIAL EXHIBITION.
This series of wood samples was brought together on behalf of the Royal
Commission. It comprises representatives of barely one-half of the
timber trees known to exist within the limits of the Victorian colonial
area ; but, inasmuch as the localities richest in the diversity of their trees
are also the least accessible ; as, moreover, but in few places the timber is
obtainable at frequented shipping ports, and as but very slender means
were available for bringing together a display of all our timber, the
collection is now less extensive than that formed in 1861 for the London
Exhibition. Nevertheless, it comprises nearly all the leading kinds of
wood, which have attracted hitherto more or less commercial attention, and
displays—at least in some samples—the huge dimensions of many of our
trees, broad planks of blackwood, evergreen beech, red gumtree, and a
few other kinds of eucalypts, having been secured. To demonstrate still
more fully the gigantic size of some of our timber trees would have
involved means over which I had no command; but a drawing in the
Victorian Timber Court will more readily exemplify how, by a moderate
outlay, the colossal sizes of our trees could be brought before the eye of
the general population. This design demonstrates, in a monumental
structure, how the slabs of various sections of the. stem and branches could
be placed over each other for showing the proportionate dimensions.
Thus, for instance, we might have a fair illustration of a tree of
Eucalyptus amygdalina, ascertained by Mr. D. Boyle to have attained, in
the valleys of Dandenong, a height of 420 feet. These trees do not
merely exceptionally rise to this amazing height, but, contrarily, very
many, in the deep recesses of the mountains, advance to the same
magnitude; and this we see repeated in regard to other tall kinds of
Eucalyptus in other parts of the country. It would appear from measure-
ments hitherto extant as if, even in Tasmania, the sizes of trees fall short of
ours, perhaps because of the mean annual heat of the forest ranges in that
island being somewhat less than the temperature of our wooded mountains.
There is only one instance on record which brings certain of our highest
trees in rivalry with those of the other Australian colonies—the instance


of a measurement of the Karri Eucalypt, on the Warren River, of
Western Australia, where Mr. Pemberton Walcott’s measurements gave a
result of, approximately, 400 feet. It is by no means thus unlikely that
Victoria possesses the most elevated trees of the globe, excelling even those
so famed for enormous height in California. It would be of the highest
interest if actual measurements of these giants of the forest could be
obtained wherever they occur; and in Australia they would be of all the
more significance, as here the extraordinary dimensions of the trees is not
so much the result of very great age but extreme rapidity of growth —a
quality which has rendered our trees already so celebrated, and caused their
introduction—for fuel, shelter, building purposes, and other intentions —to
be effected into many of those countries which bear a clime similar to ours.
It may on this occasion not be out of the scope of reference to draw
attention to the very promising quantity of tar, acetic acid and wood
spirits obtainable from timbers, either not sufficiently accessible for the
operations of sawmills, or (as in the instance of the Melaleuca ericifolia,
which covers all our swamps) not of sufficient size to be used for building
purposes. A series of these tars, &c,, prepared under my direction by Mr. A.
Hoffmann, in the laboratory of the Botanic Gardens, from ten of our trees,
of which nine are very widely prevailing over most others, is placed in the
Exhibition, and will become the subject of a special memoir. When
viewing our trees, it should also be remembered that not merely for the
purposes indicated, but also for obtaining potash, tannic and gallic acid,
dye material, volatile oil, and paper material, trees of such vast abundance
should find full appreciation. One branch of industry has already sprung
up for utilising the latter-mentioned products. I refer to the extensive
distillation of oil from Eucalypts and species of Melaleuca. This industry
was initiated by the distillation of about thirty species of oils for the last
London and Victorian Exhibition. It was undertaken at my request, and
from material selected by myself, chiefly by Mr. Joseph Bosisto, the present
Mayor of Richmond, wdro, with a most praiseworthy spirit of enterprise,
when thus becoming aware of the great yield of oils, gave to this branch of
industry commercial dimensions. This use of our native trees might be
advantageously followed up in other directions, and for other purposes, for
the benefit of unprovided families, and for the lucrative employment of
capital.
The main number of the wood specimens were secured by the Royal
Commission through a few special emissaries; but some valuable
additions were made by the contribution of Wimmera timber through
Samuel Wilson, Esq.; Gippsland woods from near Port Albert, by Mr.
Commissioner Tyers ; Murray timber, by Allan Hughan, Esq., and Peter
Beveridge, Esq.; Mount Macedon timber, by J. Snowball, Esq.; and Berwick
timber, by G. W. Robinson, Esq. These contributions have added more
to the specimens than to the species, and are interesting for comparing the
same wood from various—occasionally evengeologicallydifferent—localities.
In adopting a nomenclature for the woods it is difficult, without new
inventions, to assign to them other than strictly scientific names ; it would,
indeed, be a great gain if the present colonial names, on account of their
ambiguity or their want of logical meaning, or their absolute incorrect-
ness, could be entirely discarded, and new names, based on the
well-fixed appellations by which they arc now fully known in the
scientific world, could be substituted. It is my intention to elaborate


tills subject in detail. A convenient method to demonstrate within
narrow space the qualities of wood, both scientifically and technologically,
was adopted by the writer at the last Exhibition, in preparing the
specimens as small boxes in book-form, the back-title giving the systematic
name and native country of each Special tree. According to this design a
fine collection of wood-books (if we may term them so) was caused to be
prepared by Colonel Champ, and it could be wished that for our
future Industrial Museum every kind of wood, at least of Australia, might
be secured in this form for the sake of easy access and comparison.
Planed and polished surfaces are thus readily and elegantly shown,
while the cavity of the imitation book serves for placing in it samples of
such products as the particular tree may yield.
VICTORIAN TIMBER EXHIBITED BY THE COMMISSIONERS
OF THE INTERCOLONIAL EXHIBITION.
Notes on the size and distribution of these trees within the territory of
Victoria, by Ferd. Mueller, M.D., F.R.S.
Atherosperma Moschatum: Labillardiere — The Sassafras Tree. —In deep,
wet, forest ravines. A middle-sized tree.
Hedycarya Cunninghami: Tulasne — Native Mulberry Tree. —Extends
through the whole southern fern-tree country, where it forms a middle-
sized tree.
Eupomatia Laurina; R. Brown. —Occurring only in the most eastern
part of Gippsland, where the tree attains a height of 40 feet.
Pittosporum Undulatum: Yentenat. —In the humid forest glens from
Western Port and Dandenong, eastward throughout Gippsland. Attains in
favourable localities a diameter of 2 feet.
Pittosporum Bicolor : Hooker. —In the fern-tree gullies ; also in the
beech-regions. A small, and occasionally a middle-sized tree.
Codonocarpus Cotinifolius: Ferd. Mueller— The Radish Tree. —In the
Mallee scrub rather sparingly. Attains a height of 30 feet.
Busbeckia Mitchelli: Ferd. Mueller— The Gaper Tree. —A small tree,
very rare in the Mallee scrub opposite Euston.
Brachychiton Populneum: R. Brown— The Bottle Tree. —In more open
forest valleys on the Hume River, the Snowy River, and thence to the
eastern limits of Gippsland. Height of the tree, up to 60 feet. Wood
exceedingly soft.
Acacia Melanoxylon: R. Brown —The Blackwood Tree, also by
colonists called the Lightwood Tree. —On fertile banks and flats of rivers,
also on basaltic ridges; not rare in deep forest gullies ; attaining a height
of 120 feet and a diameter of the stem of 3 to 4 feet.
Acacia Implexa: Bentham. —On open ridges of the lower silurian
formation in many parts of the colony, but' nowhere common. A middle-
sized tree.
Acacia Penninervis : Sieber. —Scattered’through the eastern half of the
colony over ridges and ranges, gregarious on some of the bushy sub-alpine
declivities and plateaux.


Acacia Supporosa: Ferd, Mueller.—Restricted to the east part of
Gippsland. A middle-sized tree.
Acacia Verticillata : Willdenow.—ln swampy forest valleys common,
where it becomes a small tree.
Acacia Salicina : Lindley.— Not unfrequent in the Mallee scrub. The
wood dark, heavy, and durable. A small or occasionally middle-sized tree.
Acacia Homalophylla : All. Cunningham— The Myall. —ln the Mallee
scrub on many localities.
Acacia Osswaldi: Ferd. Mueller.—ln the Mallee scrub not uncommon,
always remaining a small tree. The plant is exquisitely adapted for tall
hedges.
Acacia Stenophylla: All. Cunningham,—ln Victoria restricted to the
banks of the Murray and the Lower Wimmera and Avoca. A middle-
sized tree.
Acacia Decurrens: Willdenow (A. Mollissirna W., and A. Dealhata Link) —
The Wattle. —Frequent throughout the colony, except the desert tract.
In the ferntree gullies forming a tree 150 feet high.
Eucalyptus Rostrata : Schlechtendal— The Red Gumtree. —Along river
banks—almost everywhere.
Eucalyptus Leucoxylon: Ferd. Mueller— The Ironbark Tree. —On
many of our less fertile ridges, usually indicating an auriferous country.
Eucalyptus Melliodora : All, Cunningham.—On low open ridges, parti-
cularly of the miocene formation. A middle-sized tree, comprised among
those called on some places Box Trees, on others Peppermint Trees, on
some, again, Yellow Box Trees.
Eucalyptus Viminalis : Labillardiere — The Manna-Eucalypt. On
grassy ridges; not rare. A middle-sized tree.
Eucalyptus Goniocalyx ; Ferd. Mueller— One of the White Gumtrees. —A
gigantic tree, occurring in nearly all our moist forest ranges, intermixed
with other Eucalypts.
Eucalyptus Corymbosa: Smith — The Bloodwood-Eucalypt. —ln Victoria
confined to the eastern part of Gippsland. A rather large tree.
Eucalyptus Longifolia : Link— The Woollybutt-Eucalypt. —Restricted
in Victoria to the eastern part of Gippsland, forming a tall, stately tree.
Eucalyptus Amygdalina : Labillardiere— One of the Peppermint Trees.
—ln forest country of the southern and eastern parts of the colony ; in
more open places a middle-sized tree, in deep ravines of colossal size. This
species may be the tallest of the globe, perhaps only rivalled by the
Wellingtonia gigantea of California. In the Dandenong Ranges it has
been measured repeatedly 420 feet, and towards the sources of the Yarra
it is said to attain a still greater height. It is this tree also which yields
the largest percentage of oil from the foliage, varying from 2 to 4 per cent,
from fresh leaves and branchlets.
Eucalyptus Stuartiana : Ferd. Mueller— One of the White Gumtrees. —
In moist localities, as well in plains as ranges. A tree of an enormous
size in Victoria, perhaps only surpassed by the Eucalyptus amygdalina
and the Karri Eucalypt of West Australia (E. diversicolor or E. colossea).
Eucalyptus Obliqua : L’Heritier— The Stringybark Tree. —Constitutes
the main mass of the forests in wide extent of our more barren mountains.
The height of trees of greatest size ranges from 300 to 400 feet.
Eucalyptus Globulus : Labillardiere— The Blue Gumtree of Victoria and
Tasmania (but not of New South Wales and West Australia). —Restricted


to Victoria and Tasmania. The tree is confined to forest valleys, except
near the coast, where, usually of diminutive size, it will occupy open
spaces. In deep declivities it grows to nearly the same colossal size as
E. amgydalina, E. goniocalyx, E. Stuartiana and E. obliqua.
Melaleuca Ericifolia: Smith —The so-called Tea-tree , though never used
for preparing any beverage.—lt fills most of our swamps of brackish, as
well as fresh water, and lines also innumerable watercourses. It is never
a large tree, but, on the contrary, generally small, though it may be seen
occasionally 50 to 60 feet high.
Melaleuca Squarrosa : Smith. —Common in swamps of many southern
forest regions, but not often growing to the size of a tree. In favourable
situations the stem attains a diameter of two feet.
Leptospermum Laevigatum : Ferd. Mueller.—Everywhere on the sandy
coast.—Never a large tree.
Tristania Laurina : R. Brown.—Along the rivers of East Gippsland.
But a small tree.
Angophora Intermedia : Candolle. —The spurious Apple-tree of East
Gippsland; it advances not farther westward, A fine, umbrageous,
middle-sized tree, of fair celerity of growth, well worthy of being addpted
as an avenue-tree.
Pomaderris Apetala : Labillardiere.—ln forest glens and along wooded
river banks; not rare in the southern and eastern part of the colony, but
never seen away from moist, shady, and sheltered forest valleys.
Senecio Bedfordii: Ferd. Mueller — The Duke's Tree.—A small tree,
in all fern-tree gullies and in other shady springy glens.
Aster Argophyllus : Labillardiere — The Musk-tree. —Confined to moist,
umbrageous forest gullies, but there abundant. It never exceeds 60 feet
in height, and is generally lower.
Cassinia Aculeata: R. Brown.—ln moist, wooded tracts of the colony
frequent. Oftener a shrub than a small tree.
Coprosma Microphylla : All. Cunningham.—ln forest-swamps and
periodically inundated river-banks. Not rare throughout the southern
and eastern districts. More generally a shrub than a small tree, but never
even a middle-sized tree.
Panax Palmaceus: Ferd. Mueller. — The Palm-Panax. —In Victorian
territory only to be found, on the south-eastern borders of New South
Wales. The slender palm-like stem attains seldom above 1 foot diameter,
though not rarely a height of 80 feet. The wood is singularly light and soft.
Myrsine Variabilis: R. Brown. —In the forest glens and on river banks in
the southern and eastern parts of the colony. Generally a small, occasionally
a middle-sized tree.
Myoporum Platycarpum: R. Brown— The Sugar-tree. —ln the Mallee
scrub. A small tree, exuding from its bark a saccharine substance,
Santalum Persicarium : Ferd. Mueller — Native Sandalwood. —In the
Murray desert. A small tree; its wood is far inferior to the famed sandal-
wood of commerce.
Santalum Acuminatum: A. De Candolle — The Native Peach. —ln the
Mallee scrub. Always only a small tree. *
Exocarpus Gupressiformis : Labillardiere — The native Cherry-Tree. —
Widely distributed over the more fertile open ridges, and through both
barren and fertile forest ranges. A small or middle-sized tree, of com-
paratively quick growth.


Banksia Serrata : Linnc — The Heath Honeysuckle. —On the sandy
heaths of Gippsland rather frequent. A small, or occasionally middle-
sized, tree.
Banksia Australis: R. Brown — The common Native Honeysuckle. —ln
less fertile localities all over the colonial territory, ascending to sub-alpine
elevations. A small, or middle-sized tree.
Lomatia Fraserii : R. Brown. —In forest valleys, especially among
ferntrees, not very common, but ascending to high cold elevations along
the rivulets. A good-sized tree.
Hakea stricta : Ferd. Mueller — The Water-tree. —ln the Mallee desert.
A small tree, water obtainable from the root.
Casuarina Quadrivalvis : Yentenat— The Drooping Sheoak. —Frequent
in grass lands of plains and hills, and along the sandy coast. A quick-
growing, middle-sized tree.
Casuarina Leptoclada : Miquel— The Straight Sheoak. —On grassy ridges
of the lower as well as higher regions, not rare. A moderate-sized tree.
Casuarina glauca: Sieber— The Desert Sheoak. —ln the Mallee scrub.
A middle-sized tree.
Fagus Gunninghami: Hooker— The Native Beech. —ln the most secluded
recesses of the mountains, from Dandenong to Mount Baw-Baw, on the
various remote sources of the Latrobe river, at Wilson’s Promontory, and
in the Cape Otway ranges. A magnificent tree, attaining a height of 200
feet. On the Mount Baw-Baw ranges this beech mainly constitutes for
many miles the forest. It exists only in Victoria and Tasmania.
Gallitris Verrucosa : R. Brown— The Desert Cypress Pine. —More or
less copiously dispersed through the Mallee scrub, in some directions
abundant. A middle-sized tree.
Gallitris Cupressiformis : Yentenat — The Mountain Cypress-Pine. —On
rocky, not densely timbered ranges; thus, on the Grampians, the Ovens
ranges, and the Genoa ranges. A middle-sized tree.
REMARKS ON TIMBER FROM EAST GIPPSLAND,
BY LOCKHART MORTON, ESQ.
Eucalyptus Longifolia : Link — Woollyhutt. —This seems an excellent
timber. It is like ironbark, much used for wheel spokes. It bears a
high character for durability when used for fencing purposes. As posts,
it is said to stand undecayed in the ground for twenty years. The bark
is fibrous. This wood is esteemed an excellent fuel.
Brachychiton Populneum : R. Brown— Gurrijong. —This is a soft
timber. When dry, it is soft and spongy. The wood is fibrous, and the
young wood immediately below the bark is sweet, juicy, and, I believe,
nutritious. The bark is thick, and abounds with strong, coarse fibre.
Eucalyptus Gorymhosa : Smith— Bloodivood. —The value of this timber
is not known, except as an excellent fuel. It is not an easily split timber,
and the number of resin-veins throughout it is much against its being
used. It is said to be very durable when used in fencing. The bark is
almost void of fibre.
Angophora Intermedia : Candolle— Spurious Apple-tree. —This wood


is but little used, except as fuel; for this purpose it is considered very
good. It is said to be used for naves by wheelwrights. The bark contains
but little fibre. .
Banksia Serrata : L.—This timber is soft, and short in the grain ;it is
high-coloured, and singularly marked. The bark is very thick, and seems
to contain much tannin, as well as a reddish-purple I have seen
moleskin trousers which had been tanned and dyed with this and wattle-
bark ; the colour was a rich dark purple.
Acacia Supporosa: F. Mueller— Native Hickory.— This I consider a
valuable wood for many purposes. It is exceedingly tough and elastic ;
would make good gig-shafts, handles for tools, gun-stocks, &c., and seems
to contain some inflammable material. Tall straight spars, fit for masts,
can be obtained from 50 to 100 feet long and 18 inches in diameter.
Banax Palmaceus : Ferd. Mueller —This timber is soft and very light,
floating even when unseasoned half out of water. The wood is white,
and has a large pith. The trees are generally from fifteen to eighteen
inches in diameter at the butt, and rise with a clear straight stem to
the height of fifty or sixty feet j then throw out branches at right angles,
adorned at their extremities with a dense mass of foliage.
Exocarpus Cupressiformis : Labill. — Native Cherry tree.— -This is a
soft fine-grained timber, and is the best wood I know for carving.
NAMES OF DIFFERENT WOODS, <fcc., USED BY THE YARRA
NATIVES FOR WEAPONS AND IMPLEMENTS.
Ascertained by C. Walter, the Material identified by Dr, Mueller , F.B.S.
Binnap (Manna Gumtree, Eucalyptus viminalis — Labill.), for Geeaus
(flat shields). _ _ _
Ballee (Cherrytree, Exocarpus cupressiformis —Labill.), for Gurrecks
(spear-throwers).
Burgan (Mountain Teatree, Kunzea peduncidaris —Ferd. Mueller), for
Goyjums (kangaroo spears), Breapang or Warra-Warras (fighting sticks
with bead ends), Gudjerons (waddies or clubs), Wankins (fighting
boomerangs).
Daegoyne (Messmate, Eucalyptus), for Goyjums (spears).
Djelwuck ( Hedycarya Cunninghamii —Tulasne), for Spear Ends and
Fire-sticks (native fire kindler).
Kaeawun ( Xerotes longifolia —R. Brown), for Baskets.
Bow at ( Poa Australis —R. Brown), for Net Bags (ballang cowat).
Mooeyang (Blackwood, Acacia melanoxylon —R. Brown), for Mulgar or
Club Shields.
Woolip (Light Tea-tree Shrub, Leptospermum lanigerum —Aiton), for
Goyjums (kangaroo spears).
Wayetuck (She-oak, Gasuarina leptoclada —Miquel), for Boomerangs.
Wooegook, or Wangnarra (Stringybark-tree, Eucalyptus obliqua —
L’Heritier), the fibre of which is used for strings on Baskets, Spears, &c.
Jark (Gum, from any portion of Acacia mollissima —Willdenow), which


is used for fixing the bottom ends of the Spears and taken from a small
wattle-tree ( Acacia ) in the Loddon district.
Garrong (Wattle-tree, Acacia mollissima —Willdenow), for Mulgas (club
shields), Boomerangs, and Spears.
Myall ( Acacia homalophylla —A. Cunningham),
Mallee ( Eucalyptus gracilis —Ferd. Mueller).
Tarnock (drinking vessel), and also a model of a Coorong (canoe), bark
of Eucalyptus viminalis —Labill.
Easip (Spurious Ironbarktree, Eucalyptus leucoxylon —Ferd. Mueller).
Baggup [Xanthorrhoea Australis —R. Brown). — The peduncle is used
for the lower portions of Spears.
NOTES ON SOME OF THE TIMBER SPECIMENS FROM
NEW SOUTH WALES.
By Charles Moore , Esq., F.L.S,, Director of the Botanic Gardens, Sydney.
1. Trochocarpa Laurina : R. Br. —A small-sized tree, plentiful in all
the cedar brushes from Brisbane Water to the Tweed River.
2. Weinmannia Paniculosa : Ferd. Mueller.—A tree of moderate size,
found in all the thick brushes on the eastern coast of N. S. Wales from
the Manning to the Tweed rivers.
3. Sloanea Australis: Ferd. Mueller.—A large tree, frequently attaining
a height of 200 feet, with a clear trunk of 50 feet and a diameter of
3 to 4 feet, plentiful at Camden Haven and on the Richmond River.
Specimen of wood cut from a branch.
7. Atherosperma Micranthum : Tulasne— Brush Box. —A tree of small
size, very plentiful on the Manning and Hastings rivers.
8. Tarrietia Argyrodendron: Bentham.—A tree attaining a large
size, frequently with a clear straight trunk of 70 feet, with a diameter of
from 3to 4 feet, called stonewood by the colonists; found in abundance
on all the rivers on the east coast of New South Wales from the Manning
to the Tweed rivers.
10. Geissois Benthamii: Ferd. Mueller.—A tree of large size, frequently
attaining a height of 200 feet, with a clear trunk of 60 feet, and a diameter
of 1|- to 2 feet. This specimen was cut 30 feet from the base,
12. Schizomeria Grata : Don.—A tree of large size, found in all the
thick brushes on the east coast of New South Wales from the Manning
to the Richmond rivers.
13, OrUes Excelsa: R. Br. —A moderate-sized tree, found on all the
rivers on the east coast of New South Wales.
14. Pennantia Cunninghamii: Miers.—A moderate-sized tree, found
in the thick brushes on the Manning and Hastings rivers.
19. Helicia Glahriflora: Ferd. Mueller.—Small tree, found in the
mountain brushes on the Hastings River.
20. Anopterus Macleayana: Ferd. Mueller.—A small-sized tree, with
large and handsome foliage, plentiful at Port Macquarie, and found in
many other places in thick brushes on the east coast of New South Wales.
21. Gargillia Pentamera: Woolls and Mueller.—A moderate-sized tree,
plentiful in the mountain brushes on the Hastings River, where it is


called black myrtle. This name is also applied to another .species of
Cargillia by the settlers on the Clarence River,
22. Stenocarpus Salignus : R. Brown— Port Macquarie Silky Oak.
Found in all the thick brushes on the east coast of Australia, Timber
much used by coopers. .
23. Litsaea Dealbata: Nees. —A tree of moderate size, found in
abundance near Port Macquarie, and in many of the thick brushes on the
Hastings and M‘Leay rivers.
24. Syncarpia Leptopetala: Ferd. Mueller. —A of moderate size,
very plentiful in some of the thick brushes on the Hastings River. Wood
very hard when fresh, but not much used.
25. Callitris Macleayana: Ferd. Mueller — Port Macquarie Pine. A
small-sized tree, found near Port Macquarie, where it is much used for
shingles. ,
28, Gastanospermum Australe: A. Cunningham — Moreton hay Li/iesnut }
or Bean-Tree. —A tree of very large size, and found in abundance in the
brushes from the M‘Leay River to Cape York.
29. Helicia Ternifolia: Ferd. Mueller.—A small-sized tree, found in the
thick brushes on the Richmond and Tweed rivers, where it is called by
the colonists Nut TreeP
30. Dysoxylon Rufum : Benth, — Rosewood of the Colonists. —A tree of
large size, found on all the rivers of the coast of New South Wales. Used
for making furniture.
31. Stenocarpus Sinuosus: Endlicher. —This is a very handsome tree, of
moderate size, plentiful in the thick brushes on the Richmond and Tweed
rivers. . .
UVLIO. # , ,
32. Elaeocarpus Grandis : Ferd. Mueller. —A tree attaining a veiy large
size, found in the thick brushes on all the rivers north of the Clarence, on
the east coast of New South Wales. . .
33. Akania Hillii: J. Hooker. —A handsome tree of small size, found in
the thick brushes on all the rivers on the east coast of New South Wales,
from the Manning to the Tweed rivers.
34. Helicia Praealta: Ferd. Mueller. —A moderate-sized tree, found in
the thick brushes on the Clarence and Richmond rivers. Wood used by
coopers, .
35. Cedrela Taona: Roxburgh— Red Cedar of the Colonists.—hound in
all brush forests on the coast of New South Wales, on the Richmond,
Bellinger, and Tweed rivers. This wood is yet obtainable in considerable
quantity/but will soon become a scarce article, as it is not to be procured
of any size from other localities than those indicated.
36. Grevillea Robusta: A. Cunningham— Silky Oak of the colonists.
This tree attains a considerable size, and is found in the brushes on the
east coast of Australia, from the Clarence River to Cape York. Wood
used by coopers, wherever it can be obtained.
37. Cinnamomum Camphora : F. Nees— Camphor-Tree.— Grown in
the Botanic Gardens, Sydney.
39. Rhus Rhodanthema ; Ferd. Mueller— Light Yellow Wood.— A tree
attaining a considerable size in the brush forests on the Richmond River.
Timber sometimes used for cabinet-work.
* The seeds are edible, according to Walt, Hill, Esq. They resemble those of
the Chilian Guevina.


QUEENSLAND TIMBER.
INTRODUCTORY REMARKS.
The species of timber trees of New South Wales far exceed in number
those of Victoria, while again those of Queensland surpass considerably
the number of the trees of New South Wales. The wood collection
formed in Queensland represents but a small share of the species obtain-
from the rich vegetation of its wide colonial territory, and the
specimens submitted to the jurors are again but a portion of the series
originally transmitted ; but as of many no duplicates were extant, the
withdrawal of a full collection from the Victorian Exhibition for timely
shipment to Paris left many species unrepresented ; the jurors, therefore,
can refer now only to such woods as are left. These consist of two
principal collections, one formed by Walter Hill, Esq., on behalf of the
Royal Commission of Brisbane, in the vicinity of that city • the other by
A. Thozet, Esq., on behalf of the Local Exhibition Committee of Rock-
hampton. The one collection presents, therefore, the southern species, the
other the more northern kinds of woods. Some specimens of timber not
occurring at either place have been contributed by Dr. Mueller, and these
represent trees from Cooper’s Creek and the Paroo, and others from the
vicinity of Rockingham’s Bay, in the far north. The collection is phyto-
graphically named, with the exception of a small share of specimens of
which no corresponding objects for botanical reference were available. The
majority of woods represent jungle plants, and they are all in a certain
measure indicative of the climate of the corresponding districts.
They are, in the majority of cases, allied to those of trees which
we are accustomed to see in the moist tropical jungles of India.
These trees, while so manifold in variety, can thus likewise be applied to
purposes equally manifold ; but they are generally not so gregarious as
many of our southern timber-trees. In the jungle, none ever predo-
minantly constitutes the main bulk of the forest; and what in the more
northern part of Australia is gained by the superb magnificence and extra-
ordinary diversity of the trees, is recompensed in the south by the extreme
copiousness of few species. Yet these also can be drawn into very many
important uses, and by their vast preponderance afford great facilities for
supplying material to factories on a most extensive scale. This observation
to certain extent holds good also to the open, and especially more
interior parts of East Australia (whether Queensland or New South
Wales), where from the rises of the coast ranges, westward chiefly, a
monotony of tree-vegetation of eucalyptus, and in lesser degree of acacia,
re-occurs. Many of the East Australian jungle-trees have been only of
late drawn within the precincts of science—some even only on this
occasion. On systematically scientific names sole reliance has therefore
been placed j and it is to be hoped that, should ever special vernacular
names be bestowed on these woods, the selection of appellations will
be made with such care as will guard against any further extension of that
ambiguity and confusion which renders true discrimination of the various
Australian woods already, in most instances, by popular language an
impossibility.


NOTES ON SOME OF THE WOOD SPECIMENS FROM
SOUTHERN QUEENSLAND.
By Walter Hill, Esq., Director of the Botanical Gardens, Brisbane.
13. Blindersia Schottiana: F. Mueller. —Stem 12 to 16 inches diameter;
60 to 70 feet high. This species occurs plentifully in the scrub near the
coast. It is of slender growth. The wood is soft, and soon perishes when
exposed.
45. Owenia venosa: F. Mueller. — Sour Plum; 8 to 12 inches diameter;
20 to 30 feet high. A fine shady tree, common in scrubs. The wood is
hard, of a reddish colour, and its great strength renders it fit for wheel-
wright work.
82. Melia Azedarach L.; White Cedar. —24 to 30 inches diameter ;
40 to 60 feet high. A nice deciduous tree. The wood is soft, and not
considered of any value.
153. Spondias pleiogyna: F. Mueller. —Sweet Plum; 20 to 45 inches
diameter; 70 to 100 feet high. A beautiful tree, having a cylindrical
erect trunk, growing sometimes 80 feet in height without branches. It
has a rich dark glossy green pinnate foliage, and the wood is hard and
heavy, dark red, finely marked, and susceptible of a high polish.
48. Harpullia pendula: Planch. Tulipwood; 14 to 24 inches
diameter; 50 to 80 feet high. A beautiful growing tree, with glossy
green pinnate leaves ; found in great abundance on the banks of rivers.
The wood has a firm fine texture, and is curiously veined in colouring. It
is much esteemed for cabinetwork.
97. Cupania anacardioides: A. Rich.—lB to 24 inches diameter; 30
to 50 feet high, A moderate-sized tree, but the wood is not appreciated.
103. Cupania nervosa: F. Mueller.—l2 to 20 inches diameter; 30 to
45 feet high. The wood of this tree is nicely grained.
79. Bursaria spinosa: Cavan. —6 to 9 inches diameter; 20 to 30 leet
high. A slender tree, growing in the borders of scrubs, some distance
from the sea. The timber is hard, of a close texture, and admits of a
good polish.
125. Bursaria spinosa: Cavan. —6 to 9 inches diameter; 20 to 30 feet
high. The grain is white and close.
30. Acacia pendula: A. Cunn. — Weeping Myall; 6 to 12 inches
diameter; 20 to 30 feet high. A graceful tree, small, with pendant foliage.
The wood is hard, possessing a close texture, and a rich dark colour.
From Mr. Coxen, in the neighbourhood of Dalby.
91. Barlclya syringifolia: Ferd. Mueller.—l2 to 15 inches diameter;
40 to 50 feet high. This is a most beautiful tree, with dense bright-green
glossy foliage, "it is common; the wood hard and close-grained,
112. Erythrina vespertilio: *Benth. — Cork-tree; 12 to 2o inches
diameter ; 30 to 40 feet high. A beautiful tree when in flower. The
wood is soft, and is used by the aborigines .for making war-shields.
146. Bauhinia Ilookeri: Ferd. Mueller. —10 to 20 inches diameter;
30 to 40 feet high. An ornamental spreading tree, with pale-green rich
foliage. The wood is heavy, and of a dark reddish hue. Presented by
H. Miller, Esq.


73. Badchousia citriodora : Ferd. Mueller.—9 to 12 inches diameter;
18 to 20 feet high.
43. Phyllanthus Ferdinandi: J. Mueller.—l2 to 24 inches diameter;
50 to 60 feet high. A beautiful tree; common on the banks of creeks
and rivers.
47. Excoecaria Agallocha, L. —Poison Tree; 12 to 14 inches diameter;
40 to 50 feet high. A slender tree., resembling some of the Fig species in
appearance of the foliage. It is frequently met with in the scrub. The
wood is hard, and fine grained. The juice is white and nauseous; a
single drop falling into the eye will injure the sight.
49. Sarcocephalus cordatus Miq. — Leichhardt's Tree ; 24 to 36 inches
diameter; 60 to 80 feet high. A splendid erect shady tree, with dark-
green broad foliage. The wood is soft, but close grained, of a light
colour, and easily worked.
21. Eremophila Mitchelli : Benth. — Sandal Wood; 9to 12 inches
diameter; 20 to 30 feet high.—The wood is very hard, beautifully grained,
and very fragrant. It will turn out handsome veneers for the cabinet-
maker. From Mr. C. Coxen, in the neighbourhood of Dalby.
78. Maba obovata : R. Br. —lo to 15 inches diameter ; 30 to 50 feet
high. A small tree, frequently to be seen in the Rosewood scrubs. The
timber is hard, fine grained, and likely to be useful for cabinet work.
129. Cargillia Australis : R. Br. —18 to 24 inches diameter; 60 to 80
feet high. A slender-growing tree, with elongated trunk, and elegant rigid
foliage. The grain is close, very tough and fine, of little beauty, but
likely to be useful for many purposes.
5, Podocarpus data: R. Br. — A Pine; 24 to 36 inches diameter;
50 to 80 feet high. A very beautiful tree, with elongated cylindrical
trunk. It occurs very frequently in the scrubs along the coast. The
wood is hard, fine-grained, flexible, and elastic.
15. Stenocarpus sinuosus: Endlicher — Tulip) Tree , 18 to 24 inches
diameter, 40 to 60 feet high. This is a most beautiful tree, on account
of its clean growth and large pinnatified foliage. It occurs often in the
scrubs some distance from the coast. This wood is very nicely marked,
and would admit of a good polish.
18. Exocarpus latifolia : R. Br. — Broad-leaved Cherry , 6 to 9 inches
diameter, 10 to 16 feet high. A beautiful small tree, with scaly black-
coloured bark. The wood very hard and fragrant. Excellent for cabinet
work.
26, Morns calcar Galli : A. Cunn.— Cochspur Thorn, 3 to 4 inches
diameter, 20 to 80 feet high. A rambling thorny shrub. Duramen dark
yellow colour, hard, and used in dyeing yellow and brown.
Note, —A public record of acknowledgment is due to Messrs. Anderson and
Wright for having caused the Victorian timber to be cut gratuitously into the
required sizes for the Exhibition.


BRIEF NOTES ON THE GEOGRAPHICAL DISTRIBUTION OF
THE TREES, OF WHICH TIMBER IS EXTANT IN THE
SOUTH AND NORTH QUEENSLAND DIVISION OF THE
INTERCOLONIAL EXHIBITION.
Ferd. Mueller, M.D., F.R.S.
[The matter which is printed in smaller type emanated from A. Thozet, Esq., the gentleman
who so carefully collected the timber at Rockhampton.]
1. Polyalthia Nitidissima : Benth.—A ratber gigantic tree, when con-
sidered as representative of tbe order of Anonece. It ranges through the
whole of the littoral forest tract of Queensland.
1. Polyalthia Nitidissima : Benth. —Anonacece (Aboriginal name, Pankalville). —
4to 10 inches in diameter; 30 to 60 feet high. Trunk erect, graceful; pyramidal
head ; leaves shining ; wood white, soft, and pliable; found in scrubs and beds of
creeks.
2. Bursaria Spinosa; Cavanilles.—Dispersed over nearly the whole
Australian continent; common also in Tasmania.
3. Pitfosporum Rhomhifolium: All. Cunningham.—ln the coast forests
of the northern part of New South Wales and the southern part of
Queensland. ,
21. Pittosporum Rhomhifolium : All. Cunningham— Pittosporacece.— to 12 ; 50
to 80. A very erect scrub tree; bark whitish and smooth ; tbe wood of a uniform
white colour; when fresh cut emits a very agreeable delicate odour, not unlike
mignonette.
4. Pittosporum Ovatifolium: Ferd. Mueller.—A tree of fair size, ranging
from the extreme north of Queensland considerably southward.
20. Pittosporum Ovatifolium: Ferd. Mueller— Pittosporacece (Konawareu). —4
to 8; 20 to 35. A small tree, met with on creeks and occasionally in scrubs;
flowers fragrant.
5. Citriobatus Megacarpus: Ferd. Mueller. —Never a large, occasion-
ally a small tree, but usually a shrub. In many of the Brigalow scrubs of
Queensland.
19. Citriobatus Pauciflorus: All. Cunningham— Pittosporacece (Karry).—4 to 8;
6to 15. An ornamental, prickly shrub, of a spherical growth, and white fragrant
flowers ; trunk short; wood hard and tough; takes a good polish. Will answer
admirably in a garden for edgings of borders.
6. Scolopia Brownii: Ferd. Mueller. —Dispersed through the whole
moist littoral forest tract of New South Wales and Queensland.
7. Busbeckia Mitchellii; Ferd. Mueller.—ln the Brigalow scrubs, and
also in some of the desert tracks of South Australia, Victoria, New South
Wales, Queensland, and North Australia.
8. Flindersia Schottiana; Ferd. Mueller. —This tree extends from the
northern parts of New South Wales to the vicinity of Rockingham Bay. It
is confined to forest gullies.
9. Owenia Acidula : Ferd. Mueller.—ln the Brigalow scrubs of Queens-
land and New South Wales.
10. Owenia Venosa : Ferd. Mueller.—ln the more open forest regions of
Queensland.
15. Owenia Venosa: Ferd. Mueller— Meliacece; Sour Plum (Pyddharr).—l2 to 25;
50 to 70. A fine shady tree with pinnated leaves, on winged petioles; wood hard,
of a rose colour. Its great strength renders it fit for wheelwrights’ work,
11. Melia Azedarach: Linne.—A small tree, ranging never very far away


from the coast through North Australia, Queensland, and the northern
parts of New South Wales.
17. Melia Azedarach: Willd. —Meliacece; White Cedar.— l 2 to 16; 30 to 70.
This tree is very handsome when in flower; wood soft, sometimes used for staves.
12. Spondias Pleiogyna: Ferd. Mueller. —In the less dense forests of
Queensland, towards the coast.
14. Spondias Pleiogyna: Ferd. Mueller— Meliacece; Sweet Plum (Orey Rancooran).
—A beautiful tree, having a cylindrical, erect trunk, growing sometimes 80 feet in
height, without branches; fine dark green glossy foliage; wood hard and heavy, of
a dark red-brown colour, finely marked; takes a very high polish.
13. Xanihoxylon Brachyacanthum: Ferd. Mueller.—ln most of the
jungles of Queensland and of the northern parts of New South Wales.
25. Xanihoxylon Brachyacanthum: Ferd. Mueller— Rutacece (Merrivi).—3 to 8;
30 to 80. A tall, slender, prickly tree; wood close-grained, bright yellow, nicely
marked. Will answer for veneering.
14. Ailantus Imberhijlora : Ferd Mueller,—Queensland, about the tropic
of Capricorn, towards the coast.
26. Ailantus Imberhijlora: Ferd. Mueller— Simarubuce. —A large, noble, cylin-
drical, erect tree, branchy towards the top; flowers fragrant in racemes; would be
very ornamental in a plantation. From wounds made in the bark a resinous
substance exudes, which burns with a brilliant flame. Found in dense scrubs.
Wood light, soft, and appears to be of little durability.
15. Geijera Scdicifolia: Schott. —In more or less open forests as well of
Queensland as of New South Wales,
23. Geijera Salicifolia: Schott —Rutacece (Koko).—4 to 12; 20 to 35. Found
growing at the edge of scrubs, on poor sandy soil; bark almost smooth.
16. Acronychia Laevis; Forster. —In the moist forests from East Gipps-
land through New South Wales and Queensland, to the north coast.
166. Pagetia Medicinalis : Ferd. Mueller.—-As yet only found in the
forests around Rockhampton,
17. Atcdaya Hemiglauca : Ferd, Mueller. —A small tree of the Brigalow
scrubs of Queensland and New South Wales.
8. Atalaya Hemiglauca: Ferd. Mueller— Sapindacece.— 4 to 12; 15 to 25.
Found in open forests, generally on poor soil; wood not durable,
18. Cupania Anacardioides: A. Richard. —Widely dispersed through
the littoral forest tracts of New South Wales, Queensland, and North
Australia.
9. Cupania Anacardioides: Richard— Sapindacece. —6to 15; 50 to 80. A tree
often met with in scrubs; beautiful pinnated leaves.
19. Cupania Xylocarpa: All. Cunningham.—A tree widely dispersed
through the moister forest regions of New South Wales and Queensland.
11. Cupania Xylocarpa: A. Cunningham— Sapindacoe. —12 to 24; 50 to 70. A
scrub tree, with smooth bark, branching high. May prove useful for wheelwrights’
work.
20. Cupania Nervosa: Ferd. Mueller. —In many of the jungles of New
South Wales and Queensland.
10. Cupania Nervosa: Ferd. Mueller. —Sapindacece.; Spurious Beech.— 6 to 12;
30 to 40. Wood very tough and durable, used for stock-whip handles; growing in
groups in open forests, also in scrubs.
21. llarpullia Pendula: Planchon.—ln many of the denser forests of
New South Wales and Queensland.
7. llarpullia Pendula: Planchon— Sapindacece; Tulip-wood. —6 to 15; 30 to 50..
This tine scrub tree has pinnated light green leaves ; wood soft, easily worked.
22. Sterculia Quadrijida: R. Brown. —In the coast jungles of North
Australia, Queensland, and the northern part of New South Wales.
3, Sterculia Quadrifida: R. Brown. —Sterculiacece (Convavola).—6 to 24; 20 to
40. Found in scrubs and creeks; wood soft, spongy ; soon rots.


23. Elceocarpus Ohovatus: Don.—Occurs in many of tlie moist forest
tracts of New South Wales and Queensland.
4. Elceocarpus ohovatus; G. Don,— Tiliacece.— 6 to 15; 50 to 70. A tall tree, of
common occurrence in dense scrubs; wood close-grained and tough.
24. Phyllanthus Ferdinandi; J. Mueller.—Not rare in the brush-
woods of New South Wales and South Queensland.
25. Excoecaria Agallocha; Linne.—A tree of the jungles of Queensland
and North Australia.
85. Excoecaria Agallacha: Linne. — Euphorbiacece ; River Poisonous Tree (Balavola
Karping).—l2 to 30; 40 to 70. Found bordering the estuaries of saltwater
rivers and creeks ; produces by incision in the bark an acrid, milky juice, which,
is so volatile that nobody, however careful, can gather a quarter of a pint with-
out being affected. The symptoms are an acrid burning sensation in the throat,
sore eyes and headache; a single drop falling into the eyes it is believed will
cause loss of sight. The natives of Cleveland Bay use this poisonous juice to
cure certain ulcerous chronic diseases (Murrell’s testimony). Wood light, white,
and soft; will answer for carving and marqueterie.
26. Mcdlotus Phillippinensis : J. Mueller.—Not rare in the coast
forests of Queensland, and of the Northern part of New South Wales.
84. Mallotus Phillippinensis; J. Mueller — Euphorbiacece. —6 to 15; 30 to 40.
A scrub tree; wood close-grained and tough.
27. Rhamnus Vitiensis; Bentham.—Scantily occurring in the east
part of Queensland.
32. Rhamnus Vitiensis : Bentham— Rhamnacece (Murtilam). —6 to 12; 30 to 40,
Scrub tree; trunk and branches whitish, very smooth; berries quarter-inch in
diameter; wood close-grained, of a light reddish and pink colour; may be
useful for engraving.
28. Siphonodon Australis : Bentham.—ln the jungle forests of the
northern parts of New South Wales and the southern parts of
Queensland.
31. Siphonodon Australis ; Bentham — Celastrinece (TJmpurr).—l2 to 24; 60 to
80. A tall scrub tree, trunk 40 to 60 feet clear; branches short, tortuous;
compactly arranged in a short pyramidal head; wood close-grained, of a uniform
yellowish colour, taking a good polish.
29. Eloeodendron Melanocarpum: Ferd. Mueller.—ln the more open
parts of the littoral forests of Queensland.
30. Eloeodendron Melanocarpum ; Ferd. Mueller — Oelastrinece (Korawal). —4 to
10; 40 to 60. A slender, erect tree, in scrubs; not very abundant.
30. Acacia Harpophylla ; Ferd. Mueller. —As yet only known from
capricornic eastern Australia.
34. Acacia Harpophylla : Ferd. Mueller— Leguminosoe —Brigalow (Orkor). —
An erect, tall tree; very abundant; branchy towards the top; covers large tracts
of the rich scrub lands of Middle Queensland, giving a singular appearance
to the forest scenery; wood hard, heavy, close-grained, and of a dark-pale
colour, giving a strong odour of violets. In use for building purposes. The
aboriginals make with it almost all their boomerangs, spears, and clubs.
31. Acacia Julifera: Bentham.—ln many of the littoral regions of
Queensland.
35. Acacia Julifera : Benth — Leguminosce. —4 to 10; 20 to 30. A small tree,
generally found growing in poor soil; wood prettily marked, easily worked.
32. Acacia Macradenia : Bentham. —In the coast and inland tracts of
Queensland, about the tropic of Capricorn.
39. Acacia Macradenia: Bentham —Myall (Toney).—l2 to 18; 30 to 50. In scrubs
and open forests; beautiful black, hard, and close-grained wood, taking a very
high polish.
33. Acacia Pendula: All. Cunningham.—ln the interior districts of
New South Wales and Queensland.


34. Acacia Salicina: Lindley.—Occurring in the depressed scrubby
interior regions of the whole Australian continent.
37. Acacia Salicina: Lindley— Leguminosce (Bakka). —6 to 12 ; 20 to 40. This is
mentioned by Sir Thomas Mitchell as the tree, the bark of which is, from its
deleterious properties, used by the natives of New South Wales for poisoning
fish in small lagoons. It is used in the Fitzroy Eiver for a like purpose by the
natives. Wood dark and pretty; easy to work.
35. Acacia Bidwillii: Bentham. —In various parts of Queensland, more
particularly towards the coast.
38. Acacia Bidwilli; Bentham— Leguminosce; BidwilVs Acacia ( Waneu). —4 to 8;
20 to 30. In ridges and plains ; wood coarse, soft, and not durable.
36. Pithecolobium canescens: Ferd. Mueller.—ln Queensland, about the
tropic of Capricorn.
42. Pithecolobium Canescens: Ferd. Mueller— Leguminosce (Walkor). —10 to 24 ;
30 to 50. An ornamental tree; flowers yellow. The sap of this wood is of a light-
yellow colour, wood not unlike cedar towards the centre, but harder; very much
prized by cabinet makers.
37. Pithecolobium Thozetianum; Ferd, Mueller.—ln the forests of
Queensland, about the tropic of Capricorn.
43. Pithecolobium Thozetianum: Ferd. Mueller— Leguminosce. —l2 to 30; 40 to 60.
A tree of common occurrence in stony scrubs; trunk erect, with a thin whitish
bark ; very branchy and shady towards the top ; wood very hard, heavy, tough,
and close-grained ; may prove useful for gig shafts.
38. Pithecolobium pruinosum : Bentham.—ln most of the jungles of
New South Wales, and also in the south of Queensland.
47. Pithecolobium Pruinosum: Bentham — Leguminosce (Talingora). —4 to 15; 30 to
50. A small scrub tree, generally with many stems; branches and flowers of a
rusty colour; wood soft, not durable.
39. Bauhinia Hooheri: Ferd. Mueller.—Widely distributed through
the forest regions of Queensland,
45. Bauhinia Hoolceri: Ferd. Mueller — Leguminosce; Mountain Ebony ( Warwor).
—lO to 24; 30 to 40. An ornamental spreading tree, with pale-green, handsome,
deciduous foliage, and bearing large white flowers of sweet perfume ; wood supple
and heavy, of a dark-reddish hue ; will answer well for veneering.
40. Bauhinia Leichhardtii: Ferd. Mueller,—ln the desert-interior of
South Australia, New South Wales, Queensland, and North Australia.
41. BarUya Syringifolia: Ferd. Mueller.—ln the jungles of several
parts of Queensland.
44. Barklya Syringifolia : Ferd. Mueller— Leguminosce. —4 to 8; 20 to 30. A
handsome scrub tree, with large, cordate, shining leaves ; flowers a bright yellow.
42. Erythrina Vespertilio : Bentham.—Bather frequent in Central and
North Australia, Queensland, and in the most northern parts of New
South Wales.
46. Erythrina Vespertilio: Bentham— Leguminosce; Coral Tree (Wotheugn).—l2
to 30 ;30 to 50. A graceful deciduous open forest tree ; very abundant; branches
prickly ; flowers bright red in racemes, and formed before the leaves show ; wood
soft, very light when dry; used by the aboriginals for making their shields. The
dry logs of the dead trees are also used by them as a means of fording large rivers
or creeks.
43. Eucalyptus Rostrata: Schlecht.—Dispersed over river flats and along
banks of streams throughout nearly the whole of Australia, but seemingly
not occurring in Tasmania. It is the “ Bed Gumtree ” of East Aus-
tralia, but not of West Australia.
44. Eucalyptus Microtheca : Ferd. Mueller.—Widely dispersed through
the more central regions of the continent.
53. Eucalyptus Microtheca: Ferd. Mueller — Black Box (Koloneu). —24 to 120;
100 to 180. This tree, abundant in rich alluvial scrub land, can be considered the
giant of our tropical forests. The bark black, slightly fissurated and persistent on


the whole length of the trunk, becoming smooth and ash-coloured in the branches;
wood with figures not unlike walnut, but darker, heavier, and closer-grained.
Piles made of the young trees have been used with advantage for the construction
of the Great Northern Railway.
45. Eucalyptus Gitriodora : Hooker. —Hot common in some of the
open forests of New South Wales and Queensland.
52. Eucalyptus Citriodora: Hooker — Myrtacece; Citron-scented Gum (Kangar).—
12 to 13; 50 to 80. This tree is not often met with on ridges along the eastern
coasts of Australia ; bark ash-coloured and smooth ; wood easily worked.
46. Lumnitzera Racemosa : Willd,—ln the littoral tracts and the islands
of Queensland and North Australia.
50. Lumnitzera Racemosa: Willd. —Combretacea (Karkin). —2 to 6 ; 10 to 15.
A small tree, found within the tidal saltwater in rivers and creeks; the branches
and the thick fleshy leaves easily broken ; wood prettily marked.
47. Backhousia Gitriodora: Ferd. Mueller.—ln the southern forests of
Queensland.
48. Barringtonia Carey a: Ferd. Mueller. —In the more open forest
regions of Queensland and North Australia.
54. Barringtonia Carey a: Ferd. Mueller — Barringtoniacece ; Broad-leaved Apple
Tree (Barror). —A small tree of a crooked growth, but very graceful, with broad
leaves and handsome pink and white flowers ; found in abundance in rich alluvial
soils ; wood of a blood-red colour towards the centre ; subject to crack; requiring,
like some European timber, to be submerged before being worked. According to
James Murrell the natives of Cleveland Bay use the bark of the stem for stupefying
fish in fresh water, and the bark of the root for the same purpose in salt water.
49. Terminalia Thozetii : Bentham.—ln the eastern part of Queensland.
49. Terminalia Thozetii: Bentham— Combretaceoe. —12 to 36; 50 to 90. An
erect trunked tree ; abundant in scrubs; wood close-grained and tough, of a pale-
yellow colour, splitting freely.
50. Homalium Vitiense : Bentham, —In the capricornic regions of
Queensland.
80. Homalium Vitiense : Bentham — Homaliacece. —12 to 24; 50 to 70. A tree
found in scrubs, with erect cylindrical trunk ; spreading crooked branches towards
the top; wood white, close-grained and durable ; may prove useful for wheel-
wrights’ work.
51. &'arcocephalus Cordatus: Miquel.—Not rare in the littoral forest
tracts of Queensland and North Australia.
57. Sarcocephalus Cordatus : Miquel; Rubiaceos : Ferd. Mueller— Leichhardt's
Tree (Toka). —24 to 40 ;60 to 100. A magnificent, erect, shady tree, with dark-
green deciduous foliage ; handsome, very fragrant, globular flower, and having a
bitter-flavoured granulated fruit; wood soft, of a light bright-yellow colour ; some
varieties of this timber have a beautiful wavy grain; very easily worked ; will
answer for carving ;it has the peculiarity of being difficult to ignite. The trees
should be cut in winter, when deprived of their leaves, and submerged, or the
timber will be subject to the attack of insects.
52. Ganthium Oleifolium : Hooker. —Through the Brigalow scrubs and
more open forests of the northern part of New South Wales, the whole of
Queensland, and North Australia.
56. Ganthium Oleifolium: Hooker— Rubiacecs. —A shrub met with in poor soil;
wood hard and tough.
53. Brassaia Actinophylla: Endlicher. —In deep wet forest recesses
of Queensland.
55. Brassaia Actinophylla: Endlicher— Araliacece; Umbrella Tree (Pinankaral),
6t012; 30 to 40. Leaflets on a common stalk Bto 12 inches long ; handsome,
highly ornamental ; wood soft, not durable.
54. Earlia Excelsa: Ferd. Mueller, —Bare in forests of Queensland, about
Capricorn. It is probably the largest tree in the extensive order of
Acanthacece.
75. Earlia Excelsa : Ferd. Mueller— Acanthacece, —3 to G; 15 to 25. A large and


highly-ornamental shrub, with many stems; small, dark green leaves; flowers
tubular, crimson; wood close-grained.
55. Achras Australis : R. Brown.—ln the woods of the coast-tracts of
New South Wales and the southern parts of Queensland.
64. Achras Pohlmaniana Sapotacece ; Baleam. —12 to 20; 40 to 70. A tall scrub
tree, with beautiful foliage; bark thin, grey yellowish; wood of a uniform pale
yellow colour; close-grained.
55b. Achras Pohlmaniana: Ferd, Mueller.—East Australia, about
Capricorn. Fruit edible.
56. Jl[aha Obovata :R. Brown.—ln the more open forests, widely dis-
tributed through Queensland.
63. Mala Obovata; R. Brown.— Ehenacew — Ebony; (Ronone). —5 to 12; 20 to3o.
This tree is very abundant in all scrubs, but does not attain a large size; wood hard
and tough; very close-grained, black ebony at the heart; sap white and pink. Used
for mallet and chisel handles.
57. Cargillia Australis: R. Brown.—ln the forest regions towards the
coast through New South Wales and Queensland.
62. Cargillia Australis: R. Brown.— Ebenacece, —A small tree found in scrubs.
58. Eremophila Bignoniflora : Ferd. Mueller.—ln the Brigalow scrubs
of New South Wales and Queensland.
72. Eremophila Bignoniflora: Ferd. Mueller.— Myoporincc ; (Pombel). —6 to 24;
30 to 35. A tree generally with many stems of irregular growth; wood hard’
fragrant, and most elegantly marked with green and yellowish figures; takes a high
polish. °
59. Eremophila Mitchellii: Bentham.—ln the Brigalow scrubs of New
South Wales and Queensland.
73. Eremophila Mitchellii: Bentham. ~Myoporince; Bastard,Sandalwood(Ba\vory).
—6 to 12; 20 to 30. A small tree, growing in open forest land; wood hard, of brown
colour, nicely waved. Owing to a strong aromatic odour, resembling that of sandal-
wood, furniture made of this timber may be free from the attack of insects.
60. Vitex Macrophylla : R. Brown.—ln the densest coast forests of
most northern parts of Queensland.
61. Diplanthera tetraphylla , R. Br. —In the densest coast forests in
the remotest north of Queensland.
62. Chionanthvs Effusidora: Ferd, Mueller.—ln the woods along the
coast of Queensland, especially in the more northern parts.
66. Chionanthus Effusiflora : Ferd. Mueller— Oleacece (Eurpa).— 6to 15; 30 to
60. Found in mountains, scrubs, and creeks; wood hard and tough.
63. Alstonia Gonstricta: Ferd. Mueller.—As well in the moist jungles
as in the dry Brigalow scrubs of the whole of Queensland and the northern
parts of New South Whies. This tree attains a much larger size in the
jungles than in the scrubs.
69. Alstonia Gonstricta: Ferd. Mueller— Apocynacece; Fever Baric.— 6 to 15-
40 to 70. Of common occurrence in scrubs, and occasionally in open forests • bark
thick, yellow, deeply fissu rated, of an intense bitterness. It is said that this bark
possesses the same properties as quinine.
64. Ardisia Pseudo-Jambosa : Ferd. Mueller.—ln the dense forests of
Queensland, about the tropic of Capricorn.
65. Ardisia Pseudo-Jambosa : Ferd. Mueller .—Myrsinece (Gaon Gaon)—4 to 6 •
10 to 25. A shrub or small tree, found in sandy creeks and scrubs, affecting very
shady places; fruit globular, crimson, the size of the European cherry; well deserving
room in every garden. °
65. Stenocarpus Sinuosus : Endl.—The tree occurs in the southern parts
of Queensland and the northern parts of New South Wales, in forest
ravines.
66. Gardwellia Sublimis : Ferd. Mueller.—Restricted to the humid most
northern forest country of Queensland.


67. Xylomelum Scottianum : Ferd. Mueller, —As yet only found in
the most remote north-east of Queensland, in forest gullies.
68. Darlingia Spectatissinia : Ferd. Mueller. —Known only from the
most northern part of the east coast of Queensland.
69. Hakea Strict a : Ferd. Mueller.—ln the deserts of South Australia,
Victoria, New South Wales, and the south-west of Queensland.
70. Gi'evillea Striata : R. Brown. —In the dry interior tracts of North
and Central Australia, Queensland, and the north of South Australia and
of New South Wales.
77. Orevillea Striata : E,. Brown— Proteaceoe; Silvery Honeysuckle (Turraie). —
6to 15; 30 to 50. A tree found scattered on plains and ridges, with narrow, long,
striated silvery leaves; wood reddish dark, very curiously marked, easy to work,
used for bullock yokes.
71. Ficus Vesca: Ferd, Mueller.—On river banks in the more northern
parts of Queensland.
92. Ficus Vesca: Ferd.Mueller.— Urticacece; Leichhardt'sClusteredFigtree (Parpa).
12 to 36 ; 40 to 60. Found in scrubs, also on the banks of rivers and creeks; the
fruit, which is of a light-red colour when ripe, hangs in clusters along the trunks
and on some of the largest branches; timber soft; may answer for packing cases.
72. Morus Calcar Galli: A. Cunningham. —In the forests not distant
from the coast, in various parts of New South Wales, and of the south of
Queensland.
73. Celtis Ingens: Ferd. Mueller.—ln the jungle forests of Queensland
and the northern parts of New South Wales.
94. Celtis Ingens: Ferd. Mueller— Urticacce. —6 to 12; 30 to 50. A middle-
sized scrub tree of rare occurrence ; wood white, soft, and pliable.
74. Santalum Lanceolatum: R. Brown.—Sparingly distributed over
North Australia, Central Australia, the northern parts of South Australia,
and a large portion of Queensland.
75. Exocarpus Latifolia; R. Brown. —In many parts of Queensland
and North Australia.
79. Exocarpus Latifolia: 11. Brown— Thymeleoe; Broad-leaved Native Cherry
(Oringorin).—6 to 10; 15 to 35. A small scrub tree; bark almost black, scaly;
wood hard, with the fragrance of roses ; takes a good polish.
76. Casmrina Tenuissima: Sieber.—ln more open forests, from East
Gippsland, through New South Wales to the southern parts of Queensland.
95. Gasuarina'Tenuissima; Sieber— Gasuarinece; Mountain Oak (Bureutha). —•
6to 15; 30 to 45. On the mountain sides, at an elevation of 1000 feet, this little
tree begins to make its appearance ; timber close grained, with figures white and
pink,
77. Podocarpus Elata: R. Brown,—Rather scantily dispersed through
the whole littoral tracts of New South Wales and Queensland.
WOOD BOOKS.
Colonel Champ exhibits specimens of Victorian wood, converted into
small boxes of book form, according to a design adopted by that gentleman
at the Exhibition of 1861, and then suggested by Dr. Mueller. Nothing
could be more convenient and more interesting than a library (to speak
allegorically) of such imitation books, representing the different timber of
different countries, which could be systematically, or alphabetically, or
geographically arranged. Australia alone could furnish for such a collec-
tion more than a thousand volumes.


BARKS FORWARDED TO
THE
EXHIBITION BY FERD.
MUELLER,
M.D,
1. Eugenia Smitbii
2. Eucalyptus sp.
3. Banksia serrata
7. Eucalyptus longifolia
8. Acacia penninervis
9. Eucalyptus obliqua, and Eibre of
10. Pittosporum undulatum
11. Melaleuca ericifolia
4. Eucalyptus inophloia
5. Acacia subporosa
6. Eucalyptus Stuartiana
VICTORIAN WOODS
MANUFACTURED
INTO PAPER KNIVES.
Exhibited for the
Commissioners by Dr. Mueller.
Pittosporum undulatum
Atberosperma moschatum
Acacia implexa
Senecio Bedfordii
Eucalyptus corymbosa
Leptospermum sp.
Melaleuca squarrosa
Casuarina stricta
Exocarpus cupressiformis
Eucalyptus oleosa
Acacia subporosa
Callitris verrucosa
Myrsine variabilis
Myoporum insulare
Banksia serrata
Acacia melanoxylon
Eucalyptus rostrata
Aster argophylius
Eucalyptus inophloia
Hedycaria Cunninghamii
Eucalyptus (black butt)
Panax palmaceus
Pomaderris apetala
Eucalyptus longifolia
Lomatia Eraserii
PRODUCTS OF DRY DISTILLATION OF VICTORIAN WOODS.
In placing before the visitors of the Intercolonial Exhibition the products
obtained by dry distillation from a series of the most widely-distributed
timber trees of this country, I had a double object in view. I wished
to render known new sources of employment for both labour and
capital; and I desired likewise to point to inducements hitherto
very imperfectly understood, for the occupation of a vast extent
of the densely timbered ranges, in which, as yet, no dwelling
is to be found. The climate of these free mountains is salubrious,
and, indeed, delightful, and the material for lucrative work is accessible
in unbounded abundance. While in northern countries the fir, which
yields us the Stockholm tar, is so precious as to admit of the selection
of roots and branches alone for the purpose of distillation, the stems
being needed for the softwood deals which w r e import, we can here subject,
without restrictions dictated by economy and by limited supply in old
countries, an infinitely larger mass of wood to industrial processes. While
in northern countries the inclemency of the climate renders forest opera-
tions for a part of the year surrounded with difficulties, and while the
toiling labourer there can but raise a scanty supply of food from the earth,
we can in this genial zone call forth in exuberance cereals and other main-


stays of aliment from a grateful soil, and can turn into ever-verdant and
never-frozen valleys the pasture animals needed for our local sustenance.
Moreover, by the cultivation of many highly valuable plants, excluded
from less genial zones, and of such plants as need more humidity and more
shelter than our open cereal tracts do afford, the paths of prosperity
become still more numerous, by which families may seek for their hardy
offspring independence and healthy occupation. Thus, they may engage
in work which yields for paper-mills the raw material, in the production
of tar, acids, and potash, in the artless distillation of volatile oils ; and
these occupations may be combined in sheltered glens with the rearing of
Chinese tea, Peruvian bark, senna, cork, sumach, perhaps even coffee, and
very many other products highly remunerative, while less secluded
portions of the ranges, under singular facilities for irrigation, will yield
olives, vine, oranges, and an almost endless variety of other fruits.
Wherever, therefore, the miner has vainly searched for the metallic
treasures of the soil, we should see, under circumstances so favourable to
rural pursuits, the dwellings of families arise. In sketching a hopeful
picture of future forest life, I have not thought of Victoria alone. The
results of the investigations in some of the new timber resources, here preli-
minarily placed on record, might readily be aguidance to settlers in the woods
in all the surrounding colonies, where most of the trees here experimentally
operated on likewise occupy extensive localities not readily accessible
to cereal culture or ordinary pastoral pursuits. The primary information
furnished on this occasion refers to the yield of tar, wood vinegar, and wood
spirits from such of our timber as in all instances as stated are of vast
prevalence, and in most cases restricted to barren rises or to swampy
depressions.
The percentage of tar, and the strength of the wood vinegar from native
timber, as defined in the adjoining table, bears fair comparison with the
results attained in other countries from other trees; But for greater
facility of comparison, a scale from the yield of some European trees is in
juxtaposition annexed. Though there is no great material difference
between the tars and vinegars obtained by the heating of various woods
under exclusion of air, I found it desirable to exhibit the full series of the
products. The wood employed was air-dried, the amount torrefied in each
case 25 lbs. The details of the operation were well carried out by Mr.
Hoffmann, to whose skill I also entrusted the determination of the per-
centage of yield of the tar and vinegar, and again the proportion of the
wood spirits, acetic acid, and other constituents of the latter. The
charcoal remaining as a residue after the torrefication of the wood has also
been placed in the Exhibition, to show its texture in each instance, some of
the kinds being probably eligible as an ingredient for gunpowder. The
quantities of potash have not been ascertained, as I intend to make it ere
long a subject of special inquiry. In referring to the tables on these products
of dry distillation, it must be remembered that the degree of heat to
which the wood is subjected, as well as the degree of rapidity of its action,
exercises a modifying influence on the results. Hence the percentage
must be regarded as one of approximate calculation only; besides,
wood of the same species from different climatic localities will not
precisely give the same yield of products jmd educts. Mr. Hoffmann
employed hydrochloric in preference to sulphuric acid in liberating the
■acetic acid from the lime, a process having several advantages (which here


need not be pointed out), which largely compensates for the somewhat
greater cost of that acid. It remains yet to refer, at least cursorily, to the
uses to which the products of wood distillation find their principal appli-
cation. Tar, so extensively needful for naval purposes, and for building
structures, might in these southern countries, much more extensively
than hitherto, be used for protecting ironworks exposed to the air against
oxydation, the application of tar being less costly, more lasting, and often
even more sightly, than that of oil-paint. Soft-wood, if coated with
eucalyptus-tar, assumes an excellent appearance, and if in ornamental
structures a touch of varnish is added, this tar becomes the most eligible
article for securing duration. If the production of tar is to be the main
object of secluded combustion of wood, the primitive Scandinavian means
might be adopted, which involve but little more appliances than burning
wood for coals.
The wood vinegar has its manifold applications. It serves for the
fabrication of numerous kinds of articles for dyes, for special chemical pur-
poses, and from it acetic acid may be obtained, or a rectified vinegar,
applicable to culinary purposes. As Dye-Mordant, a solution of sesqui-
acetate of alumina (the so-called red liquor) is largely used in calico print-
ing. The sesqui-acetate and the simple acetate of iron are in quest to
effect, connected with ferrocyanid of potassium, blue dyeing for woollen
ware, and with various admixtures to produce avariety of colours in dyeing
of cotton and silk. The simple acetate of iron yields, with madder (a
plant like other dye-plants introduced into Victoria), a violet colour; and
with the sesqui-acetate of alumina, brown and black dyes.
The chemical formula of the wood spirit is not identical with that of
alcohol, but it is highly valuable as a solvent for resins in the preparation
of varnish. It is but right to remark that a large factory, to which timber
is floated on the Derwent, near Hobart Town, has commenced its distillation
of wood within the last year; and that to Mr. Hugh Gray, of Ballarat, the
credit is due of having, for the Exhibition of 1861, prepared tar and wood
vinegar from a species of eucalypt, and of having given approximately the
percentage. (Vide Jurors 1 Report, 1861, 20.)


TABLE
SHOWING THE YIELD OF CHARCOAL, CRUDE
WOOD VINEGAR, AND UNCONDENSIBLE GASES,
FOR 100 PARTS OF THE DIFFERENT WOODS.
M
f
Casuarina
Banksia
Acacia
Acacia
Melaleuca
Eucalyptus
Eucalyptus
Eucalyptus
Eucalyptus
Angophora
H
W
r Systematic Name 4
Quadrivalvis
Australis
Melanoxylon
Mollissima
Ericifolia
Leucoxylon
Rostrata
Obliqua
Globulus
Intermedia
M
1
Lab.
R. Br.
R. Br.
Willd.
Sm.
F. Muell.
Sclil.
merit.
Lab.
Cand.
3
Species or Wood
h
j
.Vernacular Name!
Drooping
Sheoak.
Common
Honeysckl.
Blackwood.
Wattle
Acacia.
Swamp
Tea Tree.
Ironbark
Tree.
Redgum
Tree.
Stringybark
Tree.
Bluegum
Tree.
Spurious
Apple Tree.
W
O
o
r 1
O
27-500
29-500
29-250
26-125
27-875
28-500
29-250
29-125
28-750
29-000
£
f
42-812
40-062
40-250
44-750
46 000
44-875
41-125
43-750
45-500
43-812
X
a
w
M
Tnr
7-125
6-562
7-062
7-125
6-750
6-312
6-687
6-062
6-250
6-187
H
M
O
V
22-563
23-876
23-438
22 000
19-375
20-313
22-938
21-063
19-500
21-001
100 000
100 000
100-000
100 000
100-000
100-000
100-000
100-000
100-000
loo-ooo-


TABLE
tsS
05
Showing the amount of pure Hydrated Acetic
Acid, the amount
in gallons of proof Vinegar of the
revenue (Sp. Gr.
1 -0085), represented by the Hydrated Acetic Acid, real Wood Spirit, and Wood
Vinegar
Tar residue contained in
the Crude Wood Vinegar, obtained
From 100 pounds of the woods ; likewise, the measure of the Crude Wood Vinegar
and the amount of dry Acetate of Lime it furnished
further, the amount of pure Hydrated Acetic Acid and real
e-t
<3
Wood Spirit in the Crude Wood Vinegar per cent.
W
O
W
03
Species op Wood.
Weight
of
Measure
. °L
Weight
of dry
Acetate of
Amount
of
pure
i Amount
of
proof
Vinegar
Amount of
pure
hydrated
Acetic Acid
Amount
of
real
Wood
Amount
of real
Wood Spirit
in the
crude Wood
Weight
of
W
Si
o
w
H
crudeWood
Vinegar.
Vinegar
Lime
Hydrated
in the
Wood
Vinegar Tai
Systematic Name.
Vernacular Name.
in ounces.
produced.
Acid.
in gallons.
Vinegar
per cent.
Spirit.
Vinegar
per cent.
residue.
O
Casuarina Quadrivalvis..
Drooping Sheoak
42-812
640
5-31
5-44
2-550
4-10
3-64
5-956
5-651
2-128
2-111
4-
5-
tn
a
Banksia Australis
Common Honeysuckle...
40-062
636
2-264
3-750
<1
M
O
Acacia Melanoxylon
40-250
648
664
5-50
5-00
512
2-278
1-656
1-918
3-66
2-66
3-08
5-659
3-
4-
1-
2-
1-938
4-183
4-529
4-213
4-250
4-
5-
w
H
Acacia Mollissima
44-750
46 000
w
f
Melaleuca Ericifolia
Swamp Tea Tree
700
tei
W
Eucalyptus Leucoxylon.
,, Eostrata ...
Ironbark Tree
44-875
672
660
3-
4-
1-442
2-32
1-81
1-
1-88
2-
3-213
2-737
2-640
2-573
2-841
1-
2-
2-069
1-810
1-792
3-
4-
4-729
3-
4-
3-312
3-
4-
5-
4-125
o
o
Eed Gumtree
41-125
1-126
n
Q
H
,, Obliqua... ..
,, Globulus ...
Stringybark Tree .........
43-750
656
3-88
1-155
Ul
Blue Gumtree
45-500
676
664
3-94
1-171
1-245
Angophora Intermedia..
Spurious Apple Tree.,...
43-812
3-56


Systematic Name. Vernacular Name.
Betula Alba White Birch
Fagus Sylvatica Red Beech
Tilia Platyphylla Large-leafed Linden
Quercus Robur Oak
Fraxinus Excelsior ... Common Ash...,,....
Esenins Hippocas-1 H orseChesnut
tanum )
Populus Dilatata Lombardy Poplar...
PopulusAlba White Poplar
Prunes Padus Bird Cherry
Salix viminalis Basket W illow
Rhamnus catharticus. Buckthorn
Hsematoxylon Cam-1 L ood
pechianum ) &
Alnus glutinosa Alder
Juniperus Communis Juniper
Finns Abies White Fir
Pinus Sylvestris... , Common Pine
, Common Savin e ...
TABLE
Showing the amount of Crude Wood Vinegar, Empyreumatic Oil and
Charcoal obtained from the distillation of the undermentioned (chiefly
European) varieties of Wood, calculated for 100 pounds ; also, the
amount of pure Hydrated Acetic Acid in the Wood Vinegar; and further,
the amount of pure Hydrated Acetic Acid in the Wood Vinegar per
cent. —By Stolze.
Amount
of pure
Hydrated
Acetic
Acid in
Weight
of
Amount
of pure
Hdrated
Acetic
Weight
of
Species of Wood,
crude
Wood
Vinegar.
Empyr-
eumatic
the Wood
Vinegar,
per cent.
Juniperus Sabina Common Savine .... 48-75 2'34 5 - 36 11‘71 rf
Pinus picea Red Fir 39-84 L 97 4-96 14-06 23-43
PAPER MATERIALS.
In a retrospective view on prior discoveries of paper material, it is not
easy to ascertain how far substances also attainable beyond Australia may
have been tested and even employed. That British true rushes (Junci)
are eligible, that they contain about 40 per cent, of and
that they form a splendid substitute for rags, is long since ascertained.
From this observation and calculation the inference may be drawn that
the generality of rushes, sedges, and kindred plants, all allied in structure
and texture, may be drawn, under the prospect of similar facility for work-
ing and similar yield, into use. This the experiments here instituted
prove to be the case. Carices and many grasses furnish approximately 30
per cent, fibre, malvaceous plants average 10 to 20 per cent., and not more
is obtained from the stalks of beans, peas, hops, buckwheat, potatoes,
heath er, broom bushes, and many other plants tried. The yield f ronA ictorian
material is much larger, moreover the supply infinitely vaster, and locally
much less expensively attainable and much easier worked. Besides, the
substances just indicated are generally wanted in great agricultural countries


for refertilisation of fields. Nettles produce about 25 per cent, of pulp
fibre, fit for a beautiful paper, easily bleached, A main staple for admix-
ture to rag-pulp has been found in pinewood and straw of cereals. The
Museum of the Melbourne Botanic Garden possesses samples of writing and
printing papers, manufactured in Southern Germany, forwhich 30 to 40 per
cent, of pinewood and 12 to 15 per cent. China-clay have been employed;
wrapping paper made of 50 per cent, of pinewood, and tissue paper con-
taining 40 per cent, pinewood; good printing paper obtained by adding
20 per cent, of aspenwood ; glazed packing paper containing again 30 per
cent, of pinewood; writing paper of superior quality, prepared in France,
from 75 percent, of esparto, and others solely made of that grass; paper
prepared in Switzerland from wood solely, and turned out fit for packing
and even inferior writing paper, and fair though not elastic millboards;
packing paper made in Belgium, and printing paper prepared in Prussia,
containing a large proportion of maize straw and the straw of other
cereals.
The prior experiments on exclusively Australian material are very limited,
as far as the writer is aware. Years ago stringy bark was shipped and
tested in Britain, but seems to have borne only the character of fitness for
merely coarse and brittle packing paper. Mr. Alexander Tolmer, of
Adelaide, eight years ago caused paper to be made of the Australian
marshmallow (Lavatera plebeja), and of the sword-rush of the sand-
coast (Lepidosperma gladiatum). New Zealand Flax was pointed out
as a fitting substance for paper twenty-two years ago. Good paper of an
inland Lepidosperma rush, not so heavy and bulky as that experimented
on by Mr. Tolmer, was prepared by Mr. Newberry, and referred to
by the director of the Geological Survey in his last annual report,
published in March. Some of the kinds of material now brought
in paper-form before the public at the Intercolonial Exhibition were
pointed out several years ago, and nearly the whole of the substances
now drawn into use and submitted to the jurors were enumerated as
eligible by the writer in the earlier part of 1866, in a note furnished on
special inquiry to the Australasian. The percentage of pulp obtainable
from the new paper fibres has not been exactly ascertained in these first,
and to a certain extent preliminary, experiments; but, inasmuch as the raw
stuff can be gathered in endless quantity, and as it proved evidently rich
in pulp, the tabulation of the percentage was reserved for future more
extended experiments. With the exception of one of the samples of stringy
bark paper, all the kinds sent to the Exhibition were neither subjected to
chlorine nor drawn through size. In addition, I would remark that
forest regions and coast lines, swamps, and flats subject to inundations,
should prominently yield the material for the factory; for on open pastures
or otherwise occupied tracts of country, even paper material cannot be
harvested for an unlimited period, at the expense of the soil, with impunity.
In factories situated in the vicinity of forests, the soda expended in paper
manufactures might be profitably regained by evaporation of the ley and
calcining it with coal or sawdust. The value of Esparto, or Sparta, the
grass so extensively shipped from the Mediterranean to British paper
mills, varies from £5 10s. to £6 per ton. In viewing the immense
supply of various kinds of paper material here cheaply available, there is
no reason why they should not form, closely pressed, an article of export
probably less inflammable than rags; and still more, it may safely be antic i


pated that, together with the consumption of rags in local factories, the
new articles indicated will largely enter into the fabrication of paper,
the product of Victorian industry.
The increasing scarcity of rags, scraps, and kindred substances
has rendered their supply as a main article for paper making more and
more inadequate, while the importation of the Esparto-fibre from the
Mediterranean countries has likewise failed most fully to supply the aug-
mented want. Hence, a variety of other substances have been tried, but
few drawn into use, for the manufacture of especially the coarser kinds of
paper ; still, even for these, the raw material is in demand, and substitutes
for the finer flax and hemp rags have been for some time much in request
for the better kinds of writing-paper, Under such circumstances arose, to
a great extent, the desire of the late Duke of Newcastle, that throughout
the British colonies investigations should be instituted into the adapta-
bilities of any vegetable substances eligible for paper manufacture and
other textile fabrics. In compliance with the request of His Grace, I had
for several years carried on inquiries, microscopical as well as technolo-
gical, in this direction, whenever opportunities offered ; and with the recent
establishment of a laboratory in the department under my control, I was
able to give these researches a practical bearing, and was thereby enabled to
place in the Exhibition samples of thirty kinds of paper prepared, on
my desire, by Mr. Christian Hoffmann, each kind representing the unmixed
fibre of the particular plant operated on. It was not the aim to produce
elegant paper, but only to show the crude nature of pressed and dried
paper-pulp, without action of bleaching or glutinising substances
thereon. In the selection, besides, every kind of material was discarded
which could not be obtained in vast abundance, and also all plants were
excluded closely allied to others already selected, otherwise the samples
of the series could have been largely augmented. It may suffice on this
occasion briefly to enumerate what the collection exhibits, to indicate the
geographical range of the species operated on, and to point out what allied
plants could likewise be drawn into use. I deemed it also desirable to
notice briefly the particular use to which in each instance this paper
material could be applied.
I.—Paper from Barks.
1. Eucalyptus Obliqua: L’Herit.—The Stringyharh Eucalypt of Victoria,
Tasmania and South Australia.—The paper prepared from the bark of
this tree is not merely suited for packing, but also for printing, and even
writing. It may also be employed for mill and paste boards. Hie
pulp bleaches readily. I regard it as the most important material
drawn on this occasion into use, for be it remembered that this
tree covers many of the barren ranges from St. Vincent’s Gulf to Gipps-
land, and that it equally abounds in Tasmania. Its bark, as is well known,
is extremely thick and bulky; it moreover separates with the utmost
facility, and is hence universally used for thatching rural dwellings in or
near the ranges. Indeed, the supply is available by millions of tons. It
has been argued that sad inroads would be made into our forests by
turning this material as indicated to account; but even the bark left
unutilised by the splitters would furnish an enormous supply; and if the
sacrifice of small portions of widely-extended forests were brought within


judicious limits by legislative enactments, possibly not any injury could
occur; while indeed at present the annually more or less extensive confla-
grations of the Stringybark forests destroy an infinitely larger number of
trees, than ever could sink under the axe of settlers scattered through the
mountains. The area within Victoria alone wooded almost exclusively
with Stringybark forest extends over many thousand square miles,
generally as yet without any habitations. Allied trees, likewise with thick,
fibrous bark, occur in West Australia, Queensland, and North Australia,
though not so extensively. Other bark may be similarly converted into
paper. The whole thick stratum of the bark was employed. It yields
readily to mechanical appliances on account of its lax and loose texture,
and is also easily acted on by caustic soda for conversion into pulp.
2. Eucalyptus Rostrata : Schlechtendal. —The Red Gumtree of South-
Australia and Victoria (but not of West Australia). —The paper prepared
from the bark of this tree proves much coarser than that of the Eucalyptus
obligua ; the pulp may be either used as admixture to that of packing
paper and pasteboards, or in the composition, or perhaps as sole ingredient,
for blotting and filtering paper. The species ranges nearly over the whole
Australian continent along river flats.
3. Eucalyptus Amygdalina; Labillardiere. —One of the so-called Pepper-
mint-trees, more oily in its foliage than any of its congeners. It extends
through the southern and eastern parts of Victoria, the whole of Tasmania,
and the southern parts of New South Wales. The inner bark is adapted
for the preparation of all kinds of coarser paper.
4. Eucalyptus Globulus: Labillardiere—The well-known Blue Gumtree
of Victoria and Tasmania.—Paper prepared from the bark of this tree
answers for packing and perhaps for printing.
5. Eucaylptus Goniocalyx : Ferd. Mueller—One of the White Gum-
trees, called in some districts the Spotted Gumtree. —lt is confined to the
more fertile ranges of Victoria and the south of New South Wales. The
foliage is rich in Volatile oil. The bark yields a good packing paper, but
hardly material for any good writing paper,
6. Eucalyptus Corymbosa: Smith —The Bloodwood-tree of East Aus-
tralia. —Occurs from the southern part of Queensland to the eastern part
of Gippsland. The paper from the bark of this Eucalypt is remarkable for
its great firmness. It makes thus a very strong wrapping paper.
7. Eucalyptus Leucoxylon : Ferd, Mueller.—This tree passes in various
districts under varied names —for instance, it is the White Gumtree of St.
Vincent’s Gulf, the spurious Ironbarhtree of some parts of Victoria, and
the Mountain Ash and Ironbarlc-tree of parts of New South Wales. The
bark can be converted into rough packing paper.
8. Eucalyptus Longifolia : Link.—The Woollybutt of New South Wales
and Gippsland.—The fibre of the bark again adapted for packing paper,
9. Eucalyptus Stuartiana : Ferd. Mueller.—One of the White Gumtrees
of the eastern parts of South Australia, Victoria, Tasmania, and the south
of New South Wales. Called, strange to say, the Appletree, about
Dandenong ; the Water Gumtree of Tasmania may belong to the same
species ; it is designated locally with still other names. The bark of this
often very big tree furnishes again good material for packing paper, and
like others, for pasteboard.
10. Acacia penninervis: Sieber.—A tree, not of very large size, extending
from South Queensland through New South Wales to East Victoria; of


rather rare occurrence in Tasmania, The bark of this acacia was chosen
merely to demonstrate, that also from the bark of very many species of
this great genus a rough kind of packing paper can be produced.
11. Melaleuca ericifolia : Smith. The so-called Swamp-Teatree.
Universal in inundated places and stagnant waters, both of the littoral and
mountain tracts of south-east Australia and Tasmania. The friable
lamellar bark can be converted into an excellent blotting paper—perhaps,
also, filtering paper. It is worthy of record that many species of this genus
yield a very similar bark, formed of innumerable membranous layers. The
most gigantic species of the genus Melaleuca leucodendron, which is com-
mon in South Asia and tropical Australia, exhibits such a bark, which thus
may be turned to account.
II. —Paper from Foliage.
12. Casuarina guadrivalvis : Labillardiere.—The Drooping Sheoak A
common tree of the coast as well as the inland tracts of South Australia,
Victoria, Tasmania, and Hew South Wales. The stringy foliage formed by
the cylindrical concrescence of the branchlets with the leaves can be con-
verted into an excellent pulp for packing, and even printing paper and
millboard. The mechanical contrivances for preparing the pulp are of par-
ticular ease.
13 . Casuarina leptoclada : Miquel.—The Erect Sheoak Restricted to
Victoria and Hew South Wales. The foliage in its use is akin to that of
the former species. Different Casuarinae occur in the other Australian
colonies, in South Asia, and the Pacific Islands, but none of the species has
been employed before for paper manufacture, and consequently the investi-
gations instituted in Victoria may be found even of value in a country so
anciently industrial as China.
lll. —Paper from Grasses, Rushes and Allied Plants,
1L Scirpus maritimus : Linne.—The Saltmarsh Clubrush. This plant
being almost cosmopolitan, occurs frequently in more or less brackish
waters of, at least extra-tropical, Australia. It seems like the following
previously not yet tried, or at all events not yet extensively used for paper
manufacture, for which it is singularly well adapted, being, like most
rushes, so readily converted into pulp. The amount of bleaching material
for all these rushes is trifling. It is sufficiently common here to deserve
attention, though not so frequent as in Middle Europe. Apparently the
paper is firm enough to stand the impressions of type.
15. Scirpus lacustris : Linne. —The Lake Clubrush. It grows in
moist parts nearly all over the globe, and so it is here also frequent in some
places. Being of gregarious occurrence, the plant is readily collected. The
paper from it is remarkably good, and hence well adapted at least for
printing and tissue paper, but probably also for writing.
16. Gyperus lucidus: R. Brown. —The Shining Gallingale, a rush-like
plant, common in many parts of Australia, shown to be adapted both for.
printing, tissue, and writing paper. All these rush-like plants bleach with
great facility.
17. Gyperus vaginatus : R. Brown.—The Sheated Galingale, one of the
most widely and most copiously distributed of the rush-like plants of all


Australia. Its fibre is extraordinarily tough, and accordingly can be
formed into a very tenacious paper, which, moreover, proves one of great
excellence. The raw material is available by thousands of tons on periodi-
cally flooded river flats, swampy depressions, and other moist localities,
where a continued harvest of the plant cannot possibly exhaust the soil.
18. Heleocharis sphacelata: R. Brown —The Stout Spilcerush. Abounds in
the swamps of South-east Australia and Tasmania. It yields a paper as
good for printing as for writing and tissue.
19. Heleocharis acuta :R. Brown.—The Slender Spilcerush. Common in
moist ground over a vast extent of Australia. Closely allied to the Creeping
Spilcerush of Middle Europe and other parts of the globe, which, although
so frequent, has seemingly never yet been converted into paper. The
local experiments here show this and many other cyperaceous plants
exquisitely adapted for good printing and tissue paper, and a by no means
very inferior writing paper. Better appliances will necessarily improve on
the quality of the paper.
20. Lepidosperma gladiatum : Labillardiere.—The Stvord-Rush of the
coast. A plant everywhere to be found on the sandy shores, where it
greatly tends to bind the shifting sand. It was, nine years ago, subjected
by Mr. Tolmer, of Adelaide, to successful tests for paper-fabrication. The
article produced from it is of strong texture, and inasmuch as the plant
can be collected in enormous quantities on ground not arable, it should find
its way deservedly into factories with the many other kinds of material
now pointed out. All the species of Lepidosperma are of like utility, but
not all are equally bulky, nor equally gregarious. It grinds largely into
pulp, like many other rushes.
21. Juncus vaginatus : R. Brown. —The Sheated Rush. Very abundant
in moist parts of the whole extra-tropical part of Australia. Resembling
several Middle European common rushes, which, like ours, would be worth
collecting as material for printing, tissue, and likely also fair writing
paper. The pulp is of equability. Many other species could, in the same
way, be used.
22. Xerotes longifolia: R. Brown.—The Toothed Dry-Rush. This plant is
dispersed through south-east Australia and Tasmania, and can be employed
both for printing and writing paper. It is, however, scarcely so readily
collected as many of the other plants just referred to. It has the recom-
mendation of great tenacity for it. Several allied species will yield similar
material. The aborigines make baskets from the Dry-Rush.
23. Dichelachne crinita: J. Hooker.—The Horsetail-Grass, one of the
toughest of all kinds. It is almost universally diffused over extra-tropical
Australia, and occurs also in New Zealand. This grass yields a tenacious
paper, especially fit to be used for a thin packing or wrapping paper.
Whilst, under disadvantages, working with small quantities of the pulp, the
operator found it not needful to separate fragments of the arista, glumoe,
&c., which appear as an admixture ; but as in this instance it was not the
aim to procure an elegant paper, no such provisions Avhich machinery
provides were adopted to separate the interspersed particles. It is not unlikely
to make fair printing and the less costly kinds of writing and tissue paper.
24. Stipa semibarbata: R. Brown. —A grass to be found almost every-
where throughout South-east Australia and Tasmania. The paper from
this grass is very substantial, though not so strong as that of the preceding
kind. On these two grasses only experiments were made to demonstrate


their adaptability for the purpose in view. There are several other stipae
and besides grasses of other genera, which may finally be introduced with
these into factories.
25. Xanthorrhcca minor : R. Brown. —This stemless liliaceous plant,
of the particular genus which produces the different grass-trees of Aus-
tralia, extends on temporarily inundated flats with heathy subsoil almost
uninterruptedly over very many square miles of country in the Western
Port district, Gippsland, and other Victorian localities j there are occa-
sionally lines of from thirty to fifty miles’ extent hardly interrupted by
any other vegetation. The broad rigid tufts approach each other to the
exclusion or gradual suffocation of most other plants of the spot. The
harsh foliage, under such circumstances locally available in unlimited
quantities, is shown to be easily converted into an excellent printing and
also good writing paper; the percentage of pulp is large. This experi-
ment teaches us also, that the wiry leaves of the different grass-trees may
all be collected for paper mills, because all have a similar tissue. Thus
an ample new resource is opened, especially for West Australia, where
various Xanthorrhoea abound, and are vernacularly passing by the puzzling
appellation of “ Blackboys.”
26. Typha augustifolia, Linn. —The Bulrush or Reedmace, identical,
as it seems, with the common narrow-leaved species of Britain and many
other parts of the globe. The pulp of the weighty foliage is easily to be
pressed into good printing, tissue, and an acceptable writing paper. So
far as I have been able to ascertain, the plant has previously not received
any attention in paper factories.
27. Phormium tenax : Forster.—The Nevj Zealand Flax-Lily. Paper has
been placed in the Exhibition from material grown in Victoria. The
readiness with which the large richly fibrous leaves can be turned,into pulp
for a very substantial paper, entitles the plant not alone to our consider-
ation, but also the fact that it may be permanently established with the
greatest ease in any swampy ground. At present the limited supply of
the Phormium reared here is only sufficient to serve as tying material
in gardens, vineyards, Ac. The adaptation of the Phormium for paper-
making is not a new one. Mr. Luke Natrads, as early as 1844, exported
the New Zealand Flax prepared as raw material for paper, and, I may
mention, in the form of square solid lumps, to lessen freight. The subject
from that time to the present day has been one of almost constant dis-
cussion, and it is to be hoped that a local mill will ere long utilise so
excellent a material. The paper here obtained from Phormium is the
strongest of all.
28. Gonfervaceous Algae , with Oedogonium and other allied freshwater
weeds, cohere into extensive teguments on the bottom of our shallow
swamps, when during the summer heat the water evaporates. The paper
obtained from these Algae would serve well, on account of its strength,
for packing. At certain times and in certain localities these waterweeds
can be collected in enormous quantity. The application for the purpose
appears to be a new one, and was first suggested by Dr. Greeves.
29. Musa Banksii : Ferd. Mueller. —In the forest glens of north-east
Australia. This plant yields a fair paper for almost alFpurposes, according
to the methods employed in reducing the fibre of the leaves and stalks to
pulp. It has, on this occasion, merely been chosen to illustrate that all
bananas, and thus the Manilla rope plant, and, besides, numerous allied


products of the vegetable world, might, in tropical countries, be utilised for
the preparation of coarser paper. The Banksian banana here operated on
was grown in Victoria. The bleaching process, however, is not an easy
one. Banana leaves yield approximately 40 per cent, of fibre for pulp.
The treatment to which these fibres were subjected has been the same as that
by which the esparto—or sparta —grass ( Lygeum Spar tea) is reduced to
pulp. They were immersed in a solution of caustic soda, obtained from
quicklime and common carbonate of soda, varying in strength according to
the requirement of the fibre, but always inexpensive. In operating on
Victorian raw fibres, it may be of advantage to know that the Mediterranean
esparto, which contains about 56 per cent, ligneous fibre, needs application
of a caustic liquid, prepared from one-eighth of soda in proportion to the
grass. The process of boiling is extended over six or eight hours, whereby
oil, albumen, resin, gum, and starch are abstracted. As substitutes for
rags, all the materials indicated here deserve preference over many of the
articles elsewhere tried or employed. Thus ferns yield generally only
from 20 to 25 per cent, of pulp.
GUMS.
Gum, a good deal resembling that of gum arabic, is extant in Mr.
Thozet’s collection from Acacia harpophylla (F.M.), and Acacia Bidwillii
(Benth.), and in Dr, Mueller’s collections from Acacia pycnantha (Benth.),
Acacia decurrens (Willd.), and Acacia homalophylla ( Gunn.). The number of
arborescent species of Acacia furnishing gum is not inconsiderable. It has
been exported for cotton-printing, glueing purposes, and other applications.
The species indigenous in Australia are of greater celerity of growth than
the African gum-acacias. The supply can be rendered abundant.
PICRIC ACID.
A sample of this substance is placed in the Exhibition, prepared from
grass-tree resin in the laboratory of the Botanic Gardens. The importance
of the gum-resin of xanthorrhoea for varied industrial purposes had not
escaped attention. As early as 1845 varnish was prepared from it,
the balsamic fragrance of which is remarkably long retained. In a report
presented to the Victorian Parliament in September, 1865, it was pointed
out that, among the many gratifying results from bringing native vegetable
raw material under notice at the Great Exhibition of 1862, one of the more
important had been the general recognition of a large percentage of picric
acid in the xanthorrhoea resin, this acid being so extensively used as a yellow
dye, and on a basis of indigo for green colour. In some of the western
parts of Victoria, and particularly in Gippsland and the Western Port dis-
trict, the Xanthorrhoea Australis abounds on morassy as well as sandy
heaths. Other species occur in South Australia, New South Wales, and
Queensland, but in West Australia these odd plants form a principal
feature in the vegetation—all yield the fragrant resin alluded to, so rich


in picric acid; and in West Australia, therefore, particularly, it ought to
become an article of highly-profitable commercial export. Mr. Hoffmann
tinged some silks, placed in the Exhibition, with picric dye, prepared by
him in the laboratory of Dr. Mueller’s department. The discovery of
picric acid in xanthorrhoea resin we owe to Dr. Stenhouse, as early as
1845.
SENNA.
A very fine sample was sent by Mons. Thozet from Rockhampton,
where the climate evidently is much more genial for the growth of the
different kinds of Senna-Cassia than that of Victoria. Nevertheless it is
likely, that in the rich soil and in the mild humid air of the fern-tree
ranges of Victoria, Senna culture might be pursued as a byework with
advantage.
GASTROLOBIUM.
This genus embraces several species highly poisonous, and hence very
destructive to sheep, cattle, and horses. In West Australia they are the
bane of many pasture tracts, but fortunately in'all other parts of Australia
only one species is known to exist— Gastrolohium grandiflorum (F. M.),
which ranges from the Suttor River of Queensland to the rear of Arnhem a
Land. This is the species which Mons. Thozet forwarded, with a view
that its medicinal properties might be tested, an investigation which is to
be conducted conjointly on the West Australian species cultivated in the
Botanical Gardens. It is likely that the poisonous principle is strongest in
the seeds, as in some leguminous plants. It may, on this occasion, be
worthy of record that the Lotus Australis, a plant of such wide distribu-
tion through this continent, and also occurring in New Caledonia, proves in
some tracts unexpectedly highly deleterious, and thus caused vast losses at
one season among the flocks in the Lake Torrens regions. Experiments
thereon were made by Dr. Eades, Mr. Miscamble, Dr. Mueller, and the
late Mr. Angus M‘Millan, but it was shown also that the same species
gathered on the shores of Port Phillip is inert. It was further shown by
D/s. Rudall and Mueller that the cultivated plants of the Darling-river
pea ( Swainsona Grey ana, Lindl.), which has such an extraordinarily
deleterious effect on stock at certain seasons, was innocuous when given
here in large quantity to sheep. The seeds of all these suspicious plants
will be subjected to rigorous toxicological and chemical examination at
an early period.
The gastrolohium scrubs can undoubtedly be destroyed by repeated
burning and dissemination of perennial grasses and fodder herbs.
TEA.
Already, during the Melbourne Exhibition in 1861, and the London
Exhibition of 1862, Tea from plants of the Botanic Garden was placed
before the public, and now again a fair sample is shown. In the Fern-tree


gullies tea plantations are likely to luxuriate quite as much as in the
favourable parts of China and in Assam. As an instance of the prolific growth
and remunerative yield of this plant in Assam, it may be instanced that
from Mimguldye 4000 lbs. of prepared Tea, realised on a plantation of 40
acres, were sent to England last year; the shrubs being planted only in
1863 by a former Victorian colonist, James Daniel Bruce, Esq., the son of
Charles Alex. Bruce, who discovered the Assam variety in that locality as
a spontaneous plant. The shrubs grew in two years six to eight feet.
The Assam wild plant and the Chinese cultivated plant, when crossed,
produce a very superior Tea. Both are mere forms of one species.
The only sample in the Exhibition is that prepared in the Melbourne
Botanic Gardens from bushes which yielded their product already for the
Exhibition of 1861. In the fern-tree gullies, and in other sheltered fertile
valleys of our extensive mountain tracts, the plant would still more prosper ;
and if for the curling process steam rollers were employed, and thus
manual labour saved, a new culture industry could be rendered, doubtless,
remunerative, while it would give additional employment to the juvenile
and infirm of the labouring classes, and a tea to some of the kinds now
in ordinary use could be realised from Victorian soil.
SAND ABAC.
This resin, of which fine specimens, secured by Mr. Peter Beveridge,
from the Murray pine, are placed in the Exhibition, is the exudation
of the various species of Callitris. The Mediterranean species is not
unlike the six or seven Australian species hitherto discovered. In Victoria
we have three species of Callitris —one rather rare on the coast, a second
on generally open mountains, and the third abundant in the many
parts of the Murray desert. It is singular that our article has hitherto
not attained a standing in commerce.
MYLITTA AUSTRALIS.
A subterranean fungus, to be found in various parts of Victoria and the
adjoining colonies. It attains in ordinary cases several pounds weight,
but exceptionally it may be found weighing half a cwt.; boiled it becomes
edible, hence this truffle has been named by settlers native bread.
GARDENIA RESIN, FROM NEW CADEDONIA,
The species of gardenia yielding this resin remains as yet phytographi-
cally unknown. It is probably allied to a species discovered by myself in
North Australia, Gardenia resinosa, so called on account of its large
amount of resinous exudation. The resin from New Caledonia had
evidently been fused ; it is brittle. On fracture, it presents a yellowish
colour ; it is tasteless, but possesses an odour reminding of ginger. When
leniently heated it assumes a waxy consistence. It dissolves almost
without residue in cold alcohol; contains, therefore, only a trifle of


gummy substance. The alcoholic solution is limpid and yellow, rendered
milky by addition of water. When dissolved in boiled alcohol, it forms
after cooling a large deposit. Evaporation of the spirit leaves a pellucid,
greenish-yellow resin. This pure resin dissolves in ether, oil of turpen-
tine, and partly in strong alkaline solutions.
OPIUM.
A trifle of this drug was prepared in the Botanic Gardens, merely to
show how with facility this substance might be locally obtained, especially
in places where juvenile labour or that of the infirm is to be rendered
available. It is almost needless to point out that the clime of Victoria
resembles greatly that of the countries from which opium now is mainly
obtained.
AROMATIC PLANTS.
In the Queensland Court are leaves of the Eucalyptus citriodora
(Hooker), a tree to be found in the north of New South Wales and the
south of Queensland. The distilled oil forms a superb cosmetic, and the
yield is fair. Another lemon-scented tree occurs in the southern forest
tracts of Queensland, Backhamia citriodora (F. M.), discovered there by
Walter Hill, Esq. The leaves of this tree also deserve distillation.
AYAPANA.
Such is the name of a herb yielded by the Eupatoriuvi triplinerve of
Vahl, or Eupatorium ayapana of Ventenat, a plant indigenous to the
tropical parts of South America, and now cultivated in many of the warmer
parts of the globe. The plant, in a living state, may be seen at the
Botanic Gardens of Melbourne, It is pervaded by a highly powerful
aromatic odour, emanating from essential oil. Probably to this it princi-
pally owes its celebrated virtue of neutralising the effects of snake poison.
We have no record to what extent in the more or less intense and
diversified manifestations from different snake poisons we can rely on the
efficacy of the plant, which may in some regards act like large doses of
alcoholic liquids, with so much advantage administered in many cases, and
in other regards it may owe its value to the powerful sudorific properties
which this herb possesses. Under any circumstances, the therapeutic value
of the ayapana ought to be subjected to trials, for it holds out great
hopes of being of high importance in all cases where, through internal
medicines, cutaneous secretion is profusely to be called forth.
CHINESE GRASS-CLOTH.
The plant yielding the fibre for this textile fabric, Boehmeria nivea, or
the Rhea of Eastern Asia, grows vigorously in the Botanical Gardens of


Melbourne. There can be no doubt that among cultivated fibre plants the
Rhea will assume finally a prominent rank. Fibre has been exhibited
grown at Melbourne and at Rockhampton,
NEW SNUFF.
The remarkable sternutatory property of Myriogyne minuta and M.
Cunninghami induced Dr. Mueller to have snuff prepared from them.
These weeds grow almost everywhere in this country on moist or
occasionally-inundated localities. Myriogyne minuta occurs all over
Australia, and through a great part of Asia.
BARKS.
All the following were gathered by A. Thozet, Esq., in the vicinity of
Rockhampton:—
Bark (as well from the stem as root) of Alstonia constricta: F. M.—The
Bitterhark of Queensland and the north of New South Wales.—This
bark seems to have been advantageously drawn into use in cases of inter-
mittent fever, but as yet no published pathologic records exist on the subject.
The bark is yielded by a small or middle-sized tree, now and then to be
met with in umbrageous forests, as well as in the Brigalow scrubs. It owes
its bitterness not to an alkaloid, but, as shown by Mr. Zeyher in Professor
Wittstein’s laboratory in Munich, to other principles. It is unnecessary to
refer further to the subject, since it has been carefully treated in a published
memoir. Comparison with other apocynaceous trees throws no light on the
specific nature of this bark. In many respects it resembles that of
Quassia, unless the resemblance is traced to Thevetia nereifolia, which is
rather famed in tropical America as a febrifuge, or to Wrightia
antidysenterica, equally renowned in Ceylon, or the Alstonia scholaris of
Madagascar and various parts of India and North Queensland, never as
yet admitted into general medicine.
Bark of Acacia harpophylla, F. M.; Croton insulare, Baill.; Sarcocephalus
cordatus, Miquel; Xanthoxylon hrachyacanthum, F. M.; Bohea putuminosa,
F. M.; Melodorum Leichhardtii, Benth.; Rhammus Vitiensis, Benth. —It
is expected that all these will serve either as dye stuffs, or for tanning, or
for medicinal purposes. Their test will necessarily involve extended
researches, which have only commenced. ( Vide Appendix.)
The bark of Chionanthus (Linociera) picrophloia is intensely bitter,
and it may be administered in intermittent fevers, like that of some other
plants of the oleaceous order.
The barks of the following plants yield textile fabrics, but we have as
yet no means of calculating whether the expense attending their gather-
ing and preparation stands in proportion to their mercantile value: —
Pipturus propinquus (Wedd.), a tree ranging from the north of New South
Wales through the littoral mountains of Queensland. Brachychiton popul-
neum (R. Brown), occurring from the eastern parts of Victoria to the south-
western parts of Queensland. Brachychiton Delabechei (F.M.), the true
bottle tree of the Brigalow scrubs of New South Wales and Queensland.


Ahutilon oxycarpuni (F. M.), a shrub of various parts of New South Wales
and Queensland, and replaced in other parts of Australia by many different
kinds of Sida, Abutilon, and other raalvaceous plants, yielding likewise
textile fabrics; as, for instance, that of Hibiscus tiliaceus, which is extensively
used in tropical Australia as well as India, the Pacific groups, and elsewheie,
by the natives for fishing nets, cordage, Ac.
BARKS FROM VARIOUS PARTS OF AUSTRALIA.
Fimelea Glavata: (Lab.).— The bark of this shrub was sent by Pemberton
Walcott, Esq., of Warren River, West Australia. The species is not
unfrequent in that part of Australia. The bark is extremely tough, and
largely employed by the natives for their nets, fishing lines, and kindred
objects. The exhibitor is of opinion that the bark could be profitably
collected for textile fabrics. If so, it is the only species of sufficiently
large and gregarious growth to render the fibre commercially available. A
beautiful fibre, of similar utility to the natives of Queensland and to the
Yarra tribe, is gained from Fimelea hypericina (Cunn.), Fimelea paucijlora
(R. Br.), and Fimelea axiflora (F. M.), all tall species of our forest gullies,
the two former occurring likewise in Tasmania. The Murray River natives
use the bark of Fimelea microcephala , a shrub of the desert.
The numerous Pimelese are, perhaps, of greater significance as medicinal
plants. The acridity of their bark is more or less analogous to that of
Daphne mezeveum / the bark of Fimelea strict a (Meissn.), from St. Vincent s
Gulf, being the most acrid of all. The proportion of acrid resin, on which
the blistering properties depend, has as yet not been ascertained in any of
our species.
TANNERS’ MATERIAL.
The inquiries into the value of a series of indigenous substances likely
recoin mendable for tanners’ use, instituted in our phytochemical
laboratory, have not as yet progressed far, the processes of investigation
involving considerable sacrifices of time. It is intended to contrast the
percentage of tannic acid contained in barks already in use here with that
of many °others probably much richer. Besides, it will be of importance to
ascertain the extent of tannizing principles of the gum-resins exuded by
the various eucalypts, and to tabulate also the relative quantity of tannic
acid in many kinds of foliage. In an annexed table the first results are
given of the analyses instituted with great care and patience by Mr. C.
Hoffmann. Of many eucalypts the resinous exudations may be obtained
in rather large quantity and with great convenience. The supply avail-
able at the places where the artisans of sawmills or splitters operate is
actually boundless. Often the resin is most easily obtained while still in
a state of solution, from which it is readily reduced to dryness or concen-
tration. In either form the gum-resin might constitute an extensive article
even of export. The following kinds are exhibited:—
1. Gum-resin of Eucalyptus corymbosa (Sm.), the Bloodwood tree of
Gippsland and New South Wales.
2. Of Eucalyptus amygdalina (Labill), the Messmate tree of some
districts of Victoria ; also found in Tasmania.


3. Of Eucalyptus leucoxylon (F. M.), a tree not uncommon in South
Australia, Victoria, and New South Wales.
4. Of Eucalyptus rostrata, the Red Gumtree, so universal in Australia.
This special kind is preferred to others as a therapeutic, a stringent, and
is particularly administered in Europe and India in cases of diarrhoea
which assumed a chronic state. To this category of objects belongs also a
sample of Venetian sumach, or scotino, obtained from Rhus cotinus, culti-
vated in the Melbourne Botanic Gardens. There is nothing to prevent this
plant being reared here quite as well as on the Mediterranean shores as a
dye and tanning article. Tanners’ bark, after having served its purpose,
might perhaps in some instances be utilised as paper material, and as a source
of acetic acid. In reference to this subject, Mr. Hoffmann instances the
patent of Mr. A. P. Halliday, of Salford. The coal even is utilised again
for steel manufacture, for manure, and for deodorising purposes. Merely
to show that the tanning substances could also be employed for writing ink,
the bark of Acacia penninervis was chosen as a source of tannic acid for
the ink exhibited. For black and some other dyes, several of the barks
alluded to are available.
Table showing the
Percentage of
Tannic
(Tannin) and Gallic
Acid in
the Bark of some
Victorian
Trees.
Systematic Name.
Locality.
Vernacular Name.
Tannic Acid. Gallic Acid.
Eucalyptus Stuartiana
Eucalyptus Longifolia
Eucalyptus Corymbosa ...
Eucalyptus
Eucalyptus
Acacia Subporosa
Acacia Penninervis
Angophora Intermedia ...
Eugenia Smithii
Banksia Serrata
Pittosporum Undulatum..
Brachychiton Populneum
Mountain Ash Gippslancl
Woolly butt.
Blooclwood .
Peppermint Tree ~
Grey Gumtree ~
Hickory Acacia ~
Hardy Acacia ~
Spurious Apple Tree ... ~
Myrtle Tree ~
Heath Honeysuckle ... ~
Fragrant Pittosporum. ~
Curryong,or Bottle Tree ~
4-6 0 7
83 28
27 0-8
20-4 0-8
4-9 0-4
66 1-2
179 3-8
2-9 o'9
lti-9 3-6
10-8 0-7
1-2 07
26 0-6
These proportions are the mean of two closely agreeing analyses,
have in some cases been further corroborated by a third analysis.
LIST OP PREPARATIONS FROM THE PHYTOCHEMICAL
LABORATORY OF THE BOTANIC GARDEN.
description of specimen.
WOOD SPIRIT PREPARED PROM WOOD OF
1. Casuarina quadrivalvis
2. Banksia Australis
3. Acacia melanoxylon
4. Melaleuca ericifolia
6. Eucalyptus leucoxylon
7. Do obliqua
8. Do globulus
9. Do rostrata
5. Acacia mollissima 10. Angophora intermedia
ACETIC ACID PREPARED FROM WOOD OF —
11. Casuarina quadrivalvis
12. Banksia Australis
13. Acacia melanoxylon
14. Melaleuca ericifolia
15. Acacia mollissima
16. Eucalyptus leucoxylon
17. Do obliqua
18. Do globulus
19. Do rostrata
20. Angophora intermedia


TAR PREPARED PROM WOOD OF
21. Casuarina quadrivalvis
22. Banksia Australis
23. Acacia melanoxylon
24. Melaleuca ericifolia
25. Acacia mollissima
26. Eucalyptus leucoxylon
27. Bo obliqua
28. Do globulus
29. Do rostrata
30. Angophora intermedia
CHARCOAL PREPARED PROM WOOD OP —
31. Casuarina quadrivalvis
32. Banksia Australis
33. Acacia melanoxylon
34. Melaleuca ericifolia
35. Acacia mollissima
41. Pure Wood Spirit,
42, Pure Acetic Acid,
36. Eucalyptus leucoxylon
37. Do obliqua
38. Do globulus
39. Do rostrata
40. Angophora intermedia.
prepared from wood of Eucalyptus globulus,
prepared from wood of Eucalyptus globulus.
43. Grey Acetate of Lime, the “ distilled wood-vinegar” employed in its prepara-
tion, obtained from wood of E. globulus.
44. A portion of the foregoing preparation purified.
45. Acetate of Soda, prepared from a portion of the sample No. 43.
46. Proto-acetate of Iron. The crude Acetic Acid employed in its preparation
obtained from wood of E. globulus.
Samples illustrating the application of the foregoing as a mordant and a dye.
46a. A piece of woollen material mordanted with a portion of the Proto-acetate of
Iron (specimen No. 46).
466. A piece of cloth mordanted with a portion of the same preparation as the
foregoing.
46c. A piece of cloth mordanted with a portion of the Proto-acetate of Iron
(specimen No. 46), and finished off with logwood.
46cf, A piece of cloth dyed with a portion of the Proto-acetate of Iron (specimen
No. 46) and Bed Prussiate.
47. Acetate of Peroxide of Iron—Sesqui-acetate of Iron, The acid employed in its
preparation derived from the same source as that employed in the prepara-
tion of the Proto-acetate.
47. Samples illustrating the application of the foregoing as a mordant.
47a, A piece of woollen material mordanted with a portion of the Sesqui-acetate of
Iron (specimen No. 47).
48. Sesqui-acetate of Alumina. Bed Liquor. Acetate of Lime employed in its pre-
paration, prepared from Acetic acid, obtained from wood of E. globulus.
Samples illustrating the application of the foregoing as a mordant.
48a. A piece of cloth mordanted with a portion of the red liquor (specimen No.
48), and dyed with logwood.
486. A piece of cloth subjected to the same treatment as the foregoing, in which,
however, a trifling quantity of magenta has been employed in addition to the
logwood.
49. Varnish prepared from the gum-resin of Xanthorrhcea Australis, dissolved in
Wood Spirit prepared from wood of E. globulus.
50. Wood Vinegar Tar.
51. Wood Vinegar Tar Besidue.
52. Besidue left after treatment of the Wood Vinegar Tar Besidue with boiling
water,
53. Wood coated with some of the Wood Vinegar Tar (specimen No. 50).
54. Wood coated with some of the Tar (specimen No. 28).
55. Wood coated with some of the Xanthorrhcea Varnish (specimen No. 49).
56. Writing Ink, in the making of which the bark of Acacia penninervis has been
employed in the place of galls.
57. Tea made from plants growing in the Botanical Gardens.
58. Picric Acid, prepared from the gum-resin of Xanthorrhcea Australis.
Samples illustrating the application of the foregoing as a dye.
680. A piece of Silk dyed with some of the Picric Acid (specimen No. 58).
586. A piece of Silk dyed with some of the Picric Acid (specimen No. 58), and
Extract of Indigo.
59. Snuff prepared from Myriogyne minuta.


60. Aqueous extract prepared from the leaves of E. Stuartiaua.
61. Essential Oil distilled from the leaves of E. Stuartiana.
62. Paper made from
I. Stems and leaves of Dichelachne
crinita.
ii. Bark of Acacia penninervis.
Hi, Stems of Cyperus vaginatus.
iv. Stems of Cyperus lucidus.
v. Leaves of Casuarina leptoclada.
Vi. Leaves of Casuarina quadrivalvis.
vn. Bark of Eucalyptus leucoxylon.
vni. Bark of Eucalyptus obliqua.
ix. Bark of Eucalyptus obliqua,
bleached
X. Bark of Eucalyptus Stuartiana.
xi. Bark of Eucalyptus longifolia.
xn. Bark of Eucalyptus globulus,
xin. Bark of Eucalyptus rostrata.
xiv. Bark of Eucalyptus goniocalyx.
xv. Bark of Eucalyptus amygdalina.
xvi. Bark of Eucalyptus corymbosa.
xvii. Stems of Heleocharis sphacelata.
xviii. Stems of Heleocharis acuta.
xxx. Stems of Juncus vaginatus.
xx. Stems of Lepidosperma gladia-
tum.
xxi. Bark of Melaleuca squarrosa.
xxii. Bark of Melaleuca ericifolia.
xxiii. Leaves of Phormium tenax,
xxiv. Leaves and stems of Stipa semi-
barbata.
xxv. Stems of Scirpus lacustris.
xxvi. Stems of Scirpus maritimus.
xxvii. Leaves of Typha augustifolia.
xxviii. Fibre of Oedogonium, &c.
xxix. Leaves and stems of Xerotes
lougifolia.
xxx. Leaves of Xanthorrhcea minor,
xxxi. Bark of Boehmeria nivea, the
Chinese grasscloth plant,
grown in the Botanic
Gardens.
63. Sumach prepared from plants of Rhus Cotinus growing in the Botanical Gardens.
64. Young Fustic, prepared from plants growing in the Botanical Gardens.
65. Opium, from Poppy plants growing in the Botanical Gardens.
66. Extract of Poppy Heads, prepared from plants growing in the Botanical Gardens.
RAW MATERIAL FOR PAPER,
FIBRE FROM BARK OF EUCALYPTUS—
E. Stuartiana.
E. Obliqua.
E. Longifolia.
E. Amygdalina.
E. Corymbosa.
E, Leucoxylon.
VEGETABLES USED FOR FOOD BY THE ABORIGINES.
Two collections occur in the Exhibition—one illustrating the alimentary
substances obtained from plants by the natives in the more northern
parts of Queensland. This collection owes its existence almost entirely to
the strenuous efforts made by M. Thozet to obtain information on the
subject, whose elaborate detailed remarks are appended. In cases of
emergency even travellers might derive great advantage from the informa-
tion thus brought together through that gentleman’s intelligent assiduity.
The second collection was forwarded by E. M. Officer, Esq., on the Wim-
mera River. It comprises the following kinds : —Roots of Arthropodium
setosum, F. M.; ( Dichopogon setosus Kunth); Arthropodium laxum, Sieb.;
Geranium dissectum, L.; Convolvulus erubescens, Sims; PrasophyHum patens,
R. Br.; Anthericum hulbosum, R. Br.; Rumex bidens, R. Br.; Microseris
Forsteri , J. Hook.; Scirpus maritimus, L.; Typha augustifolia , L.; Triglo-
chin procerum, R. Br.; Lyperanthus nigricans, R. Br.; Siebera ericoides,
Benth.; Diurispalustns, Lindl.; young roots of Xanthorrhcea Australis ;
flowers (rich in mellaginous sap) of Ranksia ornata, F.M.; fruits of Styphelia
adscendens, R. Br.
There are very many other substances used as edibles by the aboriginals,


but on this occasion only those could come under review which were in
reality sent to the Exhibition. The laudable example set to elucidate this
subject should be followed up in other parts of Australia before the
aboriginal population passes away.
LIST OF SOME OF THE ROOTS AND FRUITS USED AS VEGETABLE
POOD BY THE ABORIGINALS OF NORTHERN QUEENSLAND,
AUSTRALIA. By A. THOZET, Esq.
WITHOUT PREPARATION.
ROOTS.
1. Hibiscus heterophyllus, Vent. Native Sorrel. Batham. Banks of riveis
and creeks, occasionally on plains. A rather tall shrub, part of the stem and
younc* branches covered with small prickles. Leaves entire or lobate. b lower
white and pink or yellow, with purple centre, (Roots of young plants, young
shoots, and leaves eatable.) „ . T „
2. Brachychxton platanoides, R. Br. Platan-leaved Bottle-tree. _ Ketey. in
scrub land. A tree of a beautiful pyramidal growth when young, becoming enlarged
in the centre with old age. (Roots of young plants eatable.)
3 Bkachychitoh Delabechei, F. Muell. Bottle-tree. Binkey. Generally in
stony scrub land. Remarkable by its enlarged trunk, similar in shape to a
lemonade bottle ; some measure six to eight feet in diameter. (Roots of the young
plants eatable.) The natives refresh themselves with the mucilaginous sweet
substance afforded by this tree, as well as make nets of its fibre. They cut holes
in its soft trunk, where the water lodges and rots them to the centre, thus forming
so ‘many artificial reservoirs. On their hunting excursions afterwards, when
thirsty, they tap them one or two feet below the old cuts, and procure an abundant
SU 4Vms opaca, F. Muell. Round Yam. Yaloone (large); WappooWappoo (small).
—ln clayey soil. Small creepers ; leaflets usually three, four, or live, dark green
and smooth. Berries black and globular. Tubers very numerous, some weighing
five to ten pounds. Eaten in hot weather like water-melons (the small and young
are the best); they are, however, difficult to digest. Probably the yam alluded to
by Leichhardt; in his “Journal of an Overland Expedition, ’ page 150, he says—
“ Both tubers and berries had the same pungent taste, but the former contained a
watery iuice, which was most welcome to our parched mouths.
5. Dioscorea punctata, R. Br. Long Yam. Kowar.—La. scrubs and creeks.
A small rough, twining creeper. Leaves heart-shaped and smooth, blowers
terminal. The clusters of the winged capsule look, to an unacquainted observer,
like the flowers of the common hop. (Small young tubers eatable.)
6. Heleocharis sphacelata, R. Br. Rush. Kaya. —Lagoons, creeks, and ponds.
Small, almost spherical tubers, six to twelve on each plant.
stems or flower-stalks.
7 NvMPHiEA gigantea, Hook. Blue Waterlily. Yalco Kalor (Rkh. tribe),
Kaooroo (Clev. B. tribe).—Abundant in all lagoons and ponds. _ Flower-stalks of
the unexpanded flowers, after being broken and deprived of their fibrous part, are
8. Xanthorrhosa sp. Grass Tree. Kono. —Over ridges and mountain sides.
Small part of the extremities of the young shoots, and the white tender base of
9. Lxvistonia Australis, Mart. Cabbage-tree Palm. Konda.—ln valleys and
gorges. 70 to 120 feet in height. (White part of the undeveloped leaves eatable.)
‘ ‘ Several of my companions suffered by eating too much of the cabbage palm.
Leichhardt's 0. L. Expedition, page 72.
FRUITS.
10 Melouorum Leichhardtii, Benth, Merangara .—Scrub. A small shrub,
sometimes a strong tall creeper. Bark aromatic. Producing m the top of om
scrub trees an oblong or almost round fruit, with one or two seeds.


11. Capparis Mitchelli, Liudl. Wild Pomegranate. Mondo.* —ln open
plains. A small tree of a very crooked growth. Park longitudinally fissurated.
Trunk and branches covered with short prickles, the branches nearly always
drooping. Flowers white. Fruit large, oblong or spherical, 2 to 3 inches in *
diameter.
12. Capparis canescens, Banks. Native Date. Mondolev. f —ln scrub and
open forest land. A creeper, ascending shrubs or large trees, with stipulate
hooked prickles. Leaves oblong. Flowers white. Fruit pyriform, 4 inch
diameter.
13. Capparis nobilis, F. Mueller. Small Native Pomegranate. Rarum. —ln
scrub. A small tree, with prickles on the branches. Leaves oval-oblong.
Flowers white. Fruit globular, Ito 14 inch in diameter, with a small protuberance
at the end. Small, almost spherical tubers, six to twelve in each plant.
14. Grewia polygama, Roxb. Plain Currant. Karoom (Rockh. tribe), Ouraie
(Clev. Bay tribe). —Among grass. A small shrub. Large, alternate, ovate, serrated
leaves. Berries brown and smooth, two or four in an axillary peduncle. Leichhardt
speaks of this small plant in his Journal, page 295 —“ I found a great quantity of
ripe Grewia seeds, and on eating many of them it struck me that their slightly
acidulated taste, if imparted to water, would make a very good drink; I therefore
gathered as many as I could, and boiled them for about an hour; the beverage
which they produced was at all events the best which we had tasted on our
expedition, and my companions were busy the whole afternoon in gathering and
boiling the seeds.” The same explorer states also that d Vinstar of the natives
they obtained another good beverage by soaking the blossoms of the tea tree
(Melaleuca leucadendronj, which were full of honey, in the water used for drinking.
15. Spondias pleiogyna, F. Muell. Sweet Plum. Rancooran. —Scrub. A
beautiful tree with erect trunk and pinnate glossy leaves. Eatable part (sarcocarp)
red.
16. Rhamnos Yitiensis, Benth. Murlilam. —Scrub, A tree. Trunk and
branches whitish. Leaves very smooth, shining, serrate, crenulafe, and green on
both sides. Berries \ inch diameter.
17. Zizyphus jujuba, Lam. Torres Straits Jujube Tree.—The trunk and
branches covered with prickles. Leaves ovate, rarely orbicular, green, smooth
above, and white tomentose underneath. Fruit ovoid, yellow when ripe, 4 to
| inch diameter.
18. Rubus rostefolius, Sm. Native Raspberry. Neram. —ln creeks and valleys.
19. Terminalia oblongata, F. Muell. Yananoleu. —Scrub and open forest. A
large tree, with branches spreading almost horizontally. Spikes a little longer than
the leaves, with white yellowish flowers. Fruit purple, flattened and winged.
20. Barringtonia careya, F. Muell. Broad-leaved Apple Tree. Barror. —ln
open forest—alluvial soil. A small tree. Flowers white and pink. Fruit like a
middle-sized apple.
21. Eugenia myrtifolia, Sm. Buyan Buyan. —ln creeks. Rich bright foliage,
with abundant white blossoms. Fruit rose and red, pyriform and drooping.
22. Cucumis jucunda, F. Muell. Native Cucumber. Pumpin. —On rich
alluvial soil and amongst grass. Fruit from 4an inch to fof an inch in
diameter and Ito 14 inch in length. The natives bite off one end, press the
pulpy substance and seeds into their mouths, and throw away the outer skin ox-
rind, which is very bitter.
23. Sarcocephalus cordatus, Miq. Leichhardt’s Tree. Tolca (Rockh. tribe),
Taberol (Clev. B. tribe). —Banks of rivers and creeks. Stem erect. Leaves
broad, oblong, deciduous. Flowers globular and fragrant. Fruit 14 to 2 inches
diameter, usually spherical, but varyingmuch in shape, very soft when ripe, pulp
slightly bitter.
24. Timonius Rumphii, Cand. Kavor Kavor. —Beds of creeks. Fruit 4 inch
in diameter, in shape not unlike the crab apple of Europe.
25. Maba geminata R. Br. Scrub box, or ebony. Bonone. —In scrub. A small
tree, with dark scaly bark. Leaves ovate or obovate, almost sessile. Fruit
small, egg-shaped, orange red when ripe.
* The aboriginal name is given in allusion to the heel of a native, the fruit when ripe
resembling that part of the foot,
t Diminutive of Mondo.


26. Acheas Australis, E. Br. Baleam. —In scrub. A tall straight tree.
Bark thin, grey yellowish. Leaves obovate, obtuse. Fruit as big as a middle-
sized plum, with four or five smooth, shining, flattened' seeds.
27. Caeissa ovata, E. Br. Native Scrub Lime. Karey (Eockh. tribe), Ulorin
(Clev. B. tribe).—-In scrub. A small prickly shrub. Flowers white, fragrant.
Fruit, i inch diameter, egg-shaped.
28. Myopobum diffusum, E. Br. Amulla. —Among grass. A difluse, almost
prostrate, small herbaceous plant. Leaves alternate dentate at their base,
lanceolate, acute. Fruit 4of an inch diameter, on an axillary solitary peduncle,
white and pink when ripe, slightly bitter. . .
29. Exocaepxjs latifolius, R. Br. Native Cherry. Onngonn. In scrub. A
small tree. Bark almost black, scaly. Leaves thick, dark green. Fruit red
when ripe. . , /T> , , . .
30. Ficus aspera, Forster. Eough-leaved Fig-tree. JS oomaie (Eockh. tribe),
Balemo (Clev. B. tribe). —In scrubs and plains. Fruit black when ripe.
31. Ficus vesca, F, Mueller. Leichhardt’s Clustered Fig-tree. Parpa. —ln
scrubs, banks of rivers and creeks. A good-sized tree. Leaves ovate, lanceolate,
acute, dark, smooth, green above, and pale green underneath. The fruit, which is
of a light red colour when ripe, hangs in clusters along the trunk, and on some of
the largest branches. T .
32. Biptueus propinquus, Wedd. Native Mulberry. Kongangn. In creeks.
A soft shrub, almost herbaceous. Leaves broadly ovate, serrate, acuminate,
tomentose, and white underneath. Fruit white, transparent.
33. Musa Banksii, F. Mueller. Native Banana. Morgogaha (Clev. B. tribe).
34. Band anus peduuculatus, E. Br. Screw Bine. Kaor. Brincipally on the
sea coast. The eatable part is the side of the seeds adhering to the rachis.
SEEDS.
35. Nelumbo nucifera, Gaertn. Bink Water Lily. Aquaie. In lagoons. A
splendid aquatic plant. The stalk of the leaves erect; the latter peltate, slightly
concave, one or two feet diameter. Flowers pink, five to eight inches diameter.
Seeds, 20 to 35 ; more than three-quarters imbedded in a^ large flat-topped torus.
(2 bis) Brachychiton platanoides, E. Br.
(3 bis) Brachychiton Delabechei, Ferd. Mueller. ’
36. Sterculia quadrifida, E. Br. Convavola. —In scrubs and creeks. Leaves
ovate or cordate. The pod, which contains three to six black ovoid seeds, is of a
bright crimson colour when ripe.
(7 bis) Nymph.ua gigantea, Hook.
WITH PREPARATION.-—BAKED ONLY.
• ROOTS.
37. Bhaseolus Mungo, Linn. Kovnin (Eockh. tribe), Kadolo (Clev. B. tribe).
Found slightly twining among grass. Stems and branches hairy. Leaflets 3,
narrow, 3to 4 inches long, acute. Flow’ers pale yellow. Bod cylindrical, 2 to
4 inches long. Roots the shape of small long carrots. .
38. Acacia Bidwilli, Benth. Bid will’s Acacia. Waneu.— Usually in stony
ridges. A small tree, prickly when young. Small leaflet 15 to 2o pairs, £ inch
long. (Roots of the young plants eatable).
15 bis). Dioscorea punctata, R. Br. Large old roots.
(6 bis). Helocharis sphacelata, R. Br. The small tubers, baked, are roughly
pounded between tw r o stones, and made in the same shape as almond cake.
(7 ter). Nymphjea gigantea, Hook. The tubers. _
39. Aponogeton sp. Warrumbel (Rkh. tribe), Koornabaie (01.8. tribe.)_ Shallow
water in lagoons and ponds. A small aquatic plant. Leaves oblong, lying on t e
surface of the water. Rachis erect. Flowers numerous, small, and yellow, iubers
spherical, | in. to 1 in. in diameter.
STEMS.
40. Dendrobium canaliculatum, R. Br. Yamberin. —Very abundant on the
decayed trunks and branches, principally of gumtree. (The bulbous stems, after
being deprived of the old leaves, are eatable.)


(36 bis). Sterculia quadrifida, E. Br.—The mucilaginous substance of the
unripe pod eatable.
FRUITS.
41, Avicennia offinalis. Mangrove. Egaie (Clev. Bay tribe), Tagon Tagon
(Ekh. tr,). —Generally in estuaries of rivers and creeks. A small tree, but some-
times attaining 18 inches in diameter. Small numerous roots protrude at the
base of the crooked trunks. Leaves pale green above, and white tomentose
underneath. Fruit heart-shaped, with two thick cotyledons. The aborigi-
nals of Cleveland Bay dig a hole in the ground, where they light a good fire ;
when well ignited they throw stones over it, which, when sufficiently heated, they
arrange horizontally at the bottom, and lay on the top the Egaie fruit, sprinkling
a little water over it; they cover it with bark, and over the whole earth is placed,
to prevent the steam from evaporating too freely. During the time required
for baking (about two hours), they dig another hole in the sand; the softened
Egaie is put into it; they pour water twice over it, and the Midamo is now fit for
eating. They resort to that sort of food during the wet season, when precluded
from searching for any other.— Murrell's Testimony. (The late James Murrell
was a wrecked sailor, who lived seventeen years amongst one of the Cleveland
Bay tribes, in Northern Queensland, Australia). Near Mount Elliott and
Cleveland Bay, there is also an eatable root, Wangoora, probably a species of
Ipomeea. The roots, very bitter, are cut in two, put into water for one hour or
one hour and a half, and are afterwards baked for three or four hours, in the
same way as the Egaie; they then carry it in a dilly bag (Yella barda) to the
water’s edge, where, by pouring water over and pressing it, they make the
starch fall upon the bark in the same way as arrowroot falls from the cylinder
into the trough; they wash it three or four times until the water is very clear,
and the yellow fecula is then fit for use.— Murrell’s Testimony. This plant
may be the same as the one alluded to by Leichhardt, page 284: —“ I tried
several methods to render the potatoes, which we had found in the camps of the
natives, eatable, but neither roasting nor boiling destroyed their sickening bitter-
ness ; at last, I pounded and washed them, and procured the starch, which was
entirely tasteless, but thickened rapidly in hot water like arrowroot, and was
very agreeable to eat, wanting only the addition of sugar to make it delicious
at least, so we fancied.”
POISONOUS IN A RAW STATE,
TUBERS—POUNDING, DESICCATION.
42. Caladium macrorhizon, Yent. Haklcin (Eockh. tribe), Banganga or
Nargan (Clev. Bay tribe). —In moist shady places. A strong herbaceous plant,
with very large sagittate leaves. The young bulbs, of a light rose colour inside,
found growing on large old rhizomes, are scraped, and divided into two parts*
and put under the ashes for about half an hour. When sufficiently baked, they
are then pounded by hard strokes between two stones—a large one, Wallarie,
and a small one, Kondola. All the pieces which do not look farinaceous, but
watery when broken, are thrown away; the others, by strokes of the Kondola,
are united by twos or threes, and put into the fire again ; they are then taken
out and pounded together in the form of a cake, which is again returned to the
fire and carefully turned occasionally : this operation is repeated eight or ten
times, and when the Haklcin, which is now of a green greyish colour, begins to
harden, it is fit for use.
43. Ttphonium Brownii, Schott. Merrin. —ln sandy shady places. A small
herbaceous plant. Leaves sagittate, entire, or three lobate. Flowers purple,
dark, of a disagreeable odour. The tubers, which are yellow inside, are manipu-
lated in the same way as the Hakkin, but none are watery, and they are made to
adhere together after the first roasting.
SEEDS —POUNDING, MACERATION, DESICCATION.
44. Entada scandens, Benth. Barbaddah (Clev. B. tr.) —A strong climber.
Pod 2to 4 feet in length, and 3 to 4 inches in breadth. The seeds, 1£ to 2


APPENDIX.
inches diameter, are put into the stove oven and heated in the same way, and
for the same time as the Egaie; they are then pounded fine and put into a dilly-
bag, and left for ten or twelve hours in water, when they are fit for use.
— Murrell's Testimony. .
45. Cycas media, R. Br. Nut Palm. Baveu.—Ve ry common on the mountain
sides and in valleys. A graceful tree, with a crown of fruit the size of a walnut,
yellow when ripe. The nuts are deprived of their outer succulent cover
(sarcocarp), and are then broken ; and the kernels having been roughly pounded,
are dried three or four hours by the sun, then brought in a dilly-bag to the water
stream or pond, where they remain in running water four or five days, and in
stagnant water three or four days. By a touch of the fingers the proper degree of
softness produced by maceration is ascertained. They are afterwards placed
between the two stones mentioned, reduced to a fine paste, and then baked under
the ashes in the same way that our bush people bake their damper.
Seeds—Pounding, Maceration.
46. Encephalartos Miquelii, Ferd. Mueller. Dwarf Zamia. Banga,
Mountains and valleys. Found generally in the same locality as the palm nut,
with a large cone-fruit not unlike a pine-apple. The seeds, orange red when ripe,
and separating freely, are baked for about half an hour under ashes; the outside
covers and the stones are then broken, and the kernels, divided by a stroke of the
Kondola, are put into a dilly-bag and carried to a stream or pond, where they
remain six or eight days before they are fit for eating. .
47. Encephalartos Denisonii, Ferd. Mueller. Leichhardt’s accrescent Zamia.
Prepared in the same way as E. Miquelii.
The colouring principle of all the following barks is perfectly soluble in
water • cotton, woollen, and silken goods dyed with the aqueous infusion
assumed the colours below specified.
The affinity of vegetable tissues for colouring matter being in general
not so great as that of animal tissues, the woollen material was in neatly
all cases dyed of a more decided and darker colour. The exceptions were—
the infusion of the bark from the root of Sarcocephalus cordatus, and the
infusion of the bark of Alstonia constricta; with these, cotton, woollen, and
silken material assumed a colour of equal intensity.
Ranged according to their percentage of tannin the barks would stand
thus: — .
The barks of Acacia harpophylla, Petalostigma quadriLoculare, _ and
Melodorwm Leichhardtii rank first; they afford highly astringent infusions,
and evidently contain a notable amount of tannin. Next come the barks
of Groton insula,re, and Rhamnus Vitiensis; then the barks of Chionanthus
picrophloia, Xanihoxylon brachyacanthum, Erythroxylon Australe, and
Guettardella putaminosa. Lastly, the barks of Sarcbcephalus cordatus ,
A Istonia constricta, and Morinda tinctoria.
The bark of Groton insulare, on being distilled with -water, yields an oil
of an agreeable spicy odour, not unlike mace. _
The bark of Melodorum Leichhardtii likewise yields an oil, on being
distilled with water, possessing a pleasant cinnamon odour.


J.
L—COTTON FABRIC.
II. —WOOLLEN FABEIC.
III.—SILKEN FABRIC.
Name of Bark.
From
/
Colour
of the
Dyed Fabric.
The Dyed Fabric
wrought
through a solu-
tion of a fixed
alkali; colour
changed to
The Dyed Fabric
wrought
through a solu
tion of an acid:
the colour was
The Dyed Fabric
wrought
through a solu-
tion of bichro-
mate of potash;
colour changed
to
/
Colour
of the
Dyed Fabric.
The Dyed Fabric
wrought
through a solu-
tion of bichro-
mate of potassa;
colour changed
to
N
The Dyed Fabric
wrought
through a solu-
tion of proto-
sulphate of iron;
colour changed
to
Colour
of the
Dyed Fabric,
>
The Dyed Fabric
wrought
through a solu-
tion of extract
of indigo: colour
changed to
Barkof Chionauthr.s
picrophloia
Queensland
Pale brownish
yellow
Brownish yel-
low
Render’d paler
but brighter
Pale brown
Pale brownish
yellow
Brownish yel-
low
Greenish yel-
low
-
-
Bark of Acacia har-
pophylla
11
Pale reddish
brown
Eight reddish
brown
11
Dark brown
Reddish br’wn
Dark brown
Dark dingy
olive green
—
-
Bark of Xanthoxy-
lon brachyacan-
tbum
Pale brownish
yellow
Brownish yel-
low
11
Pale brown
Brownish yel-
low
Dark brown-
ish yellow
Greenish yel-
low
—
— .
Bark of Croton in-
sulare
11
Pale reddish
brown
Eight reddish
brown
”
Dark reddish
brown
Pale reddish
brown
Light brown
Pale dingy
olive green
-
-
Bark of Petalostig-
ma quadriloculare
n
Pale brownish
yellow
Brownish yel-
low
”
Dark brown-
ish yellow
Brownish yel-
low
Light brown
Dark dingy
olive green
-
-
Bark from root of
Sarcoceplialus
cordatns
li
Bright canary
yellow
Yellow
”
Yellow faintly
ting’d brown
Bright canary-
yellow
Yellow faintly
ting’d brown
Dull yellow
Golden yellow
Pretty sea
green
Bark of Helodorum
Leichbardtii
>1
Pale brownish
red
Bright light
red
”
Dark rich
brownish red
Bright brown-
ish red
Dark brown-
ish red
Dark dingy
olive green
-
-
Bark of Erythroxy-
lon Australe
11
Pale brownish
yellow
Brownish yel-
low
>•
Light brown
Palebrownish
yellow
Light brown
Greenish yel-
low
-
-
Bark of Rhamnus
vitiensis
1»
Pale reddish
brown
Reddish hr'wn
11
Eight brown
Palo reddish
brown
Dark brown
Pale dingy
olive green
-
-
Bark of Guettar-
della putaminosa
11
Pale brownish
yellow
Brownish yel-
low
»
Brownish yel-
low
Brownish yel-
low
Dark brown-
ish yellow
Greenish yel-
low
. -
-
Bark of Alstonia
constricta
11
Canaryyellow
Canary yellow
"
Yellow faintly
ting’d brown
Canaryyellow
Yellow faintly
ting’d brown
Dull yellow
Bright canary
yellow
Rich grass
green
Bark from root of
Morinda tinctoria
N. Caledonia
Pale orange
yellow
Pale orange
yellow
Changed to
dull yellow
Pale reddish
brown
Dull orange
yellow
Dark dull or-
ange yellow
Light brown
-
-




*
.
