

l>ert
[No. 37.
SOUTH AUSTRALIA.
REPORT OF THE PROCEEDINGS
OF THE
INTER-STATE CONFERENCE
ON THE
MURRAY RIVER WATERS
HELD AT
MELBOURNE, JANUARY, 1911.




CONTENTS.
Resolutions agreed to by Conference
Minutes of Proceedings
Reports op Proceedings
Appendices :
Report of the Hon. P. McM. Glynn on the Murray River and its tributaries, the
Murrumbidgee and the Goulburn ... ... ... ... ...
Memorandum by Mr, W. Cattanach, member of the State Rivers and Water Supply
Commission of Victoria, upon the Hon. P. Glynn’s report
Plan of Lake Victoria.!




INTER-STATE CONFERENCE, MELBOURNE
JANUARY, 1911
RESOLUTIONS AGREED TO BY THE CONFERENCE.
As to the Lake Victoria works it was resolved :
“ 1. The States of New South Wales and Victoria, so far as on their, or either of their, parts
may be necessary, shall grant to the State of South Australia authority and permission
to construct, use, and enjoy the storage works at Lake Victoria (with and including
two locks on the Murray River), mentioned in section eleven of the Murray Waters
Act 1910 of the State of South Australia, and shown on the plans accompanying the
printed report, dated 9t.h December, 1902, of the Inter-State Royal Commission on the
Murray River, and on a plan produced at. this Conference, and annexed hereto.
(Appendix).
“ 2. The State of New South Wales shall transfer to, and vest in, the State of South Australia
(for an estate in fee simple, or such other estate as may be appropriate) that piece of
land in the said State of New South Wales known as Lake Victoria, with the two
watercourses known as Rufus River and Frenchman’s Creek, connecting the River
Murray with the said lake, for and throughout their entire course from the said river
to the said lake ; and, also so much of the banks and foreshores of the said lake and
watercourses as shall be sufficient for all purposes of access to, and use and enjoyment
of, the said Lake Victoria works.
“3. The State of South Australia shall be authorized to use the channel of the Murray River
as a conduit for the conveyance of impounded water from Lake Victoria to the eastern
boundary of that State
“ 4. Any riparian rights of adjoining owners and of the State of New South Wales, in virtue
of adjoining Crown lands, shall be preserved, and any compensation for encroachments
resulting fiom the works, or any resumptions necessary to effectuate the same, shall be
♦ at the expense of the State of South Australia.
“5. The Government of the State of New South Wales shall, as, and when requested by the
Government of South Australia, acquire any private lands required for the effectuation
of the works under the provisions of the Lands for Public Purposes Acquisition Act of
New South Wales, or appropriate any Crown lauds held under lease.
“6. The right to the use of such waters as may be necessary for irrigating the lands
contiguous to Lake Victoria is conserved to New South Wales without impairment of
the right t® the use by the State of South Australia of water impounded in Lake
Victoria by the State of South Australia.
“7. The States affected declare that the present agreement as to Lake Victoria and its
subsidiary works is not to be construed as prejudicing or abridging any claims of any
such States to the reasonable use of the waters of the Murray and its tributaries, or as
an admission by any State of the validity or otherwise of any such claim by any other
State ; or as in any way extending or abridging the rights of such States, inter se, in
respect of such waters.”
J. MURRAY,
Premier of the State of Victoria.
JAS. S. McGOWEN,
Premier of the State of New South Wales.
JOHN VERRAN,
Premier of the State of South Australia.


On the question of the Murray River and its tributaries it was resolved
“ 1. That the engineers of the three States be instructed to inquire, without delay, and present
to the Premiers by the Ist December, 1911, a report and recommendations based upon
data now available, and on such further data as they shall obtain by that date which
will, in their opinion, be essential or conducive to a settlement, by agreement between
the States of New South Wales, Victoria, and South Australia, of the question of the
Murray River and its tributaries.
“2. That for the purpose of such inquiry and report the engineers may jointly engage such
professional assistance as may be necessary.
“3. That the cost of the inquiry and report be shared equally by the three States.”
J. MURRAY,
Premier of the State of Victoria.
JAS. S. McGOWEN,
Premier of the State of New South Wales.
JOHN VERRAN,
Premier of the State of South Australia.
Conference Chamber,
Premier’s Office,
Melbourne, 23rd January, 1911.
6


INTEE-STATE CONFERENCE
PREMIER’S OFFICE, MELBOURNE.
MINUTES OF PROCEEDINGS.
FIRST DAY.
THURSDAY, 19th JANUARY, 1911.
Meeting of Conference.—The Conference met at the Premier’s Office, Melbourne, at Three
o’clock.
Present
NEW SOUTH WALES.
The Honorable James Sinclair McGowen, M.L.A., Premier and Treasurer.
The Honorable Campbell Carmichael, M.L.A.
SOUTH AUSTRALIA.
The Honorable John Vkrran, M.H.A., Premier and Commissioner of Public Works.
The Honorable Crawford Vaughan, M.H.A., Treasurer and Commissioner of Crown Lands
and Immigration.
VICTORIA
The Honorable John Murray, M.L.A., Premier and Chief Secretary.
The Honorable George Graham, M.L.A,, Minister of Agriculture and Water Supply.
Appointment of President. —The Honorable James McGowen moved, That the Honorable John
Murray, M.L.A., Premier of Victoria, be appointed President of the Conference.
Seconded by the Honorable John Verrau.—Carried.
Papers set'ing forth the views of the States of Victoria and South Australia regarding the Murray
waters question were read by the Honorable John Murray and the Honorable John Verran
respectively, and were ordered to be printed and distributed.
General discussion ensued.
The Conference adjourned at.forty-five minutes past four o’clock until next day at eleven.
F. SHORT,
J. MURRAY,
President.
Clerk of the Conference.
7


SECOND DAY
FRIDAY 20th JANUARY, 1911.
The Conference met pursuant to adjournment.—The President took the Chair.
Present ,*
NEW SOUTH WALES.
The Honorable James Sinclair McGowen, M.L.A., Premier and Treasurer.
The Honorable Campbell Carmichael, M.L.A.
SOUTH AUSTRALIA.
The Honorable John Verran, M.H.A., Premier and Commissioner of Public Works.
The Honorable Crawford Vaughan, M.H.A., Treasurer and Commissioner of CroAvn Land*
and Immigration.
VICTORIA.
The Honorable John Murray, M.L.A., Premier and Chief Secretary.
The Honorable George Graham, M.L.A., Minister of Agriculture and Water Supply.
Discussion on Murray River Waters resumed.
Eventually it was decided that the Engineering Experts should meet next day to prepare statistical
information by Monday.
The Conference adjourned at thirty mirutes past five o'clock until next Monday at ten.
F. SHORT, J. MURRAY,
Clerk of the Conference. President.
THIRD DAY
MONDAY, 23rd JANUARY, 1911.
The Conference met pursuant to adjournment. —The President took the Chair.
Present :
NEW SOUTH WALES.
The Honorable James Sinclair McGowen, M.L.A., Premier and Treasurer.
The Honorable Campbell Carmichael, M.L.A.
The Honorable W. A. Holman, M.L.A., Attorney-General and Minister of Justice.
SOUTH AUSTRALIA.
The Honorable John Verran, M.H.A., Premier and Commissioner of Public Works.
The Honorable Crawford Vaughan, M.H.A., Treasurer and Commissioner of Crown Lands
and Immigration.
VICTORIA.
The Honorable John Murray, M.L.A., Premier and Chief Secretary.
The Honorable George Graham, M.L.A., Minister of Agriculture and Water Supply.
Discussion on Murray Waters resumed.
The Engineers presented their recommendations, and the legal members of the Conference, consisting
of the Hon. W. A. Holman, M.L A., Attorney-General and Minister of Justice of New South
Wales ; Mr. Guinness, Crown Solicitor for Victoria ; and the Hon. P. Glynn, Legal Adviser to the
South Australian Government; were appointed a sub-coramitlee to prepare resolutions.
On the motion of the President, it was moved—
“ 1. The States of New South Wales and Victoria, so far as on their or either of their parts
may be necessary, shall grant to the State of South Australia authority and permission to construct,
use and enjoy the storage works at Lake Victoria (with and including two locks on the Murray
River) mentioned in section eleven of the Murray Waters Act 1910 of the State of South Australia,
and shown on the plans accompanying the printed report, dated 9th December, 1902, of the
Inter-State Royal Commission on the Murray River, and on a plan produced at this Conference and
annexed hereto. (Appendix.)
“ 2. The State of New South Wales shall transfer to and vest in the State of South Australia
( for an estate in fee-simple or such other estate as may be appropriate) that piece of land in the said
State of New South Wales known as Lake Victoria, with the two water-courses known as Rufus
River and Frenchman’s Creek, connecting the River Murray with the said lake for and throughout
their entire course from the said river to the said lake ; and also so much of the banks and foreshores
of the said lake and water-courses as shall be sufficient for all purposes of access to, and use and
enjoyment of, the said Lake Victoria Works.
8


“ 3, The Slate of South Australia shall he authorized to use the channel of the Murray
River as a conduit for the conveyance of impounded water from Lake Victoria to the eastern
boundary of that State.
“ 4. Any riparian rights of adjoining owners and of the State of New South Wales in virtue
of adjoining Crown lauds shall be preserved, and any compensation for encroachments resulting
from the works, or any resumptions necessary to effectuate the same, shall bo at the expense of
the State of South Australia.
“ 5. The Government of the State of New South Wales shall, as and when requested by the
Government of South Australia, acquire any private lands required for the effectuation of the works
under the provisions of the Lands for Public Purposes Acquisition Act of New South Wales, or
appropriate any Crown lands held und.w lease.
“6. The right to the use of such waters as may be necessary for irrigating the lands
contiguous to Lake Victoria is conserved to New South Wales without impairment of the right to
the use by the State of South Australia of water impounded in Lake Victoria by the State of
South Australia.
“ 7. The States affected declare that the present agreement as to Lake Victoria and its sub-
sidiary works is not to be construed as prejudicing or abridging any claims of any such States to
the reasonable use of the waters of the Murray and its tributaries, or as an admission by any State
of the validity or otherwise of any such claim by any other State, or as in any way extending or
abridging the rights of such States inter se in respect of such waters.*’
Carried.—The resolution was then signed by the Premiers of New South Wales, South Australia, and
Victoria.
On the motion of the President it was further resolved —
“1. That the engineers of the three States be instructed to inquire without delay, and
present to the Premiers by the Ist December, 1911, a report and recommendations, based upon
data now available, and on such further data as they shall obtain by that date, which will, in their
opinion, be essential or conducive to a settlement by agreement between the States of New South
Wales, Victoria, and South Australia of the question of the Murray River and its tributaries.
“2. That, for the purpose of such inquiry and report, the engineers may jointly engage such
professional assistance as may be necessary.
“ 3. That the cost of the inquiry and report bo shared equally by the three States.”
Carried.—The resolution was then signed by the Premiers of Victoria, New South Wales, and South
Australia.
The Conference, at forty minutes past four o’clock, adjourned sine die.
SHORT,
J. MURRAY,
President.
Clerk of the Conference.
9




REPORT OF PROCEEDINGS
FIRST DAY.-THURSDAY, 19th JANUARY, 1911.
[The Conference met in the Premier's Office, Melbourne , at 3 p.m .]
Representatives at the Conference.
New South Wales
The Honorable James Sinclair McGowen, M.L.A., Premier and Treasurer.
The Honorable Campbell Carmichael, M.L.A.
The Honorable W. A. Holman, Attorney-General (on the third day only)
(Mr. L. A. B. Wade, Engineer-in-Chief for Water Supply for New South Wales, was
present in attendance.)
South Australia
The Honorable John Yerran, M.H.A., Premier* and Commissioner of Public Works.
The Honorable Crawford Vaughan, M.H.A., Treasurer and Commissioner of Crown
Lands and Immigration.
(The Honorable P. Glynn, the legal adviser to the South Australian Government;
Mr. Stuart Murray, M.1.C.E., engineering adviser; Mr. J. W. Jones, Secretary
to the Minister of Public Works ; and Mr. S. Mclntosh, irrigation expert,
were in attendance.)
Victoria.
The Honorable John Murray, M.L.A, Premier and Chief Secretary.
The Honorable George Graham, M.L.A., Minister of Agriculture and Water
Supply.
(Mr. Elwood Mead, Chairman of the State Rivers and Water Supply Commission,
and Mr. Cattanach, member of the Commission, were in attendance.
Mr. Guinness, Crown Solicitor, was present on the third day.)
Election of President.
Mr. McGOWEN. —I beg to move —
That the Honorable John Murray, M.L.A., Premier of Victoria, be appointed President of the
Conference.
Mr. YERRAN seconded the motion, which was agreed to
Murray Waters-
The CHAIRMAN: In opening the proceedings, perhaps it would make things
clearer were I to read a memorandum dealing with the question of the Murray waters
which has been prepared by Mr. Elwood Mead, Chairman of the States Rivers and
Water Supply Commission of Victoria.


THE STATE RIVERS AND WATER SUPPLY COMMISSION.
Memo. Jor the Honorable the Premier —
Re Conference, Murray River Waters.
Melbourne, 19th January, 1911.
During the latter part of last year an important deputation, representing the largest area
irrigated from the Murray, in Victoria, waited upon the Government and urged the construction of a
weir in that river at a point known as the Torrumbarry head works. The desire of this deputation was
not to extend the irrigation areas, but to provide a more reliable gravitation water supply for several
districts in which the State has already provided a system of channels and storage works, which in some
seasons have proved inadequate for their purposes for the following reasons :
These channels and the storages they fill can only divert water when the river is high.
The elevation of these channels is such that water cannot be turned into them at ordinary
stages of the river, even when the volume flowing past is far beyond the needs of
navigation or any conceivable demands of irrigation.
In some seasons the period of high water is so brief that the channels will not take in enough
water to fill the storages, and, when this occurs, there are great hardships and loss among
irrigators depending on them.
The knowledge, also, that this may recur causes each season great anxiety.
The remedy which the deputation urged is the construction of a collapsible weir in the river
which could be dropped in periods of high flood but could be made effective when necessary to fill the
reservoirs, and thus give a uniform volume of water for each season. Another great advantage of this
weir, while not pressed by the deputation but appai'ent to the Government, would be that it would give a
gravitation water supply to the Cohuna and Koondrook districts which now require the operation of
expensive pumping plants. In this latter case, while not increasing the volume of water used, the
proposal will greatly decrease the cost of supplying it.
The Government x’ecognised, howevei', that the determination whether the proposal should
be given effect to does not rest entirely with Victoi’ia. Part of the structui’e would be in New
South Wales, and it would at the same time make possible the irrigation by gravitation of a
very large area of fertile land in that State. Thus, at the outset, this proposal, if given effect to, would
have a material influence in locating the locality in which a portion of the water of the x’iver would be
permanently utilized. This alone would x'ender joint action necessary. It, however, x’aised a lai'ger
question —that is, the desirability of the three States acting in concert to secui-e a more accurate and
comprehensive investigation of the physical facts which should goveni the utilization of this river. This
view seems to have been also shared by South Australia in connexion with its pi’oposed improvement of
navigation.
The need for an understanding between the States which will safeguard development in the
future is apparent, but however desh’able and urgent this may be it must be in accordance with the
physical facts, for if not in accordance with these facts dissatisfaction and disappointment are certain to
result.
Furthermore, the changing agricultural and commercial conditions are revolutionizing irrigation
practice in Victoria, and must have the same effect in the other States. In early stages it was thought
that any land that was good enough to grow soi’ghum was good enough for irrigation. We are now,
however, realizing that water is too scarce and costs too much to provide to permit of it being used in
this wasteful way, and we are now applying it only to selected ai’eas of land suited to the gi-owing of
lucerne, citrus fruits, and other high-priced crops.
The original conception was to make irrigation an adjunct of dry farming, in which a little water
would be used to grow cheap fodder crops scattered over wide ai’eas. Under the old practice it made
little difference whether the land irrigated was poor or good, but with the changed practice the water and
crops are both too valuable to allow of the use of anything but the best types of soil. Furthermore, it is
becoming inci’easingly apparent that the Muri’ay Valley is to be one of the chief fruit-pi’oducing districts
for the Northern Hemisphere, having the great advantage of being able to supply these mai’kets at a
season of the year when they would otherwise be empty, We are now shipping apples and pears success
fully to Europe, and thei’e is no doubt that stone fruits can be as successfully shipped to North America
These recent developments will influence the location of iri’igation disti’icts, and must also modify
transportation requirements.
These changing agricultural conditions, the feasibility of improving the navigation of the x-iver and
the cost of such an improvement, the proper location of storage works and their cost, the necessity of
complete gaugings that will definitely settle many of the questions raised in the last Victorian Commis-
sion’s Report warrant, it is believed, the attention of the three States with a view to the immediate
organization of a scientific inquiry to collect information which should govern an Agreement between the
States ; at the same time this State desires to submit its local questions, of the Torrumbarry weir
proposal.
This Government is anxious that progress should be made towards a complete settlement of the
division of the Murray Waters. The need for which is admitted. But this Agreement, to be satisfactory
or enduring, must, as pi’eviously stated, be in accordance with physical facts, and permit of the lax’gest
and best use of the water supply. Any Agreement which violates these conditions will not settle this
question, but will only be a fresh source of discoi’d. The first step, in my opinion, to such an Agreement
therefore, is a certainty that it is based on actual knowledge of these physical conditions, and that it does
provide for such use of the water supply as will confer the greatest benefits, not only on any single State
but on Australia as a whole.
12


That it is unwise to attempt to formulate a binding Agreement without a full knowledge of
conditions is shown by the report of the last Victorian Commission. This report points out how different
the Agreement of 1903 was from the Agreement of 1907, the marked changes which took place in the
proposed Agreement of 1907 and that of 1908, and then brings out clearly that all these conferences used
estimates of the flow of the river which were erroneous, and which, if corrected, must have modified the
conclusions reached.
As previously stated, the changed conditions of agriculture and commerce also tend to modify the
original conception of what should be done with this river. Irrigated agriculture is assuming a constantly
greater importance and value, and the need for a more extended use of the water in irrigation in all three
States is much more appareut than it was when the settlement of this question was first considered.
There is no doubt consideration of these conditions warrant a further conference, at which the
facts brought out in the Victorian Commission’s Report for 1910 could be considered along with the
changed practices and enlarged possibilities of irrigation, in the hope that out of this might come an
arrangement for an immediate beginning of a comprehensive investigation, to include exhaustive stream
gaugings to determine the respective contributions of each of the States ; to work out a system of
regulation, to be incorporated in the Agreement subsequently reached ; to determine the location and cost
of storage reservoirs, and to take up anew the question of how far irrigation and navigation can be
developed without injury of the one or the other.
It is the desire of Victoria that navigation should be retained as far as possible without the
sacrifice of irrigation development; but the State holds strongly to the position that irrigation is
of such immeasurably greater importance to each of these three States that all of the water which
can be profitably used for this purpose should be so used.
It is believed that an investigation will disclose that all of the development possible within the next
ten or twenty years will not sensibly impair the navigation which has existed in the past, and that it will
disclose more clearly than can now be determined how far it is profitable for any of the States to engage
in improvements in the way of locking, which will provide for any increase in the present facilities for
river transportation. In other words, it is believed that this investigation is the surest, safest, and most
expeditious means of reaching an enduring and satisfactory settlement of this question.
Mr. VERRAN: I will also read a statement I have prepared setting forth the
views of South Australia in the matter, and these papers can be printed for
consideration to-morrow.
My Government, with an earnest desire for an amicable settlement of this great question of the
River Murray Waters, suggested that this Conference be held to give one more opportunity for a friendly
discussion of the whole question.
When I came into office seven months ago, I found that—notwithstanding an Inter-State
Agreement on the subject arrived at with the utmost patience and mutual consideration, and cheerfully
signed by the then Premiers of the three States —practically everything was at a standstill.
The agreement is dated the eleventh day of November, 1908, so that more than two years have
elapsed without Parliamentary ratification of the agreement having been given in either of the States.
It is a sad and noteworthy fact, which we all deplore, that since the signing of this agreement
death has taken two of those who signed it. I refer to the late Sir Thomas Bent and the late
Mr. Thomas Price.
I found, further, that my predecessor, having lost patience at the delay and the prospect of its
indefinite continuance without any assurance that eventually the movement would be brought to a vote
in Parliament, had written under date 23rd February, 1909, to the Premier of Victoria, saying that the
South Australian Government were grievously disappointed when the announcement was made that the
Victorian Government intended to refer the matter to a Royal Commission, and adding that it would
appear the only means of settlement was to appeal to the Courts of Justice.
My Government, however, resolved to endeavour to ascertain at first hand what the difficulties
were which were blocking the ratification of the Agreement, and it was for that purpose that we suggested
this Conference.
You will, I am sure, give South Australia credit for being consistent in its policy regarding the
River Murray.
We have for over fifty years, indeed from the day of the first opening of the river, steadfastly
maintained a policy of navigation and irrigation, and we do so still. We will not willingly sit down and
see the destruction of this noble river as a national highway of trade and commerce. M e contend that
there is water sufficient for both these great national purposes if the waters are properly conserved and
controlled.
It was in this spirit that the 1908 Agreement was framed.
I think it will help if I state what, in my opinion, is the position in which the question now
stands. On the 11th November, 1908, as I have already mentioned, an agreement for settlement of the
Rivers question as between the three riparian States was signed by Mr. Made, the late Sir Ihomas
Bent and the late Mr. Price, as Premiers, and on behalf of New South Wales, Victoria and Soutli
Australia respectively. The opening paragraphs of this agreement concisely and clearly state what had
taken place. They read as follows :
“ Whereas at a Conference between the Premiers of the said States held on the sixteenth
day of April, One thousand nine hundred and six, certain resolutions were agreed to having for
their object the construction of certain works on the Murray River and its tributaries with a view
to improvement of navigation and the furtherance of water conservation and irrigation, and the
promotion of Inter-State communication and commerce : And whereas in order to carry the said
resolution into effect an Agreement bearing date twelfth day of July, One thousand nine hundred
and seven, was entered into between the Honorable Joseph Hector Carruthers, Premier of New
South Wales, for and on behalf of that State, the Honorable John Mark Davies, Acting Premier


of Victoria, for and on behalf of that State, and the Honorable Thomas Price, Premier of South
Australia, for and on behalf of that State : And whereas at a Conference of the Premiers of the said
States held on the nineteenth day of October, One thousand nine hundred and eight, it was agreed
to substitute for the said Agreement this Agreement.”
Now, to remind the members of the Conference of what led up to that Agreement, I will briefly
mention the facts.
There is no necessity to go further back than the Conference of Ministers at Sydney in April,
1906, when resolutions containing the conditions and terms of a friendly settlement were agreed upon,
and referred to a committee appointed by the States for the purpose of being formally expressed in an
Agreement and Bill for submission by the Government of the States to their respective Parliaments for
adoption.
It was then understood that though the conditions of the settlement could not in every point
meet the views of the representatives of each State, the Conference had, on the whole, come to as
reasonable' solution as could be expected of a long-standing, difficult, and important question, and one
which should be recommended without delay to the Parliaments for acceptance. Indeed, the report of the
last day’s proceedings of the Conference will show that it was hoped that Ministers, to quote from the
last speech then delivered, would urge their respective Parliaments to give effect to the great work
initiated that day.
Well, after a good deal of deliberation and study by the members of the drafting committee, and
reference of some matters to the Governments of the States concerned, the Bill and Agreement were
presented to the Premiers for approval and signature in November, 1906. Correspondence and discussion
followed on a few points as to which a compromise was eventually come to, so that the Agreement was
signed by the Premiers on the 12th July, 1907.
Immediate action was taken by the South Australian Government. The second reading of the
Bill for the ratification of the Agreement was moved in the House of Assembly of South Australia in
July, 1907, and about the same time the measure was submitted to the Victorian Parliament,
Circumstances, we were informed, prevented the Bill being introduced at once into the Parliament of
New South Wales.
However, the measure reached a stage in the Parliament of South Australia at which we were
bound to wait on the action of the other States,
In July, 1908, the Bill was again introduced into the House of Assembly of Victoria in a speech
by the Minister in charge, which, while not recommending the rejection of the Bill, threw doubts on the
expediency of adopting some of the terms. It was, of course, equally open to South Australia to question
the concessions to the points of view of the upper States ; but as, without compromise, nothing could be
done, my predecessor, notwithstanding some strong Parliamentary and public criticism in South Australia,
of some of the terms of the settlement, advocated acceptance.
In August, 1908, however, the Premier of Victoria wrote that there was little hope of passing the
Bill in its then form • and the Government of South Australia, at the request of the Governments of New
South Wales and Victoria, agreed to another Conference to consider certain amendments suggested, at the
instance of Victoria, by the upper States. The terms and conditions decided on at that Conference as a
final compromise on all points of difference are contained in the Agreement of the 11th November, 1908,
which is still open for ratification by the respective Parliaments. Mr. Price, the day after he signed the
Agreement in Adelaide, telegraphed to his brother Premiers that he intended to go on with the Bill at
once with a view to passing it promptly that session, and that he relied on similar efforts and success in
other States. In explaining the alterations to the House, Mr. Price acknowledged that he had made
concessions, the wisdom of which might be questioned, but recommended acceptance of the Agreement as
the ultimate result of three States surrendering to, and compromising with each other, with the object of
utilizing their great river to the best advantage of all Australia.
Well, as the members of this Conference know, the Bills were not proceeded with. The Bill
was indeed introduced into the House of Assembly in Victoria towards the end of November, 1908; but
in February, 1909, a Royal Commission was appointed in Victoria in terms that ignored the Agreement,
and meant opening up the whole question again, as we thought, needlessly, in view of the exhaustive
report of the Inter-State Commission of 1902, and the collection of elaborate detail concerning the material
facts by the Engineering Departments of the States.
It was at this stage that my predecessor, I think not without good reasons, wrote the letter of
23rd February, 1909, to the Victorian Government, which I have already referred to.
However, we are here to still settle this great question by Agreement, if possible. The Agreement,
as I said, is not in all respects satisfactory to us, and means a great diminution in the customary flow at
our boundary ; but it has been entered into after a great deal of discussion, thought, and endeavour to
understand the interests and attitudes of the States concerned, and we are still prepared to recommend it,
and to give the people of the State, through their representatives in Parliament, an opportunity of saying,
by a vote, whether it should be accepted or not.
In default of an Agreement to deal on Inter-State lines with this great continental question, we are
prepared, without prejudice to our rights, to push on at once the works sanctioned last Session by the
Parliament of South Australia for the purpose of improving local navigation, and making the best and
most economical use of the waters of the river.
It is a big outlay and responsibility to be assumed and undertaken by one State, to which, of course,
the incidental benefits are not confined, and that without any assurance of response by upper States, who,
I may be permitted to say, are under, if not greater at least equal, obligations to promote the ends in
view, which are the most economical and effective use of the waters of our great river system for navigation
and irrigation. But we are prepared to face it.


Lake Victoria.
An important provision of our Murray Works Act of last Session is the proposal for South
Australia to construct the Lake Victoria Storage Works, subject, of course, with the concurrence of New
South Wales as regards Lake Victoria and its channels, and of Victoria as regards the abutments of
Victorian side of the weirs which will form parts of that work, which concurrence we hope to arrange for
at this Conference. The section of our Act dealing with this question is as follows :
“11. In addition to the works and for the purposes mentioned in section ten the
Commissioner on entering into the Agreement hereinafter mentioned with the State of New South
Wales may construct and maintain, with such variations, modifications, and extensions as he may
consider desirable, the works at Lake Victoria (including two locks) recommended by the
Inter-State Royal Commission on the Murray River, and more particularly described on page forty-
two of the printed report of that Commission dated the ninth day of December, One thousand
nine hundred and two, and .shown on the plans accompanying the same. With a view to and for
purposes of such works the Commissioner may —
1. Enter into an agreement with—
(a) the State of New South Wales, and may acquire on such tenure and such terms as
may be so agreed that piece of land situate in the said State and covered with
water, now known as Lake Victoria, with the two water-courses known as
Rufus River and Frenchman’s Creek, connecting the River Murray with the
said lake for and throughout their entire course from the said river to the said
lake ; and also so much of the banks and foreshores of the said lake and water-
courses and of the land adjoining thereto as shall be sufficient for all purposes
of access to and use and enjoyment of the said Lake Victoria Works;
( b) The State of Victoria for the purchase, acquisition, or leasing of, lands in the said
State;
together with such rights, licences, permissions, easements, privileges, powers, and
immunities in the said State, or in respect of the use, flow, and control in the said States
of the waters of the said river as may be necessary for the construction or necessary or
conductive to the use and enjoyment of the said works for the purposes of this Act.
2. Otherwise purchase, acquire, or lease lands in the said States or either of them.”
From the latest Engineering professional information we have, particularly the recommendation in
Mr. Stuart Murray’s report to the South Australian Government, it is deemed highly desirable for the
Lake Victoria works to embrace the two weirs and locks on the River Murray, bringing the total
estimated cost of the works up to £164,800.
We, as the representatives of South Australia, with great respect, now say that any explanations
or indications of the course to be followed to secure finality by Agreement, should now come from
Ministers representing the upper States. I and my colleague will be very pleased, therefore, to hear
what, under the circumstances, is suggested by members of the Conference representing New South
Wales and Victoria.
JOHN VERRAN.
The Conference adjourned until Friday at 11 o’clock.
SECOND DAY—FRIDAY, 20th JANUARY, 1911.
The CHAIRMAN: Mr. Mead recommended a certain course should be adopted.
His recommendation was, that before any agreement was entered into, a report should
he prepared by engineers, representing the three States, on certain matters. In
the resolution I will read to you the only alteration is the substitution of
irrigation for riparian land. We desire to know the land that could be irrigated
by any scheme, not the riparian land that might be affected by it. This will give us
a basis of discussion, and may open the way to an understanding. These are the
resolutions :
I. That this Conference affirms the desirability of an agreement being entered into between the
States of New South Wales, Victoria, and South Australia, which will provide for the
diversion and regulation of the waters of the Murray River and cerlam of its tributaries,
and it agrees as a condition precedent to the preparatiou of such an agreement to the
immediate creation of an Inter-State Commission composed of one member from each State
to inquire into and report on : •
1. The effect of the existing proposed an 1 possible storage upon the Aoav of the Murray
and its tributaries.
2. Whether and to what extent the requirements of both irrigation and navigation can
be met by storage.
3. The areas of irrigable land in the Murray Valley that can be developed economically
by irrigated culture.


4. The proper location and cost of storage works necessary for such development.
5. The feasibility and cost of improving the navigation of the river, and if this would
restrict irrigation development, the extent of such restriction.
6. The establishment of gauging stations needed to determine the flow of the Murray
and its contributions thereto, and the preparation and submission of a Plan for
regulating the use of the river when an Inter-State Agreement as to the diversion
of the waters has been entered into.
7. Generally all physical facts which should influence the terms of any agreement.
And that each State place at the disposal of such Committee all papers and documents in its
possession, and as far as practicable, without interfering with public business, the services
of any expert officers in its employ.
11. That the States of New South Wales and Victoria agree to the construction of storage works
being carried out at Lake Victoria by and at the cost of South Australia, and that the States
of New South Wales and South Australia agree to the construction of a collapsible diversion
weir by and at the cost of the State of Victoria at Torrumbarry (Kow Swamp) Head-works.
These are the resolutions I would ask you to consider. I would point out that they
are in accordance with the conclusion arrived at by Mr. Mead, who has very carefully
investigated the subject. Before we can arrive at an agreement something precedent
must be done, whether you call it a commission or the appointment by each State of
an engineer to act together, and make inquiries into these questions. The Lake
Victoria work is exclusively for the benefit of South Australia, and the Kow Swamp
works exclusively for the benefit of Victoria.
Mr. VERRAN: That would not prevent our carrying out works lower down.
The CHAIRMAN : Not at all.
Mr. VERRAN; What time should elapse before we proceed with the work at
Lake Victoria ?
The CHAIRMAN : None at all. If we carry these resolutions you can
proceed with the work right away.
Mr. McGOWEN : The construction of the works at Lake Victoria is contingent
upon a certain flow of the Murray.
The CHAIRMAN : In the event of the construction of those works to fill
Lake Victoria, as to the supply that they would require, to what extent would we be
bound ?
Mr. MEAD: I do not think there would be anything in those resolutions that
would imply an obligation to fill the lake.
Mr. McGOWEN : It does impose the obligation, practically to keep it full.
The CHAIRMAN : In an ordinary year there would be no difficulty in filling
the lake.
Mr. MEAD: In no year since I have been here, it does not seem conceivable
that there would be any difficulty in filling it.
Mr. VAUGHAN : In addition to that we must have a supply sufficient for
the requirements to keep the locks filled. We are constructing locks for navigation
as well as irrigation. It would require 45,000 million cubic feet to fill the locks. I
think the minimum that our engineer suggests would be required right through would
be 85,000 million cubic feet.
The CHAIRMAN : What time do you propose to take in the construction of
those locks. Will you make one lock at a time, or carry them all out
simultaneously i
Mr. VAUGHAN ; I take it that that would depend upon the reports of the
engineers, that we are obtaining from abroad. It is generally considered we might
start with a lock on the lower part of the river. Then the question of storage at
Lake Victoria has also to be considered.
The CHAIRMAN : Supposing you have all the locks constructed, you would
require a smaller quantity of water annually.
Mr. VAUGHAN : Very much smaller, I think. The quantity now required
is 227,000 million cubic feet to keep the river navigable ; we could keep it navigable
and have all the water for irrigation on about 80,000 million cubic feet. That
difference could be allowed to the Upper States for other purposes.
Mr. GRAHAM: You propose to keep the river navigable all the year round ?
Mr. VAUGHAN : With the exception of low years.
Mr. GRAHAM : In addition to Lake Victoria, you want sufficient water to
keep the river navigable all the year round.
Mr. VAUGHAN : Within our own territory.


Mr. GRAHAM : You have never had that yet ?
Mr. VAUGHAN : We have had it all the year round in good years, hut not
through a series of years.
Mr. VERRAN : Sufficient water goes down every year to keep it navigable.
Mr. CARMICHAEL : What is the proposed length of your tenure for Lake
Victoria ?
Mr. VAUGHAN : I presume fee-simple.
Mr. MEAD : As far as this work in Victoria is concerned, it is intended to
safeguard the land that is already irrigated, that is the work at Kow Swamp. In the
case of two of our districts, where we now pump water, it would enable us for several
months longer to use gravitation, and so save firewood and pumping expenses
materially. That is the whole purpose of that weir, it is not an increase in the drain
on the river. At present very often a tremendous Hood comes down, but it is so brief
that the intake channels will not permit us to HU the works from the river, but at the
same time far more water goes down than would enable us to Hll our storages, and all
we want is to have a weir that would enable us to HU them. In some years we would
not want it at all, but at present we cannot rely upon the supply, and we want the
men who live on those lands to be relieved of any anxiety as to whether they will get
a supply.
The CHAIRMAN; It gives us our irrigation water in another way.
Mr. MEAD: We do not think it is safe to extend our development along the
Murray until there is further storage; that is the present position. The storage
works above cannot be built until we know where they are to be located, what they
will give, and what they will cost, and until we have reached an agreement with New
South Wales. We are Hnding the greatest difficulty in keeping the expenses down
so as to provide water at the price that people are willing to pay, and it more expense is
added to that, irrigation is not a beneHt to this State. Our feeling is, that so far as
Lake Victoria is concerned it is the cheapest storage that there is in the Murray
valley; you will get an acre foot of water there cheaper than at Barrenjack, or the
Goulburn, consequently you are safeguarding your water supply at less expense
than either New South Wales or Victoria. That being the case, we do not see why
we should contribute anything to the expense of that work, or assume any obligation
with respect to it. So far as locking is concerned, we are unable to see how that
beneHts Victoria in any way, and we feel, if the beneHt of locking is sufficient to
justify it, it is a beneHt that South Australia enjoys alone, and ought to pay for.
Mr. VAjJGHAN: We have never asked for the cost of locking in our State,
and we are prepared to pay the whole cost of locking Lake Victoria. The only
point as to diverting the river at Kow Swamp is that we have not any data as to the
quantity it would take off, or any information as to how it would affect the lower
stream by passing a weir across. If New South Wales also put a weir across at
another place the river might be drained dry, and only be a series of mud-holes. If
Victoria has a right to conserve water there, there would be no necessity for any
agreement with South Australia on the matter.
Mr. MEAD: We want you to be fully satisfied that it is not going to in any
way imperil your rights, and there is no reason why you should object to it. We
want you to look into that, and be fully satisfied, both as a matter of courtesy and
because we feel if you do understand it there would be no reason for any objection.
We would feel better to have you satisfied, and have that ground of anxiety removed.
Mr. VAUGHAN: Would not that be more a matter for investigation by the
Commission than a matter of agreement now, when we are in the dark as to what is
involved ?
The CHAIRMAN: What are your views, Mr. Wade?
Mr. WADE: We have no work that can be utilized in connexion with the
Torrumbarry works.
The CHAIRMAN: Will it take a larger quantity of water from the Murray?
Mr. WADE: By the construction of a weir a much larger quantity can be
taken.
The CHAIRMAN; You would fill it up with water that would otherwise run
to waste; you are simply taking water that would be no benefit to any one.
Mr. McGOWEN: At present at this Kow Swamp you fill that from the
Murray when she is at high water. To do that I suppose you have to pump very
often. If you built a weir at Torrumbarry, you could take by gravitation as much
2280. B


water as you like into the Kow Swamp reservoir. How far, then, would even the
State of New South Wales, much more South Australia, be at the mercy of the
water that you store there in the weir?
The CHAIRMAN : Which we would otherwise pump.
Mr. McGOWEN : At present you are restricted to a certain level in the
river; that restriction disappears, and if you build this weir you can take what
water you require.
Mr. GRAHAM: It is only to avoid pumping—we take water by gravitation,
instead of pumping.
Mr. CARMICHAEL: Canyon raise as much water by pumping as by weir ?
Mr. MEAD: Yes, it is merely a question of expense. We hold to this position,
that the two upper States are entitled to take from the Murray water in proportion
to their contribution to the stream. South Australia is entitled to a certain
proportion of the flow, that is a certain percentage of the total flow ; she must share
with the two upper States the vicissitudes of the river. If we were building a new
work, that would be something that should be included in an investigation, but this is
not a thing of that kind ; it is merely taking the water in a more economical way. 1
do not think there is any possibility of this being of a character to affect the South
Australian supply any time within the next three or four years, and whatever effect
there would be after that, if we took more than we were entitled to, we would have to
be cut down ; but whatever we were entitled to we would get in a less costly way
than we can now.
Mr. VAUGHAN: We would not be expected to agree to anything while in
the dark. We would require a thorough investigation to see how it would affect all
interests.
The CHAIRMAN: Mr Mead puts it that this would not affect you for three
years at least. We would get the water that we now use in an easier and more
economical way. It would pay us to spend £70,000 in the construction of this weir
to supply us with this water to All these storage basins. Suppose the supply in the
Kow Swamp is insufficient, and we require more water, and the pumps will not lift it,
it would have the same effect if we put on additional pumps as if we got more water
by this proposed work. I do not think it means any difference in the quantity of
water used. In the immediate future there will not be the quantity of water used
that would materially affect the situation.
Mr. CARMICHAEL: You will not use any more water at ss. an acre than you
would at 10s. an acre ?
Mr. MEAD : Not a bit
Mr. CARMICHAEL: If you can get water at ss. an acre, will you not use
more than if it cost 10s. ?
Mr, MEAD: No. The situation is that we have pumping plants at Cohuna
and Koondrook that supply everything.
Mr. CARMICHAEL: Is all the land of similar fertility ?
Mr. MEAD: As far as those districts are concerned all the land that we will
irrigate is provided with irrigation now. There is a difference in the fertility of the
land, but the change in the method of supply will not change the area there. When
we do not fill the storage works at present they do not irrigate, and that is always a
menace, and they are always coming to us to safeguard them against that.
Mr. CARMICHAEL: It would pay you to irrigate the whole of that land at
10s. an acre.
Mr. MEAD: So far as those lakes are concerned, they are irrigating now at
really less expense than they will after this weir is built, because now they do not
have to pay any part of the interest on the weir, which they will have to do alter it is
built. In seasons like this the reservoirs fill, and they irrigate as far as they can, but
there are seasons when they do not fill.
Mr. VERRAN: It will be necessary for you to devise some other scheme
whereby you can get a larger quantity of water —you can extend the irrigation
system.
Mr. MEAD: We do not propose to extend the irrigation scheme on the
Murray until we have arrived at an agreement.
Mr. VERRAN: Will it be necessary to raise the Goulburn weir to extend the
irrigation system ?


Mr. MEAD: Yes ; but tins is entirely different from the Goulburn scheme.
The Kow Swamp has no connexion with the Goulburn scheme. As to the Goulburn
weir, we have not utilized all the water that is available at present, but we expect in
a short time to reach the limit, and then we will have to increase the storage.
Mr. VERRAN: We have 20,000 acres under irrigation, and we only ask for
a quantity of water for the river to be navigable. The boats are prepared'to alter
their size, and have less draft. So if we can get sufficient water to make the river
navigable, and also supply the irrigation, that is all we require. The three engineers
could then go into the matter as to the quantity of water required.
Mr. VAUGHAN: We understood there would be no objection to our entering
into an agreement as to the works at Lake Victoria, and constructing our locks.
What minimum can Victoria and New South Wales give South Australia, so that we
can justify the construction of those locks to keep the river navigable, and give us
enough water to irrigate ?
The CHAIRMAN : South Australia is still inclined to adhere to the idea of
navigation.
O _
Mr. VAUGHAN : Navigation and irrigation.
Tl ic CHAIRMAN : I understand the lock system is not a system for
irrigation.
Mr. VAUGHAN : It is a storage system. It is the only storage system that
we could have in South Australia. Lalte Victoria itself would not be enough for
irrigation. We might convert Lake Bonney into a storage reservoir.
Mr, CARMICHAEL : Where do we come in in this discussion ? There must
be a communitv of interest between the three States. So far it has only been the
matter of Lake Victoria, which does not interest us as a State.
The CHAIRMAN : The question is as to the quantity of water that could be
or should be allowed to go into Lake Victoria.
Mr. CARMICHAEL : Does not that depend upon the quantity of water that
New South Wales and Victoria will require further up?
The CHAIRMAN: So far as Victoria and New South Wales are concerned,
at present I believe they can allow South Australia to have sufficient water for their
requirements to fill Lake Victoria, and keep the level of the river up.
Mr. VERRAN : The tonnage we had on the river last year was 78,6H4 tons,
and that is increasing every year.
The CHAIRMAN : That is when you have the river navigable. You will
carry very little- during the six months when it is not navigable.
Mr. VERRAN : Look at the quantity of stuff’that has to be left there now
on account of the river not being navigable. If we had the quantity of water needed
to make the river navigable all that stuff would go down.
The CHAIRMAN : Apparently of late years the shipping on the Murray has
been decreasing.
Mr. VAUGHAN : It has started on the up-grade again. They are building
new boats.
The CHAIRMAN ; Suppose we agreed to allow you more than it was found
afterwards you were entitled to, you would have to take less, or if you were entitled
to more you would get more.
Mr. VAUGHAN : That can be done. All we want is a minimum, and we
would fix that minimum at such a figure that it could not affect your diversions that you
have in hand at present, and in low years we would accept a proportionate reduction.
Mr. MEAD : The best way would be for South Australia to take a certain
percentage of the stream each month.
Mr. VAUGHAN : What percentage would you suggest ?
Mr. MEAD : I have not heard any suggestion as to that.
Mr. CARMICHAEL : What you want is a fixed percentage of the average
flow of the river.
Mr. VAUGHAN : We want a fixed minimum—enough to keep the river
navigable—and in lean years we would take less.
Mr. MEAD : A certain part of the stream belongs to each State, and it would
be the duty of the people administering the matter to see that the right quantity
came to each State. lam quite sure if you undertook to fix a hypothetical case, and
say “ Here is a certain minimum,” that you fixed arbitrarily, you will get into
trouble.


Mr. VERRAN : We say fix a* minimum, and if you have a lean year we will
take a proportionate part of it.
Mr. MEAD : It might happen that in a lean year you might have to abandon
either navigation or irrigation.
Mr. CARMICHAEL : Is it not essential to fix the principle on which
allotment will take place first ?
Mr. GRAHAM : There is a typical case in Victoria, the Broken River.
There are three trusts there depending on the river for water for stock and domestic
purposes. At the offtake at Casey’s weir the river is gauged, and they know exactly
the flow, and the officer in charge divides the stream into three parts. If it is a big
flow they get more, but each one is allowed a certain quantity ; but they do not get
a minimum. Each gets its share of what goes down the river, and it is working very
satisfactorily, and that can he done in this case without any trouble. The only
question to decide is the proportion to go to each State.
The CHAIRMAN : If you are allowed the quantity you demand, and you find
it is not sufficient for both irrigation and navigation, and eventually one must go
altogether, which would you sacrifice ?
Mr. VERRAN : We would certainly stop the ships before we drove the people
off the land.
The CHAIRMAN: In paragraph 11 of the recommendations of the Board
they say ; —“ That it should he agreed between the States that for the time being the
allocation of the Murray Waters between the States should he as follows: —New
South Wales and Victoria should receive in proportion to their contributions, hut
that the Darling flow should not be regarded as a contribution except in so far as it is
used by New South Wales to makeup that States’ contribution towards the South
Australian proportion ; and South Australia should receive one-fifth of the total
annual natural flow at the boundary, such proportion to be provided in such
quantities per minute and at such times as the stock and domestic requirements for
settlement within a reasonable distance of the river and as the irrigation of an area
not exceeding 200,000 acres may in the Board’s opinion demand.” Those
recommendations are made on the assumption of a Board being appointed.
Mr. VERRAN: One-fifth would not give us sufficient.
Mr. CARMICHAEL: It would give you too much, the original proposition
was one-sixth.
Mr. VERR AN: There was one aspect of this question which was uppermost
in the minds of Mr. Vaughan and myself, when we came to this Conference, and that
was that there must —and if we could prevent it—there should he no further delay in
coming to some Inter-State understanding, which will allow of the immediate
commencement of the works authorized by our Murray Works Act of 1910. And
further, we came prepared to prove to you that the carrying out of a great National
Irrigation Policy by our three States, could he achieved, and at the same time—as an
integral part of that policy—the River Murray and its navigable tributaries
maintained and improved, so as to he maintained permanently as highway -of trade
and commerce. We want to dispel the feeling which has evidently taken root in
some of your minds that either navigation or irrigation must be wholly sacrificed for
the other. We want it to be recognised, as we are fully convinced it should he that
the one aid which perhaps more than any other will be a guarantee of the success of
this great irrigation policy, is the provision of a cheap, a reliable and a rapid means
of transport to and from the irrigation areas to the markets of the world, than which
no other means could compare favorable with a great water highway. This is being
admitted all the world over to-day. If the Murray River, from its sources to the sea,
belonged to one State, or was under Commonwealth control, this would be soon
demonstrated, indeed would have been seen to-day by actual achievement. What
could be more attractive to the irrigationists than the fact that they would have a
permanent navigable river as their means of communication. This is so manifest that
we are astonished at it not being generally admitted —I am quite sure that if the
irrigationists, which I see in my mind’s-eye living on these lands in the near future,
were now on the land utilizing it for intense culture under irrigation—they would
quickly settle this question for us if they were allowed to do so. Why it was only
a few months ago that under our Commission Mr. Stuart Murray, your eminent
Victorian engineer, whose high professional ability you know 7 so well, most carefully
looked into the question of the reliability of our South Australian gauging, both the


method of gauging and the calculations of the discharges. Mr. Stuart Murray, with
that thoroughness which characterizes him, even went so far as to spend several months
in personally recalculating, with the most minute detail, the volumes of w r ater, and his
confirmation of the accuracy of our figures is surely as good a testimony and guar-
antee as could possibly be obtained. No further delay then is necessary as regards this
point, of which so much is made by Mr. Mead. This sheet, which I have here, of gaug-
ing and calculated discharges of the river at Morgan, South Australia, from the year
1886 to 1910 inclusive is, T maintain, an accurate record of the water which the River
Murray discharged through the South Australian portion of the river, throughout the
last twenty-five years; the tabulated statement shows the mean discharge in cubic feet
per minute for each month, the total monthly discharge in millions of cubic feet, and
the aggregate annual discharge in millions of cubic feet. A careful study of these
figures will show that after giving us in South Australia the quantities of water we
say we require, after our portion of the river is locked, for keeping the locks effective
and for irrigation, there remains an immense quantity of water which in each year —
excepting 1902, when we should all have had to be satisfied with reduced quantities—
could have been retained in the upper States for irrigation purposes. I ask you to
study these figures and you will, I am sure, be amazed at the proof of the sufficiency
of this surplus water for commanding immense areas of land in your irrigation
districts. It could be used direct from the river, or put into storages for later
diversion. In most years the areas would run into millions of acres As it seemed
clear from our discussion yesterday that the Victorian Parliament will not be asked to
ratify the 1908 Inter-state Agreement in its present form, we have come to-day
prepared to submit a proposition for an agreement on an altogether different basis,
but with the same objective as the other agreement, viz., navigation and irrigation or,
if you prefer it, irrigation and navigation. The resolutions declare that, now that
such delay Inis taken place in efforts to come to an arrangement for a joint scheme of
improvement and conservation, South Australia intends to go on with works, some of
which Avere first sanctioned in 1905. For the purpose of the Lake A ictoria works,
want the formal consent of New South Wales, where the site of the storage is,
such powers in effect as the undertakers of private works get in respect of the land of
private owners, under the Lands Acquisition Acts of the State. It is desirable, and
probably necessary also, to have an agreement for the necessary powers and facilities
with the State of Victoria. These works will conserve, and make the most effective
use of, the flow, and thus incidentally benefit the three States. If the upper States
restricted their diversions within certain limits, they would not be necessary. I fall
in with the suggestion that we have a report from the'engineers as to certain matters
to aid us in coming to an Inter-State Agreement covering the stretch of the rivers not
affected by the works South Australia proposes to at once construct. The question
can then be considered as to what should be done. Meanwhile, no existing rights are
to be affected by these resolutions, as the settlement of the rivers question is left in
abeyance.
RESOLUTIONS.
1. That with a view to enabling the State of South Australia to construct, use, and enjoy the
works at Lake Victoria (including two locks on (he River Murray), referred to in section 11
of the Murray Works Act 1910 of the said State, an Agreement be entered into between
the said State and the State of New South Wales, and, if and so far as may be necessary,
with the State of Victoria, for the purposes mentioned in the said section. In particular for
such purposes — •
A. The State of New South Wales shall transfer and vest in the State of South
Australia (for an estate in fee simple or such other estate as may be appropriate)
that piece of land in the said State and covered with water, now known as Lake
Victoria, with the two water-courses known as Rufus • River and Frenchman’s
Creek, connecting the River Murray with the said lake for and
throughout their entire course from the said river to the said lake ; and also so
much of the banks and foreshores of the said lake and water-courses and of the
land adjoining thereto as shall be sufficient for all purposes of access to and use
and enjoyment of the said Lake Victoria works.
B. The States of New South Wales and Victoria shall grant to the State of South
Australia: —“Such rights, licences, permissions, easements, privileges, powers and
immunities in the said States, or in respect of the use, flow, and control in the
said States of the waters of the said river, as may be necessary for the construc-
tion, or necessary or conducive to the use and enjoyment, of the said works for
the purposes of the said Act.” And, so far on as their or either of their parts
may be necessary for such purposes, shall facilitate the acquisition of laud by the
State of South Australia.


C. That as the completion of all the works mentioned in the said Murray Works Act
1910, and in addition to an annual flow at the eastern boundary of the State of
South Australia of not less than 60,000 millions of cubic feet in quantities and
at times suitable to the requirements of South Australia for irrigation and
conservation and the purposes of the said Act, sufficient water shall at all times
be permitted to flow to the site at the ofT-take in the Murray River for
diversion into Take Victoria to permit ot the said lake being filled at least once
a year.
2. That with a view to guidance of the respective Governments of the three States as to the terms
of an Agreement (subject to Resolutions 1 and 2 and the works constructed by the State of
South Australia thereunder), in lieu of the Agreement of 12th November, 1908, between the
three States, three engineers be appointed, one by each State, to furnish without delay a
joint report upon the following points :
A. The effect of the existing, proposed, and possible storages upon the flow of the
Murray, the Murrumbidgee, and the Darling Rivers.
B. Whether and lo what extent permanent navigation, and the requirements of the
three States for irrigation, can be met by (in addition to the works to be constructed
by the State of South Australia under the said Murray Works Act 1910) the
improvement of the river channels and tbe storage of water in aid of the
maintenance of the flow in such channels.
C. The area of nverian land in each State that can be developed economically by
irrigated culture.
3. Nothing in these resolutions, or done thereunder, is intended, or shall be deemed, to abridge or
prejudice the right of each State, or the residents therein, to the reasonable use of the waters
of the Murrav River and its tributaries for conservation and irrigation, and to the use of such
rivers for navigation.
Mr. CARMICHAEL : We have already agreed that South Australia was to
get a just proportion of the flow of the Murray, but bringing in an irreducible
minimum has knocked that out.
Mr. GLYNN :If the locks are carried out the thing will be final. There is
no guarantee without complete locking that the navigation of the river will be
respected. We do not prejudice our rights in respect to that by anything we enter
into now.
The CHAIRMAN ; You assume that if the works are carried cut at Lake
Victoria a great deal more water will be available for the other States.
Mr. GLYNN : Yes. Suppose the upper States’ diversions required to be
compensated by locking further up, we do not want anything to prejudice our rights,
whatever they may be, nor do we want you to be prejudiced by this Agreement.
The CHAIRMAN: You ask for 60,000 million cubic feet ; Lake Victoria will
hold 30.000 million cubic feet. Do you ask for 60,00 ; million cubic feet above what
is in Lake Victoria, or do you include Lake Victoria in that ?
Mr. GgYNN : It says in the resolution in addition to the 60,000 million cubic
feet.
The CHAIRMAN: You might have Lake Victoria full, and you would still
demand that they should send this quantity down the river ?
Mr. GLYNN: Yes, the annual discharge should be 60,000 million cubic feet
plus Lake Victoria.
Mr. MEAD; The discharge can be regulated from week to week on what it
actually is, and we will go by that, but we cannot go into any assumed arrangement
at the beginning of the season as to what it will be.
Mr. VAUGHAN: The difficulty in fixing the proportion is that it may not
give us sufficient water. In a low year we would not get the quantity we require, we
would not get anything like the 80,000 million cubic feet we are asking for; that is 60,()UO
million cubic feet with the 20,000 million cubic feet in Lake Victoria. We intend to
convert Lake Bonney into a storage reservoir, that is below Loxton; that would he used
for irrigation. Can you give us 60,000 million cubic feet plus the storage in Lake
Victoria ?
Mr. McGOWEN : That is going against the Agreement of 1908.
Mr. VAUGHAN: That 60,000 million cubic feet was subject to the locking of
the upper portion of the river.
Mr. GLYNN: That did not include Lake Victoria.
Mr. McGOWEN: It was clearly understood that any water in Lake
Victoria was part and parcel of your Murray water that came to you under the
Agreement : now you want to make it in addition to the 60,000 million cubic feet.
Mr. GLYNN: The first Agreement gave us 70,000 million cubic feet and any
greater quantity required for the purposes of navigation ; that included Lake Victoria,


but when we came down to 60,000 million cubic feet, having given up Lake \ ictoria,
there was a specific agreement to construct the locks throughout the whole system at
once. Now these locks are knocked out, so we want more water.
Mr McGOWEN: The locks were to help Lake Victoria.
Mr. GLYNN: The real proposition made was, the river was divided into two
periods of discharge. It was estimated by the engineers that the discharge before
locking amounted to 127,000 million cubic feet for the whole year. At first it was
proposed to give us 75,000 million cubic feet, then there was a meeting of the
Premiers at which the quantity was brought down to 60,000 million cubic feet, which
was to be inclusive of Lake Victoria, when the locks were constructed, but in
consideration of that they undertook to construct the whole of the locks from
Blanchetown to Echuca and Hay at the cost of the three States. As to the 60,000
million cubic feet, in 1906, 70,000 million cubic feet was originally recommended by
the engineers, and I believe Sir Thomas Bent said u You had better add 5,000 million
cubic feet to that 70,000 cubic feet”, and that was accepted. I never heard it
questioned before as to the fixing of the final quantity until to-day.
Mr. JONES: Under that agreement the upper States were to pay £400,000
towards locking in South Australia, now the other States are relieved of spending a
penny, and we are going to spend the money ourselves, we contend it is reasonable
that we should have the filling of Lake Victoria as well as the 60,000 million cubic
feet.
Mr. VAUGHAN: If 60,000 million cubic feet is sufficient, we can make it
that we sh{j|l only have the 60,000 million cubic feet.
Mr. CARMICHAEL : You take your “ whack ” of what is going.
Mr. VAUGHAN : There has never been a river when there has not been
60,000 million cubic feet.
Mr. McGOWEN: The question of irrigation has not been taken up in the
past by the States as it will be in the future. It is no good to say, “I am going to
give you £l,OOO whether I have the money or not;’* but if you say a percentage of
the water that comes down is yours, and the percentage belongs to other people, each
will get their share, and as the water comes down in greater or lesser quantity, so
the share varies.
Mr. CARMICHAEL: You have to recognise the conditions are altering to
what they have been. The fact that you have always had it is.no criterion that you
will always have it under the altering conditions of the future.
Mr. McGOWEN: The common-sense proposition is to agree upon the
percentage that each State shall have. I quite agree with the position of the
Victorian engineers. This question is never going to be permanently settled until
some practical men have gone into the whole ramification, and have watched the
possible development of each State with the irrigable lands. Victoria is justified in the
position she has taken up to have the matter postponed. Ours can only be a tentative
proposal to get over a temporary position, but there must be nothing definite until all
the data is connected. All the development in New South Wales in regard to
irrigation is going to be more direct benefit to Victoria than to New South Wales.
If we open the natural port to the settlers, every pound w 7 e spend on settlement in
Riverina is matter of direct benefit to tln^capital of Victoria, because it is the natural
port for those settlers, and 1 say let us agree to a percentage as a tentative proposal.
Let each State have the right to a percentage of the waters that flow down the
Murray. It is not a question of conjecture ; it is a question of fact. If 20,000 millions
cubic feet come down there, there is a certain portion for each State, and then let the
matter be settled in as definite a manner as w r e can by allowing the data to be
collected, and let the experts determine as to the detail.
The CHAIRMAN: The point is whether w 7 e can fix any percentage of
water at the present time. Should not approval be given to South Australia carrying
out the scheme ? The distribution will eventually be upon a percentage basis to be
fixed by a Board of Engineers that will have to be appointed, and whatever agreement
is arrived at between the States interested in the matter must he upon the basis of
the investigations by the engineers appointed by the States. I do not think it is
material to the bargain now whether we fix the quantity of water each has to get.
Let there be an honorable understanding that South Australia is to get its fair share
of what waters are available until the exact quantity is discovered.


Mr. CARMICHAEL: Have vve not to determine the basis on which the
allotment shall take place?
The CHAIRMAN: We cannot do that now unless we take the one in the
original agreement or the one recommended by the last Commission.
Mr. McGOWEN: No doubt from now until the time the engineers can
report definitely there is no fear of South Australia suffering, because the treatment
of irrigation has not proceeded to such an extent as to impede the possible flow
through South Australia. As far as South Australia is concerned there is enough
water going down the Murray to meet her requirements for some years to come.
Mr. MEAD: That is true as far as Victoria is concerned. There will be no
increased demand between now and the time the Board will report.
Mr. GLYNN: We have all that data elaborately prepared.
Mr. YAUGLI AN : This paper goes back to 1886. In 1898 the water
discharged at Morgan was 281,000 million cubic feet. That, after giving us the
60,000 millions cubic feet and the 20,000 millions cubic feet at Lake Victoria would
enable New South Wales and Victoria to irrigate to 24 inches 2,000,000 acres of
land.
Mr. McGOWEN: Suppose we had an abnormal year, it would be unfair to
ask New South Wales and Victoria to give you all the water that comes down the
Murray for the purposes of navigation. If your figures prove anything they prove
that you have nothing to fear, and we have nothing to fear, so where is the danger?
If there is a danger, why should you not suffer—should not we all divide it, and
suffer accordingly ?
Mr. VAUGHAN: The lowest record is 1902; there was 93, < 00 millions cubic
feet. That would have enabled Victoria and New Soutii Wales to
half-a-million acres, but in such a year we would be prepared to take a reduction in
the flow of the river.
Mr. MEAD : Mr. Vaughan is giving the total water of the river.
Mr. McGowen is taking the regulated flow. Taking the total flow, you could have
in two months in the winter four times as much water as you are asking. Are you
willing to accept that as your share of the river and let us take the whole flow of the
river when it is low? You can take that water and store it.
Mr. GLYNN : In 1908 there was an adjournment of the Conference for the
engineers to have a consultation. It was shown that in 1902, the lowest recorded
year, after giving us our quantity of 60,000 millions of cubic feet, you could irrigate
800,000 acres in the two States.
Mr. MEAD : Would you take vour quantity in the winter months ?
The CHAIRMAN : All the storage you could provide would not provide for
the whole of the water.
Mr. GLYNN : The theory of the storage is that you can impound for six
months and send it down to replenish the lower part of the river.
T 1 le CHAIRMAN : There is a great quantity of the Murray that you cannot
use by the most conservative and careful conservation of water. We can only
irrigate a mere fraction of what people at one time thought they could irrigate. We
must always bear in mind that there are natural reasons why much of the flow of the
Murray and other streams must go to waste. We cannot hold it.
Mr. GLYNN : As to the fact that diversion will not interfere with the flow of
the water for some } r ears, that has been carefully gone into by South Australia.
The figures have all been worked out, so we know what we are talking about.
The CHAIRMAN : With all the inquiries you have made, have you arrived
at the conclusion that, with fairness to tire other States, it is possible to maintain
in an ordinary dry year the navigation of the Murray —that you will have water
available ?
Mr. GLYNN : By locking you can.
The CHAIRMAN : Then you may ask yourselves the question, is it worth
our while to keep up this navigation ; are we not doing it at too great a price ?
Would not the time come when you would have to sacrifice either irrigation or
navigation ? What has been achieved by navigation in the Murray, and what are
you likely to get by it ?
Mr. GLYNN: We have done nothing to improve it until the last Act was
passed. Now we are going to spend nearly £700,000 in South Australia and at Lake
Victoria.


The CHAIRMAN: Is it not a dream that South Australia is going to make
the Murray a great water highway ?
Mr. GLYNN: On the basis of existing navigation only the whole thing is
chimerical. We are not going to spend £600,000 to secure what we might secure
more cheaply by a railway; but it is irrigation and navigation we are going in for.
Navigation is only an incident in connexion with irrigation ; but we desire to preserve
navigation incidentally, and we are prepared to make an offer towards the expense in
the other States to preserve navigation, and we ask that the engineers be instructed
to report on the matter.
Mr, VAUGHAN: We could not agree to, a Commission laying down for
acceptance by the three States the proportion we should get.
Mr. CARMICHAEL: You must lay down a basis for the distribution.
Mr. GLYNN: I am informed that two-thirds of the water is required for
irrigation.
Mr. CARMICHAEL: That is not the immediate need. You will not have a
quarter of a million acres for many years to come.
Mr. GLYNN: If we do not get 60,000 million plus 20,000 million we cannot
get the river below the lowest lock fit for navigation or irrigation at all.
Mr. CARMICHAEL: In order to keep the river navigable as far as the border
you would want something like 20,000 million cubic feet, and the balance you would
require for irrigation. What do you propose to refer to the engineers ?
Mr. GLYNN: We want to leave the other matters in abeyance, and in the
meantime get the engineers to report. We ask, can you do anything to economize
w r ater ? If you can, we are prepared to share the expense with you. Even now
Ministers are agreed to mention the sum they are prepared to offer. We will take a
minimum of 60,U00 million cubic feet plus Lake Victoria, and things then can go on
as they are. How can anything be done to save the river ? South Australia is
prepared to join the other States in the work.
Mr. CARMICHAEL : You want the minimum, to guarantee the navigation
from Lake Victoria downwards, and then to get the engineers to investigate
matters with the view to navigation above that. It is no use making an agreement
here that will not be indorsed by our Parliaments. We wish to come to an honorable
agreement, that will be indorsed by our Parliaments.
Mr. VAUGHAN : What do you suggest ?
Mr McGOWEN : I say if South Australia requires 60,000 million cubic feet
to carry on their work, and New South Wales has to agree to give her that, and
Victoria also, it is only fair that New South Wales should be assured of a sufficient
quantity of water to meet her requirements. There should be a minimum to her as
well as to South Australia, that would allow us to meet our own requirements, and
guarantee our pro rata share for the requirements of South Australia. Jf it is to be
share and share alike, let us get the benefit of the good seasons pro rata all through the
States, and in the bad seasons suffer accordingly, but not put one State on velvet at
the expense of the other States. I say the percentage distribution of this wrater is the
only correct and fair way, and if you are going to refer the question for the report of
the engineers, let it be one of the questions —do not say the amount of water that
shall go, but let the engineers determine how far the waters of the Murray can be
conserved, and how far they can be and ought to be used with the view of settlement
and navigation ; that is the arrangement I look upon as being a fair one.
Mr. MEAD : Would you want as much of that 60,000 million cubic feet from
January to March as you wmuld want in the other months ?
Mr. GLYNN : We thought the w r ater ought to be delivered as the require-
ments of South Australia suggested.
Mr. MEAD: If we have to deliver a proportionate share in those months they
would have to store water to supply it.
Mr. McGOWEN : And store it for that purpose alone ; they could not use it
for irrigation.
Mr. MEAD ; Exactly. We are not using anything like that amount of w r ater
just now.
Mr. VAUGHAN : We will construct whatever storage basins we can.
The CHAIRMAN : You take it for granted that Victoria can find as many
storage basins as she requires.
Mr. VAUGHAN : No, I do not say that.


Mr. GLYNN : Mr. Swinburne had a very good grasp of the facts.
The CHAIRMAN : He admitted he had made a very great mistake.
Mr. GLYNN : He never departed from the contention that South Australia
should have a certain quantity. He prepared the resolutions for 1906, and the
principle there was 75,000 million cubic feet to South Australia after locking.
The CHAIRMAN : In what months do the farmers in South Australia send
their stuff away ?
Mr. VAUGHAN : Mostly in January. We have millions of acres upon the
Murray.
Mr. GRAHAM : Do you depend upon the Murray to carry the stuff away ?
Mr. VERRAN : We do. If a minimum could be moved now, and the three
engineers, Messrs. Wade, Mead, and Jones, go into the matter, we could see if we
could arrive at anything definite.
Mr. CARMICHAEL : Can you make any suggestion to the engineers on
what basis you are to get your proportion ?
Mr. VAUGHAN : We are prepared for them to work on the basis suggested
by the last Conference.
Mr. CARMICHAEL : You will instruct the engineers to base the proportion
to South Australia on the needs of South Australia ?
Mr. VAUGHAN : They can decide what quantity of water we should receive
without interfering with the rights of Victoria and New South Wales.
Mr. MEAD: The amount received by South Australia will depend on what
you do to provide storage.
Mr. VAUGHAN : On our proposition w T e wall have locking and Lake
Victoria, and we are prepared to help in the storage higher up.
Mr. CARMICHAEL : Provided it is made navigable from Lake Victoria.
Your contribution to the locks higher up is merely an insurance against a very bad
year. In a bad year you would not get 60,000 million cubic feet.
Mr. VAUGHAN : w r e get more than that.
Mr. McGOWhX : At present the engineers are groping in the dark.
Without the exact information as to gauging and the needs of various States, they
can only make a tentative proposal, but they can make recommendations for the
future. Then by building storage dams higher up the river you can insure justice to
development in each State. There was an agreement made here last time as to wdiat
proportion should be given to each State in a bad year. If you want the engineers
to go into that question now r , I am perfectly walling to take that as the basis to
wmrk on.
Mr. VAUGHAN : The basis wmuld be enough to supply all Victoria wants
and South Australia too, and if they cannot work it out on that basis, take a propor-
tionate reduction.
Mr. MeGOWEN : Each of us wall be guided by the experts we have here, and
if the engineers can give us any solution, I am willing to stand by it.
Mr. CARMICHAEL :If you can say to the engineers—“ Each State will
require a certain amount of water for irrigation ; what is a fair proportion ?”—they
would have something to go on.
The CHAIRMAN : It is not difficult to determine what each State requires
now ; wmuld you make an agreement on that basis, or go further and try to anticipate
what the future developments will be ? Would South Australia be satisfied if she
was assured, as far as we could give the assurance by an agreement, of the winter that
she immediately requires ; that is to maintain the river navigable up to a certain
extent and provide water for irrigation ? You say you have 20,000 acres under
irrigation, and that area is going to increase largely.
Mr. VAUGHAN : I suppose it will double in the next three years.
The CHAIRMAN: Will the 80,000 million cubic feet that you ask for be
ample to provide for that increase in irrigation?
Mr. VAUGHAN: Yes, more than that.
The CHAIRMAN : You are locking into the future, and to provide for your
future you may to some extent destroy our own present, and certainly our ow r n future.
How do you regard the question of proprietorship of the w 7 ater ? In the first place
it belongs to the two States where it falls.
Mr. VAUGHAN : We do not agree to that.


Mr. GLYNN : The American principle would be applied here; that is, a
reasonable use by each State would be declared by the High Court.
The CHAIRMAN: A reasonable use is interpreted in some cases as a
profitable use. The upper riparian owner seems to have all the legal rights in
America, as long as he does not waste it.
Mr. GLYNN ; We are not afraid of what the High Court will do.
Mr. MEAD ; What you are asking for would destroy our existing district,
because you are asking for more than the river carried in the last two or three years
in the dry months. If you take your 80,000 million cubic feet in July, we are willing
to concede it, but if you want 5,000 million cubic feet per month, then you require
more water than the Murray will carry.
Mr. VAUGHAN: We do not ask for that; Lake Victoria will keep us going
over the critical period.
The CHAIRMAN: I should say it must come to this, that at certain periods
of the year no water can be afforded for navigation; it will all be wanted for irriga-
tion. You cannot put any more water into the river.
Mr. VAUGHAN: By locking we could do it.
Mr. GRAHAM: Locking is a waste of water; you cannot bring water back
when it goes through a lock.
Mr. CARMICHAEL: To settle the proportion of South Australia you have to
go into the requirements of each of the other States. You must fix the basis of require-
ments in order that the engineers may come to some conclusion.
The CHAIRMAN : It is a question of demand and supply—what the demands
of each State are and what amount you have to meet those demands.
Mr. VAUGHAN : The suggestion is that the engineers be asked to report on
the matter as far as —(1) What proportion of the flow is required to irrigate 250,000
acres; (2) the effectiveness of the locks; (5) what area is capable of effective
irrigation in the upper States ; (4) how can the delivery of South Australia’s fixed
quantity or proportion be made?
The CHAIRMAN: They would have to consider the irrigation requirements,
the requirements of Victoria at present, without speculating on the future. It will
take a long time to put up the works ; in the meantime the investigation could be
made, and whoever deals with the question in two years’ time will have the fullest
information.
Mr. CARMICHAEL: Upon what lines will they proceed? If South
Australia is going to indulge in a big expenditure of money on certain works it ought
not to be on a doubtful assumption later on.
Mr. McGOWEN: How far will South Australia create a vested interest by
going on with this dam, and how much of a claim will she have to a minimum
supply ?
Mr. VERRAN : You would hardly'expect South Australia to spend £600,000
on gigantic works wdthout some guarantee that she will have the w 7 ater.
The CHAIRMAN: There will be no difficulty in deciding between New
South Wales and Victoria The next question to be determined is what quantity of
water is South Australia equitably entitled to get, and in settling that the existing
rights already in the other States cannot be overlooked. It would not be fair if you
were permitted to do anything that would impair or lessen those rights ; they should
be established without any protest from any State, and I am satisfied that you can get
a fair share of the water. We have got our water by extensive and expensive schemes
of storage, and you cannot expect to utilize these wa ?rs for either purpose without
embarking in a large expenditure.
Mr. V KRRAN: We are prepared to do that
The CHAIRMAN: The total flow of the Murray is one thing, the effective
flow is another. There is the waste water that you cannot impound, that no one can
keep back. You say, “We are entitled to a certain amount.” Mr. Mead has already
pointed out that during certain months of the year you can get double what you ask
for without impairing the interests of the other States. Is what you ask for, the
80,000 million cubic feet, to supply you both for navigation and irrigation for 250,000
acres ?
Mr. VAUGHAN: Yes.
The CHAIRMAN: As you cannot possibly bring the 250,000 acres under
irrigation for many years to come, why should we provide it now ?


Mr. VAUGHAN; We know we will get far more than the maximum quantity
for many years to come ; we are not concerned for the next few years. We could
probably leave the locking for a few years if the question of irrigation was the only
one, hut when we are building locks we want to he assured they will be used for all
time.
Mr. MEAD : We know that if we were to guarantee that quantity of water
it would simply mean that a part of the Barrenjack and Goulburn waters must go
down there to supply it.
Mr. VAUGHAN : This proposition is merely for the information of the
Commission without prejudicing any conclusion—that the engineers might go into it
and ascertain where we are —what is the quantity that will he required in South
Australia, and what will he required in the upper States.
Mr. MEAD : This is the situation. You have certain existing needs down
there that ought to be provided for. Taking the existing irrigation now, to give you
a certain percentage, dropping the question of an absolute quantity, the question of
whether it would be wise for us to do that at present would have to include this—
first, whether you need that percentage at the present time, and second whether it
would stop some of our crops, and stop present development. I would not agree that
any State ought to destroy an irrigation district in order that some one may go on and
develop irrigation in some other State.
Mr. CARMICHAEL : You say to South Australia, “ I ay out three-quarters
of a million and we will give you sufficient water to meet your present needs.” The
money they are going to lay out is to meet the needs of development in the future.
Y r ou say “Lay it out and you shall have a guarantee of water to meet present needs.”
Mr. MEAD : I am speaking of our determining these matters off hand at this
meeting. I think we are not prepared to do it just now, but here is another feature.
You are spending one and a half million at Barrenjack, we are spending a good deal
more than that on the Goulburn. There is no question that both you and ourselves
are taking just as much risk as we can possibly take. If we go ahead and complete
this and there should be litigation, and it should be decided the whole river should go
down, it destroys what we are doing now, inevitably and finally. W hat we are doing
runs the risk of destruction by legal proceedings.
Mr. VERRAN : You are not prepared to give us anything at all in taking the
risk.
Mr. MEAD : You do not guarantee that you will not interfere with Barren-
jack and Goulburn.
Mr. VERB AN : We tell you that if you give us Lake Victoria we will give
you the guarantee.
Mr. VAUGHAN ; We are prepared to respect your present rights.
Mr. MEAD : Then the agreement would have to include more than you have
put in it.
Mr. VAUGHAN : This is not an agreement. It is merely a suggestion for
the engineers to consider. We say we have 20,000 acres under irrigation, but as a
matter of fact we have only started irrigation, and we should not be asked to stop our
irrigation works in South Australia.
The CHAIRMAN : And you ask for an allotment that will provide for twelve
times that area.
Mr. CARMICHAEL: Can you say on what basis the distribution should be
made; second what proportion each State should have. On that basis each State
gets its own water, and neither is interested whether the other is putting the water
to use or not.
Mr. MEAD : The distribution is easy as between two States. The
difficulty with South Australia is that it makes no contribution to the stream at all.
Mr. CARMICHAEL : But their needs must be met as far as irrigation is
concerned.
Mr. MEAD : Yes, that is why she must be considered on a different basis to
the other two States. The two States recognise that South Australia has a right to
an equitable share of that water. Then the question arises, what is that equitable
share ? The difficulty in determining that is this—an equitable share is, perhaps, that
it is entitled to irrigate as many acres as New South Wales and Victoria, or we
might say enough to enable them to maintain navigation, or to maintain navigation


and irrigate 250,000 acres of land. If we come to the last conclusion, in my opinion,
it will destroy a large amount of irrigation in Victoria. Suppose you take it on a
different basis —have you any to suggest ?
Mr. CARMICHAEL : If three of us must have some basis in common on
which to come to an agreement, I think Mr. Vaughan’s suggestion is the best one,
that the irrigable area in each State should be taken, and a proportion of water
granted according to that area, and the whole thing could be fixed up on one basis.
Mr. MEAD : The injustice of that is one State has a large territory that
supplies the water but is not suited for irrigation. Another State has territory that
is suited for irrigation, and it comes to the other State and takes the water.
Mr. GLYNN : We do not base our claim for a reasonable share upon the
matter of contribution, otherwise we should have no claim for it at all.
The CHAIRMAN : If we were making no drain upon the river South
Australia would be in a comfortable position and could carry on navigation and
irrigation.
Mr. GLYNN : We would have a fair amount of navigation, not permanent,
but nearly so ; we would have no fear as to irrigation.
It was decided to refer the matter to the engineers to consider and report.
[ The Conference adjourned to Monday at 10 o'clock .]
THIRD DAY MONDAY, 23rd JANUARY, 1911.
Mr. HOLMAN, on the question of the Murray River and tributaries, presented
the resolutions agreed on by the engineers during the adjournment of the Conference.
He said : My alteration of Mr. Glynn’s draft is only a verbal one. In these resolutions
we ask for certain additional data, which we say are necessary, as well as investigating
the data that we know to be available. We now propose these resolutions —[. Reading
the same ]: —
MURRAY RIVER WATERS.
Recommendation Arrived at by Conference of State Engineers, Saturday, 21st January, 1911.
1. That it be a recommendation to- the Premiers that consent be given and whatever necessary be
done for the construction by the State of South Australia of the Lake Victoria Works (including two
locks on the Murray River) in accordance with the Murray Works Act 1910 of that State such consent
being without prejudice to the rights of the States.
2. That each engineer consult his Minister as to the expediency of obtaining (at the joint cost of
the three States) by the Ist Uecember, 1911, a report by the engineers as to such further data as, in
their opinion is essential to a settlement by agreement of the question of the Murray River and its
tributaries. For the purpose of such investigation and report, the engineers to be authorized to engage
the assistance of other engineers.
Mr. GLYNN assented. He said: We have put in the words “what is essential
or conducive.”
Mr. MEAD : I support the proposals, but suggested an amendment on the
second section. That provides for each State engaging professional experts. I think
the three engineers should be given a fund out of which they could employ whatever
assistance may be necessary.
Mr. HOLMAN : That is a matter for this Conference to decide.
Mr. WADE : I should think £5OO for each of the three States would be
sufficient.
Mr. HOLMAN : We need not name any sum at this moment.
Mr. WADE : No.
Mr. MEAD: I think there should be an investigation carried out largely
regardless of State boundaries.
Mr. WADE : The area of the irrigable lands in each State is an important
matter to investigate. If three different men do it each State will have a different
report ; whereas one man would do it on a uniform basis.


Mr. YERRAN : We do not object to pay our proportion, but if South Australia
employs an engineer I want it put that there is no necessity for you to engage
another on our behalf.
Mr. WADE : The object would be to utilize the State officers as far as
possible.
The CHAIRMAN : I understand it is proposed that each State shall pay its
own engineer who may be appointed.
Mr, WADE : Yes. For instance, as to stream gaugings. The Victorian
stream gauging staff would do the Victorian work relating to their State, my staff
as to my State, and Mr. Verran’s staff’ for the South Australian State.
The CHAIRMAN : I take it that each of the States is to pay its own
engineer, but if the three States engineers determine to engage some additional
assistance, then the three States shall contribute an equal sum.
Mr. VERRAN : Yes.
The CH AIRMAN : You say each State should contribute to the £1,500
suggested. Suppose there is an objection made that they find they require so much
assistance that the fund would not be sufficient ?
Mr. GRAHAM : I would not limit the fund, but say, “ a sum sufficient to do
the work.”
Mr. MEAD : As far as Victoria is concerned, whoever is detailed as the
engineer to assist will not take a very active part in the investigations, but only work
at the time required. Speaking for myself, I could not be detailed off to do that
special work. I take it that that would be the same in New South Wales.
Mr. WADE : Yes ; the three engineers would merely direct.
Mr. ME AD : The man who would do this work would make an investigation,
say, of the storages ; another, the plans ; and another, the water supply.
Mr. WADE : Ves ; the three engineers might meet once a month and direct
matters.
Mr. VERRAN : And they would be responsible to see that the work was
carried out in a complete manner. So we need not say what sum should be spent.
The CHAIRMAN : I agree with that view.
Mr. VERRAN : It will be much better to leave the thing open.
{Further discussion then ensued as to the amendments. )
The CHAIRMAN : In regard to the resolutions as to the Lake Victoria
works, a slight alteration in the wording will be necessary. Instead of “a recom-
mendation to the Premiers,” it will have to be “ that the Conference agrees that
consent be given, and whatever necessary be done,” &c., our consent being without
prejudice to the rights of any one State.
Mr. HOLMAN : I suggest that the Conference take the second resolution
first.
The CHAIRMAN : The question is, does the Conference agree that consent
be given ?
Mr. VAUGHAN : These are only the recommendations of the engineers, and
on them we have prepared certain resolutions to submit to you. It is not necessary
to adopt them in the form in which the engineers put them.
Mr, GLYNN : I have a copy of the form 1 suggested to Mr. A T aughan.
The CHAIRMAN {to Mr. Holman ) : Perhaps the best way is for you, with
Mr. Guinness and other professional gentlemen, to retire and draft those resolutions in
proper, explicit, and legal form. Even then, of course, lawyers may read them and
find there is ambiguity and inconsistency, and so on, but something of the sort is
necessary to give due weight, outside the Conference itself, to any resolution passed
by such an important Conference as this.
Mr. HOLMAN : 1 shall be glad to act on that suggestion, but perhaps it will
be well to postpone the final drafting until we have had an opportunity of consulting
the Raw Departments. Personally, lam taken unawares, and I suggest that if we
content ourselves with drawing up a plain memorandum, embodying all the points we
want, we could then give it the form of binding legal agreement later on. Perhaps
the Conference might determine this point first, before we attempt to go further. I
understand, Mr. Chairman, that we want to make the granting of this permission to
erect this work at Lake Victoria subject to the saving of certain rights. We want to


safeguard riparian rights that may exist to-day, and any reservations should be
considered part of the expense of the work. Granting permission to make the work
does not in any way impair the existing rights of New South Wales.
The CHAIRMAN : It would not remove any responsibility of South
Australia any more than if New South Wales herself were carrying out the work.
Mr. GLYNN : I put in “by Act, agreement, or otherwise.” It was not
final.
[Mr. HOLMAN read the resolutions agreed on as to the Lake Victoria
works.) He said :—That last sentence in the draft means the States of Victoria
and New South Wales, not South Australia.
Mr. VAUGHAN: The three of them. There is no right of South Australia
that is prejudiced.
Mr. GLYNN: If we leave it as it is we take a bigger risk than you do.
The CHAIRMAN: It is rather inconsistent with the position, because New
South Wales is giving up the right to a large extent ; Victoria to a small extent.
New South Wales has the right to Lake Victoria, and they are going to give that
up. But does that mean without prejudice to their rights ? I cannot see how any
right of South Australia could be prejudiced.
Mr. WADE: We agreed that it should be the rights of all the States.
Mr. VAUGHAN : It refers to the Lake Victoria works. We understand it
does not settle the general question of the Murray waters.
The CH AIRMAN : Later in the day South Australia may come on with a
further claim. Why do you put in “ without prejudice to the rights of South Aus-
tralia” and leave out New South Wales and Victoria?
Mr. GLYNN : Personally Ido not mind about anything being in. But this
is not to be considered part of the Inter-State agreement. We are not by this settling
the Murray question, and I think we could in a few minutes, if the legal men have a
chat together, fix this up. Of course I understand that this is not final as to the
method of drafting ;it is only to express the mind of the Premiers. I could explain
where many of the clauses came from that we worked on.
Mr. HOLMAN : I fancy you have in your draft departed from the intention
of the engineers in their recommendation. It reads : u Such consent being without
prejudice to the rights of the States.” Mr. Wade has explained that that means that
this grant by New South Wales in the first instance, and by \ ictoria to a smaller
extent, is not to-be taken as prejudicing the sovereign rights of Victoria and New
South Wales over the facilities granted. You have in]your re-drafting taken it in
another sense —that this is not to prejudice any claims that South Australia may have.
Mr. GLYNN : This is only put in as a suggestion*
The CHAIRMAN : Cannot you go straight away and settle it up ?
Mr. GLYNN : Yes. This is not final as to the wording. We will have to
see the draftsmen of the various States.
Mr. McGOWEN :As to the question of No. 2. Had they not better lay
down the ground work —that it shall be a joint appointment, not that each State with
an engineer can run into an unlimited expense ?
The CHAIRMAN : No ; each State appoints its engineer.
Mr. McGOWEN : But they are already our engineers.
The CHAIRMAN : They would practically constitute the Board.
Mr. GRAHAM : And you leave it to them to employ any necessary outside
assistance.
Mr. VERRAN : As to that the South Australian representatives demur. We
are willing as to the appointment as long as you have not one engineer appointed to
investigate certain lands. That is, the man from Victoria can investigate all
Victorian lands, and the man from New South Wales all New South Wales lands.
The CHAIRMAN : No ; I think it would be better the other way.
Mr. VEKRAN : I want to be clear on that.
Mr. McGOWEN : I understand it is this way. Taking it for granted that
the States interested will appoint whichever of their engineers they like, say, Mr.
Mead, Mr. Jones and Mr. Wade. Now, it is impossible for those gentlemen to do
this work themselves, considering what they have to do officially in their different
departments, hut they would be a Trust or a Board, and have to engage some
engineering assistance. If Mr. Wade engages one engineer to help him in New
South Wales, and Mr. Mead another in Victoria, and Mr. Jones another in South


Australia, the chances are that there will he a widely differing opinion with regard to
the quality of the land interested, and that will never bring this matter to a satis-
factory settlement. But if those three gentlemen agree amongst themselves, and say,
“ We will get one man and let him examine on the same basis all the land capable of
being gazetted in the States of New South Wales, Victoria, and South Australia,”
that man will know exactly the quality of the land he is dealing with in each State,
and will form an accurate opinion and report to the Board, who then have to deter-
mine the question to be submitted to the Parliaments of the various States.
Mr. CARMICHAEL : At the same time the States can call on their own
officials for any reports.
Mr. McGImVEN : Of course. There is nothing to prevent them, but it is to
be so that we can get a uniform opinion of the land in each State.
The CHAIRMAN : I fail to see how the area of land in each State is to
determine the amount of water each State should have. Ido not know that that
will be an important factor in arriving at a conclusion.
Mr. McGOWEN : I do not know that it will be an important factor, but still
if some State put in a claim for 1,000,000 acres of land that would cost perhaps 10
or 50 times the expense to irrigate, and would require so much more water, and
carrying it a greater distance, then that would be most unfair. You can only irrigate
to make it pay at a certain cost, and only certain land is capable of being irrigated.
Mr. VAUGHAN : The Board would report on that.
Mr. WADE : The Board would issue instructions as to that. The Board is
responsible, and any man engaged would always act under the instructions of the
three men constituting the Board.
Mr. VERRAN : Would it be a fair thing for one man to make the whole
assessment ?
Mr. McGOWEN : I think it would.
fhe CHAIRMAN : If he could do it in the time it might be better.
Mr. WADE : The State officers would take him round.
Mr. GRAHAM : Yes, the State officers would give every assistance.
Mr. WADE : 1 think you must leave a good deal to the discretion of the
engineers.
(The professional gentlemen retired and deliberated.)
(The Conference adjourned for lunch.)
( On the Conference resuming * the professional gentlemen again retired and deliberated.)
The Conference resumed.
Mi\. HOLMAN presented and read the following resolution as agreed
upon
The South Australian Murray Works Act, 1910
Resolved —
1. The States of New South Wales and Victoria, so far as on their or either of their parts may
be necessary, shall grant to the State of South Australia, authority and permission to construct, use, and
enjoy the storage works at Lake Victoria, (with and including two Locks on the Murray River)
mentioned in Section (eleven) of the Murray Wafers Act 1910 of the State of South Australia and
shown on the plans accompanying the printed report, dated 9th December, 1902, of the Inter-State
Royal Commission on the Murray River, and on a plan produced at this Conference, and annexed
hereto (Appendix.)
2. The State of New South Wales shall transfer to, and vest in, the State of South Australia
(for an estate in fee simple or such other estate as may be appropriate) that piece of land in the said
State of New South Wales known as Lake Victoria, with the two watei-courses known as Rufus River
and Frenchman’s Creek, connecting the River Murray with the said Lake for and throughout their entire
course from the said River to the said Lake ; and also so much of the banks and foreshores of the said
Lake and water-courses as shall be sufficient for all purposes of access to, and use and enjoyment of, the
said Lake Victoria works.
3. The State of South Australia shall be authorized to use the channel of the Murray River as a
conduit for ihe conveyance of impounded water from Lake Victoria to the eastern boundary of that
State.


4. Any riparian rights of adjoining owners and of the State of New South Wales in virtue of
adjoining Crown Lands shall be preserved, and any compensation for encroachments resulting from the
works, or any resumptions necessary to effectuate the same shall be at the expense of the State of South
Australia.
5. The Government of the State of New South Wales shall, as and when requested by the
Government of South Australia, acquire any private lands x-equired for the effectuation of the works
under the provisions of the Lands for Public Pux-poses Acquisition Act of New South Wales, or appro-
priate any Crown Lands held under lease.
6. The right to the use of such waters as may be nseessaxy for irrigating the lands contiguous to
Lake Victoria is conserved to New South Wales without impairment of the right to the use of the State
of South Australia of water impounded in Lake Victoria by the State of South Australia.
7. The States affected declax-e that the present agreement as to Lake Victoria and its subsidiary
works is not to be construed as piejudicing or abridging any claims of any such States to the reasonable
use of the watei’s of the Murray and its tributaries, or as an admission by any State of the validity or
otherwise of any such claim by any other State ; or as in any way extending or abridging the rights of
such States inter se in respect of such waters.
The CHAIRMAN : What about the other resolutions as to the Mur ray
River tributaries ?
The same were read, as amended, as follows :
THE QUESTION OF THE MURRAY RIVER AND ITS TRIBUTARIES.
Resolved—
1. That the Engineers of the three States be instructed to inquire without delay and present to
the Premiers by the Ist December, 1911, a Report and Recommendations based upon data now available,
and on such further data as they shall obtain by that date which will in their opinion be essential or
conducive to a settlement by Agreement between the States of New South Wales, Victoria, and South
Australia, of the question of the Murray River and its tributaries.
2. That for the purpose of such inquiry and report the engineers may jointly engage such
professional assistance as may be necessary.
3, That the cost of the inquiry and import be shared equally by the three States.
[Further discussion took place as to the wording in clauses 6 and 7 relating
to the conservation o) the rights of the various States.)
Mr. HOLMAN ; The whole thing is merely a memorandum of agreement,
and it will have to be put into proper legal form.
Mr. McGOWEN : We are looking ahead. Possibly irrigation may be taken
close to that border by South Australia. What position are we in if we have not
allowed New South Wales to get that benefit of irrigation with the full knowledge
that all the settlers there will trade with South Australia. It may never be required
as far as we are concerned, still that power should be there to conserve the rights of
the State which is conceding everything. All those things in New South Wales
territory are conceded to South and we are asked not to preserve to
ourselves, if necessary in the distant future, the right of using that land for irrigation ;
while there is plenty of water to be put in there for the purposes of irrigation.
Mr. HOLMAN : Nothing in this will prejudice the general question.
The CHAIRMAN : Would you accept “a reasonable quantity on reasonable
terms ?” *
Mr. GLYNN ; it is the rights to the use of such water, and that it shall
not impair the use of it by South Australia.
Mr. VAUGHAN : Would not that meet what New South Wales wants?
Mr. HOLMAN : You are to have the water in the Lake, and we are to have
the use of the water so long as we have that right.
Mr. GLYNN: So long as it does not impair our right. We desire,-having
paid for the storage, to preserve the right.
(After further consultation between Mr. Holman and Mr. Glynn as to the
proposed amendments of the clause, the Chairman put the resolutions as
above.)
The resolutions were duly carried.
Mr. HOLMAN ; This is all an agreement subject to the ratification of the
Parliaments.
The CHAIRMAN : Yes.
The resolutions agreed on were duly signed by the Premiers of New' South
Wales, South Australia, and Victoria.
The Conjerence closed.
33




APPENDICES
South Australia.
THE MURRAY RIVER AN I) ITS TRIBUTARIES, THE
MURRUMBIUGEE AND THE GOULBURN.
isEPORT AFTER INSPECTION OE THE PRINCIPAL DIVERSION AND
STORAGE WORKS.
I. On Friday, June 10th, 1910, I left Adelaide with the Honorable Senator Sir Left Adelaide June
Josxah Symon; Mr. Graham Stewart, Engineer-in-Chief for the State of South Aus- 10111,19x0.
tialia; and Mr. J. Jj. Labatt, Assistant Engineer of Harbors, to inspect the principal
works for diversion and storage, and conveyance for distribution on irrigable lands,
of the waters of the Murray and Goulburn Rivers in the State of Victoria, and of the
Murrumbidgee in the State of New South Wales. The object was to facilitate a
clearer apprehension of the scope of those works, and of the probable effect on the
riparian interests of this State of the diversions for which the works have been, or
are being, constructed.
11. In volume 11. of The Case for Opinion submitted to counsel in March, j\i C ts to 1905 in
1905, the works for diversions and the diversions from the Murray River and all its “ Case for Opinion,
tributaries are stated and examined in the order of their importance; and estimates
are given of their effect under assumed and fairly exhaustive conditions. A synopsis
of tne history of the River Murray (Question is also given! The method of stating
the facts used in the case may be found best for clearness in bringing the facts up
to date, .and, should legal proceedings become necessary, as the basis of a brief. At
present it is unnecessary to do more than state in outline the impressions formed
during the visit of inspection, and, in the light of the data and negotiations of the
last three years, make some suggestions.
VICTORIA.
111. Mr. J. T. Dethridge, Victorian Chief Engineer of Water Supply, accom-
panied us throughout in Victoria, and greatly facilitated the object of the visit.
The works inspected were the Kow Swamp National Works and the Cohuna Victorian works
Works, for diversions from the Murray; and Goulburn National Works, consisting inspected,
of the weir; the Waranga Basin, and channels, for diversion and storage of the
waters of the Goulburn.
The present Victorian storages are the Waranga Basin, the Goulburn Weir, and Victorian storages.
Kow Swamp, with, according to the report of the Victorian Royal Commission on
Murray Waters, 19x0, page Ixx., a capacity of about i0,0h0,000,000 cubic feet.
NATIONAL WORKS.
IV. Kow Swamp. — The head works of these works are situated at a point on Kow Swamp,
the Murray about 50 miles —by river—below Echuca, 616 miles from the South Aus-
txalian border, and 820 miles from Morgan. The works consist of a main off-take
channel from the river and a storage in the Kow Swamp for the supply of non-riparian
lands which were comprised in eight of the recently abolished Trusts, namely,
Macorna North, Kerang East, Marquis’ Hill, Wandella, Gunbower West, South
Kerang, Dry Lake, Kerang Lakes, and Loddon River. (See report Inter-State Com-
mission, 1902, Q. 3834, and Water Supply Commissioner’s Report, 1902, page 6.)
The report of the Victorian Royal Commission of 1910, page xxxv., in an estimate of
possible diversions by proposed and present schemes, assuming that they were
developed, by storage or otherwise, and pushed to their possible extent, gives the
maximum area provided for by the Kow Swamp Works as 200,000 acres, for which Area to be served,
a water duty of 2 feet per annum would be supplied. In 1908-9, 25,578 acres, of
which 15,570 were in pasture and 6,105 f° r cereals, were irrigated. On 17th Sep-
tember, 1904, Mr. Swinburne, in moving the second reading of the Water Acts
Consolidation and Amendment Bill, stated that had been spent upon the
works.
The Gunbower or Macorna main off-take channel, which takes the water from
the river to and beyond the storage, is of 44-ft. bed width, has a sill 5 feet above
the summer level of the river on tlxe gauge at Echuca, a capacity of 40,000 cubic
feet a minute, and takes the water 14 miles to the storage at Kow Swamp, round
which it runs in a semicircle, and thence as the Macorna Channel about 23J miles
to the Loddon at a point about 12 miles south of Kerang, crosses the river by siphon,
and terminates at a point about 44J miles from the head works on the Murray. It
is a straight channel to the storage, which follows in places the improved bed of the
old meandering Gunbower Creek, into which, at Gunbower, about 10 miles from the
river, the water in excess of requirements may be discharged by a regulator, and


thus returned to the Murray at Koondrook. The water diverted is thus either taken
round the storage direct to the points of distribution, or stored at Kow Swamp until
required. The sill of the off-take channel being 5 feet above summer level, no diver-
Diversion possible sion is possible until the water is 5 feet on the Echuca gauge. The full diversion
at sft. on Echuca of 40,000 cubic feet a minute, being 8 feet depth in the channel, is not possible until
gauge> the river is 13 feet on the Echuca gauge. At 5 feet on the gauge the river at that
point discharges 250,000 cubic feet a minute, and, being of a depth of 6 ft. 6 in.,
With weir at any i s navigable for vessels of 5-ft. draught. If, however, the level of the Murray
stage ‘ were raised by a weir, it would be possible to take the maximum volume of which
Weir proposed. the channel is capable at any stage of the river’s flow. The construction of such
a weir has been proposed. Mr. Swinburne, speaking in the House of Assembly,
Mr. Swinburne. Victoria, on 7th September, 1904 {Hansard., page 1427), said —“ We have schemes
by which weirs can be constructed in connexion with Kow Swamp and other works,
and thus save large sums of money. But those schemes are mostly subject to Inter-
State rights. Until these Inter-State rights are settled, however, we have an ample
outlet for all our energies, and for all our spare money in connexion with our own
rivers, which we can control without interfering in any way with the navigability
of the Murray and with any supposed Inter-State rights which may exist.”
Mr. Garson. I n his evidence before the Victorian Commission, Mr. George Garson, civil
engineer, and Commissioner of the State Rivers and Water Supply Commission of
Victoria, recommended (Q.’s 510 and 560) a weir at Kow Swamp Head-works as
a typical part of a locking scheme, to be used as a diversion weir by gravitation.
“ The Kow Swamp Works,” he said, “ have a sill level at 5 feet above summer
level. If you have a weir below the point of off-take you could raise the water and
divert it by gravitation in summer; instead of pumping it as we are doing lower down
at Cohuna and Koondrook you could distribute it from the higher point by gravita-
Mr. Mead. tion. That would be a saving, but Ido not think the places are very numerous where
that could be done.” See also Mr. Elwocd Mead’s evidence (Q. 2173) as to the
oossibilities of increasing diversions by storage and gravity from the Murray.
Gunbowe or P r ° g re s S Q n Xl th or 12th of June (see Argus, 13th June, 19x0) a meeting of the
Gunbower Progress Association was held, at which it was decided to call a meeting
of delegates of all associations in the irrigation districts of Cohuna, Kow Swamp,
and Koondrook to consider the construction of a diversion weir at Torrumbarry, with
a view to irrigation by gravitation. The proposal seems to be to construct the weir
just below the Kow Swamp National Head-works, and to divert water for all dis
tricts supplied from these head-works and the Cohuna Works. It has been stated
that the erection of the weir would enable 10,000 cubic feet per minute to be diverted
for the whole year, and an additional 30,000 cubic feet per minute when the river
was above navigation level if required for filling the Kow Swamp Storage. When
the river is at navigation level for boats drawing 6 ft. 6 in., that is, when it dis-
charges, as mentioned, 250,000 cubic feet a minute at Kow Swamp, the discharge
at Morgan due to the discharge at Kow Swamp, allowing 33 per cent, for loss, would
be 166,000 cubic feet a minute. The conditions are worked out in volume 11. of
The Case for Of inion, page 9. The Kow Swamp Storage has a capacity of
1,780,000,000 cubic feet. The water is sent direct until the river falls to a level
insufficient to give the required supply for irrigation; then the water stored in the
swamp is used. This storage is shallow, and must permit a great waste of water.
At the time of inspection the water was about 3 ft. 6 in. on the Echuca gauge, at
which level it is not possible for any water to enter the channel from the river. It
was stated by Mr. Dethridge that no water had run into the channel since January,
1910.
Mr. A. S. Kenyon, Assistant Engineer for the Water Supply of Victoria, in his
evidence (Q. 3785, Sic.) before the Inter-State Commission of 1902, said that the
Gunbower Creek, before the construction of the Kow Swamp Head-works, would
have enabled as great diversions to take place in high years as the works do now ;
that the water diverted under natural conditions would spread over the country and
be retained by the lakes and branches, and ultimately lost by evaporation, whereas
it is now under control. But he admitted that diversions can now take place at
First diversion 4 feet lower level, at 5 feet instead of 9 feet over summer level. The first diversion
through works, 1893 since the construction of the head-works was in 1893. The dates of first diversions
are important from the point of view of acquiescence or prescription, so far as
applicable.
Two pumping V. The Cohuna Works. — These works are situated about 10 miles by road and
stations at Deep 25 by river, down stream, from the Kow Swamp Head-works. They consist of two
Cree k- pumping stations and the Deep Creek Diversion Channel. At one, the old station,
there are two 30-in. pumps, together capable of pumping 5,000 cubic feet a minute
into a channel into which the river discharges at 9 feet on the Cohuna gauge, which
connects with a gravitation channel. At the time of inspection the water was 2 ft.
9 in. on that gauge. The water may thus be taken direct from the river by means of
sluices at 9 feet above summer level up to a maximum of 13,400 cubic feet a minute,
with 6-ft. depth in the channel, at 16 feet above summer level. At the new station
there are two pairs of pumps, recently erected, each pump of a capacity of 3,000
cubic feet a minute, which discharge into a channel also connecting with the gravita-
tion channel. This is an addition of 12,000 cubic feet a minute to the pumping
power. The channels from the two sets of pumps and the gravitation channel unite
in a main channel for the distribution of the water. Up to the time of the inspection


only a trial use of the new pumps had been made. Below the old pumping works i:)ee P £ at
is the Deep Creek channel, with an inlet by circular tunnel 6 ft. 9 in. in diameter, summer eve •
the sill of which is at summer level of the river on the Echuca gauge, and which is
capable of discharging 200 cubic feet a minute when the river is 1 foot above summer
level, and a maximum of 32,800 cubic feet a minute at 18 feet above summer
level. The bed width of the channel is 10 feet, and the full supply depth in channel
12 feet. The Kow Swamp Head-works and the Cohuna Works are, with the excep-
tion of Mildura, the chief diversion works from the main river. The proposal of
the Gunbower Progress Association appears to be that the Government should construct
a weir to divert by gravitation the water required for the purposes of all these works.
At present the pumps at low stages of the river are used to supply the higher levels
which cannot then be served by gravitation.
Diversions through the Cohuna works have taken place each year since 1890 (In Diversion com-
R.C., page 127, Q. 3782). About 23,985 acres were watered in 1908-9, chiefly for menced m i8 9°-
pasture and cereals.
VI. The Cohuna National Works, comprising as mentioned the pumping stations Diversions at
and the Deep Creek Channel, have been constructed to supply the area, about 98,000 6 °
acres, comprised within the old Cohuna Trust. The Deep Creek is at present the ' 1
only channel for diversion of water at summer level, Tuppal Creek, on the New South
Wales side of the river, being 10 feet above running level, according to Mr. L. A. B.
Wade, Chief Engineer of Irrigation and Drainage, Public Works Department, New
South Wales, who promised to furnish details of that cutting. (Int. Cora. 1902,
Appx. 4). The cutting at the head of Tuppal Creek, which is ni miles from Tuppal Creek.
Tocumwal, said Mr. Wade in his evidence before the Victorian Commission of 1910
(Q.’s 2472, 2473), is purely for the purpose of providing supplies of water down creek
when there is a surplus in the Murray. There is a regulator there. The surplus
water returns to the Murray through the Edward. “It is a high level cutting as it
exists,” said Mr. Wade. “Of course there are places lower down where you could
put a cutting right down to the bed level of the Murray and drain it out.” The
question of such a cutting is being considered by the New South Wales Government.
The levels do not permit such cuttings being made for extensive schemes on the Vic-
torian side; but channels with a weir to raise the level for diversion would enable
diversions to be made at critical times and the riparian interest of down-stream
occupiers, or a State, to be prejudicially affected.
At page xxxvii. of the Victorian Commission the ultimate requirements of the pre-
sent irrigation channels and pumping plants on the Murray and Goulburn when
utilized to their utmost capacity by the addition of storages, additional pumping plant,
and channel extension are given. The possible maximum diversions are stated to be,
for Kow Swamp 20,000,000,000, and for Cohuna 5,700,000,000 cubic feet. It is
not stated whether this estimate includes the additional capacity that would be given
by a weir, but on the strict construction of the terms used it does not. The effect
on down-stream interests, however, depends on the time and volume not on the
total annual volume diverted. The practice of constructing works for diversions at
summer level is one to which objection should be taken. It has been condemned
by Mr. Stuart Murray in a report prepared by him as an officer of the State of Considered such by
Victoria (referred to in volume IT. of The Case, page 9), in which he said that, lctonan 0 lcer-
“ there should be no off-take below the point representing the draught of the largest
vessels ordinarily employed in the river trade.”
From the Cohuna Works we drove to Gunbower, examined the regulating works
to divert the excess water from the Gunbower Channel into the Gunbower Creek, and
returned to Echuca by way of Torrumbarry and Wharparilla.
VII. Next morning we took train to Rochester, on the Campaspe. The line at
passes by the Carilla Estate, of about 33,000 acres, which was recently purchased by ocieser-
the Victorian Government at £4 15s. an acre, for settlement. A third of the acreage
is to be resold for irrigation settlement. Within 2 miles of Rochester the main outlet
channel from the Waranga Basin discharges into three siphons, each of n feet
diameter, and passes into the channel on the other side of the river, from which it
will be taken on completion of the Goulburn scheme across the Loddon, to, if not
beyond, Lake Tyrrell, a distance of about 141 miles from the Waranga Basin. At
present the outlet channel has been constructed only to a point about 15 miles beyond
the Campaspe. The Campaspe, which has an effective catchment area of 970 square
miles, from which, between 1898-1901, the mean annual diversion was 1,033,000,000
compared with 4,135,000,000 from the Goulburn, is one of the rivers the waters of
which were accorded to Victoria by the resolutions of the Inter-State Royal
Commission of 1902 (page 53), and by the unratifien agreements of 1907 and 1908.
Out of a total of 171,997,000,000 cubic feet, being, according to Mr. S. T. Kenyon’s
evidence in 1902, the annual volumes to be reserved for the areas to be irrigated in
Victoria, 13,199.000,000 would be from the Campaspe. At times the river about
Rochester overflows in sudden extensive floods. The earth thrown up in construction
of the outlet channel from the Waranga Basin is heaped in mounds at intervals to
allow the floods to pass without damaging the channel. In negotiations between the Surrender of Cam-
States it would be well to consider whether the surrender of the Campaspe to Victoria, paspe should be
if again suggested and agreed to, should be subject to the condition that storage, to conditional.
the extent that it is possible and economical, of the floodwaters of that river be
provided at the expense of Victoria, so as to lessen the requirements of that State
from waters subject to Inter-State apportionment. It is doubtful whether storage On storage.


would be effective with an average low year discharge of 13,034,000,000 cubic feet
(Victorian River Gaugings, 1905, page 73), and whether a suitable site can be found.
Mr. Dethbridge, in answer to a question, told me that storage could be established
about 30 miles from Rochester, but that floods only occur about once in eight years.
The principle of economical storage is to store normal high flow for the purpose of
increasing the low flow of the same year. The point is mentioned for consideration
in connexion with an issue or agreement between the riparian States.
From Rochester we drove to the Waranga Reservoir.
VIII. The Goulhurn National Works. —The Goulburn, the most important of the
Victorian diversion and storage works, consists of, in the words of the Public Works
Loan Acts, “ a weir in the River Goulburn and channels therefrom on the east and
west side of the river, and a storage reservoir at Waranga Swamp and channel, thence
to the Campaspe, &c.” From the Campaspe the channel will be carried to the Loddon
and possibly to Lake Tyrrell. The area to be supplied within the nine (now abolished)
trusts is 1,407,000 acres, of which the Rodney, the largest trust, comprised 275,000
acres, and 1,230,000 acres will be commanded by the channels. The storage, if
inadequate, which is probable, will be increased. Mr. Stuart Murray “ comes to the
conclusion,” said Mr. Swinburne in 1904 (Victorian Hansard, 1429), “ that we will
be able to find all the water that is required for this area, except in certain years.
It will be necessary to construct other head-works upon the Goulburn, and to make a
connexion with the River Murray when that irrigation district is fully developed, and
the demand for water for the whole area has to be fully met.” The report of the
Commission of 1910 (page Ixxi.) says—‘‘The Victorian departmental, opinion seems
to be that the next work to be proceeded with as a storage is in the Goulburn.” In
an interview published in the Argus of 21st December, 1907, Mr. Elwood Mead,
Chairman of the State Rivers and Water Supply of Victoria, said that large storage
schemes were indispensable, as there were no snow banks to draw upon. At that
time a proposal was being considered to construct between two high hills just below
Trawool railway station, about 10 or 11 miles from Seymour, a dam 1,700 feet long
across the valley and Goulburn, 180 feet high, to give a depth of water at the dam
of r2O feet, an average depth of 60 feet, a water surface covering 25,000 acres, and
send the water back 30 miles. The cost was estimated to be from £1,250,000 to
,■£1,500,000. The works were to supplement the Goulburn Weir and Waranga Basin.
Though the Victorian Ministry were at first favorable to the scheme, it was for the time
abandoned. It may be that such a scheme, with storage on the river and the use of
the river channel for supply, if originally adopted, would have proved much more
effective and involved less waste of water than the works constructed.
Future extensions.
Trawool Dam.
The works.
IX. These works, as stated, consist of a weir across the Goulburn about 8 miles
above Murchison, or about no miles from the Murray; a reservoir known as the
Waranga Basin, about 20 miles to the west of the river; and two channels from the
weir, the western channel, 23J miles in length to the basin, and the eastern channel,
only partly constructed, to deliver water to the areas comprised within the old Shep-
parton and Numurkah Trusts. The contract work for the weir was finished in 1800.
From the basin the main outlet channel known as the Goulburn and Waranga Mallee
Channel, takes the water across, and 15 miles beyond, the Campaspe, with an ultimate
terminal point somewhere about 140 miles from the basin. The basin will also be
tapped by a proposed channel known as the Rodney Channel. We inspected the
Waranga Basin on Monday, 13th June, and the weir on Tuesday. The Waranga
Reservoir or Basin is a large artificial lake, formed by the construction of an embank-
ment 4\ miles long, has a surface area of about 191 square miles, a maximum depth
of 25 feet, and an average depth of 17 feet. In the opinion of a competent authority,
the average depth does not exceed 13 feet. When the basin is full, it will hold
8,600,000,000 cubic feet of water. It is supplied from the weir by the western
channel, which has a capacity of 103,000 cubic feet a minute, a bed width of no
feet, and takes a depth of 7 feet of water. The outlet channel from the basin has
a capacity of 60,000 cubic feet a minute to the Campaspe, and beyond of 40,000
cubic feet a minute. The capacity of the Rodney Channel, referred to as the minor
outlet, is 15,000 cubic feet a minute. The eastern channel from the weir to the
Shepparton and Numurkah Trusts has a diverting capacity of 20,000 cubic feet a
minute. The channels from the weir, . therefore, can take 123,000 cubic feet a
minute; in other words, when the river falls to that discharge, the whole of the river,
less 5,000 cubic feet a minute, the prescribed compensation water, to be allowed to
flow down stream. Such a capacity would enable the whole flow of the Goulburn to
be diverted, during the 20 years, 1885 to 1904 inclusive, for 133 out of 240 months,
being an average of six and a half months a year, and from December, 1901, to
April. 1903 inclusive, with the exception of two short periods. Allowing for 33 per
cent, loss, the diversion would mean about 82,000 cubic feet a minute at Morgan six-
weeks later. Of course the effect at Morgan could only be appreciated when time
and volumes delivered from the Darling and Murrumbidgee are taken into account.
The reservoir is not capacious enough to take the whole of the waters supplied bv
the western channel. It has been proposed to fill it twice a year, making a total
annual storage of 17,200,000,000 cubic feet. This may be modified by the conditions
of storage already and hereinafter referred to. Mr. Dethridge estimated the evapora-
tion at 3 feet. In India it is generally held that seepage is about equal to evaporation.
The evaporation may be more than 3 feet; but, assuming it is not, with seepage, which
for the same class of soil would be as great here as in India, the annual waste would
Weir constructed in
1890.
The Waranga
Reservoir.
Diverting power.
Capacity.
Evaporation.


be 6 feet, or, according to the estimates of average depth, from half to one-third of
the water stored. If, then, the waste of water must be considered in connexion with Waste compared
any scheme of apportionment, or in relation to the reasonableness of the use, the ' Vlth y,A ' lal ' es ‘
waste from the Waranga Basin must be taken into account as well as that from the
South Australian lakes, Alexandrina and Albert. These lakes have a total area of
326 square miles, are seldom more than 2 feet above summer level, or zero on the gauge
at Milang, which is from 7 feet to 10 feet. Evaporation from the lakes in a dry year
has been given as 60 inches. The element of waste affects Victorian artificial storage
only to a less extent than if does the South Australian natural lakes; while, on the
merits, the fact that in Victoria direct storage on the river was available must be
considered.
X. The River Goulburn, which flows into the Murray at a point 880 miles from Discharge.
Morgan, and 676 miles from the South Australian boundary, for the twelve years
ending in 1903, inclusive, had a maximum discharge of 37 per cent., a minimum of
16 per cent., and a mean of 23 per cent, of the discharge at Morgan. The mean
monthly discharge was from 30 per cent, to 70 per cent, in 1884, and 21 per cent, to
62 per cent, in 1887, of that of the Murray at Echuca, which is 10 miles below the
juncfion. The weir across the river has 21 flood-gates, 20 feet apart, making a total Dimensions of weir,
stretch of 400 feet across the river. The water is held up to a height of 40 feet, of
which 7 feet is capable of diversion into the western channel. The weir backs up the
water about 16 miles, and impounds a volume of 670,000,000 cubic feet, with a
surface of 6J square miles. Before the construction of the weir the Goulburn was
navigable to Murchison—about 120 miles from the junction. On the day of our
inspection there were two steamers of about 50 tons each at Nagambie, about 5 or 6
miles above the weir. At Tabilk, about 6 miles from Nagambie, a steamer and barge
passed along the river as the party stopped to inspect a vineyard on the bank.
XI. The water backed up by the weir is tapped half a mile to the east by the
eastern channel, the bed width of which is 20 feet. Of the capacity of 20,000 cubic
feet a minute 3,200 cubic feet will in a short time be drawn upon for irrigation. The
channel may be used for service of, it is said, a considerable area of land capable
of growing fruit and lucerne, and which the Government intends to repurchase for
closer settlement. Repurchase is necessary, and part of the irrigation settlement Repurchase of land
policy. The land—with channels to points for delivery to the settler for irrigation, necessary-
but without grading—will be offered at jQio an acre. The Hon. H. McKenzie
and Mr. Elwood Mead have left for Europe and the United States to explain the
conditions and prospects of settlement, and so induce expert irrigationists to take
up land in the irrigation areas. In his evidence before the Royal Commission of 1910
('Questions 2160 and 2161), Mr. Mead said that the urgent requirement of irrigation
in Victoria is the closer settlement of areas for which water is available ; that at Irrigationists
present it is not more works, but more men, that are needed. Water for irrigating wanted.
250.000 acres from the Goulburn is now available, which Is about 200,000 more than
is now being irrigated. Eventually, when the demand for water for irrigation in the
East Goulburn and South Rodney districts becomes urgent, additional supplies can Additional storages
be obtained by raising the Goulburn weir and the construction of the Tabilk storage. as required.
He thus states the position—“ Before undertaking the construction of any additional
reservoirs on either the Murray or Goulburn, the water now available for irrigation
should be put to use. The State works can supply water for 200.000 acres not now
irrigated. Until this is done these works will be unprofitable, and the great benefits
of irrigation will remain to be proved. The pressing need of the State is to settle
these irrigable areas and bring the surplus -water into use. E'or several years the
State has been vigorously at work extending its works for supplying water. To the
increased diversions from the Murray has been added the water stored at Waranga,
and the large water supplies which will be provided by the reservoir now building at
Pvke’s Creek. A larger water for irrigation requires more people to use it, but in
none of the districts where the supply has been augmented has there been a corre-
sponding increase in the number of irrigators. Practically there has been no increase Ldtle intense
in population in the irrigated area, taken as a whole, although the available water culture present,
supply has been more than quadrupled in the past two years. There was not enough
people in those areas before; there is only a meagre fraction of the number reouired
now. In some districts, like White Cliffs, there are practically no people ; while in
Swan Hill. Cohuna, and Goulburn districts four or five times the present population
must be placed on the land to secure satisfactory results.”
XII. Mr. Mead recognises that the system of large holdings, upon which the Smallholdings
schemes have been hitherto based, violates “ the fundamental requirements of irri- cs ' ,en ia ‘
gated agriculture.” Close settlement and intense cultivation are essential to success.
The State owns only 18,000 acres c*F land supplied with water, and more than half
of that is not at present open to settlement. The subdivision of the balance of the
200.000 acres awaiting settlement must be effected through charges for the water. Rates for water used
whether used or not, and through repurchase and resale. Men of youth and enter- 01 not-
prise, upon whom trust was placed (Question 2164) to test the possibilities ofirrigated
agriculture, have been attracted to other States by opportunities of acquiring large
areas of land at a low price. The older farmers are unwilling to change the methods Older farmers
of years ; so that men with a taste for. and knowledge of, intense cultivation must be “pposed »o change.
induced to immigrate from countries in which the population is more dense and oppor- immigrants
tunities for enterprise are not so many or great. tc Ido not believe,” says Mr. Mead. 1 ■ ! mre
“ the land will be taken up by Australians. The small areas do not satisfy the


passion for land.'’ Hut the present loss of jQ 2,000 a week must be stopped, settlers
obtained from abroad to take up the 200,000 acres available—which is but a small
portion of the irrigable area—and then the area must be extended. “ The existing
provision for irrigation from the Goulburn can certainly be multiplied by three;
though the increase in the storage on the river, and the irrigation on the land which
can be watered by gravity from the Murray, would more than double what we now
irrigate.”
XIII. It appears, then, that a stage has been reached in the development of
Victorian irrigation at which the probability of success or failure may be ascertained.
The result of Mr. McKenzie’s and of Mr. Mead’s mission must afford a basis for a
reasonable estimate of the future development of intense cultivation under Australian
conditions. The settlers on the areas commanded by the channels did not acquiesce
in Mr. Swinburne’s policy of imposing a rate equal to a fifth of the annual value of
their land as a contribution to cost, and appear opposed to the policy of the Amend-
ing Act of this year, which prescribes a charge for water tendered, whether accepted
or not. They evidently consider that with a rainfall of from 21 inches to 23 inches
they can produce payable crops, except in seasons of drought, without breaking with
old ways and recourse to water for which payment must be made; and that rates
and new methods of cultivation are too heavy a premium for insurance against occa
sional failure. The immigrant must have capital, skill, and an inclination to accom-
modate himself to the conditions of settlement in the extensive clayey plains which
make up some of the area commanded by the irrigation channels. Lucerne is at
present the principal crop raised in the Rodney district, which is second in import-
ance to Mildura. “ Dairying with lucerne,” says the Victorian Report (page LVIL),
” to get the best results involves cutting and hand-feeding, and this practice is more
congenial to settlers from older countries of the world than it is to Australians.”
Whether intensive culture for fruit, such as carried on at Renmark and Mildura,
will pay on a large scale, with or without fiscal or other adventitious aid, is some-
what doubtful. The Victorian schemes and projects are extensive, have cost since
initiation in 1886 about of which some of principal and
accumulated interest, had to be written off. “ A large proportion of the
water supplied ” (Victorian Report. 1910. page LVT.) “ is applied to native grass,
which can thirdly be a profitable use.” Irrigation culture is not increasing. Works
for additional sources of water supply have recently been constructed to meet the
possible requirements of available areas, and are being extended as part of the
development policy of other lands.' Substantial diversions have not yet taken place.
The Eastern Channel from the Waranga Basin, as stated, has only been completed,
while the maximum diversions from the Goulburn, the more extensive works, have
not exceeded 30,000 cubic feet a minute. Without accepting the statement that the
experience of Victoria is all we have to guide us in deciding on the prospect of success
or failure under Australian conditions, it may be assumed that the experience of that
State during the next year or two will enable us to better appreciate the significance
of the Inter-State questions involved.
Critical stage
reached.
Crops raised.
NEW SOUTH WALES.
The Murrumbidgee Works.—The Barren Jack Reservoir.
XIV. From Seymour we took train on Tuesday, 14th June, via Albury to Goon-
dah, in New South Wales, where Mr. L. A. B. Wade, Chief Engineer for Irrigation
and Drainage, Public Works Department, New 7 South Wales, met us and accom-
panied us to Barren Jack by the 2-ft. gauge railway built for the purpose of the
works. The w r orks are being constructed under an Act of 1906 “to sanction the
construction of a dam across the Murrumbidgee River at Barren Jack, a movable
diversion w 7 eir across the Murrumbidgee River about 19 miles in a direct line about
Narrandera, a main canal from near the diversion weir, a series of branch and
sidiary distributing and drainage channels, together with other works connected there-
with, and for purposes consequent and incidental thereto.” The waters of the Mur-
rumbidgee are to be stored at Barren Jack and released as required for the irrigation
of areas beyond Narrandera, about 220 miles down stream. The scheme is referred
to in the report of the Parliamentary Standing Committee on Public Works, 1906,
as. by reason of its magnitude and importance, marking an epoch in the history of
New South Wales. The schedule to the Act, No. 46 of 1906, describes the works
now being constructed thereunder as—
“ t. A rubble concrete dam across the Murrumbidgee River at Barren Jack, in
the parishes of West Goodradigbee and Childowla, in the counties of Buccleuch
and Harden, to retain a supply of water to a reduced top level of 1,180 feet above
high water mark, Sydney, together with by-washes, sluices, valves, and all other
necessary works for the storage and delivery of water.
“2. A diversion weir across the Murrumbidgee River about 19 miles in a direct
line above Narrandera, with movable wickets, sluices, and other works necessary for
the diversion of a supply of water,
“ 3- A main canal from the diversion weir, with branch and subsidiary distribut-
ing and drainage channels to Gunbar and Hay, with regulators, crossings, escapes,
sluices, pipes, and other works necessary for the supply and distribution of water for
irrigation, stock, and domestic purposes
“ 1 he whole to be subject to such variations and modifications as may be con-
sidered desirable by the constructing authority.”
The Act.
The scheme.


The irrigation of two large areas respectively on the northern and the southern
hanks of the river below Narrandera is contemplated; but though the works to Nar-
randera are being constructed for the purposes of both, the development of the
northern area, and of that only about 107,000 acres, which is about half what the
river when regulated by the works will serve, is to be attempted for the present.
The policy may be to extend irrigation in the northern areas, and abandon the
southern; but extension beyond 204,000 acres depends on additional storage, which,
of the capacity of the Barren Jack Reservoir, can be effected on the Tumut, a river ri, e Tumut.
which at Gundagai, the point of confluence of the two rivers, has a volume of flow
practically as great as that of the Murrumbidgee, and rising near Kosciusko, being
fed by the winter snow in summer months, has then a steadier flow than the Murrum-
bidgee. It has been suggested (see Sydney Morning Herald , 7th December, 1907) Suggested dam
that a dam below the junction of the Murrumbidgee and Tumut would give twice be '‘ ow Junction-
the storage of the Barren Jack. Under the,present scheme (in the northern areas)
a maximum of 60,000 cubic feet a minute is to be diverted from the river into the
main canal at the weir about 19 miles above Narrandera. During the irrigating
season a full Barren Jack would supply double that volume (Mr. Wade’s evidence,
Victorian Commission, Question 2365, &c.). But irrigation will not start before Sep-
tember, 1911 ; by 1912 about a tenth, and each succeeding year an additional tenth, of
the 60,000 cubic feet a minute will be used. Then, if anticipation be realized, the
volume diverted will be half that required to maintain navigation for boats of moderate
draught, or give 4 feet on the gauge at Hay (Question 2385). Without locks a com-
pensation water 18,000 cubic feet a second would be useless for navigation. It can
be shown from published diagrams that if the full capacity of the reservoir, less
compensation water, be used, navigation will be stopped for several months in many
years. Five feet on the gauge at Hay means a discharge of 180,000 cubic feet a minute.
It is easy to see the effect on navigation of a diversion at Narrandera of 60,000 cubic
feet a minute. The policy is thus stated by Mr. Wade (Question 2364) —“ The present
scheme under construction on the north side of the Murrumbidgee below Narrandera
provides for a canal with a capacity of 1,000 cubic feet per second. When that
scheme is being developed to its full extent it will become a question for decision as
to whether it will be enlarged to carry double the quantity, that is, 2,000 cubic feet
per second, or whether an additional canal will be constructed to deal with the south
side of the river. In my opinion, it will be entirely a question of the experience
gained during the next ten years as to whether it will be desirable to spread that
water over an area of land on both sides of the river, or to concentrate the whole of
it on the very high-class land which we know does exist on the north side. But there
is no proposal at the present time regarding it, and it will be entirely a question of
experience as we go along with the present scheme.”
The departmental estimate of the scheme is the following :
Total Cost of Storage and Canal.
Storage ... ... ... ... ...
Main canal ... ... ... ... ... 340,904
Main distributing ... ... ... ... 138,104
Weir and regulator, Bundidgerry Creek ... ... 35,000
Main distributaries and laterals ... ... ... 250,000
,£1,574,008
L«ss half the cost of storage debited to southern
part of scheme
405,000
;£1,169,000
XV. The dam is being constructed across the Murrumbidgee in a deep granite The dam.
gorge at a point about 3 miles below the confluence, in the valley, of that river and
the Goodrabidgee. The site is eminently suitable for the purpose, as there the hills
forming the gorge are of granite, rise to a height of about 3,000 feet, and at the
level of 244 feet from the bed, to which it has been decided to build the dam, are
only a quarter of a mile apart. The ranges thus form a great natural retaining wall,
impervious to water. When in July, 1913, the dam is finished the reservoir at the
200-ft. level, or 1,180 feet over sea-level, will have a capacity of 33,380,000,000
cubic feet, being about half the annual volume, 61,000,000,000 cubic feet of the
natural flow and storage then reaching the diversion weir above Narrandera. Of
course, the volumes and times of delivery will be then largely controlled through the
storage. When the present northern irrigation scheme is fully developed, the
delivery from storage and natural flow will probably be 120,000 cubic feet a minute
during the irrigating season, from September to March inclusive; 30,000 cubic feet
a minute from June to August inclusive, for a supply to the Yanko Creek on the
south side of the Murrumbidgee below Narrandera; and 18,000 cubic feet a minute
past the diversion weir as compensation water down stream. The water will be
dammed back on the Murrumbidgee 41 miles, 15 miles on the Goodrabidgee, and on
the Yass, an arm of the storage, 25 miles. The surface area of the retained water
will be about 20 square miles, about the same as that of the Waranga Basin; but
the waste of water must be much less from the Barren Jack Reservoir than from the The Barren Jack
Waranga Basin, as the depth and capacity are many times greater in the case of Waranga
the one than of the otfier. It is unnecessary for present purposes to do more than compared 5


refer in outline to the site and capacity of the reservoir. Storage water will be
delivered for irrigation in September, 1911, by which time the dam will have been
constructed to a height of 70 feet, and hold up 1,086,272,000 cubic feet of water.
The diversion weir XVI. We left the Barren Jack on Thursday, 16th June, at 1 a.m., and pro-
at Barren Jack. ceeded by Gundah, Cootamundra, and Junee to Grong Grong, and thence 11 miles
by trap to Berrembed, at the head of the Bundidgerry Creek, a branch of the Murrum-
bidgee, the site of the weir and regulator, about 19 miles above Narrandera. There
the level is more suitable than at any place lower down, and, as the river crosses
a wide granite bar, the foundation is good. The weir consists of Chanoine shutters
for a stretch of 165 feet, and two stony sluices of 40 feet each, one the lock chamber,
the other to run off the water when not diverted at the regulator to the canal which
runs from the river just at the opening of this sluice, and in places keeps to the bed
The lock. of the creek. The navigation lock is 140 feet long, 40 feet wide, and 40 feet high
from water level to the opening gear. The weir, according to Mr. Simmons, the
engineer in charge of the works, will hold the water up to about 15 feet; but the
The cost. plans should give the lift more definitely. The original estimate of the cost of
the weir and regulator was In the Murrumbidgee Northern Water Supply
Other weirs and Irrigation Bill, 1905, to enable Robert Gibson to construct similar works at
I,ropose * Barren Jack and near Narrandera, provision (clause 3) was made for the con-
struction of three other weirs—one near Maude, a second near the junction of
the Lachlan and Murrumbidgee rivers, and a third near Balranald—for the purpose
of raising the level of the Murrumbidgee, and thus permitting flooding an area
of 1,250 square miles, or about 800,000 acres- The clause was struck out by the
Select Committe to which the Bill was referred. The Bill was subsequently opposed
bv the Government and shelved. As a member, for New South Wales, of the Com-
mission that drafted the Inter-State Agreement for 1907, Mr. 1.. A. B. Wade told
me that two weirs, of which the weir at Berrembed is one, would (probably) be
constructed on the Murrumbidgee as part of the Supply Works. Clause 42 of the
Draft Agreement applies to such weirs as may be constructed below Hay, and to
any similar work that may be constructed on the Murray by the State of South Aus-
tralia before the completion of the general scheme of ilnter-State locking. It
reads —“ If any of the Contracting States before the completion of the works pre-
paration of the general scheme referred to in clause thirty-three hereof construct
weirs dams locks or other works on the Murray River and its tributaries within the
limits aforesaid in accordance with draft designs and estimates approved by the Com-
mission and at the places indicated by the Commission such works or any portion
thereof from time to time when the Commission determines that they have become
effective as part of the general scheme shall be taken as works under such general
scheme and be vested in the Commission.
“ Upon such determination the Contracting States other than the State by which
such works have been constructed shall pay to such last-mentioned State in the
proportion set out in clause forty-four hereof their respective shares of the then value
for the purposes of the general scheme of such works and thereafter shall contribute in
the proportions set out in clause forty-four hereof towards the cost of the maintenance
thereof for the purposes of the general scheme.
“ In default of agreement between the Contracting States such value shall be
determined by the Commission.”
In his evidence before the Parliamentary Standing Committee, 1906 (Q. 14417),
Mr. L. A. B. Wade mentions that if the Inter-State Agreement were ratified the lower
Murrumbidgee would be locked as far as Hay, and thus 18.000 cubic feet a minute
of the 30,000 cubic feet a minute compensation water then proposed released for
irrigation purposes.
The off-take canal. The main canal from the weir at Berrembed has a bed width of 50 feet to the
Experimental Farm at Yanko, below Narrandera. about 40 miles from the weir,
and. except in a few places, is constructed to that point. The Gunbar branch, of
47-ft. bed width, is being constructed to Gunbar. 75 miles from the regulator at
Oak Creek, above Narrandera : and the branch to Hav —not yet commenced, and to
be used chieflv for stock purposes—is to be constructed. The capacity of the main
channel, as stated, is 60,000 cubic feet a minute. On Thursday, from Grong Grong,
and Fridav, from Narrandera. we inspected the main channel in places from the
Sir Samuel weir to the farm. From Narrandera it passes through Sir Samuel McCaughey’s
McCaughey’s station 14 Yanko Station, too. coo acres, of which an area of 50.000 is irrigable and
t 7.000 under irrigation for lucerne. Sir Samuel at present has two pumps, each
about 2 feet in diameter, for diverting water from the Murrumbidgee. He also
pumps from Cudgel Creek, an anabranch of the Murrumbidgee on the north side,
and will be supplied from the main channel through a regulator constructed about
2 miles from Narrandera.
On 30th May. too s. an agreement, determinable bv six months’ notice, was
entered into between the Honorable Charles Lee, Minister for Works. New South
Wales, and Samuel McCaughev. bv which the Government, in view of the length
of time to be occupied in completing the Barren Jack scheme, undertook to construct
at Oak Creek temporary works and nortkan of the permanent work to enable Sir
Cudgel Creek. Samuel to use the water reaching of its own flow and flowing into Cudgel Creek.
(See Evidence. Parliamentary Standing Committee. N.S.W., O. 373.) The level
of the outflow bed of the creek is 7 feet above summer level, so that before the works
pumping, under licence, was necessary when the river fell below that level.


The area commanded is on the south side of the canal, the levels on the north Area to be irrigated,
side being unsuitable, and comprises 196,000 acres of first class land, 162,000 acres
of second class land —a total of 358,000 acres —to one in acres of which the canal
is capable of supplying water. The land is good, of reddish loam, may be pur-
chased at from jQ 2 to an acre within 30 or 40 miles of Narrandera; and further
along the canal, where it is marked on the plan as first class, at about £1 10s. an
acre. It is intended to cut 10,000 acres of the best land into blocks of 20 acres Blocks,
each for intense cultivation, and the remaining area into blocks of 80 acres each
for mixed farming—for growing fodder on one part and running stock on the other.
The 196,000 acres of first class land would thus give 2,600 blocks, or sufficient to Quality of land.
carry a population of 25,000 persons. Mr. L. A. B. Wade thinks the first class
lands to be dealt with much superior, and the second class equal, to the average of
the Goulburn Valley, and on the whole equal to the very best lands for irrigation
in the United States. Departmental experts think that the light, reddish, sandy loam.
to which the irrigation should be confined, as far as possible, is about the easiest
of all to work under irrigation. The climate is healthy, pleasant, and eminently
suitable, so that settlers should obtain, under agreeable conditions, the maximum
of results at the minimum of expenditure. (See Report, Parliamentary Standing
Commission, pages 30-31.) The principle of rating irrigable land, whether the water
is taken or not, is to be followed. To each acre will be apportioned an acre-foot
of water, for which a charge of ss. will be made. For the purpose an Administration Administration.
Bill has been prepared, and may be introduced during the present session of the
New South Wales Parliament. The compulsory charge—though essential to financial Deterrent charges,
success —may check settlement at first, as men who realize what has been done
through dry farming in other parts of Australia under conditions of soil and rainfall
not much more favorable may be disinclined to take up blocks subject to rates for
water until the advantages of irrigation are clearly shown. But the rainfall, though
no greater in parts of South Australia where good crops are raised, is better distributed
for the purposes of farming. The impression, however, may be correct that in some
of the areas to be offered for irrigated culture in both New South Wales and Vic-
toria dry farming may be made profitable. Such an impression may have contributed
to the comparative failure up to the present of the policy of irrigation settlement ir.
Victoria.
XVII. The Honorable Thomas Price, the then Premier of South Australia, pro- I’ratests by South
tested to the Honorable J. H. Carruthers, then Premier of New South Wales, Australia -
against the contract, and proposed works thereunder, on yth June, 1905, by telegram,
and on 18th July, 1905, by letter. (See Docket No. 14 of 1905.) The protest by
letter applied also to the introduction and consideration of the Murrumbidgee
Northern Water Supply and Irrigation Bill (1905) to confer certain rights on Robert
Gibson in relation to the waters of the Murrumbidgee. On 4th November, a protest
by letter, confirming one of 3rd November by telegram, was made against “the
authorization and construction by the State of New South Wales of any works for
the purpose qf obstructing or diverting the waters of the Murray or its tributaries
in violation of the rights and interests of the State of South Australia and its
residents.” A desire was nevertheless expressed “ for a friendly settlement that will
recognise the reasonable requirements, and co-ordinate the desirable development
schemes, of all the States, and reconcile, to the greatest extent possible, the interests
of navigation and irrigation.”
The Minister for ’Works (Mr. Lee) in moving the resolution for reference of
the Bill to the Parliamentary Standing Committee, referred to “ protests by South
Australia, and said that he did not blame Victoria for ignoring them.”
Mr. J. Davis, M. Inst. C.E., in his evidence in August, 1905, before a Select
Committee on the Gibson Bill, in answer to Mr. Bruce Smith, counsel for certain
interests, said that New South Wales could not do better than follow the example of
Victoria—go on until stopped.
Mr. L. A. B. Wade then argued that State rights were involved. In his written
statement to the Parliamentary Standing Committee, Mr. Davis said—“ Regarding
any objection raised by the South Australian Government to the work now before the
Committee, I need only say that the site of Barren Jack Dam is no less than 760
miles from the confluence of the Murrumbidgee and Murray Rivers, and the country
to be irrigated 5 00 miles away from the same spot 7 and if such an objection is
regarded as logical, it must be held to apply to the whole catchment areas of the
Murrumbidgee, Murray, and Darling Rivers, extending as the latter does beyond
Charleville and Warwick, in Queensland, in so far as dealing with the water is
concerned. Such a contention, if allowed, would mean that New South Wales, which
State owns nearly the whole of the three main rivers converging into the Murray
of South Australia, is to be debarred from using its natural water, upon which the
settlement and prosperity of the people in the mother State so largely depend.”
Ihe Premier of New_ South Wales, in replying (November, 1905) to the com-
munications of the Premier of South Australia, said that while appreciating the
anxiety of South Australia, and thinking that an understanding would remove all
grounds of complaint or protest, the State of New South Wales contended that it
was simply asserting its reasonable right to the use of the water for the greatest
purpose for which nature intended it, and intended to maintain its right with all its
constitutional power.


Victoria has not admitted the grounds of the protests by this State. The position
it assumes, possibly with diminishing confidence in its soundness, seems to be stated
by Mr. Irvine, as Premier of that State, in his letter of 28th January, 1903, to the
then Premier of South Australia (vol. I. of “ Case for Opinion,” pages 87-89),
when he contends that an up-stream State without regard to the effect upon the
interests of Other States, or on navigation, is entitled to divert for conservation and
irrigation, riparian or non-riparian, the whole of the waters of the tributaries of an
Inter-State stream (if not of the main stream itself) as long as the use is not wasteful
and extravagant. Though this contention may be inconsistent with the statement of
Mr. Swinburne in moving, as Minister, the second reading of the Wafers Acts Con-
solidation and Amendment Bill 1905 ( Hansard , page 363), that (as between the
riparian owners of a State) “ it seems impossible for any one to argue that the rains
and waters that fall upon our mountains and hills should be the property of the land
through which they flow,” it must be regarded in the light of events as being the
position still maintained by that State. The report of the Victorian Royal Commis-
sion of 1910 (page 12) does not materially, if at all, qualify the position, the
Ministers of the Commission being “ only influenced by the legal difficulties in the
situation to the extent of basing upon them the necessity for an amicable arrangement
between the States in the interests of future sound development in the Murray basin.”
Victorian position
COMPARISON OF THE WORKS OF VICTORIA
AND NEW SOUTH WALES.
XVIII. It may be inferred from this outline of some of the facts that the
economy of water is less, or —to apply a test suggested* by, without admitting the
soundness of, the Victorian position—the use comes nearer to being “ wasteful and
extravagant ” in Victoria than in New South Wales. The Barren Jack Dam will be
deep and retentive. The Waranga Reservoir is comparatively shallow, and appears
Waste of Water. to be more liable to losses through seepage and evaporation. Assuming annual
fillings, for the same area of water surface, the one gives more than four times the
storage of the other. The report of the Inter-State Commission of 1902 (page 16)
speaks of the great waste under the Victorian practice, which it refers to as being
faulty in respect of economical and effective use of water. George Garson, then
engineer of the Waranga Waterworks Trust, in his evidence before the Commission
of 1902 (page 70), stated that “ it was desirable to bring the channels into the most
effective state possible, and that 50 per cent, of the loss might be saved by effective
use of the water.” William Hector, then engineer for .the Rodney Irrigation and
Water Supply Trust, stated (page 75) that from 40 per cent, to 50 per cent, of the
water was lost by evaporation and seepage, and that it was possible to greatly
diminish the loss by lining the channels with an impermeable material. The impres-
sion formed during the visit of inspection was that the channels still permit of avoid-
able waste. It is admitted in the report of the Victorian Commission of 1910 (page
56) that “ a large proportion of the water used is applied to native grass, which can
hardly be called a profitable use ”; but as the policy to be furthered is intense cul-
tivation, this may be changed. As irrigation from the great works has not yet
commenced in New South Wales, only the Victorian methods are dealt with. The
opinion expressed as to the greater suitability of the land for irrigation in New South
Wales seems to an extent supported by the Victorian Report (page 36). Then,
with an 18-in. rainfall (Int. Com., 1902, Question 2241) in the Rodney, the largest
Victorian district, irrigation cultivation, though it may give the best results, and
assures produce, if not markets, is not essential to production. Such considerations,
which are overlooked by those who object to the waste from the South Australian
lakes under natural conditions, affect the merits of the Inter-State question.
Definition of rights, XIX. In view of the fact that the policy of the two upper States, and of Vic-
&c., desirable. toria in particular, is to push on works for diversions, while denying, or not admit-
ting, the right of South Australia to protest, it is in the interests of this State
that an agreement should he entered into or a declaration of mutual rights obtained.
I see no reason to qualify the arrangements and conclusions contained in Vol. I. and
summarized in Part XVII. of the Case for Opinion, or the opinions expressed by
counsel (the Hon. Sir Josiah Symon, K.C., the Hon. I. A. Isaacs, K.C., and
myself) in March, 1906, on the facts stated in the case. Decisions of the American
Courts since 1906 tend to strengthen the conclusions then come to. But in the appli-
cation for the first time of certain legal principles to the relations of States, especially
after great expenditure has been incurred and settlement developed by a State against
whom proceedings are taken, Courts of Justice, consciously or unconsciously, may be
affected by considerations of expediency, such as the far-reaching effect of an injunc-
tion upon extensive irrigation interests which may have grown up. Kansas v. Colorado,
206, U.S.R., affirms the principle of Inter-State rights upon which the opinions pre-
Principle of viously expressed were based. The principle of reasonable use was declared to be
enforceable o** 0 ** applicable to and capable of being enforced between States, but under the special
circumstances of that case, which included the absence of evidence of material injury,
and of an allegation that navigation was obstructed, an injunction was refused, with-
out prejudice to the right to apply again when the substantial interests of Kansas
were being injured to the extent of destroying equitable apportionment. The com-
parative development and capability of development of the two States was to an
extent taken into account, the Court being of opinion that before “at the instance
of a sister State this effective cause (irrigation) of Colorado’s development is destroyed


and materially interfered with, it should be made clear that such sister State has jiot
merely a technical right, but also a right with a corresponding benefit.” But the Principle to be
principle of equal rights on which the Court would act was clearly stated by Mr. applied between
Justice Brewer (at page 102-3), when he said that the local law of Kansas declared States,
that the use must be reasonable under all the circumstances, and exercised with due
regard to the equal right of every other riparian owner. “As Kansas thus recognises
the right of appropriating the waters of a stream for the purposes of irrigation sub-
ject to the condition of an equitable division between the riparian proprietors, she
cannot complain if the same rule is administered between herself and a sister State.
And this is especially true when the waters are, except for domestic purposes, prac-
tically useful only for purposes of irrigation.” A State, if at all affected by laches, Delay,
is not estopped by delay not amounting to acquiescence. Even acquiescence in “ the
proceedings of a city in carrying out in an Inter-State stream a system of sewerage
likely to become a nuisance, has not prevented an injunction to restrain being
granted.” (See Missouri v. Illinois, 180 U.S., at 246, and English cases therein
cited.) Still, it is not safe to wait many years after the construction of works for
substantial injury to down-stream settlement before applying for an injunction or
declaration of right. Protection against infringement, it must be remembered, does
not depend on substantial damage, though in the absence of such damage the Supreme
Court of the United States, as in Kansas v. Colorado, refused to go beyond a declara-
tion of right. The fact that the lower proprietor will suffer but small damage from
a proposed diversion has not in all cases been held a reply to an application for an
injunction. “ That a diversion of a watercourse without actual injury to a riparian
owner down stream legally imports damages, because it is an infringement of a right,
is a doctrine powerfully sustained by American authorities.” (Angell in Watercourses,
section 135.) Delay has been considered in determining whether an injunction should
be granted even when applied for by the Attorney-General on behalf of the public.
In a recent case an application by the Attorney-General for a mandatory injunction
was refused on the ground of the length of time which had elapsed without objection
or complaint. (Attorney-General v. Grand Junction Canal Company, 2 ch., 1909,
page 505.) Protests, as stated, have been made by this State, whose legal position
should not be prejudiced by the fact that in the absence of substantial damage, it
has delayed applying for protection to the Courts. But in view of the magnitude
of interests affected when the up-stream irrigation schemes are in full operation,
indefinite delay in obtaining a working agreement with the other States, or, in default,
a judicial declaration of right, is undesirable. It will be noticed that in the report
of the Inter-State Commission of 1902 the conservation of existing, and especially of
unchallenged, interests, is advanced as a principle of settlement, and is adopted as
basic for both irrigable works and navigation, by the report of the Victorian Com-
mission, 19x0 (page 30). Mr. Stuart Murray, in his report of 1910 to the South
Australian Minister of Public Works, regards it as essential to a satisfactory settle-
ment.
The legaj position is exhaustively dealt with in Vol. I. of the case, and the
opinions of counsel.
XX. It follows from what has been said that the practical difficulty of deciding a g ree ment
what is (not what is not) a reasonable use between States, a difficulty which an In- desirable,
junction will not altogether remove, makes an adjustment by agreement desirable.
The report of “ The Inter-Colonial Irrigation Commission, 1908,” of South Africa,
where similar questions have arisen on a smaller scale, states, on a reading of Inter-
colonial decisions, the Common Law of reasonable use on lines generally applicable,
in the opinion of counsel, to the relation of the Australian States. “In deciding
what is a reasonable use” (page 56) “ the Court will take into consideration all the
circumstances of the riparian farms, the position of the farms, their
e*ent, the extent of the arable land, and the extent of the river frontage, &c.” But
it points out (page 70) that “ one of the greatest practical difficulties in the administra-
tion of our law is to determine what is a reasonable user ”; that for thousands of
vears (page 77) the ablest legal minds have tried to minimize this difficulty, and the
best of Courts of our time have got no nearer to the solution than the Roman jurists
of the early. Christian centuries.” This, the report says, is not due “to the in-
definiteness of the legal definitions,” but to the application of them. An injunction,
or a declaration of right, would, of course, compel an upper State to enter into an
equitable arrangement for the exercise of riparian rights and the maintenance (and
improvement) of navigation; but a fair agreement may still be possible without the
compulsion of law.
XXL The report of the Victorian Commission (page 73) recommends that Storage,
an agreement should be arrived at between the States “ with regard to the regulation
and use of the Murray River and certain of its tributaries.” Though the suggested
terms of the agreement cannot be accepted, they may, as containing the latest Victorian
position, facilitate negotiations. The necessity for increased storage is referred to. Victorian S u c
The increase of the Goulburn storages by Victoria and the construction of storage above tions° rian SUggC *
Albury, probably at Cumberoona, by New South Wales and Victoria, is recommended;
and that, as far as not inconsistent with irrigation development, the stored water be
used towards maintenance of transportation facilities for localities which now have
them only by river, and do not hereafter obtain them by railway construction. When
the natural flow of the river is re-enforced by available water from storages, and is
insufficient to supply irrigation requirements, and at the same time navigation, to me
extent mentioned, a scheme, it is said, should be proposed and carried out by the
States to secure suitable transportation facilities and means of communication, whether


by land or water, for localities on the Murray and Murrumbidgee deprived of such
facilities and means. “In settling such terms the principle of payment in accordance
with benefit received shall be observed.” At the same time, the Commissioners
“ venture to think that the prophecy of the 1902 Commission, that portions of the
river would ‘ eventually be locked ’ must rank with some of those utterances that
Greek history associates with the oracle of Delphi ” (page Ixii.). The burden of the
report is the iparamountcy of irrigation, and, subject to that, the conditional improve-
ment of navigation by other means than locking. The incidental report of H. L.
Wilkinson, M.C.E., on the improvement of the Murray River and its tributaries for
navigation (Appendix B), dwells upon the advantages of an open river for navigation,
and the possibility of insuring, by means of storage in the Upper Murray, a plentiful
supply of water for irrigation and, subject to that, for navigation. He refers to the
fact that the Barren Jack storage for years to come will have a surplus for navigation;
that navigation is improved in other countries by release of stored flood waters; and
concludes by saying that if there is not to be any great increase in diversions, large
up-river storages will greatly improve navigation; if there is, additional storages would
have to be built. This branch of the question is dealt with in Mr. Labatt’s report
of 21st July, 1905, on the resolutions of the Premiers’ Conference at Hobart that year.
What is lacking, and should be supplied, is a report by engineers representing
the three States, as to the possibility of the requirements of both irrigation and naviga-
tion being permanently met, or as to the extent to which they may be met, by storage.
Mr. L. A. B. Wade told me that the Barren Jack will be inadequate for irrigation;
that they can only store the discharge of the flood period for the supply of the low
period of the same year; and that when in full operation the storage will not help
navigation. Apparently, it will at first improve navigation, and afterwards injure or
destroy it. Mr. Wilkinson (Report page 127) admits that reservoirs at Cumberoona
and Barren Jack would diminish the supply to the Lake Victoria storage in low flood
years. He doubts the estimates of cost and the efficiency of the Lake Victoria works
to be provided under the agreement of 1908, and recommends the construction of works
at a cost of instead of the works contemplated by the agreement at an
expenditure of for the purposes of that storage. Mr. Stuart Murray, on
the other hand, thinks that the latter works should be constructed; that it is super-
fluous to dwell upon the advantage that would accrue from the provision in a dry
season of this volume from Lake Victoria. The Commission of 1902 recommended
the construction of storage reservoirs at Cumberoona and Lake Victoria at the cost of
the three States, while the Victorian Commission is unable to express an opinion as
to when they should be constructed. The earlier report stated that all proposals for
storage and other works intended to serve the interests of more than one State, and
the apportionment of the cost thereof, should be investigated by the Inter-State Com-
mission to be appointed. Mr. Stuart Murray, who was a member of the Commission
of 1902, in his report of 1910 (paragraph 37) says that, in the event of sufficient
storage not being found in this State, an agreement for joint storage should be entered
into with the other States. At present there seems to be no clear or reliable information
as to the possibility of providing by storage sufficient for the permanent requirements
of both irrigation and navigation. It would be well to have this important point
definitely determined by the engineers of the three States. Experts should be in a
position to furnish, without delay, a joint report upon the following points :
1. The effect of the existing, proposed, and possible storages upon the flow
of the Murray and its tributaries.
2. Whether, and to what extent, the requirements of both irrigation and
navigation can be met by storage. It may be found that for years storage will
maintain, or maintain and extend, navigation, and that afterwards —when irriga-
tion schemes have been developed—it will prove inadequate for both purposes.
In that event, storage to the extent economically possible, supplemented by locking
when and where required, may furnish a basis of agreement between the States.
3. The areas of riparian land in each State that can be developed economically
by irrigated culture. Each State could supply the particulars for consideration
by the engineers in connexion with the question of storage. Mr. L. A, B. Wade
told me, during the inspection of the Barren Jack works, that reliable information
in detail upon this point could be obtained, and is essential to accurate estimates
of the possibilities, extent, and cost of storage.
P. McM. GLYNN.


The State Rivers and Water Supply Commission,
Melbourne, 20th January, 1911.
Memo, for the Honorable the Premier.
RE REPORT BY HON. P. McM. GLYNN ON THE MURRAY RIVER AND ITS
TRIBUTARIES—THE MURRUMBIDGEE AND THE GOULBURN.
The report of Mr. Glynn gives an interesting account of the principal diversion and storage works,
and the details seem generally to correspond with those in the possession of this State.
After a description of the principal works in both New South Wales and Victoria, Mr. Glynn
states (page 9): —
“It is in the interests of this (S.A.) State that an agreement should be entered into or a
declaration of mutual rights obtained.”
By the last expression it is plumed Mr. Glynn means an appeal to law.
Mr. Glynn (page 10) still maintains that South Australia is in a strong legal position, but admits
that a strictly legal view may be varied to some extent by the Courts through the fact that works (such
as irrigation works) are in existence, and for this reason Mr. Glynn urges early action on the part of his
State so that its legal rights will not be jeopardised by new works of diversion in the upper States.
Mr Glynn (page 11) concurs in the recommendation of the Mackinnon Commission that an
agreement should be entered into, and while not accepting the terms of the agreement therein proposed,
considers that these may be the subject of negotiation.
But what seems at the present juncture the most important part of Mr. Glynn’s statement is his
suggestion (page 11) that, presumably before an agreement is entered into, a report should be prepared
by engineers representing the three States on :
1. The effect of the existing proposed and possible storages on the flow of the Murray and its
tributaries.
2. Whether, and to what extent, the requirements of both irrigation and navigation can be
met by storage.
3. The areas of riparian land in each State that can be developed economically by irrigated
culture.
This, to a great extent, is what is suggested in the memorandum read by yourself at the opening of
the Conference, and if Mr. Glynn’s views in this respect are shared by the other South Australian
representatives there should be no objection to adopting the suggestions put forth in the memorandum
referred to.
WM. CATTANACH,
20.1.1911.
By Authority ; J. Kemp, Government Printer, Melbourne.




’Area 5 acres. *
v . Lock Site: N? 2


