

REPORT
OX THE
PROPOSED IMPROVEMENT
OF THE
p REY '"I IYER.




It
10




REPORT
ON THE
PROPOSED IMPROVEMENT
OF THE
jGrREY River,
E. O. MORIARTY, M.A., M. Inst. C.E.,
ENGINEER-IN-CHIEF FOR HARBOURS AND RIVERS, N,S,W,
S. T, LEIGH & Co., HUNTER STREET.
1874.




TO HIS WOESHIP W. F. SMITH, ESQ.,
MAYOB OF GEEY MOUTH.
Sir,
In attention to your request that I should
u Examine and report upon the best plan of improving
the bar and entrance of the Grey Eiver, and fixing
the channel in a permanent position, and to show by
what means a maximum depth of water can be main-
tained from the entrance, from deep sea water, to the
full extent of the present wharf accommodation—
the report to be accompanied by plans and estimates
of the cost.” I now do myself the honor to report as
follows: —
I have made a very careful examination of the
channel and banks of the river from the “ Gorge,”
above the Town, to its embouchure; and have caused
soundings to be taken to ascertain the depths of water
available for vessels lying at the wharves, or navigating
the channel approaching it.
I have also examined the bar and the beaches for
some distance on each side of the entrance of the
river, and have caused numerous soundings to be taken
on the bar, and as close into the surf on either side of
it, as it was considered safe t© venture with the steamer.
I havq likewise made myself acquainted with the
various changes which have taken place from time to


time on the bar, and at the river’s month, since the
settlement of the place—as they have been described
by Capt. Allardice, the Harbour Master, and other
persons who would seem to have given close attention
to the subject—and are shown on the very interesting
plan, recording those changes, which has been compiled
in the Survey Office, and which, taken in conjunction
with the reports as to the condition of the bar at the
different periods at which those surveys were made,
justify me, I think, in stating that I have acquired
sufficient acquaintance with the natural features and
peculiarities of the place, to warrant my arriving at an
opinion as to the measures that should be undertaken
for the improvement of the Port.
The soundings on the bar and on the adjacent
banks, as well as those inside the river from the entrance
to the upper part of the wharf, are shown on the accom-
panying general plan. The changes which have taken
place on the banks within the river and on the shingle
spits on either side of its entrance from 1865 to 1873,
are also shown on the accompanying plan, which has
been partly compiled from one in the office of the
Survey Department.
The Grey is a torrent river which, taking its rise
in the lofty and precipitous ranges of mountains of the
Southern Alps, has a very rapid descent to the sea,
and is subject after heavy rains, or from the melting
of the snows, or from both combined, to sudden floods
of great height and force, and the velocity of the stream
in its descent is so great, that it sweeps along in its
course, vast masses of boulders, shingle and sand.
From the place called the Gorge, at which the


river breaks through the limestone hills, the shingle and
boulders, ejected with great force, and meeting the
counteracting influence of the sea waves, have spread
out on either side, forming extensive beds, which in
the progress of ages have gradually encroached on the
sea. On these shingle banks the town of Greymouth
now stands, and the contest between the encroach-
ments of the shingle on the sea, and the resisting action
of the waves which tends to throw it back again on the
beach, is now transferred to the present mouth of the
river and the bar.
A marked difference may be observed in the
character of the material forming the north and south
beaches at the entrance of the river. On the latter,[and
extending from the spit for many miles in a southerly
direction, the beach is composed mainly of sand from
high-water mark downwards, but with a belt of
shingle about high-water mark, and occasional patches
of shingle strewn here and there, the sand deposit
however largely predominating; —about low-water
mark, the beach becomes flattened out, and is composed
of a dark coloured fine sand. Extending [ out in a
westerly direction from the present sand spit there is a
long stretch of shallow water on which a heavy surf is
constantly breaking; and the signal man, who has been
at his present station for about nine years, states that
within his observation this bank on the south side has
never been absent, while there has been frequently
bold water off the north beach and spit.
On the north beach, and extending as far as
Elizabeth Head, the character of the beach is different
from that last described, being composed mainly of


boulders and large shingle, mixed with but a small
proportion of sand.
This difference in the character of the deposit on
the northern and southern beaches is due to the pre-
valence of the south-westerly swell, which for the
greater part of the year rolls in on the coast, and which
is aided by the prevailing current setting along shore
from south to north. The sand coming from the bed
of the ocean is thrown up on the beach by the action
of the waves, but is partly held in check close in shore,
by the outflow of the river, hence the formation of the
extensive banks on the south-western side of the
entrance. But the shingle, which is of river origin,
after its ejection is thrown up by the south-westerly
swell and the current, along the north bead?.
Thus there is always a tendency of the sand spit to grow
across the mouth of the river, and force it in a northerly
direction. But there are times when other forces come
into operation to counteract this tendency: the melting
of the snows or heavy rains send down floods, which
taking the most direct course to the sea, force their
way through the sand spit, and form for themselves
new channels, to be again filled up and again reformed,
as one force on the other, the south-west swell, or the
land floods, prevail.
These ever recurring changes, of course, render the
navigation uncertain and dangerous, and while the
channel is shifting from south to north, 01 back from
north to south, the bar is always bad.
On this part of the subject, Admiral Richards, the
Hydrographer, who surveyed this coast, remarks of
the Grey River: “It has a bar at the entrance


constantly shifting; the navigation depending on
local pilotage. After a heavy fresh, when the channel
breaks out straight in a westerly direction, it is
safe and easy of access for vessels drawing 8 or 9
feet water; but in the absence of any fresh in the
river, the channel makes either to the north or to
the south, but usually to the north, running for a
short distance parallel with the coast line, and at such
times the entrance to the Grey is dangerous.” He
also observes, “ There is a constant heavy westerly
swell, rolling in on this portion of the coast.”
An illustration of the frequency of the changes in
the direction of the channel over the bar, has been
furnished since my arrival here. Coming in on Friday
the 20th instant, we took the Northern Channel over
the bar, which has been in use for some short time
back, but by Saturday (the following day) it had
changed, and the steamer entering was directed by
the signal man to take another channel which, in the
interim, had opened considerably to the southward of
that by which we entered. This mere element of
uncertainty, even in fine weather, would be of itself,
a source of considerable danger to vessels trading to
the Port; of course it is greatly aggravated by bad
weather, and when the normal depth, due to a
continuance of the channel in one direction, has
not been attained. In general it is found that the
depth of water on the bars of tidal harbours is main-
tained by the tidal action \ the ceaseless flow and
reflux of the tide tending to keep down the accumu-
lation of sand thrown in by the action of the waves ]
here, however, it is not so, there is no alternating


action of the tide, for on the third day after the spring,
I found that at half flood, and after a long continuance
of dry weather, when the river was unusually low,
that there was still an outward set between the heads.
Towards high tide there would probably be a slight
indraught of sea water flowing beneath the fresh, but
it cannot be very great, for I am informed that the
river is nearly always drinkable at the town. It is
obvious therefore that there can be no beneficial
influence exercised on the deepening of the channel
by the indraught of the flood tide, the only forces
acting on it, tending to keep open the mouth of the
river and counteract the tendency of the surf to throw
back the sand and shingle on the beach and bar
being that due to the ebb, when there is a steady
and considerable discharge of fresh'water, and to the
action of the land floods, and freshets.
This will be made more apparent on reference to the
longitudinal section of the river. The section shows
that the fall of the surface of the river in times of
flood from the Gorge to the embouchure is 5 feet,
and from thence outwards to mean tide level the
fall is over 9 feet. At an ordinary time when
there is no fresh in the river, the fall of surface at
low water springs was nearly 18 inches from the
Gorge to the entrance, and at half-flood tide it was
about 2 inches higher at the former than at the latter
place, but at the top of high water it rises one foot
higher at the heads than at the Gorge, and there
would then be, without doubt, a slight indraught
from the sea, but it can only be for a very short time
at high water, and must be so trifling as to have no


influence on the channel. At no stage of tide is there
any upward current at the wharves.
Were the entrance to be sufficiently widened and
deepened to admit the free flow of the flood tide
into the harbour, there is no doubt but that the level
of high' water at the Gorge would become equal to that
at the heads, and the whole area of the inner part of
the harbour and the lagoons, on the south-west of the
town, being filled to the extent of one foot higher than
at present, not only would a scour on the bar be
caused to some perceptible extent by the indraught
of this large body of water; but on the ebb the full
benefit of the scour resulting from the larger body of
water to be discharged would materially increase the
action on the bar and consequently tend to deepen the
channel through it.
The Harbour Master states, and in this he is sup-
ported by the concurrent testimony of the masters of
steamers, and all other persons with whom I have
spoken on the subject that, the bar is always at its
best state when the channel through it is open in a
W.H.W. or N.W. direction, and that it continues
open for a longer time, and with a more uniform depth
while in this direction than in any other; it is also
said to be more easily and safely taken by vessels
entering or leaving the port. But all are agreed that
the bar is bad, and the entrance difficult and dangerous
—when the river opens in a direction anything to the
south of west; and that it must be so is obvious from
an inspection of the localities, which shows extensive
banks lying out in a westerly direction from the
southern spit, on which a heavy surf is constantly


breaking. These facts have to be carefully borne in
mind when devising works for the improvement of the
entrance, and fixing the direction of any proposed
channel over the bar, the object of which should be to
direct the channel by artificial means, and maintain it
permanently in that course, which experience has
shown to have been most in consonance with the re-
sultants of the natural forces operating at this place.
The evidence of Captain Allardice and other per-
sons with whom I have spoken, quite bears out
the statement of Admiral Eichards, to the effect
that for nearly nine months of the year there is
a south-westerly ocean swell setting in on the coast
and bar, and that the heaviest gales blew from 8.W.,
W. f and N.W., the two former driving in on the bar
a heavy and long continued swell, but with N.W,
winds the seas are short, comparatively harmless,
and soon run down; these circumstances at once
amount for the observed fact to which I have referred
of the entrance to the river, and the bar being more
permanent and in their best states when the river
opens in a N.W. or W.N.W. direction.
I have been informed that in the year 1864 during
a heavy flood the river broke out in a westerly direc-
tion, cutting through the south spit near the slaughter-
house and discharging across the long flat bank,
which may be seen to extend out for a considerable
distance at this place. And at that time and so long as
the outlet continued in the same direction, the bar was
bad, but as the channel began to work to the northward
through the joint action of the south-west swell, and
northerly current which packed the sand in on the


southern side, the bar improved and continued to do
so till the channel got to about N.W., when it was at
its best state. The progressive movements of the
channel northward, in the years 1865-66-68-71-73-74,
are shown on the accompanying plan. Latterly the
channel had gone too far to the northward, and a long
spit extended from the south shore to the northward,
overlapping the entrance, and running parallel with
the beach. This spit forms the inner and shallower
bar; and the navigable channel ran for some distance
to the northward, between itrand the shore line, till it
ultimately turned out seaward.
When the channel opens too far to the northward, as
it has recently done, the navigation becomes difficult
and dangerous; as vessels, after crossing the bar, have
to haul round broadside to the waves, and run in on
a course parallel and close to the beach, till they come
to the entrance of the river, when they have again to
alter their course nearly at right angles to enter the
river; this is at all times a difficult manoeuvre, and
sometimes would be impracticable,when there happened
to be a strong out-run of current from the river.
If the channel across the bar ran fair in and out, in
continuation of the present channel at the entrance of the
river, the navigation would be rendered easy and safe to
the extent of its available depth of water; but, at present
the shallowness forms but one element of the danger;
the tortuosity of the channel being another and greater.
Any works, therefore, which may be undertaken, for
the improvement of the entrance to the Grey, must have
primarily for their object, the fixing of the channel at the
entrance of the river and across the bar in one direction,


and maintaining it therein. This direction to be such
as experience has shown to have been most permanent,
under the normal conditions of the river, the currents,
and the waves. Another object should be, while
leading the mouth of the river into deep water, to
protect it from the influence of the south west swell,
so that vessels entering or leaving would have the
protection the works afibrded while crossing the inner
bar. It is has been stated that, after southerly, and
south-westerly gales, which send in a heavy sea
accompanied by a strong northerly current, the south
spit rapidly extends, and the north beach is washed
away; while, after a north-westerly gale, the south
spit recedes, and the north beach follows it. A further
object therefore should be to arrest this oscillatary move-
ment of the shingle and gravel across the entrance, and
obtain the same condition of things—by artificial
means—as would have existed had nature placed a
rocky headland on the southern side.
Whenever rivers discharge into the sea between
rocky headlands the bars are rarely bad, but on the
other hand, when rivers discharge on low sandy
shores, the bars are always bad, and the channels
uncertain. The engineer, therefore, when designing
works for the improvement of the entrance of a river,
endeavours to imitate nature in this respect, and to
produce artificially a similar condition of things to
that which is observed to follow from natural causes.
All bar improvements have this broad principle for
their basis, but success, or failure, in the attainment
of the desired results, in each individual case, depends
on the skill and judgment with which it is applied.


As regards the improvement of the inner portion
of the river at the town, and the maintenance of
deep water alongside of the wharves, much will depend
on the curve to which the line of the wharf shall
be formed, and I would recommend that it he
as flat as possible. When a river sets into a bend,
the greatest force of the water is exercised on the
concave side, and the sharper the bend, the greater
the force with which it acts on the bottom and sides
of the channel, deepening the water close inshore, and
washing down the bank—while on the convex side,
the water travels with less velocity, or may even have
a reverse current; hence the shingle or sand brought
down by the river in its course is always deposited
in banks on the convex side. But the flatter the
curve and the more nearly it approaches to a
straight line, the less is the tendency of the river
to seek either shore, and the greater the force of the
current towards the centre of the channel where the
friction is least. In the instance under consideration,
the flatter we make the curve of the line of wharfs,
the less will be the tendency to cut away the bank
on the Grey-mouth side. The river will discharge
more freely in times of flood, and there will be less
danger of inundation. A perfectly straight line, how-
ever. would not be desirable in this instance, as it
will always be an object to preserve a sufficiently
strong run of current along the face of the wharf to
prevent the accumulation of shingle, and maintain a
sufficient depth of water for vessels of moderate
draught. The improvement of the entrance by
widening, straightening, and deepening the channel


will also tend towards the prevention of inundation
of the town by the land floods, and the deposition of
shingle in the channel near the wharfs.
The works which I would recommend for improving
the bar and fixing the channel in a permanent position,
are delineated on the accompaning plan which is taken
from a survey made by your Town Surveyor, Mr.
Johnston. They consist of an internal training wall,
commencing at the wharf and continued in a gentle
curve to the south spit, being a length of 3,300 feet,
and a breakwater extending thence outwards in a
north-westerly direction for a further distance of 2,100
feet, which will bring the head of the breakwater into
12 feet at low tide. The effect of the breakwater
would be to protect the entrance from the break of
the S.W. swell, and arrest the northerly trend of the
sand which would be retained in the groin at the
base of the breakwater. I would propose to carry the
head of the breakwater outwards in a more westerly
direction than the body of the work, so as to present
greater resistance to the breaking waves which will
roll in on its end, and thus diminish the danger of its
being washed down across the channel: this would also
have the effect of giving the northerly coast currents a
direction more off shore at this point, and therefore
more in the direction of the currents setting out from
the river, which would tend to prevent the formation
of a spit at the end of the breakwater.
The stones for the breakwater should be in as large
blocks as can be conveniently handled, and should
average not less than ten tons weight. Stones of this
size would not be shifted much by the waves, and with


proper tackle and plant, and careful quarrying, there
should be no difficulty in obtaining them of this size
from the limestone quarries at the Gorge; the smaller
material produced in quarrying the larger blocks for
the breakwater can be used in the construction of the
inner training wall; but in this the larger stones,
weighing from one ton to half a ton, should be placed
on the river side, the inferior materials being deposited
on the inner or laud side. The reclamation of the
space between the training wall and the present bank
may be done with gravel, quarry rubbish, or any other
material which may come cheapest.
If a large coal trade is to be done at this port (and
from what I have myself seen of the seam at
the pit and read of it in the parliamentary papers as to
the excellence of the quality of the coals, and its
practically inexhaustible quantity, I believe that there
is every reasonable prospect of a great and rapidly
increasing trade), it will be necessary to provide at the
wharf, and about the cranes, or whatever other
appliances be adopted for loading, a considerable
extent of standage room for the trains of full
and empty coal trucks—the present area abutting on
the streets would be too limited. It will be necessary,
therefore, to widen out the space below Chapman-street
on which to form sidings, but this, I have pointed out
in another place, will be rather beneficial than other-
wise to the navigable channel as tending to flatten the
curve at this point, and I have little doubt but it will
also be followed by the recession of the shingle on the
opposite side.
I would propose leading an opening in the training


wall to admit of the lagoon being filled and emptied
every tide, (so as to act, in some measure, as a sluicing
reservoir), conveying the stone for the breakwater across
it on a pile bridge :—the area of the lagoon is about
650 acres, and the water received and discharged from
it every tide must increase in some measure the in-
tensity of the ebb scour on the bar.
I would not propose at present carrying out any
works on the north side of the entrance they may
not be required at all, hut if they be, it would he
better to defer them till the effect of those on the south
side shall have been seen—until the river shall be
allowed to establish its regimen under the altered
conditions which will result from the construction of
the southern breakwater.
I think, that after the works I have indicated have
been in operation some few years, you may confidently
look to have an available depth for navigation—of
about 15 or 16 feet at H.W. neaps, on the bar and in
the channel leading to the wharves. This would not of
course he sufficient for very large vessels; but, such
would not be necessary, to command a very large coal
trade, which is, in the present day, carried on for the
most part in screw steam colliers, or small class sailing
vessels. The natural capabilities of Grey mo nth are
not great; and too much must not be expected from
any works which may be undertaken for its improve-
ment, hut if those which I have suggested be carried
out, I have no doubt of the port being rendered safe,
and comparatively easy of access, for vessels of the
class I have named. At present it cannot be con-
sidered as safe or easy of access to any vessel.


The plan which accompanies this report is a
general plan of the river from the Gorge to the bar,
showing the present wharfs and their proposed ex-
tension, the training walls and breakwater, with
soundings in the river and on the bar and adjoining
banks.
The cost of the works I have proposed would be
about £94,998 made up as follows; —
£ s. d.
124,500 tons second class stone in
inner tracing wall, at 4s. 6d. 28,012 0 0
175,000 ditto in breakwater, large
blocks averaging 10 tons each,
at ss. Od 43,750 0 0
1000 feet lineal of wharf, at £8
Bridge at entrance to lagoon
8,000 0 0
1,600 0 0
Bail way and sidings to breakwater 3,000 0 0
Pitching inner face of training wall 2,000 0 0
Add for contingencies 10 per cent. 8,636 0 0
£94,998 0 0
I have the honor to be, Sir,
Your most obedient Servant,
E. MOEIARTY.
S. T. Leigh & 00., Printers, Hunter-street, Sydney.






