

GOVERNMENT OF NEW SOUTH WALES
REPORT
ON
ELECTRICAL DEVELOPMENT
IN
NEW SOUTH WALES
1937
Rendel, Palmer & Tritton,
Consulting Engineers,
55 Broadway, Westminster,
LONDON. S.W.I.


GOVERNMENT OF NEW SOUTH WALES
REPORT
ON
ELECTRICAL DEVELOPMENT
IN
NEW SOUTH WALES
1937
Rendel, Palmer a Trittoim,
Consulting Engineers,
55 Broadway, Westminster
LONDON, S.W.I.


ELECTRICITY SUPPLY SYSTEMS


A f Inland: RENDELS, SOWEST.LON DON.
Teleobaphic Adobe | Overseas.- REN DE LS , LONDON .
Rendel,Palmer &Tritton.
CONSULTING
CHARTERED CIVIL ENGINEERS.
PARTNERS:
H.J.BUCKTON, M Inst. C.E .M.l.Mech. E.
R STRICK.M Inst.C.E.
J. S.IRITTON.M.Inst. CE-M.l.Mech. E.
CONSULTANTS
Sir Seymour B.Tritton,k.be..m.inst.c.e.
H.J.FeREDAY.M. Inst.C.E.
R.LRAY.M.I.Mech.E.
Telephone Number; Wh ITEHALL 5, (5 Lines)
SS.
,S£ndwS.WJ.
The Honourable the Premier
of New South Wales,
Sydney.
Sir,
In accordance with the commission contained in your letters of
February 13th and 26th, 1937, we have investigated, in association with
Messrs. Vattenbyggnadsbyran (VBB), of Stockholm, future electrical
development in the State, and we have the honour to submit our report
herewith, and at the same time to traverse its salient features.
Terms of Reference
In accordance with the terms of reference originally arranged by
you and subsequently supplemented by the Honourable the Minister
for Works and Local Government, the report covers the following
matters, viz.:—
The power demand within the State;
Proposed electrification of the main railway lines from Sydney to
Newcastle, Lithgow, Goulburn and Nowra;
Economics of alternative proposals for steam power generation;
Investigation of new hydro-electric developments on the Snowy
River, Shoalhaven River, Lachlan River (Wyangala), and
Wollomombi, Chandler, Oaky and Styx Rivers;
Co-ordination of supply and interconnection of power stations and
networks by transmission lines; and
Organisation and control of central generation of electricity and
main transmission on the one hand, and of local distribution
on the other.
III


193G traffic
1936 traffic
+ 40%
Capital cost of electrification
£8 728 000
£10 020 000
Annual cost of electric traction
£824 260
£1 075 200
Annual cost of steam traction
£1 232 000
£1 724 000
Saving (hie to electrification ...
£107 740
£648 800
Percentage on capital ...
4-67
6-47
Power Demand
The investigation of the power demand shows that the utilization
of electricity is bound up with the general prosperity of the State. The
depression following the boom which occurred prior to 1930 adversely
affected the use of electricity, but a recovery took place in 1932 and 1933,
and in the succeeding three years the rate of increase was marked.
During the past three years the demand for electricity in all parts of
the State has increased annually by practically constant demand.
Should the demand continue to increase at the same constant rate as
during the last three years which would not be unreasonable to assume
the peak load in the State would rise from 417 000 kilowatts in 1937 to
587 000 kilowatts in 1942 and to 727 000 kilowatts in 1947,
In 1936 the plant installed in all generating stations in the State,
including spare plant, had a capacity of 631 000 kilowatts, which was 65
per cent, over and above the total peak load of 386 000 kilowatts, in the
same year. The capital invested in generation, transmission and dis-
tribution of electricity in 1935 has been estimated at not less than
£36 000 000 corresponding to about £6O per kilowatt of generating plant
installed that year.
Main Railway Electrification
The Department of Railways has submitted a proposal for the
electrification of main railway lines radiating from Sydney, and
extending from Hornsby to Newcastle, from Parramatta to Lithgow,
from Liverpool to Goulburn, and from Sutherland to Nowra, making a
total of 361 route miles and 876 track miles. The complete electrification
of Sydney Central Station and yard and certain other works also form
part of the proposed electrification.
The scheme submitted has been examined by us in collaboration
with Mr. A. Raworth, Electrical Engineer for New Works of the
Southern Railway in England. It is concluded that, with the 1 500 volt
direct current system chosen, the proposed scheme of electrification is
technically sound. The railway transmission lines will also serve for
bulk supplies of electricity for urban and rural centres which should
result iii appreciably lower charges to such areas.
The estimates of capital and annual costs of the electrification
scheme are shown in the following Table.


Apart from the economic comparison, it should be taken into
consideration that electrification of the main railways will further have
important advantages among which the following may he mentioned: —
(a) Possibility of extending, in an economically feasible way,
electricity supply to new urban and 'rural districts;
(b) Increased speed of the trains;
(c) Increased traffic capacity of the railway lines; and
(d) Increased ability of the railways, owing to the greater speed,
comfort and cleanliness, to compete successfully with other
means of transport.
In view of these additional advantages and subject to the
estimated financial return on the capital invested being considered
sufficient, we would recommend electrification of the main railway lines
to be carried out.
Electricity Supply Areas
In regard to the supply of electricity the more densely populated
part of the State has been divided into the following areas: —
(a) Sydney and district;
(b) Newcastle and district;
(c) The South Western Area, comprising Port Kembla, Burrinjuck
and Lithgow systems; and
(d) The North Eastern Area, comprising the north-eastern portion
of the State, including the Clarence River County Council
and Tamworth systems.
Steam Power Generation for Sydney and District
Data regarding steam power generation have been collected and
certain questions in this connection studied by a Sub-Committee of
the Electricity Advisory Committee, under the Chairmanship of Mr.
11, R. Harper. The documents submitted to the Consulting Engineers
have been subjected to careful study in collaboration with Mr. A. T.
Cooper, M.lnst.C.E.
Assuming for the purposes of calculation that the growing power
demand in Sydney is to be met by generation of electricity in coal fired
steam stations, an investigation has been made into the question whether
it would be more economical to build a large steam power station at or
near the coalfields and to transmit power to Sydney, or to extend the
present steam stations in Sydney. We agree with the conclusions
arrived at by the Sub-Committee that the most economical means of
supplying additional power to Sydney by steam generation is to extend
existing steam stations in preference to the establishment of new
stations near to coalfields.
The scheme considered for the development of generation in
Sydney consists of an extension of Bunnerong power station by


100 000 kilowatts, and of an extension of White Bay power station by
150 000 kilowatts. The capital costs of these extensions have been esti-
mated as follows: —
Extension of Bunnerong station.. £2 180 000
Extension of White Bay station.. .. £3 160 000
Total, capital cost .. .. .. £5 340 000
Hydro-electric Power Generation for Sydney and District
As alternatives to extensions of the existing steam power stations
in Sydney two hydro-electric schemes on the Snowy and the Shoalhaven
Rivers, respectively, have been considered. The conclusions arrived at
are that the Shoalhaven hydro-electric scheme cannot be recommended
as an economic source of power supply whilst the Snowy River hydro-
electric scheme possesses all the elements of a successful hydro-electric
power undertaking which, operated in conjunction with steam power
plants in Sydney, could meet the growing demand in Sydney and else-
where in an economic and satisfactory manner.
Snowy River Hydro-electric Scheme
The Snowy River hydro-electric scheme is based upon the utiliza-
tion of the fall of 1 850 feet between Jindabyne and Biddi Point which
is about 18 miles distant from Jindabyne as the crow flies.
The hydro-electric scheme proposed is divided into two plants.
The upper plant will consist of a single arch dam of a maximum height
of 112 feet located a mile downstream of Jindabyne Bridge; a head race
tunnel 15 miles long excavated in rock in a direction towards Biddi
Point; two steel pressure pipe lines each 2 300 feet long leading the
water to an underground Power Station No. 1; and a tail race tunnel
2 000 feet long excavated in granite discharging the water into an inter-
mediate pondage basin. Starting from this basin the lower plant will
consist of a dam of a height of 55 feet; a second head race tunnel a mile
long excavated in granite and connected to four steel pipe lines each
7 300 feet long leading to a Power Station No. 2 on the bank of the
Snowy River.
The installed capacity of the plants has been fixed at 80 000 kilo-
watts in Power Station No. 1, utilizing an average gross head of 635
feet, and 170 000 kilowatts in Power Station No. 2, utilizing an average
gross head of 1 285 feet, making a total installed capacity of 250 000
kilowatts.
The power will be transmitted to Sydney by two 220 000 volt
transmission lines, which on their way will be tapped at Goulburn,
and will consist of two circuits each on separate steel structures. The
length of route is 265 miles. Allowing for transmission losses the maxi-
mum capacity of the scheme at load centres is estimated at 220 000
kilowatts, and the average annual output at load centres at 1120 million
kilowatt-hours. Separate supplies will be given to Dalgety and Cooma.


Two main stages of development are contemplated. The first
stage will comprise the construction of the dam, tunnels and both power
stations, with an installation of half the generating capacity in each
stations, and the requisite pipe lines. The capacity of the generating
plant in this stage will be 125 000 kilowatts, and one transmission circuit
only to Sydney will be required. The second development stage will
consist of the remaining generating plant and pipe lines, and the second
transmission line to Sydney.
The capital cost of the scheme, including transmission to Sydney
and allowing for interest during construction, has been estimated as
follows:
First stage of development .. .. £8 000 000
Second stage of development ~ .. £2 600 000
Total capital cost .. .. .. £lO 600 000
The annual cost, including interest on capital and depreciation, is
estimated as follows:
First stage of development .. .. .. £564 000
Second stage of development .. .. £259 000
Total annual cost.. .. .. .. £823 000
The time of construction of the first stage of development is esti-
mated at four years.
Comparison between Steam Station Extensions and the Snowy Eiver
Scheme
With the object of ascertaining the most economical method of
providing for the increase in demand in Sydney a comparison has been
made of the annual costs of two alternatives, viz., an extension of steam
power stations in Sydney and the development of the Snowy Eiver
hydro-electric scheme. The annual cost of meeting the demand up to a
system peak load of 486 000 kilowatts is practically the same in both
alternatives, but with the growth of the demand beyond 486 000 kilo-
watts the Snowy Eiver Scheme will result in a considerable saving.
With a peak load in excess of 486 000 kilowatts the advantage is in the
region of £lOO 000 per annum which is increased to between £230 000
and £2BO 000 per annum when the peak load has exceeded 524 000 kilo-
watts. The latter annual saving is equivalent to a surplus of about 5
per cent, on the estimated excess capital of £5 260 000 required for the
hydro-electric scheme over and above that required for steam power
station extensions and after having provided in the annual costs for
interest and depreciation on the whole capital expenditure of
£lO 600 000. On the basis adopted in the report for estimating power
demand, peak loads of 486 000 kilowatts and 524 000 kilowatts will be
reached in 1949 and 1951, respectively.


11l the above comparison no account has been taken of the benefit
of the supply of hydro-electric power to the South Western System.
If the Snowy River Scheme is not undertaken, in due course an entirely
new steam station will be required at Port Kembla, for which it will
be necessary to provide, in the initial stage, circulating water and other
facilities for an ultimate capacity of, say, 100 000 kilowatts. If these
facts are taken into consideration as well as the benefit of the co-opera-
tion of the Sydney System with the South Western system made possible
by the Snowy River transmission lines the economic superiority of the
Snowy River Scheme will be still more pronounced.
Included in the estimated annual cost of the hydro-electric scheme
there is an amount to cover depreciation calculated on the basis of
certain rates for specified groups of the assets. The average rate of
depreciation is 1.9 per cent., and annual contributions on this basis to a
sinking fund invested at 31 per cent, per annum will in 30 years amount
to the total capital cost of the scheme. After the capital cost has been
written off there will remain, for all time, a concentrated fall on the
Snowy River of about 1 900 feet established by the everlasting 15 mile
tunnel. This is of considerable value in the economic comparison of the
merits of the two alternatives.
The supply of power from the Snowy River Scheme when fully
developed will reduce the coal consumption in the State by about half
a million tons per annum which represents not more than five per cent,
of the present output from the coal mines in the State. On the other
hand, the construction of the Snowy River Scheme will result in in-
creased industrial activities arising from the manufacture of cement,
steel, and other materials required for the works, and the employment
of labour on a large scale over a period of four years or so.
It is estimated that of the capital cost of the Snowy River Scheme
of £lO 600 000 about 84 per cent, will be spent on labour and material
within the State.
The electricity supply to the Capital of the State is at present
solely dependent upon the supply of coal to the power stations, and in
the past there has been some anxiety with regard to the continuity of
fuel supply. It would therefore be of value if a portion of the electricity
supply to the Capital could be delivered from a hydro-electric station.
An additional advantage to be derived from the hydro-electric
development would be a reduction of smoke and ash nuisance in certain
city districts which might be increased if White Bay Power Station
were extended.
The conclusion reached is that the Snowy River Scheme is to bo
preferred to extensions of existing steam power stations in Sydney
beyond the present commitments. It is therefore recommended that
the Snowy River Scheme he proceeded with so as to provide for the
first stage of development being ready for operation by the time the
peak load on the Sydney supply system reaches 420 000 kilowatts, which
is estimated to take place in 1944. The scheme should be fully developed
within two or three vears thereafter.


Supply of Electeicity to Newcastle and District
The best means of providing an additional supply of electricity
to Newcastle and district has been found to lie in increasing the instal-
lation in Zarra Street Power Station in Newcastle. When the capacity of
the present building is reached, it is suggested that the additional plant
required be installed as an extension of the station at the site of which
suitable space is available for the purpose.
Supply of Electricity to the South Western Area
To develop adequate and economic power resources for the re-
quirements of the South Western Area it is proposed that the Port
.Kembla, Burriujuck, and Lithgow systems be interconnected to form the
South Western System.
The interconnection will among other things permit the surplus
power from Burriujuck during the irrigation seasons to be transmitted
to Port Kembla and the requisite supplementary fuel power during
times of low water discharge to be transmitted from Port Kembla to
Burriujuck. For this purpose and to safeguard the supply of elec-
tricity to the Burriujuck system should the power stations at the Bur-
riujuck Dam bo flooded, it is recommended that a single circuit trans-
mission line, together with the requisite transformers and switchgear,
be constructed between Port Kembla and Burriujuck Po’wer Stations.
The transmission line, 160 miles in length, will be designed for 132 000
volts and for a carrying capacity of at least 20 000 kilowatts. With
the object of ensuring a high degree of reliability special features in the
design of the line and its associated equipment are recommended.
The capital cost of this tie line is estimated at £490 000 and the
annual cost, including interest and depreciation, at £49 000. The annual
benefits resulting in 1942 from the of the line are estimated
at £5B 500; from which it will seen that within a year or two of its in-
ception and quite apart from the fact that the line is a necessity for
reasons associated with the safeguarding and maintenance of supply,
the provision of the tie line is an economical proposition. As the load
on the combined system increases the return to lie obtained from the
tie line will rise progressively.
It is proposed that the Burriujuck and Lithgow systems be inter-
connected via Wyangala, that transmission lines be extended to the
towns of Canowindra, Forbes, Parkes, Peak Hill and Dubbo, and that
a hydro-electric station at the existing dam at Wyangala be constructed
with an installed capacity of 10 000 kilowatts. The capital cost of the
transmission system is estimated at £257 000, and the annual cost includ-
ing capital charges at £26 000. The capital cost of the hydro-electric
development is estimated at £125 000 and the annual cost at £lO 000,
making a total capital cost for the proposed development of £382 000,
and a total annual cost of £36 000. The revenue lias been estimated at
£37 300 in 1942 and £46 200 in 1947.


Without the interconnection between the Burrinjuck and Lith-
gow systems as recommended it would be necessary, owing to the limited
capacity of the conductors between Lithgow and Orange, to duplicate
this line at a cost of, say, £65 000, in the near future to meet the normal
increase of load. If, however, the proposals as outlined above are
carried out the necessity for duplication of this line will not arise for
many years.
In the event of the main railway electrification being proceeded
with, the South Western System will be connected to Sydney by three
66 000 volt railway transmission lines radiating from the City to Port
Kembla, Goulburn and Lithgow. In addition, there will be a connection
at Goulburn to the 220 000 volt transmission lines from the Snowy River
hydro-electric scheme to Sydney. This will result in a considerable
saving in reserve plant capacity.
Supply op Electricity to the North Eastern Area
As the result of favourable natural conditions it lias been found
possible to submit an unusually satisfactory proposal for meeting the
power requirements of the important North Eastern Area of the State.
It is proposed that a North Eastern Supply System be estab-
lished covering practically the whole of the North Eastern Area (except
the Tweed Shire), by extending the generating plant at Lismore by two
2 500 kilowatt steam generating sets, by constructing the Styx-Georges
Creek hydro-electric scheme with an initial installed capacity of 8 000
kilowatts, and by the erection of a single-circuit 66 000 volt transmission
line 160 miles long between Nymboida and Tamworth, linking the com-
ponent parts of the system with the Styx-Georges Creek hydro-electric
station lying approximately mid-way. There will also be required
about 100 miles of single-circuit 66 000 and 33 000 volt transmission lines
for the supply of electricity to the New England Tableland, including
the towns of Armidale, Guyra, Glen limes and Inverell. Of the exist-
ing high-tension transmission lines, 168 miles now belonging to the
Clarence River County Council will be incorporated in the North
Eastern Supply System.
After the installation of plant now on order and after the con-
struction of the proposed new generating stations the installed generat-
ing capacity of the North Eastern Supply System will be 25 550 kilo-
watts. With the Styx-Georges Creek Scheme in operation and the first
steam generating unit installed at Lismore there will be sufficient plant
to meet a system load of about 17 500 kilowatts which is estimated to be
reached in about 1949. With a second steam generating unit in opera-
tion the plant capacity will be sufficient to meet a system load of 20 000
kilowatts.


The capital cost of establishing the North Eastern Supply
System to meet the prospective demand of 20 000 kilowatts including
the acquisition of existing generating plant, has been estimated as
follows: —
£
Purchase of existing generating plants (including
5 000 kilowatt steam station at Lismore), high
tension transmission lines, and substations .. 705 000
Construction of Styx-Georges Creek hydro-electric
scheme .. .. .. .. .. .. 520 000
Construction of new high-tension transmission lines,
and substations .. .. .. .. .. 220 000
Total capital cost .. .. .. .. .. £1445 000
The total annual cost of the system including interest on capital,
depreciation, maintenance, operation, management, and fuel has been
estimated at £146 000 in 1943, and at £l5l 000 in 1949.
The revenues from the sales of bulk supplies have been esti-
mated at £156 250 in 1943 and £219 950 in 1949.
The prospective financial position of local distributing authori-
ties buying power in bulk has been examined. When the capital charges,
the cost of bulk supply, and the distribution expenses have been met
there is in general a substantial balance available which could be used
for lowering the retail charges to the consumers.
As the scheme presented is technically and economically satisfac-
tory and with normal development should result in the reduction of cost
of electricity to the residents of the urban and rural districts contained
within the area, it is recommended that the work of carrying out the
scheme should be commenced as soon as possible.
Central Electricity Authority
With the prospect of the various recommended developments
being proceeded with it is considered essential, for technical and econo-
mical reasons, that efficient co-ordination within the major generating
and transmission systems of the State should be established in the near
future. The main object of any organisation and scheme of co-opera-
tion and interconnection of individual power systems in the State should
be to effect:—
{a) Economies in regard to capital expenditure on future develop-
ment ;
(b) Economies in regard to the working costs of electricity
supply in the State as a whole as well as in the various parts,
and, as a consequence, reduced tariffs;
(c) Uniformity of tariffs to bulk supply consumers;
(d) Regularity and efficiency of supply to all consumers; and
(e) Facilitated financing of future development.


The best means of achieving the object of co-ordination would,
in our opinion, be to make the generation and transmission of electricity
in the more densely populated area of the State the duty of a Central
Electricity Authority organised as a commercial undertaking, immune
from changes of Government, but responsible to Parliament, through
the Minister for Works and Local Government, for the proper dis-
charge of its obligations. This Central Authority should supersede
the existing Electricity Advisory Committee, whose present functions
would be included among the wider and more comprehensive duties of
the new body. The Central Authority should develop, generate, trans-
mit and sell electricity in bulk (but not in retail), without profit or loss,
whilst the distribution to individual consumers should be left to local
Authorities with their existing organisations, which are competent to
deal with the various problems associated with retail distribution, and
which are in close contact with the consumers.
The electricity supply in the sparsely populated parts of the
State should in general continue to be administered as at present.
The Central Authority should bo given statutory power in the
first instance to take over immediately the electricity supply systems
at present administered by the three State Departments, viz., the De-
partment of Works and Local Government, the Department of Rail-
ways, and the Water Conservation and Irrigation Commission. The
Central Authority should then open negotiations with other generating
authorities, such as the Sydney County Council and the Clarence River
Countj r Council, for the acquisition of the more important generating
stations and the main transmission systems. The regulatory control
of the electricity undertakings outside the proposed network of the
Central Authority should still be left in the hands of the Minister for
Works and Local Government.
If it is constitutionally possible, the Central Authority should be
so formed and given such powers as to enable it to borrow independ-
ently, by direct access to the capital market in Australia and abroad,
such capital as will be required for future development, without having
to call upon the financial resources of the State for this purpose.
By means of unified control the Central Authority would operate
all the power stations connected to its system on an economical basis
made possible only by the interconnections proposed and by the Author-
ity being in sole control of the stations. The Authority would ensure
that the hydro-electric stations were used to the utmost, thus economis-
ing in fuel consumpion, and it would operate the most efficient steam
plants iu preference to the less efficient ones, using the latter for peak
load and standby purposes. Apart from the saving in running costs
this co-ordination would result in reduced capital outlay by minimising
the amount of spare plant required which at present is quite consider-
able.


Local Distributing Authorities
It is impossible to make any definite recommendation with regard
to the size of supply areas and composition of Distributing Authorities
in general terms, as each area must be treated on its own merits.
Depending upon local conditions, it may be found desirable either —
(i) to group together in one district of supply one or more Shires
and their Municipalities acting jointly as a Distributing Auth-
ority for the district; or
(ii) to constitute the most important Municipality in a geographi-
cally detached district into a Distributing Authority for that
whole district.
In the first case the ultimate responsibility would lie with the
ratepayers of the whole constituent area. In the latter case this re-
sponsibility would devolve upon the ratepayers of the particular Muni-
cipality only, and care should therefore be taken that this form of
organisation is employed only where the revenue and the assets within
the Municipal area are larger than those outside that area.
The present arrangements for the retail supply of electricity by
local Distributing Authorities should in principle remain unaltered.
Concluding Remarks
The electrical developments dealt with in detail in the report
will require a capital outlay of between £9 000 000 and £lO 000 000 for
main railway electrification and about £l3 000 000 for generation and
main transmission of electricity. It is estimated that these sums will
be spent over a period of ten years. All developments envisaged are
estimated to return an annual surplus over and above the total annual
costs including 41 per cent, interest on capital, full provision for
depreciation and all working expenses.
To ensure the carrying out of these developments on an
economical basis, and their satisfactory operation and administration,
it is considered essential that a Central Electricity Authority be placed
in charge of the main generating and transmission systems for the
supply of energy in bulk to local distributing authorities, and for trac-
tion purposes.
If carried out these schemes will result in substantial advantages
to the State. Traffic conditions on 361 miles of railway will be greatly
improved, the Capital of the State will be supplied with cheap power
from another source than at present, and the welfare of many urban
centres and rural districts will be advanced by bringing the advantages
and amenities of cheap electric light and power to a considerable portion
of the population.
We remain, Sir,
Yours faithfully,
(Sgd.) RENDER, PALMER & TRITTON.
Sydney, December 30th, 1937.




GOVERNMENT OF NEW SOUTH WALES
REPORT
ON
ELECTRICAL DEVELOPMENT
IN
NEW SOUTH WALES
1937
Rendel, Palmer & Tritton,
Consulting Engineers,
55 Broadway, Westminster.
LONDON, S.W.I.




CONTENTS
PAGE
1. INTRODUCTORY
Appointment ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... 2
Acknowledgments 3
Investigations and Reports ... ... ... ... ... 4
2. PRESENT SYSTEMS OF ELECTRICITY SUPPLY
Sydney and District 5
Newcastle and District ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... 5
Port Kembla System ... ... ... ... ... ... ... 5
Burrinjuck System ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... 6
Lithgow System ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... 6
Clarence River County Council System ... ... ... ... ... ... 6
Tamwortli System ... ... ... 6
Yanco System ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... 6
Sundry Other Systems ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... 7
Particulars of Present Supply Systems ... ... ... ... ... 7
3. VOLTAGES AND FREQUENCIES
Alternating Current ... ... ... ... ... ... ...' ... ... 8
Direct Current ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... 8
4. LOAD AND POWER DEMAND
Load Variations ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... 8
Present Power Demand ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... 8
Sydney and District ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... 10
Newcastle and District ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... 10
Port Kembla-Burrinjuck-Lithgow Systems ... ... ... ... ... ... 10
Clarence River County Council System ... ... ... ... ... ... 10
Future Power Demand ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... 11
Conclusions ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... 12
5. LEGISLATION RELATING TO ELECTRICITY SUPPLY
Legislation Relating to Electricity Supply 13
• 6. MAIN RAILWAY ELECTRIFICATION
General ... ... ... ... ... ••• ••• ••• ••• ••• ••• 15
Existing Suburban Railway Electrification 15
Main Railway Electrification as Proposed by the Department of Railways 10
Examination of the Foregoing Proposal 17
Estimates of Cost ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... 18
Conclusions ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ••• ••• 20
7. COAL RESOURCES OF THE STATE
Coal Resources of the State ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... 20
* 59265—6


Page
8. WATER POWER RESOURCES OF THE STATE,
General 21
Meteorology and Topography 22
Potential Water Power ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... 23
Existing Hydro-Electric Plants 24
Possible Hydro-Electric Development at the Hume Dam ... ... ... ... 24
Possible Utilization in New South Wales of Water Power Sources in Victoria ... 24
9. SNOWY RIVER HYDRO-ELECTRIC SCHEME
Geography ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... 25
Utilization of Power ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... 25
Hydrological Data ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... 25
Main Features of Proposed Power Plants 26
Generating Capacity of the Power Stations ... ... ... ... ... ... 26
Transmission System 27
Capacity of the Scheme 27
Operation of Plants 27
Delivery of Power 27
Development in Stages 28
Estimates of Cost 28
Other Layouts Considered ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... 29
Concluding Remarks 29
10. SHOALHAVEN RIVER HYDRO-ELECTRIC SCHEME
Shoalhaven River Hydro-Electric Scheme ... ... 29
11. STYX RIVER HYDRO-ELECTRIC SCHEMES
Introductory ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... 30
Run-off ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... 30
Silt 31
Hydro-Electric Schemes ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... 32
Styx River Scheme 32
Styx-Georges Creek Scheme ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... 32
Comparison between Schemes ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... 33
12. WYANGALA HYDRO-ELECTRIC SCHEME
Wyangala Hydro-Electric Scheme ... ... ... ... ... ••• ••• 33
13 PROPOSED ORGANISATION AS AFFECTING ELECTRICITY
SUPPLY AREAS
Proposed Organisation as Affecting Electricity Supply Areas ... ... ••• 35
14. SUPPLY OF ELECTRICITY TO SYDNEY AND DISTRICT
Steam Power Generation... ... ... ... ... ... ... ••• 35
Hydro-Electric Power Generation ... ... ... ... ••• 37
Comparison between Steam Power Extensions in Sydney and the Snowy River
Scheme ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ••• ••• ••• 38
Conclusions ... ... ... ... ... ... ... 42


PaCle
15. SUPPLY OF ELECTRICITY TO NEWCASTLE AND DISTRICT
Supply of Electricity to Newcastle and District ... ... ... ... ... 42
16. SUPPLY OF ELECTRICITY TO THE SOUTH WESTERN AREA
Introductory ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... 44
South Western Supply System ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... 45
Tie-Line between Burrinjuck and Port Kembla ... ... ... ... ... 46
Interconnection of Burrinjuck and Lithgow Systems and Extensions to the Western
Towns ... ... 47
Generating Capacity of the South Western System 49
17. SUPPLY OF ELECTRICITY TO THE NORTH EASTERN AREA
Introductory 51
North Eastern Supply System ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... 51
Generating Capacity of the System 52
Possible Future Extension 53
Central Electricity Authority 53
Distributing Authorities ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... 54
Estimated Capital and Annual Cost ... ... ... 54
Revenue of Central Authority ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... 55
Revenue of Distributing Authorities ... ... ... ... ... 55
Conclusions and Recommendations ... ... ... ... ... ... ... 56
18. FUTURE DEVELOPMENT AND ORGANISATION
Introductory ... ... ... ... ... ... 56
Anticipated Future Development ... ... ... ... ... ... ... 57
Main Object of Organisation 58
Central Electricity Authority 59
Some Technical Features of the Co-ordination ... 61
Local Distributing Authorities ... 61
Other Schemes of Organisation Considered .'. 63
Conclusions and Recommendation 66
19. CONCLUSIONS AND RECOMMENDATIONS
Conclusions and Recommendations b 6




APPENDICES
PAGE
I. Description of present systems of Electricity Supply in New South Wales,.. 69
11. Legislation relating to Electricity Supply in New South Wales 85
111. Mr. A Haworth’s Report on proposed main line electrification scheme ... 91
IV. Snowy River hydro-electric scheme 101
V, Shoalhaven River hydro-electric scheme 129
VI. Styx River hydro-electric schemes 143
VII. Wyangala hydro-electric scheme 161
VIII. Steam power generation ... ... ... ... 165
IX. Supply of electricity to the South Western Area ... ... ... ... 173
X. Supply of electricity to the North Eastern Area 191
XI. Constitution and functions of proposed Central Electricity Authority ... 209




PLATES
Frontispiece; Electricity Supply Systems, existing & proposed.
1. Distribution of population in New South Wales
2. General lay-out of electricity supply systems in south-eastern Australia
3. Electricity supply in Sydney and district
4. Electricity supply in Newcastle and district
5. Load diagrams : Sydney-Sydney County Council and 50-cycle system of Depart-
ment of Railways
6. Load diagrams : Sydney-all generating stations
7. Load diagrams : Newcastle-Zarra Street generating station
8. Load diagrams : Port Kembla, Burrinjuck and Lithgow generating stations
9. Load diagrams: Clarence River County Council—Nymboida and Lismore
generating stations
10. Weekly maximum load: Sydney-Sydney County Council and 50-cycle system of
Department of Railways
11. Weekly maximum load : Sydney-all generating stations
12. Weekly maximum load: Newcastle-Zarra Street and Sydney Street generating
stations
13. Weekly maximum load: Burrinjuck, Port Kembla and Lithgow generating
stations
14. Weekly maximum load: Clarence River County Council —Nymboida and
Lismore generating stations
15. Growth of generation of energy in New South Wales
16. Sydney suburban railway electrification : Main railway electrification
17. Coal deposits in New South Wales
18. Map of south-eastern portion of Australia
19. Snowy River hydro-electric scheme : General lay-out plan
20. Snowy River hydro-electric scheme: Longitudinal profile
21. Snowy River hydro-electric scheme ; Stereoscopic aerial photograph of pipe line
and Power Station No. 2
22. Shoalhaven River hydro-electric scheme : General lay-out plan
23. Shoalhaven River hydro-electric scheme : Longitudinal profile
24. Map of catchment areas of Styx, Oaky, Chandler and Wollomombi Rivers
25. Styx-Georgcs Creek hydro-electric scheme : General lay-out plan
26. Styx-Gcorges Creek hydro-electric scheme : Longitudinal profile
27. Wyangala hydro-electric scheme : Reservoir behaviour and discharge per month
28. Energy generated by steam and hydro-electric power for Sydney and district
20. Comparison of cost of steam and hydro-electric power for Sydney and district




T / IN LAN O; R E NOELS, SOWEST. LON DON,
Telcopaphic Addresses { OviHSeAS:RENDELs§ LONDON .
Rendel,Palmer &Tritton.
CONSULTING
CHARTERED CIVIL ENGINEERS.
PARTNERS:
H. J. BUCKTON. M Inst. C.E.,M.I.Mech. E.
R.STRICK.M Inst.C.E.
J.S.TRITTON.M Inst. C.E..M.1 Mech.E.
CONSULTANTS
Sir Seymour B.Tritton,mbe..minst.ce.
H.J PEREDAY, M Inst.C.E.
R.L.RAY, M.l.Mech. E.
Tc lep h o n*£ Number; Whitehall 4455. (5 Lines)
REPORT
ON
ELECTRICAL DEVELOPMENT IN
NEW SOUTH WALES
1. INTRODUCTORY
In this report upon an investigation into the possibilities and
prospects of electrical development in New South Wales, it is consid-
ered advisable first to review briefly the present position regarding
electricty supply therein.
New South Wales, the central of the three eastern States of
Australia, has an area of over 300 000 square miles, being one-tenth
of the Continent of Australia and more than three times the area of
Great Britain. The western portion of the State is an arid high plain
sparsely populated, and the eastern portion is divided by mountain
ranges into a coastal district and a fertile highland to the west of the
coastal ranges.
It is the oldest State in the Commonwealth, having Sydney as
its capital city, and includes within its borders the Federal Capital
Territory and Canberra. The population of the State is 2 700 000,
including 1 250 000 in Sydney and 107 000 in Newcastle. The distribu-
tion of the population is shown on Plate 1.
*59265—A


Electricity in New South Wales is generated and/or supplied—
by three State Departments, viz., Department of Works and Local
Government, Department of Railways, and Water Conserva-
tion and Irrigation Commission;
by County Councils, Municipal Councils, and Shire Councils, the
most important undertakings of which are those.of Sydney
County Council, Newcastle City Council, St. George County
Council, Clarence River County Council, and Tamworth
Municipal Council; and
by public and private companies such as Electric Light and Power
Supply Corporation Ltd. (Sydney), Parramatta and Granville
Electric Supply Co. Ltd., Caledonian Collieries (Cockle
Creek), Broken Hill Pty. (Newcastle), Australian Iron and
Steel Ltd. (Port Kembla), and Western New South Wales
Electric Power Pty. Ltd. (Broken Hill).
The total capacity of installed plant in generating stations in
1936 was 631000 kW (kilowatts), of which 92.3 per cent, was steam
power, 2.4 per cent, hydro-electric power, and the remaining 5.3 per
cent, oil, gas and other power. In the same year the energy sent out
from the generating stations was 1460 million kWh (kilowatt
hours), corresponding to 545 kWh per head of population. The total
capital invested in 1935 in the electricity supply industry, including
generating stations, transmission and distribution, has been estimated
at approximately £36 000 000.
The authorities supplying electricity generally work indepen-
dently of each other, but to some extent under the regulatory control
of the Minister for Works and Local Government. For the purpose of
co-ordination the Electricity Advisory Committee was formed in 1935
to advise the Minister on matters relating to generation, transmission,
supply and use of electricity. This Committee has no technical staff of
its own.
In view of the rapidly growing demand for electricity the
Government considered that a comprehensive investigation of the
power resources of the State and their utilization should be made with
independent advice. Such an investigation would ensure as far as
possible that future developments were made on lines economically and
technically sound.
Appointment
In February, 1937, the Government appointed Messrs. Rendel,
Palmer and Tritton, of Westminster, in association with Messrs.
Vattenbyggnadsbyran (VBB), of Stockholm, to investigate and report
on electrical development in the State. The work of the Consulting
Engineers was to cover tbe following matters, viz.:—
(a) Past, present, and future power demand within the State;
(h) Proposed electrification of the main railway lines from Sydney
to Newcastle, Lithgow, Goulburn and Nowra;
2
INTRODUCTORY
Appointment


(c) Economics of alternative proposals for steam power genera-
tion by plant of tlie most modern type, either in extensions of
existing stations or in new stations, situated on coal-fields or
elsewhere, special consideration being given to the nature and
locality of the State’s fuel resources;
(d) Examination of existing hydro-electric stations, and investi-
gation of new hydro-electric developments on the Snowy River,
Shoalhaven River, Lachlan River (Wyangala), and Wollo-
mombi, Chandler, Oaky and Styx Rivers;
(e) Co-ordination of supply and interconnection of power stations
and net works by high tension transmission lines, including
supply of electricity to areas at present without such amenities;
and
(/) Organisation and control of central generation of electricity
and main high tension transmission on the one hand, and of
local distribution on the other.
For the execution of this commission Mr. B. Hellstrom,
M.lnst.C.E., M.Am.Soc.C.E., Dr. A. F. Samsioe, M.1.Y.A., and Mr. A.
E. Hughes, B.Sc., M.lnst.C.E., M.1.E.E., proceeded to New South Wales
to carry out the necessary investigations. These investigations were
started in March and completed in November, 1937.
The Consulting Engineers have collaborated with Mr. Alfred
Raworth, the Electrical Engineer for New Works of the Southern
Railway, London, in the investigation of the proposed main railway
electrification, and with Mr. A. T. Cooper, M.lnst.C.E., Consulting
Engineer, London, in connection with the investigation of steam power
generation, and the Consulting Engineers desire to acknowledge the
cordial and.able co-operation of these two gentlemen.
Acknowledgments
The Consulting Engineers desire to express their appreciation
of the excellent facilities provided by, and the hearty co-operation of
the Hon. the Premier, Mr. B. S. B. Stevens, M.L.A., and the Hon.
the Minister for Works and Local Government, Mr. E. S. Spooner,
M.L.A. They are greatly indebted to the Under Secretary to the De-
partment of Works and Local Government, Mr. H. E. Street, and to
the Chief Electrical Engineer, Mr. V. J. F. Brain, 8.E., M.I.E. (Aust.),
M.1.E.E., M.Am.I.E.E., for the personal assistance which has been of
material value to the investigation. ■
Throughout their investigation in New South Wales the repre-
sentatives of the Consulting Engineers have collaborated with the
former Chief Engineer to the State Electricity Commission of Victoria,
Mr. H. R. Harper, M.l.E.(Aust.), M.1.E.E., FeII.Am.I.E.E., appointed
by the Government for that purpose and to whom they are greatly
indebted for valuable assistance and advice.
3
INTRODUCTORY
Acknowledgments


The Electricity Advisory Committee has also rendered valuable
service by appointing Sub-Committees to co-operate with the repre-
sentatives of the Consulting Engineers, to collect data and to report on
various matters, in connection with which particular acknowledgment is
made of the assistance given by the Chief Electrical Engineer to the
Department of Railways, Mr, W. 11. Myers, 8.E., M.l.E.(Aust.),
M.lnst.T.
The Consulting Engineers also desire to express their apprecia-
tion of the assistance rendered by several State Departments, the Syd-
ney County Council, and the Special Officers for the Investigation,
Mr. E. W. Nardin, 8.E., Assoc.M.lnst.C.E., A.M.I.E. (Aust.),
Mr. R. W. J. Mackay, B.Sc., 8.E., A.M.I.E.(Aust.), Mr. J. W. Harrod,
B.Sc., 8.E., A.M.I.E.(Aust.), Mr. G. L. Harrison, 8.E., A.M.I.E.
(Aust.), Mr. R. St. C. Pitt, B.Sc., 8.E., A.M.I.E.(Aust.), and Mr. A.
Dance, B.Sc., 8.E., Stud.l.E.(Aust.).
Investigations and Reports
As the scope of the investigation is very wide it has been found
convenient to deal with certain matters in detail in appendices, attached
to this report, which can be read more or less independently of each
other. In this report, after a general review of the electricity supply
industry and the power demand in the State, summaries are given of
the subjects treated in detail in the appendices, and matters of techni-
cal and economic importance arising out of the terms of reference are
dealt with. Comparisons of alternative schemes are made, and at the
end of the report the question of organisation is discussed and a pro-
posal is submitted for the formation of a Central Electricity Authority
for generation and main transmission of electricity. The matter of
retail distribution of electricity by local authorities is also considered.
All estimates of cost are made in Australian money, the present
rate of exchange being taken at £A1.25 to £1 sterling. The estimates
refer to prices ruling in August, 1937, and take into account the con-
siderable rise in prices which occurred prior to that date. In the
estimates of annual costs the interest on capital has been taken as
per cent, per annum, a figure approved by the New South Wales Gov-
ernment for the purposes of this report.
2. PRESENT SYSTEMS OF ELECTRICITY SUPPLY
(See also Appendix I and Plate 2)
In New South Wales there are several large and numerous small
electricity supply systems, the most important of which will be briefly
mentioned, and which may he enumerated under the following
groups: —
Sydney and district;
Newcastle and district ;
Port Kemhla system;
Burrinjuck system, including Canberra;
4
PRESENT SYSTEMS OF ELECTRICITY SUPPLY


Lithgow system;
Clarence River County Council system;
Tamworth system;
Yanco system;
Other systems; and
Industrial plants.
The power stations and main transmission lines in the State are
shown on Plate 2, and detailed descriptions are given in Appendix I.
Sydney and District
In Sydney and district, electricity is generated and supplied
by—
(a) The Sydney County Council Electricity Undertaking which
generates electricity at its two power stations, at Bunnerong
and Pyrmont, retails electricity in its thirty-three constituent
municipalities in the city and suburbs, and supplies in bulk
fourteen municipalities and shires.
(b) The Department of Railways which generates electricity in
Sydney at its two power stations, at White Bay and Ultimo, at
25 and 50 cycles, mainly for traction purposes but also for
bulk supply to ten distributing authorities in the Metropolitan
area. All bulk supplies for general purposes are at 50 cycles.
(c) The Electric Light and Power Supply Corporation Ltd. This
private company generates electricity at its power station in
the suburb of Balmain, and under franchise provides supplies
in retail in five suburban municipalities.
The supply areas and transmission systems are shown on Plate 3.
Newcastle and District
In Newcastle and district, electricity is generated and supplied
by the Newcastle City Council and the Departnent of Railways. The
supply areas and transmission systems are shown on Plates 2 and 4.
The Newcastle City Council takes power in bulk from the De-
partment of Railways, both at 50 and 25 cycles, and owns and operates
a steam power station for peak load and standby purposes.
Port Kembla System
Port Kembla Electricity Supply System is owned and operated
by the Department of Works and Local Government. Electricity is
generated in a steam power station situated on the coast at Port
Kembla 56 miles south of Sydney. Twelve municipalities and shires
are supplied in bulk and a number of large industrial consumers and a
few villages and rural districts are served directly.
5
PRESENT SYSTEMS OF ELECTRICITY SUPPLY
Port Kembla System


Burrinjuck System
The Department of Works and Local Government generates
electricity at a hydro-electric power station at the Bnrrinjnck Dam. A
second station thereat is now nearing completion.
Power is supplied in hulk to 14 municipalities and shires
chiefly on the south-west tablelands, and to the Federal Capital City
of Canberra, at which point connection is also made to the small steam
power station of the Federal Government for the stand-by and supple-
mentary requirements of the Burrinjuck system. The Department
furnishes minor supplies in retail in a number of small villages and
rural districts.
Lithgow System
The Department of Railways generates electricity at its steam
power station at Lithgow, situated about 96 miles west of Sydney.
Power is supplied in bulk to seven distributing authorities which
supply an area on each side of the railway line from Lawson to Wel-
lington. A large mining development in the vicinity of Wellington is
served directly.
Clarence River County Council System
The Clarence River County Council generates the majority of
its electricity at its hydro-electric power station at Nymboida, while
its oil engine station at Lismore is used for stand-by and supplementary
purposes. The County Council supplies electricity in retail in the three
Municipalities and three Shires by which it is constituted, and has
extended its retail operations to one other municipality and five other
shires. It supplies the Municipalities of Lismore and Casino in bulk.
Arrangements have recently been concluded for supplementary bulk
supply to two additional distributing authorities and for retail supplies
in two additional Shires.
Tam worth System
A pioneer in electricity supply, the Municipal Council of
Tamworth owns and operates a, steam power station in the city for
supplying the Municipality, Electricity in bulk or retail is also supplied
to the Municipality of Manilla, the Peel Shire including the town of
Werris Creek, and the Shires of Cockbum and Mandowa.
Yanco System
The Water Conservation and Irrigation Commission which
administers the Murrumbidgee Irrigation Area, generates electricity at
its steam power station at Yanco, and supplies electricity in retail in
two main districts centred in Leeton and Griffith. The Commission
provides bulk supply to the Municipality of Narrandera, and a small
bulk supply to the Shire of Carrathool.
6
PRESENT SYSTEMS OF ELECTRICITY SUPPLY
Yanco System


GENERATION
TRANSMISSION AND
DISTRIBUTION
Capacity of Plant
Date of
Energy
High
Popula-
Name of Supply Authority
com-
Area of
Site of Power
Motive
ment
Installed
at end
of
1936
Total
gener-
Fre-
tension
tion ol
Station
power
of
opera-
capacity
1937,
ated
1936
qucncy
lines
and
supply
area
served
tion
including
cables
plant on
order
Millions
Square
Thou-
kW
kW
of
Cycles
Miles
miles
sands
SYDNEY AND DISTRICT—
kWh
Sydney County Council Elec-J'
Bunnerong..
Steam...
1929
150 000
275 000
j. 560-0
50
1 020
900
1
1 000
tricity Undertaking. \
Pyrmont ...
Steam ..
1904
49 000
49 000
( ig J
296
Sydney System of Department f
White Bay...
Steam...
1913
150 000
150 000
j-427-8
(50 cycle]
I 240
220
of Railways. \
Ultimo
Steam...
1899
60 000
50 000
25
223
(25 cycle)
J
Electric Light and Power Supply
50
12
180
Corporation Ltd. (Franchise)....
Balmain ...
Steam...
1909
41 750
41 750
50-7
NEWCASTLE AND DISTRICT—
r no 1
260
Newcastle System of Depart- f
Newcastle...
Steam...
1915
35 000
50 000
108-9
{25}
I 794
168
ment of Railways. \
(Zarra-st.)
215
Newcastle City Council j
Newcastle...
Steam...
1894
2 500
2 500
3-3
50
J
*\
(Sydney-st.]
PORT KEMBLA SYSTEM—
195
325
38
Department of Works and Local
Port Kembla
Steam...
1915
7 500
17 600
20-8
50
Government.
BURRINJUCK SYSTEM—
820
65
Department of Works and Local
Burrinjuck..
Hydro..
1928
10 000
20 000
27-4
50
606
Government
LITHGOW SYSTEM—
65
Lithgow ...
Steam...
1928
7 500
10 000
14-8
50
180
120
CLARENCE RIVER SYSTEM—
Hydro..
Oil
4 800
3 450
Clarence River County Council... <
Nymboida...
Lismore ...
1924
1933
3 200
1 500
j. 14-2
50
440
405
48
TAMWORTH SYSTEM—
200
20
Municipal Council of Tam worth ...
Tam worth...
Steam...
1888
2 300
4 300
6-2
50
72
YANCO SYSTEM—
280
23
Water Conservation and Irrigation
Yanco
Steam...
1913
4 350
4 000
6-1
50
42
Commission: Administers the
urru mbidgco Irrigation Area.
SUNDRY OTHER SYSTEMS-
Uther Municipal, Shire and Fran-
277
21 000
23 500*
29-3
industrial AND PRIVATE
plants
95 000*
150 000*
191-0
Totat.s
631 100
856 650
1 460-5
2 094
Sundry other Systems
In addition to the systems already referred to, there are numerous
medium and small public undertakings in the State for the generation
and supply of electricity.
Particulars of Present Supply System
The main technical features of the various supply systems
referred to above are given in Table I. This table also gives details
of the area of supply in square miles and the population of the areas
served.
Table I
* Approximate only.
7
PRESENT SYSTEMS OF ELECTRICITY SUPPLY
Particulars of Present Supply System


Annual load factor
Sydney and district, 50 and 25 cycle systems
Newcastle and district, 50 and 25 cycle systems ...
Port Kembla-Burrinjuck-Lithgow systems ...
Clarence River County Council system ... ...
44 per cent.
55 „
47 „
52 „
3. VOLTAGES AND FREQUENCIES
(See also Appendix I)
Alternating Current
Most of the electricity in the State is generated as three-phase,
50 cycle, alternating current. The voltages generally used for transmis-
sion and distribution are 66 kV, 33 kV, 22 kV, 11 kV, 6.6 kV, 5 kV, 2.2 kV,
and for reticulation 415/240 V.
Three-phase, 25 cycle, alternating current is generated by the
Department of Railways for traction purposes in Sydney and Newcastle
and converted to direct current, and in Newcastle 25 cycle current is
also used by a few important industries.
Direct Current
Direct current at 1 500 V is used by the Department of Railways
for the City and suburban electric railways in Sydney being converted
from three-phase alternating current of both 50 and 25 cycles.
The tramways in Sydney are operated by 600 V direct current
converted from three-phase, 25 cycle, alternating current. In Newcastle
the direct current for the tramways is converted both from 25 and 50
cycles.
4. LOAD AND POWER DEMAND
(See also Appendix I)
Load Variations
A study of the load and its variations has been made for the more
important supply systems, either as at present constituted or combined
as suggested later in this report, i.e. for Sydney, Newcastle, Port
Kembla-Burrinjuck-Lithgow (also called the “South Western Area”),
and the Clarence River County Council systems. Load diagrams for the
generating stations of these systems for four typical weeks at different
seasons of 1936 are shown on Plates 5-9.
The annual load factors for the more important supply systems
are given in Table 11.
Table II
Present Power Demand
To form an opinion as to the best means of furthering generation,
transmission and use of electricity in the State it is desirable in the
first instance to examine the present demand and then to visualise the
future demand for electricity.
8
LOAD AND POWER DEMAND
Present Power Demand


Country
Year
Generation
of electricity
per capita
British Columbia ... ...
1936
kWh
3 300
Norway ...
1935
2 700
Canada ...
1936
2 300
Tasmania ... ...
1936-37
2 260
Sweden ...
1936
1 200
United States ...
1936
1 050
Switzerland (export excluded) ...
1936
990
Finland ... ...
1936
650
Germany
1936 ’
650
Great Britain ... ...
1936
650
Belgium
1936
600
New Zealand ...
1935
600
New South Wales ... ...
1936
545
Victoria ... ... ...
1936
520
France ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ...
1936
400
South Africa
1934
390
Japan ...
1935
370
Austria ...
1934
340
Holland
1935
320
Italy
1935
320
The diagrams on Plates 10 to 14 show the weekly maximum load
for the four systems referred to in Table 11, for the period 1929 to the
middle of 1937, and indicate that the demand for electricity is bound up
with the general prosperity of the State. The depression, following the
boom which occurred prior to 1930, adversely affected the use of
electricity, and there was a gradual falling off until a low point was
reached in the middle of 1931. A slight recovery took place during
the following two years, and in the succeeding three years the rate of
increase was marked. So far as the Sydney area is concerned, it was
not until 1934 that the consumption reached the level of 1929.
During the last four years the demand for electricity in all parts
of the State has increased annually by a practically constant amount.
In .1936 the generation of electricity in the State as a whole cor-
responded to a consumption of 545 kWh per head of population. In
the same year for Sydney and district the consumption was 740 kWh and
the Newcastle and district 950 kWh per capita. In Newcastle
itself, taking into consideration energy generated by industrial
plants, the consumption per capita was in the region of 1400
kWh. These figures indicate the extensive use of electricity in the
State. It cannot, however, be considered that the saturation point has
been reached, and for the purpose of comparison the amount of elec-
tricity utilized for all purposes, including traction, in certain other
countries is given in Table 111. This Table is based on available infor-
mation and includes also energy generated in private industrial plants.
The energy generated and distributed by authorised supply under-
takings is therefore considerably less.
Table 111
9
LOAD AND POWER DEMAND
Present Power Demand


It is of interest to note that, in countries where water power
resources have been developed on an extensive scale, the consumption of
electricity per capita is higher than in other countries. The main reason
for this is generally the existence in such countries of heavy industries,
and these are often initiated and fostered by the advantageous terms for
sale of power which can be offered from hydro-electric developments.
Sydney and District
In 1929 the maximum combined load on all the Sydney systems
was 238 000 kW; during the general depression it dropped to 217 500
kW in 1931, and in 1937 it rose to 292 500 kW. The energy generated in
1931 was 766 million kWh and 1 038 million kWh in 1936.
The increase of load as represented by the “moving average”
for all systems in Sydney over the last three years has been, as shown
on Plate 11, about 36 000 kW or 12 000 kW per annum, corresponding to
an annual increase in peak load of 14 500 kW.
Newcastle and District
The growth of the maximum demand in Newcastle and district is
shown on Plate 12. In 1936-37 the combined peak load on the Zarra
Street and Sydney Street power stations was about 26 000 kW and the
energy output in 1936 was 112 million kWh. The increase of load as
represented by the moving average over the last three years has been
about 7 200 kW, or 2 400 kW per annum, corresponding to an annual
increase in peak load of 2 750 kW.
Port Kembla-Burrinjuck-Litiigow Systems
The growth of the combined maximum demand on the Port
Kembla-Burrinjuck-Lithgow systems is shown on Plate 13. The com-
bined peak in 1936-37 has been computed at 15 000 kW and the energy
output in 1936 was 63 million kWh. The increase in load as represented
by the moving average for all three systems over the last three years
has been about 1100 kW per annum, corresponding to an annual
increase in peak load of 1 300 kW.
Clarence River County Council System
The growth of the maximum demand on the Clarence River
County Council system is shown on Plate 14. In 1936-37 the peak load
was 3 500 kW and the energy output in 1936 was 14 million kWh. The
increase in load over the last three years, as represented by the moving
average, was 400 kW per annum, corresponding to an annual increase in
peak load of 450 kW.
10
LOAD AND POWEK DEMAND
Clarence Kiver Country Council System


Future Power Demand
In the case of Sydney and district, should the demand continue
to increase at the same constant rate as over the last three years and
the extra load due to the proposed electrification of the main railways
(25 000 kW in 1947) be taken into account, a total peak load on all
systems in Sydney of 375 00 kW would he reached in 1942 and of 460 000
kW in 1947.
Similar computations have been made for Newcastle and district
taking’ into account the rate of peak load growth over the past three
years and the additional load due to proposed main line railway electri-
fication (7 400 kW in 1947). In view, however, of the fact that certain
industries which have available cheap or by-product fuel have arranged
to instal further generating plant of their own, it has been necessary
to modify the results obtained on the above basis, and it is estimated
that the demand on the generating stations will be 38 000 kW in 1942,
and 49 000 kW in 1947.
Again, in the case of the Port Kembla-Burrinjuck-Lithgow
systems, the constant rate of peak load growth over the past three years
has been assumed to continue, and there have been added the additional
loads due to the proposed main line railway electrification (15 000 kW in
1947). Furthermore, arrangements for power supply to Groulburn and
to new industries in Port Kembla, Captain’s Plat and Lithgow have
recently been made, and new areas may be served west of Lithgow, as
suggested later in this report. On this basis the peak load is estimated
to be 47 000 kW in 1942, and 66 000 kW in 1947.
For the North Eastern Area, comprising the present Clarence
River County Council system, the New England towns, Tamworth, and
certain new areas of supply on the coast, similar methods of computa-
tion result in prospective loads of 12 000 kW in 1942, and 17 000 kW
in 1947. As it is thought, however, that the present rate of growth may
be regarded as unsually high, it has been deemed advisable for the pur-
pose of conservative financial estimates to regard these loads as occur-
ring in 1943 and 1949, respectively.
For other public generating stations, the rate of peak load growth
over the past three years has been assumed to continue. For private
generating stations, the load growth has been estimated with due regard
to the large private developments now in hand in Port Kembla and
Newcastle.
The actual peak loads for 1931, 1935 and 1937 of the more impor-
tant systems, either in existence or combined as suggested later in
this report, as well as the prospective loads in 1942 and 1947, are shown
in Table IV.
11
LOAD AND POWER DEMAND
Future Power Demand


Actual Peak Load
Prospective Peak
Load
'
1931
1935
1937
1942
1947
1. Sydney and district ...
kW
217 500
kW
258 000
kW
292 500
kW
375 000
kW
460 000
2. Newcastle and district ...
13 000
20 800
26 000
38 000
49 000
3. Port Kcmbla-Burrinjuck-Lithgow sys-
tems
8 800
14 400
15 000
Included in (4)
4. South Western System
47 000
66 000
5. Clarence River County Council
1 300
2 900
3 500
Included in (6)
6. North Eastern System
12 000
17 000
7. Other public and private generating
stations in the State
60 000
80 0O0
115 000
135 000
356 100
417 000
587 000
727 000
Table IV
Conclusions
It should be emphasised that the estimates of prospective power
demand are based on the actual increases in load during the last three
years, and that this period was marked by a general business recovery.
Presumably there will be years in the future marked by less prosperity,
or even by new depressions, and consequently the future rate of increase
in load, taken over a period of (say) 10 years, will show considerable
variations from time to time. On the other hand, if the annual growth
in load over the next 10 years, excluding railway electrification, is
calculated on the basis of the actual constant amount of increase per
annum during the last three years, as has been done in this estimate,
it will be found that this corresponds, in the case of the predominant
supply system, viz., Sydney and district, to an annual rate of increase
of about 4 per cent, of the load of each preceding year, and this rate of
increase is by no means excessive, but may be considered as moderate.
According to this calculation, the consumption of electricity per
capita 10 years hence will be less than the consumption already reached
by a number of countries as shown in Table 111.
The growth of the total energy generated in the State for the
period from 1907 to 1936, according to the figures supplied by the Gov-
ernment Statistician is shown on Plate 15. It will be seen that the
energy generated has risen at a progressive rate from 70 million kWh
in 1906, to 1465 million kWh in 1935-36.
Thus it would seem that the planning of the future development
for meeting the power demand during the next five years, ought not to
be based on the assumption of a lower rate of increase than contem-
plated above. We recommend, therefore, that steps be taken to meet an
increase in power demand of at least the magnitude set out in Table IV.
12
LOAD AND POWER DEMAND
Conclusions


. The estimate of the demand ten years hence is more uncertain.
Naturally, this estimate should be adjusted from time to time in accord-
ance with the future experience of the actual increase of the power
demand. A deviation of this increase from the above estimate, how-
ver, will not affect, in principle, the recommendations made later in
this report.
5. LEGISLATION RELATING TO ELECTRICITY SUPPLY
(See also Appendix II)
The first legislation in the State with reference to electricity was
enacted in 1892 and 1896 when Acts were passed dealing with the
supply to Newcastle and Sydney, respectively.
The Municipalities Electric Light Act, 1904, conferred upon
municipalities the same rights with regard to electricity supply as they
had for long held in the case of gas. They were thereby enabled to
generate and supply within and outside their areas, but not in other
municipal areas. The Local Government Act, 1906, conferred the same
powers on Shires which had just come into existence.
The authority of Municipal and Shire Councils was further
extended by the Local Government Act, 1919, the salient features of
which, so far as electricity supply was concerned, were that Councils
were authorised to form County Councils for electricity supply as well
as other purposes; to carry out electrical wiring installations on con-
sumers’ premises; to grant franchises for electricity supply to private
operators subject to the Governor’s approval being obtained to the
agreement; and to supply electricity in the areas of other Councils,
subject to the latter’s consent (and since 1935 subject also to the
Governor’s approval). Accordingly, Municipal, Shire and County
Councils now possess similar powers with regard to electricity supply.
The constitution and functions of County Councils are further
dealt with in Section 18.
The most recent important legislation is the Gas and Electricity
Act, 1935. It confers upon the Minister powers of regulation of
electricity supply, and of electrical equipment, appliances, apparatus,
materials, etc.
In the interests of the co-ordination of generation and distribu-
tion of electricity, the regulatory power of the Government is deter-
mined by providing that the Governor’s approval shall be obtained for
granting of franchises; agreements for the extension of the under-
taking of a Council into the area of another Council; agreements for
the supply of electricity in bulk to a Council by a Council, or to a
Council by any person or authority; the construction or establishment
of generating plant for public supply; the installation of an additional
main generating unit; and the construction or extension of a main
transmission lino.
13
LEGISLATION RELATING TO ELECTRICITY SUPPLY


Among the more important ordinance-making powers conferred
upon the Minister are those with reference to examination, testing and
approval of appliances, materials, etc.; standards for appliances,
materials, etc.; the form and basis of charges for electricity supply
(not intended to convey any price-fixing powers); periodical inspec-
tion by electricity supply authorities of appliances and installations on
public and private premises; safety of operatives; standards of volt-
age at consumers * terminals; and to the powers and duties vested in
County Councils.
The Gas and Electricity Act, 1935, provides for the formation
of an Electricity Advisory Committee consisting of thirteen members.
The functions of the Committee, which are only of an advisory
nature, are to consider the generation, transmission and use of elec-
tricity; to furnish information on finance, statistics, standards and
testing; to recommend schemes of co-ordination; to advise the Minister
on amending legislation; and to carry out such other advisory func-
tions as may be prescribed.
Authority for the Government to generate power at Burrinjuck
and Port Kembla and to supply electricity therefrom has been given in
several separate Acts.
The establishment and operation of the White Bay, Ultimo,
Zarra Street (Newcastle), and Lithgow power stations by the Railway
Department, and of the Yanco power station by the Water Conservation
and Irrigation Commission have been authorised by the general Acts
applicable to those bodies.
The electricity supply undertaking of the Electric Light and
Power Supply Corporation in certain suburban Municipalities of
Sydney has also been authorised by a separate Act.
The constitution, establishment and duties of the Sydney County
Council are dealt with in the Gas and Electricity Act, 1935. It is
provided that the constituent district shall consist of the City of
Sydney and the thirty-two Municipalities which were previously reti-
culated and served in retail by the Sydney Municipal Council. As the
result of this provision the identity of the former undertaking of the
Sydney Municipal Council has disappeared, the generating plants and
distribution system being taken over by the Sydney County Council.
It is further provided that the Sydney County Council shall consist of
five councillors, two elected by the City of Sydney, two by the Muni-
cipalities in the County District south of the Harbour, and one by the
Municipalities north of the Harbour.
The powers, duties, functions and electrical organisation of the
Municipal Council have been transferred to the County Council, which
is required to indemnify the Municipal Council against all claims in
respect of moneys borrowed by the Municipal Council in connection
with the undertaking.
Further details of the Acts referred to are given in Appen-
dix IT.
14
LEGISLATION RELATING TO ELECTRICITY SUPPLY.


6. MAIN RAILWAY ELECTRIFICATION
(See also Appendix III and Plate 16)
General
In considering 1 the advisability of the electrification of main
railways it is relevant to note at the outset that suburban lines around
Sydney are already electrified. The extension of the principle to
main lines has been formulated in proposals drawn up by the Depart-
ment of Railways, and these are reviewed herein. Comparative esti-
mates of cost 1 have been made in order to assess the economic possi-
bilities of the project.
Existing Suburban Railway Electrification
The electrification of the suburban railways around Sydney
extends from Sydney 21 miles towards the north to Hornsby, 15 miles
towards the west to Parramatta and Camelia, 20 miles towards the
south-west to Liverpool, and 16 miles towards the south to Sutherland
and National Park.
Like all other railways in the State, the suburban lines have a
gauge width of 4 feet 81 inches, i.e., “standard” gauge.
The electrified lines are shown on Plate 16.
Electricity is supplied by the overhead contact wire system
supported by steel structures spanning the tracks. This system
employs a hard drawn stranded copper catenary supporting a grooved
contact wire of cadmium bronze. The contact wire is supplied with
direct current at 1 500 volts from substations both of the synchronous
converter type and the metal tank mercury arc rectifier type. The
contact wire is positive and the rail return negative. Rails are bonded
or welded throughout and impedance bonds are used to separate
adjacent signal sections.
The major substations are supplied with electricity from White
Bay and Ultimo Power Stations at 11 kV, 50 cycles, and 6.6 kU, 25
cycles, through underground cables, and the more remote substations
are supplied at 33 kV, 50 cycles, by means of overhead transmission
lines from the major substations.
Trains are made up of two, four or eight cars, one of each pair
being a motor car and the other a trailer. The majority of the cars
are of steel construction, and the motor cars are equipped with two
360 horse-power motors mounted on one bogie and with electro-
pneumatic multiple unit control. Current is collected from the over-
head system by pantographs.
The signalling system is operated by alternating current utiliz-
ing the rails as track circuits split up into appropriate sections.
The electrified suburban system comprises 94 route miles and
281 track miles. The number of passenger journeys on these lines
has risen from 119 million in 1930-31 to 167 million in 1936-37. On a
week night the peak service requires 103 eight-car trains.


Main Railway Electrification, as Proposed by the Department of
Railways.
The Department of Railways has submitted a proposal for main
line electrification extending’ 83 miles from Hornsby to Newcastle, 82
miles from Parramatta to Lithgow, 117 miles from Liverpool to Gfoul-
burn, and 79 miles from Sutherland to Nowra, making a total of 361
route miles and 876 track miles. These lines are shown on Plate 16.
The Department of Railways proposes that the overhead system
be of the same design and voltage as at present, but Supported by
cantilever brackets mounted on Australian hardwood poles erected
beside each track. The high-tension lines for transmission will have
a voltage of 66 kV, and the auxiliary power supply for automatic
signalling a voltage of 2.2 kV. In general, the conductors of both the
former and the latter lines will be carried on the wooden poles support-
ing the overhead contact system.
At Sydney, Lithgow and Newcastle, the transmission lines will
be fed from the power stations at those centres, and at Goulburn
and Moss Vale from the Burrinjuck and Port Kembla systems, which
will be connected to the Snowy River hydro-electric scheme if and
when that is carried out.
The substations for converting the alternating current to direct
current will be of the automatic steel tank mercury arc rectifier type.
A central substation will be located at approximately the mid point of
each line and equipped with motor generator sets in lieu of rectifiers
in order to maintain constant voltage at that point. Supervisory con-
trol of all substations will be effected from these control substations,
which will be staffed throughout the twenty-four hours.
On the mountain sections it is proposed that mercury arc recti-
fier substations be equipped for inverted operation to feed back the
regenerated power to the 66 kY system.
Electric locomotives will be used for haulage of the existing
steam-hauled rolling stock. The majority of the locomotives tenta-
tively proposed have six driving axles, each carrying a motor of about
400 horse-power and with a total adhesive weight of about 108 tons.
The locomotives will develop about 2 500 horse-power at a speed of
25 miles per hour and will be designed for regenerative braking. A
proportion of the locomotives will be of smaller type. Current will be
collected from the overhead contact wire by pantographs on the loco-
motives.
The complete electrification of Sydney Central Station and yard,
the two existing steam-operated tracks from Central to Homebush
and North Strathfield, the Enfield goods marshalling yards and various
goods lines in the Metropolitan area, all form part of the proposed
main line electrification. Some track rearrangement work will be
necessary, and small modifications will lie required to several tunnels.
16
HATN RAILWAY ELECTRIFICATION
As Proposed by the Department of Railways


Commencement
Completion
of works
of works
Hornsby-Newcastle 'I . ,
Parramatta-Lithgow J 61 er
/Beginning 1938
Middle 1940.
\ Middle 1940
Middle 1942.
Liverpool-Goulburn
Middle 1942
Middle 1944.
Sutherland-Nowra ... ...
Middle 1944
End 1945.
The proposals anticipate that steam locomotive haulage will be
eliminated entirely from the Metropolitan area, except that, for special
shunting or short spur lines with little traffic, steam' Or other shunting*
locomotives will be used.
The signalling system will be an extension of the type of equip-
ment used at present in the Metropolitan area, and power will be
obtained from an auxiliary 2.2 kV line fed at each substation and run-
ning the full length of each line.
Provision has been made in the scheme for filter equipment at
each rectifier substation, to minimise inductive interference in tele-
phone circuits running parallel with the electrified lines.
Provided that the work on the electrification scheme be autho-
rised before the end of 1937, the stages of development suggested by
the Department of Railways are as follows:
Examination of the Foregoing Proposal
The scheme outlined above has been examined by us in collabora-
tion with Mr. Alfred Raworth, Electrical Engineer for New Works of
the Southern Railway in England. The result of this investigation is
given in Appendix 111, entitled “Report on Main Railway Electrifica-
tion in New South Wales.”
The 1500-volt direct current system has been chosen by the
Department of Railways mainly because the suburban electrification in
Sydney is operated on this system. A further factor which may have
a bearing on this subject is that an agreement was reached in 1922
between the Departments of Railways of New South Wales and Victoria
in favour of direct current for both suburban and main line electrifica-
tion. The suburban railways in Melbourne are operated by direct
current at 1 500 volts.
In view of the fact that large capital sums have already been
spent on the electrification of the suburban lines round Sydney, and
that electrified main line traffic would also use the same tracks in many
instances, no other system than the present 1 500-volt direct current
system has been considered.
It is concluded that, with the system chosen, the proposed scheme
of electrification is technically sound. Certain modifications, however,
are recommended in Mr. Raworth *s report, with a view to obtaining
increased reliability, restriction of the area affected by a fault on the
high-tension transmission line, and a more uniform voltage at the loco-
motives.
*59205—8
17
MAIN' RAILWAY
Examination of the Fofegoing Proposal


The voltage of 66 kY suggested for the transmission lines is
adequate for the power to be transmitted and at the same time
possesses the advantage that bulk supplies of electricity for urban and
rural centres can be economically tapped from the transmission lines
as required. The use of transmission lines to serve the railways and
the domestic and industrial requirements of the surrounding urban
and rural areas should result in appreciably lower charges to these
areas, which include a very large proportion of the country residents
of the State.
Estimates of Cost
The estimates of capital and annual costs of the electrification
scheme, made by Mr. Raworth, have been based on the assumption
of a traffic volume of the same magnitude as prevailed in 1936, and,
alternatively, a traffic volume 40 per cent, greater. The figures for the
1936 traffic given in April, 1937, on which Mr. Raworth’s report is
based, were subsequently revised in a memorandum dated 2nd Septem-
ber, 1937, by Mr. W. J. Bubb and Mr. W. 11. Myers, of the Department of
Railways. The estimated capital cost for the revised traffic figures is
given below: —
(a) Traffic volume of same magnitude as in 1936.
£
Transmission lines and overhead contact and other
wiring .. .. .. .. .. 2 792 000
Substations and control stations .. .. 1587 000
Alterations to signalling, system, bridges, tunnels,
telephone lines, etc .. .. .. 931 000
Electric locomotives .. .. .. .. .. 3 080 000
Engineering .. .. .. .. .. .. 84 000
Interest during construction .. .. .. .. 254 000
£8 728 000
(b) Traffic volume of a magnitude 40 per cent, greater than in 1936.
£
As in the case of 1936 traffic volume .. .. .. 8 728 000
Electric locomotives .. .. .. .. .. 1 243 000
Engineering .. 12 000
Interest during construction .. .. .. .. 37 000
£lO 020 000
In compiling the above estimates it has been assumed that the
electrical equipment in the substations and also the locomotives would
be purchased in the United Kingdom at prices ruling in August, 1937.
18
MAIN RAILWAY ELECTRIFICATION
Estimates of Cost


1936 traffic
1936 traffic +
40 per cent.
£
£
Annual cost of electric traction ...
824 260
1075 200
Annual cost of steam traction
1 232 000
1 724 000
Saving due to electrification
407 740
648 800
Percentage on capital ...
4-67
6-47
No provision has been made in the estimates for any Customs duties
on material imported into Australia, but 10 per cent, has been allowed
for contingencies.
The annual cost of the electrification scheme based on the two
sets of traffic figures, including depreciation, maintenance, operation,
and electric power, has been estimated as follows:
In the annual costs the allowance for depreciation provides
for a complete renewal of locomotives in thirty-three years, and of
other equipment in twenty-five years.
In calculating the results which may be expected under the re-
vised traffic figures, in regard to trailing ton miles per engine mile and
to annual mileage per electric locomotive, the same basic figures have
been adopted as those used in Mr. Haworth’s report, so as to obtain
a direct comparison.
In the above-mentioned memorandum dated the 2nd September,
1937, by Mr. Bubb and Mr. Myers, reference was made to the percentage
increase of locomotives required for 40 per cent, increase of trailing
ton miles. Whilst it will no doubt be found possible to operate the
40 per cent, increased traffic with less than 40 per cent, more locomo-
tives, it is felt that, for the purpose of a conservative estimate, no
reduction in the estimated number of locomotives should be con-
sidered.
In the same memorandum reference is made to the use of lighter
locomotives for certain sections. In the event of these locomotives
being used, a further saving in capital expenditure should be effected.
The estimates indicate that a saving over steam working may
be anticipated equivalent to a return of 4.67 per cent, on the first cost
on the basis of 1936 traffic figures, and of 6.47 per cent, on the basis of
1936 traffic figures increased by 40 per cent.
In addition to this saving, certain credit for the large quantities
of displaced existing equipment, chiefly steam locomotives, should be
taken into the electrification account. The amount of this credit, if
any, cannot be calculated by us, but it should correspond to the value
that the possible continued use of this equipment may have, as reserve or
otherwise, for the operation of the uneloctrified sections of the railways,
and/or to the price at which such equipment may be sold.
19
MAIN RAILWAY ELECTRIFICATION
Estimates of Cost


With regard to the steam locomotives and other assets which
would be displaced by the electrification of the railways, it is clear that
the payment of interest on and the amortisation of the capital corres-
ponding to their book value would have to be met from income,
whether the electrification is proceeded with or not.
Should the Department of Railways, in accordance with their
present practice, prefer to retain on their books the new electrical
equipment, etc., at its initial value, then the figures in the annual costs,
detailed in Appendix 111, debited against depreciation of Electrical
Equipment and Locomotives, could be used for writing off the dis-
placed steam engines.
Conclusions
Apart from the economic comparison made above, it should be
taken into consideration that electrification of the main railways will
further have important advantages. Among such advantages the
following may be mentioned: —
(1) Possibility of extending, in an economically feasible way,
electricity supply to new urban and rural districts;
(2) Increased speed of the trains;
(3) Increased traffic capacity of the railway lines;
(4) Increased ability of the railways, owing to the greater speed,
comfort and cleanliness, to compete successfully with other
means of transport.
In view of these additional advantages and subject to the esti-
mated financial return on the capital invested being considered suffi-
cient, we would recommend electrification of the main railway lines
to be carried out.
As the intensity of the traffic is greatest on the Sydney-Lithgow
line, electrification of the main railways should preferably start with
this line, the others to follow in order of importance.
7. COAL RESOURCES- OF THE STATE
(See Plate 17)
The coal resources of the State of New South Wales have been
thoroughly investigated in past years by the .Department of Mines, and
valuable geological, statistical and economic data are available.
The State is favoured with extensive deposits of coal of good
quality. The extent of the coal measures is shown on Plate 17. Although
the Permian Coal measures, from which the major part of the coal
mined is obtained, are continuous over a great extent of territory, only
the portions of these areas which are located within some hundred miles
from Sydney are being worked at present. For this reason it has been
customary to speak of the Northern, Western and Southern Coalfields,
according to the location of the working collieries relative to Sydney.
20
COAL RESOURCES OF THE STATE


In the Northern Coalfields the largest annual output is obtained
from the Greta seam. In 1936 this seam yielded 4 million tons whilst
from the other Northern seams were obtained 2.2 million tons. The
quantities from the Western and Southern Coalfields in the same year
were 1.4 and 1.6 million tons, respectively. Hence in 1936 the total
amount of coal mined in the State reached 9.2 million tons.
Although the annual output of each field has been gradually
increasing during the last few years, the output in 1936 still falls short
of the maximum recorded, which in 1924 was no less than 11.6 million
tons.
In addition to the existing collieries which are being worked
there are several mines at present lying idle which could be re-opened
and many new collieries could be established both on private and Crown
lands. Thus there is ample margin for expansion of the coal output in
the State.
The gross calorific value of the coal obtained varies between
13 600 and 12 000 B.T.U. per lb. and the ash content between 3.7 and
14.6 per cent.
Apart from railway requirements for locomotive purposes the
major part of the coal consumed in the State is used in Sydney, New-
castle and Port Kembla. Although the Southern Coalfield is the nearest
to Sydney and Southern coal is cheaper in Sydney than that from the
other coalfields, the greater part of the coal burnt in the Metropolitan
power stations has come from the Western coalfield, the balance having
been supplied from the Southern and Northern fields. This has been
due to the limited output from the Southern field and to a slightly higher
cost of coal from the Northern field. For obvious reasons Newcastle
has almost exclusively used Northern coal and Port Kembla, Southern
coal.
The price of coal has remained comparatively steady for the last
few years but has recently risen as a result of an increase in wage
rates.
8. WATER POWER RESOURCES OF THE STATE
GENERAL
The greater part of Australia is not favoured with water power
which can be economically utilized. The important water power
resources are to be found in Tasmania and on the mainland in the region
of the Australia Alps, i.e., in the north-east of Victoria and the south-
east of New South Wales. In other parts of New South Wales, how-
ever, there are smaller sources of water power which can be economi-
cally developed.
21
WATER POWER RESOURCES OF THE STATE
General


Most of the rivers of New South Wales are very erratic in their
flow and therefore co-operation between hydro-electric plants and coal
fired steam stations is essential in order to avoid excessive storage
reservoirs. Even with such interconnection, however, comparatively
large reservoirs are required to maintain the necessary output from
the hydro-electric plants during periods of low flow.
Comparatively little legislation has yet been enacted relating to
the development of water power. All rivers in the State are vested
in the Crown and no development may be undertaken without the con-
sent of the State Government. An Act has been passed granting to the
Commonwealth Government the right of utilizing certain rivers,
primarily the Snowy River, in connection with power supply to the
Federal Capital Territory, and the consent of this Government is there-
fore required for developments on these rivers.
Meteorology and Topography
In New South Wales there are no lakes providing suitable natural
storage and the run-off due to precipitation is therefore rapid except
in the south-eastern corner of the State, where a snow region assists
in maintaining a more uniform flow. The snow season, however, even
in this restricted area is of comparatively short duration.
There are in the country both summer and winter rain regions.
The former extends mostly over the territory to the north of a line
drawn between the north-west corner of the State and Newcastle, and
the latter covers the portion of the State to the south of this line.
In the southern portion of the State the winter rainfall is largely
due to Southern depressions which skirt the shores of the continent
during the winter and spring seasons. The mean annual isohyets, with
values from 10 to 20 inches, are spread over the western plains and
generally run north to south, whilst the isohyets towards the east are
more complicated with isolated regions of high and low rainfall. This
portion of the State shows to a marked degree a close relation between
topography and rainfall. Anti-cyclonic rains may occur at all times of
the year, but most markedly from March to September. They are the
cause of many of the heavy rainfalls and floods in the coastal districts.
The New England Tableland is one of the highest massifs in
Australia, the height of the plateau being some 3 000 ft. above sea level.
On its eastern border the country falls rapidly towards the coast, and
in places loses most of its elevation in a few miles. The average annual
rainfall in this area varies between 30 and 35 inches.
In the northern part of the State the bulk of the rainfall is due to
monsoons and tropical disturbances. The annual isohyets are approxi-
mately parallel with the coast, the 10 to 25 in. lines lying to the west of
the Tablelands, and the highest values, up to 60 in. or more, lying
closely together in the narrow coastal region east of the Tablelands.
22
WATER POWER RESOURCES OF THE STATE
Meteorology and Topography


Water power resources
Output at
50 per cent,
load factor
kW
(1) Developments completely surveyed for wliicli satisfactory data
are available regarding stream flow
340 000
(2) Developments completely surveyed but for which stream flow
is not satisfactorily known ...
160 000
(3) Developments with preliminary surveys only and river flows
insufficiently known ...
35 000
Gaugings of the various streams in the State have been carried
ont for many years by the Water Conservation and Irrigation Commis-
sion and by the Department of Works and Local Government. These
Departments are to be commended for the valuable work they have
carried out in this respect. Complete records of flow are available for
many of the gauging stations, and it is recommended that the collection
of such data continue without interruption. They are of value not only
for hydro-electric purposes hut are of vital importance for water sup-
plies, irrigation, bridges, etc.
Potential Water Power
Investigations of water power resources and of prospective
developments have been undertaken by the Department of Works and
Local Government. This Department has investigated various pro-
posals and detailed surveys have been made of many hydro-electric
schemes. A report on the water power resources of the Commonwealth
of Australia, prepared by the Standards Association of Australia,
included estimates of the potential output of the water power resources
of the State and these are set out in Table V.
Table V
Group (1) includes the Snowy, Shoalhaven, Murray, Murruni-
bidgee, Styx and Nymboida Rivers; group (2) includes the Tumut,
Lachlan (Wyangala Dam), Clarence, Tooma, and Swampy Plains
Rivers; and.group (3) includes the Tumbarumba, Barrington and War-
ragamba Rivers, and the head waters of the Murrumbidgee River.
The figures quoted above have not, however, been checked by us,
as our investigation work has been directed towards definite schemes
which have been selected as being promising from a technical and
economic point of view. These hydro-electric schemes will be dealt with
separately and include developments on the Snowy and Shoalhaven
Rivers in the south, on the Styx, Oaky, Chandler and Wollomombi
Rivers in the north, and on the Lachlan River at Wyangala Dam in the
west.
23
WATER POWER RESOURCES OF THE STATE
Potential Water Power


Installed capacity
Head in feet
in 1937, including
plant on order
Burrinjuck—
kW
Power Station No. 1
110 to 210
10 000
Power Station No. 2
110 to 195
10 000
Nymboida
220
4 800
Mullumbimby
320
280
Dorrigo
225
200
Total
25 280
Existing Hydro-electric Plants
Certain data regarding the existing hydro-electric plants, most
of which have been referred to in Section 2, are given in Table VI.
Table VI
Possible Hydro-electric Development at the Hume Dam
There are possibilities of installing' water turbines at certain
irrigation dams, of which the most important is the Hume Dam. A
power station can be constructed immediately downstream of this dam
on the right bank of the river, where three penstocks have been em-
bedded in the concrete of the dam for connection to generating units
of a total capacity of about 40 000 kW. The dam, however, has been
built for irrigation purposes, and, with the amount of storage provided
at present, hydro-electric power must be considered as a by-product
only. Until full use can be made of the water for irrigation, power
may be available all the year round, but, later on, little or no power
will be obtainable for several months of the year when the water is
being impounded. It is obvious that under such conditions a power
station at the Hume Dam cannot be considered as an independent
source of power supply, and must be operated in conjunction with
either a steam generating plant or another hydro-electric plant with
adequate storage facilities.
As far as can be judged there seems to be little or no prospect
that more than a small portion of this water power could be economi-
cally used for electricity supply in New South Wales. On the other
hand, it is probable that water power at the Hume Dam could be
ecomically utilized in conjunction with the Kiewa hydro-electric
scheme in Victoria.
Possible Utilization in New South Wales of Water Power
Sources in Victoria
Reference may also be made to the fact that on the Snowy
River in Victoria on sites 25 and 40 miles from the border of New
South Wales, there are possibilities of hydro-electric development.
According to surveys made by the States Electricity Commission of
24
WATER POWER RESOURCES OF THE STATU
Possible Utilization in New South Wales of Water Power Sources in Victoria


Victoria it would be possible to utilize 430 feet of head by means of
two dams, and to generate some 67 000 kW at an average load factor
of 50 per cent.
It might be possible to make an arrangement with this State
for developing power in the Victorian section of the Snowy River
and for transmitting this power into New South Wales if this course
be found desirable and feasible.
9. SNOWY RIVER HYDRO-ELECTRIC SCHEME
(See also Appendix IV and Plates 18,19, 20 and 21)
Geography
The Snowy River rises to the east of the Snowy Mountains near
the top of Mount Kosciusko, the highest peak in Australia (7 305 ft.).
As shown on Plate 18 the river and its tributaries drain the eastern
slopes of the Snowy Mountains. The catchment extends along this
range for some 60 miles. Above Jindabyne the catchment area is 680
square miles and to the north of this place there is a plain some 6 miles
long and 3 miles broad offering an almost ideal site for a large storage
reservoir. From Jindabyne the Snowy River flows in a big loop towards
the east, towards the south and then towards the west, a distance of
some 85 miles along the river to the end of the loop at Biddi Point.
At this latter place, which is about 18 miles distant from Jindabyne as
the crow flies, the river level has fallen 1 850 feet below the level at
Jindabyne. From Biddi Point the river flows southwards into Victoria
and thence to the sea.
Utilization op Power
For a major power development it would appear essential to
make use of the plain at Jindabyne as a storage reservoir, and the
utilization of the head along the shortest route between Jindabyne and
Biddi Point is the most promising project from a technical and
economic point of view.
It is obvious that the local power demand in the actual region
of the Snowy River cannot absorb the amount of power that can be
developed on the Snowy River. The only possibility of economically
utilizing this power is to transmit it to a load system which could
readily absorb the energy thus developed. The scheme considered,
which is based on the major portion of the power being transmitted
to Sydney, is dealt with in detail in Appendix IV entitled “Snowy
River Hydro-electric Scheme.”
Hydrological Data
The average run-off at Jindabyne for the last 34 years is esti-
mated at 1327 cusecs (cubic feet per second). The maximum flow at
Jindabyne observed so far is 67 000 cusecs, and the works in the river
should be built so as to be able to withstand a flood of 150 000 cusecs.
25
SNOWY RIVER HYDRO-ELECTRIC SCHEME
Hydrological Data


The total amount of storage provided in the scheme is 250 000
acre feet, and the water supply which can be utilized in the power
stations is estimated at 1 200 cusecs, on an average throughout the
year.
Main features of Proposed Power Plants
Five different layouts of the hydro-electric scheme have been
considered. In all of these the storage dam and the main portion of
the head-race tunnel would be identical. The variations refer to the
layout of the lower portion of the head-race tunnel as well as of pipe
lines, power stations and tail-race.
The scheme described below is based on the one of those layouts
that has been most thoroughly investigated. After the description of
this scheme brief reference is made to the other possible layouts.
The hydro-electric scheme referred to, which is shown on Plates
19, 20 and 21, is divided into two plants. The upper plant will consist of
a single arch dam of a maximum height of about 112 feet, located
miles downstream of Jindabyne Bridge; a head-race tunnel 14.8 miles
long excavated in rock in the direction towards Biddi Point, ending on
a spur to the east of Wet Arm Creek; two steel pressure pipe lines
each 2 300 feet long leading the water down a spur to an underground
Power Station No. 1 on the bank of Wet Arm Creek; and a tail race
tunnel 2 000 feet long, excavated in granite, discharging the water into
an intermediate pondage basin. This reservoir will be created by means
of a lamellar gravity dam of a maximum height of 55 feet built just
below the junction between Wet Arm Creek and Farm Creek. From
this basin a second head race tunnel one mile long will be excavated in
granite through the ridge between Farm Creek and Tubbet Creek and
connected to four steel pipe lines each 7 300 feet long leading on a spur
east of Tubbet Creek to a power station No. 2 on the bank of the Snowy
River.
An extensive geological survey of the sites for the dam and
power stations, and for the alignment of the proposed tunnels, has
been carried out. For most of their length the tunnels will be exca-
vated in solid granite. In the passage through the granite the tunnels
will have an area of about 500 square feet and will be unlined for the
major part. About 3 miles of the head race tunnel to Power Station
No. 1 might run through sedimentary rocks and, if so, will have to be
lined with concrete. The free area of this part will be about 190
square feet.
Generating Capacity of the Power Stations
The installed capacity of the plants has been fixed at 80 000 kW
in Power Station No. 1 utilizing an average gross head of 635 feet, and
170 000 kW in Power Station No. 2 utilizing an average gross head of
1 285 feet, making a total installed capacity of 250 000 kW. In Power
Station No. 1 there will be two generating units each of 40 000 kW,
and the installation in Power Station No. 2 will consist of four gener-
ating units each of 42 500 kW.
26
SNOWY lUVEK lIYDEO-ELECTKIC SCHEME
Generating Capacity of the Power Stations


Transmission- System
Under this proposal an outdoor transformer station will be
erected close to Power Station No. 1 containing two 3-pliase banks of
transformers each having a capacity of 50 000 kVA stepping up to
220/230 kY. At Power Station No. 2 another outdoor transformer
station will be built with four banks of transformers each consisting of
three single-phase 17 500 kVA transformers, stepping up to 220/230 kV.
A double 220 kY busbar in Power Station No. 2 will be solidly connected
to a similar busbar in Station No. 1, two miles away. Alternatively, it
may be found to be preferable to combine the two outdoor stations into
one, leaving the transformers in the Power Stations.
The 220 kV transmission lines to Sydney, which on their way
will pass near Goulburn, will consist of two circuits each on separate
steel structures. The length of route is approximately 265 miles and
it is proposed that one line only be built in the first stage of develop-
ment. The conductors will be of steel-cored aluminium. At Goulburn
the circuits will be brought into a substation to be provided there for
supply to the Burrinjuck-Port Kembla system and at this point line-
sectionalising equipment will be installed. This substation will con-
tain two 15 000 kVA 3-phase transformers for reducing the voltage to
132 kY. A t Sydney the transmission lines will terminate in an outdoor
receiving station containing five 3-phase 50 000 kYA transformers to
reduce the voltage to 33 kY for connection by means of underground
cables to the Sydney system.
Capacity of the Scheme
Allowing for transmission losses, the maximum capacity of the
scheme at load centres is estimated at 220 000 kW, and the average
annual output at load centres is estimated at 1120 million kWh.
Operation of Plants
The storage has been designed to enable the scheme to meet a
maximum load of 250 000 kW under conditions of river flow even worse
than any yet recorded. To this end the Snowy River power stations
will be operated as peak load or base load plants according to the flow
in the river. During seasons of low discharge the power stations will
serve the requirements of the upper part of the load curve, the Metro-
politan steam plants carrying the basic portion of it. At times of high
flow the water power stations will be operated continuously and gene-
rate as much of their power as can be utilized by the system served.
Delivery of Power
The bulk of the power will be delivered to Sydney, and the
Port Kembla-Burrinjuck system will be supplied at Goulburn accord-
ing to its requirements. The scheme also provides for supply to
Dalgety, Cooma and district, by means of a separate transmission line
from Power Station No. 1.
27
SNOWY RIVER HYDRO-ELECTRIC SCHEME
Delivery of Power


First
Development
Stage
Full
Development
Power in kW at load centres
110 000
220 000
Energy in million kWh per annum at load
centres
900
1 120
Annual load factor per cent.
93
58
Capital Cost in £ per kW at load centres
73
48
Annual Cost in pence per kWh at load centres
0-150
0-176
Development in Stages
Two main stages of development are contemplated.
The first stage will comprise the construction of the dams,
tunnels and both power stations, with the installation of half the gene-
rating capacity in each station and the requisite pipe lines. The
capacity of the generating plant in this stage will be 125 000 kW, and
for the transmission of this power to Goulburn and to Sydney one
transmission circuit only will be required. The power available at
load centres is estimated at 110 000 kW and the average output at
900 million kWh per annum. The second stage of development will
consist of the remaining generating plant and pipe lines, and the
second transmission line to Sydney.
Estimates of Cost
The capital cost of the complete scheme, including transmission
to Sydney, and allowing for interest during construction, has been
estimated as follows:
£
First stage of development .. .. .. .. 8 000 000
Second stage of development .. .. 2 600 000
Total capital cost .. .. .. .. 10 600 000
The annual cost, including interest on capital and depreciation,
is estimated as follows:
£
First stage of development .. .. .. .. 564 000
Second stage of development .. .. .. .. 259 000
Total annual cost .. .. .. .. .. 823 000
The estimated capital cost per kW and the annual cost per kWh
as well as certain other data are set out in Table VII.
Table VII.
28
SNOWY RIVER HYDRO-ELECTRIC SCHEME
Estimates of Cost


Other Layouts Considered
As mentioned in the foregoing, several different layouts of the
lower portion of the head-race tunnel as well as of pipe lines, power
stations and tail-race have been considered and these are briefly
described in Appendix IV. No final choice between these layouts should
be made until further investigations have been carried out. It would
seem, however, that it should be possible to arrive at a scheme which
economically is somewhat better than the one dealt with in detail.
Concluding Remarks
As a conclusion it might be stated that the high head in com-
bination with the considerable and fairly steady flow of the Snowy
River is an unusual and favourable feature of the scheme. Although
the main dam is fairly high and the tunnels have a total length of no
less than 14.8 miles the cost of energy obtained from the scheme is com-
paratively low. The project contains all the elements of a successful
hydro-electric power undertaking which, operated in conjunction with
other sources of supply considered, could meet the growing • demand
in Sydney and elsewhere in a suitable and economical way. Compari-
son with the cost of generation of electricity by steam is dealt with in
Section 15.
10. SHOALHAVEN RIVER HYDRO ELECTRIC SCHEME
(See also Appendix V and Plate 18, 22 and 23)
As an alternative to the Snowy River Hydro-electric Scheme
for supplying power to Sydney and district, a hydro-electric scheme
on the Shoalhaven River, in the central part of the east of the State,
has been considered and is dealt with in detail in Appendix V, entitled
“The Shoalhaven Eiver Hydro-electric Scheme.’ ’ The scheme is also
shown on Plates 18, 22 and 23.
As will be seen in Appendix V, a head of about 800 feet would
be utilized in this Scheme. The total installed capacity of the Power
Station would be 55 000 kW.
Allowing for transmission losses, the maximum capacity of uie
Scheme at load centres is estimated at 50 000 kW, and the average
yearly energy output at about 110. million kWh.
The capital cost of the scheme, including transmission to Syd-
ney, and allowing for interest during construction, has been estimated
at £3 580 000, and the annual cost, including interest on capital and
depreciation, at £250 000, corresponding to 0.55 pence per kWh trans-
mitted to load qentres.
29
SHOALHAVEN RIVER HYDRO-ELECTRIC SCHEME


This cost is much higher than the usual cost of power from
hydro-electric plants of this magnitude. The main reasons for this
are the following:—
(a) High floods make the diversion dam costly;
(b) The basement rocks being Ordovician sedimentary strata
make tunnel lining necessary;
( c ) The flow of the river is very variable, the major part of the
flow coming in floods which cannot be economically collected.
The yield of energy is therefore small in comparison with
the installed capacity of the scheme.
It is not likely that any other scheme for hydro-electric power
generation on the Shoalhaven River will prove materially superior to
that outlined in Appendix V.
Power from the Shoalhaven River will be more expensive than
power obtained from extensions of the present coal-fired stations in
Sydney. For this reason the Shoalhaven River cannot be recom-
mended as an economic source of electricity supply.
11. STYX RIVER HYDRO-ELECTRIC SCHEMES
(See also Appendix VI and Plates 24, 25, and 26)
INTRODUCTORY
The feasibility of generating hydro-electric power on the Styx,
Oaky, Chandler and Wollomombi Rivers, all of which are favourably
located for the supply of electricity to the North Eastern Area, has been
investigated and is dealt with in Appendix VI, entitled “Styx River
Hydro-electric schemes.’ ’ An outline of these schemes is given here-
under.
The rivers mentioned rise south of the Doughboy Range between
Point Lookout and Chandler Peak in the order east to west mentioned
above. Their upper reaches are convergent, and they cross the main
road between Armidale and Kempsey within a distance of 10 miles.
About a mile south of this road they all pass abruptly into deep gorges,
in the bottom of which they continue their courses for some distance,
join one another, and finally discharge into the Macleay River. To
the east of the Styx River, and in its upper reaches parallel to it, runs
Georges Creek in an imposing canyon at a distance of some 3 miles.
The bottom of this canyon is between 1 800 and 2 000 feet below the
water level of the Styx River at the road bridge. A map of the region
is shown on Plate 24.
Run-off
Although the catchments of the Styx, Oaky, Chandler and Wol-
lomombi Rivers are located closely together, the run-off per square
mile of the respective catchment areas differs vastly. This is explained
30
STYX RIVER HYDRO-ELECTRIC SCHEMES
Run-off


Eiver
Catchment
Area in square
Miles
Mean
Flow in
Cusecs
Minimum
Monthly Mean
Flow in Cusecs
Styx
59
137
13-0 •
Oaky
78
51
3-1
Chandler ...
117
• • •
1-6
Wollomombi
157
0-8
both by the fact that the precipitation is much greater over the eastern
than over the western portion of the region, and by the varying
character of the soil and vegetation of the catchments.
The area of the catchments at possible dam sites and the flow
of the four rivers are given in Table VIII.
Table VIII
From Table VIII it will be seen that the mean flow is much greater
in the Styx River than in the Oaky River. Figures for the mean flow
of the Chandler and the Wollomombi Rivers are missing, but compar-
ing these rivers with the Oaky River and taking into account the sizes
of the catchment areas as well as the smaller run-off per square mile
in the western part of the district, it seems obvious that the mean flow
of the Chandler and Wollomombi Rivers must be smaller than the
mean flow of the Styx River. In regard to low water conditions, how-
ever, data over a period of years are available for all rivers, and by
comparing the minimum monthly mean flows given in Table VIII, it
will be seen that the Styx is much superior to the other three rivers.
Particularly in the Chandler and Wollomombi Rivers drought periods
lasting for several months frequently occur when the flow is nil or
nearly nil.
From the above the conclusion can be drawn that, of the rivers
considered, the Styx River is the most favourable from a hydrological
point of view for water power development.
Silt
The Wollomombi River carries a considerable amount of silt
and the bed of the Chandler River is full of sand. A fine silt charac-
terises the Oaky River, whilst the Styx River is largely free from
deposits other than boulders and pebbles. This difference in silt con-
ditions is explained by varying degrees of soil erosion. The forests
on the Wollomombi and Chandler catchments have been removed and
the Oaky River catchment is partly ringbarked, whilst the forest on
the catchment of the Styx River remains almost untouched. The dif-
ference in the character of the rock has also an important bearing on
the matter.
31
STYX RIVER HYDRO-ELECTRIC SCHEMES
Silt


Hydro-electric Schemes
Four hydro-electric schemes have been considered: —
1. The Styx River Scheme, utilizing a gross head of 1056 feet in
the Styx River;
2. The Styx-Georges Creek Scheme, utilizing a gross head of
1 747 feet between the Styx River and the Little Styx Creek,
a tributary of Georges Creek;
3. The Oaky River Scheme, utilizing a gross head of 997 feet in
the Oaky River; and
4. The Wollomombi-Chandler River Scheme, utilizing the flow of
both rivers at a gross head of 1579 feet in the Chandler
River.
From a comparison, the details of which are given in Appendix
VI, it is concluded that the Styx River Scheme and the Styx-Georges
Creek Scheme are to be preferred to the Oaky River and the Wollom-
ombi-Chandler River Schemes,
Styx River Scheme
The Styx River Scheme will consist of a dam about 70 feet high
located some three-quarters of a mile south of the Styx Bridge, a
tunnel 2.0 miles long, and a pipe line 1700 feet long leading down to
a power station at a hairpin bend in the gorge 24 miles south-west of
the Styx Bridge. The installation will consist of two turbines and
generators, each unit of a capacitj r of 4 000 kW. Close to the power
station an outdoor substation will be erected containing transformers,
high-tension circuit breakers, and other equipment.
The capital cost of the scheme, allowing for interest during con-
struction, has been estimated at £520 000, and the annual cost, including
interest on capital and depreciation, at £36 500.
The amount of peak power which, during extreme drought
periods and under certain load conditions, as laid down in Appendix
VI, can be relied upon from the Styx River Scheme, together with the
Nymboida hydro-electric plant, is estimated at 8 800 kW. The aver-
age annual output of energy obtainable from the Styx River Scheme
under the same load conditions is estimated at 36 million kWh.
Styx-Georges Creek Scheme
The Styx-Georges Creek Scheme will consist of a dam about 52
feet high at Pan ton’s Point l-J miles east of the Styx Bridge, a tunnel
If miles long, running in a south-easterly direction and ending on the
Little Styx spur close to Little Styx Creek, and a pipe line 4 700 feet
long leading down the spur to a power station at the Little Styx Creek
a tributary of Georges Creek. One pipe line will be installed, to which
will be connected two turbines and generators, each unit of a capacity
of 4 000 kW. Close to the power station an outdoor substation will be
erected containing transformers, high-tension circuit breakers and
ether equipment.
32
STYX RIVER HYDRO-ELECTRIC SCHEMES
Styx-Georges Creek Scheme


The capital cost of the scheme, allowing for interest during
construction, has been estimated at £520 000, and the annual cost,
including interest on capital and depreciation, at £37 000.
The amount of peak power which, during extreme drought
periods and under certain load conditions, as laid down in Appendix
VI, can be relied upon from the Styx-Georges Creek Scheme, together
with the Nymboida hydro-electric plant, is estimated at 10 800 kW. The
average annual output of energy obtainable from the Styx-Georges
Creek Scheme under the same load conditions is estimated at 42 million
kWh.
At a future date the plant can be enlarged by the addition of one
or two more generating units served by an additional pipe line. The
suitable size of such future development of this scheme is dependent
upon the magnitude and the nature of the load and upon the require-
ments in reserve plant. After the installation of a third generating
unit of 4 000 kW the energy output will be increased by about 15 million
kWh per annum on an average. The capital cost of this extension is
estimated at £9O 000 and the annual cost £8 000.
Comparison between Schemes
As a result of this investigation, it appears that the capital and
annual costs of the Styx River Scheme and the Styx-Georges Creek
Scheme are very nearly equal.
The amount of peak power which can be relied upon to be avail-
able even during an extreme drought period is, however, 2 000 kW more
in the Styx-Georges Creek Scheme than in the Styx River Scheme and
the value of this additional peak power capacity is estimated at £6 000
per annum when the load has increased to such a degree as to enable it
to be utilized. Moreover, the Styx-Georges Creek Scheme is capable of
producing 6 million kWh per annum more than is possible with the
Styx River Scheme and this is valued at £5 000 per annum.
From these considerations it is evident that the Styx-Georges
Creek Scheme should be preferred. It is therefore comprised in the
recommendations with which Section 17 is concluded.
12. WYANGALA HYDRO-ELECTRIC SCHEME
(See also Appendix VII, and Plates 18 and 27.)
On the Lachlan River about 20 miles east of Cowra, and below
its junction with the Abercrombie River, the Wyangala Dam has been
built by the Water Conservation and Irrigation Commission at a cost
of approximately £l 350 000. The construction started in 1928, and was
completed in 1935. The location of the dam is shown on Plate 18.
The dam was built under the 1925 Migration Agreement between
the British and Commonwealth Governments for the purpose of pro-
viding an assured water supply to farmers along 800 miles of frontage
to the Lachlan, for irrigation, stock and domestic requirements, as well
* 59265—C
33
WYANGALA HYDKO-ELECTKIC SCHEME


as for the generation of power. For the latter purpose two pipes fitted
with control gates and screens have been provided in the lower part of
the dam, for connection to a power station.
A proposal to build a hydro-electric station at the dam is the
subject of Appendix VII entitled “Wyangala Hydro-electric Scheme,”
attached to this report.
The discharge of the Lachlan River at Cowra, 30 miles by river
below Wyangala, has been gauged since 1892, and the records of the
discharge are complete to date. The catchment area at Wyangala is
3 200 square miles of mountainous country over which the annual rain-
fall varies from 25 to 30 inches. The average discharge over the period
1893-1936 was about 730 cusecs. The highest flood on record occurred
in 1870 and is estimated at 125 000 cusecs.
The Wyangala Dam is an imposing structure. The maximum
height of the dam from foundation to crest is 190 ft., and the length of
the crest is 1 000 ft. The spillway is a separate structure comprising a
concrete weir, with a crest length 1 000 ft., built in a depression on the
left bank. The discharge capacity is 165 000 cusecs, the flood waters
being returned to the river at a point about a mile down-stream of the
dam.
At the time of the construction of the dam it was anticipated
that hydro-electric power might be generated from the water discharged
for irrigation purposes. Such hydro-electric power would, however,
be of little value if no discharge were available for several successive
months. In order to find out whether the discharge from the dam
could be maintained at the minimum of 100 or 150 cusecs without
interfering with the irrigation interests so far as they are known, an
estimate has been made of the fluctuations of the water level in the
reservoir if such a minimum discharge were maintained throughout
the year as shown on Plate 27. The result is that the effect of the
additional draw for hydro-electric purposes would not have interfered
in any way with the irrigation interests during the period of 13 years
investigated. During the driest period in 1929-30 and without any
special draw for hydro-electric purposes, the storage would have been
reduced from its full capacity of 304 000 acre feet to 142 000 acre feet
to serve the interests of irrigation. On the other hand if a minimum
draw of 150 cusecs had been maintained throughout, 125 000 acre feet
would still have been left unused. This reserve represents no less than
40 per cent, of the full capacity of the storage, and would be available
to meet a still more severe drought than in 1929-30. There seems to be
no reason, therefore, why the dam and reservoir should not serve the
double purpose of irrigation and hydro-electric power production as
originally contemplated.
With this object it is proposed to construct, immediately down-
stream of the dam, a power station containing two generating units
each of 5 000 kW. The capital cost of such a development is estimated
at £125 000 including a step-up transformer station, and the annual
cost of the development including capital charges at £lO 000.
The value of the power generated has been estimated at £22 000
per annum,
34
WYANGALA HYDHO-ELECT.LHC SCHEME


As set out in detail in Appendix IX entitled “ Supply of
electricity to the South Western Area,” it is intended to interconnect the
proposed power station with the Lithgow and Burrinjuck systems by
means of high-tension transmission lines to Cowra and to Orange.
13. PROPOSED ORGANISATION AS AFFECTING
ELECTRICITY SUPPLY AREAS
(See also Section 18 and Appendix XI)
In considering the present and future demand for electricity
it has been seen that the more densely populated portions of the State
may be divided, for purposes of electrical development, into four main
areas, by reason of proximity of the existing and prospective sources
of supply to the respective centres of population.
For the sake of continuity, the supply of electricity to each of
these areas, namely Sydney and district, Newcastle and district, the
South Western area, and the North Eastern Area, is dealt with in the
succeeding sections of this report, as it is bound up with the future
grouping and interconnection of existing generating stations with pro-
jected hydro-electric developments already described.
Detailed consideration of the future organisation of the supply
of electricity throughout the State has therefore been relegated to
Section 18 of the report under the heading “ Future Development and
Organisation’ ’ and to Appendix XI entitled “Constitution and Func-
tions of Proposed Central Electricity Authority,” but inasmuch
as the proposals made therein relate to the supply of electricity to the
above areas a short reference to them is made here.
Briefly, it is proposed to form a Central Electricity Authority
which would undertake the generation and main high-tension trans-
mission of electrical energy in the Eastern portion of State, whilst the
distribution to individual consumers would be left in charge of local
Distributing Authorities purchasing their bulk supplies from the
Central Electricity Authority.
There are considerable advantages and economies deriving from
this arrangment, but these are set out elesewhere (Section 18), and it
is sufficient to state that in the preparation of the schemes recommended
in this report a central organisation on the above basis has been
assumed.
14. SUPPLY OF ELECTRICITY TO SYDNEY AND
DISTRICT
(See also Appendix VIII and Plates 2, 18, 28 and 29.)
Steam Power Generation
Data regarding steam power generation have been collected and
certain questions in this connection studied by a Sub-Committee of the
Electricity Advisory Committee, under the Chairmanship of Mr. H. B.
35
SUPPLY OP ELECTRICITY TO SYDNEY AND DISTRICT
Steam Power Generation


Harper. The documents submitted to the Consulting Engineers have
been subjected to careful study in collaboration with Mr. A. T. Cooper.
M.lnst.C.E., and the generation of electricity in steam power stations
is the subject of Appendix VIII entitled “Steam Power Generation.”
A summary is given in the following paragraphs.
Assuming for purposes of calculation that the growing power
demand in Sydney is to be met by generation of electricity in coal-tired
steam stations, an investigation has been made into the question
whether it would be more economical to build a large steam power
station on or near a coal field and transmit power to Sydney, or to
extend the present steam stations in Sydney.
It has been established that there are no suitable sites available
at mine mouth on any of the coal fields with sufficient water supply for
a large generating station, even if cooling towers were employed. There
are several suitable sites within a relatively short distance from the
mines, but when using such a site it would be necessary to add to the
cost of transmitting the power to Sydney, the cost of transporting coal
from the mine to the power station, and under the sliding scale system
of railway freight charges this additional cost is considerable, even
though the length of haul may be short.
Further, by a comparison made between estimated costs of a new
station near the coal fields and of extensions to the existing steam
stations in Sydney, it has been found that, as an extension can be built
for approximately £4 less per kW installed, than a new station, the
reduction in capital cost per kW, assuming 50 per cent, annual load
factor, represents about 3s. Od. per ton of coal. This reduction can be
offset against the saving in cost of transport to a station near a coal
field as compared with one in Sydney. As the amount represents a
considerable portion of the cost of transport of coal to Sydney, the
question of transmitting fuel generated power to Sydney from an out-
side source need not be discussed further until the sites available at
Bunnerong, Pyrmont, and White Bay have been developed to their
ultimate capacities.
We agree, therefore, with the conclusions arrived at by the Sub-
Committee that, at any rate until the facilities available for major
extensions in Sydney are exhausted, any further steam generating plant
should be installed in Sydney itself.
The possibility of an extension of Bunnerong Power Station by
100 000 kW, such extension being referred to as Bunnerong “C”, and
of White Bay Power Station by 150 000 kW, referred to as White Bay
“B,” has been considered.
In such proposal it has been assumed that the Bunnerong “C”
extension will comprise two 50 000 kW turbo-generators, with four
boilers each having normal rating of 300 000 lb. of steam per hour. The
boilers will be designed to generate steam at a pressure of 650 lb. per
square inch and at a temperature of 850°F, in order to line up with the
steam-raising plant now on order. The choice between automatic
stokers and pulverised fuel firing, however, should be left over for
36
SUPPLY OF ELECTRICITY TO SYDNEY AND DISTRICT
Steam Power Generation


futnre decision in the light of the experience then available as to the
relative advantages of these two alternatives, either of which would he
covered by the estimates submitted.
In the case of White Bay it has been assumed that the extension
will comprise five 30 000 kW turbo-generators, with ten boilers each
having a normal rating of 170 000 lb. of steam per hour. The steam
conditions will be the same as in the case of Bunnerong “C”.
The capital cost of Bunnerong “C” has been estimated at
£2 180 000. The corresponding annual cost is estimated to be £2 12s. Od.
per kW of maximum demand on outgoing feeders plus 0.114 d. per kWh
sent out.
The capital cost of the extension at White Bay has been estimated
at £3160 000. The corresponding annual cost is estimated to' be
£2 10s. Od. per kW maximum demand on outgoing feeders plus 0.117 d.
per kWh sent out.
The annual costs are those relating to the installations when
acting as base load generating plants operating at 50 per cent, annual
load factor and feeding into the general electricity supply system; the
peak loads, fluctuations and standby capacity must he met from the
existing power stations.
In the event of either or both of the above extensions being made,
additional cables will be required both for the distribution of the
additional power in the Metropolitan area and for the interconnection of
the Pyrmont, Bunnerong and White Bay power stations, in order to
permit efficient utilization of spare plant capacity.
Similar arrangements will be necessary, however, if other means
of meeting the demand in Sydney are to be provided, such as the de-
velopment of the Snowy River hydro-electric scheme. For this purpose
it would be essential, and quite practicable, to locate a terminal substa-
tion at a point in favourable relation to the Metropolitan power
stations. The cost of the requisite cable facilities in the Metropolitan
area is therefor regarded as substantially the same whichever scheme
of development be adopted, and consequently the cost of these cables
is not included in the above estimates.
Afe existing steam stations in Sydney can be extended with plant
sufficient to meet the growing power demand for many years to come,
a detailed estimate for a new large steam station near the coal fields or
in Sydney is not warrantee! at this juncture.
As a result of this investigation it has been found that the most
economical means of supplying additional power to Sydney by steam
generation is to extend existing steam stations in preference to the
establishment of new stations near to coal fields.
Hydro-electric Power Generation
To meet the growing power demand in Sydney and district two
hydraulic schemes, on, the Snowy and the Shoalhaven Rivers respec-
tively, have been considered as alternatives to extensions of the exist-
37
SUPPLY OP ELECTRICITY TO SYDNEY AND DISTRICT
Hydro-electric Power Generation


Initial Plant Capacity in Thousands of kW
Station
Installed
Operating
at time
Running
Standing
Nominal
Effective
of peak
(sent out)
Reserve
Reserve
50 Cycle System —
Bunnerong “ A ” ...
175
168
120
48
Bunnerong “ B ”
White Bay “A”
100
96
96
• • •
86
83
63
20
Pyrmont
49
47
24
23
Balmain
55
53
43
10
25 Cycle System —
Ultimo “ A ”
50
48
38
10
White Bay ...
64
46*
36
10
Total ...
579
541
420
48
, 73
ing steam power stations in Sydney. These hydro-electric schemes
have been dealt with in Sections 9 and 10, and also in Appendices IV
and Y.
It is concluded that whereas the Shoalhaven hydro-electric
scheme cannot be recommended as an economic source of power
supply the Snowy River hydro-electric scheme possesses all the
elements of a successful power undertaking which, operated in con-
junction with steam power plant in Sydney, could meet the growing
demand in Sydney and elsewhere in an economic manner.
Comparison between Steam Power Extensions in Sydney and the
Snowy River Scheme
In order to determine the most economic method of providing
for the power demand in Sydney and district a comparison has been
made of the estimated total annual costs, exclusive of capital charges
on the initial plant, of supplying the Metropolitan 50 and 25 cycle
systems by two alternative schemes of development, viz., extensions
of existing power stations in Sydney, and the Snowy River Scheme.
The initial plant has been taken as all plant installed and on
order, including a second 18 750 kW generating unit assumed for the
purpose of the comparison to have been ordered for the Balmain Power
Station. With the several generating systems interconnected by cables
between Balmain and White Bay stations and by additional cables
between White Bay and Pyrmont stations, together with the installa-
tion of a 25 000 kW frequency changer now on order for White Bay,
and assuming that operations are so co-ordinated as to give the
highest overall economy, the initial plant will be capable of meeting a
peak load of 420 000 kW (sent out). The conditions of operation of
the combined plant at times of peak load are shown in Table IX.
Table IX
* Limitation due to boiler capacity
38
SUPPLY OF ELECTRICITY TO SYDNEY AND DISTRICT
Comparison between Steam Power Extensions in Sydney and the Snowy River Scheme


Stations
Energy
cost,
pence
per kWh
sent out
Annual
demand
cost of
operation
£ per
effective
kW
Annual
capital
charges,
£ per
effective
kW
Bunnerong “ B ”
0-114
0-90
Not included.
Bunnerong “ C ”
0-114
0-90
1-70
White Bay “ B ” and Ultimo “ B ”
Bunnerong “ A ” and Ultimo “ A ”
White Bay “A,” Pyrmont, Balmain, and White
0-117
0-90
1-60
0-138
1-09
Not included.
Bay, 25 cycles
0-166
1-22
Not included.
For the first alternative scheme of development, viz., the exten-
sion of the existing steam stations, a schedule has been prepared for
the installation in reasonable stages of (a) the extensions referred to
as Bunnerong “C” and 'White Bay “B,” and ( h ) an extension of
Ultimo station by 60 000 kW of 25 cycle generating plant, referred to
as Ultimo “B.” The latter extension would involve the displacement
of two small 25 cycle generating units from the present plant, Ultimo
“A.” To enable White Bay “B” extension to be carried out in its
entirety it will be necessary to displace the existing 25 cycle plant.
The various stages of development have been determined with
due regard to the peak loads to be carried and after allowing a reason-
able margin of running and standing reserve capacity which, at all
stages, has been maintained at not less than 20 per cent, of the total
effective capacity. The limitation of power interchange between the
two systems of different frequencies has also been taken into account.
An estimate has been made of the energy output from the power
stations during the various stages of development.
The result of these calculations is shown on Plate 28, Fig. 1.
The full-drawn stepped line shows the estimated annual output sent
out from the most efficient stations, Bunnerong “B” and “C,” White
Bay “B,” and Ultimo “B.” On the same Plate is also shown by a
dotted stepped line the estimated annual output from the less efficient
stations, Bunnerong “A,” White Bay “A,” Ultimo “A,” Balmain,
Pyrmont, and the 25 cycle plant at White Bay. The energy output
is considered and plotted as a function of the system peak load, and
the steps in the lines correspond to the various stages of development.
The calculations of the total annual costs of generating the
energy outputs shown on Plate 28, Pig. 1, have been based upon the
estimated cost units of steam power generation given in Table X.
Table X
The total annual costs, which are exclusive of capital charges
on the initial plant, are shown by the full-drawn line on Plate 29.
39
SUPPLY OF ELECTRICITY TO SYDNEY AND DISTRICT
Comparison between Steam Power Extensions in Sydney and the Snowy River Scheme


In the second alternative scheme, viz., the Snowy River hydro-
electric scheme, it is assumed that the plant in the first stage of de-
velopment will come into operation when the peak load on the system
has reached 420 000 kW, which is estimated to occur in 1944. In this
case no further installation of plant will be required until the peak
load has grown to 456 000 kW. Up to this point it is possible to carry
in the steam stations in Sydney sufficient running reserve plant to pick
up the load in case of a failure of the single transmission line from
the Snowy River. When the peak load exceeds this figure it will be
necessary to bring into operation the second transmission line from the
Snowy River so as to be able to limit the running reserve capacity to
the equivalent of the largest steam generating unit. The installation
of the second transmission line can be effected without any further
installation of plant in the Snowy River power stations but it has been
found more economical to complete the scheme simultaneously with the
erection of this second line. It has therefore been assumed that the
Snowy River scheme will be fully developed when a peak load of
456 000 kW has been reached. When fully developed the scheme will
be adequate in capacity to provide for a growth in the peak load to
607 000 kW (sent out), and no further steam installation will be
required until this load is exceeded.
The average annual energy outputs from the individual stations
have been determined by a detailed investigation of the combined
operation of the Snowy plant and the initial steam generating
plant at certain stages of peak load development over a typical span
of ten consecutive calendar years embracing periods of droughts and
of abundant water supply in the Snowy River.
The result of these calculations is shown on Plate 28, Pig. 2.
The dash-and-dotted line indicates the estimated average annual out-
put sent out from the Snowy River Scheme. On the same plate is also
shown, by a full-drawn line, the estimated average annual output sent
out from the most efficient station, Runnerong “B,” and by a dotted line
the output from the less efficient stations, Bunnerong “A,” White
Bay “A,” Balmain, Pyrmont, the 25 cycle plant at White Bay, and
Ultimo “A.” As before, the energy output is considered and plotted
as a function of the system peak load, the step in the graphs correspond-
ing to the second stage of development of the Snowy River Scheme.
The total annual costs for the combined operation of steam and hydro-
electric power plants have been determined so far as steam genera-
tion is concerned by using the figures of cost as set out in Table X,
and for hydro-electric generation by taking the annual cost of the first
stage at £564 000, and the full development at £823 000 in accordance
with the estimates of cost given in Section 9 and Appendix IV. These
total annual costs, which are exclusive of capital charges on the initial
steam generating plants, are shown by the dotted line on Plate 29.
As can be seen from Plate 29 the annual costs of meeting the
demand between 420 000 kW and 486 000 kW varies between £I4OO 000
and £1 650 000, and are practically the same whether extensions of
40
SUPPLY OF ELECTRICITY TO SYDNEY AND DISTRICT
Comparison between Steam Power Extensions in Sydney and the Snowy River Scheme


steam power stations in Sydney or the construction of the Snowy River
Scheme he undertaken. With the growth of the demand beyond 486 000
kW the Snowy River Scheme will result in a considerable saving.
With a peak load in excess of 486 000 kW the advantage is in the region
of £IOO 000 per annum which is increased to between £230 000 and
£2BO 000 per annum when the peak load has exceeded 524 000 kW.
The latter annual saving is equivalent to a surplus of about
5 per cent, on the estimated excess capital of £5 260 000 required for
the hydro-electric scheme over and above that required for steam
power station extensions and after having provided in the annual costs
for interest and depreciation on the whole capital expenditure of
£lO 600 000.
On the basis adopted in Section 4 for estimating the power
demand, peak loads of 486 000 kW and 524 000 kW will be reached in
1949 and 1951, respectively.
Moreover, in order not to complicate the comparative estimates,
no account has been taken of the proposed supply of power from the
Snowy River Scheme at Goulburn for use in the South Western
System. If the Snowy River Scheme is not undertaken, in due course
an entirely new steam station will be required at Port Kembla, for
which it will be necessary to provide, in the initial stage, circulating
water and other facilities for an ultimate capacity of, say, 100 000 kW.
if these facts are taken into consideration as well as the benefit of the
co-operation of the Sydney System with the South Western system
made possible by the Snowy River transmission lines the economic
superiority of the Snowy River Scheme would be still more pro-
nounced.
Included in the estimated annual cost of the hydro-electric
scheme there is an amount to cover depreciation calculated on the basis
of certain rates for specified groups of the assets. The average rate of
depreciation is 1.9 per cent., and annual contributions on this basis to
a sinking fund invested at 3 J /o per cent, per annum will in 30 years
amount to the total capital cost of the scheme. After the capital cost
has been written off there will remain, for all time, a concentrated
fall on the Snowy River of about 1 900 feet established by the ever-
lasting 15 mile tunnel. This is of considerable value in the economic
comparison of the merits of the two alternatives.
It should be noted that the comparison between the two alterna-
tive schemes is based on a coal price of 17s. 3d. per ton delivered in
Sydney, and does not take into account the rise in cost of coal which
has occurred since August, 1937. In the estimate of annual costs
contingencies of 10 per cent, have been allowed in the working costs
of the two alternative schemes to provide against the possibility of an
increase in cost of such items as affect future operation.
The supply of power from the Snowy River Scheme when fully
developed will reduce the coal consumption in the State by about half
a million tons per annum which represents about five per cent, of the
41
SUPPLY OF ELECTRICITY TO SYDNEY AND DISTRICT
Comparison between Steam Power Extensions in Sydney and the Snowy River Scheme


present output from the coal mines in the State. On the other hand
the construction of the Snowy River Scheme will result in increased
industrial activities arising from the manufacture of cement, steel,
and other materials required for the works, and the employment of
labour on a large scale over a period of four years or so.
It is estimated that of the capital cost of the Snowy River
Scheme of £lO 600 000 about 84 per cent, will be spent on labour and
material within the State.
The electricity supply to the Capital of the State is at present
solely dependent upon the supply of coal to the power stations, and
in the past there has been some anxiety with regard to the continuity
of fuel supply. It would therefore be of value if a portion of the
electricity supply to the Capital could be delivered from a hydro-
electric station.
An additional advantage to be derived from the hydro-electric
development would be a reduction of smoke and ash nuisance in certain
city districts, which might be increased if White Bay Power Station
were extended.
Conclusions
As a result of the comparison made the conclusion is reached
that from an economic point of view the Snowy River Scheme is to be
preferred to extensions of the existing steam power stations in Sydney
beyond the present commitments.
It is therefore recommended that the Snowy River Scheme be
proceeded with so as to provide for the first stage of development being
ready for operation by the time the peak load on the Sydney supply
system reaches 420 000 kW, which is estimated to occur in 1944. The
scheme should be fully developed within two to three years thereafter.
15. SUPPLY OF ELECTRICITY TO NEWCASTLE AND
DISTRICT
(See also Plate 4)
The present system of supply of electricity in Newcastle and dis-
trict is described in Section 2 and Appendix I, and the load and power
demand for the same area are dealt with in Section 4 and in Appendix
I. After the installation of plant now on order for the Zarra Street
power station the estimated capacity of the Newcastle system in 1942
42
SUPPLY OF ELECTRICITY TO NEWCASTLE AND DISTRICT


Capacity of plant
Installed
Working
Eeserve
Zarrk Street power station—
Existing plant ...
Plant on order ...
Sydney Street power station—
Existing plant
New plant required 1942 to meet estimated load
kW
*30 000 \
15 000 /
2 500
$15 000
kW
22 500
2 000
15 000
k'W
$22 500
500
62 500
39 500
23 000
Capacity of plant
Installed
Working
Reserve
Zarra Street power station—
Existing plant
Plant on order
Sydney Street power station—
Existing plant ... ...
New plant required 1947 to meet estimated load
kW
30 000 \
15 000 /
2 500
f30 000
kW
22 500
2 000
30 000
kW
*22 500
500
77 500
54 500
23 000
and 1947 will be as set out in Tables XI and XII, respectively. New
plant required to meet the estimated loads in the years mentioned is
also included in the Tables.
Estimated load in 1942 for New-
castle and district
Table XI
Including main railway electrification... 38 000 kW
Excluding main railway electrification.. 32 000 kW
* Excluding 2 500 kW, 25 cycle, and 2 500 kW, 50 cycle, plant displaced by 1942
115 000 kW 50 cycle plant and 7 500 kW 25 cycle plant
j 50 cycle plant
Estimated load in 1947 for New-
castle and district
Table XII
{lncluding main railway electrification... 49 000 kW
Excluding main railway electrification.. 42 000 kW
* 15 000 kW 50 cycle plant and 7 500 kW 25 cycle plant
f 50 cycle plant
As will bo seen from the Tables new plant of a capacity of 15 000
kW in 1942 and a further 15 000 kW in 1947 will be required at New-
castle to meet the load estimated for the years mentioned. The reserve
capacity given corresponds to the largest generating units being out of
service, but it should be noted that the equivalent of additional reserve
capacity will be made available by the electrification of the railway
between Sydney and Newcastle. Under normal conditions the railway
43
SUPPLY OF ELECTRICITY TO NEWCASTLE DISTRICT


loading will be supplied from Sydney and Newcastle in about equal pro-
portions, but the railway transmission line will be designed to transmit
the full load for the railway electrification from either end. In emer-
gencies it will therefore be possible to relieve either system of the corres-
ponding railway load, estimated at 6 000 kW in 1942 and 7 000 kW in
1947.
When the capacity of the present building is reached it is
suggested that the additional plant required at Newcastle be installed
at Zarra Street power station at the site of which suitable space is
available for an extension close to the present station.
The loadings estimated for Newcastle and district include not
only Newcastle and its environs, but also the various towns and districts
at present served from Zarra Street power station. The transmission
lines extend to Taree in the north, Woy Woy in the south and Singleton
in the west. The estimated loads, however, exclude the districts at pre-
sent served from certain privately owned generating stations generally
south of Maitland. These stations are largely for the purpose of supply-
ing collieries, with public electricity supply as a secondary matter. The
most important power station in this group is that of the Caledonian
Collieries Ltd., at Cockle Creek. The station is relatively modern and
burns coal much of which is understood to be unsaleable. About 80 per
cent, of the energy output is supplied to the collieries of the company.
There will be required in the near future a re-organisation of
distribution in the districts abovementioned, when consideration should
be given to the question of linking up the Cockle Creek station with the
Newcastle generating system.
References with regard to extensions of the system in the direc-
tion of Tamworth, via Muswellbrook, and to the Hastings and Macleay
River districts will be found in Section 17.
The proposed organisation with reference to generation, main
transmission and distribution is dealt with in Section 18.
16. SUPPLY OF ELECTRICITY TO THE SOUTH
WESTERN AREA
(See also Appendix IX and Plate 2)
Ixteoductoey
In and beyond the Bine Mountains, west of Sydney, electricity
is supplied to a large area from the Litligow steam station over the
transmission lines radiating therefrom. To the south of this an exten-
sive area, including the Federal Capital Territory and Canberra, is
supplied from the hydro-electric station at the Burrinjuck Dam. In
the coastal area south of Sydney there is a third system for which
power is generated at the Port Kembla steam station.
44
SUPPLY OP ELECTRICITY TO THE SOUTH WESTERN AREA
Introductory


South Westeen Supply System
The areas served by these three supply systems, together with
the neighbouring territory, are collectively referred to as the South
Western Area, and the supply of electricity to this area forms the subject
of Appendix IX to this report entitled “Supply of Electricity to the
South Western Area.”
To develop adequate and economical power resources for the
requirements of the Port Kembla, Burrinjuck and Lithgow systems it
is proposed that these three systems be interconnected to form the
South Western System.
The interconnection will among other things permit the surplus
power from Burrinjuck during the irrigation season to be trans-
mitted to Port Kembla and the requisite supplementary fuel power
during times of low water discharge to be transmitted from Port
Kembla to Burrinjuck. For this purpose, and to safeguard the supply
of electricity to the Burrinjuck system should the power stations at the
Burrinjuck dam be flooded, it is recommended that a single-circuit
transmission line together with the requisite transformers and switch-
gear be constructed between Port Kembla and Burrinjuck power
stations. The transmission line 160 miles long will be designed for
132 kV and for a carrying capacity of at least 20 000 kW.
The matter of this tie-line was the subject of an interim report
submitted to the Government in May this year, and subsequently the
Government decided to build the line in accordance with the recom-
mendations contained in that report.
In order to interconnect the Burrinjuck and Lithgow systems
mid to obtain a reliable and economical system it is proposed that a
hydro-electric power plant be installed at Wyangala, that a trans-
mission line be constructed from Cowra to Orange via this power
station, and that the transmission lines at present terminating at Cowra
and Wellington be extended to Forbes, Parkes, Peak Hill and Dubbo,
referred to as the Western Towns, thereby incorporating these towns
in the proposed system.
The South Western System will be connected with Sydney by
three 66 kV railway transmission lines radiating from the city to Port
Kembla, Goulburn and Lithgow. In addition there may be a connec-
tion at Goulburn to the 220 kV transmission line from the Snowy River
hydro-electric scheme to Sydney.
The power demand has been dealt with in Section 4 of this
Report, and taking all prospective loads into account the combined
peak load on the South Western System is likely to be about 47 000 kW
in 1942, and 66 000 kW in 1947.
To establish the South Western System as outlined, the Central
Authority referred to in Section 13 should take over the generating
stations at Port Kembla, Burrinjuck and Lithgow as well as the main
transmission lines. This Authority would also be responsible for the
construction of the Wyangala hydro-electric station and of new main
transmission lines.
45
SUPPLY OF ELECTRICITY TO THE SOUTH WESTERN AREA
South Western Supply System


The present arrangements for the retail supply of electricity
should in principle remain unaltered and in the hands of local Dis-
tributing Authorities, who should be encouraged to extend their opera-
tions into the rural districts surrounding their respective load centres.
Tie-Line between Burrin.juck and Port Kembla
Generally speaking, both Power Stations Nos. 1 and 2 at Burrin-
juck Dam can withstand a flood discharge at the dam of the same
magnitude as the high flood that occurred in 1925 without the necessity
for suspending operations. It must be taken into account, however,
that a still higher flood may occur, in which case the water level in the
river below the dam will rise to such height that the machinery in both
power stations will be flooded and power generation will have to cease
for a considerable period whilst the generators are being dried out and
any other damage repaired. It is therefore essential that adequate
measures be taken immediately to ensure the safety of the electricity
supply to the Burrinjuck system which includes the supply to the
Federal Capital of Canberra.
The capital cost of the tie-line is estimated as follows:
£
Substations at Port Kembla, Goulburn and
Burrinjuck .. .. .. .. .. . . 228 000
Transmission line, 132 kV, 160 miles .. .. .. 192 000
Engineering .. .. .. .. .. .. 25 000
Contingencies .. .. .. .. .. .. 45 000
£490 000
The annual cost including interest and depreciation is estimated
at £49 000.
The total benefits resulting in 1942 from the provision of the tie-
line will be as follows:
£
Supply of electricity to Goulburn and Captain’s Flat 35100
Value of energy transferred to Port Kembla .. .. 10 000
Gain due to transfer of energy to Burrinjuck .. .. 13 400
£SB 500
Against this credit of £SB 500 is to be placed the annual cost of
the tie-line of £49 000. It is evident that within a year or two of its
inception, and quite apart from the fact that the line is a necessity
for reasons associated with the safeguarding or maintenance of supply,
the provision of the tie-line between Burrinjuck and Port Kembla is an
economic proposition. The tie-line conductors as recommended would
be capable of transmitting in either direction 20 000 kW, which is ample
46
SUPPLY OP ELECTRICITY TO THE SOUTH WESTERN AIiEA
Tie-line between Burrinjuck and Port Kembla


for all reasonable future requirements. As the load on the combined
system increases beyond that estimated for 1942, the return to be
obtained from the provision of the tie-line will rise progressively.
The conclusions reached with reference to the tie-line may be
summarised as follows:
(a) In view of the probable effects of a major flood at the Burrin-
juck Dam, immediate steps are necessary to safeguard the
supply to the Burrinjuck system;
{h) Therefore the construction of a 132 kV transmission tie-line
between the Burrinjuck and Port Kembla power stations
should be undertaken forthwith;
(c) The capital cost of the tie-line and substations is estimated
at £490 000, and the annual cost at £49 000;
(d) The annual credit which may reasonably be expected to result
from the construction of the tie-line in the year 1942 is esti-
mated at £SB 500.
Interconnection of Burrinjuck and Lithgow Systems and Exten-
sions to the Western Towns
An interconnecting tie-line between Cowra, the northernmost
point of the Burrinjuck system, and Blayney, on the route of the
Lithgow-Wellington transmission line, has been the subject of discus-
sion on many occasions.
The route distance between the two power stations is 216 miles
and the intervening transmission lines totalling some 176 miles are of
small cross-sectional area, limiting the interchange of power between
the systems to about 2 500 kW. Furthermore the Burrinjuck and Port
Kembla stations will be fully complementary to each other by the year
1945 and no water power will be available after that time for supply
to the Lithgow system. In view of these circumstances there is no
object in making an interconnection between Lithgow and Burrinjuck
solely for an interchange of power. There are, however, other con-
siderations which will support a proposal to provide an interconnection
in the near future, namely, the utilization of hydro-electric power avail-
able at Wyangala and the supply of electricity to the Western Towns.
These towns could be served with a transmitted supply provided the
two systems were adequately connected as an integral part of the pro-
posed South Western System. Finally it is to be noted that the present
line from Lithgow to Wellington will shortly be fully loaded.
The hydro-electric power station at the Wyangala Dam has been
dealt with in Section 12 and Appendix VII. It is proposed to instal
in this power station two generating units each of 5 000 kW capacity.
Provided the minimum discharge is fixed at 150 cusecs, on an average,
the plant will generate 3 500 kW peak load in 1942 and 4 500 kW in
1947. The capital cost of the development is estimated at £125 000,
including a step-up transformer station, and the annual cost at £lO 000.
47
SUPPLY OF ELECTRICITY TO THE SOUTH WESTERN AREA
Interconnection of Burrinjuck and Litbgow Systems
and Extensions to the Western Towns


Year 1942
Year 1947
Revenue or Credit—
£
£
Bulk Supply to the Western Towns
Surplus Energy fed into Lithgow or Burrinjuck Systems
26 700
36 900
Peak Power supplied from Wyangala to the Combined
7 000
5 700
System
3 600
3 600
Total
37 300
46 200
Annual Cost ... ... ...
36 000
36 000
Surplus
£1 300
£10 200
The Burrinjuck and Lithgow systems will he interconnected via
Wyangala and transmission lines will also be erected to supply the
Western Towns. The capital cost of the transmission system is esti-
mated at £257 000 and the animal cost at £26 000, making a total annual
cost of £36 000 for the proposed developments.
The revenue of the Central Authority from bulk supply to the
Western Towns is estimated at £26 700 in 1942 and £36 900 in 1947,
based on a rate of £7 per kW per annum and 0.4 d. per kWh, allowing
for 12 per cent, losses in local distribution. The bulk supply rate men-
tioned should be regarded as an average, the actual rates being subject
to negotiation.
Of the 23 million kWh generated during an average year at
Wyangala, 7 million kWh will be required in 1942 and 10 million kWh
in 1947 for the supply to the Western Towns, leaving a surplus of about
16 and 13 million kWh, respectively, which can be supplied to the Lith-
gow or the Burrinjuck system. Valuing this surplus at the Lithgow
power station coal cost, viz., 0.105 d. per kWh, the resulting credit will
be about £7 000 in 1942 and £5 700 in 1947.
As the peak carrying capacity of Wyangala station is about 1 200
kW greater than the peak load of the Western Towns both in 1942 and
1947 this surplus peak capacity can be utilized to assist the other gener-
ating plants in the South Western System, and its annual value is esti-
mated at £3 600.
The economic results so far as the Central Authority is con-
cerned are set out in Table XIII.
Table XIII
Without the interconnection between the Burrinjuck and Lith-
gow systems as recommended it would be necessary, owing to the con-
ductors between Lithgow and Orange being small, to duplicate this line
at a cost of £65 000 in the near future to meet the normal increase of
load. If, however, the proposals as outlined above are carried out,
the necessity for duplication of the Lithgow-Orange line will not arise
for many years.
48
SUPPLY OP ELECTRICITY TO THE SOUTH WESTERN AREA
Interconnection of Burrinjuck and Lithgow Systems
and Extensions to the Western Towns


Plant
Capacity of Plant
Installed
Working
Reserve
Existing plant and plant on order at Port Kembla,
Burrinjuck and Canberra ... ...
kW
37 200
kW
26 700
kW
10 500
New plant for Port Kembla-Burrinjuck system re-
quired in 1942 to meet estimated load
15 000
7 500
7 500
Total, Port Kembla-Burrinjuck system
52 200
34 200
18 000
Existing plant and plant on order at Lithgow
7 500
5 000
2 500
"Wyangala
10 000
3 500
6 500
New plant for Lithgow system required in 1942 to
(peak load)
meet estimated load ...
7 500
7 500
Total, Lithgow system
25 000
16 000
9 000
The conclusions reached with regard to the proposed intercon-
nection of the Burrinjuck and Lithgow systems, and extension to the
Western Towns may be summarised as follows: —
(1) A transmitted supply of electricity to the Western Towns, in-
cluding Forbes, Parkes, Peak Hill and Hubbo, cannot for tech-
nical reasons be efficiently undertaken unless the Burrinjuck
and Lithgow systems are interconnected;
(2) If the interconnection were made without the Wyangala hydro-
electric station, it would be necessary to strengthen the exist-
ing lines from Lithgow to Orange, and from Burrinjuck to
Cowra;
(3) The establishment of a hydro-electric station at Wyangala with
connections to Burrinjuck and Lithgow systems at Cowra and
Orange respectively, makes it possible to extend to the West-
ern Towns a transmitted supply which by 1942 will be self-
supporting ;
(4) The power installation at Wyangala would obviate for many
years to come the necessity for augmenting the lines from
Lithgow to Orange and from Burrinjuck to Cowra.
Generating Capacity of the South Western System
After the installation of plant now on order and after the con-
struction of the proposed hydro-electric station at Wyangala the capac-
ity of the combined South Western System in 1942 and 1947 will be as
set out in Tables XIV and XV, respectively. New plant or additional
capacity required to meet the estimated loads in the years mentioned
are also included in the Tables.
Table XIV
. kW
f Port Kembla-Burrinjuck system ... 33 000
J Lithgow system, including railway electrification ... 14 000
1 Lithgow system, if in emergencies railway load is
f supplied from spare plant in Sydney ... ... 9 200
Estimated load in 1942
*59265—D
49
SUPPLY OP ELECTRICITY TO THE SOUTH WESTERN AREA
Generating Capacity of the South Western System


Plant
Capacity of plant
Installed
Working
Reserve
kW
kW
kW
Existing plant and plant on order at Port Kembla,
Burrinjnck and Canberra
37 200
27 700
9 500
Additional capacity of Port Kembla-Burrinj uck
system required in 1947 to meet estimated load
including that of railway electrification ...
30 000
22 500
7 500
Total, Port Kembla-Burrinj uck system. ...
67 200
50 200
17 000
Existing plant and plant on order at Lithgow
7 500
5 000
2 500
Wyangala ... ...
10 000
4 500
(peak load)
5 500
New plant for Lithgow system required in 1947 to
meet estimated load ... ...
15 000
7 500
7 500
Total, Lithgow system
32 500
17 000
15 500
Estimated load in 1947 including!'
railway electrification f .
Estimated load in 1947, if in*]
emergencies railway load is I’
supplied from spare plant j ]
in Sydney J
Table XV
kW
Port Kembla-Burrinjuck systems ... ... 49 000
Lithgow system including Western Towns... 17 000
o j o '
Port Kembla-Burrinjuck systems ... ... 39 000
Lithgow system including Western Towns... 12 000
The main railway electrification proposal provides for three G -
kV transmission lines from Sydney, connecting with the South Western
system at Port Kembla, Moss Yale, Goulburn and Lithgow. Under
normal conditions the railway loading will be supplied in definite pro-
portions from the power stations in the Sydney system and those in
the South Western system, but each railway transmission line will be
designed to transmit the full load for the corresponding railway either
from Sydney or from Port Kembla, Goulburn and Lithgow, as the case
may be. In emergencies it will therefore be possible to relieve either
system of the railway load, and the spare plant requirements can thus
be divided between the Sydney and South Western systems within cer-
tain limits.
As will be gathered from Table XIV, before 1942 Port Kembla
station will have to be extended by 15 000 kW, and the Lithgow station
by 7 500 kW of new plant.
In 1947 another 7 500 kW of new plant will be required at Lith-
gow, and additional working capacity to the extent of about 15 000 kW
over and above that necessary in 1942 will be required on the Port
Kembla-Burrinjuck system. This additional requirement at Port
Kembla may best be met by power transmitted from the Snowy River
hydro-electric scheme which includes two banks of transformers at
Goulburn, connected to the 220 kV transmission line. Jn emergencies,
50
SUPPLY OF ELECTRICITY TO THE SOUTH WESTERN AREA
Generating Capacity of the South Western System


reserve power will therefore be available for the South Western System
at Goulburn, transmitted either from Sydney or from the Snowy River
hydro-electric scheme, wherever spare generating plant may he avail-
able at the moment.
17. SUPPLY OF ELECTRICITY TO THE NORTH
EASTERN AREA
(See Appendix X and also Appendix VI, and Plates 2 and 24)
Introductory
One of the most fertile districts in New South Wales is the
closely settled north coast portion lying between the Queensland border
in the north and the Macleay River in the south. The chief industries
in this district, which extends some 175 miles along the coast, are dairy
farming, fruitgrowing and sugar cultivation.
West of this coastal district and separated from it by the main
Coastal Range is a second fertile territory referred to as the New
England Tableland stretching from Tenterfield in the north almost to
Tamworth in the south.
These two territories are collectively referred to in this report
as the North Eastern Area.
In the major portion of the Coastal District, electricity is sup-
plied by the Clarence River County Council which owns and operates
a hydro-electric power station at Nymboida, an oil engine station at
Lismore, and an extensive net-work of transmission lines.
In the same district there are also other generating authorities
and companies serving smaller areas, such as the Electric Construction
Company of Australia (supplying Ballina and three Shires) and Mul-
lumbimby and Murwillumbah Municipal Councils in the north, and
Dorrigo Shire and the Kerapsey Electric Light Company in the south.
The most important electricity supply authority south of the
New England Tableland is Tamworth Municipal Council, and, further
north, generating plants for local supply are installed in Armidale,
Guyra, Glen Lines, Inverell and Tenterfield.
The main transmission lines in this part of the country are shown
on Plate 2 and technical data regarding the more important of the
electricity supply authorities mentioned are given in Appendix I.
North Eastern Supply System
The supply of electricity in the North Eastern Area is dealt with
in detail in Appendix X entitled “Supply of Electricity in the North
Eastern Area”.
51
SUPPLY OF ELECTEICITY TO. THE NORTH EASTERN AEEA
North Eastern Supply System


Installed
Working
Reserve.
Capacity
Capacity
Capacity
kW
kW
kW
Tamworth steam station, ...
4 300
Lismore—
I 9 200
3 550
Oil engine station ...
3 450
base
Steam station (proposed,)
5 000
load
Nymboida hydro-electric station
4 800
i
10 800
2 000
Styx-Georges Creek hydro-electric station (proposed)
8 000
J peak
load
25 550
20 000
5 550
The establishment of a North Eastern Supply System is proposed,
covering practically the whole of the North Eastern Area (except the
Tweed Shire), by extending the generating plant at Lismore by two
2 500 kW steam generating sets, by constructing the Styx-Georges Creek
hydro-electric scheme with an initial installed capacity of 8 000 kW,
and by the erection of a single-circuit 66 kV transmission line 160 miles
long between Nymboida and Tamworth, linking the component parts of
the system with the Styx-Georges Creek hydro-electric station lying
approximately mid-way. There will also be required about 100 miles
of single-circuit 66 and 33 kV transmission line for the supply of
electricity to the New England Tableland. Of the existing high-tension
transmission lines, 168 miles now belonging to the Clarence River
County Council will be incorporated in the North Eastern Supply
System together with the appurtenant substations.
In accordance with the estimates given in detail in Appendix X
the total peak load in the North Eastern Area has been taken at 12 000
kW in 1943, and about 17 000 kW in 1949.
Generating Capacity oe the System
After the installation of plant now on order and after the
construction of the proposed new generating stations, the installed
capacity of the North Eastern Supply System will be as set out in
Table XVI. The working capacity of the plant during a drought year
when the load has reached 20 000 kW is also given in the same Table.
Table XVI
With the Styx-Georges Creek Scheme in operation and the first
steam generating unit installed at Lismore, there will be sufficient plant
to meet a system load of about 17 500 kW, which is estimated to be
reached about 1949. With the second steam generating unit in opera-
tion the plant capacity will be sufficient to meet a system load of
20 000 kW.
Subsequently any increase of the load can conveniently be met
by a combination of more steam power plant (either at Lismore or at
Tamworth) and an enlargement of the Styx-Georges Creek Station.
52
SUPPLY OP ELECTRICITY TO THE NORTH EASTERN AREA
Generating Capacity of the System


Energy to be generated
1943
1949
kWh
kWh
By water power from Nymboida and Styx-Georges Creek
stations
43 500 000
58 000 000
By fuel power from Lismore and Taraworth stations
2 500 000
7 000 000
Total energy required
46 000 000
65 000 000
Normally the hydro-electric plants will carry the base load and
the steam plants will be utilized for the peaks only. It has been esti-
mated that during average flow conditions in the rivers the energy
required can be obtained as set out in Table XVII.
Table XVII
Possible Future Extension
As the Municipality of Tamworth already has a transmission line
in operation in the direction of Quirindi, the future may see Tamworth
connected via Muswellbrook to the Newcastle system, as there is a con-
siderable potential demand between these two points. At the moment,
however, there does not appear to be justification for an extension
in this direction.
The Clarence River County Council has had under consideration
the possibility of extending its transmission lines further south to
Kempsey and the Macleay Shire. There is no reason why Kempsey
should not be supplied from the North Eastern Supply System, should
mutually satisfactory terms be arranged. In this event it is probable
that the 66 kV line would be extended southwards to meet the trans-
mission line from Newcastle, as and when the load justifies the
expenditure. This would assist continuity of supply in the coastal area
and enable load to be transferred from one system to the other without
parallel operation.
Central Electricity Authority
The scheme of electricity supply to the North Eastern Area, as
outlined in this report, is based on the formation of a Central Elec-
tricity Authority, as recommended in this report, to take over genera-
tion and main transmission.
So far as the North Eastern Area is concerned the Central
Authority would acquire by agreement the water power station at
Nymboida and the oil engine and steam stations at Lismore, all belong-
ing to the Clarence River County Council. At the same time it would
take over and operate the 66 kV transmission line between Nymboida
53
SUPPLY OF-ELECTRICITY TO THE NORTH EASTERN AREA
Central Electricity Authority


and Lismore, the 33 kV line from Nymboida to Maclean via South
Grafton, and the 33 kV line from Nymboida to Bellingen Shire via
Coff’s Harbour, making a total of 168 miles of main transmission lines
with the accompanying transformer substations.
The Central Authority would further acquire the generating sta-
tions at Tamworth, Armidale, Dorrigo, Guyra and Glen limes, and
carry out the construction of the Styx-Georges Creek hydro-electric
scheme and the new main transmission lines.
These transfers would enable the Central Authority to assume
responsibility for making available to the distribution districts, at the
appropriate voltage in each case, the necessary electrical energy in bulk,
to be retailed in these districts by the Distributing Authorities referred
to under the next heading.
Distributing Authorities
For the area at present served by the Clarence Elver County
Council a division into distribution districts is suggested in Appendix
X.
In the case of Tamworth and district the City Council should
continue as the Distributing Authority to retail electricity and supply
in bulk as at present.
It is understood that the City of Armidale is now contemplating
bulk electricity supply to Uralla and Walcha, and should suitable
arrangements be completed there would appear to be no reason to alter
them.
Estimated Capital and Annual Cost
The capital cost of establishing the North Eastern Supply System
to meet the prospective demand of 20 000 kW including the acquisition
of existing generating plant and transmission lines, has been estimated
as follows:
£
Purchase of existing generating plants (including 5 000
kW steam station at Lismore), high-tension trans-
mission lines, and substations .. .. .. 705 000
Construction of Styx-Georges Creek hydro-electric
scheme .. .. .. .. .. .. .. 520 000
Construction of new high-tension transmission lines,
and substations .. .. .. .. .. .. 220 000
Total capital cost .. .. .. £1445 000
The total annual cost of the system including interest on capital,
depreciation, management, maintenance, and operation including fuel is
estimated at £146 000 in 1943, and at £l5l 000 in 1949.
54
SUPPLY OF ELECTRICITY TO THE NORTH EASTERN AREA
Estimated Capital and Annual Cost


For year
For year
1943
1949
£
£
Revenue from sales of Bulk energy —
12 000 kW and 42-5 million kWh
156 250
17 000 kW and 60 million kWh
219 950
Annual cost including fuel
146 000
151 000
Surplus
10 250
68 950
1943
1949
£
£
Capital invested, in retail distribution
850 000
1 054 000
Gross revenue from retail supply at present retail rates ...
369 100
521 200
Cost of bulk supply from the Central Authority ...
156 250
219 950
Capital charges...
68 000
84 320
Balance available to cover distribution expenses, and for reduction
of retail charges ...
144 850
216 930
Revenue of Central Authority
From Table XVIII it will be seen that from sales of energy in
bulk it is estimated that the revenues of the Central Authority for the
years 1943 and 1949 will be £156 250 and £219 950 respectively and that
after providing for the whole of the annual costs the Central Authority
will have surpluses of £lO 250 and £6B 950 respectively, for those years.
The revenues are computed at a bulk supply rate of £7 per kW per
annum and 0.4 d. per kWh. The bulk supply rate should be regarded as
an average, the actual rates being subject to negotiation at the same
time as the purchase prices of the local plants to be acquired are being
settled. In no case should the cost of bulk supply to any Distributing
Authority exceed its present generating cost.
Table XVIII
As the annual costs given in Table XVIII include interest on
capital, depreciation and all other charges the surplus would be avail-
able for reduction of the rates for bulk supply.
Revenue of Distributing Authorities
An investigation has also been made of the financial position of
the Distributing Authorities buying power in bulk from the Central
Authority. The estimated aggregate results for the years 1943 and
1949 are shown in Table XIX.
Table XIX
The balance is. such as to indicate that after providing for
distribution expenses the Distribution Authorities would be left with
a considerable net balance if the present retail rates were maintained
55
SUPPLY OF ELECTRICITY TO THE NORTH EASTERN AREA
Revenue of Distributing Authorities


and consequently, as the Distributing Authorities should operate with-
out profit or loss, a reduction in retail rates could be effected within
a few years of the establishment of the scheme.
Conclusions and Recommendations
It would appear that, with the Styx-Georges Creek hydro-
electric scheme ideally placed mid-way between Nymboida and Tam-
worth, the establishment of a steam power plant at Lismore, and the
interconnection of the districts at present served by the Clarence River
County Council with Tamworth and other centres in the New England
Area, it has been possible to present a technically satisfactory scheme
of electrical development for the whole North Eastern Area of the
State. From the points of view of both the Central Authority and the
Distributing Authorities the scheme is economically sound, and in the
course of a few years, with normal development it should result in a
reduction in cost of electricity to the residents of the urban and rural
districts comprised within the scheme. In addition the advantages of
a supply from a co-ordinated system of generation and transmission
will be made available to several new areas of the State.
Therefore we recommend that the work of carrying out this
Scheme be commenced as soon as possible.
18. FUTURE DEVELOPMENT AND ORGANISATION
(See also Appendix XI)
Introductory
Reviewing the present position of electricity supply in New
South Wales, it may he stated generally that the development of power
in this State, as in other countries, has naturally been fostered from
the outset by local demands and has arisen through the initiative
taken by various public and private organisations. Consequently the
electrification of the country has been undertaken by many different
authorities and other bodies generating and supplying electricity,
which have been so far more or less independent of each other. All
the systems are supplied from generating stations situated within
each area of supply, and none of the individual systems is connected
with any of the others.
In regard to the State Authorities generating and supplying
electricity, it may be said that these Authorities have suffered from
the stringent economy that Governments have been bound to apply,
and in several instances it has been impossible to carry out develop-
ments with due regard to the increase in demand which might be
anticipated in the future, because capital has not always been avail-
able for this purpose.
56
FUTURE DEVELOPMENT AND OEGANISATION
Introductory


In Sydney and district three authorities generate and distribute
electricity at different rates. In some areas supply from two different
authorities is available.
When it was felt a few years ago that the stage had been
reached at which closer co-ordination would be to the advantage of
further development, the Electricity Advisory Committee was formed.
This Committee, the members of which act in an honorary capacity
meets fortnightly or so, and has advisory powers only and no technical
organisation. Since its formation the Committee has done very useful
work.
It would appear, however, that to obtain, in the future, the best
technical and economical results it should be considered whether a
more substantial organisation, with statutory powers and adequate
technical and financial resources, should be established for an efficient
co-ordination of the electricity supplies in the State.
Anticipated Future Development
In this connection it seems appropriate to seek to visualise the
development which should be provided for, on the assumption that the
increase during the next ten to twenty years will follow a rate on the
lines indicated in Section 5 dealing with the power demand.
Without making any attempt to forecast in what order, or at
what time, the various steps in development will be taken, the situa-
tion ten or twenty years hence may he as hereunder:—
The existing steam stations in Sydney may be more closely
interlinked and certain extensions may have taken place.
A hydro-electric scheme may have been developed on the Snowy
River having an ultimate capacity of some 250 000 kW with two 220
kV transmission lines, each 265 miles long, running to Sydney. These
lines would be tapped en route at Goulburn for power supply to the
Port Kembla and Burrinjuck systems, and to the railways.
In the Snowy River district the towns of Dalgety and Cooma
and the surrounding rural area may be supplied separately from the
hydro-electric station.
There may be a 132 kV transmission line, 160 miles long, inter-
connecting the Port Kembla and Burrinjuck power stations to make
possible an interchange of power, and to safeguard the electricity
supply to the Burrinjuck system, which is at present dependent upon
the use of water discharged for irrigation purposes from the Burrin-
juck Reservoir.
There may be an interconnection between the Lithgow and
Burrinjuck systems combined with a new hydro-electric development
at the Wyangala Dam, and an extension of the high tension trans-
mission lines towards the west and north of the present Lithgow
system.
57
FUTURE DEVELOPMENT AND ORGANISATION
Anticipated Future Development


If the proposed electrification of the main railways is pro-
ceeded with there may then be four high tension transmission lines
radiating from Sydney, viz., to Newcastle in the north, to Goulbum
and Nowra in the south, and Lithgow in the west. These lines would
he tapped en route for supply to substations for the railway electrifica-
tion and for bulk supply to the surrounding districts. Even if the
main railway electrification does not take place, the linking up of
Sydney with Port Kembla, Lithgow and Newcastle, seems probable.
In the north the Clarence River County Council system may
then have been extended in various directions, and particularly to-
wards the south, and to the New England Tableland. A new hydro-
electric power station may have been built on the Styx River, and
interconnected with the power stations at Tamworth and Nymboida,
and Lismore, the latter being extended by the addition of coal-fired
steam plant. This extended system might ultimately be interconnected
with Newcastle via Muswellbrook.
Radiating from the main systems there will be numerous urban
and rural reticulation systems of lower voltages, making electricity
supply available to a steadily increasing number of consumers.
Main Object of Organisation
With the prospect of the above development in view it seems
obvious, for technical and economic reasons, that an efficient co-ordina-
tion within the whole generating system should be established in the
near future.
The main object of any organisation and scheme of co-operation
and interconnection of individual power systems in the State should be
to effect:—
(a) Economies in regard to capital expenditure on future develop-
ment;
( b) Economies in regard to running costs of the electricity supply
in the State as a whole as well as in various parts, and, as a
consequence, reduced tariffs;
(c) Uniformity of tariffs to bulk supply consumers;
( d) Regularity and efficiency of supply to all consumers; and
( e) Facilitated financing of future development.
In endeavouring to attain similar objects in various other coun-
tries the most suitable means have proved to be very different, accord-
ing to the circumstances in the individual countries, e.g., to the character
of the power resources, to the ownership of these resources, and to the
initial development of their electricity supply. In certain countries a
voluntary co-operation between the various interested parties, i.e., the
State, Municipal and private undertakings, has proved to be the most
suitable form of co-ordination. In other countries the natural course
of development has led to the formation of special organisations more
or less under the general supervision of some State authority.
58
FUTURE DEVELOPMENT AND ORGANISATION
Main Object of Organisation


Central Electricity Authority
Any proposal for co-ordination must keep in view the prevailing
conditions. In New South Wales the most important steam power
station is owned by the Sydney County Council, who represent a very
considerable part of the population of the State, and most of the other
power undertakings are owned by other public bodies. The important
water power resources of the Country belong to the State.
The best means of achieving the object of co-ordination would, in
our opinion, be to make the generation and transmission of electricity
in the more densely populated area of the State the duty of one Central
Electricity Authority (hereinafter referred to as “the Central
Authority”), organised as a commercial undertaking, immune from
changes of Government, but responsible to Parliament, through the
Minister for Works and Local Government, for the proper discharge of
its obligations. This Central Authority should supersede the existing
Electricity Advisory Committee, whose present functions would be
included among the wider and more comprehensive functions of the
new body. The Central Authority should develop, generate, transmit
and sell electricity in bulk, without profit or loss, whilst the distribution
to individual consumers should be left to local Authorities with their
existing organisations, which are competent to deal with the various
problems associated with retail distribution, and which are in close
contact with the consumers.
The electricity supply in the sparsely populated parts of the
State should in general continue to be administered as at present.
The Central Authority should be given statutory power in the
first instance to take over immediately the electricity supply systems at
present administered by the three State Departments, i.e., the Depart-
ment of Works and Local Government, the Department of Railways,
and the Water Conservation and Irrigation Commission. The Central
Authority should then open negotiations with generating authorities
such as the Sydney County Council and the Clarence River County
Council for the acquisition of the more important generating stations
and main transmission systems. The regulatory control of the elec-
tricity undertakings outside the proposed network of the Central
Authority should still be left in the hands of the Minister for Works
and Local Government.
The power stations belonging to tbe State should be handed over
to the Central Authority, any liabilities attached to them to remain
wholly or partly with the State. Against the present value of the assets
thus acquired by the Central Authority, over and above the amount of
the liabilities, if any, still attached to these assets, the Central Author-
ity will be able to obtain capital. When other generating stations
and transmission lines belonging to County Councils and other Distri-
buting Authorities are acquired, the Central Authority should take
over the assets by agreement, the interest and depreciation of the capital
to be guaranteed by the State in order to avoid altering the status of the
various loans.
59
FUTURE DEVELOPMENT AND ORGANISATION
Central Electricity Authority


If it is constitutionally possible, the Central Authority should
be so formed and given such powers as to enable it to borrow indepen-
dently, by direct access to the capital market in Australia and abroad,
such capital as will be required for future development, without having
to call upon the financial resources of the State for this purpose. Obvi-
ously the possibility of raising large loans for such purposes, using the
power stations and transmission lines as securities, should be consider-
ably greater for such a Central Authority than it would be for smaller
individual power undertakings. It might also be possible to obtain
such loans on specially favourable terms if the loans were guaranteed
by the State.
With reference to main railway electrification, it is suggested
that, in addition to its more normal functions, the Central Authority
should assist such electrification provided that the Central Authority
is satisfied that the electrification will be a sound economic undertaking
and will further the generation and distribution of electricity in the
State. Under this condition the Central Authority should have power
to raise capital by public loans for such electrification, but it should be
a condition that the payment of interest and amortisation of such loans
would be a first charge on the revenue of the Department of Railways.
This means that, if the Central Authority can obtain money in the open
market, the finance of the main railway electrification would not
encroach upon the capital requirements of the Government, and if the
loans so raised are amortised over a suitable term of years no other
depreciation would be required.
It should be emphasised, however, that the formation of the
Central Authority is not dependent upon a decision as to whether the
main railways are electrified or not.
Undoubtedly an administrative body such as this Authority, if
organised as a commercial undertaking, should be in a position to
employ a staff of high ability. Experience in several other countries
has proved that the possibility of adjusting the salaries paid to adminis-
trative, technical and other skilled staff of the Authority, particularly
to its higher officers, so that these salaries may successfully compete
with salaries paid for similar services in private undertakings, is of
vital importance as a means of achieving efficiency in administration
and a technically and economically sound development.
There would be no necessity for any great change of the present
personnel connected with the generating stations, except a change of
Authority to which the staff is responsible. The new Authority would
have to take over and fulfil any promise or commitment as to promotion
or re-arrangement of staff, and in this respect there must be close co-
operation for several years to come between the Central Authority and
the existing bodies from which functions are taken over and staff is
transferred.
A condensed outline of the suggested constitution of this organi-
sation and its functions is given separately in Appendix XI, entitled
“Constitution and Functions of Proposed Central Electricity Auth-
ority.* *
60
FUTURE DEVELOPMENT AND ORGANISATION
Central Electricity Authority


Some Technical Features of the Co-ordination
The proposed co-ordination would have several features and
consequences of interest from a technical point of view.
In course of time all generating stations would be interconnected,
and spare plant in one station would also act as spare plant for another.
Further, the various stations would be operated so that the less efficient
stations would run as peak-load stations producing a small amount of
energy, whilst the more efficient stations would run as base-load stations
supplying the bulk of the energy. In Sydney this arrangement is
already followed for the operation of Bunnerong and Pyrmont Stations,
and, to a limited degree, of Bunnerong and White Bay Stations.
If a hydro-electric station on the Snowy River were constructed
it would be operated in conjunction with the steam stations in Sydney,
and would generate and feed into the general system as much energy
as can be derived from the water available. When there is ample water
the base load would be taken by the hydro-electric station operated
with a high load-factor, whilst during droughts the operation of the
combined system would be entirely reversed, and the peaks would be
taken by the hydro-electric station.
A development on the Snowy River of the magnitude suggested,
i.e., some 250 000 kW, will be most beneficial if the various networks of
Port Kembla, Burrinjuck, the Sydney County Council and the Depart-
ment of Railways are efficiently interconnected and operated as one
system.
The combined operation of all the stations would be directed from
a central control point (usually known in similar organisations else-
where as the Load Despatching Office) situated in Sydney. This office,
which would be in constant contact by telephone with all the stations,
would issue all instructions to the stations on the system so as to ensure
the most efficient operation, i.e., putting machines into or out of service
at short notice in accordance with the increase or decrease of load;
taking the necessary steps to have spare plant ready in any one station;
directing the use of such spare plant if a breakdown should occur in
another station; and operating the stations generally according to a
pre-determined plan adapted to the anticipated load conditions.
Although the Central Authority should not retail electricity it
should be able to give considerable technical assistance to Distributing
Authorities, and initiate the establishment of rural reticulation.
Local Distributing Authorities.
The legislation conferring upon Municipal, Shire and County
Councils power relating to electricity supply has been dealt with in
Section 5 and in Appendix IT.
Under the Local Government Act, 1919, Municipal and Shire
Councils were authorised to form County Councils, a term which does
not relate to the land divisions of the State known as counties. This is
essentially a voluntary matter, although participation of minorities may
61
FUTURE DEVELOPMENT AND ORGANISATION
Local Distributing Authorities


be required by the Minister for Works and Local Government. A
County Council is a joint undertaking analagous to the Joint Electricity
Boards of Great Britain. In each of the three County Councils so far
formed under the Act (Clarence River, St. George, and Bega Valley)
the constituent bodies have delegated to the County Council their func-
tions of electricity supply, together with the whole of their electricity
supply assets, and the identity of any previous undertakings owned by
them has entirely disappeared.
Under the Act the members of a County Council are elected by
and from the Aldermen and/or Councillors of the constituent bodies on
a certain basis of representation. The County Council has the right to
impose loan rating on the whole or part of its constituent area provided
such power is delegated to it.
In our opinion the present arrangements for the retail supply
of electricity should in principle remain unaltered. The system of
County Councils adopted, whilst having certain disadvantages, may in
general be considered sound. The disadvantages could doubtless be
gradually removed by the adoption of a more suitable basis of repre-
sentation and administration.
We believe, however, that such County Councils should not be
enlarged so that they cover too extensive an area and variety of in-
terests. Actually in New South Wales the various Municipalities and
more densely populated areas are in many cases separated geographic-
ally by tracts of territory where no appreciable sales of electricity are
likely. Each retail Distributing Authority should be confined to a single
closely settled area, the transmission of electricity supply across the
intervening unremunerative areas being undertaken by the Central
Authority in charge of generation and main distribution.
In our opinion, electricity supplies in a country town and in the
rural districts immediately surrounding it should in general be con-
ducted by the one Distributing Authority, in order that the resources
of the town, in staff and in construction and service facilities, may be
utilized to provide rural supplies at minimum cost and as far as
practicable at the same tariffs as prevail in the town.
It is impossible to make any definite recommendation with
regard to the size of supply areas and composition of Distributing
Authorities in general terms, as each area must be treated on its own
merits. Depending upon local conditions, it may be found desirable
either:
(i) To group together in one district of supply one or more Shires
and their Municipalities acting jointly as a Distributing
Authority for the district; or
(ii) to constitute the most important Municipality in a geographic-
ally detached district into a Distributing Authority for that
whole district.
62
EUTUEE DEVELOPMENT AND OEGANISATION
Local Distributing Authorities


In the first case the ultimate responsibility would lie with the
ratepayers of the whole constituent area. In the latter case this
responsibility would devolve upon the ratepayers of the particular
Municipality only, and care should therefore be taken that this form
of organisation is employed only where the revenue and the assets
within the Municipal area are larger than those outside that area.
In this connection we believe that too great importance has
generally been attached to the rating powers of Local Authorities
with regard to electricity supply. Unlike local government under-
takings for water supply, sewerage, etc., the service of electricity
supply, once the initial years are past, is supported by revenues from
sales rather than from rates, and the real security for lenders
lies in the assets and business of the undertaking rather than in the
rating powers of its Council.
Sydney and Newcastle are, by virtue of their population and
the magnitude of their industries, in a special position.
Whilst modifications will, doubtless, be necessitated from time
to time, we consider that the present arrangements for retail supply
in the Metropolitan Area of Sydney are sound. We do not favour any
proposal for the subdivision of the present retail supply area of the
Sydney County Council into smaller units, but consider rather that its
area of supply might be extended.
The City of Newcastle has extended its electrical services into
fourteen surrounding Municipal areas within a distance of over 12
miles from the City. It is understood that proposals are under con-
templation for the constitution of a Greater Newcastle, and the neces-
sary legislation should form a favourable opportunity for a reconstitu-
tion of the electricity supply undertaking so as to avoid complications
when the agreements expire under which the external supplies have
been provided.
In regard to purchase or generation of electricity we consider
that the Distributing Authorities should be bound to take bulk supply
from the Central Authority if so required, when such supply is avail-
able, unless it can be shown that the bulk supply is less economical than
generation by the plant owned by the Distributing Authority.
Other Schemes of Organisation Considered
The recommended scheme, consisting in the establishment of
a Central Electricity Authority and the continuance of local
Distributing Authorities, having now been described, brief descrip-
tions of three other schemes of organisation which have been con-
sidered, and which are based in principle upon a continuance of the
present Electricity Advisory Committee, are given below, with our
comments thereon: —
(1) The first scheme provided for the area to be divided into
suitably limited sections, each under an Electricity Supply
Authority administratively and financially autonomous, but
63
FUTURE DEVELOPMENT AND ORGANISATION
Other Schemes of Organisation Considered


subject to the control of the Electricity Advisory Committee,
which may be reorganised for this purpose; the members of
the various Electricity Supply Authorities to be elected by
the interested parties within the sections, with due regard to
the ownership of the respective power systems and to other
local circumstances in each case; these Authorities to gen-
erate, transmit and sell electricity in bulk as well as in retail
to consumers within the boundaries of the respective sections.
The only sections into which the more densely populated area
can be subdivided, as under this scheme, with a reasonable possibility
of efficient control and operation, are the following:—
( a) The South Western area, comprising the supply systems of
Burrinjuck, Port Kembla, and Lithgow;
(&) The Sydney Metropolitan and bulk supply areas;
(c) The Newcastle Metropolitan bulk supply areas; and
(d) The North Eastern area.
With reference to (a), the South Western area, there seems
to be no difficulty in forming an autonomous body, as all the systems
are State owned. In view, however, of the extent of the area, the
diversity of interests involved, and the difficulty of arranging a satis-
factory basis of representation it seems doubtful whether it would
be suitable that this body be comprised of local representatives.
In the case of (&), the Sydney areas, the major supply system is
that of the Sydney County Council, which should therefore become the
Supply Authority if such were formed. There is, however, a Company
holding a franchise and supplying electricity in the centre of the
Metropolitan area. The Department of Railways also has two power
stations in this area supplying power mainly for traction, but their
activities have extended to a considerable degree for supplying electri-
city in bulk for domestic and commercial purposes. To transfer these
independent interests to a single autonomous Authority does not seem
feasible if the Authority is a locally elected body.
The same applies to (c), the Newcastle areas, as both the New-
castle Municipal Council and the Department of Railways are supply-
ing electricity within these areas. In addition, in this district there
are numerous colliery companies possessing generating stations and
supplying urban centres and rural areas.
In the case of (d), the North Eastern area, the formation of an
Authority of the type under discussion is already the subject of a
Parliamentary Bill in draft form.
Even if it be assumed for the sake of illustration that these
Authorities were formed, there would be no guarantee that the desir-
able uniformity would be achieved, and in our opinion it is a matter
of doubt whether any appreciable increase of efficiency of generation
and administration would accrue.
64
FUTURE DEVELOPMENT AND ORGANISATION.
Other Schemes of Organisation Considered


Moreover, it is difficult to conceive how the Electricity Advisory
Committee would exercise control over these Authorities. It would
appear preferable to leave the various generating interests as they
are at present than to attempt to form four different bodies as out-
lined under this Scheme.
(2) The second of these other schemes considered provided for a
State Authority to be formed as a Government Department,
under the direct control of the Minister for Works and Local
Government, advised by the Electricity Advisory Com-
mittee; this Authority to generate, transmit and sell elec-
tricity in bulk from the State systems, but not direct to the
consumers.
In regard to this scheme, the nucleus of a State Authority
already exists in the systems in the south-west, i.e., those of Burrin-
juck, Port Kembla, Lithgow and Yanco, and in addition to these the
generating stations owned by the Department of Railways both in
Sydney and Newcastle could be transferred to such a State Authority
without much difficulty. Certain benefit would result from this,
especially if the different systems are interconnected and the main
railways electrified. If a State Authority were formed with the South-
western section as a nucleus, in the course of time it might extend its
activities to cover both the Sydney and Newcastle areas. The North-
eastern area, however, could be left as an independent system.
This scheme, however, provides for an organisation in which are
inherent the inconveniences in regard to matters of personnel and pro-
vision of capital, which have been dealt with in the foregoing and which
would tend to impede a sound development.
(3) The third scheme considered provided for a State Authority to
be formed on the lines of the Central Electricity Board in
Great Britain, that is a body which owns the main transmission
lines or “grid” and operates selected generating stations
which are not its property but are owned by private or muni-
cipal undertakings; the Board to buy energy from the selected
generating stations delivered to its “grid” and to sell the
energy at such rates as to provide a margin to cover its trans-
mission costs.
With reference to this scheme, as the bulk of the generation is
concentrated in Sydney, where no grid system is required except pos-
sibly in the outer areas, a body of this sort, which in Great Britain was
designed to reduce the large number of small generating stations, would
be of little assistance in co-ordinating electricity supply in New South
Wales.
In addition, as it would not own any generating stations, it would
have to create its initial assets and would be unable to borrow the large
sums of money which are required to finance the growth of electricity
supply in the State.
* 59265—E
65
FUTURE DEVELOPMENTS AND ORGANISATION
Other Schemes of Organisation Considered


The difficulties which have arisen in Great Britain with regard
to the operation of generating stations owned by other interests, would
doubtless also occur in New South Wales.
Conclusions and Recommendation
The forms of organisation discussed above under (1), (2) and
(3) do not seem to be well adapted to promote an efficient system of
electricity supply in New South Wales, and therefore we do not recom-
mend the adoption of any of these schemes.
The scheme previously outlined under the head of “Central
Electricity Authority,’ ’ comprising the formation of a Central
Authority together with local Distributing Authorities, would in our
opinion provide an organisation which should be well suited, financially
as well as technically, to further the electrification of New South Wales.
This conclusion is independent of the question whether an autonomous
body such as the Central Authority is able to borrow capital indepen-
dently or has to obtain its finance through the usual channels, although
the former course, in our opinion, is much preferable.
We therefore, in either case, recommend that the scheme be
carried out.
19. CONCLUSIONS AND RECOMMENDATIONS
The conclusions reached and recommendations made in this
Report may be summarised as follows:
( a) In view of many advantages and subject to the estimated
financial return on the capital invested being considered suf-
ficient, it is recommended that the main railway lines from
Sydney to Newcastle, Lithgow, Goulburn and Nowra be
electrified.
( h) To meet the growing demand for electricity in Sydney and
elsewhere, it is recommended that the Snowy River Hydro-
Electric Scheme be proceeded with. The first stage of develop-
ment should be ready for operation by the time the peak load
on the Sydney Supply System reaches 420 000 kilowatts, which
is estimated to take place in 1944. The scheme should be com-
pleted within two to three years thereafter. The time of
construction of the first stage of development is estimated at
four years.
( c ) As an economic source of electricity supply the Shoalhaven
Hydro-Electric Scheme cannot be recommended for the reason
that power therefrom will be more expensive than power from
extensions of the present coal-fired stations in Sydney.
d) To meet the growing demand for electricity in Newcastle and
district, it is recommended that further generating plant be
installed in Zarra Street Power Station in Newcastle. "When
66
CONCLUSIONS AND RECOMMENDATIONS


the capacity of the present building is reached the additional
plant required should be installed as an extension of the
present station.
{e) It is proposed that the Port Kembla, Burrinjuck and Lithgow
systems be interconnected to form the South Western Supply
System and it is recommended that steps be taken to construct
immediately a high tension tie-line between Port Kembla
and Burrinjuck; to establish a hydro-electric power station at
Wyangala; to interconnect the Burrinjuck and i Lithgow
systems by a transmission line from Cowra to Orange via
Wyangala; and to extend the transmission system to the towns
of Canowindra, Forbes, Parkes, Peak Hill and Dubbo.
(/) It is proposed that a North Eastern Supply System be estab-
lished as soon as possible and it is recommended that steps
be taken to construct the Styx-Georges Creek hydro-electric
power station; to extend the generating station at Lismore;
to erect a transmission line between Nymboida and Tamworth
via the Styx-Georges Creek Station; and to extend the trans-
mission system to the towns of Armidale, Guyra, Glen limes
and Inverell. It is recommended that the Tweed Shire be
supplied by the City Electric Light Company of Brisbane
under franchise.
(g) For technical and economical reasons it is considered essential
that efficient co-ordination of the major generating and trans-
mission systems be effected in the near future, and it is recom-
mended that a Central Electricity Authority be formed to take
charge of generation and main transmission in the more
densely populated area of the State.
The Central Authority should be constituted as an
autonomous body organised as a commercial undertaking, and
its main objects should bo to develop, generate, transmit and
sell electricity in bulk but not in retail. It should be given
statutory powers to take over immediately the electricity
supply systems at present administered by the three State
Departments, and it should acquire, by agreement, other im-
portant generating stations and main transmission systems as
may be required.
{li) It is considered that the existing organisations for reticula-
tion are in general satisfactory, and it is recommended that
the present arrangements for the retail of electricity by local
Distributing Authorities should in principle remain unaltered.
(Sgd.) RENDER, PALMER AND TRITTON.
Sydney, 20th December, 1937.
67
CONCLUSIONS AND EECOMMENDATICXNS




APPENDIX I
TO REPORT OF 1937 BY RENDEL. PALMER
& TRITTON ON ELECTRICAL DEVELOP-
MENT IN NEW SOUTH WALES
DESCRIPTION OF PRESENT SYSTEMS
OF ELECTRICITY SUPPLY AND EX-
AMINATION OF PRESENT LOAD AND
PROSPECTIVE POWER DEMAND
SUPPLY SYSTEMS
In New South Wales there are several large and numerous small
electricity supply systems, the most important of which will he described
herein and which may be classified under the following groups:—
Sydney and district,
Newcastle and district,
Port Kembla system,
Burrinjuck system, including Canberra,
Lithgow system,
North Eastern system,
Yanco system,
Tamworth system,
Other systems, and
Industrial plants.
The power stations and main transmission lines are shown on
Plate 2.
SYDNEY AND DISTRICT
In Sydney and district electricity is generated and supplied by—
(a) Sydney County Council Electricity Undertaking;
{h) Department of Railways; and
(c) Electric Light and Power Supply Corporation Ltd.
The supply areas and main transmission systems are shown on
Plate 3.
Sydney County Council
The Sydney County Council Electricity Undertaking supplies
electricity direct to the consumers in the City of Sydney and thirty-two
suburbs, and in bulk to fourteen Municipalities and Shires up to a
distance of about 30 miles west and north of Sydney. The total area
supplied is about 900 square miles with a population of about a million.
No electricity is generated for traction.
69


The system comprises two steam power stations at Bunnerong
and Pyrmont, respectively; 234 miles of 33 kV (kilovolt), 52 miles of
22 kV, 532 miles of llkV, and 200 miles of 5 kV underground cables
and overhead transmission lines; eleven 33 kV, six 22 kV and 366
service voltage substations; and local networks. All electricity is
generated and with the exceptions mentioned later is supplied as alter-
nating current at a frequency of 50 cycles.
The main generating station is situated at Bunnerong on the
north-eastern shore of Botany Bay about 7 miles south of the centre
of Sydney. Work was commenced on the site in 1926, and the station,
which was initially designed for an installed capacity of 150 000 kW,
commenced operation in 1929. The circulating water system, yard and
railway sidings, however, were built for an ultimate capacity of about
400 000 kW.
The Turbine House accommodates six 25 000 kW turbo-
alternators running at 1 500 r.p.m. and generating at 11 kV. There are
two 1500 kW house turbo-alternators generating at 425 volts, and a
further 25 000 kW turbo-alternator is at present being installed.
The installation in the boiler house comprises eighteen boilers
arranged in six batteries. Each boiler has a normal rating of 100 000
lb. of steam per hour (120 000 lb. maximum) working at a pressure of
350 lb. per square inch and a temperature of 730 deg. F., and each
battery of three boilers serves its own turbine.
Two further units, each having a capacity of 50 000 kW running
at 3 000 r.p.m. have recently been ordered and will be installed in a new
Turbine House. Four new boilers have also been ordered, each having
a normal rating of 300 000 lb. of steam per hour (350 000 lb. maximum),
working at a pressure of 650 lb. per square inch and a temperature of
850 deg. F. They will be installed in a new Boiler House. This
extension which is referred to as Bunnerong “B,” is expected to be
completed about 1941.
The Sydney County Council also owns and operates a steam
station situated at Pyrmont, Sydney. This is the original generating:
station which started operation in 1904, and is now used as a peak-load
station.
The generating plant consists of four turbo-alternators of a total
capacity of about 49 000 kW. Two 12 000 kW units were installed in
1921 and 1922, and one 8 000 kW set in 1921. There is also a set of
about 17 000 kW installed in 1924.
The boiler plant which was installed between 1921 and 1924
consists of eight boilers, each having a normal rating of 65 000 lb. of
steam per hour, working at a pressure of 225 lb. per square inch and a
temperature of 630 deg. F.
Au interconnection with White Bay Power Station was estab-
lished in 1925 and four 11 kV cables are now in service capable of trans-
mitting 1 20 000 kW. There is also an interconnection with Bunnerong
70
APPENDIX I—PRESENT SYSTEMS OF SUPPLY
Sydney County Council


Power Station consisting of four 33 kV cables. The voltage on these
latter cables was reduced from 33 to 22 kY in 1930, and they are now
capable of transmitting about 30 000 kW.
Distribution from Bunnerong power station is effected by twenty
33 kV feeders (excluding interconnectors to Pyrmont) to substations
which step the voltage down to 11 kV, and from Pyrmont power station
by thirty-seven 5kY feeders. Under normal conditions the 5kY sub-
stations are fed through Pyrmont from Bunnerong. Some of the 5kY
substations reduce the voltage to supply rotary converters which pro-
vide a 480/240 volt direct current supply for the centre of the City
area, but this direct current supply is being gradually converted to
alternating current. The remainder of the 5 kY and all the 11 kV
substations reduce the voltage to provide a 415/240 volt three-phase
alternating current supply for the suburbs and part of the City area.
Sydney System of Department of Railways.
The electricity supply system in Sydney belonging to the Depart-
ment of Railways comprises two steam power stations, at White Bay
and Ultimo, respectively. All electricity generated is alternating cur-
rent, in the former station having a frequency of 50 and 25 cycles, and
in the latter station of 25 cycles only.
Energy from the 50 cycle system at White Bay power station is
distributed through thirty 11 kY underground cables of a total length
of about 120 miles to four main Railway substations where it is con-
verted to 1 500 volt direct current for the Suburban Railways, dis-
tributed at 11 kY through 70 miles of overhead feeders to 20 other
substations for bulk supply or railway purposes, or stepped-up to
33 kY for distribution through about 100 miles of transmission lines
to outlying railway or bulk supply substations.
Energy at 25 cycles is transmitted entirely at 6.6 kV, the system
comprising 18 feeders from White Bay power station, 26 feeders from
Ultimo power station, and 6 tie feeders between the two stations
using approximately 146 miles of underground cable and 77 miles of
overhead lines. Thirty-six substations chiefly used for the Metropolitan
tramways are supplied from the 25-cycle system. The power used for
the Tramways is converted to 600 volt direct current.
All bulk supplies for general purposes are at 50 cycles.
The area of bulk supply situated south and west of Sydney
is served by ten distributing authorities and has a total area of about 240
square miles with a population of about 220 000.
White Bay power station was originally put into service in 1913
with one 7 500 kW, 25 cycle turbo-generator, which is now displaced.
The station now contains —
(a) Three 8 750 kW, 6.6 kV, 25-cycle turbo-alternators installed
in 1916, 1917 and 1919;
71
APPENDIX I—PRESENT SYSTEMS OF SUPPLY
Sydney System of Department of Railways


( b ) Two 18 750 kW, 6.6 kV, 25-cycle turbo-alternators installed in
1927 and 1928;
(c) Three 22 000 kW, 11 kY, 50-cycle turbo-alternators installed
in 1925 and 1926; and
( d) One 20 000 kW, 11 kY, 50-cycle turbo-alternator installed in
1928;
and boiler plant consisting of—
(a) Five boilers installed in 1912-1917, with a normal evaporation
of 27 000 lb. of steam per hour working at a pressure of 200 lb.
per square inch and a temperature of 588 deg. P.;
( h ) Eight boilers with a normal evaporation of 60 000 lb. of steam
per hour working at a pressure of 215 lb. per square inch and
a temperature of 594 deg. P. installed in 1923-1925; and
( c) Nine boilers with a normal evaporation of 80 000 lb. of steam
per hour working at a pressure of 275 lb. per square inch and
a temperature of 640 deg. P. of which six were installed in
1924-1926, and three installed in 1928.
The boilers under (a) and (h) serve the 25-cycle plant, and the
boilers under (c) the 50-cycle plant.
A 25 000 kW, 25/50-cycle frequency changer is now on order.
Ultimo power station was the original station operated and
owned by the Department of Eailways and was placed in service in
December, 1899, None of the original plant is still in commission, and
the station is now used solely as a 25-cycle station.
The generating plant consists of two 5 000 kW 6.6 kV turbo-
alternators installed in 1911 and 1913, and two 20 000 kW turbo-
alternators of the same voltage installed in 1930 and 1931, making a
total of 50 000 kW of 25-cycle plant.
The boiler house accommodates eight boilers each having a
normal rating of 88 000 lb. of steam per hour (110 000 lb. maximum)
six of which were installed in 1930-1931. These boilers are fired with
pulverised fuel on the unit system, the pressure being 360 lb. per square
inch and the temperature 725 deg. F.
The two old 5 000 kW generating units which were designed for a
pressure of 150 lb. per square inch are supplied with steam, when
required, from the new boilers by means of a specially designed reducing
valve.
The 25-cycle system of White Bay station is tied to the 25-cycle
system of Ultimo Station by means of a number of underground cables
having a total capacity of about 24 000 kW.
72
APPENDIX I—PRESENT SYSTEMS OF SUPPLY
Sydney System of Department of Railways


Electric Light and Power Supply Corporation Limited
This company, which operates under a franchise, supplies elec-
tricity direct to the consumers in the Municipality of Balmain, and in
four neighbouring Municipalities within the Metropolitan area. The
total area of supply is about 12 square miles with a population of
180 000.
All electricity is generated at the Company’s Balmain steam
power station at Iron Cove, Sydney, as alternating current at 5 kY and
50 cycles, distributed at 22 kY and 5 kY, and reticulated at 415/240
volts. The original distribution system was entirely overhead, but this
is gradually being put underground. There is an out-door step-up trans-
former station at the power station, and 82 step-down substations in the
area.
The installation in Balmain power station consists of: —
(a) One 2 500 kW turbo-alternator, installed in 1914;
( h ) One 3 000 kW turbo-alternator, installed in 1922;
( c ) One 7 500 kW turbo-alternator, installed in 1924;
( d ) One 10 000 kW turbo-alternator, installed in 1928; and
(e) One 18 750 kW turbo-alternator installed in 1935;
making an aggregate capacity of 41 750 kW.
The steam raising plant consists of six boilers with a normal
aggregate evaporative capacity of 275 000 lb. of steam per hour (355 000
lb. maximum). The steam pressure is 225 lb. per square inch, and the
temperature 650 deg. F. at the super-heater outlet. An order has
been placed for two additional boilers, the steam pressure of which will
be 650 lb. per square inch, and the temperature 850 deg F. The
•normal evaporative capacity of each boiler will be 120 000 lb. per hour
(160 000 lb. maximum).
Under the terms of the Company’s franchise with the Balmain
Municipal Council, a quantity of garbage has to be disposed of, the
amount of which averages 50 tons per day at present.
The Company supplies a quantity of steam to a manufacturing
chemist whose property adjoins the power house, the average monthly
requirement of steam being about 5 000 000 lb.
Load
The variations of load on the 50-cycle systems of the Sydney
County Council and the Department of Railways can be seen from the
load diagrams shown on Plate 5. During each of the first five working
days of the week three peaks occur, except in winter when the afternoon
and evening peaks—due to electric heating and lighting—become merged
into one, which may prove the maximum peak of the year.
From the load diagrams for all generating stations in Sydney,
Plate 6, it will be seen that during each of these five working days there
are two peaks only. These are due to traction load in the morning and
afternoon being superimposed upon the industrial and domestic loads.
73
APPENDIX I—PEESENT SYSTEMS OF SUPPLY
Load


The combination of loads in the evening gives rise to the annual maxi-
mum peak load which generally occurs between the 22nd and 31st week
of the year.
The daily load factor for an ordinary week day (Monday to
Friday) averages about 60 per cent., and the weekly load factor varies
between 49 and 55 per cent. The annual load factor has varied slightly
during the past five years, and in 1936 it was 44 per cent.
Power Demand
The growth of the maximum demand on the Sydney systems,
represented by the weekly half-hour maximum load on the generators,
is shown on Plates 10 and 11. The diagrams on Plate 10 refer to the
combined load on the 50-cyclo systems of the Sydney Council Council
and the Department of Railways. The diagrams on Plate 11 give the
total load on the 50 and 25 cycle systems.
In 1929 the maximum combined load on all systems was 238 000
kW, but during the general depression it dropped to 217 500 kW in
1931; and in 1937 it rose to 292 500 kW. The energy generated in 1931
was 766 million kWh (kilowatt-hours) and in 1936 1 038 million kWh.
To eliminate the variation during the year 52-week moving aver-
ages of the weekly peak loads have been formed, and are shown in Pig.
1, Plate 10 for the 50-cycle systems of the Sydney County Council and
the Department of Railways, and in Fig. 3, Plate 11, for all systems in
Sydney.
By plotting the weekly maximum load as a percentage of the
moving average, the variation of the weekly peak load during the year
has been determined and is shown in Pig. 2 on Plates 10 and 11 respec-
tively. Whilst for the 50-cycle systems of the Sydney County Council
and the Department of Railways the annual maximum peak load is
about 130 per cent, of the moving average, the corresponding value for
all systems is 122 per cent. This difference is mainly due to the
equalising effect of the traction load.
The increase of load as represented by the moving average for
all systems in Sydney over the last three years has been about 36 000
kW, or 12 000 kW per annum. If the demand should continue to increase
at the same rate, and a peak load of 120 per cent, of the moving average
be assumed, and the extra load due to the proposed electrification of
main railways be taken into account, a total peak load on all systems in
Sydney of 375 000 kW would be reached in five years, and of 460 000
kW in ten years.
NEWCASTLE AND DISTRICT
In Newcastle and district, electricity is generated and sup-
plied by the Newcastle City Council and the Department of Railways.
The supply areas and transmission systems are shown on Plates 2 and 4.
74
APPENDIX I—PRESENT SYSTEMS OF SUPPLY
Newcastle and District


Newcastle City Council
The City Council takes power in hulk from the Department of
Railways at both 50 and 25 cycles and owns and operates a steam power
station at Sydney Street, Newcastle, for peak load and stand-by pur-
poses. The Council supplies electricity direct to the consumers in New-
castle and suburbs, the area supplied being about 514 square miles, with
a population of about 136 000. No electricity is supplied by the Council
for traction, and all public supply is given at 50 cycles. The systems
consist of 179 miles of 11 and 6.6 kV, and 36 miles of 2.2 kV underground
cables and overhead lines; 210 substations and local networks.
The power station started operation in 1894 and now contains
one 2 000 kW and one 500 kW 50-cycle turbo-alternators, and two
625 kVA frequency changers. The boiler plant consists of five boilers.
Newcastle System of Department of Railways
The Department of Railways generates and supplies electricity
for traction purposes in Newcastle, and for bulk supply to Newcastle
City Council. Bulk supplies are also furnished to various public and
private consumers by transmission lines terminating 132 miles to the
north, at Taree, 44 miles to the west at Singleton, and 56 miles to the
south at Woy Woy.
The system comprises a steam power station at Zarra Street,
Newcastle, 8 miles of 11 kV and 4 miles of 6.6 kV underground cables,
4 miles of 11 kV, 13 miles of 6.6 kV, and 231 miles of 33 kV overhead
lines and 18 substations.
The generating plant consists of—
(a) One 2 500 kW, 25-cycle, 6.6 kV turbo-alternator, installed in
1915;
(h) Two 7 500 kW, 25-cycle, 6.6 kV turbo alternators, installed in
1920 and 1936;
(c) One 2 500 kW, 50-cycle, 11 kV turbo-alternator, installed in
1922;
( d ) Two 7 500 kW, 50-cycle, 11 kV turbo-alternators, installed in
1924 and 1925; and
(e) One 9 000 kVA, 25/50-cycle frequency changer.
The boiler plant consists of six boilers, each with a normal
evaporative capacity of 27 000 lb. of steam per hour working at a pres-
sure of 190 lb. per square inch, and a temperature of 580 deg. F., in-
stalled in pairs in 1920, 1921 and 1927, and two 50 000 lb. boilers in-
stalled in 1929 and 1934 for the same temperature and pressure.
An order has recently been placed for a 15 000 kW, 50-cycle, 11
kV turbo-alternator and two boilers each of an evaporative capacity of
150 000 lb. of steam per hour working at a pressure of 415 lb. per square
inch and a temperature of 820 deg. F.
Power is distributed at 50 and 25 cycles, the latter frequency being
used in a portion of the traction system and by certain industries, par-
ticularly the Broken Hill Proprietary steel works. The City of New-
castle takes 50-cycle supply at 11 kV and 25-cycle supply at 6.6 kV from
Hunter Street substation.
75
APPENDIX I—PRESENT SYSTEMS OF SUPPLY
Newcastle City Council


Load
As will be seen from the load diagrams on Plate 7 for Zarra
Street generating station, Newcastle, the variation of load in Newcastle
and district is relatively much less than in Sydney. The remarkably
high load at night time is due to the demand of the heavy industries.
Generally there is one and sometimes there are two or more peaks per
day during the first five working days of the week. The annual peak
may occur at almost any time of the year, but in general the heaviest
loading can be anticipated between the 10th and 30th week and towards
the end of the year.
Of the peak loads of Newcastle and district the Sydney Street
generating station belonging to Newcastle City Council generally
carries about 2 000 kW. This amount has to be added to the peak loads
given on Plate 7 to arrive at the total peak load for Newcastle and
district.
The daily load factor of Zarra Street power station for an ordin-
ary week day (Monday to Friday) averages about 72 per cent, and the
weekly load factor varies between 56 and 60 per cent. The annual load
factor was 55 per cent, in 1936.
Powek Demand
The growth of the maximum demand in Newcastle and district
is shown on Plate 12. In 1937 the combined peak load on the Zarra
Street and Sydney Street power stations was about 28 000 kW and the
energy output in 1936 was 112 million kWh. The increase of load as
represented by the moving average over the last three years has been
about 7 200 kW or 2 400 kW per annum. This figure, however, cannot
be used in view of the fact that certain industries which have available
cheap or by-product fuel have arranged to instal further generating
plant of their own. Taking into account the extra load due to the
proposed electrification of the railway line between Sydney and New-
castle (7 000 kW in 1947) it is estimated that the demand on the
generating stations will be 38 000 kW in 1942 and 49 000 kW in 1947.
PORT KEMBLA SYSTEM
Port Kembla electric supply system is owned and operated by
the Department of Works and Local Government. Electricity is
generated in a steam power station situated on the coast at Port Kembla
56 miles south of Sydney. Electricity was in the first instance gener-
ated for the harbour works in 1915, and in 1921 a bulk supply to the
nearby town of Wollongong was commenced. Bulk supplies were sub-
sequently extended to the towns of the Southern Highlands and to
others on the coast south of Port Kembla. In the great majority of
cases supplies are given in bulk, including ten Municipalities and two
Shires, while a number of important industrial consumers are served
directly.
76
APPENDIX I—PRESENT SYSTEMS OF SUPPLY
Port Kembla System


Electricity from the power station is transmitted over 120 miles
of 33 kV overhead lines which form a ring, and there are 75 miles of
11 kV and 6.6 kV lines. The population in the area served is about
38 000.
Port Kembla steam station was first put into service in 1915 with
two 300 kW engine sets. The present plant consists of three turbo-
alternators each of 1 500 kW, two of which were installed in 1919 and
the third in 1925, and one turbo-alternator of 3 000 kW installed in 1927.
The electricity is generated at 6.6 kY, 50 cycles. Two 5 000 kW sets
are at present on order and are expected to be in service one before the
end of 1937 and the other early in 1938.
The boiler plant consists of three boilers with a normal rating
of 23 200 lb. of steam per hour working at a pressure of 200 lb..per
square inch and a temperature of 638 deg. F., two of which were
installed in 19.19 and the third in 1925; and a larger boiler of a normal
rating of 43 000 lb. of steam per hour which was installed in 1927. Two
further boilers of a normal rating of 50 000 lb. of steam per hour are
at present on order. These latter boilers will be working at a pressure
of 260 lb. per square inch and a temperature of 750 deg. F.
Load and Power Demand
In regard to present load and prospective power demand, the
Port Kembla, Burrinjuck and Lithgow systems are later considered
together as a combined system.
BURRINJUCK SYSTEM
The construction, of the Burrinjuck Dam for the purposes of
water supply to the Murrumbidgee Irrigation Area was commenced in
1906 by the Water Conservation and Irrigation Commission and was
practically completed in 1923, although certain modifications were
effected up to 1928. In that year the Department of Works and Local
Government completed a hydro-electric power station on the right bank
of the river for the purpose of utilizing the head created by the dam.
This power station is referred to as Power Station No. 1. A second
power station, referred to as Power Station No. 2, is at present under
construction on the left bank of the river.
No territorial limit is imposed upon the area of supply from the
Burrinjuck system, and the great majority of its supplies are provided
in bulk, ten Municipalities and four Shires and the City of Canberra
being at present so served. A few small towns and some rural districts
are supplied in retail where it has not been practicable to arrange for
distribution by local authorities. Electricity is supplied in bulk to the
Federal Capital City of Canberra, and the system is linked up at that
point with a steam power station there owned by the Federal Govern-
ment. The system consists of about 306 miles of 66 kV and about 300
miles of 11 kV and 6.6 kV overhead lines. The population in the area
served is 65 000.
77
APPENDIX I—PRESENT SYSTEMS OF SUPPLY
Burrinjuck System


Power Station No. 1 has been in operation since 1928. It is
situated approximately 1 700 feet downstream from the dam, and the
head utilized varies from 210 to 130 feet. The steel pipe line leading
from the dam has a diameter of 7 feet and is concreted throughout its
whole length. The power station contains two vertical shaft turbines
with direct coupled generators of a capacity of 5 000 kW each, general
ing at 6.6 kV, 50 cycles.
Power Station No. 2is 200 feet downstream from the dam. The
head utilized is about 15 feet less than at Power Station No. 1. There
will be two turbines with horizontal shafts with direct coupled genera-
tors each of a capacity of 5 000 kW. This station will be remotely con-
trolled.
The steam power station at Canberra consists of two generating
units each of 600 kW installed in 1915, and one unit of 1 500 kW installed
in 1926. The boiler plant has a total normal rating of 24 000 lb. of
steam per hour. The area of retail supply in Canberra is 16 square
miles, the population being about 9 000.
Load and Power Demand
In regard to present load and prospective power demand, the
Port Kembla, Burrinjuck and Lithgow systems are later considered
together as a combined system.
LITHGOW SYSTEM
The Department of Railways generates electricity at a steam
power station at Lithgow, situated about 96 miles west of Sydney, and
gives bulk supply to seven Municipalities and Shires within an area
extending 137 miles in the west and north-west to Bathurst, Blayney.
Orange and Wellington, and 37 miles in the east to Lawson. The area
of supply is about 120 square miles and the population 55 000.
The system comprises 137 miles of 66 kV, 37 miles of 33 kV, 3
miles of 11 kV and 4 miles of 2.2 kV overhead lines and 12 substations.
The power station is situated at the mouth of a State-owned
coal mine whence coal is delivered by conveyor to the boiler house.
The turbine house accommodates three 2 500 kW turbo-alterna-
tors, two installed in 1928 and the third in 1931. An additional turbo-
alternator rated at 2 500 kW is now being installed.
The installation in the boiler house consists of three boilers each
having a normal rating of 25 000 lb. of steam per hour (31250 lb.
maximum) working at a pressure of 200 lb. per square inch, and a
temperature of 588 deg. F. One boiler having a maximum con-
tinuous rating of 47 500 lb. of steam per hour is now being installed.
78
APPENDIX I—PRESENT SYSTEMS OF SUPPLY
Litbgow System


PORT KEMBLA. BURRINJUCK AND LITHGOW SYSTEMS
Load
Tlie diagrams of the combined load for the Port Kembla, Burrin-
juck and Lithgow systems referred to as the S'outh Western System,
are shown on Plate 8. The load at night time is comparatively high
which is partly due to industries at Port Kembla using power for 24
hours of the day and off-peak water pumping on the Burrinjuck system.
During each of the first five working days of the week there arc three
peaks except in winter when the day load is fairly constant. As will be
seen from the diagrams the daily peak load is practically the same all
the year round and the annual maximum peak can be expected at any
time of the year.
The annual load factor has varied between 38 and 48 per cent,
during the past five years and was 47 per cent, in 1936.
Power Demand
The growth of the combined maximum demand on the Port
Kembla, Burrinjuck and Lithgow systems is shown on Plate 13. The
combined peak in 1937 was 15 000 kW and the energy output in 1936 was
63 million kWh. The increase in load as represented by the moving-
average for all three systems over the last three years has been about
1100 kW per annum. If the demand should continue to increase at the
same rate and a peak of 115 per cent, of the moving average be assumed
the annual increase of the peak load in the present area of supply would
be about 1 300 kW.
The power stations within these systems would also supply power
to the proposed main railway electrification between Sydney and Nowra,
Goulburn and Lithgow. If carried out according to programme this
electrification would provide an additional load on the systems of
5 000 kW in five, and 15 000 kW in ten years. Furthermore, arrange-
ments for power supply to Goulburn and to new industries in Port
Kembla, Captain’s Flat and Lithgow have recently been made, and
new areas may be served to the west of Lithgow, as suggested in
Appendix IX. Taking all these prospective loads into account the
combined peak load on the systems would be no less than about 47 000
kW in five, and 66 000 kW in ten years.
CLARENCE RIVER COUNTY COUNCIL
The Clarence River County Council which is constituted by the
Municipalities of Grafton, South Grafton and Ulmarra, and the Shires
of Copmanhurst (portion only), Nymboida, and Orara, began operations
in 1924. Under agreements of fixed duration it subsequently extended
its retail operations to the Shire of Harwood and the Municipality of
Maclean, and thereafter to the Shires of Dorrigo (portion only), Bellin-
gen, Nambucca and Terania. Electricity in bulk is supplied to the
79
Appendix I—PRESENT systems of supply
Clarence Elver County Council


Municipalities of Lismore and Casino, and an arrangement for retail
distribution in Kyogle Shire and for supplementary bulk supplies to
Mullumbimby and the Electric Construction Company at Ballina have
recently been concluded. The total area served is about 400 square
miles with a population of 48 000.
By far the greater part of the energy is generated at Nymboida
hydro-electric power station on the Nymboida River. The head utilized
is 220 feet and the installation consists of two 400 kW and three 800
kW water turbine-generators. The two smaller units were installed in
1924, and the three latter in 1929 to 1934. Two further units of 800 kW
each are at present being installed. The small storage above the dam
provides diurnal regulation only.
In the north the Council owns and operates a reserve power
station at Lismore with three oil engine sets of a total capacity of 1500
kW installed in 1933 to 1937. Three further units each of a capacity of
650 kW are being installed at present. The hydro-electric station at
Nymboida and the reserve power station at Lismore are connected by
90 miles of 66 kV transmission line and there are also 88 miles of 33 kV,
262 miles of 11 and 6.6 kV overhead line, twenty-one 33 kV substations,
232 distribution substations and local networks.
Load
The load diagrams for the Clarence River County Council
system are shown on Plate 9. During each of the first five working
days of the week generally one peak only occurs and this is due to
lighting load being superimposed upon the industrial and domestic
loading. The annual peak load may occur at any time of the year except
between the Ist and the Bth and between the 33rd and 40th week of the
year. The fall in loading during the latter period appears to be due to
the seasonal reduction in the output of the dairying industry.
The daily load factor for an ordinary week day (Monday to
Friday) averages about 67 per cent, and the weekly load factor varies
between 54 and 64 per cent. The annual load factor appears to have
improved slightly during the past five years and was 52 per cent, in
1936.
Power Demand
The growth of the maximum demand on the Clarence River
County Council’s system is shown on Plate 14. In 1936/37 the peak
load was 3 500 kW and the energy output in 1936 was 14 million kWh.
The increase in load over the last three years as represented by the
moving average was about 400 kW per annum corresponding to a peak
load of about 450 kW per annum. These figures refer to the present
area of supply. In Appendix X the supply of electricity to the North
Eastern Area is dealt with in detail and a proposal is put forward' to
interconnect the system of the Clarence River County Council with
80
APPENDIX I—PRESENT SYSTEMS OF SUPPLY
Power Demand


Tamworth and extend the electricity supply system into the New
England Tableland. If the power demand should continue to increase
at the same rate as during the past three years in the districts compris-
ing the North Eastern Area, the total peak load would be 12 000 kW in
five, and 17 000 kW in ten years.
As it is thought, however, that the present rate of growth may
be regarded as unusually high it has been deemed advisable for the
purpose of conservative financial estimates to regard these loads as
occurring in 1943 and 1949 respectively.
MUNICIPALITY OF TAMWORTH
A pioneer in electricity supply, the Municipal Council of Tam-
worth owns and operates a steam generating plant in the Municipality
for supplying the Municipality. Electricity in bulk or retail is also sup-
plied to the Municipality of Manilla and the Peel Shire, including the
town of Werris Creek, and the Shires of Cockburn and Mandowa. The
Council has been active in extending rural supplies to surrounding
villages, and along the Peel Eiver. The area of supply is about 200
square miles, serving a population of 20 000.
The system consists of 72 miles of 33 kV transmission line, 40
substations and local networks. In the power station at Tamworth there
are six boilers, installed between 1922 and 1934, of a total normal rating
of about 47 500 lb. of steam per hour. The turbine installation consists
of two units each of 250 kW installed in 1922, two units each of 400 kW
installed in 1924 and 1927, and a fifth unit of 1 000 kW installed in 1934.
Provision is being made for installing an additional unit of 2 000 kW.
YANCO SYSTEM
The Water Conservation and Irrigation Commission, which
administers the Murrumhidgee Irrigation Area, instituted an elec-
tricity supply in 1913 in these areas from a steam power station at
Yanco. At the outset supply w T as given to Leeton, and subsequently
extended to Griffith and Yenda.
As distinct from the other Government supply systems, electri-
city is supplied mainly in retail. The Narrandera Municipality and the
Carrathool Shire are supplied in bulk.
The area of supply is about 280 square miles with a population
of 23 000.
The system comprises 42 miles of 33 kV and 5 kV overhead lines
63 substations, and local networks.
At Yanco power station there are four boilers of a total norma,
rating of 69 000 lb. of steam per hour, and three turbo-alternators and
one steam engine set, the total installed capacity being 4 350 kW at the
end of 1936.
* 59265—F
81
Appendix 1— present systems oe supply
Yanco System'


OTHER SYSTEMS
Distributing Authorities
Included in the figures for peak load and energy output of the
major systems mentioned above there are, naturally, the operations of
the various distributing authorities which do not generate but are
supplied in the bulk from the respective systems.
Apart altogether from the retail supply operations of certain of
the systems mentioned, there are 64 separate distributing authorities
receiving energy in bulk from these systems and distributing in retail.
Of these distributing authorities one is controlled by the Federal
Government (Canberra), one by a County Council (St. George), 42
by Municipal Councils, 16 by Shire Councils and four by companies. Of
these, only the most important will be mentioned.
The St. George County Council is constituted by four municipali-
ties in the suburbs of Sydney and commenced operations in 1923, pur-
chasing bulk electricity supply at 11 kV from the Department of Rail-
ways. It serves over 28 000 consumers, the population in its area of
supply being 118 000.
The Parramatta and Granville Electric Supply Co. Ltd., holds
franchises in the Municipalities of Parramatta and Granville. It com-
menced operations in Parramatta in 1913 using a local generating
plant. In 1921 it abandoned its plant to take bulk supply at 11 kV
from the Department of Railways. It now serves over 8 000 consumers,
the population in its area of supply being 39 000.
The Municipality of West Maitland commenced operations in
1922 taking bulk electricity supply at 11 kV from the Department of
Railways. Subsequently it extended its retail supplies into two munici-
palities and four shires, giving an extensive rural service. The Under-
taking serves over 4 000 consumers, the population in its area of supply
being approximately 15 000.
Although not in State territory, the electrical undertaking of the
Federal Government at Canberra should be mentioned in view of its
connection with the Burrinjuck System. This Undertaking was com-
menced in 1915 when a local steam power station was put into service.
In 1929 bulk electricity supply at 5 kV was taken from the Burrinjuck
System and the steam power station is now only operated for the stand-
by and supplementary requirements of the Burrinjuck System. The
Undertaking now serves about 2 000 consumers, the population in its
area of supply being 9 000.
Four municipalities and shires distributing electricity, purchase
their requirements in bulk from industrial plants, generally collieries,
in their vicinity. On the Victorian Border five municipalities and
shires purchase electricity in bulk from the State Electricity Commis-
sion of Victoria, and one municipality obtains bulk supply from an
adjacent Victorian town. One municipality obtains bulk supply from
the local generating plant of a nearby Council.
82
APPENDIX I—PRESENT SYSTEMS OF SUPPLY
Other Systems


No. of
Total Installed
Plants
Capacity
Municipal and Shire
36
13 500 kW
Privately owned plants operating under franchise ...
36
7 500 kW
Undertaking
i
Location of
Plant
Type of Plant
Total
Installed
Capacity
City of Goulburn
Goulburn
Steam ...
2 550 kW
Municipality of Forbes
Forbes ...
Steam ...
750 kW
Municipality of Parkes
Parkes ...
Oil engine
654 kW
Dubbo Lighting Co. ...
JJubbo ...
Oil and suction
gas engines
1 100 kW
Municipality of Cooma
Cooma
Oil engine
132 kW
Municipality of Armidale
Armidale
Oil and suction
gas engines
820 kW
Municipality of Glen Lines
Glen Innes
Oil and suction
gas engines
885 kW .
Municipality of inveroll
Inverell
Oil engine
720 kW
Municipality of Mullumbimby
Wilson’s Creek-^
Oil engine
Hydro-electric ...
365 kW
280 kW
Electric Construction Company of
Ballina ...
Oilengine
450 kW
Australia.
Municipality of Murwillumbah
Murwillumbah ...
Steam
800 kW
Other Generating Systems
Excluding the major generating systems referred to above, there
are in the State 72 public supply authorities operating local generating
plants throughout the State. The total installed capacity of these plants
at the end of 1936 was about 21 000 kW, made up as follows: —
Of these plants, only the more important likely to be affected by
proposed extensions of the main transmission systems will be men-
tioned. They are as follows:
INDUSTRIAL PLANTS
Broken Hill Proprietary Co. Ltd.
This Company owns a power station situated at Newcastle. The
power is generated chiefly from blast-furnace and coke-oven gas and is
used in the Company’s steel works and neighbouring allied industries.
The plant consists of two turbo-alternators, each of a capacity of 5 000
kW, generating at 6.6 kY and 25 cycles, and five boilers operating at a
pressure of 200 lb. per square inch and a temperature of 590 deg.
P. Two turbo-alternators of the same voltage and frequency, each of
a capacity of 18 750 kW, together with four boilers are on order.
Australian Iron & Steel Ltd.
This Company owns a power station situated at its steelworks in
Port Kembla. The fuel mainly used is blast-furnace gas supplemented
with pulverised coal. The plant is interconnected with the Port Kembla
83
APPENDIX I—PRESENT SYSTEMS OF SUPPLY
Industrial Plants


power station of the Department of Works and Local Government from
which additional supplies are purchased. The plant consists of one
2 200 kW, one 5 600 kW, and one 5 000 kW turbo-generator, all generat-
ing at 6.6 kV, 50 cycles, and seven boilers operating at a pressure of
275 lb. per square inch, and a temperature of 515 deg. F. Further
boiler plant is on order.
Western New South Wales Electric Power Proprietary Ltd.
This Company owns a power station at Broken Hill supplying
power and compressed air to the principal mining companies. The
electric plant consists of six oil engine generators each of a capacity of
2 000 kW, generating at 6.9 kV and 40 cycles. An additional generating
unit of a capacitj r of 2 200 kW is now on order. Power is distributed
over six miles of 6.9 kV lines.
Caledonian Collieries Ltd.
This Company owns a power station at Cockle Creek near New-
castle, supplying power to a number of mines. The plant consists of
two turbo-alternators each of a capacity of 5 000 kW, generating at 6.6
kY and 50 cycles, and two coal tired boilers. Energy is transmitted at
33 kV chiefly to the Company’s mines, but also for certain public
supplies in Cessnock and district.
Muswellbrook Coal Company Ltd.
This Company’s power station provides power for its colliery
and supplies the Municipal Council of Muswellbrook in bulk. Its plant
comprises four steam engine alternators of an aggregate capacity of
750 kW, and five coal fired boilers. One 1 300 kW turbo-alternator is
on order.
Kandos Cement Co. Ltd.
The Kandos Cement Company owns a power station at Kandos.
The power is chiefly used in the Company’s works, a small portion being
supplied in bulk to the Eylstone Shire Council. The installation consists
of two 1 300 kW and one 700 kW turbo-alternators and five coal-fired
boilers.
Southern Portland Cement Co. Ltd.
The Southern Portland Cement Company’s power station at
Berrima supplies energy for the Company’s works, and provides a
small supply in a portion of the Wingecarribee Shire. The plant con-
sists of one 3 000 kW, one 750 kW turbo-alternator, and three boilers
operating at a pressure of 250 lb. per square inch and a temperature
of 690 deg. F.
84
APPENDIX I—PRESENT SYSTEMS OE SUPPLY
Southern Portland Cement Co. Ltd.


APPENDIX II
TO REPORT OF 1937 BY RENDEL,
PALMER AND TRITTON ON ELECTRICAL
DEVELOPMENT IN NEW SOUTH WALES
LEGISLATION RELATING TO
ELECTRICITY SUPPLY IN
NEW SOUTH WALES
EARLY LEGISLATION
Prior to the passing of the Municipalities Electric Light Act,
1904, Councils generally did not possess power to provide for electricity
supply 'within their areas, and special legislation was necessary in each
case. Supply in Newcastle and suburbs by the Municipal Council of
Newcastle was authorised by the Borough of Newcastle Electric Light-
ing Act, 1892. Electricity supply by the Municipal Council of Sydney
in the City of Sydney and suburbs was authorised by the Municipal
Council of Sydney Electric Lighting Act, 1896, to which various amend-
ments have been made up to 1928.
The Municipalities Electric Light Act, 1904, made the provisions
of the Municipalities Act, 1897, with regard to the manufacture and
sale of gas by Municipalities, applicable mutatis mutandis to electricity
supply. The Act of 1897 had given Councils wide powers of gas manu-
facture, gas street lighting and gas supply to consumers within and
outside their areas, but not to consumers in other Municipalities. The
Act of 1904 therefore put the initiative with regard to electricity supply
for general public purposes essentially in the hands of Councils, and
it has so remained ever since. The only substantial regulatory power
reserved by the State at that date lay in the necessity (under general
Local Government legislation) for the Governor’s approval to loans
raised by Councils.
LOCAL GOVERNMENT ACT, 1906
The Local Government Act, 1906, repealed the Municipalities
Lighting Act, 1904, but gave the Municipalities the right, subject to
the Governor’s approval being obtained, to generate and supply elec-
tricity. This power was also extended to Shires, which had just come
into existence. The power to supply to consumers outside municipal
boundaries was not retained, since the setting up of Shires had placed
those consumers in Local Government areas (except in the far West-
ern Division of the State).
LOCAL GOVERNMENT ACT, 1919
The present powers of Councils with regard to electricity supply
are in general covered by the Local Government Act, 1919. This Act,
which repealed the Local Government Act, 1906, confers upon Councils
85


wider powers with regard to electricity supply, inasmuch as the neces-
sity to obtain the Governor’s approval to a Council supplying in its
own area has been dispensed with, while in addition to generation and
supply, the Council is given power to purchase, generate or otherwise
obtain electricity. It is also empowered to supply and instal electrical
fittings and appliances.
In addition, the 1919 Act provides additional powers for Coun-
cils, the salient features of which are that Councils are authorised to
form County Councils for electricity supply purposes (inter alia ); to
grant franchises for electricity supply to private operators subject to
the Governor’s approval being obtained to the necessary agreement
between the Council and the private operator; and to extend supply into
the areas of other Councils subject to the latter’s consent (and since
1935 subject also to the Governor’s approval).
Under the Act, the formation of County Councils (which term
has no relation to the land divisions of the State known as counties)
is essentially a voluntary matter, although the participation of min-
orities may be required by the Governor. The County Council is a
joint undertaking analogous with the Joint Electricity Boards of Great
Britain. In each of the three County Councils formed so far under
the Act to deal with electricity supply (Clarence Elver, St. George and
Bega Valley) constituent bodies have delegated to the County Council
their functions of electricity supply, and the identity of any under-
takings previously owned by them has disappeared. The members of
a County Council are elected by and from the Aldermen and/or Coun-
cillors of the constituent bodies on a certain basis of representation.
The County Councils abovementioned have power to borrow and to
impose loan rating in their constituent areas.
Certain amendments of the Local Government Act were made by
the Gas and Electricity Act, 1935, which is discussed hereinafter.
BOROUGH OF BALMAIN ELECTRIC LIGHTING ACT. 1906
The Electric Light and Power Supply Corporation Ltd. supply-
ing the five suburban Municipalities of Balmain, Newtown, Leichhardt,
Petersham and Ashfield derives its franchise in Balmain from a pro-
vision of the Borough of Balmain Electric Lighting Act, 1906, under
which the Balmain Municipal Council was authorised to supply elec-
tricity, and alternatively was empowered to delegate its power to a
franchise holder. The Council granted a franchise to the Electric Light
and Power Supply Corporation in perpetuity, the undertaking being
subject to acquisition at ten-yearly periods on the basis of valuation as
a going concern. By 1913 the Company had extended its supplies to the
other four suburbs under agreements of fixed duration.
86
APPENDIX lI—LEGISLATION
Borough of Balmain Electric Lighting Act, 190 G


ACTS AUTHORISING GOVERNMENT OPERATIONS
Authority for the Government to undertake certain electricity
supplies and to construct the necessary works has been given in several
Acts. The Hydro Electric Development (Construction) Act, 1919, the
Burrinjuck Hydro Electric (Administration) Act, 1929, and the Public
Works (Port Kembla Electricity) Act, 1929-1934, authorise the under-
takings now operated by the Department of Works and Local Govern-
ment. The Mittagong-Bowral-Moss Vale Transmission Line Act, 1922,
and the South Coast Towns Transmission Line Act, 1922, provide for
the construction of certain lines from the Port Kembla plant. The
undertaking, which was commenced under the general provisions of the
Public Works Act, 1912, was granted general powers of electricity sup-
ply within the Counties of Camden and St. Vincent in 1929.
Under the Government Railways Act, 1912, as amended in 1922,
the Commissioner for Railways is authorised to undertake electricity
supply in bulk for general purposes. The City and Suburban Railways
Act, 1915-1916, provided for the construction of electric railways in the
City of Sydney and suburbs.
Under the Water Act, 1912, complete control of the water in all
the streams and rivers of the State vests in the Crown, licenses for the
use thereof being issued by the Water Conservation and Irrigation
Commission.
By the Seat of Government (Surrender) Act, 1909, as amended,
1927, the right of utilization of the waters of certain rivers, primarily
the Snowy River, has been granted to the Commonwealth Government
if required for power supply to the Federal Capital Territory.
MINOR ACTS
A number of Acts ratifying various individual agreements for
electricity supply and similar purposes has from time to time been
passed, but as these Acts do not affect electricity supply in general,
they are not discussed hereunder.
GAS AND ELECTRICITY ACT, 1935
The Gas and Electricity Act, 1935, the most recent important
legislation with regard to electricity supply in New South Wales, had
its origin in the necessity to prevent the continued sale of unsafe elec-
trical appliances, the Government’s desire to amend many features of
the Gas and Electricity Act, 1932, and the necessity for a solution of
problems encountered by the Sydney Municipal Council in its electricity
supply agreements with the suburban Councils. The early portion of
the Act deals with gas supply.
The Act confers upon the Governor powers of regulation of elec-
tricity supply and of electrical equipment, appliances, apparatus,
materials, etc. It provides for the formation of an Electricity Advisory
Committee. Of the thirteen members of this Committee, four are ex
officio, namely, the Under-Secretary for Local Government (Chairman),
87
APPENDIX lI—LEGISLATION
Gas and Electricity Act, 19155


the General Manager of the Sydney County Council, and the Chief
Electrical Engineers of the Departments of Railways and Public Works.
Eight members of the Committee are appointed by the Governor and
selected from panels nominated by the Executive Committees of the
Shires Association and Local Government Association, the Sydney
Chamber of Commerce, the Chamber of Manufactures, and the Elec-
trical Trades Union. The remaining member is appointed by the
Governor.
The functions of the Committee which are only of an advisory
nature are to consider matters relating to the generation, transmission
and use of electricity; to furnish information on finance, statistics,
standards and testing; to devise schemes of co-ordination; to advise
the Minister on amending legislation; and to carry out such other
advisory functions as may be prescribed.
Among the more important ordinance-making powers provided
for in this Act and conferred upon the Governor are those with refer-
ence to: —examination, testing and approval of appliances, materials,
etc.; standards for appliances, materials, etc.; the form and basis of
charges for electricity supply (not intended to convey any price-fixing
powers); periodical inspection by electricity supply authorities of appli-
ances and installations on public and private premises; safety of opera-
tives ; and standards of voltage at consumers ’ terminals.
In the interests of the co-ordination of generation and distribu-
tion of electricity, the Act extends the regulatory power of the Govern-
ment by providing that the Governor’s approval shall be obtained to
agreements for the extension of the undertaking of any Council into
the area of another Council; to agreements for the giving of a supply of
electricity in bulk by a Council to another Council, or the taking of a
bulk supply by a Council from any person or authority; to the construc-
tion or establishment of a public generating plant, or the installation
of an additional main generating unit; and to the construction or exten-
sion of a main transmission line.
The Act also deals with the constitution, establishment and duties
of the Sydney County Council, salient features of the Act being men-
tioned herein.
It is provided that the Sydney County district shall consist of
the City of Sydney and the thirty-two Municipalities which were pre-
viously reticulated and served in retail by the Sydney Municipal
Council, As a result of this provision the identity of the former under-
taking of the Sydney Municipal Council has disappeared, the gener-
ating plants and distribution system being taken over in toto by the
Sydney County Council. The bulk consumers of the Sydney Municipal
Council located outside the County district have in no way participated
in the constitution of the County Council, nor has the ownership of
their distribution systems and reticulations been affected by the Act,
the only alteration being that they have now become bulk consumers
of the Sydney County Council.
88
APPENDIX lI—LEGISLATION
Gas and Electricity Act, 1935


It is provided that the Sydney County Council shall consist of
five councillors, two elected by the City of Sydney, two by the Muni-
cipalities in the County District south of the Harbour, and one by the
Municipalities north of the Harbour.
The Act deals with the transfer to the County Council of the
powers, duties, functions and electrical organisation of the Sydney
Municipal Council. The County Council is required to indemnify the
Municipal Council against all claims in respect of moneys borrowed
by the Municipal Council in connection with the undertaking’, i.e., the
legislation did not alter the securities previously issued by the Sydney
Municipal Council.
An outstanding feature of the Act is the segregation of the
functions of control and management with the object of leaving the
essential control in the hands of the Council and putting the business
administration of the undertaking under the General Manager. Among
the reserved functions of the Council are those in relation to the follow-
ing matters: rates and charges; borrowing of moneys; acceptance of
tenders; awards and industrial agreements; appointment and termina-
tion of the employment of the General Manager, the Chief Engineer,
and the Secretary; agreements for bulk supply; extension of operations
into other areas; sale and hire of electrical fittings and appliances;
establishment of new generating stations; sinking funds and invest-
ments; inclusion of new areas in the County District. The Council may
delegate to the General Manager any of its reserved functions, other
than borrowing, or the making of a rate.
It is provided that the General Manager shall exercise all the
functions of the Council other than the reserved functions. He shall
be responsible for the appointment and termination of employment of
the servants of the Council, with the exception of the Chief Engineer,
and the Secretary, and he shall submit an annual budget to the Council..
Further, the Act makes provision for revision of the charges
made by the Electric Light and Power Supply Corporation Ltd., not-
withstanding the Borough of Balmain Electric Lighting Act, 19U6, or
ihe agreements between the Company and the five Municipalities which
it serves. A joint Committee is constituted of five Aldermen, one nom-
inated by and from each of the Municipal Councils. The function of
the joint committee is to arrange with the Company periodical revision
of its charges, disputes being settled by arbitration.
The Act also provides for the exercise of emergency powers by
the Governor in the event of shortage of electricity (or gas) supplies.
Finally, the Act repeals previous Acts dealing with the licensing
of electrical contractors and electricians, and abolishes the Electrical
Contractors and Electricians’ Licensing Board. Licensing powers are
vested in the Minister, a Local Government examination committee hav-
ing been formed for the purpose.
89
APPENDIX lI—LEGISLATION
Gas and Electricity Act, 1935




APPENDIX III
TO REPORT OF 1937 BY RENDEL, PALMER
& TRITTON ON ELECTRICAL DEVELOP-
MENT IN NEW SOUTH WALES
REPORT ON PROPOSED MAIN LINE
ELECTRIFICATION SCHEME
BY
ALFRED RAWORTH
INTRODUCTION
This report gives the results of an investigation into a Scheme
of Electrification proposed by the Department of Railways, particu-
lars of which are given in certain documents sent to London in April
and comprising:—
(a) A report dated 16th February, 1937, addressed to Mr. W. J.
Bubb, Comptroller of Accounts and Audit, and Mr. W. H.
Myers, Chief Electrical Engineer, and accompanied by sixteen
appendices.
(b) A letter from the Chief Electrical Engineer dated 20th April,
1937, addressed to Mr. B. Hellstrom.
(c) A report on Electrification —Sydney to Newcastle —dated 12th
September, 1933, and addressed to Mr. W. J. Bubb.
The information provided by these documents is, in some
respects, incomplete, and it has been found necessary to make certain
assumptions and deductions in order to arrive at a basis upon which
to construct estimates of the first cost of carrying out the Scheme and
of the financial results which may be expected to follow on its com-
pletion.
Wherever this procedure has been adopted, the fact is made
clear in the report, and it must be understood that the accuracy of the
estimates and the conclusions to be drawn from them are dependent
upon these assumptions and deductions being reasonably near to the
actual facts.
All figures in this report representing costs are shown in Aus-
tralian pounds taken at 125 to 100 pounds sterling.
91


Route miles.
Hornsby to Newcastle ..
83
Parramata to Lithgow ..
82
Liverpool to Goulburn ..
117
Loftus to Nowra
79
361
Single line mileage.
Running lines
759
Sidings
117
876
MILEAGE
The scheme of Electrification proposed by the Department is
such as to enable both passenger and goods traffic to be worked electri-
cally as between Sydney and Newcastle, Lithgow, Groulburn and
Nowra, and is stated to involve the electrification of some 361 route
miles, made up as follows:
The corresponding single-line mileage, including certain tracks
within the Sydney Suburban area which have not yet been electrified
is given as:—
TRAFFIC STATISTICS
The traffic handled in 1936 on the lines under consideration is
given, in the Chief Electrical Engineer’s letter of 20th April, 1937, as
equivalent to 4 250 million ton miles, including locomotive running and
shunting.
In the absence of specific information, it has been found neces-
sary to deduce the number of engine miles required to work this
traffic, in the following manner;—
In page 12 of the report of the 16th February, 1937, an addition
of 10 per cent, is made to the calculated energy consumption, to cover
shunting. If the specific energy consumption in shunting is taken as
double that in main line service, a not unreasonable assumption, the
ton miles, excluding shunting, will be 4 045 million.
The report of 16th February, 1937, gives, on page 12, the aver-
age train weight as 450 tons, and in Appendix 11 the locomotive weight
as 125 tons; the trailing ton mileage will be, therefore, of the order of
2 922 million.
From Appendix B of the report of 3rd October, 1933, on the
proposed Sydney-Newcastle Electrification, it is ascertained that it
was then calculated that the operation of 555 810 939 trailing ton miles
would necessitate the working of 2184 000 steam engine miles, or
alternatively 1917 000 electric locomotive miles: consequently, the
trailing ton miles per engine mile were 254 and 290 respectively.
92
APPENDIX lII—PEOPOSED MAIN LINE ELECTEIEICATION SCHEME
Traffic Statistics


Assuming’ that these ratios can he applied to the present scheme,
the engine mileage will be —for steam 11500 000 and for electric
traction 10 070 000.
ANTICIPATED INCREASE IN TRAFFIC
It is indicated in page 12 of the report of 16th February, 1937,
that it is anticipated that by the date upon which the electrification
could be completed, the traffic will have increased by some 40 per cent.
In estimating the first cost of carrying out the Scheme, an
increase in traffic of this magnitude has been provided for, and it is
proposed to show the financial saving likely to result from electrifica-
tion, firstly in respect of the 1936 traffic, and secondly in respect of a
volume of traffic 40 per cent, greater.
The following figures have been taken as the bases for the
calculations:—
1936 traffic 1936 traffic
plus 40%
(a) Ton miles, including locomotive running
and shunting—millions .. .. .. 4 250 5 950
(5) Ton miles, excluding shunting—millions
(a/1.05) 4 045 5 663
(c) Trailing ton miles —millions (b x
325/450) 2 922 4 090
( d) Engine miles—millions—
Steam c/254 11.5 16.1
Electric c/290 .. .. .. .. 10.07 14.1
ELECTRIC LOCOMOTIVES
A locomotive of the type proposed, with six driving axles, each
carrying a motor of about 400 horse-power, and with a total adhesive
weight of about 108 tons, could be designed to give a satisfactory
performance in passenger service, and, without modification other
than a change of gear ratio, to be suitable for handling the goods
traffic.
With the higher speed gear ratio, the locomotive could be de-
signed to haul a 400 ton train at a speed of—
-60 miles per hour on the level
33 miles per hour up a gradient of 1 in 46.5
24 miles per hour up a gradient of 1 in 33.
93
APPENDIX lII—PROPOSED MAIN LINE ELECTRIFICATION SCHEME
Electric Locomotives


Maximum
Trailing
Tons
Ruling
Gradient
No. of
Locomotives
Speed
m.p.h.
Northern Line—
Up
640
1 in 40
1
18
Down
400
1 in 40
1
20
Western Line—
Up
1 400
1 in 42
2
18
Down
1 100
1 in 33
2
18
Southern Line —
Up
1 300
1 in 50
2
19
Down
900
1 in 66
1
18-5
Illawarra Line—
Up
1 100
1 in 44
2
19
Down
580
1 in 40
1
18-5
In goods service, with the lower speed gear ratio, the speed on
the ruling gradients with the maximum weights of train, as given in
the report of 16th February, 1937, would be as shown in the following
table:—
Assuming that an annual average mileage of about 75 000 per
locomotive could be obtained, the number of locomotives required would
be 134 for the 1936 traffic, and for a volume of traffic 40 per cent,
greater, 188.
It may be found desirable to operate certain stopping trains
which do not proceed beyond the electrified area, with multiple unit
stock, rather than with locomotives. The cost of the electrical equip-
ment of a train of this type would be rather less than the cost of a
locomotive of the type proposed and it has been assumed, therefore,
for present purposes, that all trains would be hauled by locomotives.
ELECTRICAL TRANSMITTING, CONVERTING AND
DISTRIBUTING SYSTEM
As a result of an examination of the proposals of the Depart-
ment regarding the design and layout of the electrical system, certain
modifications are recommended with a view to obtaining increased
reliability, restriction of the area affected by a fault on the high tension
transmission line, and a more uniform voltage at the locomotives.
In estimating the first cost of electrical equipment, provision has
been made for the construction of 66 kV transmission lines extending
from Strathfield to the last substation on each of the four lines under
consideration, and it has been assumed that supplies of power at 66 kV
would be available at Strathfield, Newcastle and Lithgow, and in addi-
tion, at Goulburn, Wollongong and Moss Vale through the Port Kembla-
Burrinjuck 132 kV tie line, and the necessary step-down transformers.
Each line would consist of a single three-phase circuit of a sec-
tioon, equivalent in conductivity to 0.125 square inch of copper per
phase, as between Strathfield and the first substation, and to 0.0625
square inch of copper beyond.
94
APPENDIX lII—PROPOSED MAIN LINE ELECTRIFICATION SCHEME
Electrical Transmitting, Converting and Distributing System


The substations, in general, would each contain one 2 500 kW
rectifier unit, complete with wave filter, water recooler and automatic
starting equipment. A reverse current main high speed circuit breaker
would be installed together with the necessary high speed feeder circuit
breakers.
Each of the four terminal substations, however, would contain
a second rectifier unit to safeguard the supply to the end section of the
line, and to act as a spare set for the replacement of any equipment
which it might be necessary to remove for repair or other purposes.
Two substations, at Lawson and Gosford, would each contain
two 4 000 kVA/2 500 kW motor generator units to maintain the voltage
on the 66 kV line at these points.
In view of the supply from the 132 kV line at Moss Vale, it is
not considered necessary to provide rotating synchronous converters
at this substation, .
Substations would be spaced at a maximum distance of 7 miles
apart, with an intermediate trolley wire paralleling equipment, includ-
ing the necessary high speed circuit breakers, midway between them.
The loading on any rectifier unit would be such that in the event
of the unit becoming unavailable for service, its load could be taken by
adjacent substations.
Every alternate substation would be provided with two incoming
E.H.T. feeder switchgear equipments, and the 66 kV line between these
substations, a maximum length of 14 miles would be protected by
impedance relays.
There would be installed in each substation a 66 kV/2 kV/440
volt transformer for giving signalling and lighting supplies and an
auxiliary service for use within the substation.
Provision is made for the installation of a 3 unit 2 kV switchgear
equipment for controlling the transformer output.
All rectifier substations would be remotely controlled from con-
trol substations at Gosford, Lawson, Moss Vale and Wollongong.
1 500 volt overhead contact wiring is provided for on the lines
listed in the report of 16th February, 1937, and amounting in the aggre-
gate to 876 single line miles.
The estimate allows for steel supporting structures and wiring
with a conductivity equal to 0.5 square inch of copper per track within
the Suburban area, and for a design similar to that illustrated in
Appendix M to the report of 16th February, 1937, but with wiring of a
conductivity equal to 0.625 square inch of copper per track on Main
lines, outside the Suburban area.
95
APPENDIX lII—PROPOSED MAIN LINE ELECTRIFICATION SCHEME
Electrical Transmitting 1 , Converting and Distributing


The wiring of sidings would be equivalent to 0.5 square inch of
copper per track.
Provision has been made for a three phase 2 kV signalling and
lighting power line constructed of 7/16 conductor and for a multicore
cable for supervisory control and telephone communication suspended
from a catenary cable supported from brackets carried on the overhead
wiring structures.
The total substation plant capacity allowed for is 145 000 kW.
In the absence of any information as to the requirements, pro-
vision has not been made for taking any supplies from the 66 kV lines
other than for traction purposes and for supplying the substation
signalling and auxiliary transformers.
REGENERATIVE BRAKING
Degenerative braking, that is to say, braking by arranging the
locomotive motors to act as generators and to return current to the
line, is sometimes advantageous in circumstances in which it is neces-
sary to handle heavy trains on long falling gradients.
The chief advantage is the ease of control which is obtained, but,
in addition, the cost of maintaining mechanical brake gear is reduced
and some saving in energy may result.
With such a system of braking, it is possible that, if there is no
ascending train in the vicinity of the train which is descending the
gradient, regenerated energy may be returned to the substation.
While this condition can be satisfactorily dealt with in cases
where rotating converting plant is installed, there are certain difficul-
ties in arranging rectifier substations in a manner which allows of
regenerated current from trains passing to the high tension transmis-
sion system. Developments are proceeding with a view to simplifying
and improving the performance of the equipment and it is considered
that, for this reason, a decision as to the employment of regenerative
braking should be deferred for the time being.
If and when it is decided to proceed with the Scheme, it might
then be desirable to investigate the question in detail and to decide if
the advantages to be gained are likely to compensate for the added
cost and complication.
In making the present estimates, the additional cost of equip-
ment to provide for regenerative braking has not been included, and
no credit has been taken either for reduced wear of mechanical brake
gear or for regenerated power.
96
APPENDIX lII—PROPOSED MAIN LINE ELECTRIFICATION SCHEME?
Regenerative Braking


ESTIMATE FOR THE FIRST COST OF ELECTRIFICATION
The estimated first cost of carrying out the Scheme as outlined
in the foregoing paragraphs, is as follows: —
£
1. 66 kV transmission lines, 1 500 volt overhead contact
wiring, 2 kV signalling line and supervisory con-
trol and telephone cable .. .. .. .. 2 792 200
2. Substations, control stations and paralleling circuit
breaker equipment .. .. .. .. 1586 800
3. Estimates of the Department of Railways, given in
Appendix II of the report of 16th February, 1937,
for—
£
Signalling, alterations and additions,
bonding and signal power supply 609 000
Way and works, alterations to
bridges, tunnels, provision of
terminal arrangements for elec-
tric locomotives, reconditioning
goods yards, etc. .. .. .. 271000
Altering Postmaster General’s lines 48 000
931 000
4. 134 Electric locomotives .. .. .. 3 618 000
5. Engineering expenses ~ .. .. .. 89 280
9 017 280
6. Interest during construction .. .. 270 520
Total for 1936 Traffic 9 287 800
Add—for dealing with 40 per cent, increase
in traffic—
7. 54 electric locomotives .. .. .. 1458 000
8. Engineering expenses .. .. .. 14 600
1 472 600
9. Interest during construction .. .. 44 200
1516 800
Total for 1936 Traffic increased by
40 per cent. .. .. .. £lO 804 600
In compiling the foregoing estimate, it has been assumed that
substation electrical apparatus and locomotives would be purchased in
the United Kingdom at prices ruling at the present time, but provision
bas not been made in the estimate for any Customs duty on imported
materials.
*59265—G
97
appendix hi—proposed main line electrification scheme
Estimate for the First Cost of Electrification


The amounts included in respect of the different classes of
apparatus, etc., which, it has been assumed, might be imported, are as
follows:
£
58 Converter units .. .. .. .. .. .. 445 750
Switchgear and supervisory control apparatus, etc. .. 544 282
134 locomotives—
Electrical parts .. .. .. .. .. .. 2 326 000
Mechanical parts .. .. .. .. .. 1 226 000
54 locomotives—
Electrical parts .. .. .. .. .. 938 000
Mechanical parts .. ~ .. .. .. 494 000
£5 974 032
In calculating the amount of interest (at 4 per cent, per annum)
payable during construction, it has been assumed that the expenditure
would be spread evenly over a period of six years, and that the work
would be divided into four sections, each of which would be brought
into use on completion and would thenceforth become remunerative.
ESTIMATED SAVING BY ELECTRIC TRACTION-
-1936 TRAFFIC
The following table shows the estimated saving by electric trac-
tion as compared with steam, on the basis of the 1936 traffic.
In the case of electric traction, the costs given are those which
correspond to locomotive running costs, repairs, maintenance and re-
newals in the case of steam traction.
£ .
Cost of working hy electric traction Per annum
1. Maintenance and repair of 66 kV transmission lines,
1 500 volt overhead contact wiring, 2 kV signalling
line and supervisory control and telephone cable .. 61 500
2. Maintenance, repair and running costs of substations,
control stations and paralleling circuit breaker
equipment 25 000
3. Locomotive running costs (excluding power), main-
tenance and repairs .. .. .. .. .. 432 000
4. Electrical power .. .. .. .. .. .. 241 600
760100
5. Depreciation of electrical equipment and locomotives 174 900
935 000
Cost of working hy steam traction
6. Locomotive running costs, repairs, maintenance and
renewals .. .. .. .. .. .. 1446 000
Difference —being saving due to electrical operation £5ll 000
Equal to 5.5 per cent, on First Cost.
98
APPENDIX lII—PROPOSED MAIN LINE ELECTRIFICATION SCHEME
Estimated Saving by Electric Traction—l 936 Traffic


ESTIMATED SAVING BY ELECTRIC TRACTION—I 936
TRAFFIC INCREASED BY 40 PER CENT.
The estimated saving by electric traction on the basis of the
1936 traffic increased by 40 per cent, is shown in the following table.
In the case of electric traction, the costs given are those which
correspond to locomotive running costs, repairs, maintenance and
renewals in the case of steam working.
Cost of working hy electric traction Per annum
£
1. Maintenance and repair of 66 kV transmission lines,
1 500 volt overhead contact wiring, 2 kY signalling
line, and supervisory control and telephone cable .. 61 500
2. Maintenance, repair and running costs of sub-
stations, control stations, and paralleling circuit
breaker equipment .. .. .. .. .. 25 000
3. Locomotive running costs (excluding power) main-
tenance and repairs .. .. .. .. .. 604 000
4. Electrical power .. .. .. .. .. .. 338 000
1 028 500
5. Depreciation of electrical equipment and locomotives 201400
£1 229 900
Cost of working hy steam traction
6. Locomotive running costs, repairs, maintenance
and renewals .. .. .. .. .. 2 025 000
Difference —being saving due to electrical operation 795 100
Equal to 7.35 per cent, on First Cost.
In constructing the foregoing estimates of working costs, the
cost of running, repairing and renewing steam locomotives has been
taken at the figure of 30.2 pence per engine mile given in Appendix B
to the report of 3rd October, 1933, on the proposed Sydney-Newcastle
Electrification, which includes for coal at 12s. 6d. per ton.
The cost of electric locomotive running (excluding power), re-
pairs and maintenance has been taken at the figures given in the same
report, with the addition of a suitable allowance to compensate for the
increase in size of the locomotive.
An annual allowance has been made for depreciation of elec-
trical equipment and locomotives, which, if invested at 3 per cent, com-
pound interest, will provide for complete renewal at the end of a
period of thirty-three years in respect of the locomotives and twenty-
five years in respect of the remaining equipment.
99
APPENDIX lII—PROPOSED MAIN LINE ELECTRIFICATION SCHEME
Estimated Saving by Electric Traction —1936
Traffic Increased by 40 per cent.


COST OF ELECTRICITY
In the report of 16th February, 1937, it is stated that the cost
of energy generated at any of the power stations is estimated to be
not more than 0.2 pence per kilowatt hour, and that this figure should
be used in calculating the cost of power for the projected electrifica-
tion.
As the question of power station development and extension is
being examined in Australia, it has been considered desirable, for
estimating purposes, to regard the Railway Electrification as a sepa-
rate undertaking distinct from the power stations, and a request was
made, therefore, to Australia that a figure should be given represent-
ing the cost of power, including all capital charges, delivered to the
Railway 66 kV transmission system.
As a result, instructions were received that the cost of electricity
should be taken as 0.237 pence per kilowatt hour, and this figure, con-
sequently, has been used in calculating the cost of the total energy
requirements.
CREDIT FOR RELEASED ASSETS
The electric locomotives provided for in the foregoing estimates
will, of course, displace large quantities of existing equipment, mainly
steam locomotives, and it is clear that some credit for these released
assets should be taken into the Electrification account.
It is suggested that the amount of this credit should be the
capitalised value of the annual saving on steam locomotive renewals
throughout the period during which the displaced steam locomotives
would render expenditure on renewals unnecessary.
It has not been found possible to ascertain from the published
account of the department the actual amount spent annually on the
renewal of locomotives, a figure which is required for the calculation
of the sum which can properly be allowed as a credit, and it is suggested,
therefore, that this matter should be considered by the Comptroller of
Accounts.
CONCLUSIONS
It is considered that the scheme of electrification proposed is
technically sound, hut certain modifications, which have been indicated
in the section headed Electrical Transmitting, Converting and Dis-
tributing System, are recommended as advisable.
Financially the estimates of capital and working costs indicate
that before taking credit for released steam locomotives the amount of
which cannot be calculated from available information a saving as com-
pared with steam working can be anticipated equivalent to a return
of 5.5 per cent, on the first cost on the basis of 1936 traffic figures, or
7.35 per cent, on the basis of 1936 traffic increased by 40 per cent.
When the credit for released assets has been assessed and taken
into the Electrification Account, the above figures would show rather
more favourably.
(Sgd.) ALFRED RAWORTH.
100
APPENDIX lII—PROPOSED MAIN LINE ELECTRIFICATION SCHEME
Conclusions


SNOWY RIVER HYDRO-ELECTRIC
SCHEME
(See also Plates 18, 19, 20 and 21.)
INTRODUCTORY
An Earlier Project
A preliminary survey for a project to utilize the water power of
the Snowy River, situated some 250 miles south of Sydney, for the
generation of electricity, was carried out in 1915, and a further survey
was made in 1918 on instructions by the late Wm. Corin, then Chief
Electrical Engineer, Public Works Department. His proposals are
contained in a report, dated 16th January, 1920, to the Under Secretary
of the Public Works Department.
The proposal then was to create a self-contained hydro-electric
scheme capable of gradual development for supplying electricity to the
surrounding district by transmission up to a distance of 80 or 100 miles
in the first instance. The ultimate capacity was intended to be some
150 000 kW. In Mr. Gorin’s report the future development was visual-
ised in the following statement: —
“The eventual construction of an extra high tension bus between
the Snowy River and Sydney, i.e., a transmission main connecting
the various generating centres such as the Snowy, Burrinjuck, the
Murray tributaries, the Shoalhaven, Port Kembla and the Cataract
and Cordeaux Development, would enable the power stations estab-
lished on the various rivers or coalfields to aid each other and to
effect desirable distribution of loading, and at the same time when
rainfall is abundant, if the additional power thereby available were
transmitted to the Metropolis, the coal power stations in Sydney
would either greatly reduce their output or at times even entirely
shut down.”.
The idea of bringing the power to Sydney was, however, not
further dealt with in Mr. Corin’s report, in which mainly a first stage
of development was envisaged with an installed capacity of 30 000 kW
and a transmission line to Eden.
According to Mr. Gorin’s project a diversion conduit consist-
ing of 12.3 miles of canal and 3.3 miles of tunnels were to be built con-
touring the hill-sides of the Snowy and Beloka River valleys, continued
by a tunnel 3.3 miles long through the Beloka Range to the Wild Bullock
Range. On a spur of the latter a pressure pipe line was to lead the
101
APPENDIX IV
TO REPORT OF 1937 BY RENDEL, PALMER
& TRITTON ON ELECTRICAL DEVELOP-
MENT IN NEW SOUTH WALES


water to an upper power station on tlie bank of Popong Creek. A
second race line continued by a pressure pipe line was to lead the water
from this power station to a lower power station also situated on the
bank of Popong Creek near its junction with the Snowy River. The
length of the conduit was to be about 23.6 miles in all. It was not
intended to build any storage dam in the first instance, but to extend the
head race canal upstream of the dam site and to pick up the discharge
by small diversion dams in the Snowy River and in the Thredbo River,
one of its main tributaries. The construction of a main storage
reservoir by means of a dam II miles downstream of Jindabyne bridge
was considered but postponed to a future stage of development.
Disadvantages of Earlier Project
Diversion by means of long open races constructed on steep hill-
sides is an undesirable feature of any water power scheme and such a
lay-out does not lend itself readily to gradual development. As, more-
over, a demand equal to the proposed initial installed capacity could
not be envisaged in the district, and possibly for other reasons, the
project was not proceeded with.
Considerations Leading to Present Scheme
The situation becomes different if Mr. Corin’s suggestion of
transmission of the bulk of the power to Sydney is made the main
object of a power plant on the Snowy River. In Sydney the power
demand is growing rapidly and the energy from the Snowy River can
readily be absorbed there. The major works can therefore be executed
in the first instance for the full capacity and a development in stages
will mainly consist of the installation of further pipe lines, generating
plant, transformers and transmission lines so as to keep step with the
growth of the power demand in Sydney.
Further Investigation
Representatives of the Consulting Engineers visited the site for
the proposed works in May, 1937, and suggested certain geological
investigations and additional surveys to be carried out.
For detailed geological investigations the Consulting Engineers
are indebted to Mr. Leo J. Jones, Government Geologist, and to Mr.
C. St. G. Mulholland, Geological Surveyor, Department of Mines. Ad-
ditional surveys have been carried out by Mr. G. H. Kenny, Engineering
Surveyor, under the direction of Mr. E. W. Nardin, Supervising Engi-
neer, Department of Works and Local Government. Electrical calcu-
lations have been made by Mr. R. W. J. Mackay and Mr. J. Harrod.
The Consulting Engineers wish to express their appreciation of the
valuable assistance rendered by these officers. The work has been facili-
tated by the excellent aerial survey made by Adastra Airways Ltd.
102
APPENDIX IY—SNOWY EIYEE HYDEO-ELECTEIC SCHEME
Further Investigation


GEOGRAPHY
The Snowy River rises to the east of the Snowy Mountains near
the top of Mount Kosciusko, the highest mountain peak in Australia
(7 305 ft.). As shown on Plate 18 the river and’ its tributaries, the
Eucumbene and the Thredbo Rivers, drain the eastern slopes of the
Snowy Mountains, the catchment extending along this range for some
60 miles. The upper reaches of the Snowy River and of its tributaries
flow through mountainous country, and have scoured themselves down
into deep valleys with steep banks. Between their junction and Jinda-
byne, however, the country flattens out into a plain some 6 miles long
and 3 miles broad offering an almost ideal site for a large storage
reservoir.
From Jindabyne the Snowy River flows in a big loop towards
the east, towards the south and then towards the west, a distance along
the river of 85 miles. At the end of the loop, at Biddi Point, which is
about 18 miles distant from Jindabyne as the crow flies, the river level
has fallen 1 850 ft. From Biddi Point the river flows southwards into
Victoria and thence to the sea.
For a major power development it would appear essential to
make use of the plain at Jindabyne as a storage reservoir, and the
utilization of the head along the shortest route between Jindabyne and
Biddi Point is the most promising project from a technical and economic
point of view.
HYDROLOGY
GrAUGINGS
Since 1903 the discharge of the Snowy River has been gauged
at Jindabyne, where the catchment area is 680 square miles. The
records of the water level at this place are complete to date, with the
exception of two months.
Discharge Rating Curve
A discharge rating curve has been established by a great number
of discharge measurements up to a water level of 6 ft. KH in. on the
gauge. For higher water levels the known part of the rating curve
has been assumed to continue smoothly up to the estimated discharge
at the highest flood on record. The hydrological data relating to
Jindabyne Bridge are directly applicable to the power plant under
consideration.
Average Run-ofe
The average run-off at Jindabyne for the last 34 years is esti-
mated at 1 W cusecs. Part of the run-off, however, comes in floods
and cannot be economically collected. Calculations have been made in
order to establish the average quantity of water that can be used in a
power plant of a given maximum capacity and with the free use of a
103
APPENDIX IV—SNOWY RIVER HYDRO-ELECTRIC SCHEME
Hydrology


OBTAIN ABU
— ro
_ o o o
O O o o
: AVERAGE. FLOW AS OEPENDIN
(A O S CO U)
O O O O Q O
o o o o O o
G UPON THE STORAGE
8 5 ' g § CUSECS
6 o o o
5
o
ro
O
o
8
o
g
o
«n
o
o
§
s
o
a
8
s
o
8
5
o
fo
o
o
Zi
8
£
8
«
o
V
\
>
y
y
\
\
\
\
\
A
>
I
\
\
\
\
\
\
I
\
\
\
\
55
\
\
8
\
\
\
\
5
\
\
\
o
o
>
CD
\
o
o
\
\
\
s
\
\
o
o
2
in
ro
V
>
2
o
8
CO c
3? 5
.3
m
jo ?
£ r
X
.c
M
m
n! "
i nri
JJ
A
m
o
tA C
A
— fs
o r
* UK 1
<
i 1
b
3
O c
B iF
,oc>
OC)
m
>
B
o
D
2
o c
r ~ot r
OCi
“ X
in
>
■o
t*
O
5
•
1 -O ■ >
i
1
•H
T
< ,a i • <
ui
n
c
w
m
n
in
104
APPENDIX IV—SNOWY RIVER HYDRO-ELECTRIC SCHEME


given storage volume. The result of these calculations is shown in
Fig. 1 from which it can be gathered, inter alia, that if the maximum
water supply which can be utilized in the power plant during a week,
on an average, having due regard to the shape of the load diagram, is
1 750 cusecs, then 1 200 cusecs can be utilised, on an average, during
the year, with the free use of storage volume of 200 000 acre feet.
Floods Observed
The maximum rise of the river observed at Jindabyne is some
24 ft. The maximum discharge on this occasion has been estimated by
Mr. A. Morrison, Chief Hydrographer of the Water Conservation and
Irrigation Commission, by taking into consideration the area of the
cross section, the fall and the resulting velocity. The value arrived
at for the peak flow was 67 000 cusecs, and in our opinion this figure
is the most accurate that can be obtained.
Floods to be Anticipated
In considering the run-off corresponding to the maximum flood
on record, the question immediately arises whether this flood should be
considered as the maximum flood that should be provided for or
anticijjated.
In endeavouring to settle this question consideration has to be
given to the magnitude and frequency of all yearly maximum floods on
record for Jindabyne and a comparison made with peak values of run-
off from other catchment areas. Taking this into consideration, as
well as the fact that the run-off in this case is from a snow-fed catch-
ment, we are of the opinion that a dam at Jindabyne should be built so
as to be able to withstand a flood of 150 000 cusecs.
GENERAL GEOLOGY
Basement Rocks
Two dominant geological formations occur within the area,
Ordovician sediments and granite intrusions, the latter occupying by
far the greater area. Small remnants of basalt flows and occasional
basalt dykes, probably of Tertiary age, also occur. The Ordovician
sediments consist mainly of altered sandstones, cleaved micaceous sand-
stones, slates, phyllites, shales and mudstones. They are steeply folded,
dips of the order of 50° to 70° being common. The general strike of
the sediments is N. 30° E. In places they have been intruded by
granitic dykes probably connected with the main mass of granite.
Graptolites were found in black slates at Sheep Station Creek near
Beloka Station and in Beloka Creek near its junction with Gully Gap
Creek.
The granite is generally of the hornblende biotite variety and
in places is somewhat gneissic. It has undergone a large amount of
magmatic differentiation in places with the development of numerous
105
APPENDIX IV—SNOWY RIVER HYDRO-ELECTRIC SCHEME
General Geology


dykes of pegmatite and aplite and, in some localities, of porphyry,
particularly in the vicinity of Jindabyne. The porphyry may represent
a separate intrusion of later age than that of the formation of the
pegmatite and aplite.
Near the Mowambah River the granite contains numerous inclu-
sions of country rock, chiefly quartzite and phyllite.
South of Jindabyne two basalt dykes were observed, intruding
the granite, while a third occurs a few chains north of the subsidiary
dam site on Farm Creek.
Remnants of basalt flows occur on many of the high points of
tlie district and on a line of small hills extending from the Dalgety-
road 2 miles south-east of the Mowambah River crossing to the head of
Tin Mine Creek. The flow basalt is underlain by water worn gravels in
several localities.
Structure of Rooks
The main structure of the various formations have been care-
fully examined in order to judge their effects on the different engineer-
ing projects.
The oldest, structures are probably the steep folds of the Ordo-
vician sediments. The folding has been accompanied by the develop-
ment of cleavage in the shales and the conversion of the latter to slates
and phyllites. A small amount of cleavage is developed in the stronger
sandstones but where argillaceous sandstones have occurred they have
been converted to cleaved micaceous sandstones. The sediments occupy
rough deeply dissected country in much of the area, and structural
features are difficult to locate owing to the large amount of talus on the
hillsides. This talus is usually made up of cubes of altered sandstone
from 3 in. to 9 in. across. Where sections could be obtained, it was
observed that there was an appreciable amount of shale and slate
interbedded with the sandstones, but being soft they do not appear so
frequently in the loose talus on the slopes.
The sediments when found in situ showed rapid alternation of
type from siliceous to shaly varieties, together with close jointing both
along the bedding planes and at right angles thereto.
The main structural features of the granite are the development
of jointing, dykes, and gneissic structures.
Three sets of major jointing were observed witli the following
average strikes and dips—N. 20° W. with vertical to steep easterly dips,
E. and W. with steep southerly dips (50° to 70°) and N. 40° E. with
steep southerly dips. There are many topographic features controlled
by major jointing, mainly ridges or reaches of rivers and creeks, ex-
tending along straight lines over appreciable distances. The most
powerful set of joints appears to be those with a strike of N. 20° W.
These control the general direction of Steels Creek and that part of Old
Hut Creek that traverses granite, also certain stretches of the Snowy
River; they also control the direction of strike of certain dykes of
106
APPENDIX IV—SNOWY EIVEE HYDEO-ELECTEIC SCHEME
Structure of Eocks


porphyry and felsite. The other two sets of joints have the same strike
as most of the dykes of pegmatite and aplite and in all cases the dykes
appear to be more resistant to weathering than the normal granite,
and form very prominent ridges.
Basalt dykes of probable Tertiary age were found striking in an
east-west direction. The direction of dip wss not obtained.
Many of the dykes showed the presence of small faults trending
approximately at right angles to the strike, the amount of throw vary-
ing from a few feet to about 30 feet.
Gneissic structure was seen in the granite where the proposed
tunnel line crossed the Mowambah River and for about half a mile north
of this point.
In this locality the granite contained numerous inclusions of
quartzite and schist and probably represents an area in which the
granite came in contact with the Ordovician sediments and from which
the latter have been removed by denudation.
An examination of the physiography and geology of the Cooma-
Kosciusko district reveals the presence of major block faulting asso-
ciated with the formation of the Snowy Mountains. None of the faults
appears to affect the area examined as the extent of the proposed works
is confined to one large block, about twenty miles wide separated from
the surrounding country by two faults trending in a north-easterly
direction. One of these appears to be in the vicinity of the Thredbo
River, while the other was observed along the eastern flank of the
Beloka Range. The throw of the latter vertically approximates 1 000
feet.
In the case of large earth movements of this nature there are
probably a number of subsidiary faults developed, but in granite coun-
try evidence of their presence is difficult to find. The actual zone of
movement along which faulting took place would probably be very
narrow and in the case of subsidiary faults would most likely be no
more serious than major jointing.
The various structures and their probable effect will be dis-
cussed in more detail in conjunction with the description of the various
proposed works.
GENERAL LAY-OUT OF THE HYDRO-ELECTRIC
SCHEME
Five different lay-outs of the hydro-electric scheme have been
considered. In all of these the storage dam and the main portion of
the head-race tunnel would be identical. The variations refer to the
lay-out of the lower portion of the head-race tunnel as well as of pipe
lines, power stations and tail-race.
The scheme described below is based on the one of these lay-
outs that has been most thoroughly investigated. After the description
of this scheme brief reference is made to the other possible layouts.
107
APPENDIX IV—SNOWY EIVEE HYDEO-ELECTRIC SCHEME
General Lay-out of the Hydro-electric Scheme


The hydro-electric scheme referred to as shown on Plates 19, 20
and 21, is divided into two plants. The upper plant will consist of a
single arch dam of a maximum height of 112 feet located If miles
downstream of Jindabyne Bridge; a head race tunnel 14.8 miles long
excavated in rock in the direction towards Biddi Point ending on a
spur to the east of Wet Arm Creek; two steel pressure pipe lines each
2 300 feet long leading the water down a spur to an underground
Power Station No. 1 on the bank of Wet Arm Creek; and a tail race
tunnel 2 000 feet long excavated in granite discharging the water into
an intermediate pondage basin. This reservoir will be created by
means of a lamellar gravity dam of a maximum height of 55 feet built
just below the junction between Wet Arm Creek and Farm Creek.
From this basin a second head race tunnel 1.0 mile long will be ex-
cavated in granite through the ridge between Farm Creek and Tubbet
Creek, and connected to four steel pipe lines each 7 300 feet long lead-
ing on a spur east of Tubbet Creek to a Power Station No. 2 on the
bank of the Snowy River.
The installed capacity of the plant has been fixed at 80 000 kW
in Power Station No. 1 utilizing an average gross head of 635 feet,
and 170 OOOkW in Power Station No. 2, utilizing an average gross head
of 1 285 feet, making a total installed capacity of 250 OOOkW.
STORAGE
Principle of Operation
The amount of water available for power production on the
Snowy River varies with the season. During period of abundant water
supply the power stations will run at full or nearly full capacity day
and night taking the base load on the electricity supply system. Dur-
ing periods of drought, economy will have to be exercised in the use
of water, and the power stations will therefore take the peak load and
operate during the daytime only.
Demand Storage
During the period from January up to and including the month
of July the natural flow of the river may not be sufficient for generation
of the minimum output necessary, i.e., the output when the Snowy
plant takes only the peaks of the load rising over and above the working
capacity of the steam stations connected to the system. Storage which
can be drawn upon on these occasions will, therefore, have to be pro-
vided. The amount of storage assigned for the above purpose, i.e.,
to meet the minimum output required, will be called “demand storage.”
Energy Storage
In order to collect for energy production the major portion of
the water discharged during floods, it is economic to provide a storage
over and above that which should be reserved as demand storage. This
upper part of the storage volume will be called “energy storage.” •
108
APPENDIX IY—SNOWY EIVEE HYDEO-ELECTEIC SCHEME
Energy Storage


Installed
Working
Keserve
capacity
capacity
capacity
kW
kW
kW
Bunnerong “ A ”...
Bunnerong “ B ”
175 000
100 000
j. 200 000
75 000
Pyrmont ...
49 000
14 000
35 000
White Bay
86 000
66 000
20 000
Snowy Kiver Scheme
250 000
250 000
660 000
530 000
130 000
Total Storage
The storage volume provided in the scheme will thus consist of
two parts which are divided at a certain level, and which are to serve
different purposes. The level at which the storage is divided will be
called “the mark,” the volume below that level being the demand
storage and above it the energy storage.
Capacity of Sources of Supply
The amount of the demand storage which will have to be reserved
for a certain year will depend on the estimated maximum load on the
distribution system during the year in question, and on the capacity
of other sources of supply to the system.
If the Snowy River scheme is proceeded with immediately instead
of further extension of the steam power plant over and above the
present commitments, the maximum peak load which can be carried
by the generating plant serving the 50 cycle Sydney distribution system
may be assumed to be divided between existing steam plant, including
steam plant on order, and the Snowy River plant as shown in Table I.
Table I
With reference to Table I it should be noted that —
Bunnerong “A,” Pyrmont and White Bay are existing
plants;
Bunnerong “B” is a plant now on order as an extension
of the existing Bunnerong Power Station;
no /spare plant has been provided in the Snowy River
Scheme as running spares will have to be located in Sydney and
standing spares are most economically obtained by reserving part
of the existing plant at Pyrmont for this purpose.
Load Diagram
It is, of course, difficult to forecast the shape of the daily load
diagram on the Sydney distribution system at that time when the
maximum load on the power stations will have risen to some 530 000 kW.
The daily load diagrams for the last few years show no marked changes
109
Appendix iv— snowy river hydro-electric scheme
Load Diagram


and it is therefore assumed that the load diagrams at the time con-
sidered will have a shape similar to the present ones, but with a some-
what improved load factor due to the proposed electrification of the
main railways.
Minimum Load to be taken by Snowy River Plant
If, on load diagrams designed for a generated peak load of 530 000
kW, a line be drawn at the working capacity of the combined steam
plants, the area included between this line and the top portion of the
load curve shows the minimum output which has to be generated by
the Snowy River plant.
In the calculations of the demand storage, Saturdays and Sun-
days and other days with similar load can be disregarded as the load
curves for these days have small and narrow peaks which seldom exceed
the working capacity of the combined steam plants.
Efficiency of Hydro-electric Plant
For the purpose of estimating the power output, the combined
efficiency of the water turbine and generator has been taken at 80
per cent. Considering the type of load to be met, the assumed efficiency
is low when the turbines are new, and may be considered as a fair
average during the life of the machinery.
Drought Period
As previously mentioned records of the discharge at Jindabyne
are available from 1903. The most severe drought period during this
time occurred from the middle of February to the end of March, 1915.
This cannot, however, be considered as giving the extreme conditions
which might occur. To represent the worst drought year which may
reasonably be anticipated a “synthetic year” has been composed from
such calendar months, picked out from the whole record, as have the
minimum run-off.
Volume op Demand Storage
As a result our calculations show that a storage volume of
60 000 acre feet of water would be sufficient to provide for the neces-
sary supply of power during the assumed drought year if the maximum
load on the generators be 530 000 kW, including 250 000 kW on the
Snowy River plant. Allowing, say, 25 000 acre feet of water, corre-
sponding to about 30 million kWh at load centres supplied from the
Snowy River plant, as an emergency reserve, the conclusion is arrived
at that an amount of 85 000 acre feet would be adequate for demand
storage at the maximum load mentioned.
Volume of Energy Storage
Calculations carried out show that from an economic point of
view the energy storage should be between 150 000 and 250 000 acre
feet, the smaller figure having been tentatively adopted for the
purpose of the report.
110
APPENDIX IY—SNOWY RIVER HYDRO-ELECTRIC SCHEME
Volume of Energy Storage


Operation of Storage
When the storage is full and water spilling over the crest of
the dam the Snowy River plant should obviously be run at its full
capacity so as to supply as great an amount of energy as possible to
the Sydney system, thus relieving the load on the steam plants and
effecting a corresponding saving of coal.
When water is available in the energy storage but the reservoir
is not spilling, i.e., when the water level is above the “mark” but does
not exceed the level of the spillway crest, the operation policy would
be to utilize the water in the storage together with the inflow to the
reservoir so as to effect the greatest possible saving of coal in the
combined steam stations. For this purpose the Snowy River plant
should be loaded up so as to utilize the water contained in the energy,
storage at a convenient but rapid rate and bring down the water level
to the “mark” without undue delay, thus enabling as much water as
possible to be collected again should a flood occur in a short time.
When the water level is at the “mark” the power plant should
generally be run so as to utilize the inflow to the reservoir only. As
the inflow diminishes the load taken by the plant will be moved upward
on the load diagram of the system, and when the inflow becomes very
small the plant should be operated to take the top of the peaks only.
When the inflow is insufficient for taking the peak load over and above
the working capacity of the combined steam plants the demand storage
should be resorted to in order to make up the deficiency.
It is obvious that during the period of the year, when the inflow
to the reservoir is sufficient or more than sufficient to take the peak
load on the system exceeding the working capacity of the steam plants
no demand storage is required to be kept. This period is from August
to December inclusive. During the first half of the calendar year the
mark can be moved down gradually as the season advances, and an
increasing portion of the storage utilized as energy storage. The lower
part of the storage must, however, be utilized in this way with caution
and foresight so as to ensure that the demand storage is entirely
replenished before the beginning of the critical first half of the fol-
lowing calendar year.
Alternative Operation
In the preceding paragraphs it has been assumed that the
Snowy River plant will be operated in combination with the 50-cycle
Sydney distribution system only. It may, however, become more
advantageous to operate the Snowy River plant in conjunction with
the whole Sydney distribution system including the 25-cycle supply
for traction purposes, in which case the energy fed into the 25-cycle
system from the Snowy River plant would have to bo converted by
frequency changers. With the last mentioned method of operation the
demand storage will be slightly less than the amount stated above.
111
APPENDIX IV—SNOWY RIVER HYDRO-ELECTRIC SCHEME
Alternative Operation


Storage
Height above
volume
bed level
R.L.
Thousands
of acre feet
Feet
Feet
Bottom part, not to be used but left for gradual
silting up
15
51
2 896
For demand storage, maximum (January), and
for emergency reserve
85
The (January) mark at ...
100
83
2 928
For energy storage, minimum ...
150
Total storage at crest level
250
112
2 957
Fiest Stage of Development
So far, the conditions have been dealt with which would exist
when the entire proposed plant is fully utilized. If the plant is con-
structed in two stages as suggested later no demand storage is required
for the first stage of development except the small volume needed as
an emergency reserve.
STORAGE DAM
Impounding Levels at Site Selected
As mentioned previously the storage dam will be located li
miles south of Jindabyne. Surveys of the volume of water which can
be stored by dams of different heights at this place were carried out
by the late J. Rorison, Engineering Surveyor, Public Works Depart-
ment, in 1916. From his data it appears that the storage volume pro-
posed in the previous paragraph can be provided advantageously as
shown in Table 11.
Table II
Suitability of Site
The site chosen is quite suitable for the construction of a dam
of this height. It is situated in a narrow gorge about 850 feet south
of the junction of Lees Creek and the Snowy River. The dam site has
been investigated in detail by the Consulting Engineers and by the
geologists with the following result.
Investigation of Dam Site
Where loose material has been removed by river action solid
granite is exposed at water level in the river banks. The granite is
massive and is traversed by the joint systems previously mentioned.
The joints are usually separated from one another by a few feet. A
few small aplite dykes were observed traversing the solid granite in
exposures near water level. These are “welded” to the granite and
do not appear to persist over lengths of more than a few feet. They do
112
Appendix iv-snowy river hydro-electric schemd
Investigation of Dam Site


not exceed one foot in width. A basalt dyke about 3 feet wide crosses
the river in an easterly direction about 545 feet upstream from the
base line of the dam shown on Plate 19, this base line being permanently
marked at the site.
Above the right bank of the river a large dyke of granophyre with
an average widtli of 20 feet crosses an extension of the base line of
the proposed dam, about 310 feet from the river and approximately
140 feet above bed level of the river. The dyke crosses the river about
500 feet south of the base line of the dam site. The rock in the dyke
is very resistant to weathering and forms a prominent ridge extending
from the dam site to Jindabyne.
About 160 feet east of the granophyre dyke a dyke of felsite,
4 to 6 feet in width, occurs trending in the same direction. This
material has not been affected by weathering to any great extent.
The granite has undergone a great deal of weathering at the
surface, which consists of loose boulders of solid granite underlain by
soft weathered material, but such weathering does not appear to be
abnormal. The depth of weathering has been found by test shafts
and bores carried into hard rock.
Most of the dykes do not appear to be large enough to cause
weakness and when exposed below the zone of weathering form a
strong compact material with the main granite mass. The large grano-
phyre dyke is a particularly strong feature and appears large enough
to give added strength to the granite surrounding it.
Type of Dam Proposed
Due to the geological formation the dam site is suitable for a
single arch dam and therefore the estimate of cost has been based on
this type of dam. There will be no difficulty in obtaining a water-tight
connection between the dam proper and the granite foundation.
Spillway
The length of spillway which can be obtained is about 430 feet
and the maximum flood to be provided for, viz. 150 000 cusecs inflow,
corresponding to about 120 000 cusecs over the dam, will rise about 20
feet above the crest of the dam, i.e. to R.L. 2977.
The abutments on both sides of the spillway will have to be
carried up well above this height and made strong enough to withstand
water pressure to the top.
The hillsides of the river are well above the assumed maximum
high water level but at this elevation the ground to a considerable
depth consists of deteriorated granite and boulders, and cut-off walls
will therefore have to be built to solid rock.
Protective Works Below Dam
Downstream of the dam the bottom of the river will have to be
protected against scouring by a thick reinforced concrete apron. A
retarding wall across the river bed some 200 feet downstream of the
*59205—H
113
APPENDIX IV—SNOWY RIVER HYDEO-ELEOTEIC SCHEME
Protective Works Below Dam


dam is proposed. The arrangement for the protection of the river
bed, however, cannot be designed before adequate model tests have
been made.
The water of the Snowy River, coming from a catchment which
is chiefly granite, can be expected to be almost neutral in reaction.
Utmost care should, therefore, be taken to make the dam and other
water retaining structures water-tight and the concrete used should
be rich in cement.
HEAD RACE TUNNEL
Length op Tunnel
From an intake on the western side of the river some 800 feet
up Lees Creek, a head race tunnel will lead the water in a southerly
direction to a spur opposite Biddi Point, a distance of 14.8 miles.
The mileage given in the following description is measured from the
intake along the tunnel traverse. The location of the tunnel is shown
on Plate 19 and a longitudinal profile on Plate 20.
Geology op Location (i) I)am Site to Cobbin Creek
Near the dam site the tunnel line will intersect the geological
formations previously described and then proceed through massive
jointed granite for a length of half a mile. At 0.5 and 0.6 miles from
the commencement two well jointed dykes of felsite about 4 feet wide
occur and at 0.9 miles a basalt dyke is crossed. This is displaced by
several small faults with horizontal throws up to 30 feet which will
probably intersect the tunnel line. To the west of the tunnel line
there is a granophyre dyke about 8 feet wide similar in character to
that near the dam site. This is faulted at 1.2 miles and should the
fault extend to the depth of the tunnel line it will cut it at about 1 mile.
With the exception of the dykes and faults mentioned above, the
remainder of the tunnel will pass through biotite granite somewhat
jointed but with the jointing becoming less prominent as the rock cover
over the tunnel increases.
Geology of Location: (ii) Cobbin Creek to MacGufpiok's House
At 1.4 miles the tunnel line crosses at an acute angle the grano-
phyre dyke mentioned above. The dyke is a particularly strong for-
mation and forms a well marked ridge extending as far as Lees Creek.
The line crosses the creek in solid granite and then traverses a
piece of open country in which there are no outcrops as far as the
Dalgety Road, 2.2 miles. Prom this point to 3.2 miles solid granite
with occasional aplite and pegmatite dykes is traversed. From the last
mentioned point to the vicinity of Steels Creek, 4.2 miles, the granite
is gneissic and closely jointed, although lenses of normal granite also
occur. The jointing at Mowambah River is sufficiently close to cause
possible weakness and the river has evidently carved its channel out
of the weak structures in the vicinity. The closely jointed area extends
114
APPENDIX IY—SNOWr HIVED HVDKO-ELECTRIC SCHEME
Geology of Location


westerly for nearly a mile and easterly as far as Mowambah Bridge.
On leaving the river and going south the jointing becomes more widely
separated and the granite loses its gneissic structure. From Steels
Creek, 4.2 miles, to MacGuffick’s house, at approximately 7 miles, the
tunnel follows a high ridge of massive granite with widely separated
jointing.
Geology of Location: (hi) MacGuffick’s House to Tunnel Mouth
Going south from MacGuffick’s house the tunnel traverses solid
granite and gradually approaches the granite-Ordovician contact.
About a mile south of Mowambah Post Office, at 9.7 miles, the traverse
crosses this contact and the tunnel passes for over half a mile through
a region where the surface of the ground consists of Ordovician sedi-
ments with a strike of N. 30° E. It is not possible to say at present
whether the tunnel will enter into these sedimentary strata as the
depth below the surface at which it will be driven is some 400 feet.
For the purpose of the estimates of cost it has, however, been assumed
that the tunnel will pass through the sedimentary rocks for half a
mile at this region.
From 10.6 miles the tunnel will again be driven through solid
granite to 12.5 miles, where the traverse once more crosses the granite-
Ordovician contact. For the remaining 2.3 miles it passes through a
region where the surface of the ground consists of Ordovician sedi-
ments. Here also it is not possible at present to say at what point the
tunnel will actually enter the sedimentary rocks, but as the tunnel
mouth reaches the surface above the granite contact it is possible
that for the whole length of tunnel from 12.5 miles to the tunnel mouth
at 14.8 miles it will penetrate the sedimentary rocks, and this has been
assumed for the purpose of the estimates of cost.
Although the sediments contain a large percentage of altered
sandstones which are resistant to weathering they are closely jointed
and intercalated with weaker shales and mudstones which have the
effect of making them break out in small cubes from the main rock
mass when exposed to the action of the weather.
Tunnel Lining
In the passage through the sedimentary rocks the tunnel will
have to be lined with concrete. The cross section will be circular with
a free area of about 190 square feet, corresponding to an internal
diameter of 15 ft. 6 in., and the reinforced concrete lining will be 11
ft. thick.
In the passage through the granite the tunnel will be unlined
for the major part. The area will be 500 square feet and the cross
section shaped so as to facilitate the excavation. It is, however, evi-
dent that concrete lining will be required where the tunnel has to bo
taken through rocks that have been subjected to earth movement and
broken up, for instance by faulting, or if the tunnel has to pass through
a seam of decomposed rock or soft material.
115
APPENDIX IY— SNOWY RIVER HYDRO-ELECTRIC SCHEME
Tunnel Lining:


Although the major part of the tunnel in granite passes through
apparently solid rock, experience has shown that even in rock of the
very best quality there will be places where a limited amount of con-
crete work will be required to obviate too sudden changes of the cross
section, which may be formed when excavating the tunnel, or for other
reasons, and this has to be provided for. In the estimates of cost 15
per cent, of the cost of excavation has been added to provide for such
concrete work in those parts of the tunnel where no complete lining is
considered necessary.
Method of Excavation
From the profile of the tunnel traverse, Plate 20, it can be seen
that the tunnel for practically its entire length is located deep below
the surface of the ground. There are, however, two places along the
line of the tunnel whence the work of tunneling can be undertaken
with advantage. For reasons mentioned under the next heading it is
proposed to sink a shaft just south of the crossing with the Mowambah
River and excavate the tunnel from this shaft in both directions. At
12 miles the tunnel is located in a steep hillside and an inclined shaft
or alternatively an adit could be arranged here and the tunnel driven
in both directions. If the tunnel is also worked from the intake end
and the power station end, the longest distance to be driven from one
face will be about 22 000 feet, and this occurs in solid granite between
the two shafts. As with modern tunnel driving methods a progress of
30 feet per day or more can be achieved in good rock, the actual driving
of this portion of the tunnel could, if required, be accomplished in about
two years. During the same period also the end portions can be com-
pleted and, therefore, the estimated time of construction of four years
for the first stage of development of the entire plant, as referred to
later, will be ample for the completion of the tunnel.
On the assumption that the method of construction set out above
is adopted, the bottom of the tunnel should be graded in such a manner
as to facilitate the drainage of water during construction operations
in case seams with water are encountered.
DIVERSION OF MOWAMBAH RIVER
As mentioned in the preceding section the tunnel will pass
under the Mowambah River. This will take place near the junction
of this river and its main tributary, Steel's Creek, The drainage area
at this junction is about 100 square miles and it has been estimated
that the discharge is about 4 per cent, of that of the Snowy River at
Jindabyne. By diverting the water of the Mowambah River and Steel's
Creek into the tunnel the water supply for the power plant would be
increased by a few per cent. As the cost of collecting this water is
small, it appears to be worth while to effect this diversion. This can
be accomplished by means of a dam constructed just below the junction
116
APPENDIX IY —SNOWY RIVER HYDRO-ELECTRIC SCHEME
Diversion of Mowambah River


of Mowambah River and Steel’s Creek, backing up the water so as
to make it flow down the construction shaft located near this place.
Special precautions, however, will have to be taken to avoid air or
silt being introduced into the main tunnel by this diversion.
SURGE TANK
At the downstream end of the tunnel a surge tank will be
excavated in rock. As the rocks consist of Ordovician sediments the
tank will have to be lined with concrete. The surge tank will contain
two chambers each with an area of about 8 500 square feet, the upper
between R.L. 2980 and R.L. 3006, the lower between R.L. 2775 and
R.L. 2807. The two chambers will be joined together by a shaft having
a diameter of about 26 feet.
PRESSURE PIPE LINE TO POWER STATION No. 1
From the tunnel mouth at the spur to the east of Wet Arm Creek
two pressure pipe lines, each 2 300 feet long (including the portion in
the tunnel) will lead down this spur to Power Station No. 1. As the
spur is covered by a great deal of loose sandstone talus, the concrete
supports for the pipe line will have to go down through this loose
material and be founded on the solid rock beneath it. The pipe lines
will be designed with long spans and provided with stiffening rings
at the supports only. The pipes will have a diameter of 9 feet 6 inches
at the upper end diminishing to 9 feet 0 inches at the lower end. At
their upper end each pressure pipe will be provided with a hand
operated sluice valve, and also with an automatically operated plunger
valve which closes should the discharge of water in the pipe on which
it is situated exceed, in case of emergency, that required for the maxi-
mum output of the turbine. To safeguard the water supply to Power
Station No. 2, in case Power Station No. 1 is put out of service, the
pipes will be provided with separate by-passes having sluice valves
and energy dissipators located a little above the vertical pipe shaft.
POWER STATION No. 1 AND TAIL RACE TUNNEL
Power Station No. 1 will be located on the bank of the Wet Arm
Creek near its junction with a small creek coming from the. east. The
power station will be underground and provided with two Francis
turbines with vertical shafts and direct coupled generators. Each tur-
bine will be provided with a sluice valve and a relief valve and designed
for a maximum output of 42 000 kW on the turbine shaft. The genera-
tors will be specially designed for line charging and will have a maxi-
mum output of 40 000 kW each at 0.8 power factor.
The site of the power station is on solid hornblende granite well
below its contact with Ordovician rocks, and from a geological point of
view there should be no unusual difficulties involved in the construc-
tion of an underground power station. The roof of the generator room,
117
APPENDIX IV—SNOWY EIVEE HYDEO-ELECTEIO SCHEME
Power Station No. 1 and Tail Eace Tunnel


which is excavated out of the rock, will he supported by reinforced
concrete arches. The rock walls will be braced by reinforced concrete
columns and covered by thin concrete panels.
From Power Station No. 1 the water will be discharged through
an unlined tail race tunnel with cross sectional area of about 500 square
feet driven through solid granite to the intermediate storage reservoir.
At the power station a surge chamber with an area of about 3 200 square
feet will be excavated in solid granite between R.L. 2290 and R.L. 2316.
At the outlet of the tunnel arrangements will be made for the use of stop
logs so that the water can be pumped out of the tunnel and draft tubes.
INTERMEDIATE STORAGE RESERVOIR
At the junction of Farm Creek and Wet Arm Creek an inter-
mediate storage reservoir will be created by means of a lamellar gravity
dam. The spillway will have a length of 75 feet and its crest at R.L.
2300 about 55 feet above bed level. The non-overflow dam will have
its crest at R.L. 2310. The creek bed downstream of the dam will be
protected by a reinforced concrete apron. The storage reservoir will
have a capacity of about 30 acre feet between R.L. 2290 and R.L. 2300.
The dam site is on solid hornblende granite which appears to be
very massive where it is exposed in the left bank of Farm Creek. It
contains a few large joints similar to those found in the solid granite
throughout the district. Above the right bank there is a large spur
on which the surface granite is weathered, but by sinking test pits it
has been established that the depth of this weathering does not exceed
10 feet. No weak structures likely to affect the dam were observed.
HEAD RACE TUNNEL AND PRESSURE PIPE LINE TO
POWER STATION No. 2
The head race tunnel will have a length of 1.0 mile and will bear
off in a south-westerly direction from the intermediate reservoir
through a high spur of solid granite, whence it will emerge on the
southern slope. There appear to be no weak features in this section.
The tunnel will be unlined and have an area of 500 square feet. Near
the mouth of the tunnel a surge tank with an area of about 2 200 square
feet between R.L. 2270 and R.L. 2330 will be excavated in granite.
The tunnel will be connected to four pressure pipe lines each
7 300 feet long (including the portion in the tunnel) leading down the
spur to Power Station No. 2. The pipe lines will be designed with long
spans and provided with stiffening rings at the supports only. The
pipes will have a diameter of 7 feet 0 inches at the upper end diminish-
ing to 5 feet 10 inches at the lower end. At its upper end each pressure
pipe will be provided with a hand operated sluice valve, and also with
an automatically operated plunger valve which closes should the dis-
charge of water through the pipe on which it is situated exceed, in case
of emergency, the amount required for the maximum output of the
turbine to which it leads.
118
APPENDIX IV—SNOWY KIVEK HYDEO-ELECTIHC SCHEME
Head Pace Tunnel and Pressure Pipe Line to Power Station No. 2


POWER STATION No. 2 AND TAIL RACE
Power Station No. 2 is located on the bank of the Snowy River
at its junction with Tubbet Creek opposite Biddi Point. The power
station will be above ground and provided with four Francis turbines
with vertical shafts and direct coupled generators. Each turbine will
be provided with a sluice inlet valve and a relief valve, and will be
designed for a maximum output of 44 500 kW on the turbine shaft. The
generators will be specially designed for line charging and will have
a maximum output of 42 500 kW at 0.8 power factor.
Machines of the Francis type with vertical shafts have been
chosen for economic reasons and also because it is easier with this
arrangement to provide against an occasional rise of tail water level
without losing head under normal conditions.
The power station will consist of a generator hall excavated in
the rock and covered by a building. The rock walls of the excavated
chamber will be braced with a framework of reinforced concrete and
covered with thin concrete panels. The turbines and guide vane covers
as well as the whole substructure will be designed and anchored so as
to withstand the stresses which may occur on occasions of exceptionally
high water level in the river.
Prom the power station the water will flow through four separate
tail race tunnels one from each turbine to a common open canal which
discharges into the Snowy River. Provision will be made so that the
tunnels can be shut at the outlet, one at a time, by means of a common
gate.
The outdoor substation referred to later will be located on the
opposite bank of the Tubbet Creek.
The power station site is underlain by solid granite. At the
mouth of Tubbet Creek loose basalt boulders occur. These do not
appear to be in situ but probably represent the remains of part of a
basalt flow, examples of which occur on the top of several small peaks
further north. The basalt has probably been carried down the creek
and deposited at the junction with the Snowy River.
A stereoscopic aerial photograph of the locality of the pipe and
Power Station No. 2 is shown on Plate 21.
HIGH TENSION TRANSMISSION
Outdoor Transformer Stations
An outdoor transformer station will be erected close to Power
Station No. 1 containing two 3-pbase banks of transformers, each having
a capacity of 50 000 kVA for stepping up to 220/230 kY, together with
the necessary circuit breakers, isolating switches, double high tension
busbar and sundry equipment.
At Power Station No. 2 a similar outdoor transformer station
will be built at a safe level above the river. This station will contain
four banks of transformers, each consisting of three single phase 17 500
119
APPENDIX IY—SNOWY EIVEE HYDEO-ELECTEIC SCHEME
High Tension Tranmission


kYA transformers for stepping up to 220/230 kV. The necessary cir-
cuit breakers, isolating switches, a double high tension busbar and
sundry equipment will also be provided together witli one spare single
phase transformer.
The double high tension busbar in Station No. 1 will be solidly
connected to the corresponding busbar in Station No. 2, two miles away
The outgoing transmission lines to Sydney will leave from Station No
1, where also Petersen coils and busbar couplers will be provided.
The circuit breakers and other equipment in Station No. 2 will
be operated from the control room in Station No. 1.
Alternatively, it might be found convenient in both stations to
erect the transformers outside the walls of the Power Stations, leaving
only the oil switches etc. in the outdoor stations, which could be com-
bined into one switching station for the two power stations. Connec-
tion from the transformers would then be made by means of overhead
conductors at 220/230 kV and all control would be carried out as before,
from Power Station No. 1.
Transmission Line
The transmission line will be designed for 220 kV and will con-
sist of two circuits each supported on a separate line of steel towers,
the horizontal spacing between conductors being 23 feet. For the last
few miles near Sydney, however, both circuits will be carried on a
single line of steel towers. The conductors will be of steel cored
aluminium having a cross sectional area of 0.4 square inch copper
equivalent.
The length of the line is approximately 265 miles, and one line
only will be built in the first stage of development.
Outdoor Station at Goulburn
At Goulburn the transmission lines will be brought into the
substation to be provided there for supply to the Burrinjuck-Port
Kembla system. A double 220 kV busbar with all necessary circuit
breakers and isolating switches will be provided, and at this place line
sectionalising equipment will be installed so that in the event of a line
fault only one section of a circuit would be temporarily out of
operation.
At the Goulburn substation two 15 000 kYA 3-phase transformers
for the purpose of reducing the voltage to 132 kY will be provided for
interconnection with the Burrinjuck-Port Kembla system.
Outdoor Receiving Station at Sydney
At Sydney the transmission line will terminate in an outdoor
receiving station containing five 3-phase 50 000 kYA transformers
to reduce the voltage to 33 kY. Each transformer will have a 30 000
kYA tertiary winding for connection to four or five synchronous con-
densers having a total capacity of approximately 120 000 kYA. On the
120
APPENDIX IV— SNOWY RIVER HYDRO-ELECTRIC SCHEME
Outdoor Receiving Station at Sydney


high tension side the terminal station will be provided with a double
busbar, also a Petersen coil and the necessary circuit breakers, isolat-
ing switches and other equipment.
At the receiving station a building will be .erected to house the
synchronous condensers and the control equipment, and on the 33 kV
side of the station ten feeder switches will be provided for cable con-
nection with the Zetland substation of the Sydney supply system.
Supply to Dalgety, Cooma and District.
Prom the substation at No. 1 Power Station a separate 66 kV
transmission line will be carried to Dalgety and Cooma, in order to
provide an adequate supply of electricity to the local district.
HEAD UTILIZED AND ENERGY OUTPUT
, The mean water level in the storage reservoir can be taken to
be R.L. 2930. The water level in the intermediate storage can be
assumed to be on an average R.L. 2295, and therefore the average
gross head of Power Station No. 1 will be 635 feet. At a weighted
average water consumption of 1 860 cusecs, and with the dimensions
of tunnels and pipe lines proposed, the loss of head will be about 65
ft. and the average net head, therefore, 570 ft. for Power Station No.
1. When this station is working at full capacity the loss will be about
91 ft., and the water consumption 2 200 cusecs.
The mean water level in the Snowy River at Power Station No.
2 may be taken to be R.L. 1010, and the average gross head of this
station will thus be 1 285 ft. At the weighted average water consump-
tion mentioned above, and with the proposed dimensions of tunnels
and pipe lines, the loss of head will be about 58 ft., and the average
not head therefore 1 227 ft. When this power station is working at full
capacity the loss will be 81 ft., and the water consumption 2 200 cusecs.
When the Snowy River scheme is taking the base load of the
Sydney 50 cycle and 25 cycle system the average load factor will be
about 84 per cent., and with due regard to this and to the storage pro-
vided the average amount of water which can be utilized will be 1 200
cusecs, corresponding to an average annual energy output of 1 270
million kWh generated. In practice some water will of necessity
be wasted, but on the other hand the water diverted into the tunnel from
the Mowambah River and SteePs Creek has not been taken into con-
sideration. It is therefore estimated that, with due allowance for trans-
mission losses, the average yearly output at load centres over a number
of years will be 1120 million kWh. Allowing for transmission losses
the maximum capacity of the scheme at load centres is estimated at
220 000 kW.
121
APPENDIX IV—SNOWY RIYER HYDRO-ELECTRIC SCHEME
Head Utilized and Energy Output


DEVELOPMENT IN STAGES
Two main stages of development are contemplated. The first
stage will comprise the construction of the dams, tunnels, and both
power stations with the installation of half the generating capacity in
each station, and the requisite pipe lines. The capacity of the generat-
ing plant in this stage will be 125 000 kW, and for the transmission
of this power to Goulburn and to Sydney one transmission circuit only
will be required. The second stage of development will consist of the
remaining generating plant and pipe lines, and the second transmission
line to Sydney. In order to review the capital required as the work
proceeds the estimates of cost are divided into these two main stages.
As mentioned previously, in the first stage of development, no
demand storage is required except the small volume needed as an
emergency reserve. Therefore nearly the whole storage volume can
be used as energy storage. In this stage the average amount of water
which can be utilized is 960 cusecs, corresponding to an average annual
energy output of 1 020 million kWh generated. Allowing for unavoid-
able waste of water and for the transmission losses it is estimated that
the average annual output at load centres will be about 900 million kWh.
The maximum capacity of the first development stage is estimated at
110 000 kW at load centres.
The time of construction of the first stage of development is esti-
mated at four years.
ESTIMATES OF COST
Estimates oe Capital Cost
The capital cost (in Australian money) of the works described
in the previous sections is estimated as follows: —
£
First stage of development;—
Access road, land resumption, easements and clear-
ing for works .. .. 300 000
Diversion dam 510 000
Main head race tunnel with intake, works for divert-
ing the Mowambah River, and surge tank .. 1 950 000
Power Station No. 1 for a capacity of 40 000 kW
including pipe line, underground power station,
machinery, and tail race tunnel .. .. .. 415 000
Intermediate storage dam and second head race
tunnel with intake and surge tank .. .. 240 000
Power Station No. 2 for a capacity of 85 000 kW
including pipe lines, power station building,
machinery, and tail race .. 830 000
Carried forward .. .. .. .. 4 245 000
122
APPENDIX IV—SNOWY RIVER HYDRO-ELECTRIC SCHEME
Estimates of Cose


£
Brought forward .. .. .. .. 4 245 000
Outdoor step-up transformer stations at Power
Stations Nos. 1 and 2, single circuit transmis-
sion line to Sydney, substation at Goulburn
and receiving station at Sydney .. .. .. 1700 000
Permanent offices and quarters for operation staff 30 000
Local administration during construction including
staff offices, temporary quarters, social ameni-
ties, store facilities, and other general charges 425 000
Engineering .. .. .. .. .. .. 420 000
Contingencies .. .. .. .. .. .. 640 000
Interest during construction .. .. .. '.. 540 000
First stage of development—Total .. .. .. £8 000 000
Second stage of development:—
£
Extension of Power Station No. 1 by 40 000 kW with
pipe line .. .. .. .. .. .. 195 000
Extension of Power Station No. 2 by 85 000 kW with
pipe lines .. .. .. .. .. .. 540 000
Extension of out-door stations at the power stations,
and of receiving stations in Sydney and Goul-
burn, and second transmission line to Sydney 1380 000
Local administration and supervision during con-
struction .. .. .. .. .. .. 30 000
Engineering .. .. .. .. .. .. 140 000
Contingencies .. .. .. .. .. .. 215 000
Interest during construction .. .. .. .. 100 000
Second stage of development—Total .. .. £2 600 000
£
Summary of capital cost: —
First stage .. .. .. .. •.. .. 8 000 000
Second stage .. .. .. .. ... .. 2 600 000
Total £lO 600 000
The estimate of capital cost is based on market prices ruling
in August, 1937, and includes the cost of all material and labour
necessary for the completion of the work as well as overhead charges
and contingencies. It has been assumed that the works will be carried
out departmentally using the most efficient methods of construction
with adequate and most modern plant.
123
APPENDIX IV—SNOWY RIVER HYDRO-ELECTRIC SCHEME
Estimates of Cost


Estimate of Annual Cost
The annual cost of the scheme is estimated as follows:
£ .
First stage of development:—
Interest on capital per cent, on £8 000 000 .. 360 000
Depreciation .. .. .. .. .. .. 12-1000
Maintenance and operation .. .. .. .. 73 000
Contingencies .. .. .. .. .. .. 7 000
First stage of development—Total .. £561 000
£
Second stage of development:—
Interest on capital per cent, on £2 600 000 .. 117 000
Depreciation .. .. .. .. .. .. 78 000
Maintenance and operation .. .. .. .. 58 000
Contingencies .. .. .. .. .. .. 6 000
Second stage of development—Total .. .. £259 000
£
Summary of annual cost:—
First stage .... .. .. .. .. 561000
Second stage .. .. .. .. .. .. 259 000
Total £823 000
The depreciation charges included in the estimate are based
on the following rates: —
4 per cent, per annum for tunnels and other main rock excava-
tions, land resumption and easements, roads, and interest during con-
struction ;
1 per cent, per annum for dams, power station buildings and other
concrete works ;
3 per cent, per annum for steel structures, turbines, other me-
chanical equipment, generators and all other electrical equip-
ment.
On an average the depreciation charges correspond to 1.90 per
cent, of the estimated capital cost.
The estimated capital cost of the scheme including transmission
is, at load centres, £lB per kW and the estimated annual cost £3.71 per
kW at a load factor of 58 per cent. This corresponds to 0.176 pence per
kWh transmitted to load centres.
In the first stage of development the estimated capital cost is,
at load centres, £73 per kW, and the estimated annual cost £5.13 per
kW at a load factor of 93 per cent, corresponding to 0.150 pence per
kWh delivered.
124
APPENDIX IY—SNOWY EIVEE HYDEO-ELECTEIC SCHEME
Estimate of Annual Cost


OTHER LAYOUTS CONSIDERED
Apart from the layout of the Scheme put forward in the fore-
going, investigations have been made to find out whether a more
economical layout, particularly of the pipe lines and stations,
would be possible.
Dam Site
As regards the location of the storage dam this may be con-
sidered to be definite within a limit of a few hundred yards. The
plains at Jindabyne will have to be utilized for the storage reservoir
and from a topographical or geological point of view there is no more
promising site for a dam of the magnitude in question than the straight
stretch of the river extending some 350 feet upstream and 600 feet
downstream from the proposed dam site. On the stretch of river
referred to the left bank is covered by deteriorated granite to a great
depth and it is impossible to determine except by extensive diamond
rock drillings the best site available. Such drillings have been in con-
tinuous progress since the commencement of the present investigation
but so far the result is not sufficiently conclusive to make a definite
choice. The rock-drilling investigation of the dam site should therefore
be continued.
Tunnel Line
From the aerial survey it appears that the most solid granite is
likely to be met with to the east of Steel’s Creek. The investigations
carried out in the field corroborate this opinion and the location of the
tunnel so far as the first 12 miles are concerned may therefore be taken
as definite. The location of the remaining part of the tunnel will
depend upon the layout of pipe lines and power stations.
Pipe Lines and Powee Stations
For bringing the water down from the tunnel mouth to Snowy
River several possibilities have been surveyed and studied. The spurs
immediately to the west and to the east of Farm Creek, the latter called
Farm Ridge, were found less favourable for the location of the pipe
lines bringing the water down from the intermediate storage at the
junction of Farm and Wet Arm Creeks than the spur chosen.
An alternative of locating Power Station No. 1 and the inter-
mediate storage reservoir at Pot Hole Creek and driving the head race
tunnel through the Wild Bullock Range, to be continued by pipe lines
down to a Power Station No. 2 at the junction of Pot Hole and Popong
Creek, was also found less favourable. It can be concluded that all
possible developments east of the proposed layout can be discarded.
125
APPENDIX IV—SNOWY RIVER HYDRO-ELECTRIC SCHEME
Pipe Lines and Power Stations


Towards the west of the proposed development, however, certain
possibilities should be taken into consideration. From the peg at 12
miles the tunnel can be driven through apparently solid granite all the
way to the Tubbet’s Ridge and from this ridge pipe lines can be led
down a spur joining the spur on which the proposed pipe lines for Power
Station No. 2 are located. This would make it possible to utilize the
whole head in one power station at the proposed site of Power Station
No. 2. There is also the possibility of utilizing the head in one power
station by continuing the tunnel to the Tubbet Creek in a south-westerly
direction for three-quarters of a mile and then leading pipe lines down
another spur to the site of Power Station No 2.
In both these cases the use of Francis turbines would be imprac-
ticable owing to the high head. It would therefore be necessary to use
Pelton turbines. The power stations would then have to be located
above the highest possible tail water level, resulting in a loss of head
of about 4 per cent. The capital cost of this layout has been estimated
to be about 4 per cent, less than in the original proposal.
With the same layout of tunnel and pipe lines, the head may,
alternatively, be utilized in two equal stages by building Power Station
No. 1 at a position on the line of the pipes where the head equals one
half of the total head. A small equalising basin, cut out of the rock,
would have to be provided at Power Station No. 1 to take care of fluc-
tuations of load on the two power stations. Power Station No. 2 would
be located as before. It should further be investigated whether the pipe
line can be taken direct from the end of the head race tunnel at peg 17
down to a Power Station, No. 1, on the Tubbet Creek, located at a place
where the head equals one-half of the total head. It might then be
possible to provide a small equalising basin by building a dam on the
creek. From this basin the water could be taken through a short tunnel
to a pipe line intake on either of the two spurs referred to above and
from there through pipe lines to Power Station No. 2. In this case
Francis turbines can be used in both power stations and there would
then be no such loss of head as in the case of the total head being
utilized in one power station.
The capital cost of this alternative, has been estimated at some-
what less than the original proposal.
Whether or not one of the layouts referred to above should be
preferred to the original proposal will chiefly depend on whether it is
confirmed by further investigation of the rock along the tunnel lines
referred to above, that the tunnel can be driven entirely through solid
granite. This would mean an advantage as compared with the original
proposal, in which the lower part of the tunnel will have to be lined
witli concrete and therefore be subject to repair and maintenance.
The final choice between the various possible layouts should not
be made until further investigations have been carried out. A decision
to proceed with the Snowy River Scheme or not is, however, independent
of such a choice.
126
APPENDIX IV—SNOWY RIVER HYDRO-ELECTRIC SCHEME
Other Layouts Considered


CONCLUDING REMARKS
As a conclusion it might be mentioned that a high head in com-
bination with a considerable and fairly steady flow is an unusual and
favourable feature of the Snowy River Hydro-electric scheme.
Although the dam is fairly high and the head race tunnel has a length
of no less than 14.8 miles the cost of energy obtained from the scheme
is remarkably low. The project contains all the elements of a success-
ful hydro-electric power undertaking which, operated in conjunction
witli other sources of supply considered, could meet the growing demand
in Sydney and elsewhere in a suitable and economical way.
127
APPENDIX IV—SNOWY RIVER HYDRO-ELECTRIC SCHEME
Concluding Remarks




APPENDIX V
TO REPORT OF 1937 BY RENDEL.
PALMER AND TRITTON ON ELECTRICAL
DEVELOPMENT IN NEW SOUTH WALES
SHOALHAVEN RIVER HYDRO-ELECTRIC
SCHEME
(See also Plates 18, 22 and 23)
INTRODUCTORY
Earlier Projects
The feasibility of utilizing the water power of the Shoalhaven
River, situated about 120 miles south of Sydney, for generation of
electricity, has been considered on several occasions. Preliminary
investigations for such a project were carried out in 1911 on the
instructions of the late Wm. Corin, then Chief Electrical Engineer,
Public Works Department. His report was submitted in 1913, but no
further work was carried out until 1923, when a new investigation
was started by Mr. H. G. Carter, D. 5.0., 8.E., M.lnst.C.E., M.I.E.
(Aust.), then Chief Electrical Engineer, Public Works Department.
Mr. Carter’s proposals are contained in two reports submitted in 1925
and 1926.
The idea at the time was to frame a self-contained hydro-electric
scheme to provide electricity for the surrounding district and capable
of gradual development up to an ultimate capacity of 55 000 kW.
Droughts cause the discharge of the Shoalhaven River to be very low
for long periods and to meet these conditions a large and expensive
storage was provided so as to enable the plant to operate at about the
same load factor throughout the year. To meet extreme drought con-
ditions the further provision of a fuel reserve plant was considered
Two power stations on the Shoalhaven River were included in the
scheme, one drawing its water directly from a storage reservoir, and
the second from a subsidiary storage created by a weir about 6-|- miles
downstream from the main storage dam.
A hydro-electric development on the Shoalhaven River does not
lend itself readily to gradual development as expensive dams and
tunnels sufficient for the ultimate capacity will have to be constructed
in the first instance. The power demand in the area concerned is very
small and there is no visible prospect of it growing within a reason-
able time to anything like the ultimate capacity of the proposed
installation. For those and possibly other reasons the project was not
proceeded with.
Considerations Leading to Present Scheme
The situation is changed if a power plant on the Shoalhaven
River is considered for transmission of power to Sydney. The total
output of any such power plant can readily be absorbed in Sydney,
*59265—1
129


and therefore the plant can be constructed for its ultimate capacity
from the outset. As the total load on the Sydney supply system
is many times higher than the capacity of a power plant on the Shoal-
haven River, this plant can be operated during drought periods to
take the peak loads only, and as a result the storage requirements
become very much smaller than for a plant operated as the only or
major source of supply to a local district.
When the supply of water is ample the power plant will, of
course, use all the water available up to its maximum capacity.
In this Appendix a general review is made of the possibilities of
hydro-electric power generation on the Shoalhaven River coupled with
the transmission of the power to Sydney.
Further Investigations
Representatives of the Consulting Engineers visited the site
for the proposed works in April, 1937, and suggested certain geological
investigations and additional surveys to be carried out. For the detail
geological investigations the Consulting Engineers are indebted to Mr.
Leo J. Jones, Government Geologist, and to Mr. Harold Raggatt,
Geological Surveyor, Department of Mines. New additional surveys
have been carried out by Mr. R. H. Pocock, Engineering Surveyor,
under the direction of Mr. E. W. Nardin, Supervising Engineer,
Department of Works and Local Government, and the Consulting
Engineers wish to express their appreciation of the valuable assistance
rendered by these officers. The work has been facilitated by an
excellent aerial survey made by Adastra Airways Limited.
GEOGRAPHY
The Shoalhaven River rises between the Great Dividing Range
and the Coastal Range and flows for 140 miles in a northerly direc-
tion between these two ranges. As will be seen from Plate 18, at a
point about 20 miles east of Goulbnrn the river turns through a right
angle, crosses the Coastal Range, and runs east to the coast at Nowra.
The whole of the country between the two ranges forms a
plateau at an altitude of 2 000 to 3 000 feet, and the river has eroded
its channel through this tableland to a depth of over 1 500 feet at the
northern end. In its upper reaches the fall of the river is compara-
tively small but at Welcome Reef the character of the river changes, it
enters a rocky gorge and for 20 miles falls at an average rate of
50 feet per mile. As the river and the gorge run in big serpentines
through the tablelands the head per mile obtainable by a straight
line diversion is far greater. For instance, the difference in elevation
between the water level at DeviPs Bridge and at Sewell’s Point is
about 800 feet and the distance between the two places about 6.1
miles as the crow flies.
130
APPENDIX Y—SHOALHAVEN EIYEE HYDEO-ELECTEIC SCHEME
Geography


A preliminary investigation into the economy of utilizing the
river for hydro-electric power generation may be limited to a con-
sideration of the region between Devil’s Bridge and Sewell’s Point.
There is little likelihood that a power scheme in .any other stretch of
the river would prove to be better.
HYDROLOGY
Gaugings
The discharge of the Shoalhaven River has been gauged since
1914 at Warri where the catchment area is 550 square miles, and since
1910 at Welcome Reef where the catchment area is 1 066 square miles.
Except for a few short periods, when the gauges have been damaged,
the records of the water level at Warri and at Welcome Reef are
complete to date.
Discharge Rating Curves
Discharge rating curves have been established by a great num-
ber of discharge measurements up to a water level of 14 feet 5 inches
on the Warri gauge, and 5 feet 9 inches on the Welcome Reef gauge.
For higher water levels the known parts of the rating curves have
been assumed to continue smoothly up to the estimated discharge at
the highest flood on record. As the catchment at Devil’s Bridge is
practically identical with that at Welcome Reef, the hydrological data
for the latter place can be applied directly to a plant drawing water
from a dam at Devil’s Bridge.
Average Run-off.
The average run-off at Welcome Reef is about 493 cubic feet
per second (cusecs). A great part of the run-off comes, however, in
floods and cannot be economically utilized. If it be assumed that the
maximum amount of water which can be utilized in the proposed
power plant is 1 000 cusecs, calculations made show that with the free
use of a storage volume of 5 000 acre feet 259 cusecs on an average
can be utilized in. such a power plant. For a storage volume of 10 000
acre feet the corresponding figure would be 273 cusecs.
Floods Observed
The maximum rise of the river observed at Welcome Reef is
55 feet 6 inches. This occurred on the 27th May, 1925. On the same
day the river rose to 46 feet 1 inch at the Warri gauge. The maximum
discharge on this occasion has been carefully estimated by Mr. A.
Morrison, Chief Hydrographer of the Water Conservation and Irriga-
tion Commission. By using the available data regarding fall, cross
131
APPENDIX Y—SHOALHAVEN RIVER HYDRO-ELECTRIC SCHEME
Hydrology


sections etc., and applying to them different discharge formulae he
arrives at the conclusion that the peak flow at Warri was 218 000
cusecs, and at Welcome Reef 312 000 cusecs. In our opinion these
figures are the most accurate thax can be obtained.
Floods to be Anticipated
In considering the maximum run-off estimated for the 1925 flood,
the question immediately arises whether this flood should be con-
sidered as the maximum flood to be provided for or anticipated.
In endeavouring to settle this question, consideration has to be
given to the magnitude and frequency of all floods on record for' the
Shoalhaven River and a comparison made with peak values of run-off
for other catchment areas. In our opinion the dam should be built so
as to be able to withstand a flood of twice the magnitude of the 1925
flood, i.e., a flood of some 600 000 cusecs.
Bearing upon Scheme
As these flood conditions will make any dam across the Shoal-
haven River an expensive structure it appears essential for any econo-
mical scheme to include only one dam and to utilize the water diverted
by means of this dam at as great a head as possible.
GENERAL GEOLOGY
Basement Rocks
The geological formations over the catchment area are very
varied. For the upper portions of the river granite predominates.
For the lower regions where the geographical features are favour-
able for the construction of a hydro-electric plant, the basement rocks
appear to belong to one group of sedimentary strata. These are cer-
tainly pre-Devonian in age, but whether Silurian or Ordovician has
not been determined. They are predominantly shales with inter-
bedded sandstones and shaly sandstones which have suffered mild
metamorphism. The shales have been altered to slates with cleavage
planes generally parallel to the bedding. Most of the sandstones have
been hardened and are referred to as quartzites although they are
not recrystallised and possess only a slight degree of schistosity.
Structurally the slates are weak, the quartzites strong and the schis-
tose quartzites intermediate in strength.
Intrusions
The Palaeozoic rocks are intruded by dolerite. In most sections
the dolerites appear in sills, but dykes are not uncommon. Generally
speaking the dolerites are strong rocks, but they weather deeply on
exposure to the atmosphere.
132
APPENDIX V— SHOALiIAYEN RIVER HYDRO-ELECTRIC SCHEME
General Geology


Old Stream Deposits
Remnants of old stream deposits are found here and there on
the surface of the tableland. These consist of sands and gravels gener-
ally rather loosely compacted but with occasional thin beds strongly
cemented. In some places the beds have been silicified by contact with
basalt flows. At Wingello these beds contain plant remains which
prove them to be late Tertiary to Pleistocene in age. They are over-
lain at Nerriga and elsewhere by basalts, the late Tertiary age of
which is well established.
Structure of Rocks
The Palaeozoic rocks have been steeply folded. The closeness
of the folding and the monotonous lithology of the beds suggest that
no great thickness of sediments is involved. The fact that the flow
cleavage is developed parallel to the bedding and the absence of marked
recrystallisation supports this view, because these facts suggest that
folding took place under light loading.
Relief under compressive stress has taken place mainly by slip
along the bedding of the weak slates and in some instances in planes
slightly oblique thereto, the movement having been upwards and out-
wards from synclinal axes. A feature of this type of fault is the
squeezing out of the incompetent (weak) slates on the underneath
side of competent (strong) quartzites.
Induration of the rocks has been the result of regional meta-
morphism in the main, but there has been a certain amount of silifica-
tion and quartz veining which probably is related to the Marulan
bathylith. Where the Tertiary dolerites are closely spaced they also
have had a hardening effect. The fresh appearance of the rocks in the
larger stream beds as compared with their outcrop elsewhere appears
to be due solely to the fact that the products of rock weathering are
removed in the one instance and not in the other.
The details of the geological features of the ground will be
reverted to in connection with the various works proposed.
Bearing upon Scheme
From the general geological features of the ground and
especially from the fact that there is an abundant presence of weak
strata, the conclusion can be drawn that a tunnel in this ground will
have to be lined with concrete throughout.
GENERAL LAY-OUT OF THE HYDRO-ELECTRIC
SCHEME
The hydro-electric scheme considered as shown on Plates 22
and 23 consists of a storage dam at Devil’s Bridge, a head race tunnel
0.0 miles long lined with reinforced concrete, running in an almost
133
APPENDIX V—SHOALHAYEN RIVER HYDRO-ELECTRIC SCHEME
General Lay-out of the Hydro-electric Scheme


straight line to Sewell’s Point and on the way crossing the river half
a mile west of Meangora Bend, a steel pressure pipeline 1 800 feet
long leading the water down the spur opposite Sewell’s Point to a
power house on the bank of the river. The installation has been fixed
at three generating units each of 18 300 kW, making a total installed
capacity of 55 000 kW. The plant will utilize an average gross head of
860 feet.
STORAGE
Demand Storage
In the Shoalhaven District dry spells may occur at almost any
time of the year and the discharge may fall almost to nil for a few
months in succession. If it were necessary in order to meet the
demand on the supply system to operate the Shoalhaven plant during
such periods water would have to be drawn from storage. The amount
of storage assigned for the above purpose, i.e., to meet the minimum
output required, will be called the “demand storage.”
Energy Storage
In order to collect, for energy production, some of the water dis-
charged during floods, it is economical to provide a storage over and
above that which should be reserved as demand storage. This upper
part of the storage volume will be called “energy storage.”
Total Storage
The storage volume provided in the scheme will thus consist
of two parts which are divided at a certain level, and which are to serve
different purposes. The level at which the storage is divided will be
called “the mark,” the volume below that level being the demand
storage and above it the energy storage.
Capacity of Sources of Electric Supply
The amount of the demand storage which will have to be
reserved for a certain year will depend on the estimated maximum
load on the distribution system during the year in question, and on the
capacity of other sources of supply to the system.
If the Shoalhaven Scheme is proceeded with in the near future
the maximum peak load which can be carried by the generating plant
serving the 50-cycle Sydney distribution system may be assumed to be
divided between existing steam plant including plant on order, and
the Shoalhaven Plant as shown in Table I.
134
APPENDIX Y—SHOALHAYEN RIVER HYDRO-ELECTRIC SCHEME
Storage


Installed
Working
Reserve
Capacity
Capacity
Capacity
kW
kW
kW
Bunnerong “ A ”
175,000\
225,000
50,000
Bunnerong “ B ”
100,000/
Pyrmont
49,000
25,000
24,000
White Bay
86,000
66,000
20,000
Shoalhaven River Scheme
55,000
55,000
465,000
371,000
94,000
Table I
With reference to Table I it should be noted that—
Bunnerong “ A,” Pyrmont and White Bay, are existing plants;
Bunnerong “B” is a plant now on order as an extension of the
existing Bunnerong Power Station;
no spare plant has been provided in the Shoalhaven River
Scheme, as spare capacity is more economically obtained by
reserving part of the existing plant at Pyrmont for this
purpose.
Load Diagram
It is, of course, difficult to forecast the shape of the daily load
diagram of the Sydney distribution system when the maximum load
on the generating plant will have risen to some 371 000 kW. The daily
load diagrams for the last few years show no marked changes and it
is therefore assumed that the load diagrams at the time considered will
have the same shape as the present ones.
Loads to be Taken by Shoalhaven Plant during Droughts
The maximum weekly peak load on the Sydney distribution system
varies considerably during the year. If load diagrams with a generating
peak load of 371 000 kW are drawn for a whole year it will he found
that the maximum peak during thirty weeks of that year will not
exceed the assumed working capacity of the combined steam plant,
and that therefore the Shoalhaven plant can be shut down during
this period, if little or no water is available, without affecting the
supply to the consumers connected to the Sydney system. During
fourteen weeks of that year, viz., from the middle of May to the end
of August, the maximum weekly load exceeds the assumed working
capacity of the combined steam plant, and the Shoalhaven Plant will
therefore have to be depended upon even during a drought year to
rake the daily peaks on the system. For the months of June and July
ihe amount of energy contained in that portion of the peaks which
rises over and above the working capacity of the combined steam
plant has been estimated to average some 80 000 kWh for each full
135
APPENDIX Y—SHOALHAYEN RIYER HYDRO-ELECTRIC SCHEME
Loads to be Taken by Shoalhaven Plant During Droughts


working day. Allowing 20 000 kWh daily for overlapping, and dis-
regarding the days which have a load similar to the load on Satur-
days and Sundays which never exceeds the working capacity of the
combined steam plant, the amount of energy required from Shoal-
haven during those two months is 4 million kWh. During June the
absolute minimum inflow less evaporation represents 0.9 million kWli
at the head proposed to be utilized, and during July 1.9 million kWh.
Thus the amount of energy to be supplied from storage will be less
than 1.5 million kWh during those two months.
During May the requirements of energy from Shoalhaven are
less than half of those during June and the absolute minimum inflow
represents 1.4 million kWh. During August the requirements may
be about half of those in June but the absolute minimum inflow repre-
sents 2.0 million kWh.
During the remaining eight weeks of the year the maximum
weekly load may occasionally exceed the working capacity of the com-
bined steam plant but the energy contained in the peaks over and
above this capacity is small and can be met without difficulty by the
absolute minimum inflow.
Volume of Demand Storage
The maximum requirements for demand storage are thus about
1.5 million kWh equivalent to about 2 200 acre feet of water. The
demand storage cannot, however, be restricted to this very small
volume as an emergency may arise calling for an immediate draw on
the storage. Therefore in the scheme discussed the demand storage
has been assumed to have a volume of 7 000 acre feet which appears to
be ample.
Volume op Energy Storage
Calculations made show that from an economic point of view
the energy storage should not be less than 5 000 acre feet and not more
than 10 000 acre feet. As, however, the revenue to be obtained from
the storage nearly balances the annual cost of its provision up to about
10 000 acre feet, the latter figure has been chosen for the energy stor-
age provided in the scheme.
Operation op Storage
The storage would have to be operated, in principle, in the same
manner as the storage of the Snowy River hydro-electric scheme,
which has been fully dealt with in Appendix IV.
DETAILS OF PLANT AND STRUCTURES
The Dam
As mentioned previously, the storage dam will be located at
Devil’s Bridge some three-quarters of a mile downstream from Welcome
Reef. Surveys of the volume of storage water which can be obtained
136
APPENDIX Y—SHOALHAYEN EIVER HYDRO-ELECTRIC SCHEME
Details of Plant and Structures


Storage
Volume
Height
above Bed
Level
R.L.
Bottom part not to be used, but left for gradual silt-
ing up
For demand storage, maximum (June and July), and
for emergency reserve
acre-feet
3 000
7 000
feet
47
feet
1 763
The (June and July) mark at ...
For energy storage, minimum ...
10 000
10 000
70
1 786
Total storage at crest level ... ... ...
20 000
86
1802
by dams of different heights at this place were carried out in 1911 by
the late W. J. Woodfield. From his data it appears that the storage
volume proposed in the previous section can be fitted in advantageously
as set out in Table II:
Table II
The site at Devil’s Bridge is quite suitable for the construction
of a dam of this height. A section 600 feet in length has been investi-
gated in detail by the geologists with the following result.
The section was found to comprise: slate 60 per cent.; quartzite
26 per cent.; schistose quartzite 12 per cent.; dolerite 2 per cent.
This indicates a high proportion of weak strata. Some particularly
weak zones were found which can be described as crumpled and partly
silicified blue slate with quartz veins. These probably represent nar-
row zones of minor drag folding on thrust planes. They are commonly
bounded by soft clayey layers which break down on exposure to atmo-
sphere.
Careful examination of the section shows that the beds are con-
tinuous across the river. No fold axes were noted and it is considered
that the schistose beds would have been detected had there been repeti-
tion by faulting or folding.
A dolerite sill was found to cross the river and the tributary
gully which joins it immediately above the proposed dam site. It was
also found to crop out north from the dam site.
Owing to the presence of several layers of weak strata in the
canyon walls it is apparent that these cannot be relied, upon to take
the thrust of a large single arch dam. The dam will therefore have
to be either a plain gravity dam or a gravity dam of the buttress or of
the Ambursen type. The two latter types offer great advantages over
the plain gravity type especially in a case like this where the flood
water level will rise to a very great height over the crest of the dam.
A choice between the buttress type and the Ambursen type need not
be made at this juncture as the cost of both types can be assumed to
be practically the same. The project has been based on the buttress
type of dam without prejudice to the final decision should the project
be carried through in future.
137
APPENDIX Y— SHOALHAVEN El YEP HYDRO-ELECTRIC SCHEME
Details of Plant and Structures


Spillway
The length of spillway which can be obtained is some 380 feet,
and a flood of 600 000 cusecs would rise some 60 feet above the crest
of the dam, i.e. ? to about R.L. 1860. The abutments on both sides of
the spillway will have to be carried up well above this height and made
strong enough to withstand water pressure up to the top.
Protective Works
The ground on both sides of the river is well above the water
level corresponding to a flood 600 000 cusecs, but as the uppermost
strata consist of Tertiary sands and gravels certain cut-off walls will
have to be constructed in trenches through these deposits so as to
ensure that no catastrophic wash-out on the sides of the dam will
occur even in the case of an extreme flood.
The bottom of the river will have to be protected by thick re-
inforced concrete aprons extending some 300 feet downstream from
the dam, where they will be joined to a group of particularly resistant
and strong quartzite strata crossing the river bank at this point.
Also the water-tight connection between the dam and the rock
can follow another similar group of competent strata across the river
bed, and there will be no difficulty in obtaining a water-tight and reli-
able joint.
As the water of the Shoalhaven River comes from a catchment
which is mostly granite, it can be expected to be almost neutral in re-
action. The utmost care therefore should be taken to make the dam
and other water-retaining structures water-tight and the concrete used
should be rich in cement.
Head Race Tunnel
Prom an intake on the left bank of the river in a small gully
upstream of the storage dam a head race tunnel will lead the water to
the spur opposite Sewell’s Point. The tunnel will have an internal
diameter of 11 feet 6 inches and will be lined with a shell of reinforced
concrete 1 foot thick.
As a straight line diversion will cross the river downstream of
Meangora bend, the head race tunnel will be in two parts divided by
an inverted syphon for crossing the river at this place. Both these
parts will be excavated from the downstream end only, and both tunnels
are therefore given a slope towards the downstream end in order to
facilitate the transport of the excavated material out of the tunnel, and
the discharge of water should strata with subterranean water be
encountered.
With the exception two small areas of Tertiary gravels,
the tunnel traverse passes over the same sediments as those which out-
crop in the river. There is a high percentage of slate present and the
beds are sharply folded, several axes having been noted. Between the
syphon and the proposed power station site the tunnel runs parallel to
the strike of the sediments for a considerable distance.
138
APPENDIX Y—SHOALHAVEN EIYEE HYDEO-ELECTEIC SCHEME
Head Eace Tunnel


It is very unlikely that faults of any magnitude exist, trending
across the line of the tunnel. No features were observed suggesting
the existence of any zones of faulting or shearing other than those
parallel to the strike of the sediments.
From the nature of the ground it is evident that the tunnel will
have to be lined with concrete throughout, and this has been allowed
for in the estimate of cost.
Syphon
The crossing of the river half a mile downstream of Meangora
bend will as mentioned previously be made by means of an inverted
syphon. The syphon will consist of a pressure pipe leading down the
canyon wall to a level about 80 feet above the water level of the river,
an arched pressure pipe across the river and a pressure pipe leading
up the opposite canyon wall and joined to the second part of the head
race tunnel. The whole of the exterior of the pipe will be accessible
for inspection and maintenance. The pipe will have a diameter of
10 feet 6 inches. The conduit will be provided with automatic air relief
and anti-vacuum valves at the vertex of the arched pipe and at the con-
nection with both parts of the tunnels. The conduit will also be pro-
vided with manholes and drain valves for emptying it to permit the
inspection of the pipe or painting of the interior.
In the vicinity of the proposed syphon crossing the best struc-
tural sections noted during the investigation of the geologists are
exposed. From a point approximately 20 chains upstream from
Photo Point the river has a remarkably straight course in the direc-
tion S. 60 deg. W. for approximately 15 chains. This is parallel to the
strike of a dolerite dyke, the weathering away of which has, no doubt,
determined the course of the river. The section is composed of:—slate
58 per cent.; quartzite 37 per cent.; dolerite 5 per cent.
Surge Tank
At the downstream end of the head race tunnel a surge tank will
be excavated in rock and provided with concrete lining. The surge
tank contains an upper and a lower chamber each with an aren of
about 4 000 square feet. The two chambers will be joined together
by a vertical shaft having a diameter of 18 feet 6 inches.
Pressure Pipe Line
From the downstream end of the tunnel at the spur opposite
to Sewell’s Point a pressure pipe having a length of 1 800 feet will
lead the water down the spur to the power station. The pipe line is
designed with long spans and provided with stiffening rings at the
supports only. The pipe will have a diameter of 8 feet 6' inches at the
upper end, diminishing to 7 feet 3 inches at the lower end. At the
upper end the pipe will be provided with a hand operated sluice valve
and also with a plunger valve which will close automatically in case of
emergency should the discharge of water exceed that required for the
maximum output of the turbines.
139
APPENDIX Y—SHOALHAYEN RIVER HYDRO-ELECTRIC SCHEME
Pressure Pipe Line


Power House
The power house will be located close to the hank of the river
opposite Sewell’s Point. It will contain three turbines with vertical
shafts and direct coupled generators. Each turbine will be designed
for a maximum output of 19 000 kW on the turbine shaft and a speed
of 500 r.p.m. Each generator will be designed for an output of 22 500
kYA.
The power station will be situated on the river bank and will
consist of a generator hall excavated in the rock and covered by a
building. The walls of the excavated pit will be braced by a frame-
work of reinforced concrete filled in with thin concrete panels. The
turbines and the guide vane covers as well as the whole substructure
will be designed and anchored so as to withstand the stresses which
may occur on occasions of exceptionally high water level in the river.
The pipe leading to the turbines will be located in a shaft excavated
out of the rock and at its lower end will fork into three branch pipes,
each leading to a turbine and provided with a sluice valve and a relief
valve. Prom the power station the water will be discharged into the
Shoalhaven River by means of three separate tunnels which can be
closed at the outlet, one at a time, by means of one common gate.
Outdoor Transformer Station
Close to the power station at a safe level on the bank of the
river an outdoor transformer station will be erected containing ten
single-phase 7 500 kYA 11/132 kV transformers as well as high tension
oil circuit breakers, isolators and sundry equipment. Single-phase
transformers are proposed for the purpose of facilitating transport.
Transmission Line
The transmission line designed for 132 kV will consist of two
circuits with steel cored aluminium conductors of 0.15 square inch
copper equivalent each circuit being carried on a separate wooden pole
from Shoalhaven to Goulburn. From Goulburn to Sydney it will con-
sist of a single circuit with 0.2 square inch conductors, also carried on
wooden poles.
Outdoor Substation at Goulburn
At Goulburn the transmission line will tie in with the 132 kV
busbar to which the transmission line from Burrinjuck to Port Kembla
will be connected.
Outdoor Receiving Station in Sydney
At Sydney the transmission line will terminate in an outdoor
receiving station. To minimise the cost the design of this station has
been made as simple as possible and the station will consist of four
single-phase 18 000 kYA, 120/33 kV transformers and a single high
tension oil circuit breaker. The estimate includes the necessary syn-
chronous condensers and also a Petersen coil.
140
appendix y— shoalhayen river HYDRO-ELECTRIC scheme
Outdoor Receiving Station in Sydney


Head Utilized
The mean water level at the dam can be taken as E.L. 1785. The
average water level downstream of the power station is at E.L. 925,
and therefore the average gross head will be 860 feet. At the weighted
average water consumption of 850 cusecs and with the stated dimen-
sion of conduits, the loss will be about 70 feet and the average net
head therefore 790 feet. When the power station is working at full
capacity the water consumption will be about 1 070 cusecs and the loss
of head about 110 feet.
Energy Output
As mentioned before the average amount of water which can be
utilized with the storage provided is 273 cusecs. This corresponds
to an average energy output of 129 million kWh generated per annum.
This figure is based upon a possible but almost ideal operation. In
practice some water will, of necessity, be wasted, but on the other
hand during long periods of the year a greater energy storage than
assumed above can be used which will more than compensate for the
occasional waste of water. It is therefore considered reasonable to
assume that, with due allowance for transmission losses, the average
yearly output referred to load centres over a number of years will be
about 110 million kWh. Allowing for transmission losses the maxi-
mum capacity of the scheme at load centres is estimated at 50 000 kW.
ESTIMATES OF COST
Capital Cost
Tlie capital cost (in Australian money) of the works described
in the previous section is estimated as follows: — £
Access road, land resumption, easements and clearing
for works . . .. .. . . .. . . 50 000
Diversion dam at Devil’s Bridge .. .. .. . . 900 000-
Tunnel intake, head race tunnels, syphon over river,
surge tank and pressure pipe line .. .. .. 830 000
Power station Building, turbines, generators, low ten-
sion switchgear, travelling crane and sundry
mechanical and electrical equipment in power
station .. .. .. .. .. .. .. 355 000
Permanent offices and quarters and local administration
during construction .. .. .. .. .. 225 000
Outdoor substations at Shoalhaven, Goulburn and
Sydney .. .. .. .. .. .. .. 235 000
Transmission lines .. .. .. .. .. .. 260 000
Engineering .. ' .. .. .. .. .. .. 185 000
Contingencies .. .. .. .. .. .. 285 000
Interest during construction .. .. .. .. 255 000
Total £3 580 000
141
Appendix y—shoalhayen eivee hydeo-electeic scheme
Estimates o£ Cost


The estimate of capital cost is based on market prices ruling in
August, 1937, and includes the cost of all material and labour necessary
for the completion of the work as well as overhead charges and con-
tingencies.
It has been assumed that the works will be carried out depart-
mentally, using the most efficient methods of construction with ade-
quate and most modern plant.
Annual Cost
The annual cost of the scheme is estimated as follows: —
£
Interest on capital, 41 per cent, on £3 580 000 .. .. 161 100
Depreciation .. .. .. .. •. • • • • 56 600
Maintenance and operation .. .. .. .. .. 28 000
Contingencies .. .. .. .. .. .. . • 4 300
Total .. .. £250 000
The depreciation charges included in the estimate are based upon
the following rates: —
1 per cent, per annum for roads, land resumptions and easements,
dam, tunnels, power station building and other concrete works.
3 per cent, per annum for steel structures in syphon and pipeline,
turbines, travelling crane and other mechanical equipment,
generators, substations, transmission lines and other electrical
equipment.
On an average the depreciation charges correspond to 1.6 per cent,
of the capital cost.
Concluding Remarks
The estimated capital cost of the scheme including transmission
is, at load centres, £72 per kW and the estimated annual cost £5 per kW.
At a load factor of about 25 per cent, this corresponds to 0.55 pence per
kWh transmitted to load centres.
These cost figures are much higher than Hie usual cost of power
from hydro-electric plants of this magnitude. The main reasons for
this are the following:—
{a) High floods make the diversion dam costly.
{h) The basement rocks being ordovician sedimentary strata makes
tunnel lining necessary.
( c ) The flow of the river is very variable the major part of the flow
coming in floods which cannot be economically collected. The
yield of energy is therefore small in comparison with the
installed capacity of the scheme.
It is not likely that any other scheme for hydro-electric power
generation on the Shoalhaven River will prove materially superior to
that outlined in this Appendix.
142
APPENDIX V—SHOALHAVEN RIVER HYDRO-ELECTRIC SCHEME
Concluding Remarks


APPENDIX Vl
TO REPORT OF 1937 OF RENDEL, PALMER
& TRITTON ON ELECTRICAL DEVELOP-
MENT IN NEW SOUTH WALES
STYX RIVER HYDRO-ELECTRIC
SCHEMES
(See also Plates 24, 25 and 26)
INTRODUCTORY
In the north-east portion of New South Wales electricity is prin-
cipally supplied by the Clarence River County Council, which operates
a hydro-electric power plant at Nymboida, with an installed capacity
of 4 800 kW and an oil engine station at Lismore, with an installed
capacity of 3 450 kW. The territory served by the Clarence River
County Council is a closely settled and fertile district with a compara-
tively rapidly growing power demand, and as far as can be judged at
present the capacity of the installed plant of the County Council will
be inadequate to deal with the load in two years ’ time.
Lying behind the main Coastal Range is a second fertile area,
called the New England Tableland, stretching from Tenterfield in the
north almost to Tamworth in the south. The most important supply
authority in this district is that of Tamworth, operating a steam power
station which, after installation of plant now on order will have an
installed capacity of 4 300 kW. The other towns in the district have
small generating stations and are thus provided with an electricity
supply, but these stations will not be able to cope in an efficient way
with the normal growth of load.
The means of providing electricity supply adequate for future
requirements have been dealt with in Section 18 of the report and in
Appendix X entitled “The Supply of Electricity in the North Eas-
tern Area.” In that Appendix a proposed Electricity Supply System
is described covering practically the whole of the North Eastern Area
by extending the generating plant at Lismore by two 2 500 kW steam
power sets and by interlinking the Clarence River County Council
system with Tamworth via a new hydro-electric station on the Styx
River, and by extending the main transmission lines to Inverell via
Armidale, Guyra and Glen Innes. The new hydro-electric station,
which for the purpose of electrically stabilising the transmission system
should have a capacity of at least 8 000 kW, is the subject of this
Appendix.
For the purpose of interconnecting the Nymboida-Lismore sys-
tem with Tamworth and for the supply to the New England Tableland,
the ideal position for a hydro-electric station is midway between
Nymboida and Tamworth, and therefore the feasibility has been inves-
tigated of generating hydro-electric power on the Styx, Oaky, Chandler
and Wollomombi Rivers, all of which are favourably located in this
respect.
143


, The water power of the Styx River has previously been utilized
in a small water power plant, with a capacity of 320 kW, constructed in
1908. This plant utilized a head of about 300 feet and supplied power
to the Hillgrove Mines. When the last of these mines was abandoned
in 1921 tile generating machinery was removed from the site and the
structures left to decay.
In connection with a general investigation into the water power
resources of the State, surveys of the Styx, Oaky, Chandler and Wol-
lomombi Rivers were made in 1923 on the instructions of the late Wm.
Corin, then Chief Electrical Engineer, Public Works Department. The
water power schemes were at that time considered in connection with
the electrification of a proposed railway line between Guyra and Dor-
rigo, which, however, was not constructed. These hydro-electric
schemes were also considered in 1929 in connection with the supply of
electricity to New England Tableland, but at that time Avithout the
intention of interconnecting the hydro-electric stations with the Clarence
River County CounciPs system. None of the schemes was proceeded
with.
Representatives of the Consulting Engineers visited the sites
for the proposed Avorks in June, 1937, and suggested certain geological
investigations and additional surveys. For the detailed geological
investigations carried out the Consulting Engineers are indebted to
Mr. Harold Raggatt, Geological Surveyor, Department of Mines. Addi-
tional surveys have been made by Mr. R. H. Pocock, Engineering Sur-
veyor under the direction of Mr. E. W. Nardin, Supervising Engineer,
Department of Works and Local Government, and the Consulting Engi-
neers Avish to express their appreciation of the valuable assistance
rendered by these officers. The Avork has been facilitated by an excellent
aerial survey made by Adastra Ainvays Ltd.
GEOGRAPHY
The Styx, Oaky, Chandler and Wollomombi Rivers all rise south
of the Doughboy Range between Point Lookout (5 250 ft.) and Chandler
Peak (5 130 ft.) in the order from east to west as mentioned. Their
upper reaches are convergent and they cross the main road between
Armidale and Kempsey within a distance of 10 miles. About a mile
south of this road they all pass abruptly into deep gorges in the bottom
of which they continue their courses for some distance, join one another
and finally discharge into the Macleay River.
To the east of the Styx River, and in its upper reaches parallel
to it, runs Georges Creek in an imposing canyon at a distance of some
3 miles. The bottom of this canyon is between 1 800 and 2 000 feet
below the water level of the Styx River at the road bridge. A map of
the region is shown on Plato 24.
144
Appendix yi—styx klvek hydro-electric schemes
Geography


River
Catch-
ment
Area
Period
of
Maximum
Recorded
Gauge Reading
O O
Maximum
Measured
Discharge
Mean
Dis-
charge
square
miles
Records
Gauge
Height
Esti-
mated
Cusecs
Cusecs
Corres-
ponding
Gauge
Height
for
Period
Styx
59
29-4-18 to
date.
23' 0"
14 940
1 948
8' 0"
137
Oaky ...
78
10-10-24 to
date.
10' 0"
2 530
614
4' iii"
51
Chandler
117
20-12-23—
31-8-31.
23' 6"
...
76
1' 0"
Wolloraombi ...
157
15-11-23—
30-10-29.
27' 0"
96
2' 44"
...
The original forest cover on the catchment area of the Wollo-
mombi and Chandler Rivers has been almost wholly destroyed, whilst
the forest of the Styx River and Georges Creek areas remains largely
untouched. The Oaky River catchment still retains a fair amount of
forest on that part of the area which is underlain-by rock most suscep-
tible to erosion (granite).
From the point of view of water power development it is obvious
that an effort should be made to utilize the sheer drop in the rivers
south of the main road, or in the case of the Styx River, alternatively
to utilize the head which can be obtained by diverting it into George’s
Creek.
HYDROLOGY
Although the catchments of the Styx, Oaky, Chandler and Wollo-
mombi Rivers are located closely together, the run-off per square mile
of the respective catchment areas differs vastly. This is explained both
by the fact that the precipitation is much greater on the eastern than
the western portion of the region, and by the varying character of the
soil and vegetation of the catchments. The discharge of the rivers at
the bridges on the Armidale-Kempsey road has been gauged for the
periods given below in Table I and discharge rating curves have been
established up to the gauge reading given in the same Table.
Table I
Unfortunately the discharge rating curves for the Chandler and
Wollomombi Rivers are established for low water conditions only and
it is therefore not possible at present to give a figure for the mean
discharge of these rivers. However, comparing the Chandler and the
Wollomombi Rivers with the Oaky River and taking into account the
catchment areas as well as the smaller run-off per square mile in the
western part of the district, it seems obvious that the mean discharges
of the Chandler and Wollomombi Rivers must be smaller than the mean
discharge of the Styx River.
* 59265—K
145
APPENDIX Yl STYX RIVER HYDRO-ELECTRIC SCHEMES
Hydrology


Minimum Monthly Average Discharge in Cusecs for —
Styx
Oaky
Chandler
Wollomombi
January
5 (1919)
3-6 (1931)
1-0 (1931)
0-3 (1924)
February
7 (1919)
2-3 (1932)
8-9 (1930)
2-9 (1926)
March ...
13 (1932)
2-3 (1926)
0-8 (1926)
0-8 (1924)
April ...
16 (1932)
34 (1926)
0-6 (1926)
0-3 (1*924)
May
25 (1933)
2-9 (1933)
04 (1926)
0-8 (1924)
Juno
16 (1935)
5-7 (1935)
4-6 (1927)
1-0 (1927)
July
25 (1927)
5-6 (1926)
4-0 (1927)
1-0 (1927)
August
13 (1935)
3-3 (1927)
0-2 (1926)
0-6 (1927)
September
11 (1927)
2-0 (1927)
0-0 (1926)
0-2 (1927)
(1930)
October
10 (1931)
2-9 (1926)
0-0 (1930)
0-8 (1926)
November
2 (1936)
0-8 (1926)
0-0 (1930)
0-0 (1926)
December
10 (1930)
1-6 (1935)
0-0 (1930)
0-7 (1930)
Average ...
13
34
1-6
0-8
As regards low water conditions the records make a satisfactory
comparison possible. The minimum average flow which has occurred in
these rivers during the period on record in the different calendar months
is set out in Table 11, and within brackets the year of its occurrence is
given.
Table IT
From Table II it can be seen that the low water conditions are
very much more favourable in the Styx River than in the others. Par-
ticularly in the Chandler and Wollomombi Rivers drought periods
lasting for several months frequently occur when the flow is nil, or
nearly nil.
Prom the above particulars the conclusion can be drawn that of
the rivers considered the Styx River is the most favourable from a
hydrological point of view for water power development.
GENERAL GEOLOGY
The examinations carried out by the Geologists have disclosed the
following features of the general and structural geology of the areas
considered.
General Geology
To explain the topographical features of the areas concerned all
these streams should be visualised as flowing originally in fairly
mature valleys such as can now be seen upstream from the falls. In
the Kosciusko epoch faults and warps occurred along the Eastern
Australian coast which can now be seen forming the eastern scarps of
the coastal ranges. In some places it can be clearly seen that the
streams were able to cut down as quickly as the surface was warped
146
Appendix vi—styx river hydro-electric schemes
General Geology


upwards and so retain their grade, but in others faults originated and
the falls which these caused have migrated upstream either as one
face or as a series of steps. Thus the depth of the gorges is a measure
of the amount of vertical uplift which then took place, and the present
position of the falls is due to headward recession of the original
scarps.
The examination of the areas adjacent to the main falls on the
Styx, Oaky, Chandler and Wollomombi Rivers showed that the present
position of the falls is not controlled by a major line of faulting.
The rocks of the area in their order of deposition or intrusion
may be classified as follows:
Namhucca Series : —Claystone, both cherty and tufaceous, in-
durated alternating sands, muds and shales, quartzite, slate and
rhyolite.
Granite and related types : —lntruding Nambucca Series, mainly
as sills.
Tertiary Leads: —Sands and quartz gravels mainly with sub-
ordinate clays and concretionary ironstone.
Tertiary Basalts :—Columnar massive and amygdaloidal types
found forming both large tableland areas and, as remnants, capping
the leads.
The distribution of different rock types, especially when con-
sidered in relation to the forest cover or lack of it, furnishes an ex-
planation of certain differences in the quantity and characteristics of
the silt in the present streams and in their run-off.
The Wollomombi River is considerably silted and the bed of the
Chandler River is full of sand. A fine silt characterises the Oaky
River, whilst the Styx River is largely free from deposits other than
boulders and pebbles. The difference in silt conditions is explained
by varying degrees of soil erosion.
As mentioned previously the catchment area of the Wollomombi
River is almost wholly denuded of large groups of trees. The base-
ment rocks consist of the Nambucca Series as well as of granite and
basalt. The sediments and the granite are both deeply eroded, and
under present conditions erosion will continue and probably increase.
The catchment of the Chandler River is also practically devoid
of forest. The basement rock is mainly granite, the denudation of
which has provided the sand deposits in the river. Granite, and par-
ticularly the rather acid type such as occurs here, weathers deeply,
and once the forest is destroyed erosion inevitably follows. Under
present conditions erosion will undoubted!}' become worse, and a con-
siderable number of small gutters have been cut in the granite soil by
the water.
147
APPENDIX VI—STYX RIVER HYDRO-ELECTRIC SCHEMES
General Geology


The Oaky River catchment is only partly ringbarked. A con-
siderable portion of this catchment consists of granite but only one of
its tributaries (Ponds Creek) is flowing over a granite area on which
the forest cover has been destroyed. In many places the granite is
deeply weathered and if the trees were destroyed and stock allowed
to pasture on those areas rapid silting of the Oaky River would soon
follow. The remainder of the catchment is Nambucca Series, which
provides the finer elements in the silt, together with a proportion of
fine sands derived from the denudation of Tertiary leads.
The forest cover remains almost untouched on the catchments
of the Styx River and Georges Creek. Moreover, much of the catch-
ment is made up of basalt, the amount of granite present is relatively
insignificant, and the sediments are harder than those on the other
catchments. The small plateau areas which have been ringbarked on
the headwaters of both streams are underlain mainly by basalt and
the amount of erosion thereof is negligible.
Structural Geology
The area is part of a geosyncline forming the north-eastern part
of the State and south-eastern Queensland.
In the northern section of the part of the area concerned the
general strike of the sediments is easterly, the dip being northerly at
about 60 degrees, but in the southern section the strike swings until
it is approximately meridional with a general westerly dip. The re-
gional structure thus appears to be an anticline plunging to the north-
west. Many subsidiary folds are imposed on this axis. The strike is
delineated by the southern boundary of the main granite mass and by
the small sills.
Owing to the topography, the most suitable means of conveying
water to any hydro-electric plant will be by tunnels excavated in the
rock. In the various schemes referred to later, almost the full length
of the tunnels will be in the Nambucca Series.
An old mine adit near the Styx bridge and new and old workings
at Hillgrove were examined to see if they afforded any information,
bearing on the strength of the rocks for tunnelling and their perme-
ability. There seems little doubt that, generally speaking, tunnels in
these rocks stand for long periods of time without deterioration but
where sheared and shaly zones are encountered concrete lining will be
required. Unfortunately an examination of the ground surface along
the proposed tunnels gives very little information as to the lithology
of the beds likely to be met with and therefore the extent of such zones
as require lining cannot be estimated. For this reason it has been
assumed, for the purpose of the estimate of cost, that all tunnels will
be lined with concrete throughout.
148
APPENDIX Vl STYX RIVED HYDRO-ELECTRIC SCHEMES
Structural Geology


GENERAL LAY-OUT OF POSSIBLE HYDRO-ELECTRIC
SCHEMES
Schemes for utilizing the water power of the rivers considered
have been sketched out and considered. These are as follows:
1. The Styx River Scheme consists of a dam about 70 feet high
some three-quarters of a mile south of the Styx bridge, a tunnel 2.0
miles long, a pipe line 1 700 feet long leading down to a power station
utilizing 1 056 feet gross head at the hairpin bend in the gorge 24- miles
south-west of the Styx bridge.
2. The Styx-Georges Creek Scheme consists of a dam about 52
feet high at Panton’s Point, some 14 miles east of the Styx bridge, a
tunnel If miles long in a south-easterly direction ending on the Little
Styx spur close to Little Styx Creek, a pipe line 4 700 feet long leading
down the spur to a power station utilizing 1 747 feet gross head at the
Little Styx Creek, a tributary of Georges Creek.
3. The Oaky River Scheme consists of a dam about 46 feet high
just downstream of the Big Pool, a tunnel 0.9 miles long to a spur on
the right-hand side of the river, a pipe line 1 600 feet long leading
down the spur to a power station utilizing 997 feet gross head on the
bank of the river.
4. The Wollomomhi-Chandler River Scheme consists of an off
take on the Wollomombi River half a mile south-east of the Wollom-
ombi bridge, a tunnel 0.6 miles long diverting the water from the 'Wol-
lomombi into the Chandler River upstream of the storage dam on this
river, a storage dam about 50 feet high on the Chandler River
about 1 mile south of the main road, a second tunnel 2.8 miles
long on the left-hand side of the river leading out on a spur some 3f
miles south of the main road, and a pipe line 2 550 feet long leading
down this spur to a power station utilizing 1 579 feet gross head on the
bank of the Chandler River.
In each case the gross head mentioned is measured from 10 feet
below the crest of the storage dam to the level of the Pelton wheel
turbines. In the Schemes 1, 3 and 4to provide for floods the turbines
are assumed to be located 40 feet above the water level in the river at
the power station site. In Scheme 2, the power station being located
on the bank of Little Styx Creek, which has a catchment area of only
3 square miles, the turbines will be safe if located 10 feet above bed
level of the creek at the power station site.
In order to compare the different schemes and the natural possi-
bilities for obtaining storage, Table 111 has been prepared.
149
APPENDIX VI—STYX RIVER HYDRO-ELECTRIC SCHEMES
General Lay-out of Possible Hydro-electric Schemes


Styx
River
Scheme
Styx-
Georges
Creek
Scheme
Oaky
River
Scheme
Wollo-
mombi-
Chandler
River
Scheme
ft.
ft.
ft.
ft.
Height of dam to obtain a useful storage
of 1 000 acre-feet
70
52
46
50
Gross head ...
1 056
1 747
997
1 579
Length of tunnels
10 500
9 250
4 850
17 850
Length of pipe lines
1 700
4 700
1 600
2 550
Table 111
In the first instance a comparison will be made between the
Styx-Georges Creek Scheme and the Wollomombi-Chandler River
Scheme both having approximately the same head.
The cost of construction will be slightly higher in the latter
scheme as the cost of the longer tunnel will by no means be com-
pensated by the shorter pipe line, and the cost of the two dams in the
latter scheme is at least as high as the cost of the single dam in the
former scheme. The discharge of the Styx River is far more favour-
able for power production and is greater than in the combined
Chandler-Wollomombi Rivers. The amount of silt carried by the
Chandler River would endanger the existence for any long period of
any storage on this river by filling it up, whilst in the Styx River this
danger hardly exists.
As thus, from all points of view, the Styx-Georges Creek Scheme
is to be preferred to the Wollomombi-Chandler Scheme, this latter
scheme is not dealt with further.
A comparison between the Styx River Scheme and the Oaky
River Scheme, both having approximately the same head, reveals the
following. Owing to the smaller run-off in the Oaky River the amount
of energy which will be produced by the Oaky River Scheme will be
on an average some 20 million kWh per annum as compared with 36
million kWh in the Styx River Scheme. The value of this difference in
energy production more than outweighs the smaller annual cost of the
Oaky River Scheme that is due to the shorter tunnel. The silt question
in the Oaky River is also rather serious, and as the Oaky River Scheme
does not possess any other advantages compared with the Styx River
Scheme, the latter is to be preferred, and therefore the Oaky River
Scheme is not dealt with further.
From the foregoing general comparison, two schemes worthy
of further consideration thus emerge, the Styx River Scheme and the
Styx-Georges Creek Scheme, and these will be compared in detail, but
before doing so the question of storage should be considered.
150
APPENDIX VI—STYX ELVER HYDRO-ELECTRIC SCHEMES
General Lay-out of Possible Hydro-electric Schemes


STORAGE
The operation of the hydro-electric stations will have to follow
the variations in the flow of the river. During periods of abundant
water supply the power station will run at full or nearly full capacity,
day and night, taking the base load on the supply system. During
periods of drought, economy will have to be exercised in the use of
water and the power station will therefore take the peak load and
operate during the day time only.
During the summer months the natural flow of the river will not
always be sufficient for generation of the minimum output required, i.e.,
the output when Nymboida and the Styx station takes the peak of the
load only. Storage, therefore, will have to be provided which can be
drawn upon on these occasions. The amount of storage assigned for
the above purpose, i.e., to meet the minimum output required, will be
called the “demand storage.”
In reporting on the Snowy and the Shoalhaven hydro-electric
schemes we have, for reasons of economy, proposed to provide a
storage over and above that which at the critical time of the year is
required as demand storage. This upper part of the storage, which is
called “energy storage,” is provided for the purpose of collecting, for
energy production, portion of the water discharged during floods. In
the Styx River the storage possibilities are limited and the cost of
storage high, and therefore no more storage is provided than that
required as demand storage during the critical time of the year.
During the period of the year when the inflow to the storage
reservoir is sufficient to take the part of the peak load referred to above,
it is of course not necessary to keep any volume of water as demand
storage, and therefore the whole storage volume, or most of it, can be
utilized as energy storage. The storage must, however, be utilized in
this way with caution and foresight, so as to ensure it being entirely
replenished before the beginning of the critical period of the year when
an extreme drought may occur.
The amount of peak load which the Styx and Nymboida hydro-
electric stations combined can be relied upon to take will depend on the
storage provided in the Styx River, as daily pondage only is available
at Nymboida, and it will also depend upon the total load on the supply
system into which the energy is fed.
The amount of storage which can be economically provided in
the Styx-Georges Creek Scheme and the Styx River Scheme is about
the same, viz., some 1 000 acre feet, but in combination with Nymboida,
this amount of storage will enable the former scheme to carry a peak
load of 2 000 kW higher than the latter.
STYX RIVER SCHEME
Capacity
Calculations made show that with a storage volume of 1 000 acre
feet in the Styx River Scheme this power plant, in combination with
Nymboida, could, during an assumed possible coincidence of such
151
APPENDIX VI—STYX RIVER HYDROELECTRIC SCHEMES
Capacity


Installed
Working
Reserve
Capacity
Capacity
Capacity
kW
kW
kW
Tamworth ...
4 300*
Lismore—
►
9 200
3 550
Oil
3 450
base load
Steam (proposed) ...
5 000 J
Nymboida
4 800 "
8 800
4 000
Styx River (proposed)
8 000 j
peak load
Total
25 550
18 000
7 550
extreme drought periods as have occurred in both rivers at different
times, deliver 8 800 kW of peak power, provided that the system load
is not less than about 18 000 kW.
The power generated and supplied to the system at the time of
the maximum peak load would be divided between the various sources
of supply as set out in Table IV.
Table IV
* After installation of a 2 000 kW set now on order.
The maximum load on all generating plant is estimated to reach
18 000 kW in about 1950 and up to this time the proposed installed
capacity would be sufficient. A further increase of the load could be
met by either the installation of more steam plant or the development
of further water power elsewhere.
Storage Dam
In the Styx River Scheme the storage dam will be located some
three-quarters of a mile south of the Styx Bridge on the main road
Armidale-Kempsey. Surveys of the storage capacity of dams of dif-
ferent heights at this place have been made during the present investi-
gation. From the data obtained it appears that a useful storage volume
of 1 000 acre feet can be obtained by a 70 ft. high dam having its crest
at R.L. 2730 with provision for the water level to be drawn down by
40 ft., i.e., to R.L. 2690.
The dam will be of the single arch type and the length of spillway
crest which can be suitably obtained is about 210 ft. At the maximum
flood which will have to be provided for, i.e., about 35 000 cusecs, the
water level will rise 14 ft. above the crest, i.e., to R.L. 2744. In the event
of such a flood the Styx River Bridge could probably not be crossed, but
this is of little importance as in such circumstances the main road would
probably not be passable in any case. Such high floods as are likely
to occur at more frequent intervals will not affect the bridge.
152
APPENDIX VI—STYX El YEP HYDEO-ELECTKIC SCHEMES
Storage Dam


Head Race Tunnel
From an intake located on the left bank of the river close to the
storage dam, a head race tunnel having a length of 10 500 ft. will lead
the water to a spur located about 1 500 ft. east of the hairpin bend of
the Styx Eiver as shown on Plate 24. For the purpose of estimating
the cost the tunnel has been assumed to be either circular or horseshoe
shaped, to have an internal height and width of 7ft., and to be lined
throughout with a shell of reinforced concrete having a minimum thick-
ness of 7 in.
Surge Tank
At the downstream end of the head race tunnel a surge tank will
be excavated in rock and provided with concrete lining. The surge tank
will have an area of about 215 square feet between E.L. 2774 and E.L.
2650.
Pressure Pipe Line
From the downstream end of the tunnel a pressure pipe line
1 700 ft. long will lead the water down a spur to the power station.
The pipe line will be designed with long spans and provided Avith
stiffening rings at the supports only. The pipe will have a diameter of
3 ft. 9 in, at the upper end diminishing to 3 ft. 3 in. at the loAver end.
At the upper end the pipe will be provided both with a hand operated
sluice valve and with an automatically operated plunger valve which
will shut off the water should the Aoav in case of emergency exceed the
amount required for the maximum output of the turbines. At its loAver
end the pipe will fork into two branches each leading to a turbine and
provided with a sluice vakve.
Poaver House
The power house will be located close to the north-east end of the
hairpin bend in the gorge 21 miles south-Avest of the Styx bridge. It
will be situated on the river bank well above high water level. The
plant will consist of tAVO turbines of Pelton type Avith horizontal shafts
and direct coupled generators. Each turbine will be designed for a
maximum output of 4 200 kW on the turbine shaft. Each generator
will be designed for a capacity of 5 000 kYA.
Outdoor Transformer Station
Close to the poAver station an outdoor transformer station will
be erected containing two 5 000 kYA three-phrase transformers, 11/66
kV, as well as high-tension circuit breakers, isolators and sundry equip-
ment.
Transmission Line
The transmission of the power to the North Eastern System is
dealt Avith in Section 17 of the Report and in Appendix X entitled
153
APPENDIX YI—STYX RIVER HYDRO-ELECTRIC SCHEMES
Transmission Line


“Supply of Electricity in the North Eastern Area,” and in this Appen-
dix it is suggested that the Styx hydro-electric station be interlinked
with Tamworth in the south-west, and Nymboida in the north-east by
means of single circuit 66 kV transmission lines.
Head Utilized
The mean water level at the dam can be taken to be R.L. 2720.
The low water level in the river at the power station site is R.L. 1624,
and the Pelton turbines will be placed with their nozzles at R.L. 1664.
The gross head therefore will be 1 056 ft. With a weighted nverage
water consumption of 95 cusecs, and the dimensions of conduits as
given the loss will be about 21 ft. and the average net head therefore
1 035 ft. When the power station is working at full capacity the loss
will be about 30 ft. and the water consumption about 115 cusecs.
Energy Output
The average amount of water which can be utilized with the
storage provided is estimated at 59 cusecs with due regard to the divi-
sion of load between the Nymboida and Styx power stations. On an
average the amount of energy generated annually at the Styx station
is estimated at 36 million kWh.
Estimates of Cost
The capital cost (in Australian money) of the works described
in this section is estimated as follows:
£
Access road, land resumption, easements and clearing for
works .. .. .. .. .. .. .. 10 000
Storage dams, tunnel intake, head race tunnel, surge tank
and pressure pipe line .. .. .. .. .. 278 000
Power station building, turbines, generators, low tension
switchgear, travelling crane and sundry mechanical
and electrical equipment in the power station .. 63 000
Outdoor step-up transformer station .. .. .. 31 000
Permanent offices and quarters and local administration
during time of construction .. .. .. .. 45 000
Engineering .. .. .. .. .. .. 27 000
Contingencies .. .. .. .. .. .. .. 42 000
Interest during construction .. .. .. .. ~ 24 000
Total £520 000
The estimate of capital cost is based on market prices ruling in
August, 1937, and includes cost of all material and labour necessary
for the completion of the work as well as overhead charges and con-
tingencies. It has been assumed that the works will be carried out
departmentally using the most efficient methods of construction with
adequate and most modern plant.
154
APPENDIX YI—STYX RIVER HYDRO-ELECTRIC SCHEMES
Estimates of Cost


Installed
Working
Reserve
Capacity
Capacity
Capacity
kW
kW
kW
Tamworth
4 300* '
Lismore—
►
9 200
3 550
Oil
3 450
base load
Steam (proposed) ...
5 000 J
Nymboida ...
4 800 "
10 800
2 000
Styx-Georges Creek (proposed)...
8 000 J
peak load
Total
25 550
20 000
5 550
The annual cost of the scheme is estimated as follows: —
£
Interest on capital—4£ per cent, on £520 000 23 400
Depreciation .. .. .. .. .. • .. .. 7 400
Maintenance and operation .. .. .. .. .. 5 000
Contingencies .. .. .. .. .. .. .. 700
Total .. .. .. .. .. .. .. 36 500
The depreciation charges included in the estimate are based on
the following rates: —
1 per cent, per annum for roads, land resumption, easements, dam,
lined tunnels, power station building and other concrete work;
3 per cent, per annum for steel structures, turbines, travelling
crane and other mechanical equipment, generators, sub-
stations, as well as other electrical equipment.
On an average the depreciation charges correspond to 1.43 per
cent, of the capital cost.
STYX-GEORGES CREEK SCHEME
Storage
Calculations made show that with a storage volume of 1 000
acre feet in the Styx-Georges Creek Scheme this power plant in com-
bination with Nymboida could, during a coincidence of such extreme
drought periods as have occurred in both rivers at different times,
deliver 10 800 kW of peak power, provided that the load on the generat-
ing plant is not less than about 20 000 kW.
The power generated and supplied to the system at the time of
the maximum peak load would be divided between the various sources
of supply as set out in Table V.
Table V
* After installation of a 2 000 kW set now on order
155
APPENDIX VI—STYX RIVER HYDRO-ELECTRIC SCHEMES
Styx-Georges Creek Scheme


As can be seen from Table V as compared with Table IV the
capacity for peak load during an extreme drought is in this scheme
2 000 kW greater than in the Styx River Scheme and this is due to water
being utilized at a greater head.
Up to the time when the maximum load on the generating system
shall have reached 20 000 kW the proposed installed capacity will be
sufficient. A further increase of the load could conveniently be met
by a combination of more steam plant either at Lismore or at Tam-
worth and the installation of a new pipe line and an enlargement of the
hydro-electric plant at Georges Creek.
In accordance with this project, the surge tank must, in tlie first
stage of development, be constructed of the size that will be required
for the future full development of the scheme. The tunnel is of mini-
mum size but sufficient to carry the water at full development.
Storage Dam
In the Styx-Georges Creek Scheme the storage dam will be
located at Panton’s Point If miles east of the Styx bridge on the main
road Armidale-Kempsey. Surveys of the storage capacity of dams
of different heights at this place were made in 1922. From the data
available it appears that the useful storage volume of 1 000 acre feet
can be obtained by a 52 ft. high dam having its crest at R.L. 2867 with
provision for the water level to be drawn down by 30 ft., i.e. to R.L.
2837. The dam will be of the single arch type and the length of spill-
way crest which can be suitably obtained is about 230 ft. As the maxi-
mum flood which will have to be provided for is about 35 000 cusecs
the water level will on such occasions rise 1-f ft. above the crest, i.e.
to R.L. 2881
Head Race'Tunnel
From an intake located in the Spanker’s Gully a head race
tunnel of a length of 9 250 ft. will lead the water in a south-easterly
direction to the Little Styx spur close to the Georges Creek, as shown
on Plates 24, 25 and 26. For the purpose of estimating the cost the
tunnel has been assumed to be circular or horseshoe shaped, having
an internal height and width of 7 ft., and to be lined throughout with
a shell of reinforced concrete having a minimum thickness of 7 in.
Surge Tank
At the downstream end of the head race tunnel a surge tank will
be excavated in rock and provided with concrete lining. The surge
tank will have an area of about 315 square feet between R.L. 2914 and
R.L. 2794.
Pressuee Pipe Lines
From the downstream end of the tunnel one pressure pipe line
4 700 ft. long will lead the water down a spur to the power station. The
pipe line will be designed with long spans and provided with stiffening
156
APPENDIX VI—STYX RIVER HYDRO-ELECTRIC SCHEMES
Pressure Pipe Lines


rings at the supports only. The pipe will have a diameter of 3 ft. 3 in.
at the upper end diminishing to 2 ft. 7 in. at the lower end. At the
upper end the pipe will be provided both with a hand operated sluice
valve and an automatically operated plunger valve which will shut off
the water should the flow in case of emergency exceed the amount
required for the maximum output of the turbines. At its lower end the
pipe will fork into two branches each leading to a turbine and provided
with sluice valve.
In the future, another pipe line may be constructed.
Power House
The powerhouse will be located on the bank of Little Styx Creek,
a tributary of the Georges Creek. The plant will consist of two tur-
bines of Pelton type with horizontal shafts and direct coupled genera-
tors. Each turbine will be designed for a maximum output of 4 200 kW
on the turbine shaft. Each generator will be designed for a capacity
of 5 000 kVA.
At a future date the plant may be extended by the addition of
one or two more generating units fed from the second pipe line referred
to above.
Outdoor Transformer Station
Close to the power station an outdoor transformer station will
be erected containing two 5 000 kVA three-phase transformers, 11/66
kY as well as high tension cricuit breakers, isolators and sundry equip-
ment.
Transmission Line
The transmission of the power to the North Eastern System is
dealt with in Section 17 of the Report and in Appendix X entitled
“Supply of Electricity in the North Eastern Area/’ and in this Appen-
dix it is suggested that the Styx-Georges Creek hydro-electric station
be interlinked with Tamworth in the south-west, and Nymboida in the
north-east direction by means of single-circuit 66 kY transmission
lines.
Head Utilized
The mean water level at the dam, can be taken to be R.L. 2857.
The elevation of the nozzles of the Pelton turbines will be at R.L. 1110
and therefore the gross head will be 1 747 ft. With a weighted average
water consumption of 54 cusecs, and the dimensions of conduits as given
the loss will be about 30 ft. and the average net head therefore 1 717 ft.
When the power station is working at full capacity the loss will be
about 50 ft. and the water consumption about 70 cusecs.
Energy Output
The average amount of water which can be utilized with the
storage provided is estimated at 41 cusecs having due regard to the
division of load between the Nymboida and Styx power stations. On
an average the amount of energy generated annually at the Styx station
equipped as above is estimated as 42 million kWh.
157
APPENDIX VI—STYX RIVER HYDRO-ELECTRIC SCHEMES
Energy Output


Estimates of Cost
The capital cost (in Australian money) of the works described
in this section is estimated as follows:
£
Access road, land resumption, easements, and clearing
for works .. .. .. .. .. .. .. 10 000
Storage dam, tunnel intake, head race tunnel, surge tank
and pressure pipe line .. .. . . . . .. 285 000
Power station building, turbines, generators, low tension
switchgear, travelling crane and sundry mechanical
and electrical equipment in the power station .. 56 000
Ont-door step-np transformer station .. .. .. 31 000
Permanent offices and quarters and local administration
during time of construction .. .. .. .. 45 000
Engineering .. .. . . . . .. .. .. 27 000
Contingencies .. .. .. .. .. .. .. 42 000
Interest during construction .. .. .. .. 24 000
Total £520 000
The estimate of capital cost is based on market prices prevailing
in August, 1937, and includes cost of all material and labour necessary
for the completion of the work as well as overhead charges and contin-
gencies. It has been assumed that the works will be carried out depart-
mentally using the most efficient methods of construction with adequate
and most modern plant.
The annual cost of the scheme is estimated as follows:
£
Interest on capital—4l per cent, on £520 000 .. 23 400
Depreciation .. .. .. .. .. .. 7 900
Maintenance and operation .. .. .. .. 5 000
Contingencies .. .. .. .. .. ~ 700
Total.. .. . . .. .. £37 000
The depreciation charges included in the estimate are based on
the following rates: —
1 per cent, per annum for roads, land resumption, easements, dam,
lined tunnels, power station building and other concrete work;
3 per cent, per annum for steel structures, turbines, travelling
crane and other mechanical equipment, generators, substations
as well as other electrical equipment.
On an average the depreciation charges correspond to 1.48 per
cent, of the capital cost.
158
APPENDIX VI—STYX PIVEIi HYDPO-ELECTPIC SCHEMES
Estimates of Cost


Futuke Development
The size of a future development is dependent upon the magni-
tude and the nature of the load and upon the requirements in reserve
plant. At the installation, for instance, of a third generating unit of
4 000 kW the energy output will be increased by about 15 million kWh
per annum on an average. The capital cost has been estimated at
£9O 000 and the annual cost at £8 000.
COMPARISON BETWEEN SCHEMES AND RECOM-
MENDATIONS
In tliis Appendix a comparison is made between possible hydro-
electric developments on the Chandler-Wollomombi Rivers and the
Oaky River on the one hand and two alternative developments utilizing
the Styx water on the other hand, and it has been found that the latter
are to be preferred.
The two alternative developments using the water of the Styx
River and referred to as the Styx River and the Styx-Georges Creek
Schemes have been studied in detail. As a result of this investigation
it appears that the capital and annual costs of these two schemes are
very nearly equal.
The amount of peak power which can be relied upon to be avail-
able even during an extreme drought period is, however, 2 000 kW more
in the Styx-Georges Creek Scheme than in the Styx River Scheme and
the value of this additional peak power capacity is estimated at £6 000
per annum when the load has increased to such a degree as to enable
it to be utilized. Moreover, the Styx-Georges Creek Scheme is capable
of producing 6 million kWh per annum more than is possible with the
Styx River Scheme and this is valued at £5 000 per annum.
From these considerations it is evident that the Styx-Georges
Creek Scheme should be preferred.
159
APPENDIX VI—STYX ELVEE IIYDEO-ELECTEIC SCHEMES
Comparison between Schemes and Kecoramendations




APPENDIX VII
TO REPORT OF 1937 BY RENDEL,
PALMER AND TRITTON ON ELECTRICAL
DEVELOPMENT IN NEW SOUTH WALES
WYANGALA HYDRO-ELECTRIC SCHEME
(See also Plates 18 and 27)
Introductory
On the Lachlan River about 20 miles east of Cowra, and below its
junction with the Abercrombie River, the Wyangala Dam has been built
by the Water Conservation and Irrigation Commission at a cost of
approximately £1 350 000. The construction was commenced in 1928
and completed in 1935.
The dam was built under the 1925 Migration Agreement between
the British and Commonwealth Governments, for the purpose of pro-
viding an assured water supply to farmers along 800 miles of frontage
to the Lachlan, for irrigation, stock and domestic requirements, as well
as for the generation of power. For the latter purpose, two pipes
fitted with control gates and screens have been provided in the lower
part of the dam for connection to a power station.
A hydro-electric power station at this site is desirable for pro-
viding a cheap supply of electricity to the towns of Forbes, Parkes,
Peak Hill and Dubbo, and for electrically stabilising a proposed connec-
tion between the Burrinjuck and the Lithgow systems. It would also
have the effect of postponing for many years the need for duplicating
certain transmission lines in these systems.
Representatives of the Consulting Engineers visited the
Wyangala Dam in September, 1937.
Geography
The Lachlan River rises to the west of the Main Dividing Range
some 20 miles west of Goulburn. As can be seen on Plate 18, the river
flows for some 50 miles in a northerly direction to the site of the
Wyangala Dam. Prom this point its course becomes westerly and after
having traversed a large part of the interior of the State joins the
Murrumbidgee River. At Wyangala the Lachlan River has already
been joined by two main tributaries, the Crookwell and the Abercrombie
Rivers.
Hydrology
The discharge of the Lachlan River at Cowra, 30 miles by river
below Wyangala, has been gauged since 1892 and the records of the
discharge are complete to date. The catchment area at Wyangala is
3 200 square miles of mountainous country, over which the annual
rainfall varies from 25 to 30 inches. The average discharge over the
period 1893-1936 was about 730 cusecs. The highest flood recorded
*59265 —L
161


at Cowra occurred in 1870 when the water level rose 52 ft. 3 in. and this
is estimated to correspond to a discharge of about 98 000 cusecs. On
the same occasion the water level below the site of Wyangala Dam rose
64 ft., which is estimated to correspond to a discharge of about 125 000
cusecs.
The Dam
The Wyangala Dam is an imposing structure. The maximum
height of the dam from foundation to crest is 190 ft., the length of the
crest is 1 000 ft., and the volume of masonry concrete placed in the dam
and spillway proper is 237 000 cubic yards. The capacity of the storage
is about 304 000 acre feet, and the water can be drawn down 165 ft. The
full supply level is at E.L. 1173.45 and the crest level of the dam is
at R.L. 1190.45, giving 17 ft. of freeboard.
The spillway is a separate structure consisting of a concrete
weir, with a crest length of 1 000 ft., built in a depression on the left
bank. The discharge capacity is 165 000 cusecs, the flood waters being
returned to the river at a point about a mile downstream of the dam.
Use of Irrigation Storage
The Water Conservation and Irrigation Commission has studied
the prospective use of the dam for irrigation purposes and arrived at
a forecast of the future use of the water stored, as shown in full drawn
lines on Plate 27. The water discharged from the dam is intended to
be supplemented by the flow of the Belubula River, which joins the
Lachlan below Cowra, and therefore, if no other objects were in view,
no water would be drawn from the reservoir during such times as the
discharge of the Belubula is sufficient for the requirements. As a result
the Commission anticipates no discharge from the storage during
several months of the year.
Hydro-electric Development
As previously mentioned, at the time of the construction of the
dam it was anticipated that hydro-electric power might be generated
by the water discharged. Such hydro-electric power would, however,
be of little value if interrupted through no discharge being available
for several successive months. In order to find out whether the discharge
from the dam could be maintained at the minimum of 100 or 150 cusecs
without interfering with the irrigation interests so far as they are
known, an estimate has been made of the fluctuations of the water level
in the reservoir if such a minimum discharge were maintained through-
out the year. The result is shown with dotted lines on Plate 27 from
which can be gathered that the effect of the additional draw for hydro-
electric purposes would not have interfered in any way with the irriga-
tion interests during the period of 13 years investigated. During the
driest period in 1929-30 and without any special draw for hydro-
electric purposes the storage would have been reduced from its full
162
APPENDIX YII—WYANGALA HYDEO-ELEOTEIC SCHEME
Hydro-electric Development


capacity of 304 000 acre feet to 142 000 acre feet to serve the interests
of irrigation. On the other hand if a minimum draw of 150 cusecs had
been maintained throughout 125 000 acre feet would still have been left
unused. This reserve represents no less than 40 per cent, of the full
capacity of the storage, and would be available to meet a still more
severe drought than in 1929-30. There seems to be no reason, therefore,
why the dam and reservoir should not serve the double purpose of
irrigation and hydro-electric power production as originally con-
templated.
For this object it is proposed to instal immediately downstream
of the dam a hydro-electric power station containing two generating
units each of 5 000 kW. The capital cost of such a development is
estimated at £125 000 including a step-up transformer station, and the
annual cost of the development at £lO 000. As set out in detail in
Appendix IX entitled “The supply of electricity to the South "Western
Area,” it is intended to link up the proposed power station with the
Lithgow and Burrinjuck systems by means of 66 kY transmission lines
to Orange and Cowra.
Head Utilized and Energy Output
Due to the draw of water for irrigation purposes, the water level
in the reservoir varies during the year with the result that the proposed
hydro-electric plant will operate under a head varying between 160 and
123 feet. The output will also vary with the quantity of water dis-
charged for irrigation purposes. It is suggested that the minimum
discharge during the non-irrigation season should be 150 cusecs on an
average.
The effective output from the power station at times of abundant
flow is somewhat limited by the capacity of the existing transmission
lines from Lithgow to Orange and from Burrinjuck to Cowra, as it has
been estimated that the maximum amount of power which can be trans-
ferred over these lines is about 2 500 kW to each system.
Notwithstanding the restrictions imposed upon the Wyangala
plant, due to the varying head and water conditions, and to the limita-
tions of the amount of power which can be transferred to the two
systems, it has been estimated that on an average 23 million kWh
annually could be generated and utilized. Further, provided the
minimum discharge is fixed at 150 cusecs the plant would be capable of
taking about 4 500 kW of peak load (in 1947). The annual value of the
energy generated, taken at Lithgow coal costs only, namely 0.105 pence
per kWh, would be £lO 000, and the annual value of the peak capacity,
estimated at £3 per kW, would be £l2 000, giving a total annual value
of £22 000.
163
APPENDIX YII—WYANGALA HYDEO-ELECTRIC SCHEME
. Head Utilized and Energy Output




APPENDIX VIII
TO REPORT OF 1937. BY RENDEL, PALMER
& TRITTON ON ELECTRICAL DEVELOP-
MENT IN NEW SOUTH WALES
STEAM POWER GENERATION
GENERAL
In this Appendix the questions under consideration are whether
in the event of future power requirements in the Sydney area having
to be met by an increase in steam generating plant, this increase should
be in the form of extensions to existing stations or by a new
power station, situated on or near the coal fields, with transmission
of power to Sydney, and what is the probable cost of such additional
supplies.
In dealing with these questions, it is necessary first to review
the location, character and capacity of the existing stations in
Sydney; then to examine alternative proposals for expansion and
their comparative costs, in order that the best course of development
may he determined on sound economic lines.
For this purpose estimates have been made of capital cost and
annual costs of extensions to existing stations and on broad lines a
comparison has been drawn between such costs and those appertaining
to the establishment of a new power station, although, for reasons given,
it is not found necessary at present to plan or estimate in detail for the
latter method.
EXISTING POWER STATIONS IN SYDNEY
Of the five power stations in Sydney the two most important,
viz.:—Bunnerong, belonging to the Sydney County Council, and White
Bay, belonging to the Department of Railways, have been selected
for an investigation into the relative costs of extension of plant therein.
Beyond the plant which is on order for Bunnerong, both these stations
are capable of very considerable extension. These stations are described
hereunder.
BUNNERONG POWER STATION
Present Installation
The main generating station of the Sydney County Councilis
situated at Bunnerong, on the north-eastern shore of Botany Bay,
about 7 miles south of the centre of Sydney. Work was commenced
on the site in 1926, and the station, which was designed for an initial
installed capacity of 150 000 kW, commenced operation in 1929. The
circulating water system, yard and railway sidings, however, were
constructed for an ultimate capacity of about 400 000 kW.
165


The installation in the boiler house consists of eighteen boilers
arranged in six batteries. Each boiler has a normal rating of 100 000
lb. of steam per hour (120 000 lb. maximum) working at a pressure of
350 lb. per square inch and a temperature of 750 deg. P., and each
battery of three boilers serves its own turbine.
The turbine house accommodates six 25 000 kW turbo-alterna-
tors running at 1500 r.p.m. and generating at 11 kV. There are two
1500 kW house turbo-alternators generating at 425 volts, and a
seventh 25 000 kW turbo-alternator is at present being installed.
Additions Already Arranged
Two further units, each having a capacity of 50 000 kW, run-
ning at 3 000 r.p.m., have recently been ordered and will be installed in
a. new turbine house. Four new boilers have also been ordered, each
having a normal rating of 300 000 lb. of steam per hour (350 000 lb.
maximum), working at a pressure of 650 lb. per square inch and a
temperature of 850 deg. F. They will be installed in a new boiler house
and will burn pulverised fuel. This extension is expected to be in
commission about 1941.
Possible Further Extension
It is assumed that the next extension, for which estimates are
included in this Appendix, would consist of two further 50 000 kW
units designed for the same pressure, namely 600 lb. per square inch
at the stop valve but only two additional boilers would be installed,
making six boilers for the four 50 000 kW units when the extension is
complete.
WHITE BAY POWER STATION
Present Installation
The White Bay Power Station, belonging to the Department of
Railways, is situated in Sydney itself near the centre of the city. It
was originally put into service in 1913 with one 7 500 kW 25-cycle
turbo-generator, which is now displaced. The station now contains
three 8 750 kW, 6.6 kV, 25-cycle turbo-alternators installed in 1916,
1917 and 1919, and two 18 750 kW, 6.6 kV, 25-cycle sets installed in 1927
and 1928. On the 50-cycle side there are three 22 000 kW, 11 kV turbo-
alternators installed in 1925 and 1926, and one 20 000 kW, 11 kV set
installed in 1928.
The boiler plant consists of —
(a) five boilers installed in 1912-1917, with a normal evaporation
of 27 000 lb. of steam per hour working at a pressure of
200 lb. per square inch and a temperature of 588 deg. F.;
166
APPENDIX VIII—STEAM POWER GENERATION
White Bay Power Station,


( b ) eight boilers with a normal evaporation of 60 000 lb. of steam
per hour working at a pressure of 215 lb. per square inch and
a temperature of 594 deg. F, installed in 1923-1925; and
(c) nine boilers with a normal evaporation of 80 000 lb. of steam
per hour working at a pressure of 275 lb. per square inch and
a temperature of 640 deg. P, of which six were installed in 1924-
1926, and three in 1928.
The boilers under (a) and {h) serve the 25-cycle plant and the
boilers under (c) the 50-cycle plant.
Possible Extension
It is assumed that the station would be remodelled and extended
to contain five 30 000 kW units, the 25-cycle units and boilers being
removed and installed in Ultimo Station, or displaced. This means
that White Bay Station would become a 50-cycle station only. The
new machines would work at a pressure of 600 lb. per square inch and
825 deg. F. at the turbine stop valve, and there would be ten boilers
each rated at 150 000 lb. of steam per hour normal continuous rating
(170 000 lb. maximum). An estimate for the extension thus described
has been worked out and is included in this Appendix,
REPORT OF SUB-COMMITTEE
Documents Received
The Consulting Engineers have carefully studied the documents
on Steam Power Stations prepared by the Sub-Committee under the
chairmanship of Mr. H. R. Harper, appointed by the Electricity
Advisory Committee. These documents deal with the following sub-
jects :
(1) Steam power station developments in relation to the power
requirements of the future, in the Metropolitan Area of
Sydney;
(2) The transmission of electricity versus transport of coal over
distances of 100 and 50 miles for 200 000 kW delivered at
various load factors;
(3) Steam power station extensions (Sydney area);
(4) Description of power stations in Sydney;
(5) Proposed power station on coast line within 100 and 150 miles
of Sydney;
(6) The coal-fields of New South Wales in relation to electric
power production;
(7) Coal —printed document by Mr. E. C. Andrews (1929).
167
APPENDIX YIII— STEAM POWER GENERATION
Report of Sub-committee


Location or Plant
The question of transmitting power to Sydney from a steam
power station either 50 or 100 miles away is the subject of a detailed
study referred to under (2) above, and there are various graphs sub-
mitted showing the results of the calculations.
The document under reference indicates that if a suitable site
could be found right on a coalfield where no trucking or freight charges
are incurred, it would be cheaper to build a large steam station there
and transmit the power to Sydney than to build a new station in Sydney
itself. The new steam station would naturally operate as a base load
plant at not less than 50 per cent, annual load factor in the same man-
ner as any extension in Sydney itself would do.
However, it has been established that there are no suitable sites
available at mine mouth on any of the coal fields at which sufficient
circulating water for a large generating plant could be obtained, even
if cooling towers were employed. There are several within a relatively
short distance of the mines, but in order to move the coal even 20 miles
the trucking and freight charges are immediately incurred, with the
result that the balance in favour of transmission from a power station
outside Sydney may be eliminated.
Further, by a comparison made between a new station near the
coalfields and extensions to the existing steam stations in Sydney it
has been found that, as an extension can be built for approximately £4
per kW installed less than a new station, the reduction in capital cost
per kW, assuming 50 per cent, annual load factor, represents about
3s. Od. per ton of coal. This reduction can be offset against the saving
in cost of transport to a station near a coalfield as compared with one
in Sydney. As the amount represents a considerable portion of the
cost of transport of coal to Sydney, the question of transmitting fuel
generated power to Sydney from an outside source need not be dis-
cussed further until the sites available at Bunnerong, Pyrmont and
White Bay have been developed to their ultimate capacities.
We agree therefore with the conclusions arrived at by the Sub-
Committee that, at any rate until the facilities available for major
extensions in Sydney are exhausted, all further steam generating plant
should be installed in Sydney itself.
Coal
The document under reference indicates that, from an economic
point of view, any station situated in Sydney should preferably burn
Southern coal. It is doubtful, however, whether Southern coal will be
available in sufficient quantities in years to come, owing to the require-
ments of the steel industry in the Port Kembla district. The estimates
submitted below have consequently been based upon the use of Northern
and Western coal.
168
APPENDIX VIII—STEAM POWER GENERATION
Coal


No.
Item
Extension
of Bunnerong
(Bunnerong
“C”)
Remodelling
and Extension
of White Bay
1
Generating Capacity
100 000 kW
150 000 kW
2
Total Capital Cost ...
£2 180 000
£3160 000
3
Rate of Interest on Capital assumed
U%
H%
4
Depreciation of Assets, on a 4% sinking fund
basis as applied to an average life of 22 years...
3%
3%
5
Cost of Coal delivered to Bunkers
17/3
17/3
6
Gross Calorific Value of Coal, B.T.U.’s per lb. ...
12 000
12 000
7
Cost of Generation—
(a) Fixed charge per kW of demand on
out-going feeders ...
£2-12-0
£2-10-0
(6) Running charge per kWh delivered to
outgoing feeders
0-114d.
0-117d.
Estimate of Cost
As existing steam stations in Sydney can be extended with plant
sufficient to meet the growing power demand for many years to come,
a detailed estimate for a new base load steam station is not warranted
at this juncture.
The estimates on the following pages accordingly cover capital
outlay and annual costs of the extensions to Bunnerong and White
Bay Stations, based on prices ruling as at August, 1937, and may be
summarised as follows:
The charges set out under item (7) apply to the installations
covered by the corresponding capital estimates when operating at 50 per
cent, annual load factor.
At higher load factors, as the fixed charges would remain prac-
tically constant, and the running charges would only be fractionally
reduced both may be deemed to apply to all load factors over 50 per
cent.
It must be further emphasised that the charges in question are
those relating to the installations when acting as base load generating
plants, feeding into the general electricity supply system, and that peak
loads, fluctuations, and reserve capacity must be met from the existing
power stations.-
Resume
The foregoing table and the following detailed schedules show
the estimated cost of generating additional power by means of exten-
sions to existing steam stations in Sydney, which is the course found
to be preferable, on economic grounds, to the establishment of new
stations near the coal-fields. Comparison with the cost of generation
by water power is dealt with in Section 14 of the report.
169
APPENDIX VIII—STEAM POWER GENERATION
Resume


Total
Debited to —
No.
Item
Amount
Fixed
Charge
Running
Charge
1
Interest on Capital, 4| per cent, on £2 180 000
£
98 000
£
98 000
£
2
Depreciation 3 per cent, on £2 180 000
65 400
65 400
3
Coal at 50 per cent. Load Factor, 412 million
kWh sent out, 205 000 tons at 17s. 3d.
177 000
24 000
153 000
4
Operating Salaries and Wages, from data
supplied by Sub-Committee ...
32 000
26 800
5 200
5
Oil, Water and Stores (Annual Average)
5 000
850
4150
6
Repairs and Maintenance, from data supplied
by Sub-Committee (Annual Allocation)
37 000
26 000
11 000
7
Contingencies, 10 per cent, on total of items
3 to 6, inclusive
25 100
3 100
22 000
Totals ... ... ... £
439 500
244 150
195 350
Note.— In making the allocations as between Fixed and Running
Divided
Divided
Charges, the usually accepted percentages relating to 50 per
by 94 000
by 412
cent. Load Factor have been adopted
kW maxi-
mum de-
mand on
outgoing
feeders =
£2 12s.per
kW
million
kWh de-
livered to
outgoing
feeders =
0-114d.
per kWh
EXTENSION OF BUNNEEONG POWER STATION, BUN-
NERONG “C.”
Two 50 000 kW sets in addition to present commitments.
Estimated Capital Cost
Excavation, foundations and building .. .. .. 300 000
Boiler plant, piping chimneys and bunkers (steaming
capacity 80 000 kW, thus providing, with the plant
on order, a total steaming capacity of 240 000 kW
in respect of 200 000 kW of turbine plant) .. .. 655 000
Coal and ash handling plant .. .. .. .. 40 000
Turbo-alternators—
-2 sets of 50 000 kW each .. .. .. .. 480 000
Transformers —4at 30 000 kVA .. .. .. .. 70 000
Switchgears and reactors .. .. .. .. .. 247 000
Local administration during construction, engineering
and inspection .. .. .. .. .. .. 107 000
Contingencies and spares, 10% .. .. .. .. 180 000
Interest during construction .. .. .. .. 101 000
Grand total .. .. .. .. .. £2 180 000
Estimated Annual. Cost
170
APPENDIX VIII—STEAM POWER GENERATION
Extension of Bunnerong Power Station, Bunnerong “C”


Total
Debited to—
No.
Item.
Amount.
Fixed
Charge.
Running
Charge.
1
Interest on Capital, 44- per cent, on £3 160 000
£
142 000
£
142 000
£
2
Depreciation, 3 per cent, on £3 160 000
94 800
94 800
3
Coal at 50 per cent. Load Factor, 630 million
kWh sent out, 326 000 tons at 17s. 3d.
281 000
38 000
243 000
4
Operating Salaries and Wages, from data
supplied by Sub-Committee ...
48 000
40 000
8 000
5
Oil, Water and Stores (Annual Average)
7 500
1300
6 200
6
Repairs and Maintenance, from data supplied
by Sub-Committee (Annual Allocation)
56 000
39 000
17 000
7
Contingencies, 10 per cent, on total of items
3 to 6, inclusive
39 200
. 5 200
34 000
Totals
668 500
360 300
308 200
Note, — In making the allocations as between Fixed and Running
Divided
Divided
Charges, the usually accepted percentages relating to 50 per
by144 000
by 630
cent. Load Factor have been adopted
mum de-
mand on
outgoing
feeders =
£2 lOs.per
kW
million
kWh de-
livered to
outgoing
feeders =
0-117d.per
kWh
REMODELLING AND EXTENSION OF WHITE BAY POWER
STATION
Five 30 000 kW sets replacing present 25-cycle plant, which is to be
moved to Ultimo Power Station or displaced.
Estimated Capital Cost _
£
Clearing of site, alterations to buildings, foundations,
etc 110 000
Boiler plant, piping, chimneys and new bunkers (steam
for 180 000 kW) 1 250 000
Coal and ash handling plant .. .... .. .. 40 000
Turbo-alternators —5 sets of 30 000 kW each complete
erected 765 000
Transformers —5 at 35 000 kVA .. .. .. .. 90 000
Switchgear and auxiliary transformers, cables, etc. .. 315 000
Additional pumps and house turbine .. .. .. 30 000
Local administration during construction, engineering
and inspection .. .. .. .. .. .. 155 000
Contingencies and spares, 10 per cent. ~ .. .. 260 000
Interest during construction .. .. .. .. 145 000
Grand Total .. .. .. .. .. £3 160 000
Estimated Annual Cost
171
APPENDIX VIII—STEAM POWER GENERATION
Remodelling and Extension of White Bay Power Station




APPENDIX IX
TO REPORT OF 1937 BY RENDEL. PALMER
& TRITTON, ON ELECTRICAL DEVELOP-
MENT IN NEW SOUTH WALES
THE SUPPLY OF ELECTRICITY TO THE
SOUTH WESTERN AREA
INTRODUCTORY
In and beyond the Blue Mountains, west of Sydney, electricity
is supplied to a large area from the Lithgow steam station over the
transmission lines radiating therefrom. To the south of this, an exten-
sive area, including the Federal Capital of Canberra, is supplied from
the hydro-electric station at the Burrinjuck Dam. In the coastal area
south of Sydney there is a third system for which power is generated
at the Port Kembla steam station.
At present the three systems are not interconnected and there-
fore no exchange of power can take place. An interim report on the
interconnection of the Port Kembla and the Burrinjuck systems was
submitted to the Government by the Consulting Engineers in May this
year, and subsequently the Government decided to construct a trans-
mission line between Port Kembla and Burrinjuck in accordance with
the recommendation contained in that report and restated herein.
To the west of the Lithgow system there is a group of towns the
chief of which are Forbes, Parkes, Peak Hill and Dubbo referred to as
the “Western Towns.” These towns are at present supplied with
electricity from small local generating plants which will not be able
to cope in an efficient way with the normal growth of load in the
district. They are not of a type which can be extended to produce
cheap power, and it is therefore desirable to connect them to a main
supply system. This is not possible, however, either, technically or
economically, unless the Burrinjuck and Lithgow systems are first
connected in an adequate manner.
The interconnection of the first mentioned three supply systems,
the generation of power at a hydro-electric station to be constructed
at the Wyangala Dam, and the extension of the combined system to the
Western Towns, are the subject of this Appendix. The areas con-
cerned are collectively referred to as the South Western Area.
PRESENT SUPPLY SYSTEMS
The main transmission lines in the areas concerned are shown
on Plate 2, and technical data regarding the three supply systems are
given hereunder.
Lithgow System
The Department of Railways generates electricity at the steam
station at Lithgow, 96 miles west of Sydney, and furnishes bulk
supply to seven Municipalities and Shires within an area extending 137
173


miles in the west and north-west to Bathurst, Blayney, Orange and
Wellington and 37 miles in the east to Lawson. The system comprises
180 miles of transmission lines. The area of supply is about 120 square
miles, with a population of 55 000. 'The total installed capacity is 7 500
kW, and an additional unit of 2 500 kW is now being installed.
At about 81 miles in a westerly direction from Lithgow the
66-kY transmission line reaches the town of Orange, and 66 miles
south-west therefrom is the town of Cowra which is the extreme
northern limit of the Burrinjuck supply system.
Burrinjuck System
The construction of the Burrinjuck Dam for the purposes of
water supply to the Murrumbidgee Irrigation Area was commenced
in 1906 by the Water Conservation and Irrigation Commission and
was practically completed in 1923, although certain modifications were
effected up to 1928. In that year the Department of Works and Local
Government completed a hydro-electric power station on the right bank
of the river for the purpose of utilizing the head created by the dam.
This power station is referred to as Power Station No. 1. A second
power station, referred to as Power Station No. 2, is at present under
construction on the left bank of the river.
The great majority of supplies from Burrinjuck are provided in
bulk, ten Municipalities, four Shires and the City of Canberra being
at present so served. A few small towns and rural districts are sup-
plied in retail where it has not been practicable to arrange for distribu-
tion by local authorities. The system consists of about 606 miles of
transmission lines. The population in the area served is 65 000.
The installed capacity in Power Station No. 1 is 10 000 kW,
and in Power, Station No. 2 provision is being made for plant of the
same capacity.
The system is linked up at Canberra with a steam power station
owned by the Federal Government. This power station has a total
installed capacity of 2 700 kW and is used only to supplement the
resources of the Burrinjuck system in times of water shortage.
Port Kembla System
At the coast some 56 miles south of Sydney electricity is also
generated by the Department of Works and Local Government in a
steam power station at Port Kembla. Electricity was in the first
instance generated for the harbour works in 1915, and in 1921 bulk
supply to the near-by town of Wollongong was commenced. Bulk
supplies were subsequently extended to the towns of the Southern High-
lands and to others on the coast south of Port Kembla. In the great
majority of cases, including ten Municipalities and two Shires, sup-
plies are given in bulk, while a number of important industrial con-
sumers are served directly.
174
APPENDIX IX—SOUTH WESTERN AREA
Port Kembla System


Electricity from the power station is transmitted over 195 miles
of overhead lines. The population in the area served is about 38 000.
The present total installed capacity is 7 500 kW which is about
to be increased by 10 000 kW.
Floods at Btjrrinjuck
In a preliminary report on the Burrinjuck Dam dated 28th May,
1937, the opinion has been expressed that the flood which occurred in
the Murrumbidgee River in May, 1925, cannot be taken as the highest
flood that may be anticipated. In the same report it has been esti-
mated that the discharge beyond the dam would be at least 500 000
cusecs during such flood conditions as might be anticipated to occur at
rare intervals. The maximum discharge beyond the dam in 1925 was
174 000 cusecs.
Based on the observations during floods and particularly during
the flood in 1925, discharge rating curves have been calculated for
cross sections of the river at Power Stations Nos. 1 and 2. According
to the curves the water level at Power Station No, 1 will rise to ILL.
1017 at a discharge of 500 000 cusecs. In 1925 the high water level
rose to R.L. 1002 at a discharge of 174 000 cusecs. In Power Statioh
No. 1 the sills of the Avindows are at R.L. 1006 and the top of the
Avater-tight door at R.L. 1002. Assuming that 4 feet of stop logs could
be placed on top of the door, this power station may be kept in opera-
tion until the Avater level in the river rises to R.L. 1006 corresponding
to a discharge of about 230 000 cusecs.
At PoAver Station No. 2, which is now under construction, the
Avater level would rise to R.L. 1031 if the discharge beyond the dam
were 500 000 cusecs. The high water level observed at this power
station in 1925 Avas R.L. 1015. This poAver station is being made
water-tight up to the roof at R.L. 1019 corresponding to a discharge
of about 230 000 cusecs. On the other hand surges in the water level
are likely to occur, and in the event of a major flood water will be
discharged over the crest of the dam immediately above the power
house. The effect is difficult to estimate and it is probable that the
operation of the station will have to cease at a somewhat lower dis-
charge, beyond the dam, than that Avhich will flood PoAver Station
No. 1.
As will be realised it is necessary to take into account the
possibility, even if remote, of the operation of the tAvo hydro-electric
stations at Burrinjuck being entirely suspended.
GENERAL OUTLINE OF THE PROPOSED SOUTH
WESTERN SUPPLY SYSTEM
To develop adequate and economical power resources for the
requirements of the Port Kembla, Burrinjuck and Lithgow systems,
it is proposed that the two former systems be interconnected and
further connected to form the South Western System.
175
APPENDIX IX—SOUTH WESTERN AREA
General Outline of tlie Proposed South Western Supply System


For this purpose and to safeguard the supply of electricity to
the Burrinjuck system, should the power stations at the Burrinjuck
Dam be flooded, it is recommended that a single-circuit 132 kV trans-
mission line, together with the requisite transformers and switch-gear,
be constructed between Port Kembla and Burrinjuck power stations.
The length of the transmission line would be about 160 miles.
In order to allow transfer of power between the Burrinjuck and
Lithgow systems and to obtain a reliable and economical combined
system it is proposed that a hydro-electric power plant be constructed
at Wyangala, that a transmission line be built from Cowra to Orange
via this power station, and that the transmission line from Cowra be
extended to Forbes, Parkes, Peak Hill, Dubbo and Wellington, thereby
incorporating these towns in the proposed system.
The South Western System will be connected with Sydney by
three 66 kV railway transmission lines radiating from the city to
Port Kembla, Gfoulburn and Lithgow. In addition there will be a
connection at Goulburn to the 220 kV transmission line from the Snowy
hydro-electric scheme to Sydney.
To establish the South Western System as outlined in this report
we are of the opinion that it will be necessary to create the Central
Electricity Authority, as recommended in the report, to take over the
generating stations at Port Kembla, Burrinjuck and Lithgow as well as
the main transmission lines. The Central Authority would also be
responsible for the construction of the Wyangala hydro-electric station
and new main transmission lines.
The present arrangements for the retail supply of electricity
should in principle remain unaltered and in the hands of local Dis-
tributing Authorities who should be encouraged to extend their opera-
tions into the rural districts surrounding their respective load centres.
LOAD AND POWER DEMAND
Load
The diagrams of the combined loads of the Port Kembla,
Burrinjuck and Lithgow systems are shown on Plate 8. The load at
night time is comparatively high, which is partly due to industries at
Port Kembla using power for 24 hours of the day and to off-peak water
pumping on the Bnrrinjnck system. During each of the first five
working days of the week there are three peaks, except in winter when
•the day load is fairly constant. The annual maximum peak can be
expected at any time of the year.
The annual load factor was 47 per cent, in 1936.
Power Demand
The growth of the combined maximum demand on the Port
Kembla, Burrinjuck and Lithgow systems is shown on Plate 13.
Allowing for diversity the combined peak in 1936 is computed at
15 000 kW and the energy output was 61 million kWh. The increase
176
APPENDIX IX —SOUTH WESTERN AREA
Load and Power Demand


1936
1942
1947
Peak
Load
Power
Station
Output
Peak
Load
Power
Station
Output
Peak
Load
Power
Station
Output
Thous.
Thous.
Thous.
kW
kWh
kW
kWh
kW
kWh
Port Kembla system ; —
Present system
6 760
19 700
10 000
29 000
13 000
37 000
Major new consumers
9 600
29 000
10 000
30 000
Burrinjuck system: —
Present system
5 700
27 000
8 600
41 000
11 000
53,000
Goulburn and Captain’s Flat
Railway Electrification :
1 500*
5 300*
5 600
30 000
6 400
33 000
Port Kembla-
Burrinjuck system
.. .
10700
70 000
Lithgow system; —
Present system ...
3 560
If 200
5 400
22 000
6 800
27 000
Major new consumers ...
2 400
18 000
2 400
18 000
Western towns ...
1 300
3 900
2 300
7 000
3 200
10 000
Railway Electrification : ...
Lithgow system ....
4 800
27 000
5 600
31 000
Total...
Peak load for the South Western
18 820
70 100
48 700
203 000
69 100
309 000
System (with allowance for
diversity)
47 000
66 000
in load as represented by the moving average for all three systems
over the last three years has been about 1100 kW per annum. If the
demand should continue to increase at the same rate and a peak of 115
per cent, of the moving average be assumed, the annual increase of the
peak load in the present area of supply would be about 1 300 kW.
The power stations within these systems would also supply a
portion of the power for the proposed main railway electrification
between Sydney and Nowra, Goulburn and Lithgow. If carried out
according to the programme laid down by the Department of Railways
this electrification would load the systems with a further 5 000 kW in
five, and 15 000 kW in ten years. Furthermore, arrangements for
power supply to Goulburn and to new industries at Port Kembla,
Captain’s Flat and near Wellington have recently been made. The
demand from these new consumers should be 17 600 kW in about five,
and 18 800 kW in about ten years. New areas west of Lithgow may
also be served as suggested. Taking all these prospective loads into
account the combined peak load on the South Western System for
which provision will have to be made is likely to be 47 000 kW in 1942,
and 66 000 kW in 1947.
The actual loads in 1936 in the component parts of the South
Western System, and the prospective loads in 1942 and 1947, based on
figures supplied by the Departments concerned, are set out in Table I.
Table I
* Goulburn only
*59265—M
177
APPENDIX IX—SOUTH WESTERN AREA
Power Demand


TIE-LINE BETWEEN BURRINJUCK AND PORT KEMBLA
Comparison op Alternative Proposals
Before recommending’ the construction of a transmission line
between the Port Kembla and Bnrrinjnck generating stations two other
possibilities were taken into consideration, viz.:—
(1) the interconnection of the Bnrrinjnck and the Lithgow systems
by a tie-line adequate for the purpose;
(2) the construction of a fuel station at a suitable point in the
Burrinjuck system.
Both these possibilities were found less economical for reasons
stated hereunder.
The Burrinjuck plant is essentially an irrigation plant, the
generation of electric power being subordinate to the requirements of
irrigation, and therefore power can only be generated in proportion to
the amount of water released for irrigation purposes. It is clear
therefore that during the summer months when irrigation is in full
operation there is a much greater amount of power available from the
Burrinjuck power stations than in the winter months.
So far as the first alternative is concerned the existing trans-
mission lines of the Lithgow system and of the northern part of the
Burrinjuck system are of low transmission capacity, from the point of
view of interchange of power as the conductors have a small cross
sectional area. To obtain a transfer of such an amount of power as
would be required in the Burrinjuck system if the Burrinjuck power
stations were flooded, it would be necessary either to double or to
restring with heavier conductors 176 miles of transmission line and to
build at least 40 miles of new line.
Further the Lithgow system is at present comparatively small
and therefore unable to absorb as much of the surplus energy from
Burrinjuck during the summer months as the Port Kembla system.
So far as the second alternative is concerned a new fuel station
for the Burrinjuck system, situated so as to be able to serve additional
consumers, would require to be located somewhere towards the northern
end of the system and to have an installed capacity of, say, 12 000 kW.
Its capital cost would be in the neighbourhood of £3OO 000.
This alternative has the disadvantage that there would be no
possibility of absorbing, for many years to come, the surplus power
from Burrinjuck system available during the irrigation season, and
moreover the cost of generation would be comparatively high.
On the other hand the tie-line between Port Kembla and
Burrinjuck will have the advantage that by the time this tie-line can be
completed, i.e., in about 1939, a large quantity of energy could be trans-
ferred from Burrinjuck and absorbed in the Port Kembla system during
the irrigation season. As the tie-line must pass in the vicinity of
Coulburn, the necessity of building special transmission lines to serve
this City, the supply to which is to be undertaken, is obviated.
178
APPENDIX IX—SOUTH WESTERN AREA
Tie-line between Burrinjuck and Port Kembla


The Department of Works and Local Government are in negotia-
tion for the supply of power to a prospective undertaking at Captain’s
Flat, to the south-east of Canberra, and it is desirable that this supply
as well as the service to Canberra be safeguarded by supplying power
to the Goulburn-Canberra lino from the tie-line at Goulburn.
These considerations lead to the conclusion that the most satis-
factory scheme, both technically and economically, is to connect together
the Port Kembla and Burrinjuck systems in the way proposed and
decided upon.
Capacity of tie-line between Burrinjuck and Pout Kembla
To provide for future load development on the Burrinjuck
system and at Goulburn the proposed tie-line would require to have a
capacity of about 20 000 kW, and would have to be designed for 132 kV,
a voltage higher than any so far in use in New South Wales. Having-
regard to the voltage and elevation of the line above sea level the size
of the conductor is determined more by the corona voltage than by the
load to be carried. This consideration has led to the adoption for this
line of steel-cored aluminium conductors, each of 0.15 square inch copper
equivalent section.
Alterations to existing Power Station at Burrinjuck
It is proposed to choose at Burrinjuck a site well above flood
level on the right bank of the river for outdoor substation No. 2 to
accommodate the transformers and switchgear in connection with
Power House No. 2 and the outgoing lines transferred from outdoor
station No. 1. The terminal station for the 132 kV transmission tie-line
to accommodate the transformers and switchgear should be placed on
the same site. It is proposed to transfer some of the transformers
from the existing substation No. 1 to the site of substation No. 2, a new
transformer bank being installed in the former. All alterations should
of course be designed with due regard to flood conditions and to the
construction work to be carried out at the dam. With the completion
of the terminal station the present outgoing 66 kV lines from substation
No. 1 will be transferred to the new site and the 66 kV busbars of both
stations will be solidly connected together.
By these measures the supply to the Burrinjuck Power System
would be safeguarded, as in the event of a major flood the load on the
hydro-electric stations could be rapidly transferred to the Port Kembla
Power Station or some other power plant, which in the future, may be
connected to the tie-line.
Cafital Cost of Tie-line
For the tie-line the use of wooden polo construction and hori-
zontal flat spacing of conductors on a steel girder cross-arm is recom-
mended, the distance between conductors to be approximately 14 feet.
Either one or two steel earth wires should be carried throughout the
whole length of the line and each structure should be suitably earthed.
179
APPENDIX IX—SOUTH WESTERN AREA
Capital Cost of Tie-line


As the tie-line is of considerable importance and consists of a
single-circuit only, Petersen coils should be installed, one at Port
Kembla for the Port Kembla-Goulburn section, and the other at Bur-
rinjuck for the Burrinjuck-Gonlburn section, thereby reducing the
possibility of interruption to a minimum. The estimate provides for
the installation at each end of the line of duplicate transformers, each
of a capacity of 10 000 kVA. Space should be left in the substations at
Burrinjuck and Port Kembla for the installation of a third bank of
transformers of similar capacity. The transformers should be pro-
vided with on-load tap changing devices.
At the Goulburn substation two 12 000 kVA 3-phase three wind-
ing transformers for 132/66/11 kY will be installed, the 66 kV winding
of about 5 000 kYA capacity, being required for the supply to Canberra
and Captain’s Plat, and the 11 kY for supply to Goulburn. Pour 4 000
kVA reactors, or their equivalent, have been included for the compen-
sation of the line charging current during periods of light load and
would be connected to the 11 kV busbars. A building at Goulburn to
accommodate the control gear has been provided, and provision has
also been made for carrier current telephonic communication.
At prices ruling in August, 1937, the capital cost has been esti-
mated as follows:
£
Port Kembla terminal station (20 000 kVA) 55 000
Goulburn substation .. .. .. .. 97 000
Burrinjuck terminal station (20 000 kVA) .. 76 000
160 miles of 132 kV transmission line .. 192 000
Engineering and supervision .. .. 25 000
Contingencies .. .. .. .. 45 000
Total £490 000
Annual Cost and Revenue
With interest at 4£ per cent., depreciation at 3 per cent., and
operation and maintenance at 24 per cent, of the capital expenditure,
the annual cost would be £49 000.
The construction of the tie-line will result in certain economies
and additional revenues sufficient to cover the annual cost almost from
the inception. The following analysis of the economic results refers to
the year 1942.
(1) Supply to Goulburn and Captain's Flat
It is estimated that during the year 1942 the demand for bulk
supply at Goulburn and Captain’s Flat will be in the region of 5 600
kW, with an energy consumption of 27.5 million kWh at the consumers’
terminals. The gross revenue therefrom will be about £64 000. The
180
APPENDIX IX—SOUTH WESTERN AREA
Supply to Goulburn and Captain’s Flat


Feeder connections and transfer of Goulburn
£
£
generating- plant
Energy cost
4 000
5 600 kW at £2 per kW
11 000 000 kWh from fuel station at 0.3d. per
11 200
kWh
13 700
24 900
Total annual cost (exclusive of transmission)
£28 900
energy required will be provided from the Burrinjuck plant during the
irrigation season and from Port Kembla during the non-irrigation
period. The annual cost of supplying this energy, exclusive of cost of
transmission, is estimated as follows:
The balance of £35 100 between the annual gross revenue and
the annual cost estimated above is directly attributable to the provision
of the tie-line which makes it possible to supply the consumers with
water power during the major part of the year and steam power during
the non-irrigation season only.
(2) Energy transmitted from Burrinjuck to Port Kembla
During the irrigation season of the year 1942 there will be at
Burrinjuck, after provision for the energy requirements of the Burrin-
juck system, Goulburn and Captain’s Flat, a surplus amounting to 22
million kWh which can be transmitted to Port Kembla relieving the
latter station of the generation of 20 million kWh. The annual saving
in running costs at Port Kembla effected thereby and attributable to
the tie-line is estimated at £lO 000.
(3) Energy Transmitted from Port Kembla to the Burrinjuck
System
During the non-irrigation season in 1942 the energy require-
ments of the Burrinjuck system, exclusive of Goulburn and Captain’s
Flat, which are dealt with under clause (1), will under average water
conditions, exceed the amount available at Burrinjuck power station
by about 7 million kWh. When the tie-line is constructed this deficiency
will be made up by a supply from the Port Kembla station and the
value of this energy may be determined by estimating its cost from the
best alternative source. At present the deficiency in energy output of
Burrinjuck power station No. 1 during the non-irrigation season is
made up by a supply from the steam power station at Canberra. This
power station which is owned and operated by the Federal Govern-
ment has not sufficient capacity to supply the estimated deficiency even
before 1942.
If the tie-line were not built, this deficiency, as well as the supply
to Goulburn and Captain’s Flat, would have to be supplied from a fuel
station, either as an extension to the Canberra station or as a new
station, and would require to have a working capacity in 1942 of
approximately 9 000 kW, with an adequate standby.
181
APPENDIX IX—SOUTH WESTERN AREA
Energy Transmitted from Port Kembla to the Burrinjuck System


11l either of the above cases, the cost of such a station would be
approximately £27 per kW installed, or £32/10/- per kW of the output
of a station with 20 per cent, standby.
As the cost of transport of coal to this area is high, the capital
and running costs of this station would be approximately £3.25 per kW
of output plus 0.36 d. per kWh.
Disregarding the requirements of Goulburn and Captain’s Flat,
the amount of peak power which may be required for the present
Burrinjuck system in 1942 may be estimated at about 3 600 kW, exclud-
ing auxiliaries, so that the cost of generating the 7 million kWh would
be about —
£
3 750 kW at £3.25 12 200
71 million kWh at 0.36 d 11 200
£23 400
The cost of generation at Port Kembla, taking into account a
proportion of the capital charges and the special circumstances, may
be taken at 0.3 d. per kWh. At this rate, and allowing for losses, the
annual expenditure involved in making up the deficiency by taking a
supply from Port Kembla would be about £lO 000. It may therefore be
concluded that the difference between these annual expenditures,
namely £l3 400, may be taken as a set-off against the annual cost of the
tie-line.
(4) Summary
The total benefits resulting in 1942 from the provision of the tie-
line are therefore as follows:
£
Supply of electricity to Goulburn and Captain’s Flat 35100
Value of energy transferred to Port Kembla .. .. 10 000
Gain due to transfer of energy to Burrinjuck .. .. 13 400
£5B 500
Against this credit of £5B 500, the annual cost of the tie-line of
£49 000 is to be placed. It is evident that within a year or two of its
inception and quite apart from the fact that the line is a necessity for
reasons associated with the safeguarding or maintenance of supply,
the provision of the tie-line between Burrinjuck and Port Kembla is an
economic proposition. The tie-line conductors as recommended would
be capable of transmitting in either direction 20 000 kW which is ample
for reasonable future requirements. As the load on the combined
system increases beyond that estimated for 1942 the return to be
obtained from the provision of the tie-line will rise progressively.
182
APPENDIX IX—SOUTH WESTERN AREA
Summary


Conclusions
The above may be summarised as follows: —
(a) In view of the likely effects of a major flood at the Burrinjuck
Dam immediate steps are necessary to safeguard the supply
to the Burrinjuck system;
(b) Therefore the construction of a 132 kV transmission tie-line
between the Burrinjuck and Port Kembla power stations has
been recommended;
(c) The capital cost of the tie-line and substations is estimated at
£490 000 and the annual cost at £49 000;
(d) The annual credit which may reasonably be expected to result
from the construction of the tie-line is estimated at £5B 500
in the year 1942.
INTERCONNECTION OF BURRINJUCK AND LITHGOW
SYSTEMS AND EXTENSION TO THE WESTERN TOWNS
Introductory
An interconnecting tie-line between Cowra, the northernmost
point of the Burrinjuck system, and Blayney or Orange on the route of
the Lithgow-Wellington transmission line, has been the subject of dis-
cussion on many occasions.
The route distance between the two power stations at Burrin-
juck Dam and at Lithgow is 216 miles, and the intervening 66 kV
transmission lines, totalling some 176 miles, are of small cross-sectional
area (0.058 square inch copper equivalent). If a tie-line were erected
between the two systems, the interchange of power between the systems
would be limited to about 2 500 kW which could not be exceeded unless
the existing lines were either duplicated or re-strung with heavier
conductors.
With the interconnection of the Port Kembla and Burrinjuck
systems the Burrinjuck stations would supply base load power to the
combined systems during the irrigation season and peak load power
during the non-irrigation months. The Burrinjuck and Port Kembla
stations are estimated to be fully complementary to each other by the
year 1945 and no water power would be available after that time for
supply to the Lithgow system.
In view of these circumstances there is no object in making an
interconnection between Lithgow and Burrinjuck solely for an inter-
change of power. There are, however, other considerations which will
support a proposal to provide an interconnection in the near future.
Some 20 miles from Cowra there is an irrigation dam at Wyan-
gala where a certain amount of hydro-electric power can be generated.
Furthermore, north-west of Cowra is a group of towns the chief of
which are Forbes, Parkes, Peak Hill and Dubbo, referred to as the
Western Towns. These could be served with a transmitted supply
183
APPENDIX IX—SOUTH WESTERN AREA
Interconnection of Burrinjuck and Lithgow Systems


provided the two systems were adequately interconnected as an in-
tegral part of the proposed South Western System. Finally, it is to be
noted that the present line from Lithgow to Wellington will shortly be
fully loaded.
Wyangala Hydro-electric Scheme
A proposal to generate hydro-electric power at the Wyangala
Dam has been investigated and is dealt with in Appendix VII entitled,
“Wyangala Hydro-electric Schemo. ,, An outline of the scheme is
given hereunder.
It is proposed that there be installed at the dam a hydro-electric
power station containing two generating units of 5 000 kW each.
Owing to the draw of water for irrigation purposes the water
level in the reservoir varies during the year, with the result that the
proposed hydro-electric plant will operate under a head varying
between 160 and 123 feet. The output will also vary with the quantity
of water discharged for irrigation purposes and it is suggested that
the minimum discharge during the non-irrigation season should be 150
cusecs, on an average.
The output from the power station which can be utilized is limited
at present by the low capacity of the existing transmission lines from
Litligow to Orange, and from Burrinjuck to Cowra. Notwithstanding
this and the restrictions due to irrigation requirements it is estimated
that on an average 23 million kWh per annum could be generated and
transmitted. Further, provided the minimum discharge is fixed at 150
cusecs on an average, the plant will be able to supply 3 500 kW of
peak load in 1942 and 4 500 kW in 1947.
As the proposed hydro-electric station is situated about midway
between Burrinjuck and Litligow, the generating units will be designed
so that the generators can run as synchronous condensers. A syn-
chronous capacity of about 3 500 kVA will be required to maintain con-
stant voltage at Cowra under present conditions of loading.
The capital cost of the development, including a step-up trans-
former station, is estimated at £125 000. The annual cost is estimated
at £lO 000.
Transmission Lines
If this proposal is carried out, the Burrinjuck and Litligow
systems will be interconnected via the hydro-electric station at Wyan-
gala Dam, and transmission lines will also be erected to supply the
Western Towns.
The distances between the towns are very considerable and
except along the Lachlan Valley there is little load to be supplied in the
intervening territory. The cost of the transmission lines, which will
be designed for 66 kV, has been estimated as given in Table II and the
184
APPENDIX IX —SOUTH WESTERN AREA
Transmission Lines


Capital Cost of
Distances
Transmission Lines
and Substations
Miles
£
Wyangala to Cowra (2 circuits) ...
20
36 000
Cowra to Canowindra
24
26 000
Canowindra to Orange ...
38
34 000
Canowindra to Forbes
50
45 000
Forbes to Parkes ...
20
21 000
Parkes to Peak Hill
30
28 000
Peak Hill to Dubbo ... ... ...
44
42 000
Dubbo to Wellington
32
25 000
Total (route miles)
258
£257 000
1936
1942
1947
Peak
Energy
Peak
Energy
Peak
Energy
load
sold
load
sold
load
sold
Thous.
Thous.
Thous.
kW
kWh
kW
kWh
kW
kWh
Canowiudra
120
270
210
500
300
650
Dubbo ...
495
1 442
860
2 500
1 200
3 500
Forbes ...
260
612
460
1 100
650
1 500
Parkes ...
330
638
580
1 100
800
1 500
Peak Hill
105
200
190
400
250
500
Total ...
1 310
3 142
2 300
5 600
• 3 200
7 650
figures include the cost of engineering, local administration, and con-
tingencies. The line between Wyangala, Canowindra and Orange should
have conductors equal to approximately 0.1 sq. in. of copper.
Table II
Allowing for interest at 4i/> per cent., depreciation at 3 per cent.,
and operation at 2-| per cent., the annual cost of the transmission lines
included in Table II will be about £26 000.
Annual Cost and Revenue
The annual cost of the Wyangala hydro-electric scheme is esti-
mated at £lO 000 and the annual cost of the new transmission lines at
£26 000, making a total annual cost of £36 000.
The estimated loads in the Western Towns are set out in Table
111.
Table 111
The revenue of the Central Authority from bulk supply to the
Western Towns is estimated at £26 700 in 1942 and at £36 000 in 1.947,
based on a rate of £7 per kW per annum and 0.4 d. per kWh and allow-
ing for 12 per cent, losses in local distribution. The hulk supply rate
mentioned should be regarded as an average, the actual rates being
subject to negotiation.
Of the 23 million kWh generated during an average year at
Wyangala, 7 million kWh would be required in 1942 and 10 million kWh
in 1947, for the supply to the Western Towns, leaving a surplus of about
185
APPENDIX IX—SOUTH WESTERN AREA
Annual Cost and Revenue


1942
1947
Revenue or Credit—
£
£
Bulk Supply to the Western Towns
26 700
36 900
Surplus Energy fed into Lithgow or Burrinjuck Systems
7 000
5 700
Peak Power supplied from Wyangala to the Combined
System ... ... ...
3 600
3 600
Total
37 300
46 200
Annual Cost ...
36 000
36 000
Surplus
£1 300
£10 200
16 and 13 million kWh, respectively, which can be supplied to the Lith-
gow or the Burrinjuck system. Valuing this surplus at the Lithgow
power station coal cost, viz., 0.105 d. per kWh, the resulting credit will
be about £7 000 in 1942 and £5 700 in 1947.
As the peak-carrying capacity of Wyangala station is about
1 200 kW greater than the peak load of the Western Towns, both in
1942 and 1947, this surplus peak capacity can be utilized to assist the
other generating plants in the South Western System and the annual
value of this is estimated at £3 600.
The economic results, so far as the Central Authority is con-
cerned, are set out in Table IV.
Table IV
When considering the surplus arrived at above it should he borne
in mind that all the Western Towns have local generating plants, two
of the towns being served under franchise. No capital, however, has
been included in the estimate of cost for the acquisition of these gener-
ating stations, as it is expected that bulk supplies can be made avail-
able at rates considerably less than the present generating cost.
It may, however, be necessary to provide some capital for the purchase
of certain of the existing power stations.
Without the proposed connection between the Burrinjuck and
Lithgow systems, it would be necessary, owing to the conductors between
Lithgow and Orange being small, to duplicate this line in the near
future to meet the normal increase of load. The cost of such duplica-
tion is estimated at £65 000. If the proposals as outlined above are
carried out, however, the necessity for duplication of the Lithgow-
Orange line will not arise for many years.
Conclusions
The conclusions reached with regard to the proposed intercon-
nection of the Burrinjuck and Lithgow systems, and extension to the
Western Towns may be summarised as follows;
(1) A transmitted supply of electricity to the Western Towns, includ-
ing Forbes, Parkes, Peak Hill and Bubbo, cannot be efficiently
undertaken, for technical and economic reasons, unless the
Burrinjuck and Lithgow systems are interconnected;
186
APPENDIX IX —SOUTH WESTEEN AEEA
Conclusions


Plant
Capacity of Plant
Installed
Working
Reserve
Port Kembla—
kW
kW
kW
Existing Plant ... ...
4 500*
14 500
Plant on Order ...
10 000
Burrinjuck—
Existing Plant
10 000
\ 11 000
9 000
Plant on Order
10 000
/ (peak load)
Canberra—
Existing Plant
2 700
1 200
1 500
New Plant for Port Kcmbla-Burrinjuck System
required in 1942 to meet Estimated Load
15 000
' 7 500
7 500
Total, Port Kembla-Burrinjuck System ...
52 200
34 200
18 000
Lithgow—
Existing Plant
Plant on Order ... ... ...
5 000f
2 500
y 5 000
2 500
Wyangala
10 000
3 500
(peak load)
6 500
New Plant for Lithgow System required in 1942
to meet Estimated Load
7 500
7 500
Total, Lithgow System ...
25 000
16 000
9 000
(2) If the interconnection were made without the Wyangala hydro-
electric station it would be necessary to strengthen the existing
lines from Lithgow to Orange, and from Burrinjuck to Cowra;
(3) The establishment of a hydro-electric station at Wyangala with
conections to Burrinjuck and Lithgow systems at Cowra and
Orange, respectively, makes it possible to extend to the Western
Towns a transmitted supply which will be self-supporting by 1942;
(4) The power installation at Wyangala would obviate, for many years
to come, the necessity for augmenting the lines from Lithgow to
Orange and from Burrinjuck to Cowra.
GENERATING CAPACITY OF THE SOUTH WESTERN
SYSTEM
After the installation of plant now on order and after the con-
struction of the proposed hydro-electric station at Wyangala the
capacity of the South Western System in 1942 and 1947 will be as set
out in Tables V and VI respectively. The additional capacity required
to meet the estimated loads in the years mentioned is also included in
the Tables.
Table V
kW
fPort Kembla-Burrinjuck System ... ... ... 33 000
Lithgow System, including Railway Electrification ... 14 000
Lithgow System, if in emergencies railway load is
[_ supplied from spare plant in Sydney ... ... 9 200
Estimated load in
1942
* Excluding 3 000 kW of plant displaced
1 Excluding 2 500 kW. of plant displaced
187
APPENDIX IX—SOUTH WESTERN AREA
Generating Capacity of the South Western System


Plant
Capacity of Plant
Installed
Working
Eeserve
kW
kW
kW
Port Kembla—
Existing Plant
4 500
14 500
Plant on Order
10 000
Burrinjuck—
Existing Plant
10 000
\ 12 000
8 000
Plant on Order
10 000
/ (peak load)
Canberra —
Existing Plant
2 700
1 200
1 500
Additional capacity of Port Kembla-Burrinjuck
system required in 1947 to meet estimated
load, including that of railway electri-
fication ... ...
30 000
22 500
7 500
Total, Port Kembla-Burrinjuck system
67 200
50 200
17 000
Lithgow —
Existing plant
Plant on order
5 000
2 500
y 5 000
2 500
Wyangala ...
10 000
4 500
(peak load)
5 500
New plant for Lithgow system required in 1947
to meet estimated load
15 000
7 500
7 500
Total, Lithgow system
32 500
17 000
15 500
Estimated load in 1947, in-
cluding railway electrifi-*
cation.
Estimated load in 1947, if in
emergencies railway load
is supplied from spare
plant in Sydney.
Table VI
kW
f Port Kembla-Burrinjuck Systems ... ... 49 000
ALithgow System, including Western Towns 17 000
fPort Kembla-Burrinjuck Systems ... 39 000
Lithgow System, including Western Towns 12 000
The working capacity of the hydro-electric stations has been esti-
mated with due regard both to the quantity of water available and to
the peak loads of the systems. Owing to the two existing turbines in
Power Station No. 1 at Burrinjuck being connected to the same pipe
line the actual reserve capacity at Burrinjuck will be about 3 000 kW
when the peak load is 12 000 kW. Apart from the supply to the Western
Towns the reserve capacity of Wyangala hydro-electric station can be
utilized to a limited degree only until the transmission line from
Orange to Lithgow is strengthened to carry more power than at present.
These facts have been taken into account when considering the reserve
capacity of the South Western System.
The main railway electrification proposal provides for three
6G kV transmission lines from Sydney connected to the South Western
System at Port Kembla, Moss Vale, Goulburn and Lithgow. Under
normal conditions the railway loading will be supplied in definite pro-
portions from the power stations in the Sydney and from those
in the South Western System, but each railway transmission line will
188
APPENDIX IX—SOUTH WESTERN AREA
Generating Capacity of the South Western System


be designed to transmit the full load for the corresponding railway
either from Sydney or from Port Kembla, Goulburn and Lithgow, as
the case may be, and the suggested conductor sizes for this purpose
are given in Appendix 111.
There must be sufficient stand-by plant'at either end to enable
this to be done, but the spare plant requirements can be divided between
tlie Sydney and South Western Systems only within certain limits.
In order to safeguard the supply and avoid the necessity of
carrying excess stand-by plant in the South Western System in 1917,
however, the G 6 kV line from Sydney to Port Kembla, which is at a
reasonable distance from Sydney for an efficient transmission of a large
amount of power at GG kV, could bo of sufficient size to enable the load-
ings on both the Goulburn and Nowra lines to be taken over by the
Sydney System, or the Port Kembla System by means of the Burrin-
juck tie-line, in case of a breakdown in either system on the Railway
transmission line.
The Lithgow station, however, should have sufficient stand-by
plant to enable it to take over the whole of the railway loading on
that section in case of a transmission line fault near Sydney or for
other reasons.
As will be gathered from Table V, before 1942 Port Kembla
Station will have had to be extended by 15 000 kW of new plant. In
the event of the Burrinjuck plant being put entirely out of use, there
will remain enough capacity in the South Western System to meet the
system peak load in 1942.
As regards Lithgow it will be seen that before 1942 the station
will have had to be extended by a new generating set of 7 500 kW, and
a second set of similar size will be required before 1947.
From Table VI it will be seen that, to meet the prospective load
of 49 000 kW in 1947 on the Port Kembla-Burrinjuck System, it will
be necessary to provide additional working capacity to the extent of
about 15 000 kW over and above that required in 1942.
This additional requirement could best be met by power trans-
mitted from the Snowy River hydro-electric scheme if this is under-
taken. Two banks of transformers at Goulburn, connected to the 220
kV transmission line, are included in the estimates for the proposed
Snowy River Scheme. In emergencies, reserve power will therefore be
available for the South Western System at Goulburn, transmitted either
from Sydney or from the Snowy River hydro-electric scheme, where-
ever spare generating plant may be available.
If the Snowy River hydro-electric scheme is not undertaken, the
future load on the Port Kembla-Burrinjuck System will have to be met
by additional plant installed at Port Kembla. As the present power
station at this place will have reached the limit of its capacity by the
extension required in 1942, additional capacity can only be provided by
the construction of an entirely new generating station, for which it will
be necessary to provide, in the initial stage, circulating water and other
facilities for an ultimate capacity of, say, 100 000 kW.
189
APPENDIX IX—SOUTH WESTERN AREA
Generating Capacity of the South Western System




APPENDIX X
TO REPORT OF 1937 BY RENDEL, PALMER
& TRITTON ON ELECTRICAL DEVELOP-
MENT IN NEW SOUTH WALES
SUPPLY OF ELECTRICITY IN THE
NORTH EASTERN AREA
(See also Appendix VI and Plates 2 and 24)
INTRODUCTORY
One of the most fertile districts in New South Wales is the
closely settled north coast portion, lying* between the Queensland
border in the north and the Macleay River in the south. The chief
industries in this district, which extends some 175 miles along* the
coast, are dairy farming, fruit-growing and sugar cultivation.
West of this coastal district and separated from it by the main
Coastal Range is a second fertile territory, referred to as the New
England Tableland, stretching from Tenterfield in the north almost to
Tamworth in the south.
In this Appendix these two territories are collectively referred
to as the North Eastern Area.
In the major portion of the coastal district electricity is sup-
lied by the Clarence River County Council, which owns and operates a
hydro-electric power station at Nymboida, an oil engine station at
Lismore, and an extensive network of transmission lines.
In the same district there are also other generating authorities
and companies serving smaller areas such as the Electric Construction
Company of Australia (supplying Ballina and three Shires) and
Mullumbimby and Murwillumbah Municipal Councils in the north, and
Dorrigo Shire and the Kempsey Electric Light Company in the south.
The most important electricity supply authority south of the
New England Tableland is Tamworth Municipal Council, and further
north generating plants for local supply are installed in Armidale,
Gnyra, Glen Lines, Inverell and Tenterfield.
VISIT TO NORTH -EASTERN AREA
In order to examine tlie conditions governing* the development
of electricity supply in the North Eastern Area, and to form an opinion
as to the most suitable lines on which to plan for future developments,
representatives of the Consulting* Engineers have visited the district.
During* their tour the Clarence River County Council hydro-electric
power station at Nymboida and oil engine power plant at Lismore were
visited, and discussions took place with the Chairman and Chief Offi-
cers of the County Council. The question of the supply of electricity
191


was also discussed in general terms with the Mayors and leading offi-
cers of the Municipalities of Casino, Lismore, Mullumbimby and Mur-
willumbah, as well as with the President and other representatives of
the Tweed Shire Council.
The Consulting Engineers would like to express their apprecia-
tion of the courtesy extended by the representatives of these authori-
ties in placing all available information at their disposal.
The municipal power stations at Mullumbimby and Murwillum-
bah were visited, as was also the power station belonging to the Elec-
tric Construction Company of Australia, at Ballina.
In view of the proposal by the Tweed Shire Council to enter into
an agreement for electricity supply with the City Electric Light Com-
pany of Brisbane, the representatives of the Consulting Engineers
visited Brisbane and discussed this matter with the officials of the com-
pany. While there, the opportunity was taken to inspect some of the
typical rural developments carried out by this company in South
Queensland.
Subsequently, a visit was paid to the New England Tableland
(Tenterfield, Glen limes, Armidale and Tamworth) in order to form
an opinion as to the potential value of this district as a market for
electricity, and to ascertain the possibility of connecting it to a major
supply system, thereby extending the service into new territory.
PRESENT SUPPLY OF ELECTRICITY
The main transmission lines in the North Eastern Area are
shown on Plate 2 and technical data regarding the more important
authorities in the area are given hereunder:—
Clarence River County Council
As previously mentioned, the principal supply authority on the
North Coast is the Clarence River County Council. The County
Council, which is constituted by the Municipalities of Grafton, South
Grafton and Ulmarra, and the Shires of Copmanhurst (portion only),
Nymboida and Orara, began operations in 1924. Under agreements of
fixed duration the council subsequently extended its retail operations
to the Shire of Harwood and the Municipality of Maclean, and there-
after to the Shires of Dorrigo (portion only), Bellingen, Nambucca and
Terania. Electricity in bulk is supplied to the Municipalities of Lismore
and Casino, and arrangements for retail distribution in Kyogle Shire
and for supplementary bulk supplies to Mullumbimby and the Electric
Construction Company at Ballina have recently been concluded. The
total area at present served is about 6 200 square miles with a population
of 76 000.
192
APPENDIX X—NORTH EASTERN AREA
Present Supply of Electricity


Tlie greater part of the energy is generated at Nymboida hydro-
electric power station on the Nymboida River. The head utilized is
220 feet and the total installed capacity is 3 200 kW. Two further
units of 800 kW each are at present being installed. The small storage
above the dam provides for diurnal regulation only.
In the north the Council owns and operates a reserve power
station at Lismore with oil engine sets having a total installed capacity
of 1 500 kW which is being extended by 1 950 kW. The stations at
Nymboida and Lismore are connected by 90 miles of 66 kV transmission
line, whilst in addition there are 350 miles of transmission lines of lower
voltage with the necessary substations and distribution network.
The extensions into areas surrounding the county district are
indicative of considerable enterprise on the part of the County Council.
On the principle of similar rates of charge for both urban and rural
services within the county district, the County Council, with commend-
able foresight, has made available a supply to a very large part of
the rural settlement within the county district. Outside the county
district, the Council has found it necessary to maintain higher charges
for retail supply.
It may be mentioned that considerable difficulty is being experi-
enced by the Council in financing extensions of its retail system outside
the county district, and it appears that only by re-constitution of the
County Council Authority is the difficulty likely to be overcome.
Municipality of Tam worth
A pioneer in electricity supply, the Municipal Council of Tam-
worth owns and operates a steam power plant for supplying the
Municipality. Electricity in bulk or retail is also supplied to the Muni-
cipality of Manilla, the Peel Shire including the town of Werris Creek,
and the Shires of Cockburn and Mandowa. The Municipal Council has
been active in extending rural supplies to surrounding villages, and
along the Peel River. The area of supply is about 2 600 square miles,
serving a population of 25 000.
The system consists of 72 miles of transmission lines nnd a
considerable rural reticulation system. The installed capacity of the
generating plant is 2 300 kW and this is about to be increased by 2 000
kW.
Other Supply Authorities
In the various other towns previously mentioned there are small
local supply authorities. The generating stations in these towns, how-
ever, will not be able to cope in an efficient way with the normal growth
of loading in the districts. They are not of the type which can be
extended to produce cheap electricity as their prime movers are oil or
suction gas engines. For this reason very little has been done by these
*59205—N
193
APPENDIX X—NORTH EASTERN AREA
Other Supply Authorities


authorities in extending electricity supply to their rural districts. The
Municipality of Armidale, which has recently acquired the property of
the City of Armidale Electric Supply Company, whose franchise expired
last year, is now contemplating rural reticulation and desires sanction
to supply Uralla and Walcha.
LOAD AND POWER DEMAND
The load diagrams for the Clarence Elver County Council
system are shown on Plate 9. The annual peak load may occur at any
time of the year except between the Ist and Bth, and the 33rd and
40th week of the year. The fall in loading during the latter period
appears to be due to the seasonal reduction in the output of the dairying
industry.
The daily load factor for an ordinary week day (Monday to
Friday) averages about 67 per cent, and the weekly load factor varies
between 54 and 64 per cent. The annual load factor appears to have
improved slightly during the past five years and was 52 per cent, in
1936. This is higher than is usual in rural districts of New South
Wales, duo probably to the extensive dairying in the area.
The growth of the maximum demand on the Clarence River
County Council system is shown on Plate 14. In June, 1937, the peak
load was 3 500 kW and the energy output in 1936 was 14 million kWh.
The increase in load over the last three years as represented by the
moving average was about 400 kW per annum corresponding to a peak
load increase of about 450 kW per annum.
Should the power demand continue to increase at the same rate
as during the past three years in this area as well as in other areas
referred to in this Appendix, the total peak load in the North Eastern
Area would be about 12 000 kW in 1942 and about 17 000 kW iu 1947.
Such an increase in load, however, would correspond to an annual rate
of increase of about 12 per cent., on an average, of the load of each
preceding year during the first 5 years, and to about 7 per cent, during
the subsequent 5 years. These figures are comparatively high, and
taking into account that the new areas to be supplied differ somewhat
from the areas supplied by the Clarence River County Council, and
that the last three years have been characterised by a remarkable pros-
perity which may be followed by years of less prosperity, it seems
advisable for the purpose of conservative financial estimates to refer
the abovementioned figures to the year 1943 and 1949 respectively.
The actual load in 1936 in the various districts of the North
Eastren Area and the prospective loads in 1943 and 1949 in the same
districts, including anticipated new rural consumers, are set out in
Table I.
194
APPENDIX X—NORTH EASTERN AREA
Load and Power Demand


1936
1943
1949
(Actual)
(Prospective)
(Prospective)
Peak
Energy
Peak
Energy
Peak
Energy
Load
Sales
Load
Sales
Load
Sales
kW
Thous.
kWh
kW
Thous.
kWh
kW
Thous.
kWh
Lismore and Terania ...
1 090
3 972
2 050
7 410
2 800
10 300
Casino and Tomki
250
942
640
2 280
1 000
3 600
Central District (Clarence River C.C.)
1250
4 611
1850
6 880
2 500
9 400
Southern District (Clarence River C.C.)
520
1 196
870
2 000
1 250
2 940
Mullumbimby ...
330
900
675
1 850
900
2 450
Ballina (present supply area)
328
758
800
1 900
1 200
2 800
Kyogle ...
200
545
415
1 060
550
1 400
Tamworth
1 314
4 990
2 250
8 500
3 200
12 000
New England Towns and Dorrigo
1 314
2 732
2 690
5 350
3 850
7 500
Total
6 596
20 646
12 240
37 230
17 250
52 390
In preparing’ this Table regard lias been had, as far as possible,
to the varying extent to which the different districts and municipalities
have been electrified up to the present.
TABLE I
MAIN TECHNICAL FEATURES OF A NORTH EASTERN
SUPPLY SYSTEM
In order to cope with the expected growth of power demand in
the North Eastern Area, covering also such new districts within the
area as might be supplied with electricity if a suitable source of cheap
power be found, the establishment of a safe and economic supply system
is required. In reviewing existing supplies it has already been,
remarked that in several small towns within the area the existing
generating plants have small oil or suction gas engines only, and are
not of the type which can be extended to produce cheap electricity to
cope with the normal growth of demand in the surrounding rural
districts. If, on the other hand, electricity were to be supplied in bulk
from a main system, this would obviously facilitate the supply of cheap
electricity to the towns and accelerate the development in the surround-
ing rural districts. For these purposes the following proposals are
submitted for the creation of a North Eastern Supply System covering
practically the whole area.
As all the present systems supply 50-cycle alternating current,
the interconnection can bo carried out without difficulty and without
alteration to consumers’ existing installations.
Electricity for this area will be generated at Nymboida hydro-
electric station, Lismore station extended with steam plant as herein-
after proposed, Tamworth steam station, and a new hydro-electric
station utilizing the water of the Styx River.
195
A'PPKNIriX X—NORTH EASTERN AREA
Main Technical Features of a North Eastern Supply System


Tlie Clarence River County Council’s system will be inter-
connected with Tamworth through the proposed new hydro-electric
station and high tension transmission lines will be extended to Glen
limes via Armidale, Guyra, with a branch line to Inverell.
Tenterfield, owing to its distance from Glen limes, and the small
prospect of loading in the intervening territory, has not been included
in the scheme. The Tweed Shire is also excluded, as the supply to this
Shire should preferably be obtained from the City Electric Light Com-
pany, of Brisbane. This matter is referred to later.
The new power plants, and the interconnection of the power
generating systems within the area, referred to above, are described
in the following.
LISMORE STEAM STATION
As the peak load on the present Clarence River County Council
system has increased during’ the last three years at the rate of about
450 kW per annum, and as the proposal outlined in this report will take
some time to become effective, it is necessary for the Council to pro-
ceed at once with its plans for extension of the generating capacity to
meet the prospective load in 1939. The station at Nymboida cannot be
developed for additional primary power, and no further extension
of oil engine plant should be made at Lismore. Extensions at the latter
place, should, in our opinion, be in the form of steam plant dependent
on coal, thus rendering the station independent of overseas fuel supply
sources.
At the Lismore site two steam turbo-alternators, each of a capa-
city of 2 500 kW, together with the necessary boilers and auxiliary
plant, should be installed. One of these generating sets should be in-
stalled in 1939, and the other at a later date, depending on the speed
of construction of the hydro-electric station on the Styx River. The
plant should be designed for moderately quick starting, although, as
the oil engine plant would be still in existence, it is not advisable that
efficiency should be unduly sacrificed thereby.
The location which has been proposed for this station is on the
banks of the Richmond River which, if it rose again to the highest
recorded level, would partially flood the site. While similar conditions
have been satisfactorily dealt with elsewhere, the choice of a
site at a higher level might well be investigated as, in view of the
37 feet variation in water level, any arrangement for drawing cir-
culating water direct from the river would not only involve costly civil
engineering work, but might become unreliable under spate conditions,
when quantities of silt and debris are brought down. Moreover, high
lift pumps would be called for to deal with low water conditions with-
out full siphonic assistance, while if no external source of electric supply
were available in an emergency the turbines would have to be started
ap non-condensing, which is undesirable and consequently a system
employing cooling towers may be preferred.
196
APPENDIX X—NORTH EASTERN AREA
Lismore Steam Station


As there would presumably be no difficulty in obtaining the small
amount of make-up water from either a borehole or deep open well or
river well, cooling towers in conjunction with “non-basement’ ’ geared
turbo-alternators would form the simplest and most reliable combina-
tion, as this type of generating plant drives its own circulating pump,
and by a simple by-pass connection can be started up in a few minutes
under condensing conditions.
With single-stage “ bled ’’-steam feed-water heating the tem-
perature of the condensate can be raised to 150 deg. F. and, as high
thermal efficiency is not called for, feed water economisers could be
dispensed with.
The power station should be laid out for two turbo-alternators,
three water-tube boilers and two concrete cooling towers, the initial
installation comprising:—
Quo Turbo-alternator of 2 500 kW;
Two Boilers (one as standby for overhauls and repairs); and
One Cooling Tower.
A simple steel-framed building, either as an extension of the
existing building or separate, and capable of housing the ultimate in-
stallation of two generating units and three boilers, would be erected
at the outset, together with a suction culvert for connecting the two
cooling toAvers.
The estimated cost (in Australian money) of the initial installa-
tion erected complete, based on prices ruling in August, 1937, would be
approximately as folloAvs:—
£
Tavo Avater-tube boilers 30 000/37 500 lb. per hour com-
plete Avith chain-grate stokers, self-supporting steel
stack, fan and flues .. .. .. .. .. 35 000
One 2 500 kW geared turbo-alternator and accessories .. 15 000
Pipe-Avork, tanks, feed pumps, borehole pump, etc. .. 5 000
Steel-framed building Avith turbine room crane .. .. 7 500
SAvitch-gear, station transformer, Aviring and cabling .. 2 000
Foundations and preparation of site .. .. .. 6 000
Reinforced-concrete cooling toAver for 250 000 g.p.h., cul-
vert, etc. .. .. .. .. .. .. • • 9 000
Engineering ~ .. .. .. .. .. .. 4 700
Sundries, spares and contingencies, 10 per cent . . '. . 8 000
Interest during construction .. .. .. . • . • 2 000
Total £94 200
The cost of completing the station by the addition of one boiler,
one turbo-alternator, and the second cooling toAver, Avould at present-
day prices be in the neighbourhood of £45 000,
With plant of the size and type indicated, when used as a peak
load station operating at full rated capacity for about two hours a day,
the coal consumption including banking and other losses Avould average
197
APPENDIX X—NORTH EASTERN AREA
Lismore Steam Station


about 3 lb. per kWh sent out. Under base-load operation the coal con-
sumption will be appreciably lower. The make-up water required for
cooling towers and boilers should not exceed 2-£ gallons per kWh or
25 000 gallons per day for the completed station when operating under
the conditions assumed.
STYX-GEORGES CREEK HYDRO-ELECTRIC SCHEME
The feasibility of generating hydro-electric power on the Styx,
Oaky, Chandler and Wollomombi Rivers, all of which are favourably
located for the supply of electricity to the North Eastern Area, has
been investigated and is dealt with in Appendix VI entitled “Styx
River Hydro-electric Schemes.”
From a comparison it is concluded that the most favourable
project is the Styx-Georges Creek Scheme utilizing a gross head of
1 747 feet between the Styx River and the Little Styx Creek, a tributary
of Georges Creek.
This scheme will consist of a dam about 52 feet high at Panton’s
Point If miles east of the Styx bridge, a tunnel If miles long in a
south-easterly direction ending on the Little Styx spur close to the
Little Styx Creek, and a pipe line 4 700 feet long leading down the spur
to a power station at the creek. One pipe line will be installed to which
will be connected two turbines and generators, each of a capacity of
4 000 kW. Close to the power station, an out-door transformer station
will be erected containing transformers, high tension circuit breakers
and other equipment. The capital cost of the scheme, allowing for
interest during construction, has been estimated at £520 000, and the
annual cost, including interest on capital and depreciation, at £37 000.
When the system loading has reached 20 000 kW, the amount of
peak power which, during extreme drought periods, can be relied upon
from the Styx-Georges Creek Scheme, combined with the Nymboida
hydro-electric plant, is estimated at 10 800 kW, and the average annual
output of energy from the Styx-Georges Creek Scheme is estimated at
42 million kWh.
At a future date the plant could be enlarged by the addition of
one more generating unit served by an additional pipe line.
INTERCONNECTION OF THE COMPLETE SYSTEM
The Styx-Georges Creek development, if proceeded with, would
provide adequately and efficiently for the normal expansion of the load
in the present area of the Clarence River County Council and in the
New England Tableland to which reference has been made. It is
therefore suggested that from the Styx-Georges Creek Power Station
two transmission lines should be constructed, one 70 miles long to
connect with the Nymboida Power Station, and a second line 90 miles
long running in the opposite direction to connect, via Armidale and
Uralla, with the existing steam station at Tamworth. There would
198
APPENDIX X—NORTH EASTERN AREA
Interconnection of the Complete System


Installed
Working
Reserve
capacity
capacity
capacity
kW
kW
kW
Tamworth steam station
4 300
1
Lismore—
L 9 200
3 550
Oil engine station ...
3 450
f base
Steam station (proposed) ...
5 000
J load.
Nymboida hydro-electric station
4 800
1 10,800
2 000
Styx-Georges Creek hydro-electric station
(proposed) ...
8 000
y peak
J load.
25 550
20 000
5 550
thus be an interconnecting transmission line 160 miles long, designed
for 66 kV, linking the component parts of the system with the
Styx-Georges Greek hydro-electric station lying approximately mid-
way. From this transmission line, at a point near Armidale, a
branch at the same voltage would connect with Guyra and Glen Innes,
a distance of 60 miles. From Glen Innes, a 33 kY transmission line
would connect with Inverell 40 miles away. These extensions would
form a complete connected system of transmission throughout the
north-eastern area from Lismoro and Casino in the north to Tamworth
in the south-west.
As the Municipality of Tamworth already has a transmission
line in operation in the direction of Quirindi, the future may see Tam-
worth connected via Muswellbrook to the Newcastle system, as there
is a considerable potential demand between these two points. At the
moment, however, there does not appear to be justification for an exten-
sion in this direction.
The Clarence River County Council has had under consideration
the possibility of extending its transmission lines further south to
Ivempsey and the Macleay Shire. There is no reason why Kempsey
should not be supplied from the North Eastern System, should
mutually satisfactory terms be arranged. In this event it is probable
that the 66kV line would be extended southwards to meet the trans-
mission line from Newcastle, as and when the load justifies the expendi-
ture, This would assist continuity of supply in the coastal area and
enable load to be transferred from one system to the other without
parallel operation.
GENERATING CAPACITY OF THE NORTH
EASTERN SYSTEM
After the installation of plant now on order, and after the con-
struction of the proposed new generating stations, the installed capacity
of the North Eastern Supply System will be as set out in Table 11. The
working capacity of the plant during a drought year is also given in
the same Table.
Table II
199
APPENDIX X—NORTH EASTERN AREA
Generating Capacity of the North Eastern System


Energy in kWh to be
generated
1943
1949
By water power from Nymboida and Styx-Georges Creek
stations
By fuel pow r er from Lismore and Tamwortb stations
43 500 000
2 500 000
58 000 000
7 000 COO
Total energy required
46 000 000
65 000 000
With the Styx-Georges Creek Scheme in operation and the first
steam generating unit installed at Lismore, there should be sufficient
plant to meet a system load of about 17 500 kW, which, according to
the prospective load set out in Table I, will be reached about 1949.
When the system load has reached 20 000 kW, the working
capacity of the hydro-electric stations combined as peak load stations
will be 10 800 kW in a drought year, and together with the second
generating unit installed at Lismore and the plant at Tamworth this
would be sufficient to meet the prospective load on the whole system
of 20 000 kW.
Subsequently any increase of the load could conveniently be
met by a combination of more steam power plant (either at Lismore
or at Tamworth) and an enlargement of the Styx-Georges Creek
Station.
Normally the hydro-electric plants will carry the base load and
the steam plants will be utilized for the peaks only. It has been esti-
mated that, during a year of average flow in the rivers, the energy
required can be obtained as set out in Table 111.
Table 111
CENTRAL ADMINISTRATION OF THE NORTH
EASTERN SYSTEM
The scheme of electricity supply to the North Eastern Area, as
outlined in this Appendix, is based on the formation of a Central Elec-
tricity Authority, as recommended in the report, to take over genera-
tion and main transmission.
So far as the North Eastern Area is concerned, the Central
Authority would acquire by agreement the water power station at
Nymboida and the oil engine and steam stations at Lismore, all be-
longing to the Clarence River County Council. At the same time it
would take over and operate the 66 kY transmission line between Nym-
boida and Lismore, the 33 kY line from Nymboida to Maclean via
South Grafton, and the 33 kY line from Nymboida to Bellingen Shire
via Coif’s Harbour, making a total of 168 miles of main transmission
lines, with the accompanying transformer substations.
200
APPENDIX X—NORTH EASTERN AREA
Central Administration of the North Eastern System


These transfers would enable the Central Authority to assume
responsibility for making available to the distribution districts, at the
appropriate voltage in each case, the necessary electrical energy in
bulk, to be retailed in these districts by the Distributing Authorities
referred to under the next heading.
DISTRIBUTING AUTHORITIES
As recommended in the report, Distributing Authorities should
be formed to retail electricity. Depending upon local conditions it may
be found desirable either:—
(1) to group together in one district of supply one or more Shires
with their Municipalities as a joint distributing authority for
the district; or
(2) to constitute the most important Municipality in a geographic-
ally detached district into a distributing authority for that
whole district.
In the first case the ultimate responsibility would be with the
ratepayers of the whole constituent area. In the second case this
responsibility would devolve upon the ratepayers of the Municipality
only and care should therefore be taken that this form of organisation
is employed only where the revenue and the assets within the Muni-
cipal area are appreciably larger than those outside that area.
The same consideration should be applied in determining the
constitution of the Distributing Authorities in the coastal area.
Area Served by Clarence River County Council
It is suggested that the area served by the County Council, with
the adjoining coastal territory, should be divided into (say) seven dis-
tribution districts, the Distributing Authority in each district pur-
chasing electricity in bulk from the Central Authority and retailing it
within the boundaries of the district. In some cases the district would
comprise that of the Municipal Council and the immediately surround-
ing rural territory, whilst in others it would consist of one or more
Shires suitably grouped. In each case the district boundaries would
require to be so delineated as to promote efficient distribution and ade-
quate service to the rural communities. It seems that the Councils
concerned are very willing to undertake the extension of their distri-
bution systems into rural territory, recognising as they do the import-
ance of a contented rural community as a factor in the prosperity
of the municipality.
It would be a function of the proposed Central Authority to
encourage and energetically assist the Distributing Authorities with
regard to the technical and financial problems involved in the expansion
of their services in the direction above indicated.
201
APPENDIX X—NORTH EASTERN AREA
Area Served by Clarence River County Council


It is suggested that the area of the County Council, with the
adjoining territory, be divided into the following distribution districts:
1. Kyogle Shire;
2. Lismore and Terania Shire;
3. Casino and Tomki Shire;
4. Mullumbimby and .Byron Shire;
5. Ballina and the present franchise area which includes
Gundurimba Shire;
6. The present constituent area of the Clarence River County
Council, namely the Municipalities of Grafton, South Grafton and
Ulmarra and the Shires of Copmanhurst, Nymboida and Orara, to
which should be added the Municipality of Maclean and the Shire
of Harwood, all forming the central district of the County Council;
and
7. Dorrigo, Bellingen and Kambucca Shires designated the
Southern District of the Clarence River County Council System.
The Municipality of Ballina is served by a private company
holding a franchise the terms of which provide for possible acquisition
of the company’s assets by the local authority during specified years.
Early in 1938, and again in 1942, the Ballina Council will have an
opportunity to acquire the generating station and the distribution sys-
tem. In the event of this taking place, the Shire of Gundurimba should
be transferred to the distribution district of the Lismore Council,
leaving the remainder of the company’s area, namely Tintenbar
Shire and Woodburn Shire, together with the Ballina Municipality,
to be served by the Ballina Council or some other appropriately
constituted Distributing Authority.
It is to be noted that the Clarence River County Council has
recently purchased the power plant at Kyogle and is proposing to
proceed with the reticulation of the Shire. There is no reason why
this work should not proceed, as it will not interfere with the carrying
out of the general scheme as outlined above.
Tam worth and Armidale
In the case of Tamworth and district, the Municipal Council
should continue as the distribution authority to retail electricity and
probably also to supply in bulk as at present.
It is understood that the City of Armidale is now contemplating
bulk electricity supply to Uralla and Walcha, and should suitable
arrangements be completed there would appear to be no reason why
the work should not proceed.
T weed Shire
The fertile valley of the Tweed River is an area isolated from
its southern neighbour by a considerable strip of country in which
little or no demand for electricity exists at present, or is likely to
202
APPENDIX X—NORTH EASTERN AREA
Tweed Shire


arise in the near future. In the centre of this area is the town of
Murwillumbah, the electrical requirements of which are served by a
municipally-owned steam plant located there. It is doubtful whether
this station could be extended to serve the Shire on a basis competitive
with other sources of supply.
The Tweed Shire Council has in recent years negotiated with
the Electric Construction Company of Australia at Ballina, the Clarence
River County Council, and the City Electric Light Company, Brisbane,
with a view to obtaining an inexpensive and efficient supply of elec-
tricity in the Shire. The several possibilities having been examined,
it seems that the most economical solution would be for the Tweed
Shire to be supplied from Brisbane, and that this will not adversely
affect electricity supply in any part of the State. Therefore the Tweed
Shire Council should continue their negotiations with a view to arriving
at an agreement with the City Electric Light Company for the retailing
of electricity in their Shire. No agreement should be concluded, how-
ever, without a provision to the effect that any statutory distributing
authority which subsequently may 1)0 formed in New South Wales in
relation to this district, may take over the complete reticulation system,
after reasonable notice, on the basis of fair valuation.
ESTIMATES OF COST AND REVENUE OF THE
CENTRAL AUTHORITY
An estimate of capital cost has been made for the Styx-Goorges
Creek Hydro-electric Scheme, for the new steam station at Lismore
with two units of 2 500 kW each, and for the erection of the requisite
(56 and 33 kV transmission lines as well as substations of simple design.
It is assumed that all new construction work associated with genera-
tion and main transmission will be undertaken by the Central
Authority, and capital sums have been included in the estimate to
cover the probable cost of acquisition of the Clarence River County
Council’s generating stations and main transmission system, Tam-
worth steam station, and the smaller generating stations, the latter
being either shut down or retained for stand-by purposes. The actual
cost of acquisition would be the subject of negotiations, as would also
be the rates for bulk supply.
It is not an essential feature of the scheme in its initial stage
that the Tamworth power station be acquired, as it could still remain
with the Municipality although linked to the system. It would, how-
ever, be required to supply power to the main system at certain times,
and it would at least have to come under the direction and supervisory
control of the Central Authority for interchange of power between the
Tamworth station and the other generating stations comprising the
scheme.
203
APPENDIX X—NORTH EASTERN AREA
Estimates of Cost and Revenue of the Central Authority


Purchase of plant :
£
£
Nymboida hydro-electric station, Lis-
more oil engine station, 168 miles
of transmission lines, and new
steam station (5 000 kW) at Lis-
more
480 000
Tamworth steam station and other
generating stations (less sale
value) ..
125 000
Negotiations, valuations, etc., and con-
tingenoies
100 000
705 000
New construction, inclusive of Engineering,
Supervision and Contingencies:
£
Styx-Georges Creek Scheme
520 000
Transmission lines —66 kV line from
Nymboida to Tamworth, Styx and
Uralla (160 miles), and from
Uralla to Armidale, Guyra and
Glen limes (60 miles); 33 kV line
from Glen limes to Inverell (40
miles) ..
178 000
Substations at —Dorrigo, Armidale,
Guyra, Glen limes, Tamworth and
Nymboida
42 000
740 000
Total
£1 445 000
The capital cost of the plant necessary to meet the prospective
demand up to about 1950 is estimated as follows: —
The fixed annual costs are estimated as follows:
£
Fixed Annual Costs :
1. Operation, maintenance, management, capital
charges, contingencies, etc. —
(a) Nymboida and Lismore generating stations
(oil and steam) and main transmission
systems—
121X> per cent, on £4BO 000 .. .. fiO 000
(b) New transmission lines and substations —
10 per cent, on £220 000 .. .. .. 22 000
(c) Styx-Georges Creek hydro-electric scheme
as separately estimated .. .. 37 000
(d) Tamworth generating station .. .. 12 000
2. Amortisation of purchase values of other local
generating stations, negotiations, etc- ~ .. 12 000
Total £143 000
204
APPENDIX X—NOETH EASTERN AEEA
Estimate of Cost and Eevenue


For Year
1943
For Year
1949
Kevenue from sales of bulk energy (see Tables V and YI) —
£
£
12 000 kW and 42-5 million kWh ...
156 250
17 000 kW and 60 million kWh
219 950
Annual cost, including fuel ...
146 000
151 000
Surplus ... ... ... ... £
10 250
68 950
The expenditure on fuel at Tamworth and Lismore Stations must
be added to arrive at the total annual costs of the complete scheme and
this expenditure can be taken to be about £3 000 in 1943 and about
£8 000 in 1949.
Revenue
The estimated revnues of the Central Authority for the years
1943 and 1949 are £156 250 and £219 950, respectively, as set out in
Tables V and VI. These figures are computed at the rate of £7 per
kW per annum and 0.4 d. per kWh. The bulk supply rate should be
regarded as an average, the actual rates being subject to negotiation
at the same time as the purchase price of the local plant to be acquired
is being settled. In no case should the cost of bulk supply exceed the
present generating cost for the Distributing Authority.
It has been assumed that energy losses in transmission will be
8 per cent., and that the simultaneous peak load at the generating
stations would be equal to the sum of the individual peaks at supply
centres, as the gain from diversity of peaks and the power loss in
transmission are usually of the same order in a system of this type.
The economic results so far as the Central Authority is con-
cerned are set out in Table IV.
Table IV
The surplus balances shown above are dependent on an average
bulk supply rate of £7 per kW and 0.4 d. per kWh being obtained and
may be slightly reduced when the actual rates are negotiated with the
various Municipalities. On the other hand, if the Styx-Georges Creek
Scheme is proceeded with expeditiously, the installation of the second
2 500 kW steam turbine at Lismore may be postponed until a later
date. In this event the annual surplus available for the Central
Authority up to 1949 would be increased correspondingly.
205
APPENDIX X—NORTH EASTERN AREA
Revenue


Energy
Sales
Peak
load
Capital
Revenue
average
per kWh
!
i
| Revenue
Cost of
bulk
supply
at £7 plus
Old.
Capital
charges
Cost of
bulk
supply
plus
capital
charges
Balance
to cover
distribu-
tion
working
expenses
Millions
of kWh
kW
Thous-
ands
of £
Penee
£
£
£
£
£
Lismore and Terania ...
7-41
2 050
95
2-15
66 500
28 400
7 600
36 000
30 500
Casino and Tomki
2-28
640
64
3-5
33 200
8 800
5 120
13 920
19 280
Central C.R.C.C.
6-88
1850
155
2-04
58 500
26 050
12 400
38 450
20 050
Southern C.K.C.C.
2-0
870
78
3-1
25 800
9 870
6 240
16 110
9 690
Mullumbimby
Ballina (present supply
1-85
675
66
2-86
22 000
8 235
5 280
13 515
8 485
area) ...
1-9
800
72
3-0
23 800
9 200
5 760
14 960
8 840
Kyogle
1-06
415
43
2-78
12 300
4 915
3 440
8 355
3 945
Tamworth
New England Towns and
8-5
2 250
100
1-7
60 200
31 850
8 000
39 850
20 350
Dorrigo
5-35
2 690
177
3-0
66 800
28 930
14 160
43 090
23 710
Total ...
37-23
12 240
850
369 100
156 250
68 000
224 250
144 850
Energy-
Sales
Peak
load
Capital
Revenue
average
per kWh
Revenue
Cost of
bulk
supply
at £7 plus
0-4d.
Capital
charges
Cost of
bulk
supply
plus
capital
charges
Balance
to cover
distribu-
tion
working
expenses
Millions
of kWh
kW
Thous-
ands
of £
Pence
£
£
£
£
£
Lismore and Terania ...
10-3
2 800
120
2-15
92 200
39 100
9 600
48 700
43 500
Casino and Tomki
3-6
1 000
80
3-5
52 400
13 850
6 400
20 250
32 150
Central C.K.C.C.
94
2 500
164
2-04
79 700
35 300
13 120
48 420
31 280
Southern C.K.C.C.
2-94
1 250
98
3-1
38 000
14 310
7 840
22 150
15 850
Mullumbimby ...
Ballina (present supply
245
900
78
2-86
29 200
10 940
6 240
17 180
12 020
area) ...
2-8
1 200
84
3-0
35 000
13 700
6 720
20 420
14 580
Kyogle
14
550
55
2-78
16 200
6 500
4 400
10 900
5 300
Tamworth
New England Towns and
12-0
3 200
140
1-70
85 000
45 100
11 200
56 300
28 700
Dorrigo
7-5
3 850
235
3-0
93 500
41 150
18 800
59 950
33 550
Total ...
52-39
17 250
1 054
• • •
521 200
219 950
84 320
304 270
216 930
ESTIMATES OF COST AND REVENUE OF THE
DISTRIBUTING AUTHORITIES
The economic results for the years 1943 and 1949, so far as the
Distributing Authorities are concerned, are set out in Tables Y and YI.
Table Y
(for the year 1948)
Table VI
(for the year 1949)
206
ARREADIX X— AohTH AREA
Estimates of Cost and Revenue of the Distributing- Authorities


The capital sums shown in the Tables are the estimated investments
by the Distributing Authorities in their urban and rural distribution
systems. Based on available information in regard to present expendi-
ture, they include sums estimated as being required for extensions of
the Distribution Authorities’ systems, consequent on the growth of
demand and extension of their areas of supply.
The estimated revenues of the Distributing Authorities are based
on the average revenues per kWh sold at rates at present prevailing in
the districts, which are also set out in Tables. It will be seen that after
providing for the cost of power and capital charges there remain
balances to cover distribution working expenses, aggregating £144 850
and £216 930 respectively for the two years under consideration. These
balances are not only sufficient for this purpose but provide a margin
for reductions in charges to the consumers. The calculations in the
Tables are based on an allowance of 12 per cent, for losses in distri-
bution.
In the case of the New England area and that of the district at
present served by the Electric Construction Company of Australia
from its Ballina station, an average rate of 3.0 d. per kWh sold has
been assumed. In both cases this would appear to be a reasonable
figure for the first few years of the scheme, but so far as the Ballina
district is concerned it represents a considerable reduction in the
present average price ruling therein.
TECHNICAL STAFF
At the time of acquisition of generating stations and main
transmission lines it would be advisable for the Central Authority to
take over that part of the Clarence River County Council’s technical
and clerical organisation, the functions of which are in a major degree
associated with the portion of the system to be transferred, this staff
having been largely responsible for the present state of efficiency of
the undertaking. The staff would continue to function as it does to-day,
but those members of the staff taken over would become responsible
to the Central Authority instead of to the County Council. For some
time after the transfer had been effected, there could be no objection
to senior officers so transferred having their services partially placed
at the disposal of the County Council on some plan to be agreed upon,
so as to minimise the inconvenience that may arise as a result of the
transfer. By such an arrangement, the County Council would have
available the advice of experienced members of their present staff for
the problems of local distribution, particularly with regard to rural
extensions, and the effect upon overhead costs should be favourable.
207
APPENDIX X —NORTH EASTERN AREA
Technical Staff


CONCLUDING REMARKS
It would appear that, with the Styx-Georges Creek hydro-electrie
scheme ideally placed mid-way between Nymboida and Tamworth, the
establishment of a steam power plant at Lismore,* and the linking up
of the districts at present served by the Clarence River County Council
with Tamworth and other centres in the New England area, it has been
possible to present a technically satisfactory scheme of electrical
development for the whole North Eastern area of the State. From the
points of view of both the Central Authority and the Distributing
Authorities the scheme is economically sound, and in the course of a
few years, with normal development it should result in a reduction in
cost of electricity to the residents of the urban and rural districts com-
prised within the scheme. In addition the advantages of a supply from
a co-ordinated system of generation and transmission will be made
available to several new areas of the State.
* After the completion of the report and this Appendix we understand an offer
lias been received from the City Electric Light Company, Brisbane, for the supply
of power at Lismore in lieu of power generated at the proposed steam station. Pro-
vided that the transmitted supply is as economical as a supply generated at Lismore
there appears no reason why such an offer should not be accepted.
208
APPENDIX X—NORTH EASTERN AREA
Concluding Remarks


APPENDIX XI
TO REPORT OF 1937 BY RENDEL.
PALMER AND TRITTON ON ELECTRICAL
DEVELOPMENT IN NEW SOUTH WALES
CONSTITUTION AND FUNCTIONS OF
PROPOSED CENTRAL ELECTRICITY
AUTHORITY
A recommendation being made in the Report that a Central
Authority should be set up, this Appendix defines the constitution of
such Authority in its main features, and outlines its principal functions.
CONSTITUTION
Status and Scope
The Central Electricity Authority, hereinafter referred to
as the “Central Authority,’ ’ should be responsible to Parliament,
through the Minister for Works and Local Government, for the proper
discharge of all statutory obligations. Close liaison should be main-
tained between the Minister and the Central Authority, but it is impera-
tive that the Central Authority should be given an independent status
which will enable it to achieve its task within its constitution.
The Central Authority should conduct the business on sound
economic lines and should be in fact the “central authority” for genera-
tion, main transmission and bulk supply of electricity in the State, for
domestic, industrial, traction and other purposes. The Central
Authority should not retail electricity.
Composition
The Central Authority should consist of five members, including
the Chairman, who should be a permanent full-time officer possessing
in addition to high administrative ability an adequate knowledge of
finance. The remuneration should be such that the position would be
acceptable to men of first-class attainments possessing such qualifica-
tions. The other members of the Central Authority need be only part-
time officers, but should be chosen on the merit of their special com-
petence to render useful service in the work to be undertaken by the
Central Authority, and they should be adequately remunerated. One
of these members should be an engineer, of high standing in the profes-
sion, with business experience; another member should have consider-
able experience in the financial direction of important enterprises and
have the’ confidence of the financial concerns which act as main under-
writers of loans; and the remaining two members should be selected
from important business interests in the State. The Chairman and
the members should be selected and appointed by the Government.
Proper regulations should be framed to govern the term for which
office should be held, subject to renewal, and the method of filling
vacancies occasioned by retirement, illness or death.
• 59265—0
209


Powers
The Central Authority should be a body corporate according to
the laws of the State and given the necessary legal powers to perform
all the functions as described herein. The Central Authority should be
able to employ, discharge, and retain sole control of staff. Its chief
officer should be a Manager and Chief Engineer, who is widely experi-
enced in the electricity supply industry, and a Secretary of outstanding
ability and experience preferably with legal knowledge.
FUNCTIONS
The specific functions, powers and duties of the Central
Authority should be: —
(i) As an administrative and advisory body—
{a) To administer the existing and future State legislation
dealing with or referring to electricity supply and to
initiate and recommend amendments to legislation refer-
ring thereto.
( b ) To advise the Minister for Works and Local Government
on all matters relating to electricity or to the generation,
transmission, supply or distribution thereof, on which he
may require advice, and generally to take over all the
functions of the existing Electricity Advisory Committee.
( c ) To make recommendations to the Minister for Works and
Local Government with regard to the planning and co-
ordination of the distribution of electricity in the most
efficient way in such districts of the State as are not under
the direct control of the Central Authority.
,(ii) As an electricity supply authority—
(a) To acquire, construct, maintain and operate electricity
generating stations, main transmission lines and sub-
stations for the purpose of establishing a central electricity
supply system and to furnish supplies of energy in bulk
to Government Departments, County Councils and in
general to any other Distributing Authorities.
The Central Authority may require the Distribut-
ing Authorities to take bulk supply from the Central
Authority when such supply is available unless it can be
shown that the bulk supply is less economical than genera-
tion by their own plant.
{h) To take over in the first instance the retail distribution
carried out by the Department of Works and Local Gov-
ernment and by the Water Conservation and Irrigation
Commission. The Central Authority should then recom-
mend to the Minister for Works and Local Government
the formation of Distributing Authorities in these areas
to take over the retail distribution.
210
APPENDIX XI—CENTRAL AUTHORITY
Enactions


(c) To supply, except in the areas of Sydney and Newcastle,
new industrial and other large consumers requiring 1 000
kW or more, if this be the most suitable arrangement.
In such cases the supply should be given only after con-
sultation with the Distributing Authority in whose sup-
ply area the consumer is located.
( d ) To operate their system as a whole without profit or loss
after providing adequately for depreciation of their
assets, amortisation of loan capital and reserve fund.
Their accounts should be subject to audit and submitted
annually to the Minister for Works and Local Govern-
ment.
( e) To have direct access to the capital market in Australia
as well as abroad for borrowing, with the approval of
the Governor in Council, such capital as may be required
for carrying out their functions as an electricity supply
authority, including rural development mentioned in
paragraph (/), using the assets of the generating sys-
tems which will have been acquired by the Central
Authority as a security for such borrowings. Such loans
may also be guaranteed by the State.
(/) To form a Rural Development Section to investigate
rural electrification schemes projected by Distributing
Authorities and to initiate rural development in such
areas as may seem practicable.
The services of the Rural Development Section
should be available for technical advice and assistance on
rural distribution problems to any Distributing Author-
ity which may so desire.
{g) To assist Distributing Authorities to extend the use
of electricity in their areas, by the formation of a special
department of the Central Authority to co-operate with
the Distributing Authorities, in the development of effic-
ient sales organisations and propaganda.
(h) To investigate, at the reasonable request of a representa-
tive body of consumers in any area, the efficiency of the
operation of Distributing Authorities and the charges
made by such Authorities for electricity supply to the
public and to report thereon to the Minister for Works
and Local Government.
( i ) To carry out investigations and surveys, cither by their
own staff or by independent experts, having for their
object the extension of the central system of electricity
supply, with regard to both hydro-electric and steam-
operated power stations,
211
APPENDIX XI—CENTRAL AUTHORITY
EunctioDS


(j) To send officers of the leading departments abroad at fre-
quent intervals to enable them to become acquainted with
the latest developments in their particular sphere of
activity.
INAUGURAL ARRANGEMENTS
Railway Electrification
Provided that it can be shown to the satisfaction of the Central
Authority that the electrification of main railways will assist the gen-
eration and distribution of electricity in the State, and that the railway
electrification as such is economically and technically sound, the
Central Authority may undertake the raising of loans on behalf of
the Department of Railways for the aforesaid railway electrification
and the appurtenant transmission lines.
The interest on and amortisation of any such loan or loans to
the Department of Railways should be guaranteed by the State and
be a first charge against the revenue of the railways.
Transfer of Present Systems
Within a short prescribed period after the constitution of the
Central Authority, the generating stations, transmission and distribu-
tion systems at present owned and operated by the Department of
Works and Local Government, by the Water Conservation and Irriga-
tion Commission, and, with certain exceptions mentioned hereunder,
by the Department of Railways, should be transferred to the Central
Authority. i
The transmission lines belonging to the Department of Railways
and used primarily or solely for railway purposes should remain the
property of the Department of Railways, and be operated and main-
tained by that Department. The Central Authority would take over
all the bulk supplies at present given by the Department and be
entitled to use these lines for additional bulk supplies, to the extent
that railway interests would not be adversely affected. The Central
Authority should, upon terms to be agreed upon between the two
parties, or settled by arbitration in case of difference, compensate
the Department for the use of such lines. The same applies to all
transmission lines, which will be built in future and used primarily
or solely for railway purposes.
When the Central Authority is desirous of acquiring any power
stations or main transmission lines belonging to the Sydney County
Council, to the Clarence River County Council, or to any other Dis-
tributing Authority, or to a private company, it should enter into
negotiations with the owners of such property with a view to arriving
at a mutually satisfactory transfer valuation and scheme of payment.
212
APPENDIX XI—CENTRAL AUTHORITY
Transfer of Present Systems


The Central Authority should have powers to acquire land and
easements compulsorily, subject to suitable compensation to the
owners, for the purpose of constructing thereon transmission lines,
power stations, etc., and the extension of such works.
All properties transferred to or acquired by the Central
Authority should form part of its assets.
Government
The regulatory functions at present being performed by the
Minister for Works and Local Government under the various Acts
should remain with the Minister, except such functions which for
practical reasons should be transferred to the Central Authority.
As the Central Authority may advise the Minister for Works
and Local Government on such matters as those on which at present
he obtains the advice of the Electricity Advisory Committee, this
Committee should be dissolved.
213
APPENDIX Xl CENTRAL AUTHORITY
Government
Sydney: David Harold Paisley, Government Printer—l 937.




PLATES


DISTRIBUTION OF POPULATION IN NEW SOUTH WALES
1933 CENSUS ACCORDING TO DEPARTMENT OF GEOGRAPHY,
UNIVERSITY OF SYDNEY
PLATE I
TO REPORT OF 1937 BY MESSRS
RENDEL, PALMER AND TRITTON
ON ELECTRICAL- DEVELOPMENT
IN NEW SOUTH WALES.


GENERAL LAYOUT OF ELECTRICITY SUPPLY SYSTEMS
IN SOUTH EASTERN AUSTRALIA
PLATE 2
TO REPORT OF 1937 BY MESSRS
rendel palmer and tritton
ON ELECTRICAL development
IN NEW SOUTH WALES


ELECTRICITY SUPPLY
IN SYDNEY AND DISTRICT
PLATE 3
TO REPORT OF 1337 BY MESSRS
RENDEU, PALMER AND TRITTON
ON ELECTRICAL DEVELOPMENT
IN NEW SOUTH WALES
REFERENCE
Sydney County Council Supplied direct to Consumers
■ •• - Bulk Supply
Electric Light &. Power Supply Corp.
Department oT Railways Bulk Supply
Transmission Lines 33 k V n .1.1.
II k V i
« 22 k V (E.U. & P S. C only) |
Power Stations W
NOTE i II k V and lower voltage distribution
not shown in areas of Sydney County Council
and Electric Light and Power Supply Corp.
Saa-Ce- of A/tica
1. RICHMOND


ELECTRICITY SUPPLY
IN NEWCASTLE AND DISTRICT
PLATE 4-
TO REPORT OF 1937 BY MESSRS
RENDEL, PALMER, AND TRITTON
ON ELECTRICAL DEVELOPMENT
IN NEW SOUTH WALES
REFERENCE
Power* Stations ■
Transmission Lines
6-6 kV. & II kV Distribution
/All /^uthorithies
33 kV Distribution
Department of Railways
g-Caledonian Colleries
SCALE OF MILES
0 12 3 4


KILOWATTS
MONDAY
TUESDAY
WEDNESDAY
THURSDAY
FRIDAY
SATURDAY
SUNDAY
225.000
-
200.000
>
■
175.000
-
150.000
125000
rs
•
100.000
r\.
■
75.000
f\
50.000
\
:
25.000
23.3.36
2A. 3.36
25.3.36
26.3.36
27.3.36
28.3.36
29.3.36
o
l
i-
i
>
i
•
.»
i i
•
»
N
225.000
tN.
NOON
M.N.
NOON
M.N.
NOON
M.N.
NOON
MW.
NOON
M.N. NOON
MN
NOON
IN
200.000
175.000
•
150.000
125.000
.
100.000
■ J
75.000
I
50.000
}
25.000
23.6.36
24.6.36
25.6.36
26.6.36
27. 6.36
28.6.36
29.6.36
o
j
i
i
_
•
1
i .
i
i - »
i
*
225.000
4.N.
NOON
M.N.
NOON
M.N.
NOON
MW.
NOON
MN.
NOON
M.N. NOON
MN.
NOON
MN.
1
200.000
175.000
- ■
150000
125.000
•
r
rvA
%i
100.000
-
\
r\ ■
75.000
V
50.000
25.000
21.9.36
22.9.36
23.9.36
24.9.36
25.9.3 6
\ /
26.9.36
r 27. 9. 36
1;
o
1
i
i
•
• - - -
»
• - • -
1
... - i
V
225000
i.Kj
NOON
Misl.
NOON
MN.
NOON
MN.
NOON
M.N.
NOON
M.N. NOON
MN.
NOON
MJ
-4.
200.000
-
175.000
-
150.000
125000
rs
*
100.000
\
-
75.000
\
J.
J
50 000
25.000
y—s
7. 12.36
8.12.36
9.12.36
10.12.36
II. 12.36
12.12.36
L ~ JjX 13.12.36
L
1 ; —
i
:
i
i
J 5
1
i
U
M.N.
NOON
M.N.
NOON
M.N.
NOON
MN.
NOON
M.N.
NOON M.N. NOON
MN.
NOON
MN.
LOAD DIAGRAMS
SYDNEY
SYDNEY COUNTY COUNCIL AND 50 CYCLE SYSTEM OF.DEPARTMENT OF RAILWAYS
PLATE 5
TO REPORT OF 193 T BY MESSRS
REND EL, PALMER AND TRITTON
ON ELECTRICAL DEVELOPMENT
IN NEW SOUTH WALES.


MONDAY
TUESDAY
WEDNESDAY
THURS DAY
FRIDAY
SATURDAY
SUNDAY
KILOWATTS
225.000
•
200.000
■
n.
n
n
fL
175.000
-
/V
/
L
K
150.000
-
h
1
/
\
125.000
■
J
X T
pu
100.000
m
r
1 J
r
1 J
J
\ J
rv
75.000
■
\
\
50.000
J
25.000
•
23.3.36
24.3.36
25.3. 36
26.3.36
27 3.36
28.3.36
29.3.36
0
■
i
J
i
i
1
1
i
■
•
M.N.
NOON
MN,
NOON
MN.
NOON
MN.
NOON
MN.
NOON
MN.
NOON
M.N.
NOON
M.N.
n
n
J
A
225.000
r
,T
200.000
-
/
*L
JV
/
1
h
/
A,
J
a
175.000
-
I
/
\
/
V
f
\
1
ISO. OOO
-
1
u
\
Pi
125.000
.
1
\
\
J
\ j
\ J
J
I
I
100.000
*
\
v
75.000
-
\
u
-
50.000
J
\J
25.000
-
23.
6.36
24.6.36
25.6.36
26.6.36
27. 6.36
28.6.36
29.6.36
O
i
1
i_
L
t
i
j
i
I
i
M.M.
NOON
M.N.
NOON
M.N.
NOON
M.N.
NOON
M.N.
NOON
M.N.
NOON
M.N.
NOON.
M.N.
225.000
•
fl
200.000
(1
n,
/
A
p,
/
A
-
175.000
S
/
s
/
150.000
/
J
f
A
A
125.000
-
u
M
\
n, ■
IOO 000
J
\ S
\ s
i
\ J
\J
\
V
75.000
i'
50.000
25.000
21.9.36
22.9.36
23.9.36
24.9.36
25.9.36
26.9. 36
27. 9. 36
•
O
1
1
1
i
I
i
i
i
M.N.
NOON
M.N.
NOON
M.N.
NOON
M.N.
NOON
M.N.
NOON
M.N.
NOON
M.N.
NOON
MN.
225.000
n
n
n
200000
a
\
\
L
r-^1
175.000
L
r
1
1
1 1
-
150.000
1
J
Ajt,
-
125000 •
1
f I
-
100.000 -
J
\ /
\ I
J
\ J
‘ \ -
75.000 -
1-
50.000 •
-
25.000 -
n- ' ■ rOJ
7. 12
.36
8 12.36
9.12.36
10.12.36
II. 12.36
12.12.36
13.12.36
-
n _
1
i
,
i
i
_L
L
J.
I
i
I
i
M.N.
NOON
M.N.
NOON
M.N.
NOON
M.N.
NOON
M.N.
NOON
M.N.
NOON
M.N.
NOON
M.N.
LOAD DIAGRAMS
SYDNEY
ALL GENERATING STATIONS
PLATE 6
TO REPORT OF 1937 BY MESSRS
RENDEL,PALMER AND TRITTON
ON ELECTRICAL DEVELOPMENT
IN NEW SOUTH WALES


MONDAY
TUESDAY
WEDNESDAY
THURSDAY
FRIDAY
SATURDAY
SUNDAY
KILOWATTS
22500
20000
ri
fk_
17500
-
\
p/sa
ft r
n n
hn i* 1^
[L
15000
-
Pif.
/ifii
In n
K. A*
"ijlA
V JlN
V
U U 11
1
AnAi
V
12500
-
v,/
lr u 11
i\j
In r
IOOOO
-
u
v u
liu
“Hi
r r \.J
7500
5000
■
2500
•
23.3.36
24.3.36
25.
3.36
26. 3.36
27. 3.36
2Q.3.36
29.3.36
o
•
1
i
i
i
1
1
1
i i
\ J
i
M.N
NOON
MN.
NOON
M.N. NOON
MN.
NOON
M.N.
NOON
M.N
NOON
M.N.
NOON
M.N
22500
•
20000
-
17500
•
ft
rv. -
rs rJjp]
15000
-
“Hn. A
r
VY
V
12500
Y//
1
Y J
U UkJ
IOOOO
■
Y
Y
V" 1
rv'
7500
-
r \
5000
2500
23.
6.36
24.6.
36
25.6.36
26
6.36
27. 6.36
28.6.36
29.6.36
O
i . .....
i
i
i
1
i
i
i
1
i
. - «
i
a
MN.
NOON
M.N.
NOON
MN. NOON
MN.
NOON
MN.
NOON
M.N.
NOON
M.N.
NOON
M.N.
22500
■
‘
20000
-
-
17500
nil
15000
[\ n JV r
ruf
-
12500
r L
a, Hr
iiu tJ
\ j/*
u l
IOOOO
■
TUT
Ir^l
7500
•
r\
5000
K.
2500
-
21.9.36
22.9.36
23.9.36
24. 9.36
25. 9.36
26. 9.36
27. 9.36
■
O
i
i
i
i ..
i
■
i
1
i
i
1
»
M.N.
NOON
MN.
NOON
M.N. NOON
M.N.
NOON
M.N.
NOON
M.N.
NOON
M.N.
NOON
M.N
22500
-
20000
-
17500
iSr*! n
r\
ri
fin
Pin n
rinfln 1
-
15000
-
A
J IT
1 n iHlTr
n
\ /
V ,n ii|
•
12500
Y
/
\n/
w
u u
\Y
L
•
1 oooo
ki If
u
kT
'
7500
r v
5000
-
2500
7.12.36
8.12.36
9.12.36
10.12.36
11.12.36
12.12.36
I3.l2.3e
•
O
i
I
»
1
J
— 1_
J
i ..
i
i
1
i
1
M.N.
NOON
M.N.
NOON
M.N. NOON
M.N,
NOON
M.N.
NOON
MN.
NOON
M.N.
NOON
M.N.
LOAD DIAGRAMS
NEWCASTLE
ZARRA STREET GENERATING STATION
PLATE 7
TO REPORT OF 1937 BV MESSRS
RENDEL, PALMER AND TRITTON
ON ELECTRICAL DEVELOPMENT
IN NEW SOUTH WALES


MONDAY
TUESDAY
WEDNESDAY
THURSDAY
FRIDAY
SATURDAY
SUNDAY
12000
-
IOOOO
-
r\
8000
i
rv-v s
'
T \
6000
\
r
v V /
b- 1
4000
2000
23.3.36
i
1
24.3.36
I
1
25.3.36
i
1
263.36
I 1
273.36
1
i
28.3.36.
«
I
29.3.36.
1
M
N
NOON
M.N
NOON
M.N
NOON
MN
NOON
M.N
NOON
M.N
NOON
-
M.N
NOON
M.N
14000
12000
rH
IOOOO
/a
aiA
JVVL,
pjlr'
8000
/
X
\
f\ ‘
6000
/
A.
, n/
vii y
V
4000
1 J
'rJlr
u HxT
2000
22.6.36
i
l
23.6.36
i
1
24 6.36
I
1
25.6. 36
i l
26.6.36
1
1
276.36
1
1
286.36
I
o
M.N
NOON
MN
NOON
M.N
NOON
MN
NOON
M.N
NOON
M.N
NOON
M.N
NOON
M.N
14000
12000
0
-
IOOOO
/in
PJI
A
i\r i
A
f in
[A M
8000
r V
lr
/ \
J V
J h
1 \JU,
r
\ /
6000
V-L J
J
lr 1
Li Hx
"J
1 | "
4000
V
■* Hr
2000
21.9.36
I
i
22.9.36
i
1
23936
i
1
24.9.36
1 l
25.9.36
l
I
26.9.36
I
1
279.36
1
o
IN
4N
NOON
MM
NOON
M.N
NOON
M.N
NOON
M.N
NOON
M.N
NOON
MN
NOON
MN
1400 O
•
-
12000
FLT S
r^1
n
IOOOO
n J
1
f \
\
]
\
rA
A r
nr~T
rx
f\
r
\
80oo
J
\ J
u
V
/
1
J
J
I
f VI
V
;
\
A-
6000
j^r
J
/
v
4-00 0
Lr
f
2000
7 12.36
8 12.36
9.12. 36
1012.36
II. 12.36
12.12.36
13.12.36
1
i
■
l
(
1
l 1
L
1
I
J
1
w
l.N
NOON
M.N
NOON
M.N
NOON
M.N
NOON
M.N
NOON
M.N
NOON
M.N
NOON
M.N
LOAD DIAGRAMS
PORTKEMBLA, BURRINJUCK AND UTHGOW GENERATING STATIONS
PLATE 8
TO REPORT OF 193 T BV MESSRS
RENDEL, PALMER, AND TRITTON
ON ELECTRICAL DEVELOPMENT
IN NEW SOUTH WALES


MONDAY
TUESDAY
WEDNESDAY
THURSDAY
FRIDAY
SATURDAY
SUNDAY
KILOWATTS
3500
*1
3000
2500
r\
-
2000
1500
r \ ‘
1 OOO
500
23.3.36
24.3.36
25. 3. 36
26.3.36
27.3.36
28.3.36
29.3.36
-
O
»
j-
1
,
1
1
M.N.
NOON
M.N.
NOON
M.N.
NOON
M.N.
NOON
M.N.
NOON
M.N.
NOON
M.N.
NOON
M
N
3500
-
3000
2500
-
2000
/“W
A
1 500
V
1 OOO
/
V
500
•
236.36
24.6.36
25.6.36
26.6.36
27 6.36
28.6.36
29.6.36
O
1
'
i
I
•
«
«
i
i
1
i
i
i
M.N.
NOON
■
M.N.
MOON
M.N.
NOON
M.N.
NOON
M.N
NOON
M.N.
NOON
M.N.
NOON
M
.N
3500
3000
2500
’l
-
2000
J 1
r
\
A -
1500
r
u
V
jJHY In.
V
IOOO
' r U
500
■
21.9.36
22.9.36
23.9 36 •
24.9.36
25.9.36
26.936
27.9.36
O
i -
1
• ■
a
i
i
i
•
i
i
1
M.N.
NOON
M.N.
NOON
M.N.
NOON
M.N
NOON
M.N.
NOON
M.N.
NOON
M.N.
NOON
M
N
3500
-
3000
■
-
2500
-
r\
2000
•
J
rs
1500
y
/
looo
500
-
7.12.36
8.12.36
9.12.36
10.12.36
II. 12.36
12.12.36
13.12.36
O
1
i
1
1—
•
i
■
■
i
i
MN.
NOON
M.N.
NOON
M.N.
NOON
MN.
NOON
M.N.
NOON
M.N.
NOON
M.N
NOON
M.
N.
LOAD DIAGRAMS
CLARENCE RIVER COUNTY COUNCIL
NVMBOIDA AND LISMORE GENERATING STATIONS
PLATE 9
TO REPORT OF IO3T BV MESSRS
RENDEL, PALMER AND TRITTON
ON ELECTRICAL DEVELOPMENT
IN NEW SOUTH WALES


WEEKLY MAXIMUM LOAD IN KILOWATTS
SYDNEY
SYDNEY COUNTY COUNCIL AND 50 CYCLE SYSTEM OF DEPARTMENT OF RAILWAYS
FIG. I
PLATE 10
TO REPORT OF 1937 BY MESSRS
RENDEL , PALMER AND TRITTON
ON ELECTRICAL DEVELOPMENT
IN NEW SOUTH WALES
WEEKLY MAXIMUM LOAD IN PER CENT
SYDNEY
SYDNEY COUNTY COUNCIL AND 50 CYCLE SYSTEM
OF DEPARTMENT OF RAILWAYS
FIG. 2


WEEKLY MAXIMUM LOAD IN KILOWATTS
SYDNEY
ALL GENERATING STATIONS
PLATE II
TO REPORT OF 1937 BY MESSRS
REN DEL, PALMER AND TRITTON
ON ELECTRICAL DEVELOPMENT
IN NEW SOUTH WALES
WEEKLY MAXIMUM LOAD IN PER CENT
SYDNEY
ALL GENERATING STATIONS
FIG. 2
FI G. I


PLATE 12
TO REPORT OF 1937 BV MESSRS
RENDEL, PALMER AND TRITTON
ON ELECTRICAL DEVELOPMENT
IN NEW SOUTH WALES.
WEEKLY MAXIMUM LOAD IN KILOWATTS
NEWCASTLE
ZARRA ST AND SYDNEY ST GENERATING STATIONS
FIG. I
WEEKLY MAXIMUM LOAD IN PER CENT
NEWCASTLE
ZARRA ST AND SYDNEY ST GENERATING STATIONS
FIG. 2


PLATE 13
TO REPORT OF 1937 BY MESSRS
RE NOEL , PALMEP AND TRITTON
ON ELECTRICAL DEVELOPMENT
IN NEW SOUTH WALES
WEEKLY MAXIMUM LOAD IN KILOWATTS
BURRINJUCK,PORT KEMBLA AND LITHGOW
GENERATING STATIONS
Weekly maximum load in per cent
BURRINJUCK , PORT KEMSLA AND LITHGOW
GENERATING STATIONS
FIG. 2


WEEKLY MAXIMUM LOAD IN KILOWATTS
CLARENCE RIVER COUNTY COUNCIL
NYMBOIDA AND LISMORE GENERATING STATIONS
PLATE 14
TO REPORT OF 1937 BY MESSRS
RENDEL, PALMER AND TRITTON
ON ELECTRICAL DEVELOPMENT
IN NEW SOUTH WALES
WEEKLY MAXIMUM LOAD IN PER CENT
clarence: river county council
NVMBOIDA AND LISMORE GENERATING STATIONS
FIG. 2


PLATE 15
TO REPORT OF 1937 BY MESSRS
RENDEL, PALMER, AND TRITTON
ON ELECTRICAL DEVELOPMENT
IN NEW SOUTH WALES
GROWTH OF GENERATION OF ENERGY
IN NEW SOUTH WALES


SYDNEY SUBURBAN RAILWAY
ELECTRIFICATION
MAIN RAILWAY
ELECTRIFICATION
tSc-oube. of lAiZ&s
10 5 o 10 20
PLATE 16
TO REPORT OF 1937 BY MESSRS
RENDEL PALMER AND TRITTON
ON ELECTRICAL DEVELOPMENT
IN NEW SOUTH WALES
REFERENCE
Existing Electrified Railways o— -o-■ ■
Proposed •» c p-
Non-Electrified Railways -
Existing Transmission Lines 33 kV
Proposed •» •• 66 kV ———
Power Stations ■
Existing Substations ■
Proposed „ □


MAP OF COAL DEPOSITS
IN
NEW SOUTH WALES
PLATE 17
TO REPORT OF 1937 BV MESSRS
RENOEL PALMER AND TRITTON
ON ELECTRICAL DEVELOPMENT
IN NEW SOUTH WUS
REFERENCE
Coal Fields/P*. rrn '* n j|||
\Tnassic
Coal Out Crop j|
Number of Coal Mines ®
Railways —. —i —r
Scale of Miles
9O lgo


MAP
OF SOUTH EASTERN PORTION OF
AUSTRALIA
PLATE 18
TO REPORT OF 1©37 BY MESSRS.
RENOEL, PALMER AND TRITTON
ON ELECTRICAL DEVELOPMENT
IN NEW SOUTH WALES


REFERENCE
granite r 1
ORDOVICIAN f 1
GRAMOPHYRE [“^
PELSiTC DYKES U'SlZl
APUTE AND p~—
PEGMATITE dykes *-■ J
BASALT | 1
roads \
PATHS ** _
PARISH BOUNDARIES ~~~~ . - . »»___
tunnels
PIPE UNiES
POWER STATIONS Mm
SNOWY RIVER HYDRO ELECTRIC SCHEME
GENERAL LAYOUT PLAN
■ PLATE 19
TO REPORT OF 1537 BY MESSRS
RENDEL PALMER AND TRITTON
ON ELECTRIC DEVELOPMENT
JN NEW SOUTH WALES


SNOWY RIVER HYDRO ELECTRIC SCHEME
LONGITUDINAL PROFILE
PLATE 20
TO REPORT OF 1937 BV MESSRS
RENDEL, PALMER AND TRITTON
ON ELECTRICAL DEVELOPMENT
IN NEW SOUTH WALES


PLATE 21
TO REPORT OF 1937 BY MESSRS RENDEL,
PALMER AND TRITTON ON ELECTRICAL
DEVELOPMENT IN NEW SOUTH WALES
SNOWY RIVER HYDRO-ELECTRIC SCHEME
STEREOSCOPIC AERIAL PHOTOGRAPH SHOWING
THE LOCALITY OF THE PIPE LINES AND POWER
STATION No. 2
TO BE VIEWED WITH COLOURED GLASSES
(SEE POCKET AT BACK OF REPORT)


SHOALHAVEN RIVER HYDRO ELECTRIC SCHEME
GENERAL LAYOUT PLAN
PLATE 22
TO REPORT OF 1937 BY MESSRS
RENDEL, PALMER, AND TRITTON
ON ELECTRICAL DEVELOPMENT
IN NEW SOUTH WALES


SHOAL-HAVEN RIVER HYDRO ELECTRIC SCHEME
LONGITUDINAL PROFILE
PLATE 23
TO REPORT OF 1937 BV MESSRS
RENJOEL, PALMER, AND TRITTON
ON ELECTRICAL DEVELOPMENT
IN NEW SOUTH WALES


MAP OF CATCHMENT AREAS OF
STYX, OAKY, CHANDLER, AND WOLLOMOMBI RIVERS
PLATE 24
TO REPORT OF 1937 BY MESSRS
RENDEL, PALfYIER, AND TRITTON
ON ELECTRICAL DEVELOPMENT
IN NEW SOUTH WALES
reference
’ ■ 1 mainly basalt small areas of sand
1 I gravels and clays at margins
TERTIARY . sands gravels clays and
I J CONCRETIONARY IRONSTONE
O I —i GRANITE AND ALLIED TYPES INTRUDING
EPI - SILURIAN ! [ J nambucca series
p | 1 NAMBUCCA SERIES SILICIFIED CUAYSTONES
SILURIAN | 1 quartzite alternating quartzite and slate
MAIN ROADS ======== === SS====='
SUBSIDIARY ROADS
PARISH BOUNDARIES 1 *
TUNNELS
PIPE LINES
POWER STATIONS ■■


STYX-GEORGES CREEK HYDRO ELECTRIC SCHEME
GENERAL LAYOUT PLAN
PLATE 25
TO REPORT OF 1937 BV MESSRS
RENDEL, PALMER. AND TRITTON
ON ELECTRICAL DEVELOPMENT
IN NEW SOUTH WALES


PLATE 26
TO REPORT OF 1937 BV MESSRS
REN DEL PALMER AND TBITTON
ON ELECTRICAL DEVELOPMENT
IN NEW SOUTH WALES.
STYX RIVER _ GEORGES CREEK
HYDRO ELECTRIC SCHEME
LONGITUDINAL. PROFILE


WYANGAL4 HYDRO ELECTRIC SCHEME
RESERVOIR BEHAVIOUR AND DISCHARGE PER MONTH
PLATE: 27
TO REPORT or 1937 BY MESSRS
RENDEL, PALMER AND TRITTON
ON ELECTRICAL DEVELOPMENT
IN NEW SOUTH WALES


ENERGY GENERATED BY STEAM AND
HYDRO ELECTRIC POWER FOR SYDNEY AND DISTRICT
PLATE 28
TO REPORT OF 1937 •BY MESSRS
RENDEL, PALMER AND TRITTON
ON ELECTRICAL DEVELOPMENT
IN NEW SOUTH WALES.
FIG. 2
FIG; I


PLATE 29
TO REPORT OF 1937 BY MESSRS
RENDEL PALMER AND TRITTON
ON ELECTRICAL DEVELOPMENT
IN NEW SOUTH WALES
COMPARISON OF COST OF STEAM
AND HYDRO ELECTRIC POWER
FOR SYDNEY AND DISTRICT
