





1950
VICTORIA
REPORT OF ROYAL
COMMISSION
Inquiring into the origins, aims, objects
and funds of the Communist Party in
Victoria and other related matters.
ROYAL COMMISSIONER—
The Hon. SIR CHARLES LOWE,
A Judge of the Supreme Court
of Victoria
PRESENTED TO BOTH HOUSES OF PARLIAMENT BY HIS EXCELLENCY’S COMMAND
[Cost of Report: —Preparation:—Not given. Printing (1,500 copies), £650
By Authority:
J. J. GOURLEY, GOVERNMENT PRINTER, MELBOURNE.
No. 12.—[6s.] —4329/50.




PREFATORY MEMORANDUM.
Throughout the following report I have for the sake of brevity often
used the alphabetical abbreviations, which are current in Communist and other
writings, to denote organizations and organs of the Communist Party, and also
initials to denote many trade unions and other bodies. I set out hereunder the
principal of these with the full title of the body which the particular abbreviation
denotes:—
A.C.P. .. Australian Communist Party, This has been the name of
the party since the middle of 1944. Before that date its
title was The Communist Party of Australia
0. .. Central Committee of Communist Party.
C.E. .. Central Executive.
C.I. .. Communist International.
Comintern .. Generally used contraction of Third or Communist
International which was dissolved in 1943.
Cominform .. Since 1943 the contracted form of The Communist
Information Bureau.
C.P. .. Communist Party.
C. .. The Communist Party of Australia (see A.C.P, above).
D. .. District Committee.
E. .. Executive Committee of the Communist International. This
body in Eussian documents is referred to as E.K.K.I.
TEADE UNIONS AND OTHEE BODIES.
A.E.U. .. Amalgamated Engineering Union.
A.E.U.L.E. .. Australian Federated Union of Locomotive Enginemen.
A.L.P. .. Australian Labour Party.
A.E.U. .. Australian Eailways Union.
A.S.F.L. .. Australia-Soviet Friendship League.
A. .. Australian Socialist Party.
B. .. Building Trades Federation.
8.W.1.U. .. Building Workers’ Industrial Union.
F. .. Federated Engine Drivers and Firemen’s Association.
F.O.S.U. .. Friends of the Soviet Union.
1. .. Independent Labour Party (of England).
I.W.W. .. Militant Industrial Workers of the World.
M.A.W.F. .. Movement against War and Fascism.
T.H.O. .. Trades Hall Council.
NOTE.
In the setting up of the Commissioner’s Report in print the opportunity has been taken to
add some further marginal references and to correct some errors that have crept into the Report
during the typing.
E. W. LAWN,
Secretary to the Commission.




To His Excellency The Governor of , Victoria General Sir Dallas Brooks,
K. 0.8., C.M.G., D.S.O.
May it Please Youe Excellency:
I have the honour to forward my findings of fact in relation to the
matters which I was asked to inquire into and report upon in Letters Patent
of Royal Commissions granted to me on the 19th day of May and the 14th day
of June, 1949, and duly published in the Government Gazette.
The Commissions were issued pursuant to Act No. 5366, which empowered
the Governor in Council to appoint a Royal Commissioner to inquire into and
report upon the origins, aims, objects and funds of the Communist Party in
Victoria, and the operations and activities in Victoria of that Party and
members thereof, and organizations and persons associated therewith.
Sittings op the Commission and Peesons Repeesented.
The Commission first sat on the 6th June, 1949, when matters preliminary
to the hearing were discussed. Mr. Sholl, K.C., Mr. Lewis, K.C., and Mr.
Mclnerney, all of the Victorian Bar, appeared to assist the Commission. Many
other applications were made by Counsel or individuals for leave to appear, all
of which, with one exception, I deferred dealing with until it should appear
that the applicants were affected by the evidence adduced before me, and I
gave leave to the applicants to renew their applications if that event should
happen. Some applications were not renewed.
The exception was in the case of the Communist Party. I said that
since the inquiry directly related to the nature and activities of that Party, I
would as a matter of course grant its application for leave to appear. Mr.
F. W. Paterson (of the Queensland Bar), Mr. E. F, Hill (of the Victorian
Bar), Mr. M. N. Julius (of the Queensland Bar) and Mr. E. A. H. Laurie
(of the Victorian Bar) then announced their appearance for the Communist
Party in Victoria. They cross-examined witnesses called to assist the
Commission, called -what witnesses they thought proper, including leading
members of the Party such as Hill, Johnson, Chandler, Brown and Mrs.
Samson, put in written evidence and generally acted as Counsel would in
litigation between parties. As the hearing progressed the representation
changed. After some weeks Mr. Paterson ceased to appear. Later Mr. Julius
returned to Queensland. Still later Mr. Hill withdrew as Counsel, and
afterwards gave evidence for the Communist Party. Mr. Laurie remained to
represent the Party until the close of evidence.
Of Counsel assisting the Commission Mr. Sholl was in January of this
year appointed to the Supreme Court Bench, and did not thereafter. appear
before the Commission.
Peesons Only Incidentally Affected by Evidence.
During the hearing the names of many persons were mentioned by
witnesses, and a considerable number of those who thought the implication
injurious to themselves applied either by Counsel or in person for leave to
deny, rebut, or qualify statements affecting themselves. As such statements had
been made on oath, I required that the answer should be made on oath, but
when an undertaking was given: to me that the applicant would make his
statement on oath, I gave each such person or his Counsel leave to cross-examine
the witness making the challenged statement, and I heard on oath his reply.
It was obvious from the opening of the inquiry that great publicity was!
being given by the press to the proceedings, and I directed the attention of the
press to the fact that replies were being made to statements which affected the
witness. In most of these cases I did not conceive that I was by the terms of
my Commission called upon to make specific findings as to the truth or the
untruth of such incidental statements and I gave no leave to Counsel to address
me in connexion therewith. The evidence affecting the intervener and the
latter’s reply had both been published, and in these cases I did not think it
incumbent on me to do more, Any other course would, I think, have rendered
Tr. pp. 927,
992-8.


the inquiry well-nigh interminable. In a few instances, however, the evidence
given affected the intervener either in a public or professional capacity, or
after being made was withdrawn, and in these cases I shall hereafter make
specific findings.
Special Cases of Representation.
Two special cases of representation should be mentioned. Many
allegations of irregular conduct by members of the Communist Party and
their sympathizers were made by the witness Sharpley. Mr. E, R. Reynolds,
K.C., and Mr. Coldham (of the Victorian Bar) were given leave to appear for
him to protect his interests, and in that capacity Mr. Reynolds cross-examined
some witnesses and re-examined Sharpley. He was not given leave to address
me.
The other case concerned the representation of eleven unions and a
number of individuals connected with one or other of them, in relation to
charges that ballots in these unions had been fraudulently, or irregularly
conducted. Mr. J. M. Oullity of the Victorian Bar was given leave to appear
for these. He took a considerable part in the proceedings by cross-examining
witnesses whose evidence affected any of his clients and by calling and examining
witnesses to rebut or explain such evidence. Having regard to the extent of the
interests he represented I gave him leave (quite exceptionally) to address me
and make submissions on the evidence as it affected his clients.
Course oe the Proceedings.
The preliminary sitting was a short one. The Commission then adjourned
to the_ 20th June, 1949. Counsel assisting the Commission then started to open
the evidence they had available, and thereafter the Commission sat continuously
on every available Court day until the 6th March, 1950. In all, it sat on 154
days, and during that time 159 witnesses were heard, and 1,083 exhibits
received in evidence. The transcribed record of the inquiry reached 9,791
pages.
Length oe the Evidence.
Much, but not all, of this mass of evidence is attributable to the extreme
width of the investigation committed to me. A good deal of it. however, is due
to my desire not to shut out any relevant evidence which the Communist
Party or its members or any person affected by the evidence desired to submit.
And the record will show, I think, that wherever I have checked the giving of
evidence it has been because the ground had already been covered or the
evidence only affected the credit of the witness—of which I was the sole
judge—or I thought that a fact had been sufficiently tested. I did, however,
on a number of occasions, stop the public reading of long documents, but not
the putting of them in evidence, and what has gone in evidence I have read.
Prevention of Use oe Inquiry for Propaganda.
I. did my best, though not always with success, to prevent the
proceedings from becoming a forum for propaganda for any party or cause.
. was not unmindful of the policy set out in the £< How to organise M series
issued by the Central Committee of the C.P.—
Our tactics in the public proceedings of the law court are not
tactics of defence but of attack. Without clinging to legal formalities,
the Communist must use the trial as a means of bringing his
indictment against the dominant capitalist regime and courageously
voicing the views of the party.”
Nor was the attempt to rise the proceedings for purposes of propaganda
limited to the Communist Party. 1 *
Written Submissions.
Lastly, in order to save time spent in public sittings, and to ensure an
?T S S s^ miSslo f s > J asked for written submissions from
lace °f their making ura! addresses. These submissions will be
found at the end of the bound volumes of the Transcript.
Tr. pp. 1213,
1276, 4544.
6444.
Ex, 78. p. 14.
6


CONSTRUCTION OF FINDINGS.
It is necessary, in order to avoid misunderstanding, that I should say
something as to the meaning of my findings, before I set out in detail what those
findings are.
Since my Commission requires me to inquire into, and report upon, the
matters therein mentioned, I have felt that I should not treat the matters
investigated before me merely as a piece of litigation between parties in which
findings should be made on the evidence in favour of one party or the other, but
as matters in which the Executive desires to know, not merely what I find
proved by the evidence, but also what the evidence does not satisfactorily
determine and which I think may nevertheless possibly be true. In what follows
there are some matters which I am able to say on the evidence are in accordance
with the allegation, and some others which I am able to say are not in
accordance with the allegation, but there are a number of matters in which all
1 can say is that I am not satisfied on the evidence that the allegation is true.
Such a finding is not intended to be, and must not be taken to be, equivalent to
a finding of “ not guilty,” It indicates only that I think I have not been able
to discover what the truth is, and that further evidence may show the
allegation either to be true or untrue.
Credibility or Witnesses.
The determination of many of the questions raised before me has been
more than usually difficult because of the nature of the evidence on such
questions. Communism presents a view of history and an outlook on life
which evokes from its adherents a fanatical devotion, and provokes in its
opponents a fanatical hatred. Each of these responses is very apt to distort
the testimony of a witness so affected, and both are likely to cause the witness
to relate for fact what is. really no more than suspicion. There were, in my
judgment, a number of examples of this tendency, and it has resulted in my
not: accepting the evidence of two witnesses called by those assisting the
Commission.
The witness Sharpley makes many of the allegations, and almost
without exception his allegations are denied by the persons implicated. In
bearing in examination-in-chief, Sharpley was in general a good witness, but
in cross-examination there was much to make one doubt parts of his evidence,,
and there is much otherwise against him. He was himself a member of the
Communist Party till January, 1949, and I have a good deal of evidence that,
when a member of the party is in difficulties or brought into Court-
proceedings, he should dissemble to protect the party and its not to ■
say himself. On Sharpley’s own allegation he was in many cases a participant
in the fraudulent practices he alleges. Moreover, there were occasions, as I
have said, in his cross-examination when his statements were shown to be
unreliable, and in his published articles there were some exaggerations and
misstatements. Lastly his role was akin to that of an informer on those he had
for years associated with, and for his disclosures to the Press he had been paid
at a rate which must have seemed to him munificent.
The credibility of such a witness is heavily suspect, and had it not been
for unexpected corroboration of his evidence at a number of points, I should
have been inclined not to act on it at all. On the other hand, I was left with
the impression that many of the Communist witnesses who gave evidence
contradicting Sharpley told me only so much of the truth as they could not
succeed in withholding. Moreover the Communist teaching as to conduct of 1 :
a member of the party when brought into Court must be borne in mind with
them as with Sharpley,
In the result I have , not acted on Sharpley’s evidence to prove any
allegation except where I find it admitted or not denied by the persons affected
or corroborated by other evidence, whether written or oral, which I accept or
where I think the circumstances are much more in favour of the truth than the
untruth of his story.
Ex. 78.
Tr. 314-5.
Tr. p. 6639.
Tr. p. 806-7.


One other matter I should mention is that a woman witness is referred
to in this Report as Mrs. X. She was so referred to in the press during the
sittings of the Commission, and my reasons for not allowing her name to be
published are recorded in the Transcript. Those reasons still operate, and
hence her name is not now given.
Marginal References and Footnotes.
I should add that (with few exceptions) the marginal references are to
the pages of the Transcript of the evidence or the exhibits on which I rely for
my finding, while the footnotes give references to passages in works not in
' evidence that I have come across, and which seem to me. either analogous to
the evidence, or to give a possible significance to matters dealt with in my
findings. There are many other passages in the evidence corroborative of
those indicated in the margin, but limitations of space and of human
endurance have prevented my giving them.
Appendices.
In the course of the Inquiry many documents were put in evidence, a
general knowledge at least of which is advisable if not necessary for a full
understanding of the bases of the answers I have given to the questions
submitted to me. The length of many of them makes it highly inconvenient, if
not impracticable, to set them out at length in my Report. I have therefore
included the most important of them in the Appendices to this Report. The
rest of the documents are available among the exhibits. I have adopted
the same course of putting in the Appendices, matters which are concerned
with detail, whose inclusion in the Report would break the continuity of the
narrative and impede the intelligent reading of it. Such are the list of
witnesses called and the members of the O.P. whose names appeared on the
hearing.
Acknowledgments.
I acknowledge at once my indebtedness to Counsel for their assistance
in the marshalling, presentation, and sifting of the evidence. Without their
assistance the performance of this onerous task would have been
quite impossible. I acknowledge, too, the great help I have received from the
Secretary of the Commission, Mr. E. W. Lawn. His knowledge of the
exhibits has been quite remarkable, and has led to much economy of time.
-Both Mr. Lawn and Mr. C. P. Allen of the Crown Law Department have
helped me much in the checking of marginal notes and in the preparation of
the Appendices.
Subjects oe Inquiry.
The matters into which I was commissioned to inquire and report upon
were:—■
“ The origins aims objects and funds of the Communist Party in
victoria and the activities and operations in Victoria of that party
and of members thereof and of organizations and persons associated
therewith and, in particular—
(a) whether that party by its constitution or propaganda, or any of
its members or any of such organizations or persons by
propaganda or otherwise, advocates or encourages the
overthrow by force or violence of established government;
(h) whether the activities or operations of that party or any of its
members or any of such organizations or persons are or have
been designed to effect or accomplish, or are or have been
directed at effecting or accomplishing—
(i) the overthrow or disruption of representative or
democratic institutions;
(ii) the subversion of law and order;,
(iii) the attainment of social economic industrial or political
ends by force violence intimidation or fraudulent
practices;
Act No. 5865,


(iv) the dislocation or disruption of services safeguarding,
or essential to the maintenance of, the life health
and welfare of the community;
(v) the dislocation disruption or retardation of industrial
production;
(vi) the indoctrination of children and young people
with beliefs or ideas calculated or likely to result
in activities and operations of the nature herein-
before referred to.”
Background or Matters Inquired into.
I shall in this Report make detailed findings, so far as the evidence
allows me, on all these matters, but the nature of Communism and the activities
of the party and its members can only be understood as the current phase of
events having their origins long prior to the French Revolution but which began
to be violently agitated_ about the time of the Communist Manifesto prepared by
Karl Marx and Frederick Engels and published in 1848. Rather than describe
it myself, I quote from the standard work of H. A. L. Fisher, “ A History of
Europe ”.
The Communist Manifesto.
“In this flaming document ”, he says, “ Marx put out a new philosophy
of history, a new programme of revolutionary reform, and a new call for
international action. He argues that the bourgeoisie had brought into existence
its antithesis the proletariat, that the struggle between these two classes was
the key to modem history, that the class-conscious section of the proletariat
were the communists, and that the communists would be content with nothing
less than the ‘ violent overthrow of the whole contemporary social order.’
.... He offered a formula of human progress suggested by Hegelian
philosophy but in some important particulars differing from Hegel, which
seemed to set the past, the present, and the future of humanity in a logical
and necessary sequence. Primitive communism had given way to feudal
society, feudal society had been supplanted by the capitalistic bourgeoisie,
the bourgeoisie were now to be expropriated by the proletariat. All history
was a struggle of classes for the material goods of life. Class hatred, class
war, was the prime law of change.* The dictatorship of the capitalists would
be followed by the dictatorship of the proletariat, and this in turn by a
classless society, which would be the ultimate end of the long and savage
scramble for material things. As for capitalism, it carried within itself the
seeds of its own doom. (1) In a passage which has been often cited Marx
describes the predestined overthrow of the capitalistic system, how as time
proceeds businesses become larger, capitalists become fewer, and the mass
of poverty and oppression, of degeneration and exploitation becomes
correspondingly greater. At last the system perishes of its excesses. The
working class, which has grown in number, is developed, unified, and organized
by the very mechanism of capitalistic production. As they contemplate the
growing power of capitalistic monopoly and contrast the opulence of the
fortunate with their own ascending scale of misery and want, the wrath of
the workers explodes. The inevitable happens. ‘ The centralization of the
means of production and the socialization of labour reach a point where they
prove incompatible with the capitalistic husk. This bursts asunder. The
knell of capitalistic private property sounds. The expropriators are
expropriated. ’ ”
The Manifesto itself ends with these words, “ In short, the Communists
everywhere support every revolutionary movement against the existing social
and political order of things ”... and again, “ The Communists disdain to
conceal their views and aims. They openly declare that their ends can be
attained only by the forcible overthrow of all existing social conditions. Let
Ex. 124.
By the very
un-English
word “ bour-
geoisie ”
Engels said
was meant
“ the class of
modern
capitalists,
owners of
the means of
social
production
and
employers of
wage
labour
Ex. 124.
Stalin states
■what he
considers
these are.
Ex. 17, pp. 7
et 6eq.
Tr, pp. 09-70.
Ex. 124, p 40.
(1) William Gallacher, M.P., in The Case For Communism (Penguin Special), p„ 17, says, “This is the basic
contradiction in Capitalism, the opposing tendencies between social production of wealth and the individual ownership
Of wealth,”


the ruling classes tremble at a Communist revolution. The proletarians have
nothing to lose but their chains. They have a world to win. Workingmen
of all countries, unite. ’ ’
Present Importance of the Manifesto.
These statements were made in 1848, and I shall indicate later to what
extent (if any) the evidence shows that they are to be modified in relation
to existing conditions, but as a broad picture of the basic philosophy and
aims of the Communist movement the Manifesto _ must still be studied and
indeed is part of the teaching given by the Party in its various schools even
as late as 1949, and is the subject of an exposition by Vyshinsky in
“ Pravda ” of February, 1948, which is reprinted in the Communist Review
of October, 1948.
Marxism-Leninism.
The 1948 Constitution of the Communist Party of Australia, however,
speaks of “ Marxism-Leninism, the basic theory of our party”, and it is
necessary that I should explain the relationship of this theory to that
expounded in the Manifesto and elsewhere by Marx and Engels, What J
have already cited shows nnmistakeably that they contemplated violence and
force as an accompaniment of the revolutionary change, but there is much to
show that both Marx and Engels in their later years thought that violence
might not always be necessary, and that in countries like England and XJ.S.A,.
other methods might alleviate and change the position of the working masses.
Leninism.
Lenin would have none of this, and later I shall point out his attitude
to those who thought that capitalism could be reformed so as to be tolerable
to the proletariat. Wherever he deals with these matters he is uncomprising
in his opposition. (l) He regarded Marxism as a living force which called
for development to keep pace with life, and therefore with the phenomenon
of monopoly capitalism or imperialism. He considered, too, that the Second
International, in accepting the doctrine of national defence had abandoned
the Marxian view that “the workers have no country”. lie insisted on a
return to Marxism. Moreover, he emphasized again and again the
revolutionary aspect of the Manifesto. “Leninism”, said Stalin, “is
Marxism of the era of imperialism and of the proletarian revolution. To be
more exact, Leninism is the theory and ta'etics of the proletarian revolution
in general, the theory and tactics of the dictatorship of the proletariat in
particular.” And Stalin himself, in the preface to the work quoted from, is
said to be the foremost living Marxist-Leninist scholar of to-day.
Repudiation op Trotskyism.
To complete the picture of what is involved in Marxism-Leninism, I
should draw attention to what Communists describe as “ Trotskyism,” which
is regarded as heretical and is anathema to the lt is described in the
Marxist Glossary (hereinafter described) as “A counter-revolutionary
organization: named after Leon Trotsky, who was connected with the Russian
Labour Movement for many years. He and his followers were exposed as
Fifth Columnists in Russia several years ago.
In Australia, U.S.A., Spain, China and everywhere, Trotskyists play the
role of provocateurs, As Communism increased its strength throughout the
world, sections of Social-Democracy adopted the Trotskyist technique of
Ex. 116.
Ex. 4, p. 9.
Ex. 13,
pp. 62, 61.
Ex. 17. p. 10.
Ex. 17, P. 4.
Tr. p. 41.
Ex. 12, p. 96.
(1) In this attitude he emphasized Marx’s earlier views which are thus expressed by Laski in his booh
Communism (Home University Library), pp.. 70-71:—"But Marx insists that, for the completion of the process, the
emancipation must be attained by the workers themselves. They must not be satisfied with reform, nor put their
trust, from a lack of audacity or self-confidence, in the sense of justice displayed by bourgeois thinkers and politicians
who are appalled at the existence of misery and want They must seek, not the mitigation, but the exacerbation of
the class-struggle. :
• concess * oris that are won from capitalism are evidence merely ,of its weakness. They do not prevent
the inevitability of a final conflict between the capitalist and the wage-earner. Things like the battle over rates of
wages, or tlxe length of the working-day, are, so to speak, merely an index to the greater struggle beyond. The
W 4° r ufl 18 ai< * their-masters in finding terms upon which capitalism may endure, but to discover the period
at which its pyerthrow may be successfully prepared. To that end they must capture the machinery of the State;
since it is through of this machinery that the governing class enforces its will. And, possessing it, the
workers must then utilize Its authority to transform a capitalist into a communist society.”


provocation against the Communists and other progressives and against the
Soviet Union, e.g., the leadership of the Independent Labour Party of England
(1.L.P.); the Socialist Party of America; in Australia the journals controlled
by J. T. Lang, the leadership of the Australian Workers’ Union, and others.”
Such then is the nature of the basic theory of the A.C.P.
But there are some general matters to which I shall make reference
before addressing myself to the findings I make on the particular matters
referred to me. The first is—
The Position'OF the C.P. in Victoria in Relation to the General
Movement of Communism in the World.
The C.P. in Victoria is a section of the A.C.P., and the latter was from
1922 until the dissolution of the Comintern (Third Communist International)
in 1943 a constituent member thereof. The Victorian Party was accordingly,
until 1943 at least, united to the world movement for Communism. In a wide
sense therefore the origins aims and objects of the C.P. in Victoria must be
sought largely outside Victoria, and much of the evidence I have had to
consider is not limited to Victoria but applies wherever a section of the C.P.
operates.
I have not thought that I am required in this report to examine, much
less discuss, matters which are to be found in standard works on Communism,
which are readily available to anyone who would wish to investigate them. I
shall, therefore, merely state a few of the salient facts and then come to the
origin in Victoria of the C.P.
The Manifesto had come into existence at the request in November,
1847, of the Communist League (a German Workingmen’s Association).
This league was dissolved in 1852.
The Internationals.
In 1864 the first “ International Association of Workers ” was formed
in London. It was commonly known as the ‘ ‘ First International, ’ ’ and hence
gives rise to the terminology of “ International ” which has lasted to our own
day, I do not attempt to enter into the controversies which caused it to break
up in 1874.
The Second International was formed in 1889, and many Socialist parties
in many parts of the world were affiliated to it. The last International is the
Third, of which I shall later have more to say. In 1921 it is said by the 2nd
Congress of the Third International that the Second International had been
wrecked. I find it unnecessary to say anything as to the parties to the Second
International except in the two following respects: —
1. Russian Groups.
Several Marxist groups were formed in Russia which in 1898 united
to hold the First Congress of the Russian Social Democratic Labour Party.
A Second Congress in 1903 is only mentioned because it gives rise to terms
which are common currency in Communist writings since, A struggle between
Lenin’s group and that of Markov resulted in a victory for Lenin’s group.
They were the majority and were henceforth known as Bolsheviks (Bolsheviki,
from Bolshinstvo —majority) and their defeated opponents Mensheviks
(Mensheviki, from Menshinstvo —minority). I pass over all movements in
Russia, including the rising of 1905 and the general strike in Petrograd in
February, 1917, and come to the return to Russia in April, 1917, of Lenin,
who had been living in exile in Switzerland. This return, which was facilitated
by the Germans, led after an abortive attempt in which the Bolsheviks took
part in July, 1917, to the October Revolution on 24th October (old style)
November 6th, 1917 (new style) in which Lenin and his bolsheviks overthrew
the provisional government of Kerensky and seized power. The modern era of
Communism may be said to date from this event. In March, 1919, the
Bolsheviks called together at Moscow the First Congress of the Communist
Parties of various countries and thus the Communist or Third International
came into existence. It was not till August, 1922, that affiliation was granted
to the Communist Party of Australia.
Preface
Ex. 124.
Ex. 2. p. 13.
Ex. 2. p. 14.
Ex. 150, p. 21.
Ex. 150, p. 43.
Ex. 150,
p. 193.
Ex, 150.
p. 208.
Ex.lßO.
p. 231.
Ex. 5, p. 72.


2. The predecessors of the A.C.P.
It is now necessary for me to show in brief outline how the A.C.P. came
into existence. In 1887 in New South Wales the Australian Socialist League
was formed and soon after in Victoria the Social Democratic Federation was
founded. Little need be said of them until the visit of Tom Mann (1903-9)
who stimulated them into greater activity. In 1907 most of the Socialist bodies
united in the “ Socialist Federation of Australia ” and this again in 1912
became the “ Australian Socialist Party.”
A more radical element appeared with the formation in Melbourne in
1913 of the Militant Industrial Workers of the World (1.W.W.) There is
also a claim in a letter 14/12/20 but not otherwise attested before me, that
there was in existence before 30/10/20 a branch of the A.C.P.
This was the state of affairs when the First Congress of the Third
International met. The second Congress assembled in July, 1920, and it is
about this time, as the evidence shows, that steps were taken to form an
Australian branch of the C.P.
The official Journal of the C.P., “ The Australian Communist, ” in its first
issue (24/12/20) stated that the Australian Socialist Party had convened a
conference to consider the formation of a C.P. • The conference formed itself
into such a party and elected an executive, three of whom were delegates of
the Australian Socialist Party. Several Conferences were held, and a dispute
arose between the A.S.P. and the newly-formed executive of the C.P. of
Australia 00 . The A.S.P. notified the C.P. of Australia that it withdrew its
delegates and that it intended to adopt the name of “ Communist Party of
Australia (the Australian Section of the 3rd Communist International).” 00
In spite of the action of the A.S.P. the elected executive of the
Communist Party of Australia decided to publish an official journal, “ The
Australian Communist ” and elected as its first editor, T. Glynn. (This
journal is not to be confused with the current “ Communist Review.”)
We have then at this stage two competing communist parties the
dissidents (the former A.S.P.) calling themselves the United C.P., and their
opponents the C.P. of Australia.
A.C.P. Joins the Third International!
The 3rd Congress of the 3rd International met in 1921 and the C.P. of
Australia sent delegates to attend. The Congress refused to recognize any
C.P. in Australia until unity was achieved between the two conflicting
claimants and the Executive Committee of the Communist International
(E.C.C.1.) officially demanded that unity should be achieved by the end of
January, 1922. The 2nd Congress had already laid down 21 conditions,
compliance with which was required of applicants for affiliation. With these
matters before them the C.P. of Australia convened a unity conference for
February 16, 1922, and invited to it —
“ Australian Socialist Party (now the C.P.).
The Worker’s International Industrial Union.
The Industrial Union Propaganda League.
Communist Groups in all parts of Australia.
Revolutionary and Communist Groups working inside Trade
Unions.”
What happened at that conference does not appear in the evidence, but
the Communist, 5/1/23, reports that the “ Council of Action ” ordered by the
E.C.C.I. decision referred to above, met on 27/6/22; that the Unity Conference,
Ex. 761.
Tr. p. 6316.
Ex. 761.
Tr. 6318.
Ex. 761.
Tr. 6319.
Ex. 22.
Tr. 115.
Ex. 22.
Tr. p. 116.
Ex. 27.
Ex. 25.
Tr. p. 127.
Ex. 23.
Tr. pp. 120
et B€Q.
Ex. 26.
Ex. 27.
(1) After withdrawal of the A.S.P. delegates the C.P. executive was:—W. P. Earsman (Secretary),
Tr. pp. 6010-2. Giyim, G. Hook, A. Thomas, J. S. Garden, C. Baker (of Melbourne), Miss C. Jollie Smith (of the firm
of C. Jollie Smith & Co., solicitors, mentioned later in the evidence of McGillick), Thomas Walsh, Mrs.
Adela Pankhurst Walsh, R. Webster, and S. Zanders.
(2) The party was called the Communist Party of Australia till the middle of 1944, when it becomes the
Australian Communist Party. This change was made to emphasize the Australian nature of the Party. (Tr. p. 823.)
I refer in this Report to the Communist Party of Australia and the Australian Communist Party as the " A.C.P.”,
except where the context otherwise requires.


presided over by Comrade Howie, consisted of ten members each from the
United C.P. and the C.P.; that the two parties united on the basis of the
“ conditions of admission to the Communist International ” and that the
united party be called “ The Communist Party of Australia, Australian
Section of the Communist International ” with headquarters at Communist
Hall, 395 Sussex-street, Sydney.
As a result, the C.P. of Australia was, by decision of the Executive ®
Committee at the Communist International in August, 1922, granted affiliation
with the Communist International.
Indeed, four delegates from the A.C.P. attended the 4th World r
Congress of the Communist International held at Petrograd and Moscow from i
November 7th to December 3rd, 1922. Three of these delegates were Earsman, i
Garden and Paine, but the name of the fourth does not appear.
Prom the Report of Credentials Committee of the 4th Congress of the i
Comintern it would appear that at this date the A.C.P. numbered 900
members, of whom 750 were “ full paying.”
Early Organization of the A.C.P.
After the “ Unity Conferences ” the new A.C.P. held its first
Conference at Sydney on 23/12/22. This Conference adopted ( inter alia) a ;
Constitution, the earliest of a series of Constitutions in evidence in the
Inquiry. For convenience of reference and comparison I tabulate them and
give their exhibit numbers —
1922 . . .. Exhibits 31 and 27.
1929 .. . . Exhibit 2.
1935 .. .. Exhibits 310 and 347.
1938 .. .. Exhibit 7.
1942 .. .. Exhibit 8.
1943' .. .. Exhibits 9 and 366.
1945 .. .. Exhibit 3.
1948 .. .. Exhibit 4.
The early organization of the Party was described by J. S. Garden in <
his speech to the 4th Congress of the Comintern held in November, 1922. He
claimed that the party had a membership of nearly 1,000 but was able to direct
close on 400,000 workers. He said it was based on the nuclei system, the
nucleus consisting of from 2 to 20 members, but the report is too long to quote
in extenso.
Factional Fights.
There were factional fights within the A.C.P. in its early years and
these are reviewed in Sharkey’s “ History of the Australian Communist
Party.” It does not appear when or why publicity as to such differences
ceased, but the split in 1929 (solved by the appeal to and decision of the
E.C.C.1., which I shall refer to later), is the last occasion, so far as I know, on
which any controversy on policy has been aired openly in the Party Press.
The Party Press.
It may be convenient to observe that the Party press in 1923 appears
to have consisted of a weekly newspaper “ The Communist ” (edited by H. L.
Denford) and a monthly review “ The Proletarian ” (edited by C. W.
Baker.) Later a monthly paper entitled “ The Labour Review” was
published by E. McDonald of Workers’ Art Club, Sydney, and its first issue
was dated Ist August, 1932. This magazine gave way in February, 1934, to
the “ Communist Review,” which is still currently published. In Victoria
the present official publication of the C.P. is “ The Guardian.”
Exs. 30 and
30a.
Tr. p. 136.
Tr. pp. 133,
139.
Exs. 27, 29.
29a and 31.
Ex. 29a.
Tr. p. 140.
Exs. 27, 31.
Ex. 29a.
Tr. p. 138.
Ex. 6.
Tr. pp. 18-23.
Exs. 27. 80a.
876. 403. and
404.
Tr. p. 3239.
Ex. 371.
Tr. p. 3143.
Ex. 978.


Origins of the Yiotobian Branch of the A.O.P.
I come now to the origin of the Victorian branch of the C.P. The evidence
given is lacking in many respects but it would appear that the branch came
into existence in 1920. The witness Hid, the present Secretary of the Party
in Victoria, writes that the inaugural meeting of the Communist Party in
Victoria is said to have taken place in Parer’s Hotel in November, 1920, and
the “ Communist Review ” of June, 1937, attributes the founding to the efforts
of Guido Baracchi and Percy Laidler. Baracchi himself says that in December,
1920, he participated in the foundation of the Communist Party in Australia.
But, whatever the exact date of founding, the branch was established, but for
some years it appears to have been very weak and afflicted with dissensions.
The issue of the “ Communist Review ” to which I have referred states that
“ the first Melbourne Communist Party died in its early childhood,” and that
the present branch was formed in 1925. Dissensions seem to have continued,
for Baracchi was expelled in 1925 or 1926 and Lovegrove (then known as
Jackson) was expelled in 1933.
Several witnesses joined during this period, viz., McClintock in 1931 and
Johnson and Gibson in 1932, and these have since remained members of the
Party.
In the Victorian elections in 1929 the Party issued a Manifesto to the
electors and in 1933 was appealing for funds to start a new Communist
newspaper in Victoria. At this time it would appear that the branch was
known as No. 4 District of the Communist Party of Australia. The
newspaper later appeared as “ The Workers’ Voice ” and a number of issues
of this paper were put in evidence. The issue of 10th August, 1934, revealed
that the financial position of the Party was not very sound.
Aims and Objects of the A.C.P.
I shall next deal with the aims and objects of the C.P. in Victoria and
it will be apparent from what I have said that these do not differ from the aims
and objects of the Communist Party in other parts of Australia. Mr, Laurie
accepted the position that the Victorian section was an integral part of the
A.C.P.
I have already referred to the series of Constitutions issued at short
intervals from 1922 to 1948. Before dealing with their substance and pointing
out any significant variations between the various issues, I shall set out a
statement formulated in December, 1928, by the first conference of the C.P.
after unity was achieved. It declared that the party was the “ Australian
Section of the Communist International.” Later the following series of
resolutions were endorsed:—
Resolutions of First Conference of the A.O.P.
“1. The policy of a united front of all sections of the working class is
imperatively demanded by the conditions of the class struggle, as evidenced in
particular by the present capitalist attack upon wages and hours.
2. Action by the working class can only be taken through the
organizations thrown up by that class in the course of the struggle in which it
is compelled to engage. Outside of these organizations the working class does
not exist as a fighting force.
3. Politically the working class in Australia finds its fullest expression
in the Labour Party, The aims, ideals, leadership of the Labour Party remain
anti-revolutionary because the workers themselves lack class-consciousness
and, so far as large sections are concerned, are still dominated by middle class
prejudices and ideology.
4. Only in action as the class struggle develops will the workers be able
to gain the experience that will enable them to throw off these ideals, rid
themselves of the reformist leadership, and move towards a revolutionary
objective.
Ex. 761.
I). 682.
Tr. pp. 6319-
6320.
Ex. 379.
Tr. p. 3176-6.
Ex. 285.
Ex. 879.
Ex. 761.
Ex. 5.
Tr. p. 6320.
Tr. pp. 6441,
8132, 8197.
Ex. 881.
Tr. p. 8177.
Ex. 380,
Tr. p. 3176.
Ex. 276.
Tr. 2592-3.
Tr. I). 6339.
Ex. 27 and 31.


5. The Communist Party, as the vanguard of this fighting working
class, can only fulfil its missions by constant contact with all working class
organizations, and constant participation in the working class struggle against
the forces of capitalism.
To this end the Communist Party declares its readiness to support the
Labour Party in every act of resistance against capitalist oppression, proclaims
its solidarity with the workers organized in the Labour Party, instructs its
members to apply for membership in the Labour Party, and demands the right
to affiliate as an integral part of the Party, whilst maintaining at the same time
its own independent and revolutionary point of view, based upon the
unassailable principles of Communism.”
Objectives or A.G.P.
In the same document the objectives were set out in these words:—
“ The Communist Party of Australia is the organization of the
vanguard of the class-conscious workers. Its purpose is the education
and organization of the workers for the overthrow of the capitalist
state, establishment of Dictatorship of the Proletariat, abolition of
the capitalist system and the development of a Communist society.”
In the 1929 Constitution it is again stated that the A.C.P. is the
Australian section of the Communist International and the objectives are
expressed in language identical with that of 1922.
The membership book which sets out the Constitution of 1929 also
contains a reprint of the Statutes of the Third International.
There appears to have been a Constitution intervening between 1929 and
1935 of -which no copy is in evidence but there is some evidence that it stated
the party’s objective in the following words; —
“ The Communist Party of Australia, which, in its capacity as
leader and organizer of the revolutionary movement of the Proletariat,
fights for the capture of the majority of the working class, and of large
sections of poor and middle farmers for Communist principles and
aims, for the colonial peoples in their struggles against Imperialism,
for the establishment of the dictatorship of the Proletariat, for the
formation, of an Australian Socialist Soviet Republic, for the total
abolition of classes, and for the realization of socialism, which is the
initial state of the Communist social order,”
a formulation later directed to be deleted from the then existing rules.
The Constitution of 1935 recasts the name section and the objectives of
the party by omitting the formulation of 1922 and 1929 and putting in its place
the following:—
“ The Communist Party of Australia, being a section of the
Communist International, is the organized vanguard of the proletariat
of Australia, the highest form of its class organization.
The Party fights for the leadership of the proletariat, the toiling
farmers and all the toiling masses in the struggle for the dictatorship
of the proletariat, for the victory of Socialism.”
In the 1938 Constitution the aims and objects of the party are set out in
a preamble which reads: —
“ The Communist Party of Australia is a working-class political
party carrying forward to-day the best traditions of Australian
democracy, the struggle against convictism for; self-government, at
Eureka, the fight for social reforms, against military conscription
and for peace. Upholding the achievements of democracy and
standing for the right of the majority to direct the destinies of our
country, the Communist Party fights with all its strength to unite the
masses to resist any and every effort whether it comes from abroad
or within, to impose upon the Australian people the arbitrary will of
any selfish minority group, or party, or clique. It is devoted to the
defence of the immediate interests of the workers, farmers, and middle
Ex. 27 and 81.
Ex. 2.
Ex. 310, p. Ifi.
Exa. 810 aiid
347.
Tr. pp. 2838-
2876.
Ex. 7.


class against capitalist exploitation. The Communist Party works
tirelessly in the cause of world peace and for the defence of Australia
against fascist invasion. It works for the preparation of the working
class for its historic mission to unite and lead the Australian people
to extend these democratic principles to their necessary and logical
conclusion; by. establishing common ownership of the national economy
through a government of the toiling people; the abolition of class
divisions in society by the ending of exploitation of man by man and
nation by nation: i.e., by the establishment of Socialism, according to
the scientific principles given us by the great teachers of mankind,
Marx, Engels, Lenin and Stalin, expressed in the policy of the
Communist International.
The Communist Party works toward the free co-operation of the
Australian people with those of other lands —striving toward a world
without oppression and war —a world brotherhood of man. ’ ’
In the 1942 Constitution the amis and objects again appear in the same
language and the same form, but in the Introduction it is remarked that ‘ ‘ the
preamble was written in language suited to the line of struggle against Fascism
and war prior to September, 1939. It remains basically correct but some
formulations would be changed to-day.”
These considerations may have led to some slight alterations in the
preamble to the 1943 Constitution, but there are two alterations in the aims
and objects which no doubt are explained by the date and the differing
conditions prevailing in regard to Australia at war in 1943 as compared with
pre-war Australia in 1939. “ The fight against military conscription and for
peace ” now becomes “ the struggle against imperialist war and fascism,” and
the Party’s work “ in the cause of world peace and for the defence of Australia
against fascist invasion,” is now directed “ in the interests of Australian
security and independence.”
The preamble to the 1945 Constitution occupies twelve pages of the
booklet in which the Constitution is printed. I do not here attempt to set it
out, but the following important attitudes, aims and purposes are set out, viz.:—■
(a) “ The Australian Communist Party has as its objective the
, establishment of a classless, socialist society.”
(5) An immediate measure necessary to break the control of
monopoly capital is the nationalization of key industries
now in the possession of a handful of monopolists.
(c) The method to be adopted by the A.C.P. is the democratic
method, i.e., the winning of a majority of the Australian
people, and majority rule.
(d) Opposition to minority dictatorships.
(e) The G.P. has no aim of establishing a totalitarian state.
(/) The C.P. does not neglect immediate issues, e.g., post-war
reconstruction.
(</) The C.P. supports U.N.O.
Qi) The C.P. demands unproved living standards, &c.
(0 Unity of the labour movement is the key to the people’s future
and the realization of socialism.
(j) The C.P. strives for unity of the labour movement.
1948 Constitution.—The last Constitution put in evidence on the Inquiry
was that of 1948. In the main it follows that of 1945, but there are some
differences to be noted. The 1945 document had stated that “ socialism needs
a state authority; the people need this authority to carry through the great
programme of the reconstruction of society and to safeguard Socialist
democracy.” This passage is replaced by the statement—“ The democratic
Peoples will carry through the great programme of the reconstruction
of society. A passage calling for “ a strong and independent Australian
polity based on the expansion of industry, increase of population, economic
Ex. 8.
Tr. pp, 26-8.
Ex. I).
Ex. 3.
Tr. pp. 18-20.
Ex. i.


security and adjustment of immigration policy is omitted and in its place is
a declaration against imperialism, particularly American imperialism which
aims at a third world war and world domination, and a statement that “ the
Communist _ Party fights to withdraw Australia from the imperialist
war-mongering camp of Anglo-American monopoly capital imperialists and to
realign this country with the peace-loving progressive forces of the world, the
U.S.S.R., the Peoples’ Democracies, the colonial liberation movements, and the
international labour movement.” The preamble in 1948 ends with the following
statement, the third paragraph of which had not appeared in earlier
constitutions: —
“The Communist Party strives always for an agreement, united
action and a united front with the other sections of the labour
movement. It works at all times for the strengthening and unity
of the trade union movement and the furtherance of the objectives of
trade unionism.
The Communist Party strives for the unity of the labour movement
and all other democratic forces for the realization of the democratic
aims of the people and for Socialism,
To consolidate the all-round unity of the popular forces, the
Communist Party strives to establish a type of People’s Front, in
conformity with Australian conditions and traditions, which will lead
the toilers to liberation and Socialism through People’s Democracy.
People’s Democracy is a higher and more comprehensive form of
democracy than the existing bourgeois democracy, which preserves the
rule of the capitalist class, while People’s Democracy ensures the rule
of the working class and all toilers on the basis of public ownership of
the means of production.
The following Constitution and Rules are laid down to enable the
Party to work more effectively for the realization of the above aims. ’ ’
Opposition to Social Democratic Parties and Reformism.
Since the Communist Party believes, as I have already pointed out,
that the capitalist system is inherently contradictory, it opposes the policy of
what it calls the Social Democratic Parties, and policies which seek to solve
workers’ problems by reforms in the existing system. These policies it calls
Reformism, which, it claims, is rooted in Imperialism.
This attitude of the Second International was, according to Stalin, its
mortal sin, and its advocacy by Kautsky draws from Lenin a wealth of.
invective and abuse.
Mr. Laurie in his opening laid stress on the view that influences are at
work and forces operating, under the surface of society as it were, in the case
of all revolutions in history, until there comes a time when these forces burst ■
through the containing crust and issue forth as a revolutionary movement'
which changes the current of development. 05 Reformism seeks to contain such,
forces by reforming the existing system.
Special Sense of Words Used-—Capitalism, the State,
Dictatorship, Imperialism.
Phrases like “ overthrow of the capitalist state ”, and “ dictatorship
of the proletariat ” have implications for the communist that are not at once
seen by those who have not been instructed in Communist theory and practice.
Capitalism denotes particularly the land of economic system familiar for a
century or more in Great Britain and the U.S.A., in which the ownership of
the means of production and distribution is in the hands of a relatively small
Ex. 17.
Tv. pi), 60, 70.
Ex. 12, p. 82.
Ex. 17, p. 78.
Ex. 126,
Vol. 2, pp. 369
et aeg, and
Ex. 835.
TV. pp. 6311
et. seq.
(1) Ramsay Macdonald, in The Socialist Movement (Home University Library), page 104, says;—"lt is to be
regretted that in order to keep up an honoured but antiquated phraseology, some Socialists still use the word
revolution to indicate what they have in mind. It must be observed, therefore, that they use the word in a very
special way They simply mean to indicate by it, that when Socialism has come the change will be so great as to be
fundamental, and that the state of society which then will have been evolved will be so different from that from which
the evolution sprung, that it will not be the same kind of society at all.”
See too Gallacher p 16—Perhaps Mathematicians and Physicists may find some analogy in the Quantum
theory in’which an electron is said to jump from one orbit to another at a different level of energy. See Bases of
Modern Science—Sullivan, p. 170,
4329/50.—2


portion of the people, on whom the larger mass of the population is dependent
for employment and in which the pursuit and prospect of profit determine
• whether and how resources shall be employed/ 0 I call attention to but do not
. quote the description given in the Marxist Glossary by L. Harry Gould.
The State is conceived of as the apparatus of power in the hands of the
governing class and its various organizations (Parliament, police, judiciary,
army, &c.), as means of protecting and advancing the interests of that class
and repressing and suppressing those of all other classes. There are many
passages hi the Exhibits especially attacking the Arbitration Courts as
■ agencies of the capitalist system and advising the party to ignore them. An
exposition of the various aspects of the state is to be found in the Glossary.
When the Communist speaks of the “ overthrow of the capitalist state ”
he does not contemplate merely seizing and using the existing organs of
government. Ever since the failure of ihe Commune in Paris in 1871, in which
the communards sought to use the existing state machinery, Communist leaders
have insisted that the first task of the successful revolution is to destroy—
to “ smash ” —the existing machinery. “ The victory of the dictatorship of
the proletariat signifies ”, says Stalin, “ the suppression of the bourgeoisie,
the smashing of the bourgeois state machine and the substitution of proletarian
democracy for bourgeois democracy.” By way of contrast one may refer to
a comment on Australian methods by Lenin in June, 1913, cited by L.
Sharkey hi his “ Australia Marches On ”. The then recent Federal election
in Australia had resulted in the defeat of the Labour Party in the House of
Representatives, though not in the Senate. It had had a majority in both
Houses in the previous Parliament, “ What a peculiar capitalist country is
this ”, said Lenin, “ in which Labour predominates in the Upper House and
recently predominated hi the Lower House and yet the capitalist system
does not suffer any danger.”
And as to dictatorship—the Communist regards all governments which
have existed to the present as dictatorships in which the class holding power
governs the rest of the people by force. In capitalist countries, he insists,
there is a concealed dictatorship of the capitalist class, and he claims that his
purpose is merely to substitute for a dictatorship of a minority that of the
majority. Stalin discusses in “ Foundations of Leninism ”, what organizations
are required for this task, organizations “ that can serve as the grave-digger
of the bourgeois state machine ”, and he answers that they are the Soviets.
The work runs to 80 pages and I do not quote further on this point.
Use of the Marxist Glossary.
What I have just said emphasizes that it is necessary to the
understanding of Communist documents constantly to bear in mind that words
are often used in a special sense and not in their ordinary English meanings.
To gather what this special sense is I have already referred to the Marxist
Glossary. To give a further instance “Imperialism” is the subject of a
two-page exposition which commences with a quotation from Lenin: —
“ Imperialism is a particular historic stage of capitalism. Its
special character is threefold. Imperialism is (1) Monopoly
capitalism, (2) parasitic or decaying capitalism, (3) moribund
capitalism. The substitution of monopoly for free competition is
the fundamental economic feature, the quintessence of imperialism.”
The Glossary itself commences with the well-known saying quoted
from Talleyrand, “ Words are spoken to conceal thoughts,” and this is a
useful reminder that one should consult the Glossary where the meaning
does not seem clear.
Statement of Objective.
The various Constitutions have set out in formal terms the professed
aims and objects of the A.C.P., but Mr. Laurie in his address suggested that
“ the fundamental objective of the party is the changing of the class relations,
Ex. 12, p. 18.
Tr. p. 177.
Ex. 17, p. 82.
Tr. p. 7717.
Ex. 37,
Tr. 167,171.
Ex. 38, p. 60.
Ex. 43. p. 24.
Tr. p. 226.
Ex. 12. p. 92.
Ex. 38. pp, 80,
,’.5 and 56.
Tr. p. 188-5.
Ex. 18,
pp. 49, 50.
Tr. p. 55.
Ex. 12, p. 92.
Ex. 17, p. 35.
Ex. 709, p. 6.
Ex. 12, p. 41.
Ex. 17, p. 35.
See Glossary
us to cadre,
deviation,
'Taction,
sectarianism,
spontaneity.
Tr. p. 6326.
(1) Cf, The History of the Homeland (1947), by Henry Hamilton, p. 145.


the establishment of new class relations and not, as it had been put, the
overthrow of the state.” I have thought it wise to let the documents speak
for themselves.
Further Aims.
So much for the aims and objects of the G.P. as they appear in the
formal documents but these documents are not the whole of the story. The
Communists, as I shall show later, aim at nothing less than the remoulding of
human nature in the course of remoulding Society. Hence something further
ought to be said as to the philosophy which underlies their aims and which
their activities and operations are intended to implement. The passage cited
above from Fisher’s “ History of Europe ” referred to. Marx’s view that all
history was a struggle of classes for the material goods of life. Fisher did not
develop or even discuss the relationship of Marx’s philosophy to Religion and
Ethics. I propose now to say something as to what the evidence discloses on
these subjects.
Religion and Ethics.
One of the Exhibits put in evidence was “ Lenin on Religion.” The
editor sums up the question in the following propositions: —
“ Atheism is a natural and inseparable part of Marxism, of the
theory and practice of scientific socialism. In accordance with their
fundamental philosophical outlook, Marx and Engels always called
themselves materialists. ’ ’
Then further down on the same page—
“ While the first programme of the Social-Democrats of Germany
(the Eisenach programme of 1869) clearly and correctly stated the
• demand for the separation of Church from State, and School from
the Church, the Gotha programme of Socialist Labour Party (1875)
contained the formulation: ‘ Religion is declared a private matter. ’
This opened wide the door to the opportunists. In his commentary
on this programme, Marx wrote that the worker’s party should try
rather to ‘ liberate the conscience from the spectre of religion,’ and
added wrathfully: ‘ but they don’t think it proper to overstep the
bourgeois mark.’ The German Social-Democratic Party kept to the
same idea in its Erfurt programme of 1891.”
Then there is a discussion of that attitude which is called ‘ opportunist. ’
Then the editor sums up the Introduction in these terms: —
“ Four principles from Lenin.
From the writings of Lenin the following four principles stand out as
the most important:
1. Atheism is an integral part of Marxism. Consequently a class-
conscious Marxist party must carry on propaganda in favour of atheism.
2. The demand for the complete separation of Church and State, and
Church and Schools, must be made.
3. The winning over of the proletariat is accomplished principally by
dealing with their everyday economic and political interests, consequently the
propaganda in favour of atheism must grow out of, and be carefully related
to, the defence of these interests. .
4. The final emancipation of the toiling masses from religion will occur
only after the proletarian revolution, only in a Communist society. This,
however, is not a reason for postponing the propaganda for atheism. Rather
does it emphasize its urgency in subordination to the general needs of the
worker’s class struggle. Lenin’s attitude towards religion can be seen most
clearly in the programme of the Communist Party of Russia drawn up in
March 1919. Under the heading of £ General political Questions ’ Section 13,
we read: ‘ With regard to religion, the Communist Party of the Soviet Union
does not confine itself to the already decreed separation of Church and State
and of School and Church, i.e., measures advocated in the programmes of
Ex. 292.
Tr. p. 2763
«( seg.


bourgeois democracy, wMeh the latter has nowhere consistently carried out to
the end owing to the diverse and actual ties which bind capital with religious
propaganda. Idle Communist Party of the Soviet Union is guided by the
conviction that only the conscious and deliberate planning of all the social and
economic activities of the masses will cause religious prejudices to die out.
The Party strives for the complete dissolution of the ties between the
exploiting classes and the organization of religious propaganda, facilitates the
real emancipation of the working masses from religious prejudices and
organizes the widest possible scientific educational and anti-religious
propaganda. At the same time it is necessary carefully to avoid giving such
offence to the religious sentiments of believers, as only leads to the
strengthening of religious fanaticism.' ’
In Lenin’s own work he says:—
“Religion is one of the forms of spiritual oppression which
everywhere weigh upon the masses who are crushed by continuous
toil for others, by poverty and deprivation. The helplessness of all
the exploited in their struggle against the exploiters inevitably
generates a belief in a better life after death, even as the helplessness
of the savage in his struggle with nature gives rise to a belief in gods,
devils, miracles, &c. Religion teaches those who toil in poverty all
their lives to be resigned and patient in this world, and consoles them
with the hope of reward in heaven. As for those who live upon the
labour of others, religion teaches them to be ‘ charitable ’ —thus
providing a justification for exploitation, and as it were, a cheap
ticket to heaven likewise. ‘ Religion is the opium of the people.’ ” (1)
“ Religion is a kind of spiritual intoxicant, in which the slaves of
capital drown their humanity, and blunt their desire for a decent
human existence.”
Then further down on page 12—
Religion as a private matter.
“ Religion must be regarded as a private matter.”
“ In these words the attitude of Socialists to religion is usually
expressed. But we must define the meaning of these words precisely
so as to avoid misunderstanding. We demand that religion be
regarded as a private matter as far as the State is concerned, but
under no circumstances can we regard it as as private matter in our
own Party. ’ ’
“ To the proletarian Socialist Party, however, religion is not a
private matter. Our Party is a league of class-conscious progressive
fighters for the liberation of the working class. Such a league cannot
and must not _be indifferent to ignorance or benightedness in the
shape of religious beliefs. We demand the entire separation of the
State from the Church, in order to disperse the fog of religion by
purely intellectual and only intellectual weapons, by our press and
oral persuasion. One of the objects of our organization, the Russian
Social-Democratic Labour Party, is precisely to fight against all
religious deception of the workers. For us, the ideological struggle
is not a private matter but one that concerns the whole Party, and
the whole proletariat.” (
“ To draw a hard and fast line between the theoretical propagation
of Atheism, between breaking down the religious beliefs of certain
sections of the proletariat, and the effect, the development, the
general implications of the class struggle of these sections, is to
reason non-dialeetically; to transform a variable, relative boundary
into an absolute one. It is a forcible tearing asunder of that which
is indissolubly connected in reality. For example, the proletariat
Ex, 292, p. 11.
Ex. 292. p. 18.
Ex. 292. pp.
20-1.
(1) That this much quoted aphorism originated with Marx seems questionable. The Oxford Dictionary of
Quotations lists it as anonymous. _ Moreover, Marx, like Shakespeare, readily took from other sources what was useful
to him. Charles Kingsley had said of the Bible that we had used it "as an opium dose for keeping beasts of burden
patient while they were being overloaded."


of a given district in a given branch of industry can be divided, let
us say, into a vanguard of fairly class-conscious Social-Democrats
(who are, it stands to reason, atheists), and the rather backward
mass which, still having ties with the villages and the peasantry,
still believes in Gj-od, goes to church or is even directly influenced
by the priest. These constitute, let us assume, the Christian Workers’
Union. _ Let us suppose, further, that the economic struggle in such
a locality has resulted in a strike. A Marxist must place the success
of the strike movement above all else, must definitely oppose the
division of the workers in this struggle into atheists and Christians,
must fight resolutely against such a division.”
The class struggle will convert Christian Workers to Atheism.
“In such circumstances the preaching of atheism is superfluous»
and harmful —not from the narrow-minded consideration of not
frightening the backward elements, or of losing votes at elections,
&e., but from the point of view of the actual progress of the class
struggle, which, in the conditions of modern capitalist society, will
convert Christian workers to Social-Democracy, and to atheism a
hundred times more effectively than any bald atheist sermons. To
preach atheism' at such a time, and in such circumstances, would
only be playing into the hands of the Church and the priests, who
would desire nothing more than to have the workers participating
in the strike movement divided in accordance with their religious
beliefs. ’ ’
This view of the A.C.P’s. attitude to religion, Hill, I think, accepted.
An article in “ The Proletarian ” of June Ist, 1923, by C. W. Baker i
one of the founders of the A.C.P., sets out six concepts which he said*
constitute Materialism. I cite the sixth which is headed “ Ethical
Materialism
“ Based on the above, which completely breaks with all bourgeois i
moral and ethical conceptions, rejects the idea of a world beyond,
as taught by religion, recognizes no end and no powers in life or
history but those set by the material world ”,
Later (at p. 11 of the article), the author says:—
“ Ethical Materialism is but the application of our materialist'
conceptions to man’s relations to his fellow man. It also sweeps
aside the bourgeois conceptions in this field and rejects entirely the
bourgeois conceptions of ‘ right ’, ‘ justice ’, ‘ honor ’, ‘ liberty -
‘ equality ’, fraternity ’, ‘ virtue ’, ‘ truth ’, and other trade marks
of ruling class morality. In place of this code of laws for slaves,
the proletariat creates its own ethical conceptions. It does not love i
its class enemies, it hates them. It considers wrong what the ruling
class considers right. Bourgeois justice to the workers is injustice,
their liberty is slavery, their truth is a historical lie. The proletarian
ideology is' in complete opposition to bourgeois ideology. The class
war manifests itself in the field of ideas, and in this war of ideas all
bourgeois conceptions must be destroyed; as many as possible now,
the remainder when the workers have the power to carry out their
destruction. In this field, instead of accepting bourgeois morality,
the proletariat by the application of its Marxian theories erects
for itself out of its own experience and its own ideas a proletarian
system of ethics, and so Marxism conquers step by step the world
for materialism.”
A month earlier, in “The Proletarian ”, May 1,1923, there had been
published an article entitled “ Communism and Christianity ” in which the
writer had said:—
“No worker can consistently be both a Communist and a Christian.
The guiding principle of his life may be either Christian or Communist,
( or neither, but it cannot be both. To attempt to combine these two
P. 21.
Ex. 403.
Ex. 22.
Tr. p. 3241.
Tr. p. 3242.
See also
Ex. 900.
Ex. 404, p. 11.
Tr. 3243
et sag.


diametrically opposed viewpoints denotes either ignorance of one or
both of them or charlatanism which is akin to political opportunism.
The acceptance of Communism leads to the complete dissolution of
all religious beliefs.”
Nor did I understand Hill to dissent from this view. He said; —
“ The philosophy of Communism is a materialistic philosophy, but
we admit to membership of the C.P. people of religious beliefs,
irrespective of their religious beliefs.”
The Transcript then records the following questions and answers:—
“By the Commissioner: That is a thing which has been puzzling
me a good deal. I want to ask you a question about it. I suppose
if you fully accept the materialist philosophy which is embodied in
Communism, that is inconsistent with the holding of a religious
belief. A. Yes. Q. And the fact that you admit people holding
various religious beliefs into the Party must mean then that they
do not fully accept the Communist philosophy 1 ? A. That is so, Sir.
Q. They may accept its practice, they may accept its objects, but
they cannot accept the philosophy of the movement? H. That is
right, Sir. Q. I thought that must be the reconciliation, but I was
not sure. A. Might I say this, Sir, that all that has ever been
demanded of a person before he joined the Party is the acceptance
of the Party’s programme, the payment of. dues, and the attachment
to a basic organization of the Party, and that obviously permits of
the holding of religious beliefs.”
The last citation I make is from a publication called “ Forward ”
authorized by the Communist Party. Its date is May, 1943, and it contains
an article on religion which says
“ If any one is prepared to accept our programme and engage in
genuine working-class activity it would be absurd to exclude him
because he clings to his old religious beliefs. In acquiring a
knowledge of Marxism such a comrade will lose his religious beliefs;
but here again we do not make an issue of the matter.”
Does the End Justify the Means ?
The investigation before me of morality under Communism was
largely concerned with the question whether or not in the Communist view
the end justified the means. I shall set out my view of the evidence on this
matter but will first deal with the more general question of Communist Ethics.
Lenin in his work on Religion has this to say:—
“ But is there such a thing as Communist ethics? Is there such a
thing as Communist morality? Of course there is. It is frequently
asserted that we have no ethics, and very frequently the bourgeoisie
says that we Communists deny all morality. That is one of their
methods of confusing the issue, of throwing dust into the eyes of the
workers and peasants.
In what sense do we deny ethics, morals?
In the sense in which they are preached by the bourgeoisie, a sense
which deduces these morals from God’s Commandments. Of course,
we say that we do not believe in Cod. We know perfectly' well that
the clergy, the landlords, and the bourgeoisie all claimed to speak in
the name of Cod, in order to protect their own interests as exploiters,
or instead of deducing their ethics from the commandments of
morality, from the commandments of Cod, they deduced them from
idealistic or semi-idealistic phrases which in substance were always
very similar to Divine commandments.
We deny all morality taken from superhuman or non-class
conceptions. We say that this is a deception, a swindle, a befogging
of the minds of the workers and peasants in the interests of the
landlords and capitalists.
Tr. p. 7383.
Ex. 760, p. 3.
Tr. p. 0393.
Ex. 292, p. 66.
Tr. p. 2767.


We say that our morality is wholly subordinated to the interests
of the class struggle of the proletariat. We deduce our morality from
the facts and needs of the class struggle of the proletariat.”
And insofar as conventional ethics derive from or are concerned to
protect the institution of individual property one would expect the
Communists to repudiate them.
On the narrower question of the end justifying the means there is a
good deal of evidence which is perhaps best introduced by an article in The
Modern Quarterly, Autumn, 1946, put in evidence by Mr. Laurie, entitled 3
“ The Great Moral Muddle.” The author contends that the phrase “ the end'
justifies the means ” is a term of abuse and a question-begging phrase and
that it assumes that means can be judged apart from the ends they bring
about. He argues that the means are chosen because they are suitable and
they are suitable because their results are good and these results include all
and not merely some of the results. Later he says that the rightness or
wrongness of actions does not depend on the feelings or upon opinions but
upon motives and actual consequences, those actions being right which have
the best consequences on the whole.
Again he says:—
“Any rule, say of truthfulness, or saeredness of human life, is 1
itself only valid because it generally makes for good. But it does
not do so always. To give the ordinary textbook case, if by
misdirecting a murderer I may save the victim’s life, not only may I
lie, but I ought to he, and it would be sharing in the guilt of murder
if I did not, ’ ’ and
“There are many cases in which it is right to lie. But that does not
overthrow the general rule that one should tell the truth. There is
simply no foolproof rule in the matter. Morals are not foolproof,
and cannot be. Being moral is not obeying an external authoritative
commandment, but taking the moral responsibility of finding out
what is right and making the best judgment we can arrive at
authoritative. . . ” (1)
Mr. Laurie concluded; —
“And it follows from that, Sir, that as far as the Party is ■
concerned, we say that, if the Party in fact did adopt fraudulent
means or did in fact try to win a position of leadership by violence
and these other methods, looking at all the consequences that flow
from that, the evil consequences even from the point of view of the
Party would so overweigh the immediate possible gains that it would
not be justifiable and would result in the loss of the confidence of
the worldng class.”
Hill expressed his view in these words: —
“ I think that any Communist forms an assessment of the state of
political development of the public and the views that people hold
and I do not see any difficulty in guiding one’s conduct accordingly.”
He added —
“ I think that my morality and that of the C.P. is determined by
what will assist human development forward.”
I conclude this section with one further citation. In the Communist
Review of October, 1937, in an article by Harry Gould certain questions are
put and answers made. One is as to the mode of approach to Catholics for
co-operation and the relevant part of the answer is—;
“ Here as elsewhere the test should be: In the given circumstances
can it help or not in our immediate task of winning the battle of
democracy 1 ?”
Ex. 782, p. 55
ct actf.
Ex. 782. p. 61.
Tr. p. 6425,
Tr. p. 739;,
Tr. p. 7396.
Ex. 425.
Tv. pp. 3558-0.
(1) Laski on Communism, p. 52, says that the Communist has an assurance of his ultimate triumph, and adds:—
“ That certainty produces in its possessors the temperament of the fanatic. They know so surely the rightness of their
end that they feel morally entitled to use all means for its accomplishment. It is this assurance that they have the
truth on their side which makes the Bolsheviks so impatient of and so intolerant to criticism and dissent. Like all
the great fanatics of history they cannot help but equate disagreement with sin.


My conclusion from the foregoing is that the C.P. is prepared to use any
means to achieve what it regards as a desirable object, so long as it regards the
means as fitting and the results as not on the whole disadvantageous.
But apart from documents and statements, the party’s activities and
operations may show that there are other aims and objects. I merely mention
the possibility at this stage and leave any further development of the subject
to a later stage.
Further Questions.
But two questions at once arise—
(a) When are these aims and objects to be attained 1 ?
(&) Are they to be brought about by violence or peaceably?
(a) When is the capitalistic state of society to be overthrown . and the
Dictatorship of the Proletariat established f
Mr. Sharkey in his ‘ £ Outline History of the Communist Party ’ ’ answers
this question by saying not until the Australian people peacefully and
democratically decide by a majority to change the existing social order and
embrace Socialism. A number of Communist witnesses gave evidence to the
same effect. To the same effect is the statement in the Programmatic
Declaration of the C.P. “ with the support of the majority of the people we
will overthrow and smash the power of the capitalists and big land owners.”
Dr. H. Y. Evatt, when a Justice of the High Court of Australia, recalled
the socialist and labour aphorism, “ the inevitability of gradualness, ” (1) and
concluded, “ The history of the attempts and failures of Communism to gain
control of other political movements of the working classes may tend, upon
close analysis, to show that, to turn the phrase, Communism illustrates the
gradualness, the extreme gradualness of inevitability.”
Stalin in “ Foundations of Leninism ” (1944 Ed.) at p. 13 says:—
“ The opportunists assert that the proletariat cannot and ought not
to seize power if it does not itself constitute a majority in the country.
No proofs are adduced, for this absurd thesis cannot be justified either
theoretically or practically. But suppose a historic situation arises
(war, agrarian crisis, &c.) in which the proletariat, a minority of the
population, is able to rally around itself the vast majority of the
working masses, why should it not seize power then? Why should
it not profit by the favourable internal and international situation to
pierce the front of capitalism and hasten the general climax ? ’ ’
Lastly, the witness Gibson said that the C.P. could not say that the
contingency might arise in any foreseeable term of years, but that they intended
at the earliest practicable time (2) to overthrow capitalism and install Socialism
and he added —“ We feel that the dangers opened up by capitalism at the
present time are absolutely appalling.”
Lenin’s View.
It would seem from the evidence before me that no more specific
indication of the time contemplated for the overthrow of the existing system
can he given than the above, and indeed indefiniteness of time seems inherent
in the authoritative exposition of revolutionary crisis by Lenin himself:—
“ The fundamental law of revolution,” he says, “ confirmed by all
revolutions, and in particular by the three Russian revolutions in the
twentieth century, is as follows: It is not sufficient for revolution that
the exploited and oppressed masses understand the impossibility of
living in the old way, and demand changes; for revolution it is necessary
that the exploiters should not be able to live and rule in the old way.
Ex. 5, p. 71.
Ex. 44.
48. C.L.R..
pp. 517-8.
Ex. 17, p. 13.
IT. p. 6473.
Ex. 12,
pp. 85-6.
(1) The Party Training Manual uses the more usual word “ gradualism,” and Mr. Allen has drawn my attention
to the fact that in Uncle Tom’s Cabin, by Harriet Beecher Stowe (1853) there occurs at p, xviii. of the introductory
remarks the phrase—" the superior prudence of gradualism . ... seldom mentioned now except in derision.”
Time " (1) In his charge to the jury on the trial of eleven defendants charged with conspiring to overthrow
OjtMtt. the U.S. Government by violence, Judge Medina defined the crime as involving “Intent to cause the
overthrow or destruction of the U.S. Government by force and violence as speedily as circumstances
would permit it to he achieved," ’


Only when the ‘ lower classes ’ do not want the old, and when the
‘ upper classes ’ cannot continue in the old way, then only can the
revolution be victorious. This truth may be expressed in other words;
revolution is impossible without a national crisis affecting both the
exploited and the exploiters. It follows that for revolution it is
essential, first, that a majority of the workers (or at least a majority
of the class-conscious, thinking politically-active workers) should
fully understand the necessity for revolution, and be ready to
sacrifice their lives for it; secondly, that the ruling classes should he in
a state of governmental crisis which draws even the most backward
masses into politics (a symptom of every real revolution is the rapid
tenfold, and even hundred-fold, increase in the number of hitherto
apathetic representatives of the toiling and oppressed masses capable
of waging the political struggle), weakens the Government and makes
it possible for the revolutionaries to overthrow it rapidly.”
Re-orientation of Human Nature.
The period of the dictatorship of the proletariat is regarded as a
preparation for and prelude to the development of a Communist Society, but
it is a mistake to regard this period as temporary in any ordinary sense. It
contemplates a time of re-education and re-orienting of human nature in
which the unit is not a year but a generation.
Stalin’s View.
Stalin has dealt at length with the topic, and I quote his words:—
“We must, therefore, regard the dictatorship of the proletariat, the
transition from capitalism to Communism, not as a fleeting period
replete with ‘ super-revolutionary ’ deeds and decrees, but as an entire
historical epoch full of civil wars and external conflicts, of persistent
organizational work and economic construction, of attacks and
retreats, of victories and defeats. This historical epoch is necessary
not only in order to create the economic and cultural prerequisites
for the complete victory of Socialism, but also in order to enable the
proletariat, first, to educate itself and become steeled into a force
capable of governing the country; secondly, to re-educate and remould
the petty-bourgeois strata along such lines as will assure the
organization of social production. Marx said to the workers: You will
have to go through fifteen, twenty, fifty years of civil wars and conflicts
of peoples, not only to change the conditions, but in order to change
yourselves and to make yourselves capable of wielding political
power. ” (1)
Socialism to precede Communism.
Two further points must be made on this branch of the case. In this
state of the dictatorship of the proletariat, at least in the beginning, the
Communist Party does not conceive the possibility of establishing Communism
completely. At this stage it contemplates a state of Socialism in which each
will give according to his ability and will receive according to his work. When,
however, the time it ripe for Communism each will give according to his
ability and receive according to his needs. Indeed one witness put the matter
so high that the recipient will receive according to his own estimate of his
needs, which may be thought to come very close to saying according to his
desires.
(b) How is the capitalist state of Society to be overthrown—by violence or
peaceably ?
Mr. Sholl in his opening summarized his contentions in a series of
propositions, one of which was that the fundamental objective of the
Communists is the overthrow by violence of the existing state and its organs
of Government and the seizure of power and the establishment of the
dictatorship of the proletariat.
Ex. 17, p. 31.
Tr. p. 6327
et. seq.
Tr. p. 6450.
Tr. p. 30.
(1) Toynbee, in his Study of History, Vol. V., p. 179, refers to the Communist claim that the Dictatorship of the
Proletariat is a transient regime and remarks that “ a similar transitoriness is of course one of the traditional features
of the Jewish Messiah’s millenial reign on earth.”


Mr. Laurie in Ms opening refused to accept the proposition that the
overthrow must he by violence. He said the fundamental objective was the
achievement of a Socialist Society and that the question of how it can be
achieved is a secondary one and depends entirely upon the time, conditions
and place. The main communist witnesses took the same position. They all
referred to recent experiences in Eastern Europe where what they called
Peoples ’ Democracies had come into existence. These, they said, had effected
the change without violence. I have had no evidence of the manner of making
these changes and hence cannot say whether these happenings support the
contention or not. (1) 1
Evidence oe the Communist Texts.
I refer to some evidence which seems to me to throw light on the
matter. The Communist Manifesto spoke of the inevitability of the change
being achieved by violent revolution. Lenin in “ The State and Revolution ”
has without ambiguity expressed his view—“ The hymn of praise sung in
its honour by Engels and fully corresponding to the repeated declaration of
Marx (see the concluding passages of the “ Poverty of Philosophy ” and
the “ Communist Manifesto ”, with its proud and open declaration of the
inevitability of a violent revolution; also Marx’s “ Criticism of the Hotha
Programme of 1875 ” in which, thirty years after, he mercilessly castigates
its opportunist character) —this praise is by no means a mere “ impulse ”, a
mere declamation, or a mere polemical sally. The necessity of systematically
fostering among the masses this and only this point of view about violent
revolution lies at the root of the whole of Marx’s and Engels’ teaching, and
it is just the neglect of such propaganda and agitation both by the present
predominant Social-Chauvinists and the Kautskian schools that brings their
betrayal of it into prominent relief. The substitution of a proletarian for
the capitalist State is impossible without a violent revolution, while the
abolition of the proletarian State —that is, of all States —is ordy possible
through ‘ withering away.’ ” In “ The Proletarian Revolution and Renegade
Kautsky ”, Lenin says:—
“ Dictatorship is rule based directly on force and unrestricted by
any laws. The revolutionary dictatorship of the proletariat is rule
won and maintained by the use of violence by the proletariat against
the bourgeoisie, rule that is unrestricted by any laws.”
The “ Handbook for Tutors ” quotes Lenin as saying:—
“ The dictatorsMp of the proletariat is the domination of the
proletariat over the bourgeoisie, untrammelled by law and based on
violence, and enjoying the sympathy and support of the toiling and
exploited masses.”
Hibson said in evidence that this meant untrammelled by bourgeois
law. Kor is the need for violence past with the overthrow of the old order.
“ If you exploiters attempt to offer resistance to our proletarian revolution ”,
says Lenin, “We shall ruthlessly suppress you. We shall deprive you of
your rights. More than that we shall not give you any bread, for in our
proletarian republic the exploiters will have no rights, they will be deprived
of fire and water, for we are socialists in real earnest and not the Scheideman
or Kautskian type of socialist.”
Evidence oe Communist Witness on Inquiry.
I forbear further citation from Communist writings in the same sense
and close the material on this question by referring to some evidence of the
witness Hibson. His attention had been drawn to the above work of Lenin
and his statements as to violence. Hibson’s comment was that in the view
of the A.C.P. Lenin was writing of the special conditions existing in 1917.
Tr. p. 6839.
Ex. 124.
Ex. 18, p. 23.
Ex. 126,
Vol. 2, p. 365.
Ex. 835, p. 10.
Ex. 15, p. 27.
Ex. 17, p. 33.
Tr. p. 6765,
Ex. 125,
Vol. 2, p. 399,
and Ex. 835,
p. 60.
Tr. p. 6753.
(1) Gallacher, pp. 134-5, says;-—“The parties in the countries of east Europe, where the Communist parties are
exerting a decisive influence, are all working together in the Governments to reconstruct their countries. But what
about the opposition? What opposition? The parties in the Government bloc represent the people, and carry forward
a policy in the interests of, and for the welfare of, the people. Those who want to put the clock back are enemies of
the people. There can be no toleration for such."


“We do not want any violence ”, he said, “We will not start any violence’
but if the owning class itself does what previous owning classes in history
have done and tries to retain an increasingly unworkable system which
produces ever greater calamities, by minoritv resistance, then violence must
be used against them. It is the only attitude that a self-respecting democratic
community should take.
“By Mr. Shell: Would it be too much to say that from human
experience, your programme is such that one must confidently expect
violence'? A. Not in every case. No. Q. Can you point to any revolution
in history of the character that the Communist Party visualizes that did not
involve violence ? A. I cannot, hut on the other hand, the situation is changing in
such a way that the weight of power of the working classes of the world
becomes greater and the weight of the power of capitalism becomes less.
And it may well be that capitalism, in some country in future may decide
that it is not worth while to stop the inevitable march of the revolution by
force.
By the Commissioner: This is really what you told me of, the other
day; that there are only two ways in which the surrender of power will
come about —one, by the voluntary abdication of power of the present-
possessing class, and the other by taking away that power from the
possessing class? A. Yes. I added the proviso that it was on the assumption
that it was desired by the people and was not a desire of the Communist
Party. Q. Yes, but that is not dealing with it. Of the two alternatives —
I think you agreed they are those that I put to you—that if there is no
voluntary surrender you would need to overthrow the existing government
violently and to seize power in that way, would you not? A. Yes.”
Tr. pp. 6753-4.
OBJECTS, STRATEGY AND TACTICS.
I conclude this section by drawing attention to three related concepts,
objects, strategy and tactics.
These three matters must be treated as three separate concepts, and
different considerations apply to each. The fundamental objects of the
Communist Party never change, though the language in which they are
expressed may vary in formulation from time to time.
Strategy is constant at a particular stage of the revolution but may be
changed at another stage hut tactics are infinitely variable to meet the
requirements of any particular situation as it arises. In his “ Left Wing
Communism ” Lenin insists that the history of Bolshevism has been “ full of
instances of manoeuvring, temporising and compromising with other parties,
bourgeois parties included.” His injunction is that Communists' must get
inside trade unions and use them to their advantage. They must participate
in Parliamentary elections and get inside Parliament and work there. The
dispersion (sic) of Parliament, he said, would be facilitated by the presence of a
Soviet opposition within, the counter-revolutionary parliament.
The Transcript furnishes many examples of the application of these
concepts to Australian conditions in regard to such matters as isolationism,
the League of Nations, The United Fronts, attitude towards the A.L.P.,
attitude towards the war and attitude to strikes in war time.
Tr. pp. 3448-4,
8558.
Ex. 5, i>. 44.
Ex. 17, P. 56
et seq.
Ex. 12, p. 94.
Ex. IS, p. 52.
Ex. 18, p. 38.
Ex, 13, p. 44.
Ex. 409.
Tr. p. 3259.
Bxs. 5, 37,
275, 280. 285,
378. 381, 393.
Tr. pp. 2685,
3167 et seq,
3177-8, 3190,
3221, 3429,
3459, 8687-8,
6668, 6851-5,
6598.
ORGANIZATION OF THE A.C.P.
I turn now to the organization of the A.C.P. and the machinery through
which it acts. Ido not go hack beyond the Constitution of 1946 except when
I think it necessary to point out some significant change.


As an Australian Body.
The Party is organized on a national basis and all subordinate bodies
are carefully co-ordinated and integrated with the National body. In the
national sphere the main organs are the National Congress and the Central
Committee. I set out two paragraphs to indicate the powers and scope of
activity of each of these bodies: —
“ The supreme authority in the Australian Communist Party is the
National Congress, which shall be held at least every three years.
Special National Congresses shall be called by a majority vote of the
Central Committee or by a request from Party organizations
representing 50 per cent, of the entire Party membership.”
“ The National Congress reviews the work of the Party and the
outgoing Central Committee since the preceding Congress. It
determines the direction of the policy to be pursued by the Party in
the ensuing period, and considers all major tactical and organizational
questions and proposed amendments to the Party Constitution, It
elects the Central Committee, which shall consist of members having
at least seven years ’ Party membership. The number of members to
be elected to the Central Committee shall be determined by Congress.
Election shall be by secret ballot of delegates assembled.”
“ The Central Committee which shall hold at least three meetings
in each year, is the highest authority of the Party between National
Congresses, and is responsible for upholding the Constitution and
securing the execution of the general policies adopted by the National
Congress. The Central Committee organizes various departments and
sub-committees; leads the political and organizational work of the
Party, appoints the Editors of its press, who work under its
leadership and control; organizes and supervises the finances and all
important undertakings for the Party. The Central Committee may
call special State, City or District conferences. An audited financial
statement shall be submitted to the first Central Committee meeting
in each year and by the Central Committee of the National Congress.”
“ The Central Committee elects from its members a Political
Committee, the size of which shall be decided by the Central
Committee, and such other Committees or Departments as may be
necessary. The Political Committee is charged with the responsibility
of carrying out the decisions and the work of the Central Committee
between its sessions. It is responsible to the Central Committee for
all decisions.”
As a State Body.
The State organization is on parallel lines —
‘ ‘ The State Organization comprises all Party organizations within
a given State. The highest body in the State is the State Conference,
which meets annually, with the exception of Queensland, which should
meet at least every two years. It shall elect a State Committee, the
number of members and candidates of which shall be determined by the
State Conference. Except with special permission of the Central
Committee, members of the State Committee must have a minimum
of four years’ Party membership. The State Conference consists of
delegates elected according to membership, by District Conferences
and Branches not attached to a district and of the members of the
outgoing State Committee. The basis of representation to the State
Conference is determined by the State Committee.”
‘ ‘ The State Committee, which functions under the general direction
and supervision of the Central Committee, is responsible for the
operation of the policy and decisions of the Central Committee and
for the conduct of all Party work in the State. The State Committee
which shall meet at regular intervals shall elect a Secretariat or other
suitable body to carry out the work of the Committee between
meetings and a State Secretary whose election shall be subject to
Central Committee endorsement. ”
Ex. 4, p. 19.
Ex. i, p. 20.
Ex. 4, p. 20.
Ex. 4, p. 21.
Ex. 4, p. 22.
Ex. 4, p. 28.


District Organization.
The State Committee has power to create District Organizations the
nature of which and the scope of whose functions appear from the following
rule: —
“ The District Organization comprises all Party Branches in a given :
locality as determined by the State Committee. The highest body in
the district is the District Conference, which meets at least annually.
It elects the District Committee and, when necessary, delegates to
the State Conference or National Congress. Except with special
permission of the Central Committee members of the District
Committee must have a minimum of four years’ Party membership.
The basis of representation to the District Conference is decided upon
by the District Committee in consultation with the State Committee.
The District Committee, which is the highest authority in the District
between Conferences, organizes the application of the decisions of the
higher Party Committees, takes up economic and political questions
arising in the District, and gives leadership and assistance to the Party
organizations within the District.”
Branch Organization.
Finally, the Constitution provides for a branch organization:—
“ The basic organizations of the Australian Communist Party are
the workplace and locality branches. A workplace branch consists of
those Party members who are employed in a particular workplace.
Workplace branches shall he organized in every factory, shop, mine,
dock, office, &c., where sufficient Party members are employed. A
local branch consists of members of the Party living in the same locality.
Local branches shall be organized on the basis of streets, municipal
wards, or suburbs in the cities, and in country towns.”
“ The tasks of the branch include carrying out national state and
local campaigns, developing working-class and people’s unity;
organizing systematic agitation and propaganda, including sales of
the Party press and literature; collection of contributions for Party
funds; recruitment of new members, organization of social, cultural,
and educational work both within the Party and among the people
generally. ’ ’
At each level—National, State, and Branch—it is the Secretary who is
the leader, and not the President.
Evidence was given that branches existed in a number of localities. The
following list is not exhaustive: —
Carlton.
South Yarra.
Brighton.
Prahran.
Caulfield.
New.
Kilsyth.
Camberwell.
Middle Park.
Croydon.
Footseray.
Mordialloc.
Williamstown.
Coburg.
East Coburg.
Newport.
Malvern.
Elwood and Elsternwick.
Ex. 4. p. 24.
Ex. 4, p. 26.
Tr. p. 7348.
Tr. p. 2665.
Tv. pp. 1120.
841.
Tr. p. 8236.
Tr. p. 841.
Tr. p. 841.
Tr. p. 8132
Tr. p, 9612.
Tr. p. 841.
Tr. p. 7012.
Tr. pp. 9612 a.
1680.
Tr. p. 841.
Tr. pp. 5410,
9362.
Tr. pp. 841,
7824.
Tr. pp. 5480,
9602.
Tr. p. 9730.
Tr. p. 6775.
Tr. p. 5418.
Tr. p. 6664
and Ex, 826.


There was also evidence of branches at certain industrial establishments,
e.g.:—
Johns and Waygood Ltd.
S.E.C. (State Electricity Commission).
General Motors Holden Ltd.
and of vocational or institutional groups, e.g.:—
Journalists’Group.
Artists’ Group.
Waterfront Branch.
Greek Enit.
Taxi-drivers’ Unit.
Army Group.
University Group. ’ h . ’
i \
Basic Organization is the Workplace and Local Branch.
In the 1938, 1942 and 1943 Constitutions it was provided that “ the
basic organizations of the O.P. of Australia are the workshop (“ workplace ”
in 1943 Constitution) and local branches. Branches that do not come within
these categories can be established only with the agreement of the Central
Committee.” It would, therefore, seem that the establishment of some of
these groups was under the direct authority of the Central Committee,
The Nucleus.
I have already drawn attention to Garden’s statement at the end of 1922
at the 4th Congress of the Comintern that the Communist Party of Australia
was based on the nuclei system. I have had evidence to show that the
. “ nucleus ” was later called a “ unit ” and also a “ fraction.” There is also
some suggestion both in documents and orally that the term ‘ ‘ cell ’ ’ was used,
though Communist witnesses asserted that this latter term was never used by
Communists but only by non-Communists.
Fractions.
Whatever may be the correct terminology, I have a great deal of
evidence of the existence and operation in this State of fractions in trade
unions, though there is no express mention of them in any Constitution from
1938 onwards. There was, however, circulated in Australia a most elaborate
resolution of the E.G.C.I. in 1926 running to nearly 60 paragraphs on the
organization and the structure of Communist fraction in Trade Unions. This
resolution appears in an appendix to this Report. The fraction is a Coimmmist
organ inside a non-Communist organization, and in the resolution of the E.G.C.I.
already referred to it is said, “ The Communist fractions work with all their
energy to bring the majority of the trade union members under their influence.”
Thornton’s speech reported in the “ Communist Review ” of July, 1948, refers
to the position of Communists in the Ironworkers’ Union. He doubts whether
there are more than 5-600 members of the Labour Party of the 40,000 odd
members in the Ironworkers’ Union, and only two members of the A.L.P.
are officials of the Union. He adds: ‘ ‘ And the general policy of the Union,
is that decided in consultation with the leaders of the Labour Party ? No.
The policy of the Ironworkers’ Union is decided in consultation with the
leaders of the Communist Party. The great achievements of our Union in
the past few years should be credited to the Communist Party. But they
are not so credited. Because the party does not appear as the O.P. to the
members of the Union. ... The same thing in many ways applies to the
Waterside Workers’ Federation, The Miners’ Federation, and the Seamen’s
Union, and soon will apply to many other Unions such as the A.E.U., A.R.U.,
and so on.”
In the 1929 Constitution it is provided that, “ In all non-party worker
and poor farmer organizations and branches (trade unions, co-operatives,
cultural societies, educational societies, sport and other clubs, war participants,
factory committees, unemployed, as Congresses and Conferences, in local
administrative bodies, parliaments, &c., where there are at least two
Tr. p. 9368.
Tr, p. 844.
Tr. p. 5689.
Tr. pp. 844,
849.
Tr. p. 835.
8140.
Tr. p. 7716.
Tr. pp. 890,
1904, 6153-5.
Tr, p. 6388.
Tr. p. 6942,
Tr. pp. 893,
6289-91, 6430.
Ex. 7. p. 8.
Ex. 8, Rule 6.
Ex. 9, p. 16.
Ex. 29.
Tr. p. 184.
Exs. 310 and
347.
Tr. pp. 2858-9.
Tr. pp. 3499,
5188.
Tr. pp. 5546,
7941 et aeq.
Ex. 808.
Tr. p. 2855
et aeq.
Ex. 2, p. 46.
Ex. 116,
p. 207.
Ex. 2, p. 45.


Communists, Communist fractions must be organized for the purpose of
increasing the influence of the Party and applying its policy in the non-Party
sphere.”
The continuing existence of fractions indicates that the printed
Constitutions are not a complete exposition of the organization of the
Communist Party.
Committees eok Particular Purposes.
I have evidence that the State Committee has elected a number of
Committees for particular purposes. These are—
{a) Industrial.
(&) Youth.
(c) Women.
( d ) Propaganda.
(e) Arts and Science.
(/) Medical.
( g ) Rehabilitation.
( [h ) Agrarian.
( i ) Organization.
O') Security (or Control Commission).
Each of these Committees has its own Executive.
Enforcement oe Discipline.
An account of the organization of the Party would not be complete
without some reference to the means by which and the manner in which
it enforces discipline.
The 1948 Constitution sets up a Central Control and Auditing
Commission part of whose duties concern the enforcing of discipline. It
provides that—
“ On various disciplinary cases such as those concerning violations
of Party unity, discipline, honesty or ethics, or concerning lack of
class vigilance or Communist firmness in facing the class enemy, or
concerning spies and other agents of the class enemy—the Central
Control and Auditing Commission shall be charged with making
investigations and decisions, either on appeals against the decisions
of lower Party bodies, or on cases which are referred to it by the
Central Committee, or on cases which the Central Control and
Auditing Commission itself considers necessary to take up directly.”
There is also procedure in relation to branches: —•
“ A member guilty of a breach of Party discipline may be censured,
publicly censured, removed from responsible positions or expelled
from the Party organization. Members involved in any unsatisfactory
conduct may be suspended from the branch pending the case being
investigated. Any decision to terminate or suspend membership in
the Party must be endorsed by the next higher Party Committee
before being put into effect.”
“ Except as provided for in Rule 4, Clause ,“.G ”, all applications
for re-admission by persons expelled or lapsed must be submitted to
the Central Control Commission.”
The witness Sharpley gave evidence too of the existence of a State
Control Commission in addition to the Central Control Commission and a
passage in the Carpenters’ Fraction Minute Book suggests that that was
the fact in 1942,
Self Criticism.
A nearly related subject is that of self-criticism by members, a practice'
deposed to by Sharpley, Rawling and Mrs. A. The prevalence of this practice i
is recognized by the witness Gibson and by numerous articles in the!
“Communist Review” by Thornton and others, and is confirmed by!
e.S; Tr.
p. 9647.
Tr. p, 828.
Tr. p. 834.
Tr. pp. 836,
6536.
Tr. pp. 835,
8242.
Tr. pp. 835,
8140.
Tr. pp. 835-6,
7810.
Tr.pp, 836,
6937,
Tr, pp. 837,
6303.
Tr. p. 837.
Tr. 887-8.
Tr. 9614
et Beg.
See also
Ex. 38, p. 92.
Ex. 17, p. 76.
Ex. 4, p. 21.
Ex. 4, p. 26.
Tr. 837-8.
Ex. 662.
Tr. p. 9514.
Tr. p. 9521.
Tr. pp. 1121,
2622, 2638,
2696, 8126,
6161,6687.
Tr. p. 6606.
Ex. 6. 116,
p. 207.
Exs. 226 and
286.


several examples of self-criticism in evidence. Provisions as to re-admission
of members in the Constitutions of 1938 and 1945 are framed in terms
consistent with such a practice. Gibson said the criticism could arise either
spontaneously from the member or after interrogation by officials of the
Party. In the latter case the member appears to be subjected to criticism
by the appropriate organ of the Party and then, as a penitent, submits a
self-criticism, _ sometimes in abject terms. There is a good deal in the
doctrinal writings of the Party recommending and sivpporting the efficacy of
the practice.
Domestic Tribunal.
Sharpley also gave evidence of the existence of a tribunal which dealt
with the domestic concerns of members, even to the extent of directing that
one spouse of a married pair should not live with the other (such a case was
also deposed to by Mrs. X) and permitting a man and woman, who were not
husband and wife, to live with each other. These allegations were completely
denied by the Communist witnesses who gave evidence. There was some
independent evidence of some of the facts Sharpley deposed to. Gibson’s
evidence shows that the State Executive did concern itself on occasion with
the private lives of members, but he said it only acted when its advice was
sought, and then its efforts were to compose differences or to avoid public
scandal. On the whole lam not satisfied that it interfered to the extent
Sharpley deposed to.
Democratic Centralism.
_ The account of this branch of the inquiry would be incomplete without
describing how decisions are arrived at in the Communist Party. The method
is described as that of Democratic Centralism, which the Constitution of 1948
thus describes:—
“A. The Australian Communist Party is based on the Leninist
principle of Democratic Centralism which means:
(1) The election of all officials and leading committees of the
Party, from the Branch Committees up to the highest committees,
either directly by the membership or through their elected
representatives.
(2) Periodical reports of the Party Committees and leading organs
to the organizations to which they are responsible.
(3) Strict Party discipline and subordination of the minority to
the majority.
(4) The decisions of higher bodies to be absolutely binding upon
lower bodies.
B. All Party organizations have autonomy in deciding local questions,
provided that their decisions do not conflict with the policy of the Party.
C. Any Party official may be removed at any time from his position by
a majority vote of the organization which elected him, or to which he is
responsible, providing in this latter case the approval of the next higher Party
Committee is obtained.
D. Requests for the release of Party members from responsible posts
may be granted only by the Party organizations which elected them, or,
providing the next higher Party Committee agrees, by the organization to
which they are responsible.”
It was stated in evidence that there was complete freedom of discussion
up to the taking of a decision and thereafter the minority, however large, must
comply with the decision.
Earlier I have written that the A.O.P. was up to the dissolution of the
Communist International affiliated with it. It is now necessary to say
something as to whether its actions were affected in any way by the decisions
of the Comintern.
Exs. 8,9, 8.
Tr. p. 887 a.
Tr. pp. 2631-
2633.
Tr. p. 2699-
2702, 5321.
Tr. pp. 6604,
6702.
Ex. 4, p. 17.
Tr. pp. 1289,
2664.


CONDUCT OF COMMUNIST PARTY OF AUSTRALIA IN
RELATION TO THE COMMUNIST INTERNATIONAL.
Conditions foe Admission to Third International.
I have already drawn attention to the facts that the A.C.P. was affiliated
to the Third International until its dissolution in 1943 and that to its name
there was attached at first the description “Section of the (Third)
Communist International.’’ (The word “third” was dropped in later
constitutions). This affiliation, so long as it continued, necessitated compliance
by the A.C.P. with all decisions of the Congress and of the Executive
Committee of the International. The Australian Communist of March 18th,
1921, reprinted what it describes as “ The Famous Twenty-one Points,” setting
out the conditions of admission of parties to the Communist International.
To use the language of the Congress introducing the conditions “ the Second
Congress of the Communist International considers it necessary to define with
precision the conditions for the admission of new parties and to direct the
attention of those parties which have been admitted to the Communist
International to the duties incumbent upon them. The Second Congress of
the Communist International determines the conditions for membership as
follows.”
The Famous Twenty-one Points.
These conditions, though lengthy, cannot I think be summarized without
risk of altering the meaning and I therefore set them out in full.
“1. The daily propaganda and organization must have a clear
Communist character, and agree with the programme and decisions of the Third
Internationale. The party press must be edited by responsible Communists,
who have_ proved their devotion to the cause of the proletariat. The
dictatorship of the proletariat should not be discussed as a current and formal
phrase: propaganda for it should be such that its necessity deduced from the
facts of daily life, would be obvious to every worker, soldier, and peasant, and
regularly noted in our Press.
In the columns of the Press, at public meetings, in the trade unions, in
the co-operatives, wherever the supporters of the Third Internationale have
access, the bourgeoisie and also its accomplices, the reformers of all types,
must be systematically and unmercifully branded,
2. Organizations desiring to affiliate with the Communist Internationale
should regularly and systematically remove the reformists and Centrists from all
responsible posts, major or minor, in the labour movement (party organization,
editorial offices, trade unions, parliamentary groups, co-operatives, municipal
administrations, &e.) and replace them with tried Communists, without
hesitating, especially at the begining to rep] ace “ experienced ” opportunists
by workers of the rank and file.
3. In countries where because of a state of siege or of exceptional laws
the Communists are unable to carry on all their work legally, it is absolutely
necessary to combine legal with illegal ln nearly every country of
Europe and America the class struggle is entering upon the phase of civil
war. Under such circumstances the Communist cannot rely upon bourgeois
legality. It is their duty everywhere to create parallel to the legal an illegal
organization capable at the decisive moment of fulfilling its duty to the
revolution.
4. A systematic and vigorous propaganda must be carried on in the
army. Communist nuclei should be formed in every military unit. Most of this
work will be illegal, but to refuse to do it would be treason to revolutionary
duty and incompatible with membership in the Third Internationale.
5. A systematic and well-planned agitation must be carried on in the
country districts. The working class cannot triumph unless it has the support
of at least a part of the farm workers (day workers and poorer farmers) and
unless its policy has won.the neutrality of at least a part of the backward
rural groups. Communist activity in the country is coming to be of capital
importance.;'
4329/50.—3
Ex. 2S.
Tr. 120 et seQ,


It must be carried on chiefly by the urban Communist workers who have
connexions in the country. Refusal to do this work or confiding it to
unreliable semi-reformists hands is equivalent to renunciation of the
proletarian revolution.
6. It is the duty of every party desiring to belong to the Third
Internationale to denounce not only avowed patriotism, but also dishonest and
hypocritical pacifism and systematically to demonstrate to the workers that
without the revolutionary overthrow of capitalism no international court of
arbitration, no discussion of the reduction of armaments, no “ democratic ”
reorganization of the League of Nations can preserve mankind from fresh
imperialistic wars.
7. It is the duty of parties desiring to belong to the Communist
Internationale to recognize the necessity of a complete and final break with
Reformist and Centrist policies, and to preach this break among the members
of the party. Without this a consistent Communist policy is impossible. The
Communist Internationale demands imperatively and without discussion that
this break be made within a very short time. The Communist Internationale
cannot admit that such avowed opportunists as Turati, Kautsky, Hilferding,
Hillquit, Longuet, MacDonald, Modigliani, &c., should have the right to call
themselves members of the Third Internationale. That would make the Third
Internationale too much like the Second.
8. A particularly clear-cut stand should be taken in the matter of
colonies and oppressed nationalities by parties in those countries whose
bourgeoisie possesses colonies and oppresses nationalities. Parties belonging to
the Coimnunistlnternationale are duty-bound pitilessly to unmask the acts of
their own imperialists in the colonies, to support every movement for
emancipation in the colonies not only with words, but with acts, to demand the
expulsion of their own imperialists from those colonies, to nourish in the
hearts of the workers in their own countries a genuine fraternal feeling for
the working population of the colonies and for the oppressed nationalities,
and to sustain a systematic agitation among the troops of their countries
against all oppression of the people of the colonies.
9. Parties desiring to belong to the Communist Internationale should
carry on a systematic and persistent propaganda within the trade unions, the
workers’ and shop councils, the co-operatives and other mass organizations of
the workers. Within those organizations Communist nuclei should be formed
whose stubborn and persistent work will win the trade unions to Communism.
It will be their constant task to expose the treason of the social patriots and
the instability of the ‘Center.’ These Communist nuclei should be
completely subordinate to the party as a whole.
10. It is the duty of parties belonging to the Communist Internationale
vigorously and persistently to fight the yellow Trade Union International
organized at Amsterdam. On the other hand, they should aid with all their
power the international of the Red trade unions affiliated with the Communist
Internationale.
11. It is the duty of parties desiring to belong to the Third
Internationale to revise the personnel of their parliamentary groups, to expel
all unreliable elements, and to make those groups subject to the party
executives not only in form, but in fact, by demanding that each Communist
member of Parliament subordinate all his activity to the true interests of
revolutionary propaganda and agitation.
12. The periodical and non-periodical press and all party publishing
concerns should be under the complete control of the party executive, whether
that be legal or illegal. The organs of publicity cannot be permitted to abuse
their autonomy and to follow a policy not in complete accord with the Party
policy.
13. Parties belonging to the Communist Internationale should be
organized on the principle of democratic centralization. In the present period
of acute civil war the Communist Party can fulfill its functions only if


organized, in most centralized fashion, if controlled by iron military discipline,
and if_ the party executive, armed with lax‘ge power exercises uneontested
authority and has the unanimous confidence of the active membership.
14. The Communist parties in countries where the Communists work
legally must carry out periodical house cleanings of the party organizations to
rid the party of petty bourgeois and special interest elements.
15. Parties desiring to belong to the Communist Internationale should
give unqualified support to all Soviet republics in their struggles against the
counter-revolution. _ They should untiringly preach refusal to transport
munitions ot supplies to the enemies of the Soviet Republic, and whether
legally or illegally, they should carry on propaganda among the troops sent
against the Soviet republics.
16. Parties which have hitherto retained their old Social Democratic
programmes are duty bound to revise those programmes without delay, and to
work out a new programme in the spirit of the decisions of the Communist
Internationale adapted to the special conditions of their countries. As a rule
the programmes of parties belonging to the Communist Internationale should be
confirmed by the Congress of the Communist Internationale, or by its
Executive Committee. If the programme of a party should not be sanctioned
by the Executive Committee, the party may appeal to the Congress,
17. All decisions of the Congress and of the Executive Committee of
the Communist Internationale are binding upon all parties affiliated with it.
In this period of acute civil war the Communist Internationale must be far
more centralized than was the Second. The Communist Internationale and its
Executive Committee should take into consideration the very varied conditions
in the different countries, and make general and binding resolutions only
when they can be carried out.
18. In accordance with the above, all parties belonging to the
Communist Internationale should change their names. Any party desiring to
join the Communist Internationale should be called ‘ Communist Party of
(Section of the Third Communist Internationale).’ The question
of name is not a mere matter of form, but has considerable political
importance. The Communist Internationale has declared war upon the entire
old bourgeois world and on all the old yellow Social Democratic parties. It
is important that the difference between the Communist parties and the old
official ‘ Social Democratic ’ and ‘ Socialist ’ parties which have betrayed
the banner of the -working class should be made clear to every working man.
19. It is the duty of all leading press organs of the parties to print
all important official documents of the Executive Committee of the Communist
Internationale.
20. All parties belonging to the Communist Internationale or which
have applied for admission to it, should as soon as possible, at the latest
within four months after the Second Congress of the Communist
Internationale, call a special convention to examine these conditions. The
party Executive should see that all local organizations are made acquainted
with the decisions of the Second Congress.
21. Parties desiring to enter the Third Internationale which have not
yet radically changed their former tactics should arrange that before
entrance into the Third Internationale at least two-thirds of the members
of the Party Executive and of all the important central bodies shall have
clearly and publicly declared in favour of entrance into Third Internationale
before its Second Congress. Exceptions may be allowed with the approval
of the Executive Committee of the Third Internationale. The Executive
Committee may also make exceptions in the cases of the Centrist adherents
named in Condition 7,
Party members who on principle reject these conditions laid down by
the Communist Internationale are to be expelled from the Party. This applies
especially to delegates to the special party convention.”


There is no evidence before me that these conditions were ever varied.
I also draw attention to the Constitution of the Red International of Trade
Unions (R.1.T.U.) which was published in “ The Communist ” of May 20th,
1921, and which is set out in the Appendix.
Policy op A.O.P. in Accordance with that op Third International. (1)
In the face of these conditions it would be strange if the policy of the
A.C.P. were not in accordance with that of the International, and I have no
evidence which suggests that it was not. Of actual directions to the A.C.P.
there are some traces and some suggestions in the evidence. I have already
referred to the demand by the E.C.C.I. for unity of the rival parties in
Australia as a condition of admission to membership of the International.
In 1929 there was a further example arising out of a difference of opinion
between Moxon and Sharkey on the one hand and the rest of the Central
Executive on the other. Moxon and Sharkey having been defeated and
censured by the Executive appealed to the 0.1. The “Workers’ Weekly” of
January 10th, 1930, sufficiently describes the incident in reporting the
proceedings of the next Conference of the Communist Party:—
“ Conference considers,” it reports, “ that the Minority Report
charge against the Central Committee of ignoring and suppressing
Comintern cabled instructions is proven. The C.O. is censured,
firstly for refusing to carry out the instructions, and secondly for
suppressing the fact of the - Comintern cabled instructions even
beyond the date of the G.I. cable acquainting the Party of the ‘ open
letter ’.
Conference approves of the action of the minority in appealing
to the C.I. and is of the opinion that loyalty to the C.C. before the
members of the Communist Party of Australia in the matter of the
cables and the Tenth Plenum decisions .... was not necessary after
October 12th. Therefore the censure imposed on Comrades Moxon
and Sharkey on October 21st is lifted.”
In the “ Workers’ Weekly ”, February 7th, 1930, there are published
the “ Resolutions of the Ninth Annual Conference of the Communist Party of
Australia ” and these indicate the receipt of cabled communications from the
E.C.C.I.
There is also evidence of directions from the C.I. to the A.C.P. in 1929
in relation to various elections held in that year, viz.:—
Federal.
Queensland.
Victorian.
Directions were given too as to the A.C.P. seeking affiliation with and
entry into the Australian Labour Party; and the Communist Party’s attitude
in relation to the United Front, to conscription, League of Nations, and
Collective Security, was in each case as prescribed by Congresses of the
Comintern.
Moreover there is evidence of the A.C.P. adopting a policy towards
the A.L.P. and again changing it for a united front with the A.L.P. on the
instructions of the E.C.C.I.
It would be tedious to multiply citations, but during the period of
affiliation I think the fair inference from the evidence is that communication
between the A.C.P. and the Communist International was made as often as
was thought necessary.
The A.C.P. and the War, 1989-45.
The final matter to which I shall refer in this connexion is the attitude
of the A.C.P. in relation to the last war. At its outbreak the Communist
Party of Australia first supported the war effort of the British and Australian
Governments. Later it changed its attitude and regarded the struggle as one
of contending imperialisms. Still later, in 1941, its attitude again changed
Ex. 24.
Tr. 126.
Ex, 26.
Tr. 127 et seq.
Ex. E, p. 21.
Tr. p. 75.
Ex. 39.
Tr. p. 194.
Ex. 40.
Tr. p. 196
ft BBQ,
Ex. 378.
Ex. 37.
Tr. pp. 166,
3172.
Ex. 381.
Ex. 6, p. 28,
Ex. 89, 41.
Tr. pp. 194,
202. 204. 206.
A.L.P.:
Exa. 38, 376.
Tr, p. 8167.
United Front!
Tr. 3187-9.
Exs. 885, 387.
League:
Exs. 888. 393.
Tr. 3190. 3209.
Ex. 48.
Tr. 210 et seq.
Exs. 92, 100.
Tr. pp. 8212,
3221, 6482.
(1) I have used the spelling “International” except when quoting from a document which spells the word
“ Internationale.”


and it lent its full support to the allied effort. Mr. Sharkey in language of
great restraint has thus described the conduct of the A.C.P.—“ At the
outbreak of the War the O.C. for a brief moment made an incorrect appraisal
of the character of the War.” Again, “The C.C. instantly grasped the
significance of the attack on the Soviet Union and its entry into the War.
This changed the character of the war into a war of independence on the part
of the democratic people against Fascist imperialist aggression.”
Means oe Harmonizing the Policy of A.C.P. and that
of the International.
During this period there were various means of harmonizing the policy
of the A.C.P. with that of the Comintern:—
(a) Some of the Australian Communists visited Moscow for training
and I have evidence of this kind in regard to Blake, Bonrke
and Dixon.
(h) Other Communist Party members who visited Moscow hut not,
so far as the evidence shows, for training, were Earsman,
Harden and Payne in 1922, Kavanagh, Moxon, Jeffery,
Higgins, Hector Ross and Ryan in 1928, Sharkey in 1932 and
again in 1935, Dixon in 1937 and MeGilliek in 1938.
Thornton and Miles also visited Moscow but there is no
evidence of the year or years they did so.
(c) There is some evidence of reports made to the Comintern by
leading members of the Communist Party of Australia.
(d) In the 1920’s there were visits to Australia by representatives
of the Comintern. The “ Workers’ Weekly ” of December
6th, 1929, refers to one such representative. Another was
Egon Kisch in 1934. There is also a good deal of evidence that
another Yakin (otherwise Herbert Moore) was here in 1930,
and actually wrote the important policy document published
in 1929 as the Programmatic Declaration of the Communist
Party.
( e ) Supervision by the C.I. of publications of the A.C.P.
(/) Adoption in Australia of the Comintern analysis of stages of
world history and world politics.
(g) Publication in Australia of the reports of the various Congresses
of the Comintern.
(h) It is also suggested by the.evidence that when members of the:
A.C.P. went abroad they took with them documents to give 1
to members of the party abroad. A significant instance of
this is MeGilliek’s evidence that in 1938 he received from;
Miles to deliver to Blake in Moscow plans of an
anti-submarine device, a commission which he duly performed.
His evidence on this matter was not contradicted nor indeed
did Blake give evidence, although at the preliminary sitting
he was present and asked leave to appear and although the
Grown Solicitor wrote offering to lead his evidence. No
explanation was offered for his not giving evidence.
Relations of the A.C.P. with the Gominporm.
I have not been able to satisfy myself whether since the dissolution in
1943 of the Comintern the policy and actions of the A.C.P. have any direction (
from abroad. Sharpley asserted that in substance the relation of the A.C.P. to |
the international movement had not changed and that the means hj T which the ■
A.C.P. received instructions or information was by the circulation in Australia
of the Cominfonn Newspaper—“ Por a Lasting Peace, Por a People’s
Democracy ’’—and by broadcasts from the Moscow Radio and from “ Pravda ’
editorials. The “ Guardian ” of 21st June, 1939, gave the times of Moscow Radiol
Centre broadcasts, hut I have not observed similar announcements since then.
Ex. 6, pp. 36,
44.
Tr. pp. 918,
1877, 1818-19.
Exa. 28-29,
and 36.
Tr. pp. 133-4,
1877, 2780,
3187-8, 8267-8,
3429. 3649-50.
Exs. 378 and
374.
Tr. pp. 8161-2.
Ex, 37.
Tr. pp. 166,
3136-6, 6012-7,
5212-3, 5249.
Exs. 870, 374,
674.
Tr, 3137, 3141,
Ex. 127.
Ex. 87.
Tr. 166.
Ex. 39.
Tr. p. 195-6.
Ex. 878.
Tr. p. 3169-73.
Ex. 382-3-4.
Tr. 3180-7.
Tr. p, 6042
et HCq.
Tr. pp. 926-6,
1260-6:,
1877-9. 2663.
Ex. 969.
Tr, 6493.


These assertions were completely denied by Communist witnesses. Sharkey in
a pamphlet, “ Australian Communists and Soviet Russia,” states the position
thus: —
“ This technique of pretending that everything the Communists do
in Australia or elsewhere is dictated by the foreign policy of the Soviet
Union is all too reminiscent of Hitler’s technique of the “ big lie.”
It will be dismissed by thinking persons. Neither the Australian, nor
any other Communist Party needs orders from Moscow. It is a
question of studying the philosophy, the economic and political
teachings of Marxism, and applying them to Australian problems.
There is no question of subservience to a foreign power but of
workers of different countries pursuing, naturally enough, a similar
or identical policy, because their common starting point is the struggle
for Socialism and the application of Marxist principles to the great
national and international problems as they arise.
The Australian Communist Party has no relations, official or
otherwise, with the Soviet Government, nor did we ever have such
relations. Formerly, there existed the Third International, now
abolished, and, like the Communist Parties of every other country,
the Australian Communist Party was affiliated. The Communist
International had no relations with the Soviet Grovernment, but was
an independent organization, whose officials are typified by George
Dimitrov, now Prime Minister of Bulgaria, who was its General
Secretary.
Such an international organization of the working class was by
no means new. The First International, founded by Karl Marx,
Frederick Engels, English Chartists, and French Socialists, existed
in the 1860’s. It was succeeded by the Second International, of which
the British Labour Party was one of the leading parties. Ramsay
Macdonald, afterwards Tory Prime Minister, was a prominent figure
of the Second International. There is nothing “ sinister ” in an
international organization of the working class, nothing unnatural in
the workers of all lands uniting to realize a common goal.
To-day there exists no political International, but there is the
World Federation of Trade Unions, which includes both the Soviet
and Australian Trade Union movements, with a world membership
of 70,000,000.
The Communist Party does not propose for Australia a society the
same in every detail as that the working class has already established
in Russia. The Australian people will find a Avay to organize a new
society in keeping with our own national characteristics. It will be a
Socialist society, in principle the same, but the institutions can, and no
doubt will, be quite different.
Already there are a number of precedents for asserting this. The
new democracies in Eastern Europe are marching to Socialism along
quite a different road, with different institutions and methods to those
which were necessary in Soviet Russia. In some respects these
new-type democracies also differ from one another. Therefore we can
accept that which is best in the Socialist system in its Soviet form
for Russia, while relying on the genius of the Australian people to find
its own road to Socialism and to set up its own institutions in keeping
with the Australian temperament and ideas of freedom.
Our relation to the Soviet people can be summed up, then, as
based on the Marxist principle of working class internationalism, of
support for them in their struggle to establish a Communist society
in their country, and of using the lessons of their experience in
building Socialism, to the advantage of the Australian labor
movement. ” (1)
Ex. 762. p. 4.
Tr. 6320-1
tit (SdQ.
Ex. 762. p.d.
Ex. 7G2. p. 7.
1). 8.
(1) See, too, Gallacher, p. 89,—“The Third (Communist) International was dissolved In 1943. This step was
possible owing to the fact that all the principal parties had reach maturity. In other words, were so
well grounded in the principles of Marxism as to be able to carry forward, along similar lines, according to the
conditions in their respective countries, the fight for scientific as opposed to reformist Socialism, without the necessity
of international direction.”


I should, however, draw attention to the facts: —
(a) That there is evidence that leaders of the A.C.P. have been
abroad since 1943 as follows
Henry to the Empire Conference. T
Sharkey to India and Malaya. J.
Elliott to Pekin. T
Thornton to Europe. 7
Dixon to Czechoslovakia. T
Audrey Blake to Hungary. 7
) !
Counihan 1
[ to Paris and Hungary.
Williams j_; f
(&) That the Cominform newspaper “ For a Lasting Peace, For a a
People’s Democracy ” is still regularly on sale in Melbourne, 0
and that some members of the Communist Party here listen
in to Moscow broadcasts.
(c) That the attitude of the Cominform in relation to Yugoslavia
has been adopted by the A.C.P. \
(cl) That Comintern material is circulated freely here. i
(e) That the A.C.P. pays particular attention to the views of the
C.P. in Russia as those of a party which has successfully
carried through a revolution and one with a greater experience
of revolutionary technique.
The Canadian Royal Commission quotes the evidence of a Russian,
witness G-ouzenko called before it that “ the announcement of the dissolution'
of the Comintern was probably the greatest farce of the Communists in recent
years. Only the name was liquidated with the object of reassuring public
opinion in the democratic countries. Actually the Comintern exists and
continues its work.” The Commission adds, “ The documents which Gouzenko
brought with him corroborate this testimony. ” (1) I cannot of course judge
of the material before the Canadian Commission but, on the evidence before
me, I am not satisfied that Sharpley’s allegations in this matter are correct.
Funds or the A.C.P.
In the general survey I have so far made I have given some account
of the origins, aims, objects and organizations of the A.C.P. I shall now say
something as to the funds of the Party in Victoria, and particularly as to the
sources of its funds. The evidence covers considerable ground, but does not
enable me to report with certainty on this aspect of the inquiry. An
elaborate analysis by the witness Hordern of copies of bank accounts kept on
behalf of the Communist Party in Victoria showed that large sums of money
amounting to many thousand pounds had passed through the accounts which
do not seem to me to he sufficiently explained by the sources of finance
disclosed in the evidence.
Tr. 2780, 6541.
Tr. 025, 1878,
2780, 6494,
Tr. 6736, 6738.
Tr. 2780.
Tr. 1878, 6494.
Tr. 2780.
Tr. 2780.
Exs. 172, 287.
- Tr. 1259, 6493,
6733 et seq*
i
I
* Tr. pp. 918,
025. 035. 6733.
Exa. Ifi4, 800.
Exs. 161, 162.
163, 164. 287.
Ex. 6.
Tr. 28-6.
Exs. 664 to
667, 669, 670,
721-768.
(1) Crisp in his Parliamentary Government of the Commonwealth of Australia (1949), is also apparently of the
same opinion for he speaks of the relationship of the Communist Parties as "still apparently as closely knit together
as in the heyday of the Communist International.” See p. 83.


Ex. 354.
Debits
to
Account,
£ s.
d.
Credits
to
Account.
£ s.
d.
Period from 3rd August, 1943, to 31st
December, 1943 .. ..
5,036 4
5
5,123 0
2
Year ended 31st December, 1944
.. 12,800 7 10
13,317 14
10
Year ended 31st December, 1945
15,341 16
8
14,896 19
1
Year ended 31st December, 1946
8,915 5
11
9,359 6
0
Year ended 31st December, 1947
Year ended 31st December, 1948
8,864 3
4
9,518 4
6
8,050 14
6
7,209 16
S
Period from 1st January, 1949, to
21st July, 1949
3,753 11
8
3,393 4
10
Total
.. 62,762 4
4
62,818 6
1
(h) Account with the Commonwealth Bank of Australia, Geelong Branch.
Debits
Credit
to
to
Account.
Account.
£ s. d.
£ s.
d.
Period from 4th November, 1943, to
Ex. 383.
31st December, 1943
41 1 1
82 0
1
Ex. 748.
Year ended 31st December, 1944
253 2 5
238 19
5
Tr. 3102.
Year ended 31st December, 1945
212 0 7
197 9
11
Tr. 6275.
Year ended 31st December, 1946
141 16 8
140 3
7
Year ended 31st December, 1947
500 15 10
505 8
1
Year ended 31st December, 1948
264 14 10
267 13
2
Period from 1st January, 1949, to 27th
April, 1949
.. 93 13 11
75 11
1
Total
.. 1,507 5 4 1,507. 5
4
(c) Account with the Commonwealth Bank of Australia, Bendigo Branch.
Debits
Credit
to
to
Account .
Account.
£ s.
d.
£ 5.
d.
Ex. 862.
Period from 22nd February, 1943, to
31st December, 1943
518 6
0
571 7
7
Ex. 744.
Year ended 31st December, 1944 .,
658 14
8
621 16
3
Tr. 3101.
Year ended 31st December, 1945 ..
598 11
10
597 3
0
Tr. 6832.
Year ended 31st December, 1946
726 1
6
723 17
5
Period from 1st January, 1947, to 8th
Tr. 6276.
July, 1947 .. .. ..
335 1
3
322 11
0
Period from 8th July, 1947, to 31st
December, 1947 ., ..
426 13
2
457 11
0
Year ended 31st December, 1948
421 13
7
390 18
8
Period from 1st January, 1949, to 25th
June, 1949 ....
156 6
0
156 3
1
Total ..
.. 3,841 8
0 3,841 8
0
There are three accounts of which I have evidence and it is possible
that there are other accounts of which I have no evidence. I give the following
particulars of the debits and credits to the three accounts mentioned: —
(a) Account with the Commonwealth Bank of Australia, Melbourne Branch.


I have evidence too of other accounts kept in the name of individuals,
but I think the evidence tends to show and the probability is that they
were merely feeders to one or other of the accounts of which I have given
particulars and that moneys paid to them ultimately found their way into these
accounts. There is evidence too that during the period when the Party’s
activities were unlawful no account was kept in the name of the C.P. but
accounts were kept in the names of individuals.
The evidence as to the sources of the Party’s funds is both oral and
documentary. I shall not encumber this report by references but they will
be found in the appendices, and the evidence and exhibits there referred to
are the basis of my findings save where I indicate some other basis. It will
appear that some of the contributions were for special purposes.
The following methods appear from the evidence: —
(1) Initiation or entrance fees.
(2) Dues from members.
(3) Donations from members aiid sympathizers.
(4) Profit on sales of publications.
(5) Levies on members.
(6) Pees on appeals.
(7) Contributions to Pighting Fund.
(8) Quotas assessed on District or Branch.
(9) Sweeps and similar methods.
(10) Linotype bonds and finance for party press.
(11) Punds raised by fraction members to defray election expenses.
(12) Collections at meetings.
In his opening Mr. Laurie said —‘ ‘ There are no overseas funds at all,
the main sources of the funds being the working class and the amount of
funds depending upon the support that can be achieved in the working class,
the source of funds being dues, donations and the sale of literature.” With
the possible exception of profits on the sale of books from overseas no evidence
was given to show that any funds came to the "Victorian section of the
Communist Partjr of Australia from overseas.
In order to appreciate what were the receipts from initiation fees and
dues and levies it is necessary to know something of the membership of the
Party. In Victoria, as I shall suggest, in the next section, the membership
was about 3,000 to 4,000.
The amount of fees and dues as fixed by the 1948 Constitution is thus
set out —“ The entrance fee and dues payments shall be as follows: Those in
receipt of an income of over £2 10s. per week, entrance fee 25., dues 2s. 2d.
per month; all others, entrance fee 6d., dues Is. Id. per month.”
Sharpley gave evidence that the dues had to be paid from Victoria to
the Central Committee. He also said that branches ynie under an obligation
to pay to the State Office each month the dues of all members of a branch
irrespective of whether the individual members had paid them or not; and the
analysis made by Hordern seemed to support this.
Donations, though substantial, do not seem to be a very important
source of income. Mr. Laurie said: “ There are a few donors in
comparatively large amounts, but even these are only comparatively large and
are infinitesimal as compared with the total smn which is raised in small
amounts from workers.” There is evidence from Sharpley of a gathering of
Jewish people arranged by Gibson at which a collection of £1,500 was made
to the funds of the Party after an appeal by Gould, a member for the O.C.
That such a meeting took place seems not to be disputed by Gibson, but he says
the amount of £1,500 is certainly exaggerated, though “ it was a generous
collection.” Gibson says he made arrangements for the meeting with Mr.
Gust.
jTr. p. 8211.
r
I
l
3 Ex. 664.
L Tr. p. 7466.
I
I
) App.
Tr. 6346.
Tr. p. 5077.
Tr. pp. 6667
ct sen-, 7434.
Ex. 4, p. 15.
r. 4- ,
Tr. p. 905,
2733.
Ex. 665.
Tr. pp. 6836-
6837.
Tr. p. 6346.
Tr. pp. 757
et aeq.
Tr. pp. 6709-
6710.


Tr. p. 6708.
Tr. p. Oil
et seq.
Tr. p. 7341.
Tr. p. 6346.
Tr. pp. 5048-9,
5320, 5425.
Tr. p. 5077.
Gifts seem to have also been made or collected by a Mr. Markov to help
the Party publications. Others who seem to have helped by gifts are Mr,
Alexander (Gibson’s father-in-law) and Mr. Brilliant. The evidence does not
carry the matter further. Mr Hill when pressed in cross-examination for
names said he desired to protect contributors by concealing their identity.
In Mr. Laurie’s opening he said that the sale of literature was one of
the sources of the Party’s income. I have evidence from McGillick and Mrs.
Xof the sale of Party publications. There was a difference of 10s. between
the purchase and sale price of an illustrated “ History of the U.S.S.E.” “ The
History of the C.P. of the Soviet Union,” McGillick bought for 4s. 6d. and
sold for 6s. 6d., but the profit to the Party may have been much greater.
McGillick said that the manager of the C.P. bookshop in Sydney had told
him these hooks were invoiced from Russia at lOd. I have not traced to my
own satisfaction how much of the profit on such sales reached the Communist
Party.
As to levies, the 1948 Constitution gave power to the Central Committee
or National Congress to make special levies and there was evidence that such
levies were in fact made, viz.—International, Education, Spain, Defence Fund.
Sharpley says the International levy was collected until 1943. The fact
of the Education levy seems not to have been disputed. The levy for Spanish
Relief is proved by the witness Mrs. X. Sharpley alone speaks of the
Defence levy. He says the amount was not less than 3s. per member per week,
and the purpose of the fund was to assist the payment of wages or
sustenance to the O.P. organizers in Asian countries. I cannot recall that
these statements were challenged.
An appeal for a Fighting Fund is launched by J. G. Henry in the
“ Communist Review,” April, 1949. Mr. Henry is a member of the Central
Committee and of the inner executive, and the aim was to raise a minimum of
£40,000 in New South Wales during the period April to September, 1949. In
Victoria the “ Guardian,” June 24th, 1949, states: “ The Communist Party’s
income has never been greater than in these last few weeks. Because of the
smashing response to its appeal the A.C.P. has lifted its Victorian target to
£25,000 and the National target to £100,000.”
There is a good deal of evidence that the quotas assessed for Districts
varied from as high as £72 a month to as low as £2.
Sweeps, &h., bonds and other finance for special purposes, funds raised
by fraction members and collections at meetings need no elaboration, but
there is a good deal of evidence on those subjects. I should also say that I
have evidence of payment from the Central Committee to _ the Victorian
section and of payments by the “ Guardian ” to the same section.
There were a number of allegations by Sharpley of practices which
would indirectly benefit the Communist Party, e.g., by the Party press
charging higher prices for work done for Trade Unions under Communist
control and thereby putting the press in a position to make greater payments
to the Party, by publishing Party propaganda at the expense of the Unions, by
payment of less than award rates to employees, and by the use of Union cars
for Party purposes. These allegations are not wholly dependent on Sharpley,
hut I prefer not to act on them. I think the total benefit, even if I accepted
the evidence, is not of very great importance.
The witness Hill gave evidence that the Party in Victoria has now ceased
the practice of paying money into a hank account.
Purposes for which Funds are Applied.
It appears from the evidence that the funds of the O.P. in Victoria
have been applied for the following purposes, though the enumeration may not
be exhaustive: —
1. Payments to the Central Committee of the A.C.P.
2. To finance the C.P. press.
Ex. 4, p. 6.
Ex. 2, 7. 9.
Ex. 969.
Tr. pp. 907-8.
Tr. pp. 1760-1.
Tr. p. 5441.
Tr. p. 908.
Ex. 846.
Tr. p. 6936.
Tr. pp. 905,
5141 and
Ex. 969.
“ Guardian,”
7th Oct.. 1939
(not in
evidence).
Ex. 809.
Tr. 905-7,
1188-42, 2691,
5384-5, 5078
et sec 7.
Ex. 591.
Tr. pp. 5178-6,
5500-11.
Exs. 726, 729.
Tr. pp. 909-10.
Ex. 178.
Tr. pp. 710
et sc#.
Tr. p. 7841.
Tr, pp. 905,
5887, 6272-4,
Tr. pp. 913-4,
5175-6, 6708,


3. To finance Party schools.
4. In payment of expense allowances, wages and salaries to Party
officials.
5. In defraying election expenses.
6. To pay for wireless broadcasts, and other propaganda,
7* finance lecture tours (e.g., those conducted under the auspices of
the F.0.5.U.).
8. To assist in financing trips of members to Europe if those trips are in
furtherance of some Party objective (e.g., the Counihan Art Eund).
Tr. pp. 1760
at eeq.
Tr. pp. 6222,
7966, 8282.
Tr. p. 2691.
Tr. pp. 6836-7,
6843.
Tr. pp. 5048-9.
Tr. p. 6836,
Ex. 112.
Tr. p. 442.
MEMBERSHIP OF THE A.C.P.
Before I deal with, the activities and operations of the Party in Victoria
it will be convenient, I think, to say something of its membership as a separate
subject, though it may be said that the getting of members is the first of its
activities. In this section I set out Avhat the evidence discloses as to both the
Australian and the Victorian membership.
Australian Membeeship.
The Report of the work of the Central’Committee from the 14th to the
15th Rational Congresses gives the registered Party membership for
Australia; —
1945 .. .. .. 16,280
1946 13,450
1947 12,108
The “ Communist Review ” of April, 1949, refers to a membership of
between 12,000-13,000. There was evidence from which I deduce (as I show
presently) that the Party membership in Victoria was from 3,000-4,000. But
all the Communist evidence I have had agrees that the Party records in
Victoria were destroyed when the Party feared in 1948 that it would be
declared illegal or its premises raided and its property seized. Sharpley indeed
said that records had been deposited at Effron’s News Agency and with Keith
Crisp, who had a business in the city, but I was told that there are now no
records in existence and certainly none have been brought to my attention.
Up to 1948 the evidence suggests that there were records. It is difficult
to understand how the Party can operate without records, and I am completely
sceptical of the statement that they do not exist. I suspect that they do
somewhere and in some form. Gibson said that the Party would consider
it a betrayal of the interests of members if the police acted and obtained a list
of their members. However, no membership records are in evidence and any
estimate I give can only be an approximation. In addition to the figures I
have already cited for Australia there are the following statements in evidence.
In Campbell’s “ History of the Australian Labour Movement ” (1945) it is
stated that at the end of 1943 the membership had reached 20,000. Sharkey,
in his “ Outline History of the Australian Communist Party ” says—“ Our
Party to-day (1943-4) stands as a solid force of 20,000.” In the “ Communist
Review,” April, 1949, JVC. Henry says—“ We have a party of somewhere
between twelve and thirteen thousand members at the present time, a very
widespread organization. ”
Victorian Membership.
Gibson was exceedingly uncommunicative on the matter, but these
statements emerge from his evidence—that there are about 200 branches of the;
Party in Victoria; that the Party does not favour large branches as it regards
them as less efficient than smaller branches; that there is no branch with as
many as 100 members, and that the largest branch consists of about 30 or 40'
or 50 members; but he said that he really did not know, though at one portion
of his evidence he said the number of members was round about 3,500. Hill,
who as Secretary of the Party in Victoria, may be supposed to he in a position
to have special knowledge, used language which suggests that the Victorian
membership is about 3,000.
Ex. 118.
Tr. p. 604.
Tr. pp. 6667,
7121, 7340.
Tr. pp. 2621-2.
Tr. pp. 6668-
6671.
Ex. 689,
6.159.
Ex. 5, p. 70.
Ex. 118.
D. 100.
Tr. p. 604.
Tr. pp. 8667
at seq.
Tr. p. 6673.
Tr. p. 7484.


There are references too, here and there in the evidence, to the existence
of under-cover members of the C.P., but whether these are included in such
figures as I have there is no means of knowing on the evidence before me.
Prom all this only an approximation or a guess can be made, and I guess
the Victorian membership is 200 X, say 3,000 to 4,000, X denoting the average
membership of a branch.
In the Appendices to this report will be found a list of the names of
persons who, I am satisfied on the evidence, were or are members of the
Victorian Branch of the A.C.P.
Activities and Operations op the C.P. in Victoria.
In reporting on the aims and objects of the C.P. I have adverted to the
possibility that the activities of the Party may in fact indicate that its aims
and objects extend beyond those expressed in the printed word. What I am
now about to discuss will I think disclose auxiliary aims and objects as they
disclose the means and stages by which the fundamental objects of the Party
is to be brought about.
Every activity of the Party is designed to aid in achieving the
fundamental aim of the Party to overthrow the capitalist system and install
the dictatorship of the proletariat.
Immediate and Ultimate Aims.
In discussing this proposition with the witness Gibson, Mr. Shell
suggested that the tactics for achieving the design might vary from time to
time. Gibson assented but said: —
“ When we struggle for improved living conditions we want to see
improved living conditions. When we struggle for greater democratic
freedom we want that and we value it, and when we struggle for
peace we want that; we consider it vital and indispensable. ’ ’
‘ £ The Commissioner; Does that mean that each of these steps in
your opinion and your Party’s opinion, has a value in itself which
you desire to achieve although it may be part of a larger plan to
bring about your strategic objective? A. I would accept that
statement. Yes, Your Honour.”
The Role op the Communist Party.
To achieve its fundamental aim the Party regards itself, as I have
shown above, as the vanguard of, and its destiny and function to be, the
leadership of the proletariat. I think Mr. Sholl was right in his opening
when he said the evidence would show the role of Communists to be what in
fact the evidence has shown: —
A. To rouse the proletariat into class consciousness.
B. To teach them the need of the seizure of power through
revolution.
■ C. To act as their general staff in directing the revolution.
He added a fourth heading—“To train them to use violent means for
this purpose.”
I think the evidence shows undoubtedly that the Communist Party does
give training, the purpose of which is to aid in bringing about the revolution,
but the question of the use of violence is controversial and I think it better to
let the evidence speak for itself on this point.
The witness Gibson who was the chief witness called by the Communist
Party on doctrinal matters said as to A —“ Ido not quarrel with that.”
As to B—“ Seizure of power ” could create a false impression. It
could be understood as “ seizure by a minority ” and might suggest military
means. He assented, however, to the proposition in the form—“ To teach
them the heed of obtaining power through revolution.”
Tr. p. 6768.
Tr. p. 80.
Tr. p. 6764,


He said as to training'—“ We are not training anyone to use violent
means for any purpose,” but he agreed later that the dictatorship would be
achieved by “ violence if necessary.” 1
Nor did Gibson take objection to C —“ To act as their general staff i
in directing the revolution.” He did, however, protest that the accumulation
of military terms in a very short space gave an impression of violence as being
of the essence of Communism and that this was quite false.
Means and Stages by which: O.P. Aims to Achieve its Objective.
Mr. Shell in opening went on to enumerate the means and stages by
which the Communist Party sought, in his submission, to achieve its ends,
viz.—
(а) Control of Trade Unions;
(б) The use of political and general strikes;
(c) The education of the masses to the use of their political power i
through such strikes;
(d) The use of strikes, demonstrations and armed demonstrations;
(e) The production thereby of a revolutionary situation in which
the Government can no longer govern, and the masses are
perplexed and ready to follow the C.P. lead;
(/) Armed insurrection: the seizure of power; the liquidation of
the State as we know it, including officials, Parliament,
judiciary and police.
(g) Forcible suppression and expropriation of all class enemies.
(h) Management of the State by the Dictatorship of the Proletariat
using the Trade Unions as levers or instruments to carry on
production.
I deal with these in the same order :
(a) Control of the Trade Unions.
After a lengthy examination of Gibson by Counsel on this topic, I
said —
“ Mr. Sholl, I want to be sure that I understand what Mr. Gibson 1
said about your proposition (a) ‘ Control of Trade Unions.’
Suppose Mr. Gibson, instead of ‘ Control of Trade Unions ’ the
words were— ‘ Leadership of and influence in the actions of Trade
Unions.’ Would you disagree with that? A: No. I would agree
with that. ”
(h) The use of political and general strikes.
This matter was fully discussed by Counsel with Gibson and so that
there shall be no danger of my misinterpreting his evidence, I set it out
verbatim:—
“ Mr. Sholl: Do you disagree with the statement ‘The use of
political and general strikes’? A. No, they may have an important
part to play in certain situations.
Q. Did you not, at one stage, offer the view that it was one of the
Party’s functions to make strikes political? A. I pointed out that
it was capitalism itself that had made strikes political and that in
order to win strikes the workers had to fight more and more on a
political basis.
Q. I think in another part of this volume the expression is used
‘ one of the Party’s most important functions was the politicalization
of strikes.’ Do you dissent from that? A. No, not in view of the
stage we have reached with highly organized capitalism and the
Government participating so much in particular strikes, if they can.
Q. I was quoting from Mr. Sharkey where he said that one of your
chief trade union tasks was the politicalization of strikes. I gather
you assent to that ? A. I assent to that in the present .situation.
Tr. p. 6766.
Tr. p. 6766.
Tr. pp. 30 and
ai.
Tr. p. 6775.
Tr. p. 6775
eeq.


Q. And to stage strikes for the overthrow of the Government
and the rule of the capitalist class. Do you assent to that 1 ?
A. They (sic) do.
Q. And then referring to this matter of military methods he said
there is need for generalship in strikes. Do you agree with that ?
A. Certainly there is. It is absolutely wrong for a strike to be
launched without the fullest consideration of whether the strike can
be successful and how it can be made successful with the least
possible sacrifice by the people.
Q . On page 33 of Exhibit 14, Sharkey on the Trade Unions, he
states: 'Leninism teaches us that a general strike, that is, a strike
in all or most of the basic industries, as distinct from a general
strike in one industry, must as a rule be a political mass strike.
It is often necessary to broaden out partial strikes and aim to
transform them also into political mass strikes. Our Party, because
of this, would call for such strikes. Our Party, because of this,
would call for such stoppages only in the most favourable conditions,
particularly a revolutionary or near-revolutionary situation. Usually,
in ordinary situations, our tactics are a one-day general stoppage or
a series of such one-day stoppages, as Engels and Lenin opposed the
‘ Economic ’ general strike of the Anarchists. The 1917 strike
resulted, primarily because of its reformist leadership, in defeat, in
a bad setback for the Unions. Many of the Unions did not recover
from the defeat for years, and even to-day the cry is raised that
1917 proved the ‘ futility of strikes It did not, but it further
demonstrated the rottenness of reformist leadership and the incapacity
of such anarchist and sectarian groups as the I.W.W. to take over
the leadership of the working-class. It confirmed Lenin’s estimation
of the general strike as a revolutionary weapon.”
“ What do you take to be the meaning of that? The general strike
as a revolutionary weapon? A. I would take the meaning of that
statement to be that the workers in the 1917 strike developed
probably a greater consciousness of the needs of the working class
in Australia, that is in comparison with one or two previous strikes
in other years.
Q. Do you mean that according to this it is an educative
instrument? A. Yes.
Q. Then listen to what Sharkey says at the top of Page 33.
‘ Leninism teaches us that a general strike, that is, a strike in all or
most of the basic industries, as distinct from a general strike in
one industry, must as a rule.be a political mass strike.’ Do you
agree with that? A. Yes, as proved necessary by some recent
strikes.
Q. And you say merely for educative purposes? A. And for the
purpose of winning strikes.
Q. Sharkey goes on to say— ‘ Our Party, because, of this, would
call for such stoppages only in the most favourable conditions,
particularly a revolutionary or near-revolutionary situation. ’ Wiry
do you suppose he said that? A. Because in the calling of a strike
which will involve large numbers of workers, there is a situation
favourable to a state of affairs that can lead to catastrophe.
Q. Is it not a fact that your Party favours the general strike as
one of the last stages in challenging the rule of the existing state?
A. The general strike has played quite a big part in the development
of the revolution of the workers in Russia, and in the overthrow of
Fascism in many countries. In many such countries the workers
have been compelled to face up to the supreme catastrophe of
capitalism.


Q. Well, Sharkey, on page 29 says:— ‘ Lenin, in preparing for the
Russian Revolution, raised the slogan of mass political strikes, which
he declared, may be of great importance at the beginning and in the
very process of insurrection.’ Do you agree with that 1 ? A. I would
agree with that.
Mr. Laurie: There are two statements in that, Your Honour, and
I do not know whether the witness is agreeing to what Lenin did,
or to what is said about Lenin.
The Commissioner: They can be taken separately.
Mr. Sholl: Lenin, in preparing for the Russian Revolution, raised
the slogan of mass political strikes. Do you agree with that Mr.
Gibson'? A. Yes.
Q. Which he declared may be of great importance at the beginning
and in the very process of insurrection. Do you agree with that,
as a process'? A. Yes, as he applied it then. He said it might be
of great importance at the moment of insurrection, and assuming
there is a conflict and violence here, an insurrection, then, where
necessary, it might be of great importance.”
(c) The education of the masses to the use of their political power through’.
such strikes.
Gibson accepted this proposition simplieiter,
(d) The use of strikes demonstrations and armed demonstrations. <
Gibson was asked if he accepted this proposition. He answered—
“ Yes, where the necessity for armed demonstrations is created by the
capitalists themselves.”
(e) The production thereby of a revolutionary situation in which Government
can no longer govern and the masses are perplexed and ready to follow
the Communist Party lead.
Again I quote the questions and answers which set out the position
which Gibson puts in relation to this proposition:—
“ Mr. Sholl: How let us take the next one ‘ The production thereby ■
of a revolutionary situation in which the Government can no longer 1
govern, and the masses are perplexed and ready to follow the C.P.
lead.’ Do you take exception to that 1 ? The word ‘ production ’7
A. Yes, I take exception to that and I take very strong exception to
the statement as to a revolutionary situation as one in which the
Government can no longer govern and the masses are perplexed and
ready to turn to the Communist leaders. I would say it is not that
they are perplexed, but it was the absence of perplexity which would
enable them to size up the situation and take them to the point of
following the Party lead. : i
Q. Is it correct to say one of the roles of the Party for the
leadership of the masses is to bring to the forefront the forms of
organization in the struggle-suited to the prevailing conditions of the
times'? A. Yes.
Q. And would it be correct to say that one of the Party’s roles is
to bring to the forefront the forms of struggle and organization
which are calculated to assure the bringing of the masses to a
revolutionary position? A. Yes, but that is something different from
the revolutionary situation.
Q. What is the difference between a revolutionary situation and the
bringing of the masses to a revolutionary position? A. A revolutionary
situation is one in which there is, first of all what Lenin called a
‘ crack in the upper stratum of the Government ’ —the Government
can no longer govern in the old way, the Government has broken
down or is in the process of breaking down. Secondly, when the
conditions of living of the people become impossible owing to the
sacrifices and hardships imposed upon them and they regard the
Tr.p. 0776 a.
6776 a.
Tr, p. 6776 a
to 6778.


position as intolerable and consequently they would act in a
revolutionary way. That is something quite different from the
training of Communists to be ready to act on such an occasion and to
lead the people in such a situation.
Mr. Sholl: Then what do you take to be the meaning of the expression
used in Foundations of Leninism, at page 29, where there is this
passage: ‘ What is required to attain this end ? ’ At least three main
tasks confronting the dictatorship of the proletariat ‘ on the morrow ’
of victory must be fulfilled. They are:—
( a ) To break the resistance of the landlords and capitalists
overthrown and expropriated by the revolution, and to
liquidate every attempt they make to restore the power of
capital.
(b) To organize construction in such a way as will rally all toilers
around the proletariat and to carry on this work in such a
way as will prepare for the liquidation, the extinction of
classes.
( c ) To arm the revolution and to organize the army of the revolution
for the struggle against the external enemy and for the
struggle against imperialism.
Do you suggest there is no arming of the revolutionaries until after
the revolution itself is over? A. If there is armed violence used
against the people’s will, then violence is to be used against it before
the revolution.
The Commissioner: ‘ Armed violence against the people’s will ’ —do
you include in that any police action of the existing state? A. Yes,
if it is being used in that way.
Mr. Sholl: On page 14 of that same document Stalin states this:—
‘ Does not the history of the revolutionary movement show that
the parliamentary struggle is only a school, only an aid for the
organization of the extra-parliamentary struggle of the proletariat,
that under the capitalist system the essential questions of the labour
movement are settled by force, by direct struggle, the general strike,
the insurrection of the proletarian masses? ’
X take it you know that statement? A. Yes.
Q. Do you agree with that? A. I agree with that subject to the
necessity for an insurrection having been created by the capitalists.
Q, Then I suggest to you that my expression in relation to the
revolutionary situation as a period in which the Government could no
longer govern is covered directly by that militarist writing ? A. I did
not take any exception to that part. It is the ‘ perplexed masses ’
which implies that the Communist Party is duping the masses, whereas
in fact it is educating them.
Q. Now, as to bringing about the revolutionary situation, take the
Foundations of Leninism, page 63: ‘ Tactical leadership is a part of
strategic leadership, subordinated to the tasks and the requirements
of the latter. The task of tactical leadership is to master all the forms
of struggle and of organization of the proletariat and to assure their
correct utilization in order to achieve the maximum results obtainable
with the relative strength of forces available, the maximum necessary
in preparing for strategic success. What does the correct utilization
of the forms of struggle and of organization of the proletariat mean ?
It means fulfilling several necessary conditions, of which the following
may be considered the principal ones First, to bring to the forefront
those forms of struggle and of organization which are best suited to
the conditions prevailing during, the ebb or flow of the movement, as
the case may be, and therefore, calculated to facilitate and assure the
bringing of the masses to the revolutionary positions, the bringing of
millions to the revolutionary front and their assignment to various
sectors of the revolutionary front.’ A. The bringing of the masses to


the revolutionary point of view and to an organized state where it is
possible for them to carry through revolutionary action is something
totally different from the production of a revolutionary situation in
which such action can be taken.
Q- Is it not one of the factors constituting a revolutionary
situation? A. No, one of the factors constituting the possibility of
success in a revolutionary situation.
Q. So you use the term ‘ revolutionary situation ’ in an economic
sense as different from the sense of connoting in part a disposition of
proletarian forces? A. In an economic and political sense, Yes.”
(/) Armed insurrection, the seizure of power, the liquidation of the state as
we know it, including officials, Parliament, the judiciary and the police.
Gibson prefaced his answers on this proposition by saying “lamina
position of deep responsibility here in framing my answers and I have to say
again we do not desire violence. We welcome any signs of the possibility of a
peaceful road forward, and if armed insurrection is carried out it is because of
the determination of the minority to maintain the old society.”
Q. Referring to armed insurrection, or to insurrection, as to the
seizure of power we have discussed that now in regard to the
liquidation of the State as we know it, including officials, parliament,
judiciary and police? A. Might I just make a comment before you
proceed further to that on the seizure of power. As it stands there, it
definitely appears as the seizure of power by the Communists —the role
of the Communists, is not that so? The seizure of power by the
working classes in alliance with the toiling sections of the people
generally.
Mr. Shell: Or, to put it shortly, the seizure of nower by the
proletariat? A. Yes, in that sense.
Q. Well, the next passage I have already quoted to you, but I shall
read it again— ‘ the liquidation of the State as we know it, including
officials, Parliament, judiciary and police.’ Is it only the word
£ liquidation ’ that you object to there? A. I objected to the
expression ‘ liquidation of officials, liquidation of police ’ because it
implied a personal liquidation of these people, which is something
that is not our object at all. ' The liquidation of the State as we
know it.’ Yes, I would accept that. I think there is very much that
has been developed within the present State in the way of
administration in clerical and other capacities, which will be of very
great use when it is pieced into the new State. But ‘ the liquidation
of the State as we know it,’ Yes. There ought to be a State that is
much closer to the masses of the people.”
(g) Forcible suppression and expropriation of ail class enemies.
The discussion of this proposition is comparatively short and I set it
out:—
“By Mr. Shell: Well, let us go back now and move on to■
sub-proposition \g) of my statement ‘ Forcible Suppression and
expropriation of all class enemies. ’ I have read you a lot of passages
this morning. I suppose you would accept that one? A. Yes, always
understanding what the term ‘ class enemies ’ there applies to-—to
members of the owning class who have resisted the march of history
and world opinion.
By the Commissioner: Whether they have resisted or not, if they
owned property you would expropriate it, would you not? A. Not
necessarily. If they are owners of big property, it will have to be
taken over.
Q. I have not forgotten what you said, that for some time in the
transition period small owners might be allowed to exist. But is it
not the ultimate aim of expropriating all owners of property except
personal possessions, when you bring about the State of Communism?
4329/50 4
Ex. 14,p. 29.
Ex. 17.
pp. 60-1.
Ex. 18, pp. 27,
50, 51.
Ex. 275, p. 0.
Ex. 836.
pp. 47 and 48.
Tr. p. 0778.
Tr. i>p. 6781-2.


A. It is a fact that they would be competed out of existence by
superior organization of socialist enterprises. It is not our view that
the small owners would ever be expropriated in that sense.
By Mr. Sholl: Were you suggesting that there is another
qualification and that that is that you have some instrument of the
state which determines whether a man has resisted or not? Would
you expropriate the Broken Hill Pty. Company which resists but not
expropriate the Electrolytic Zinc Company which concurs? A. Ho.
Those works will all be taken over.
By the Commissioner: What you are leaving out, I understand, is
the corner greengrocer who carries on a small business —at any rate,
temporarily? A. That is so; or even someone who may have a larger
business than that.
By Mr. Sholl: You do not expropriate him instanter but compete
him out of existence by state enterprise? A. If it proves itself
superior, as we are quite convinced it would do.
Q. His demise might be less sudden but none the less certain. A.
Hot his demise.
Q. His industrial and economic demise? A. His transformation
from a small proprietor to what we consider would be a more secure
and more honoured position as an ordinary wage worker or a salaried
worker, for instance, in.a socialist society.
Q. The corner greengrocer who is competed out of existence by a
state greengrocery shop has to be given a job at a wage payable by
the State? A. Very possibly, if he is a capable manager of a shop
his services would be extremely welcome in the State or in a
. co-operative greengrocery or whatever it might be. That is a very
likely place for him to obtain a job. But in a system where there
is an ever expanding economy and there is no limit to the use of
the resources at our disposal by science, there is always a sphere of
useful and suitable employment of all the people.
Q. But not to put too fine a point on it, in the case of the corner
greengrocer, you take away his shop and let him manage it as a
salaried employee? A. That might be the position. But the
monopolist drives him out and leaves him with nothing.”
( 'h ) Management of the State by the dictatorship of the proletariat, using the
trade unions as levers or instruments to carry on production.
Gibson offered some verbal criticism of the language in which this
proposition is expressed, but I do not think that in substance he disagreed
with it. In any event I think it is justified by the citations from the doctrinal
writings which were put to the witness.
Ex. 11, p. SS.
Ex. 14.
pp. 46-8.
Ex. BS7, p. 61.
TV. p. G 782
et seq and
6787.
METHODS OF CARRYING INTO EFFECT THE PARTY POLICY.
So far I have dealt with types of activity in which the Communist
Party engages. It is now necessary that I should relate more particularly and
in some detail how the Party works.
I shall deal first with the subject of how it prepares its adherents to
understand its aims and objects and trains them to carry out those aims and
objects.
It will be apparent from this report that the Communist Party
attaches the greatest importance to instruction both of adults and of youth.
Training of Members of the Party.
In 1928 the O.P. published a “ Party Training Manual.” This is too
long to quote, but the preface states that it is adapted from the one issued by
the C.P. of Great Britain and contains the main points in the development of
the revolutionary struggle of the working class and is a guide to correct
revolutionary activity within Australia,
Exs. 38,16.


The Party insists on zeal in its members. The application form for
membership requires the applicant, if and when admitted, to engage in some
one or more of the Party’s activities, and a ground for loss of membership is
inactivity. Classes of instruction often require attendance in the early
morning before the hour when work starts, or late in the evening, and those
who attend may be taken to be earnest in learning the Party’s doctrines and
techniques.
The Mabx School.
The Party has an organization known as The Marx School, which is
carried on on the Bth Floor, Howey Court, 234 Collins-street, Melbourne. The
syllabus states —“ Marx School was founded as a memorial to the great leader
and organizer of the working class, Karl Marx (1818-1883), to provide facilities
for an advanced study of scientific socialism and to supplement the educational
activities of the Political, Trade Union, Workshop and other organizations of
the working class. It is the Workers’ University.”
The syllabus provides for weekly and fortnightly classes, and provides
for instruction in the following subjects (amongst others), viz.:—Dialectical
and Historical Materialism, Marxist Theory of the State, Principles of
Scientific Socialism, History of the Communist Party of the Soviet Union,
United Front and People’s Front, Foundations of Leninism, Working Class
Tactics, The Communist Manifesto, History of the Australian Labour
Movement, and Political Economy. Membership of the classes is open to all
A.C.P. members and supporters at a fee of 2s. 6d. a quarter or 10s. a year, but
for those earning less than £2 10s. a week only half fees are charged. (In the
appendices will be found a syllabus for this school.) The School has been in
existence since 1944. Many of the documents to which I have made reference
in this report are the subject of teaching or of reference in the syllabus, and
textbooks in the historical aspects of the Trade Unions and the Labour Party
are by E. W. Campbell (Director of the Marx School in Sydney), Sharkey,
and Thornton, leading members of the Communist Party, and Brian Fitzpatrick,
the Secretary of the Council of Civil Liberties. There is a Marx School in each
of the capital cities.
The Choice and Training oe Tutors.
Tutors are carefully chosen and instructed, A“ Handbook for Tutors ”
which is on sale at the Party bookshops, is available for their use. The
handbook prescribes the material to be studied, and gives a number of hints
for tutors. According to Hill’s evidence there is little likelihood of any
departure from orthodoxy in the teaching.
Research Oeeicers and the Writing op Textbooks.
JSTor does the Party confine itself to existing books and writings.
Rawling gave evidence that he was instructed by Miles and Dixon of the
Secretariat to write historical articles for the “ Communist Review ” and a
history of Australia stressing the part played by the people and the radical
leaders, choosing as the chief episode the Eureka incident and finding a
prominent place for mass movements in which the people took part, and that
he was to represent the C.P. as the successor of those who led these movements.
Rawling was at this time the research officer of the Party, and among his duties
was the task of preparing material for Party papers, pamphlets, leaflets and
speakers’ notes, and many of his articles appear in the Exhibits.
Party Bookshops.
I have previously mentioned the Party press. The C.P. also conducted
Party bookshops in several suburbs and in two or three country towns.
The control of the International Book Shop in Exhibition-street,
Melbourne, is in the hands of Communists.
Ex. 12, p. 9.
Exs. 184, 132.
Ex. 4, p. 14.
Ex. 10.
Tr. pp. 31-34.
Ex. SGS.
Ex. 979, p. 4,
Tr. pp. 6712-3.
Ex. 18.
Tr, p. 88
Tr. p. 7814.
Tr. p. 8140.
Tr. pp. 320 7-S.
Exs. 126 and
127.
Tr. pp. 839,
2721,
Ex. 286.
Tr. pp. 1260,
2716-21,
7418-21.


Special Classes.
1 have had evidence too of special classes being held, one mentioned
being at Sherbrooke in the Dandenong Ranges near Melbourne, and Sharpley
also deposed to week-end classes having been held at holiday resorts such as
Upper Ferntree Q-ully and Chelsea. Classes were also conducted ,at local
branches or units of the Party, and Mrs. X. gave evidence of a class of
General Motors-Holden employees at a member’s home.
Cottage Lectures.
Cottage lectures at the homes of Party members were spoken of by
several witnesses, and the practice was still followed in 1945.
Classes for Special Sections of Community.
In addition, special classes were held for particular sections of the
Party. Thus there were classes for:—
(a) Women members.
(5) Trade Union Officials.
(c) Ex-servicemen.
Nor does attendance seem to have been wholly voluntary, for Bawling
gave evidence that instructions were given to members on occasion to attend
particular classes.
Overseas and Interstate Classes.
There is evidence too of leading members of the Party going from
Victoria to Sydney for a class lasting for three months in 1948. I have in
another context referred to leading members of the Party going to Moscow for
a course of training.
Personal Instruction.
The evidence shows too that personal teaching was given to individual
members, and that this task was assigned to some prominent member of the
Party. Mrs. X produced notes of the teaching given to her which shows the
thoroughness of the instruction in the doctrines and organization of the Party.
I see no reason to distrust the substantial accuracy of this part of her evidence.
Training or Youth.
The C.P. regards the training of youth as of particular importance.
In the Report of the 7th Congress of the Communist International there is ah
abridged account of a speech by Dimitrov, and as to this speech Sharkey, in a
foreword to a reprint, says that it ranks “ as a classic exposition of what unity
of the Labour movement is and what it means. It is still a reliable guide for
all united front activity and indicates the line of march to Socialism.” As to
youth, Dimitrov says, “ We have under-estimated the enormous importance of
the youth in the fight against Fascism. We have not always taken count of
the specific economic, political and cultural interests of the youth. We have
likewise not paid proper attention to revolutionary education of the youth. . .
A great part of the responsibility for all this must be borne, of course, by the
Communist Parties as well, for they ought to lead and support the Y.O.L,
(Young Communist League) in its work. For the problem of the youth is
not only a Y.C.L. problem. It is a problem for the entire Communist
movement. In the struggle for youth the Communist Parties and the Y.C.L.
organizations must actually effect a decisive change.”
Summer School.
Dimitrov’s injunction has not passed unheeded by the A.C.P. The
Young Communists’ League, which had catered for the interests of Communist
Youth up to 1935, was in that year dissolved and was succeeded by the Young
Democrats League, and that in its turn by the Eureka Youth League. There
is in evidence a syllabus for a E.Y.L. summer educational school in two terms
of approximately five weeks each. , The subjects present a close parallel to
Tr. p. 773.
Tr. pp. 776,
780, 792,1889,
8204.
Tr. pp. 700,
771, 776. 799,
6144, 5178,
5549, 7918-9.
Exb. 601 and
070.
Tr. pp. 740,
9613.
Tr. pp. 5143-4.
Tr. pp. 700-2.
8899.
Tr. pp. 1886,
2627-80, 7012.
Tr. p. 3493.
Tr. pp. 794,
1844-6.
Tr. pp. 7470-
7472.
Tr. p. 6164.
Tr. p. 5606.
Exs. 79, SO.
Tr. pp. 816-7.
Ex. SO. p. 57.
Ex. SO, p. 68.
Ex. 166.
Tr. pp. 866
et seg.
Of.Tr,
pp. 834,
2937-8.


the subjects of the Marx School Syllabus, and the great majority of the
lecturers were members of the C.P. The textbooks referred to in dealing
with Trades Unionism were by Sharkey, Thornton, and Brian Fitzpatrick.
Holiday Camps.
In addition, holiday camps were organized for young people, and of ■
these there is frequent reference in the “ Guardian ” and in the evidence of ■
Sharpley and Mrs. X.
I shall not at this stage deal further with youth activities, but I shall
have to return to the subject later in reporting on the question of indoctrination.
Fraternal Organizations.
The C.P. also worked through organizations which in name were not;
connected with it but in fact were dominated or influenced by it or were very *
friendly to the A.C.P. In 1933 instructions were issued from the Central;
Committee in relation to War and Illegality. This document was addressed;
to “ Every D.C., Each Party. Fraction, Section Committees and Job Units
Among other things it enjoined that —“At every meeting, factory, street,'
fraternal organization, union, &c., special resolutions must be moved, calling
upon the masses to establish Anti-War organization, to support the Anti-War
Conference, and pledging each individual in the audience to become an active
anti-war propagandist in the places where he comes in contact with other-
workers ”,
The witness Pawling was asked what was the meaning of the reference -
to “ fraternal organization ”, and he answered that it was the name applied
by Party members to subsidiary organizations controlled by the Party such
as, “ The Friends of the Soviet Union ”, “ The League against Imperialism ”,
and so on. Gibson did not agree with this description—but gave none of his
own. Later Pawling named The International Labor Defence Corps, The'
Movement against War and Fascism, The Workers Inter-national Relief, The
International Prisoners Aid, The Unemployed Workers Movement, and the
Minority Movement as fraternals, and said that this was the term always;
applied to these organizations by members of the Central Committee. He said ‘
they were always regarded as subsidiary organizations by the C.P. All these
fraternals operated in Victoria.
In the ease of the League against Imperialism there is at least one.
instance of communications received from abroad and action taken here in
response to a request therefor..
Non-Communist Facade.
The Transcript shows that there were many communists in these ;
organizations. Pawling speaks of approaching clergymen and others to give
added respectability to a Peace Congress and the whole passage in which
this statement occurs strongly suggests that the Communist fraction was;
using these men as a facade behind which the Communists directed the
movement.
I cite one other illustration from his evidence in relation to the League
against Imperialism:—r •
Q. “ You started to organize—did you make any approach to
people ? Did you draw up a list of people whom you would
approach? A. “ Yes, we drew up a plan to approach people that
were not communists, that were not known, or were not known _as
communists, in order to present a respectable facade behind which
the Communist Party could organize the Congress. We approached
trade union leaders, clergymen, writers and so on, some members of
the Armed forces—particularly returned soldiers of the previous war,
one or two with decorations, and we printed those names on the
letterhead and sent out invitations to the Congress,”
Tr. pp. 884.
6143, 6179-80.
Ex. 088, p. 5.
Cf. Ex. 11,
P. 89.
Tr. p. 77A.
Tr. pp. 1906,
8166.
Ex. 266.
Tr. p. 2546.
Tr. p. 2547.
Tr. p, 2547.
Tr. p. 6802.
Tr. pp. 2829,
2852.
Ex. 376.
Tr. p. 8161.
Tr. pp. 2815
«t seq,
Tr, pp. 3625-8.
Tr. pp. 2616
et seq, 2630.
Tr. p. 2528.


Q. “ And when you sent out these invitations to each person, did
you send out with that invitation a list of persons for the Provisional
Committee 1 ? ” A. “To each one? ”
Q. “ Yes.” A. “ No, I think they were got in different ways.
Some were members of the Communist Party and were simply
instructed to have their names used. Others ■ were approached
individually—l approached one or two —and others by letter.”
>■ I have set out only two or three questions, but the whole incident as
it appears in the Transcript is informative as to the means adopted.
Australia —Soviet House.
Sharpley in his evidence said that Australia-Soviet House was used by
the Party for its own purposes in spreading propaganda, &c., that its director,
Rodgers, was a secret member of the Party, and that he had attended meetings
of the State Executive and State Secretariat of the Party for discussing
Party work that affected Australia-Soviet House and-the Trade Unions, and
that the State Executive discussed with him early in 1948 his going to Europe.
These allegations were investigated before me at some length. They were
denied wholly by Rodgers and members of the Party who gave evidence. I
state quite shortly my finding in the matter. Australia-Soviet House is an
institution which is legally a separate entity from the C.P. Among its
shareholders there are members of the C.P. and persons who are not. There
is nothing in the management of it to suggest that it was controlled or
directed by the C.P., though individual Communists were on committees.
Among its debenture holders were some Communists and some non-Communists.
The banking account of the Party showed some payments in from
Australia-Soviet House, but nothing to indicate that it was a subsidiary of
the Party. It Avas in fact supported by many who Avere neither Communists
nor sympathetic with Communists but who simply desired to see better
relations with the U.S.S.R. As to Rodgers, I see no reason to prefer his
evidence to that of Sharpley. In fact he did visit Russia, Eastern Europe
and other countries, and Sharpley’s evidence as to his trip abroad could be
true, but I am not satisfied on the evidence that he was a member of the 0.P.,
secret or otherwise, or that Sharpleys’ allegations as to his attending meetings
is true or that his trip abroad was arranged or facilitated by the C.P.
Council op Civil Liberties.
Sharpley also gave evidence that in 1948 the State Executive of the
Communist Party were seeking help to oppose what they regarded as
oppressive legislation and decided that Brian Fitzpatrick, the Secretary of
the Council of Civil Liberties, be asked to revive the activities of that body
and that the Council be asked to issue propaganda opposing such threatened
legislation. Sharpley said Oke had reported back to the Executive that he
had seen Fitzpatrick, who had agreed to revive the activities of the Council
and had agreed to discuss with other members the proposal for issuing a
pamphlet.
Sharpley said that Fitzpatrick was very sympathetic to the C.P. and
one who could be approached at all times to do something for the Party that
the Party might want done in a special direction. Fitzpatrick cross-examined
Sharpley and gave evidence himself. In cross-examination Sharpley said not
only that he did not believe Fitzpatrick to be a member for the C.P. but knew
him not to be a member. Fitzpatrick denied that Oke had spoken to him as
alleged, and said that at no time had the Council of Civil Liberties discussed
the suggested oppressive legislation.
I have not investigated the constitution, activities, or membership of the
Council of Civil Liberties and consequently make no finding in regard to that
body. As to the allegation that he was sympathetic to the 0.P., Fitzpatrick
said that in political convictions he was a socialist but not attached to any
party and to the extent that the Labour Party and the C.P. appeared to him
to advocate the socialist cause he was favourable to them. To this admission
there must be added that there is evidence that he took part in the
demonstration against Von Luckner as an observer for the Council of Civil
Tr. pp. 2528-9.
Tr. p. 868.
Tr. pp. 2339,
2373, 2554.
2617, 8578.
3647, 3679
et soq.
Tr. p. 875.
Tr. p. 875.
Tr. pp. 2317
et aeq.
2824 et aoq.
Tr. pp. 2328,
9652.
Tr. p. 2831.


Liberties, that he had spoken against the National Security Act in 1940, that
he was joint author of a pamphlet, “ The Case against the Crimes Act,” that
he spoke at a C.P. meeting on the Yarra Bank opposing the internment of
Ratcliffe and Thomas, and at May Day Meetings, and had spoken in support
of a protest against the Rocket Range. I think at least it is correct to say he '
was favourable to many movements supported by' the C.P.
A Reaction in Action.
In its work within trade unions the chief means of advancing the
Party’s interest were the fractions. An interesting illustration of the systems
in work appears in the evidence of the witness Martin, which I accept. He e
was not a member of the C.P., but by some odd mischance notices for a
fraction meeting came to him. He attended. The Transcript shows a
discussion of business to come before a meeting of a section of the Clerks’
Union, the tactics to be pursued at the meeting, and how unfavourable moves
might be blocked by adroit chairmanship. In the Clerks’ Hnion one,
Mortimer, was the chairman both of the fraction and of the section meeting
whose business was discussed by the fraction. It is curious to observe that, ■
under the rules of the Hnion, Mortimer was ineligible to be even a member of'
that section of the Hnion.
Martin’s evidence shows too how the Communists of one Union helped l
those of another. E. J. Rowe, a Communist, had been a Commonwealth
Council representative for some six years in the Amalgamated Engineering •
Union, and it was desired by the Communists that he be re-elected. The rules !
of the A.E.U. forbade the issue by candidates of printed propaganda. At
this meeting of the fraction of the Clerks’ Union each member was asked to i
make so many copies of a circular supporting Rowe’s candidature so that the
rules of the A.E.U. might be literally complied with.
Shop Papees, Leaflets and Slogans.
Some of the doctrinal writings which I have already referred to speak
of the importance of shop papers and, in the light of these, papers such as j
“ Mail Branch News ” issued in the P.M.G.’s Department, may have more
significance than appears on the surface. An allied activity appears in the;
distribution of leaflets, the chalking up and painting of slogans and the pasting;
up of posters. These I shall speak of in greater detail later.
Ohaiemanship or Meetings.
There is a good deal of evidence which suggests that both the
Communists in a Union and their opponents made a special study of thei
rules, and points of order were frequently taken. Often the purpose of such:
a ' course was, in case of uncertainty where the majority lay, to test the
strength of the opposing faction and then force a division by challenging the
chairman’s ruling. If the majority were against the party raising the point,
there are instances in the evidence to show that dilatory tactics were resorted
to in order to prevent a decision on an important question at such a meeting
and to have it postponed to a later meeting. In many unions there was a fixed
time for the termination of the meeting and if debate had continued to that
time the Chairman drew attention to the fact and the meeting closed.
Union Ballots.
The conduct of the C.P. or its members in relation to Union ballots
I shall have to deal with specifically later and therefore do not discuss it in
this section.
Publicity and Peopaganda.
The Communist Party had its own apparatus for publicity and
carrying on its propaganda. I have already, spoken of the Party press and its
methods of obtaining suitable material. I should add here that leading
members of the Party were assiduous in writing pamphlets and articles for
the Party press supporting the Party programme and attacking all opponents.
Tr. p. 2383.
Tr. pp. 5736
et seq.
Tr. pp. 5966-
5970.
Tr. p. 9740.
Tr. p, 822.
Tr. pp. 5745,
ct Rcq.
7141.
Ex. 054.
Exs. 325,
327.
Tr. pp. 5145-6,
7506, 8135-6,
8247-8,
8260-2,
Tr. pp. 1101.
2707, 4379-81,
4460-1, 4567-8,
4647-50,
5772-3. 5991-51,
5999-6000.
8156-91.
Tr. p. 4689.


Sharkey, Miles, Dixon, Thornton, and Hill are some of those who acted thus.
The Federal Press, an incorporated company, did a great deal of the Party’s
printing. I have no doubt on the evidence that it was under the control of the
Party. The Party also controlled the Realist Film Unit or. Realist Film
Association and the New Theatre, both of which are constantly advertised in
the “ Guardian ”.
Medical Sub-Committees.
The Party had too a medical sub-committee which dealt with many
matters of public interest, which were not peculiar to the Communist Party,
but which also sought to make popular the programme of the Party among the
medical profession.
There were two instances also established to my satisfaction of a member
of the Party who was a medical practitioner having given a medical certificate
to another member of the Party to explain his absence from his work with his
employer and to enable him to be available for Party work.
Screening Committee.
I mention too without elaborating the matter that the C.P. had committees
to examine the suitability of members for admission to the Party and the
activities of secret or “ undercover ” members.
United Front.
The last matter I shall mention under this heading is the subject of the
United Front.
I have already drawn attention to the statement by Dimitrov as to the
importance of the United Front, and this is one of the methods by which the
Communist Party seeks to control the working class. The United Front as
distinct from The People’s Front is limited to the working class and may be
brought about by either of two methods, (a) from below, or (b) from above: —
(a) The former is brought into being by rank and file committees
elected from militant unionists who act in disregard of the
control of the officials of their Union and make common
cause with the Communists who are members of the Union.
(b) The United Front from above is sought to be achieved by
the Communist Party co-operating with the officials and
leaders of the Labour unions.
According to Rawling both policies, i.e., from below and from above,
were pursued by the Communist Party in regard to the Labour movement.
The Communist Party, however, aims at a wider organization than the
United Front. Concurrently with its efforts to achieve this it seeks to create
a People’s Front, which, unlike the United Front, seeks to align in support
of its policy all (whether of the working class or not) who will support the
Communist Party. Dixon, in 1935, at the Congress of the Communist Party,
put forward the proposal to create a People’s Front Government, and the
question was discussed in June, 1936, in the ‘ ‘ Communist Review ” by L.
Donald, another member of the Party, and recommended by Sharkey in the
same publication in January, 1939. Its policy was to support the League of
Nations and oppose war, and it continued until receipt of a cabled account of
Molotov’s speech set out in the “ Tribune ” of 19th September, 1939. The
changed attitude is indicated in the “ Communist Review ” of November, 1939,
Exs. 21,117,
707, 016.
Exs. 159, 745-
758.
Tr. pp. 896
Ct S6Q.
Tr. po. 801-2,
944, 8242,
947, 2951,
2956, 4968,
6743, 6266,
6280. 7779,
7076.
Tr, p. 836.
Tr. p. 7810.
Tr. p. 2802.
Tr. p. 3032.
Tr. p. 9666.
Tr. p. 837.
Exs. 79, 80.
Tr. pp. 314-
316.
Tr. p. 3537.
Tr. P. 3538.
Ex. 810.
Ex. 309.
Tr. p. 3267.
Tr. pp. 3205-6.
Tr. pp. 3210-B.


Organizations and Persons Associated with the Communist Party.
The activities operations of members of the A.C.P., as a general
subject matter are sufficiently indicated in wbat I have already written in
regard to the activities and operations of the A.C.P. The particular conduct
of members will be further dealt with under specific heads of inquiry which will
follow in this Report. My next task is to give some further particulars about
organizations and persons associated with the A.C.P. In effect these
organizations are the fraternals to which I have referred and some of which
I have named. Those named may not be and probably are not a complete
enumeration and I have omitted some in regard to which I think the evidence
is inconclusive or suggests that the organization may not have operated in
Victoria.
Peaternals.
In cross-examining the witness Rawling, Mr. Laurie put to him some
passages from a work loy Stalin, “ Foundations of Leninism,” which seem to me
to be relevant to the understanding of the relationship of the C.P. to fraternals.
I cite portion of the cross-examination on this point.
“ Q. On page 73, Stalin deals with the relationship of the Party to
other working class organizations. He says this: ‘ The Party is the
organized detachment of the working class. But the Party is not
the only organization of the working class. The. proletariat has in
addition a great number of other organizations which are indispensable
in its correct struggle against the capitalist struggle, trade unions,
co-operative societies, factory and shop organizations, Parliamentary
fractions, non-Party women’s associations, the press, cultural and
educational organizations, youth leagues, military revolutionary
organizations (in tunes of direct revolutionary action), soviets of
deputies as the state form of organization (where the proletariat is
in power), &c. Most of these organizations are non-Party and only
a certain part of these adhere directly to the Party, or represent its
offshoots. All these organizations, under certain conditions, are
absolutely necessary for the working class, as without them it is
impossible to consolidate the class position of the proletariat in the
diversified spheres of struggle, and without them it is impossible to
steek the proletariat as the force whose mission it is to replace the
bourgeois order by the socialist order. But how can unity of leadership
become a reality in the face of such a multiplicity of organizations?
What guarantee is there that this multiplicity of organizations will
not lead to discord in leadership ? ’
Then he goes on, further down: ‘ But it is likewise true that the
activities of all these organizations ought to be directed into a single
channel, as they serve one class, the class of the proletariat. The
question then arises: Who is to determine the line, the general direction
along which the work of all these organizations is to be conducted?
Where is that central organization which is not only able, having the
necessary experience, to work out such a general line, but also capable,
because of its authority, of prevailing upon all these organizations to
carry out this line, in order to attain unity of direction and preclude
the possibility of working at cross purposes? This organization is the
Party of the proletariat.’
At page 74, he goes on to discuss why it is the best organization:—
‘ This does not mean, of course, that non-Party organizations
like trade unions, co-operative societies, &c., must be formally
subordinated to Party leadership.
It means simply that the members of the Party who belong to
these organizations and doubtless exercise influence in them, should
do all they can to persuade these non-Party organizations to draw
nearer to the Party of the proletariat in their work and voluntarily
accept its political guidance. ’
Ex. 17.
Tr. p. 8328.
Of. Tr. p. 77a.
Ex. 11, p. 89.
Tr. pp. 1906,
3156.


Well, now, would .you agree that that too is an accurate statement of
the Communist Party’s view of the relationship between the Party and mass
organizations of the working class'? A. Yes, as long as I am allowed to give
my own meaning to the words ‘ prevail ’ and ‘ persuade ’.
Q. I am just talking about whether that is the theoretical basis
upon, which the Party acts in relation to mass organizations—is not
it 1 ? A. Yes.”
Communist Party Control over Members in other Organizations.
Gibson too in re-examination to Mr. Laurie throws some light on the
control which the party exercises over a member who is also a member of
another organization.
“ By Mr. Laurie: You were also cross-examined at some length as
to the control that the party exercises over a member of the party
who is also a member of another organization, and it was put to you
that the Party has a right to direct such a member how he should vote
in such a body, and that the member was bound to obey such n
direction. A. Yes, it was.
Q. What do you say as to that? A. The Party would have the
right in the last resort to decide how he should vote. Of course that
would be something quite distinct from what he should do as a
member of the other organization. But with regard to discipline,
we insist that the Communist Party is a voluntary organization.
People can be in it if they wish and not in it if they do not wish; and
in any such organization discipline must be conscious, voluntary
self-discipline, must it not'?
,Q. Well that is the view you hold, it if? A. Yes. I think that. I
do not know whether I quoted the statement of Stalin when he was
commenting on what Lenin said about iron discipline—he said ‘ Only
a conscious discipline can be a discipline of iron.’ ”
i
List oe Praternals.
According to Bawling and others the Praternals were controlled by
communist fractions within the organizations.
I add some information and comments on particular organizations:—
{a) The Militant Minority Movement. —This is commonly ref erred
to in Communist publications by the initials M.M.
According to Bawling it was a later development of the
Trade Union Educational League a body which may not have
operated in Victoria.
( b) The Unemployed Workers’ Movement. —Bawling stated that
the U.W.M. was set up by the Communist Party and the
M.M. and that it was controlled in the same way as the
other fraternal organizations. There was a Central
Unemployed Committee which was a non-Communist body
and was opposed to the U.W.M. operating in Victoria at the
same time.
(c) The League against Imperialism. —Gibson agreed that this body
was functioning in Victoria in 1932.
{d) The Friends of the Soviet Union. —Gibson agreed that this
body also was functioning in Victoria in 1932.
McGillick said it “ had for its purpose a conveyer belt on
which we conveyed the best elements from this organization
into the ranks of the party. ”
“ Conveyer Belt ” was a term which he said was common
in party literature and among party members. According
to Gibson this body issued a magazine “ Soviets To-day ”
which by 1936 had attained a wide circulation—probably
16,000 copies.
Tr. PP. 6918-0.
Tr. pp. 2864,
3642 and 6143.
Ex. 307.
Tr. p. 2862.
Tr. 6801-2.
Ex. 421.
Tr. pp. 3495-6.
Tr. p. 3324-5.
Tr. pp. 2853,
6801-2.
Ex, 307.
Tr. p. 1363.
Tr. pp. 680 X-2.
Tr. pp. 6801-2.
Tr. p. 5039.
Tr. p. 6804.
Ex. 9X7.


(e) Australian Soviet Friendship League. —This body seems to
have come into existence about 1941. Rodgers, the Director
of Australia-Soviet House, was one of its joint secretaries
at the beginning and afterwards sole secretary, and A. A.
Hughes was a member of its Council. Ralph Hibson spoke
under its auspices. In a statement to Parliament Hughes
said the body was brought into existence to foster mutual
understanding between Russia and Australia. He agreed that
there might have been communist members on the Council
but said he didn’t know; and said that a number of clergymen
were members of the body. He said the body just faded
out of existence. The banking account of the Communist
Party in Melbourne shows that cheques amounting to £9B 6s,
payable to the Australian Soviet Friendship League were
debited against the account.
(/) Worhers’ International Relief. —Hibson agreed that this body
was regarded as a fraternal organisation and that it was
functioning in Victoria in 1932.
(g) The International Glass War Prisoners Aid. —Its Secretary
was a prominent communist.
(h) The United Front against Fascism. —The bodies just mentioned
(g) and (h) later amalgamated to form The International
Labour Defence Corps.
(i) Movement against War and Fascism. —This movement was
first known in Victoria as The Victorian Council against
War. Hibson says the change of name was due to the
accession of Hitler to power in Hermany and suggested that
the change of name would have come about by a vote of the
Council approved by the following Conference. Mr. Laurie
in his opening said that the Communist Party admitted that
it took a leading part in the development of the movement
but said that that part was well known to persons working in
the Movement and he asserted that the body was an
independent autonomous body. It is possible that the steps
taken in New South Wales to effect the change of name
differed from those taken in Victoria, but according to
Rawling, whose evidence I accept, the way the matter was;
handled there is set out in the following extract from the
transcript:—
“By Mr. Mclnerney: By this time, were you receiving,
in the National Committee of the Council of the
Movement against War, from the World Headquarters
of the organization in Paris, regular reports of the
activities of this body, the Movement against War? A.
Yes.
Q. And in one of those reports'had you been informed
that the World Committee of the Movement against War
had amalgamated with the other organization, the World
Movement against Fascism? A. Yes.
Q. And was the question of the amalgamation of these
two World Movements discussed at a meeting of the Party
fraction of the National Committee of the Movement
against War? A. Yes.
Q. And can you tell us what the discussion was, among
the members of the fraction? A. The question arose as to
what we were going to do because in Australia we had had
a conference of the Movement against War and had set
up this body—the Movement against War. The question
was raised whether we should have another Congress to
create a Movement against Fascism or whether we should
Tr. pp. 1713-6,
1727-60,
8620-1, 6711.
Ex 737.
Tr. pp. 6801-2.
Tr. pp. 2852,
2854, 3401-8,
6801-2.
Ex. 307.
Tpt 2864,
6801-2.
Ex. 266.
Tr, pp. 6673-4.
Tr. p. 6575.
Tr. pp, 6363-4.
Tr, pp. 2549-
2560.


Tr. pi). 2496-7.
Ex. 417.
Ex. 273.
Tr. 2832.
Tr. p. r. 291,
6230.
Tr. p. 2495.
Tr. p. 2583.
ct, scq.
Ex. 273.
Tr. p. 0209.
Tr. p. 2506-7.
Tr. p. 2010.
Ex. 258 and
417.
Tr. p, 2510
et sea.
Tr. p. 2496.
Tr. p. 2597.
Tr. 2604.
Tr. 2407.
Tr. p, 3104.
Tr. p. 6862.
Ex. 277.
Tr. 3642.
Tr. 6299.
Tr. 6316.
Tr. pp. 901,
8139-40,
in some way insert the words ‘ and Fascism ’ in the name
and objects of the Movement against War. And J, B,
Miles suggested and instructed us that the words ‘ and
Fascism ’ should be added to the title and that the whole
thing should be presented to the people quietly, without
making any comment at all, so that from that time on, the
name of the Movement should become ‘ The Movement
against War and Fascism He said that it would create
misunderstandings and so on if any open movement was
made to add to the name. Therefore, it should be done
quietly.”
Bawling said that major moves of this organization were
always under the control and at the direction of the
Communist Party and that he could not recall any major
move either in New South Wales or Victoria that was not so
done.
There is a good deal of evidence as to the operation of this
body in Victoria during the Thirties. It issued a journal
known as “ World Peace ” which circulated in Victoria and
of which there are several issues in evidence. There is an
interesting photograph of a meeting at Port Melbourne in
1934 in which a vacant chair is left for Egon Kisch who was
absent.
According to the witness Mrs. X this Movement against
War and Fascism was succeeded by a body called The League
for Peace and Democracy, “ only the name has been
changed ”, she said. It is not clear when this change occurred
and there seems to be clear evidence that the League for
Peace and Democracy was functioning at the end of 1939,
Indeed as one traces the history of these different bodies
difficulties are apt to occur from the kaleidoscopic changes of
names. The League for Peace and Democracy continued the
journal known as “ World Peace ”.
(, j ) International Peace Campaign. —Bawling gave evidence that
he received instructions from the Communist Party in 1936
to set up this body in Australia and that he was the first
Secretary of it and that in conjunction with Simpson and
Miles he worked out the major moves of that body. The
M.A.W.F. was the organizing body and approached prominent
people to associate with the 1.P.0. He was in Melbourne
several times about this period and discussed matters about
M.A.W.F. (and presumably the 1.P.C.) with members of the
State Committee of the M.A.W.F. He said that the 1.P.0.
and also the League against Imperialism regularly received
instructions from overseas. The I.P.C. held a congress in
Melbourne in 1937. Bawling said that in 1937 the main
purpose of keeping the M.A.W.F. going was to extend the
propaganda of the I.P.C. Gibson was responsible to the
State Committee for the Communist fraction in the 1.P.0.
and Mrs. X names four members of the party who were in
that fraction.
(/«) The Arts Council of Australia. —This body was formerly known
as The Council for the Encouragement of Music and the Arts
or by its initials C.E.M.A. There is little evidence about
this body and nothing of significance apart from the fact that
several Communists are members of it, e.g. McClintock and
Grant Taylor, and the general instructions of the party as
to the formation of Communist fractious in organizations of
which Communists are members,


(l) Eureka Youth League. —l have earlier said something ofi
this body and will again have to deal with it at a later stage. I
All I shall say here is that a perusal of photostats of i
documents coming from the Secretariat of the Communist
Party leaves little room for doubting that there was a close
relationship existing between the Communist Party and the j
Eureka Youth League and renders credible the evidence;
given by Sharpley that the membership of the League and 1
the policy of the_ League and its activities are under the
control and direction of the party. Sharpley suggested.that
there were 800 members in Victoria at the end of 1948 of
whom between 150 and 200 were Communists but later was
prepared to accept a statement of Counsel that there would
not be 60.
(m) Australasian Student Labour Federation. —Some evidence -
was given of the existence of this body which claimed in a'
circular issued by it to be an organization of socialist students
in Australia and New Zealand, whose members belonged to
Labour, Socialist and Radical Clubs in the various
universities. It claimed not to be affiliated with any political
party hut to unite within its organization A.L.P. members,
Communists and students who belong to no party at all. lan
Turner, a Communist, was the secretary of the organization.
The Communist Party was at least interested in the
organization, and it provided a field in which a Communist
fraction might operate, but I have no evidence of any control
or direction of it by the Communist Party.
(n) New Housewives Association. —The origin of this body and
some account of its activities are to be found in the evidence
of the Secretary of the Fairfield Branch, Mrs. Peggy Baldwin,
a member of the Communist Party.
Ex. 750.
Tr. pp. 6285
et aeq.
Ex. 168.
p. 175.
Ex. 280, 290.
Tr. pp. 131 -
-1323.. 2737
at seq.
Tr. p. 6724
et seq.
Ex. 830.
Tr. pp. 801,
046-7.
Tr. pp. 7722,
7748 et aeq.
DOES THE AUSTRALIAN COMMUNIST PARTY OR ANY OF
ITS ASSOCIATED ORGANIZATIONS ADVOCATE OR
ENCOURAGE THE OVERTHROW BY FORGE OR VIOLENCE
OF ESTABLISHED GOVERNMENT?
I have now reached the stage at which I must answer the question—
Whether the Australian Communist Party by its constitution or propaganda or
any of its members or any of its associated organizations or persons by
propaganda or otherwise advocates or encourages the overthrow by force or
violence of established government. By the phrase “ established government ”
I understand the mode of government now existing and not as it may change
from time to time. The question relates, in my understanding of it, to the
overthrow of parliamentary government as we know it, in which at the head
there is the King’s representative, in which the executive authority is in the
hands of a ministry which enjoys the support of the majority of Parliament, in
which Parliament is a deliberative assembly and is itself elected on a popular
basis by such of the people as possess electoral qualifications, and in which the
judicial power is in the last resort exercised by a judiciary whose tenure is
independent of the control of the executive. I have already dealt in some
detail with the constitution of the Australian 'Communist Party, I have also
dealt with associated organizations (fraternals) and with the activities and
operations both-of members of the Party and of associated organizations and
I need say little more on these matters under the present heading. I have
made it plain, I think, that the Australian Communist Party itself and all
these bodies and persons so far as they are controlled by the Communist
Party aim ultimately at the overthrow of the capitalist system and that the
Australian Communist Party regards existing governments in capitalist
countries as a concealed dictatorship of the capitalist class. Beyond debate,
the evidence shows an aim by the Australian Communist Party and its
members and others who will support them to overthrow such existing
governments and “ smash ” the State machine, but as I have already pointed
Ex. 88 pp. S 3
and 38.
Tr. pp* 17.9 a
et aeq., 7717.
Se«ante, p, 15.


out Communist witnesses denied that the aim was to overthrow the existing
system with violence. The basis of this denial was, however, that the
possessing class might in the light of history voluntarily abdicate the seat of
power and that then the transfer of power could be achieved without violence.
But Gibson’s answers, already quoted above, leave no room for doubt that if
there is no voluntary abdication of power by the Government existing when a
revolutionary situation arises, the overthrow will be effected with violence. I
draw attention to but do not repeat what I have said above on the question of
time when such overthrow is designed. It is summed up in the evidence of
Gibson that the overthrow is intended “ at the earliest practicable time.”
Tr. pp. 6339,
6766.
Tr. p. 6764,
Tr, p. 6478.
ACTIVITIES AND OPERATIONS IN RELATION TO
PARTICULAR ENDS.
The next question I am asked to report about is whether the activities
or operations of the Party or any of its members or of any such organizations
or persons are or have been designed to effect or accomplish or are or have
been directed at effecting or accomplishing various particular ends, (It should
be noticed that there is considerable overlapping of matters involved in the
headings which follow and it must be expected that some matters will be
relevant to more than one heading.) These I shall now deal with in some detail
in the order in which they appear in my Commission. The first heading is:—
(1) The overthrow or disruption of representative or democratic institutions.
I understand the phrase “ representative or democratic institutions ” to
refer to institutions of the kind we are familiar with in the present
governmental structure of the State. And I say so much since neither adjective
would be accepted by the Communist Party as properly applicable to these
institutions. Marx thought that the essence of parliamentarism was the
opportunity to decide every few years which member of the ruling class was
to misrepresent the people in Parliament, and Lenin spoke of the Communists
creating a “ fuller ” democracy for the State machine which they found and
smashed, and he speaks of “ the transformation of bourgeois democracy into
proletarian democracy. ’ ’ The Party Training Manual states that ‘ ‘ Parliament
merely registers and gives legal sanction to the decisions arrived at by the
ruling class elsewhere.” And in his evidence, Gibson emphasizes that the
governing institutions “ must be really close to the people,” which, he insists,
the existing institutions are not.
In discussing the evidence as to this heading, it is necessary to keep in
mind what I have said at an earlier stage in relation to time. Hence, it is not
surprising to find that there is what may be called a short term policy and an
ultimate aim. Until a revolutionary situation occurs, the Communist Party is
prepared to make use of existing institutions, and to get what benefit it can
from these for itself and for the workers it leads. Indeed, it is on the successful
operation of the existing system for the workers’ benefit that it relies to
maintain, consolidate and extend its influence over the working class. But, as
I have pointed out earlier, the Party leaders never lose sight of the ultimate
aim of the Party. Gibson expressed this in the passage already cited. For
convenience I repeat it:—
‘ ‘ When we struggle for unproved living conditions, ’ ’ he said, ‘ ‘ we
want to see improved living conditions. When we struggle for greater
democratic freedom we want that and we value it and when we struggle
for peace we want that. We consider it vital and indispensable.”
“ Q. Does that mean that each of these steps in your opinion and
your Party’s opinion has a value in itself which you desire to achieve,
although it may be part of a larger plan to bring about your strategic
objective? A. I would accept that statement; yes, Your Honour.”
In implementing this policy, as will appear under a later heading, the
Communist Party has succeeded in getting into influential positions in the
unions dynamic and aggressive members of the Party.
Ex. 772.
Ex. 15, p. 6.
Ex. 18,
pp. 48-9.
Ex. 18, p. 49.
Ex. 38, pp. 33.
Tr. pp. 179 a
to 182 (of. Tr.
pp. 6790-1).
Tr. pp. 6509
at eeq.
Tr, p. 6763.


This use of existing institutions includes the use of Parliament. The
Party Training Manual lays down the teaching of the Party. I quote the
following passage:—
“ Communist Use of Parliament. —The Communist Party makes
use of bourgeois parliaments and enters them for the furtherance of
the revolutionary class struggle:—
1. To expose the fraudulent character of £ democratic ’ policies.
2. To secure points of vantage from which to harass the ruling class.
3. To formulate immediate demands on which the masses can unite
for the struggle against capitalist rule.
The Bolshevik Party of Russia was represented in the Duma; they
did not recognize the Duma as an ideal or even as a permissible form
of State organization, but sent rejoresentatives to it as one way of
attacking the government apparatus of Tsardom.
Parliamentary action of this type was pursued by our late comrade
Liebkneeht in the Berman Reichstag, in the Drench Chamber of
Deputies by the Drench comrades and by Saklatvala in Britain. In
Australian experience, the conduct of Brookfield in the Hew South
Wales Parliament is the nearest approach to revolutionary action in
Parliament. Brookfield’s shortcomings were due largely to the fact
that he was an isolated individual, with no revolutionary party
controlling him.
These members enter Parliament not that they may take the
machine into their own hands, but that they may help the masses
to destroy it. Above all, it is necessary that the centre of gravity of
the struggle be outside Parliament, in strikes and other forms of mass
struggles, that the parliamentary activity should harmonize, and that
the members of Parliament act in obedience to the E.O. of the Party.
That is why the energies of Communists must be mainly
concentrated on the mobilization of the masses —the extension of
Party membership, factory and workshop groups, fraction work in the
trade unions and the conquest of the unions, and propaganda among
the masses. Parliamentary activity and participation in electoral
campaigns are supplementary to the above.”
Gibson suggested that the Party Training Manual was not, in his r
experience, in use by the Party, but similar teaching appears in the “ Handbook 5
for Tutors,” which is still on current sale.
The evidence shows that on a number of occasions members of the
Communist Party have sought to enter Parliament, both in the State and the
Dederal spheres. It appears, too, that Mr. Paterson, of Counsel, was elected
in April, 1944, to the Queensland State Parliament. One of the exhibits ]
before me was a reprint of two of his speeches in Parliament, and to this
reprint was an Introduction by J. B. Miles, the general secretary of the
Australian Communist Party. I quote from this to show that in his view
Mr. Paterson in Parliament was expounding the immediate and long range
programme of the Communist Party. He says:—
“ The two speeches reprinted in this pamphlet are good examples
of the Communist view that Parliament can be a forum from which to
expose the evils of capitalism and expound the immediate and long
range programme of the Communist Party.
In his advocacy of Allied Unity, our M.P. in parliamentary language
indicts the anti-Soviet enemies of unity whether of the Opposition
or the Labour Party right wing.
In his statement of the case for Socialism, Comrade Paterson
underlines the Labour Party acceptance of this objective and
expresses the conviction that socialists in the Labour Party will
endorse his views.”
Ex. 38, p. 88.
Tr. GDIS.
Ex-. 16, p. 62.
Ex. 769.


But I should do less than justice to Mr. Paterson if I did not say that the
evidence discloses action on his part to _ help his constituents during
a shortage of ice and other commodities, which would be admirable in any
citizen.
Local Government.
I may say in passing that the Party Training Manual, while pointing-
out that the participation of Communists in Local Government has not yet
become a practical problem in Australia, also points out how the organs of
Local Government maj r be used by the Party.
Council’s propositions.
Mr. Laurie, in his opening, contended, inter alia:—
“ 1. The first is that we defend the democratic institutions that
exist within the existing capitalist society, and we are
particularly concerned with the defence of the democratic
rights of the working class. Under this head we say that
the danger to democratic institutions in our Society comes
from the trends towards Fascism.
2. We say that while we defend democratic institutions that exist
in capitalist society, we recognize the limitations of capitalist
democracy for the mass of the people.”
I think the evidence establishes that the Communist Party is alert to
appreciate, and active to oppose, any restriction of the liberty, which it has
under the existing law to advocate and to endeavour to carry out its policy,
and to this extent Mr. Laurie’s contentions are established. For instance,
any limitation of the existing right to strike, or to comment freely on the
utterances or conduct of public men or authorities, or any attempt to punish
summarily any comment, however gross, it opposes by every means within
its power. There is evidence, too, that the Party seeks to broaden the
franchise of the Upper House if it cannot abolish it.
The long term policy and the ultimate aim of the Australian Communist
Party is to abolish the present institutions, though Mr. Laurie contended
that what the Party sought to abolish was not representative government
or even necessarily the Parliamentaiy form of Government. Unless the words
“ representative ” and “ parliamentary ” are used by him in a sense other
than I have indicated above, I think the evidence does not support his
contention.
I shall deal first with the Communist policy in relation to Parliament.
_ Gibson gave some evidence of what in his view would happen when the
existing system was overthrown and the dictatorship of the proletariat was
established, which I quote from the transcript:—
“This closeness of the governing institutions to the people and
the active participation of the people in those governing institutions
—that is, I should say, one of the essential characteristics of the
dictatorship of the proletariat.
The Commissioner: Before you leave that, I want to ask you
this. You were asked whether it necessarily involved an interference
with parliamentary institutions. Suppose the Communist Party,
having achieved power, is in office, is there any possibility of a
rival party by parliamentary means, unseating the Communist Party
and taking its place, as an opposition may now after a general
election take the place of a ministerial party? A. The system would
not be a Party system.
Q. The party system as we know it would go? A. Yes, the party
system as we know it, would go.
Q. So that if parliament survives it would be parliament as a very
different institution from what we have at the present time? A. In
my opinion, as a much better institution.
Tr. p, 6537-8.
Ex. 38, p. 39.
Tr. p. 6038-9.
Tr, p. 6870,
'IT. p. 6469-
6472.
Tr. p. 6616.
Ex. 822,
Tr, p. 6870.
Tr, p. 6610
et eeg.


Q. That may be, but it would go as we know it at present 1 A.
Parliament involving many parties would finally go. But there may
be as, for example, in Eastern Europe to-day, many parties remain
various parties which, in the case of Russia, rebelled against the
new authority and were, therefore suppressed—have been prepared
to co-operate in the new democracies in Eastern Europe. Sometimes
they form electoral blocs, at other times they continue to work as
separate parties—peasant parties, Catholic parties or other parties
—and that is quite conceivable for a considerable period in a socialist
society; but our theory is that parties in the sense of one set of
people permanently ranged against another set of people do not arise
except on the basis of conflicting class interests.
Q. I understood you to say that in Russia an opposition party
was suppressed. Does it mean that any party other than the
Communist Party which is dominant, on the assumption we are
dealing with, must co-operate or be suppressed? Is that the
conception? A. It means that any party must be prepared to work
upon the new Socialist basis which has been decided upon. If it
exists and is prepared to work on that basis, that party may exist
for as long as it has any reason for existence.
Q. And as long, I suppose, as it (sic) continues to govern? A.
As long as it accepts the fundamental constitution of the new State.
Q. Supposing a party being strongwilled, and perhaps foolish, does
not accept the new constitution, what in the conception of
Communism, would happen to it? A. If a party decides to join in
resistance by force to the will of the majority of the people, then
what I said yesterday applies as to how that resistance by force
would have to be dealt with.”
And again question and answer elucidate the witness’s view.
“ Q. To come back to the question of parliament, is it envisaged
that the institutions under that system will be something other than
parliamentary or may they be parliamentary? A. You might have
governing institutions that were still parliamentary hi form. In
essence they would be different, because where you have bodies
which are much closer to the people, and administrative as well as
legislative, you have something substantially different from the
present parliament. I think it may be possible to have a parliamentary
system combined with a wide network of people’s committees of
different kinds.
The Commissioner: At any rate, one thing seems plain from what
you have said, that the present political set-up of a federal
government and State governments could hardly continue to exist
under a Communist authority such as you have been expounding,
could it? A. As at present constituted, no, Your Honour.
Mr. Laurie: That presupposes, does it not, a change in the existing
set-up as laid down in the present constitution? A. That is so.
Q, Has the Communist Party formed any view as to how the
constitution as it at present exists, should be changed? A.
We are prepared to work as long as possible and as fully as
possible within parliamentary channels and to adopt the
means available for the alteration of the present constitution,
under the constitution, but we hold the view, as I said yesterday, that
there are so many defences for the power of the capitalists within
this State and outside this State that we do not expect to be able to
proceed more than a certain way along that; line. In any ease, we
believe that the mass action of the people outside Parliament—trade
union action and other action—is bound to be of the greatest
importance in effecting the change.”
4329/50.—6


The Communist M.P. in a Revolutionary Situation.
Gibson was asked as to the position of a Communist who was a member
of Parliament in the event of the Party seizing power, and I set out the
questions and answers: —
“ Q. What is his position conceived of as being in the event of a
seizure of power? Is he then, as a member of the Communist Party,
not bound to participate in the replacement of parliamentary
institutions by whatever organization it is decided to substitute for
them? A. Under those circumstances he would certainly participate
along with every other Communist in bringing about the change.
By the Commissioner: That would necessarily mean, would it not,
the breaking of the oath which he gives as a member of Parliament
of loyalty to the government? A. Rot at all, Your Honour.
Q. Why not? A. Because the actual experience of history has been
that it is the ruling class in present society which has broken
parliamentary institutions.
Q. But you are not facing the question I am putting to you. A
member of Parliament takes an oath of allegiance, does he not? A.
Yes.
Q. And, if in a revolutionary situation, it being his duty then to
support the revolutionary party, does not that necessarily involve a
breaking of the oath of allegiance which he has taken as a member
of the Parliament? A. He understands that oath of allegiance as an
oath to his people and his country and he would not consider himself to
be breaking it in such circumstances.
Q. Does that mean that the Communist member of Parliament,
when he takes the oath of allegiance takes it with a mental reservation
that he understands it in a particular sense which in a revolutionary
situation would entitle him to break that oath? A. He understands
it in a particular sense, and in that sense he would not be breaking
the oath.
Q. Well, does not that mean what I have put to you, that he takes
it with a mental reservation so that he can justify to himself in a
revolutionary situation what appears to be the breaking of the literal
oath which he has taken? A. He places his own interpretation on the
oath, Your Honour, and I would repeat that in every experience that
I can recollect in history the breaking up of parliamentary
democratic government has come from the top and not from the
people or from the Communist Party.”
I feel no doubt that Parliament in the sense we now use the term would
be abolished if the Communists ’ ultimate aim were achieved.
As to the Executive, I have quoted sufficient to show that the Australian
Communist Party’s aim is to destroy it, and that it, too, would be destroyed in
such a revolution.
The monarchy as a separate institution seems only to come into
consideration by the Communist Party as a matter for contempt or derision.
There is in evidence an exhibit headed “ Jehovah, George Wettin and the
Herapire.” It speaks of “ the specious humbug of Monarchy ” and of “ the
procession of pimps, harlots and criminal lunatics who have occupied
the English throne since the Rorman Conquest.” There is no place for the
Monarchy or its representative in the Communist Revolution.
The Judiciary.—l have pointed out above that the Communist Party
regards the Courts and the judges as part of the apparatus of power used by
the existing State, weighted in favour of property and biased against the
propertyless class. There are many exhibits in evidence illustrating this view.
The witness Hill gave an example of this view when he said he did not think
this Commission could possibly be impartial and that you might as well ask
him to investigate the existence of capitalism. There is no doubt that the
Courts as at present constituted, if they then existed, would be abolished by
the Communist Revolution,
Tr. p. 6791-2.
Ti.p 7288.
Exs 586, 900.
Ex. 911.
Ex. 12, p. 92.
Ija, 916,
p. 356.
Tr. 6635.
Ex. 190.
Tr. pp. 7362-8-
Ex. 846.
Tr. 7SG4,
Ex. 903-9.
Tr. 7365-82.
Tr. p. 7368.


The Arbitration Courts must be dealt with separately. Sharkey, in his -
book, “ The Trade Unions.” writes: —
“ The Communists regard the State-controlled Arbitration system
as a pernicious, anti-working class institution, whose objective is to
keep the workers shackled to the capitalistic state, i.e., eternally
wage-slaves. We fight against this Arbitration, relying on the unity
and organization of the workers in the struggle to improve conditions
and enforce collective agreements with the employers instead of
legalized Awards. We want to restore the position described by
Engels in his ‘ Conditions of the Working Class in England in
1844 ’—
1 In the meantime, until the majority of unionists are convinced
of the role of Arbitration, Communists have to represent their
unions in the Court, in order not to lose contact with the masses,
and, for tactical reasons, may temporarily support one form of
Arbitration against another, i.e., Conciliation Committees, &c.’
Our condemnation of capitalist State-controlled Arbitration Courts
does not mean opposition to Government legislation guaranteeing
conditions won by the masses.”
He also says in his Outline History of the A.O.P. that the system “ is
essentially a liberal capitalist and not a working class measure.”
Mr. Laurie in opening stated that the Communist Party was opposed
to compulsory arbitration, and would prefer a system of collective bargaining
between employers and employees and that the Communist Party regarded the
system as binding the working class to the capitalist system. Nevertheless, 1
they sought to work within the existing system as far as possible, and to try
to get such reforms of the systems as they felt to be in the best interests of
the working class. He asserted the right to strike, notwithstanding an
Arbitration Award or order on an important matter, and Gibson agreed, so
long as it was some vital issue. I have no doubt that the Arbitration Courts
would not survive the Communist Revolution.
It is important, too, to remember the Party’s tactics where it or its
members are brought into Court.
The pamphlet, “ How to Organise,” states:—
“ Our tactics in the public proceedings of the Law Court are not
tactics of defence, but of attack. Without clinging to legal formalities,
the Communist must use the trial as a means of bringing his
indictment against the dominant Capitalist regime and courageously
voicing the view of his Party.”
This, Gibson agreed, in substance was correct.
(ii) The subversion of law and order.
I understand this heading to refer to law and order as it exists in the
existing state or as it may be changed by constitutional means. Much that I
have written as to the C.P’s. aims is relevant to the present subject and I do
not repeat it. In the general overthrow of the capitalist system I have no
doubt it is intended to overthrow the law and order supported by that system.
But the element of time is again of importance. Till the revolutionary
situation arrives which the Communists desire they must make shift with the
capitalist order.
Legal and Illegal Woke.
I have already spoken of the party’s repudiation of the notion that any
worth-while improvement of the conditions of the proletariat can be achieved
by any reform or revision of the capitalist system, and Stalin himself has
written of what must be the party’s attitude when reforms are made. “ The
revolutionary will accept a reform ”, he says in Foundations of Leninism, “ in
order to use it as a means wherewith to link legal work with illegal work,
in order to use it as a screen behind which his illegal activities for the
Ex. 14. p. 20,
Tr. 101 a,
Ex 6, p. 10.
Tr. pp. G4IS-4.
Tr. p. 6435.
Tr/p.6415.
Tr. p. 6547.
Ex. 784.
Ex. 78. p. 14.
Tr. p. 6630.
Ex. 17» l). 66.
Tr. p. 10Q.


preparation of the masses for the overthrow of the bourgeoisie may be
intensified. This is what the revolutionary utilization of reforms and
agreements in an imperialist environment means.”
In the Transcript there are copied some of the statutes of the
Communist International to which during its existence I have said the A.C.P.
was affiliated and one paragraph provides—“ The Communist parties must
be prepared to carry on their work illegally. The E.C.C.I. must assist the
parties in the preparation for illegal work and see to it that the work is
carried out.” This is part of the matter reprinted in the booklet containing
the 1929 Constitution of the A.C.P.
I call attention under the present heading to paragraphs 3 and I of
the conditions prescribed for affiliation with the Third International: —
“ 3. In countries where because of a state of siege or of exceptional
laws the Communists are unable to carry on all their work legally,
it is absolutely necessary to combine legal with illegal activities. In
nearly every country of Europe and America the class struggle is
entering upon the phase of civil war. Under such circumstances the
Communists cannot rely upon bourgeois legality. It is their dut.y
everywhere to create parallel to the legal an illegal organization
capable at the decisive moment of fulfilling its duty to the revolution.
4. A systematic and vigorous propaganda must be carried on in
the army. Communist nuclei should be formed in every military
unit. Most of this work will be illegal, but to refuse to do it would
be treason to revolutionary duty and incompatible with membership
of the Third Internationale.”
Directions for Illegal Organization.
Moreover reprints were made under the authority of the A.C.P. from
'• International Press Correspondence ” (abbreviated to “ Inpreeorr ”)
of directions for illegal organization of which I cite one section:—
“ In all capitalist countries the factory nucleus can only work as
an illegal organization. Therefore its work and the work of every
member of the factory nucleus must be conducted in a manner to
keep any police agency in the factory as much as possible in the
dark with regard to the concrete work by the Com mi mist Party in
the domain of political propaganda and agitation among the workers
and the organizational consolidation of the influence of the party in
the factory. That is why it is essential to observe elementary
conspirative rules in the work of the factory nucleus. This applies
equally to countries with illegal or legal Communist Parties. In
countries with illegal Communist Parties connexion between the
nucleus and the Party committee meets -with complications. In order
to guarantee this connexion, there must be, side by side -with the
establishment of a strong illegal apparatus and a very effective
apparatus for illegal connexions, full utilization of all legal and
semi-legal possibilities, in the first instance utilization of the fractions
of legal and semi-legal mass organizations, municipal fractions, &e.
But even in countries with legal Communist parties, the party
committees which control the work of the factory nuclei must give
full instructions to the members of the factory nuclei with regard to
conspirative rules in factory work.
Some of the conspiracy rules to be mentioned are as follows: —
(1) Party members must not go by their-own names but use
pseudonyms at the meetings of the nucleus and in discussing
party affairs and especially when drawing up minutes and
similar documents.
■ (2) As a rule never discuss party matters in the presence of
people you do not know or such who are known to have
- connexions with the police.
Tr. p. 16.
Ex. 2, p. 30,
para 34.
Tr, p. 121.
Ex, 23, p. 2.
Ex. 372.
Tr. pp. 3146-7.


(3) Do not organize party meetings and conferences publicly.
Party meetings should be held where there is least chance
for outsiders to intrude and listen to what is going on.
Therefore one must take into consideration that, as a rule,
factory nucleus meetings will have to be held more often
than not on other premises. But this certainly should not
alter the character of their work as liaison organs between
the party and the workers of the various factories and works.
(4) Make sure you have no party documents with you when going
to a meeting so that it cannot be proved that it is a communist
meeting. :
(5) Do not boast before everyone in the factory that you belong
to the Party.
When instructing members of factory nuclei along these lines the
Party committee should at the same time make it definitely
understood that conspiracy must by no means cut the nucleus away
from the masses of the workers in the factories. While taking
precautionary measures against being detected by the police and their
agents, party nuclei in the factories must constantly let the workers
know of their existence; they must publish leaflets, factory
newspapers, organize meetings, &c, The most important duty of
factory nuclei is to make the factory workers realize that the factory
nuclei react immediately to every event in the factory and country.
They must bring forward on behalf of the party organizational slogans
connected with the struggle for the interests of the working class.
While taking the necessary precautionary measures so as not to attract
to themselves attention of the police agents, party members must not
only carry on persistent daily work in order to bring new sections of
workers into the ranks of the party and into the sphere of party
influence, they must also whenever the situation demands (for instance,
excitement amongst the workers in connexion with a mine explosion),
instruct active members of the nuclei to appear in their true colours
before the workers even at the risk of arrest and dismissal.”
Conduct of Communists in Court.
I call attention again to the “ How to Organize,” Series No. 3, issued by ]
the C.C. of the A.O.P. This pamphlet contains a complete code of conduct
on the question of Illegal Work and The Fight against Provocation, the latter
setting out rules of behaviour for the member as a revolutionary and for conduct
before the police and in Court.
Sharkey on Illegal Work.
Sharkey also in his “ History of the Australian Communist Party ” has ■
something to say on the matter. _ After referring to the fact that the party ■
and several fraternal organizations had on June 15, 1940, been declared
unlawful he says
“ The C.C. had previously supervised and led the preparations of
the Party organizations for the transference to conditions of illegal
work. Owing to the illegal conditions, the Party Congress was
postponed after agreement had been reached with the Party
organizations, and the C.C. also met at longer intervals, after agreeing
that a smaller committee of leading comrades direct the work in order
to meet the difficult illegal conditions of work. The Party continued
to maintain its organizational and political unity and to reach the
masses with its message of struggle against fascism and reaction
everywhere.” And again he says, “ The Central Committee was able
also, at the worst period of illegality to produce pamphlets of a
programmatic character: ‘ Soviet Russia and the War,’ ‘ The Coming
War in the Pacific,’ and ‘ What is this Labour Party 1 ’ which set out
■ the Party’s main policies in the imperialist stage of the war. ’ ’
Ex. 78.
Ex, 5,
pp. 40-43*
Tr. p. 100.
Ex. 5, p. 43.


Ex. 5, p. 43.
Still further on he says:—“ The Party was able to carry on its
work in the trade union movement without much hindrance and, in
addition, to hold public meetings in the name of individuals, but not
in the name of the Party. Stan Moran, assisted by other comrades,
maintained the Party platform in the Sydney Domain right through
the illegal period. Similar meetings were held in other centres.
The C.C. decided to take advantage of such legal opportunities in
the 1940 Federal Elections and a large team of Party members
contested as Independents, some of whom resumed public activity
for the election period. The Party was well received and recorded a
substantially increased vote; Ered' Paterson, in Queensland, polling a
record Communist vote.
Many other legal opportunities were similarly availed of in order to
keep the Party message before the masses.”
Trial Manoeuvres foe Underground Operation.
'• _ Pawling too gave evidence of trial manoeuvres in underground activities
which might be carried out in the event of the Party being declared illegal.
For nearly two years, he said, Miles was in hiding and members were practised
in making contact with him and with holding meetings under such conditions.
Counsel’s Propositions.
Evidence of this kind must not be forgotten in considering the following
propositions advanced by Mr. Laurie in his opening which I think are not
unfairly summarized as follows:
(i) The Communist Party does not stand for the establishment of
some sort of society in which there is no law and order, but
rather for a society in which law and order is organized in
the interests of the working class and the mass of the people,
and protects socialist property relations.
(ii) The Communist Party holds that the existing system of law and
order grows out of and reflects the particular economic
foundations upon which it is built; the existing system,
therefore, specifically defends and protects capitalist property
relationships and is a weapon in the hands of the existing
ruling class.
(hi) While the Communist Party seeks to work as far as possible
within the confines of the existing law, there are certain
circumstances where it becomes necessary to struggle against
the existing law, and in some circumstances it becomes
necessary in the interests of the working class to break that
law. Where the ruling class has introduced repressive
legislation against the working class, the Communist Party
holds that it is necessary to fight against the law —
(a) to obtain its repeal, and
( b ) to strengthen the organization of the working class.
Subversive Conduct of Communists.
Before I make any finding I shall glance at the evidence of actual conduct
by members of the Party. It discloses conduct of two classes :
(1) Conduct, which, though not necessarily contrary to law, departs
from the usual conduct of citizens in like circumstances,
and
(2) conduct which constitutes a breach of the existing law.
Tv. pp. 3147-8.
Tv, pp. R 409-
0410.
Tr. pp. 2715-B.


, . characteristic of the first class is that it is concealed and
conspiratorial in its nature. Of such conduct the following examples appear
in the evidence:—
Conduct not Necessarily Illegal.
(a) Messages and other communications sent by courier and not
through the post or by telegraph or telephone. Of this practice
there was evidence from Sharpley, Gibson, Hill, McGillick and
Mrs. X. Communications so made may have been innocent or
they may have been unlawful.
(5) Destruction of party records at the beginning of 1948.
(c) The practice not to make records or take minutes since that period.
(d) Destruction of financial records after each conference.
(e) The use of party names or aliases. Mrs. X gave evidence of
teaching given her that such names were to be used in all factory
work. But the Communist witnesses said that though there were
instances of such use of names in the past there were none now.
(/) Instructions given to individual party members, e.g. to Bawling.
(g) Concealment of whereabouts of leading members, e.g., Miles in
1933-4.
Qi) Policy of not asking unnecessary questions as to membership.
This seems a particular example of a general policy. J. J. Brown
said that he had received some early advice as a party member
that what you do not know about you have not got to worry
about.
(i) Preparation to use “ flat hetjs ” for printing in the event of the
party being declared illegal, though these may also be used to
roneo leaflets at any time.
(j) Departure from standards of conventional morality.
I have some evidence of matters coming under this head and I disregard
it, though not for the reason that the proof is deficient. I have no evidence to
show that these irregularities, in departing from conventional standards, are
any greater than, if indeed so great as, those existing in any other section of
the community. Merely to enumerate and discuss them might therefore give
rise to false impressions.
Hill, J. J. Brown and Mrs. Samson were all questioned as to preparation 1
by the C.P. to carry on operations in the event of its being declared an illegal
organization. Brown said he thought the State leadership of the party would
have taken the necessary precautionary measures to protect the party, to
destroy records so as to prevent members from being traced, and to take all
necessary steps to protect the party organization in the circumstances. Samson
saw the possibility of such action but Hill denied the truth of the suggestion.
There is much evidence from Sharpley, Mrs. X and McGillick from
witnesses called by the C.P. as to what was done by the C.P. at the beginning
of the last war, though Hill denied knowledge of much of it. I have in
evidence, however, exhibits which show that notwithstanding the fact that the
party was declared unlawful in 1940 the party journals were still produced
and circulated and that meetings of members took place. I feel no doubt that,
whether preparations for illegality were in hand or not when Hill gave
evidence and whether or not he knew all that was happening, the C.P. will
carry on its activities so far as it can in all circumstances.
Conduct in Breach oe Existing Law.
Mr. Laurie’s third proposition as summarized above conceded that in
certain circumstances the party held it to be necessary to struggle against the
existing law even to the extent of breaking it. There are a niimber of
instances of carrying out this policy in the evidence which I shall briefly
refer to. ' "
Tr. 523. 837-8,
5012. 51,84,
5145-8, 5231-2,
5393, 8874,
7342 a.
Tr. pp. 858-7,
6687,
Tr. p- 7340-4.
Tr. p. 7340.
Tr. pp. 695,
830. 865,
5038-9, 5153,
5173, 5180,
5182, u 194,
5267, 5388-02,
6730. 7028,
7388-8.
Cf. Ex. 372,
pp. 11 rf seq.
Tr. pp. 3146-7.
Tr. pp. 3MT-8,
5267-73.
Tr. pp. 3147-8.
Tr. pp. 6570,
7122, 7-453-4.
Tr. pp. 6689.
7453-4.
Tr. pp. 7120
ct seq.,
7452 ct seq.,
7968 et seq.
Tr. p. 7122.
Tr. pp. 7988.
Ct BCQ.
Tr. p. 7453.
Tr. p. 7452.
Ex. 5, p. 40.
Exg. 135,139
and BSI.
f,x. 589,
pp. 156 el fieri


Before doing so however I refer to some passages in the evidence
which illustrate the party’s attitude that the Courts are instruments of the
repressive power of a hostile State.
Gibson took the twofold position that the law was weighted
against the Communists and that the Court wrongly interpreted the
law in a sense unfavourable to Communists. He agreed in substance with
the passage referred to above that the party member should use a court trial
to. bring his indictment against the dominant capitalist regime and voice the
views of his party. There are a number of exhibits in the shape of issues of
the ‘ ‘ Guardian ’ ’ and of leaflets attacking the class character of the law courts
and of this Commission. The “ Guardian,” it will be remembered, is the
official organ of the party in Victoria, and the leaflets in their contents give
strong evidence of their origin. If they were not formally authorized by the
C.P, or some organ or official thereof the views expressed met with the
approval of the party and no steps were taken to repudiate them. An instance
of such approval appears in the evidence of Hill in relation to a leaflet
attacking this Commission. The Guardian publications on this matter formed
the subject matter of proceedings in the Supreme Court. I think the only
reasonable inference from the evidence is that these publications were made
with the authority, connivance or concurrence of the C.P.
Illegal Conduct and the Advocacy oe it.
(a) MeGillick in South Australia defied the police order to move on and
was convicted in August, 1930, and again in December, 1930. It
was he who was sent to Mildura in late 1931 to organize the Party
and the Unemployed Workers’ Movement in that district.
(b) Gibson was convicted on several occasions for offensive behaviour
and obstructing the roadway and of speaking in a place where
permission was necessary without having obtained permission.
Both these cases may well be instances of a determination to assert
what were thought to be natural rights and to attempt by publicity to bring
about the repeal of the law.
But the following matters extend into a wider field.
Arming the Workers.
In the Resolutions of the Ninth Annual Conference of the A. C.P.
under the heading of “ Conscription ” there is this passage:—
‘‘ When war comes, the workers must be prepared not to boycott
war by refusal to render service or by inaction or by pacifist means,
but to take advantage of the opportunity to acquire arms and turn
them to their account. The workers alone can end war by smashing
for all time the present cause of war, capitalism.
Our task is to stimulate such mass opposition so that it manifests
itself not merely as an anti-conscription ‘ opposition, ’ not merely as
a defence of £ democratic ’ rights of Australian citizens, but as a
definite opposition to imperialist war.
Out of this opposition will grow a larger and more class-conscious
movement determined to wage civil war rather than be conscripted and
eventually to press forward through mass political strikes to the
challenge for complete political power, and (sic) as guarantee that
the workers shall hold what we take, the establishment of our
dictatorship.”
These passages inter alia being read to Gibson, he was asked whether
there was anything about that view which was inconsistent with the Party’s
literature to-day. He replied “ Not inconsistent, in certain circumstances, No. ”
Tr. p. 6637.
Tr, p. 6639.
Exa. 190. 846,
903. 904, 906,
907. 90S. 909,
912.
Ex. 908.
Tr. p. 7874.
Tr. pp. 4999.
5005, 5027.
Tr. pp. 6635*
6640.
Tr. p. 6760.
Ex. 40.
Tr. p. 6760,


Labour Defence Organizations.
The “ Communist Review ” of August, 1934, cites from the proceedings i
of the 6th Congress of the Comintern in regard to the formation of Labour
Defence Organizations:—
“ Where the military training of the youth is compulsory, the 1
communists should urge the young workers to accept it, but they must
organize work for the political education of these young workers and
for the disintegration of the bourgeois military organizations. Similar
work must be carried on in bourgeois, voluntary military training
organizations. For this purpose, the Communist Party and the Young
Communist League must send members into these organizations, but
they must not urge the young workers to join them. Instead, they
must urge the young workers to join, or form Labour Defence
Organizations.”
The Unemployed Workers’ Movements (U.W.M.).
A Communist Fraternal that among its objects had one which read, “ To -j
form W.D.C. to protect workers’ processions and demonstrations and safeguard 1
their interests in every way.” The exhibits show that the initials “ W.D.0.”
represent “ Workers Defence Corps.”
What is contemplated in these organizations seems to go far beyond any
question of self-defence which is conceivably the explanation of bodies such as
Gibson was cross-examined about where it was suggested that persons convicted'
were in possession of batons which Gibson had admitted issuing.
Commissioner’s Conclusions.
From a survey of the matter so far adverted to under the heading I
conclude that the immediate design is to bring about the repeal of all such laws
as restrict the liberty of the C.P. and its members to strive for its idtimate
objective whether by word or deed, and I think its activities and operations
and those of its members and of bodies and persons it can influence are designed
to effect that purpose. Its ultimate aim is to abolish the system of law and
order as it now exists.
Disregard op Unfavourable Court Orders or Other Decisions.
The matters which are dealt with under this designation are treated
separately because they indicate a somewhat different aspect of conduct from
that dealt with under the two previous headings and moreover, apart from
Sharpley’s evidence, they may be said to show only the individual conduct of
and outlook by members of the party who occupied official positions in trade
unions. There is no evidence however that this conduct was in any way
disapproved by the C.P. and I think the strong probability, when one remembers ■
the control which Gibson said the party exercised over its members who were
also members of another organization, is that the C.P. approved of such conduct.
The cases I refer to are those of: —
(a) Miller. ■
(h) Lewis.
(c) Mrs. X.
(d) Clerks’Union.
(a) I deal with further details of Miller’s case under a later heading at
page 77 of this Report. Here I merely state that Miller had been
fined by his union the B.W.LU. and that his appeal under the rules
was dismissed. He then sought a declaration from the Arbitration
Court of the illegality of the union proceedings and succeeded in
getting such an order. The fine was therefore illegally imposed.
The union ignored the Court order, insisted that the fine was owing
and because of Miller’s refusal to pay it treated him as unfinancial
and declared “ black ” jobs on which he was subsequently working.
He was actually, again fined for working on a “ black ” job. This
fine was the subject of further proceedings before a Conciliation
■ Commissioner and ultimately the fine was “ lifted,” but the union
notified him he was under censure.
Tr. 401, p. 36.
Tr. p. 3315.
Tr. p. 4998.
Exs. 850, 571.
Tr. p. 6645
oi si!<7.
Tr. j). 6918.
Tr. DP* 4209
et scq.
Exa. 512-3.


( b) Lewis was secretary o£ a Sub-branch of the Munitions Union and
strongly opposed its amalgamation with the Ironworkers’
Association. He was suspended from office on a charge made
under the rules of the union. At a pending election he had
nominated for the office of President of the Victorian Branch
and for the position of a sub-branch delegate to the Federal Council
and his nomination was refused. He applied to the Arbitration
Court to have the suspension declared invalid and his name
submitted to ballot. The Court acceded to his application. The
union ignored the Court’s order. There was some evidence which
is not very clear that an appeal against the Arbitration Court
judgment was taken to the High Court but that judgment was
not disturbed. This seems however to be irrelevant to the point
discussed above, viz., that a valid existing order of the Court was
ignored.
(c) In the case of Mrs. X she had been suspended under a statutory
rule made under the National Security (Manpower) Regulations
and her suspension had been confirmed by the Deputy Director
General of Manpower. She appealed against this confirmation
to the Local Appeal Board which directed that she be reinstated
to her former position and paid wages for the full period of her
suspension. She was thereupon directed to attend at the place of
her former work at Maribymong and on reporting for duty was
directed to proceed to Highett. Her uncontradicted evidence is
that the Canteen Manager at Maribymong to which she had been
directed to report said he was exceedingly sorry, but could do
nothing about it and that he was afraid he could not do what the
Appeal Board had ordered. On her protesting that she was
reinstated at Maribymong and refusing to go to Highett she was
again suspended.
This suspension led to further proceedings including an appeal which I
need not trace and ultimately Mrs. X was dismissed.
It will be recalled that she had been a member of the C.P. and had left it.
During her employment there had been issued leaflets attacking her character
and her original suspension seems to have been influenced by the statement of
Grace Cameron (or Elliott) an organizer of the Communist Party that Mrs. X
was a police spy, an allegation in support of which I can find no evidence
whatever. The whole incident as set out in the transcript suggests that
throughout there was a determination by the C.P. to get rid of Mrs. X
at Maribymong whatever her employers thought. I find the official
correspondence hard to understand, unless its directions were decided at
ministerial level and the writers of the letters were acting under instructions.
(d) In the case of the Clerks’ Union a dispute had arisen as to the
validity of the deposition of one Merrett as secretary and the
election of an acting secretary. Merrett and his communist
supporters refused to vacate the offices or hand over the records.
Proceedings were taken in the Arbitration Court which resulted
in an order directing Merrett and others to vacate the offices
and hand over the records and restraining them from impeding
the branch president and members of the council from exercising
their powers under the rules. An appeal to the High Court was
dismissed, but for many months the Court orders were ignored
by Merrett and his supporters and they continued in occupation
of the Union’s offices.
Tr. pp. 4581-
1382-3, 4403
et aeq.
Exs, 612. 614,
615.
Tr. pp, 5370
ct aeq.
5372 C.D.
Tr. p. 5372.
Exs. 616-7.
Ex. 623.
Tr.pp. 25376 C.
ct aeq.
Tr. 6139.
ct aeq.
Tr. 5145,
Tr. 6343.
Tr. p. 5367
et aeq.
Tr. pp. 5792
ei aeq.
of In A History of the English People, by Halevy, Vol. IV., pp. 60-1, he cites the advice given to Sinn
Schneidentmn Fein to employ the method of the Hungarians in 1861. "The latter”, he said, "who at that time were
watt's p agitating for the re-establishment of the constitution of 1848, had simply acted as though it were still in
at p. 189. eP ’ force .... paying no attention to official documents . . . . ” and he went on to suggest that
the Irish should set up Courts of Arbitration to whose jurisdiction loyal Irishmen would submit their
disputes instead of employing the regular Courts.


THE ATTAINMENT OF SOCIAL, ECONOMIC, INDUSTRIAL OR
POLITICAL ENDS BY FORCE, VIOLENCE, INTIMIDATION OR
FRAUDULENT PRACTICES.
This heading masses together several distinct methods but in dealing
with the subject I shall as far as I can conveniently treat separately:—
( a ) Force and Violence,
(b) Intimidation, and
(c) Fraudulent Practices.
Force and Violence.
Much that I have written earlier of the general view of the C.P. as
to the use of force and violence is in point here and Ido not repeat it. The
Constitutions since 1938 however do not mention the use of violence for the
attainment of the Party’s ends and Gibson cited Marxist authorities to show 1
that the C.P. will not use violence against the masses and does not favour
the seizure of power by a minority. He also said that the Communists only
used force in defence against the use of force by their opponents. An
article in “The Tribune ” of 28/5/48 devoted to the subject “ Communism
cannot be imposed by Force.” A letter by Lenin to Central Committee and
by Marx to Count Zu Eulenberg were cited in support of the same thesis.
But it would seem that violence is always envisaged as a mode of action of
the C.P. if the C.P. thinks it necessary. In 1945 a pamphlet “ A Free
World without violence ” by Dixon and Sharkey was published in which the
authors say:—
“We want an Australia in which class struggle, class hatred and
violence will no longer exist. If that state of society can be reached
peacefully, we will be the first to welcome it, but if it’s necessary
to fight for it we won’t hesitate to lead the fight.”
For can one who has read the verses, of the use of which McGilliek
gave evidence, doubt that violence would in fact be used at what were thought
to be appropriate times. The first set of verses was called “ Might is Eight ”,
and the last stanza reads; —
“ The sword-strong races own the earth,
And ride in the Conqueror’s car.
And liberty has ne’er yet been won,
Except by deeds of war.”
The second set dealt with, the unemployed and ended with the lines: —
“We will swarm as swarm the locusts,
That on Pharoah’s Kingdom fell,
And we will send this rotten system,
And its policemen into Hell.”
Instances oe Use oe Force and Violence.
Coming now to particular instances about which evidence was given,
I pass by a number of incidents to which Slmrpley alone referred. There
may be substantial truth in what he said, but for reasons I have given
earlier, I am not satisfied in the face of the denial by witnesses affected by
his evidence, that the incidents occurred. This statement covers his evidence
as to a threat to use physical violence to opponents at the Trades Hall
(this does not cover Qi) below where there is corroboration) as to overawing
non-communists at a meeting of the Clerks’ Union, as to discussions at
meetings of the C.P. to use physical violence, his evidence that the records
of the Bricklayers’ Union should be seized and his evidence that there were
discussions among C.P. members to use force at the meeting of the
Ironworkers’Union.
Tr. pp. 6464-7.
Ex. 768.
Exs. 766-6-7,
779, p. 282.
Ex. 111, p. 10.
Tr. p. 430.
Tr. p. 5004.
Tr. pp. 765,
7313, 7325-6.
Ex. 819.
Tr. 1190,
Tr. pp. 1018-
1021.
Tr. p. 2704
et eeq.


But I am satisfied on the evidence that the following incidents occurred
as alleged by the witnesses: —
(а) That in Adelaide in September, 1931, in a strike at the waterside,
violence was used and also threatened against right-wing members
and officials by members of the C.P. I mention this incident
since it was from the Adelaide branch that McGillick was
sent to organize the Mildura branch.
(б) The organization of a Workers’ Defence Corps and the use by
Gibson of private retainers with loaded batons at the meeting of
F.O.S.U. These incidents I have already referred to above.
(c) That in April, 1946, a group of officials of the Ironworkers’
Federation used violence to force their w r ay into a meeting of
the Munitions Union and took charge of the meeting. During
- the melee Lloyd was roughly assaulted.
Among the Ironworkers’ officials were Sharpley, Donegan,
Taylor, Flanagan and Montgomery, who were Communists, and
J. M. Mac Kay who, although not a member of the Party, was
well-disposed toward the Communists.
(d) Packing of the Richmond Town Hall on the occasion of the Keon-
Flanagan debate.
(e) The illegal seizure and retention of the Clerks’ Union’s offices by
Merrett, Crowe, Shave, F. Farrall and others on 31st January,
1945, in defiance of the decision of the Arbitration Court.
(/) The forcible entry by members of the C.P. into houses and placing
in possession thereof perons other than the ejected occupier.
(g) Abuse and threats of force and the use of force towards members
of the Ship Joiners’ Society by members of the 8.W.1.U., many
of them known communists, and the use of a camera to photograph
the members of the S.J.S. then attempting to work, the
photographs to be used “to brand them for life.” In the case
of the S.J.S, Mr. Laurie has contended that all that the 8.W.1.U.
did was to use its industrial strength and to ask other unions to
participate with it in using .their industrial strength to protect
its interests against the machinations of a clique—a practice in
accordance with accepted trade union practices in this country.
I have not investigated trade union practices, I am merely
recording what seems to me an incident of violence.
Qi) The exercise of force and the use of obstruction by communist
dominated unions at the Trades Hall in December, .1947, and
January, 1948, preceding and at the time of passing of the
Essential Services Act.
Intimidation.
Intimidation may take many forms. There is evidence of the threat of
physical violence, of economic pressure exercised and of social ostracism
attempted, and I shall say something on each of these aspects.
( a) Threats of Physical Violence.
Something has been said on this subject in dealing with force and violence
and I refer to what is there said without repeating it. In addition to those
instances there is evidence of threats of violence against Mrs. X. She had, for
reasons which appear in the transcript, determined to leave the party; Her
house was entered without her permission by members of the party and her
room searched—one of the party struck her. Leaflets were then placed in letter
boxes suggesting that she be got rid of “by hook or by crook ”. I entertain no
doubt that these leaflets were issued under the authority or at least with the
connivance of the local branch of the C.P.
Tr. pp. 5211,
5251 et seq,
Tr. p. 8027.
Tr. pu. 914-8,
1962-3, 6645-6,
Tr. pp. 1106-7,
4423 et seq.
Tr. p. 1930.
Tr. p. 4423,
4481.
Tr. pp. 915-6,
2480-1.
Tr. p. 5791
et seq.,
5805 et seq.
5852.
Tr. 6998
ct seq.
Tr. pp. 1613,
1622, 1623,
1376-7, 1412,
1419, 1472.
Tr. 816.
pp. 976-7,
loae-uoi.
Tr. pp. 5144
fit seq.
Tr. pp. 6342-8.
Tr. pp. 6345-6.


. Under tins heading I also deal with the use by communist officers of
disciplinary powers contained in Trade Union rules in order to checkmate or
prevent action by non-communist members or unlawfully to punish them. I
refer to the case of Peters, Miller and Kennedy.
1. Peters was charged with knowingly doing—
(i) an act which was contrary to union principles.
(if) an act calculated to injure the union, and
(iii) an act calculated to bring the Union into disrepute.
The charge was one which might (but not necessarily) have
resulted in expulsion. His offence was speaking at a mass rally
sponsored by the Clerical Workers of the A.L.P. Group (to which
he belonged.) of members of the Federated Clerks’ Union, “ to
protest against the undemocratic conditionsiu the Clerks’ Union.”
He had at that meeting criticized the conduct of the 1945 ballot in
the Union and alleged that an attempt was made to discriminate
against people because of their political beliefs.
2. Kennedy was a member of the Munition Workers’ Organization and
with Lloyd and others opposed its amalgamation with the
Ironworkers’ Association. There was an arguable case that the
Munition Workers had not been incorporated in the Ironworkers.
Lloyd and his supporters sought to keep alive the activities of the
Munition Workers and (among others) Kennedy was charged
with activities in setting up up a breakaway organization and was
fined £lO.
3. Miller. In Miller’s case the facts were that he was a member of the
8.W.1.U. and at a meeting of the Clifton Hill Sub-Branch he
criticized the “ balance sheet.” In respect of this criticism a
charge was laid against him under the Union rules and he was
fined. He appealed under the rules and his appeal was dismissed.
The amount of the fine was debited to him in the books of the
Union, He then appealed to the Arbitration Court which held
invalid the proceedings before the Union tribunals and set aside
the fine. Miller paid up all moneys owing by him to the Union but
did not pay the fine. The Union still debited him with the amount
of the fine, and declared “ black ” several jobs on which Miller
was working on the ground that he was unfinancial.
In all these Unions communist officials were in office.
Miller’s case leads naturally to the wider use of the weapon of declaring
jobs li black ” on which opponents of those administering the Union worked.
There may have been a genuine dispute as to demarcation of work in the
case of the 8.W.1.U. and the Ship Joiner’s Society, (S.J.S.), but at least the
S.J.S. had been registered by the Arbitration Court in New South Wales. The
dispute-seems to have developed as a contest between the Communist-controlled
8.W.1.U., and the non-Communist S.J.S. The evidence shows a persistent
campaign to trace out the members of S.J.S., even though members also of
the 8.W.1.U., and declare black any job upon which any member of it was
engaged.
Similarly in the case of Lloyd, jobs on which he was working were declared
“ black.”
Expulsion—Scully’s Case.
The hare outline of this case is as followsScully was and is a leading
shunter in the Victorian Railways and employed at the Melbourne Yards. He
was a member of the A.L.P. Industrial Group. He had strenuously opposed
the progressive policy of the A.R.H., of which J. J. Brown was secretary, and
had made some scathing attacks on A.R.H. ballots. According to Sharpley the
State Executive of the G.P. and the Industrial Sub-committee met and it was
determined that if grounds could be found under :■ the Umon rules charges
should he brought against Scully in the A.R.H., Peters m the Clerks Union, and
Miller in the 8W.1.U, and they should be expelled. They would then become
Tr. pp. 8572,
8671 ct sea.
Ex. 675, p. 42.
Tr. p. 5051
ct scq.
Ex. G 76.
Tr. 8671.
Tr. 1924.
Tr. 4416
et scq.
Tr. 1422.
Tr. pp. 4207
ct scq.
Ex. 512-3.
Ex. 188.
Tr. p. 1353.
Tr. pp. 1878,
1556.
Tr. pp, 4425-6.
4433.
Tr. pp. 4126-7,
Tr.p. 7215,
Tr. p. 7193.
Tr.p. 971 b,
1104.


non-unionists and could be driven out of a very large section of the Trade Union
movement, because other unions would refuse to enrol members expelled from
another union. In June, 1948, an election was being held in the A.R.U. and one,
Crimeen, of Oastlemaine, wrote to Scully;
“ I am sending you a few ballot papers from the boys here and would
like you to put them all down below for us. ”
He enclosed sealed envelopes marked “ Ballot papers.” Scully handed them
in to Unity Hall in that condition. Scully was a candidate at the election.
By-law 89 of the Victorian Branch of the Union provided that no candidate
shall, under any circumstances, handle ballot papers in any election held
within the Union other than his own. In relation to this incident Scully
was charged with:—
“ (a) Handling ballot papers other than your own in the recent ballot
for the State Branch Council and for the Chief Executive Offices.
(b) Not being able to give a satisfactory explanation regarding the
disposal of at least five ballot papers in a bundle of twelve ballot
papers forwarded to you by member T. Crimeen, Castlemaine.”
The latter portion of the charge was based on a statement said to
have been made to Brown and the State President on one occasion and on
another to Brown and two other members of the State Executive.
At the hearing before the State Branch Executive Brown reported
upon his interviews with Crimeen. A motion was put for an adjournment
to enable Crimeen to be present. This was rejected. The charges were found
to be upheld and a motion for Scully’s expulsion carried. Crimeen was
charged with illegally collecting ballot papers and was fined £l. Scully
appealed to the State Branch Council. He asked to have legal representation
on the hearing of the appeal but this was refused. The motion to refuse his
request was moved by Brown and seconded by O’Toole another Communist.
Crimeen gave evidence which bore out exactly Scully’s story that he had
handed in every ballot paper he had received from Castlemaine. The appeal
was dismissed. Scully then appealed to the State Branch Annual Conference
and after discussion the Report of proceedings records: —
“ moved by Comrades Brown and Meade that the appeal ....
be dismissed and the decision of the State Branch Executive and
State Branch Council be confirmed.”
The motion, was carried by 66 to 17. A call for a division being insufficiently
supported was disallowed. Scully was informed that he had a further right
of appeal to the Australasian Council if he so desired. Since then there has
not been any meeting of the Australasian Council which can entertain the
clplDGcll.
: I . i i 1 : ; ' i U ■■: ■ .
Defamatory Attacks on Persons and Institutions Supposed to be
Hostile. 1 Cl)
There is so much material in evidence of attempts by or under the
authority or with the connivance of the C.P. to impair or destroy the reputation
of persons or institutions supposed to be hostile to the C.P. or who have
incurred the displeasure of that party, that to treat them in any detail
would in itself call for a volume.
Tr. p. 7104
et scq.
Ex. 887.
Tr. p. 7197.
Ex. 88b.
Tr. 7194.
Tr. 7194.
Tr. p. 7200.
Ex. 891.
Tr. pp. 7211,
Tr. 7109
et scq.
Ex. 888.
Tr. p. 7206.
Tr. p. 7200.
Tr. p, 7207.
Tr. p. 7208.
Tr. p. 7209.
Ex. 891.
Tr, pp. 7211,
7213.
Tr. y. 7214,
Tr. p. 7219.
(1) The use of violent invective seems to be traditional in the C.P. from the time of Marx. Many
instances of its use are to be found in the unexpurgated edition of the Marx-Efigels correspondence
issued by the Marx-Engels Institute in Moscow and referred to under the German title Marx-Engels
Gesamt-Ausgabe, Lenin and Stalin are also free in the use of such language towards opponents, not
always without some confusion of ideas. Kautsky is at once a "first-class hypocrite and a virtuoso in the
art of prostituting Marxism” which at the same time, and elsewhere, he is accused of having castrated
(“Socialist Tradition —Moses to Lenin” —by Alexander Gray). But the use of such language may not be
confined to one side; as the Transcript shows; —
Ti’. p. 2G3. “Q. Do you produce an origin al'of that? A. Yes, page 3, an article called ‘Specially written
for all Capitalist Lick-Spittles.’ There are also two other articles.
The Commissioner; This literature seems to show a great mastery of epithets.
Mr, Shell; It does, Your Honour.
Mr. Paterson: I do not think any more mastery than some of the stuff that is aimed at us,
Your Honour,
The Commissioner; I am not saying they have a monopoly of mastery of epithets, but they
certainly have a proficiency in it”


boniG of tlicsG attacks arc made upon persons wlio liave in some way
attacked tlie party oi some one in whom the party is interested* Others seem
made in an endea’v our to soften the criticism the party fears hy sullying the
character of the critic.
Under tins heading I propose only to enumerate instances of this class
of conduct, giving as throughout this report, a reference to the evidence on
which the enumeration is based.
(i) Distribution of leaflets attacking the character of Mrs. X in
the neighbourhood of her residence.
(ii) Publication in Ironworkers’ Union Journal of an attack on
Mrs. X and production of leaflets against her to discredit
her among members of the Munition Workers’ Union.
(iii) Attacks made on Mrs. X’s character by one, Bell, at a meeting
of the Non-Conscription League.
(iv) Demonstration against Sharpley when he was about to begin
giving his evidence.
(v) Cartoons depicting Sharpley as a rat, numerous attacks on
him in the “ Guardian ” and in leaflets issued in some cases
anonymously and in others expressly under the authority
of the C.P. See for example:—
“ Guardian ”, 22/4/49.
“ Guardian ”, 17/6/49, re Sharpley’s address at Wesley
Church.
“ Guardian ”, 25/6/49.
“ Guardian ”, 2/7/49.
“ Guardian ”, 29/4/49.
Leaflet “ Biassed Judge and Perjured Witness.”
(vi) Whispering campaign against Lloyd and members of his
family.
(vii) Issue of union leaflet against Lloyd.
(viii) Allegation against Lloyd (by Mackay, National President of
the Ironworkers’ Association) that he was a scab,
(ix) Issue of scurrilous leaflets against Miller, including a reprint
of Jack London’s article, “ The Scab,” and Henry Lawson’s
poem “I’m Too Old to Rat.” (The latter was also used
against Sharpley, see Ex. 907.)
(x) Leaflets attacking Henderson of the 8.W.1.U.
(xi) Leaflets and photos attacking Woodhouse of the 8.W.1.H., also
conduct of Heinze in making these allegations against
Woodhouse without making any proper inquiries.
(xii) Issue of posters against General Blarney (31st January, 1939).
(xiii) Issue of leaflets attacking, Stout, Monk, Jordan and Clarey of
the A.C.T.H. and Trades Hall Council, Melbourne, and
attacks upon these men in the “ Guardian ’ ’ and “ Communist
Review. ”
(xiv) Attacks in “ Equity News ” on witnesses opposed to Diamond
and Communism.
(xv) The Party stirs up sectarian feeling for its own purposes.
There are many instances among these leaflets of a hi each of the law
which requires the name and place of the printer to appear and there are some
instances where an entirely fictitious name and address are given.
Tr. pp. 5345-6.
Ex. 613.
Tr. pp. 3123,
5371.
Tr. p. 5320 a
et aeq.
Tr. pp. 683-9.
Ex. 902.
Tr. d. 7349
et scq.
Ex. 190.
Tr. p. 7362.
Ex. 904.
Tr. pp. 7367-8.
Ex. DOS.
Tr. p. 7870.
Ex. 907.
Tr. pp 7371-2.
Ex. 008.
Tr. pp. 7577-8..
Tr. pp. 4383-4.
4444-5.
Ex. 175.
Tr. p. 4452.
Tr. p. 4441.
Ex. 176.
Tr. pp. 4221,
1305, 1117.
Ex. 465.
Tr. pp. 377-4
ot scq.
E*. 497.
Tr. p. 4075
et seij.
Ex. 471.
Tr. p. 3818.
9604-
9611.
Ex. 982.
Tr. pp. 5145-6,
6183, 8247-9,
7663.
Ex. 169, 170.
908, 922.
Tr. pp. 945-9,
7450-1.
Ex. 7G3,
I). 333,
Exs, 1043.
1044.
Tr. pp. 9129,
9X43.
Tr. np. 846,
1800-2. 2939-
2940, 2682,
3776 et sen,,
4884.
Ex. 176 ets&q.
Exs. 169-70,
908-9, 912.


Fraudulent Practices.
It will be convenient to treat the evidence in relation to this head in two
sections:—
( а ) Fraudulent practices other than “ ballot-rigging.”
(б) “ Ballot-rigging.”
The conclusion reached at page 24 of this Report “ that the O.P. is
prepared to use any means to achieve what it regards as a desirable object, so
long as it regards the means as fitting and the result as not on the whole
disadvantageous,” embraces the use of fraudulent means. But it does not
follow that the O.P. in its actual operations has resorted to such means. There
are, however, instances of such conduct satisfactorily attested in the evidence.
I shall enumerate them with any necessary comment; —
( a ) A woman member of the party passed herself off as the wife of a
railway employee to avoid the payment of a railway fare to
Sydney in order to attend the Party Congress. The same woman
made a false declaration before marriage.
(b) A medical man in two instances issued a medical certificate of
ill-health in order to make available for party service without
loss of pay a member of the party.
(c) Higgins rewrote an article in the “ Red Leader ” on conditions in
Russia in order to make it accord with party propaganda.
(d) The production by Higgins of a bogus “ cablegram ” purporting
to come from Muenzenburg, World Secretary of the League
against Imperialism, to the National Conference of that body in
Sydney.
(e) Purdy attempted to induce McGilliek to rewrite his commentary
on the film “ Ten Days that Shook the World.”
(/) A bogus and misleading circular was got out in order to frustrate
the rally of the members of the Clerks’ Union called by the A.L.P.
group. This circular was reprinted in “ The Guardian ” with
the sanction of Meyer, Secretary of the Clerks’ Union.
(g) Diamond, a one time member of the party and Secretary of the
Victorian branch of Actors’ Equity, gave a false history of his
prior experience and produced a false testimonial in connexion
with his employment by the Department of Aircraft Production.
{]%) The making of a false declaration by a leading member of the party
in an application for a motor car driver’s licence and for
insurance of the car and the giving of a false name to the police
in connexion with an offence under the Motor Car Act and
allowing a conviction to go against him in that name —Cassidy.
The following questions were put to and answered by the
witness: —
By the Commissioner: Did you think you were doing
any injustice to Cassidy?;—
A. Candidly, sir, no.
Q. Why—is it part of the duty of a member of the Party
to put up with an incident of this sort if you think it is
desirable? A. Well, yes sir.
(i) During the Transport Strike of 1946 a ballot was taken of the
Victorian branch of the Australian Railways Union (A.R.U.).
Its secretary was and is J. J. Brown, a prominent Communist and
(when he gave evidence) the Federal President of the Australian
Council of the A.R.U. The Branch had put forward a nine-point
programme of its demands. Seven of these were listed on the
ballot paper and a ballot was taken by members on the question:
Are you in favour of direct action to obtain above claims (seven
points)? If in favour cross out the word “No.” If against
cross out the word “ Yes.”'
Tr. pp. 7957-8
et seq.
Tr. pp. 2802,
3032-3, 8386,
9655.
Exs. 338, 1076.
Tr. pp. 3247-8.
Tr. p. 3248.
Tr. p. 6358.
Exs. 602, 608.
Ex. 678.
Tr, pp. 5954,
8700 etseq.
Tr. pp. 0148-
9156.
Exs. 1045-46.
Sec also
Tr. nn. 742.
1176.
Exs. 973-74.
Tr. pn. 8216-8.
Ex. 975.
Tr. p. 8229.
Tv. p. 7027.
Sx. 87H.
Tr. p. 7043
et seq.
Ex. 876.


There was at the time a strike in progress of tramway employees.
Brown said a very strong majority of something like 2 to 1 voted
in favour of taking action, including direct action, if necessary,
to implement that programme. The result of this ballot was used
by the Executive to justify the calling of a strike of the
railwaymen a few days after the ballot and thus to stop railway ■
as well as tram transport.
There are a number of incidents which call for criticism, but in which
I am not satisfied that what was done was done with fraudulent intent and
these I consequently omit from this section.
Creation op Sections in the Clerks' Union.
I mention this matter so that it may not be thought that I have
overlooked it.
Sharpley gave evidence that in 1946 there were special discussions in the'
Industrial Sub-Committee about the influence of the C.P. in the Clerks’ Union
and it was decided to give greater attention to that Union. A special
committee (consisting of Mrs. Samson, Meyer, Crow, Brian Oke and others)
was appointed to organize and watch developments in clerical organizations.
The truth of this evidence was denied by Mrs. Samson and Meyer. Indeed;
Mrs. Samson said she had never personally met Meyer or Crow. A good 1
deal of evidence was given by members of the Clerks’ Union suggesting that;
a power given under the Union rules to create and disband sections had been'
dishonestly used by a Communist-dominated Executive to disband sections
in which they were losing control and transfer the members of the disbanded
sections to other or newly created sections where the Communists and their
sympathizers were in the majority. Meyer indignantly denied the suggestion.
I can understand the suspicion which the Executive’s action created in the
minds of those who opposed the Executive and I am far from saying the
suspicion was without foundation, but on the evidence it is possible that
the Executive did not act from improper motives and I am not satisfied that
the charge is established.
(a) Ballot “ Rigging ” in Trades Union Elections.
The witness Sharpley made allegations of specific occasions on which
he said trade union elections or voting had been fraudulently manipulated.
Fourteen unions were involved and of necessity the investigation of the
matters alleged has been lengthy. I have given much consideration as to the
manner in which I should report on these allegations. To treat the case of
each union in detail, to discuss the evidence in support of the allegation and
the evidence to rebut it would require a volume and the interest of that
volume would be mainly to the parties concerned. In litigation between
parties this would be the natural and usual course. Here, however, I am
not determining matters inter partes but reporting pursuant to my Commission
and I apprehend that what is required of me is to say whether or not the
allegation is established in each case. I shall, therefore, in each case only
set out so much of the facts as show what the allegation is and what
attitude was taken by those affected by the allegation and whether there was
any corroboration of the allegation. Then I shall in each case state whether
I am or am not satisfied that the allegation is established. I shall in addition
add any further finding which seems to me proper in view of the evidence
before me.
Circumstantial Evidence.
If Sharpley’s evidence were accepted the conclusion would be arrived
at on direct oral testimony, supported in some instances by corroborative
detail. But I have already intimated my view of Sharpley’s evidence and
the limited extent to which I am prepared to act on it. In cases where his
evidence is put aside the proof offered is circumstantial. I think it proper
therefore to indicate the test by which I have guided myself in coming to
my determinations,
4329/50.—6
Tr, p. 7045
et seq.
Tr. p. 958.
Tr. pp. 7975-6,
8648.
Tr.pm 5944
et seq,
Ti‘. p. 8648.


Sir Owen Dixon has in two pronouncements set forth this test.—“ The
question involved,” he says, “ largely depends upon the_ degree to which
the coincidence of events and circumstances warrants a belief in their causal
connexion. An examination of hypotheses logically consistent with proved
facts is the received method of testing their sufficiency to establish the
conclusion. In the end, however, the reasonableness or the probability of the
occurrence of such hypotheses determines their admissibility and when
coincidence of fact and concurrence of time are relied upon, the sufficiency
of the circumstances must inevitably be judged by considering whether human
experience would be contradicted if the proved fact were unaccompanied by
the fact sought to be proved.”
In his second statement he put it “ that according to the common
course of human affairs, the degree of probability that the occurrence of the
facts proved would be accompanied by the occurrence of the fact to be proved
is so high that the contrary cannot reasonably be supposed.”
I shall now deal with the Unions affected in alphabetical order.
(a) The Actors and Announcers Equity Association of Australia (. Actors’
Equity ).
Sharpley’s original allegation was that Alexander, the Federal Secretary,
and Diamond, the Victorian Secretary of the Union, who were both
communists, had discussed with him and Johnson of the State Executive of
the C.P. how to defeat a motion to prevent persons who were members of,
or who supported subversive organizations, from holding official positions in
the Union. As a result of discussion he said an agreement was made to send
persons who were not members of the Union to the meeting who would vote
with the bloc of communist members to defeat the motion. A scheme was
worked out, he said, to bring about this result. Diamond was to issue bogus
receipts for dues to persons to be sent. Oke and Johnson were to assist in
getting persons to go to Diamond and thence to the meeting. Sharpley’s
original statement was that this incident occurred about July or August,
1948, and the meeting to which non-members were to be sent as some two
months afterwards. He said some 30 of these persons were sent though later
he said some 15 to 25 were sent. It turned out later that there were two
meetings at which somewhat related matters were dealt with, viz.—A meeting
, in June, 1948, at which a motion was proposed to prevent (shortly) communists
from holding office in the union, and a meeting in December, 1948, to prevent
members “ who supported or were concerned in subversive organizations ”
from holding office. Sharpley in cross-examination said the conversation with
Alexander and Diamond was in relation to the motion to come before the
June meeting. These are but examples of the difficulty of placing any reliance
on Sharpley’s allegation. I had evidence from a number of witnesses that
strangers, some of them dressed differently from ordinary members, were
present at both meetings, and that the chairman of these meetings had acted
in a partisan manner in order to prevent either motion from being carried.
It was also said that the attendance at these meetings was much larger than
usual. Sharpley’s allegations were completely denied by Diamond and others
who attended these meetings, and it was sworn that all who were present
were members of the Union and reasons were given why the attendance might
well be larger than usual.
The motion in June was ruled out of order and the motion in December
was lost by a majority larger than the number of strangers alleged to have
been sent. There is a good deal in the evidence to raise suspicion as to the
regularity and bona tides of the conduct of those in charge of the meetings
and of the impartiality of the chairman, but on the whole I am not satisfied that
the allegations have been proved.
I am quite sceptical of the bona fides of invoking Rule 4F. of the
Constitution and Rules of Actors’ Equity which provides that “ all members
. . . . . are guaranteed their inalienable and democratic rights of religious
and political freedom of conscience .....”
43 C.L.R.,
p. 173.
55 C.L.R.,
p. 875.
Tr. pp. 1014
et aeq.
Tr.pp.loH,
1016.
Tr. p, 2020.
Tr. pp. 4550-1,
4700.
Ex. 648.
Tr. p. 2066.
Tr. pp. 4660,
4569, 4579,
4635, 4715.
Tr. pp. 4686,
4643, 4548
et BGQ.
Tr. p. 4547.
Tr. pp. 9069-
9070.
Tr. p. 9086.
Ex. 230.


Advice was given and acted upon by the chairman that the motion was'
out of order because of tbis rule. My scepticism is raised by what is said by
Sharkey in The Trade Unions
“ No politics in the Union ” means bourgeois polities in the Union.;
We must skilfully seize appropriate moments and opportunities to
discuss politics and Socialism with the workers at Union meetings and
elsewhere. ’ ’
. . • t
There were some minor matters investigated~as to the manner in which
Diamond was appointed Secretary, about a printer’s inscription on a ballot
paper, about some action in relation to Miss Isles, about a dispute at the Tivoli
Theatre, about a Dramatic School established by a Mr. Kaweuoka, and about the
existence and activity of a Catholic Entertainment Guild. Their only
significance was to enable me to weigh the credit of witnesses and assess the
probability of their having acted as alleged. I make no finding on any of these
matters.
Sharpley’s allegation that Alexander was a communist is, I think,
established. Alexander himself did not give evidence, Diamond had been a
member of the party hut denied that he was any longer one. lam not satisfied
that he was when he gave evidence a communist but I have no doubt he was
very well disposed towards the party. Two other members of Actors’ Equity
who were prominent in the conduct of its meetings were said to be communists
—Keith Eden and Lloyd Lamble. Eden denied that he was a communist. The
evidence satisfies me that Lamble is a member and that Eden is sympathetic to
the O.P. As to Lamble he was given an opportunity to appear, cross-examine
Sharpley. and give evidence himself. He was in Melbourne while the Commission
was sitting but did not appear. I think that in his case the allegation is
established.
A file of the Journal of Actors’ Equity—“ Equity News ” —was put in
evidence. A perusal of it convinces me that those responsible for its publication
entertain friendly feelings towards members of the C.P.
(h) Amalgamated Engineering Union (A.E.U.).
Mr. Cnllity’s appearance in this ease was annoimeed to be for the Union,
Southwell, Whitfield, Maxwell and Tennant, but on the 22nd February, 1950,
an instruction from the Union dated 31st August, 1949, was put in evidence
which read “ Council directs all legal representation before Royal Commission
on behalf of Union or members be immediately withdrawn.” Mr. Cullity,
however, continued to appear and I take his appearance thereafter as being
solely for the individuals above named. Sharpley alleged:—
1. That Blake said everything must be done to see that the party
ticket won in the elections of the A.E.U. and 8.W.1.U.
2. That Sharpley and Oke under the supervision of Hill should draw
up a list of party members, not members of the A.E.U., to attend
meetings of these Branches on election nights.
3. That there was a meeting day by day of the leadership of the
A.E.U. Fraction.
4 That records of A.E.U. Branches were examined to see if the
Returning Officer was a member of the O.P. or favourably disposed to
it and it was arranged for members of C.P. wbo were A.E.U. members
to get in touch with such officers or members and obtain pence cards
ancl then to’bring them to Sharpley, Hill and Oke, that this was done,
and pence cards were given to party members not members of the
A E U with instructions to visit certain Branches on election nights
and" vote for the party ticket; and that the Coburg and Brunswick
Branches were said to be among such Branches to be visited for tbe
purpose.
Tr.p. 4542.
Ex. 14, p. IS.
Tr. p. 1014.
Tr. p. 9065.
Tr. pp. 2780-1.
6058.
Tr. pp. 5066,
5735, 9119.
Exs, 566,
1043-44.
Tr. p. 10^6.
Ex. 1056.
Tr. 9297-8.
Tr. p. 1027.
Tr. p. 1028.
Tr.p, 1028.


5, That a proposal was made at a meeting, at which Whitfield,
Maxwell, Oke and Hill were present, that a ticket advocating voting
for certain candidates should be dropped in breach o± the rules at
(’lit'ton Hill Branch so as to disfranchise that Branch which was
thought to he a Right Wing Branch. That Rowe, however, instructed
that this should not he done.
(j. That dailv meetings took place in Sharpley’s office, and that at
oik! meeting after the election started Maxwell and Southwell reported
(Whitfield, Tennant, Hill, Sharpley and Yin Bourke were present)
that Maxwell was losing in the Branches that had voted.
Arrangements were made for C.P. members (not A.B.H. members) to
go to A.E.U. Branches and vote for Maxwell and other C.P. candidates.
Pence cards were to be obtained from favourable Branch secretaries.
7. That Oke was to notify C.P. members to report between 5 p.m.
and (i p.m. at the 8.W.1.U. offices in Little Bourke-street and see Oke
or Sharpley and take their instructions. They were then told where
meetings were and how to vote, and that when they had voted they
were to leave immediately. The Branches selected were those where
pence cards had been obtained from the secretary.
8. That Tennant obtained sick leave with pay on a certificate of a
communist medical practitioner from the 13th to 21st December so
that he could work for the C.P. candidates. The certificate was dated
20th December. These allegations were denied by Hill, Southwell,
Tennant, Whitfield and Maxwell.
There are however, admissions of some of the facts alleged, for example,
that there were discussions between Sharpley, Tennant, Whitfield and Southwell
as to election prospects, that the Clerk’s Union had possession of the circular
letter, Ex. 054, which had been drafted by Southwell in consultation with
Whitfield, that the copying of it had been undertaken by the Clerk’s Union, and
that matters in the A.E.U. concerning the C.P. had been reported to Sharpley.
There is also the fact that Tennant was absent from his work, that he did attend
Branch meetings of the Union and that he had a medical certificate for a period
covering his visits and the election and that he did not return to work until after
the election.
Moreover much of the evidence of the Communist witnesses called was
unconvincing and lacking in frankness. lam exceedingly suspicious of the
bona fides and regularity of this election, a suspicion which is not lessened by the
fact that neither Oke, Blake nor Rowe gave evidence and by the view at which
I have arrived in the case of the 8.W.1.U. elections. Suspicion, however, is
not sufficient. On the whole I record that lam not satisfied that the allegation
is established.
(e) Blacksmiths ’ Society of Australasia.
Sharpley alleged that in the first half of 1948 it became necessary to
elect a secretary to the Union and that one Harper who was sympathetic to
the party had agreed to stand for election; that the election was by postal
ballot; that he discussed with Hill whether the ballot could he rigged; that
Hill told him later that he knew that the National Secretariat in Sydney had
discussed the question with MeLerman (l) and that the National Secretariat
were giving attention to the matter; that he (Sharpley) had subsequently seen
in Melbourne Len Donald, a member of the Central Committee of the Party
and a full time organizer of it in Sydney, and that Donald had told him he had
been to Adelaide and that Donald handed to him a parcel of 200‘ ballot papers
so that he could arrange to have them filled in in favour of Harper at the
election. Subsequently, Sharpley said, Hill, Oke and he had filled in
approximately 180 ballot papers in favour of Harper, that he had posted some
of them himself in various suburbs and had given others to Hill and to Oke
for them to post. As to the ballot papers Donald had handed to him, Sharpley
Tr. up-1029-
1030.
Tr. v. 1031.
Tr. t). 1031.
Tr. op. 1031-3.
Tr. P. 103 S.
Tr. pp. 2802-4.
Tr. pp. 3031-4,
Tr. op. 7298.
9921,9307,
9355, 9379.
Tr. p, 9243.
Tr. pp, 9263-4.
Tr. p. 6748,
Tr. p. 9240.
9312 (t MB.
9383 «( mq.
tor'*
<t) Sharpley here meant “McLelknd" not “McLennan", but was in error and, later substituted the name
" Hate " (Tr, p. 2111). LateragataSterpley said that he was in some confusion as to the name of the man with whom
'this discussion took placo (Tr. p, 2798).


said he had noticed a spelling difference of a name as compared with the
official ballot papers and that he and Oke procured a party member
McClintock (a commercial artist) to make them accord.
The election took place and Harper won. There was satisfactory,
evidence that Donald did about the time alleged make a journey from Sydney 1
to Adelaide and that on his return he broke his journey at Melbourne. I am
also satisfied that the votes cast were a somewhat higher percentage than was
usual in the elections of this Society. The ballot papers used were in fact;
printed in South Australia.
Hill and McClintock gave evidence and denied Sharpley’s allegations, j
Donald did not give evidence.
On the whole I am not satisfied of the truth of the allegations made
in this case.
(d) The Boilermakers’ Society of Australia.
Sharpley alleged that at the election in the latter part of 1947—first'
he said in September, but later he said in November —the party were
successful in winning positions for two scrutineers, though they were
unsuccessful in winning the position of Returning Officer. The election was
for the position of Assistant Secretary and Organizer, and Bevan was the
candidate supported by the C.P. After votes had been east the counting was
to take place at the Trades Hall. Sharpley alleged that there was a discussion
between himself, Bevan, Sharpe, Johnson, Hill and Oke at which it was,
arranged that when the ballot was being counted, one of the two scrutineers
should at the lunch adjournment slip out bundles of ballot papers when not
observed by the Returning Officer, and take them to Sevan’s house nearby in
Lygon-street. It was arranged that Oke, Hill, Johnson, Keating and Sharpley
should then alter as many as possible in favour of Bevan. After lunch, the
scrutineer was to slip them back as altered among the ballot papers still to he
counted. Sharpley said that this scheme w T as carried out and some 80-100
ballot papers altered in favour of Bevan.
Bevan in fact was defeated in the election.
Hill, Bevan and Sharpe denied Sharpley’s allegations and Creswell the-
Returning Officer gave evidence to show that the fraud as alleged could not:
possibly he carried out. Dean who was not a Communist and was one of the
scrutineers, supported Cresswell.
There are some matters which are not satisfactorily explained, such as
Sharpley’s knowledge of the interior of Bevan’s house and Sevan’s own
conduct during the election campaign when he was away from work for a
period for which later he produced a medical certificate. These raise suspicion
that I have not heard the whole truth of the matter.
My conclusion is that I am not satisfied that the allegation has been
established.
(e) Bricklayers’ Union.
Sharpley gave evidence of a plan by the O.P. to win official positions in
the Bricklayers’ Union in which he said the officials were strongly
anti-Oommunist. He said the scheme was abandoned because of a leakage of
information. The matter was not further investigated in the proceedings
before me.
In this instance the allegation is not established.
(/) Australian Builders’ Labourers’ Federation. (Victorian Branch).
The allegation in this case rests on Sharpley’s evidence. In brief it
arose out of the removal and later reinstatement of one Neilson in relation to
his position as organizer in the Union. Elections were subsequently being held
and at these elections Neilson was a candidate for re-election. Sharpley says
at this stage he Malone and McEwan had a discussion and Malone said it
would be possible to interfere with the ballot papers of the election so as to
Tr. pp. 9784-
9788.
Ex. 318.
Tr. p. 2924.
Tr. p. 2911.
Tr. pp. 7293,
8130.
Tr. 987. 989.
Tr. p. 2177.
Tr. p. 989.
Tr. pp. 7293,
8276, 8254.
Tr. p. 8347.
Tr. p. 8332
«t 9eq,
Tr. pp, 2188,
8276. 8297.
Ex. 1076.
Tr. pp. 9655-9.
Tr. in,. 101#-
1020.
Tr. pp. 1009-
1010.


ensure iliat Neilsou was not elected to his former position. In fact Neilaon
was not elected In cross-examination Sharpley was uncertain whether the
(lection was held in 1947 or 1948. To this uncertainty I do not attach great
significance us an honest mistake might easily be made on the matter. My
decision in the case of this charge rests on a much broader ground. The
whole of Sharpley’s evidence was elaborately tested on cross-examination and
his allegations denied by witnesses called on behalf of the Union. Sharpley s
is the only evidence to support the allegations and I can find no circumstances
which point unambiguously in support of his evidence.
In this case I am not satisfied that the allegation is true.
(//) lliiildinu Workers' Industrial Union ( B.WJ.U .) (Victorian Branch).
Sharpley’s allegation in this ease related to the conduct of the elections
of the union in December, 1948, and particularly in regard to the office of
seci-etaiT. For this position, Chandler, a Communist, was seeking re-election
and was opposed by Henderson. The C.P. desired that Chandler should win.
The election extended over a period from the Ist to the 21st the
personal voting being at sub-branches and the time of voting being determined
by the meeting night of the sub-branch. The rules provided for the issue of
postal ballot papers to members desiring to vote who would be absent from
their sub-branch on election night because of sickness or who would be working
on that night. The scheme alleged by Sharpley was to manipulate the postal
votes and to introduce non-members to branches so as to enable Chandler to
win. It was common ground that the totals resulting from the counting at
sub-branches were carefully scanned and up to the 9th December Henderson
was in the lead. The personal voting at sub-branches resulted in Henderson
receiving 1,508 and Chandler 1,156, but of 1,122 postal votes cast Chandler
received 963 and Henderson only 159. This total of postal votes was by far
the largest ever east in this Union’s elections. The Returning Officer,
Morris, in spite of the protests of a number of Henderson’s supporters, issued
postal ballot forms to all members who chose to apply and persisted in an
obstinate misinterpretation of the rule allowing the issue of 'postal ballot
papers. He was on several occasions, while the applications were still in
existence, asked to preserve them, so that they might be inspected. He,
however, destroyed all except a very few special ones and thus effectually
prevented an examination of the applications.
The allegation in regard to this election was most elaborately
investigated. Many witnesses were called both to support Sharpley and to
attempt to show the regularity of the ballot. In addition, I have one exhibit
which tabulates everv vote cast and shows for whom it was cast and whether
it was a personal or a postal vote.
Conclusion.—A full consideration of all this evidence has led me to the
conclusion that Shai*pley’s allegation as to postal votes is substantially true.
I think there was a deliberate scheme to have false postal ballot papers issued
in order to enable Chandler To win, and that this scheme was carried out.
It could not have been carried out without prevailing on Morris to issue
postal ballot forms, but in his case his participation may have been due to
obstinacy, ignorance, or bewilderment in an unusually large poll, rather than
to conscious co-operation with Chandler and his supporters. That the scheme
could not have been planned and carried out without fraud on some ones part
is obvious enough, but I have not found myself able on the evidence to
determine the degree of complicity of each of those who took part in it Nor
is it possible to say with any assurance that it was the fraudulent manipulation
or the ballot that brought about Chandler’s return,
(h) The Federated Clerks’ Union of Australia (Victorian Branch) .
■ ■ . The allegations in this ease were most elaborately investigated and the
toe taken was eomjmnble to-that taken in connexion with the charges about
the B.WXU. election. I shall nevertheless deal with the matter very shortly.
Tr. pp. 21129-
2030.
Tr. pp. 8577-8.
5939.
Tr. KP. 102",
lOSri-42.
Tr.». 9302.
Ex. 47.7.
Ex. 201, Rule
19 (121.
Tr. pn. 1027,
1038, 1041.
2209.
Exr, 455, 720.
Em 717, 486-
486.
Tr. 6194.
Tr. 6171-2,
6192.
Tt. 6181-3.
Ex. 718,


Sharpley’s allegations were twofold. The first was in relation to a ballot i
held to decide whether the Victorian Branch of the Union should re-affiliate'
with the Australian Labour Party (A.L.P.). The second concerns meetings
and ballots in the Commercial Section of the Clerks’ Union. The incidents
in the second case were alleged to have occurred in 1947 and 1948. The
method of fraud suggested was to issue receipts for payments to persons
who were not members of the Clerks’ Union and who had paid no money in
fact, so as to entitle them to admission to the meeting and to vote. The
arrangement was alleged to be made with the Secretary, Mover, Hill and Oke,
and it was further said that Meyer gave to Sharplev* a receipt book which
Sharpley might use to issue such receipts.
In relation to the re-affiliation ballot, Sharpley later said the result of
the ballot had been ascertained and made known to some, and was altered so
that the result published was not the actual result but the altered result. •
Meyer in evidence completely denied the allegations, as did Hill. I had ■
much other evidence as to the office system in the Union and the method of ‘
admission and proof of membership and of the actual voting. I shall not
traverse the evidence.
Conclusion. —Although there is in the material before me evidence of
slackness in office management and of opportunity for fraud to a fraudulently
minded person and although I think there are circumstances of suspicion
surrounding these meetings and ballots, I am not satisfied that the allegations
are proved in either case.
(i) The Federated Engine Drivers 1 and Fire men’s Association of Australasia
( F.F.D.F.A. ).
Two allegations were made in this case —
(1) In relation to the election of Federal Secretary in 194 G.
(2) In relation to the 194 S election for branch officers.
(1) Election in 1946 for Federal Secretary.
This election was to take place in December, 1946, The C.P. were
opposing the then secretary Blackburn, an anti-Communist. The system of
voting was preferential and the party decided that in Victoria Evans should -
be given No. 1 preference and Richards No. 2, It was also determined that
Williams, a party member and member of the Executive of the Victorian
branch, should be supported for the position of Returning Officer. Williams
was elected as Returning Officer and the election proceeded and the counting
commenced at Williams’s house. At the end of the first day’s counting Sharpley
said that Williams had the impression that Evans might be defeated and ■
Blackburn elected and that he (Sharpley) took Williams to Hill’s office and
reported the position and that Hill said they would have to do some alteration
of the ballot papers. He then related how he went to Hill’s house and nn
Hill’s car he and Hill went to Williams’s house, opened bundles of ballot
papers and altered with rubber and pencil votes cast in favour of Blackburn
to make them appear in favour of Evans. He says that about 200 ballot
papers were so dealt with in the course of 4-5 hours and that Hill and Williams
had participated in the alterations. Hill and V illiams gave a complete denial
to the allegations. The evidence showed the correctness of some of the
surrounding detail, especially in relation to V illiains s house, which raises
another intriguing Question as to the source of Sharpley s knowledge, but thri
is not sufficient in my judgment to afford the necessary con oboration foi
Sharpley’s story.
Conclusion.—On the whole I find that the allegation is not established
to my satisfaction.
(2) Election in 1948 for Assistant Secretary.
Sharpley said that Williams was supported for the position of Assistant
Secretary by the Party and that Moss was asked not to stand but refused
to accede to the request, that he stood and was returned. While the election
Tr. pp. TJu-l
et eeq.
Tr. lip. 1*96,
2000 et snj.
Tr. pp. 7293,
8540 et M,q.
Tr. pp, 981-5.
Tr. p. 655.
Tr. p. 986.
Tr. p». 7283.
8361, 8873.
5379-80.
p. 16 of
Ex. 238.
Tr. pp. 8379.
2798 a.
Tr. 1021
ft <I«7.


was prom-ding, Sharpley said, there was a discussion between Hill, Oke and
himself whether it was possible to print extra ballot papers and use them to
support Williams. He said that Williams gave them a sample of the ballot
paper and Oke undertook to have it photographed and a block made of it;
that a block was made which proved defective, so that it was impossible to
proceed with the printing of the ballot papers. He also sard that Williams
had offered to provide 200 envelopes for the ballot papers. Williams in fact
was not elected. Oke was not called to give evidence, but Hill denies any
complicity in or knowledge of “ ballot rigging ”.
Cnndtmon.~-I am not satisfied that the allegation has been made out.
(j) Federated Ironmrken* Association of Australia (Victorian Branch).
Sharpley alleged ballot rigging in respect of two elections in this union,
one in 1937 and the other in 1944 or 1945. (There was some uncertainty as to
naming the year correctly.)
The 1937 Election Sharpley stated that in 1937, when he was manager
of the “ Starlight Press,” Thornton, who was then Victorian Secretary of the
Ironworkers’ Union, came to him and gave him the material for the printing of
the ballot papers in the election of the Ironworkers’ Union; that Thornton told
Sharpley the number of papers required to be printed and asked Sharpley to
print 200 additional copies and hold those additional ones in case Thornton
wanted them. Sharpley said that Thornton’s words were: “ We understand that
the people opposed to us in the Ironworkers’ Union may be doing some funny
business, and it they do we intend to do it more efficiently.” And Sharpley
added that Thornton then said that he (Thornton) would let Sharpley know if
he (Thornton) was going to use any of the additional 200 papers, but if he
(Thornton) did not let Sharpley know by Christmas Sharpley was to destroy
them; that Thornton did not subsequently inform Sharpley that the papers
would be required and that Sharpley then destroyed the papers.
Thornton was not called as a witness.
There is with this allegation, in addition to other difficulties I have
pointed out in accepting Sharpley’s evidence, the great lapse of time since the
incident is said to have occurred, and the difficulty of tracing written material
alleged then to lie in existence.
Conchmion.—l find that this allegation is not established.
The 1945 Election. —Sharpley said that in Victoria there was considerable
opposition to himself, Flanagan and Whitcombe, and in the Federal sphere to
Sic Phillips. He said that a discussion took place in the Victorian Branch
Office between Whitcombe, Flanagan and Considine (afterwards said to be
Constantine) who was a Party member and also returning officer for the
election and—
” it was decided at the end of it that if the figures as the papers came
in from the various workshops and were looked over each evening by
Mr. Whitcombe and Mr. Considine—if they showed that there was an
increasing strong vote against the Communist, extra ballot papers not
being used should he put in to replace ballot papers on which votes were
east against the Communist, they should be exchanged.”
“ At subsequent discussions Sharpley said Mr. Whitcombe reported
that certain of the number, a certain amount from day to day, had been
put in to exchange for opponent ballot papers that east a vote in
opposition to the Communists. Mr. Flanagan also, at this time, and at
the discussions that took place each morning in the Union office during
■the election told us that Mr. McPhillips had rung him and told him
that there was an increasing strong vote against him in New South
Wales and it was necessary that two things should he done in Victoria,
Communists should be mobilized to obtain votes for
McPhillips that is by contacting the members of the Union in the
workshops and persuading them to vote for McPhillips and, secondly,
that where ballot papers could be obtained that were not being used
Tr, p. 1021.
Tr. p. 7 m.
Tr. p. 980.
Tr. p. 981.
Tr.p.2fis2,
Tr. i*. 981.
tr.». m


by members of the Union who were not very interested in voting, they
should be filled in in favour of McPhillips and of other Communist
candidates in the Federal election, especially of himself, because the
mam vote being cast was being shown as east against McPhillips.
By the Commissioner: Who was to do the filling ini A. The filling
in would be done by the officials of the union or by other party members
such as shop stewards or non-party members if thev could be sufficiently
trusted.
By Mr. Lewis: Well, I suppose as a result of that the Communists
were elected? A. According to Mr. Flanagan there was no doubt that
Mr. McPhillips would he elected in any case but that he would get a
small vote, and the Party was concerned that Mr. McPhillips’s prestige
should be maintained by showing a very good vote. ”
Wliitcombe and Constantine gave evidence in denial of these allegations, *
but Flanagan was not called. t
Conclusion. —I am not satisfied that this allegation is true.
(k) The Australian Meal; Industry Employees’ Union. (Victorian Branch)—
{Meat Employees’ Union).
Sharpley’s allegation in the case of this Union is as follows:
1. That Seelaf was Yictorian Secretary of the Butchers’ Union, a t
member of the Party, and at one time Secretary of the Footscray
Branch of the Party.
2. That Seelaf and Allen, another Communist, had decided to tell j
organizers of the Union who were Party members— 1
(a) to persuade Union members to vote for the Party ticket;
(b) to ask shop stewards who were Party members or trusted
supporters to fill in ballot papers in favour of the Party ticket
where they found them not being used by members not
bothering to vote.
3. ( a ) That Seelaf asked Sharpley whether he could get printed i
a number of small receipts which had to be stuck on ballot
papers, and gave him a sample. These receipts were
numbered consecutively.
(b) That Sharpley took these receipts to Oke and asked him whether,
it would be possible to have others like the samples printed
at the Federal Press, and Oke told him afterwards that Watson
of Federal Press said that arrangements could be made for
these receipts to be printed.
(c) That about a week later Oke gave Sharpley a parcel and said:
they were the receipts and Sharpley gave them to Seelaf.
4. That 100 were ordered, and Seelaf gave a starting number, a-
high number, to be placed on the receipts. 1
5. That he reported to Hill what was being done, and about the -
receipts.
6. That Seelaf reported shortly before Christmas that the result of-
the election was favourable.
Seelaf denied these allegations though on his story there was some;
talk between him and Sharpley before the elections about the possibility of;
opponents resorting to “ ballot rigging ” and as to the use of printed slips.'
Conclusion—l am not satisfied that the allegation in this case is
established.
(1) Musicians’ Union,
The allegation in this case concerns the membership of one, W. A.
Boag (alleged by Sharpley to have been a member of the C.P. since 1942),
an organizer of the Musicians’ Union. Sharpley said Boag often came in to
see him in the latter part of 1948, and they concocted a plan to try and
Tr. pp. 59."»0
1 H BC(J.
Tr. pp. 8992
et srr;.
Tr. p. 1016.
Tr. pp. 1016-
101".
- Tz, p. 1017.
k
’ Tr. p. 1017.
[
i
I Tr. p, 1017.
I Tr. pp. 1017-
1017 A.
i Tr. pp. 1017a-
-1018.
f Tr. p. 1018.
1 Tt.vd.9oZ7-
» 9029.
[ Tr.pp.2195.
2200, 9028 80.


build up sufficient support in the Union to enable the C.P. representatives
and supporters to gain control of the Union. The plan was to try and
create a split between the permanent and the casual employees in the Union.
Boag was also a shareholder in Federal Press Pty. Ltd.
The Executive of the Musicians’ Union removed Boag from his position
as organizer and subsequently a large majority at a special meeting approved
the Executive’s action. Some slight corroboration of Sharpley s _ allegation
that Boag was a Communist was given by a witness, Eogers. Neither Boag
nor any member of the Musicians’ Union was called in relation to this
allegation.
I report these facts but make no finding.
(m) Operative Painters and Decorators’ Union of Australia (Victorian
Branch ).
The allegation by Sharpley concerned elections in the .Victorian
Branch of the Painters’ Union in the year 1948. Sharpley’s allegation was
very short. He stated that Willman, a member of the Communist Party who
was employed in the office of the Painters’ Union as a clerk, told him
(Sharpley)'' that there appeared to be a fairly strong ticket against some of
the C.P. candidates in the election but that that did not apply to Lewins,
the Secretary of the Union, that the ballot papers were being sent out and
some were coming in, and that he (Willman) was responsible for them in his
duty as clerk, and that he (Willman) was endeavouring to alter some of these
ballot papers or was altering some of the ballot papers in favour of the
Communist or pro-Communist candidate. Sharpley stated that most of the
Party candidates were, in the result, elected.
In cross-examination, Sharpley stated that he did not knoiv the details
of the methods of voting, that he did not think Lewins was opposed at this
election, that he thought that the positions of Assistant Secretary,
Management Committee, members of the Federal Council, and delegates to the
Trades Hall Council were the positions which were being contested at this
election. He stated that he did not know whether Willman actually altered
any papers, that all he knew was that Willman had said that he would be
able to make some alterations in favour of the C.P. candidates, that it was
in the light of his conversation with Willman and his knowledge that in the
result the Party ticket was successful that he (Sharpley) had assumed that
the ballot papers had been tampered with.
Willman denied having had any such conversation with Sharpley, and
denied having altered or endeavoured to alter any of the ballot papers.
In Willman’s evidence he conceded the possibility of returning to the
returning officer a number of ballot papers different from the number he had
run off on the duplicating machine. At most this is evidence of opportunity.
Conclusion— l am not satisfied that the conversation alleged by
Sharpley occurred, but I am satisfied that Willman did not in fact alter any
of the ballot papers.
(n) Plumbers and Oas Fitters’ Employees’ Union of Australia (Victorian
Branch).
Sharpley’s allegation concerns one Armstrong, a Party member and
organizer of the Union. It is very short and is as follows:
“ Mr. Armstrong told me that he would be able to see, since he
would be assisting the returning officer in the distribution of ballot
papers and collection of ballot papers in the Union meeting, he
would be able to see that the Communist ticket or the pro-Communist
ticket won the election and if necessary he would be, able to make
alterations in the ballot papers. He did not make clear to me
whether he meant by that actually altering the ballot papers or the
replacing of ballot papers collected, by other ones.”
Tr. pp. 890-
000.
Ex. 189.
Tr. pp. 896-7.
Tr. pp. 1007-8.
Tr. p. 3015.
Tr. pp, 1008-9.
Tr, pp. 2205-9.
Tr. pi). 8481-2.
Tr. p. 8449.
Tr. pp. 998-9.


There is no corroboration of Sharpley’s evidence.
Armstrong denied the conversation, and said he had never discussed
Union affairs with Sharpley.
Conclusion. —l am not satisfied that this conversation took place.
Tr. pp. 8488-9.
Ex. 14.
DISLOCATION OR DISRUPTION OF ESSENTIAL SERVICES.
I shall in the first place call attention to the views expressed by a
leader of the A.C.P. in his widely circulated writings.
Sharkey in his booklet “ The Trade Unions ”, says at page 26;
“ Strikes, properly led and conducted and properly timed, are a
revolutionary 'weapon. Strikes develop the labour movement,
organize and unite workers and win the intermediate social strata
to the side of the revolution.”
At page 27, he says:—
“ A number of strikes which we have led or influenced have
considerably strengthened the Communist Party.”
At page 30, it is said:—
“ The general run of strikes in Australia have been of an economic
character, or confined to economic demands, by the reformists.
Political strikes have been few in number (Port Kembla, against
scrap iron for J apan, for the release of Rat cliff e and Thomas, against
the execution of Sacco and Vanzetti in the U.S.A., and possibly a
few more). Political strikes are a higher form of struggle than
economic strikes. Such strikes challenge the Government, the State,
the rule of the capitalist class. One of our chief Trade Union tasks
is the politicalization of strikes.
Strikes are also important in that they reveal the class line-up to
the more backward workers. The bourgeoisie, its press and
politicians, and most of the parsons all unite to fight the strikers
with every possible weapon. The law, the police, even the army, are
used to crush the workers. The reformists oppose the strikers and
thus expose themselves. The hypocritical mask is off. In a flash,
the real character of the capitalist State is revealed to the masses.”
Earlier Sharkey had said; —
“ The political significance of this strike depends upon the size and
scope of the movement. Even where the strike is on a broad scale,
if the leaders from the very outset lead it into narrow craft channels,
the political edge of the strike is blunted and it is immediately
deprived of its chief content —it can no longer yield the political
results which it could have yielded originally; if a strike which has
purely economic demands as its point of departure is from the very
beginning consciously directed along the line of combining it with
the political struggle, it yields maximum effects.”
Making Strikes Political.
Gibson too, I think, agreed that nearly always now m order to achieve
success in a strike it was necessary to make it a political issue.
“ Q. Let us take that a step further. Could you tell us whether it
is or is not the aim of the Communist Party to make strikes political ?
A. Under such circumstances where this action is taken, as it nearly
always is taken now in any important strike, we hold that the hope of
victory for the workers rests in their gaining assistance from the
rest of their class and, as far as possible, from the whole people.
That means making the strike a political issue.
Q. I do not know that that quite answers the question I was putting.
What you are saying is that if the actions that develop as a result of
an economic strike lead to it becoming political, then the Communist
Party aims to fight it on a political level—l think that is what your
answer means, does it 1 ? A. Yes.
Ex. 14, p. 26.
Tr. i). 6544.


Q. What I was putting to you was as to whether the Communist
parfv irsdf had anv aim to make strikes political? it. We aim to
develop the political" eoirseiuiisuess of the workers during a, strike.
We aim to secure such solidarity from other sections of the workers
a* ri m-eessarv to win the strike." Is that an adequate answer to your
question i The term ‘ make strikes political ’ is somewhat vague.
Q, Vour answer, of course, depends upon the description yon have
previously given as to how a strike in the first place becomes political?
.!, Strikes of necessity have become political in this present very
highly organized stage of capitalism —that is the idea. But some
may he much more political than others.
</. And, there are .also, are there not. instances where strikes have
occurred on a directly political issue? A. Acs, such as the Port
Kemhla waterside workers’ strike —that is a pure example of a
political strike where no economic issue was involved.”
It seems obvious that political action may more easily be forced where
the strike takes place in essential services of which transport, lighting and
heating and the requisites therefore may he taken as examples.
Control ix Essential Services Unions.
in order to answer the questions involved in this heading it is of
importance to know to what extent there is communist control or influence in
the industries or services affected. 1. therefore, report what the evidence
discloses as to such control in the following:—
Henri/ Industries.
(i) fW.--Miners Federation under control of Communist Party—ldris
Williams, General President, is member of UP. also other officials of the
Federation.
til) Steel and Metal Trades. —Secretary of Metal Trades Federation
is Torn Wright, a member of C.P. Thornton, National Secretary of P.1.A.,
McPhillips, National Assistant Secretary, Flanagan (Victorian Secretary) all
members of the* C.P,
Transport Industries.
fi) Seamen's Union.- —General Secretary—Elliott, (UP.). Victorian
Secretary—Bird (UP.).
(ii) Waterside 1 Workers Federation.— National Secretary—Jim Healy.
National Assistant Secretary—Roach. Both are members of UP. (Victorian
Brandi, however, is A.L.P. and Anti-Communist.)
Tramways Employees Union.
Victorian Secretary—O’Shea (UP.). President—Cullen (denied that
he was UP.' but admitted he was closely associated with Communists and was
far to the left of the Labour Movement).
A.R.IL
General President and'Victorian Secretary—Brown (UP.).
Building Trades.
Thomson, Secretary ■of B.T.F. (UP). Chandler,' Secretary of
B.WJ.r. fUP.). ' Malone,■ Secretary of Builders Labourers (C.P.).
Operative General Secretary •' (CP.). State
Seerelary—Lewim (UP.).
, A..M.U .
- . ; Whitfield. Tennant,' all members of C.P.
((nmmonwealth Cmmed, however, is evenly divided).
Tr », !»«.
Tr. p. tm.
Tr. j>.
ST**-
Tr. », TK.
Tr p.m
Tr n< *i»,
»t«. rm,
tm. mm,
Kr**
ar“*


HAS THE COMMUNIST PARTY BEEN ACTIVE IN DESINNING OR EFFECTING
DISRUPTION ?
Transport Strike, 1946.
_ Sharpley gave evidence of a conversation between himself, Brown and
Hill in which it was decided that Brown should make demands on the'
Railways Commissioners for the satisfaction of outstanding grievances and
that if these demands were not satisfied strike action should be taken and
that the control and leadership should be left in the hands of Hill and Brown.
He said that Hill remarked that since there were grievances the
Communist leadership should show itself capable of enhancing its prestige
by conducting an industrial struggle that would satisfy the feelings and the
demands of the railway workers. There was no admission by Hill of the
truth of Sharpley’s statements, but I think it plain from Brown’s evidence
that he did discuss the question of striking with G.P. leaders before such
action was taken. The railway strike operated in two stages. ( a ) First there
was a strike —a 24-hour stoppage —on the 7th October and (&) later a 9-day
strike from the 21st to 29th October (inclusive). In the interim between the
first and second stages of the railway strike came a tram strike to enforce the
concession of the demands of tramwaymen. Brown was kept informed by
O’Shea, the Secretary of the Tramways Union, of what the trainmen intended
to do and were doing. He denied that there was any co-operation between
the two bodies, but admits that it was a cardinal point of Communist policy
that the workers should act in co-operation and that members of the State
Executive of the C.P. had told him that if the tramway men acted it was best
for the railway men to act in co-operation with them. He said it was his own
opinion that it was absolutely necessary that the tramway men and the
railway men should act in conjunction.
I think the proper conclusion from this evidence is that the G.P. -were
active in the design and the carrying on of this strike and that their purpose
was to dislocate and disrupt transport in order to enforce compliance with
the workers’ demands, to give training in mass action to the strikers and
generally for the training indicated by Sharkey in the passage cited.
Metal Trades Strike, 1947-8.
According to Sharpley the origin of this strike was a communication
of policy from the National Secretariat of the A.C.P. to the State Executive.
It came in writing by courier and contained a decision that a claim for marginal
increases should be made for all workers in the Metal Trades and that
preparations should be made for a big struggle in Victoria. The
correspondence, he said, contained instructions for the making of such a
demand and for propaganda in support thereof and that industrial action
should be taken in the event of a refusal by employers to concede the demands.
It was planned that the A.E.U. should take the leadership in such action
and that the Ironworkers (F.1.A.) should support them. Later it was decided
to bring the Ironworkers into the strike in respect of their own demands.
Sharpley said that in the discussions the possibility of extending strike action
to Sydney and Newcastle was considered. There was discussion how the
President of the A.E.U., who was a non-Communist, might be won to the
support of the proposal by emphasizing the improvement sought in the
material position of the union members. Further discussion was as to means
of bringing in to the support of the strike, unions which had non-Communist
leadership, e.g., the Blacksmiths’ Union and the Boilermakers’ Society. The
strike ultimately took place but Thornton of the Ironworkers became
concerned as to the financial drain on his Union. The stxike, Sharpley said,
was temporarily called oft at Christmas 1947, to enable workers involved to
take their annual Christmas leave and then it started again in 1948. All
these actions were taken in accordance with decisions made by the State
Executive of the C.P. and conveyed to the Unions in question. All records
in Victoria it wall be remembered have been destroyed, or at any rate are not
available. Hence the correspondence alleged is not before me. I cannot find
that Sharpley’s account of these matters has been denied, and there is at least
Tr. p. lOflfin.
Tr. pp. 7136
et eeq.
Tr. p. 7188.
Tr. pp. 1069-
1070.
Tr. pp. 1071-2.
Tr. p. 1074.


• evident from Brown that he thought the Metal Trades dispute should be
broadened by extending the struggle to the members or the A.E.U. m the
railway sendee.
Essential Services Strikes and Threats.
(а) January , 1048.
In January, 1948, the Victorian Legislature passed the Essential
Sendees Ad; which was assented to on the 20th January, 1948, but was not
to conic into operation until a date proclaimed by the Governor m Council
and published in the “ Government Gazette.” I have no doubt on the evidence
that tlie passing of the Act and the fear that it would be put into operation
occasioned widespread opposition and not least in the C.P. and its members.
There was a proposal to call a stoppage of work for 24 hours by the A.R.U.,
the Trnmwavs, the 8.W.1.U., and Building Trades Federation (8.T.F.), the
Iron the A.E.U. and The Federated Engine Drivers and Firemen’s
Association (F.E.D.P.A.). Sharpie? gives many details of the actions taken
to bring about the stoppage of work, but as his account is denied in many
respects by either Hill or Brown and in some respects by both, I do not set it
out.
The Government refused to repeal the Act, but after hearing a
deputation from the Trades Hall Council undertook not to proclaim it
without consulting the Trades Hall Council. In the result the threatened
strike did not take place. Sharpley reports that Blake adversely criticized
the decision to call off the strike.
“ The mistake had been made and it could not be mended, but in
future —it must be for the future a lesson to show our Communist
Trade Union officials that they must be always militant and prepared
to tight and that they must always remember that they were not
only Trade Union officials, but they were Communist politicians, and
therefore they must always think of the prestige of the Party in all
these matters as distinct from the prestige of the reformists in the
Labour Party and in the Trade Unions.”
Brown agreed that Blake had in substance made this criticism but said
it was made throe weeks later than Sharpley had said.
(б) November, 1948.
A strike of Gas Workers in November, 1948, led to the proclamation
of the Essential Services Act. Hill who was in Sydney returned to Melbourne
to supervise the straggle against the Act. There was a meeting of C.P.
Trade Union officials at Marx House at which Hill demanded a 24 hours’
stoppage and despite opposition from several union leaders this course was
decided on.
The following Unions, Australian Federated Union of Locomotive
Euginemen (A.P.U.L.E.), Tramways, A.R.U., Seamen’s, Ships’ Painters and
Dockers, Ironworkers and 8.W.1.U., stopped work for 24 hours. Bird,
Secretary of the Seamen’s Union, threatened a blockade of coal ships to
Victoria if the Act were not repealed. There was a suggestion of a lightning
stoppage of the rail services and a stoppage of power at the Newport Power
House, ami there was an actual stoppage of work by fifteen signalmen in the
Johmont Yards for an hour, thereby bringing trains to a standstill. Brown
and Hill both denied any complicity m this last action.
. . Sharpley*s statement rings true that Dixon pointed out “that the
decision to withdraw fifteen signalmen from work in the middle of the day
without notice to the public was in his opinion wrong and that it was
a »« hndieal error on the part of the State Executive here; that the
efteeh or such a stoppage was to inconvenience the public and to
especially inconvenience the wives and families of working men who
iisod the mow .to other sections of the community; and that
in the future we needed to be careful in examininsr or in takim? sucb
tactical steps and such quick stoppages that it was alwlys necessary to keep
m mmd the need for public sympathy on behalf of the line of the Party,
Xr. 7140-1.
Tr, 1079-
lout.
7106, 7330.
Tr. up. 1085-4.
Tr. up. 7104-6.
Tr. pp. 1084.
7470-9.
Tr. pp. 7157-
71«.
Zx.il.
Tr. p. 98.
p. 9«.
Tr. p. \m.
Tr.pp.n&S.
74454.
Tr.p.MW.


and that quick stoppages like that did not bring any economic pressure to
bear on industry, it did not mean a stoppage of industry to any extent and
10 anc i it produced public feeling against the policy
Dixon did not give evidence before me.
ktiii of thi s strike in the Communist Review of
January, 1949, which Sharpley said was taken from a report made bv Hill
to the Central Committee of the C.P.
The (Government announced its intention to institute prosecutions
under the Act and thereupon the P.E.D.P.A, threatened to call a stoppage of
key men at Yallonrn, and the seamen threatened not to carry coal to Victoria.
Prosecutions nevertheless were instituted against certain union officials. While
these proceedings were pending negotiations for a settlement of the disputes
were successfully concluded and no further steps were taken to implement the
threats.
Brown has also thrown some light on the activities of the C.P.
throughout this campaign—
“ The Commissioner: Do you think the Communist Party provided
the driving force or the leadership in this propaganda campaign’
against the Essential Services Act? A. I feel that they were the
driving force and that without their assistance I do not think it would
have been possible for the leaders of the movement to have conducted
such a fine campaign as they did at that time.
but he had some reservations.
“ I do not think,” he said, “the campaign against the Essential
Services Act has been as good or strong as the campaign carried on,
for years regarding the Grimes Act.”
Ban on Dutch Shipping.
Sharpley said that a ban on Dutch Shipping was imposed by the-
Waterside Workers’ Federation and by the Seamen’s Union. Saunders'
supports him in regard to the W.W.E. The decision was that of the Federal.
Council, endorsed by a general meeting of Victorian members. According to ■
Sharpley, the National Congress of the A. C.P. in March, 1948, decided to call 1
off the ban; it was later re-imposed, again by decision of the A.C.P., and last
of all lifted—in part, because the G.P. officials at the unions wanted to get on
good terms with the Federal Cabinet which had been pressing for the'
withdrawal of the ban.
Other Methods oe Strike.
(1) Systematic withdrawal of labour.
In the course of the Meta! Trades disputes, members of the Ironworkers i
Union, employed in foundries, put pressure on the employers to grant wage
increases by a policy of systematic resignations, i.e,, if the employer refused
the increase the ironworker resigned,
(2) Wave policy.
“ Instead of having one strike immediately you will have a running >
strike. You will have a 24 hour stoppage. Then if that does not
get the desired effect, you will pull the_ seamen out and block the
Sorts. If that does not get the desired effect, you will pull some
other section out. In other words, you are pulling everyone out
at the same time, hut you are going in waves.
This statement depends on Sharpley but I cannot find that it was ever
denied.
Ex. 21.
Tr. pp. 'll
€t aev.
Tr. pp. 766-8.
Tr. p. 7182.
Tr. pp. 7183-4.
Tr. pp. 945,
1355.
Tr. p. 7674-5,
Tr. pp. 1358-
1542.
Tr. »n. 7188-9.
Tr. pp. 1344-5.


(3) “ The General Strike.”
Tins method, according to Brown, is not often invoked and the reason
is suggested by Sharkey in his book “ Trade Unions.”
‘ ‘ Leninism teaches ns that a general strike, that is a strike in all or
most of the basic industries, as distinct from a general strike in one
industry, must as a rule he a political mass strike. It is often
necessary to broaden out partial strikes and aim to transform them
also into political mass strikes. Our Party, because of this, would
call for such stoppages only in the most favourable conditions,
particularly a revolutionary or near-revolutionary situation. Usually
in ordinary situations, our tactics are a one day general stoppage or
a series of such one day stoppages.”
(4) One. day stoppages.
This particular tactic seems to have been used on political issues, e.g.,
the imprisonment of McPhillips, It was resorted to by the Ironworkers who
threatened to stop weekly until McPhillips was released. The Victorian C.P.
members of the W.W.P. supported the proposal but it was rejected by the
Victorian Brandi of the Federation. Proposals for similar stoppages were
made because of the imprisonment of Healy and Roach.
(5) Regulation Strikes.
Sharpley gave evidence of this practice which is used on occasion in
order to slow up the movement of railway traffic.
General.
Brown pointed out that while a transport strike affects industry very
quickly, a stoppage such as the Metal Trades strike would have a more
devastating effect on industry in the long run, because the lack of maintenance
of machines such as then occurred can have a very serious effect.
He also said that the lightning strike was “ a general tactic that was
applied in transport industries,” but this is perhaps only in amplification of
the considerations mentioned by him above.
Tr. p. 7149.
r.x. 14. r, 31.
Tr. 9P. 7692-3,
7710-2. 7720.
Tr. up. 7691,
7717.
Tr. p. 1778.
Tr. p. 7188.
Tr. p. 7159.
DISLOCATION, DISRUPTION OR RETARDATION OF INDUSTRIAL
PRODUCTION.
Almost all of what I have written in the previous section is relevant to
this heading. It needs no argument to understand that, if essential services
such as transport are interrupted, the interruption must affect industrial
production, which depends on what is ordinarily brought for raw materials
and upon transport to distribute its products in the shape of manufactured
goods and upon work people being able to get to their places of employment.
Industrial production is also affected by interference with sources of power
such as gas and electricity, and by strikes in trades or industries which provide
the raw material or the equipment for other trades or industries. Hence a
strike in the Metal Trades for example will affect production in other
industries. In this section I shall merely add some observations on how
communist theory hears on the present matter and whether the evidence
supports the view that communist action is designed to effect dislocation,
disruption or retardation of industrial production.
Communist Theory.
. I have already written much of the communist view that capitalism
contains within itself inherent contradictions and the seeds of its own decay
and that its overthrow is inevitable.
Hill conceded the possibility of the C.P. assisting this inevitable
process and expediting it. Any retardation of production was, in his view,
relations of production under capitalism,” and again, lie said,
th&t the fliiEi solution of the problem ot production will only come when the
Tr. ». tm.
Tr.», W.


situation is changed , presumably by the overthrow of the capitalistic system,
Gibson also thought that the advent of Socialism would bring about a
tremendous increase in production.
I have also drawn attention to the hostility of the C.P. to the policy ol
reformism which, says the Glossary, “ results in subordination to the capitalist
class , and is “ the policy that seeks to harmonize or reconcile the interests
of the capitalists and the workers—interests which are antagonistic and
irreconcilable.” _ These doctrines suggest that it can only be as a matter of
strategy or tactics that the C.P. is willing to work within the frame-work of
the capitalist system and then only so long as an opportunity does not arises
to overthrow it.
It is noteworthy too that in the years of depression many turned to -
the C.P. and became members of it. Gibson, Hill, Saunders, Brown, Johnson
and Sharpley all joined the party in tins period.
I have shown too that the C.P. regards it as its mission to act as the
vanguard of the proletariat in its struggle to overthrow capitalism, and that
it seeks to gain positions of leadership in the trade unions.
All these considerations seem to point to the conclusion that the C.P.
is not interested in securing an increase of production in industry under
existing conditions but that it is interested in obtaining positions in the trade
unions in which it can carry out its function as the vanguard. But it does
not follow that at this stage of its fight with the capitalist system it is seeking
as a primary object to disrupt or dislocate the system, though disruption
and dislocation may be the result. It may feel that however much it may
hate the system it must for the time being work within its frame and give its
main attention to other ends.
Mr. Laurie in his final submission says— ‘‘ The role of the Communist
in leading the strike struggles of the workers is the exact reverse of that
indicated by this tendentious heading. By convincing the people of the
inevitability of Socialism Communists are hastening the day when the
productive forces will be liberated from the stranglehold of a small owning
class and set to work at top pressure for the satisfaction of the people’s
wants,” In any action of the Communists, he says, the aim was the
improvement of conditions and any dislocation or disruption that occurred
was only temporary.
Apart from Sharpley’s, there is no evidence before me to suggest that
the C.P,, in its association with the strikes dealt with in the last section was
seeking either to create disruption for its own sake, or to create depression
conditions by disruption of industrial production, though disruption was a
necessary consequence of strike action.
Gibson’s contention was—“ We do not try to create the depression.
Capitalism brings it,”
Conclusion,
I think the proper conclusion from the evidence before me is that where
strikes have occurred under Communist leadership or influence, the purpose
has been really, in the first place, to gain the advantages sought m the men’s
demands I think, however, that the leaders of the C.P. at any rate have never
lost sight of what they consider are the further advantages of giving training
to the strikers in concerted action against the employers and of sinking one
further blow at the capitalist system.
I should add that there is much evidence to show that the strikers have
at times secured substantial gains by their action, and these gains in their
turn have added greatly to the prestige of Communist union officials and
consolidated the power of the C.P. and these officials in the unions.
4329/50.—7
Tr. pp. M4T,
6740.
Ex. 834.
Es. 12. p. 21,
Tr. i>p. 6441,
7027, 7639.
7643. 81117, &e.
Submission,
p. 74,
Tr. ,o. 12SS.
Tt\ p-
Tr* pp. Mb
m.
Kx. U, p. SS.
Cf. Tr.
p.7441*


INDOCTRINATION OF CHILDREN AND YOUNG PEOPLE.
Earlier in this Report at pages 50 et seq. I have given some information
as to the training by the (Jommunist Party of both youth and adults. What I
now write is to be taken as supplementary to what there appears.
Importance Attached to Youth Training.
Lenin, Stalin and Dimitrov have emphasized the importance to the
partv of the training of the youth and the same view has been insisted on in
Australia.
The “ Communist Review ” for April, 1946, contains an article entitled
“ Lenin and Youth ” from which I cite the following passage:—
“ He (Lenin) realized better than any that the future belongs to the
youth, and it is the duty of the elders to train and fit youth for its
high obligations .... Lenin taught the youth first, the importance
of theory, the need to leam; second, the need for organization; and
third, the need for character based on Communist morality.”
Lenin’s views are further elucidated in this passage in-one of his
works: —
“ Being a member of the Youth League means devoting one’s labor
and efforts to the common cause. That is what Communist training
means. Only in the course of such work does a young man or woman
become a real Communist. Only in this way, only if they achieve
practical results in this work, will they become Communists.”
I have earlier spoken of the Young Communists League (Y.C.L.), its
successor the Young Democrats League (Y.D.L.) and the Eureka Youth
League (E.Y.L.).
The Young Communists League.
Communist Youth is referred to in the A.C.P.’s Constitutions of 1929
and 1935 and its relationship to the A.O.P. stated. The “Party Training
Manual ” described the Y.C.L. as “ organizationally autonomous but politically
subordinate to the Party,” and later states that the “ Y.C.L, of Australia is
a section of the Young Communist International, which is a section of the
Comintern with full rights as any other section.” Mr. Laurie conceded that
the Y.C.L. “ was closely linked with the C.P.”
At the 7th World Congress of the Comintern in 1935 Dimitrov spoke
of work in youth movements and said, among other things—
“ For the problem of the youth is not only a Y.C.L. problem. It
is a problem for the entire Communist movement. In the struggle
for the youth, the Communist parties and the Y.C.L. organizations
must actually effect a decisive change. The main task of the
Communist youth movement in the capitalist countries is to advance
boldly in the direction of bringing about the united front, along the
path of organizing and uniting the toilers of the young generation.”
The Young Democrats League.
Following upon this speech and probably as the result of it the Y.C.L.
was succeeded by the Y.D.L. This step was taken upon the decision of the
Victorian State Executive of the C.P., and Miller, Mrs. Blake, Stein and
Dulcie Steffanou (all of whom were or afterwards became Party members)
were assigned to its development. The circular letters in evidence, however,
called for the establishment of a genuine mass non-party labour youth
organization and the Y.C.L. declared, “We offer our organization as a
contribution towards establishing a great genuine non-party labour youth
movement.” Mr. Laurie claimed that the Y.D.L. was a body independent of
the party, but there is no evidence to support this statement. It was one of
the organizations banned by the Commonwealth Government in 1940
47 it seq,
Ex. 786. p. 148.
Tr. 6440 a.
Ex. 785, p. 88.
Tr. p. 6440.
Ex. 2,
Ex». 310. 3-17.
Ex. 28, pp. 84.
88.
Tr. p. 6430,
Ex. SO, p. 88.
Tr.p. 64424.
Ex. <26.
TV. p. 5307.
Tr. p. 6430.
Commit*.
GaztiU,
24th Fob..
1941, p. 887.


The Eureka Youth League.
When the ban was removed in 1942 the State Committee decided that
the youth organization should he re-established. It was—as the Eureka Youth
League, under the leadership of Audrey Blake and Harry Stein. Hill stated
that this body was formed in 1941, but there is a record in evidence of the
6th National Congress which suggests that it was formed in 1942. Sharpley
gave a good deal of evidence as to the E.Y.L. which I pass over, hut one
statement——that control was exercised by the Communists by means of a
fraction —is completely in accordance with the Party’s policy as I have
previously shown.
The A.G.P. made a loan to it to assist in ecpiipping a camp for 1,000
campers and there is a good deal of evidence as to the use of this camp for
summer schools. lan Turner, a Communist and secretary of the C.P. branch at
the University, sponsored a prospectus of the Australian Student Labour
Federation for a summer school at this camp. A delegation from the E.Y.L.
attended a World Youth Festival at Prague and a work brigade of fourteen
of these worked on the Yugo-Slav Youth Railway.
An exhibit in evidence reports that E.Y.L. gained 80 new members
from its Christmas Gamp.
There is a great deal of other material in evidence as to the policy of
the E.Y.L. which I shall not mention otherwise than by marginal references.
Youth Branches.
In the issue of “ Forward ” for May, 1943, which is in evidence, under
a heading “ Youth will Win,” there is an article, the perusal of which suggests
that in addition to specific organizations such as the E.Y.L. there are youth
branches of the A.C.P. The reference in the Constitutions of 1929 and 1935
seems to support such an inference.
Junior Eureka League.
To further the work among the youth a Junior Eureka League for
children between the ages of 5-6 and 10-12 years was proposed by Audrey
Blake, and according to Gibson was actually in existence.
Apprentices.
The Melbourne Apprentices Committee was formed to support the
demands of apprentices. This according to Sharpley was promoted by the:
C.P., and I cannot find that his statement was disputed.
In Audrey Blake’s report to the 1948 National Congress of the A.C.P.
she refers to the wage demands of apprentices and “the daylight training
campaign ” as “the right of all young workers whether apprenticed or not,
to continue their education, both technical and general, in the bosses’ time.”
Fraction in Teachers’ Union.
Sharpley alleged and Mrs. X corroborated that there was a Communist
fraction in the Teachers’ Union. Sharpley said it was under the supervision
of Bourke, a member of the State Executive, and that the problems winch arose'
were discussed from time to time by the State Executive of the C.P., and that
up to 30-40 teachers had attended meetings of the fraction. This evidence wasr
never challenged nor was Bourke called as a witness. Communists who were
members of the Teachers’ Union were Doris Mcßae, lan Mill, Clem. Berman,;
Charles Silver and Kathie Stewart. I accept Mr. Laurie’s submission that;
there is no evidence that Communists in the teaching profession have in any
way used their position to carry out C.P. functions in relation to education.
State Schools Committees’ Association op Victoria.
Under the Education Act the parents and guardians of children
attending a particular State School have the right to elect a committee, whose
names are then submitted to the Governor-m-Gouncil for confirmation. The-
committees for the various schools formed a. "voluntary association the State
School Committees Association of Victoria.
Tr. pp, 884,
884-6, 1318-
1319, 1822-23.
2738, 7436.
Ex. 259-90.
Ex. 112.
Tr. p. 444.
Ex. 769.
Tr. p. 0287.
Exs. 166, 168,
171, 289, 290,
667, 858, 867,
918, 914,
Tr. pp. 867,
984-50,970,
2738, 2743,
7436-46.
Ex. 760.
Cf. Tr,
p. 9731.
Tr. p. 6723.
Exs. 112,172,
269, 769.
Tr. pp. 444,
2740-1, 6287.
Tr. pp. SEO-83,
866-6.
Tr. pp. 6301-8.
Tr. p. 552.
6303.
Tr. p. 7668.
Tr. p. 6480.
Tr. p, 6646.


A member of the Executive of that Association, Mr. McLean, gave
evidence that there were communists on that executive, namely, Mrs. Nell
White, Messrs. Stan Johns and J. H. Hawker. Mr. McLean also described
how these members attempted to replace the S.S.C.A.V. with a Parents’ and
Citizens’ Association, whose membership was to be open to all, irrespective of
whether the persons concerned were the parents or guardians of children
attending State Schools or not.
In 1948 at the Annual Conference the S.S.C.A.V. adopted a resolution
“ that no member of or avowed sympathizer with the Communist Party be
permitted to hold office with the ln consequence of this
resolution, two known communists on the Executive, W. Mayhew and Mrs.
Nell White, were ruled to he ineligible to continue as members of the
Association.
Mr. Merrifield, M.L.A., who was a Vice-President of the Association for
two years from September, 1947, onwards did not renominate after the passing
at the 1948 Conference of the resolution above referred to. Merrifield had
also expressed disapproval of the rulings of ineligibility given against
Mayhew and Mrs. White. There is nothing in the evidence to show that this
body interfered in any way with the instruction or training of the children
at the school in respect of which the Committees were elected.
The University op Melbourne.
Sharpley deposed to the existence of a G.P. Branch at the University,
which he had on several occasions addressed. The meetings were held at
Cameron Hall, Cipps-street, Richmond, and about 40 members were present.
He said that Mr. Rex Mortimer had at one stage been secretary of the branch
and that in 1948 one lan Turner, the President of the S.R.C., was secretary
of the C.P. Branch. Gibson confirmed Turner’s membership of the O.P.
Mr. Laurie agreed that there had been a branch at the University but
said that it was no different from branches of other political parties which
operate freely in the University. He said that, at present, because of
organizational changes there was no branch there. Some communists, he said,
were members of the University Labour Club, but its policy was in no way
determined by the C.P. The photostat in evidence of a document in the
possession of the Chief Commissioner of Police in Western Australia indicates
that in 1948 there was a branch of the C.P. at the University of Melbourne
and that there was also a communist fraction in the Labour Club. It may be
significant that the magazine of the Labour Club is now entitled “ United
Front.”
In the photostat referred to there is evidence of regular reports to the
C.E. of the Party’s activities at the University of Melbourne.
There is no credible evidence whatever before me of any teaching or other
indoctrination in communism of youth at the University of Melbourne.
Mothers’ Clubs.
There is a good deal of evidence as to the existence of Mothers’ Clubs
m various districts of the communist organization and of reports to District
Committee and District Conference of their doings. I can find no trace in the
evidence of the scope of their activities, but there is some evidence that the
Clubs had Executives and that there was a Federation (presumably of clubs)
Grace Burkett reported to the District Committee in 1938 (?) “ on work in
r s Mcl she had been able to secure support for her election
to Middle Park Mothers’ Club and delegate from the Club to the Federation
This would be of extreme value to Party and her position on the Federation
would enable her to do propaganda work. There may be opportmitla Sr he?
to speak on several days each week to various Mothers’ Clubs In addition she
was m a position to recommend Party speakers to different Mothers’ Clubs ”
I presume it was thought that propaganda to mothers might reach the children.
Tr. p. d 689.
Tr. pji. 5089,
5091.
Tr. pp. 5707a-
-57117b.
Tr, p. 6708.
Tr. pp. 803-4.
Tr. pp. 894.
6724.
Tr. p, 0430.
Ex. 760.
Tr. pp, 6289-
6291,
Ex. 168.
Tr. p. 6720.
Tr. 6721.
Ex. 502.
Tr. pp. 5800,
5816, 5488,
6154. 6176.


FINDINGS IN RELATION TO PARTICULAR PERSONS.
The cases dealt with under this heading are exceptions from the general
practice which (as I indicated earlier) I have followed of allowing persons
affected by the evidence to intervene and make what answer they wished and
to leave the matter there without any finding from me. The exceptions are
made because of the public position of the person affected or because the evidence
affects the conduct of the person in his professional capacity. The cases thus
specially dealt with are :-(a) R Grant Taylor, (6) A. E. Wallis, (c) Samuel
Memfield, (d) E. E. Hill, and (e) J. M. Lazarus.
(а) Taylor,
Ronald Grant Taylor is a solicitor. A witness, Miss Moss, stated that
an elderly woman, a client of Taylor’s, had become deranged and that within
a very short time of this event, Taylor had arranged for the disposal of the
client’s property at a figure far below its value at that tune to a friend of his
(Taylor’s), which friend was a member of the C.P. Taylor gave evidence
before me and produced the docmnents relating to the transaction. Moreover,
the Public Trustee seems to have been fully aware of the details of the
transaction.
Finding.— l find that there is not the slightest ground for the allegation,
and that Taylor’s conduct in this transaction is not properly open to any
criticism whatever.
(б) A. B. Wallis.
Mr. Wallis is a Conciliation Commissioner under the Commonwealth
Arbitration Act. Sharpley referred to Wallis as a trade unionist associated
with Australia-Soviet House, but almost immediately said that he had made a
mistake and assented to the suggestion that Wallis had never been associated
with it. Rodgers, the director of Australia-Soviet House, said that to the best
of his knowledge Wallis had never been a member of Australia-Soviet House
Committee and had never been associated with Australia-Soviet House.
I conclude without hesitation that the allegation is unfounded.
(c) Samuel Merrifield.
Merrifield was and is a member of the Legislative Assembly. Sharpley
said that Hill had told him that during the Metal Trades and Transport Strike
he could learn from Merrifield the attitude of the Labour Caucus. P. B. Wilson,
an ex-member of the 0.P., said that at an industrial conference of the C.P. in
1938 or 1939 Merrifield was present and that he was introduced to him by
Booley, who informed him that Merrifield was an undercover member of the
C.P. Booley himself was a member of the C.P. and a member of the Communist
fraction of ’ the A.R.H. Wilson also said that one Guy, Secretary of the
Newport Branch of the C.P., had told him that Merrifield was a member of
the Party. Mrs. X said on information given her by Samson, an organizer of
the C.P., that Merrifield was working for the Party. She also said that
Merrifield had spoken on two occasions at conferences of the C.P. in 1938 or
1939 and had said that the A.L.P. work needed more help from the State
Committee of the C.P. and that he had spoken on the organization and
activities of the C.P. within the Labour Party. Further evidence was given
by witnesses Ryan and Molloy as to the conduct of Merrifield at a meeting in
August, 1945, of the Essendon Branch of the A.L.P. It was said that
Merrifield was asked by Ryan whether he was a member of the C.P., what
was his attitude towards communism and towards Booley, and that he gave no
direct answer to these questions. Hill denied the statemeMs attributed to him
and stated that Merrifield was an anti-communist. Merrifield on oath denied
that he was or ever had been a communist. He denied that he had ever attended
or spoken at a conference of the C.P. He stated he wags not present; at, the
meeting of 23rd July, 1945, of the Essendon Branch of the A.L.P., when a
proposal to expel Booley was debated, and the minutes produced showed that he
had been present at a meeting of 9th July, 1915, nrd bf
Tinolpv’cj p’VTvnlcnnn moved and. seconded, but ruled out of order ; that he
had been absent from the meeting of 23rd July, 1945;J>ut on
Ryan had sought “ permission to question the Secietary as to communist
Tr. p. 1637.
Tr. pp. 1742-
1757.
Ex. 214.
Tr. p. 2357.
Tr, pp. 2554-5.
Tr. p. 874.
Tr. pp. 5775-
5782.
Tr. pp. 5282-
6285.
Tr, p. 6030,
Tr. pp. 6890-
5927.
Ex. 702.
Tr. p. 6145.
Tr. p. 7517.
Tr. pp. 2440
et 86Q'
Tr. pp. 8148 b
et scq.
Ex. 702.
Tr. p. 6145.


associations and activities in the Branch generally. On cross-examination
Merrifield admitted that he had not answered the questions put by Ryan. From
this evidence, some of it hearsay, some of it partisan in character, and most
of it denied, it is not possible for me to feel very confident what is the truth
of these matters.
Finding. —On the whole I am not satisfied that Merrifield is or was a
member of the C.P. or that he supplied information to any member of the
C.P. of what happened or was happening in the Labour Caucus.
(d) E. V. Hill
Hill is the secretary of the C.P. in Victoria. He is a member of the legal
profession practising as a barrister, and he appeared before the Commission,
first as one of the Counsel representing the C.P. and later, after he had retired
as Counsel, in the capacity of witness.
There are two incidents recorded in the evidence in which his conduct
in a professional capacity is involved, viz.—
(i) in relation to the settlement of the action, Henderson v. Morris.
In this matter the conduct of the solicitor J. M. Lazarus is also
involved; and
(ii) in relation to the defence of Johnson in the Police Court on a
charge under the Motor Car Act.
I shall deal with these in turn.
(0 Settlement of the Action, Henderson v. Morris.
This action arose out of the 1948 elections of the 8.W.1.U. which I have
dealt with at p. 86 above. It will be recalled that the candidates for the
position of Secretary were Henderson and Chandler, and that the voting at
sub-branches commenced on the Ist December and was concluded on the 21st
December. The voting was either personally or by postal vote. Morris was
the Returning Officer. On the 13th December (while the election was still
proceeding) Henderson issued a Supreme Court writ against Morris, and by
motion in that action he asked inter alia to have Morris restrained “ from
parting with or destroying all or any applications for postal votes ’ ’ in respect
of the election. This motion was ready for hearing on the 17th, but before it
was heard a settlement of the action was arranged between Counsel. Mr.
Tredinnick appeared for Henderson and Mr. Voumard and Mr. Hill appeared
for Morris, According to Tredinnick he and Voumard ultimately agreed,
inter alia, that the whole of the applications for postal ballot papers and ballot
papers, the lists and any other documents there might be should be given
into the custody of the manager of a branch of the Commonwealth Bank.
Voumard agreed in substance with this evidence. At this stage I accept without
any reservation their statements that they - believed the whole of the
applications for postal ballots to be in existence. In fact, all but 60 or 70 of
these applications had been destroyed by Morris. Hill was not present at the
talks between Tredinnick and Voumard, but was some distance away with
Morris’s solicitor, Lazarus. When agreement had been reached Voumard went
to Hill and Lazarus and reported that fact. Voumard says (and I accept his
evidence implicitly on questions of fact) that he overheard Hill say to Lazarus
that some of the applications for ballot papers were no longer in existence.
Voumard immediately returned to Tredinnick and said that he had heard that
some of the applications were not in existence, that he was not prepared to
sign anything which he knew could not be carried into effect, and that the
terms would have to be altered to the form “ all applications for ballot papers
now in existence or to come into tire possession or power of the defendant.”
Tredinnick agreed, and the terns of settlement were signed. Voumard said
that it might be inferred that Hill was willing for the agreement in its original
form to be signed. Voumard was angry at what he thought was the willingness
of his junior Counsel and his solicitor to permit him to sign terms of settlement
which he didn’t know but they did know could not be carried out.' Later
Voumard returned to the witness box and said that on further reflection he
he was wrong in that opinion and that it rested on a false premise
that Hill knew that he (vouniard) was unaware of the destruction of the
Tr. pp. 2441,
6152.
Ex, 456.
Tr, p. 7564.
Tr. p. 7572.
Tr. pp. 7573.4.
Tr. pp. 7565,
7676.
Tr. p. 7676.
Tr. p. 7599.


fonus. Hill said tliat in Ins brief was a proof of Morrises ovideneo r
in which the statement was made “No longer in my possession application ]
forms other than those which came in the last two or three days,” and he i
assumed that Youmard’s brief was the same as his own, but he could not'
recollect whether he had discussed with Youmard whether the application
forms were in existence or not. Now, if the question had rested on the matters
here recited I should hare had no difficulty in arriving at the conclusion that
the whole trouble arose out of a misapprehension and out of assumptions
natural enough in themselves but not iu accordance with fact.
There are, however, some further matters to relate. Morris, who.
destroyed the application forms, said he had done so on the 12th or 13th
December and that at the time of settlement on the 17th December neither
his counsel nor solicitor knew that he had already destroyed them. Moreover, ■
when his proof of evidence is closely examined it is plain that what is set out
in Hill’s brief is not a carbon copy of what appears in Youmard’s brief,:
though without a close examination it might easily be taken for a carbon :
copy of the proof in Youmard’s brief and it certainly looks to be a carbon copy
of something. No original of this document was produced nor was its absence
explained. Moreover, the statement which is critical appears only on the
second sheet, which Youmard asserts he never saw 7 until immediately before
he went into the box to give evidence.
The only conclusion that I can arrive at with any satisfaction is that I
have not heard the whole truth of the matter. I make no finding in regard to
Hill in this matter.
(ii) Police Court Proceedings. i
Proceedings for an offence under the Motor Car Act had been taken
against a Party member, Johnson, who was president of the Victorian State
Committee of the A.C.P., a member of the Central Committee and also a
member of the Victorian State Executive. The motor vehicle was registered
in the name of Cassidy. In an affidavit Cassidy said this w r as done with his
permission and authority. Johnson had applied for and reeived a driver’s
licence in the name of Cassidy. Cassidy too was the name he gave to the
police as his own when questioned about the offence and the information
against him -was in the name of Cassidy and the conviction was recorded in
that name. Johnson said that Hill had appeared for him hi the Police Court
and that. Hill knew 7 him as Johnson. When Johnson returned to the box after
an adjournment of the day’s hearing of the Commission, he said that overnight
Hill had reminded him that he (Hill) w 7 as unaware of the fact that when he
defended Cassidy that he (Johnson) w 7 as the person concerned. Johnson said
he had instructed Hill over the telephone to defend Cassidy and had forwarded
the papers to Hill. He said there was a real'Cassidy who resided in Tasmania
and that Hill knew 7 the real Cassidy. Hill gave no evidence on this matter.
Conclusion— On this evidence I cannot conclude that Hill w r as guilty
of any impropriety.
(e) J. M. Lamms.
I have already set out in some detail the facts out of which a question
arises as to the conduct of Lazarus. Without a further investigation of the
matters preceding the settlement of the action, Henderson v. Morris I am
not prepared to make any finding as to the conduct of Lazarus,
Costs. '
At the conclusion-of the final submission for the A.HP., Mr. Laurie
requested me to add in my report a recommendation that the costs
(or some part thereof) of the A.C.P.’s representation before the Commission
be met by the Grovernment. Such a submission has, of com sc, implications
which go beyond the representation of the A.C.P.* but I do not puisue the
subject for what seems to me a sufficient reason, viz, "that the matter lies
entirely outside the scope of my commission.
Tr. p. 7666.
Exs. 9LC, 10S1,
Ex. 918.
Tr. p. 7615.
Tr. p. 6183.
Tr. p. 618 a.
Ex. 918 a.
1081.
Tr. p. 7579,
Tr. p. 8337.
Ex. im.
Ex. 978.
Tr. pp. 823 7-9,
Tr. p. 8224
cl 80(7.


SUMMARY OF FINDINGS.
Having regard to the unavoidable length of this report, I have thought
it wise to set out hereunder in summary form the findings I have made. The
warning however should be borne in mind that to read the summary alone is
probably to get a false idea of the meaning of the findings. They are findings
in relation to the matters discussed or to the_ evidence set out. Read alone,
they give a starkness of outline and a seeming simplicity where the truth
embodied in the findings is often complex and sometimes not absolute but only
relative to the circumstances. The summary should rather be taken_ as an
index to the sections in which the findings are made. If, and only if, this
warning is borne in mind, the following summary may be of real use.
(References are to pages of the Report); —
1. The Victorian Communist Party is a section of the Australian
Communist Party which itself is the Australian representative of
International Communism.
2. Up to 1943 the A.C.P. was the Australian section of the Third
(or Communist) International. Since then there is no evidence to
show control from abroad but generally the policy of the A.C.P. is
in harmony with that of the O.P. elsewhere.
T 3. The philosophy and guiding principles of the Party are
Marxism-Leninism, i.e., Marxism as developed by Lenin and Stalin,
who emphasize the revolutionary aspects of Marx’s teaching.
4. The G.P. in Australia dates from February, 1922. It was
admitted to the Third International in August, 1922. A Victorian
Branch of the O.P. came into existence in 1920, but the present
Victorian branch was formed in 1925.
5. The aims and objects of the O.P. in Victoria do not differ from
those of the O.P. in others parts of Australia. The aims and objects
are: —
If (a) To overthrow the Capitalist State;
j (b) To establish the dictatorship of the proletariat;
I ( c ) To smash the existing State machine;
II (d) To introduce Socialism by expropriating the present
ownership of the means of production and distribution and
the great landlords; and
I (e) Ultimately to introduce Communism.
6. The O.P. regards itself as the vanguard of the working class and
the spearhead of the movement to overthrow the existing system.
I j 7. If the present possessors do not abdicate power voluntarily they
; | will be violently overthrown.
8. The dictatorship of the proletariat may last for generations and
the time may be a whole historical epoch. When human nature has
been re-educated the proletarian State will wither away and full
Communism will be possible, where each will give according to his
ability and will receive according to his needs.
9. Atheism is an integral part of Marxism. The O.P. demands
that religion be regarded as a private matter where the State is
concerned but not as a private matter where the Party is concerned.
It says that it cannot be indifferent to ignorance or benightedness in
the shape of religious beliefs and that ‘ ‘ Religion is the opium of the
people.” .The holding of a religious belief is no bar to admission to
membership of the O.P, but those who hold such beliefs do not fully
accept Communist philosophy. No worker can consistently be both
a Communist and a Christian. It regards the existing code of ethics
as bourgeois and as a code for slaves, in place of which the proletariat
creates its own ethical conceptions.
P. 11 et BBQ.
Pp. 12, 33,
and 37.
P. 10 et aeg.
P. 12 et acef.
Pp. 14 et sag.
P. IB
Pp. 27,19,
and 61.
P. 26,
P.


Prepared to use any means to achieve what it thinks *
to be a desirable object, so long as it regards the means as fitting and
the result as not on the whole disadvantageous.
. 11 ■ The fundamental objects of the C.P. never change. Strategy*
is constant at a particular stage but may change at another stage.
Tactics are infinitely variable to meet the requirements of anv
particular situation as it arises.
12. The C.P. in Australia is organized on a national and a State *
basis. All State and other subordinate bodies are carefully
co-ordinated and integrated into the national body.
The supreme authority in the A.C.P. is the National Congress
which is held at least every three years.
13. The State organization is on lines parallel to the National 1
organization.
There are about 200 branches in the State, none of large
membership.
14. The basic organizations are the branch and the workplace, and 1
the constitution requires workplace branches to lie organized in every
factory, workshop, mine, dockyard, office, &c., where sufficient party
members are employed. Local branches are organized on the basis of
streets or municipal wards and in country towns. There are groups
in industrial concerns and in vocations and institutions.
15. There are many Communist “ fractions ” in trade unions. A 1
fraction is a Communist organ in a non-communist organization. It
works with all its energy to bring the majority of the people in the
particular organization under its influence. There are many
committees in the C.P. to look after special interests, e.g., industrial,
youth, women, propaganda, &c.
16. C.P. members are subject to a rigid discipline including the ]
practice of self-criticism.
17. All organs of the C.P. act on the principle of “ democratic i
centralism.” Lower organs are subject to higher organs, but subject
to this have autonomy in local matters. Officials are elected.
Discussion is free up to the point of decision but then the decision
of the majority must be carried out.
18. Up to the dissolution of the Comintern in 1943 the A.C.P. was j
as an affiliated member hound to carry out the decisions of the'
Comintern and there are instances of direction from abroad. There
is no evidence that since then it has been subject to direction from
abroad but its policy is in harmony with that of the Cominform.
19. The membership of the A.C.P. in Australia is about 12,000-13,000, :
In Victoria it is 3,000-4,000.
20. The A.C.P. is prepared to carry on its work under all conditions,:
both'when its operations are not hampered by the law and when they
are hampered by the law.
21 The funds of the Party come from various local sources and
there is no evidence of funds coming from overseas.
22 The immediate aim of the party is to obtain the leadership of
the working class, hut it is always alive to the training which is given
by co-operation of the working class in struggles for improvement of
conditions as a factor in the preparation for and taking advantage of
a revolutionary situation.
23. The A.C.P. strives—
(ci) to rouse the proletariat into class consciousnessj
(b) to teach them the need of obtaining power through revolution;
P. 24.
P. 27.
P. 28.
P ,2sct*eq.
P. 29.
P, 30.
i
I P, 31.
} P. 33.
i
Pp. 83. 36
it ieq.
i
i
_ P. 43.
, P. O'? cl «c<7-
7
J P. 39 «t ten.
f Pp. 15 et «o.
1
f
3
P. 44.


(c) to train them in the means of obtaining power;
(cl) to act as their general staff in directing the revolution.
24. The means and stages by which the C.P. aims to achieve its
objective are: —
(a) Leadership of and influence in Trade Unions.
(ft) The use of political and general strikes.
(c) The education of the masses to the use of their political
power through such strikes,
(d) The use of strikes, demonstrations and armed demonstrations
where the C.P. considers them necessary.
(e) The leadership of the masses in a revolutionary situation
when the Government can no longer govern and the masses
are ready to follow the Communist lead.
(/) Armed insurrection (if necessary) the seizure of power by
the proletariat and the smashing of the State as we know it.
(cj) The forcible suppression and expropriation of the owning
class who have resisted.
(h) Management of the State by the dictatorship of the proletariat,
using the trade unions as levers or instruments to carry
on production.
25. The C.P. trains its members intensively. There is a Party
Training Manual (though Communist leaders said it is not now in use).
There are many classes and a Marx School which is described as the
Workers’ University. Tutors are trained for their work and there
is a Tutors’ Hand Book. Research officers are employed and books
and pamphlets written. There is a party press and there are party
bookshops. Leading members are sent to schools in other States and
some few go overseas.
26. There are youth branches and women’s branches. There is the
Eureka Youth League and the Junior Eureka League, the latter for
children.
27. The C.P. also works through fraternal organizations and many
instances are given in the Report. A Fraternal is a subsidiary
organization controlled by the Party. The C.P. also seeks to create
a United Front with Labour Unions and a People’s Front with all who
will support its policy.
28. The C.P. seeks to overthrow representative and democratic
institutions as we know them, when a revolutionary situation arrives.
In the meantime it is willing to make use of these institutions in order
to further its own aims.
29. The C.P. regards existing law and order as that which is created
by, and is used to support, the existing system. It does not hold itself
bound to obey laws which it regards as oppressive, or restrictive of its
efforts to overthrow the existing system.
30. In a period when there was a ban to its operation it carried on,
so far as it could, its usual activities and it has made preparations to
meet any revival of those conditions.
31. There are a number of instances in the Report of the A.C.P. or
members of it using violence, intimidation and fraudulent practices to
achieve their aim, but of the allegations of the fraudulent u rigging
of ballots only n one is completely established, though there are
circumstances of suspicion in regard to most of the others.
P. 45 et aeq..
P. 50 et eeq.
Pp. 52. 99.
Pp. 53. 57.
P. 62 et scq.
P. 18.
P* 67 et aeq,
P. 68 et aeq .
P. 75 el aeq*
P. 81 etaeq*


32. TheC.P. has taken steps which have dislocated and disrupted **■««* »»-
the essential services and it claims to have been the driving force
behind the propaganda for the actions taken, and it further claims that
what was done was done to achieve the betterment of the conditions
of the workers concerned.
33. It has in fact dislocated, disrupted or retarded industrial
production, but claims that this effect was only a concomitant to the
struggle to obtain better conditions for the workers.
34. The G.P. has organs for the instruction in its doctrines of
children and young people. There is evidence of a communist fraction p - 98 rt M,] -
in the Teachers Union and in the Labour Club of the University, and
also evidence of there having been a branch of the party at the
University, but there is no evidence of any member of the party who
is or was an officer either of the Education Department or of any
School or of the University using his position for purposes of
indoctrination in Communism.
Conclusion op Report.
I have now completely traversed all the matters submitted to me for
inquiry and report. There only remains the various appendices I have referred
to. These are in course of preparation, and when complete will also be
submitted, to Your Excellency. I shall then return my Commissions.
I have the honour to be,
Yours obediently,
28th April, 1950.
CHARLES J. LOWE.




To His Excellency The Governor of Victoria, General Sir Dallas Brooks,
K.C.8., C.M.G., D.S.O.
May it Please Yoije Excellency:
I have the honour now to submit to you the appendices referred to in
my Report of the 28th April last.
In doing so I make one amendment to that Report. The first sentence
in para. 32 of the Summary of Bindings at p. 107 of the Report should be
amended to read:
“ The C.P. has taken steps which have dislocated and disrupted
the essential services and it claims to have been the driving force
behind the propaganda for the actions taken . . .
The words in italics are substituted for the words “in so doing.” This
alteration has been made not because the original statement was not completely
justified by the evidence, but because the summary merely purports to give
the effect of a prior finding in the body of the Report and that finding had
referred only to propaganda and not actions. The evidence referred to in the
margin hereof will be found to support a finding in the language I originally
used.
I have now completed the task committed to me and I herewith return
my Commissions.
I have the honour to be,
Yours obediently,
CHARLES J. LOWE.
12th May, 1950.




REPORT OF ROYAL COMMISSION.
Page
Appendices.
4ppendix “ A —Alphabetical List of Witnesses .. .. .. 113
appendix “ B —List of Witnesses classified according to subject matter as to
which they gave evidence .. .. .. .. 115
Appendix “ C —List of Exhibits .. .. 117
Appendix “ D ”, —List of persons who as Shown by the evidence are or have
been members of the Victorian Branch of the A.C.P. .. 136
Appendix “ E —Sources of evidence as to the funds of the Victorian Branch
of the A.C.P. . . . . . . . . . . . . 144
Appendix “ F ”.—White Australia Policy of the A.C.P. .. .. .. 144
Appendix “ G ”. —Marx School Syllabus for January-March Term 1949 —
Exhibit 10 . . . . . . . . . . 145
Appendix “ H ”. —Constitution of Red Trade Union International —Exhibit 24 .. 147
Appendix “ I ”. —Programmatic Declaration of the Communist Party—Exhibit 44 148
Appendix “ J ”. —Eureka Youth League Summer Educational Syllabus-
Exhibit 156 .. .. .. .. .. .. 150
Appendix “ K ”. —Resolution of the enlarged E.C.C.I. of 1926 on the organization
and the structure of the Communist Fractions in the Trade
Unions—Exhibit 308 .. .. .. .. .. 153




APPENDIX “A"
ALPHABETICAL LIST OF WITNESSES.
Transcript Pages.
Acheson, W. R. . . .. . . 9723 to 9734
Andrews, R. E. . . . . . . 4347 to 4362
Armstrong, H. . . . . . . 8488 to 8498
8500 to 8522
Baldwin, P. G. . . . . . . 7722 to 7807
Barrington, C. C. . . . . 8628 to 8630
Barter, F. .. . . . . 5631 to 5637
Bell, I. . . . . . . 5637 to 5639
Bennett, John E. . . . . 2298 to 2316
Bennett, S. J. . . . . . . 4173 to 4177
Bent, P. E. . . . . . . 4312 a to 4334
Bevan, J. W. . . . . .. 8274 to 8310
8384 to 8392
Blair, J. H. . . . . . . 3580 to 3581
3616
Brennan, J. M. . . . . . . 4159 to 4168
Brophy, J. J. . . . . .. 4283 to 4300
Brown, I. M. . . .. . . 5626 to 5627
Brown, J. J. . . . . . . 7026 to 7285
Buckle, E. . . . . . . 4112 to 4118
Burgess, D. P. .. .. .. 8799 to 8810
Cameron, J. E. . . . . . . 6962 to 6965 a
Campion, C. J. .. . . . . 3954 to 3967
3986 to 3992
Carleton, M. . . . . . . 4874 to 4887
Chandler, J. C. . . . . . . 6206 b to 6226
9427 to 9456
9463 to 9582
9585 to 9599
9652 to 9653
Charlesworth, F. W. . . . . 9645 to 9651
9657 to 9573
Connell, J. A. . . . . . . 7614 to 7615
Constantine, L. M. . . . . 8992 to 9009
Courtnay, F. . . . . . . 8453 to 8488
8522 to 8527
8534 to 8538
Crawford, M. M. . . . . 8111 to 8129
Cresswell, W. C. . . . . 8344 to 8359
Crow, M. S. . . . . . . 8790 to 8792
8810 to 8871
Cullen, A. C. . . . . . . 2458 to 2475
Currie, N. A. . . . . . . 9718 to 9723
Dace, S. W. . . . . . . 7613 to 7614
Dawes, E. . . . . . . 4150 to 4159
Dean, J. . . .. . . 8331 to 8341
Diamond, R. . . . . . . 4697 to 4705
4887 to 4894
9059 to 9134
9138 to 9198
9203 to 9215
Dinnell, W. . . . . . . 4907 to 4912
Dobbin, A. H. . . . . .. 7807 to 7834
Eden, K. D. G. . . . . . . 6058 to 6084
Ellis, C. E. .. . . . . 4765 to 4812
Ellis, M. H. .. . . 110 to 681
Farr all, F. T. . . . . . . 5980 to 5988
7167 to 7179
Fearn, N. F. . . . . . . 4363 to 4369
Fitzpatrick, B. C. . . . . 2325 to 2338
Flockart, C. P. . . . . . . 4515 to 4519
5731 to 5735
Friend, R. G. .. .. .. 3096 to 3106
Garvey, W. H. .. .. .. 6284 to 6292
Gibson, R. S. .. .. .. 6441 to 6930
4329/50.—8
Transcript Pages.
Goller, G. M. . . .. . . 1598 to 1601
Gooding, S. . . .. . . 2475 to 2479
Hansen, E. W. J. . . . . 1552 to 1591
Hatwell, A. J. . . . . . . 9784 to 9788
Heinze, B. W. . . . . . . 9599 to 9645
Hellier, L. J. L. .. . . . . 7614
Henderson, G. B. . . . . 3718 to 3903
Henry, J. E. A. . . . . . . 5936 to 5979
5989 to 6027
8164 to 8196
Hill, E. F. . . . . . . 7293 to 7561
7615 to 7630
Hollingworth, J. . . . . 3031 to 3035
Hordern, B. L. D. . . . . 5823
6258 to 6284
Hudson, Keith F. .. .. 4705 to 4765
Hudson, Kenrick, F. V. . . . . 4575 to 4630 c
Hughes, A. A. . . . . .. 1693 to 1741
2385 to 2387
Hunt, C. H. . . . . . . 4049 to 4051
4147 to 4148
Ind, A. A. . . . . . . 4060 to 4062
Johns, E. L. . . . . . . 7838 to 7888
Johnson, F. T. . . . . . . 8197 to 8242
Jones, B. . . . . . . 6226 to 6234
Junck, G. . . . . . . 4902 to 4906
Kennedy, P. . . . . .. 4812 to 4874
Kennett, R. D. W. . . . . 7986 to 8004
Kerby, N. . . . . .. 2879 to 2894
3035 to 3053
Kimpton, A. N. . . . . . . 4068 to 4074
Lannan, J. R. .. . . 4003 to 4030
Law, H. Z. . . . . . . 4342 to 4346
Lazarus, J. M. . . . . . . 7580 to 7597
9764 to 9776
L’Estrange, L. F. . . . . 3994 to 4002
Lewis, N. G. . . . . . . 3586 to 3593
Lloyd, W. T. . . . . . . 4374 to 4515
Logan, H. . . . . . . 5627 to 5630
Long, C. F. . . . . . 1602 to 1606
Loughnan, C. A. . . . . 2480 to 2485
Lynch, R. D. . . . . . . 8792 to 8799
McClintock, A. R. . . . . 8129 to 8145
8242 to 8247
MacDonald, I. C. . . . . 2269 to 2286
McEwan, J. S. . . . . . . 8938 to 8946
McGillick, T. C. . . . . . . 4980 to 5124
5197 to 5257
5357 to 5364
Mclnnes, M. J. . . . . . . 5640 to 5645
5667 to 5672
McLean, A. E. . . . . . . 5645 to 5664
5672 to 5730
MacLennan, D. A. . . . . 2899 to 2928
3015 to 3016
3689 to 3708
McMahon, M. J, . . .. 4300 to 4312 a
McVeigh, L. T. . . . . . . 4052 to 4057
Malone, J. P. . . . . . . 8877 to 8888
8891 to 8938
9744 to 9748
Martin, J. C. . . . . . . 4177 to 4181
Martin, R. S. W. .. .. 5735 to 5756
Maxwell, L. R. O. . . . . 9379 to 9406
May, D. .. .. .. 9776 to 9779


Transcript Pages.
Mercier, L. St. V. . . . . 5888 a to 5890
Merrifield, S. . . • ■ • • 2439 to 2457
6143 to 6169
Meyer, F, J. . . . . . . 8540 to 8560
8563 to 8626
8630 to 8790
9734 to 9743
Middleton, G. C. . . . . 9655 to 9657
Miller, A. T. . . .. . . 4251 to 4282
Molloy, J. P. . . . . • • 5895 to 5896
5916 to 5927
Morgan, J. . . . . ■ ■ 9153 to 9154
Morris, G. . . . . . . 6170 to 6206 b
Morrish, L. F. . . . . . . 4532 to 4574
Moss, C. . . . . . . 1628 to 1650
1659 a to 1675
Moy, Dorothy . . . . . . 9776 to 9779
Murphy, J. . . . ■ . . 4127 b to 4173
Musgrave, G. R. . . . . 4058 to 4060
Negline, D. B. . . . . . . 5757 to 5774 b
8062 to 8111
Nicholls, J. P. .. .. .. 7602 to 7612
9753 to 9764
O’Dwyer, J. P. . . . . . . 2929 to 2938
3708 to 3717
Peach, R. . . .. .. 4631 to 4696
Pierce, V. M. . . . . . . 4048 to 4049
Pitt, S. L. . . . . . . 5789 to 5797
5805 to 5807
8004 to 8062
Pulford, H. F. . . . . . . 8247 to 8249
Rawling, J. N. . . . . . . 2487 to 2553
2577 to 2615
2813 to 2876
3082 to 3096
3106 to 3564
Redfern, K. D. . . . . . . 4118 to 4128
Reed, H. J. S. . . . . . . 3624 to 3635
Rodgers, J. . . . . . . 2373 to 2382
2388 to 2438
2554 to 2576
3594 to 3614
3617 to 3623
3647 to 3686
Rogan, J. F. . . . . .. 3967 to 3986
4148 to 4149
Rogers, F. E. . . . . . . 1651 to 1659
Roulston, J. F. . . . . . . 8310 a to 8330
Russell, L. R. . . . . . . 3904 to 3949
3992 to 3994
4334 to 4342
Ryan, W. T. .. .. .. 5890 to 5894
5903 to 5916
Samson, J. . . .. . . 7911 to 7986
Satchell, J. S. . . . . . . 3614 to 3615
Saunders, J. . . . . . . 7639 to 7666
7674 to 7721
Savage, A. E. . . .. .. 3054 to 3081
Scully, T. F. . . . . . . 3016 to 3030
4912 to 4914
Seelaf, G. .. . . .. 9026 to 9057
Transcript Pages.
Sharpe, F. . . .. ■. 7889 to 7903
8254 to 8273
Sharpley, C. H. . . . . 682 to 1352
1675 to 1692
1758 to 2268
2288 to 2297
2317 to 2324
2339 to 2392
2618 to 2812
5808 to 5888
Smith, L. J. S. . . . . . . 1406 to 1417
1483 to 1521
Southwell, C. M. . . . . 9221 to 9257
9262 to 9307
Stafford, J. A. . . . . . . 1417 to 1422
1594 to 1597
Stirling, R. F. . . . . . . 3582 to 3586
3616 to 3617
Street, B. W. . . . . . . 4168 to 4172 b
Stubbs, T. L. . . . . . . 5617 to 5625
Taylor, R. G. . . . . . . 1742 to 1757
Tennant, A. McN. . . . . 9307' to 9327
9332 to 9353
9406 to 9407
Thomson, D. D. . . . . . . 6084 to 6089
Tierney, H. M. . . . . . . 4062 to 4068
Toakley, A. H. . . . . . . 6965 to 6967
Tredinnick, W. H. . . . . 7563 to 7572
Tregear, W. H. . . . . . . 6937 to 7025
Voumard, L. . . . . . . 7572 to 7580
7597 to 7601
7666 to 7674
Ward, J. . . . . . . 2940 to 3014
3567 to 3577
Waters, R. J. G. . . . . 1362 to 1399
1424 to 1475
1522 to 1551
1592 to 1594
Watson, A. W. . . .. . . 1610 to 1626
Webb, J. U. . . . . . . 4894 to 4902
4915 to 4922
Whitcombe, E. A. .. .. 8950 to 8992
9075 to 9076
9673 to 9715
White, H. S. . . . 1399 to 1406
1475 to 1483
White, J. . . . . . . 1607 to 1609
Whitfield, C. T. . . . . . . 9353 to 9378
Williams, S. J. . . . . . . 8359 to 8383
8392 to 8428
Willman, C. . . . . . . 8429 to 8452
8468 to 8469
Wilson, P. B. . . . . . . 5775 to 5789
6091 to 6142
Wood, G. M. . . . . . . 9014 to 9026
Woodhouse, D. F. . . . . 4031 to 4046
4074 to 4111
4128 to 4146
Mrs. X . . . . . . 5125 to 5196
5258 to 5336
5364 a to 5616
6027 to 6058
Appendix “ C ” — continued.
Alphabetical List of Witnesses — continued.


APPENDIX “B"
LIST OF WITNESSES CLASSIFIED ACCORDING TO SUBJECT MATTER AS TO WHICH THEY
GAVE EVIDENCE.
As to all headings in this appendix, see also—
Mr. Shell's opening (pp. 9-109).
Mr. Laurie’s opening (pp. 6295-6440 b).
(1) Origins and History of the A.C.P.
Ellis, M. H. McGillick, T. C.
Gibson, R. S. Rawling, J. N.
Hill, E. F. Samson, J.
Johnson, F. T. Sharpley, C. H.
(2) Aims and Objects of the A.C.P.
Brown, J. J. Moss, C.
Dobbin, A. H. Rawling, J. N.
Ellis, M. H. Samson, J.
Gibson, R. S. Saunders, J.
Hill, E. F. Sharpley, C. H.
Johnson, F. T. Tregear, W. H.
Kennett, R. D. Wilson, P. B.
Lloyd, W. T. Mrs. X.
McGillick, T. C.
(3) Funds of the A.C.P.
Bevan, J. W. Johnson, F. T.
Friend, R. G. McGillick, T. C.
Gibson, R. S. Samson, J.
Hill, E. F. Sharpley, C. H.
Hordern, B. L. Mrs. X.
(4) Organization of the A.C.P.
Bevan, J. W. Maxwell, L. R.
Chandler, J. C. Rawling, J. N.
Cullen, A. C. Samson, J.
Dobbin, A. H. Sharpe, F.
Ellis, M. H. Sharpley, C. H.
Gibson, R. S. Southwell, C. M.
Heinze, B. W. Tennant, A. McN.
Hill, E. F. Tregear, W. H.
Johnson, F. T. Ward, J.
McClintock, A. R. Whitfield, C. T.
McGillick, T. C. Wilson, P. B.
Martin, R. S. W. Mrs. X.
(5) Theory and Doctrines of the C.P. —See also (6)
below.
Bevan, J. W. Kennett, R. D.
Brown, J. J. McGillick, T. C.
Dobbin, A. H. Rawling, J. N.
Ellis, M. H. Samson, J.
Gibson, R. S. Saunders, J.
Hill, E. F. Sharpley, C. H.
Johnson, F. T.
(6) Teaching of Party Doctrine.
Acheson, W. R. McGillick, T. C.
Bevan, J. W. Moss, C.
Ellis, M. H. Rawling, J. N.
Gibson, R. S. Samson, J.
Hill, E. F. Sharpley, C. H.
Johnson, F. T. Mrs. X.
Kennett, R. D.
(7) Activities and Operations of the A.C.P. —See also
Nos. (6), (8), (9), (10), (11), and (12).
Acheson, W. R. Cameron, J. E.
Baldwin, P. G. Carleton, M.
Barter, F. Chandler, J, C.
Bell, I. Constantine, L. M.
Bent, P. E. Crow, M. S.
Brophy, J. J. Diamond, R.
Brown, J. J. Dinnell, W.
(7) Activities and Operations of the A.C.P. —See also
Nos. (6), (8), (9), (10), (11), and (12)—
continued.
Dobbin, A. H. Meyer, F. J.
Eden, K. D. Miller, A. T.
Ellis, M. H. Morrish, L. F.
Farrall, F. T. Moss, C.
Flockart, C. P. Negline, D. B.
Garvie, W. H. Peach, R.
Gibson, R. S. Pitt, S. L.
Hansen, E. W. J. Pulford, H. F.
Heinze, B. W. Rawling, J. N.
Henry, J. E. A. Rogers, F. E.
Hill, E. F. Russell, L. R.
Hudson, Keith. Samson, J.
Hudson, Kenrick. Saunders, J.
Johns, E. L. Seelaf, G.
Johnson, F. T. Sharpe, F.
Jones, B. Sharpley, C. H.
Junck, G. Southwell, C. M.
Kennedy, P. Stubbs, T. L.
Kennett, R. D. Taylor, R. G.
Kerby, N. Tennant, A. McN.
Lloyd, W. T. Toakley, A. H.
Logan, H. Tregear, W. H.
McClintock, A. R. Ward, J.
MacDonald, I. C. Webb, J. U.
Mclnnes, M. J. Whitcombe, E. A.
McGillick, T. C. Whitfield, C. T.
McLean, A. E. Willman, C.
Malone, J. P. Wilson, P. B.
Martin, R. S. W. Mrs. X.
(8) (a) Fraudulent Practices , Other than Ballot-
rigging.
Acheson, W. R. Lloyd, W. T.
Andrews, R. E. McClintock, A. R.
Bevan, J. W. McGillick, T. C.
Brown, J. J. Mclnnes, M. J.
Crawford, M. M. Meyer, F. J.
Diamond, R. Morgan, J.
Gibson, R. S. Rawling, J. N.
Henry, J. E. A. Samson, J.
Hill, E. F. Sharpley, C. H.
Hollingworth, J. Tennant, A. McN.
Johnson, F. T. Mrs. X.
(8) ( b) Ballot-rigging.
Acheson, W. R. McLennan, D. A.
Andrews, R. E. Malone, J. P.
Armstrong, H. Maxwell, L. R.
Bevan, J. W. Meyer, F. J.
Campion, C. J. Morris, G.
Chandler, J. C. Morrish, L. F.
Charlesworth, F. W. O’Dwyer, J. P.
Constantine, L. M. Peach, R.
Courtney, F. Rogan, J. F.
Creswell, W. Roulston, J. F.
Dean, J. Russell, L. R.
Diamond, R. Seelaf, G.
Ellis, C. E. Sharpe, F.
Heinze, B. W. Sharpley, C. H.
Henderson. G. B. Southwell. C. M.
Hill, E. F. Tennant, A. McN.
Hudson, Keith. Whitcombe, E. A.
Hudson, Kenrick. Whitfield, C. T.
Johnson, F. T. Williams. S. J.
Lannan, J. R. Willman, C.
Law, H. Z. Wood, G. M.
McClintock, A. R. Woodhouse, D. F.
McEwan, J. S.


List of Witnesses Classified According to Subject Matter as to which they gave Evidence — continued.
(9) Disruption of Production and Essential Services. (11) As to Secret Members, “Fellow Travellers” and
Brophy, J. J. Hill, E. F.
Brown, J. J. Junck, G.
Chandler, J. C. Lloyd, W. T.
Cullen, A. C. Miller, A. T.
Dinnell, W. Saunders, J.
Flockart, C. P. Sharpley, C. H.
Gibson, R. S. Ward, J.
Hansen, E. W. J.
(10) Force, Violence, and Intimidation.
Baldwin, P. G. Long, C. F.
Brophy, J. J. Loughnan, C. A.
Crawford, M. M. McGillick, T. C.
Crow, M. S. Miller, A. T.
Dinnell, W. Pitt, S. L.
Farrall, F. T. Sharpley, C. H.
Flockart, C. T. Smith, L. J. S.
Gibson, R. S. Stafford, J. A.
Gollen, G. M. Tregear, W. H.
Gooding, S. Ward, J.
Hansen, E. W. J. Waters, R. V. G.
Henderson, G. B. Watson, A. W.
Henry, J. E. A. White, H. S.
Hill, E. F. White, J.
Junck, G. Woodhouse, D. F.
Lloyd, W. T. Mrs. X.
Disputed Membership.
Bennett, John. McLean, A. E.
Chandler, J. C. Mercier, L. St. V.
Crow, M. S. Merrifield, S.
Cullen, A. C. Meyer, F. J.
Diamond, R. Molloy, J. P.
Dobbin, A. H. Moss, C.
Eden, K. D. Moy, D.
Farrall, F. T. Rawling, J. N.
Fitzpatrick, B. C. Rodgers, J.
Hill, E. F. Ryan, W. T.
Hughes, A. A. Sharpley, C. PL
Kerby, N. Tierney, H. M.
Lazarus, J. M. Ward, J.
Loughnan, C. A. Wilson, P. B.
McGillick, T. C. Mrs. X.
Mclnnes, M. J.
(12) Fraternals.
Baldwin, P. G. McGillick, T. C.
Dobbin, A. H. Moss, C.
Ellis, M. H. Rawling, J. N.
Fitzpatrick, B. C. Rodgers, J.
Garvie, W. H. Samson, J.
Gibson, R. S. Sharpley, C. H.
Hill, E. F. Taylor, R. G.
Hughes, A. A. Mrs. X.
McClintock, A. R.
Appendix “ B ” — continued.


APPENDIX “C"
LIST OF EXHIBITS.
Transcript
Page.
Exhibit I. —Dialectical and Historical Materialism, edited by L. L. Sharkey and S. Moston .. 11
Exhibit 2. —Membership Book of the Communist Party of Australia, published at the
Headquarters, The Communist Hall 395 Sussex-street, Sydney .. .. 18
Exhibit 3. —Constitution of the Australian Communist Party 1945 . . . . . . 18
Exhibit 4. —Constitution of the Australian Communist Party 1948 . . . . . . 21
Exhibit 5. —Outline History of the Australian Communist Party, by L. L. Sharkey .. 22
Exhibit 6. —Report of the Canadian Royal Commission, 1946 . . . . . . . . 25
Exhibit 7. —Constitution of the Communist Party of Australia, 1938 . . . . . . 25
Exhibit 8. —Constitution of the Communist Party of Australia, 1942 . . . . . . 27
Exhibit 9. —Constitution of the Communist Party of Australia adopted by 12 th National
Congress, 1938, and amended by the 13 th National Congress, 1943 . . 27
Exhibit 10. —Syllabus of Marx School, Melbourne, 1949 . . . . . . ■ ■ 34
Exhibit 11. — Communism —The Programme of the Communist International, published by the
Communist Party of Australia, 1929 . . . . . . . . 34
Exhibit 12. —Marxist Glossary, Second Edition, 1947, by L. Gould . . . . . . 35
Exhibit 13. —Left Wing Communism, by Lenin . . . . .. . . • • 36
Exhibit 14. —The Trade Unions, by L. L. Sharkey . . . . . . . ■ • • 38
Exhibit 15. —Handbook for Tutors, published by Marx House, Sydney . . . . . . 38
Exhibit 16. —Communist Programme of the World Revolution, by N. Bucharin, 1920 . . 40
Exhibit 17. —Foundations of Leninism, by Stalin .. .. .. • • • • 41
Exhibit 18. —The State and Revolution, by Lenin .. .. .. .. • • 48
Exhibit 19. —War and the Second International, by Lenin .. .. .. . . 88
Exhibit 20. —Communist Review for November, 1948 . . . . . . . . • • 90
Exhibit 21. —Communist Review for January, 1949 . . . . . . . . • • 91
Exhibit 22. —The Australian Communist of 24th December, 1920 . . . . . . . . 112
Exhibit 23. —The Australian Communist of 18th March, 1921 . . . . . . . . 120
Exhibit 24. —The Communist of 20th May, 1921 . . . . . . . . • • 125
Exhibit 25. —The Communist of 21st October, 1921 . . . . . . . . . ■ 127
Exhibit 26. —The Communist of 27th January, 1922 . . . . . . . ■ - • 131
Exhibit 27. —The Communist of sth January, 1923 . . . . .. . . . . 132
Exhibit 28. —The Communist of Bth September, 1922 . . . . .. . . . . 132
Exhibit 29. —Abridged Report of the Fourth Congress of the Communist International, 1922 133
Exhibit 29a.—Extracts from Ex. 29 . . .. . . . . . . . • 133
Exhibit 30. —The Communist of Ist September, 1922 . . . . .. . . . . 136
Exhibit 30a. —Photostat of Ex. 30 . . . . . . . . .. . ■ • • 507
Exhibit 31. —The Communist of sth January, 1923. (Part of it put in as Exhibit 27) . . 138
Exhibit 32. —The Communist of 12th January, 1923 .. .. .. .. . . 143
Exhibit 33. —The Communist of 23rd February, 1923 . . . . . . . . 147
Exhibit 34. —Report of the Communist International between the sth and 6th World
Congress, 1924 and 1928 .. .. . . .. .. • • 154
Exhibit 34a. —Roneod Extract of Exhibit 34 (pages 10-11, 484-7) . . . . . . 154
Exhibit 35.—Roneod Extracts —(pages 18-21 of Exhibit 5) .. . . . . • ■ 162
Exhibit 36. —Workers Weekly, 20th July, 1928, p. 1. .. . . .. .. . . 163
Exhibit 37. —Workers Weekly, 6th December, 1929, p. 3 .. .. . . . . 166
Exhibit 38. —Party Training Manual, Communist Party of Australia, 1928 . . . . 174
Exhibit 39. —Workers Weekly, 10th January, 1930 .. .. .. . . . . 192
Exhibit 40. —Workers Weekly, 7th February, 1930 .. .. .. .. .. 197
Exhibit 41. —Workers Weekly, 14th March, 1930 .. .. .. . . . . 205
Exhibit 41a. —Workers Weekly, 16th May, 1930 .. .. .. . . . . 205
Exhibit 42. —Roneod extracts, pages 25-28 of Exhibit 5 . . . . . . . . 209
Exhibit 43. — Australia’s Part in the World Revolution, 1930 . . .. . . . ■ 210
Exhibit 44. —Workers Weekly, 4th September, 1931, containing Programmatic Declaration of
the Communist Party —Aims of Communist Movement of Australia . . 212
Exhibit 45. —Workers Weekly, 13th April, 1934 .. .. . . ■ . . . 216
Exhibit 46. —Workers Weekly, 18th January, 1935 .. . . . . . . . ■ 218
Exhibit 47. —The Australian Communist, 4th February, 1921 . . .. . . . . 238
Exhibit 48. —The Communist, 18th August, 1922 . . . . . . . . . . 240
Exhibit 49. —The Communist, 7th November, 1922 . . .. . . . . . . 242
Exhibit 50. —Reds in Congress, First congress of R.1.L.U., 1921, by J. Howie . . . . 244
Exhibit 51. —Labor Monthly, Ist August, 1928 . . . . . . • • • • • • 246
Exhibit 52. —The Pan Pacific Worker, Ist March, 1930 .. .. • • • • ■ • 250
Exhibit 53. —The Tasks of the Red Trade Unions and The Minority Movement —Resolutions of
the sth Congress R.I.L.U. . . . . . . ■ • • • • • 257
Exhibit 54. —Workers Weekly, 17th or 24th October, 1930 . . . . .. . . 257
Exhibit 55. —Workers Weekly, 19th December, 1980 . . . . . . . . . . 259
Exhibit 56. —The Red Leader, 21st August, 1931 .. .. . . . . . . 259
Exhibit 57. —The Red Leader, 4th September, 1931 . . . . . . . . . . 260
Exhibit 58. —The Red Leader, 9th October, 1931 . . . . . . . . . . 261
Exhibit 59. —The Red Leader, 13th November, 1931 . . . . .. . . . . 262
Exhibit 60. —The Red Leader, 12th February, 1932 .. .. .. .. .. 263
Exhibit 61. —The Red Leader, 19th February, 1932 .. .. .. .. .. 267


Transcript
Page.
Exhibit 62. —The Red Leader, 26th February, 1932 .. .. .. . . . . 268
Exhibit 63. —The Red Leader, 4th January, 1933 . . . . , . . . . . 269
Exhibit 64. —The Red Leader, 11th January, 1933 . . . . . . . . . . 271
Exhibit 65. —The Red Leader, 18th January, 1933 .. .. . . . . .. 272
Exhibit 66. —The Red Leader, 25th January, 1933 . . .. . . . . . . 272 c
Exhibit 67. —The Red Leader, Ist February, 1933 . . .. . . . . . . 272 c
Exhibit 68. —The Red Leader, Ist March, 1933 . . . , .. . . . . . . 273
Exhibit 69. —The Red Leader, sth April, 1933 , . .. .. . . .. . . 274
Exhibit 70. —The Red Leader, 4th October, 1933 . . . . . . . . . . 275
Exhibit 71. —The Red Leader, 11th October, 1933 .. .. . . .. . . 277 a
Exhibit 72. —The Red Leader, 26th September, 1934 . . . . . . . , . . 278
Exhibit 73. —The Red Leader, 17th October, 1934 . . .. . . . , . . 278
Exhibit 74. —The Red Leader, 21st November, 1934 . . . . . . . . . . 280 a
Exhibit 75. —Supplement to Workers Weekly, 10th January, 1936 . . . . . . 282
Exhibit 76. —The Workers Weekly, 24th January, 1930 . . . . . . . . . . 289
Exhibit 77. —The Red Leader, 6th November, 1931 . . . . . . . . . . 295
Exhibit 78. —Pamphlet How to Organize, Series No. 3. Defence of the Party and the Fight
against Provocation .. .. .. .. .. ~ 301
Exhibit 79. —Abridged report of the 7th Congress of the Communist International . . 316
Exhibit 80. —United Front against Fascism, speeches by Dimitrov . . . . . . 316
Exhibit 81. —Supplement to Workers Weekly, 15th November, 1935 . . . . . . 337
Exhibit 82. —The Way Forward, decisions of the 12th Australian Congress .. . . 340
Exhibit 83. —Workers Weekly, 14th March, 1939 . . . . . . . . . . 361
Exhibit 84. —Workers Weekly, 25th April, 1939 .. .. . , .. . . 367
Exhibit 85. —Workers Weekly, 21st July, 1939 . . . . . . .. . . . . 367
Exhibit 86. —Workers Weekly, 25th July, 1939 . . .. .. .. . . . . 367
Exhibit 87. —Workers Weekly, 25th August, 1939 .. .. . . .. . . 369
Exhibit 88. —Workers Weekly, 29th August, 1939 . . . . . . . . . . 369
Exhibit 89. — Tribune, Ist September, 1939 . . .. .. . . .. . . 371
Exhibit 90. — Tribune, sth September, 1939 . . .. .. .. .. . . 372
Exhibit 91. — Tribune, Bth September, 1939 , . .. .. .. .. .. 374
Exhibit 92. — Tribune, 19th September, 1939 . . .. .. .. .. . . 375
Exhibit 93. — Tribune, 26th September, 1939 . . .. .. .. .. . . 375
Exhibit 94. — Tribune, 3rd October, 1939 . . .. .. . . .. . . 377
Exhibit 95. — Tribune, 10th October, 1939 . . .. .. . . .. . . 379
Exhibit 96. — Tribune, 13th October, 1939 . . .. .. . . .. .. 380
Exhibit 97. —The War and The Working Class, by Dimitrov . . . . .. . . 381
Exhibit 98. — Tribune, 24th October, 1939 .. .. .. . . .. . . 384
Exhibit 99. — Tribune, 27th October, 1939 . . .. . . . . . . . . 386
Exhibit 100. — Tribune, 3rd November, 1939 . . .. . . . . . . . . 393
Exhibit 101. — Tribune, 7th November, 1939 . . .. .. .. .. . . 394
Exhibit 102.— Tribune, 10th November, 1939 . . .. .. . . . . . . 398
Exhibit 103.— Tribune, 17th November, 1939 . . .. .. .. .. . . 399
Exhibit 104. — Tribune, Bth December, 1939 . . ~ .. .. .. .. 401
Exhibit 105. —Communist Review of December, 1939 .. . . . . . . . . 404
Exhibit 106. — Tribune, sth April, 1940 .. .. .. .. .. .. 410 a
Exhibit 107. — Tribune, 23rd April, 1940 . . .. .. .. .. .. 410 a
Exhibit 108. — Tribune, 24th May, 1941 . . .. . . . . . . . . 411
Exhibit 109. —Party Builder, June, 1942, and November, 1942 .. .. .. . . 414
Exhibit 110. —Communist Review, June, 1945 . . .. . . .. . . . . 422
Exhibit 111. —A Free World Without Violence, by Dixon and Sharkey . . . . . . 425
Exhibit 112. —Report of the Central Committee from the 14 th to 15 th National Congress—
-1945 to 1948 , . . . . . .. . . .. . . 438
Exhibit 113. —For Australia —Prosperous and Independent —A Report by L. Sharkey to the
15th Congress, 1948 . . . . . . .. . . . . 461
Exhibit 114. —The Way Forward —Resolutions of the 15th Congress of the A.C.P., 1948 . . 472
Exhibit 115. —Communist Review, No. 83, July, 1948 . . .. .. . . . . 486
Exhibit 116. —Communist Review, No. 86, October, 1948 .. .. .. .. . . 487
Exhibit 117. —Communist Review, No. 90, February, 1949 .. . . . . .. 500
Exhibit 118. —Communist Review, No. 92, April, 1949 .. .. .. .. . . 503 a
Exhibit 119. —Photostat copy of Tribune, 22nd June, 1941 . . .. . . . . 508
Exhibit 120. —Photostat copy of Tribune, 30th June, 1941 . . . . . . . . 508
Exhibit 121. —The Theory and Practice of Leninism, by Stalin .. . . . . . . 514
Exhibit 122. —The State, by Lenin . . . . .. .. .. .. . . 515
Exhibit 123. —Stalin on Organization . . . . . . . . . . . . . , 516
Exhibit 124. —Communist Manifesto, 1848 . . .. .... . . .. 549
Exhibit 125. — Lenin’s Selected Works — Two-Volume Edition . . .. . . . . 574
Exhibit 126. —Communist Review, January-December, 1938 .. . . . . . . 607
Exhibit 127. —Communist Review, January-December, 1939 . . .. . . . . 611
Exhibit 128. —Pamphlet Immigration and the White Australia Policy, by R. Dixon . . 632
Exhibit 129. —Communists in Congress —Report of 14th Congress of A.C.P., 1945 . . 675
Exhibit 130. —War and the Working Class, by Dimitrov . . .. . . . . 678
Appendix “ C ” — continued.
List of Exhibits — continued.


Transcript
Page.
Exhibit 131. — Tribune, 17th October, 1939 . . . . . . . . .. .. 683
Exhibit 132. —Application form for membership of A.C.P. . . .. . . . . 699
Exhibit 133.—File from Registrar-General’s office re Starlight Press . . . . .. 708
Exhibit 134.—“ The Guardian,” file of various issues in 1939 . . . . . . . . 714 and 753
Exhibit 135.—Copy of Guardian, 12th July, 1941 . . .. . . .. .. 724
Exhibit 136. —Pamphlet No War on Soviet Russia, by R. Dixon, 1940 . . . . . . 725
Exhibit 137. — Victory, 22nd June, 1942 (Political Rights Committee) . . . . . . 737
Exhibit 138. —Document entitled The Guardian, Ist September, 1942 (Political Rights
Committee) . . .. .. . . .. .. .. 738
Exhibit 139. —Three Guardians —
(i) Vol. 10, No. 9, 23rd October, 1942
(ii) Vol. 10, No. 10, 6th November, 1942
(iii) Vol. 10, No. 12, 11th December, 1942 . . . . . . 739
Exhibit 140. —Pamphlet, Lift the Ban on the Communist Party, by J. D. Blake . . . . 739
Exhibit 141. —The Guardian, 28th February, 1940 . . . . . . , . . . 740
Exhibit 142. —Munition Worker, January, 1943 . . . . . . . . . . 744
Exhibit 143. —Communist News, 12th January, 1943 . . . . . . . . . . 747
Exhibit 144. —Pamphlet A Great Day for the Australian Labour Movement . . . . 74 0
Exhibit 145. — Ironworker, September, 1942 . . . , . . . . . . . . 74
Exhibit 146. —Fitzpatrick —A Short History of the Australian Labour Movement . . . . 773
Exhibit 147. —Socialism and War, Lenin . . . . . . . . . . . . 774
Exhibit 148. —Extracts from Communist literature as taught by or to the witness Sharpley 774
Exhibit 148 a detached from Exhibit 148 . . .. . . . . . . 783
Exhibit 149. —Principles of Communism, Frederick Engels . . . . . . . . 779
Exhibit 150. —History of the Communist Party of the Soviet Union—Bolsheviks . . 779
Exhibit 151. —Qualities of a Communist Party, Joseph Stalin . . . . . . . . 779
Exhibit 152. —Pamphlet Strengthen the Party . . . . .. .. . . . . 780
Exhibit 153. — Anti-Duhring, Engels . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 794
Exhibit 154. —Duplicate Transfer Form, A.C.P. . . . . . . . . . . 850
Exhibit 155. —Circular to Discharged Servicemen, dated 11th January, 1946, with Enrolment
Form attached . . .. . . .. .. . . .. 864
Exhibit 156. —Eureka Youth League Summer Educational Syllabus . . . . . . 867
Exhibit 157. —Circular To All Branches, re Returned Soldiers’ Organizations . . . . 879
Exhibit 158. —United Front, booklet published by the University Labour Club . . . . 894
Exhibit 159. —Registrar-General’s file re Federal Press Pty. Ltd. . . . . . . 896
Exhibit 160. —Registrar-General’s file re Modern Slippers Pty. Ltd. . . . . . . 903
Exhibit 161. —Communist Review, June, 1948, No. 82 . . . . . . . . 928
Exhibit 162. —For a Lasting Peace, For a People’s Democracy, Ist July, 1948 .. .. 930
Exhibit 163. —For a Lasting Peace, For a People’s Democracy, 15th July, 1948 . . . . 933
Exhibit 164. —Communist Review, August, 1948 . . . . . . . . . . 935
Exhibit 165. —The Guardian, 29th November, 1946 . . . . . . . . . . 945
Exhibit 166.—Leaflet Gas—Housewives Suffer Again, New Housewives Association . . 946
Exhibit 167. —Leaflet Open Letter to Mr. Hallway, Realist Film Association . . . . 948
Exhibit 168. —Communist Review, June, 1949 . . . . . . . . .. . . 949 a
Exhibit 169. —Pamphlet Workers Beioare of Traitors . . .. . . .. . . 956
Exhibit 170. —Pamphlet Metal Strike —Close Ranks —Defeat the Traitors . . . . . . 956
Exhibit 171. —Youth Voice —Free Supplement . . . . . . . . . . . . 970
Exhibit 172. —Apprentice News, March, 1946 . . . . . . . . . . . . 971 c
Exhibit 173. —Summary of voting cards at 8.W.1.U. election . . . . . . . . 1041
Exhibit 174. —Resolution in pamphlet dated 11th March, 1949 . . . . . . . . 1098
Exhibit 175. —Leaflet issued by the Federated Ironworkers Association .. . . . . 1111
Exhibit 176. —Leaflets issued in campaign against Miller . . . . . . . . 1117
Exhibit 177.—Issues of Trade Union News of 22nd and 27th November, 1948 . . . . 1118
Exhibit 178. -Two leaflets . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 1118
Exhibit 179. —Circular on film screening restrictions, dated 6th July, 1948 . . . . 1129
Exhibit 180. —Pamphlet re International Women’s Day Rally . . . . . . . . 1131
Exhibit 181. —Herald pamphlet, I was a Communist Leader, by witness Sharpley . . . . 1142
Exhibit 182. —Article published in The Herald, 19th May, 1949 . . . . . . . . 1149 a
Exhibit 183. —Questionnaire completed by Sharpley . . . . . . . . . . 1174
Exhibit 184. —Two applications fo membership of the A.C.P. . . . . . . . . 1195
Exhibit 185.—Telegram dated 16th November, 1948, from Elliott to Bird . . . . 1218
Exhibit 186. —Article in The Herald of 17th May, 1949, headed Bitter fight for A.E.U.
control .. . . .. . , . . . . . . . . 1227
Exhibit 187. —Minute Book of the Building Trades Federation, sth December, 1914, to 16th
December, 1921 . . .. .. .. .. .. . . 1333
Exhibit 188. —Arbitration Court Print No. 6584 . . . . .. . . . . 1353
Exhibit 189. —Arbitration Court Award, 6th January, 1949 . . . . . . . . 1360
Exhibit 190. —Copy of Guardian, 17th June, 1949 .. . . .. ~ .. 1385
Exhibit 191. —Two circulars dated 21st June, 1949, and 30th June, 1949 .. . . . . 1389
Exhibit 192. —Building Workers’ Organizer of June, 1949 . . . . . . . . 1394
Exhibit 193. —The Building Worker of July, 1949 . . . . .. .. .. 1397
Appendix “ C ” — continued.
List of Exhibits — continued.


Transcript
Page.
Exhibit 194. —Communist Plan for Victory . . . . . , .. 1424
Exhibit 195. —Communist Plan for Victory and Peace .. . . ~ .. . . 1425
Exhibit 196. A.C.P. Resolutions for the Victorian State Conference, April, 1946 . . 1425
Exhibit 197. —The Communist Way Forward, by J. D. Blake . . . . 1425
Exhibit 198. —Three Minute Books of B.T.F. . . . . . . , . '. ’ 1426
Exhibit 199.—8.T.F. cheque butts, showing withdrawals in the period 21st January, 1932 to
20th May, 1938 . , . . . . , . . . , . , . 1426
Exhibit 200. Draft resolution to be submitted to the Victorian State Conference of the
A.C.P., April, 1945 . . . . .. . . . . 446 Q
Exhibit 201.—Rules of the 8.W.1.U. (State) 1948 . . , . . . ‘ ‘ i 530
Exhibit 202.—Summary wages sheet No. 4296, Clements Langford Pty. Ltd. ' ’ 1559
Exhibit 203.—Letter Ist July, 1949, from J. C. Chandler . . . . . . . ’ 1591
Exhibit 204.—Letter from 8.W.1.U., Ist July, 1949 . . . . . . 15gg
Exhibit 205. Letter from B.T.F. Picnic and Social Committee to Clements Langford Pty.
Ltd., 25th January. 1949 . . . . , . . . . . X 568
Exhibit 206. —Government Gazette of 24th March, 1949, and 12th May, 1948 . . ’ ] 1591
Exhibit 207.—Letter from United Shipping Service to 8.W.1.U., 21st February, 1949 ! ’ 1607
Exhibit 208.—Two manifestos of A. A. Hughes, 1943 and 1945 . . . . . . . , 1693
Exhibit 209.—Statement by witness A. A. Hughes . . . . . . . . 1594
Exhibit 210. Pamphlet Social Justice and Economic Reconstruction . . . . . 1720
Exhibit 211.—Victorian Parliamentary Debates Session 1943, Vol. 215, p. 655 ' ! ’ . 1725
Exhibit 212. Letter 9th January, 1942, from witness Taylor to the Public Trustee . . 1748
Exhibit 213.—Receipt from Public Trustee to R. Taylor, dated 7th September, 1943 ’ ’ 1751
Exhibit 214.—Letter by R. Taylor to Public Trustee, dated 17th February, 1942 1751
Exhibit 215. —The Guardian, 18th April, 1947 . . .. . . . . . . ’ ’ 1795
Exhibit 216. —The Guardian, 16th April, 1948 . . . , . . . . 1798
Exhibit 217. —The Communist Review, March, 1947 .. . . . , . ’ ’ ' 1793
Exhibit 218. — The Communist Review, July, 1944 . , . . ~ 1799
Exhibit 219.—Article from The Herald, 4th June, 1949 .. . . . 1804
Exhibit 220. —Article in The Herald, 21st April, 1949 . . . . . . ' 1814
Exhibit 221. Study Course No. 1 Elementary Communist Theory, a Marx House publication 1855
Exhibit 222.— War—What for? by J. D. Blake . . . . . . . . . . 1 875
Exhibit 223. The Collapse of the Second International, Selected Works of Lenin, Volume 5 1887
Exhibit 224. —Three pamphlets on the basic wage and prices . . . . 1890
Exhibit 225. —Communist Review, October, 1945 .. . . .' ’ \ 48g8
Exhibit 226.—Witness Sharpley’s self criticism .. . . . . ~ iggg
Exhibit 227. Circular, Federated Clerks Union of Australia (Victorian Branch) to members 2004
Exhibit 228.—Attendance Book of Actor’s Equity . . . . , . , . 2027 a
Exhibit 229. —List of names supplied by witness . . . . . . ’ ’ | 2027 a
Exhibit 230. Constitution and Rules of the Actor’s and Announcers’ Equity Association of
Australia . . . , _ _ _ _ _ 2028
Exhibit 231. Notice of Motion for new provision in the Constitution of Actors’ Equity . . 2043
Exhibit 232. Particulars regarding four members of Actors’ Equity . .. 2046
Exhibit 233.—Slip of paper with names written by witness . . , . ’ ’ 20 gg
Exhibit 234. Rules of the Plumbers’ and Gas Fitters’ Employees Union 2101
Exhibit 235.—1.0. U. for £4 . . , . . . . . . . . . ‘ ’ ‘ ‘ 2141
Exhibit 236.—Transcript of proceedings before the Federal Council of the F.E.D.F.A. ’ ! 2161
Exhibit 237. Cheque dated 17th December, 1946, £l3, Pearson to Sharpley . . 2169
Exhibit 238.—Butchers’ Union receipt for contribution 17s. Bth July, 1949 . . ’ . 2190
Exhibit 239.—A form of ballot slip, Butchers’ Union, 1947 ~ ’ . . . , ’ 24 90
Exhibit 240. —Form of ballot slip with perforations, Butchers’ Union, 1946 ' \ ' ’ 2191
Exhibit 241. Small slips of paper approximately the size of each one of the ballot slips of
the Butchers’ Union . . . . , . 2192
Exhibit 242.—8a110t slip for Butchers’ Union, 1948 .. !! ’’ " 21 qq
Exhibit 243.—Rules of the A.E.U. 1942 .. .. \\ ’ ' ” ' ' 2 236
Exhibit 244. Medical certificate from Dr. lan Macdonald to Don Thomson . . 2263
Exhibit 245.—Dr. Macdonald’s clinical card re D. Thomson . . . . ' ' . 2270
Exhibit 246. Receipt book of witness Macdonald, August to October, 1948 . 2272
Exhibit 247. —Statement by Professor Crawford on Australia-Soviet House activities ' ! 2377
Exhibit 248. Memorandum and Articles of Association of Australia-Soviet House . . 2380
Exhibit 249. Application of amendment of Articles of Association of Australia-Soviet House 2380
Exhibit 250. —Cablegram from Voks, Russia, to J. Rodgers . . . . , . 2382
Exhibit 251. Letter dated 24th March, 1943, with attachments, from J. H Skerry 2396
Exhibit 252.—Australia-Soviet House Circular dated 17th August, 1948 . . . " 2403
Exhibit 253.—Circular bearing signature of Mrs. Dorothy Gibson, A.S.F.L., 22nd September
. . .. .. 2409
Exhibit 254. Letter, copy of letter and copy of cablegram produced by witness Rodgers . . 2418
Exhibit X (see Ex. 443). List of contributors written down by witness Rodgers . . . . 2428 and
Exhibit 255.—Minutes of meeting of Executive State Schools’ Committees Association of 3612
Victoria, 18th October, 1948 . . . . . . 2456
Appendix “ C ” — continued.
List of continued.


Transcript
Page.
Exhibit 256.—Election Manifesto—Tramway Union elections, 24th November, 1948 .. 2468
Exhibit 257. —Instructions from Central Secretariat dated 30th May, 1934 . . .. 2502
Exhibit 258. —World Peace, February, 1940, together with other documents . . . . 2511
Exhibit 259. —Workers Weekly, 15th August, 1930 . . . . . . . . . . 2514
Exhibit 260.—Excerpts from Inprecor (International Press Correspondence) , Vol. 12, No. 43
29th September, 1932 . . . . . . . . . . . . 2519 a
Exhibit 261.—Excerpts from Inprecor, Vol. 12, No. 58, 29th December, 1932 . . . . 2523
Exhibit 262.—Report of proceedings, Bth April, 1933, New South Wales Conference against
War . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 2535
Exhibit 263. —Manifesto of the Amsterdam conference . . . . . . . . . . 2535
Exhibit 264. —Manifesto of the N.S.W. Conference against War, Sydney, Bth April, 1933 . . 2535
Exhibit 265. —Draft Manifesto Victorian Committee against War with attached criticisms . . 2542
Exhibit 266.—Instructions from Central Committee to D.C.’s in relation to war and illegality 2545
Exhibit 267. —Leaflet, Bth April, 1933, of the League against Imperialism . . . . . . 2551
Exhibit 268.—C.P. Directive to Fraction, 2nd December, 1933 . . . . . . . . 2578
Exhibit 269. —W0r1d Survey, January, 1934 . . .. .. . . .. . . 2482
Exhibit 270.—Leaflet headed Our Enemy is Here .. .. .. . . . . 2584
Exhibit 271.— War, Vol. 1, No. 2, December, 1933 .. .. . . . . . . 2587
Exhibit 272. —Circular letter signed by J. James, Secretary, All Australian Congress Against
War . . . . . . . . .. . . . . . . 2587
Exhibit 273. —Photograph taken at All-Australian Congress Against War, Port Melbourne
Town Hall, November, 1934 . . .. .. . . . . . . 2590
Exhibit 274.—Folders of Annual Reports and Accounts, Australia-Soviet House, from 1943 to
1949 .. .... .... .. .. .. .. .. 2590
Exhibit 275. —Workers Voice, Bth June, 27th July and 10th August, 1934 . . . . 2592
Exhibit 276. —Cablegram to Smith, 193 Hay-street, Sydney, from World Committee, Remain
Roland and Langevin, Bth May, 1936 . . .. . . . . . . 2594
Exhibit 277. —Agenda of World Peace Congress, Sydney, April 22nd, 1936 .. . . 2596
Exhibit 278. —Report by R. Gibson on the Brussels Congress .. . . . . . . 2603
Exhibit 279.—Letter 19th January, 1937, World Committee Against War and Fascism, to
witness Rawling . . .. .. .. .. . . . . 2611
Exhibit 280.—Report by R. Gibson, headed Formation of the New Peace Council .. .. 2611
Exhibit 281. —The Guardian, 27th May, 1949 and 12th July, 1949 . . . . . . 2652
Exhibit 282. —Booklet Stronger Trade Unions, E. Thornton .. .. . . . . 2703
Exhibit 283.—Copy affidavit dated 19th June, 1936, by E. Thornton . . . . . . 2703
Exhibit 284.—Letter 18th November, 1948, W. Bird (Secretary Seamen’s Union), to Acting
Premier, Mr. McDonald . . .. .. . . .. . . 2709
Exhibit 285. —Cuttings from The Workers Weekly —self criticisms of Baracchi, Paterson and
Thornton . . . . .. .. .. . . . . .. 2712
Exhibit 286. —Registrar-General’s file re International Bookshop Pty. Ltd. .. .. 2717
Exhibit 287. —For a Lasting Peace, For a People’s Democracy, Ist March, 1948, Ist August,
1948, 15th December, 1948 and Ist January, 1949 . . . . . . 2722
Exhibit 288. —Two lists of names .. . . .. .. .. .. . . 2731
Exhibit 289.—Photostat of speech of Audrey Blake on youth work at 15th National Congress,
1948 .. .. .. .. .. .. .. .. 2738
Exhibit 290.—Photostat of Resolutions of 6th National Congress of Eureka Youth League,
1948 . . . . . . .. . . . . .. .. 2738
Exhibit 291. —Analysis of Exhibit 199 .. .. .. . .. . . 2754
Exhibit 292.—Lenin on Religion . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 2763
Exhibit 293.—Tw0 affidavits dated 12th April, 1946, of J. M. McKay and L. J. McPhillips . . 2787
Exhibit 294.—A list of names .. .. . . . . . . . . . . 2807
Exhibit 295. —A list of three names . . . . .. .. .. . . . . 2810
Exhibit 296. —Report to World Committee Against War and Fascism .. .. .. 2815
Exhibit 297.—Invitation, 7th July, 1937, from Victorian Council, International Peace
Campaign, to National Peace Congress .. .. .. .. 2821
Exhibit 298.—Document headed Relations with International Peace Campaign . . . . 2821
Exhibit 299. —Report of Fourth All-Australian Congress Against War and Fascism, 1938 . . 2824
Exhibit 300. —Report of the N.S.W. District Committee, May, 1938 . . . . . . 2829
Exhibit 301. —N.S.W. District Committee C.P. to Labour Groups, 2nd September, 1937 . . 2835
Exhibit 302. —Leaflet, Open letter to the A.I.F. .. .. . . . . 2839
Exhibit 303. —Pamphlet, Hitler’s Threat to Peace .. .. .. . . 2842
Exhibit 304.—Cutting from Workers Weekly, 4th August, 1933 . . . . . . . . 2843
Exhibit 305. —File of documents, including cutting from Workers Weekly, 16th August, 1929 2848
Exhibit 306. —The Australian Student, 27th March, 1936 .. .. .. . . 2850
Exhibit 307. —Minority Movement circular . . .. .. . . . . . . 2852
Exhibit 308. —Extract from Inprecor, No. 31, 1932 . . .. .. . . 2855
Exhibit 309.—Circular, Instructions to members of the Party, by T. Payne re the unemployed 2855
Exhibit 310. —Draft Resolution of 11th Congress, C.P.A. . . . . . . . . 2855
Exhibit 311. —Set of Draft Resolutions forwarded to witness MacLennan by Federal secretary 2905
Exhibit 312. —Minutes of Special Federal Conference, 23rd May, 1948 .. .. . . 2905
Exhibit 313. —List of Financial Victorian Members Blacksmiths Union, Ist June, 1948 .. 2912
Appendix “ C ” — continued.
List of Exhibits — continued.


Transcript
Page.
Exhibit 314. —Report of Returning Officer on Blacksmiths Society Victorian election, dated
10th July, 1948 . . . . . . . . . . . . • • 2917
Exhibit 315. —Bundles of envelopes . . . . . . . . ■ ■ ■ • • • 2918
Exhibit 316. —Analysis of envelopes produced by D. A. MacLennan . . .. .. 2919
Exhibit 317.—Report of Returning Officer of 1949 election, Victorian Blacksmiths Society,
6th February, 1949 . . . . . . . . . . • • • • 2922
Exhibit 318.—Blacksmiths Society, Victorian Branch, comparative statement for years 1945
to 1949 for election of Secretary .. .. .. .. • • 2923
Exhibit 319. —Election Dodger, A.P.W. Union, Victorian Branch election, 1948-49 . . . . 2945
Exhibit 320.—F0r identification, letter signed S. E. Richards dated 30th June, 1946 . . 2945
Exhibit 321. —Election Dodger, A.P.W. Union, Victorian Branch elections, 1947-48 . . . . 2946
Exhibit 322.—Copy of part of Minutes of A.P.W. Meeting held 9th June, 1948 .. . . 2949
Exhibit 323. —Four copies of Postal Notes April, May, June, and July, 1949 . . . . 2951
Exhibit 324.—Pamphlet headed Playing Merry Hell (Realist Film Unit) . . . . . . 2956
Exhibit 325. —The Mail Branch News, 16th December, 1948 . . . . . . . . 2959
Exhibit 326.—Petition dated 16th December, 1948 " . . .. • • • • - • 2960
Exhibit 327. —The Mail Branch News, 7th April, 1949 . . . . . . . . ■ ■ 2961
Exhibit 328. —Copy of Minutes of 6th June, 1948 .. .. . . . ■ • • 2964
Exhibit 329. —Report of Conference of the Commonwealth Public Service, 18th July, 1948 . . 2969
Exhibit 330. —Leaflet issued by Federated Clerks’ Union of Australia . . . . . . 2970
Exhibit 331.—Circular of A.P.W.U. re 1947 elections .. .. . . • • • ■ 2972
Exhibit 332. —Minute of Meeting of A.P.W.U. 25th January, 1949 . . . . . . 2987 a
Exhibit 333.—Minute of A.P.W.U. dated 10th May, 1949 .. .. .. . - 2990
Exhibit 334.—Minute of 24th May, 1949 . . .. .. • • • • 2990
Exhibit 335. —Minute of 22nd June, 1948 . . .. .. • • • • • • 2992
Exhibit 336.—Pamphlet headed Commonwealth Public Service —Salaries Campaign .. 2997
Exhibit 337.—Petition to Senator Cameron, dated August, 1949 .. .. .. 3023
Exhibit 338.—Application for leave by Angus Tennant with medical certificate attached (13th
December, 1948, to 21st December, 1948) . . . . . . . - 3033
Exhibit 339.—Application for leave by Angus Tennant with medical certificate attached,
18th August, 1948, to 27th August, 1948) . . . . . . . . 3034
Exhibit 340.—Specimen signature of office-bearers, Ex-servicemen and Women’s Political
Association of Australia . . .. .. .. ■ ■ • • 3052
Exhibit 341. —Requisition for meeting, A.P.W.U. .. .. .. • • • • 3055
Exhibit 342. —Minutes of Meetings A.P.W.U., 26th November and 10th December, 1946 . . 3058
Exhibit 343.—Minute 106 of the A.P.W.U., 22nd Annual Conference, 1946 . . . . 3059
Exhibit 344.—Minute of A.P.W.U., 2nd February, 1947 . . . . • ■ • • 3063
Exhibit 345. —Letter to S. E. Richards dated 19th July, 1946 .. .. .. .. 3078
Exhibit 346.—Minutes of the 17th September, 1946, A.P.W.U. . . . . . . . . 3081
Exhibit 347. —File containing 1935 Constitution of C.P. and cuttings from Workers Weekly . . 3083
Exhibit 348. —United Front Against Fascism —Constitution .. .. .. .. 3084
Exhibit 349. —The Pan-Pacific Worker, 12th May, 1931 . . . . . . • • 3085
Exhibit 350. —Cutting, The Workers’ Weekly, 28th November, 1930 . . . . . . 3085
Exhibit 351.— Workers’ Weekly cuttings, 25th July, 1930, and 27th June, 1930 . . . . 3085
Exhibit 352.—Articles published in Workers’ Weekly, 9th May, 1930, 10th November, 1933
(2), 23rd February, 1934 . . . . . . • • • • • • 3090
Exhibit 353. —Article published .in Workers’ Weekly, 25th April, 1930 . . . . . . 3090
Exhibit 354.—Copy statement (Commonwealth Bank) of A.C.P. . . . . • • 3098
Exhibit 355.—Cheques drawn on Account of C.P. of Australia, Victoria State Committee,
3rd August, 1943, to 21st July, 1949 . . • • • ■ • • • ■ 3098
Exhibit 356.—Pay-in Slips—Account of C.P. of Australia, Victoria State Committee, 3rd
August, 1943, to 21st July, 1949 .. .. • ■ • • • • 3098
Exhibit 357.—Instructions to Bank and letter re Account of C.P. of Australia, Victoria
State Committee dated 22nd July, 1943 . . . . • • • • 3098
Exhibit 358. —Affidavit of J. V. Bedkober and copy of Account of the Federal Press Pty. Ltd.
from 3rd May, 1948, to 19th July, 1949 . . . . ■ . • • 3100
Exhibit 359. —Cheques drawn on Account of Federal Press Pty. Ltd., 3rd May, 1948, to 19th
July, 1949 . . . . . . .. .. . . • • ■ • 3100
Exhibit 360. —Pay-in Slips in regard to above Account .. .. .. • • 3100
Exhibit 361.—Instructions and Memorandum and Articles of Association of the Federal
Press Pty. Ltd. . . . . .. . . . • ■ • • • 3100
Exhibit 362. —Two Affidavits of D. R. Small and Copy of Account of H. E. O’Sullivan from Bth
July, 1947, to 25th June, 1949, and H. E. O’Sullivan and R. J. Purcell from
22nd February, 1943, to Bth July, 1947 .. .. ■ . . . 3101
Exhibit 363. —Affidavit of W. R. Alexander, and attached account . . ■ • . . 3102
Exhibit 364. —Cheques drawn on account of Brown, McGill, and Baker from 4th November,
1943, to 27th April, 1949 . . . . . . . . .. . . 3103
Exhibit 365. —Pay-in Slips relating to above Account for same period . . .. .. 3103
Exhibit 366.—Constitution of the C.P. of Australia, 1943 . . . . . . . . 3103
Exhibit 367. —Cuttings from The Workers’ Weekly dated 2nd September, 1932, 13th May,
1932, and 29th July, 1932 .. .. .. .. .. 3128
Appendix “ C ” — continued.
List of Exhibits — continued.


Transcript
Page.
Exhibit 368. —Two Affidavits of T. Nettlefold dated 26th August, 1949 .. .. .. 3133
Exhibit 369. —Instruction to attend meeting of the Central Committee dated 10th July, 1936 3135
Exhibit 370.—File containing cutting Workers’ Weekly, &c. . . . . . . . . 3136
Exhibit 371. —Two issues of The Labour Review . . . . . . . . .. 3143
Exhibit 372. —Organizational Questions issued by C.C. of C.P. of Australia, containing
reprints from Inprecor .. .. .. .. .. .. 3144
Exhibit 373. —Copy of Inprecor dated 15th September, 1932 . . . . . . . . 3162
Exhibit 374. —Copy of Inprecor dated 18th August, 1932 . . . . . . . . 3162
Exhibit 375. —Letter dated 20th February, 1932 from International Secretariat, League
Against Imperialism . . . . . . . . . . . . 3164
Exhibit 376. —The Proletarian, Ist March, 1923 . . . . . . . . . . . . 3167
Exhibit 377. —File of Inprecor, 15th August, 1929, to 15th October, 1929 . . . . 3169
Exhibit 378. — Workers’ Weekly, 25th October, 1929 . . . . . . . . . . 3169
Exhibit 379. —Cutting from Communist Review, June, 1937 . . . . . . . . 3175
Exhibit 380.—Articles in The Workers’ Voice dated 7th July, 1933, 18th August, 1933, 12th
January, 1934 .. ' .. .. .. .. .. .. 3176
Exhibit 381.— Workers’ Weekly, 15th November, 1929 . . . . . . . . . . 3177
Exhibit 382. —Cutting from Workers’ Weekly dated 13th December, 1929 . . . . . . 3180
Exhibit 383. — Inprecor, 12th December, 1928 .. .. .. .. .. .. 3180
Exhibit 384.—Copies of Inprecor, 1932 .. .. .. . . .. . . 3187
Exhibit 385.—Extract from The Communist Review, June, 1937 .. .. .. 3187
Exhibit 386.—Cutting, Workers’ Weekly and others . . . . . . .. . . 3189
Exhibit 387. —Extract from Communist Review, April, 1935 .. . . . . . . 3189
Exhibit 388. —The Trade Union Leader, September, 1935 . . . . . . . . 3190
Exhibit 389. —Draft resolution of National Defence, New South Wales District Committee,
1938 .. .. .. . . .. . . .. .. 3197
Exhibit 390. —Copy of World News and Views (formerly International Press
(Correspondence) dated Bth July, 1939 .. .. .. .. 3204
Exhibit 391. —Leaflet headed Return the Curtin Government .. .. .. .. 3205
Exhibit 392. —Cutting from Workers’ Weekly, 16th June, 1933 .. . . . . . . 3206
Exhibit 393.—Copy of Inprecor, 27th October, 1932 .. . . .. . . 3209
Exhibit 394. —Moscow News of 23rd May, 1943 —Cutting .. .. .. .. 3216
Exhibit 395. —Theses on Tactics adopted by the Third Congress of the Communist
International, 1921 .. .. .. .. .. .. 3218
Exhibit 396. —File containing issue of Communist, Ist November, 1927, and others . . 3220
Exhibit 397. —Pamphlet by T. Wright, We Defend Peace, and other documents . . . . 3221
Exhibit 398. —Cutting from The Sydney Morning Herald of 26th May, 1939 .. . . 3232
Exhibit 399.—Tw0 flies People’s Front, &c. . . . . .. •. .. . . 3234
Exhibit 400. —Four issues of Communist Review, 1936 to 1939 .. .. .. . . 3237
Exhibit 401. —Communist Review, August, 1934 .. .. .. .. .. 3238
Exhibit 402. —Article in Communist Review, August 1935 .. .. .. .. 3238
Exhibit 403. —The Proletarian, Ist June, 1923 .. .. .. .. .. . . 3239
Exhibit 404. —The Proletarian, Ist May, 1923 .. .. .. .. .. .. 3239
Exhibit 405. —The Labour Monthly, December, 192 6 .. .. . . . . . . 3239
Exhibit 406.—Cutting from Communist Review, May, 1939 . . . . . . . . 3257
Exhibit 407. —The Communist, Bth June, 1923 .. .. .. .. .. 3257
Exhibit 408.—Report of the 11th Plenum of the E.C.C.I. .. .. .. .. 3258
Exhibit 409. —The Communist, February, 1925 . . .. . • • • • • • • 3259
Exhibit 410. —The Tribune, Bth December, 1940 . . . . . . . . . . 3259
Exhibit 411. —The Tribune, 22nd June, 1941 . . .. .. .. .. .. 3259
Exhibit 412. —World News and Views, 2nd, 9th, and 16th September, 1939 .. .. 3261
Exhibit 413. —Minutes of National Council Meetings of the Movement Against War and
Fascism, 15th November, 1936, and 29th April, 1938 . . . . . . 3263
Exhibit 414.—Resolutions and Decisions, Seventh World Congress of the Communist
International . . . . . . .. • • • . . . 3264
Exhibit 415.—Articles in Workers’ Weekly dated Ist August, 1930, 22nd August, 1930, and
20th July, 1937 . . . . • • • • ■ • • • • • 3266
Exhibit 416.—Pamphlet, War or Peace, by R. Dixon . . . . .. . . . . 3353
Exhibit 417. —World Peace for November, 1936 .. .. . • • ■ . . 3377
Exhibit 418. —Article from The Communist Review of April, 1935, by J. B. Miles .. .. 3418
Exhibit 419. —Who Owns Australia, by J. N. Rawling .. .. .. .. 3461
Exhibit 420. —A Reply to Father Ryan, by L. L. Sharkey .. .. .. .. 3469
Exhibit 421.— Workers’ Weekly, 12th November. 1936, and others .. . . . . 3497
Exhibit 422.— Workers’ Weekly, 30th November, 1934, and others .. .. .. 3548
Exhibit 423.— Workers’ Weekly, 23rd October, 1936 .. .. . . . . 3556
Exhibit 424.—Pamphlet by L. Sharkey, An Appeal to Catholics .. . . . . 3557
Exhibit 425.—-Article in Communist Review on page 55, October, 1937, by Harry Gould . . 3558
Exhibit 426. —A Message to Catholics, by Earl Browder .. .. .. .. 3564
Exhibit 427. —Copy letter. Crown solicitor to Mr. Cedric Ralph, 6th September, 1949 . . 3565
Exhibit 428.—'Divisional Cash Book of A.N.A. Society, Yea .. .. .. .. 3566
Exhibit 429. —Audited Statement for the half-year ended May, 1941, A.N.A., Yea Branch .. 3566
Appendix “ C ” — continued.
List of Exhibits — continued.


Transcript
Page.
Exhibit 430.—Correspondence file regarding the Yea Branch, A.N.A., 1941 to 1942 . . 3566
Exhibit 431. —Circular, United Protestant Action of Victoria .. .. .. . . 3574
Exhibit 432. —Letters dated 26th August, 1949, from J. Ward and S. G. Heron .. . . 3577
Exhibit 433.—Drafts of articles by Sharpley published in The Herald .. .. . . 3576
Exhibit 434.—Debenture Trust Deed dated 18th July, 1945, between Australia-Soviet House
and Trustees .. .. . . .. .. . . 3579
Exhibit 435. —Retirement and Discharge of Trustee and Appointment of New Trustee, 14th
September, 1948 . . . . . . .. .. . . 3579
Exhibit 436. —Verified copy of Account of Mrs. R. F. Stirling for period from 31st March, to
2nd April, 1948, inclusive . . . . . . . . . . . . 3581
Exhibit 437.—Pay-in Slips relating to four deposits .. . . . . . . . . 3581
Exhibit 438. —Cheque No. 891 for £2,310, R. F. Stirling . . . . . . . . 3581
Exhibit 439.—Agreement dated 2nd April, 1948, between Australia-Soviet House and R. F.
Stirling . , .. .. .. .. . . . . . . 3585
Exhibit 440.—Receipt from Ingleton and Lewis for £llO commission on sale of Soviet House
cafe, 7th May, 1948 . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 3586
Exhibit 441.—Trading and Profit and Loss Account of Australia Soviet-House cafe . . 3592
Exhibit 442 —(Confidential). —Personal Banking Documents and supporting Statement
of the witness Rodgers in respect of his trip abroad, 1948-49 . . . . 3611
Exhibit 443—(Confidential). —List of Contributors and Amounts, written by the
witness Rodgers . . . . . . . . . . , . . . 3612
Exhibit 444 —(Confidential). —Register of Debenture Holders of Australia-Soviet House .. 3612
Exhibit 445. —Statement of analysis of Receipt Butts . . .. . . . . . . 3613
Exhibit 446. —Ballot-box of the 8.W.1.U. deposited at Commonwealth Bank, by G. B.
Henderson and G. Morris on 12th February, 1949 . . . . .. 3615
Exhibit 446a.—Applications for Postal Votes .. .. .. .. . . . . 3752
Exhibit 447.—Tw0 resolutions of Australia-Soviet House Committee .. .. . . 3618
Exhibit 448. —Analysis of Cash Book prepared by Accountant to Crown Solicitor . . 3619
Exhibit 449. —Statement of contributions to Australia-Soviet House prepared by Accountant
to Crown Solicitor . . . . .. .. . . . . . . 3620
Exhibit 450.—Extracts from Minutes of Australia-Soviet House —Executive Meeting, 23rd
March, 1948; Committee Meeting, 31st March, 1948; Executive Meeting, Bth
April, 1948 .. .. .. .. .. .. . . 3686
Exhibit 451.—Article headed, Union Satisfied on Ballot Rigging, from The Sun, 3rd May, 1949 3690
Exhibit 452. —Rules of the Blacksmiths’ Society of Australasia . . . . . . . . 3706
Exhibit 453.—Federal Rules of the 8.W.1.U. . . . . .. . . .. . . 3718
Exhibit 454.—Correspondence re 8.W.1.U. election .. .. . . . . . . 3721
Exhibit 455. —List of Observers at Sub-Branches, 8.W.1.U. election . . . . . . 3728
Exhibit 456.—Supreme Court Writ No. 1120, 1948 —Henderson v. Morris . . . . 3730
Exhibit 457. —Bundle of envelopes marked with the letter “ X ” in Affidavit of J. Rogan . . 3736
Exhibit 458.—Key produced by Mr. Cullity for George Morris . . . . . . . . 3742 a
Exhibit 459.—Key produced by witness Henderson .. .. .. .. .. 3742 a
Exhibit 460. —Analysis of 41 Postal Applications, 8.W.1.U. .. . . . . .. 3752
Exhibit 461. —Exhibit referred to in paragraph 25 of Henderson’s affidavit, 8.W.1.U. . . 3752
Exhibit 462. —1946 Rules of the Victorian Branch of 8.W.1.U. . . . . . . 3757
Exhibit 463. —8.W.1.U. Minutes of Special State Conference held on the 4th
and sth of February, 1949 .. .. .. .. . . .. 3771
Exhibit 464.—Tw0 ballot-papers of 8.W.1.U. and envelope .. . . .. .. 3772
Exhibit 465. —Pamphlets issued attacking G. B. Henderson . . .. . . .. 3781
Exhibit 466.—Transcript of Proceedings before J. E. Taylor, Industrial Registrar, March, 1949 3787
Exhibit 467. —Pamphlet headed, Carpenters and Joiners—Rank and File . . . . .. 3797
Exhibit 468.—Article in Herald, 20th April, 1949 .. .. .. . . . . 3798
Exhibit 469. —Pamphlet issued by G. B. Henderson —Vote Thus . . . . .. . . 3811 a
Exhibit 470.—Application to State Returning Officer for Postal Ballot-Paper . . . . 3811 b
Exhibit 471. —Pamphlet headed, United Leadership that gets results . . . . .. 3818
Exhibit 472. —Voting Card for 8.W.1.U. election, December, 1948, issued by J. C. Chandler 3820
Exhibit 473. —Letter from J. E. Taylor, Industrial Registrar, Commonwealth Court of
Conciliation and Arbitration, dated 17th August, 1948, to Secretary, 8.W.1.U. 3825
Exhibit 474.—Circular 1080—Timber Merchants’ and Sawmillers’ Association, 30th September,
1948 .. . . . . . . . . . . .. 3836
Exhibit 475.—Statement by G. B. Henderson for A.L.P. Conference . . . . . . 3859
Exhibit 476. —Pamphlet, Carpenters and Joiners—Rank and File . . . . . . . . , 3864
Exhibit 477. —Chandler’s form of Application for Postal Ballot . . . . . . . . 3879
Exhibit 478. —Judgment of Mr. Justice Kelly, 6th October, 1947 . . . . . . ~ 3894
Exhibit 479.—Judgment of Conciliation Commissioner Galvin, sth December, 1947 .. .. 3894
Exhibit 480. —Letter from J. C. Chandler, State Secretary, 8.W.1.U., Victorian Section, to
witness Russell, dated 7th February, 1949 . . .. . . .. 3911
Exhibit 481.—Letter from J. C. Chandler, Secretary, 8.W.1.U., to witness Russell, dated 30th
August, 1949 . . . . . . . . .. . . .. 3913
Exhibit 482.—Financial statement of J. C. Chandler, 8.W.1.U. . . 3923
Exhibit 483.—Clear Card 8.W.1.U.—J. C. Chandler .. ~ .. .. .. 3924
Appendix “ C ”•— continued.
List of Exhibits— continued.


Transcript
Page.
Exhibit 484.—Contribution Notice 8.W.1.U., addressed to G. B. Henderson .. .. 3940
Exhibit 485. —Letter from Chief Electoral Officer dated 13th September, 1949, with analysis
attached .. .. .. .. .. .. .. .. 3950
Exhibit 486.—-Additional analysis from Chief Electoral Officer showing initialed and not
initialed ballot-papers . . . . . . . . .. . . .. 3953
Exhibit 487. —Clifton Hill Sub-Branch Counting Sheets .. . . . . .. . . 3974
Exhibit 488. —Notes of witness Campion with envelope attached . . . . . . 3989
Exhibit 489. —Counting Sheets and Financial Sheets for Oakleigh Sub-Branch, 8.W.1.U. .. 3992
Exhibit 490. —Clifton Hill Sub-Branch, 8.W.1.U. Financial Sheets .. .. .. 4013
Exhibit 491. —Questions put by Woodhouse to Morris .. .. .. .. 4040
Exhibit 492. —Financial Sheets Prahran Sub-Branch, 8.W.1.U. .. .. .. .. 4049
Exhibit 493.—Financial Sheets Essendon Sub-Branch, 8.W.1.U. .. .. .. .. 4050
Exhibit 494. —Financial Sheets Richmond Sub-Branch, 8.W.1.U. .. .. .. 4059
Exhibit 495. —Financial Sheet Preston Sub-Branch, 8.W.1.U. . . . . . . . . 4064 a
Exhibit 496.—Copy letter 6th January, 1949, Woodhouse to Morris and letter in reply .. 4074
Exhibit 497. —Photographs . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 4075
Exhibit 498.—Minutes of 8.W.1.U. Conference, Bth March, 1948 . . .. .. .. 4081
Exhibit 499. —Minutes, 8.W.1.U., 10th May, 1947 .. .. .. .. .. 4082
Exhibit 500.—Minutes, 8.W.1.U.,' 10th May, 1946 .. .. .. .. .. 4083
Exhibit 501. —Pamphlet issued by Woodhouse .. .. .. .. .. 4086
Exhibit 502.—Minutes of 1945 Conference 8.W.1.U. . . .. . . .. 4087
Exhibit 503. —Rules Amalgamated Society of Carpenters and Joiners, 1942 .. .. 4097
Exhibit 504.—Financial Sheet, 30th November, 1948, Prahran Sub-Branch .. .. 4119
Exhibit 505. —Pamphlet headed, Militant Leaders Get Results, Bth September, 1949 .. 4143
Exhibit 506. —Trade Unions and the Labour Party Pamphlet .. . . . . . . 4146
Exhibit 507.—Copy letter, Hunt to Morris, 23rd November, 1948, and reply . . . . 4148
Exhibit 508. —Two envelopes with witness Rogan’s handwriting .. .. .. 4149
Exhibit 509.—Numbers of Postal Votes at Prahran sub-branch, 8.W.1.U. .. .. 4162
Exhibit 510. —Envelopes produced by S. J. Bennett .. .. .. .. . . 4176
Exhibit 511. —Memorandum of calculations of witness Martin .. .. .. .. 4181
Exhibit 512. —Arbitration Court Print No. 8088—In the matter of A. T. Miller and the 8.W.1.U. 4185
Exhibit 513.—'File in relation to proceedings against Miller .. .. . . .. 4209
Exhibit 514. —Notice of motion and Subpoena served on Morris . . . . . . . . 4321
Exhibit 515.—Financial Sheets Oakleigh Sub-Branch .. .. . . .. 4338
Exhibit 516. —Amalgamation agreement dated 23rd October, 1934, Ironworkers and M.W.U. 4370
Exhibit 517. —Rules of the Arms, Explosives and Munition Workers’ Federation of Australia 4378
Exhibit 518.—File of correspondence between Federated Ironworkers’ Association and W. T.
Lloyd, 1946 . . .. .. . . .. .. . . 4390
Exhibit 519.—Judgment in the Matter of the Federated Ironworkers’ and the A.E.U. (Print
No. 6463) . . . . . . .. .. . . .. . . 4394
Exhibit 520. —Labour News, September, 1944 .. .. .. .. .. 4409
Exhibit 521. —Pamphlet Trouble Makers, &c. . . . . . . . . . . .. 4412
Exhibit 522. —Judgment—Federated Ironworkers Association v. Inglis .. .. .. 4421
Exhibit 523.—Correspondence from Lloyd’s Solicitors to 1.C.1.A.N.Z. Ltd. .. .. 4429
Exhibit 524. —Letter, T.H.C. to C.P. Flockart, 1.C.1. dated 14th June, 1946 .. .. 4431
Exhibit 525. —Judgment dated 3rd May, 1946, in the Matter of Nobel (Australasia) Pty.
Ltd. and The Federated Ironworkers’ Association .. .. .. 4431
Exhibit 526.—Letter dated 19th August, 1946, from Nobels Pty. Ltd. to Federated
Ironworkers’ Association . . . . . . .. . . . . 4442
Exhibit 527. —Judgment of Judge O’Mara dated 19th June, 1946, re Federated Ironworkers’
Association of Australia . . .. .. .. .. .. 4475
Exhibit 528. —Circular letter dated 24th June, 1946, from Secretary, T.H.C. . . . . 4486
Exhibit 529.- —Letter dated Ist July, 1946, from Secretary, T.H.C. to Lloyd .. .. 4487
Exhibit 530. —Order of Arbitration Court in re Gotch v. 1.C.1. . . .. .. .. 4515
Exhibit 531.- —Nobel Pty. Ltd.—Notice posted sth July, 1946 .. .. .. .. 4517
Exhibit 532. —Blank membership card Actors Equity Association . . . . . . . . 4532
Exhibit 533.—Letter dated 19th March, 1947, Morrish to Secretary of Actors Equity . . 4534
Exhibit 534.—Honour Card—Actors Equity Association . . . . . . .. 4535
Exhibit 535.—Notice of Motion at meeting of Actors Equity . . . . . . . . 4550
Exhibit 536.—Letter dated 20th May, 1948, Diamond to Morrish . . . . . . . . 4552
Exhibit 537. —Letter dated 24th May, 1948, Morrish to Diamond . . . . . . . . 4559
Exhibit 538.—Circular letter to members of Actors Equity dated Bth June, 1948 . . . . 4559
Exhibit 539. —Circular of 23rd June to members of Actors Equity . . . . . . 4560
Exhibit 540. —Equity News, January, 1949 . . . . . . . . . . . . 4586
Exhibit 541. —Notices of Objections by C. Allen and V. J. A. O’Connor, 6th December, 1948 .. 4614
Exhibit 542. —Minutes of 30th June, 1948, and 15th December, 1948, Actors Equity meeting .. 4630 a
Exhibit 543. —Equity News, July, 1948 .. .. .. .. .. .. .. 4640
Exhibit 544. —Letters from Diamond to Patricia Isles, 20th August and 14th September, 1949 4646
Exhibit 545. —Letter Diamond to Peach, Bth September, 1949 .. .. .. .. 4650
Exhibit 546. —Invitation to lunch of the Catholic Entertainments Guild .. . . . . 4676
Exhibit 547.—Letter dated 6th September, 1949, John Hickling to Equity . . .. 4680
Appendix “ C ” — continued.
List of Exhibits — continued.


Transcript
Page.
Exhibit 548. —Copy of minutes of 30th June, 1948, and 15th December, 1948 . . . . 4700
Exhibit 549.—Extract from the Age and Argus, Saturday, 9th December, 1944 . . .. 4733
Exhibit 550. —Minutes of Meeting, Actors Equity, 3rd August, 1949 . . . . .. 4779
Exhibit 551.—Minutes of General Meeting, 23rd February, 1949 . . . . . . . . 4824
Exhibit 552.—Letter from Diamond to witness Kennedy dated 12th April, 1949 . . . . 4824
Exhibit 553. —Copy letter, Kennedy to Diamond, 21st April, 1949 . . . . .. 4825
Exhibit 554. —Letter, Diamond to Kennedy, dated 4th May, 1949 .. .. .. 4826
Exhibit 555.—Letter, Diamond to Kennedy, dated 13 th May, 1949 .. .. .. 4826
Exhibit 556. —Minutes of Meeting of 24th May, 1949 . . . . . . . . .. 827 c
Exhibit 557.—Letter 14th June, 1949, Kennedy to Diamond . . . . .. . . 4828
Exhibit 558. —Account dated 31st March, 1949, from Thomas Urquhart and Son Pty. Ltd., &c. 4840
Exhibit 559.—8a110t paper Actors Equity . . . . . . . . . . .. 4845
Exhibit 560.—Note handed to Counsel by Miss P. Kennedy .. . . .. . . 4867
Exhibit 561.—Minutes of Meeting, sth July, 1949 . . . . . . . . . . 4881
Exhibit 562. —Copy for ballot paper (Urquhart’s) . . .. . . . . . . 4901 a
Exhibit 563. —Job Bag No. 1594 (Urquhart’s) . . . . . . . . . . . . 4901 a
Exhibit 564. —Proof of Actors’ Equity ballot paper 1949 . . . . . . . . 4920
Exhibit 565. —Two proof bags (Urquhart’s) . . . . .. . . .. . . 4921
Exhibit 566.—Issues of Equity and Equity News from August, 1946, to June, 1949 . . 4928
Exhibit 567.— Youth Voice, June, 1948 . , . . . . . . . . . . . . 4977
Exhibit 568. —Photostat copy of Workers Weekly, No. 312 . . . . . . .. 4983
Exhibit 569. —Typewritten copy of article in Workers Weekly of 14th February, 1930 . . 4986
Exhibit 570. —Constitution of the Minority Movement . . . . . . . . . . 4996
Exhibit 571. —Rules and Constitution of the Unemployed Workers’ Movement, 1931 . . 4997
Exhibit 572.—Photostat copy of Workers Weekly, dated 22nd August, 1930 . . . . 4999
Exhibit 573. —Workers Weekly, 30th January, 1931, Extracts . . .. . . . . 5007
Exhibit 574. —Photostat copies of articles by Herbert Moore in Workers Weekly . . . . 5017
Exhibit 575. —Paragraph from Workers Weekly of 13th March, 1931 .. . . , . 5023
Exhibit 576. —Cutting from Workers Weekly, 20th March, 1931 . . . . . . . . 5025
Exhibit 577. —Photostat of Workers Weekly, 6th November, 1931 . . . . . . 5028
Exhibit 578. —Workers Weekly, 13th November, 1931 . . . . , . . . . . 5030
Exhibit 579.—Membership Card, F.O.S.U. . . . . . . .. . . . . 5037
Exhibit 580. —Soviets To-day . . . . . . .. .. .. .. . . 5057
Exhibit 581. —Advertisement in Sydney Sunday Sun, 20th April, 1941 . . . . . . 5064
Exhibit 582.—Pamphlet, Labour’s Programme for the People, 1941 . . . . .. 5067
Exhibit 583.— Progress, 21st November, 1941 . . . . . . . . . . . . 5069
Exhibit 584. —Letter from A.L.P. to McGillick, 21st May, 1942 . . . . .. . . 5075
Exhibit 583. —Circular from F.0.5.U., 7th September, 1942 . . . . . . . . 5077
Exhibit 586.—Photostat of The Communist of 26th May, 1922 . . . . . . . . 5090
Exhibit 587. —The First World War and The Second, by L. P. Fox . . . . . . 5093
Exhibit 588. —Supplement to Workers Weekly, 10th January, 1946 . . . , . . 5097
Exhibit 589. —History of the Australian Labour Movement, by E. W. Campbell . . . . 5103
Exhibit 590.—History of the Australian Labour Movement, a study course in eight lectures,
by E. W. Campbell . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 5104
Exhibit 591. —Book of Notes . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 5151
Exhibit 592.—Lecture notes produced by witness .. .. . . .. . . 5185
Exhibit 593. —Notes of witness as leader of Middle Park Branch . . .. .. 5185
Exhibit 593 a copy of Ex. 593, marked by Witness Sharpley . . .. .. 5865
Exhibit 594. —Notice to quit from K. Horsman to witness .. .. . . .. 5346
Exhibit 595. —Receipt No. 31922 dated 10th August, 1943, Munition Workers Union .. 5348
Exhibit 596. —Letter dated 23rd September, 1943, to Deputy Director of Manpower .. 5349
Exhibit 597. —Clerks’ Union Election Leaflet . . . . .. .. .. . . 5352
Exhibit 598. —Telegram dated 27th August, 1943, to witness .. .. . . .. 5352
Exhibit 599. —Telegram dated 27th August, to witnes s .. . . . . . . .. 5352
Exhibit 600. —Letter dated 3rd September, 1943, A. w. Keown to witness .. . . 5355
Exhibit 601. —Letter dated 6th September, 1943, from witness to A. W. Keown . . . . 5356
Exhibit 602. —Script of Ten Days that Shook the used by McGillick . . . . 5358
Exhibit 603. —Letter dated 24th November, 1941, Purdy to McGillick .. .. . . 5358
Exhibit 604. —Letter dated 10th September, 1943, from Department of Labour and National
Service . . .. . . . . .. . . . . .. 5364 a
Exhibit 605. —Letter dated 15th September, 1943, from Department of Labour and National
Service . . .. ■ ■ . . . . . .. , . 5365
Exhibit 606. —Letter dated 16th September, 1943, from Department of Labour and National
Service . . . - • ■ . . .. , . .. .. 5365
Exhibit 607. —Letter dated 21st September, 1943, from Deputy Director-General .. .. 5365
Exhibit 608. —Letter dated 7th October, 1943, from Deputy Director-General .. . . 5366
Exhibit 609. —Letter dated 11th October, 1943, from Minister for Labour and National
Service . . .. . . . . , . . . . . . . 5366
Exhibit 610. —Letter dated 13th October, 1943, witness to Deputy Director of Manpower .. 5369
Exhibit 611. —Notice re manpower appeal .. .. .. .. .. ~ 5359
Exhibit 612. —Letter dated 26th October, 1943, from Chairman of Appeal Board to witness .. 5370
Appendix “ C ” — continued.
List of Exhibits — continued.


Transcript
Page.
Exhibit 613. —Labour News, September, 1943 .. .. .. .. .. .. 5371
Exhibit 614.—Letter dated 29th October, 1943, from Department of Labour and National
Service .. .. .. .. .. .. .. .. 5371
Exhibit 615. —Letter dated 30th October, 1943, from Department of Labour and National
Service .. .. .. .. .. .. .. .. 5372
Exhibit 616. —'Memorandum dated 2nd November, 1943, for the Director-General of Manpower
from Department of Labour and National Service .. .. .. 5372
Exhibit 617. —Letter dated 2nd November, 1943, from Department of Labour and National
Service .. .. .. .. .. .. .. .. 5372 a
Exhibit 618.—Letter dated Bth November, 1943, from Deputy Director-General .. .. 5372 b
Exhibit 619. —Letter dated 13th November, 1943, to Deputy Director of Manpower for
Victoria .. .. .. .. .. .. .. .. 5372 b
Exhibit 620.—Letter from Prime Minister’s Department to witness dated 13th November, 1943 5372 b
Exhibit 621. —Copy of letter from Deputy Director-General to Secretary, Department of Labour
and National Service .. .. .. .. .. .. .. 5372 b
Exhibit 622. —Letter from D. Cameron dated 18th November .. .. .. .. 5372 c
Exhibit 623. —Letter to the Deputy Director-General of Manpower dated 25th November, 1943 5372 d
Exhibit 624.—0. K. Card Munition Workers’ Union, 1944 .. .. .. .. 5373
Exhibit 625. —Letter dated 12th October, 1949, from Food Preservers’ Union of Australia 5379
Exhibit 626.—Circular letters April, 1939, Young Communist League . . .. .. 5442
Exhibit 627.—Copy of letter dated 28th June, 1939, to J. B. Miles .. .. .. 5490
Exhibit 628. —Avis de Reception card dated 30th October, 1943 .. .. .. 5608
Exhibit 629. —Declaration of I. M. Brown dated 4th May, 1944 . . . . . . . . 5627
Exhibit 630. —Declaration of H. Logan dated 4th May, 1944 .. .. ~ .. 5629
Exhibit 631. —Statement by Florence Barter . . . . .. .. .. . . 5533
Exhibit 632. —Regulation 33 of the Education Act .. .. .. .. . . 5645
Exhibit 633.—Constitution, State School Committees’ Association of Victoria, 1947 .. 5647
Exhibit 634. —List of Executive, S.S.C.A.V. . . .. . . .. .. . . 5550
Exhibit 635. —The Guardian, 7th May, 1948 . . . . .. .. .. . . 5656
Exhibit 636. —S.S.C.A.V. Report of sub-Committee on proposals .. . . .. 5659
Exhibit 637. —Minute Book of 24th Annual Conference S.S.C.A.V. . . . . . . 5664
Exhibit 638. —Copy of letter 10th September, 1948, from Minister of Public Instruction . . 5674
Exhibit 639.—5.5.C.A.V. Report of Annual Conference, 1948 . . .. . . . . 5675
Exhibit 640.—Notes of remarks by witness to the Chief Secretary .. .. .. 5683
Exhibit 641. —Letter dated 10th September, 1948—‘Minister of Public Instruction to the
Secretary, S.S.C.A.V. . . .. . . .. .. . . 5685
Exhibit 642.—Agenda, Annual Conference, S.S.C.A.V., September, 1948 .. .. 5685
Exhibit 643. —The Guardian, 20th August, 1948 .. .. .. .. .. 5591
Exhibit 644.—Circular of December, 1948, signed by S. C. Johns . . . . . . . . 5693
Exhibit 645.—Copy of letter, Hawker to Minister of Public Instruction, Ist September, 1948 . . 5696
Exhibit 646. —Letter dated 13th September, 1948, from Minister of Public Instruction to
President, S.S.C.A.V. .. .. .. .. .. .. .. 5698
Exhibit 647. —Letter dated 30th August, 1949, Hawker to McLean .. .. .. 5701
Exhibit 648. —Agenda for Annual Conference, 1949 .. . . . . . . . . 5703
Exhibit 649.—Report of a Ministry of the Executive to 1949 Conference, S.S.C.A.V. . . 5707
Exhibit 650. —List of Executive Members in office prior to 1949 Conference, S.S.C.A.V. . . 5705 a
Exhibit 651.—Notice of Meeting, 10th February, Clerks’ Union .. .. .. .. 5736
Exhibit 652.—Notice of Meeting, 2nd March, Clerks’ Union .. .. .. .. 5737
Exhibit 653.—Notice of Meeting, 2nd March, 1949, Clerks’ Union . . .. . . 5737
Exhibit 654. —Circular letter, A.E.U. election .. .. .. .. .. .. 5745
Exhibit 655. —Telegram Crown-Solicitor to W. Acheson, 24th October, 1949 .. .. 5756
Exhibit 656. —Circular letter dated 28th January, 1949, signed K. Farrell and L. Edmonds .. 5763
Exhibit 657.—Circular Clerks’ Union, 9th February, 1949 . . . . . . . . 5763
Exhibit 658. —Circular Clerks’ Union, 9th February, 1949 . . .. . . .. 5764
Exhibit 659. —Clerks’ Union, Statement on Constitution of Commonwealth P.S. Section . . 5765
Exhibit 660.—Circular Clerks’ Union, no date .. .. .. .. .. .. 5771
Exhibit 661. —Arbitration Court Print No. 6750-6092 Opitz v. Barrett . . . . . . 5791 a
Exhibit 662.—Minute Book .. .. .. .. .. .. .. .. 5821
and 9505
Exhibit 663. —Bundle of four receipts .. . . . . .. . . .. . . 5822
Exhibit 664. —Analysis of Account—payments in .. .. .. .. .. 5823
Exhibit 665. —Analysis of Account —payments out .. .. .. .. .. 5823
Exhibit 666. —Analysis payments credited to three persons named, Geelong .. .. 5824
Exhibit 667. —Analysis debit entries to three persons named, Geelong .. .. .. 5824
Exhibit 668.—Tw0 Copy Cablegrams, Premier’s Office to Agent-General, London, and Reply
dated 16th and 17th August, 1949 .. .. .. .. . . 5834 a
Exhibit 669.—Analysis of amounts banked to the credit of Federal Press with
the Commonwealth Bank .. .. .. .. .. .. 5844
Exhibit 670. —Analysis of cheques and other entries debited to the Account of Federal Press
Pty. Ltd. with the Commonwealth Bank of Australia .. .. .. 5844
Exhibit 671.— The Clerk, Vol. 3, No. 2, May, 1946 .. .. .. .. .. 5866
Appendix “ C ” — continued.
List of Exhibits — continued.


Transcript
Page
Exhibit 672. —Ballot paper, Ironworkers’ Union . . . . . . .. . . 5885
Exhibit 673. —Rules Clerks’ Union, 1946 . . . . . . . . .. .. 5937
Exhibit 674.—Leaflet headed, Victorian Dispute Settled, 1944 Branch Council upheld .. 5939
Exhibit 675. —Chart of Organization of Clerks’ Union . . . . . . .. . . 5944
Exhibit 676.—Leaflet to members of the Clerks’ Union advertising Mass Rally .. . . 5951
Exhibit 677.—Telegram, Meyer to Henry, Ist June, 1948 .. .. .. .. 5951
Exhibit 678.—Photostat copy of Secret Circular and reprint in Guardian of 4th June, 1948,
and 11th June, 1948 .. .. .. .. .. .. .. 5953
Exhibit 679. —The Clerical Worker, June, 1948 .. .. .. .. .. 5956
Exhibit 680.—Circular letter from F. J. Meyer, 11th August, 1948 . . . . . . 5964
Exhibit 681. —Circular concerning alterations to Section Rules .. .. .. .. 5967
Exhibit 682. —Government Gazette dated 12th March, 1948, Determination of the Commercial
Clerks’ Board . . .. .. .. . . .. . . 5967
Exhibit 683. —Government Gazette dated 7th January, 1949, Determination of the Law Clerks’
Board . . .. . . . . .. . . .. . . 5968
Exhibit 684. —File from Prothonotary’s Office, re Mortimer .. .. .. .. 5970
Exhibit 685. — Herald, cutting dated 18th August, 1948 .. .. . . . . . . 5972
Exhibit 686. —Notice of Meeting for 29th August .. .. .. .. .. 5976
Exhibit 687. —Two notices re Sunday, 29th August .. .. .. .. .. 5989
Exhibit 688. —Bundle of envelopes, Notices of Meeting, Sunday, 29th August .. .. 5991
Exhibit 689. —Copies of letters sent to Returning Officer, State President and State Secretary
by J. Henry, 9th November, 1948 . . . . .. . . . . 5996
Exhibit 690.—Letter dated 11th November, 1948, Meyer to Henry . . .. . . 5998
Exhibit 691.—Copy of letter, dated 12th November, 1948, Henry to F. J. Meyer .. . . 5998
Exhibit 692. —Circular to members of Commercial Section, Clerk’s Union, 9th March, 1949 6002
Exhibit 693. —Circular dated 22nd June, 1949, together with four leaflets .. .. .. 6008
Exhibit 694. —Minute Books, 8.T.F., January, 1944, to July, 1949 . . . . . . 6088
Exhibit 695.—Slip of paper containing expression .. .. .. . . . . 6092
Exhibit 696. —Statutory Declaration dated the sth April, 1954 . . . . . . . . 6109
Exhibit 697. —Copy of Statutory Declaration dated 22nd February, 1949 . . . . . . 6111
Exhibit 698.—A.L.P. membership ticket, 1943 . . . . . . . . . . . . 6133
Exhibit 699.—A.L.P. membership ticket for 1944 . . . . . . . . . . 6135
Exhibit 700. —A.L.P. membership ticket for 1945 .. .. .. .. .. 6135
Exhibit 701. —Letter of Resignation from A.L.P. by witness dated 9th July, 1946 . . 6140
Exhibit 702.—Extracts from Minutes of the Moonee Ponds A.L.P. Branch dated 23rd July,
1945 and 6th August, 1945 . . . . .. . . .. .. 6145
Exhibit 703. —Letter dated 12th July, 1945, F. Rowan to Merrifleld . . . . . . 6149
Exhibit 704. —Letter P. J. Kenneally to the Moonee Ponds Branch re H. Booley and K. J.
Owens . . . . .. . . . . .. . . . . 6150
Exhibit 705.—Minutes of Meeting of 6th May, 1946 . . . . . . . . 6159
Exhibit 706. —List showing the number of ballot papers sent to Sub-Branches and of postal
votes issued, 8.W.1.U. . . . . . . . . .. . . 6173
Exhibit 707. —Letter dated 14th January, 1949, from Federal Press Pty. Ltd. to Morris . . 6175
Exhibit 708. —Analysis of Voting, 8.W.1.U. Annual Election, 1948-49 . . . . . . 6189
Exhibit 709. —Subpoena to G. Morris, 15th December, 1948 . . . . . . . . 6206 a
Exhibit 710. —List of names relating to Prahran, Clifton Hill, and Essendon Sub-Branches,
8.W.1.U. . . .. . . . . . . .. .. . . 6218
Exhibit 711. —Roneoed document containing extracts of evidence re 8.W.1.U., before Royal
Commission .. .. .. .. .. .. .. .. 6220
Exhibit 712. —Memorandum to Counsel re 8.W.1.U. sheets . . . . . . .. 6231
Exhibit 713.—Financial Proof Sheets relating to Prahran, Essendon, Clifton Hill .. 6235
Exhibit 714. —Analysis of applications for Postal Ballot Papers .. .. .. .. 6237
Exhibit 715.—Analysis of Ballot Papers listed in Ex. 509 . . . . . . . . 6237
Exhibit 716. —Analysis of envelopes in Exhibit 510 . . .. .. . . . . 6237
Exhibit 717. —Analysis of Ballot Papers in box and detailed analysis by Branches .. .. 6238
Exhibit 718. —Analysis of distribution of Ballot Papers, 8.W.1.U. .. .. .. 6253
Exhibit 719.—Analysis of consecutive blocks of votes for Chandler .. . . . . 6253
Exhibit 720. —Analysis of progressive totals in the election—Chandler, Henderson . . . . 6256
Exhibit 721. —Summary of the bank account of A.C.P. (Commonwealth Bank) . . .. 6259
Exhibit 722. —Cash Deposits credited to Account of A.C.P. (Commonwealth Bank), 3rd August,
1943, to 21st July, 1949 .. . . . . . . .. .. 6260
Exhibit 723.—Cheques drawn on the Commercial Banking Co. of Sydney, by Australia-Soviet
House, credited to Communist Party, 3rd August, 1943, to 21st July, 1949 6261
Exhibit 724.—Cheques drawn on Commonwealth Bank, Ballarat, credited to Communist Party,
3rd August, 1943, to 21st July, 1949 .. . . .. . . 6261
Exhibit 725. —Cheques drawn on Commonwealth Bank by L. Cohen, and credited to A.C.P., 3rd
August, 1943, to 21st July, 1949 .. .. .. .. .. 6262
Exhibit 726. —Cheques drawn on Commercial Bank, Sydney, by Central Committee
of Communist Party, and credited to Victorian State Committee, 3rd August,
1943, to 21st July, 1949 .. .. .. .. ~ .. 6263
Appendix “ C ” — continued.
List of Exhibits— continued.


Transcript
Page.
Exhibit 727.—Cheques drawn on Commonwealth Bank, Bourke-street, Melbourne, by Yarra
District Committee, Communist Party, and credited to Victorian State
Committee, 3rd August, 1943, to 21st July, 1949 .. .. .. 6263
Exhibit 728. —Cheques drawn on Commonwealth Bank, by Ellis and Steffanou, and credited to
Victorian State Committee 3rd August, 1943, to 21st July, 1949 . . .. 6264
Exhibit 729. —Cheques drawn on Commonwealth Bank by the Guardian, credited
to Communist Party, 3rd August, 1943, to 21st July, 1949 .. .. 6264
Exhibit 730.—Cheques drawn on Commonwealth Bank, and credited to Communist Party,
3rd August, 1943, to 21st July, 1949 . . . . . . . . .. 6265
Exhibit 731.—Cheques drawn on E.S. and A. Bank Ltd., by B. Laidler, and credited to A.C.P.,
3rd August, 1943, to 21st July, 1949 . . . . . . .. . . 6265
Exhibit 732.—Particulars of cheques drawn on National Bank, by Z. Markov, credited to
Victorian State Committee .. . . .. .. .. .. 6266
Exhibit 733. —Particulars of cheques drawn on E.S. and A. Bank Ltd., Royal Bank Branch,
Melbourne, by New Theatre Club, credited to Victoria State Committee .. 6266
Exhibit 734. —Particulars of cheques drawn on Commercial Bank, by G. V. Scott, and
credited to Victorian State Committee .. .. .. . . .. 6267
Exhibit 735. —Particulars of cash cheques debited to Account of Victorian State Committee,
3rd August, 1943, to 21st July, 1949 .. . . . . .. .. 6267
Exhibit 736. —Particulars of cheques payable to M. Aarons, and deposited at the Commercial
Bank, debited to Victorian State Committee, with the Commonwealth
Bank, 3rd August, 1943, to 21st July, 1949 .. .. .. .. 6271
Exhibit 737. —Particulars of cheques, payable to A.S.F.L. and deposited at the Commonwealth
Bank of Australia, Melbourne, which were debited to A.C.P., Victorian State
Committee, 3rd August, 1943, to 21st July, 1949 .. .. .. 6217
Exhibit 738.—Particulars of cheques payable to the A.C.P., Central Committee, and deposited
at the Commercial Bank debited to A.C.P., Victorian State Committee with
the Commonwealth Bank, 3rd August, 1943, to 21st July, 1949 .. .. 6272
Exhibit 739. —Particulars of cheques payable to L. Donald and deposited at the Commercial
Bank debited to A.C.P., Victorian State Committee, with the Commonwealth
Bank, 3rd August, 1943, to 21st July, 1949 . . .. . . .. 6272
Exhibit 740. —Particulars of cheques, payable to International Bookshop Pty. Ltd. and
deposited at the E.S. & A. Bank or the Commonwealth Bank debited to
A.C.P., Victorian State Committee, with the Commonwealth Bank, 3rd
August, 1943, to 21st July, 1949 . . . . . . . . .. 6273
Exhibit 741. —Particulars of cheques payable to J. Simpson and deposited at the Commercial
Bank debited to A.C.P., 3rd August, 1943, to 21st July, 1949 . . . . 6273
Exhibit 742.- —Particulars of cheques payable to T. T. Watson, and deposited at the
Commonwealth Bank debited to the A.C.P., Victorian State Committee,
with the Commonwealth Bank, 3rd August, 1943, to 21st July, 1949 . . 6274
Exhibit 743. —Summary of the account of Brown, McGill and Baker with the Commonwealth
Bank, Geelong .. .. .. .. .. .. ;. 6275
Exhibit 744. —Account of O’Sullivan and Purcell, Commonwealth Bank, Bendigo . . 6276
Exhibit 745. —Summary of account of Federal Press with Commonwealth Bank, 3rd May,
1948, to 19th July, 1949 . . .. . . . . . . . . 6277
Exhibit 746. —Particulars of cash deposits credited to Federal Press Pty. Ltd., with
Commonwealth Bank, 3rd May, 1948, to 19th July, 1949 .. .. 6277
Exhibit 747. —Particulars of cheques drawn on the Commercial Banking Company of Sydney
by Australia-Soviet House, credited to Federal Press Pty. Ltd. with the
Commonwealth Bank, 3rd May, 1948, to 19th July, 1949 . . . . 6277
Exhibit 748. —Particulars of cheques drawn on the Commonwealth Savings Bank, Melbourne,
by Australian Railways Union, credited to Federal Press Pty. Ltd. with the
Commonwealth Bank, 3rd May, 1948, to 19th July, 1949 .. .. 6278
Exhibit 749. —Particulars of cheques drawn on the Bank of N.S.W. by R. C. Bretherton,
credited to Federal Press Pty. Ltd. with the Commonwealth Bank, 3rd May,
1948, to 19th July, 1949 . . . . . . . . . . .. 6278
Exhibit 750.—Particulars of cheques drawn on Commonwealth Savings Bank, Melbourne,
by 8.T.F., credited to Federal Press Pty. Ltd. with the Commonwealth Bank,
3rd May, 1948, to 19th July, 1949 . . . . . . . . .. 6278
Exhibit 751. —Particulars of cheques drawn on Commonwealth Bank by 8.W.1.U., credited
to Federal Press Pty. Ltd. with Commonwealth Bank, 3rd May, 1948, to
19th July, 1949 . . . . . . . . . . . . .. 6279
Exhibit 752.—Particulars of cheques drawn on the Bank of Australasia by the Clerks’ Union,
credited to Federal Press with Commonwealth Bank, 3rd May, 1948, to 19th
July, 1949 . . . . . . .. . . . . . . 6279
Exhibit 753.—Particulars of cheques drawn on Commonwealth Savings Bank by Federated
Ironworkers’ Association, credited to Federal Press Pty. Ltd. with the
Commonwealth Bank, 3rd May, 1948, to 19th July, 1949 . . . . 6279
Exhibit 754. —Particulars of cheques drawn on Commonwealth Bank by International
Bookshop Pty. Ltd., credited to Federal Press Pty. Ltd., with
Commonwealth Bank, 3rd May, 1948, to 19th July, 1949 .. .. 6280
4329/50.—9
Appendix “ C ” — continued.
List of Exhibits — continued.


Transcript
Page.
Exhibit 755. —Particulars of cheques drawn on E.S. & A. Bank Ltd., by the New Theatre,
credited to Federal Press Pty. Ltd. with Commonwealth Bank, 3rd May,
1948, to 19th July, 1949 . . . . . . . . . . . . 6280
Exhibit 756.—Particulars of cheques drawn on National Bank by Students’ Rep. Council,
credited to Federal Press Pty. Ltd. with Commonwealth Bank, 3rd May,
1948, to 19th July, 1949 . . .. . . . . . . . . 6280
Exhibit 757. —Particulars of cheques drawn on Commonwealth Bank of Australia by T. T.
Watson, credited to Federal Press Pty. Ltd. with the Commonwealth Bank,
3rd May to 19th July, 1949 . . . . . . .. . . . . 6281
Exhibit 758.—Particulars of cash cheques debited to Federal Press Pty. Ltd. with
Commonwealth Bank, 3rd May, 1948, to 19th July, 1949 . . . . 6282
Exhibit 759. —Photostats from W.A. . . .. . . . . . . . . .. 6291
Exhibit 760.—Copy of Forward, May 1943. (Authorized by the A.C.P. North West District)
Exhibit 761. —Communist Review, August, 1945 . . .. . . . . .. 6315
Exhibit 762. —Pamphlet Australian Communists and Soviet Russia, by L. L. Sharkey . . 6320
Exhibit 763. —Communist Review, November, 1946 .. .. .. .. .. 6347
Exhibit 764. —Communist Review, December, 1948 . . . . .. . . .. 6352
Exhibit 765.—Selected writings of Lenin and Stalin . . .. . . . . .. 6360
Exhibit 766. —Communist Review, September, 1944 .. .. .. .. .. 6361
Exhibit 767. —Tribune dated 28th May, 1949 . . .. .. .. .. .. 6362
Exhibit 768. —Vol. 6, Selected Works of Lenin . . . . . . . . . . . . 6367
Exhibit 769. —Speeches in Parliament, by Fred Paterson . . . . . . . . 6369
Exhibit 770.—Booklet The Deception of the People, by Lenin . . . . . . . . 6378
Exhibit 771. — Stalin: Marxism and the National Question . . . . . . . . 6382
Exhibit 772. —Pamphlet Democracy for Whom?, by L. L. Sharkey . . . . .. 6386
Exhibit 773. —Communist Review, June, 1949 .. . . . . . . .. . . 6391
Exhibit 774. —The State and Revolution, Lenin .. . . . . . . .. 6399
Exhibit 775. —Pamphlet The Crimes Act, by E. W. Campbell . . . . . . , . 6405
Exhibit 776.—Pamphlet The Upper House must Go, by H. B. Chandler . . . . . . 6405
Exhibit 777. —Communist Review, August, 1947 .. .. . . . . . . 6406
Exhibit 778. —Communist Review, July, 1948 .. .. .. .. .. .. 6407
Exhibit 779.— Leninism, by Joseph Stalin .. .. .. .. .. .. 6408
Exhibit 780. —Marx & Engels Selected Corresponder ce .. . . . . . . 6411
Exhibit 781. —Communist Review, May, 1947 . . . . .. . . . . . . 6418
Exhibit 782. —The Modern Quarterly, Autumn, 1946 .. .. . . . . . . 6421
Exhibit 783. — Guardian, 28th January, 1949 . . ~ .. .. . . . . 6429
Exhibit 784. —Pamphlet Thornton on “ Arbitration ” . . . . . . . . 6435
Exhibit 785. —Volume 21 of Little Lenin Library—Lenin and Stalin on Youth . . . . 6439
Exhibit 786. —Communist Review, April, 1946 . . .. . . .. . , , . 6440 a
Exhibit 787. —A straight talk on wages and prices, by Ralph Gibson . . . . . . 6457
Exhibit 788. —The Eighteenth Brumaire of Louis Bonaparte, by Karl Marx . . . . 6457
Exhibit 789. — Value, Price and Profit, by Karl Marx . . . . . . . . . . 6458
Exhibit 790. —Pamphlet The Gas Monopoly .. .. .. .. .. .. 6459
Exhibit 791. —Leaflet, Its Your Son they Want .. .. .. .. .. .. 6474
Exhibit 792. — Marx-Engels Marxism, by Lenin .. .. .. . . . . 6479
Exhibit 793. — Inprecar, 14th March, 1936 . . .. . . . . . . . . 6480
Exhibit 794. —Communist Review, December, 1948 . . . . .. . . . . 6480
Exhibit 795. —Articles headed The News Review (in Ex. 127) . . .. .. . . 6487
Exhibit 796. —Communist Review, August, 1943 . . . . . . . . . . 6489
Exhibit 797. —Communist Review, March, 1949 .. .. .. .. .. 6490
Exhibit 798. —Supplement to The Guardian of sth November, 1948 . . . . . . 6504
Exhibit 799. —Australia Marches On, by L. Sharkey . . . . . . . . . . 6516
Exhibit 800. —Communist Review, September, 1949 . . . . . . . . . , 6518
Exhibit 801. —The Story of Government Enterprise in Australia, by Sharkey & Campbell . . 6523
Exhibit 802. —Pamphlets on housing . . . . . . . , . . .. . . 6526
Exhibit 803. —Five issues of The Guardian . . . . . . . . . . . . 6530
Exhibit 804. —Pamphlet Every Farmer Well-to-do . . . , . . .. . . 6532
Exhibit 805. —Pamphlet A Real Social Insurance Plan, by Tom Wright . . . . . . 6533
Exhibit 806. —Pamphlet Social Services and the Struggle against the Economic Crisis . . 6534
Exhibit 807. —Pamphlet Who is Robbing You of Free Medicine . . . . . . . . 6535
Exhibit 808. —Pamphlet A New Deal for Women, and others concerning the home .. 6535
Exhibit 809.—Pamphlet Dunstan Starves our Education, and others relating to Mr. Dunstan 6536
Exhibit 810. —Pamphlet A Modern Tale of Two Cities, and two others on municipal affairs .. 6537
Exhibit 811.—Pamphlet Communists are Changing the World, by Ralph Gibson .. .. 6537
Exhibit 812. —Cutting from The Guardian, 28th February, 1948 . . . . .. .. 6541
Exhibit 813.— Socialism —Utopian and Scientific, by Engels . . . . . . . . 6561
Exhibit 814. —Leaflet J. B. Miles Calls for United Front with A.L.P. .. . . . . 6566
Exhibit 815. —The Communist Review, April, 1949 .. .. ~ .. .. 6568
Exhibit 816. —Letterhead of United Peace Council .. .. .. .. .. 6584
Exhibit 817. —Invitation headed United Peace Council . . . . . . . . . . 6585
Exhibit 818. —Appeal by the Victorian World Peace Congress Committee .. .. 6586
Appendix “ C ” — continued.
List of Exhibits — continued.


Transcript
Page.
Exhibit 819. —Cutting from The Guardian of 6th February, 1948 . . .. . . 6601
Exhibit 820. —Communist Review, July, 1945 .. .. .. .. .. .. 6608
Exhibit 821.—A.C.P. electoral leaflet .. .. .. .. .. .. .. 6614
Exhibit 822. —Manifesto of A.C.P. Communist Call to Electors .. .. .. .. 6615
Exhibit 823. —Communist Review, June, 1948 .. .. .. .. .. .. 6619
Exhibit 824.—The Age of sth April, 1949 . . . . .. . . .. . . 6631
Exhibit 825. —Lenin’s Selected Works, Vol. 3 .. .. .. .. .. .. 6631
Exhibit 826. —Pamphlet headed E. &E. News, (Elwood and Elsternwick News) .. .. 6657
Exhibit 827. — Guardian, Bth November, 1949 . . . . . . .. .. . . 6661
Exhibit 828. —Confidential document, list of names .. .. .. .. .. 6706
Exhibit 829. —Confidential documents, list of names .. . . .. . . . . 6708
Exhibit 830. —Pamphlet headed What is A.S.L.F.f . . . . . . . . . . 6727
Exhibit 831. —Guardian of 28th August, 1942, and of 11th September, 1942 .. .. 6727
Exhibit 832. —Leaflet headed For Consideration by all Workers .. .. .. 6732
Exhibit 833.—Booklet Programme of the Communist International, 1932 . . . . . . 6735
Exhibit 834. — Guardian, Ist July, 1949 .. .. .. .. .. .. 6739
Exhibit 835. —The Proletariat Revolution and the Renegade Kautsky, by Lenin . . .. 6759
Exhibit 836. —Report on the work of the Central Committee to the 18 th Congress of the
C.P.S.U. (B), by J. Stalin .. .. .. .. .. .. 6786
Exhibit 837. —The Teaching of Lenin and Stalin on Proletarian Revolution and The State, by
A. Y. Vyshinsky .. .. .. .. .. . . .. 6787
Exhibit 838.—Letter from the C.C. of the A.C.P. to the Secretary of the Communist Party,
Victoria, District Four, dated 28th July, 1932 .. .. .. .. 6830
Exhibit 839. —Universal Declaration of Human Rights . . . . . . . . 6882
Exhibit 840. —Pamphlet entitled The Rich get Richer, by Brian Fitzpatrick; Wealthy Men, by
Len Fox; People versus Banks, by E. W. Campbell; Monopoly . . . . 6896
Exhibit 841. —The Guardian, 25th October, 1949 .. .. .. . . . . 6923
Exhibit 842. —The Guardian, Ist November, 1949 . . .. . . .. . . 6926
Exhibit 843. —The Guardian, 11th November, 1949 .. .. .. .. .. 6926
Exhibit 844. —The Guardian, 14th July, 1949 . . .. .. . . . . . . 6933
Exhibit 845. —The Guardian, Bth July, 1949 .. .. .. .. .. .. 6934
Exhibit 846. —The Guardian, 24th June, 1949 . . .. .. .. .. .. 6935
Exhibit 847. —Pamphlet A United Working Glass, &c. .. . . . . .. . . 6939
Exhibit 848. —Programme of the A.C.P., published 1944 .. .. .. .. 6941
Exhibit 849. —Communist Programme Series No. 3, A Plan for the Fighting Man, August,
1944 .. . . . . . . . . .. .. 6942
Exhibit 850. —The Guardian, 28th January, 1944 .. .. .. .. .. 6944
Exhibit 851. —The Guardian, 25th February, 1944 .. .. .. .. .. 6945
Exhibit 852. —The Guardian, 10th March, 1944 . . . . . . . . . . 6945
Exhibit 853. —The Guardian, 3rd March, 1944 .. .. .. .. .. .. 6945
Exhibit 854. —The Guardian, 24th March, 1944 .. .. .. .. .. .. 6947
Exhibit 855. —The Guardian, 2nd June, 1944 . . .. . . . . .. 6947
Exhibit 856. —The Guardian, Ist September, 1944 .. .. .. .. .. 6947
Exhibit 857. —The Guardian, Bth December, 1944 . . . . . . . . .. 6948
Exhibit 858. —The Guardian, 27th April, 1945 . . . . . . . . . . . . 6948
Exhibit 859. —The Guardian, 19th January, 1945 .. .. .. .. . . 6949
Exhibit 860; —The Guardian, 16th February, 1945 . . . . . . . . . . 6949
Exhibit 861. —The Guardian, 16th March, 1945 . . .. . . . . . . . . 6949
Exhibit 862. —The Guardian, 2nd March, 1945 . . . . . . . . . . . . 6949
Exhibit 863. —The Guardian, 12th January, 1945 .. .. .. .. .. 6950
Exhibit 864. —The Guardian, 9th February, 1945 .. .. .. .. .. 6950
Exhibit 865. —The Guardian, 20th April, 1945 . . .. . . .. .. .. 6951
Exhibit 866.—Report of the C.C. from 13th to 14th Congress . . . . . . . . 6955
Exhibit 867. —Communist Review, February, 1944 .. . . . . .. .. 6958
Exhibit 868.—Pamphlet, Civvy Street .. .. .. .. . . .. .. 6958
Exhibit 869. —Transcript of proceedings at Hawthorn Town Hall, 1940 . . . . . . 6965
Exhibit 870. —The Guardian, 14th September, 1945 . . . . . . . . . . 6975
Exhibit 871.- —The Guardian, Bth March, 1946 . . . . . . . . . . . . 6976
Exhibit 872. —The Guardian, 29th June, 1945 . . . . . . . . . . . . 6977
Exhibit 873. —The Guardian, 21st May, 1948 . . . . . . . . . . . . 6988
Exhibit 874. —Leaflets, Who’s Loyal to Who? They fought Fascism. Now they’re disloyal 7021
Exhibit 875. —Pamphlet entitled Railway Service in Chaos .. . . .. . . 7043
Exhibit 876. —Ballot Paper—A.R.U. .. .. .. .. .. .. .. 7044
Exhibit 877.—A.R.U. State Secretary’s Report, 1948 . . . . . . . . .. 7064
Exhibit 878. —Extract from Minutes of meeting of Joint Executives of A.R.U. and A.F.U.L.E.,
16th January, 1948 .. .. .. . . .. .. .. 7095
Exhibit 879. —Extract from Minutes of meeting of A.R.U. State Branch Executive, 27th
January, 1948 .. .. .. .. .. .. .. 7096
Exhibit 880. —Pamphlet headed The Facts of the Attacks on the Trade Union Movement .. 7100
Exhibit 881. —Pamphlet, Railway Service in Chaos! (Ex. 875) first part, and also pamphlet
headed The Commissioners to You .. .. .. .. .. 7146
Appendix “ C ” — continued.
List of Exhibits — continued.


Transcript
Page.
Exhibit 882. —The Sydney Morning Herald, 18th September, 1931 . . . . . . 7174
Exhibit 883. —Extract from The Sun (Sydney), 17th September, 1931 . . . . . . 7176
Exhibit 884. —Leaflet, Stop Hallway’s Attack on Worker’s Conditions . . . . . . 7185
Exhibit 885.—Leaflet, Your Liberties—Your Living Standards Threatened . . .. 7187
Exhibit 886. —Rules of the A.R.U. 1937 . . . . . . . . . . . . 7193
Exhibit 887. —Letter dated 22nd June, 1948, from T. Crimeen, addressed Dear Frank . . 7194
Exhibit 888. —Letter 4th August, 1948, J. J. Brown to Scully . . . . . . . . 7197
Exhibit 889. —Letters dated (1) 6th, (2) 13th, (3) 22nd, and (4) 28th July, 1948, from J. J.
Brown to F. R. Scully . . . . . . . . . . . . 7203
Exhibit 890. —Letter dated 6th October, 1948, from A.R.U. to Mr. F. Scully . . . . 7207
Exhibit 891.—Railways Union Gazette, June, 1949 . . . . . . . . .. 7211
Exhibit 892. —Telegram, Brown to Scully .. .. .. .. .. .. 7215
Exhibit 893. —Letter, 23rd May, 1949, Brown to Mr. F. Scully . . . . . . . . 7219
Exhibit 894. —The Railways Union Gazette, September and November, 1948 . . . . 7220
Exhibit 895. —File of letters between J. J. Brown, State Secretary, Australian Railways Union,
and Mr. F. G. Keating .. . . . . . . . . . . 7229
Exhibit 896.—Copy of Minutes of mass meeting, West Melbourne Stadium, 29th October, 1946 7239
Exhibit 897. —Circular dated 18th November, 1949, signed by Brown . . . . .. 7250
Exhibit 898. —Copy of report of visit by J. J. Brown to T. Crimeen .. .. 7274
Exhibit 899. —Regulations under Essential Services Act . . . . . . . . 7279
Exhibit 900. —The Communist, 26th May, 1922 . . . . . . . . . . .. 7289
Exhibit 901. —List of names (confidential) . . . . . . . . . . . . 7297
Exhibit 902. —The Guardian, 22nd April, 1949 . . . . . . . . . . . . 7357
Exhibit 903. —The Guardian, 3rd June, 1949 . . .. . . . . . . .. 7366
Exhibit 904. —The Guardian, 25th June, 1949 . . . . . . . . . . . . 7368
Exhibit 905. —The Guardian, 2nd July, 1949 . . . . . . . . . . . . 7370
Exhibit 906. —The Guardian, sth July, 1949 . . . . . . . , . . . . 7371
Exhibit 907. —The Guardian, 29th April, 1949 . . .. . . . . . . ~ 7372
Exhibit 908. —Leaflet headed Royal Commission’s biassed Judge and perjured Witness . . 7376 a
Exhibit 909.—Leaflet headed Stop Hallway’s Witch Hunt .. .. .. .. 7382
Exhibit 910. —Proletariat of October-December, 1935 .. . . . . . . . , 7408
Exhibit 911. — Workers’ Voice, 15th May, 1937 . . . . . . . . . . . . 7413
Exhibit 912. —Leaflet Stop Gaoling of Workers’ Leaders . . . . . . . . 7436
Exhibit 913. —Youth Voice, May, 1949 . . . . . . . . . . . . 7438
Exhibit 914. —The Guardian, 22nd November, 1949 . . . . . . . . . . 7466
Exhibit 915. —The Guardian, 30th April, 1948 . . . . . . . . , . . . 7463
Exhibit 916. —Communist Review, December, 1949 . . . . . . . . . . 7509
Exhibit 917-. —Soviets To-day, Ist June, 1938 .. .. .. .. .. .. 7530
Exhibit 918. —Voumard’s Brief (Henderson v. Morris) .. . . . . . , . . 7579
Exhibit 918 a foolscap sheets, from Ex. 918 . . .. . . . . . . 7579
Exhibit 919. —Proof of G. Morris’s evidence . . . . .. . . . . . . 7583
Exhibit 920.—Hill’s Brief (Henderson v. Morris) . . . . . . . , . . 7596
Exhibit 921. —The Guardian, 28th July, 1949 .. .. .. .. . . .. 7693
Exhibit 922. —Their Masters Voice, pamphlet . . . . .. . . . . . . 7708 a
Exhibit 923. —Leaflet entitled Wharfle, dated 25th August, 1949. . . . . . . . 7708 a
Exhibit 924. —The Guardian, 14th April, 1949 . . . . .. . . . . . . 7709
Exhibit 925. —Summary of Articles of Association registered by Housewives’ Association . . - 7722
Exhibit 926. — Housewives’ Budget, publication of Fairfield Housewives, No. 1, July, 1948 . . 7728
Exhibit 927. —Letter from Housewives’ Association to Mrs. Bonnar, dated 9th September, 1948 7729
Exhibit 928. —Cutting from The Age, 22nd July, 1948 . . . . . . . . . . 7730
Exhibit 929. —Letter from Housewives’ Association to Mrs. Baldwin, 22nd July, 1948 .. 7730
Exhibit 930. —Copy of letter from Mrs. Baldwin to Miss R. Robinson, 9th August, 1948 . . 7732
Exhibit 931. —Roneoed Monthly News Letter No. 3 of Housewives’ Association, Ist September,
1948 .. .. .. .. .. .. .. .. 7733
Exhibit 932. —Letter from Housewives’ Association to Mrs. D. Bonnar, 20th August, 1948 . . 7737
Exhibit 933. —Letter from Housewives’ Association to Mrs. P. L. Pickford, sth November, 7739
1948 .. .. .. .. .. .. .. 7739
Exhibit 934. —Circular letter to Branches of Housewives’ Association and other Committees,
with draft constitution . . . . , . . . . , . . 7748
Exhibit 935. —The Guardian, 17th October, 1947 . . . . . . . . . . 7767
Exhibit 936. —Communist Review, March, 1947 . . . . . . . . . . . . 7771
Exhibit 937. —The Guardian, 18th June, 1948 . . . . . . . . . . . . 7774
Exhibit 938. —The Guardian, 23rd July, 1948 . . . . . . . . . . . . 7781
Exhibit 939. —The Guardian, 27th August, 1948 .. . . . . . . . . 7787
Exhibit 940. —The Guardian, 2nd August, 1940 .. .. .. .. .. .. 7790
Exhibit 941. —The Guardian, Ist October, 1948 . . . . . . . . . . . . 7792
Exhibit 942. —The Guardian, 19th November, 1948 .. .. .. .. .. 7794
Exhibit 943. —The Guardian, 26th November, 1948 .. . . . . . . . . 7795
Exhibit 944. —Photograph of Eureka Day March, sth December, 1948 . . . . . . 7800
Exhibit 945. —Photograph of May Day Procession, 1949 .. .. .. .. 7801
Exhibit 946. —Photograph of May Day Procession 1949 .. .. .. .. 7801
Appendix “ C ” — continued.
List of Exhibits— continued.


Transcript
Page.
Exhibit 947. —Application form for membership of the New Housewives’ Association . . 7803
Exhibit 948. —Typed document headed Medical Education .. .. ■ ■ ■ ■ 7811
Exhibit 949.—Speakers’ Notes on National Health Services Bill . . . . . . . . 7812
Exhibit 950. —Introduction to speakers’ notes on the National Health Services Act .. 7813
Exhibit 951. —Letters dated 23rd November, 1949, Crown Solicitor to J. C. Chandler, and reply,
29th November, 1949, from J. M. Lazarus . . . . . . 7906
Exhibit 952. —The Guardian, 9th July, 1949 .. .. . . .. . . .. 7909
Exhibit 953. — Tribune, 20th July, 1949 . . . . . . . . . . 7910
Exhibit 954. —Rent book for premises, Canterbury-road, St. Kilda 7938
Exhibit 955. —Communist Review, May, 1949 . . .. .. . . .. . ■ 7948
Exhibit 956. —Certified copy of Certificate of Marriage . . ■ ■ • • ■ • •• 7958
Exhibit 957. —Guardian of 12th August, 1939 .. .. .. .. . • • • 7980
Exhibit 958. —Copy of The Guardian, 25th October, 1939 .. . . ■ • • • 7982
Exhibit 959.—Sketch plan of Clerks’ Union offices .. . . • • 8047
Exhibit 960. —Circular letter Ist May, 1945, from the Clerks’ Union . . . . .. 8056
Exhibit 961. —Circular letter, 3rd May, 1945, from the Clerks’ Union . . . . . . 8057
Exhibit 962. —Copy Arbitration Court File, Miscellaneous 95 of 1945 . . . . . . 8062
Exhibit 963. —The Clerk, March, 1949 .. .. ■ • ■ ■ 8083
Exhibit 964.—List of number of receipt books missing (Clerks’ Union) . . . . . . 8123
Exhibit 965. —Signature of A. R. McClintock .. .. .. .. .. • • 8144
Exhibit 966. —Letter dated 13th December, 1949, from J. C. Chandler to Crown-Solicitor .. 8163
Exhibit 967. —Statement made by witness Henry to Crown Law Officer . . . . 8188
Exhibit 968.— The Guardian, 25th May, 1945 .. .. .. .. .. • ■ 8204
Exhibit 969.—Copy Guardian, 21st June, 1939 .. .. .. .. .. ■ • 8208
Exhibit 970. —Deed Poll for Change of Name, Ewer to Johnson, 12th October, 1939 . . 8210
Exhibit 971.—Specimen of writing of Johnson .. .. . • • • • • 8214
Exhibit 972. —Application for Motor Cycle Driver’s Licence, No. 530266, 23rd December, 1937 8214
Exhibit 973. —Form of Application for Car Driver’s Licence, No. 764737, 14th April, 1948 8216
Exhibit 974.—Nomination of Authorized Insurer, 23rd November, 1949 .. .. .. 8217
Exhibit 975. —Two Certificates of Summary Conviction dated 7th August, 1947 . . . . 8217
Exhibit 976.—Pamphlet Stop the War—Fight the Budget .. .. .. . • 8221
Exhibit 977. —Leaflet Manifesto, Communist Call to Defend Australia .. .. .. 8223
Exhibit 978. —The Guardian, 9th August, 1939 . . .. .. .. . . ■ • 8232
Exhibit 979.— The Guardian, 23rd March, 1945 .. .. .. .. • - • • 8234
Exhibit 980. —File from Registrar-General’s Office re Screen Printz Pty. Ltd. . . .. 8243
Exhibit 981. —List containing names of shareholders in Screen Printz Pty. Ltd. . . .. 8247
Exhibit 982.—Blarney poster . . . . . . .. .. .. . . • • 8248
Exhibit 983. —The Guardian, 22nd July, 1939 . . .. .. .. .. . . 8249
Exhibit 984. —The Guardian, 15th October, 1948 .. .. .. .. • • 8290
Exhibit 985. —The Guardian, 18th March, 1949 .. .. .. .. .. • • 8300
Exhibit 986.—References given to Williams . . .. .. .. . . • • 8360
Exhibit 987.—Bundle of five ballot papers for 1946 election, F.E.D.F.A. .. .. . . 8368
Exhibit 988. — Guardian, 16th December, 1949 . . .. .. .. ■ • • • 8470
Exhibit 989. —Circular, Clerk’s Union, 29th October, 1948 . . . . . . • • 8546
Exhibit 990. —Daily Receipt Book Register . . .. .. . . • • • ■ 8548
Exhibit 991. —Advertisement inserted in Age and Argus .. .. . • • ■ 8556
Exhibit 992. —Letter Thomas Urquhart and Son Pty. Ltd. to J. M. Lazarus, 18th June, 1947 8556
Exhibit 993. —Letter from P.M.G.’s Department, 11th June, 1947 . . . . .. 8557
Exhibit 994.—Declaration of ballot, Clerk’s Union from R. 0., 7th July, 1947 . . . . 8560
Exhibit 995.—Scrutineer’s Certificate, dated 7th July, 1947, and Returning Officer’s
Certificate, dated 23rd July, 1947 .. .. .. .. .. 8564
Exhibit 996.—Receipt Book No. A. 2301-2400 . . .. .. . . . . . . 8566
Exhibit 997. —Receipt Book No. A. 77201-77400 . . .. . . . . . . . . 8567
Exhibit 998.—Receipt Book No. A. 79401-79600 . . .. . . . . . . .. 8568
Exhibit 999. —Receipt Book No. A. 79801-80000 . . .. .. . . . . . . 8569
Exhibit 1000. —Receipt Book No. A.BOOOl-80200 .. .. . . . . . . 8570
Exhibit 1001.—Receipt Book No. 85401-85600 . . .. . . . . . . . . 8571
Exhibit 1002. —Copy from Customers Safe Custody Register, Bank of Australasia . . . . 8629
Exhibit 1003.—Letter 9th August, 1948, from witness Meyer to J. J. O’Donnell . . . . 8655
Exhibit 1004. —Letter 16th July, 1948, from F. J. Meyer to E. W. Peters . . . . . . 8671
Exhibit 1005. —Pamphlet headed, An Appeal to all members of the Commonwealth Section 8680
Exhibit 1006. —Minutes of State Council Meeting, Clerks’ Union, 20th February, 1949 . . 8714
Exhibit 1007.—Minutes of State Council Meeting held on 15th May, 1949. . . . . . 8719
Exhibit 1008. —Minutes of State Council Meeting held on 31st July, 1949.. .. .. 8731
Exhibit 1009. —Copy of letter 25th August, 1948, F. J. Meyer to E. W. Peters .. .. 8748
Exhibit 1010. —Extract of Minutes of State Executive, dated 12th June, 1945 .. .. 8755
Exhibit 1011.—Extract of Minutes of Branch Executive Meeting, 26th June, 1945 .. 8756
Exhibit 1012.—Extract of Minutes of State Executive, 3rd July, 1945 . . .. . . 8757
Exhibit 1013. —State Executive Report, April, 1946 . . .. . . . . . . 8770
Exhibit 1014.—Original of Branch Secretary’s Report, October, 1946 . . . . . . 8771
Exhibit 1015. —Branch Secretary’s Report, October, 1947 .. .. .. • ■ 8771
Appendix “ C ” — continued.
List of Exhibits — continued.


Transcript
Page.
Exhibit 1016.—Branch Secretary’s Report, July, 1948 .. .. .. .. .. 8722
Exhibit 1017. —Report of 27th Federal Conference, Brisbane, April, 1948 .. .. .. 8774
Exhibit 1018. —Pamphlet headed, Stop .. .. .. .. .. .. .. 8776
Exhibit 1019.—Letter Lazarus to Meyer, 15th July, 1947 .. .. . . . . 8781
Exhibit 1020. —Circular letter, 23rd May, 1946 . . . . . . .. .. . . 8787
Exhibit 1021. —Leaflet, Trade Union’s Defence League, Communists’ all-out offensive against
Clerk’s Union, 20th February, 1945 ... .. .. .. .. 8837
Exhibit 1022. —Rules, Australian Builders’ Labourers’ Federation .. .. .. 8885
Exhibit 1023. —Returning Officer’s Report, dated Bth September, 1947, P. H. Christie .. 8902
Exhibit 1024. —Minutes of Meeting of Builders Workers’ Federation, 27th August, 1946 . . 8934
Exhibit 1025. —Auditor’s Report, C. H. McDermott, Chartered Accountant, dated 14th
August, to 8.W.1.U. .. . . . . .. . . . . . . 8935
Exhibit 1026.—Ironworkers’ Union, Victorian Branch election for 1945, voting results . . 8961
Exhibit 1027. —Ballot for National Officers, January, 1945 .. .. .. .. 8965
Exhibit 1028. —The Guardian, 9th April, 1948 . . .. .. .. .. .. 9019
Exhibit 1029. —The Guardian, 4th August, 1944 .. .. .. .. .. .. 9022
Exhibit 1030.—Minutes of Committee of Management Meeting, 13th January, 1948 .. 9050
Exhibit 1031. —Minutes of Committee of Management Meeting, 10th February, 1948 .. 9050
Exhibit 1032. —Rules of Australasian Meat Industry Employees’ Union .. .. .. 9053
Exhibit 1033.—Application card for membership in Actors’ Equity . . . . .. 9077
Exhibit 1034. —List headed, Approximate Financial Membership at June, 1948 . . .. 9085
Exhibit 1035.—Plan of the New Theatre .. .. .. .. .. .. 9086
Exhibit 1036. —Two copy letters, 29th August, 1947, from David N. Martin to General
Secretary, Actors’ Equity, and reply thereto, Ist September, 1947 . . 9109
Exhibit 1037.—Letter dated sth September, 1949, Hickling to Secretary, Actors’ Equity .. 9110
Exhibit 1038. —Extract from Minutes of Quarterly General Meeting, 7th September, 1949 .. 9111
Exhibit 1039. —Extract of Minutes of Divisional Committee, dated 29th August, 1949 .. 9113
Exhibit 1040.—Extract of Minutes of Divisional Committee, dated sth September, 1949 .. 9113
Exhibit 1041.—Extract of Minutes of Victorian Divisional Committee, 19th September, 1949 9114
Exhibit 1042. —Letter dated 30th October, 1949, from Miss Isles to Secretary, Actors’
Equity . . . . . . . . . . . . .. .. 9114
Exhibit 1043. —Equity News, January, 1950 .. .. .. .. .. .. 9129
Exhibit 1044. —Equity News, October, 1949 ... .. .. .. .. .. 9143
Exhibit 1045.—File from D.A.P. records . . .. .. .. .. . . 9152
Exhibit 1046. —File, Local Trades Committee, Department of Labour and National Service .. 9154
Exhibit 1047. —Communist Review, April, 1945 .. .. .. .. .. 9163
Exhibit 1048. —Letter, 11th December, 1944, Diamond to W. Lamble, and copy letter, 12th
December, 1944 .. .. .. .. .. .. .. 9167
Exhibit 1049. —The Guardian, 26th January, 1945 . . .. .. . . . . 9171
Exhibit 1050. —The Guardian, 22nd August, 1947 .. .. .. .. .. 9175
Exhibit 1051.—Copy of Minute, Actors’ Equity Meeting, Bth December, 1944 .. .. 9208 a
Exhibit 1052. —Copy letter, dated 26th October, 1949, from Diamond to H. Alexander . 9211
Exhibit 1053. —Reference dated 27th October, 1944, D. A. P. to R. Diamond .. .. 9213
Exhibit 1054.—List of Secretaries’ names and addresses of A.E.U. branches .. .. 9289
Exhibit 1055. —List of A.E.U. Branch Meeting dates, September, 1948, to September 1949,
inclusive .. .. .. .. .. .. .. .. 9290
Exhibit 1056. —Correspondence Southwell with A.E.U. Commonwealth Council .. .. 9297
Exhibit 1057. —Application for leave by Tennant and Medical certificate Dr. L. F. Edmunds,
12th November, 1947 .. .. .. .. .. .. .. 9342
Exhibit 1058. —Application for leave by Tennant and Medical certificate Dr. L. F. Edmunds,
27th May, 1949 . . . . .. . . . . .. .. 9342
Exhibit 1059. —Application for leave by Tennant and Medical certificate Dr. L. F. Edmunds,
18th August, 1949 . . .. .. . . . . . . .. 9342
Exhibit 1060.—Medical certificate Dr. McDonald, 17th March, 1949, and application for leave
by Tennant .. .. .. .. .. .. .. .. 9344
Exhibit 1061. —Record of Tennant’s recreation and sick leave card .. .. .. 9344
Exhibit 1062. —Series of applications for leave without pay made by Tennant .. .. 9345
Exhibit 1063. —Pence card, A.E.U. . . .. .. .. .. .. 9380
Exhibit 1064.—List of Branch Secretaries of the A.E.U. .. .. .. .. 9380
Exhibit 1065.—A.E.U. Journal, May, 1949 .. . . .. .. .. .. 9380
Exhibit 1066. —Letter 11th April, 1949, from A.E.U. to Maxwell .. .. .. .. 9381
Exhibit 1067.—Circular of the White Campaign, 3rd November, 1948 .. .. .. 9385
Exhibit 1068.—Circular, 18th July, 1945, issued by Commonwealth Council, A.E.U. .. 9401
Exhibit 1069. —Statement headed, Record of All Votes Cast, 1948, compiled by J. Chandler
from Exhibits .. .. .. .. .. .. .. 9490
Exhibit 1070. —Circular, Ist December, 1948, to Brunswick members (8.W.1.U.) .. .. 9494
Exhibit 1071. —Extract from S.M.C. Minutes, 9th April, 1946. Extract from S.M.C. Minutes,
15th May, 1946 . . .. .. .. .. .. .. 9499
Appendix “ C ” — continued.
List of Exhibits — continued.


Transcript
Page.
Exhibit 1072. —Half-yearly report of Victorian S.M.C. (8.W.1.U.) .. .. • • 9567
Exhibit 1073. —Returning Officer’s certificate, Society of Carpenters and Joiners
annual elections, December, 1946 .. .. .. • ■ • • 9568
Exhibit 1074. —Returning Officer’s certificate, 8.W.1.U. Annual Elections, December, 1947 .. 9568
Exhibit 1075. —Envelope with word Richmond endorsed thereon .. .. .. .. 9587
Exhibit 1076.—Personal file relating to J. W. Bevan .. . . . . .. • • 9655
Exhibit 1077. —Cutting headed, £192 Wages recovered .. . . . ■ • ■ 9657
Exhibit 1078. —Application card signed by Rex Mortimer .. 9734
Exhibit 1079. —Comparison of votes, Clerks’ Union . . .. . . . . • • 9737
Exhibit 1080. —Minute of 17th December, Clerks’ Union .. .. .. ■ ■ 9738
Exhibit 1081. —Statement of George Morris (copy) .. .. .. ■ • • • 9754
Exhibit 1082. —Aircraft passenger tickets (L. Donald) . . . . ■ ■ • • • • 9788
Exhibit 1083. —Affidavit of Cassidy, 20th December, 1949 .. . • • • • • 9790
Appendix “ C ” — continued.
List of Exhibits — continued.


APPENDIX “D"
LIST OF PERSONS WHO AS SHOWN BY THE EVIDENCE ARE OR HAVE
BEEN MEMBERS OF THE VICTORIAN BRANCH OF THE A.C.P.
N.B.—The date after a name indicates that this is the latest date at which
the evidence refers to the person named as a member of the A.C.P.
Wherever there is a doubt as to whether a person is shown by the evidence
to he a member the name does not appear in this list.
Tr. pp. 5383,7663. Aanenson (Snipe). (1939-40.)
Tr. p. 5386. Aanenson (Ted). (1939-40.)
Tr. p. 5388. Aanneson, Grace. (1939-40).
Tr.pp. 4361, 4363, Acheson, William Robert (Electrician).
9726. '
Tr. pp. 1046,3756 Adams, Claude (B.W.I.U.)
3918, 6821, 9607, 9534.
Ex. 662.
Tr. pp. 849, 992, 6055.
Aird, Ian (Journalist).
Tr. pp. 6824, 7417. Alderman, T. (expelled in 1945 or 1946).
Tr. pp. 1016. 9038. Allen, Lester (Butchers’ Union).
Tr. p. ices. Allen (Organizer Seamen’s Union).
Tr. p.6421. Allen (Snowy). (Party Press.) (1939-40.)
Tr. pp. 1063, 8465, Armstrong, Henry (Plumbers’ Union).
8492, 8901.
Tr. pp. 2826, 5081,
Arnold, Victor (New Theatre).
6809, 6826. Ex. 664.
Tr. pp. 829,1097. Arrowsmith (John).
8999, 9032.
Tr. pp. 2649, 9239. Arter (Assistant Organizer of the A.E.U.).
9400.
Tr. p. 7722. Baldwin, Peggy Greenwood (New Housewives).
Tr. pp. 6290a, 6297, Barnes, Les (former Treasurer of A.C.P. in Victoria).
6858, 8249. Ex. 893.
Tr. p. 6664. Ex. ass. Baracchi, Guido. (1932.)
Tr. pp. 907, 2626, Barter, J. W. (Victorian State Treasurer of the A.C.P.).
6173, 7340. Ex. 366.
Tr. pp. 6320a et seq.
Bell, Frank (Brighton Unit of A.C.P.). (1939-40.)
Tr. pp. 6283-4,5317, Bennett, Marjorie (now Mrs. Brian Oke).
5626.
Tr. pp. 829,841,863, Berman, Clement (A.C.P. organizer).
868, 1126, 8281.
Tr. pp. 841, 8255. Bevan, John Walter (A.C.P. organizer).
8277.
Tr. p. 5338. Beveridge. (1939-40.)
Tr. p. 5.1063. Bird, Victor (State Secretary of the Seamen’s Union. A member of the
Victorian Executive of the A.C.P.).
Tr. p. 6808. Blackshaw, V., Miss.
Tr. pp. 829, 7436-7. Blake, Audrey (member of the State Committee of the A.C.P. National Secretary
of the Eureka Youth League).
Tr. p. 5389. Blake, H. (Taxi Drivers’ Unit of the A.C.P.). (1939-40.)
Tr. pp. 6, 697. Blake, John David (Jack). (Member of the State Executive of the A.C.P.
Previously the leader and Secretary of the Victorian Branch of the party.)
Tr. P . 6826. Boardman, J. G. (there is some doubt as to the correct initials of this person).
Tr. pp. 5400,5870. Bodsworth (ceased to be a member between the latter part of 1939 and middle
of 1940).
Tr. pp. 873-4,5780. Booley, Harold (member of the A.R.U. and the A.L.P.).
Tr. pn. 829. Ex. io. Bourke, Vin (Director of Marx School in Victoria).
Tr. p. 6713.
Tr. pp. 6403, 6406a, Boyd, Clarrie (Secretary of the South Metropolitan District of the A.C.P.).
6868.
Tr. pp. 836, 897,6846, Bretherton, Dr. R. C.
and Ex. 669.
Tr. pp. 6278, 9315,
9336-7, 9352, 7816.
T r . p. 3181 et seq. Brew, J. (A.C.P. campaign director for Federal Election of 1934).
Ex. 275.
Tr.pp.834,866,8241. Brilliant, Rivke (Rivka). (Member of the Youth Sub-committee of the A.C.P.
Organizer for the Eureka Youth League.)
Tr. pp. 1049,7027. Brown, John Joseph (Federal President and Victorian State Secretary of the
7111 - 2 - A.R.U.).
Tr. pp. 6166, 6437. Brown, Max (Reporter in the Age office). (1939-40.)
Tr. pp. 4112,4114, Buckle, Ernest (Secretary of the Melbourne City Sub-branch of the B.W.I.U.
5816, 6821,9508. who left the party in 1946).
Tr. pp. 8363, 9175. Buller, J. (member of the Ironworkers’ Union).
Ex. 1060.
Tr.p.9635. Burchett, Bob (B.W.I.U.).
Tr. pp. 4176, 9579. Burchett, Clive (B.W.I.U.).
Tr. pp. 6154. 5316, Burkett, Grace (Mothers’ Club Executive). (1939-40.)
5339, see Report
p. 100.
Tr. p. 6027. Burley (Secretary of the A.C.P. at Mildura). (1931.)
635o?^575o-i,’862i.’ Cameron, Grace (formerly Grace Elliott). (Clerks’Union organizer.)
Tr. P p. 6617-8. Challis, Syd. (shop steward of the A.E.U.). (1943-4.)


List of persons who as shown by the evidence are or have been members of the
Victorian branch of the A.C.P. — continued.
Chandler, Joseph Charles (Secretary of the Victorian Branch of the B.W.I.U.).Tr.pp. 1035,3755,
9428.
Chappie, Linda (wife of J. J. Brown). (Clerks’ Union.) Tr. pp. 5867, 8187-8.
Charlesworth, Frederick William (B.W.I.U.). Tr. pp. 3783, esie.
_ . , 9646.
Chiphn, Rex (reporter for the Guardian). Tr . pp . 786 i e t seq.
Christie, P. H. (Builders’ Labourers’ Federation). Tr. pp. 2039,8902.
Clarey, Mrs. (Caulfield). (1939-40.) Tr . P . 5447.’
Clark, Duncan (Journalist). Tr. PP . 849,1097.
1795, 7489. ’
Clark, Stan (Oakleigh). (1944.) Tr. P . 8998.
Clayton (Internation Book Shop). (1941.) Tr. P . 2718. Ex. 286.
Clifford (A.R.U.). Tr. pp. 791, 1049.
7246.
Cohen, Lela (former Treasurer of the North-west District of the A.C.P.). Tr. pp. 6827.6829.
7464.
Coldicutt (Realist Film Association). Tr. pp. 6071,7779.
Collein (Middle Park). (Greek Unit of the A.C.P.). (1939-40.) Tr. PP . 5395-6.
Collins (this man was also known as Cavell). (Boilermakers’ Union.) (1939-40.) Tr. p. esse.
Collins (South Port District of the A.C.P.). (1939-40.) Tr. PP . 5157-8,7929,
7972.
Connelly, Miss (sister-in-law of the witness, Sharpley). T r. P . sss.
Constantine, Leslie M. (breadcarter and former ironworker). Tr . pp . 981i 3993.
Cook (Postal Workers’ Union). Tr. p. icee.
Corke, Dr. Winifred (now deceased). Tr.p. 78is.
Coull, J. (State Secretary of the Federated Liquor Trades Union). Tr. PP . loss, isis,
5827. Ex. 664.
Tr. pp. 6660-1, 8535
et seq., 8605, et seq.
Ex. 10.
Counihan, Noel (Artist). Tr. PP . 914,2780.
Counihan, Pat. (1944.) Tr. p. 3999.
Crawford, Ursula (formerly Miss Hill, then Mrs. Crowther, and now Mrs. Tr.pp. 701,748.
Southwell). Ex. 143. Tr.p. 7418.
Cregan, A. Tr. p. 6660.
Crew, Arthur. Tr. pp. 5327,7937-8,
7939-9A, 7953.
Crisp, Keith (Jeweller). (1948.) Tr. PP . sss, 1123,
2622.
Crother, J. (journalist on the Guardian). Tr.p. 701.
Crossland, Mr. and Mrs. (Parkdale). (1939-40.) Tr. pp. 5411-2.
Crow, Maurice Stuart (Clerks’ Union). Tr . pp. sis, 8792.
Crowley. (1939-40). Tr.p. 5420.
Curlewis, Mrs. Joan (wee Reynolds). (Eureka Youth League.) Tr. PP . 866, 5414-5,
8286. Ex.’156.
D’Altera, S. (A.C.P. candidate for Heidelberg municipal election in 1947). Tr. P . 9175. ex. 1050.
Davey, Humphrey (St. Kilda). (1945.) Tr. p. ssie.
Davidson, Nellie Mrs. (Sunshine). (Party name “ Steel ”.) Tr. p P . 6283, 5317,
5846, 6183-4.
Day, Stan (President of the A.C.P. Branch at Johns and Waygood). (1948.) Tr. p. 9S63a.
Delaland, Grace. Tr. pp. 6i48, 5394,
7979-80. See also
Tr. pp. 701 and 5339.
Diamond, Richard (Victorian Secretary of Actors’ Equity. A member of the Tr. pp. 1014, 9065.
A.C.P. between the years 1938-44).
Digallatos, G. (now deceased). (Greek unit of the A.C.P.) T r. P . 5396.
Dinan, James (Clerks’ Union —Shipping Section). Tr.pp. 2005 2884,
8024, 8559, 8631, 8762
Dobbin, Dr. Alexander Hamilton. Tr. pp . 836, 7807.
Doig, W. (member of the Victorian State Committee of the A.C.P.). Tr. p. 829.
Donald, Len (Victorian Secretary of the A.C.P. from 1933-37). Tr . pp. 700, 6595,
7533.
Donegan, J. (Ships Painters and Dockers’ Union). Tr . PP . 963,8962.
Report p. 76.
Donovan, Frank (Timberworkers’Union). Tr.pp. 701,5295,
6431, 5780, 6859.
Doyle, “ Doc ”. (Victorian State Secretary of the Ships Painters and Dockers’ Tr. PP . sei, 1050,
■ ■. 2143, 6805.
Union).
Down, Rex (Chelsea). Tr.pp.9658-9.
Duffy, Tom (Coburg East). Tr.p. 9730.
Dunsmore, Miss (Camberwell). (1939-40.) Tr.p. 5326.
Dye, Julie (reporter on the Guardian). Tr. p. see. Ex. 935.
Tr. p. 7767. Ex. 166
Ebbels, N. (University student). (1948.) Tr.p.894. Ex.i68.
Edmonds, Lloyd (former schoolteacher, later with the Department of Labour and Tr. BP . 5405, bsss.
National Service). &T’ 8146 ’ 9176
Edson, George, Geelong (A.C.P. organizer). Tr. pp. 796,829,5827.
6846, 7502.
Ellis, “ Ted ” (finance sub-committee of the A.C.P.). Tr. pp. 6297. bszs.
JLx. ob4. ir. p. 6264.
Ex. 728.
Appendix “ D.” — continued.


List of persons who as shown by the evidence are or have been members of the
Victorian branch of the A.C.P. — continued.
Tr. pp. 2828, B285-6, Ellis, Irene, nee Urquhart (Communist candidate for Prahran municipal election
6297, 6828, 6861, 9175. 10471
Ex. 1050. m 194 O-
Tr. pp. 68Bi, 5866a, Farrall, Frederick Theodore (Clerks’ Union).
6980, 7167-8, 7171-2,
7173 et seq. Ex. 882.
Tr. p. 7602. Fiddler,
Tr. p. 849-bo. Findlay (journalist).
Tr. pp. 6032, 6226-7, Finger, Dr. Alan.
7658, 8860. b
Tr.p.6032. Finger, Joan ( nee Hardiman, party name, “Hunter,” wife of Dr. Finger).
Tr. pp. 760, 7879. Flanagan, Bart (Secretary of the Ironworkers’ Union).
See Report p. 76. J '
Tr. pp. 5172,5320, Flowerday, Mr. and Mrs. (rejoined Middle Park Branch of the A.C.P. in 1938-9).
6058.
Tr. p. 1130. Ex. 180. Fong, Dr. Gwen.
Tr.p.5829. Ex. 664. Forster, H. (Ships Painters and Dockers Union).
Tr. p.6866. Ex. 593a Frank, Mrs. George. (1943.)
Tr. pp. 6816 9606-7. Frank, George (B.W.I.U.). (1942.)
Exs. 662 and 453. o v / \ '
Tr.p.5428. Franks, Charlie (Painters’ Union). (1939-40.)
Tr. P . 5428. Franks, Mrs. (wife of above). (1939-40.)
Tr.p.58i2. Frey, Margaret (dancing teacher). (Actors’ Equity).
Tnpp. 6317,6319, Fromberg, Mrs. (Moonee Ponds). (1941.)
Tr. p. 5813. Fryberg, Nancy (New Theatre).
Tr.p.6438. Garland, Dan. (Y.C.L.). (1939-40.)
Tr.pp. 86i-2,1050. Gearing (Ships Painters and Dockers’ Union).
1230, 8257. .
Tr.p.9032. Gibbons, Len. (Footscray Branch of the A.C.P.). (1942.)
Tr. pp. 688, 68i9. Gibson, Dorothy (wife of Ralph Gibson).
Tr.pp. 6441-2. Gibson, Ralph (former State Secretary; former State President; Member of State
Committee; Member of State Executive; Member of State Secretarist).
Tr.pp. 1062,7879, Gillies, Doug. (Ironworkers’Union).
8962, 9730.
Tr.p. 1064. Glasson (Secretary of the Wool and Basil Worker’s Union).
Tr. pp. H20a, 5436, Goode, Malcolm (artist).
6993-96.
f? S pp 4 7«, d ii20A. Goode, Mrs. Malcolm, formerly Mrs. Vera Brown (Building Trades Federation).
3102, 7463-4.
Tr. p. 5391. Gordner, T. C. (Taxi Drivers’ Unit of the A.C.P.). (1939-40.)
moT’sssV 5,697 , Grainger, Tom. (Party name “ Duncan ”). (Clerks’ Union).
Tr.pp. 5344-5, .7495-9. Grant (now deceased). (1939-40.)
Tr. pp. 890, 1244, Gust, Isaac.
6709. Ex. 160.
Tr.p.5782. Guy, Bert (Secretary of the Newport Branch of the A.C.P.).
Tr.pp. 1062-3, 1123. Haddon (Secretary of the Jewellers’ Union).
Tr.p. 6560. Hampson (Williamstown Naval Dockyards). (1943-4.)
Tr. pp. 1045,3783, Hancock, Ron. (Assistant Secretary, B.W.I.U.).
6813, 6661. 9519, 9672. J
Ex. 472.
Tr. p.2036. Hand, J. (Builders’ Labourers’ Union).
Tr. pp. 791,1060, Harding, Claude (Australian Railways Union).
5777, 6110, 7254-6.
Tr. p. 756. Hardy, Frank.
Tr. p. 5404-b Hardy, Joe (St. Kilda). (1939-40.)
Tr.p. 6229 Hardy, Rita (St. Kilda). (1939-40.)
Tr. pp. 1127. 564i. Hawker, John W.
5672.
Tr.pp.743-4. Hayden (Munition Workers’ Union). (1942.)
Tr.p.6167. Hayden (party name “West”) (General Motors-Holdens Unit of the A.C.P.).
(1939-40.)
Tr. pp. 5337-8. Hayden, Miss (Middle Park Branch of the A.C.P.). (1939^0.)
6054 PD 7642 5, 1044 ‘ Healy, Jim (Federal Secretary of the Waterside Workers’ Federation).
Tr. pp. io46,9599. Heinze, Bernard W. (B.W.I.U.).
Jr. r>. 2036,8S99, Heitsch, T. or C. (the initial is variously given) (Builders’Labourers’Federation).
8817, HjX.
Tr. pp. 7777,7791. Henderson, Mrs. (New Housewives Association).
Tr.p. 5327. Hewitt, G. (Middle Park Branch of the A.C.P.). (1939-40.)
Tr.p. 5327. Hewitt, D. (wife of above). (Middle Park Branch of the A.C.P.). (1939-40.)
Tr. pp. 5156 6394. Howitt (or Hewett) J. (Australian Natives’ Association). (1939-40.)
Tr. p. 7293. Hill, Edward Fowler (Secretary of the Victorian State Committee and Member of
the Central Committee).
Tr.pp. 5164,6163, Hills, Mrs. D. (known as Dot Landers). (New Housewives’ Association and
Ex. 6 ioB0. 2,9175 ‘ candidate for 1947 municipal elections at Port Melbourne).
Tr. pp. iocs. bibs. Hills, Tom. (Waterfront Branch of the A.C.P.)
7567, 7662.
Tr. p. 8441. Hogan (Communist candidate for Moonee Ponds Council in 1941).
Tr. p. 4061. Ind, Alfred Antonio (B.W.I.U.) .
Appendix “ D.” — continued.


List of persons who as shown by the evidence are or have been members of the
Victorian branch of the A.C.P. — continued.
Inge, Alice Mary (also referred to as Mollie Inge). Tr. bp. sot. 1019.
Ireland, George (International Book Shop). Tr. PP . 271s, 6572.
Irving, Miss D. (Clerks’Union). Tr. P . ssee. Ex. on.
James, Miss. (Munition Workers’ Union). Jr. pp. 96°, 4370,
Dobl.
James, Norm. (Secretary of the Footscray Branch of the A.C.P. in 1942-3). Tr. P . oosi-2.
James, Mrs. Norm, (wife of above, Footscray Branch of the A.C.P.). Tr. P . 9032.
James, Stan. (Coburg East Branch of the A.C.P.). Tr.p.9730.
Jeffreys, Bill (Secretary of the St. Kilda Branch of the A.C.P.). (1938-40.) Tr. P . dibs.
Jefferies (Engineers Unit of the A.C.P. and a member of the South Port District Tr - pp - 6392 ~ 3 ’ 6398a.
Committee). (1939-40).
Johns, Stan. (Executive of the Northern Suburbs Branch of the A.C.P.). t455 PP 'ex 9 ’io 71a ’
Johnson, Francis Thomas (President of the Victorian State Committee; a member Tr. P . 8197.
fo the Victorian State Executive, and a member of the Central Committee
of the A.C.P.).
Jolly (or Jolley, Medical student in 1939-40). Tr. P . 884i.
Keane, Tom. (Newport Branch of the A.R.U.). Tr. P . 5776.
Keating, Fred, (on the staff of the Guardian). Tr. PP . 829, eses.
Keating, Marmie, (wife of Fred. Keating, artist). (1939-40.) Tr. P . 5435.
Kellett, Miss Dot. Tr. P . 8137.
Kennett, Ronald David Wyatt (Meat Industry employee). Tr. P . 7986.
Kerr (Middle Park Branch of the A.C.P.). (1939-40.) Tr. PP . 533s. 5400-1.
Kerr, Mrs. (wife of above, Middle Park). (1939-40.) Tr. PP . 5400-1.
Kinman (Tramways Union). (1940.) Tr. P . 735.
Knowles, Mr. and Mrs. (Brunswick Branch of the A.C.P.). (1939-40.) Tr. PP . 5319,5430.
Laidler, Miss Bertha. Tr. PP . 765, im.
2653, 7312, 8999.
Lamble, Lloyd (Actors Equity). Report P . ss.
Lapthorn (B.W.I.U.). Tr. PP . 3764,5816.
Lasslett, Jim (B.W.I.U.). Tr. PP . 4062, 5814,
5831.
Laurie, E. A. (Barrister). Tr. P . 1095.
Laurie, R. O. (Bob, Journalist, Truth). Jo r i- pp c ',?o 5 r’ o lo B0 ’
0Z00, 54ob, 000O.
Lazarus, Jack (Party name “Malvern,” Solicitor). inss^m 9 ’ 881,1043,
Lees, Thelma (New Housewives’ Association). Jj- pp - 891 -
1 v ' 7761, 9175. Ex. 1050.
Lennon (Colac). (1939-40.) t^ pp . 5293,5296,
Lewins (Painters’ Union). 8Bi2 PP 8899 08,1046,
Lewis (1939). Tr. P .B42o.
Little, Mrs. Vida (also known as “Vida Rich,” A.C.P. organizer). Ex PP 9 841 ’ 8B3 ’
Tr.’ PP . 8280-1.
Tr. pp. 32, 34. Ex. 10.
Little, Victor (also known as “ Victor Rich,” Musicians’ Union and Federal Press). f 0 1i7 P 2b9i 9 269o’
2794-5.
Lorbach, Doreen (East St. Kilda Branch of the A.C.P.). Tr. P . 5839. e x . 66b.
Lovegrove, D. (Party name “Jackson,” expelled from A.C.P. in 1933). Ji iia9-9o,
6632-3, 6717. Ex. 761,
Tr. p. 6320.
Loye, Les. (Collingwood). ix S p ?64 58 and eeT’
Lyng, Maurice (Food Preservers’ Union). (1943-4.) Tr. P . seog.
Lyons, Lacey (Seamen’s Union). (1933.) Tr. PP . 2027, 67is.
Lyttle, Pat. (now the wife of K. C. Miller, E.Y.L.). ex PP 6 866 ' 7 '
Mackie, William (Secretary of the Coburg East Branch of the A.C.P.). Tn PP . 1234,7326-8,
Malone, Patrick John (Victorian Secretary of the Builders’ Labourers’ Tr - p - 8877 -
Federation).
Martello (known as “Shorty,” Port Melbourne). (1939-40.) Tr. P . 5387.
Mathews, Robert E. (Realist Film Association). tv. PP . 892,897-8,
Maxwell, Leslie R. O. (A.E.U.). Tr.9379.
Mayall, Mrs. Muriel. mst! ssil?!,’Mali!’
5445.’ 5822. Exs. 299,
579, 663.
Mayall, Clyde (husband of Muriel Mayall). (1939-40.) Tr. P . 5425a.
Mayhew, Wally (Chelsea North, Communist candidate for municipal election at Ji 7 5 " r 1 e™ « 9 i 050
North Chelsea in 1948).
Mill, Ian (sometimes referred to as “Mills,” teacher). Tr. PP .852, sen
v 8240-1.
Mill, Mrs. Marie (wife of Ian Mill, formerly Miss Phillips). Jr. pp^r,s55-6. 5740,
Appendix “ D.” — continued.


List of persons who as shown by the evidence are or have been members of the
Victorian branch of the A.C.P. — continued.
Tr. p. 6964. Miller, Mrs. Dulcie.
Tr. pp. B856,8622. Miller, E. R. A. (Clerks’ Union, left C.P. between 1946 and 1948).
Ex. 597.
Tr.pp. 795-6,7337-8, Miller, Kenneth Craig (on staff of the Guardian).
7370, 8281.
Miller, Pat. (see under Lyttle).
Tr. pp. 9248,9273. Miller, Les. (A.E.U., member of the A.C.P. in the early war years).
Tr. pp. 709,6050, Mitchell James (referred to as “Jimmy,” reporter on Guardian, proprietor of
6301-2,5523, 6431. Starlight Press in 1938, now said to be in Adelaide).
54 r 3i®B8B9 B «°t«ea. 6 ' Mitchell, Mrs. Ann. (wife of Jimmie Mitchell, Carlton).
I/.: Montgomery (Ironworkers’ Union).
983, 4426, 4481,
7855-6, 8979.
Report p. 76.
Tr. p.6407. Moody (Sub-Editor of the Sun or the Herald in 1939-40).
Tr.p. 6407. Moody, Mrs. (wife of above, now deceased).
Tr. p P . 7ooi, 9635. Mooney, Val or Mai. (B.W.I.U.).
Tr. pp. 869-70-71. Morley, Mrs. I. (formerly a member of the Hospital Employees’ Union, but now a
member of the Shop Assistants’ Union).
Tr.pp.5180, 5338. Moroney, John (Party name “Strong,” Middle Park Branch of the A.C.P.).
(1939-40.)
Tr. p. 6661. Morrison, W. J. (International Book Shop).
Tr. pp. 893,5970. Mortimer, Rex A. (Solicitor).
Ex 684.
t?. P pp! mEss'ex.' Moss, Syd. (Assistant Secretary of the F.E.D. and F.A.).
Tr pp 792-3 5829. Mullett, Jack (a member of the North-West District Committee of the A.C.P. in
1944).
Mullett, Mrs. (see Cohen, Lela).
Tr. p. 6980. Mulligan, Jack (former member of the East Melbourne Sub-Branch of the R.S.L.).
Tr. pp. 7029-30. Mullins (A.R.U.) (1933.)
Tr. pp. 5294. 5859. Munroe (Timber Workers’Union). (1939-40.)
Tr. p. 5431. Murphy (International Bookshop). (1939-40.)
Tr. p.8267. Murray, John (Naval Dockyards). (1947.)
Tr. P . 9363. Murray, Paddy (believed to be deceased, Johns and Waygood’s Branch of the
A.C.P.). (1947.)
Tr. p.6327. McArthur (Middle Park Branch of the A.C.P.). (1939-40.)
Tr.P.1052. McCallum (Ironworkers’Union).
Tr. p.9363. McCarthy, Mick (Johns and Waygood’s Branch of the A.C.P.). (1947.)
Tr. p.8i29. McClintock, Alexander R. (Commercial Artist).
Tr. P .5426a. McColl, Mrs. (Fitzroy Branch of the A.C.P.). (1939-40.)
Tr.pp.852,1125, McCrae, Doris (Teacher).
7568.
Tr. pp. 6717-8. McCrae, R. (A.C.P. candidate for Burke in Federal elections). (1932.)
Tr.pp. 6316, 7958, MacDonald, Alan (Railways engineer; A.C.P. municipal candidate for Mordialloc
9175. Ex. 1050. in 1947).
Tr. p.9032. McDonald, Hec. (Footscray Branch of the A.C.P.).
Tr. p.2269. MacDonald Dr. Ian (Medical Practitioner).
Ex. 1076.
Tr.pp. 8289-90. McDonnaugh, Jim (South Melbourne District of the A.C.P.).
Tr. p.8939. McEwan, J. S. (Builders Labourers’ Federation).
Tr.p.3102. Ex. 363. McGill, A.L.P. (collector for the A.C.P. at Geelong).
Tr.p.ii29. Mclnnes, Robert (no longer a member of the A.C.P.). (1938-9.)
Tr.pp. 5148, 5537, Mclntivy (Port Melbourne Waterside Unit of the A.C.P.). (1939-40.)
7921.
Tr. pp. 6316,5325. Mclntivy, Mrs. (Port Melbourne). (1939-40.)
7921.
Tr. p.5820. Ex. 662. McKissick, Wally (B.W.I.U.).
Tr.pn. ioo9, 2029, Neilson (Builders Labourers’ Federation). (1948.)
8877, 8918.
Tr. 5425. Nunan, Jimmy (Collingwood). (1939-40.)
Tr.pp.5301, 5326, Nunan, Marge (Brunswick. Women’s Organizing Committee of the A.C.P.).
5831 ‘ (1939-40.)
Tr pp.5839-40, O’Connor, V. G., “Vic.” (Solicitor and Artist).
7557-8, 7774-5,
9123-4, 9125.
Exs. 228,541, 856,
937.
Tr.pp. 836,78i5. O’Day, Dr. G. P. (Medical Sub-Committee of the A.C.P.).
Tr.p.i064. O’Loughlin (Victorian State Secretary of the Wool and Basil Workers’ Union).
Tr.pp.790,1046, O’Mara, J. (B.W.I.U.).
8899, 9635.
Tr. pp. 5319, 6866. O’Neill, Lou (Clerks’ Union).
Tr. pp. 740-1, 829, O’Shea C. (Victorian State Secretary of the Tramways Employees’ Association
1064-5, 6548. and a member of the State Committee of the A.C.P.).
Tr. pp. 5317,6326, O’Shea, Winnie (Camberwell, former member of the Eastern District Committee
5432 ' of the A.C.P.). (1939-40.)
Tr.p. 5390. O’Sullivan, D. (Taxi drivers’ Unit of the A.C.P.). (1939-40.)
Tr. pp. 3100,6391, O’Sullivan, H. E. (Party name “Herman,” A.C.P. organizer at Bendigo).
5832, 6276. Exs. 362,
744.
Appendix “ D.” — continued.


List of persons who as shown by the evidence are or have been members of the
Victorian branch of the A.C.P. — continued.
O’Sullivan, T. (Taxi-drivers’ Unit of the A.C.P.)• (1939-40.) Tr. p.5391.
O’Toole (A.R.U.). Tr. P . 7208.
Ogden, Eric (Workers’ Sports Federation and Young Democrats League). Tr. P . seo, 5177,543s.
(1939-40.)
Oke, Brian (a member of the Victorian State Executive of the A.C.P.). Tr. PP . 697,712s.
Oke, Richard (a member of the Victorian State Committee of the A.C.P.). Tr. PP . 697,7301.
Oke, Mrs. Betty (wife of Richard Oke, A.C.P. organizer). Tr. PP . 74s, 7419.
Old, Miss N. (Teachers’ Union). Tr. PP . 1126-7.
Opie, Alec. (Workers’ Sports Federation). Tr. PP . B177.5298,
5832. Ex. 664.
Opie, Allan (Wonthaggi miner). Tr. P . 5832. Ex. 664.
Orloff, Clara (Carlton). (1943.) Tr. P .749. Ex. 143.
Otis, Mrs. (a member of the North Melbourne Branch of the A.C.P., who ceased Tr. PP . 5582,5870.
to be a member of the Party in 1939).
Owens, Kevin (Newport Workshops, ceased to be a member of the A.C.P. in 1945). Tr. PP . 6784, 6097.
Parry (Tanners’ Union, ceased to be a member of the A.C.P. before the war). Tr. P . icei.
Paul, Mrs. Margaret Tr. pp. less-se, 7558.
Payne, Bert. (1944). Tr. PP . see, 517s.
lajuc, V -*/• 6865, 6871-2, 5873.
Pearson, Percival Joseph (North Carlton). 9oi P Ex 8 159* se9 "
Tr.’un. 7507-8.
Pearson, Percy (Chairman of the A.C.P. Branch at Department of Aircraft Tr. P . 9158.
Production). (1940.)
Pearson, Mrs. (Brighton Unit of the A.C.P.). (1939-40.) Tr. P . 6407.
Phillips, G. (Waterside Workers’ Federation). (1948.) Tr. PP . 7698,7700.
Potts, Douglas (Accountant on staff of Guardian ). Tr. PP . 897-8,6832.
Ex. 159.
Potter, Ann (Party name “Owen,” South Port District of the A.C.P.). Tr. PP . 5338,7986.
Prescott, John Francis (A.C.P. candidate for Yarra at the. Federal elections in Tr. PP . 901, 6956,
1Q/1C\ 6997. Ex. 159.
Tr. 898 et seq.
Proud, L. (B.W.I.U.). Tr. PP . 3764, 6815,
9176, 9564, 9613.
Purcell, Richard James (formerly of Bendigo, ceased to be a member of the A.C.P. Tr. PP . 3100-1.58.32.
during or shortly after the war). Ex- 362,
Puxley, Mrs. (Burwood). (1939-40.) Ex. P . 5433.
Quincey (B.W.I.U.). Tr. PP . 5817-9, sssi.
Ralph, Cedric (Solicitor;. Tr. P . 8243.
Ratcliffe, A. L. Tr. P . 6832.
Raven (Postal Workers’ Union). (1947.) Tr. PP .846, 2940-7,
v 3000, 3011.
Rawlingson, Mrs. (Northcote). (1939-40.) Tr. P . 5325.
Rawlingson (son of Mrs. Rawlingson above. Waterside Unit of the A.C.P.). (1938.) Tr. PP . 6384, 7643.
Reilly, Betty (St. Kilda Unit of the A.C.P.) t«3p:p. ssis. 5404,
Reilly, Fred, (husband of Betty Reilly above, St. Kilda Unit of the A.C.P.) Tr. PP . 5317-8. 5404.
6229, 9175a.
Reynolds, Joan (see “ Curlewis ”).
Rich, Victor (see “Little, Victor”).
Richards, S. E. (Postal Workers’ Union). Tr. PP . 2945,3003,
3063-4, 3077. Ex. 320.
Richardson (Secretary of the Bendigo Trades and Labour Council). (1948-9.) Tr. P . 2694.
Robertson (or Robinson), Jean. Tr. P . 5866.
Robertson (or Robinson), Wally, Workers Sports Federation). 6309 P1 96b| 91 ’ 6298,
Rosewarne, Charlie (Port Melbourne Unit of the A.C.P.). (1939-40.) Tr. PP . 5339-40.
Ross, Jack (St. Kilda Unit of the A.C.P.). (1939-40.) Tr. P . 64oe.
Roulston, James Francis (Boilermakers’ Society). Tr. PP . 8311, 8316.
Rowe, Allan (State Electricity Commission). Tr. PP . 2041.2806-7.
5809-10. Exs. 229a,
294.
Rowe, E. J. (A.E.U.). Tr. PP . 762,7141.
Rudkin (Arts and Science Committee of the A.C.P.). Tr. P . 8245.
Russel (or Russell), John Joseph (proprietor of Starlight Press in 1934). Tr. PP . 701,703-5
2712-3.
Russel, J. (Taxi-drivers’ Unit of the A.C.P.). (1939-40.) Tr. P . 5390.
Russell (Party name “ Laurance,” General Motors-Holdens Unit of the A.C.P.). Tr. P . 6167-8.
(1939-40.)
Russell, Dorothy (North Melbourne). (1939-40.) Tr. P . 5319.
Russell, Flo. (A.C.P. organizer, member of Victorian State Committee of the Tr . PP 701 75.5 7973
A.C.P. in 1942).
Samson, L. J. (known as “ Sam.” member of the Victorian State Committee of the Tr- pp 829 866 . 7
ACPI 5140, E317, 6733. ’
Ex 16g
Samson, Mrs. Jean (also known by her maiden name. “Jean Young,” member Tr. PP . 829, 7911.
of Marx School Committee).
Sappatos, Peter (Member of Greek Unit of the A.C.P.). (1939-40.) Tr. D . 5396.
Appendix “ D.” — continued.


List of persons who as shown by the evidence are or have been members of the
Victorian branch of the A.C.P. — continued.
Tr.p.7643. Saunders, J. (Waterside Workers’ Federation).
Tr.pp.53UU-1, Saunders, Mrs. Darriel (Housewives’ Association). (1939-40.)
6322, 6384, 7695.
Tr. p.9730. Scanlon, T. (Coburg East Branch of the A.C.P.).
Tr.p.i046. Scott (President of the Operative Painters’ Union).
Tr. pp. 1816, 2768. Scott.
Tr. pp. 5838, 6267. Scott, 'G. N. (1945.)
Exs. 664, 734.
Tr. pp. 6999,7000, Scott, Mrs. Gladys May (formerly secretary of the A.C.P. Branch at the
9168 ‘ Department of Aircraft Production). (1946.)
Tr.p. 749. Ex. 143. Scullin, “Joe” (Coburg). (1949.)
Tr.p.9027. Seelaf, George (Meat Employees Union).
Tr. pp 7°6,7°9, esig. Seeligson, Nathaniel Edward (Employed on Guardian).
Ex. 133.
Tr. p.79o. Seenya (Operative Painters’Union).
Tr. pp. 6842, 9021. Sharman, Harry (former secretary of the Meat Employees’ Union, expelled from
A.C.P., and from the industry). (1947.)
Tr. p. 7889. Sharpe, Frederick (member of Boilermakers’ Union).
Tr.pp. 8262, 8268-9. Sharpe, Mrs. Lily (wife of F. Sharpe, above).
Tr. pp. 697,766-s, Sharpley, Cecil Herbert (former member of the Victorian State Executive of the
1136 - A.C.P., who left the Party in January, 1949).
Tr. pp. 2720, 7419. Sharpley, Mrs. Veronica Teresa (wife of the witness Sharpley). (1948.)
Tr. p.3i8o. Ex. 383. Shelley, J. (formerly of Melbourne, but later of Townsville). (1929.)
Tr. pp. 6315, 5446, Sherlock, Gus. (St. Hilda, stood as A.C.P. candidate for municipal election at St.
5862,9176. Ex. 1060. Hilda in I947).
Tr. pp. 866. 112.6. Silver, Charles (State School teacher).
5833. Ex. 664.
Tr. p. 5398. Skerry, S. (a member of the A.C.P. Branch at General Motors-Holdens). (1939-40.)
Tr. pp. ass, 7472, Smethurst, Miss Rae (a member of the Women’s Committee of the A.C.P.).
7762.
Tr. pp. 7263, 7256. Smith, E. L. (A.R.U, resigned from the A.C.P. in 1944).
Tr.p.97ic. Smith, Sid (Moonee Ponds).
Tr.p. 7021. Ex. 874. Smith, W. (Ballarat). (1948.)
Tr.p.9239. Southwell, Cuthbert Mark (“Cup”). (A.E.U.).
Southwell, Mrs. (see under “Ursula Crawford”).
Tr. p. 9032. Spencer (Footscray Branch of the A.C.P.). (1949.)
Tr.p.6406. Spicer, Syd (St. Kilda Unit of the A.C.P.). (1939-40.)
Tr. p. 9i7s. Ex. lose. Spicer, H. (Stood as A.C.P. candidate for municipal elections at Brunswick in
1947).
Tr. pp. 79i, 829, Stanistreet, J. (A.R.U.).
1085, 7474. ’ V '
Tr.pp.846, 2941. Stanistreet, Harry (Postal Workers’ Union).
Tr pp. 3660-1, 6395, Steffanou, Basil (a member of the Democritus League and leader of the Greek
Unit of the A.C.P.).
Tr. pp. 863, 883. Steffanou, Dulcie.
Ex. 10. 7
Tr. pp. 834, 882, 886. Stein, Harry (a member of the Youth Sub-Committee of the Victorian Branch of
the A.C.P.).
Tr. p.53i8. Stein (Party name “Lanzer”). (1939-40.)
Tr. pp. 6775-6, 6867. Stevens, L. H. (“ Snowy ”). (A.R.U., expelled from the A.C.P.). (1948.)
Tr.p.ii2G. Stewart, Miss Alvie (former school teacher).
Tr. pp. 6303, 53!4, Stewart, Kathie (School teacher). (1939-40.)
636o P1 6303 4 6868 90 Stewart, Nellie (former school teacher). (1939-40.)
5860-1, 7696.
Tr. pp. 1046. 9674-5. stride, J. B. (B.W.I.U.).
Sturrock ’ Frank (B.W.I.U.).
Tr. p.5430. Sullivan, Mrs. (a member of the Coburg Branch of the A.C.P.) (1939-40.)
Tr.pp.5404,6411. Sullivan, Len (Party name “Vincent,” Mordialloc). (member of South
Metropolitan District Committee of the A.C.P.). (1939-40.)
Tr. pp. 5317, 6411. Sullivan, Mrs. Pat (wife of Len Sullivan, secretary of the Mordialloc Branch of
the A.C.P.). (1939-40.)
Tr. pp. 866. Ex. 166. Sutherland, Betty.
Tr. p. 8317. Sweet,
Tr. p. 6713. Taft, Bernard (former director of Marx School, now at Victorian Headquarters
of the A.C.P.).
Tr. pp. 742-3,790, Tavlor, Ephraim (also known as “Eric”). (Ironworkers’ Union).
867-8, 4375-6, 6784-5. . > r- v ' •
6111, 8613. Ex. 697.
Tr.p. 1755. Taylor, Ronald James Grant (Solicitor).
Tr. p. 930/. Tennant, Angus McNeil (A.E.U.).
Tr. p.6086. Thomson, Donald David (Secretary of the Building Trades Federation).
Tr. 8856-6. Thorne> H A- (clerks’ Union).
Appendix “ D.” — continued.


List of persons who as shown by the evidence are or have been members of the
Victorian branch of the A.C.P. — continued.
Thornton, E. (Ironworkers’ Union), Tr. PP . gso, 1051,
2791 et S€Q , .,7875.
Ex. 115.
Timbs (Meat Employees Union) xr. PP . 1044.9019.
Ex. 1028.
Toby (Naval Dockyards Branch of the A.C.P.). (1947.) Tr. P . 8257.
Treanor, V. (Communist candidate for municipal elections at Caulfield in 1947). x r . P . 9175. ex. iobo.
Tregear, William Hamilton (A.C.P. organizer). x r . P . 6937.
Tunzi (Operative Painters’ Union). xr PP . iooo, 1046.
Turner, Ian (Secretary of the Australasian Student Labour Federation). xr. PP .894, 6724.
Urquhart, Irene (see Irene Ellis).
Vlass, Peter (Greek Unit of the A.C.P.). (1939-40.) Tr p 5396
Walker, Clarrie (A.C.P. organizer for Shepparton and Wangaratta districts). • xr. PP . 768, 1192-3.
Walker, John (St. Kilda). (Architect). Tr p 5811
Wallace, A. (A.C.P. organizer; Communist candidate for municipal election for Xr. PP . 7759, 828i,
Heidelberg in 1947). 9173 - Ex - 106 °-
Walman, B. (Party name “Barnet”). (Taxi-drivers’ Unit of the A.C.P.). Tr. P . ssss.
(1939-40.)
Wannon (Sandringham or Black Rock). (School teacher: member of Brighton x r . PP . 6314,5407.
Branch of the A.C.P.; League for Peace and Democracy). (1939-40.)
Ward, P. A. (North Williamstown). x r . PP . 749,7823.
Ward, Rupert (Richmond, party name “Simpson,” estate agent). (1939-40.) xr pTsiio 6isa-3
Warden (Journalist). T r! PP ! 849-so,
1977-8.
Warren. Joyce (Methodist Youth Peace Committee). Tr. pp . 586, 2612.
5314-6* 5447, 68?i.
6877. Ex. 280.
Waten, Judah (Civil Servant). (1939.) Tr. pp . bobo-i. bob2.
Watson, Thomas Taylor (former printer of the Guardian). xr. PP . 5374-5.7117.
Watson, Mrs. (member of the Footscray Branch of the A.C.P.). (1942.) x r . P .9032.
Watt, Alf. (former member of the Victorian State Committee of the A.C.P., who xr. P . 5858.
went to Adelaide late in 1939.) Tr - pp - 6711 > 7918 - 9 -
Watt, Mrs. Mavis (wife of Alf. Watt). (Secretary of the Carlton Branch of the xr. P . 2bb4a
A.C.P. in 1937).
Weiner, Bella (a member of a Jewish organization known as Gezerd). (1939.) Xr. PP . bobo-i.
Wellard, R. E. (known as “Tiny” Wellard). (Clerks’ Union.) x r . pp .71s,5324,
5866. Ex. 671.
Wells (Engineer; a former member of the Victorian State Committee of the Tr. pp .5291.S309,
A.C.P. in 1937.) 5316 -
Wells (Organizer for Prahran District of the A.C.P., shortly before the war). Tr. P . ssei.
Whitbread (also known as Andrews). (Expelled from the Victorian Branch of „„ C7 ,, n „ Q0 „
the A.C.P. in 1933.) T r’ P 8967
Whitcombe, Edward Adye (B.W.I.U.).
White, A. (Party name “Lewis”), (member of the Taxi-drivers’ Unit of the Tr. P .5391.
A.C.P.). (1939-40.)
White, Dr. Egal (member of Medical Sub-Committee of the A.C.P.). xr. PP . sse, 902
7815.
White, Mrs. Nellie (State Schools’ Committees Association of Victoria). Xr. pp . 2447-8,5355-6
5689-90. Ex. 635.
Whitfield, Cecil Thomas (A.E.U.). Tr. P . 9353.
Whitney (State School Teacher from Sandringham or Black Rock). Tr. PP . 5314,5409.
Wilkinson, W. (member of the Ex-Service Committee of the A.C.P.). Tr. P . 6965.
Williams, Stanley James (F.E.D. and F.A.). Tr. PP . ssei, sr.94.
Willman, Colin (Clerks’ Union). Tr. P . 8440.
Wilson, (Port Melbourne Unit of the A.C.P.). (1939-40.) x r . PP . 5171, 5320,
5387, 5548.
Wilson, Phillip Benn (Confectioner, former member of the Newport Branch of Tr. p- 5775.
the A.C.P., who ceased to be a member in 1944).
Witton, Dick (member of the Victorian State Committee of the A.C.P. in 1938-39, Tr. PP - 5292-3,5298,
who was expelled from the Party in 1942 or 1943). 5427,5358-9.
Wood, Wally H. (Postal Workers’ Union). Tr. PP . 846, 2941,
2946, 3020. Ex. 321.
Woollard, A. F. (Alfle) (member of the Taxi Drivers’ Unit of the A.C.P.). Tr. PP . 5390-1.
(1939-40.)
Mrs. “ X ” (former secretary of the Middle Park Branch of the A.C.P. and former Tr - pp - 6390-1.
organizer in the A.C.P. for the South Port district). (1939-40.) xr.^ PP . B139,5144,
Yarker, Les (Secretary of the Kilsyth Branch of the A.C.P.). Tr. P . 9612.
Young, Jean (see under Samson, Mrs.).
Young, Matty (Miss or Mrs.) (member of Port Melbourne Unit of the A.C.P.) Tr. P . 5388.
(1939-40.)
Zimmerman (former member of Caulfield Branch of the A.C.P., died in 1939). Tr. P . 5418.
Appendix “ D.” — continued.


APPENDIX “E.”
SOURCES OF EVIDENCE AS TO THE FUNDS OF THE VICTORIAN BRANCH
OF THE AUSTRALIAN COMMUNIST PARTY.
The evidence bearing on this aspect of the inquiry is:—
1. ORAL.—
That of Bevan,
Friend,
Gibson,
Hill,
Hordern,
Johnson,
McGillick,
Samson,
Sharpley,
Mrs. “ X ”.
Mr. Laurie also referred to the sources of Party funds in his opening at
p. 6346.
2. DOCUMENTARY.—
(a) Exhibit 2 (Membership Book).
(b) Exhibit 4 (1948 Constitution).
(c) Exhibit 115 (Article, “ Unions and the Party,” by E.
Thornton).
( d ) Exhibit 118 ( Communist Review for April, 1949, containing
articles on fighting fund, pp. 99 and 116).
(e) Exhibits 132 and 184 (Application for membership).
(/) Exhibit 309 (Instruction to Party fraction members which
refer inter alia to sales of literature, and to a guessing
competition, paragraphs 6 and 16.)
( g ) Exhibits 354 to 365 (produced by witness, Friend).
( h) Exhibit 591 (Book of notes produced by witness, Mrs. “X”).
(i) Exhibit 593 (Notes made by witness, Mrs. “X”).
(;) Exhibit 663 (Receipts for dues and initiation fee).
(k) Exhibits 664 to 670 and 721 to 758 (produced by witness,
Hordern).
(Z) Exhibit 846 ( Guardian of 24th June, 1949, p. 3).
(to) Exhibit 969 ( Guardian of 21st June, 1939).
APPENDIX “F.”
WHITE AUSTRALIA POLICY OF AUSTRALIAN COMMUNIST PARTY.
In Exhibit 43, “ Australia’s Part in the World Revolution ”, there were
references to the attitude of the Australian Communist Party on the White
Australia policy, such as —“ The work of all district and section organizations
and their sub-committees must be concentrated on ... . the fight against the
White Australia policy ” and again—“ The former opportunist policy
pursued by the Party of evading the fight against the jingoistic White Australia
policy must be supplanted by the most determined policy against it.” Another
statement in the same document was —“ The White Australia policy is a
capitalistic measure for stirring up racial antagonism between the workers and
preparing for imperialist and colonial wars.”
I said I would give the Communist Party an opportunity of stating their
policy on the question.
Exhibit 128, is, Mr. Paterson said, such a statement. The exhibit is a
pamphlet by R. Dixon, entitled “ Immigration and the White Australia Policy.”
The pamphlet is readily procurable at Australian Communist Party book-shops,
and I have not thought it necessary to copy it here.
Tr. p. 231.
Tr. p. 234.
Tr. p. 236.
Tr. p. 632.


APPENDIX “G”.
MARX SCHOOL.
MELBOURNE.
Room 811, Bth Floor,
Howey Court, 234 Collins Street,
Melbourne.
Telephone: Central 2088.
January-March Term, 1949.
Marx School was founded as a memorial to the great
leader and organizer of the working class, Karl Marx
(1818-1883), to provide facilities for an advanced study of
scientific socialism and to supplement the educational
activities of the Political, Trade Union, Workshop and
other organizations of the working class. It is the
Workers’ University.
GUIDE TO CLASSES.
The classes have been divided into three groups, corresponding
roughly to the difficulty of the subject. Students are strongly
urged to begin with the first group and to take at least two
subjects in each group before passing on to the next.
If this is done, they will find the classes easier and more
beneficial.
First Group.
History of the Australian Labour Movement.
Marxism and the Trade Unions.
Life under Socialism and in the New Democracies.
Marxist Theory of the State.
Political Economy, Part I.
The World To-day.
The Marxist Party.
Second Group.
Political Economy, Part 11.
Foundations of Leninism.
Communist Manifesto.
Working Class Tactics.
United Front and People’s Front.
Historical Background of the World Labour Movement.
Structure and Features of the Australian Trade Union
Movement.
Third Group.
Marxism and the National and Colonial Question.
Agriculture Under Capitalism and Socialism.
Dialectical and Historical Materialism.
Reformist Politics and Socialist Politics.
History of the C.P.S.U.CB.).
Principles of Scientific Socialism.
Political Economy, Part 111.
MEMBERSHIP.
Membership is open to all A.C.P. members and supporters.
The fee is 2s. 6d. a quarter or 10s. a year. (Half fees for
those earning less than f 2 10s. a week.) Membership entitles
you to:
Free enrolment to any of the classes.
Free admittance to lectures.
Use of the Marx School reference and lending libraries.
Five per cent, reduction in the price of all Marxist classics
on presentation of the Marx School membership card to
the International Bookshop (180 Exhibition-street),
Melbourne.
Printed by T. T. Watson, 16 Corrs-lane, Melbourne, C.l.
SUNDAY NIGHT LECTURES.
At New Theatre, 92 Flinders-street, commencing at 7.45 p.m.
Marx School Sunday evening lectures provide members and
their friends with the opportunity to hear leading Marxists
outline the Marxist view of history, society, current events, &c.
February 6th:
Marxism and Modern Science.
By a Leading Scientist.
March 6th:
What is Wrong in Yugoslavia?
Ralph Gibson.
April 3rd:
The History of Philosophy.
Vin Bourke.
THE LIBRARY.
The library, which is available for the use of members, consists
of two sections —
1. A well-stocked Marxist Reference Library, containing the
main works of Marx, Engels, Lenin, Stalin and other working
class leaders, as well as periodicals, current pamphlets and
working class papers, including some from Europe, Britain,
India, U.S.S.R. and U.S.A.
2. A Lending Library, containing many of the Marxist Classics
and a good selection of general literature and fiction, including
a number of Stalin prize-winning novels. Two books may be
borrowed at a time, free of charge.
Office Hours:
Monday to Friday, 10 a.m. to 7.45 p.m.
Saturday, 11 a.m. to 12 noon.
Week and Week-end Schools.
For information about Week and Week-end Schools apply
to Marx School.
4329/50,—U


Ted Laurie.
Ralph Gibson.
Ken Miller.
Flo Russell.
Jim Coull.
Jean Young.
Ted Hill.
Cecil Sharpley.
Vida Little.
Bernard Taft.
Frank Johnson.
Clem Berman.
Vin Bourke.
Stan Johns.
Rick Oke.
Dulcie Steffanou.
Andy Wallace.
Les Barnes.
Rae Smethurst.
John Arrowsmith.
Jack Bevan.
Nat Seeligson.
WEEKLY CLASSES.
Dialectical and Historical Materialism (9 lessons). The scientific outlook of the Marxists and its application to the study of
social life. Main reading; Dialectical and Historical Materialism, Sharkey and Mostyn.
How to Write and Edit Bulletins (5 lessons). A practical course dealing with all aspects of writing and reproducing factory
and local bulletins.
Marxism and the Arts (9 lessons). Admission by personal interview only.
Marxist Theory of the State (9 lessons). How the State arose; its role and functions; the reformist attitude to the State; the
Marxist attitude and its development; democracy and dictatorship; the State under Capitalism, Socialism, and Communism.
Main reading: State and Revolution, Lenin. Material on New Democracies.
The World To-day (5 lessons). The Marxist interpretation of current events.
Public Speaking (5 lessons). Admission to this class by personal interview only.
Principles of Scientific Socialism (6 lessons). How Marx and Engels transformed early (Utopian) socialism to scientific
socialism; the historical, economic and philosophical background; application of Marxist principles to-day. Reading: Engels,
Socialism, Utopian and Scientific.
FORTNIGHTLY CLASSES.
The Marxist Theory of the State (5 lessons). How the State arose; its role and functions; the reformist attitude to the State;
the Marxist attitude and its development; democracy and dictatorship; the State under Capitalism, Socialism and
Communism. Main reading: State and Revolution, Lenin. Material on New Democracies.
Political Economy, Part I. (5 lessons) (Wages, Prices and Profits). The rise and development of capitalism; relation between
wages and prices; the source of profit and methods of capitalist exploitation. Main reading: Political Economy, Leontiev,
Chap. 1-5.
History of the Communist Party of the Soviet Union, Part I. (5 lessons). Stalin’s Short History of the C.P.S.U. (B.) is an
outstanding product of revolutionary Marxism, a classic of scientific Communism. It provides a powerful theoretical
weapon for the international Communist movement. Reading; History of the C.P.8.UA8.).
Qualities of the Communist Party (5 lessons). How the Communist Party differs from other political parties. Reading: Stalin,
Foundations of Leninism, Chap. 8. What is this Labour Party ?
Political Economy, Part 11. (5 lessons). (For students who have completed Political Economy, Part I.) The anarchy of
capitalism; the epoch of Imperialism and the general crisis. Main reading: Political Economy, Leontiev, Chaps. 6, 8 to 11.
Marxism and the National and Colonial Question (5 lessons). Stalin on the National Question; the liberation struggles in India,
China, Indonesia, Palestine, New Guinea and Australia. Main reading: Marxism and the National and Colonial Question, Stalin.
United Front and People’s Front (5 lessons). Our way forward to a Socialist Australia. Main reading: The United Front
Against Fascism, Dimitrov. Building the People’s Mass Movement, R. Dixon.
The World To-day (5 lessons). To be held at 1 Denham-street, Hawthorn. The Marxist interpretation of current events.
History of the Australian Labour Movement (5 lessons). Main reading; History of the Australian Labour Movement, E. W.
Campbell.
The Marxist Theory of the State (5 lessons). How the State arose; its role and functions; the reformist attitude to the State;
the Marxist attitude and its development; democracy and dictatorship; the State under Capitalism, Socialism and
Communism. Main reading; State and Revolution, Lenin. Material on New Democracies.
Political Economy, Part I. (5 lessons). To be held at 24 The Corso, Parkdale. (Wages, Prices and Profits.) The rise and
development of capitalism; relation between wages and prices; the source of profit and methods of capitalist exploitation.
Main reading: Political Economy, Leontiev, Chap. 1-5.
The Marxist Party (5 lessons). How the “ Party of a new type ” differs from all other parties. Its relation to other working class
organizations. Examination of the errors committed by Yugoslav Communists. Main reading: Stalin, The Party,
Information Bureau on Yugoslavia, Com. Rev., Aug., 1948.
Foundations of Leninism (5 lessons). Marxism in the epoch of Imperialism; the theory of the proletarian revolution. Main
reading: Foundations of Leninism, Stalin.
Working Class Tactics (5 lessons). To be held at 1 Bambra-road, Caulfield. The chief tactics for winning the people for peace,
progress and socialism. Main reading: Left Wing Communism, Lenin. Report to the 7th Word Congress, Dimitrov.
The Communist Manifesto (5 lessons). The workers, the “grave diggers” of capitalism, have just completed the celebration
of the Centenary anniversary of its publication (February, 1848).
Political Economy, Part I. (5 lessons). To be held at 257 Sydney-road, Brunswick. (Wages, Prices and Profits.) The rise
and development of capitalism; relation between wages and prices; the source of profit and methods of capitalist
exploitation. Main reading: Political Economy, Leontiev, Chap. 1-5.
Marxism and the Trade Unions (5 lessons). Application of Marxist teachings on the Trade Unions to our work, particularly in
regard to the Australian Trade Union Movement.
Marxism and the Trade Unions (5 lessons). See above.
Life under Socialism and in the New Democracies (5 lessons). How Socialism works and how the people live in that quarter of
the world which is no longer capitalist. Initial reading: Soviet Constitution.
Date commencing;
Tuesday, Feb. 1st —
8 to 10 p.m.
Wednesday, Feb. 2nd —
6 to 7.45 p.m.
8 to 10 p.m.
Monday, Feb. 7th —
1.10 to 1.50 p.m.
6 to 7.45 p.m.
8 to 10 p.m.
8 to 10 p.m.
Tuesday, Feb. 1st —
6 to 7.45 p.m.
8 to 10 p.m.
Wednesday, Feb. 2nd —
8 to 10 p.m.
Thursday, Feb. 3rd —
2 to 3.30 p.m.
5 to 6.30 p.m.
8 to 10 p.m.
8 to 10 p.m.
8 to 10 p.m.
Friday, Feb. 4th —
8 to 10 p.m.
8 to 10 p.m.
8 to 10 p.m.
Tuesday, Feb. 8th —
6 to 7.45 p.m.
8 to 10 p.m.
8 to 10 p.m.
Wednesday, Feb. 9th —
8 to 10 p.m.
8 to 10 p.m.
Thursday, Feb. 10th —
8 to 10 p.m.
Friday, Feb. 11th —
5 to 6.30 p.m.
8 to 10 p.m.


APPENDIX “H.”
THE COMMUNIST.
May 20, 1921.
Constitution of Red Trade Union International.
1. Name.
The provisional organization which has been
organized on the basis of an agreement between the
representatives of the Trade Union organizations of
different lands will bear the name “ Provisional
International Council of Workers’ Trade Union
Organizations.”
2. Aim.
The Provisional International Council of the
Workers’ Trade Union Organizations has as its aim:—
(1) Active propaganda for the idea of the revolu-
tionary class struggle, the Dictatorship of the Prole-
tariat, and the revolutionary mass action for the
overthrow of the capitalist system and the bourgeois
State. (2) To lead the struggle against that plague of
the Trade Union movement of the whole world, the
policy of reconciliation with the bourgeois, and against
the hopes of peaceful transition from Capitalism to
Socialism. (3) The bringing together of the class-
conscious revolutionary elements of the Trade Union
movement of the whole world, and the resolute battle
against the Labour Bureau of the League of Nations,
and against the programme and tactics of the Amster-
dam Trade Union International. (4) The seizing of
the initiative for international action in connexion with
important happenings of the class struggle, the holding
of demonstrations for the support of strikers in great
social conflicts. (5) Collection of all data, material,
and documents referring to the international Trade
Union movement and the informing of all the affiliated
organizations of the situation in the different lands.
(6) Publication of books and pamphlets devoted to
the questions of the international Trade Union
movement.
3. Composition.
The Trade Union Council is composed of a represen-
tative of Russia, Italy, Spain, Jugoslavia, Bulgaria,
France, Georgia, and other organizations who unite
with the international Trade Union organization, and
one representative of the Third International. The
Trade Union Council elects an executive bureau con-
sisting of three persons, included in which is a
secretary of the Council and a representative of the
Third International.
(Note. — In the case of those revolutionary Trade
Unions who do not adopt a sufficiently clear attitude
to the question of the Dictatorship of the Proletariat,
e.g. 1.W.W., the Trade Union Council authorizes the
Executive Bureau to propose to them that they should
put this question on the order of business in all their
local groups and induce them to take part in an
international conference.)
4. The Bulletin.
The Bureau publishes a bulletin in four languages
under the name “ Bulletin of the Provincial Inter-
national Council of Crafts and Industrial Unions.”
5. The Conference.
Only those Unions will be invited to the inter-
national conference who hold the platform of the
Dictatorship of the Proletariat and who wage the class
war. National organizations of Trade Unions, single
Trade Unions, and international Federations may be
represented on the basis laid down above.
The basis of representation at the International
Conference is as follows: —National Trade Union
Organizations, single Trade Unions, and Trade Union
minorities who have less than 500,000 members send
two delegates; for every extra 500,000, or part thereof,
one extra delegate. The international bureaux of the
single industry or Craft Unions send one delegate each,
with consulting voice. Single Trade Unions will only
be admitted to this Conference when the central
organization of their land does not take part in the
Conference.
6. Headquarters.
Until the summoning of the International Conference,
Moscow will be the headquarters of the International
Trade Union Council.
General.
1. The provisional Executive Committee of the
International Trade Union Council consists of three
members elected by the Trade Union Council,
irrespective of what land they represent.
2. The meetings of the Council will be held at least
fortnightly. The Executive has the right, according
to need, or at the demand of two-thirds of the members,
to summon a special meeting.
3. The Executive Committee carries out the decisions
of the Council, until the drawing up of the laws and
powers of the Committee by the International Con-
ference. The Executive Committee is empowered, in
case the situation demands it, to act immediately—in
which case it must allow itself to be guided by the
principles upon which the International Trade Union
Council is grounded. The Executive must conduct the
struggle against the Amsterdam Labour Bureau with
every means at its disposal, and must take all necessary
steps for ensuring the success of the International
Conference.


APPENDIX “I.”
WORKERS’ WEEKLY.
Sydney, Friday, September 4, 1931.
PROGRAMMATIC DECLARATION OF THE COMMUNIST PARTY.
Aims of Communist Movement of Australia.
The economic and political situation throughout the
world grows more serious from day to day. In the
midst of bountiful harvests, bursting granaries and
warehouses, there is displayed the supreme contradic-
tion of modern society; because the markets are
glutted with goods, millions are unemployed, starving
and destitute. The crisis leads to a further concen-
tration of wealth into fewer hands, the growth of
monopoly and the ruination of tremendous numbers
of middle class people who are dispossessed and
hurled into the ranks of the working class. Between
the different nations of the capitalist world, the
struggle for markets grows more bitter and leads
from tariff wars, price cutting, monopolizing raw
materials, &c., to feverish preparations for a new
imperialist war to re-divide the world.
Repudiate the Debts.
The world decline in prices has been more catas-
trophic in relation to raw materials and foodstuffs
than in manufactured goods, and as a consequence the
world crisis has affected with particular severity
Australia and those other countries dependent upon
the export of primary products. The situation in
Australia is worsened still more by Indebtedness over-
seas, chiefly to British Finance Capital. The decline
in prices necessitates an increased share of Australian
exports being used to pay for interest to British and
American bondholders.
Within Australia the various sections of the
capitalist class manoeuvre and struggle, each against
the other, over the division of the reduced national
wealth. This internal conflict is reflected in the new
political alignments, within the Labour Party, the
National and Country Parties, the Riverina and other
movements in New South Wales, the formation of the
All For Australia League, the New Guard, and other
fascist organizations.
Unity—Against the Workers.
Despite the internal struggles of the capitalist class,
reflected in the antagonisms of the various capitalist
political parties, all sections of the capitalist class
present a united front against the toiling masses in
town and country—just as in the international field all
capitalist nations unite against the Soviet Union,
conduct lying propaganda, and prepare for a war of
aggression against it.
In the Federal Parliament, Scullin, Lyons, Latham
and Page unite for the most ruthless and callous
impoverishment of the toilers. Through the Federal
Arbitration machinery, wage cuts of unprecedented
magnitude are imposed upon the working class, and
all forms of social insurance are reduced, including
old-age pensions and the pensions of those maimed in
the late world war. From experience, the ruling class
of finance and industrial capitalists and big land
owners have learned that Labour Governments, because
of their influence over the masses, are best fitted to
lead the offensive against the masses. The difference
between Scullin and the demagogic Lang in New South
Wales is a difference in method only. While Scullin
cynically and openly proclaims the policy of reduced
standard of living for the workers, Lang loudly con-
demns such a policy in order more efficiently to carry
it into effect. Under the smoke-screen of verbal
attacks upon the Governor and the Upper House,
Lang in New South Wales develops and intensifies the
offensive against the working class. Lang, who parti-
cipated in the unanimous decisions ol the last Premiers’
Conference, including the 20 per cent, cut in all
“ adjustable ” Government expenditure, neglects to
inform the masses that the abolition of the Upper
House in Queensland and the appointment of an
Australian, instead of an English Governor-General in
the Commonwealth, have not altered the character of
capitalist exploitation or its effects on the toiling
masses.
While the crisis affects with great severity all
sections of the toilers, it is particularly harsh with
the children, youth and women of the working class.
Rampant malnutrition claims a heavy toll of sickness
and mortality among children, increasing numbers of
the youth are denied the right to enter industry and
learn an occupation, and women, underpaid in normal
times in relation to other workers, through wage-cuts
and unemployment are subjected to the dangers of the
vilest degradation.
Fascism Grows.
The impoverishment of the industrial workers and
the working farmers has intensified the struggle
inherent in all class society. While the leadership of
the Labour Party and the reformist trade unions
become linked with the State apparatus (the instru-
ment of the ruling class for suppressing the workers
and small farmers), the capitalist class organizes open
fascist organizations, the All For Australia League,
the Citizens’ League, New Guard, &c., some of which
openly proclaim their military form of organization
and their aims of armed violence against the working
class movement, commencing with attacks upon its
militant organizations.
In opposition to the ruling class, the Labour Party
and the fascists, the Communist Party of Australia
proclaims the following brief summary of its aims on
behalf of the workers of town and country:—
Programme.
With the support of a majority of the people we will
overthrow and smash the power of the capitalists and
big land owners.
We will expel all governors and other representatives
of British finance capital, withdraw from the British
Empire and establish in Australia a workers’ and
farmers’ Republic, with a Soviet form of government
led by the workers —the dictatorship of the proletariat.
We will establish a firm political and economic
alliance with the Union of Socialist Soviet Republics
and such other countries as may be under the control
of the workers and farmers.
We shall at once throw off the tremendous burden
of interest payments by cancelling the national debt
of more than a Thousand million pounds owing to
capitalists at home and abroad. Provision will be
made to compensate workers and those working
middle-class people who have invested their savings
in these bonds.
We will end the imperialist policy of the Australian
bourgeoisie in their subjection and exploitation of
native races, at home, in New Guinea, and other


possessions in the Pacific. We will give to these
native races our friendship and economic co-operation
with the unqualified right of self-determination.
In contrast to the mouthings of Lang and others of
the Labour Party against the big bankers, we will
effect the proletarian nationalization of the banks and
annul all debts to Australian and overseas capitalists.
We will seize without compensation the big indus-
trial undertakings so that industrial production may
be organized on a socialist basis.
We will expropriate without compensation the big
land owners and make their land available to the poor
farmers. We will set up Soviet estates equipped with
the most modern machinery, and give to the rural
workers the same working conditions as those enjoyed
by the city workers; through collective farming and
co-operation we will draw the mass of working
farmers into the work of socialist construction.
When we have come to power we shall nationalize
wholesale trade and thus put an end to the machina-
tions of the wholesale dealers who rob the farmers
and ruin small shopkeepers.
We will create powerful consumers’ co-operatives
representing the interests of the toilers, and destroy
any speculation taking advantage of their needs.
By introducing the seven-hour day and the five-day
week, and by raising the purchasing power of the
masses, we will abolish unemployment. The produc-
tive forces will be placed at the service of the toilers.
The working women and working youth will have
full political equality, with equal pay for the same
work.
We will expropriate the wealthy house owners with-
out compensation and quarter the workers and poor
population of the towns in the houses of the rich.
Payment for rent, gas, water, electricity, and all other
communal services will be graduated according to the
principle of classes and reduced to a minimum for all
toilers possessing little means.
By seizing power, taking over without compensation
the enterprises, banks, big house property, and whole-
sale trade we will put an end to the taxation policy of
the capitalist class and create the basis of a class
budget for the Soviet State. Social insurance of every
kind will be put upon a sound basis at the cost of the
State (unemployment, accident, sickness, old age, war
cripples, invalids, and the dependants of those
incapacitated or fallen in war).
Socialism Only Alternative.
We Communists bring to the toilers the programme
of their social emancipation from the shackles of
capitalism. In the Soviet Union, under the leadership
of the Communist Party, this programme has been
achieved, and the Soviet Union goes forward with
giant strides in the building of socialism, expanding
production, improving its technical basis, and raising
incessantly the standard of living and cultural level
of its population.
History offers no alternative; the various stages of
class society, chattel slavery, feudalism and capitalism
will be superseded by socialism. Under the dictator-
ship of the working class, private ownership of the
means of production will be abolished, production and
distribution of wealth will be socialized progressively,
until all class divisions will disappear and humanity
will be united in one world-wide society, free from
economic and political antagonisms.
The Communist Party calls upon all workers, all
small farmers, and all working middle-class people,
suffering under the crisis, to break from the parties
of capitalism and from fascism, the oppressors and
deceivers of the people. The Communist Party is
fighting the battle of the exploited against the
exploiters—is leading the struggle for the overthrow
of the rule of the capitalists and big land owners.
When the masses of exploited gather round the Com-
munist Party this task will be achieved, and all
capitalist resistance will prove futile.
There is no easy road to victory for the toilers.
The fascist bloodhounds are straining at the leash.
Power can be wrested from the hands of the ruling
class only by ruthless class struggle. Victory can be
gained only by a mass revolutionary front with the
Communists. We call upon all toilers to join the
army of the class struggle in the fight for the
dictatorship of the proletariat.
Down with Imperialism.
Down with Capitalist Governments.
Down with Labour Traitors.
Down with Langism.
Down with Fascism.
Long live the Dictatorship of the Proletariat.
Long live the Workers’ and Farmers’ Soviet Republic
of Australia.
Political Bureau, Communist Party of Australia.
29th August, 1931.


APPENDIX “J”.
LEARN MORE—FIGHT BETTER!
Eureka Youth League.
EUREKA YOUTH LEAGUE
SUMMER EDUCATIONAL.
SYLLABUS.
First Term commences January 18th, continuing to February 26th.
Second Term commences March 15th, continuing to April 23rd.
Napoleon made famous the saying that an army
marches on its stomach. He also knew the value of
an army understanding what it was fighting for.
The more we know the better we can organize the
young men and women to fight Fascism. The more
we know the more we can build our League. The
more we know the more capable we are of clearing up
questions the youth are asking to-day.
The aim of the League summer educational course
is to train League members to the highest possible
standard. It aims to better our effort to smash
Fascism; to make us more skilful fighters for a new
Socialist order in Australia.
Programme of Classes.
Monday.
Youth and Trade Unionism. Mr. L. Samson,
well-known Trade Union expert, City Club,
59 Elizabeth-street, City.
Tuesday.
History of the Australian Labour Movement.
Well-known student of Australian history.
City Club.
Political Economy. Charles Silver. City Club.
Public Speaking and Debating. Mr. Bert Payne,
Chairman, Clerks’ Union, General Division.
City Club.
How Socialism Works. Joan Reynolds. Flat No.
12, Park Towers, 21 Adam-street, South
Yarra (off Toorak-road).
An Introduction to Politics. Betty Sutherland.
Preston Eureka Youth House, corner of High-
street and Garnet-street, Preston.
Wednesday.
Marxism and Science. Simon Max. Carlton
Eureka Youth House, 927 Lygon-street,
Carlton.
India To-day. Frank Stewart. South Melbourne
Eureka Youth House, 214 Clarendon-street,
South Melbourne.
Thursday.
History of the Russian Labour Movement. Audrey
Blake. City Club.
Science and Every Day Life. Stuart Dryden, B.Sc.
City Club.
An Introduction to Politics. Julie Dye. City
Club.
From Karl Marx to Communism. Marxist
student. 248 Glenferrie-road (one minute
from station).
Literature and Society. Rivka Brilliant, B.A.
City Club.
Friday.
An Introduction to Politics. M. Lyttle. Brunswick
and Coburg Eureka Youth House, corner of
Sydney-road and The Avenue, Coburg.
An Introduction to Politics. H. Zimmerman.
24 The Corso, Parkdale.
An Introduction to Politics. Pat Lyttle. 7 Docker-
street, Richmond.
(page 2)
Course 1 (Eureka Youth League Summer Education).
An Introduction to Politics.
1. History and People.
2. From Slave to Worker.
3. Cads, Capitalism and Countries.
4. Dark Skins and Capitalism.
5. Must Capitalism Last?
6. Summary. (Reading material); Historical
Materialism (Stalin); Capitalist Social System; Work
and Labour under Capitalism and Socialism (Leon-
tiev) ; India and Australia (G. Peel); United Front
(Dimitrov); Youth, Unite to Smash Fascism Now
(A. Blake); Report on Youth (M. Wolfe).
Course 2.
Public Speaking and Debating.
1. Collecting Material and Preparing a Speech.
2. Materials Necessary to Deliver a Speech.
3. Natural Aids to Speakers; Debating Platform
Chairmanship.
Course 3.
From Karl Marx to Communism.
1. Who was Karl Marx? What did he teach?
Dialetical and Historical Materialism. The Study of
Nature and History in Movement. (Reading material):
Pamphlet, Dioletical and Historical Materialism
(Stalin); Communist Manifesto.
2. Two Classes dealing with Economics of Marxism.
(Reading material): Wage, Labour, Capital; Pam-
phlet, Work and Labour under Socialism (Leontiev).
3. Lenin-Stalin and the Birth of Socialism. (Reading
material): Ist and 2nd Sections, Stalin’s Foundations
of Leninism; Biography of the Life of Stalin.
4. The Difference between Socialism and Com-
munism. Communist attitude to Personal Property,
Religion, Pacifism, Democracy. (Reading material):
Communist Manifesto.
5. A Lecture on the Communist Party of Australia
and Their Work to Defeat Fascism.
(page 3)
Course 4 (Eureka Youth League Summer Education).
History of the Australian Labour Movement.
1. Beginnings of Labour Movement. (Suggested
reading): History of the Australian Labour Move-
ment (pages Ito 65); Fitzpatrick’s British Empire in
Australia.
2. Labour Party Period. (Reading material): Fitz-
patrick’s A.L.M. (pages 65 to 114).
3. Labour Party in 1914 (War of 1914-18). Trade
Unionism; Socialism.
4. Post-War Boom, 1918-29. (Reading material):
Australian Labour Movement (pages 153-163).


5. Crisis of 1929-32. (Reading material): Monopoly;
Left Book Club Pamphlet.
6. Pre-War Period, 1932-39. (Special reading
material): The Trade Unions (L. Sharkey); Youth,
Unite to Smash Fascism Now (A. Blake).
Course 5.
Political Economy.
1. The main Social and Economic Systems in
History leading up to Capitalism and Socialism To-day.
2. How Capitalism arose from Feudalism.
3. How the Working Class is exploited under
Capitalism—Value and Surplus Value.
4. The Uses and Role of Money.
5. How Wages are Fixed under Capitalism—
Reducing the Value of Labour Power.
6. Imperialism—The Last Stage of Capitalism.
Crisis and War under Capitalism. The People’s War
against Fascism. (Reading matter): Wage-Labour
and Capital (by Marx); Work and Labour under
Capitalism and Socialism (by Leontiev); Capitalist
Social System; Youth, Unite to Smash Fascism Now
(A. Blake); Report on Youth (M. Wolfe).
(page 4)
Course 6 (Eureka Youth League Summer Education).
Youth and Trade Unionism.
1. Why Were Trade Unions Formed? (Reading
material); Sharkey’s Trade Unionism —Section 1;
Fitzpatrick’s History Australian Labour Movement.
2. Trade Unions and the Struggle for Socialism.
(Reading material): Sharkey’s Trade Unionism —
Section 2.
3. How Trade Unions Defend the Workers’ Interests.
(Reading material): Sharkey’s Trade Unionism —
Section 3; Thornton’s Trade Unions and the War.
4. Trade Unions Organization. (Reading material);
Sharkey’s Trade Unionism —Section 4.
5. Trade Unions —Youth and Production. (Reading
material): Factory Front (Lindsey); Production
Front (Lindsey); Spark Up (Youth).
6. Socialist Trade Unions. (Reading material):
Sharkey’s Trade Unionism —Section 6; Trade Unions
in U.S.S.R. (A.S.F.L. Pamphlet); Soviet Trade Unions
(Dobb). , .
Course 7.
Russian Labour Movement.
1. The struggle for the creation of a Social Demo-
cratic Labour Party in Russia (1883-1901).
2. Formation of the Russian Social Democratic
Labour Party appearance of the Bolshevik and the
Menshevik Groups within the Party (1901-1904).
3. The Mensheviks and the Bolsheviks in the period
of the Russo-Japanese War and the first Russian
Revolution (1904-1907).
4. The Mensheviks and the Bolsheviks in the period
of the Stolypin reaction. The Bolsheviks constitute
themselves an independent Marxist Party (1908-1912).
5. The Bolshevik Party during the new rise of the
Working Class Movement before the first Imperialist
war (1912-1914).
6. The Bolshevik Party in the period of the
Imperialist war. The second Revolution in Russia
(March, 1914-1917).
7. The Bolshevik Party in the period of prepara-
tion and realization of the October Social Revolution
(April, 1917-1918).
8. The Bolshevik Party in the period of foreign
military intervention and civil war (1918-1920).
9. The Bolshevik Party in the period of transition
to the peaceful work of economic restoration
(1921-1925).
10. The Bolshevik Party in the struggle for the
Socialist industrialization of the country (1926-1929).
11. The Bolshevik Party in the struggle for the
collectivization of agriculture (1930-1934).
12. The Bolshevik Party in the struggle to complete
the building of the Socialist Society. Introduction of
the new Constitution (1935-1937). Work of the
Bolsheviks to defeat Fascism. (Reading material):
History of the Communist Party of the Soviet Union;
Youth in Soviet Union (Maisky); Message to Australian
Youth from Moscow Youth.
Course 8.
India To-day.
1. Aryans, Hindus and Mohommedans; India’s Early
History.
2. The European Invasion; Portuguese, Dutch,
English and French; 180 Years of British Rule.
3. Why India is not Free To-day.
4. Ghandi, Goat’s Milk and P.A.P. (Permanent
Austerity Plan).
5. A Comparison in Constitutions. The India Act
1935 and the Stalin Constitution, 1937.
6. The Present Situation in India and the Way to
Win 400 Million for the War against Fascism. What
does the future hold? (Reading material); India
To-day (Pamphlet by Dutt); Australia and India
(Pamphlet by G. Peel); Report on Youth (M. Wolfe).
Course 9.
Science in Every Day Life.
1. The Universe —Some Early Theories.
2. The Universe —Later Developments.
3. Early Chemistry.
4. Splitting the Atom.
5. Galileo versus the Pope.
6. Is Science Responsible for Wars? (Reading
references): Stars and Their Courses (Jeans) (Peli-
can) ; Science and Every-day Life (Haldane) (Pelican);
Science —Course or Blessing (H. Levy) (The Thinker’s
Forum).
(page 6)
Course 10 (Eureka Youth League Summer Education).
Marxism and Science.
1. Introduction and Bird’s Eye View of Course.
2. Evolution of Universe; Physical Science;
Chemistry.
3. Life; Biochemistry; Biology.
4. Man; Biology; Sociology.
5. Civilization; History.
6. Summary and Conclusion. (Reading reference):
Outline of Universe, by Crowther (Pelican Library) ;
Inequality of Man (Haldane); Science in Every-day
Life (Pelican Library); Science in Peace and War
(Haldane).
Course 11.
How Socialism Works.
1. Daily Life in the Soviet Union. (Reading
material); Daily Life in the Soviet Union (Doris
Mcßae); Russia: The Country with a Plan (Chap. 4
to 12 inclusive) (Pat Sloan).


2. Tsarism and the Revolution.
3. Soviet Planned Economy. (Reading material):
How the Soviet State is Run (Chapter 8); Russia: The
Country with a Plan (Chapter 3) (Pat Sloan).
4. Twenty-five Years of Socialist Achievement.
5. Soviet Democracy. (Reading material): Russia:
The Country with a Plan (pages 35 to 49 (Pat Sloan).
6. Soviet Foreign Policy and Her Struggle Against
Fascism. (Reading material): Russia: The Country
with a Plan (pages 54 to 62) (Pat Sloan). (Special
reading): Youth in Soviet Union (Maisky).
Course 12.
Literature and Society.
1. Has Literature any Relation with Life?
2. Can We Afford to Worry about Culture in this
Crisis Period?
3. Books —Whatever You Like.
4. Australian and Soviet Literature.
5. The Literature of Wars.
6. This War, Literature and You.
(page 7)
Special Message for Students Enrolling.
1. Post your Enrolment Form to the Educational
Committee, Eureka Youth League, 59 Elizabeth-street,
City.
2. Most books or pamphlets can be bought at the
International Book Shop, 182 Exhibition-street, City,
or read at Public Library. Some books are available
by joining the League Library in the City Club.
3. All courses go for six weeks, with the exception of
the History of the Russian Labour Movement (twelve
weeks’ course).
There will be a two weeks’ vacation in February
and the course will begin again in the second week
in March.
4. You can enroll in any course you desire. Begin-
ners are advised to start with Course 1. Your tutor
is your friend and will answer your problems and will
suggest private readings and suggest the next course
you should take.
The only fee for enrolling students is 6d. regis-
tration fee, which covers cost of notes and other class
expenses.
If more than twenty enroll for a class, other classes
of same subjects will be commenced.
Special diplomas will be awarded to pupils passing
through courses. Special week-end schools will be
held during course.
Fill in this form and post it to-day.
I wish to enroll in the
Course.
Name
Address
Branch
Occupation
I am also interested in continuing my education by
going on to the course at the
completion of the present course.
News About Certificates and Diplomas.
All students who attend classes regularly and com-
plete their course, on recommendation of their tutor,
will receive a special certificate.
To receive the Eureka Youth League Socialist
Theory Diploma students must have the following
certificates: —
Either Introduction to Politics or From Karl
Marx to Communism certificates.
History Australian Labour Movement Certificate.
History Russian Labour Movement Certificate.
Certificate Presentation Night.
First Term .. .. Sunday 7th March.
Second Term .. .. Sunday, 2nd May.
Presentation Nights will be held at City Club.


APPENDIX “K"
INTERNATIONAL PRESS CORRESPONDENCE.
No. 31. Pages 643 to 646.
Resolution of the Enlarged E.C.C.I. of 1926 on
the Organization and the Structure of the
Communist Fractions in the Trade Unions.
1. The Enlarged Plenum of the E.C.C.I. endorses
the instruction of the 11. Org. Conference on the
organization and structure of the Communist fractions
in the Trade Unions and recommends all Communist
Parties to adapt the elaborated instruction according
to the peculiar conditions of the Trade Union Move-
ment in each country.
Model Directions for the Formation and Structure
of the Communist Fractions in the Trade
Unions.
Endorsed by the VI. Enlarged E.C.C.I. (See above
resolution.)
The following directions contain the principles in
accordance with which the Communist fractions are
to be formed by the Sections of the C.I. The varying
structure of the trade unions and the varying degrees
of development of the Communist Parties render it
necessary that the Sections of the C.I. formulate
special ways and means for adapting these directions
to the special conditions in their country.
I.
The Role of the Fractions.
The Communist members of a trade union organiza-
tion and its organs (committees, conferences,
congresses, &c.) must unite into a fraction and carry
on active fractional work.
The Communist fractions work with all their energy
to bring the majority of the trade union members
under their influence. The more devotedly, practi-
cally, and energetically they know how to heed the
interests of these members, the better they understand
how to defend proletarian class interests in every way
in all spheres, and on all occasions, and to link up the
fight for the immediate tasks with the fight for the
final aim of the working class, the more easily will
they succeed in gaining this influence. This
Communist trade union work must be conducted
within the framework of the statutes and decisions of
the respective trade unions.
11.
Party and Fractions.
The Party members must keep in mind that the
fractions are not the foundation of the Party and
that they therefore can deal only with the questions
of their special field of activity.
The success of the fractional work is dependent on
the unity, solidarity, and discipline of all the members
of the fraction. It is not the individual member of
the fraction, often not even the fraction itself, but
always the Communist Party as a whole that is held
responsible by the masses of workers for the activity
of the Communist fractions and for every remark of
a member of a Communist fraction.
The Party Executive determines the political and
tactical line of the Communist fractions, directs and
instructs them, and controls their activity.
Important tasks of the fractions shall be discussed
in the Trade Union Department in the presence of
representatives of the fractions. In case of serious
differences of opinion between the fraction and the
Trade Union Department, the Party Executive shall
decide the matter in the presence of fraction rep-
-4329/50.—ll
resentatives. The decisions of the Party Executive
must be carried out unconditionally by the Fraction.
Non-fulfilment constitutes a breach of discipline.
Candidates for all Congresses, Conferences, and
Committees shall be nominated by the Fraction
Executive and approved by the proper Party Ex-
ecutive. If necessary, the Party Executive itself can
nominate candidates.
The proper Party Executive is authorized at any
time to correct or annul Fraction decisions and to
remove or appoint Fraction Executives or leaders. In
such cases it is necessary to explain these measures
to the members of the Fraction.
Within the limits of the General Party directives,
the fractions deal independently with the questions of
their inner life and their current work. The Party
Executive shall not interfere unnecessarily in the
daily work, and should give the Fractions all possible
freedom of action and initiative.
The Fraction Executives are obliged to give regular
reports to the proper Party Executive or to the proper
Department and higher Fraction Executive.
111.
The Structure of the Fractions.
The Communist trade union work in the factories
shall be carried on through the nuclei, and in the
trade union organizations and organs through the
fractions. No trade union fractions shall exist in the
factories.
Trade Union Work in the Factories.
Trade Union work in the factories shall be con-
ducted and controlled by the nucleus executive. The
nucleus executive shall appoint one of its members as
the director of Communist trade union work in the
factory. In large factories, where the nuclei are
divided according to departments, workshops or blocs,
the nucleus executive shall also appoint chiefs for the
various departments for the Communist trade union
work. Departments in which no comrades are em-
ployed shall be taken in charge by comrades from
other departments. Where several trade unions
(various craft unions, or trade unions of varying
tendencies, e.g., Red, Amsterdam, Christian, or others)
are represented in one factory, one comrade from
each union shall be appointed by the nucleus execu-
tive. These comrades form a trade union commission
of the nucleus executive, to which other comrades,
particularly the directors of the Communist trade
union work of the factory departments, can be co-
opted. As a rule, a representative of the nucleus of
the Y.C.L. should also belong to this Commission.
When meetings of the various trade unions take place
inside or outside the factories, the director of
Communist trade union work shall call together the
comrades of the respective trade union to discuss
tactics on the basis of the decision of the nucleus
executive or of the higher Party Executive. In large
factories the Communist trade union officials shall be
called together by the nucleus executive for discus-
sions whenever necessary.
The nucleus executive directs and controls the
activity of the Communist trade union officials in the
factory. It must see to it that in the factorys’ trade
union elections those comrades are nominated as
candidates, who are carrying on trade union work
under the instructions of the nucleus.
The local fraction executives shall not, as a rule,
maintain direct contact with the nuclei. This contact
shall be made through the local Party Executive


(through its trade union department or the trade
union director). In special cases, in order to deal
with definite problems (such as, for instance, the
calling together of the trade union delegates of
certain factories) these fraction executives can, with
the approval of the proper Party Executive, deal
directly through the nucleus executive with the
nuclei.
In the Locals.
1. All Communist members of a trade union shall
form fractions in the lower trade union organization.
The following cases might occur in this
connexion:—
(a) When the territory of the trade union
organization covers several contiguous
localities, one fraction shall be formed for
the whole territory. When trade union
meetings are held in separate localities of
this sort, or in parts of the area of the
local administration, the Communists
belonging to that trade union shall be
called together before-hand by the local
Party Executive.
( b ) In towns where section organizations form
the lowest trade union organizations and
have committees, section fractions shall be
formed.
(c) When the trade unions are divided into
branches according to craft, fractions shall
be formed there also.
( d ) In towns where the delegate system prevails
in the trade unions, the Communist
delegates shall be united into a fraction.
If this fraction of the delegate meeting
is too weak, the directors of the
Communist trade union work of the
respective trade unions shall be co-opted
to the fraction meetings from the factories
which are not represented in the fraction
meeting.
2. All Communists in the organs of the trade unions
(executives, councils, &c.) shall form a fraction.
The Communist fraction of the local administration
of a trade union at the same time form the executive
of the Communist fraction in the respective union
organization. The following cases might occur in
this connexion:—
(a) In towns where the trade union is divided
into sections which have committees, the
Communist committee members shall form
the fraction executive for the correspond-
ing trade union section. This fraction
executive is subordinated to the Communist
fraction of the local administration.
(b) The Communist members of the branch
(craft union) committees shall form the
executive of the branch fraction. This
executive is likewise subordinated to the
Communist fraction of the local adminis-
tration of the trade union in question.
(c) The fraction of the local administration is
the Executive of the permanent delegate-
meeting fractions.
( d) When the forces of the local fraction
executive of the trade union are in-
sufficient, the fraction executive shall be
supplemented by comrades who are elected
in a joint meeting of the fractions of the
branch committees, and town districts. If
there are no branches in the respective
trade unions, the election of members to be
drawn in shall occur in a meeting of all
the Communist trade union delegates from
the factories. When this method is also
impossible (too few delegates, &c.) the
election shall be conducted in the full
meeting of the local trade union fraction.
This same method is to be taken when
there are no Communists at all on the
trade union committee in the local in
question.
This applies to (a), ( b ) and (c).
(e) When the fraction executive is too large, it
shall have a bureau composed of three to
five members for directing the current
work.
3. All members of the fraction shall be called
together for a fraction meeting by the fraction
executive whenever necessary but, in any case, prior
to every meeting of the trade union in question. The
carrying out of the directions shall be discussed here
on the basis of the decisions of the respective Party
Executive. If for objective reasons the decision of
the entire fraction cannot be formulated, the instruc-
tions of the fraction executive are obligatory for all
fraction members in the meeting. Under all circum-
stances the comrades shall act and vote as a unit.
4. If the trade unions in a town are united in a
trades council to which Communists belong, these
shall form a fraction, which at the same time shall
constitute the executive for all the fractions of the
various trade unions in the locals.
The following cases might occur in this
connexion;
If no Communists belong to the trades council,
or if the forces of the trades council fraction are
insufficient or if no Communists represent im-
portant trade unions in the trades council, then
the Trade Union Department, or the chief for
trade union work of the local Party Executive
shall call together the fractions of the various
trade union committees, in order to form or
supplement an executive for all the fractions of
the trade unions in the locality.
5. The work of the fractions of the local adminis-
trations of the various unions shall be conducted
under the guidance of the local trades council fraction.
The latter carries on its activity under the guidance
and control of the Party Executive. The Party
executive can also establish direct contact with the
fraction executives of the various trade unions.
In the District.
1. In the district committees of the various trade
unions, the Communist committee members combine
into a fraction.
This district committee fraction is at the same time
the executive of all the local fractions of this trade
union within the district.
The following cases must be taken into consideration
in this connexion:—
(a) If the forces of the district committee
fraction of the trade union are insufficient,
it shall be supplemented with the approval
of the proper district Party Executive, by
members of the local administrative
fraction of this trade union in the head-
quarters city of the district committee, or
of suitable trade union officials who are
living in the said headquarters city.


(b) If there are no Communists in the district
committee, either the local fraction of the
said trade union at the district committee
headquarters city shall exercise the
functions of the district committee
fraction, on such fractions shall be
elected from among the trade union
officials living in the headquarters city of
the district committee by the Communist
delegates to the trade union district confer-
ence where there are a sufficient number
of Communist delegates and representa-
tives of the locals, in agreement with the
proper Party district committee, and
serving until the next conference.
(c) If the fraction in the district headquarters
city is too weak, the headquarters of the
fraction executive can be transferred
temporarily to another place, where there
are sufficient forces in agreement with the
Trade Union Department of the C.C.
2. If the district trade unions are united into a
district trades council, on the committee of which
there are Communists, these Communists shall form
a district trades council fraction. This fraction shall
constitute at the same time the executive for all
fractions of the trade unions in the trades council
area. It shall work under the guidance and control
of the proper district Party Executive (trade union
department). The district Party executive can also
make direct contact with the district fraction
executives of the various trade unions.
The following cases may occur in this connexion:
(a) If there are no Communists in the trades
council, or if their forces are insufficient,
or if there are no Communists representing
the important trade unions in the trades
council, the Trade Union Department of
the district Party Executive at the head-
quarters city of the trades council shall
call together the fractions of the district
committees of the various trade unions, in
order to form, or to supplement the
executive for all the fractions of the trade
unions in the territory of the trades
council, from among the Communist trade
union officials living in the headquarters
city of the Trade Council committee.
(b) The fraction executive for the trades council
area can be elected (provided there are a
sufficient number of Communist delegates
and local representatives), by the
Communist delegates to the district trades
council conferences. The fraction execu-
tive shall be elected in this manner for
the period up to the next conference. This
election shall be made from among the
ranks of the trade union officials living in
the headquarters city of the trades council,
in agreement with the proper Party
district executive.
(c) If the boundaries of the trades council area
of the trade union district do not corres-
pond to the boundaries of the Party
district, the fraction executive for the
trades council or district area of the
various trade unions shall be subordinated
to that Party district committee, in the
headquarters city or in the territory of
which is located the district trades council
or trade union committee. In this case the
district Party committee shall take its
measures with regard to the fractions, in
closest co-operation with the other district
Party executive involved.
( d ) A district trades council fraction executive
can also be subordinated directly to the
C.C. of the Party, when an adequate
executive of the trades council committee
fraction is not secured by the Party
district executive at its headquarters (e.g.
when there is no general Party committee
in autonomous provinces).
On a National Scale.
1. The Communist members of the central executive
committee of every union shall form a fraction, which
at the same time is the fraction executive for the
entire union.
The following cases may occur in this connexion;—•
(a) If there are no Communists in the central
executive committee of the trade unions,
the fraction of the district committee of
this trade union which is located at the
headquarters city of such central com-
mittee, shall exercise the functions of the
national fraction executive of the trade
union.
(h) The Communist fractions of the central
executive committees of the various trade
unions are subordinated to the Communist
fraction of the Committee of the Trade
Union Federation. The latter shall work
under the direct guidance of the C.C.
(Trade Union Department). The C.C. can
also deal directly with the various national
fraction executives.
The following case is possible in this connexion:
In case the Communists are not represented in
the executive committee of the Trade Union
Federation (Central Council), the C.C. shall call
together the Communist fractions of the national
central executive committee of the various trade
unions in order to form a central fraction
executive.
Fractions in Trade Unions of Various Tendencies.
If there are trade unions of various tendencies in
one trade (Red, Amsterdam, Syndicalist, &c.), a
fraction shall be formed in each organization in
conformity with its structure. It is also necessary to
organize fractions in the Christian, Hirsch-Dunker,
fascist, and company unions. For this purpose the
Party organization must try to win over members of
these trade unions as Party members. In order to
bring about a systematic united action of the fractions
of the trade unions of the various tendencies on
definite occasions, the fractions, or the fraction
executives of the respective trade unions shall be
called together for joint discussion by the proper
Party Executive (Trade Union Department), accord-
ing to necessity.
IV.
Relations of Fractions to Each Other.
1. The fractions in the committees of the various
trade unions in the district, as well as in various
localities shall receive instructions on the one hand
from the fractions of the central or district executive
committee and on the other hand from the fractions
of the district or local trades councils. The Party
executives shall guide the work of the trade union
fractions by sending their instructions to the proper
(district or local) trades council fraction. On special
occasions, or in cases where the direction of the
fractions of the individual trade unions by the trades
council fraction is made difficult the fractions of the
individual trade unions can be guided directly by the
Party executives in question.


V.
Fractions at Conferences and Congresses.
The Party Executive shall thoroughly prepare
(through elections of delegates, motions, &c.) for
congresses, conferences and delegate meetings,
through its organs (trade union departments and
fractions executives). They shall call fraction meet-
ings in advance, and guide and control the Communist
work during the session. For the period of the
Congress or conference, the fraction shall elect a
bureau to deal with current work. The fraction
bureau which is working under the leadership of the
respective Party Executive is politically fully respon-
sible for its work to the Party Executive in question.
It is essential for Communists to maintain strict
discipline and unanimity in their actions at the
sessions, because the rank and file workers carefully
follow the proceedings at such congresses and confer-
ences, and hold the Communist Party responsible for
anything said by individual Communists.
VI.
Fractions and Opposition.
Every fraction is obliged to maintain contact with
the non-Party oppositional elements of the trade
unions. In order to make joint and unanimous action
on important occasions possible, conferences and
meetings must be held with these sympathisers. This
applies not only to important questions of principles
(international trade union unity, for or against Soviet
Russia, governmental questions, &c.) but also to wage
movements, factory council elections, elections on
local trade union committees or trade councils and
national and international congress delegates.
Previous to these conferences, Communist fractions
must discuss all questions among themselves and
decide on their tactics and the carrying out of same
on the basis of the strictest discipline.
VII.
Financing Fraction Work.
The regular revenue of the Party organization shall
provide the means for fraction work. No special
fraction dues are permitted.
VIII.
The Fractions of the Young Communist League.
The members of the Y.C.L. who belong to a trade
union organization must join the Communist fraction
of the latter and participate in the fraction meetings.
Moreover, the members of the Y.C.L. within the
fractions shall be organized in youth fractions, which
shall deal with the special questions of the young
workers of the respective organization. These youth
fractions may have their own executive, and vice
versa. The Communist youth fraction receives direct
instructions from the proper Y.C.L. executives on the
one hand, and from the Communist fraction executive
of the respective trade union on the other.
The Communist fraction executive and all the
fraction members are obliged to support the activity
of the youth comrades constantly and systematically.
By Authority: J. J. Gourlet, Government Printer, Melbourne.
