

REPORT
OF THE
ROYAL COMMISSION
ON THE
METHOD FOR DETERMINING THE UNIMPROVED
VALUE OF LAND HELD UNDER CROWN LEASES,
TOGETHER WITH APPENDICES.
COMMONWEALTH OF AUSTRALIA
Printed and Published for the Government of the Commonwealth of Australia by H. J. Green,
Government Printer fur the State of Victoria.
No. . — F.17208. —PRICE 1s. 9D.




COMMONWEALTH OF AUSTRALIA .
GEORGE V. by the Grace of God, of the United Kingdom of Great Britain and Ireland, and of the British Dominions beyond the
Seas King, Defender of the Faith, Emperor of India.
TO Our Trusty and Well-beloved William Warren Kerr, G.M.G., C.8.E., John Jolly, Maurice Boyce Duffy.
Greeting :
KNOW YE that We do by these Our Letters Patent , issued in Our name by Our Governor-General of Our Commonwealth of Australia,
acting with the advice of Our Federal Executive Council, and in pursuance of the Constitution of Our said Commonwealth, the Royal
Commissions Act 1902-1912, and all other powers him thereunto enabling, appoint you to be Commissioners to inquire into and report
upon the method which should, in view of the decision of the Parliament of the Commonwealth that the taxation imposed on lessees' estates
in Crown leases under the Land Tax Assessment Act 1901-1916 should be collected, be adopted for determining, upon the basis laid down
by the Act, the unimproved value of the land held under such leases.
AND WE APPOINT YOU, the said William Warren Kerr, Esquire, to be the Chairman of the said Commissioners. AND WE
REQUIRE you with as little delay as possible to report to Our Governor-General of Our said Commonwealth the result of your inquiries
into the matters entrusted to you by these Our Letters Patent.
IN TESTIMONY WHEREOF We have caused these Our Letters to be made patent and the Seal of Our said Commonwealth to
be thereunto affixed.
WITNESS Our Right Trusty and Well-beloved Henry William, Baron Forster, a Member of Our Most Honorable
Privy Council, Knight Grand Cross of Our Most Distinguished Order of Saint Michael and Saint George, Our
(seal.) Governor-General and Commander-in-Chief in and over Our Commonwealth of Australia, this twelfth day of
July in the year of Our Lord One thousand nine hundred and twenty-four, and in the fifteenth year of Our Reign,
FORSTER,
Governor- General.
. .. ,-.'S
By His Excellency's Command,
LL. ATKINSON,
for Prime Minister.
Entered on record by me, in Register of Patents, No. 25, page 272, this seventeenth day of July, One thousand nine hundred and
twenty-four.
P. E. DEANE.


INDEX
Paragraphs.
Ito 9 . • Introductory.
10 .. Restricted Scope of Inquiry.
11 to 30 •• Brief Historical Review.
31 to 48 .. Variations in Department’s Method of Valuation.
49 to 63 .. Commissioner’s Reasons for Adoption of Method of Capitalization of Average Net Returns
64 to 76 .. The Pastoralists’ Views.
77 .. Comments by the Knibbs Commission.
7g _ _ Comments by the Royal Commission on Taxation.
79 to 118 .. Evidence before this Commission.
119 to 145 .. Address by Counsel for Pastoralists.
146 to 152 .. Selling value of the Lease suggested as a basis of the lax.
153 to 168 .. Average of Average Net Returns Method.
169 to 179 . • Allowance for Onerous Conditions.
180 to 197 .. Valuation of each Parcel of Land.
198 to 209 . • Allowance for Weight of Land Tax.
210 to 217 .. Allowance for Magnitude.
218 to 227 .. Subdivisional Value.
228 to 236 .. Right of Resumption as determining lease Tenure.
237 to 241 .. Land Tax General Order 816.
242 to 249 .. Provisions of the Act specially related to this Inquiry.
250 to 252 .. What is the best evidence of Values ?
253 to 281 .. The method of Valuation recommended for Adoption.
282 to 285 .. Reappraisement of Rents.
286 to 290 • • Recoupment of loss of Capital on Improvements.
291 to 298 .. Should 1914-1915 Valuations be adopted for all years ?
299 to 302 .. Must value he determined as at date of Lease ?
303 to 310 .. Board of Appeal.
311 to 317 .. Does the Act set an impossible task ?
318 .. Publication of Land Tax Office Orders.


COMMONWEALTH OF AUSTRALIA.
REPORT OF THE COMMISSIONERS.
INTRODUCTION.
To His Excellency the Eight Honorable Henry William, Baron Forster, a Member
of His Majesty's Most Honorable Privy Council, Knight Grand Cross of the Most
Distinguished Order of Saint Michael and Saint George, Governor-General and
Commander-in-Chief of the Commonwealth of Australia.
May it please Your Excellency :
Me, Commissioners appointed, by Royal Letters Patent to inquire nto and report upon—
The method which should, in view of the decision of the Parliament of the Common-
wealth that the taxation imposed on lessees’ estates in Crown leases under the
Land Tax Assessment Act 1910—1916 should be collected, be adopted for
determining, upon the basis laid down by the Act, the unimproved value of the
land held under such leases,
have the honour to report as follows :
2. Mr. John Jolly, who was originally appointed as one of the Commissioners, was present
at all sittings of the Commission, both private and public, up till the 26th August, 1924, on which
date he resigned his Commission for the reasons set out in a letter addressed by him to the Prime
Minister.
3. Our first meeting was held on the 14th July, 1924. The first public sitting at which
evidence was given took place on the 21st July, 1924. The last witness examined appeared
before us on the 4th September, 1924. The final public sitting of the Commission was held on
the Bth September, 1924, when Mr. Owen Dixon, K.C., appearing on behalf of the Graziers’
Vigilance Committee (which represents all the Pastoralists’ Associations in the various States)
addressed us.
4. In all 25 public sittings were held and twelve witnesses were examined.
5. The Departmental witnesses were :
Mr. Robert Ewing, Federal Commissioner of Taxation, Melbourne.
Mr. W. J. Lambert, Senior Valuer, Federal Taxation Department, Melbourne.
Mr. A. Dunn, Senior Valuer, Federal Taxation Department, Adelaide.
Mr. C. H. Richards, District Valuer, Federal Taxation Department, Adelaide^
Mr. W. J. Gore, Senior Valuer, Federal Taxation Department, Sydney.
Mr. Edward Byrne, District Valuer, Federal Taxation Department, Sydney.
Mr. Herbert Valentine Franklin, Senior Valuer, Federal Taxation Department,
Brisbane.
Mr. A. H. Smith, District Valuer, Federal Taxation Department, Brisbane.
In addition, evidence was given by :
Mr. C. W. Reid, General Manager, Beltana Pastoral Co. Ltd., South Australia.
Mr. Murray Clapham, Manager, Australian Estates and Mortgage Co. Ltd., Melbourne.
Mr. Edmund Jowett, Grazier, William-street, Melbourne.
Mr. J. S. Eastwood, Public Accountant (Melbourne) and Official Representative of the
Graziers’ Vigilance Committee.
6. In addition to the oral evidence, we have received and given full consideration to a
large volume of correspondence and official memoranda, besides carefully studying the reports of
the Royal Commission on the Taxation of Leasehold Estates in Crown Lands and the Royal
Commission on Taxation, and informing ourselves as to the evidence given before these
Commissions relative to the subject of our inquiry.
7. Early in our inquiry a Questionnaire (see Appendix I.) was prepared and submitted
primarily to the Taxation Departmental Valuers. Adaptations of the Questionnaire formed the
basis of correspondence with others who for various reasons were unable to appear before us,
but whose special experience warranted the expectation that their opinions on the particular
matters referred to them might be of assistance to us.
8. Mr. J. S. Eastwood, in addition to tendering direct evidence, attended the public sittings
of the Commission as the official representative of the Graziers’ Vigilance Committee, and, by
permission, took part in the examination of witnesses.


Mr. W. J. Lambert, Senior Valuer for Victoria for the Federal Taxation Department,
similarly represented the Taxation Department at five of the public sittings of the Commission.
9. Within a few days of our appointment we addressed letters to several representative
pastoralists and others who had appeared as witnesses before the Royal Commission on Taxation
of Leasehold Estates in Crown Lands (Sir George Knibbs, Chairman), informing them of the
scope of our inquiry, and asking if they wished to submit any evidence to us either in modification
or amplification of that tendered before the former Commission, which, it was pointed out, was
available to us and need not be repeated. At the same time similar letters were sent to 38 firms,
companies, and associations representative of pastoral interests throughout Australia as well as
to taxpayers’ associations in five States.
The replies, for the most part, disclosed a disinclination on the part of the recipients to
tender fresh evidence, and in the case of the pastoral companies, in the majority of instances the
matter was referred by them to the United Graziers Association for joint action.
RESTRICTED SCOPE OF INQUIRY.
10. It will be observed that by the terms of reference our inquiry is somewhat- restricted.
We are to inquire into and report upon the method which should be adopted for determining the
unimproved value of the land held under Crown leases, but the determination of such
unimproved value must be upon the basis laid down by the Land Tax Assessment Act 1910-
1916. In other words, any method recommended by us must not involve an amendment of the
relevant provisions of the Act.
BRIEF HISTORICAL REVIEW.
11. Before discussing in detail the sections of the Act relevant to the subject of our
investigations, we deem it desirable to briefly review the circumstances which have led up to
the present inquiry. This is necessary in order that the difficulties which surround the question
may be adequately realized, and the nature and effect of our recommendations fully
appreciated.
12. Under the original Land Tax Assessment Act 1910, the owner of a leasehold estate
under the laws of a State relating to the alienation or occupation of Crown lands or relating
to mining (not being a perpetual lease without revaluation or a lease with a right of
purchase) was not liable to assessment or taxation in respect of the estate. But by
section 3 of the amending Act (No. 29 of 1914) “ the ambit of liability in respect of
Crown lessees has been greatly extended. The earlier policy was to include only such
lessees as had either the practical or the potential status of freeholders, but at the same
time to abstain from taxing them as full freeholders ; until in the case of the potential
freeholder his interest matured into actuality. But now lessees with no right even potentially
to the freehold are made liable according to the value of their estates.”
13. The extracts from the Fifth, Sixth, Seventh, and Eighth Annual Reports of the
Commissioner of Land Tax dealing with the question of the Taxation of Crown Leaseholds, which
are quoted in the succeeding paragraphs, will, it is thought, serve to indicate in a condensed and
convenient form the official attitude at successive periods in respect of the principal matters of
dispute between Crown lessees and the Taxation Department from the inception of the tax in
1914, and the circumstances under which at the present time (over fifteen months after the
cessation of the impost) these differences still remain unsettled.
14. Commissioner’s Fifth Annual Report. —The Commissioner, in his Fifth Annual Report
(year 1914-1915), dated 14th August, 1917, says : —•
Valuation of Grown Leases. —The Department recognized there were considerable difficulties connected with
the valuation of Crown leases. In the first place, the law requires that the value of the leasehold estate should be the
capitalized value of the difference between the rent paid under the lease and 4|~ per cent, of the freehold unimproved
value of the land. The determination of the unimproved value of the land has given rise to much difference of opinion
between leaseholders and the Department. The majority of the Queensland leaseholders very early took the view
that the unimproved value of the land was the rent reserved under the lease capitalized at 5 per cent. If correct, this
would have been a very simple solution of the difficulty, but twenty times the rent did not produce consistent results.
The fixing of rentals for Crown leases was not done at one time, nor have rents fixed in later years necessarily been
similarly based to those fixed in earlier years. Amended State legislation in regard to Crown lands has from time to
time produced differences in the rents demanded by the Crown, so that the capitalization of the rents paid, at 5 per
cent., cannot be accepted by the Department as the correct method of ascertaining the unimproved value of the land.
The Department takes the view that under the law the proper method of arriving at the freehold unimproved
value of leasehold estates in lands held from the Crown under pastoral leases is set out hereunder :
Pastoral Leases.
In all cases the valuation of lessees’ leasehold estates in pastoral leases must be based upon the freehold
unimproved value of the land.
The freehold value of the land must be arrived at in the same manner, wherever possible, as if the land is
in fact freehold.
The use to which the land may be put by virtue of the lease must be taken to be the best use to which it
could be put, unless the lease agreement permits some other and better use being made of it.


The selling price of the land used for pastoral purposes must be ascertained from the normal economic rental
value based upon average carrying capacity, and this should be ascertained, wherever possible, by
comparison with sales of freehold lands of similar character put to similar use.
When valuing improvements on leasehold lands for the purpose of ascertaining the freehold unimproved
value, the rules laid down for application to ordinary freehold lands should be applied, but the allowance
fo: improvements should be on the most liberal basis possible consistent with reasonable unimproved
values.
The basis of capitalization of costs should be 5 per cent, in all cases.
The calculation of the value of improvements should not be complicated by paying attention to a lessee’s
tenant rights in improvements. Those rights exist only because the land is held under lease. They
cannot have any bearing on the freehold value. They have, however, a material bearing on the selling
value of a leased property in case the lessee in possession desires to sell.
Assessments have, accordingly, been made on this basis.
In addition to the basis for ascertaining the unimproved value of the land, discussions have taken place with
leaseholders as to the period over which the capitalization of rents should be made. Leaseholders who hold land from
the Crown subject to possible or probable resumption after the expiration of fixed periods, maintain that the
capitalization should not extend beyond the period of probable resumption.
Another point raised is that the rent under the lease should have regard to the provision for reappraisement of
Crown rents.
On both these points the Department’s view differs from that of the taxpayers. The departmental view is
that the rent should be capitalized for the full period of the lease as stated in the lease, and that the law does not permit
any departure from the current rent under the lease. In connexion with the period of the lease, it is recognis(d that
if resumption really takes place, it will be necessary to adjust past assessments in the light of that fact, and make refunds ;
but such adjustments cannot be made in an kipation.
Objections have been lodged in Queensland and South Auatralia by pastoral lessees, and one lease-holding
company in South Australia has asked that its objection, which has been disallowed by the Department, shall be treated
as an appeal and referred to the High Court for judgment. An effort will be made in connexion with this appeal to
bring before the Court all the points in dispute between the Department and Crown lessees generally in connexion with
the basis of valuation.
A number of the objectors in Queensland have recently accepted the departmental freehold valuations on which
the values of their leasehold estates were based, and have withdrawn their objections.
In consequence of the number and great areas of Crown leaseholds, unsettled conditions, and the limited
valuation staffs maintained by the Department, the inspection of those properties which have been returned by
leaseholders has not yet been completed. Considerable progress has, however, been made in that direction, and finality
is expected by the end of the present calendar year.
The general question of valuations and assessments of leasehold estates in Crown lands is receiving special
consideration.
15. Attention is specially invited to the extracts quoted in the preceding paragraph which
describe what was, in the departmental view, the proper method of arriving at the freehold
unimproved value of leasehold estates in lands held from the Crown under pastoral leases, and
to the statement that assessments (presumably in respect of the year under review, viz., 1914-15)
have been made upon the basis laid down.
16. We reserve for the present comment upon the Department’s views on the subject of
the proper method of dealing with leases which are held subject to the right of resumption by
the Crown as to whole or part. (See paragraphs 228 to 236.)
17. With respect to the reference made to the objection lodged by a lease-holding company
in South Australia, and the request that its objection should be treated as an appeal and referred
to the High Court for judgment, in answer to an inquiry as to whether or not the “ Curnamona ”
case is the one alluded to, the official reply indicates that it is, but that the reference to the High
Court in the Commissioner’s Report should have been to the Supreme Court.
18. We are of opinion that had the expressed intention of the Commissioner in 1917, in
connexion with this appeal, to bring before the Court “ all the points in dispute between the
Department and Crown lessees generally in connexion wuth the basis of valuation,” been given
full effect by carrying that appeal to the High Court, many of the legal questions involved —
concerning which to-day there still remains grave doubt—would have been authoritatively
settled, and innumerable causes of friction and differences of opinion between Department and
Crown lessees would long since have been removed.
19. Commissioner’s Sixth Annual Report. —ln his Sixth Annual Report (year 1915-16),
dated 7th November, 1918, the Commissioner states
Valuation of Crown Leases. —The first assessments of values of lessees’ estates in Crown leaseholds were recently
issued as part of the assessment for the financial year 1914-15.
The basis of the assessment was fully explained in the Fifth Annual Report. The valuations arrived at upon
that basis have in many instances given rise to strong objections by pastoralists. The ground of the objection in all
cases is that the basic principle in the law is wrong, as the results arrived at generally very greatly exceed the actual
sum paid for the lease over and above the prices paid for live stock and improvements.
Three appeals to the courts exist. One part is heard by the Supreme Court of South Australia ; another is about
to be dealt with by the Supreme Court of New South Wales ; and the third is in suspense pending the decisions in. the
other two cases.


20. The Curnamona Case. —Allusion need only be made to the cases of appeal referred
to in the Report. The one which, at the time, was part heard by the Supreme Court of South
Australia, is the case of Rymill v. Federal Commissioner of Taxation (commonly referred to as
the “ Curnamona ” case). This was an appeal against the assessment of Curnamona station, a
leasehold property comprising an area of 782 square miles. The term of the lease was for 42
years from the Ist January, 1904, the rent being £234 12s. per year. The Canowie Pastoral
Company returned the freehold value of the land at £5,213, and a re-assessment by the
Department placed a value of £33,365 on the land included in the lease and £20,922 on the
lessee’s estate. The assessment was later reduced to £26,032 value of the land, and lessee’s
estate £15,472. The appellant contended that the value of the land did not exceed £5,213.
Held, applying the principle laid down in the case of Fisher v. Deputy Commissioner of
Taxation, that the value of the land was not worth more than £5,213, and the lessee’s estate in
it had no taxable value. The judgment of the Court (Murray, C.J .) which was not given till
22nd January, 1919, is recorded in extenso in the Commissioner’s Seventh Annual Report, page
223 et seq.
21. Our comments upon the principle of valuation adopted by the Court in this instance
will be made later in our Report. In the meantime attention is invited to a reference to the case
in the Commissioner’s evidence before the Royal Commission on Taxation of Leasehold Estates
in Crown Lands on 13th June, 1919 (page 222 of the Minutes of Evidence). Mr. Ewing said :
Mr. C. N. Murphy, in his evidence on pages 20 and 21 of the transcript, refers to the judgment recently given by
the Supreme Court of South Australia on the unimproved value of “ Curnamona ” Crown leaseholds, and he states
he understands the Department has decided not to appeal against the judgment. I wish to state that all arrangements
for appeal were being made, but owing to an unfortunate misunderstanding on the part of one of the officers, the time
for lodging the notice of appeal was allowed to pass. The judgment is, however, of course, being applied to the particular
assessment that was before the Court, but it will not be applied in any other assessment except by direction of the High
Court. In my opinion, the judgment is entirely at variance with the principles expressed in all valuation judgments
by the High Court. I merely wanted to make the departmental attitude clear in that case. It was a misfortune and
it would have been well had that particular judgment been challenged at the time.
3853. By Mr. Allan.—You can appeal next year if you so desire ?—Yes ; there is the annual right of appeal
I do not know what the assessment will be for this year.
3854. By Mr. Benjamin. —Would he be assessed on the same valuations as appealed from ? —I cannot say that.
In answer to onr inquiry as to whv no subsequent appeal was lodged in this case, the
Commissioner wrote us on 6th October, 1924, as follows :
Curnamona Case.
In reply to your letter of 3rd October instant relative to the above matter, the reason why no subsequent appeal
was made in this case was, that as the Department had no definite basis to work upon in connexion with the valuation
of Crown leaseholds, it was considered necessary to follow the judgment until the basis of valuation of Crown leaseholds
had been definitely settled.
The judgment was given by the Supreme Court of South Australia on 22nd January, 1919.
It will be remembered by the Royal Commission that the Treasurer of the day had suspended the payment of
Land Tax on Crown leaseholds in March, 1918, pending consideration of the future policy of the Government as to
whether Land Tax should or should not be levied upon the unimproved value of lessees’ estates in Crown leaseholds.
In view of that position, it was not reasonably possible for the Department to take such action as would have
brought a further appeal before the Court.
22. The Dunumbral Case.— The appeal case referred to in the Report as “ about to be
dealt with by the Supreme Court of New South Wales ” is one known as the “ Dunumbral ”
case. With regard to this case on 18th September, 1924, we addressed the following inquiry to
the Taxation Department:—
We shall be glad if you will furnish us with the fullest information as to the circumstances governing the
determination of the Taxation Department in advising the taxpayer that if he asked for an adjournment the Department
would not oppose the request. Will you supply us with dates of (a) lodging appeal, (b) request by Taxpayer to Treasurer
that instructions should be given to withdraw the case, (c) the date any such instructions were given to the Department,
and the nature of those instructions.
We should like also to know if it is still possible for that appeal to be gone on with, and if so, what steps are
necessary to ensure the hearing of the appeal.
23. From the official reply it appears :
(1) That the Commissioner was requested by memorandum from the Secretary of the
Department of the Treasury, 31st May, 1919, to take the necessary action to
postpone the appeal.
(2) That on 31st May, 1918, the Commissioner telegraphed to the Deputy Com-
missioner, Sydney, “ Treasurer desires Dunumbral Appeal postponed. Arrange
postpone six weeks.”
(3) That 6th June, 1918, was the date fixed for the case to be heard.
(4) That on sth June, 1918, on application of Crown Solicitor, the hearing was
postponed until the sittings commencing 2nd September, 1918.
(5) That on 20th August,l9lB, on application of respondent, the hearing was furthe
postponed until the sittings commencing 25th November, 1918.


(6) That on 20th November, 1918, on application of appellant, the hearing was
postponed indefinitely, either party to be at liberty to have case restored to
list upon fourteen days’ notice.
(7) That in each of these applications consent to adjournment was recorded by the
other party.
In referring to this information the Commissioner wrote :
From the above, it will be apparent that the Appeal can be proceeded with whenever either party desires, but
so far as this Department is concerned, any action to prosecute this or any other Crown leasehold appeal will be held
in abeyance pending the consideration by the Government of the R port to be made to it by your Commission, unless
this or any other taxpayer in the meantime forces an appeal into the Court, in which case the Department must, of
course, contest the appeal.
24. Commissioner’s Seventh Annual Report. —In his Seventh Annual Report (years 1916—17
to 1919-20), dated 18th May, 1921, the Commissioner states :
Valuation of Crown Leases.— ln December, 1918, the Government appointed a Royal
Commission, consisting of Messrs G. H. Knibbs, C.M.G., F.S.S., Commonwealth Statistician,
H. A. G. Curry, J.P., President Land Appeal Court of New South Wales, and H. 0. Allan,
Victorian Lands Department, for the following purposes
(a) to inquire into the incidence of that portion of the Commonwealth law which
imposes a tax upon the owners of leasehold estates in Crown lands ;.
( b) to report whether such tax has been arranged upon an equitable basis, having
regard to the fact that freehold lands are subject to tax as provided by Com-
monwealth law; .
(c) to report whether some other method of taxation of leasehold estates m Crown
lands should be adopted and, if so, what that should be ;
(d) to report generally upon such tax and its application.
The principles of valuation and their application by the Department were subjected to
searching inquiry by the Commission, and the land-owners’ representatives who appeared before
the Commission. The Commission in its Report upheld the Department.
The Commission recommended several alterations in the law for the purpose of endeavouring
to provide for what the Commission considered were special features connected with outlying
country used by pastoral lessees for pastoral purposes.
The Government has announced its acceptance of one of these proposals, and the further
consideration of the remainder. The accepted proposal is that the value of the lessee s estate
should be the sum obtained by capitalizing the net difference between the economic rent (4- 2 - per
cent, of the unimproved freehold value of the land) and the rent reserved by the lease on the
basis of 8 per cent, compound interest. The economic rental for the land has not been altered
from 41 per cent, of the freehold unimproved value of the land. In an arithmetical sense,
therefore, the proposal is not an accurate one, as it. results, in a lower capital sum than the
technically correct sum. In that respect, however, it provides, an arbitrary allowance for a
number of contingencies which could not be provided for otherwise.
Tax on Crown Leaseholds. —The tax on lessees’ estates in Crown leaseholds is being assessed,
but is not being collected. ,
The amounts outstanding in this respect are approximately as follows. Ihe exact amount
cannot be stated, as the total amount of tax outstanding includes Land Tax due by some tax-
pavers who are applying for relief from tax owing to drought and similar conditions :
1914- £258,043*
1915- • • • • PHIo
1916- 164,973
1917- .. • • • • • • • • 204,201
1918- |6,219
1919- .. .. . • • • •• 23 > 790
Grand Total .. .. • • £844,301
This tax has remained outstanding under a verbal direction to me by the Right Honorable
W. A. Watt, P.C., when Treasurer, pending an investigation by a Royal Commission into the
taxation of lessees’ estates in Crown leaseholds. # n m
The Report of the Royal Commission was submitted in 1919, and the Acting treasurer
at that time, the Honorable A. Poynton, M.P., announced in his Budget Speech that the
Government had decided to accept the recommendation of the Royal Commission to amend the
Land Tax Regulations, so as to permit the calculation of a lessee’s estate by capitalizing the
difference between the rack rent of the land and the rent paid under the lease at 8 per cent,
compound interest instead of 4J per cent., as at present.
* This amount is incorrect, and should have been stated as being £58,043 (see paragraph No. 25). The grand total should therefore read, £644.301.


Up to the present the Regulations have not been amended, in this respect.
The question of collecting the outstanding tax is under consideration by the Treasurer.
25. ihe Commissioner s Eighth Annual Report. —The Commissioner’s Eighth Annual
Report (years 1920-21, 1921-22, and 1922-23), dated 30th June, 1924, contains a brief reference
only to the tax on Crown leaseholds. An error in the Seventh Annual Report in the amount of
this tax stated to be outstanding in respect of the year 1914-15 is corrected. Schedule No. 3
?oooi?o e | ort f!Z tlie total amount of Tand Tax and fine outstanding as at 30th June, 1921,
1922, 1923, and 1924. The Commissioner states that “ the bulk of the outstanding tax in each
year represents assessed but uncollected taxon the unimproved values of leasehold estates in Crown
lands. Ihe total tax and fine outstanding as at 30th June, 1924,.is stated to be £2,114 914.
It is further remarked that collection of this particular tax for all years prior to the financial
year 1923-24 is now proceeding.”
26. Commissioner’s communication to Treasurer, June, 1924.— 0 n the 19th June last the
Commonwealth Treasurer (Dr. Earle Page), in a Ministerial Statement made in the House of
Representatives, read a lengthy communication received by him on the 17th June, 1924, from the
Commissioner of Taxation on the subject of the taxation of Crown leaseholds, and at the close of
.is statement announced the Government’s intention to appoint the present Commission to
investigate the matter and determine a basis of valuation. (See Hansard No 11 21st June 1924
pages 1425 to 1429.) ’ ’ ’
2i. It is unnecessary to quote the Commissioner’s communication to the Honorable the
treasurer at length, but the following is a brief summary of the salient points which relate to
the subject of our inquiry.
28. The Commissioner referred to the Taxation Department’s method of arriving at the
unimproved value of land held under lease from the Crown by ascertaining its probable sale
price by comparing each particular leasehold property with freehold lands in the district or the
State which were of similar character, and put to similar use, and which has been the’subject
ot sale and by making allowance, as far as possible, for all disadvantages from which the subject
land suffered m comparison with the basic land. The Commissioner pointed out that in
consequence of the objection of many lessees to the fee-simple value attributed to the land by
n partment ’ t l ’ e Kl ! lbbs Commission was appointed, and that he had recommended before
that Commission that the rate of capitalization of the difference between the economic and
reserved rents should be on the basis €>f 8 per cent, tables of calculation instead of 44 per cent,
tables because he thought the consequential reduction in the values of lessees’ estates might thus
provide more or less adequately for many factors in the valuation of Crown leases on a freehold
basis which might not, or could not, readily be taken into consideration in the Department’s
method of arriving at the probable selling price of the fee-simple of the lands. The Knibbs
Commissions recommendation that the proposed course should be followed was, in view of the
great importance of the question at issue, submitted for the consideration of the Government
then m office, but no action was taken by the Government except to refer the whole of the
subject of the taxation of Crown leases to the Royal Commission on Taxation appointed in
September, 1920. The Commissioner went on to say that as experience had shown the impractica-
bility of ascertaining the true value of most of the leasehold land by taking sale prices of freehold
lands as a basis, especially when great distance separated the sold from the subject lands and great
variation existed m climatic influences, the Commissioner, in November, 1920, introduced an
additional basis of valuation for such lands, viz., the capitalization of net returns of the subject
lands at the percentages which the average net returns from the sold lands bore to the capital
invested m the sold lands. r
Ro revaluations of the fee-simple values of Crown leaseholds were undertaken by the
Department during the period of suspension of payment of the tax.
• i A consolidation of the existing rules regarding valuation (General Order 816) was issued
m booklet form to valuers m July, 1922.
In practice valuation by capitalization of net returns of a subject property by reference
to the average percentage which the net returns of sold properties bore to the capital invested
in them was found to involve considerable difficulty on account of the variations of the
percentages m the case of the sold properties.
, 1 1 Commissioner °f Taxation considered that one uniform percentage for the purpose
should be adopted for all cases, and, after inquiry and much consideration, he decided during
the first quarter of the calendar year 1923 to adopt 8 per cent.
Capitalization of average net returns on an 8 per cent, basis was adopted for two reasons
. (1) It was considered by a fairly representative pastoralist as representing the fair
?rk? ra ff net . return wp ich would be expected from a freehold pastoral property.
(Ihe Commissoner was informed quite recently that a similar view was held
by other representative pastoralists.)


(2) Examination of the net returns for ten years up to 1919 to invested capital, in
a typical case of a pastoral country, showed 7* 6 per cent, on the average.
Immediately Parliament decided, in August, 1923, that the tax should be collected for past
years, the Commissioner directed Deputy Commissioners to review valuations of Crown leases on
the basis of the capitalization of average net returns at 8 per cent, simple interest. Shortly after-
wards, however, three Deputy Commissioners reported that examination of the average net
returns to invested capital over the period 1911 to 1915, inclusive, in the case of several freehold
properties in their States, indicated an average annual net return of from 9 per cent, to 10 per
cent, on invested capital.
The Commissioner of Taxation then decided that the period was the most reasonable
one to adopt to ascertain average net returns for purposes of all subsequent valuations of Crown
leaseholds. It was also the period for which reliable data was available.
In May, 1924, the Commissioner of Taxation decided to capitalize average net returns on
alO per cent, basis instead of 8 per cent. The new method of ascertaining the fee-simple value
of the land has resulted in substantial reductions in the former departmental valuation of Crown
leaseholds.
29. The Government’s Announcement in 1920. —The Honorable the Commonwealth
Treasurer, when bringing the Commissioner’s communication before the House of Representa-
tives, made reference to the Knibbs Commission’s recommendation that 8 per cent, tables of
calculation should be substituted for the existing 4|- per cent, tables of calculation which are
used under the lease and the economic rent, and stated: —
“ The Treasurer of the day, the Honorable A. Poynton, in his Budget speech 1919-20,
which is reported on page 20 of the Hansard record, announced that the
Government had decided to give effect to the Royal Commission’s recommendation
on this point, but that was not done.”
30. Commissioner’s Statement supplemented in Evidence. —When appearing before us the
Commissioner supplemented the statement summarized in paragraph 28 by informing us :
(1) That collection of tax due to the inclusion of Crown leaseholds which become
taxable under the 1914 Act was deferred by an instruction issued to Deputy
Commissioners on the 15th March, 1918.
(2) That on the Bth December, 1919, the Secretary to the Treasury was asked to
ascertain whether the capitalization at 8 per cent, (as recommended by the
Knibbs Commission and announced as having been accepted by the Govern-
ment) was to be retrospective, but no reply was ever received.
(3) That the tax imposed on Crown leaseholds still remained in suspense and the
work of valuation proceeded somewhat intermittently.
(4) That on the 31st July, 1922, owing to the difficulties experienced by the valuers
in the various States and reported by the Deputy Commissioners, the latter
were instructed not to proceed further with the work of valuing Crown
leaseholds in the manner prescribed by Order 816.
(5) That on the 11th December, 1923, following on the decision of Parliament that
the tax on Crown leases assessed for past years should be collected, all Deputy
Commissioners were instructed to demand outstanding tax due on Crown
leases as soon as their value had been arrived at in accordance with the
instruction of 29th October, 1923.
Note. —This instruction described the manner in which the average of average net returns method was to be
applied, and is more particularly referred to in paragraph 154 of this Report.
(6) That on the 14th April, 1924, following representations to the Treasurer, Deputy
Commissioners were instructed to allow to Crown leaseholders eighteen months
in which to pay the tax based on revised valuations.
(7) That on the 18th June, 1924, they instructed not to issue further assessments
or revised valuations. On the appointment of this Royal Commission all
action in this direction was suspended.
VARIATIONS IN DEPARTMENT’S METHODS OF VALUATION.
31. It has been impossible within, reasonable limits to more than trace in barest outline
the chequered history of the tax on Crown leaseholds, but it is appropriate in addition to what
has already been said that further reference be made to the departmental change of view on
the question of the method of valuing land held under lease from the Crown upon the basis laid
down by the Act.


32. Before doing so, however, it is necessary to point out that both before and subsequent
to the issue of Land Tax General Order 816, the departmental procedure in the valuation of Crown
leasehold land discloses some variations in the several States. The Commissioner handed us a
statement setting out the position, and the method or methods of valuation adopted in each
State. A summary of this statement appears as Appendix 11. to this Report.
33. It may be explained that as a result of discussions at a conference of Deputy
Commissioners and Staff Valuers, held in Melbourne in March, 1917, main rules were framed for
application throughout Australia to secure uniformity in the methods applied by the
Department for ascertaining the unimproved values of lands. These rules, in the form of G.O. 816,
were originally issued on 15th June, 1917, and a consolidation of the existing rulings regarding
valuation, still known as Order 816, was issued in booklet form to valuers in July, 1922.
34. Official change of view.— The Commissioner’s Evidence in 1919.—When appearing before
the Knibbs Commission in June, 1919, the Taxation Commissioner, in answer to the question
(No. 3868) —Do you think the present system of land tax in your Department, and the method
of arriving at the valuation, is the best that could be devised ? —replied “ I think so.” When
asked a little later on (Question 3968) if he would like to say anything about the difficulty of
discovering the freehold value of leaseholds from other freeholds, Mr. Ewing replied “ I cannot
appreciate the difficulty.” The chairman then said (Question 3969). —“ You do not believe there
is a difficulty ?” The answer was, “No more difficulty than there is in ascertaining the value
of a far distant freehold from sales of freehold lands.” In reply to Question 3982 Mr. Ewing
remarked, “ Mr. Benjamin [who appeared before the Knibbs Commission as representative of the
legislative committee of the Pastoral Associations] has stated that there are some features
connected with valuations which the departmental valuers have not allowed for. I wish to say
in this regard that valuers who have made the actual inspection and valuation of properties
have, in fact, considered every possible feature connected with a property, but in measuring them
in comparison with basic lands, they have found that, in the case of some feature, no special
allowance was necessary.” And when dealing with the subject of the appointment of a Valuer-
General in each State (Question 3729) Mr. Ewing said, “ A Valuer-General could not apply any
other principles of valuation than those at present applied, as they are those which have been
definitely laid down by the Courts for valuations of land.”
35. This evidence is somewhat qualified by the Commissioner’s statement in his recent
communication to the Honorable the Treasurer (see paragraph 28 of this Report), viz., that the
reason for his recommendation to the Knibbs Commission that the rate of capitalization of the
difference between the economic and reserved rent should be on the basis of 8 per cent, tables
of calculation instead of 4| per cent, tables was that he “ considered the consequential reduction
in the values of lessees’ estates might thus provide more or less adequately for many factors in
the valuation of Crown leases on the freehold basis, which might not, or could not, readily be
taken into consideration in the method which had been followed in arriving at the probable
selling price of the fee-simple of the lands.” Mr. Ewing’s evidence on this point is recorded
in Minutes of Evidence (Question 3818, page 219), and on page 37 of that Commission’s
Report.
36. Other Departmental Evidence. —The following extracts from the evidence of other
departmental witnesses before the Knibbs Commission will indicate the strong support they
gave to the departmental method of valuation, the principles of which are embodied in G.O. 816.
37. Mr. A. F. Twine (then assistant Federal Commissioner of Taxation) :
In view of the fact of your close association with the valuing branch of the Taxation Department, does the
system now adopted commend itself in its entirety to you, as one experienced in valuing, so far as New South Wales
is concerned ? —Yes.
In connexion with the disabilities for which allowances are made in order to estimate the freehold value of lands
somewhat remote from lands the value of which is known, do you feel that on the whole, the method is sufficiently
liberal in its allowances, and that, on the whole, it gives a close approximation of what would be considered the true
value ? —I think it does.
Would you say that you had a reasonable opportunity of judging that matter from your connexion with
the Department ? My opinion has to be qualified, for this reason, that I have not inspected the leasehold areas.
So that you estimated from general considerations ?—Yes. (Questions 3667, 3668, 3669, and 3670.)
38. Mr. H. V. Franklin, Staff Valuer, Federal Taxation Office, Queensland :
Are you satisfied wi h the general instructions given in that order ? —-I am satisfied with the general principles.
I think they are the most equitable we can get under the Act as it stands.
When you say that they are “ the most equitable we can get under the Act as it stands,” there appears to be a
sort of implication in your answer that the order is not absolutely perfect? —I valued under a different system
altogether before I came to value under the Act. I had to find an average basis. For many years, in valuing for the
State, I valued on a different basis to the one we are following now.


Which do you think is the better system ?—The present. It is more scientific.
Apart from any restrictions or limitations imposed by the Act, if you were going to embark on a valuation
to-morrow, would you prefer to go on your own or on the principles you have laid down at the present time. Which
would give the fairest result ?—I think you get a more perfect result under the present system. It is more scientific
than the system under which I valued before.
Are you quite satisfied with the method laid down in Order 816 ? —Yes, so far as the principle of the thing goes.
That order is largely the result of various conferences we have had. There are certain little alterations that should
be made in a State like Queensland, as compared with Victoria or New South Wales, where they have many more
freeholds than we have. (Questions 2825, 2826, 2827, 2828 and 2831.)
39. Mr. R. P. Cowen (temporary Valuer in the service of the Federal Government): —
Can you suggest any improvement on the present method of valuation ? —No, I have heard many discussions
on it, but Ido not know any method which is more equitable than the present one. (Question 3192.)
40. Mr. W. J. Lambert (at present Senior Valuer for Victoria), of the Federal Taxation
Department, whose experience in valuing country lands was gained in Western Australia over
a period extending from 1907 to 1920, and whose experience in respect of Crown leaseholds was
from 1915 to 1920, before us was asked, “ Do you think that Order 816 contains all the necessary
factors ?” Mr. Lambert’s reply was, “ Yes, I cannot think of any that are omitted.” (Page 286.)
41. It is not easy to follow the workings of the official mind on the subject of valuation
of Crown lands held under pastoral leases.
42. It would appear that in the first instance the Department determined upon what was
considered as the proper method of valuation (see paragraph 14). This method was with
increasing experience of the practical work of valuation, and in the light of several Court judgments
gradually elaborated and embodied in the rules which constitute G.O. 816.
43. Assessment made on different bases. —Assessments in respect of lessees’ estates in
Crown lands seem to have been made upon —
(a) the basis of one or other of the methods of valuation set out in the statement
which constitutes Appendix 2 of this Report ;
(b) the basis of taxpayers’ own valuations ;
(c) the basis at first laid down by the Department (paragraph 14) ; and
( d ) the basis prescribed under G.O. 816 which apparently first took definite shape
in 1917.
44. Departmental Disabilities. —There is little doubt that the work of the Department
has suffered in continuity and effectiveness in respect both of valuation and assessment as they
relate to Crown leases by—
(a) the non collection of outstanding tax under the instructions of the then Treasurer
in March, 1918;
(b) the subsequent appointment of the Royal Commission on Crown Leaseholds ;
(c) the failure to give effect to the recommendation of that Commission with respect
of the altered capitalization rate after the announcement of its acceptance by
the Government;
( d ) the absence of any clear indication of Government policy up till the decision of
Parliament, in August, 1923, that the tax should be collected.
45. Official comments indicate confusion.— -The confused condition of things is indicated
by the following official comments on the position :
1. Mr. Franklin (Staff Valuer, Queensland), when before the Knibbs Commission in
May, 1919, said, in answer to the question by Mr. Allan —
To make valuations of Crown leaseholds, do you act on General Order 816 ? —Not invariably.
We had started making valuations before Order 816 was issued. We generally followed the
principles of the Order, which was the outcome of the Melbourne Conference, of which I was a
member. General Order 816 was not issued until the 15th June, 1917. I have not made any
valuations myself for three years, except an odd check one when I have gone out specially to
make it.
In reply to Mr. Benjamin, who asked —■“ Have any valuations been made in compliance
with Order 816 since 15th June, 1917 ?” the same witness said —Yes. We have practically
amended all our valuations in accordance with that order, or as many as possible. In some
instances it has been impossible to do so yet because of the fact that we have been unable to get
the value of the improvements. When we knew the Royal Commission was coming along we
shut down on this work. (Questions 3140 and 3141.)
2. The Commissioner, in bis Fifth Annual Report (year 1914-15), spoke of assessment?
having been made on the basis then laid down by the Department (see
paragraph 14 ,of this Report).


3. In 1919 the Commissioner told the Knibbs Commission that the judgment of the
Supreme Court of South Australia in the Curnamona case was “ of course being-
applied to the particular assessment that was before the Court, but it will not
be applied in any other assessment except by direction of the High Court.
In my opinion, the judgment is entirely at variance with the principles expressed
in all valuation judgments by the High Court.” (Question 3852.)
4. The Commissioner stated to us that subsequent to the presentation of the Report
of the Knibbs Commission—“ the work of valuation proceeded somewhat
intermittently.”
5. In his communication to the Honorable the Treasurer in June last the Commissioner
stated that in November, 1920, he introduced an additional basis of valuation ;
that in February, 1921, Deputy Commissioners were instructed to apply that
method of valuation to the classes of land referred to ; that experience of its
working indicated from time to time the necessity for amplification of it; and
that no revaluations of the fee-simple values of Crown leaseholds were
undertaken by the Department during the period of suspension of payment
of the tax, because it was not known what decision Parliament would come
to in regard to the continuance or discontinuance of the tax on these
properties.
6. Mr. Ewing further explained that after Parliament decided in August, 1923, that
the tax should be collected he directed Deputy Commissioners to review
valuation of Crown leases on the basis of the capitalization of average net
returns at 8 per cent, simple interest; and that in May, 1924, he decided to
capitalize average net returns on a 10 per cent, basis instead of 8 per cent.,
and that that substitution was suggested only to try to provide in some way for
the unknown contingencies affecting the leasehold lands, which could not be
adequately measured by the comparative system of valuation formerly adopted.
These unknown contingencies are, however, fully reflected in the average net
returns from the properties over a period of years.
46. Definite information sought. —ln order that the position might be clarified we sought
the following information from the Commissioner :
1. Were all original assessments made on owner’s valuations ?
2. Were any assessments made by the Commissioner in respect of any leases returned by owner as beino-
non-taxable ?
3. In respect of what years was tax collected and on what basis—
(a) Owners’ valuations.
( b ) Default assessments.
(c) Departmental check valuations.
4-. Upon what date was collection of tax suspended? Was suspension general throughout Australia, and has
suspension of collection been continuous ?
5. Have default or other assessments been issued to protect the Department up to termination of Act ?
6. Has a general intimation of suspension of collection been made to all taxpayers and that payment need not
be made for the present ?
1 . What are the circumstances in respect of holding back appeal cases or case at the instance of—
(a) the Department;
( b ) any taxpayer.
8. To what extent and for what period Departmental check valuations have been made ?
47. The contained in the official reply (see Appendix III.) discloses that
owners’ valuations as furnished in a large number of returns in respect of lessees’ estates in Crown
lands reveal a taxable interest either in individual leases or in aggregation with other leasehold
or freehold lands ; and further, that considerable amounts have been paid in tax on lessees’
estates in Crown lands both when these estates have been assessed on owners’ valuations and
when assessed on departmental check valuations.
48. Conclusion drawn from the facts disclosed. —Allowing full margin for those cases in
which lessees have accepted departmental valuations without question, or in which lessees have
paid tax under protest or have felt aggrieved at what they considered excessive assessment, the
fact that in so many instances lessees’ own valuations have disclosed a taxable interest, and that
appeals against assessment either have not been lodged or have not been pressed to a final issue,
affords strong ground for the assumption that the Crown has not, in the majority of cases, exacted
the full economic rent for the leased lands (though the contrary assumption has been strongly
urged), and that the departmental estimates of the unimproved value of land held under lease
from the Crown have not always been excessive. The facts afford at least prima facie evidence
that the departmental methods of valuation of leasehold lands upon the basis laid down by the
Act are not fundamentally unsound.


REASONS FOR ADOPTION OF METHOD OF CAPITALIZATION OF AVERAGE NET RETURNS.
49. In response to a request by ns the Commissioner presented in evidence a written
statement setting out the reasons which led him to ascertain the unimproved value on a freehold
basis of pastoral lands leased from the Crown by ascertaining an average net return from the land
and capitalizing it at 10 per cent, simple interest.
In this statement Mr. Ewing said
“ The principal reasons which led to the adoption of the above-mentioned method
of ascertaining the unimproved value of pastoral land leased from the Crown were :
1. A conviction that the methods previously adopted by the Departmental Valuers in New South
Wales, Queensland and South Australia were generally ineffective for making due allowances for all kinds
of differences which might exist between an “ outback ” leasehold property which was being valued and
the freehold properties which had been the subject of sale and from which standards of unimproved value
had been deduced for application to the lands being valued.
2. That there was an absence of sales of comparable freehold lands—
(a) in Queensland after 1914 ; and
(b) in South Australia for all years from 1910 onwards.
Note. —There have been sales of freehold lands in New South Wales from which it would be possible
to deduce unimproved values which, when suitably modified, might be used as standards for valuing those
leasehold lands which are situated principally about midway between the Eastern and Western Land
Divisions of the State. This result, however, necessarily postulates a satisfactory measurement of
disadvantages of the leasehold lands compared with the standard freehold lands.
3. The differences between the methods followed in South Australia and those followed in New
South Wales, Queensland, and Western Australia.
4. The fact than an average of net returns ascertained for a property, assuming average efficient
management, reflects all the advantages and disadvantages associated with the property.
The unabbreviated statement appears as Appendix IV.
50. Comments on Commissioner’s reasons. — The first reason , viz., that the methods
previously adopted in three States were generally ineffective for making due allowances for
differences between an outback leasehold property and the sold basic properties, is amplified later
in the statement when tjie opinion is expressed that district valuers had not adequately measured
disadvantages especially of outback pastoral properties, either through over-sight of essential
points, or on account of the insurmountable difficulties associated with the problem. The opinion
is further expressed that the nature of the difficulties was the principal cause of the apparent
ineffective measurement of the disadvantages. These conclusions were, it is pointed out, the
outcome of conferences during the past three or four years with senior and district valuers in
the States mentioned
51. The evidence submitted to us by the departmental witnesses has not made clear the
precise reasons which -led to the doubts now expressed as to the effectiveness of the Department s
former methods of valuation. As has already been shown, exactly the contrary conviction was
strongly held and vigorously defended. The question naturally arises, what is held to constitute
ineffectiveness in this connexion ? Is the fact that the unimproved fee-simple land values as
determined by the Department have greatly exceeded in many cases those arrived at by taxpayers
regarded as conclusive evidence of ineffectiveness of method ? Have the number of objections
lodged against assessments led to the conclusion that departmental valuations are excessive, and
that therefore the basis of these valuations must be fundamentally unsound, or has there been
any unconscious preference for the new method because it seems to promise on the whole lower
valuations ?
52. No evidence has been submitted that would justify the substitution of the proposed new
method for either the basis laid down in G.O. 815 or the direct method as applied by the Supreme
Court of South Australia in the Curnamona judgment. The proposed new method is, in our
opinion, neither scientific nor equitable, and does not conform as closely as do either of the
other methods to the basis laid down by the Act. Moreover there is reason to believe that in
some measure such method will rest upon data which, being confidential, could not be used before
a Court of Appeal.
53. A growing dissatisfaction with, and a decreasing confidence in the thoroughness of the
Department’s methods of valuation or in the application by valuers in individual cases of
essential principles laid down in G.O. 816, may have had some justification not sufficiently
demonstrated to us ; but whether this is so or not there has been, in our opinion, an excessive desire
to provide by rule for every contingency that may arise in the process of valuation, and an over-anxiety
to ensure strict uniformity in practice .
54. This possibly has had the effect of crippling initiative and preventing a sufficiently free
exercise of independent judgment on the part of valuers. It is unreasonable to expect that rules
for valuing can be drafted with such extraordinary fulness and foresight as to anticipate and
adequately provide for every circumstance that may arise in the inspection of a property or an
examination into the net income derived therefrom over a number of years.


55. The valuer’s problem involves more than the mere mechanical observance of more or less
rigid, rules however skilfully framed. He must rely to some extent upon his own experience,
draw his own inferences and form independent judgments in respect not only of the land itself
and the management of the business, but also as to the relevancy or otherwise of many facts
elicited in the course of his investigation. The rules formulated for the guidance of valuers should
be clear as to principle, and while tull enough to require a high standard in the often difficult task
of valuation should permit of the exercise and expression of the valuer’s considered views on
many points, concerning which his special trainmg and experience may peculiarly fit him to
form a reliable judgment.
56. In this connexion the following comment by the Privy Council, in Secretary of State
for Foreign Affairs v. Charles worth, Pillmg & Co., is pertinent:—
It is quite true that in all valuations, judicial or other, there must be room for inferences and inclinations
of opinion which, being more or less conjectural, are difficult to reduce to exact reasoning or to explain to others.
Everyone who has gone through the process is aware of this lack of demonstrative proof in his own mind, and knows
that every expert witness called before him has had his own set of conjectures, of more or less weight according to his
experience and personal sagacity. In such an inquiry as the present, relating to subjects abounding with uncertainties
and on which there is little experience, there is more than ordinary room for such guess work \ and it would be very
unfair to require an exact exposition of reasons for the conclusions arrived at.
57. G.O. 816 is not the final word in valuation ; it bas been added to from time to time, and
is capable of further expansion, but after a careful study of its various provisions we are of opinion
that on the whole the compilation is a painstaking effort to lay down a sound and intelligent method
of valuation of land for taxation purposes. It evinces an evident desire to interpret correctly
the requirements of the Land Tax Assessment Act.
58. The second reason. —With regard to the second reason given for the change of method
viz., the absence of sales of comparable freehold lands —
(a) in Queensland after 1914 ; and
(b) in South Australia from 1910,
it might be naturally supposed that in order to appropriately meet the position indicated the
Department would have adopted the direct method applied by the Supreme Court of South
Australia in the Curnamona case, at least till an opportunity was taken of testing its soundness
by an appeal to the High Court.
59. It is, in our opinion, a matter of regret that by over-sight the opportunity for appeal in
this case was lost and that subsequent circumstances, referred to by the Commissioner
(paragraph 21), have not favoured a reference on the issue in question to the final authority, the
High Court.
60. r l ht third reason advanced hi favour of the proposed method viz., the differences
between the methods followed in South Australia and those followed in New South Wales,
Queensland, and West Australia, is not very convincing. The differences hi the varying methods
referred to lie more in detail than in principle and were not greater than might reasonably have
been expected in the initiation of the laborious and difficult task imposed upon the Department
by the Act. These methods have not been successfully challenged m the Court except in the
one instance, and the circumstances in that case would not apply generally. In addition, while
numerous objections have been lodged against assessments based upon these methods, and many
have not yet been dealt with, a considerable number of differences between taxpayers and the
Department have been settled and the resultant tax collected.
61. The fourth reason advanced for change of method is “ the fact that an average of net
returns ascertained for a property, assuming efficient management, reflects all the advantages and
disadvantages associated with the property.” Separated from their context these words of the
Commissioner of Taxation are noteworthy and indicate an approximation of view to that
expressed by Isaacs and Gavan Duffy, JJ ., in Fisher’s case in the following extract from the
Judgment
When ascertaining the unimproved value of a station property suck as this, which has been for years an
improved and working concern, the practical, and really the only way, at least in the majority of instances, is to find
first of all, from its present condition and its history, its fair carrying capacity, of course taking into consideration among
its characteristics all existing improvements. That is what any practical man desirous of buying would do. Having
got the carrying capacity as a basis—so many sheep or cattle to so many acres—the prospective buyer has fixed the
intrinsic character of the station itself as a money-making machine. But before he can say what price he is willino' to
give for it, the extrinsic circumstances have to be examined and appraised —as the situation of the property relatively
to markets, all taxation, the state of trade, current prices, further probabilities, and so on. So the prospective buyer
arrives at a price for the improved property as it stands. Then this has to be reduced to unimproved value. All you
have to do is to make an allowance by way of deduction for the absence of internal characteristics of improvements.
Imagine they are non-existent, but displace nothing else.
62. This passage from the Judgment of the Full High Court was quoted with approval by
Murray, C.J ., and the principles enunciated were applied by him in the Curnamona case. But
the Commissioner s words have to be interpreted in their relation to the average of average net
returns method, which he proposes to adopt. As this method forms the subject of criticism


Jater in cmr Report, nothing further need be said at this stage except that under that method
the basis of valuation is not the capitalization of the average ascertained net returns (in the
ordinary acceptations of the term) of the individual subject property but the capita ization of an
assumed average return based upon the average net returns of a number of properties. Hence the
fact alleged in the fourth reason cannot rightly be advanced as an argument in support of a
method which ignores the basis upon which the alleged fact apparently rests.
63. There does not seem to us to be in the Commissioner’s various statements upon the
subject a clear line of demarcation between the additional basis of valuation introduced by him
m November, 1920, viz., 44 the capitalization of net returns of the subject lands at the percentages
which the average net returns from the sold lands bore to the capital m the sold lands ” and the
method set out m his order of 29th October, 1923, which indicates the manner of arriving at the
average of average net returns which are to be regarded as representing the average net return
which an average lessee might reasonably be expected to derive from his land per unit of stock
carried. We have assumed m the review in the immediately preceding paragraphs of the statement
of reasons and directions to Deputy Commissioners that the newly adopted meiUod of the Commis-
sioner is the one that has come to be known more explicitly as the average of average net
returns method, This method is examined in some detail in paragraphs 153 to 108 of this Report.
THE PASTORALISTS’ VIEWS.
° Ur nves^ga^i°n . -f ias been directed to the determination of the method which
should be adopted for determining, upon the basis laid down by the Act, the unimproved
value of the land held under lease from the Crown, we sought to inform our minds fully
as to the views of those immediately concerned. As will be seen, however, we did not
receive much help in the present inquiry from the pastoralists or their representatives in
the direction of the submission by them of any constructive scheme for the solution of the
problem set by the terms of our reference. The evidence tendered us on behalf of pastoralists
was chiefly of either a destructive or negative character. In this respect it differed from a good
deal of the evidence submitted to the previous Commissions which dealt with the subject of the
taxation of Crown leaseholds. J
bn the present instance where the adoption was urged of any procedure which
modified or differed in entirety from that of the Department, it was made clear that any such
variation m practice was approved only for application in assessments up to the date of the
suspension of the collection of the tax in 1918, from which date it was submitted the section of
the act relating to Crown leaseholds should be repealed.
66. The Graziers’ 1918 Resolution.— When appearing before us Mr. Murray Clapham, acting
chairman of the Committee of the Graziers’ Federal Council, handed to us a resolution presented
on Bth April, 1918, to the Honorable W. A. Watt (then Treasurer) by representatives of Crown
leaseholds. The resolution reads :
.-j That, as ie P r€ j se atatives of New South Wales, Queensland, South Australia and Victoria, we unanimously affirm
that t e unimproved value of a Crown leasehold should be taken to mean the capital sum that the unexpired term of
such Crown leasehold may be expected to realize if offered for sale on such reasonable terms and conditions as a bona fide
sel er would require, assuming that the improvements (if any) thereon, or appertaining thereto, and made or acquired
by the owner or his predecessor m title, had not been made. a
67. By courtesy of the Department of the Treasury, we were furnished with a copy of an
official memorandum dated the Bth April, 1918, setting out the substance of what was said at
the interview with the Treasurer. It was stated at that interview inter aha that the views of
the deputation were endorsed by the whole pastoral industry throughout Australia ; that the
‘"on of the pastoralists was that the value of a leasehold estate for purposes of taxation
should be taken at its fair selling value in the open market; that any departure from that
simple rule only led to absurdity in results ; and that the Commissioner of Taxation was obliged
by law to work along an impossible line because he is required to ascertain a freehold selling
value for land which never can be freehold. &
68. It was admitted that in some cases in New South Wales in which leasehold lands are
adjacent to freehold lands it is possible to calculate the probable selling value of the land,
assummg the land were freehold, because the lands are to an extent comparable. It was
considered the position was entirely different in the case of lands far removed from freehold
lands, and situated in districts which can never become freehold. It was thought impossible
ior either a practical pastoralist or the Taxation Department to ascertain a freehold selling value
for such lands. Instances were cited of several leasehold estates which had been sold for amounts
very much below the departmental assessment of the leasehold estates, and it was argued that
any basis of calculation which will produce results entirely foreign to market values must of
necessity be wrong.
69. Tne Pastoralists’ Representations before the Knibbs Commission. — The Royal
Commission on Taxation of Leasehold Lstates in Crown Lands presented its Report in 1919
F. 17208.—2


The printed volume of Minutes of Evidence given before that Commission includes as exhibits
A and H a statement of the case for owners of Crown leases prepared and submitted by Mr.
William Benjamin, who appeared as the representative of the legislative committee of the
Pastoralists 5 Associations, and a letter received by the Chairman of the Commission from the
Honorable James Ashton, M.L.C.
70. With the representations in these communications in respect of the incidence of the tax,
involving, as that issue does, questions of policy, we are not in the present inquiry concerned.
71. On the question, however, as to whether such tax has been arranged upon an equitable
basis, certain aspects of the problem of valuation were discussed which it is of interest and
importance to note. Mr. Benjamin’s contentions in this regard were briefly
1. That the difficulties in arriving at the freehold value of large areas in outlying dry
districts are almost insuperable.
2. That due regard has not been made by the Department to all the factors and
matters that should be taken into account in arriving at the freehold value of
leased lands.
72. Mr. Ashton submitted :
1. That a tax on a lessee’s interest on a Crown leasehold would be justified only where
it formed part of a system for the taxation of wealth generally.
2. That if it be taxable, the only conceivably reasonable basis upon which to levy the
tax is exchangeable value ; that, after considering this question for several
years, he felt convinced that there is no satisfactory solution of the difficulty
except by taxing leaseholds upon their market values just as freeholds are
taxed on their market value.
73. Mr. Benjamin tendered a further statement to the Commission in reply to the inquiry
whether there are any means of arriving at the freehold value of Crown leased lands, in the course
of which he said :
The basis from which I have worked is the law with regard to values as set out in the Federal Land Tax Assessment
Act 1910-16, and the decisions on that law by the various courts that have dealt with questions of valuesin cases before
them.
Human nature being varied, values are largely a matter of opinion, and that being the case, it at once becomes
apparent that the question is one of great difficulty, and the possibility of arriving at anything like perfection is remote,
but it does not follow that an attempt to arrive at a workable basis is altogether hopeless
It will be seen that the first thing to do in ascertaining the value of land (whether actually freehold or presumed
to be freehold) used for pastoral purposes is to find from the present and past history of the property what as an average
is its safe carrying capacity of stock to the acre. But for practical purposes some standard of value is required as a
starting point from which to then proceed. In the case of Macdonald v. Deputy Commissioner of New South W ales
(20 C.L.R., p. 231) on appeal by the Commissioner from the decision of Mr. Justice Ferguson, of the Supreme Court
of New South Wales, the High Court held that, in ascertaining the improved value of pastoral land,the value of land
which, situated as land in question (Mungi Bundi) is, would carry one sheep to the acre may properly be taken as
the standard value. The rate adopted by Mr. Justice Ferguson for Mungi Bundi, near Moree (carrying one sheep to
the acre), as the standard value (of such land) was £3 ss. per acre.
The proposition of ascertaining the freehold improved value of any pastoral land seems, therefore, to resolve
itself into the following proposition :
1. Ascertain the “ carrying capacity ” of the land.
2. If the carrying capacity is kss or more than one sheep to the acre, assuming for the time that the property
under consideration is similar in every way to the standard property, then the standard value of 655.
per acre for sheep to the acre country must be decreased or increased in accordance with same.
3. The value thus arrived at must now be further decreased or increased according to the variation of the
property under consideration from the property used as the standard.
4. In this connexion the comparison should be made as to the variation in—
(a) Situation with regard to natural advantages, such as river frontages, &c.
(b ) Situation with regard to distance from market, &c.
• (c) Situation with regard to removing stock in time of drought.
(d) Rainfall.
( e ) Liability to drought, fire, and flood.
(f) Character of the soil and fevd thereon.
(g) Size of property to be held for profitable use.
(h) Number and character of improvements to be maintained.
( i ) Taxation if the property is aggregated with other lands.
(j) Existence of noxious vermin and weeds, and the necessity of keeping them under subjection.
(A;) Obtaining and maintaining a water supply.
(l) Cost of materials for improvements and other goods that may be required.
(m) The difficulty in obtaining a suitable supply of competent labour.
(n) Area to be worked to provide the pasture for sheep.
(o) Working expenses and other outgoings.
(p) The risks to which the capital invested in the business is subject, and the returns to be expected
on the capital.
(q) The competition among buyers for large areas as against smaller ones.


Halving had regard to all the above-mentioned factors and such other as will, no doubt, occur to a practical man
the approximate improved value can be fixed, and from that value can then be deducted the value of the improvements’
the ascertainment of which does not present very great difficulty. The resulting sum will be the “ unimproved value.”
It may be said that it is all very well to point out the factors to be taken into consideration, arriving first at the
improved value, but how is anyone to make due allowance for such factors. Values of land are in every case entirely
a matter of opinion, and a practical man, buying land either with a freehold or leasehold tenure, can always say what
k e ii S j^ re^ t 0 ’ and w^de ma y not consciously value each factor bearing on the property he is buying he
still does so unconsciously. I have myself neither the practical knowledge or experience to enable me to point out
how much should be allowed for each variation of the standard, but I feel sure that while it appears an extremely difficult
matter, there are men who have the necessary knowledge and experience to express an opinion, not alone upon the
factors that should be taken into consideration, but upon the value that should be assigned to each of them.
• a ® ver y P rac fi ca l man i n considering the exact value as freehold to be attributed to any land, will have in his
mind as a standard (not necessarily the standard pointed out herein) some property with whieii he is well acquainted.
It will be seen, therefore, that to apply the theoretical basis outlined herein would result in so many varying standards
being adopted that, as a matter of practical business, it is evident that the arrival at the freehold value of leased land
is almost an impossibility. (Question 427.)
74. In Iris closing address to tlie Oomnussion in June, 1919, Mr. Benjamin remarked :
If Parliament in its wisdom, insists that Crown leaseholds be taxed, I contend that, on the very strong evidence
before the commission, the tax should be based on the “ Selling Value ”of the lease. To do so would be to bring the
taxation of leaseholds into conformity with the scheme of valuation under the law, which is based, and rightly so on
what a willing buyer would under reasonable terms and conditions give a willing, but not too anxious, seller.
As to the ascertainment of the value of the leased land as if it were in fact freehold, I submitted to the Commission
what, in my opinion, the law requires to be consideied by the valuers when arriving at the freehold value of pastoral
land. Ihe taxation officers have stated that they are in entire accord with the proposition put by me. But, however
true and perfect the method and law may be theoretically, the evidence before the commission shows I submit that
it is utterly impossible for any human being to accurately apply the factors to be regarded when actually making a
valuation. Many of them cannot be measured monetarily ; they partake more of a mental measurement of value
which can only be the result of long experience.
It is submitted that the Department’s instructions to valuers should be enlarged with more detailed statements
of the factors to be considered when making valuations, that more close and careful study be made of all the factors by
the valuers, and that a more generous view be taken in making allowance for them than the evidence has shown has so
far been done The importance of arriving at equitable freehold values for leased lands cannot be stressed too strongly
because the Commission is aware that if these values are wrong or inequitable, then the whole superstructure built
upon it to ascertain the value of the Crown lessee’s leasehold interest in the land must fall to the ground and give as
a consequence, an entirely erroneous result. & 5
75. Mr. Ashton was asked in the course of his examination, “ Admitting that some
particular leasehold has a goodwill value, what do you think would be a suitable method of
determining a nominal freehold value corresponding thereto ? ” Mr. Ashton’s reply was :
d k now °f an y in the case of some leaseholds. Take land in the extraordinary wastes of country in the
Western Division of New South Wales, Queensland, the Northern Territory, South Australia and Western Australia
1 say it is absolutely beyond the wit of man to put a freehold value on millions and millions of acres in that country
(Question 1732.) J '
76. Later, Mr. Ashton expressed the opinion that:—
There has never been a freehold value in the Northern Territory or far out in the western districts of Queensland
or tar out in the west of New South Wales, and the nearest freehold values to them might just as well be in another
country so far as reflecting their values are concerned. (Question 1736).
COMMENTS BY THE KNIBBS COMMISSION.
77. The 1919 Commission in the course of its Report made the following comments on
the evidence: —
It was alleged that in the outback country at least the rent reserved to the Crown is, when all relevant
circumstances are taken into account, really the full economic rental. Hence any system of valuation which gave a
freehold value higher than that deduced from such rental was deemed by them to be invalid.
A large number of witnesses affirmed that it was impossible to attribute a freehold value to leasehold lands for
the reason, among others—(a) that there were no sales of comparable freehold lands similarly or identically circumstanced
an conditioned as to tenure, characteristics, and usage ; and (&) that over a large portion of the Australian States
no person, having due regard to the salient facts, would think of purchasing lands as freeholds for pastoral purposes
i , fr e evidence showed that some taxpayers had at least no serious objection to the taxation of leaseholds if the
leaseholds were not aggregated with freeholds (see Q. 267. Evidence : Mr. J.M. Niall). It shows also that they
recognized that the imposition of a tax on the lessee’s interest would not involve hardship if this interest was
appropriately ascertained (see also Q. 856). Mr. L. A. Addison, a property salesman, South Australia (see Q. 959)
states that he thinksi “ pastoralists as a whole recognise that they should pay a tax ; and a manager of a large pastoral
company (Mr. Rymill, Q. 1012) held the opinion “ . . . . that there would be no hardship ” provided the
values were equitably fixed, Mr.W. J. Young, the General Manager of the Australian Pastoral Company while
objecting to taxation both on freeholds and leaseholds, states that he does not consider “ that leaseholds and freeholds
are in a totally different category in respect of the principle of progressive taxation,” and Mr. \ickery (Q. 2463 a) expresses
an opinion to the same effect, viz., that while “ land taxation both freehold and leasehold is wrong in principle, if the
imposition of the tax is to continue, as seems inevitable, the leaseholder should shoulder a fair proportion of the tax.”
a^s P note tkat Mr. G. R. Linton (Inspector of Stations for the Scottish Australian Investment Company
(Q. 3276), considers that “freeholders are treated worse than leaseholders.”


COMMENTS BY THE ROYAL COMMISSION ON TAXATION.
78. The following comments on the evidence on the taxation of lessees’ estates in
Crown leaseholds are made in the Commission’s Fourth Report (Land Taxation), dated 3rd
March, 1922.
It was argued on behalf of Crown leasholders that, even after making all allowances for such matters as distance
from market, defective means of transit, difficulty or excessive cost of removing stock in time of drought, extra cost of
management owing to low carrying capacity of the country, diminution in value of stock due to comparative
unsuitability of the land, &c., it is practically impossible to determine freehold value, upon which rests the computation
of the taxable interest in a leasehold. Indeed, some witnesses go so far as to say that Crown leaseholds, apart from
the live stock and improvements (if any) upon them, have no definite value at all. This contention appears to have
arisen largely out of the practice followed in sales of pastoral leaseholds. Such sales are very commonly upon the
“ walk-in-walk-out ” basis, the price being frequently expresse d in a lump sum or in terms of the unit of sheep or cattle
upon the holding, the improvements and the value of the lease being included in the lump sum or price per head.
Another reason leading some pastoralists to regard the idea of freehold value as inapplicable to leasehold areas,
particularly the more remote areas, is that much of the grazing country held under lease from the Crown would remain
unoccupied if occupation were permissible only on terms of purchase.
EVIDENCE BEFORE THIS COMMISSION.
79. Mr. C. W. Reid, General Manager of the Beltana Pastoral Company Ltd., of South
Australia, in the course of his evidence said : —•
In regard to the unimproved value of leaseholds, unimproved country in the far north has practically no value.
If by any stretch of imagination, a normal unimproved value could be attributed to such country, I can see no method
of arriving at it.
Mr. Reid was not acquainted with the method of the Taxation Department in valuing
pastoral lands, and was not in a position to make any comparison between the departmental
practice in this regard and his own.
80. Mr. Murray Clapham, Acting Chairman of the Committee of the Graziers’ Federal
Council, brought under our notice the following resolution which was passed at the Annual
Conference of the New South Wales Graziers Association in May, 1923 :
That this Conference is strongly of opinion that the imposition of the Federal Land Tax upon Leasehold Estates
in Crown Lands is unjustifiable,and,further,that any attempt to enforce the collection of arrears of such taxation would
have a disastrous effect upon the pastoral industry.
For the foregoing reasons this Conference desi es to urge the Commonwealth Government to immediately amend
the Federal Land Tax Act in such a way as to exempt Leasehold Estates in Crown Lands from its operation, and also
to make such exemption retrospective.
Mr. Clapham further stated that his committee claims that the taxation on Crown lease-
holds should be abolished for the reason that it is impossible of assessment.
81. It will be seen that Mr. Clapham in his advocacy of the abolition of the tax ab initio
went further than Mr. Eastwood, who advocated the repeal of the Act so far as it relates to
Crown leaseholds as from the date of the suspension of the tax.
82. Mr. Clapham reiterated his disagreement with Mr. Benjamin’s advocacy (before the
Knibbs Commission) of the adoption of “ selling values ” of leases as a basis of taxation if there
must be taxation on Crown leaseholds.
83. On the question of the incidence of resumption, Mr. Clapham referred to the com-
pulsory resumption by the Crown of the Burnett lands in Queensland, and the restriction
under the Act by which the maximum amount of compensation payable to the dispossessed
Crown tenants was 4s. per beast of carrying capacity per annum for the unexpired portion of the
lease, and stated he knew leaseholders who suffered a very serious loss by that compulsory
resumption.
84. With respect to recent notification by the Queensland Government of intention to
resume certain other leases, though so far the resumptions have not been proceeded with, Mr.
Clapham thought the fact that the embargo stands on these leases has a depressing effect on
their value, and causes uncertainty and anxiety in the minds of lessees.
85. In the case of a lease in which the Crown has the explicit right of resumption of part
at varying dates, Mr. Clapham expressed the opinion that the proper course would be for the
Department to reflect the liability to resumption in the original assessment.
86. Mr. Clapham considered that with the liability of leaseholders to re-appraisement of
rentals assessment for taxation is impossible; and that, speaking generally, in Queensland the
full rental is being paid for Crown leaseholds.
87. With regard to valuation of pastoral leasehold properties, Mr. Clapham stated that his
company was accustomed to leave their valuers unfettered in practical affairs and did not supply
them with valuation forms.
88. Mr. Edmund Jowett, grazier, expressed the view that “ owing to the uncertainties
attached to Crown leases, there is no possibility of obtaining any reasonable accuracy in
assessments. It must, therefore, be capricious in its incidence, and harsh and unjust in its
operations.” Mr. Jowett further contended that “it has been more than ever demonstrated
that it is impossible to arrive with any degree of accuracy at an estimate of the freehold value


of a Crown leasehold. One may say, here is a piece of freehold land, and here is a Crown lease.
IJiey are side by side, and they may be the same, or the difference, if any, may be allowed for,
but that point of view fails to take into consideration the essential differences between a Crown
easenold and a freehold. Those differences have become very much more marked and apparent
during the last few years. They arise from what may be termed the three R’s, namely, the
question of the revision or re-appraisement of rents, the question of resumptions, and the
question ot the residual value of improvements.” (Page 1148.)
£ Jl 1 us l ra 4ion of his contention Mr. Jowett cited a case in which the rent was reduced
from 20s. 6d. to 11s. 9d., and added—
, * d ° *} ot wisl^ to infer that the valuers adopted incorrect methods of valuing the lease, because I think that
ey a ope t e only method they could adopt under the Act. Ido not say one word against their methods, although
ey va ue a p ace w hich was not worth anything at all at £6,300. Then in 1923 the rent of mv Drummondslope
lease was reduced to 11s. 9d. J
I have before me a copy of the report of the Knibbs Commission, showing the valuation by the. Federal Taxation
cpar men of the uninfproved value of Drummondslope at £14,720. That was because they considered that the
Queensland Government had not charged me enough rent. The unimproved value must have some meaning. The
epar ment c larged my interest at £4,5/9, so that they assumed that the Crown had not charged me enough rent
when they charged me 20s. 6d. (Page 1150.)
90. In reply to the question, “ Do you think it is impossible to arrive at the unimproved
value of a piece of land, irrespective of the question as to whether it is leasehold or freehold ? ”
Mr. Jowett replied, No, Ido not think it is,” but he did not think it possible to arrive at the
unimproved value of a block of land by comparison with a freehold value because the terms
under which the lands are held are totally different. He regarded the three uncertainties—
revision of rents, resumption, and residual value of improvements—as impossible of measurement.
91. Mr. J. S. Eastwood, in his representations on behalf of pastoralists, specially directed
attention to the evidence of, in all, twenty witnesses who appeared before the Knibbs Commission,
ihe following extracts are taken from that evidence:—
92. Mr. C. R. Murphy a holder of small freeholds in the western district of Victoria, said—
I know of no reasonable or just method by which leaseholds in the dry districts can be valued as freeholds. (Q. 94.)
90. Mr. A. G. Rymill, manager of the Canowie Pastoral Company, was asked, “Do you
think any Crown leases have what may be called a freehold value ? ” His reply was, “ That is a
difficult question to answer. There may be a freehold value there, Yes.” He was also asked,
“ How would you arrive at a determination of the freehold value?” and replied, “I can only
follow the Chief Justice s method as laid down by him in that recent case about it [Curnamona
Case].” (Questions 999 and 1000.)
94. Mr. Rymill was also asked, “ Are you perfectly satisfied with the principle laid down by
the Chief Justice in that case for the determination of the value ? ” He replied, “ Yes,
perfectly.” (Question 1010.)
95. Later on Mr. Rymill, in his reply to the question, “ Do you say that the selling value
should be the basis of taxation ? ” said —“ Yes, that is correct. May I add it practically comes
back to what the Chief Justice fixed as his method. In comparing his method, to what we would
expect to get from Curnamona, our own estimate is practically coincident.”
{( . 96. Mr. W. G. Duncan, M.L.C., a South Australian pastoralist, expressed the view that
if leaseholds are to be subject to Federal Land Tax, which I submit they should not (if the
pastoral industry is to extend), to my mind the only possible way —and the way laid down in
the Act is to base that valuation on 4 selling values.’ In the past the practice has been to guess
at the freehold value (to do so accurately is an absolute impossibility), and from the guess
calculate the lessee’s interest.” (Question 1066.)
97. Mr. W. J. Young, General Manager for the Australian Pastoral Company, in the course
of his evidence, said he did not know the process of ascertaining the freehold value of leasehold
land. He had no process, and had never come across a person who had. He did not think it
possible to arrive at the unimproved value of leasehold land by comparison with the nearest
freehold lands as a basis, as there were so many factors to be taken into consideration. (Questions
1860 and 1861.)
He did not offer any suggestion as a substitute to the departmental method of valuation,
adding, “I do not want to make any proposition by means of which you might put a tax upon
my land, because Ido not think it would be right. ... Ido not think there should be any
tax on land of any description whatever. I object just as strongly to a tax on freehold as Ido
to a tax on leasehold.” (Questions 1865 and 1873.) «
98. Mr. Young also expressed the opinion that undoubtedly the carrying capacity would
give an idea of the value of the land; and in answer to the question, “ Could the Taxation
Commissioner arrive at a freehold value by the number of sheep that the property would carry
in the year that he had to value ? ” Mr. Young said, “ Yes ; but it becomes a capital tax ; it is
not a land tax then ; it ceases to be a land tax. because you are taxing a man on his capital. You
are taxing a man for his fences, water, and the improvements he has made on the property.
The unimproved value follows the improved value.” (Questions 1879 and 1880.)


99. Mr. Thomas Vincent thought it “ absolutely impossible to fix an approximately
correct unimproved value on Crown leases as he knew them. No man can estimate the various
and constantly changing conditions. The advantages and disabilities can only be arrived at
through profit and loss over a period.” (Question 1949.) Asked if his argument was that there
is no unimproved value in a leasehold at all, Mr. Vincent said, “We cannot deny that there is
some.” (Question 1984.)
100. Mr. Kobert McDonald, land and financial agent, formerly Chief Surveyor for New
South Wales, and Under Secretary for Lands, and at one time Western Lands Commissioner,
was asked, “Do you think there is an ascertainable freehold value of land in the Western
Division ?” His reply was, “ Certainly there is a great deal of it, unless in the very bad Mallee
country.” (Question 2458.) Asked “ How do you think the value of the freehold could be
ascertained?” Mr. McDonald said, “Freehold is exactly the same character of country as
leasehold. There is no difference as regards the character of the land. It could not be appraised
unless there were sales to guide one under the principle laid down in the Act, the capabilities of
the country over a great period of years would have to be ascertained, the cost of improvements,
management, and that sort of thing would have to be deducted.”
101. Mr. Colin James McMaster, Chief Commissioner of Western Lands, New South Wales,
was quite satisfied that it is impossible to arrive at the true unimproved value of the greater
part of the lands in the Western Division. (Question 2485.)
102. Mr. Eastwood quoted from the evidence of departmental witnesses before the Knibbs
Commission in which the departmental system of arriving at the freehold unimproved value of
land held under lease from the Crown was upheld, also from the findings of that Commission
which expressed a majority decision that the departmental methods are in the main sound and
with very little modification can be made to give satisfactory results. From this view, it was
pointed out, one Commissioner dissented.
103. The evidence of departmental witnesses before the Knibbs Commission was contrasted
by Mr. Eastwood with the departmental evidence submitted to us, and the Taxation Commissioner
is quoted as having “ frankly and fairly ” admitted the defects in the previous departmental
methods which had been stressed by pastoralists.
104. It was also claimed that in arriving at the unimproved value of the land for the
purpose of calculating the lessees’ interest three important matters have not been taken into
account, viz.
1. Weight of land tax.
2. Magnitude.
3. Dislocation.
105. It was also asserted that the following factors in the determination of lessees’ interests
had not been allowed for in any of the assessments, viz. :
1. Eesumptions.
2. Onerous conditions.
3. Eeappraisements.
4. Depreciation on improvements not inuring to the benefit of the lessee at
termination of lease.
106. Mr. Eastwood criticized the proposed average of average net returns method
emphasizing the difficulties that would attach to obtaining reliable information on account of
the varying methods adopted by graziers in respect of live stock values and numbers at the
beginning and end of each accounting period. He further pointed out the doubts expressed
by the departmental valuers as to whether the proposed method would prove more economical
than the former methods, and as to whether the 10 per cent, rate of capitalization can be equitably
applied to the whole of Australia. For these reasons, and for the reason that the Department
would not be in a position to disclose to objecting taxpayers the information upon which a
valuation rests, he condemned the scheme.
107. Mr. Eastwood claimed for the Crown tenants in Queensland that there is no taxable
equity in the leases in that State.
108. Mr. Eastwood’s representations closed with the statement that the lessees, after the
most careful consideration, were unable to suggest any scheme whereby the unimproved value
of the lessee’s interest can be ascertained in accordance with the provisions of the Land Tax Act,
and we were asked to find—
(a) That on the basis laid down by the Act it is impossible in the vast majority of
. cases to determine the value of a lessee’s interest in Crown leaseholds;
( b ) That the unimproved freehold value of a large area of Australia is unascertainable ;


(c) That the average of averages system advocated by the departmental witnesses is
impracticable ;
(d) That since the Federal Land Tax Act was amended to include Crown leaseholds
the operation of the Land Act Amendment Act of 1920 (Queensland) has
removed all Crown leaseholds in Queensland from the taxable area; and
(e) That as 80 per cent, of the suspended tax is in respect of Queensland leaseholds
and cannot be recovered, the section of the Act relating to Crown leaseholds
be repealed as from the date of the suspension of the tax.
109. We do not regard the questions embraced in {a), (d), and (e) as coming within the scope
of our inquiry.
110. When under examination, Mr. Eastwood was asked what was intended to be conveyed
by the claim that it was impossible to arrive at the unimproved value of land leased from the
Crown for the purpose of the Act. In reply Mr. Eastwood said: —
Dealing with your question seriatim, it is, in the first place, suggested that Parliament was wrong in adopting
the basis which it has adopted ; that the basis was one to be applied originally in the case of lands which were at the
same time freehold, the values of which could be reasonably ascertained, and that when the Act was amended to deal
with the large areas of Crown leaseholds the defini ion made (we say it required amendment) was not taken into account.
•In the second place, we say that the evidence before this Commission shows that thfe departmental values were clearly
wrong, and we say that is so. In the third place, we say that the land may or may not have a freehold value, but we
think, in view of the large areas and the policy of the State Government, that it has no freehold value for the purposes
of taxation. Fourthly, we think it is beyond the skill and ingenuity of any valuation branch to establish a correct
freehold improved value of those leasehold lands.
There are some cases where leaseholds join freeholds, and I will not say as to those that a system could not be
applied, but they are so very few, and the mass is so far away from these freeholds, that we say the many should not
be penalized by an artificial method because it is capable of being applied in the case of a very limited number.
111. Mr. Eastwood, in the course of examination, agreed that the evidence tendered by
the departmental valuers disclosed considerable care and skill (page 1068) ; be adhered to
the opinion that, for the most part, basic sales, or comparable sales of freehold lands were not
available to the Department, and that where they were available the disabilities of the subject
lands were incapable of measurement and expression in £s. d. When asked his opinion of the
method of valuation embodied in G.O. 816, assuming these two difficulties could be overcome or
eliminated, he said, “Of arriving at freehold values under Order 8161 think that is a sound method.
There may be divergences of opinion on detail, but the order shows evidence of great care, and
it seems to be a reliable method of arriving at values.” (Page 1069.)
112. On the question of allowance in respect of magnitude, Mr. Eastwood had no suggestion
to offer, but agreed that the reasons for the allowance given by the expert valuers seemed to be
good. He thought the problem was one that had to be dealt with by the expert on the spot, on
the presupposition that the area could not be handled in smaller parcels. (Page 1087.)
113. Mr. Eastwood was unable to indicate any definite minimum area to which the
allowance for magnitude should apply, nor had he any opinion to offer as to the percentage
allowance that should be made, or how such allowance was to be measured. These were all,
he thought, part of the valuer’s problem. (Page 1092.)
114. On the question of “ dislocation ” Mr. Eastwood thought that “ the evidence of the
experts seemed to have been well considered and very reasonable.” He could not suggest how
the disability of dislocation can be measured, but thought it “ probably could be estimated by
an expert valuer.” (Page 1094.)
115. Mr. Eastwood claimed that, so far as is known, no allowance has been made in any
assessment in respect of onerous conditions, though Deputy Commissioners had been instructed
to do so —adding, “ We are not at present making any representations as to how that allowance
should be made.” (Page 1100.)
116. A further claim was made by Mr. Eastwood that an allowance should have been made
to provide for the recoupment of the whole of the lessee’s capital which was expended on
improvements not inuring to him at the termination of the lease less depreciation and whatever
amount he may receive by way of purchase or compensation.
117. In the course of Mr. Eastwood’s examination a number of questions arose upon which
we asked for a considered opinion, or for further information from the witness.


118. To some of these requests Mr. Eastwood replied by letter on the 2nd and 28th October,
1924.
From these letters we quote the following :
Method of arriving at net returns :—The Committee feels that as the net returns of individual lessees available
to the Department are, in the majority of instances, the figures submitted for State or Federal Income Tax purposes
such information is misleading and inaccurate for the following reasons :
(a) An Income Tax return is compiled on a different basis from a return of net income
(b) Where a taxpayer keeps no books of account but relies on his memory and his bank books, his Income
Tax retu-ns cannot be considered a reasonable and proper basis for arriving at the “ net return.”
(c) Livestock. —It is possible that in any given district some of the taxpayers will adopt the market value
basis and others the average cost price basis, and there will thus be no harmony for the purpose
of arriving at a general average. Such being the case, my principals feel that the adoption of a
net returns basis would be most unsatisfactory and would not give correct results.
On going more fully into the matter of the compilation of a skeleton form for ascertaining the returns from the
pastoral property, I regret to state that I find it almost impossible to devise a form that would be suitable for universal
adoption such as is the case for Income Tax purposes
It is of course possible from inspection of books and records to ascertain the various avenues of income and the
various purposes for which payments and outgoings are made or incurred. This is the method, subject to the
artificial restrictions of the Income Tax Assessment Acts, which is for the purpose of the levying of Income Tax, but
which does not, and cannot in any way, give any indication as to the true value of the subject land.
I regret that I cannot help the Commission by suggestirg a skeleton form for general application that would assist
the Commission in laying down any rules for the guidance of Valuers in ascertaining the value of land based on such
form or the information contained therein.
Average of Averages. —lt is claimed that quite apart from the difficulty of arriving at the net returns of the
individual, the proposition that the average of all district averages should be taken is open to grave objection because
of the different methods employed in working the various properties and of the differences in the capacities of the
various owners.
The varying methods of carrying on pastoral businesses—such as breeding, dealing, the raising of stud sheep—
and a combination of these methods, together with the wide differences in business management, stock, country, the
capacity of individuals, and many other factors which cannot be reduced to a common basis, seem to me to preclude
the earning value of any particular area of country being determined from general averages comprising such widely
different bases.
“ Curnamona ” Judgment. —l was asked by your Commission to criticize this judgment.
After discussion wfith my principals and most careful thought the view is taken that this should be regarded
as a special case. This is indicated by the evidence of the Commissioner of Taxation before the first Commission, where
he stated that he would have appealed had not the time been allowed to lapse. My principals feel that as the matter
of the method of taxing Crown Leaseholds is now sub judice, they would not feel justified in venturing to criticize the
judgment of the Supreme Court of South Australia.
[Note. —The following is an extract from Mr. Eastwood’s evidence respecting this judgment: —
Question. —That suggests one possible method which, at any rate, found acceptance from the Chief Justice of
the South Australian Supreme Court. Have you any opinion to give us why that method should be considered, and do
you think it could be applied universally ?
Answer. —l do not think it could.
Question. —Would you like to consider a criticism of that method, and give us your opinion at a later date ?
Answer. —Yes.
Question. —The Commission would like you to give us the benefit of your opinions as to the more general or
universal adoption of the method used in that case, rather than the method of comparison by sales, or as to whether
this method could be usefully adopted in the case where comparable basic land sales are not available ?
Answer. —l will attend to that.]
Constitution and powers of Appeal Board. —The feelings of my principals are that the requirements of the Land
Tax Assessment Act, so far as they are applicable to Crown Leaseholds, cannot be carried into effect, and under these
circumstances they feel that an Appeal Board would be useless. On their behalf I have to state that it is considered
that an impossible task has been assigned to the Commissioner in the assessment of Crown Leaseholds, and that no good
will result from the appointment of an Appeal Board.
119. Address by Counsel. —At the close of our public inquiry Mr. Owen Dixon, K.C., on
behalf of the graziers of Australia, addressed us at length.
120. Brief reference may be made to some aspects of the many-sided problem with which we
have to deal upon which we do not find ourselves in accord with the views expressed by Mr. Dixon.
121. The use of State Valuations. —Taking these in the order in which they were dealt with
by Mr. Dixon, there is first the question of the use by the Commissioner of Taxation of valuations
made by or for any State or any State authority.
122. Sections 17 and 18 of the Land Tax Assessment Act read :
17. — (1.) The Commissioner may. if, as, and when he thinks fit, make or cause to be made valuations of any land.
(2.) The Commissioner may obtain and use as valuations, or for the purpose of preparing valuations, an
valuations made by or for any State or any authority constituted under a State.


18. From the returns and valuations so made, if any, and from any other information in his possession, or from
any one or more of those sources, and whether any return has been furnished or not, the Commissioner shall cause
assessments to be made for the purpose of ascertaining the amount upon which land tax shall be levied.
123. Mr. Dixon in dealing with these sections of the Act said
It is to be noted, and it is rather important in this connexion, that he [i.e., the Commissioner] has to use the
valuations of his own valuers and any valuations made by or for any State or any authority under a State, which he
likes to treat as material in informing his mind of the fact. By those means he has to get at the unimproved value
of the land, and the improved value in the case of leaseholds.” (Page 1172.)
124. Later Mr. Dixon incidentally refers to the same matter in the following words
In the next place, the leaseholds themselves are subject to re-valuation by the State, and, logically if the
•re-valuation is carried out on anything approximating to the principles which are understood to prevail in Queensland
there ought to be no taxable value. If the Act directs the Commissioner to take State valuations into consideration,
and State valuations are made, they are not (at any rate here in Victoria) considered in the case of Queensland to
be unduly favorable to the leaseholder, and it would be quite in conformity with the direction contained in the Act
itself if the Commissioner started off with the nrima facie assumption that they were right. In truth there could be
no taxation of these leaseholds, if the State re-valuation was really effective. (Page 1212.)
125. Mr. Dixon in these words seems to imply that it is obligatory on the part of the
Commissioner to take into consideration valuations made by or for any State or authority
constituted under a State.
126. We take the view that under Sub-section (2) of Section 17 the use for any purpose by the
Commissioner of such valuations is optional and not mandatory.
127. This view accords with that expressed by the High Court. In the case Nathan v.
The Commissioner of Land Tax, Mr. Justice Isaacs in delivering judgment said
By section 17 of the Land Tax Assessment Act 1901-1911, the Commissioner is empowered to make valuations
of land. He is also empowered, but not bound, to obtain and use State valuations. Section 18 says that from these
and from returns and from any other information in his possession, or from any one or more of these sources, he shall
cause assessments to be made for the purpose of ascertaining the amount upon which land tax is to be levied.
128. In the case Duncan v. Others (19 C.L.R. 551), Griffith, C.J ,, said :
Another matter to which the learned Judge paid some attention —quite independently of the others—was the
fact that the State valuation of the same land was £5 per acre. He thought he was entitled to regard that as evidence
in the case. Ido not think that he was. The Commissioner was entitled to look at that valuation, because for one reason
the statute says so. The duty of the Commissioner is to ascertain in the best wav he can what he thinks is the value
of the land, just as any person required to form his opinion is entitled to inform his mind in the best way he can. But
when the matter comes before a Court, the Court must have regard to the rules of evidence. The facts upon which
the Commissioner has informed his mind cannot be considered by the Court, unless brought before it by proper and
admissible evidence. I think, therefore, that the State assessment was not admissible in the case as evidence of the
value of the land.
129. In the same case Mr. Justice Isaacs said :
Another question of law is as to the adm'ssibility of the valuations for State land tax as evidence of the correctnes
or incorrectness of the Commissioner’s valuation. In my opinion, the State valuations are not admissible for that
purpose. Section 17 (1) of the Act says : —“ The Commissioner may if as and when he thinks fit make or cause to be
made valuations of any land.” Section 17 (2), under which these valuations were admitted by the learned Judge
is as follows :
“ The Commissioner may obtain and use as valuations or for the purpose of preparing valuations any
valuations made by or for any State or any authority constituted under a State.”
These are the only purposes for which State valuations may be used according to the terms of the section. That
is all preparatory. It is only up to the stage of valuation. And the provision is obviously to save unnecessary trouble
and expense in employing valuators. But it is one thing to say that the State valuation may be used as a convenient
method of preparing the valuation, and it is quite another thing to say that the State valuation, even w T hen rejected
by the Commissioner, shall be evidence—and as the learned Judge thought, mos 4 - reliable evidence —of the value of
the land. Again, if the learned Judge’s decision were not independent of the weight which he attached to the State
valuations, I should think it would not be sustainable.”
130. Individual consideration of the individual parcel. —Mr. Dixon in the course of
argument emphasizing the necessity for individual consideration of the individual parcel of land
by persons well acquainted with it said :
The unfortunate fact is that the criterion set by the Act is a criterion which every taxing officer is loth to comply
with to its full extent.”
This statement seems to imply a disinclination on the part of the Taxation Department to
determine unimproved land values for the purposes of taxation upon reports of its valuers after
detailed personal inspection of individual properties but this implication is not justified by the
facts disclosed in evidence.
131. Has land a freehold value if no purchaser forthcoming? —Mr. Dixon quoted an opinion
expressed by Mr. H. A. G. Curry, the dissentient Commissioner, recorded in paragraph 13, page 40,
of the Deport of the Knibbs Commission. The quotation reads :
Your Commissioner (Mr. Currv) desires also to say that the task of ascribing a freehold value to lands which
if offered for sale, would not find a willing purchaser, seems to him a very hazardous one.”


In referring to these words Mr. Dixon said :
When he (Mr. Curry) says “ the task of ascribing a freehoM value to lands which, if offered for sale, would
not find a willing purchaser,” he has at once negatived any value whatever. If he is right (and Ido not say for one
moment one way or the other) in supposing that no purchaser would be forthcoming at all, these is no hazard about
it. You have simply got the answer “ There is no value.”
132. We cannot subscribe to this contention in view of the opinion expressed by Griffith, C.J.
133. In the judgment of the High Court in the case Spencer v. The Commonwealth
(C.L.R. vol. 5 page 431), His Honour said :
There is, no doubt, much land in many places the value of which per acre is as definitely fixed as the price of
wheat or sugar. But in the case of a new port, in a new State, where the area of land is limited, and each piece differs
in many of its characteristics from the rest, it is impossible to apply any such rule. Bearing in mind that value implies
the existence of a willing buyer as well as of a willing seller, some modification of the rule must be made in order to
make it applicable to the case of a piece of land which has any unique value. It may be that the land is fit for many
purposes, and will in all probability be soon required for some of them, but there may be no one actually willing at the
moment to buy it at any price. Still it does not follow that the land has no value. In my judgment the tes, of value
of land is to be determined, not by inquiring what price a man desiring to sell could actually have obtained for it on
a given day, i.e., whether there was in fact on that day a willing buyer, but by inquiring “ What would a man
desiring to buy the land have had to pay for it on that day to a vendor willing to sell it for a fair price, but not
desirous to sell ? ” It is, no doubt, very difficult to answer such a question, and any answer must be to some extent
conjectural. The necessary mental process is to put yourself as far as possible in the position of persons conversant
with the subject at the relevant time and from ihat point of view to ascertain what, according to the then current
opinion of land values, a purchaser would have had to offer for the land to induce such a willing vendor to sell it, or,
in other words, to inquire at what point a desirous purchaser and a not unwilling vendor would come together.
134. In the Judgment of the High Court on Appeal in the case Duncan and others v.
Commissioner of Land Tax (19 C.L.R., 551, 553), the Chief Justice also said :
The underlying idea is that the land is to be treated as converted into money as on the day as of which the
assessment is made, so that a realized capital sum takes the place of the land. That, of course, assumes a hypothetical
purchaser. It does not mean that you are to inquire whether there was at that time a purchaser in existence, who
would have been willing to buy the particular piece of land
The theory of the hypothetical purchaser does not, therefore, assume the existence of a person actually willing
to buy.
135. Mr. Dixon’s suggested solution of the problem. —One suggestion made by Mr. Dixon
in the course of his address does not, in our opinion, offer any practical solution of the difficulty
which confronts the Taxation Department in valuing some Crown leaseholds if regard be paid
to the principle of aggregation in the Land Tax Assessment Act.
136. Mr. Dixon said : —-
I venture to suggest to the Commission that, from a practical point of view, the valuer need not be instructed
to carry out this very difficult task, but that he should, as a practical instruction, be told “ When you have come to
the conclusion from your preliminary considerations (those that I have mentioned) that there is not going to be any
tax resulting from a valuation of this land, in other words, that the person is not going so far to prefer the fee-simple
to the leasehold tenure as to give a price sufficient to bring about the operation of Section 28 (3) you can drop it and
proceed no further. That would save a lot of difficulty.
137. Mr. Dixon, however, went on to say :
If, however, he comes to the conclusion that the proper application of these principles may very well lead to
taxability, he will then proceed to give some very definite opinion as to what, firstly at the date when the lease was
granted by the Crown, and, secondly at the 30th June a person would be likely to give, and I would suggest to this
Commission that his opinion can best be founded upon a consideration of what is in fact, given for similar leaseholds
in the market, and that, really, when you get down to bedrock, except by ascertaining or forming an opinion as to
what is really given for leaseholds of a similar character, there is no way of valuing these. When dealing with land
which is saleable upon different tenure, instead of going far away to the Mitchell River and computing on some
hypothetical basis what is the earning capacity of land, and capitalizing it, surely the easiest and most obvious way
of adjusting these two matters, of bringing these two things into relationship is to find out what is given for uniform
or similar land of another tenure, and then make proper allowances for the difference in tenure, by a proper consideration
of the rent reserved; by the added sum which is given for the lease when it is sold, if any, and by capitalization of
that rent for the real period of the lease, not for its nominal period. My suggestion is that individuals conversant
with dealing in this commodity can, by taking into consideration a multitude of factors, which they are fairly well
accustomed to, bring about a valuation more or less accurate, but a valuation which will, in nearly every case be
entirely different to that which the Commissioner has been rather suggesting as the possible result. (Pages 1211 and
1212.).
138. Further developing this suggestion Mr. Dixon said :
I therefore suggest to the Commissioner that the real solution of the problem is to ascertain what is given in
substance for leaseholds, whether it is nothing or something—just starting from some notion of the value of the land,
and then ascertaining the fee-simple value by making just allowances for the difference in value of tenure and, of course,
in the preliminary stages inquiring whether you will get anybody to buy the fee-simple, having regard to the tax which
is involved in it, and having regard to the condition of leasehold tenure, and being able to desert the country in case
of drought, and various other advantages, and also weighing the disadvantages such as the liability of resumption
without proper compensation for fixtures. Probably there are numerous other disadvantages more or less trivial,
but no one can deny that, considered simply as a tenure a fee simple tenure is a far safer one and more advantageous
than a leasehold tenure. No one can deny the advantages of the tenure considered alone. (Page 1214.)


139. Mr. Dixon’s suggested solution examined. —Mr. Dixon’s suggested solution of the
problem is expressed in somewhat vague terms. He apparently suggests that the correct method
of determining the unimproved freehold value of a Crown leasehold is first to ascertain its selling
value as a leasehold and then to add to that amount the capitalized rent reserved to the Crown,
the result giving the unimproved freehold value.
140. This process, however, could only give an unimproved value for a limited tenure,
viz. the unexpired period of the lease ; and it may fairly be assumed that a fee-simple —that
is an in-perpetuity—-value will be greater than a limited tenure value.
141. Mr. Dixon’s suggestion led us to explore its possibilities. We have , however, been
unable to discover that the suggested solution of the valuation 'problem is a reliable or practical one.
If the selling value (the price paid for the leasehold) and the rent reserved to the Crown were the
consideration payable for an unrestricted use of the land for the unexpired term of the lease
(that is to say for an occupancy free from all conditions as to improvements, re-appraisement
or resumption, &c.), then the sum of the price paid for the lease and the capitalized rent would
be an indication of the unimproved value of the land for the unexpired period of the lease ; but
there would still remain the difficulty of converting that sum into the freehold value.
142. The only method of conversion would be to reduce (at the appropriate rate of interest)
the amount paid for the lease to the equivalent annual sum that would be payable over the
unexpired period of the lease, and to add to that annual sum the reserved rent, so as to arrive
at the annual unimproved value of the property.
143. Having ascertained the annual unimproved value by this process, the annual
unimproved value could be converted into its capital equivalent by using the appropriate rate
of interest as the factor, and that capital sum would represent the unimproved freehold value
of the leasehold land.
144. The appropriate rate of interest referred to in the immediately preceding paragraphs
would need to be the average percentage rate of net profit over a term of years disclosed by analysis
of returns of sold freehold properties comparable by locality and similar use with the leasehold
land.
145. But in addition to the question of the rate of interest great difficulty and uncertainty
would arise in applying this method due to the varying circumstances governing the price paid
for a leasehold interest. For example, the sale of a lease may be governed by fortuitous
circumstances, and the leasehold may be subject to re-appraisement or resumption, &c., and
although allowance may be made by the purchaser to meet these and other contingencies, such
allowance, being wholly dependent upon the judgment or skill in bargaining of the individual
purchaser is incapable of standardization ; and as (apart from the question of tenure) most leases
contain restrictions or conditions from which the fee-simple is free, we do not consider that the
selling price of a restricted lease provided a sound basis for arriving at the value of an unrestricted
lease. We are, therefore, unable to recommend the adoption of the suggested method.
THE “SELLING VALUE” OF THE LEASE SUGGESTED AS A BASIS OF THE TAX.
146. It was repeatedly urged by pastoralists before the Knibbs Commission that the tax
on Crown leaseholds should be based on the selling value of the lease. (See pages 22 and 23 of
that Commission’s Report, and paragraphs 95 and 96 of this Report.)
147. Witnesses divided in opinion. —Witnesses before that Commission were divided in
their opinions on the subject. Though the proposal found strong support from some it was
condemned with equal force by others, amongst whom was the Commissioner of Taxation.
(Q. 3864.)
148. The Knibbs Commission’s View. —The Knibbs Commission regarded the suggested
method as invalid, and, in addition to urging a number of objections against it, considered that
“ the method really suggests that the basic principle of a land tax, # viz., that it should be based
on the actual freehold value of the land, should really be wholly eliminated.”
149. Would the suggested basis involve amendment of the Act ?—As we wished to assure
ourselves as to whether or not such a scheme, if approved, could be adopted without involving
amendment of the Land Tax Assessment Act, we sought the opinion of the Solicitor-General
upon the question of the permissibility of a wider interpretation than the generally accepted one
of certain definitions in the Act.
150. Questions to the Solicitor-General. —Our questions to the Solicitor-General were :
(1) In view of the fact that the Land Tax Assessment Act originally excluded lessees’ estates in Crown leases
from its operations (original Section 29), and in view of the possibility when the Amending Act No. 29 of 1914 extended
its operations to include lessees’ estates in Crown leases, that the significance of and necessity for consequential


alterations in tlie text of Sections other then Section 29, may not have been fully realized, would it be permissible
to seek to interpret the spirit of the Act and the intention of Parliament in the light of the new conditions created
by the extention of the scope of the Act ?
Specifically, would it be permissible to read the definitions of “ Improved Value ” and “ Unimproved Value ”
in Section 3, when applied in relation to Grown land as meaning or implying the capital sum which the right of lease
(instead of the fee-simple) of the land might be expected to realize if offered for sale on such reasonable terms and
conditions as a bond fide seller would require ?
It is recognized that such reading may do violence to the words of the Act, but in this instance if, in view of
the 1914 amendment of the Act referred to above, the extended meaning previously indicated may, by reasonable
implication, attach to the words, may such extended meaning be adopted ?
(2) Does the definition of the unimproved value of a lease or leasehold estate in land in Section 28 (3.) (a) when
read in conjunction with the definition of “ Unimproved Value ” in relation to land in Section 3 make it obligatory
to arrive at the value of a leasehold estate in Crown lands by determining the “ Unimproved Value ” of the land on
a freehold basis ?
Note. —Attention is directed to the frequent use in Sections 27, 28, and 29 of the terms “ Unimproved Value of
the leasehold estate ” and “ Unimproved value of the lease ” and to the fact that when these Sections were originally
drafted leasehold estates in the Crown lands (which become taxable under the 1814 Amendment Act) were not
taxable.
151. The Solicitor-GeneraTs Opinion. —The Solicitor-General’s reply was as follows :
The Act of 1910 defined “ improved value ” and “ unimproved value ” in relation to land, in terms based upon
the sale value of the fee-simple.
It dealt with the valuation of leasehold estates in two ways, according as the lease was made after (Section 27)
or before (Section 28) the commencement of the Act. By Section 29, Crown leases (with certain exceptions) were
exempt.
The Act of 1914 amended Section 29 in such a way as to exclude what may for short be called pastoral leases
from the exemption ; and also amended Section 27 in such a way as to make Crown leases, whether made before or after
the commencement of the Act of 1910, assessable under Section 28, Section 27 may now, therefore, in this connexion
be excluded from consideration.
Under Section 28, the owner of a leasehold estate of land is deemed to be the owner of land of an unimproved
value equal to the unimproved value of his leasehold estate ; and for the purpose of the section the unimproved value
of a leasehold estate is defined as per cent, of the unimproved value of the land, less the annual rent reserved by
the lease, calculated for the unexpired term of the lease in the prescribed way.
It is therefore necessary, in order to arrive at the unimproved value of the leasehold estate, to ascertain the
unimproved value of the land.
I can see in the Act no indication of an intention that the definition in Section 3, which provides a fee simple
basis for the unimproved value of land, should not apply ; and I think, therefore, that it does apply. That is to say,
as a basis for determining the unimproved value of a Crown leasehold, it is necessary to determine the sum which the
fee-simple of the land, if offered for sale without improvements, might be expected to realize.
152. In view of the above opinion of the Solicitor-General we do not consider it necessary
to further discuss the merits and demerits of the suggested scheme.
AVERAGE OF AVERAGE NET RETURNS METHOD.
153. The principal reasons which led the Commissioner to adopt this method of
determining the unimproved value on a freehold basis of pastoral lands leased from the Crown are
quoted and commented upon in paragraphs 49 to 63 of this Report. (See also Appendix IV.)
154. The manner of its application.— The manner in which it is proposed that the method
should be applied is set out in an official order dated 29th October, 1923. This order reads as
follows
Assessment, of Croton Leaseho'ds.
U For the purpose of dealing with valuations of Crown Lands in cases in which the basis of assessment through
unimproved values is in dispute with taxpayers, it is proposed to endeavour to arrive expeditiously and economically
at freehold values for the leased lands in the following manner :
2. From the annual net returns of as large a number as possible of properties in the same district as the cases in
dispute and carrying on the same class of business with the same class of stock, the average net returns over as long a
period as possible will be ascertained for each property in the district and reduced down to a unit of stock carried.
3. The average of the average net returns thus ascertained will be calculated and these will be regarded as
representing the average net return which an average lessee might reasonably be expected to derive from his land per
unit of stock carried.
4. This average applied to the carrying capacity will be capitalized at 8 per cent, so as to arrive at the total
capital investment in the business which would yield the net return mentioned.
5. From the total of the capital investment thus ascertained there will be deducted—
(l) The value of live stock required to yield the average net return ;
(2) the value of plant; and
(3) improvements on the property.
6. Any residue will represent the capital value of the unimproved land as an opportunity for carrying on the
business, subject, however, to the incidence of Land Tax for which a reduction may be necessary.
7. The provisions of the Act will then be applied to calculate the value of the lessee’s estate..


8. For example, assume that the total average net return is ss. 6d. per sheep area and that there are 20,000
sheep =-- £5,500 per annum. Capitalized at 8 per cent, the net return represents a capital investment of .. £68,750
Deduct —
Live stock at, say, an average of 15s. per head .. .. .. .. £15,000
Plant 1,000
Improvements .. .. .. .. .. •• •• 11,600
27,600
Unimproved value of the land as an opportunity if free from Land Tax .. .. £41,150
Allowance for weight of tax or magnitude .. .. .. .. .. 5,150
Economic unimproved value .. .. .. .. .. . • • • £36,000
Value of the leasehold estate —
Assume the rent is £5OO per annum .. .. .. .. .. .. £5OO
The rack rent fixed by law is 4| per cent, of £36,000 .. .. .. .. 1,620
Annual rental benefit to the lessee .. .. .. .. .. • • £1,120
Assume the lease has 20 years to run—
Present value at 4i per cent, of rental benefit for 20 years—
-1120x13-298* .. .. .. .. •• .. .. 14,893
Statutory deduction .. .. .. .. •. •. • • • • 5,000
The assessable value of the lessee's estate in this lease is .. .. .. .. £9,893
The tax on this assessable value plus super-tax = £63 plus 12 = £75.
13-208 (the multiplier in this case) is shown in the prescribed tables tor calculation of values as the present value of £1 for 20 years @ 4J %.
155. The Commissioner when being examined on the foregoing Order explained that when
the average net returns of a given district were ascertained in accordance with paragraph 1 of the
Order the average of those average net returns would be made applicable to the property in the
most favoured situation in the district; and that in the case of other properties less favorably
situated the average would be subject to reduction according to the disclosed disabilities of such
properties when compared with the most favorably situated property.
156. In illustration of this process the Commissioner cited an instance in which an effort
was made to apply the system in a certain district in Queensland where it was found that' the
average of average net returns was 15s. 7d. per unit of stock carried. This average then became
the assumed rate of return for the properties situated at rail head, and other properties distant
from rail head were reduced according to the measure of disadvantage disclosed in comparison.
In this district were two properties showing returns of 325. and 6s. sd. per head respectively.
The 325. property was reduced to the average of averages, i.e., 15s. 7d., and the 6s. sd. property,
being below the average of averages (when discounted by distance and other disadvantages), was
allowed to remain at. 6s. sd. because in this case the department was not in a position to prove
inefficient management. The justification for the reduction in the former case from 325. to
15s. 7d. was £ound in the fact that the higher return was due to some fortuitous or exceptional
circumstances. The Commissioner stated that both these properties were included for the
purpose of arriving at the average of average net returns, but the Queensland valuers
subsequently explained that because of their exceptional nature they were not taken into
account in fixing the average to be applied to the district.
157. In further explanation of the scheme the Commissioner stated that the average was
arrived at by taking the average net returns per unit of stock carried from each property, adding
them together and dividing the result by the number of properties, but subsequently this statement
was modified to the extent that in fixing the average the total net returns from all the properties
were added together and the total so arrived at was divided by the number of the total stock
carried on all properties.
158. The Commissioner and the departmental valuers admitted that the method was an
arbitrary one and that it would have the effect of arbitrarily reducing the return to be used as
the basis of valuation in a district below the net actual returns of the individual properties.
159 To illustrate how the proposed method in effect reduces the total returns of a district
for the purposes of valuation and tax assessment, the following examples are submitted :
Station.
Carrying Capacity.
Ro. of Stock.
Average return per
Unit of Stock carried.
Average Annual
Return.
s. d.
£
A.
100,000
6 0
30,000
B
75,000
5 3
19,687
C. ..
40,000
5 0
10,000
D.
90,000
4 6
20,250
Total
305,000
79,937
Average of averages for district, ss. 3d. (approximately).


Thus Stations A. and B. would be assessed on the basis of a return of ss. 3d. per head (the
average for the district) or upon an assumed total annual return of £3,750 less than the actual
returns, while properties C. and D. would be assessed on the basis of their actual returns
because these are less than the average. This would be the effect in a case where the
properties included in the average are similarly situated and are otherwise comparable ; but in
the case of properties not similarly situated m respect of distance from rail or market the
discrepancy becomes more marked. The following table illustrates this :
Station.
Distance from Rail.
Carrying Capacity.
Ao. of Stock.
Average Return,
Annual.
Average Per Head.
E. ..
At rail head
200,000
£
60,000
s. d.
6 0
F. ..
50 miles
50,000
13,750
5 6
G
80 miles
100,000
25,000
5 0
H
100 miles ..
200,000
40,000
4 0
I.
75 miles
80,000
20,000
5 0
All Stations .. ...
..
630,000
158,750
The average for the district (in this case approximately 55.) becomes the average return
applicable to property E. at rail head, the return m this case being reduced by approximately
Is. per head.
160. If it be assumed that in the illustrations in the preceding paragraph, the lower rate
of net returns per unit of stock carried in certain instances is due to inefficient management, it
will be seen that the effect of the scheme is not oniy to assess the less efficiently managed properties
at the figure disclosed by their actual net returns (when these are below the average), but to
arbitrarily reduce the returns of the more efficiently managed properties because the actual returns
of both classes of property are used to arrive at the average net return.
161. Nor is this all, for, as has been shown, the scheme must of necessity reduce the
aggregate values in a district. A scheme of land valuation deduced from net returns which seeks
to eliminate the question of good and bad management by making a concession in the one case
while disregarding it in the other cannot claim to be ei tiler equitable or scientific.
162. Its Alleged Simplicity and Economy. —It is claimed for the scheme that it will enable
values to be determined expeditiously and economically. But inasmuch as the scheme involves
a comparison of individual properties with the most favorably situated property in the district
after the average of averages is arrived at, it also involves the measurement of disadvantages
which calls for tne exercise of skill aiid care on the part of valuers. While this measurement of
disadvantages may be freer from difficulty and doubt when the comparable properties are all
within the boundaries of a given district tUan where they are more widely separated by distance
and circumstance, it is problematical whether the proposed method of valuation in practice will
prove less costly than tJie one it is proposed to replace. The gain of expedition and economy
(even if they were assured) could in no wise compensate for the sacrifice of equity which is
inevitable.
163. For the purpose of arriving at a true average of net returns for a district it is obviously
wrong to average the returns from a fully developed property with those of one only partially
developed, or those of a property favorably situated m respect of rail or market facilities with
one not so situated; or to bring into the average both poor land and good land enriched by a
natural watershed. The effect of such a process has already been made evident. If it be
contended that the net returns from a property reflect all the disadvantages of that property,
it cannot be held that they will do so when they are varied as the result of averaging them with
those of other similar properties.
164. Even if it were sought by adjustment of returns to bring all the properties in a district
to a common distance from rail head before averaging their net returns there would still remain
the other differences between the properties which would require to be equalized in order to arrive
at the actual average of average net returns. To do this would involve just as much investigation
and just as accurate a measurement of disadvantages as the original method of valuation applied
by the department, with no guarantee of either reduced cost or greater accuracy.
165. If the practice be followed as outlined by the Department’s Queensland valuers,
viz., that of eliminating from the average such properties as showed exceptional returns, either
high or low, an additional complication will be added, for it will be always a matter of controversy
as to the precise point at which a given return is to be rightly regarded as exceptional.


166. Two other difficulties in connexion with the average of average net returns method
may be briefly referred to. The first would arise in fixing the geographical boundaries of a district
in which the average net return is to be ascertained ; in determining the number of eligible
properties therein whose net returns are to be included in the average ; and in fixing the years
in respect of which the returns are to be used.
167. The second difficulty is one which we are of opinion is likely to prove fatal to the
scheme should it be brought into operation. It relates to the use made by the department of
taxpayers’ income tax returns in arriving at the net returns from a property and so at the average
of average net returns of a district. In view of the provisions of the Income Tax Assessment
Act, it is very doubtful if such information, though available to the Commissioner of Taxation,
could be publicly disclosed in court in substantiation of departmental figures and estimates.
This feature of the proposal was incidentally referred to in paragraph 52 of this report and was
adversely commented upon by Mr. Eastwood (paragraph 106) and by Mr. Dixon (page 1203).
168. For the reasons indicated we do not recommend the adoption of the average of
average net returns method for determining upon the basis laid down by the act the unimproved
value of land held under lease from the Crown.
We may point out, however, that the information gained by the Taxation Department
in its investigation of the net returns from leasehold pastoral properties may be usefully applied
as an internal check by valuers in forming their judgments in respect of the unimproved value
of comparable land.
ALLOWANCE FOR ONEROUS CONDITIONS.
169. Sub-section (3) of section 28 of the Land Tax Assessment Act 1910-1916 reads as
follows :
(3) For the purposes of this section. —
(cs) the unimproved value of a lease or leasehold estate in land means the value of the amount (if any) by
which 4| per centum of the unimproved value of land exceeds the annual rent reserved by the lease
calculated for the unexpired period of the lease at 4f per centum according to the calculations based
on the prescribed tables for the calculation of values :
Provided that the Commissioner may from time to time, if he thinks fit, alter the rate per
centum upon which the calculations in this section are based ;
( j)) rent, in the case of a lease of improved land, means so much of the whole rent as bears to the whole
rent the proportion which the unimproved value of the land at the date of the lease bore to the
improved value :
Provided that, where onerous conditions for constructing buildings, works, or other improvements
upon the land, or expending money thereon, are imposed upon the less.ee, or where any fine, premium,
or fore-gift, or consideration in the nature of fine, premium, or fore-gift, is payable by the lessee,
the Commissioner may assess the amount (if any) which ought, for the purposes of this section, to
be added to the value of the rent in respect thereof, and the value of the rent shall be deemed
to be increased by that amount accordingly ;
(c) the owner of a leasehold estate includes the lessee of land for life under a lease or an agreement for a
lease.
170. This sub-section defines (in {a) ) the term “the unimproved value of a lease or
leasehold estate in land,” and provides (in ( b) ) that the Commissioner may assess the amount
(if any) which ought to be added to the value of the rent reserved by the lease in respect of
onerous conditions imposed upon the lessee.
171. Allowance in respect of onerous conditions was the subject of repeated representations
made to us, as well as to the two previous Commissions which had to deal with the question of
the taxation of Crown leaseholds.
172. While the process of fixing this allowance is, in a literal sense, distinct from that of
determining the unimproved valuq of the land held under lease, it will be readily realized that
the two matters are closely and vitally related inasmuch as they represent two essential
processes in the assessment of the tax on the leasehold estate. Correct assessment of the tax
that is, assessment in accordance with the provisions of the Act—is the object in view. That
object can only be obtained if both processes are correctly carried out.
173. A correct freehold unimproved value of the land may be arrived at, but if certain
additions to the reserved rent as provided for by the Act are not made, or are inadequately made,
it is clear that the difference between the reserved rent and the economic rent (as prescribed by
the Act) will be greater than it should be and the resultant taxable interest (if any) unfairly
increased. It is conceivable that the non-allowance of additions to the reserved rent in respect
of onerous conditions in accordance with section 28 sub-section (3.) (b) might in some instances
bring into the taxable field leasehold estates which would otherwise have disclosed no taxable
interest.


174. The Commissioner of Taxation in his evidence before the Knibbs Commission said :
“Up to the present no allowances have been made to Crown lessees on account of onerous conditions. In
September, 1916, I altered the previous practice of the Department, which had not allowed any deduction under the
heading of “ Onerous Conditions ” ; but owing to the appointment of the Royal Commission soon afterwards, and to
the fact that payment of tax on assessments of Crown leaseholds had been deferred pending the decision of the
Government on the general question, the altered practice of the Department has not yet been applied. If the principle
of the present law is continued the altered practice will, of course, be applied, and allowances for onerous conditions
as defined in section 28 (3.) (6) of the Act will be granted.” (Question 21.7.)
175. In this statement “ September, 1916 ” should, we think, read “ about September,
1918,” as Land Tax Order No. 871, which was issued on 28th August, 1918, contains the
following rulings :
“ The fourth paragraph of Order 855 is cancelled, in so far as it limits the application of the High Court
decision in the Coal Cliff Collieries case.
The usual conditions upon which a lease is granted are, (1) that rent, rates, and taxes shall be paid, (2) that
the premises shall be kept in proper repair, and (3) that at the expiration of the lease the premises shall be yielded
up in as good order—subject to fair wear and tear—as at the commencement. Such conditions are not onerous,
though anything further may usually be considered so.
There is onerousness in a covenant which binds the lessee to do something which will increase the value of the
property on its return to the landlord ; as, for example, clearing land or putting up additional buildings in which he
has no tenant right. But there is nothing onerous in a requirement to merely maintain existing improvements ; in
such a case the landlord gets back only what he leased out, and the actual rent paid represents the total benefit
derived by him.
The principle affirmed by the Court should be applied wherever the lessee is required by the lease to construct
improvements upon the land, or to expend money thereon for other than ordinary maintenance purposes.”
176. A later Land Tax Order (No. 903) was issued on the 23rd January, 1920. This
Order reads :
M.125/N.S.W. 5.
Land Tax Order No. 903.
Subject : Onerous conditions.
Index : Onerous conditions —Allowance under section 28 (3) (6).
Headings : Allowance in Pastoral Leases to be made in all assessments to date. '
Principle expressed in Order 871 to stand.
At the recent conference of Deputy Commissioners, the question of what constitutes an onerous condition was
considered.
It was agreed by the Conference that the principle expressed in Order 871, regarding what constitutes onerous
conditions, should be adhered to, both as regards leases of city land and broad acres.
Discussion then ensued on a point raised by the Commissioner, viz., whether any further deduction for onerous
conditions should be allowed in those cases in which the reason for the onerous conditions is reflected in the un-
improved value of the land.
The Conference agreed with the view that in any case in which a freehold unimproved value of land has been
arrived at after allowance for the presence of features which depreciate the value and which are covered by a condition
in a lease for the removal or alteration of the feature, e.g., the control or eradication of pests, the allowance under
section 28 (3) ( b) proviso in respect of expenditure in terms of the condition of the lease should be —
(1) The difference between per cent, on the amount allowed in arriving at the unimproved value, and
the actual average annual expenditure required or incurred under the covenant in those cases in
which the necessity for the annual expenditure still exists ;
(2) Where the necessity for the annual expenditure under the lease has ceased the allowance should be
the sinking fund required to recoup the balance of the total of the expenditure not previously allowed
for in an assessment.”
Please give effect to the decisions given above.
The allowance for onerous conditions in respect of pastoral leases must be made in all assessments to date.
Read with Order 897.
177. The Land Tax Order 897 referred to in the Order quoted in the preceding paragraph
appears as Appendix No. Y.
178. lie are of opinion that if effect be given to the Office Orders referred to in the
preceding paragraph in all assessments of lessees’ estates in Crown lands at least one ground of
legitimate objection on the part of Crown lessees will be removed.
179. In this connexion it is of interest to note a comment by Isaacs, Duffy, and Rich,
JJ .j in the Apperley case, reported in full in the Commissioner’s Thud Annual Report.
In this case the Crown was not the landlord, and the reference in the extract is to the
proviso to sub-section (6) of section 28 of the Act.
“ Because the proviso, which makes allowance for special circumstances, states expressly to what obligations
they are to apply, and we have no power to extend them.
If the tenant is under the “ onerous conditions ” (in other words the burdensome obligations) enumerated, the
Commissiouer s powers of allowance arise. If those stated conditions exist, they may or may not give the landlord
a larger share of the land than is represented by the actual rent reserved. The Commissioner then is under an


obligation to consider the circumstances, and if he finds that in his opinion the landlord does or will receive a larger
share of the land than is represented by the rent, or a more valuable piece of land than he has let then the
Commissioner is to estimate the capital value of the additional value, and add it to the capitalized value of the rent
already deductible. Pro tanto that increases the taxable liability of the lessor by reducing that of the lessee.
But the Commissioner is not left at large as to the nature of the onerous obligation to be so considered It
enumerated obUgatloll which in fact inures to the benefit that he is to consider, but only those obligations
And a covenant to repair is not, in our opinion, within those terms.”
VALUATION OF EACH PARCEL OF LAND.
180. Section 11 ot the Land Tax Assessment Act reads :
“ (1) Land Tax shall be payable by the owner of land upon the taxable value of all the land owned bv him
and not exempt from taxation under this Act. • * 1
(2) The taxable value of all the land owned by a person is—
(a) in the case of an absentee—the total sum of the unimproved value of each parcel of the land •
(o) m the case of an owner not being an absentee —the balance of the total sum of the unimproved value
ot each parcel of the land, after deducting the sum of Five thousand pounds.
(3) Every part of a holding which is separately held by any ocoupier, tenant, lessee, or owner shall be deemed
to be a separate parcel.
181. This section of the Act contains two important definitions. The first defines what
under the Act, is. the taxable value of all the land owned by a resident taxpayer and an absentee
taxpayer respectively (sub-section (2.)). The second sets out what constitutes a separate parcel
ot land (sub-section (3.)). - r
ie secon( l definition is of importance in the ascertainment of the unimproved value
°| * anc ~ * or the purposes of taxation. In all cases the total unimproved value of each parcel
ot the land has to be ascertained. This aggregate value is, for the purposes of the Act, subject
to a deduction of £5,000 in the case of a resident taxpayer.
183. The departmental practice is embodied in a statement which appears in the Second
and Third Annual Reports of the Commissioner, and in rule 4 of Order -816.
{{ re^erence ' n the Second and Third Annual Reports appears under the heading,
JSotes on departmental practice in cases constantly arising in administration ,” and reads:
Parcel.
A parcel of land, for the purposes of land tax, is a portion or aggregation of practically contiguous
portions in the same ownership, provided that no other person oocupies or leases any part of it or holds
any part of it by way of mortgage.” J
185. Rule 4 of Order 816 reads :
Valuing in Parcels.
The iaw requires that each parcel of land shall be valued separately. A parcel of land
may be taken to be —
(tt) any area Qf land which is separately let or leased out by the owner j*
• +l, area of land belonging to one owner which is held by a mortgagee in possession, and which, if valued
m the owner s assessment, would be treated as one parcel or part of one paroel.
, An y a f ea of land separated by distance from other land of the same owner and not reasonably essential to
the other lands for purposes of use and occupation. J
(d) Subject to (a), (b), and (c) above, all lands owned by one person and contiguous to each other or separated
only by fences, roads, public reserves, or water-course, and used by the owner or another person for the purposes of
any business or treated by the owner as one area.” 1 F
i When the Commissioner of Taxation appeared before the Royal Commission on Taxation
m 1920 (that is before the present Order 816 was made available) he handed that Commission type-
written copies of what were called “ Main Rules for Valuation of Land for Land Tax Purposes ”
concerning which this Commission was informed that though the verbiage was subject to revision
ley might be taken as being a substantially correct record of the departmental practice. The
majority of these rules reappear as part of Order 816 in their original form, some in an amended
±orm. Amongst the latter is the foregoing Rule, No. 4, in which there was originally an additional
subdivision which reads :
(e) in the case of land subject to lease, the land included in each separate lease
document must be valued as a separate parcel.
187. In examination before that Commission Mr, Ewing said :
to a paZuilX h llXl r iec\loM3°) r UP ° n *° de ‘“ n,i “ °* WMds 1 have tead with "*«»
The Department has been acting along lines that have generally met with the approval of land-owners by taking
a parcel to mean one property worked as a whole. That is in most cases. If, however, the Court should hold that a
parcel means land included inonetitleldo not know at present what effect thatwould haveonthe incidenceof taxation.
In some cases it might increase the tax, while in other cases it might reduce it,”
F. 17208.—3
Crown. * U Wi>S explained t 0 118 in evidence that the term “ owner "is used in (a) in a restricted sense. It refers exclusively to a private owner, and not to the


188. The departmental practice was further explained by Mr. W. J. Lambert (Senior Valuer)
in his evidence when dealing with the subject of allowance for weight of land tax. Rule No. 45
of Order 816 (which sets out the adjustment to be made when ascertaining net returns) states,
inter alia : —
“ In allowing land tax, the deduction should be the tax payable on the whole of the land used by the occupier
for the purposes of his business as one parcel as defined in rule 4 ( d ).” (See preceding paragraph.)
Mr. Lambert, speaking of this clause, said:—
“ It meant that an aggregation of parcels was to be taken at the rate of tax applicable to the lot, and not to
any particular parcel. If there were seven leases in a run the tax was to be calculated on the total value of the seven
leases, and not on the respective value of the one lease. Being a graduated tax, there would be a distinct difference.
As I have explained before, the Department does not interpret the provision in that way in respect to farming
properties. I know a property of 2,000 acres which is made up of 40-acre blocks. As a farm of 2,000 acres it is a
workable proposition, but as 40 acres it would be quite impossible.”
Question. —But the 40-acre blocks are freehold areas ?
Answer.—Yes, separate titles. The lawyers say that a separate title is a separate holding. Legally speaking,
they say that a separate title constitutes a separate holding.
Question. —Do you know whether there are any opinions of the Attorney-General to that effect ?
Answer. —I do not think that there are any in writing, but I know that the Crown Solicitor expressed the
opinion in my presence during a discussion which we had in 1917.
The way in which the Department has interpreted the provision is to aggregate the blocks which are touching
one another, and worked as one property.
Question. —Perhaps you can ascertain for us whether the definition of “ parcels ” in the rules is in accordance
with a Crown Law decision, or whether it is merely a departmental interpretation ?
Answer. —I should say that it was a departmental interpretation. This crops up as a valuer’s problem. In
the case of a big property held in several leases, great difficulty is created in valuing each lease separately. For
instance, the water may be so distributed that one property is unable to carry stock at all. It may be served with
water from an adjoining block. The matter came up emphatically for a decision, and it was decided that until the
Court directed otherwise a property would be valued as a going concern.
Question. —Then take the case of an extensive freehold property which the owner has leased in four or five
blocks to different tenants. Under sub-section (3.) of section 11 of the Act, each of those is a separate parcel?
Answer. —Yes.
Question. —So that you would value and weight each of them individually ?
Answer. —Yes.
Question. —Consequently, in the case of land let by a private owner, you are treating it differently from the same
land let by the Crown ?
Answer.—Yes, that may be so.”
189. Mr. Lambert later set out bis understanding of the position in a statement he handed
in, which reads:—
“ A holding is all the land a man owns in Australia. For instance it may comprise :
(1) a block of land in Collins-street, Melbourne ;
(2) a property in Brisbane ;
(3) a station property in New South Wales, comprising several leases worked as one property ;
(4) a farm in Gippsland comprising, say, 2,000 acres represented as to registration at the
Titles Office by seven different Crown grants.
This man’s holding is deemed to contain four separate parcels, separately held by the owner from the
Crown.
If the owner elects to create further holdings by any occupier, tenant, or lessee, these also are deemed to
be separate parcels.”
190. A suggestion that the Department was acting under legal advice in its view as to what
constitutes a separate parcel of land, was conveyed in a remark made by Mr. Lambert under
examination to the effect that in a case of dispute which did not reach the Court “ this phase
of the matter was discussed with counsel assisting the Department in the preparation of the case
for the Court, and the advice was that we should take the contiguous land as one parcel. 55
191. Mr. Lambert further stated : —We have tried to get what we call substantial justice :
whether we have succeeded or not is a matter for the Courts to say. 55
192. When appearing before the Royal Commission on Taxation in August, 1922, the
Commissioner of Taxation said:—
“ Land-owners may bold a number of leases under separate leasehold documents of title, and they may
associate those leasehold lands in one area to be worked as one property. I have not been able to get any satisfactory
assistance or advice as to whether there is a separate parcel for each separate lease title, or one parcel for the
aggregation of the leases. Especially is it difficult when the periods of the leases vary. We have to try and get it
on an average.
It is possible that part of its value may be due to its association with other lands. I would be inclined to think
that separate value would tend to reduce the tax.
It is difficult to know what is the proper thing to do. What we have done is to treat them as one parcel if used
as such by the owner. That is the best we can do under the circumstances.”


193. Subsequent to the public sittings of the Commission, we addressed the following
inquiry to the Solicitor-General (Sir Robert Garran) :
r 7 P astora l properties consist of Crown lands held under various separate leases. Does section 11 of the
Land lax Assessment Act 1910-1916 require in all such cases, even when the lands comprised in the several leases are
contiguous to each other and are worked as one property, that the land comprised in each lease shall be deemed to
constitute a separate parcel, and as such to be separately valued ?
194. The Solicitor-General’s reply is as follows :
I do not see how the facts that the lands comprised in several leases are contiguous and worked as one property
anect the operation of sub-section (3.) of Section 11.- r r J
In my opinion that sub-section requires that the land comprised in each lease shall be treated as a separate parcel
irrespective of the considerations above mentioned.
195. Though the present practice of the Department in resped? of “ a separate parcel ”
oi land does not appear to have been challenged in any Court, that practice (in the light of the
oolicitor-General s opinion) seems to rest upon an incorrect interpretation of the Act.
196. An alteration oi departmental procedure to conform with the present legal opinion both
as to what constitutes a separate parcel, and to the necessity of valuing each parcel separately
would no doubt in many cases present considerable difficulties, and frequently involve alterations
m the v alues arrived at under the present method. In some instances the aggregate unimproved
value of the land might be materially reduced, in others increased; but unless the practice of the
epartment is based on legal authority, finality in assessment cannot be assured, nor can there
be any ceitainty in many cases as to the correct allowance to be made in respect of weight of
land tax.
. . 197. We ate of opinion that the practice of the Department should conform with the
opinion of the Crown Law Department.
ALLOWANCE FOR WEIGHT OF LAND TAX.
198. That in arriving at the unimproved value of the land for the purpose of calculating
t e essees inteiest the Commissioner had not taken into account the weight of land tax was
the subject oi complaint before us by the pastoralists’ representative.
199. In the course of his evidence before us the Commissioner of Taxation said :
Under the old method there has never been any deduction on account of the weight of land tax. Especially
m the Queensland cases, there was no alteration of the valuation. Our Chief Valuer Lambert has mentioned to me
that in his opinion the old values would necessarily have to be materially reduced by the allowance of the weight of
land tax, that they could not be maintained at their old standard, even assuming their accuracy otherwise.
« 200- Presunmbl y as a resup of the judgment of the Supreme Court of South Australia in
the Curnamona case the departmental practice has now been amended in this respect.
201. In the course of his judgment in the Curnamona ” case Chief Justice Murray said :
Having now fixed the intrinsic character ”of Curnamona proper as a money-making machine, the next step
is to consider the extrinsic circumstances which would operate on a prospective buyer’s mind. The most important
and the easiest to calculate, is taxation. Mr Justice Isaacs and Mr. Justice Duffy, in Fisher’s case, expressly say “ all
taxation which clearly covers, and must have been intended to cover, income tax as well as land tax, for the purchaser
would know that both taxes would have to be paid before the money that went into his pocket could be regarded in
a business sense, as profit. •
202. Ihe following departmental instruction in respect of allowance for weight of tax was
issued in May, 1921:
Calculation of Land Tax Payable on the Subject Land.
. As the vaiue of the subject land will not have been ascertained at the time the average net returns from it are
being obtained, it will be necessary to act in the following manner :
sa^e P r j ce °* basic standard land as a going concern in conjunction with the average net return therefrom
(alter deduction of land tax on the basic land) will disclose the percentage of net return from the investment.
Ihe average net return from the subject land before making any debit for land tax will be known. It is to
oe presumed tnat the buyer of the basic land would accept the same percentage of net return from the investment in
the subject iana as from the oasic land. If the average annual net return from the basic land represented 10 per cent,
on the total amount invested in it, it is presumed that the total capital investment in the subject property would be
ten times the average annual net return. From that total sum it would then be necessary to deduct live stock, plant
and improvements, m order to obtain the residual unimproved value of the land.


The land tax payable on the residual unimproved value of the land (less the statutory exemption of £5,000)
is readily obtainable from the Ready Reckoner. The amount by which this unimproved value of the land (and
incidentally the total investment in the property) would be reduced on account of the land tax will be calculated in
the following manner
Basic sale property —
Average annual net return (after deducting land tax), Bs. per sheep area.
Total sale price for the whole property as a going concern, £4 per sheep area.
Rate per cent, of net income to investment, 10 per cent.
Subject land —
Average annual net return before debiting land tax, say, 6s. per sheep area.
Capital investment on a 10 per cent, basis as in the case of the basic land is £3 per sheep area.
Total area is, say, 10,000 sheep areas .. .. .. .. .. .. £30,000
Deduct live stock, say .. .. .. .. ~ .. .. £lO,OOO
Improvements on land, say .. .. .. .. .. .. 5,000
15,000
Unimproved vaffie of the land .. .. .. .. .. .. .. £15,000
Land Tax on this —£76 13s. 4d. per annum —1.226 d. in the £.
(The Statutory Exemption of £5,000 has been deducted before tax is calculated.)
If this amount of tax on the unreduced unimproved value capitalized at 10 per cent, (the percentage shown
above) were deducted from the “ unreduced unimproved value of the land ” it would leave a net unimproved value
less than the true unimproved value.
The effect of such a method would be particularly pronounced in the case of a subject property having a large
unimproved value.
For example a property with an “ unreduced unimproved value ” of, say, £290,000 would yield a net unimproved
value of £176,750, which would be considerably below the true net unimproved value of £208,556.
To calculate the true net unimproved value the following course is essential:—
Find the amount of land tax on the “ unreduced unimproved value.” In the present case the tax averages
1.226 d. per £ on £15,000 and this rate represented in decimals of £1 is £.0051.
Multiply £ .0051 by 10 (10 per cent, being the percentage of net return to capital in the basic sale) and the result
is £.051.
Now add 1= £1.051.
The reason why one is added is that the method described results from the application of an algebraical formula
to ascertain the true land tax to be allowed for, on the true net unimproved value. The unknown quantity equals
one plus something else. The something else in the present case is £ .051.
The true net unimproved value of the land is then obtained by dividing the “ unreduced unimproved value ”
(£15,000 in the present case) by the result of the formula.
In the present case the result is £15,000 divided by £1.051 = .. .. .. .. £14,271
The land tax on this amount at 1.226 d. is £72 18s.
This tax capitalized at 10 per cent. .. .. .. .. .. .. .. 729
£15,000
The true land tax on £14,271 is £69 ss. 6d. This amount capitalized at 10 per cent, gives £693 as against the
allowance made of £729 which is therefore liberal to the taxpayer.
Example—
Suppose the “ unreduced unimproved value ” to be £BO,OOO.
Land tax on this amount (viz., on £75,000) is £1,875.
This tax represents a rate of 5.625 d. in the £, viz., (£1,875 divided by 80,000).
This rate —expressed as a decimal of a £ —is £ .0234
Multiply £.0234 by 10 = £ .2343
Add 1 £1.2343
80,000 divided by £1.234 = 64,810 .. .. .. .. .. .. £64,810
Tax on £64,810 at 5.625 d. in £ = £1,518 19s. 9d. 1
This tax capitalized at 10 per cent. = £15,190 .. .. .. .. . • 15,190
£BO,OOO
The true land tax on £64,810 is £1,252 19s. 7d. This amount capitalized at 10 per cent, gives £12,530 as against
the allowance of £15,190, which is therefore liberal to the taxpayer.
203. An extract from the evidence of the Senior Valuer for Victoria (Mr. Lambert) will
further illustrate the operation of this allowance :
The biggest disturbing factor is the allowance of weight of land tax. In many cases it is cutting the value
almost in half. That arises out of the Curnamona decision. We do not allow weight of tax in connexion with property
that can be sub-divided and sold. If a man wants to escape the tax he can sell half of it or all of it, but on those areas
which are right out where we cannot argue a sub-divisional potentiality, you must allow the weight of tax, in fairness.
If you suppose a freehold value you must assume a freehold liability. I will give an illustration which will bring it
home fairly clearly. There was the sale of freehold of, say, 1,000 sheep capacity in Queensland. That will show a capital
value of £3 per acre. Practically it pays no tax, state or federal. Adopting that basis and applying it to an 80,000 sheep
proposition at £3 per acre the state and federal tax per sheep area amounts to 4s. and the return per sheep to 65.,
leaving 2s. to the owner and 4s. to the two Governments. If you calculate the weight of tax it comes to this, that
you reduce your values to the extent that the two Governments get 2s. and the owner gets 4s. That is, you reduce
your 60s. sheep area to 40s. He gets his 10 per cent, on the 40s. which is 45., and the tax amounts to 2s. (Pages 232,
246 and 247.)


204. The object in making an allowance for “ weight of land tax ”is apparent. The
a lowance is designed, in the case of difference in value, to effect the necessary adjustment between
tiie basic and subject lands so as to ensure that'the value of a subject area as determined by the
department will be such as would permit of a purchaser of the fee-simple earning on his capital
invested m the business the same net return as that disclosed by the sales of the basic lands.
A 205 * lf ba ; s i s of valuation was a sold area, the unimproved value of which was
b5,U00 on which no federal land tax is payable, and the subject area for valuation was an area
tour times the size and of similar quality m every respect to the sold area, the value of the subject
area would not be four times £5,000 but an amount somewhat less because the “allowance for
weight of tax on the more valuable area would be deducted, so that the percentage of return
to capital invested would be the same in both cases after paying all state and federal land taxes.
. , , 206 - In . tbe cas ® of lands of similar aggregate value to the sold lands which are used as
value 0± ValUe n ° aAloWance 1S made as the sale P rice reflects the tax liability of lands of that
207. In the application of this allowance the converse should also apply, i.e., if the basic
sales evidence is of lands of higher value than the subject lands then the weight of tax on the sold
lands should be added to the sale price before comparison is made with the lands of lesser value.
208. It will be observed that the amount allowed for weight of land tax in the case mentioned
in the departmental instruction quoted in paragraph 202 is higher than the actual amount of
land tax capitalized, hence the taxpayer is allowed a deduction from the unimproved value
ol his land of an amount in excess of the actual tax liability.
r i are °pi n i° n that the allowance in no case should exceed the actual tax
liability.
ALLOWANCE FOR MAGNITUDE.
210. Reference will be found in paragraphs 104 and 113 to representations made to us
m respect ol allowance for magnitude.
211. It was claimed in Mr. Eastwood's evidence-in-chief that “ the sale price of a very
large property must necessarily be influenced by the restricted field of buyers willing to pay out
urge sums of money for land, stock and improvements," and that " this factor does not appear
to have been taken into account by the valuers unless it is measured in some allowance which has
been made, and, up to the present, not disclosed as such." (Page 972.)
• ? 12 * S l enior Valuer Lambert considered the method laid down at present, i.e., allowance
ol weight of land tax, allows fully for any consideration of magnitude. When asked if he would
allow something in addition to land tax for magnitude he replied, “ Absolutely, no," and expressed
the opinion that “ No property could be better valued for magnitude than by the weight of land
tax, and that the land tax more than adequately measures it." (Pages 917 and 918.)
213. Prior to the adoption of the rule providing for allowance for weight of land tax the
departmental practice was expressed in rule 53 of Order 816.
. Tliat P le required that attention should be paid to the difference, if any, between the
total investment m the subject land compared with that required by the basic land, and imposed
upon the valuer the duty o: inquiring carefully into the circumstances so as to arrive at the proper
discount, if any, to be allowed on the larger investment.
215. The rule reads—
Discount on Laege compaeed with Small Investments.
When deducing the probable selling value of a subject land from a standard based on sales of other lands
attention should be paid to the difference, if any, between the total investment in the subject land compared with that’
required by the basic land.
ma y ? ,e ass vmed for the present, that in cases in which the investment involved in a subject property exceeds
that for a basic property by any considerable amount, the probable number of purchasers for the subject property
would be less than the number for the basic property, and that therefore it is possible that the actual price which would
be given for the subject land would be less than the amount ascertained by strict arithmetical comparison on the basis
of net returns of both properties.
The valuer may find evidence that as high or even higher prices per beast area have been given for large capital
propositions compared with small capital propositions, notwithstanding the amount of capital investment involved,
in such a case, of course, no discount would be permissible on the larger investment compared with the smaller.
In other cases it may be found that sales reflect some discount in this connexion.
It will be the duty of the valuer to inquire carefully into the circumstances of all such cases, so as to arrive at
the proper discount, if any, to be allowed.
zl6. In considering the claim for allowance for magnitude as well as for weight of tax we
have borne in mind the fact that the Commonwealth Land Tax is levied on a graduated scale.jj
217. We are of opinion that no allowance should be made in respect of magnitude in addition
to that for weight of land tax.


SUBDIVISIONS VALUE.
218. Closely related to the question of magnitude is that of suitability for subdivision, a
factor which is dealt with in rules 14-18 of Order 816.
219. The reference made in rule 14 (quoted in paragraph 241) to the opinions expressed
by the High Court in the Duncan case, does not, in our opinion, convey their real significance.
In the course of the judgment in that case Griffith, C.J., said :
The contention for the Commissioner now is that that theory [the theory of the hypothetical purchaser]
does not connote a single purchaser ; but that you must take into consideration the possibility of there being a number
of persons—2, 5,10 or 100—who would have been willing amongst them to buy the whole of the land. The two
hypotheses are entirely different. The hypothesis of a willing purchaser assumes, as I have shown, ability as well as
willingness to buy. An hypothesis which assumes an indefinite number of purchasers able and willing amongst them
to buy the whole of the land in separate parcels is quite a different thing, and is not the hypothesis made by the Act.
A man may think that he may get £3,000 for a parcel of land at once. He may also think that, if he
subdivides the land, and offers very liberal terms, speculative buyers will be likely to give a nominal price amounting
to a great deal more than £3,000. But, on the whole, he may come to the conclusion that £3,000 in hand is more than
the present value of what he would probably get by selling on credit after taking all these contingencies into account.
Nevertheless, I agree that the probability of being able to sell the whole at once on such terms is an element to be taken
into consideration ; but I think it is no more. For instance, in the case of a city property, a reasonable man might
expect to obtain a higher price by selling in two parcels instead of in one, and if an ordinary vendor would do so, the fact
might very fairly be take into consideration, not as a matter of law, but as a matter of fact, in considering the value
of the land. This only shows that the possibility of a subdivisional sale and the probability of there being a number
of purchasers who amongst them would buy the whole of the land, are relevant, but not conclusive circumstances. The
statute, in my opinion, contemplates a sale of the whole of the land on the day as of which the valuation is made.
220. In the same case Isaacs, J., said—
The interpretation put upon that [the definition in the Act of Unimproved value] by the learned Judge from
whom this appeal comes was that it does not include a possible subdivisional sale by the owner. He thought that it
meant necessarily a sale of the whole land in one block. In my opinion, that is a wrong construction. There
is one vendor, but the interpretation section says nothing about one purchaser. The whole of the land is, for the purpose
of the section, assumed to be disposed of in fee-simple by the vendor. But it does not connote that the only potentiality
to be considered is one purchaser who is able and willing to take the whole of the land uno ictu. That would reduce
the range of competition, and very materially effect the unimproved value of the land.
221. It is of interest that in the Payne case (a recent Victorian case heard before Mr. Justice
Macfarlan) the appellant relied upon the reasons given by the Chief Justice and Mr. Justice Rich,
while for the Commissioner of Taxation certain expressions used by Mr. Justice Isaacs were relied
upon. In commenting upon this fact, Mr. Justice Macfarlan said—
If I had to determine the matter as a matter of law, I should prefer the view apparently taken by the Chief Justice
and Mr. Justice Rich.
222. As indicated in rule 14, the conclusion drawn by the Commissioner of Taxation from
the opinions of the majority of the High Court in the Duncan case is that in the case of land suitable
for subdivision its sale value may be taken as the total amount which the owner cou'd expect to
get by selling the land in subdivision on his own account on reasonable terms and conditions.
223. The position appears to be that while the Chief Justice thought the subdivisional
value was an element to be taken into consideration, Mr. Justice Isaacs went somewhat further,
and was of opinion that the subdivisional selling price might be taken as the value so long as the
terms and conditions of sale were of such a character as to fairly represent a cash equivalent.
224. Mr. Justice Macfarlan's decision in the Payne case appears to have been based upon
the probability that in that particular instance the owner would, in preference to subdividing
the land himself, have sold in one lot at such a figure as would admit of subsequent subdivisional
profit to the purchaser.
225. These several judicial views do not appear to be mutually exclusive.
226. In our opinion where the valuer can prove the existence of a market for the land in
subdivision, and has convincing evidence that all the land could be sold in subdivision as at the
date of valuation on reasonable terms and conditions, the Commissioner of Taxation is justified in
adopting the subdivisional value as the basis of assessment.
227. We are further of opinion that a valuer is justified in regarding the subdivisional value
of land as an element likely to influence the mind of a buyer and so to enhance its value beyond
what may be termed the present utility value; and that the measure of such enhancement is a
valuer's problem.
RIGHT OF RESUMPTION AS DETERMINING THE LEASE TENURE.
228. It was stated by the Commissioner of Taxation in evidence before the Knibbs
Commission that one of the grounds of objection lodged against assessments of Crown
leaseholds was that areas subject to resumption by the Crown should be excluded from the area
for which an unimproved freehold value is being obtained, as from the date of probable
resumption. (Question 211.)


229. To this contention the Commissioner replied—
The liability to resumption of the whole or part of a leasehold estate does affect its market value, but the
departmental practice of revising all past assessments upon the resumption of any part of a leasehold property so as
to base the period of the lease of the resumed area on the actual period during which it was held fully provides, in my
opinion, for equitable adjustment in such cases. (Question 216.)
230. At a later stage the Commissioner further stated —
In regard to the problem connected with the liability to resumption of a part of the leasehold areas, I would be
prepared to recommend an amendment of the law to provide that the tenure of that portion of the lease which is liable
to resumption without compensation should be deemed to cease upon the date when the liability to resumption
materializes, and that if the lessee continues in possession of that portion after that date he should be regarded as
occupying it on sufferance. At the present time the department deems him to have a lease for the full period for which
the lease was granted, subject to an amendment of the assessment for past years so as to calculate the lessee’s estate
in any resumed area for the period during which he actually occupied it. The reason for this practice was that
information was given to my predecessor to show that in very many instances the Crown never exercised its power
of resumption. I think the present departmental practice should continue in the case of liability to resumption with
compensation. (Question 3836.)
231. In his closing address to the Knibbs Commission Mr. Benjamin said—
As the Commissioner of Taxation recognises that under the terms of resumption set out above the lessee has no
lease in the true sense of the resumable portion after the time of resumption has arrived, and has intimated that he is
prepared to recommend an amendment of the law to provide clearly, and without ambiguity, that the tenure of that
portion of a lease which is liable to resumption without compensation should be deemed to cease upon the date when
the liability to resumption materializes. I ask the Commission to recommend accordingly. (Question 3981.)
232. The Knibbs Commission dealt with this subject at some length in paragraph 2 of
Section IV. of its Report, and, while endorsing the opinion of the Commissioner quoted in paragraph
230, did not recommend that in its present form it be given effect. The Commissioners thought it
would be better to allow for resumption rights as a disability in the same way as allowances are
made for other disabilities.
233. Reference has been made in paragraphs 83, 84, 85 and 88 to representations on the
subject made to us by Mr. Clapham and Mr. Jowett.
234. For our further guidance on the issue we sought the opinion of the Solicitor-General.
We asked—
In the cases of leases from the Crown in which the Crown has the explicit right of resumption as to parts at varying
dates, would it be competent for the Taxation Department to treat the tenure of the lessee’s estate as being limited
to the period or periods of assured occupancy of such parts by the lessee ?
For example, in the case of a lease for 42 years in which the Crown has the right of resumption of a specified
portion of the land—say one-fourth—at the end of seven years, would it be correct at the outset to regard the tenure
of the lease as being for seven years in respect of the whole area, and for 35 years in respect of three-fourths of the area ?
Tbe Solicitor-General's reply was —
I assume that the specific proposal mentioned would assume a seven years’ tenure as to the whole, and a 35 years’
further tenure as to three-quarters of the leased land. I see no statutory objection to the proposal, but in the event
of the Crown not exercising its right of resumption the tenant would enjoy a 35 years’ tenure of a quarter of the land
without assessment in respect thereof.
235. We are of opinion that for tbe purposes of Land Tax Assessment in tbe cases of leases
from tbe Crown in which tbe Crown has tbe explicit right of resumption without compensation
as to part or parts at specified dates the tenure of tbe lease in respect of such part or parts
should be treated as being limited to tbe period or periods of assured occupancy by tbe lessee.
236. Tbe Solicitor-General pointed out in bis reply a position which would arise in tbe
specific example given in our question, viz., that “ in the event of tbe Crown not exercising its
right of resumption tbe tenant would enjoy a 35 years' tenure of a quarter of tbe land without
assessment in respect thereof." We consider that position is one which naturally arises from the
circumstances that from the beginning of the eighth year onwards the area in question would be
held under a permissive occupancy. jy?
GENERAL ORDER 816 J
237. We do not consider it for the purposes fof four inquiryyto f publish the
Departmental Order 816 in extenso.
238. As has been explained, the Order consists of a number of rules (79 in [all) formulated
for the guidance of the Valuers of the Taxation Department. These rules embody certain well-
defined principles laid down by the Department as the basis of land valuation for the purposes
of the Federal Land Tax. They have been modified and added to from time to time as the result
of experience, and as has seemed necessary to the Commissioner in the light of legal opinion
and in view of various decisions of the Courts on the subject of land valuations; and they will
no doubt be further amended and added to in the future.


239. It would be a matter of surprise if the rules were entirely free from error and were
not in some respects open to criticism, dealing as they do with so complex a subject as the valuation
of freehold and leasehold land, upon which there will always be wide differences of opinion*
240. We have elsewhere in our Eeport expressed disagreement with some of the
Department’s methods of valuing, but on the whole we regard Order 816 as a painstaking effort to
lay down sound lines for valuing land in conformity with the requirements of the Land Tax
Assessment Act. (See also paragraph 57.)
241. We have quoted some of the rules in Order 816 in the course of our Eeport. The
following additional extracts from the Order, and the subjoined list of some of the principal topical
headings therein, will serve to further indicate the general scope and purpose of the compilation:—
Buie I.—The law assumes a sale of the subject laud, and the Department is required to ascertain the price that
a willing buyer would have to pay a willing seller, each having a full knowledge of the subject land and its potentialities
and willing, but not anxious, to do business with the other.
Rule 2.—The best evidence from which to deduce the value of a properly is the average price at which similar
properties in the same district have been sold in the open market. Such sales form the basis of the departmental
valuations and are to be applied in accordance with the rules set out hereafter.
Rule 3.—A1l lands are to be valued as freehold in possession and as if unencumbered, and only after prior careful
inspection.
Valuation of Crown Leases.
Rule 5. —In all cases the value of a Crown lease must be ascertained upon the assumption that it is freehold land.
The freehold value of the land must be arrived at according to the rules applicable to actual freehold land, but if the
conditions of the lease place restrictions on the use of the land embraced within the lease the freehold value must be
arrived at having full regard to such restricted use.
Values of Land Suitable for Subdivision.
Rule 14.—1 f the land is suitable for subdivision, but is not subdivided, the opinions expressed by the majority of the
High Court in the case of Duncan v. Deputy Commissioner of Taxation, South Australia, may be applied, namely, that
its sale value may be taken as the total amount which the owner could expect to get by selling the land in subdivision
on his own account on reasonable terms and conditions. The valuer must be in a position to prove that a market
exists for the land in subdivision and that the whole of the land could be sold without delay, otherwise subdivisional
value cannot be taken as the value of the land. No deduction is to be made in respect of possible profit to the owner
on the subdivisional sales in such cases.
Comparable Sales. (6-13.)
Ascertaining Unimproved Values by the Direct Method. (19-20.)
Ascertaining Unimproved Values from Improved Values. (21.)
Method of Analyzing Basic Sales. (22-28.)
Carrying Capacity—How Ascertained. (32-34.)
Ascertaining Net Returns. (35-36.)
Net Returns affected by Fortuitous Circumstances. (37.)
Excess Improvements. (40-41.)
Live Stock Values. (42-43.)
Adjustments to be made when Ascertaining Net Returns. (45.)
Allowance for Losses by Drought, &c. (46.)
Sales of Stock to avoid Drought Losses. (47.)
Information required Respecting Subject Lands. (48-49.)
Comparison by Proportion. (51.)
Comparison other than by Proportion. (52.)
Discount of Large Compared with Small Investments. (53.)
Example of Summarizing Analyses and Comparing. (54-57.)
Valuing Improvements. (60-61.)
Timber Treatment. (62.)
Interest Allowance on Unimproved Value. (63—65.)
Influence on Values of Depreciating Factors. (69-70.)
PROVISIONS OF THE LAND TAX ASSESSMENT ACT SPECIALLY RELATED TO THF
SUBJECT OF OUR INQUIRY.
. 242. Section 29 of the Act renders the owner of a leasehold estate in Crown lands liable to
taxation according to the value of his estate, provided the lease is for a term longer than one year
The section reads — J
Notwithstanding anything in the last two preceding sections, the owner of a leasehold estate under the laws of
a State or part of the Commonwealth relating to the alienation or occupation of Crown lands or relating to mining (not
being a perpetual lease or a lease with a right of purchase or a lease of land to be used for pastoral, grazing or
cultivation purposes, or a homestead lease or a mining lease or a timber lease) shall not be liable to assessment or
taxation m respect of the estate, and the owner of a leasehold estate under any such laws for a term not greater
than one year certain shall not be so liable : s
, Provided that in the assessment of the unimproved value of a lease the value of any metals or minerals or other
rights reserved to the Crown shall be excluded.
243. Sub-section, (3.) of section 27 provides that a Crown lessee shall be assessed and liable
to tax as it the lease were made before the commencement of the Act.


244. The sub-section reads—
Notwithstanding anything in this section, where the owner of the fee-simple is exempt under sections thirteen
or forty-one of this Act from taxation in respect of the land or the lease is a lease from the Crown, a lessee of the land shall
be assessed and liable for land tax as if the lease were made before the commencement of this Act and not otherwise.
245. Section 28 deals with the liability and assessment of the owner of a leasehold estate
under a lease made or agreed to be made before the commencement of the Act and defines the
term “ the unimproved value of a lease or leasehold estate in land.” By section 27 sub-section (3.)
a lease from the Crown is deemed to have been made before the commencement of the Act.
Sub-sections (2.) and (3.) of section 28 read —
The owner of a leasehold estate in land, under a lease made or agreed to he made before the commencement
of this Act, shall be deemed to be, in respect of the land, the owner of land of an unimproved value equal to the
unimproved value (if any) of his estate ; but if he has, before the commencement of this Act, entered into an agreement
to make or granted a lease of the land, he shall be entitled, during the currency of that lease, to have the unimproved
value (if any) of that lease deducted from the unimproved value of his estate:
Provided that where the owner of the leasehold estate has, "within three years before the commencement of this
Act, been the owner of a freehold estate in the land, he shall be assessed and liable to land tax as if his leasehold estate
had been under a lease made after the commencement of this Act.
(3) For the purposes of this section—
(а) the unimproved value of a lease or leasehold estate in land means the value of the amount (if any) by
which four and a half per centum of the unimproved value of land exceeds the annual rent reserved
by the lease, calculated for the unexpired period of the lease at four and a half per centum, according
to the calculations based on the prescribed tables for the calculation of values :
Provided that the Commissioner may from time to time, if he thinks fit, alter the rate per centum
upon which the calculations in this section are based;
(б) rent, in the case of a lease of improved land, means so much of the whole rent as bears to the whole
rent the proportion which the unimproved value of the land at the date of the lease bore to the
improved value:
Provided that, where onerous conditions for constructing buildings, works, or other improvements
upon the land, or expending money thereon, are imposed upon the lessee, or where any fine, premium,
or fore-gift, or consideration of the nature of fine, premium, or fore-gift, is payable by the lessee,
the Commissioner may assess the amount (if any) which ought, for the purposes of this section, to
be added to the value of the rent in respect thereof, and the value of the rent shall be deemed to be
increased by that amount accordingly;
(c) the owner of a leasehold estate includes the lessee of land for life under a lease or an agreement for a
lease.
246. Section 3 of the Act contains the two following definitions :
Unimproved value, in relation to land, means the capital sum which the fee-simple of the land might be expected
to realize if offered for sale on such reasonable terms and conditions as a bond fide seller would require, assuming that
the improvements (if any) thereon or appertaining thereto and made or acquired by the owner or his predecessor in
title had not been made.
“ Value of improvements ” in relation to land, means the added value which the improvements give to the land
at the date of valuation, irrespective of the cost of the improvements:
Provided that the added value shall in no case exceed the amount that should reasonably be involved in bringing
the unimproved value of the land to its improved value as at the date of assessment.
247. Section 11 (3.) is the subject of special comment in paragraphs 180 to 197.
248. It will be seen by reference to the provisions of section 28 of the Act quoted above
that the owner of a leasehold estate in land is deemed to be the owner of land of an unimproved
value equal to the unimproved value (if any) of his estate ; and that the unimproved value of a
leasehold estate in land means the value of the amount (if any) by which 4§ per cent, of the unimproved
value of land exceeds the annual rent reserved by the lease, &c.
249. These provisions necessitate regard being paid to the definition in the Act of
“ Unimproved value ” in relation to land as quoted above, and that definition necessitates the
valuation of lands held under lease from the Crown as though they were freehold, and sets the
problem.
WHAT IS THE BEST EVIDENCE OF VALUES?
250. In a written statement furnished to the Royal Commission on Taxation in 1920, the
Commissioner of Taxation said—
The High Court which has dealt with valuations of land for purposes of taxation or resumption has ruled that
the best evidence of the value for which one area of land could be sold is the actual price realized upon the sale of
comparable lands suitable for similar use.
When the subject land is unimproved, its probable selling value is deduced from the amounts for which
comparable unimproved lands have been sold, if available. If there are no such sales, the probable selling value of
the land is arrived at from the unimproved value deduced from sales of comparable improved land.
251. Amplifying this paragraph under examination the Commissioner said—
The law assumes these lands [outback leasehold properties] to be saleable as freehold and it is the duty of the
department to ascertain that selling value. The department obtains the selling values of land which has not been
the subject of sale by comparing these lands with comparable lands which have been the subject of sale and by a process
of deduction and general calculations we arrive at approximately the selling value. You see we take the property as
a business proposition. We say what is it worth as a business proposition or that that is a business proposition and
there is a comparable business proposition sold for so much. It is all a question of comparison. (Page 187.)


following termT* Comm]SSloner,s statemen t further explained the departmental practice in the
Tj- h I f nd f imp f ° ved > unimproved value is deduced in accordance with rules laid down by the
to theproperty.’ deduCtmg from lts probab!e sellm g value m its improved condition, the value of the improvements
nf oimii? 6 probable se ! bng value °f tbe improved property is arrived at from the amounts for which improved properties
into T T ltj and USe haVG been S ° ld - F ° r the pUrpose of tbis comparison of values the department takes
t I l '! 1 the average net return from the land, assuming of course it has been put to its best use. The
era & e net return is taken for as long a period as possible, up to ten years.
must be °“ a “ omt ° f ° f i-P~nts which
The original definition of “ value of improvements ” reads :
In relation to land means the added value which the improvements give to the land at date of
valuation irrespective of the cost of the improvements.”
i,. ti i t Uiis m ? ant tl,at ' from the present day capital value of the improved property there
of such » con w the * ff ere“ce between it and the original cost of the land. To prevent the possibilityof the Loess
of such a contention, the definition was altered by Parliament to read
~r r °\ 11 "F rovements ’ , m relatl °n to land, means the added value which the improvements give to the land
at the date of valuation irrespective of the cost of the improvements : 6
„ • Provided that the added value shall in no case exceed the amount that should reasonably be involved in bringing the
unimproved value of the land to its improved value as at the date of assessment. ”
The words in italics explain the limitation imposed by Parliament to this deduction,
r • , o amount wblcb would reasonably be involved in effecting the improvements on any property is the principal
subject of discussion between the taxpayers and the department. The capital value of the improved property is the
arpni r!?? ai ? COI f l deratlon > bat lts determination does not give rise to as frequent dispute as does the deduction on
account ot value of improvements.
Fhe Hlgh Cour * bas beld that; the “ present-day ” cost (cost at 30th June then last past) of replacing existing
j. , f im _P r °vements m their existing condition (physical and useful) is to be regarded as the amount of the deduction
to be allowed m respect of improvements.
THE METHOD OF VALUATION RECOMMENDED FOR ADOPTION.
253. The first step. Of primary importance in determining the value of a pastoral
property is the ascertainment of its carrying capacity.
Isaacs said— * M ° rris ° n ( Killin g wort h) case, heard before the Full High Court, Mr. Justice
, ev * denc ® T as f to the unimproved value of the land as a single unconnected fact, that is, apart
UnhLs T dw 10 '/ ltS i JSt °T and tbc improvements, regarding it in fact as in its original primeval condition.
Unless I were driven to it as the only available means of arriving at some solution, I should be altogether indisposed
to accept that evidence, because it is eminently unsatisfactory to me, and appears to be altogether haphazard,
n such a case as the present, and certainly as applying to this particular estate, there is a much better method available
f T al T lie 1 fir fb and tben arrive at a value of tb e improvements within the meaning of the Act
thuJmVn * ? e t nod . wblch -I.thmk is much more satisfactory in the present case. ... In that view, the first
. to do is to determine its fair carrying capacity, because when that is done other considerations, though still elastic
wA°n a r B6 ome reducible to practical limits. When you once get its carrying capacity you
6 to a large extent a solid basis from whence to proceed.
255. In the Fisher case, Isaacs and (Javan Duffy, JJ. } stated—
When ascertaining the unimproved value of a station property such as this which has been for years an improved
frol Tw ng T COT tv 6 Pr s Ct fn- r d rea ¥. tbe on ! y at least in the majority of instances, is to find first of all
from its present condition and history its fair carrying capacity.
n , , In ascertaining the carrying capacity of a pastoral property, the valuer should
first of all apply his knowledge of the country and supplement his general information by
investigating the recorded history of the property to be valued as well as the records of similar
properties preferably (though not of necessity exclusively) in the same district. He should also
take special cognizance of such other information gained in the course of his inquiry as seems
relevant and likely to affect his final judgment.
follows 2^7 * Rules 32, 33, and 34 of Order 816 the departmental valuers are instructed as
a- in V wnivwrf re b l° 01 ? ° f r H? rd i ar j available > tbese should be inspected over a period of ten years ending on 30th June
cairyiny 1 capacity a Uatl ° n ° f knd 18 bemg 01 f ° r SUcb sborter period ’ if ai W> which will reflect the fair average
33. The stocks on hand at the beginning and end of each year, the stock shown by the shearing tallies or mustering
records and by purchases and sales, with dates of purchase and sale, are to be ascertained, and from these figures the
average carrying capacity for each year is to be calculated. g
° f reco l ds l a f\ not mailable, the valuer is to collect the fullest possible information from the
land and m the locality upon which to base an opinion regarding the carrying capacity.
258. Rule 46 purports to make provision by allowance for the effect upon carrying capacity
and net returns through drought. . J ° 1 J


259. The second step.— Having ascertained the carrying capacity, the next step should be
to determine a beast area value for the subject property. In this process the valuer may determine
the value per beast area —
1. By direct comparison with sold comparable freehold areas, due allowance
being made for all disadvantages.
2. By (a) estimating what the average net profit per beast area of the subject
land should be under normal management; and (6) capitalizing that profit at the
appropriate rate of interest.
260. It is considered that wherever practicable it would prove an advantage, and afford a
safeguard against error, if the valuer tested the results arrived at under one method by app ymg
the other. ,
261. In the application of method 2, as defined in paragraph 259 the valuer s estimate
should be reviewed and checked in the light of the available records o esu jec proper y, as
well as the returns from similar properties. . ,
262. The adoption by the valuer of either or both methods will call for the use of the fullest
available information and the exercise of the same care as in the case of ascertaining the carrying
capacity of the land.
263. It is essential that in any direct comparison of the subject land with another property
in order to ascertain the value per beast area of the former, the comparison should be with freehold
properties which have been the subject of sale and have so established a market value—the point
at which buyer and seller would come together.
264 In those oases in which the valuer considers that it is not practicable to rely upon
the method of direct comparison and to measure the disadvantages of the subject property
effectively, sales of freehold lands nearest to the subject land and used for similar purposes
should be analyzed in order to ascertain the rate of interest earned by the sold properties
rate of interest disclosed by these sales would determine the rate of interest to be ‘ ,
capitalizing the net returns from the subject land. It is considered that the rate of interest di
by sales would afford a reliable indication as to the return an intending purchaser would expect
to receive upon his investment.
265. In the Curnamona case, Murray, G.J., used 10 per cent, as the interest rate for
capitalization, and the following extract from his judgment indicates the method adopted .
I may say that the most critical question in the whole inquiry is what rate of interest a prudent purchaser wou
expect on hi investment. The smaller the rate, the more he could pay for the tod. I
which I consider to be the absolute minimum; but it is doubtful whether he would be satisfied with that' ™te “S the
risks are very vreat If, as might easily happen, he failed to make any profit the first year, he would require » F
in the second 8 and if he only lade 5 per cent, in that year, he must have 25 per cent, m the following year and so on
What has mainly led me to'decide on 10 per cent, is that I regard the carrying capacity I-have, determined on wl
not too low as reasonably safe. If I had accepted the evidence for the respondent, I shou d have increased tde rate to
at least m per c«t, because it is clear that there would be greater difficulty in maintaining an average of 40 sheep
to the mile than 33, and more uncertainty in making ss. per head net profit than 4s. »d.
266. In the determination of a rate of interest that would be looked for by a pure aser
definite evidence of rates of interest actually earned and disclosed by sales of lands that are put
to similar use is in our opinion a more reliable guide than an estimate unrelated to established
facts Moreover, arising out of the definition m section 3of the Act (which provides a me-simp
basis for the unimproved land), there is the necessity for relating the returns of the subject
leasehold property with those o' comparable freehold lands. (See also paragraph 246 )
therefore consider that the rate of interest to be used as the factor for the capitalization of t he n
returns of the subject property should he that disclosed by sales of land nearest to, and put to
similar nse as, tbe subject lands. _
267. Capitalizing Disadvantages.— We were informed by the Commissioner of Taxauoii in
evidence that “ Order 816, issued in 1917, laid it down as a general rule that disadvantages shou d
he measured on a basis of 5 per cent.,” and that “ There was no deep analysis of the proposition
at that time by the Department.” To the question “ But there was a disregard of the ate o
interest which might be expected to be earned on the property as a whole ? the Commissioner
replied “Yes ” and added/" No one would challenge it, but would rather support it, because it
would work out to the advantage of the land-owner. At a later stage I seriously contemplate
altering the 5 per cent, to 10 per cent., but I did not continue on that line, because I thought the
other scheme of net returns would cover it all/ 5 (Pages 38 and 39.)
268. Senior Valuer Lambert in bis evidence said, “ I will now read from tbe amended Lane
Tax Order No. 816, issued on November, 1918 —
It will be noted that capitalization of the disadvantages has been made at 10 per cent This has ,en d one
because it is asserted by pastoralists generally that they expect an at
investments. When, therefore, they are judging a property they usually the
10 per cent. In these circumstances the only proper course of measuring the i c g P
another is to capitalize them at 10 per cent. (Page 232.)


269. We are of opinion that the same rule should be adopted in respect of capitalizing
disadvantages as we recommend in the case of capitalizing net returns, i.e., that the factor for
capitalization should be the rate of interest disclosed by analysis of the sales of freehold lands
with which comparison is be : ng made.
270. We therefore recommend that the following general principles should be observed in
the valuation of improved Crown leasehold areas in order to determine their freehold unimproved
value
1. Ascertain the carrying capacity of the land by reference to all available
information and by the exercise of the valuer's expert knowledge.
2. Compare the subject land with sold freehold areas and allow for disadvantages,
which should be capitalized at the appropriate rate of interest. From the improved
value deduct the amount properly attributable to the value of the improvements.
3. Estimate the net earning per beast area of the subject land under normal
management and normal conditions. Check the estimate by reference to records of the
property and the valuer's knowledge of other similar properties. Then capitalize at
appropriate rate of interest, and eliminate value of stock and improvements. The
appropriate rate of interest to be used should be that disclosed by sales of freehold land
nearest by distance and put to similar use as that of the subject area.
4. Compare the results of 2 and 3, and if any great variation adopt 3 as the more
reliable in accurately reflecting disadvantages.
271. Relation of Leasehold Subject Lands with Sold Freehold Lands essential. —lt is
apparent that no value can be ascertained without some appropriate measure ; that the most
appropriate measure in the case of land is market value, and that market value is disclosed by
sales.
272. It is equally clear that the definition in the Act of “ Unimproved value " requires, in
the course of valuation of land held under lease from the Crown, a relation of the subject lands
with sold freehold lands as the basic lands. Hence arises the necessity for basing the departmental
estimate of the unimproved value of a subject property either upon evidence of the sale price
of comparable freehold areas, or upon the percentage of net profits to capital invested in freehold
lands put to the same use as the subject property.
273. Ascertaining Net Returns. —The practice of the Taxation Department in ascertaining
the net returns from a property that has been improved is set out in Rules Nos, 35 to 49 of
General Order 816 and is in general harmony with commercial practice.
274. It is the custom of the Department to employ men with business and accountancy
experience in investigating returns.
275. Consideration is given in the Rules to matters that necessitate adjustment in the
accounts such as for example :
Fortuitous circumstances,
Management,
Unnecessary Improvements,
Live Stock Values,
Losses by Drought, &c.
276. The only Rule that calls for special comment is Rule 45, which provides, inter alia, for
adjustment in respect of rates and taxes applicable to the land. The Rule provides that
allowance is to be made for all rates and taxes except income tax.
277. The question of allowance for land tax has been dealt with in paragraphs 198-209
of this Report.
278. In the “ Curnamona ” case Chief Justice Murray, after quoting Isaacs and Duffy, JJ.,
in the Fisher case, said —“ 4 all taxation 5 clearly covers and must have been intended to cover
income tax as well as land tax." This interpretation of the view expressed by the two High
Court Judges led Chief Justice Murray to allow as a deduction the amount payable in respect
of income tax when arriving at the net returns from the land, the valuation of which was the
subject of the appeal heard by him.
279. One difficulty in respect of such allowance may be pointed out. The amount of
income tax attributable to the income earned from, any property would vary according to the
financial circumstances of the taxpayer. Obviously the rate of tax would be appreciably
greater if the taxpayer had considerable sources of income other than from the returns of the
property being valued.


280. No claim was made before us that income tax should be included in the allowance
made in arriving at the net returns from a property, nor did we receive from the Pastoralists’
representative the assistance asked for in the elucidation of that part of our inquiry which
had relation to the question of net returns. It will be seen by reference to paragraph 118 of
our Report that, in October, Mr. Eastwood wrote to us on the subject of the method of arriving
at net returns as follows :
“ On going more fully into the matter of the compilation of a skeleton form for ascertaining the returns from
the pastoral property, I regret to state that I find it almost impossible to devise a form that would be suitable for universal
adoption such as is the case for income tax purposes. ... I regret that I cannot help the Commission by suggesting
a skeleton form for general application that would assist the Commission in laying down any rules for the guidance
of valuers in ascertaining the value of land based on such form or the information contained therein.”
281. We are of opinion that payments in respect of income tax should not enter & into
the calculation of net returns for the reason that income tax is a charge upon the income of a
person after the income, in respect of which the tax is levied, has been earned and ascertained,
and therefore cannot righbly be treated as an expenditure incurred in the production of the
income.
RE-APPRAISEMENT OF RENTS.
282. It was contended by witnesses before us—l. That owing to liability of Crown Lessees
to re-appraisement of rentals, the taxation of the lessees 5 interests was impossible; 2. That
re-appraisement or revision of rents was one of the uncertainties attached to Crown Leases which
was incapable of measurement, and which rendered impossible any reasonable accuracy in assess-
ments ; and 3. That re-appraisement was one of the factors in the determination of lessees 5 interests
which had not been allowed for in any of the assessments.
283. It is necessary to remember always that under the provisions of the Land Tax Assess-
ment Act the unimproved value of land held under lease from the Crown has to be determined upon
a fee-simple basis. The rent payable under the lease, therefore, does not affect the unimproved
value of the land, qua land, but is an important factor in the determination of the unimproved
value of the lessee s estate. The rent payable to the Crown only comes into the calculation of the
lessee’s interest after the unimproved value of the land has been ascertained upon the basis laid down
by the Act.
284. There was no suggestion made in evidence as to how a contingency such as re-appraise-
ment of rent could be measured at the date of valuation. The rent of a Crown leasehold property
is, sometimes, decreased on re-appraisement, and the view may be advanced that in whichever
direction —upward or downward —the rent is subsequently altered, the alteration reflects a
proportionate change in the unimproved value of the land, and that there is, therefore, little, if
any, variation in the value of lessee’s interest other than that which is due to its measurement in
relation to the unexpired term of the lease.
285. Be that as it may, we are of opinion that allowance in respect of re-appraisement of rent
cannot be made by w r ay of a deduction from the unimproved value of the land, and is practicable
only when a rent variation is no longer a contingent liability under the lease, but has become
actual.
RECOUPMENT OF LOSS ON CAPITAL EXPENDED ON IMPROVEMENTS.
286. The claim was made before us on behalf of pastoralists, that some allowance should
be made in the determination of a lessee’s estate in Crown lands for the capital lost in improvements
(apart from depreciation), by reason of the amount received by way of purchase or compensation
at the termination of the lease being less than the then depreciated cost of the improvements.
287. In most pastoral Crown leases there are tenant rights in the improvements to the
extent that the lessee is paid for improvements at the termination of the lease an amount equal to
their value to the incoming tenant. In many instances the value, to the incoming tenant is not
equal to the depreciated cost, hence the loss for which allowance is claimed.
288. This claim is similar in character to that made in respect of re-appraisement of rent.
The possible loss of capital expended on improvements does not in any way affect the unimproved
value of the land as a freehold, and the only manner in which an allowance of this nature could
be made is by adding a sum to the reserved rent to cover the contingency when calculating the
lessee’s interest.
289. By sub-section (3.) ( b ) of section 28 of the Land Tax Assessment Act, additions may
be made to the value of the reserved rent only in respect of onerous conditions for constructing
buildings, works, or other improvements upon the land, or expending money theieon, imposed
upon the lessee, or where any fine, premium, or fore-gift, or consideration in the nature of fine,
premium, or fore-gift, is payable by the lessee.


290. Apart, therefore, from the impracticability of accurate measurement of such a
contingency as the loss of capital expended on improvements, there is no provision in the Act for
an allowance to provide against such cc ntingent loss.
SHOULD 1914-1915 VALUATIONS BE ADOPfED AS THE BASIS OF THE TAX ON CROWN
LEASEHOLDS FOR ALL YEARS, VIZ., 1914-1923 ?
291. In evidence the Commissioner of Taxation was asked, “For assessments for later years
running up to 1920, 1921 and 1922, would the valuation of from 1911 to 1915 be a fair thing to go
by ? ” The Commissioner replied : “ I thought so, for the reason that it leads up to the present-
day method, the analysis of the average of average net returns. I was confronted with this :
not only had prices of produce gone up, but the cost of improvements had gone up tremendously,
and one had to be set off against the other. In some of the calculations that were made in that
respect we found that they did reasonably balance each other. So that the increased cost of
making improvements could be ignored just as the increased prices of produce could be ignored.”
(Page 15).
292. The following additional extracts from the Commissioner’s evidence will afford further
indication of his intentions in this regard
Question. —Generally speaking, it has been found impracticable to make the valuations more frequently than
once in three years ?
Answer.—Yes, having regard to the circumstances.
Question. —In the case of Crown leaseholds, it has not even been attempted ?
Answer. —You must remember for the last six years the payment of the tax has been in suspense, and we did not
know what Parliament would do ; therefore we suspended practically all our work. What I have suggested is that the
system of valuation which I have introduced lately should be applied to all years, and that will involve the acceptance
of valuations based upon an average of net returns for the five years from 1911 to 1915. That is really s what it boils down
to.
Question. —Ignoring the whole of the war period ?
Answer. —Yes, ignoring the whole of the war period as abnormal.
Question. —Would you adopt that basis in dealing with city lands ?
Answer. —No ; because the conditions are altogether different with city land. (Page 61.)
Later the Commissioner said
We are trying to get a settled unimproved value which might be applied for a fairly long period. We had no
evidence to show that unimproved values had increased or decreased since 1914, and we had not sufficient sales to show that
they had varied during the war up to the date when Parliament exempted these leaseholds, the idea being to apply a
common unimproved value throughout the whole period. (Page 158.)
Recognizing the difficulties that might arise from the adoption of his suggestion the
Commissioner considered “ it might involve legislation to maintain the value for the whole period.”
(Page 161.)
Senior Valuer Lambert was asked :
Would you think, if these earlier values were made to apply to the whole period ending 1923, it would be, generally
speaking, fair to the taxpayer ?
His reply was :
Up to 1919 I should say it was demanding full measure from the taxpayer, and for later years it would be favorable
to him. (Page 279.)
293. The question of applying unimproved values determined by the Taxation Department
as at 30th June, 1914, or 1915, in assessments of lessees of Crown lands in respect of each of the
years of the currency of the Tax on Crown Leaseholds is one which presents some difficulty. In
view of the absence or scarcity of sales during the greater part of the period embraced by the tax ;
the suspension of the work of valuation by the Taxation Department; and the increase in the
value of improvements, but the difficulty should not be insuperable in view of the valuation work
already done, and the information recorded by the Department.
294. On the general contention of the Commissioner of Taxation that in relation to pastoral
properties the advance in the prices of produce since 1914-1915 is in correspondence with the
increased cost of improvements, the evidence was not conclusive. The probability appears to
be that, speaking generally, the unimproved value of pastoral leasehold lands in Australia has not
decreased during the last ten years. Where sales or reduction of Crown rents do not afford
evidence of decrease in values, no injustice would be inflicted upon taxpayers by the adoption,
as the basis of assessment in the latter years of the tax period, of the unimproved values
determined in respect of the earlier years by the method of valuation we recommend.
295. We are of opinion that unimproved land values should remain constant for taxation
purposes only while the sales basis upon which such values rest remains unchanged. Should sales
indicate a material rise or fall in such values, the valuation of subject lands should be altered to
accord with the sales evidence.


296. Had circumstances in respect of the tax on Crown leaseholds permitted, the depart-
mental valuations, in our opinion, should have been subjected to a triennial revision in the light
of all available evidence.
297. As the currency of the tax has expired, a periodical review of the valuations at intervals
of not exceeding three years is not possible —but an effort should be made by the Taxation Depart-
ment to give effect to the principle of triennial review as far as may be practicable by a close scrutiny
of all sales evidence as at say, the 30th June, 1917, and 30th June, 1920.
298. Should evidence available at those dates reflect an alteration in unimproved land
values, the existing valuations should be amended in accordance with such evidence.
MUST VALUE BE DETERMINED AS AT DATE OF LEASE?
299. Mr. Owen Dixon, K.C.,inthe course of his address to us, stated that it was necessary
to ascertain the value of an improved leasehold property at the date of the lease in order to ascertain
the proportion of the reserved rent that applies to the unimproved land.
300. Section 28 (3.) ( b ) of the Land Tax Assessment iVct provides that- —
Rent, in the case of a lease of improved land, means so much of the whole rent as
bears to the whole rent the proportion which the unimproved value of the land at the
date of the lease bore to the improved value.
301. The difficulty in ascertaining the value of leasehold areas as at the date of the lease,
particularly in those cases where leases were taken up many years ago, would be considerable ;
but upon inquiry we found that the difficulty is practically non-existent.
302. Our inquiries elicited the following information :
New South Wales.
There is no record in the New South Wales Taxation office of a Crown lease where it has been necessary to make
the allocation. In leases granted by the Western Lands Board the Crown has no interest in the improvements on the
land.
In respect of leases granted by the Department of Lands, such as Settlement Leases, Improvement Leases, Scrub
Leases, &c., there are only a few old leases which were leased on rental to cover both the land and the improvements.
Rentals are now based on the unimproved value only, any improvements on the land being paid for by the lessors as a
rule by instalments.
South Australia.
As a general rule the rent of Crown leases in this State is attributable solely to the unimproved value of the land
leased. This applies to :
1. All pastoral leases.
2. Right of purchase and perpetual leases (without revaluation of rent) of lands “ originally 55 alienated from
the Crown.
3. Right of purchase and perpetual leases of land situated in pastoral areas.
4. All perpetual leases not subject to revaluation of rent.
5. Miscellaneous leases, e.g., scrub leases, selectors’ leases, water leases, &c. {Note. —These leases are
not frequently met with in Land Tax assessing, and their value is inconsiderable.)
Queensland.
In this State the Crown does not grant any improved leases, but determines its rent on the unimproved basis under
section 125 of the Consolidated Land Act 1910-1920. Any improvements which may have been effected by any prede-
cessor are paid for as tenant rights under sections 123 and 124, and their value is recovered from the incoming lessee,
selector, or purchaser.
Western Australia.
There are no instances in Western Australia of lands leased out by the Crown in an improved state for which it
is necessary to make an allocation of rent as provided under section 28 (3) (6) of the Land Tax Assessment Act.
Taxation Department Central Office.
So far as assessments that are issued from the Central Office are concerned no instances can be recalled for which
an allocation of rent has been necessary.
BOARD OF APPEAL.
303. The adoption of a comparatively simple and inexpensive method of procedure in
dealing with objections and appeals in respect of the taxation of Crown leaseholds such as would
be afforded by the appointment, on the lines recommended by us in paragraph 310, of a Board
of Appeal under the Land Tax Assessment Act, is, in our opinion , desirable.
304. As will be seen by reference to the subjoined extracts from their respective Reports,
two Commissions have already strongly approved of the appointment of a Board of Appeal under
the Land Tax Assessment Act.


representative of the pastoralists informed us by letter that “it is considered
at an impossible task has j*to |the Commissioner in the assessment of Crown
leaseholds, and that no good-will resuit of an Appeal Board.” (See
paragraph JLJLo).
306. A review of the present position and of the evidence of many witnesses does not lead
us to share the view expressed by Mr. Eastwood, that no good will result from the appointment
of an Appeal Board , nor to concur in the consideration upon which that view is based.
307. On the subject of a Board of Appeal the Knibbs Commission remarked (see paragraph
9, section (iv) of that Commission’s Report) :
, . , 5-f >ill i° n - 8 ,w r f freel f by witnesses as to the desirability of the establishment of a Board of Appeal to
whieh dissatisned Crown leaseholders might make their appeals j&gainst valuations, and thus have their objections
expeditiously and economically dealt with instead of having to bring them before the High Court, as is usually now the
case. Without doubt, appeals to a High or Supreme Court necessarily entail much expenditure and cause considerable
. ■ y \ AT® majority of the witnesses thoroughly favour the appointment of a special body of experts to act as a Board
“J uk i' + On A 7 °“ 6SS advocat f d the reteßtion of tde present regime, whilst another suggested that the appeal
should be only to the Full Court of each State.
In the opinion of your Commissioners it would be 4 an advantage to have such a Board, and they recommend its
appointment by legislative enactment. J
308. On the same subject the Royal Commission on Taxation in its Fourth (Land Taxation)
Report, section xxvn, wrote :
a 716 1 evidence submitted on the question of the appointment of a Board of Appeal under the Land Tax
Assrasment Act disclosed as great unanimity of opinion in support of the proposal as that manifested in relation to the
establishment of a similar tribunal under the Income Tax Assessment Act. We are satisfied that the reasons justifying
717. Under section 44 of the Land Tax Assessment Act a taxpayer may appeal against any assessment by the
Commissioner of the High Court, the bupreme Court, or a county or district court of a State, or such other cour/as is
specified in that behalf by proclamation, on the ground that he is is not liable for the tax or any part thereof or that
the assessment is excessive. There is a natural unwillingness on the part of many taxpayers to incur the delay trouble
expense and publicity of legal proceedings against the Taxation Department. In the administration of so 7 technical
and complex a measure as the Land Tax Assessment Act, many grounds of dispute between the taxpayer and the
Department must inevitably arise. We are of the opinion that if taxpayers were given access to an independent
tribunal (having a simple and inexpensive procedure) for the settlement of these disputes, it would do much to allav
the existing irritation and discontent on the part of taxpayers. ' y
718. The following extracts from our First Report in respect of the Board of Appeal under the Income Tax
Assessment Act are quoted as being equally appropriate to a Board of Appeal under the Land Tax Assessment Act^
,i n 151. The Commission approves of the view generally expressed by witnesses on the subject that
the Board s decisions as to matters of fact should be final.” J
, ■ ■ if/, \ IS c ° nsldered that it should be the duty of the Commissioner to forward an objection to his
Mm reqU6Sted t 0 d ° S 0 by taxpayer within 30 days of the receipt by
" The parties should have the right to appear before the Board in person, or by representative.”
104. With a view to discouraging appeals to the Board on unimportant issues or on frivolous or
unreasonable grounds, it is suggested that the appellant should be required to deposit a prescribed fee at the
time of lodging an appeal. In the event of the Board considering the appeal frivolous or unreasonable
the Board shall have the power to order the forfeiture of the whole or part of the fee.” 5
721. We therefore recommend —
X. That the existing Taxation Appeal Board appointed under the Income Tax Assessment Act and
any subsequent or additional Board of Appeal similarly appointed be empowered to hear and adjudicate in
matters of appeal under the Land Tax Assessment Act.
2. That it shall be competent for the Board of Appeal to adjudicate (in respect of Land Taxation
upon matters which involve questions either of law or of fact; that in respect of questions of fact the Board’s
cision shall be final, but that m respect of questions of law an appeal should lie from the Board to the High
Court or to the Supreme Court of a State. gn
3. That in those instances in which (prior to the constitution of the Board of Appeal)—
(1) notice of appeal to a court has been given in accordance with section 44 of the Act but the
case has not come on for hearing ;
(2) objection againt assessment has been lodged but no deoision has been given by the Commissioner
the Act should provide that taxpayers shall have the option of transferring their appeal or objection as the
case may be, to the Appeal Board. J ’
309. We are in complete accord with the opinion expressed by the Royal Commission on
Taxation in paragraph 717, and with the recommendations made in paragraph 721 of that
Commission s Report, r
, 310 ’ 5® t! ? erefore recommend—That the existing Taxation Appeal Board appointed under
the income Tax Assessment Act and any subsequent or additional Board of Appeal similarly
appointed be empowered to hear and adjudicate in matters of appeal under the Land Tax Assessment
Act*


IN THE ASSESSMENT OF CROWN LEASEHOLDS DOES THE ACT SET AN IMPOSSIBLE TASK ?
311. A reference to the nnmerons extracts from the evidence which are to he found
throughout our Report will indicate that many witnesses would answer this question affirmatively,
though individual opinions have been expressed with varying degrees of emphasis, and in many
instances, not without qualification.
312. The tenor of our general observations, opinions expressed and of recommendations
made throughout our Report will already have indicated that from the evidence submitted,
and facts disclosed in the course of our inquiry, we are of opinion that the determination of the
unimproved value of land held under lease from the Crown, upon the basis laid down by the Act
is not an impossible task, though it is—for reasons that are apparent —often a difficult one.
313. We invite attention to a statement submitted to the Knibbs Commission in 1919 by
the Commissioner of Taxation. In the course of examination before that Commission, Mr. Ewing
was asked :
What evidence have you available as to cases where a value has been definitely assigned to the goodwill of the
leasehold, or to the unimproved value of the leasehold qua leaseholds ?
The Commissioner’s reply was :
I produce a statement showing a few cases in which a value has been definitely assigned to the goodwill of an
unimproved lease. This statement refers to Queensland, Western Australia, South Australia, and New South Wales.
It is not exhaustive, it is only indicative :
Crown Leaseholds.
Comparative statement showing in respect of certain Crown leaseholds, the leasehold interest as disclosed by
the sale, together with the leasehold interest as calculated under section 28 of the Land, Tax Assessment Act 1910-16
Lease Number.
Date of Sale.
Leasehold Interest
as disclosed by the
Sale.
Leasehold Interest
as calculated by the
Department.
£ s. d.
£ s. d.
QUEENSLAND.
1
9th October, 1917
38,415 0 0 •
33,881 0 0
2
4th June, 1914
16,711 0 0
18,696 0 0
3
10th March, 1915 ..
19,202 0 0
34,779 0 0
4
3,191 0 0
39,013 0 0
5
15,919 0 0
59,908 0 0
6
27,246 0 0
44,403 0 0
7
24,251 0 0
8,569 0 0
8
11,344 0 0
16,141 0 0
9
813 0 0
18,119 0 0
10
12th August, 1918..
9,500 0 0
9,509 0 0
11
1st July, 1915
3,405 0 0
3,537 0 0
12
1916
3,202 0 0
1,158 0 0
13
1st July, 1914
3,781 0 0
4,999 0 0
14
19 th May, 1916
4,321 0 0
1,882 0 0
15
9th July, 1917
1.568 0 0
2,165 0 0
2,464 0 0
4,142 0 0
16
15th March, 1918
6,588 0 0
6,392 0 0
17
7th September, 1916
23,000 0 0
41,902 0 0
18
24th May, 1916 ..
14,000 0 0
18,252 0 0
19
1st November, 1918
38,483 0 0
38,172 0 0
20
2nd November, 1916
5,000 0 0
9,029 0 O
21
11th September, 1917
10,000 0 0
11,327 0 0
22
1st February, 1917
180 0 0
21,829 0 0
23
23rd April, 1917 ..
4,781 0 0
4,969 0 0
24
24th March, 1916
1,200 0 0
1,593 0 0
25
31st March, 1919 ..
2,602 0 0
8,101 0 0
26
25th October, 1915
1,200 0 0
1,707 0 0
27
April, 1917
3,500 0 0
1,133 0 0
28
3rd April, 1918 ..
1,750 0 0
4,867 0 0
29
15th December, 1915
3,400 0 0
2,647 0 0
WESTERN AUSTRALIA.
1
December, 1912
9,000 0 0
16,486 0 O
2
5th November, 1915
1,700 0 0
1,833 0 0
3
30th June, 1916
2,380 0 0
2,544 0 0
4
November, 1916 ..
7,485 0 0
5,121 0 0
5
30th June, 1914 ..
3,080 0 0
3,171 0 0
6
30th June, 1916
1,400 0 0
624 0 0
May, 1918
3,210 0 0
4,090 0 0
7
30th November, 1912
4,354 0 0
4,614 0 0
8
30th June, 1917 ..
933 0 0
983 0 0
9
30th November, 1913
3,500 0 0
4,786 0 0
April, 1916
3,250 0 0
4,088 0 0
10
30th June, 1918
3,000 0 0
2,066 0 0
11
15th June, 1916
1,400 0 0
1,277 0 0
F. 17208.— 4


Lease Number.
Date of Sale.
Leasehold Interest
as disclosed by the
Sale.
Leasehold Interest
as calculated by the
Department.
£ s. d.
£ s. d.
SOUTH AUSTRALIA.
1
11th January, 1912
7,963 0 0
4,664 0 0
2 .. f
24th March, 1911
| 3,150 0 0
1,149 0 0
1
8th November, 1917
1
O
fj
24th March, 1911 ..
8,180 0 0
2,575 0 0
4 .. (
21st November, 1911
1 5,882 0 0
7,536 0 0
*
September, 1912 ..
f
NEW SOUTH WALES.
’ ■ . ■ ■ V * -
Value of Improvements.
1
1915
3,280 0 0
1,857 0 0
2
1915
7,495 0 0
7,992 0 0
3
1916
4,920 0 0
3,017 0 0
4
1916
55,794 0 0
51,321 0 0
5
1918
28,162 0 0
33,440 0 0
6
1918
5,700 0 0
5,802 0 0
The New South Wales figures of values attributed to lessees’ estates in purchase prices have been arrived at
by deducting departmental values of improvements on the sold leases from the sale price where the latter was for land
and improvements only. None of the New South Wales cases cited represents a “ walk-in-walk-out ” sale. (Questions
382 U-5.)
314. We also invite attention to tlie Departmental return relating to Valuations,
Assessments, Collection, and Suspension of Tax on Crown Leaseholds which appears as Appendix
No. 111. of this Report.
315. This return shows that tax has been collected upon owners’ valuations, in many
instances, as well as upon Departmental Check Valuations.
316. Even though it may be found necessary in the light of our several recommendations
to revise many of the existing valuations and assessments the work of valuation of Crown leaseholds
already carried out by the Department affords, in our opinion, strong presumptive evidence that
the task set by the Act in relation to the assessment of Crown leaseholds is not an impossible one.
317. In the course of correspondence the following official opinions have been expressed
upon the question as to whether buyers would be forthcoming if large pastoral leasehold areas
were offered for sale as freehold on reasonable terms and conditions.
The Under Secretary, Department of Public Lands, Brisbane, wrote under date Bth October,
1924-
No land can now be sold in Queensland on freehold tenure, but if the freehold of sheep country were offered for
sale at the present time on reasonable terms and conditions, it would be readily sold.
The Under Secretary, Department of Lands and Survey, Perth, wrote under date 3rd
October, 1924
I beg to inform you that there is no provision in the Land Act of this State to enable the Government to submit
any land held under pastoral lease publicly as freehold, nor does the Act allow private offers to be received for the purchase
of any pastoral lease as freehold. Under the circumstances, it is impossible for me to reply to the question asked in
paragraph 3 of your letter of the Bth idem with any degree of certainty, but there is no doubt that if the land were
submitted for sale on reasonable terms and at a suitable price, buyers would be forthcoming.
PUBLICATION OF LAND TAX OFFICE ORDERS.
318. We invite attention to Section XXIX. (Office Orders) of the Fourth (Land Tax) Report
of the Royal Commission on Taxation, which appears as Appendix No. VI.
We understand the Taxation Department has printed and made available to the public
Land Tax Orders issued since the publication of that Report in 1922, thus in part giving effect
to the recommendations contained in the section referred to.


ACKNOWLEDGMENTS.
We desire to appreciatively acknowledge the courteous and willing assistance given us
in the course of our inquiry by the Commissioner of Taxation and other Departmental Officers.
The labour involved in the preparation of evidence returns and other official data called
for by us has been considerable, and in every instance there was an evident disposition to facilitate
our investigations.
We also desire to thank the Solicitor-General of the Commonwealth (Sir Robert Garran)
for his helpful guidance on the several matters referred to him for opinion.
In addition, grateiul acknowledgment of courteous help is due to many correspondents
throughout Australia, both official and private, to Mr. J. L. Menzies, who was originally
appointed Secretary to the Commission, but who was almost immediately transferred to other
official duties, and to Mr. H. C. Brown, who has since acceptably filled the position.
We have the honour to be,
Your Excellency’s most obedient servants,
W. W ARREN KERR, Chairman.
M. B. DUFFY.
12th December, 1924.


APPENDIX I.
QUESTIONNAIRE.— ROYAL COMMISSION ON THE VALUATION FOR TAXATION OF CROWN
LEASEHOLDS.
1. State particulars of your experience in valuing country lands and pastoral properties, and the States in.
which your experience was gained.
2. What has been the length of your service as valuer for the Taxation Department ?
3. Describe the methods which have been adopted by you in valuing pastoral properties—freehold and leasehold.
State clearly as to each of these methods whether (a) it is, as it stands, correct and reliable; (&) in what way and for
what reason it is not reliable; (c) would any modification —and if so what—make one of these quite reliable.
4. In the valuation of pastoral properties for purposes other than taxation does the practice of outside valuers
differ materially from the methods laid down in the departmental rules (Order 816) ? If the answer is in the
affirmative, state what in your opinion are the chief points of variance.
5. In the sale of Crown leasehold properties as going concerns, is it your experience that a definite value is
attributed to the goodwill by both parties to the transaction. If so, how is that value arrived at ?
6. If in your opinion reliable inference as to value can be deduced from the estimates or proved return from
the subject lands, what rate of interest on capital might be reasonably looked for by a purchaser of Crown leaseholds.
On what do you base your opinion 1
7. In determining the unimproved value of land held under lease from the Crown, are tnere in your opinion
factors other than those mentioned in Order 816 which should be taken into account. If so, what are they .
8. When average net returns are used as a factor in valuing Crown leasehold land, what period should be taken
to arrive at the average ?
9. State what in your opinion are the principal factors in the determination of the unimproved value of pastoral
land, in the order of their importance.
10. What in your opinion are the advantages and disadvantages of the method of arriving at the value of
Crown leasehold land by capitalizing the average of average net returns at an agreed upon percentage as compared
with the method prescribed under Order 816 ? Is it your opinion that this method would ensure equitable taxation .
11. Define what is, in your mind, the exact meaning of the term “ Comparable Land.” In your opinion, to what
extent may there be divergence between subject and basic land before they cease to be comparable for practicable
purposes ?
12. The following method has been proposed for determining the actual freehold value of leasehold land,
viz. :
(1) Ascertain the “ carrying capacity ”of the land. . , ,
(2) If the “ carrying capacity ” is less or more than one sheep to the acre, assuming for the time that the
property under consideration is similar in every way to standard property, then the standard value
per acre for sheep to the acre country must be decreased or increased in accordance with the same.
(3) The value thus arrived at must now be further decreased or increased according to the variation of
the property under consideration, from the property used as the standard.
(4) In this connexion the comparison should be made as to the variation in
(a) Situation with regard to natural advantages, such as river frontage, &c.
(&) Situation with regard to distance from market, &c.
(c) Situation with regard to removing stock in time of drought.
(d) Rainfall.
(e) Liability to drought, fire and flood.
(f) Character of the soil and feed thereon.
( g ) Size of property to be held for profitable use.
(h) Number and character, and improvements to be maintained.
( i) Taxation if the property is aggregated with other lands. i .
( j ) Existence of vermin and noxious weeds, and the necessity of keeping them under subjection..
(1c) Obtaining and maintaining a water supply.
( l) Cost of materials for improvements and other goods that may be required.
(m) The difficulty in obtaining a suitable supply of competent labour.
(n) Area to be worked to provide the pasture per sheep.
(o) Workings, expenses, and other outgoings. t ,
(p) The risks to which the capital invested in the business is subject, and the returns to be
expected on the capital.
(q) The competition among buyers for large areas as against smaller ones.
Do you consider the foregoing method accurate and complete \ If not, correct and supplement it.
13. What method do you consider should be adopted in valuing leaseholds under which the Crown has the
right of resumption as to separate parts at varying dates ? -


APPENDIX II.
METHOD OF VALUATION OF PASTORAL CROWN LEASEHOLD LAND ADOPTED IN THE
SEVERAL STATES.
New South Wales.
8 ’ as States, Crown leasehold land has been treated as freehold in order to arrive at the unimproved
value The value has been arrived at in exactly the same way as freehold, sales of comparable sold lands being taken
as a basis, and values deduced therefrom in accordance with the instructions contained in General Order 816, due
allowance being made for any disadvantages such as distance from rail head, cost of droving, situation with regard
to distance from market, &c., including removal of stock in time of drought, &c.
The method of arriving at the unimproved value of a sold property is illustrated by the following
21,000 acres at 60s. —purchase price £63 000 0 0
Improvements— / *"* *
Fencing £4, 180 plus 5 per cent. 1J years .. .. .. .. £4,441 5 0
Timber treatment £11,210 plus 5 per cent. 4 years .. .. .. 13,452 0 0
Clearing £6OO plus 5 per cent, one year, structural £3,425 plus 5 per cent,
one year .. .. .. .. .. .. .. 4,226 5 0
nl x . £22,119 10 0
A\ per cent, four years (£63,000—£22,119 10s., £40,880 10s.) ~ .. 4,088 1 0
26,207 11 0
Unimproved value .. .. .. .. # £3q 799 g q
The valuer ascertains from the data available particulars of stock actually carried on the property with a view
of arriving at its correct carrying capacity. The average value of a number of comparable sold properties is then
applied to the leasehold, the carrying capacity of which will have also been obtained by the valuer ; in arriving at
the value of the leasehold the valuer is required to take into consideration all possible disabilities under which it may
suffer as compared with the basic sales. ' J
The method above referred to is the only method which has actually been applied. There have been no
variations although certain investigation work has been carried out in connexion with the proposal to use net returns
from the land as a basis of valuation.
Queensland.
W' V T \ e g eneral principle adopted in Queensland before G.O. 816 was issued, was to fix a standard of valuation
from sales or comparable land, and established values from valuations issued by the Taxation Department and
accepted by the owners. In the case of pastoral holdings the comparison was made from the fair average normal
carrying capacity of the land ; and the eatage value per beast area was determined for certain localities, deductions
being made for droving, trucking, carnage, &c., which was left to the discretion of the valuers, as a valuer’s problem
to determine m the locality. In many instances these valuations were check values from known normal agistment
rates capitalized at 5 per cent, to find the improved value from which was deducted the fair value of the improvements
m their state of preservation as at date of valuation, plus 5 per cent, extra for the period it was considered would
be required to effect them if they were non-existent.
2. Some variation was permitted in cases where it was considered that valuers could best ascertain their
comparison from established unimproved sales of unimproved land, instead of sales from land improved, and in these
cases it was customary for the valuers to make an allowance in the reduced carrying capacity to the extent that thev
considered the improvements had increased the capacity above the normally improved country.
In some instances where the lands were situated in very remote parts of the State and valuations were urgently
required (e.g., when runs had been sold and the vendors desired an assessment) tentative valuations were applied
which were based on State Lands Department reports and official stock returns or on the number of stock declared
m the sales, on an annual agistment rate capitalized at 5 per cent, simple interest.
, r T 4 :,. r f hc eata B c rates referred to above which represented the value of a sheep or beast area reflected the land
tax liability as existing at the dates of the various sale transactions employed, which sales were effected prior to 1914
Values arrived at under this method were adopted for years 1914 onward to 1917, as there were no further comparable
sales of pastoral freeholds m Western Queensland from which a basis for the later years could be obtained Bv
a opting these uniform valuations for the years in question no other factors affecting values such as variations in
gross returns or increased land taxation had been taken into account, nor was the size of a parcel of and allowed to
influence its per acre value either as an original or an accumulation of titles treated as one parcel,
values '* Sn , ' SeC|Uent to 1917 P rov i slon s of General Order 816 were applied in arriving at unimproved land
6. This order provided for the valuation in the first instance of Crown leasehold land on a freehold basis, by
comparison with sold freehold lands, comparison to be measured by relative earning powers. The difficulty of
makmg such a comparison became apparent when values were required for years subsequent to the sales before
referred to, for these transactions did not reflect the altered conditions existing in later years. A further difficulty
presented itself as a result of the inability to obtain net profits for a longer period than five years prior to 1914 and
m some instances reference had to be made to income tax returns in the absence of other records In view of the
above the Commissioner directed that a comparison of net profits of subject and basic lands could only be made on the
period ending 1914, and where no net profits were available on subject land, the average of average net profits for the
district could be applied to individual properties for the purpose of comparison with basic lands
F. 17208.—5


7. The Commissioner further directed that valuations thus arrived at for 30th June., 1914, should be applied
for years subsequent to 1914 (where no comparable sales for the latter years are available) unless there was some
other factor of a permanent nature which should be taken into consideration, such as the State Land Tax in Queensland
and the increases in the Federal Land Tax. The only advantage which is permitted of any increase in net profits
would be as a set-off against any increase in the costs of improvements. The weight of taxation as affecting land
values has been measured by a formula furnished by the Commissioner.
8. On the 30th August, 1923, the Commissioner directed that valuations of Crown leases be made by the
capitalization at 8 per cent, of the average of average net profits.
9. At a Conference in Brisbane on 7th May, 1924, the Commissioner was advised that the average of average
net returns taken on sold freehold sheep properties to 30th June, 1914, showed 9 per cent, on the capital invested,
these properties were all favorably situated in an attractive portion of the State, and the capitalization of their own
net profits at 8 per cent, would result in a higher value than the purchase price, and a higher rate of capitalization
than 8 per cent, was recommended to him for application, more particularly for properties remotely situated. The
Commissioner decided that the rate of capitalization should be 10 per cent, throughout.
10. These instructions have been carried out as far as possible until receipt of the Commissioner’s instructions
suspending operations pending the report of the Royal Commission.
South Australia.
1. In July, 1915, a start was made to value these leases—Departmental Order No. 816 not being then in
existence. In 1915 the local Deputy Commissioner considered that the best method of valuation was to proceed
from the conclusions of values to be d-awn from certain known sales of pastoral properties in 1911-1912. These
sales were of two stations, (1) Culnina, and (2) Outalpa. These pastoral properties were of very great extent, and
were sold in subdivision.
2. The lands to be valued were approximately in three districts, viz. :
(1) North-Eastern (sheep).
(2) Northern (sheep or cattle —mainly cattle).
(3) Western (sheep).
The Culnina and Outalpa sales were in the North-Eastern district and being adjacent to the railway (Adelaide
to Broken Hill) were considered particularly useful for the purpose of deducing conclusions as to values under the
most favorable conditions, i.e., at a rail head.
3. The district valuers inspected the properties. They took the sale value as the proved capital value —-
adding to the sale value certain amounts, being liabilities to the Crown taken over by the buyer. Note.—These
liabilities were the amounts owing to the Crown for Crown interests in improvements on leasehold lands.) The
valuers valued the tangible improvements, and included in such value an allowance for interest on the constructive
cost of such improvements, i.e., structural improvements in the nature of buildings, fences, and water. The valuers
also estimated the total amount of interest which would be lost to the buyer on the capital outlay during the period
necessary to bring the unimproved land to the improved condition at the date of sale—i.e., an allowance for what is
known in Departmental Land Tax Order 816 as “ measure of expectation.” From the adjusted capital value as
abovementioned, the valuers deducted the value of the tangible improvements, plus the “ measure of expectation,”
and the balance or residue was deemed to be the unimproved value of the land, and was expressed at so much per
acre or square mile.
4. At the same time as the calculations abovementioned, the valuers, as practical men having a knowledge of
the sheep pastoral business, estimated on the spot what in their opinion was the annual profit per sheep.
5. North-Eastern District. —Being possessed of the deduced unimproved value (i.e., as leaseholds) per acre or
square mile of the Culnina and Outalpa properties, the same valuers proceeded to value the other properties in the
North-Eastern district. The “ other ” properties were inspected for the precise purpose of making comparisons with
Culnina and Outalpa under the headings of (a) carrying capacity, (b) marketing facilities, and (c) water facilities—
with special reference not only to existing water, but to respective prospects of water supplies. (Note. —At this
time no valuation for the improvements on the “ other ” properties was made, the valuers concerning themselves
with a calculation of the unimproved value of the “ other ” properties, and basing such valuation upon a direct
comparison of the three features mentioned above, i.e., carrying capacity, marketing facilities, and water facilities.)
6. Officially the valuers were not instructed to make for the “ other ” subject properties an estimate of the
annual profit per sheep as they had been instructed to make for the Culnina and Outalpa properties, but although
there is no direct evidence in the reports of the valuers, it is understood that they did make for the “ other ”
properties an estimate of the annual profit per sheep and used such estimates in checking the results arrived at after
measuring the comparisons mentioned above.
7. The values as determined above were adopted in the assessments and generally speaking have either been
objected to or appealed against. In certain cases, and subsequent to the inspections above, further inspections were
made to determine the value of the improvements, using the Departmental Land Tax Order 816 for necessary rules.
8. Northern District. —Following the actions as to the North-Eastern district as abovementioned, a valuer
was specially selected for his knowledge of pastoral properties (sheep and cattle). This valuer, having absorbed
from the reports of the North-Eastern valuers their standards of unimproved value and annual profit per sheep,
proceeded to a certain station in the Northern district known as “ Wilgena.” This valuer had been the manager
and subsequently the owner of “ Wilgena ” Station, and acting on such knowledge he determined for the Wilgena
station (a) the unimproved value per square mile, and (6) the annual profit per sheep. Working from the
Wilgena results or standards, and proceeding on the same lines as used by the North-Eastern valuers, this valuer
made a valuation of the unimproved value of the Northern district, i.e., concerning himself with unimproved value
only, and making no valuation of improvements. These values were carried into assessments, and generally speaking
were either objected to or appealed against.
9. Western District. —For the Western district, the same Northern valuer, using the same information as
deduced from Wilgena as abovementioned, valued certain of the more Northern lands of the Western district. The
remaining lands in the Western district were valued by one of the North-Eastern valuers, using his Culnina and
Outalpa standards, and his other valuations in the North-Eastern district, together with the particular knowledge
gained by him as an owner of pastoral properties in the Western district. Each of these two valuers concerned
himself with only the unimproved value, making no valuation of the improvements. These values were carried
into assessments, and generally speaking were either objected to or appealed against.


10. Re Capitalizing of net returns. —For certain taxpayers the details have been taken out under the heading
of average annual net returns. No valuations, however, have been made on this basis, nor have any conferences been
held with taxpayers with a view to settlement of objections and appeals on this basis.
11. Re Curnamona appeal case, Supreme Court, S.A. (1917). —In connexion with the general question of valuing
pastoral leases, it is perhaps proper to mention that in this State there has been one important appeal, i.e., Curnamona
pastoral station. This station is situated in the North-Eastern district, as mentioned above, and was valued (as
above mentioned) on the basis of the Culnina and Outalpa standards. The Judge rejected the Department’s valuation,
and substituted a valuation based on the capitalizing factor, but stated that he would have been prepared to use a
capitalizing factor as high as 12| per cent. The case is also noteworthy in that the Judge definitely rejected as
evidence the Culnina and Outalpa sales, basing his rejection on the irrelevancy of those sales. In short, the Judge
apparently considered that the true principle of valuing the Curnamona property was the capitalizing of the annual
net returns.
Western Australia.
Lands the subject of pastoral leases were valued after consideration of sales of land in the freehold areas#
and the returns that these lands might be expected to yield. The values applied to the districts containing the
pastoral leases are on such a basis that each property may be expected to return 10 per cent, per annum of the capital
freehold value fixed by the Department.
Tasmania.
1. Departmental valuations have been made in this State without variation on one basis only, viz. :
s. d.
First class .. .. .. .. .. .. 10 0 per acre.
Second class .. .. .. .. .. 7 6 „ „
Third class .. .. .. .. .. 5 0 „ „
2. This basis of valuation was adopted after full consideration by the valuers and upon the advice of the
Lands Department, which divides the leasehold lands into the three classes mentioned.
3. Leaseholds in this State consist entirely of extremely poor lands, so much so that, although available for
purchase, they have not been found to be sufficiently attractive to be selected.
4. In most cases the leasehold land is held in conjunction with freeholdings. It is situated chiefly in remote
and mountainous localities, and its value is practically restricted to the owners of the freehold land in connexion with
which it is used.
5. The amount of tax attributable to the Crown leasehold estate is under £2OO. The approximate total area
of Crown leases held by taxpayers is 339,000 acres, the total leasehold estate being about £23,000.
6. All valuations on account of Crown leaseholds so far as this State is concerned have been finalized and
assessments made and accepted by taxpayers.


APPENDIX No. III.
DEPARTMENTAL RETURN RELATING TO VALUATIONS, ASSESSMENTS, COLLECTION AND SUSPENSION OF TAX ON CROWN LEASEHOLDS.
Question.
Central and Victoria.
New South Wales.
Queensland.
South Australia.
Western Australia.
Tasmania.
No. 1. — Were all original as-
sessments made on owners’
valuations
With few exceptions Crown leases were included
in original assessments on owners’ values if
there were any estate on such values
All original assessments were not made on owners’ values
No
No. Substantially the assessments have been made
solely on departmental valuations
All original assess-
ments in respect oJ
Crown leases were
made on depart-
mental check
valuations
No
No. 2. — Were any assessments
made by the Commissioner
in respect of any leases re-
turned by owner as being
non-taxable
Yes. In many cases there was no leasehold
estate on owners’ values, but the application of
departmental valuation made the leases tax-
able
Some assessments made in respect of leases returned by owner
as being non-taxable
Yes
Yes. In majority of cases the leases were returned
by owners as of little or no unimproved value
Yes. Several owners
included Crown
leases but showed
no values. Upon
check valuation
being applied the
leases were pro-
bably taxable
Taxpayers rarely
showed any
value to these
leaseholds, leav-
ing it to the
Department to
fix a value
No. 3. — In respect of what
years was tax collected and
on what basis —
(a) Owners’ valuations
(b) Default assessments
(c) Departmental check
valuations
Tax was collected —•
(a) On owners’ valuations for all years
1914-22
(b) On default assessment only to the extent
of the tax on an equal amount to a lease-
hold estate based on previous return
values
(c) On departmental check valuation on
assessments issued prior to application
of direction to suspend tax issued on 15th
March, 1918. The years affected were —
1914-15, approximately 27 per cent, of
tax on departmental valuations col-
lected ; 1915-16, approximately 10 per
cent, of tax on departmental valua-
tion collected ; 1916-17, approximately
21 per cent, of tax on departmental
valuation collected
Number of Cases where Tax is Outstanding and Tax has been Paid.
Tax was collect*
was also colie
;d on the basis of owners’ valuations for the years 1914-15, 1915-16, and 1916-17. Tax
eted on departmental check valuations for the same years. In both cases the collections
respect of assessments which were issued prior to the end of March, 1918. While tax
espect of these years, there is, nevertheless, some tax outstanding for the same years,
or these years were made before and after March, 1918, when instructions were received
n lease taxation payments. There is evidence of some default assessments having been
Collection of Tax on Specified Basis.
(a) Nil ..
(b) Nil
| (c) All assessments
| iued on check
values, and up to
end of 1921 no
(a) Departmental
check valua-
tions all years
to 1922-23
Default Assessments.
Departmental
Check
Valuations.
collected in r
Assessments i
to defer Crow
Year.
Owners’
Valuations.
Default
Assessments.
Departmental
Check
Valuations.
Year.
Paid.
Out-
standing.
Paid.
Out-
standing .
Paid
Out-
standing!
Paid.
Out-
standing
issued ana tax having been collected tor iyio-io and iyit>-17. it is a difficult matter now to trace
default assessments prior to 19th June, 1916, because before the issue of Land Tax Order No. 796
it was not the practice to indicate on assessments that they were default ones when such was the case
Assessed.
Paid.
Assessed :
Paid.
Assessed 1
Paid.
notice of suspen-
sion was given
1914-
1915-
1916-
1917-
1918-
1919-
1920-
1921-
1922-
Total
£
39
28
£
Nil
19
£
”3
18
97
11
40
22
£
3
18
97
Nil
1
Nil
£
7,195
7,019
5,183
3,793
3,848
3,738
3,717
3,130
1,483
£
7,103
6,126
3,656
2,030
459
652
383
131
39
1914-
1915-
1916-
1917-
1918-
1919-
1920-
1921-
1922-
284
297
270
256
245
258
234
234
178
12
13
15
22
23
27
44
45
108
3
6
4
5
9
2
2
2
3
1
1
1
1
2
8
6
9
19
10
3
2
4
10
9
20
20
12
11
4
1
90
87
117
101
85
92
51
35
27
67
80
113
138
160
162
177
170
90
Number of Assessments which Issued on Owners’ Valuations and
Departmental Check Valuations.
67
19
191
119
39,106
20,579
X
Year.
Owners’
Valuations.
Departmental
Check
Valuations.
1914-
1915-
1916-
1917-
1918-
1919-
1920-
1921-
1922-
296
310
285
278
268
285
279
279
286
157
167
230
239
245
254
228
206
117
1914- .. 9
1915- .. 24
1916- .. 19
Default Assessments.
1917- .. 34
1918- .. 49
1919- .. 24
1920- .. 17
1921- .. 9
1922- .. 5
No. 4.—Upon what date was
collection of tax suspended,
was suspension general
throughout Australia, and
has suspension of collection
been continuous
t
Direction to suspend tax was given on 15th
March, 1918, since which date suspension has
been continuous
• •
From 23rd March, 1918, to 12th May, 1922, in all assessments
issued, including Crown leases on departmental values
increasing owners’ values, taxpayers were informed that
additional tax due to departmental valuation might be de-
ferred pending further notification. From 12th May, 1922,
until 12th December, 1923, taxpayers were informed that
whole of amount of tax due to inclusion of Crown leases
(whether on owners’ or departmental values) may be deferred.
From 12th December, 1923, to present, in any assessment
which issued on departmental valuation increasing owners’
values, taxpayers were informed that additional tax due
departmental valuation may be deferred pending further
notification
Collection of tax was suspended from the end of March, 1918, so far as the extra tax was due to depart-
mental valuations applied to Crown leaseholds. The Assistant Commissioner’s instructions in Land
Tax Order No. 854 were interpreted as having the intention of deferring the increase of tax resultant
upon the departmental .valuation compared with the owners’ valuation. However, in May, 1922, the
Commissioner by memorandum, No. M.229/15, directed that all Crown leasehold tax should be deferred.
From about the middle of May, 1922, suspension of payment of tax, due to the inclusion of Crown
leases in assessments, has been continuous
April, 1919, suspension continuous since that date..
Practically whole of
assessments on
Crown leases is-
sued up to and
including 1921-22
without reference
to suspension.
The letter allowing
suspension of pay-
ment accom-
panied the last of
1921-22 and whole
of 1922-23 assess-
ments
Tax was never
suspended
No. 5. —’Have default or other
assessments been issued to
protect the Department up
to termination of Act
Yes. Departmental valuations of Crown leases
has not yet been applied to assessments for
1922-23
Default and other assessments have been issued to protect the
Department up to termination of Act
Generally yes. The Department has also been protected by the non-inclusion of leasehold interests in
some assessments, and thereby is not at a disadvantage by reason of section 21 (2) of the Land Tax
Assessment Act
Yes. Either departmental or owners’ values have
been calculated (and where tax results have
issued) in all cases; revision of these assessments
is in course
Original assessments
have issued against
all taxpayers
owning Crown
leases
Original assess-
ments
No. 6. —’Has a general inti-
mation of suspension of col-
lection been made to all
taxpayers and that payment
need not be made for the
present
Where departmental valuation has been applied
in Crown leases the taxpayer has received an
intimation that tax need not be paid until
further advised
A general intimation was not given taxpayers, but, as assessments
issued, each taxpayer was notified of amount of tax whiph
might remain in suspense
Yes. Subject to the modification set out in answer to No. 4
Yes, by special notice, i.e., an explanatory letter with
each assessment. First suspension in April, 1919 ;
continuous since that date
Yes. Intimation of
suspension given in
last cases of 1921-
22 assessment and
whole of 1922-23
assessment
No. All tax has
been paid
\ '
No. 7.—What are the circum-
stances in respect of holding
back appeal cases or cases at
the instance of —
(а) the Department
(б) the taxpayer
(a) When an appeal is lodged taxpayer is asked to
defer action pending determination of the
basis of valuation of Crown leases
(b) If a taxpayer requests that action be deferred
such is agreed to
(a) Nil
(b) Four cases held over at taxpayer’s request to await Govern-
ment’s decision
(a) The Department has not pursued action in relation to appeals, because of the unsettled basis of
Crown lease valuations
( b ) The indeterminate attitude of the Department as to basis of valuation which is known to taxpayers
has influenced their attitude. A typical example of the attitude is expressed in the following com-
munication from a taxpayer “ I should be obliged if you would kindly hold the appeal over in
regard to the freehold value placed by you on the leased lands, pending the decision of the
Government in reference to the method of valuing Crown leases for taxation purposes ”
Generally most of the cases cannot be said to have
been held back specifically at the instance of either
the Department or taxpayers, but were held up by
•inaction of both parties, such inaction arising from
a tacit understanding to await developments
No appeals held back,
for either of rea-
sons stated
None held back
No. 8.—To what extent and for
what period departmental
check valuations have been
made
Primary.
Secondary.
Total.
Number of Departmental Check Valuations applied to Assessments
in each of Periods —
Number of Departmental Check Valuations applied to Assessments
in each of Periods —
Number of Assessments made on Owners’
Valuations of Leases
which were not altered because —
Number of Departmental Check Valuations applied to
Assessments in each of Periods —
Number of
Departmental Check
Valuations
applied to Assessments
in each of Periods.
Assess-
ments.
Check
Valua-
tions
applied.
Assess-
ments.
Check
Valua-
tions
applied.-
Assess-
ments.
Check
Valuations
applied.
excluding
Secondary
Interests.
2. (a) Prior to Date
of fssue of
G.O. 816 in 1917.
(b) Between Date of
Issue of
G.O. 816 in 1917 and
Date of
First Suspension of
Tax in 1918.
(c) Since Date of
Suspension of
Tax in 1918 up to
present Date.
2. (a) Prior to Date
of Issue of
G.O. 816 in 1917.
(b) Between Date of
Issue of
G.O. 816 in 1917 and
Date of
First Suspension of
Tax in 1918.
(c) Since Date of
Suspension of
Tax in 1918 up to
present Date.
(1) Check Valuations
confirmed
Owner s Values.
(2) Check Valuation
was not made and applied
within Period
of Two Years fixed by
Section 21 of Act.
2. (a) Prior to Date
of Issue of
G.O. 816 in 1917.
(b) Between Date of
Issue of
G.O. 816 in 1917 and
Date of
First Suspension of
Tax in 1918.
(ft) Since Date of
Suspension of
Tax in 1918 up to
present Date.
(а) 72
(б) 101
(c) 1,368
280
531
5,988
43
17
736
Disre-
garded
99
115
118
2,104
280
531
5,988
147 assessments ap-
plied in 65 returns
72 assessments ap-
plied in 34 returns
1,698 assessments
applied in 383
returns
732
340
6,211 (of this num-
ber 125 and 142,
total 267) are on
8 per cent, and 10
per cent, net profit
basis respectively
156
97
118
37
393
All Crown leaseholds
were check valued
prior to issue of
G.O. 816 in 1917
1,541
6,799
796
2,337
6,799
(6) Number of check valuations applied
in assessments and which were
based upon comparison of subject
lands with basic sales without
reference to net returns from either
or both basic sales on subject
lands .. .. .. .. 4,728
Number of check valuations in assess-
ments as result of capitalizing
average net returns at 8 per oent.
dimple interest .. .. 5
Number of check valuations applied
in assessments as result of
capitalizing average net returns at
10 per cent, simple interest .. Nil
Number of check valuations made
from other data .. .. 2,066
Total 6,799
F.17208. —6




APPENDIX IV.
STATEMENT PREPARED FOR THE ROYAL COMMISSION ON THE TAXATION OF CROWN LEASEHOLDS
BY THE COMMISSIONER OF TAXATION OF THE REASONS WHICH CAUSED HIM TO DIRECT
DEPUTY COMMISSIONERS TO ASCERTAIN THE UNIMPROVED VALUE ON A FREEHOLD BASIS
OF PASTORAL LANDS LEASED FROM THE CROWN, BY ASCERTAINING AN AVERAGE NET
RETURN FROM THE LAND AND CAPITALIZING IT AT 10 PER CENT. SIMPLE INTEREST.
“ The principal reasons which led to the adoption of the above-mentioned method of ascertaining the
unimproved value of pastoral land leased from the Crown were :
(1) A conviction that the methods previously adopted by the departmental valuers in New South Wales,
Queensland, and South Australia were generally ineffective for making due allowances for all kinds
of differences which might exist between an “ outback ” leasehold property which was being valued
and the freehold. properties which had been the subject of sale and from which standards of
unimproved value had been deduced for application to the lands being valued.
(2) That there was an absence of sales of comparable freehold lands :
(a) in Queensland after 1914 : and
( b ) in South Australia for all years from 1910 onwards.
Note.—' There have been sales of freehold lands in New South Wales from which it would be
possible to deduce unimproved values which, when suitably modified, might be used as standards
for valuing those leasehold lands which are situated principally about midway between the Eastern
and Western Land Divisions of the State. This result, however, necessarily postulates a satisfactory
measurement of disadvantages of the leasehold lands compared with the standard freehold lands.
(3) The differences between the methods followed in South Australia and those followed in New South Wales,
Queensland, and Western Australia.
(4) The fact that an average of net returns ascertained for a property, assuming average efficient manage-
ment, reflects all the advantages and disadvantages associated with the property.”
The conviction that the methods previously adopted by the departmental valuers in New South Wales,
Queensland and South Australia have been ineffective for making due allowance for the advantages and disadvantages
referred to above, was the result of a number of conferences which I had at various times during the past three of four
years with Senior and District Valuers in the States mentioned on the general subject of valuations for all classes of
land, both freehold and leasehold. These discussions had led me to the belief that District Valuers had not adequately
measured disadvantages, especially of “outback” pastoral properties, either through oversight of essential points,
or on account of the insurmountable difficulties associated with the problem, when its solution was attempted by way
of varying a standard of unimproved value to fit the condition of a subject property. I formed the opinion that the
nature of the difficulties was the principal cause of the apparent ineffective measurement of the disadvantages.
I concluded, therefore, that some more effective method of providing for all contingencies associated with an
“ outback ” pastoral property was necessary so as to arrive at the correct amount which a hypothetical purchaser
could afford to give for the property if he was purchasing it on a freehold basis. It was considered that if pastoral
lands leased from the Crown were thrown open to freehold acquisition, a purchaser would not be likely to base his
purchase price upon the price which other persons may have given for freehold pastoral lands situated in more favored
parts of the State, but rather upon his estimate of what he could afford to give for the land, having regard to its
probable average net returns.
The actual amount of purchase price which a purchaser would give would depend entirely upon his idea of the
percentage which the net returns should bear to invested capital. This percentage would probably vary amongst
the purchasers, but it is probable the variation might not be considerable.
It was considered that, apart from any fortuitous gain, the average net returns of a property under average
efficient management would reflect all the contingencies associated with these pastoral leases and render unnecessary
any further attempt by the Department to measure the capital value of disadvantages for deduction from the standard
unimproved value of sold properties far removed from the subject land.
Therefore, given a satisfactory percentage which the average net returns might be regarded as bearing to invested
capital, the calculation of an unimproved value of the land on a freehold basis would present no difficulties.
Before this method of arriving at an unimproved value on a freehold basis was adopted, very many discussions
took place within the Department regarding—
(а) the practicability of obtaining an average net return for a pastoral property ; and
(б) the rate per cent, at which the net return should be capitalized.
In regard to the net returns, the Queensland and South Australian Branches of the Department made special
investigations of pastoralists’ books in a number of cases, and in some, the actual net returns were obtained for a number
of years past. The periods of years varied according to the state of the accounts ; they ranged from about five years
up to fifteen years in one case.
In other instances it was not possible to ascertain the net returns as the particular properties were being. worked
in conjunction with other lands, although they were separated from them by considerable distances. In those'cases
the average net returns were estimated on the assumption that the subject lands were being treated as separate and
distinct pastoral properties put to their own particular best use without reference to any other peoperty.
In regard to the rate per cent, at which average net returns should be capitalized, I would refer the Royal
Commission to my memorandum addressed to the Treasurer in which I state, that I first selected 8 per cent, as the
basis of this capitalization on account of information which I had gathered from one or two representative quarters,
as to what might be reasonably regarded as a fair percentage return on capital invested in freehold pastoral properties.


Verbal and tentative instructions had been given to Deputy Commissioners in Queensland, New South Wales
and South Australia to prepare to arrive at unimproved values by the capitalization of net returns at 8 per cent, simple
interest, and these instructions were confirmed by a written direction issued on 29th October, 1923.
Soon afterwards it became apparent that the Department would be called upon by some lessee taxpayers to defend
its assessments in the Court, and steps were taken to make a close analysis of all evidence in support of both the net
returns adopted as a basis, and the rate per cent, at which they should be capitalized.
This analysis caused Deputy Commissioners in Queensland and South Australia to draw attention to the fact
that 8 per cent, simple interest could not apparently be fully supported by evidence which the Department had to put
before the Court. This evidence indicated that the net returns of the properties being dealt with required to be
capitalized at approximately 10 per cent, simple interest.
It was also represented by the Acting Deputy Commissioner for South Australia that all appeals against South
Australian assessments of Crown leaseholds would be made to the Supreme Court of South Australia, and that they
would certainly be decided on similar lines to those followed by Chief Justice Murray in the Curnamona case. In the
circumstances it was felt that so far as South Australian pastoral leases were concerned, there was no alternative to
capitalization of net returns at 10 per cent, simple interest.
A similar position was indicated by the evidence submitted from Queensland.
Seeing that the Commonwealth Constitution forbids the Commonwealth by any Act or Regulation relating to
taxation, to discriminate between States, the circumstances mentioned left no alternative to the adoption of 10 per cent,
simple interest as the rate for capitalization of net returns throughout the Commonwealth.
As previously stated in my evidence, the sales of land in Western Australia which were taken as the standards
of value for valuing other lands in the State, show that the estimated net returns of the sold lands represent 10 per cent,
on the invested capital.
APPENDIX V.
LAND TAX ORDER No. 897.
Commonwealth of Australia.
Federal Commissioner of Taxation,
Post Office Buildings,
Bourke and Elizabeth-streets,
Deputy Federal Commissioner of Taxation. Melbourne, 16th September, 1919.
LAND TAX.
Case : —A taxpayer is the holder of a scrub lease which contains the following onerous conditions :
(a) The lessee shall effectually destroy all noxious scrub or noxious trees on at least one-half (i.e., about
21,500 acres) of the scrub area of about 43,000 acres, and on such parts of such scrub area as the
Minister shall approve ; and shall keep the estimated area of 8,900 acres of good pastoral country
free from all vermin, noxious scrubs, and suckers during the whole term of the lease. All timber
suitable for splitting or sawing shall be carefully preserved.
(b) The work of cleaning shall be commenced by the lessee within three months from this date, and shall
be done systematically on blocks of not less than 100 acres nor less width than 20 chains, and shall
be proceeded with at the rate of not less than 3,000 acres per annum.
(c) The lessee shall, within three months from the commencement of the lease, take such steps as in the
opinion of the Minister are reasonably effective to destroy rabbits and other noxious animals, and
shall continue to do so during the whole term of the lease and any extension thereof.
(d) The lessee shall fence the external boundaries of the lease as near such boundaries as practicable. The
position of such fence shall be approved by an officer of the Department and shall be of the
following description : —A substantial dog-proof and rabbit-proof fence with wire netting attached,
the netting shall be six (6) inches in the ground and three (3) feet out of the ground, and shall be
of 12| inch mesh and 17 gauge ; panels are to be 16 feet with one batten and the netting shall be
firmly attached to two (2) No. 8 black wires. Two (2) barbed wires shall be securely fixed above
the netting. The fence shall be 4 feet 6 inches high. All subdivision fences where necessary shall
be of the same description or of such a character as to effectively serve the purposes of a subdivision
fence.
The expenditure on these conditions for a period of seventeen years has been £8,831 or an average of £519 per
annum and the question has been raised whether the £519 should be added to the reserved rent for the purpose of
applying section 28 (3) (6) proviso.
Decision :—
G.O. 753 refers to scrub selections in Queensland which contain conditions that the selectors shall ring-bark
and destroy growing timber, the cost being deemed to be in lieu of rent except during the last ten years of the currency
of the lease.
The Order lays down the rule that in cases of this nature the total cost to 30th June then last past of the
operations referred to should be ascertained and an average annual expenditure for the expired period of the
lease should be regarded as the rent reserved by the lease and payable at 30th June last past.
The principle of this Order should be applied in these cases.
R. EWING,
Commissioner of Taxation.


APPENDIX VI.
SECTION XXIX. OF FOURTH (LAND TAX) REPORT OF THE ROYAL COMMISSION ON TAXATION.
OFFICE ORDERS.
724. In our Third Report, pages 170-1, we drew attention to the fact that the numerous Office Orders relating
to the Commonwealth Income Tax Assessment Act had not yet been codified and made available to taxpayers, and
we recommended the publication of those Orders for the benefit of the public at the earliest possible moment. The
reasons which justify the public issue of the Office Orders in the case of the Commonwealth Income Tax Assessment
Act apply with equal force to the publication of Office Orders issued under the Land Tax Assessment Act. A large
number of these Orders have been made available to the Commission, and were of considerable assistance to us in our
detailed study of the Act. Our examination of them confirms the view expressed by a number of witnesses, that the
publication of the Orders would be in the public interest. Many of the Orders, as supplied to us, contain the names
of the taxpayers upon whose cases the Orders were based. These names should in our opinion be deleted before
publication of the Orders. Our recommendations (paragraph 590, Third Report) in respect of Income Tax Office
Orders, appear to us appropriate also in respect of the Orders issued under the Land Tax Assessment Act.
725. We therefore recommend, in respect of the Orders issued and to be issued under the Land Tax Assessment
Act:—
(1) That the existing body of Office Orders affecting the general practice of the Department be published
at the earliest possible moment, and be offered for sale to the public at a moderate cost.
(2) That all such Office Orders subsequently issued be made accessible to taxpayers as soon as issued.
(3) That, with a view to securing wide publicity, the daily press in each capital city be furnished with
copies of all such Office Orders as soon as issued.
(4) That all .such Office Orders be purchasable at each Commonwealth Taxation Office at a moderate cost.
(5) That facilities be provided free of charge at each Commonwealth Taxation Office for the perusal by
taxpayers of all such Office Orders as are operative.
(6) That all such Office Orders be made to apply to all assessments affected thereby relating to the current
year of assessment.
(7) That, when the volume of Office Orders is published, a public notification be made that within twelve
months from the date of publication (or such further period as the Commissioner mav allow) any
taxpayer may apply for an alteration of his assessment for any previous year, where the application
is based upon an Office Order the contents of which were not available to the taxpayer at the time
of the original assessment.
(8) That, to where a claim for refund of tax would be apparently sustainable under any Office
Order which has been cancelled before the publication of the volume of Orders, for twelve months
after the publication of that volume, such cancelled Orders shall be available for perusal by
taxpayers at the Taxation Office in each capital city and that during that period taxpayers shall
have the same right of application for alteration of their assessment for any previous year arising
out of the provisions of any such 4»».thgy would have in respect of published (current)
Orders. nr
Printed and Published for the Government of the Commonwealth of Australia by H. J. Green, Government
Printer for the State of Victoria.


