

REPORT
On Exploration of a Portion of Central
Australia by the Barclay-Macpherson
Expedition, 1904-1905
Captain HENRY
VERB BARCLAY.
(With a Sketch Plan)
Reprinted from the Proceedings of the Royal Geographical
Society of Australasia, South Australian Branch.
Adelaide
J. L. Bonython & Co.. Printers, “ The Advertiser " Office, King William Street




Report on Exploration of a Portion of Central
Australia by the Barclay-Macpherson Expedition
1904-1905.
By Henry Verb Barclay.
In the South-Eastern corner of the Northern Territory,
abutting Queensland on the East and South Australia on
the South, is a large tract of country abounding in high sand
ridges, which generally run in a south-easterly and north-
westerly direction, and which have baffled all attempts to
cross from east to west or west to east. The object of the
Barclay-Macpherson Expedition was to cross from the west
side and zig-zag the country, in the hope of finding some
traces of the long-lost Leichhardt Expedition, as it is well-
known that Leichhardt intended crossing the continent from
east to west, also to ascertain whether a practicable watered
route exists between Charlotte Waters and a point on the
Queensland border, north of Birdsville.
The party was equipped by Mr. Ronald Maepherson.
and included Captain H, Y. Barclay (Leader and Surveyor)
and Messrs, R. Maepherson , Edgar Langley, D. 5.0., and T,
Miller. Camels were lent by the South Australian Govern-
ment.
Captain Barclay’s journal is not available, but the fol-
lowing statements were made by him to the South Austra-
lian Government and to this society. The reports now printed
will give the reader a general idea of the country traversed
by the Expedition in the region referred to.
With the exception of a small portion at Dalhousie, the
country now described is hounded on the south by Latitude
2G, on the west by the Overland Telegraph, on the north by
Latitude 22, and on the east by the Queensland border, thus
comprising an area of about 70,000 square miles, or forty-
four million eight hundred thousand acres.


4- Emm* ON.HXH.OBAMON OP A PORTION OP OHKTRAL AUSTRALIA.
ml „ Ac . c ° rdl “S to a map prepared for the Royal Geogranhi
cal Society of Australia, S.A. Branch, about thirty-two S
hon acies of this area remained unexplored at the time the
work now reported upon was commenced.
REPORT MADE TO THE GOVERNMENT.
Dalhousie Springs.
of a lo !' Da 1 lll ° usie T) p astoral Lease about 75
nnes noithwaul of Oodnadatta Railway-station „
Pm-g y es g “nd b WoodS Ck q Vitll at Willow Wcll > Three
j 0S) Wo °dgate Swamp m most seasons tlim-P-i-v™
vMi "
itSSZSs?** the *>■“ " »»
At Dalhousie there are natural Thermal in
less variety, Artesian water fresh from the hS, Z X
able size°S gS'deptlf 011 1 ° f sp f ngs are of consider-
large bubbles constantly rise to the surfaced P ?- lnt ’ V liere
. After many personal trials I can affirm +i In +
singularly refreshing, hot though it ma^^d
artatt
bord^Tby I °* tepi f w,to
spreading itself fver a wMe flattho™™?, *7 ' 6ntually


greatly appreciated by the Dalhousie herds, and doubtless
accounts for the high reputation the beef has for succulent
tenderness.
Near some of the springs Date Palms were planted by
some early benefactor of humanity and now bear _ fruit,
which, notwithstanding being uneared for and subject to
the molestations of birds and aborigines, was still appre-
ciated by myself and other members of the party.
In view of the success of these isolated examples, it
seems possible that date-growing in this locality would prove
remunerative. In Egypt, under less favorable conditions,
dates are a source of income and nourishment to many thou-
sands of human beings.
Most of the springs, whether hot or cold, are full of fish,
in the tepid springs they grow to two or three pounds size
and afford excellent sport to the angler. There are also
multitudes of wild fowl, duck, teal, water hens, and ibis
whilst during the time the wild grape bush surrounding the
springs is in fruit wild turkeys abound.
Anacoora Bore.
By the courtesy of the Works Department I am supplied
with a lithograph giving details of this remarkably success-
ful search for Artesian water, the importance and signifi-
cance of which can hardly be over-estimated when consider-
ing the future development of the country.
According to ray observations, Anacoora Boro is
situated in Latitude 25 deg. 56 min. 10 sec. S. and Longi-
tude 135 dog. 39 min. 46 sec. 8., that is to say, 78 1/10 miles
■east of Charlotte Waters Telegraph Station on the Overland
Telegraph, and 4 4/10 miles north of the southern boundary
of the Northern Territory. The bore is 1,250 feet deep
and discharges 700,000 gallons per diem. The water has a
temperature of 135 deg. F., is-perfectly fresh, and rises to a
height of 48 feet above the surface of the ground, which is
here 475 feet above sea level. The surrounding country
consists of high sand ridges generally, parallel to one
another, with narrow valleys between, in one of which the
bore is located, so that it cannot he seen until within a couple
of hundred yards. The sand ridges run in aN. 15,30 deg.
W. and south 15,30 deg, E. direction, and are from 50 to .1.20
feet above the level of the valleys, therefore quite impassable
for any heavy loading excepting along the valleys, which


form good roads and maintain their direction and continuity
throughout extensive areas.
This being the case, it was found impracticable to make
a second bore in a north-oast direction from Anacoora winch
necessarily entailed crossing hundreds of high sandhi Is at
right angles, hence after a trial the projected series of bores
ivas abandoned, and Anacoora left as an isolated example,
proving the existence of abundance of water m a country
where it is so urgently needed.
The 700 000 gallons of water daily poured out from
Anacoora Bore has no outlet, yet the loss from soakage and
evaporation is so great that this quantity ot water has only
formed a small lagoon 400 yards long by J»0 yards wide,
about 3 feet deep, during the five or six years it has been
running.
In the vicinity of the bore bulrushes margin the lagoon
otherwise the water has had no effect on the surrounding
vegetation, so that a completely successful and costly bore is,
at present absolutely useless except as an object lesson
demonstrating the existence of artesian water at this level.
An Available Stock Route to Central Australia and
Queensland.
Prom what I know of the •sandhill country, I believe-
that the original scheme can he successfully carried out, and
a valuable Stock Route to Central Australia and Western
Queensland opened, which would be available in all seasons
by putting down a bore about 40 miles east of Anacoora and
from thence continuing a series of bores in a Nor -Nor - West
direction following the valley lines until reaching the Box
Tree flat shown on the accompanying map (where there is.
a strong probability of obtaining water by an oidmary
well). Prom this point it is comparatively easy to reach
the Hale River and the Illogwa River, from either of winch
two series of bores (or wells) could he continued to A 1 ana-
jeer Water Hole on the Alanajeer River, and thence to the-
Metaeka Creek on the Queensland border.
I believe the whole route shown is within the limits of
the Artesian Basin, the greater part being probably at a
lower level than Anacoora Bore, as indicated by the course-
taken by all the rivers rising in the Mae Donnell and Jer-


REPORT ON EXPLORATION OF A PORTION OF CENTRAL AUSTRALIA. 7
vois Ranges. Along some hundreds of miles ua Queensland
near the Western Border first-class water is obtained by
moans of shallow wells, on several of winch I have_ recently
camped. The country on the South Australian side has .
similar geological formation as tar west as the Mihail
River, hence water at shallow depths may be confident y
predicted.
I have; marked the suggested route on the maps supplied
to the Surveyor-General, and have been told by all the
tral Australian settlers to whom 1 have mentioned the n al-
ter, and also several Queenslanders, that were it opened a
boon would be conferred bn Central Australia and Western
Queensland. I have no data regarding the cost of Artesian
Bores in the Northern Territory, hut know that in North-
western Queensland bores have been successfully driven to
a depth of over 5,000 feet at an average cost of 20/ per loot
allowing that in the sandhill country in the area described
the cost might he somewhat greater, giving the liberal mar-
gin of 30/ per foot to a depth of 1,500 feet, at which, or
less water should'be struck; each bore might cost fc2,foo—
small item when the benefit to the Transcontinental Rail-
way and the large areas of new country winch ’would be
opened arc taken into consideration. Moreover, Lho amotuit
named is probably very largely in excess of what would be
actually required.
The Sandhill Country.
Much of the country lying between the Overland Tel?-
graph Line and the Queensland Border, south of the Cora-
minna Ranges, is covered by high, sand ridges m paralc'
rows, generally bearing N. 15,30 deg. W,, and b. 10.30 L.
In most places these ridges have been formed by the
action of the prevailing wind, but this is not invariably the
case since I have seen high sandhills maintain their direc-
tion’and continuity in situations where under existing con-
ditions they could not have been formed by wind. To give
an instance, an extremely regular and high sandhill runs
through a deep narrow gorge m the Bony thou Hills (see
map), maintaining its direction through the gap and for
miles on either side, having the appearance of a great rail-
way embankment.


The Bonythou Hills run at right angles to the course
of the sand waves, and in the gorge (over a mile in length
with high hills on either hand), the wind, if any, would
follow the trend of the gorge and thus blow in the direction
of the crest of the sand ridge, hence it could not have
formed this wave.
It is difficult to account for the enormous quantity of
sand (frequently hundreds of miles distant from any
apparent source), thus distributed over the Argillaceous
levels upon which the ridges rest. As a rule the sand is
of extreme fineness, Indian yellow to red in color, and with
high specific gravity, differing in all respects from the sand
found in the'beds of the rivers in_ this locality, which is
light yellow or grey, coarse and ot light gravity.
I have noticed that the higher the sandhills the nearoi
the color of the sand approaches to reel, also becoming ftnei
grained and of greater weight.
As an example of the difficulty of travelling in this
country in any direction excepting that taken by the valley
lines, I may mention that by reference, to my notebook .1. find
that for two successive days, during which I kept a carefuil
count, the sand ridges averaged seven to the mile., ranging
from fifty to one hundred and twenty feet in height above
the valleys, and so steep on one side that it was difficult loi
the camels to keep their feet with scarcely any loading
beyond their saddles. On the windward side of the waves
the slope is about one to five, whilst on the leeward side i
is frequently as steep as one in one and a halt.
On this occasion I was compelled to cross the sandhill
in order to reach Anaeoora Bore, the only water available
in the desert country, and after discarding everything tha
could possibly he dispensed with, found the task almos
beyond the endurance of the camels.
Nothing more depressing can he imagined than travel
ling amidst this ocean of sand, if in the valley there i
nothing to be seen but a high sandbank close on either hand
and overhead the sky, from a ridge an endless plain as fa
as the eye can reach slightly broken here and there by som
sand ridge a little higher than the average.
It is devoid of animals or birds, and snakes and scor
pions have apparently given it best, leaving the uhiquiton


flies, and equally numerous ants, sole representatives of
'
It must not, however, be imagined that the country is
devoid of vegetation, the contrary being the case. in the
valleys there are frequent clumps of Mulga bushes, and on
the slopes of the ridges many other shrubs, the names of
which I am unacquainted with, hut which are readily eaten
by camels; Spinifcx grows everywhere mtersporaed with
at least three distinct varieties of 1. ortulncca, called y - -
natives “Parakylia,” an extremely valuable plant, greedily
oaten by cattle' and camels, the stems and leaves of this
plant are filled with a water-like sap (not in the least
‘‘railkv” as the name applies) which is so satisfying 1 hat
where "it is abundant no other water is necessary. On one
.occasion the camels were ten clear days without water, and
at the time averaging six hundredweight of loading, exclu-
sive of the saddles, making long stages, and I expected to
find them thirsty on arriving at the well 1 was steeimg loi.
instead of which they merely played with the water and
then went off to feed.
During this trip the Parakylia was very abundant and
in full bloom, I bad made a practice of pulling the camels
down for an hour at midday without unpacking, and
gathering enough of the plant, which is easily uprooted m
the soft sand, to feed them until they would eat no more.
This with what they found for themselves when turned out
for the night, evidently completely satisfied them. I have
been informed by Station Managers and cattle men (mat
bullocks have been known to live for six months in this .«>
called desert without having a drink of water, and when
found were “mud fat.”
The'natives use the plant for drinking purposes by
gathering a considerable quantity and crushing the sup out
but they informed me that it was necessary to let it stand
for a night before drinking. I have, tried chewing the
stalks and found the flavor by no means unpleasant.
In addition to this plant there are many other herbs
which make good feed, whether green or dry, for both cattle
and horses, and which, I am informed by a gentleman of
■great experience as a Station Manager in the far north, can
readily be propagated by seed. During the latter end of
■summer most of the Parakylia dries up, but m this state is


even more greedily eaten by camels and cattle than when
green, but of course supplies no water.
Probably I have seen the “desert” at its dryest, since
the rainfall returns at Charlotte Waters Telegraph Station
give the following figures, showing the period referred to
as being exceptionally dry, viz., 1904, rainfall, 3.78 inches;
days on which rain fell, 19; 1905, rainfall, 3,94 inches; days
on which rain fell, 18. The. first four months of 1906,
rainfall, 0.59 inches; days on which rain fell, 4. Not-
withstanding this long period of drought the Government
sheep and cattle at the Charlotte Telegraph Station were
laden with fat, although the sheep have to be shepherded
on account of the dingoes, and are regularly driven into the
station for water at the Charlotte Bore.
There was very little herbage to bo seen anywhere near
the station, and it was surprising to find the meat so fat
At Crown Point Station, to the northward in the sandhill
area, the cattle were in grand condition, demonstrating the
value of this country even in a dry season. There are mil-
lions of acres unoccupied for the want of a few Arlesian
Bores as a base to work from, and which would carry stock
as well, or better than, the places referred to.
I have repeatedly seen it stated that the far north
country can only he profitably worked in very large areas,
requiring the investment of much capital, and admit having
been of that opinion myself; however, I have now made
careful enquiry into the matter on the spot, and find that
the small station-holders (“claypan squatters” as they are
somewhat contemptuously styled by large squatters) can
and do, make a comfortable and secure living, commencing
sometimes with less than £2OO worth of stock, and beyond
that no capital except their personal labor and constant
supervision. I know more than one man in the Territory
who, starting with even less than the modest amount named
has accumulated wealth, and so increased his holdings that
he has become a squatter on a large scale, these persons
have very candidly assured me that they are not so well off
as when their belongings were under their immediate per-
sonal supervision, "Without a single exception, all the
small holders I met were doing well and accumulating
wealth.
I am expressing the opinion of all persons with whom I


have di.sens.sed “Territory” matters when X say that the
successful development of the country depends on the con-
tinuation of the Transcontinental Railway, the immediate,
granting 'of leases having at least 28 years’ currency at a
fixed rental for the whole period, the amount in each case
to be determined by the Government proportionately to the
value of the block.
The present system of charging for all parts of the
Territory alike being obviously unjust. Another much-
desired reform is the abolition of the absurd regulations
regarding the quantity of stock to lie carried per square
mile. Every squatter may be trusted to carry all the stock
he, can with safety, and surely he is the best judge.
The small holders should be encouraged by the Govern-
ment granting substantial aid towards the initial cost of
providing water, the interest on the amounts so expended
being added to tin; annual rent.
Under these conditions largo areas would ho imme-
diately occupied even if the minimum rental was estab-
lished at 2/6 per mile, and the Territory, instead of being-
regarded as a “'White Elephant,” would speedily become the
backbone of the Commonwealth.
A Forest -or Gasuarina. (Desert Oak).
Tn my former report I mentioned having discovered a.
large forest of ‘ * Desert Oak. ’ ’ Like many other hush names
this is quite inaccurate, since the tree undoubtedly belongs-
to the Casuariua,
The forest is situated on the northern slopes of the
Bouython Hills and is shown on my map. The, trees,
here are of considerable size, that is to say, growing to a
height of 20 or 30 feet without a branch, and from two to
three feet in diameter. The timber would be valuable for
railway or mining work, and is reputed to withstand the-
white ant very well. It splits easily, although the dark-
colored centre wood is extremely hard.
Abet UNO a.
Whilst in the Mae Donnell Range I camped for a few
days at Arltunga, and took advantage of the opportunity
to visit the White Range and other gold workings in that


vicinity. This country has been repeatedly reported upon
by competent Geologists and mining men, but the follow-
ing figures hear repetition:—
“A ten-head stamper battery with a small cyanide
plant was erected here by the Government and opened Ist
March, 1898. The ore treated to January 31st, 1906
amounted to 7,540 tons 12% ewt. The total gold recovered
was 9,253 oz. 5 dwt. 12 grains, of the value of £34,517 2/2
About thirty men have on an average been engaged in rais-
ing the above ore. In addition to the above output of gold
fully £lO,OOO worth of alluvial gold lias been won.”
The foregoing statement was given to me by the officer
in charge of the battery. At the 'White Range there is
ample ore in sight to keep a hundred head of stamps in
constant work, nearly all the ore mentioned in above state-
ment comes from the White Range, being carted seven or
eight miles over very rough country in some instances
In this connection I may state the rainfall in this locality
■during the last few exceptionally dry years. 1904 rain-
fall, 17.64; days on which rain fell, 35; 1905 rainfall, 10,30;
days on which rain fell —; and in the first four months of
1906, rainfall, 1.51; days on which rain fell, 8.
These figures demonstrate the feasibility of securing
ample water for mining purposed. There are also many
very successful wells, and there is no doubt whatsoever
that abundance of water might be obtained from this source
alone.
In the surrounding country there! are vast quantities
of other minerals, including Mica, of excellent quantity,
but most of this great mineral wealth lies unused for want
■of railway communication at a reasonable distance.
From Arltunga I proceeded eastward to the “Tnnuraba
River,” now mapped for the first time. Here there had
been recently a great flood, caused by the bursting of a
thundercloud over the ranges near its source, leaving seve-
ral surface waters, some of which may last for twelve
months or more.
From here I followed the river down to near Mount
Observation, passing through splendidly-grassed country,
although it was evident there had been no rain since I first
visited this spot (in 1904), that is to say, for nearly twelve


months. The old camel tracks were plain everywhere, and
on striking my previous pad at Mount Observation I fol-
lowed it to the MaePherson River,, where the wells pre-
viously sunk were now quite dry.
X degided to push on to the “Plenty River,” and there-
very fortunately found water in some deep native wells
I followed the Plenty down for some distance, and noticed
another native well which subsequently on our return jour-
ney proved of the greatest value. From here I struck
across to the Marshall Raver, finding water in the sand,
though neither this river nor the Plenty had run for a con-
siderable period.
I then followed the Marshall eastward to its junction
with the Arthur River, where I was again fortunate in
finding a native soakage in the Marshall, a mile below its.
junction with the Arthur, with a splendid supply of water
although there was no appearance of rain having fallen
over any of this country.
Prom here I went across splendid pastoral country
which has, however, already been minutely described by
Mr. Whine eke,* until reaching the Queensland Border at
the Metacka Creek, and from thence northwards along the
Queensland rabbit proof fence to Toko Waterhole, which,
though full of water was as salt as the Bead Sea, So
much so that the camels, five days from water on dry feed
could not drink it. Hero ' matters looked serious, and
would have proved so had not the blackhoy, when bring-
ing in the camels for a dash hack to the well in the Mar-
shall, discovered a drinkable soakage in a hy-eroek run-
ning into the Warminga, near Toko Waterhole, This water
though somewhat saline, lasted for several months, during
which no rain fell. After spending several weeks in this
locality examining the surrounding country and going
through to ITrandangie for provisions, I returned to the
Marshall Well and found abundance of water.
Prom here I took a direct course across sandy country
covered with Spinifex and Mallee Scrub for the Plenty
River, where I had seen a native soakage well, in the hope
of finding water there, which proved the case.
* See Parliamentary Paper No. 321, of 1882,
13
REPORT ON EXPLORATION OP A PORTION OF CENTRAL AUSTRALIA.


From this point I returned to Arltunga by my out-
ward track, finding the waterholes in the “Inuumba
Creek” with sufficient remaining to enjoy a few splendid
swims.
From Arltunga I returned to Oodnadatta by the Car-
rier Track and mail route. *
SEPARATE REPORT TO TPIIS SOCIETY,
From Dalhousie we went across country to Anacoora
Bore, arriving there on the 6th July, 1904, and on the fol-
lowing day commenced a detailed survey of the surrounding
country, an arduous work, necessitating much tedious tramp-
ing over high sand ridges with heavy instruments, the sand
being soft and friable in this neighborhood gave beneath
one’s feet at every step.
Aneoofa Bore is situated in south latitude 25 deg. 56
min. 10 sec., and east longitude 9 lira. .02 min. 39.5 sec., ac-
cording to our observations. Being in a valley surrounded
by sand ridges, it cannot be seen until within a couple of
hundred yards, and would be a difficult place to find were it
not for the tracks made carting water and material during
the boring operations.
The geographical position of the Bore is given “ap-
proximately” only on the published maps, hence desiring
to establish its correct position in case of our returning from
the northward, we took observations for latitude and longi-
tude, also connecting it with the triangulation of the sur-
rounding country by intersections with a six-inch Troughton
and Simms transit theodolite, which instrument we used for
all observations during our exploration. Ancoora Bore is a
complete success from a water-bearing point of view, and it
is to be regretted that owing to the nature of the surround-
ing country it is at present absolutely useless; were it made
one of the series extending northwards to the Hale River,
say, 25 miles between each bore, a much shorter and easier
route to the goldfields at Arltunga would be available, and
in combination with a few soakage wells on the eastern
margin of the Macdonnell Ranges a valuable route through
to Queensland might be obtained, via the Plenty and Mar-
shall rivers, also the large unoccupied area of excellent pas-
toral country east of the Mhedonnell Ranges would be


opened up and placed in direct communication with the
railway at Oodnadatta. The area explored is within the
artesian water-bearing basin, and falls rapidly from the
Finite River towards the east, consequently there is strong
probability that the water would rise to the surface
throughout, providing the route selected is in the great
depression lying between the Halo and Hay rivers. It is
also essential that it should as far as possible folknv one of
the valley lines between the sand ridges characteristic of
this country, since it would be impracticable to cross them
for any distance with heavy loading. The persistence with
which the valleys maintain their continuity and direction is
very remarkable, and the travelling along them good,
Aneoora Bore is 427 ft. above the sea level, and the
water rises to a height of 48 ft. above the surface, so that
when the height above the sea level does not exceed 475 ft,
the artesian water should be available without pumping.
We believe this to be the case over most of the country
referred to. The discharge from the bore is stated at
700,000 gallons per diem, and the temperature 135 deg,
This vast quantity of water has no outlet, and yet the
soakage and evaporation is so great that it has only formed
a small lagoon from two to three feet deep, 400 yards long,
by about 150 yards wide. It is of excellent quality for all
purposes, and we found that it kept good both in our
wooden kegs and galvanized iron canteens, a matter of
considerable importance to travellers, since most of the
saline waters become undrinkable after keeping a short
time.
Whilst at Aneoora three of the Government camels
calved, one calf being born about midnight, when the ther-
mometer was standing at 26 deg. and a cold wind blowing,
consequently the calf was weak and subsequently died.
Some days later two other calves were born and sur-
vived throughout the trip. These wo handed over to the
Government.
A portion of our loading having already been for-
warded to Charlotte Waters per carrier, we went there to
bring it out, taking advantage of the opportunity to make
a series of careful barometric levels from the Bore to Char-
lotte Waters and back.
15
HEFOKT ON KXPLOBATION OF A i’OETXON OF OENTEAL AUSTEALIA.


Subsequently we utilised the available camels by
making a reconnoitre of the country to the north-west, look-
ing for a reputed swamp with water in that direction and
a possible track over the sandhills. During this trip we
essayed crossing the sandhills, many of them being from
70 to 80 ft. high, but quickly discovered the impractica-
bility of doing so with loading, therefore we abandoned the
attempt, and followed the valleys, taking advantage of every
break to resume our bearing. On the second day we found
the swamp, if it could be so named, an oval flat now arid,
as the desert, surrounded by high red sandhills. In the
j ear that Charlotte Waters telegraph station was being
built, our blackboy (then a piccaninny) was camped here,
and showed us the still existing water marks; at that time
this claypan must have been 11 ft. deep, covering an area
of about one hundred and fifty acres.
Crossing the flat we found a small quantity of bad
water in a depression on the southern side; this we tested
by boiling with charcoal (not liking the appearance of the
green fluid), but found it useless, even too bad for our
camels to taste. Crossing some high sandhills we found
that a somewhat similar flat existed to the southward, but
still waterless.
It being evident that our camels could not bring the
whole equipment by this route over the sand ridges, we re-
turned to our camp at Anaeoora, and decided to make our
departure further westward from a well on the Finke, near
which we had stored a portion of our loading previously.
On arrival we cleaned out the well, obtaining a large
supply of very good fresh water, and after picking up the
remainder of our stores, proceeded in a north-westerly
direction, following the valley as far as possible. On the
second evening out we camped abreast of Mount Peebles,
bearing north-east three-quarters of a mile.
From the summit of this hill we had a fine view of the
surrounding country; eastward a succession of sandridges.
stretching far away to the horizon, in appearance quite simi-
lar to ocean waves; westward still sandridges, hut broken
and eventually disappearing on what seemed a stony table-
land, towards which we decided to steer, _ Many small
watercourses run down the slopes of the hill into elaypans.
on the flat, which would hold a supply of water for some


QNVISN33HO *g! |
■MM .MM ,MM. MM. -M.. .MM. MM.MM,.MM.! J
i i -s i I
>j /i j i <,i
J jL .J .
■ z'” I a
I / 1 “.S'
_ !«, ! i -o
o : 1 1 I - 1 t
8.
<u
DC
tn
TS.
< s
Of '
h- I
I
o
£
CQ


time, but, of course, there was none, nor had there been
any rain for many mouths, judging by the look of the
vegetation.
The following morning we resumed our course towards
the stony plain, which we reached about noon, and then
turned north-west by north, continuing along the plain un-
til evening, when we searched for water in a small gum
creek, and, not finding any, moved on until sunset and
camped in some mulga scrub on a clay flat.
The following day at noon we struck high sandhills
again, and put into Crown Point station for a supply of
water. From thence we proceeded north by west along a
valley between high sandhills, which wo followed practi-
cally on the same bearing for four days, the ridges on either
hand being so high and steep that we could not see across
them if we would.
Fortunately wo found abundance of parakylia (Portu-
lacoa), of which invaluable plant we noticed three varieties
Portullacas Australis, Filifolis and” Bieolor, two of which
have beautiful purple blossoms, and the other a similarly-
shaped flower, but primrose in color. This plant grows in
clumps, with a long taproot, but is easily gathered in the
soft sand. The foliage is quite full of water, and we
found that by pulling up arms’ full of the plant we wore
easily able to satisfy the camels whilst on the march.
On the fourth day we sighted a considerable range run-
ning in a west-south-west direction across the sand ridges,
We climbed the highest point near our route, and from
thence saw the range extending for many miles in that direc-
tion, and also as far as we could see towards the eastward.
This range wo named the Bonython Hills, after Sir
Langdon Bonython, the president of the South Australian
branch of the Royal Geograpmcal Society of Australasia
We also saw parallel hills at some distance to the north-
ward, towards which the valley in which we were travelling
led. Continuing our journey, we arrived at this range about
noon on the following day, and, being unable to cross it.
wo skirted along the foot for five or six miles, crossing over
many difficult sand ridges, which ran some distance up the
slopes of the range. Eventually we found a gap through
which a high sandhill passed, quite similar in appearance to


18 IMPORT ON EXPLORATION OF A PORTXON OF CENTRAL AUSTRALIA.
a railway embankment; following this weßoth
very rough and difficult to ascend.
The country was now changing, there being occasional
■wide rlav flats covered with desert oak trees ot large size,
and patches of hard spinifex, interspersed with abnndance
of parakylia, which plant seems to be constantly associate
with spinifex.
The sand ridges were now much broken, and we ±ounc-
numerous low ranges of desert sandstone, running parallel,
with the Bonython Hills, the travelling being very rough.
At 4 p m on the 31st August we struck the 1 hilhpsou
rwk P whieh spreads for miles over the clay flats. Wc
searched for water, but could find none, and altered our
course to the westward for the Oorammna Well, travelling
along a valley in the Ooraminna Range, our supply of wata
being nearly exhausted.
In the afternoon ft£ the 2nd of September we readied
the Well, and camped there for a day to refill our can-
teens and kegs, also observing the latitude and bearing.
The abundant parakylia had so satisfied the camels that
though they were heavily loaded, and had to cross much
rough country, with high sand ridges, and had been ten
clear days without water, we found they scarcely needed a
drink, notwithstanding the fact that the bull was carrying
7 cwt., the pack cows 6 cwt., and the riding camels 2 cm, o -
flour each, and our personal kits.
On the 4th we started eastward for the head of the
Phillipson Creek, where we had been informed by Mr Ross
some springs existed. On the 6th we struck the Phillipson,
and followed the main branch np to the springs, generally
very rough travelling with thick scrub.
We found a good supply of water in the springs, but
strongly impregnated with magnesia, and generally bad foi
all purposes.
We remained at the springs four days to give the
camels a spell and readjust our and on the 12th
September started in a northerly direction for the Todd
River, following a large creek after crossing the watershed.


We had great difficulty descending from the face of a
precipitous cliff to the creek, and were thankful to nego-
tiate the descent without accident. We named this creek
the Althinga, the native name for a weeping gum tree, of
which there were large numbers on the banks. We fol-
lowed the creek through the ranges on to a wide plain, on
the north of which we could see the Macdonnell Ranges, and
in the afternoon struck the Todd River, running in an
easterly direction, and camped on the northern bank.
On the following day we searched for water, sinking
several wells in the sand until striking the clay bed, but
quite unsuccessfully. We also tried the Ross Creek, which
runs from Mlaedoxiuell Range into the Todd about a couple
of miles west of where we camped, but again without suc-
cess. The water from the springs, which we had in our
kegs, had now become so saline as to be almost undrink-
able. It being evident that no water was to be obtained'
in the Todd, we decided on following the Rosa Creek up to
Love’s Creek old station in the Macdonnell Range, Here we
found a splendid supply of water, and were kindly received
by Mr. Abott, who was in charge during the absence of Mr.
Wallis, the owner. We remained here a day, and then took
an easterly course for Btneemba waterhole, on the Hale
River, finding it rather rough travelling through the ranges.
About halfway we found plenty of water in the Giles Greek
and enjoyed a most refreshing swim, striking right into
Etneemba waterhole on the afternoon of the third day out
from Love’s Creek.
Here we decided on making a depot camp while we
examined the country to the eastward, there being a large
rock waterhole 12 or 13 ft. deep.
Whilst at Love’s Creek we were informed that although
there had been good local rains in parts of the Macdonnell
Range, there had been no general rain, and that none of
the main creeks had run throughout for at least twelve
years, most of the waterholes in the ranges, which were for-
merly regarded as permanent, being now dry, or, at best,
with a little water in the sand. Etneemba waterhole, al-
though in the bed of the Hale River, is filled by several small
watercourses, which,passing through steep, rocky ranges, run
with any heavy thunderstorm, of which there are many in
this mountainous region, and was in this way several times


-20 RETORT ON EXPLORATION OF A PORTION OF CENTRAL AUSTRALIA.
replenished during our stay. A high and veryrGughspur
from the Maedonnell Range rims down the eastern bank of
the Hale River for many miles, dividing it from the Illogwa
River; and as we wished to get to the eastward we spent
some days examining the country to find a point at which
we might cross the range with the camels, eventually finding
an exceedingly rough track up a small creek coming ml from
the eastward some five miles south of our camp. It not
being possible to carry heaving loading over this track, 11
determined on leaving the greater part of our stores at the
depot camp until our return from the east, i ßrec * l ?f l
tent for the first time during the trip as a storehouse to keep
the things dry, in the event of rain.
During our stay at Btneemba we repeatedly heard loud
noises like heavy cannonading, and noticed that they gener-
ally occurred after heavy thunderstorms, of which wo had
several. We found that these reports were caused by Land-
slips, sometimes of great magnitude, probably the result ot
water getting into the cavities of the rocks and betw em the
strata. This fact we were able to verify from personal
observation.
Having completed our arrangement for storing the
things as securely as possible, we started eastward, lightly
loaded, following up the creek before-mentioned «
named Printhie Creek (a large iguana) having shot a good-
sized one in the top of a dead tree on the bank, not amy
easy matter since we put six revolver bullets into it, the first
causing it to disgorge a good-sized rabbit, before it came
down. ,
We followed this creek up to its source, passing through
rough granite- ranges, intersected by promising _ looking
ouartz reefs in many places, and also found specimens
' copper ore. This part of the Maedonnell Range should be
worth careful prospecting, since we noted dykes of cliontc
quartzites, and also large quartz reefs capped with iron. rhe
granite rocks vary much in their components from coarse
pegmatite to micaceous schists, and we also saw almandme
garnets, which are characteristic of some parts of these
tanges. Probably other gems might be found were the
vicinity carefully prospected.
On reaching the head of the Printhie Greek we came out.
on an elevated valley, running in an east and west direc-


tion, crossed by several small creeks running south-westerly
to the Hale River, through gaps in the ranges on either
side of the Maedonnell Range, which we reached in a few
hours’ time, having taken two days to travel about ten
miles, so rough is the country.
Being now in the open country, we changed our course
to north-east, towards the eastern point of a high spur run-
ning out from the main range, passing over splendidly-
grassed and bushed country, through which the Illogwa
River runs in a south-easterly direction. This river is a
large one, draining the eastern watershed of the Maedon-
nell Ranges, but at the time of our visit was quite dry, and
no appearance of having run for several years, yet the
grasses and bushes were quite green, due partly to the fre-
quent thunder-showers, and probably also to the existence
of water at no great depth beneath the surface. The soil
of this plain is mostly red loam, and at the time of our visit
was covered with vegetation and flowering plants. At the
place where wo crossed the Illogwa the sandy bed was over
three hundred yards wide, between steep and well-defined
banks, timbered with white gums of large size, showing
high-flood marks, denoting that at some period immense
quantities of water run down.
After crossing tho Illogwa we continued our course in
a north-easterly direction, crossing a considerable gum creeic
(about 12 miles from the Illogwa), running in an east by
south direction, which we named Fire Creek, owing to our
taking refuge there from a large bush fire kindled by a
party of natives out hunting. There was a strong wind
blowing, and we were on the lee side of the tire, which
enne unpleasantly close before reaching the creek. About
a. hour afterwards we passed the extreme easterly point
of the Maedonnell Range, which -we named Lizard Point
from its similarity to the well-known cape of that name.
• The country now changed somewhat, there being occa-
sional patches of sand and spinifex, amongst which we no-
ticed clumps of parakylia, but neither so succulent nor
luxuriant as those further south in the desert. At about
,23 miles from Lizard Point we crossed some low hills
strewn with fragments of white quartz, which extended in
a north-west direction for several miles. On the north side
of these hills we found extensive flats, covered with gidea-


22 REPORT ON EXPLORATION OP A PORTION OP CENTRAL AUSTRALIA.
bush, alternating with spinifcx and raallee scrub, through
which we worked our way slowy for three or four miles,
filially coming on good country again, which continued
we reached a large creek with well-defined banks running
in a south-easterly direction. Crossing this, we continued
our course to the north-east, and about a mile further on
f, tmd another considerable creek running easterly and
inobably mining the other a few miles down. We named this
creek the Princess. Neither of the creeks had water in the
sand. Crossing this, we changed our bearing to the eaat-
sonth-east, and followed the general course of the creek for
about ten miles, through very nice country (remarkable for
the numerous red anthills, sometimes higher than one could
reach from the camel saddle, and 12 to 14 ft. through).
Here we found a few low, isolated hills to the north-east,-
After travelling about seven miles over mostly good coun-
try, we came on a large creek going bordered with
fine white gums, the grass and foliage being remarkably
gceen and fresh-looking. We made a well in the sand about
5 ft. deep, striking a plentiful supply of excellent water.
We came to the conclusion that this creek was a con-
tinuation of the Plenty River, which fact we verified later
on. Having watered the extemporising a trougli.
by digging a trench and covering it with our tarpaulin, and
filled up onr kegs, we continued down the creek for 40
miles, meeting with several parties of natives engaged in
burning the country.
Here we put down another well, but found no water,
so returned seven or eight miles up the creek, where tha
natives bad a well. Subsequently we sunk a large well
near this, obtaining an abundance of water. By tins tone
we were short of provisions, so determined to return to the
depot on the 9th October, having been absent for twelve
clays. During onr absence one of the camels (left behind,)
calved, and the calf being too weak to travel, remained in
oamp, we working general repairs until 17th October, when
we made a fresh start to the eastward along our previous
track, this time taking all the camels with ns, and a larger
supply of provisions, being desirous of reaching the Hay
River in the hope, we may find water there that would give
ns a good starting-point for otir return journey througn
the desert to Anacoora. On this occasion we followed our


previous pad, ho that we might got to the wells we made
in the Plenty, as soon as possible.
On our arrival at the first well we found that the
supply of water had perceptibly diminished, the well not
making water nearly so rapidly as before. Finding, how-
ever, that there was still sufficient for our purposes of
watering the camels and replenishing our kegs, we con-
tinued our journey down the creek to the second well, at
which water showed no signs of failing.
Here we gave the camels a couple of days rest, and
then continued travelling down the crock in an easterly
direction, until it commenced to make towards the south-
east, when we again tried for water, although the creek
did not appear to have run so far, The sand was dry
right down to the clay, so that it was evident the water
higher up was purely local in character, probably the result
of heavy thunderstorms in the ranges. From a high sand-
hill on the northern side of the creek we could see it fol-
lowing a south-easterly course for many miles, so we deter-
mined' to go straight for Mount Winnecke, on the Hay
River, which the blacks informed ns (through our boy Jim)
had been in Hood twice this season;
Leaving the Plenty, we turned east-north-east, crossing
a good-sized' creek, with fine white gums, a couple of hours
afterwards. Wo tried this creek, hut it did not appear to be
water-bearing at this point, although there is quite a village
of wurlies on the hank. Possibly there has been a water-
hole hereabouts, now filled in. After leaving this creek we
wane into low sand ridges, country covered with mallee
scrub and spinifex, travelling through which distressed the
camels greatly.
About noon on the third day after leaving the Plenty
River we sighted Mount Winnecke right ahead, and shortly
afterward reached the Hay River, a wide expanse of sand,
well-timbered on the hanks with large gum trees. We sunk
several deep holes in the bed of the creek, going through
the sand to clay without finding a trace of water—a great
disappointment after the statement we had heard. We
then followed the creek up for several miles, and tried
again, making a hole 11 ft. deep to the clay, finding nothing
hut dry sand.


24 REPORT ON EXPLORATION OF A PORTION OF CENTRAL AUSTRALIA
The following day we walked for miles up thei crook
past the position, where a native well was “by Mi.
Winnecke, but it had evidently become filled d J
could find no indications as to. its whereabouts We lun
put down several more holes without success, Oux camels
now being done up from the excessive heat, the
ter registering from 95 deg. to 114 deg for the last few
days, and not a breath of air stirring, we had no option but
to 'make for our well on the Plenty. We loaded up at 6 pan.,
and started on our return journey. The night proved in-
tensely dark, not a star to be seen, and we had some livclj
experiences travelling through the malice scrub, now and
then striking a match to have a look at the compass. At.
midnight we rested for half an hour, and then pushed on
■until 7 a.m., when we camped for an hour and had some
breakfast. Fortunately the day was fairly cool (»U deg,
to 92 deg.), so we made a dash fox’ the well, arriving tliexe
at 6.15 p.m., after 22% hours’ continuous travelling.
On arrival at the well we found that a large cpxantity
•of sand had fallen, taking over an hour’s hard work to clear
out, when we spread our tarpaulin over a trench in the
sand and filled it continuously until all the camels had as
much as they could drink, not getting our own supply until
10 p.m. The following day we gave the camels a much-
needed rest, and there being no water in the Hay nor Lower
Plenty rivers, decided to return to our depot at Eneemba
and follow down the Hale as far as possible before striking
across the desert to Anaeoora.
Leaving the pack camels to follow at leisure along our
previous track to No. 1 well on the Plenty, two members of
the party pushed on with a view of running xxp the river
to connect with the survey made by Barclay in 1878*. This
was successfully accomplished, the whole party meeting, as
arranged, at No. 1 well. We found the water nearly all
exhausted, but got a good supply by opening up a native
well about half a mile higher up the river. Here we
watered the camels, and filled xxp our own kegs, starting on
our return journey to the depot on November sth, verifying
the former traverses as we went along.
On the Bth November we reached the Hale River, and
found oxxr tent standing and all the remaining stores intact.
* See Parliamentary Paper No, 209, 1878.


notwithstanding the fact that our camp had evidently been
visited by both white and black persons during our 20 days ’
absence.
On the 10th November we left Etueemba with all our
belongings, following the Halo down to the Cellora Springs
(Smith’s camp), very rough travelling through rough
ranges, with occasional patches of thick gidgee scrub
We reached Smith’s camp late in the evening, and
■camped there the following day, making necessary repairs
and sorting out stores, exchanging all we could dispense
with for a couple of goats, one of which we proposed taking
with us as a supply of fresh meat. On the 12th November
wo loft Smith’s camp for Prosser’s old well,'about 15 miles
■down the Hale, arriving there after dark to find it com-
pletely filled in.
The following day was spent clearing out the well,
when we found a good supply, but rather gummy-tasting.
The weather being now too warm to travel the camels suc-
cessfully, we decided to camp by day, starting in the even-
ing about sunset and on the 14th November. We continued
down the Hale to a native well about 11 miles distant.
Here we found a number of blacks camped near a circular
well about 1.5 or 16 ft. deep to the surface of the water, and
not more than 3 ft. in diameter. It is difficult to conceive
how they contrived to sink it in so small a space, through
fairly compact soil, in the bed of a small watercourse run-
ning into the Hale. There was a fair supply of water, but
the blacks offered to show us a large rockhole in another
tributary of the Halo, some ten miles to the southward, for
which we started at 5.30 p.m, the following day, taking a
■couple of natives with us.
We followed the course of the Hale for twenty minutes
in an easterly direction, and then left it, the river taking
a bend in a north-easterly direction, and cut across low lime-
stone hills until 7.40 p.m., when we struck the river again,
and followed until 10 p.m., whore we finally left it, running
in an easterly direction, whilst our guides went south-west
over a high hill, and half an hour later showed ns a fine
rockhole with a large quantity of excellent fresh water, in
rather a difficult position to get at, it being impracticable
to get the camels down to the water. Next day we took
the camels with our kegs and canteens as near the water


26 REPORT ON EXPLORATION 01' A PORTION OX'' CENTRAL AUSTRALIA.
as possible, and then by lowering a bucket on a rope about
20 ft we lifted sufficient to give them as much as they
could drink, and filled up all our water-carrying appli-
ances, there being no prospect of obtaining any more before
reaching Anacoora,
The native name for this valuable waterhole is
“Ilyarka.” It has the appearance of being durable, and
should be replenished by a small rainfall, the catchment
being good and the bed of the watercourses leading to it
mostly of rock.
At 6.40 p.m., on the 16th November we started south,
and, having descended the tableland on which we were
camped, came on a plain, having very fairly good travelling
until 9 a.m., when we crossed a low range running east
and west, to the southward of which we found high red sand
ridges running in a parallel direction.
At 11 p.m. we camped, fearing to knock the camels np
iu the endeavor to cross the sand ridges, which had now
changed their direction south-east. In the morning we
examined the surrounding country, and seeing no chance
of crossing the ridges, decided to follow the valley we were
in, making westing wherever possible, as the direction of
the ridges would take ns far to the east of our destination.
On the 17th we continued our plan of travelling by
night, talcing advantage of every opportunity to make
westing, crossing a desolate waste oi sand ridges, with little
feed for the camels.
Next night we struck, a large box flat, which is pro-
bably formed by the Todd River. Here we made a levs
miles westing until getting into high sand ridges, when wc
■were compelled to resume -onr south-easterly course aion|
the valleys.
On the 19th the sand ridges increased in height, am
wc found few opportunities of crossing them, whilst the feec
was scarce and dry, and the country desolate and devou
of life of any kind, excepting ants, flies, and few smal
lizards.
The following day, it being evident that we should h
compelled to cross the sandhills to strike Anacoora, and on
of onr camels being knocked np, whilst another was too nea
calving to do much, we decided to discard everything w


could dispense with, and take a direct course towards
Mount Peebles, until the trend of the valley should lead
us to Anacoora. Owing to our canteens and kegs being
in a leaky condition, and the surprising amount of water
lost by evaporation, it was evident we should have a hard
push for the bore, and we cut down our daily allowance
to the smallest quantity on which we could subsist.
Unfortunately the heat was great, the thermometer re-
gistering in the shade from 100 deg. to 110 deg by day and
100 deg. by night, and our stanch friend, Paralcylia, almost
all dried up, so that even by sacrificing a large lot of valu-
able .stores and personal effects, including a good collection
of native curios, our prospects were not bright.
We made a start in a south-south-west course at 7.40
p.m., crossing high sandhills at an average of 15 miles per
day, and travelled all night, with a thermometer above 98
deg. We had great difficulty in getting the camels over
some of the ridges, notwithstanding that they were now
practically without loading.
The following night we .started at the same hour, and
again travelled all night, crossing over 150 ridges, mostly
very high and occasionally so steep as to give us much
trouble to find a crossing-place. We camped at 7.40 a.m..
and had a trying day, the thermometer being 112 deg, at
noon.
On the 22nd we started at 8 p.m., and travelled until
7.50 a.m., crossing over 100 sand ridges, some being ex-
tremely difficult. At daylight, from the top of a high sand
ridge, we could see portion of the Peebles Range, right
ahead, about 12 miles distant, Having now made sufficient
westing, we decided on running clown the valley to Mount
Anacoora, and thence to Scant’s camp, on the Finke
River, our provisions being nearly exhausted, and started
at 8 p.m,, steering south-south-east. At daybreak sighted
Mount Anacoora right ahead, and camped at 7.30 a.m. for
breakfast, using almost the last drop of water we had.
After breakfast continued on the same course to Scant’s
camp, at which we arrived at 1.15 p.m., having been seven
days out since leaving “Ilyarka” roekhole. We were hos-
pitably received by Mr. Scant, and both ourselves and the
camels had a much-needed rest for a day, during which
one of the camels calved.
