

LITERACY AND PHILOSOPHICAL
INTELLIGENCE.
New South Wales.—River Lachlan.
Government and General Orders. —
Civil Department.—Government House,
Windsor, Monday, 6th October 1817.
His Excellency the Governor feels par-
ticular pleasure in publicly announcing
the safe return of John Oxley, Esq. sur-
veyor general, with the party that accom-
panied him in an expedition to the west-
ward of the Blue Mountains to trace the
course of the lately discovered River
Lachlan, and to ascertain the soil, ca-
pabilities and productions of the country
through which it was expected to pass in
its course to the sea. Mr. Oxley’s return
to Bathurst took place on the 29th of
August last, after an absence of nineteen
weeks.
Anxious to give publicity to tire result
of so important an expedition, and which
has excited such a general interest, H.
Exc. is pleased to order and direct that
the following letter, comprising a sum-
mary abstract of the tour, and trans-
mitted by Mr. Oxley on his return to
Bathurst, on the 30th of August, be pub-
lished for general information.
H. Exc. has derived much gratification
from Mr. Oxley’s very interesting report
of his tour, and with the very able exer-
tions of himself and his party in this ar-
duous expedition, for which he desires
that gentleman will accept his best thanks
and acknowledgment; nor is H. Exc. less
solicitous to express his high sense of the
meritorious services and assistance of Mr.
Evans, the deputy surveyor-general, to-
gether with all the individuals composing
the party on this expedition ; and H. Exc.
will feel happy to embrace the earliest
opportunity that may offer to represent
to his Majesty’s ministers the sense he
entertains of the services of those gen-
tlemen.
Notwithstanding the extraordinary and
unexpected termination of the River
Lachlan, whereby the sanguine expecta-
tions formed on the outset of this expe-
dition have been disappointed, H. Exc.
has still the gratification to find that in
the judicious detour made by Mr. Oxley,
the “ Macquarie River ” had been fallen
in with, taking a northerly direction, and
presenting so distinguished an appearance
as to be designated by Mr. Oxley “ a
river of the first magnitude." The course
and direction of this river will become
the object of an early expedition, and H.
Exc. trusts the result will amply compen-
sate for the disappointment of the hopes
entertained of the River Lachlan.
The governor would have availed him-
self of making tins public testimony of
his sense of Mr. Oxley’s services, and of
the party under his direction, at an earlier
period, had not an extraordinary pressure
of public business interfered to prevent it.
By bis Excellency’s command,
J. T. Campbell, Sec.
Bathurst, August 30, 1817.—“ Sir, I
have the honor to acquaint your Exc. with
my arrival at this place last evening, with
the persons comprising the expedition to
the westward, which your Exc. was
pleased to place under my direction;
“ Your Exc. is already informed of my
proceedings up to 30th April. The limits
of a letter will not permit me to enter at
large into the occurrences of nineteen
weeks ; and as I shall have the honor of
waiting on your Exc. in a few days, I
trust you will have the goodness to excuse
the summary account I now offer to your
Exc.
“ I proceeded down the Lachlan in
company with the boats until the 12th
May, the country rapidly descending until
the waters of the river rose to a level
with it, and, dividing into numerous
branches, inundated the country to the
west and N. W. prevented any further
progress in that direction, the river itself
being lost among marshes. Up to this
point it had received no accession of wa-
ters from either side, but on the contrary
was constantly dissipating in lagoons and
swamps.
“ The impossibility of proceeding fur-
ther in conjunction with the boats being
evident, I determined, upon maturcr de-
liberation, to haul them up, and divest-
ing ourselves of every thing that could
possibly be spared, proceed with the
horses loaded with the additional pro-
visions from the boats, on such a course
towards the coast as would intersect any
stream thatmight arise from the divided
waters of the Lachlan.
“ In pursuance of this plan I quitted
the river on the 17th May (mentioned by
mistake in the last gazette the 11th),
taking a S. VV. course towards Cape Nor-
thumberland, as the best one to answer
my intended purpose. I will not here de-
tail the difficulties and privations we ex-
perienced in passing through a barren and
desolate country, without any water but
such rain-water as was found remaining
in holes and the crevices of rocks. I con-
tinued this course .until the 9th June ;
when, having lost two horses through fa-
tigue and want, and the others in a de-
plorable condition, I changed our coursl;
2 P 2


to north, along a range of lofty hills run-
ning in that direction, as they afforded
the only means of procuring water, until
we should fall in with some running
stream. On this course I continued till
the 23d June, when we again fell in with
a stream, which we had at first some
difficulty to recognize as the Lachlan, it
being little larger than one of the branches
of it where it was quitted on the 17th
May.
“ I did not hesitate a moment to pur-
sue the course of this stream ; not that
the nature of the country or its own ap-
pearance in any manner indicated that it
would become navigable, or was even
permanent, but 1 was unwilling that the
smallest doubt should remain of any na-
vigable waters falling westward into the
sea, between the limits pointed out in my
instructions.
“ I continued along the banks of the
stream until the Bth July, it having taken
during this period a westerly direction,
and passing through a perfectly level
country, barren in the extreme, and being
evidently at periods entirely under water.
To this point it had been gradually di-
minishing, and spreading its waters over
stagnated lagoons and morasses, without
receiving any stream that we knew of du-
ring the whole extent of its course. The
banks were not more than three feet high,
and the marks of flood on the shrubs and
bashes shewed that at times it rose be-
tween two and three feet higher, causing
the whole country to become a marsh,
and altogether uninhabitable.
<c Further progress westward, had it
been possible, was now useless, as there
was neither hill or rising ground of any
kind within the compass of our view,
which was only bounded by the horizon in
every quarter, entirely devoid of timber,
except a few diminutive gums on the very
edge of the stream might be so termed.
The water in the bed of the lagoon, as it
might now properly be denominated, was
stagnant, its breadth about twenty feet,
and the heads of grass growing in it shew-
ed it to be about three feet deep.
‘ '• This originally unlocked for and truly
singular termination of a river, which we
had anxiously hoped and reasonably ex-
pected would have led to a far different
conclusion, filled us with the most painful
sensations. We were full 500 miles west
of Sydney, and nearly in its latitude; and
it had taken us ten weeks of unremitted
exertion to proceed so far. The nearest
part of the coast about Cape Bernouilli,had
it been accessible, was distant about 150
miles. We had demonstrated, beyond the
shadow of a doubt, that no river whatever
could fall into the sea between Cape Otway
and Spencer’s Gulph, at least none de-
riving their waters from the eastern coast,
and that the country south of the parallel
of 34° and west of the meridian of 147®
30' E. was uninhabitable and useless for
all the purposes of civilized man.
“ It now became my duty to make our
remaining resources as extensively useful
to the colony as our circumstances would
allow. These were much diminished ; an
accident to one of the boats in the outset
of the expedition had deprived us of one-
third of our dry provisions, of which we
had originally but eighteen weeks, and we
had been in consequence for some time on
a reduced ration of two quarts of flour
per man per week. To return to the de-
p6t by the route we had come would have
been as useless as impossible ; and serious-
ly considering the spirit of your Exc.’s in-
structions, I determined, upon the most
mature deliberation, to take such a route,
on our return, as would I hoped best com-
port with your Exc.’s views, had our pre-
sent situation ever been contemplated.
“ Returning down the Lachlan, I re-
commenced the survey of it from the
point in which it was made the 23d June,
intending to continue up its banks until its
connection with the marshes, where we
quitted it on the 17th May, was satisfac-
torily established, as also to ascertain if
any streams might have escaped our re-
search. The connection with all the
points of the survey previously ascertain-
ed, was completed between the 19th July
and the 3d August. In the space passed
over within that period, the river had di-
vided into various branches, and formed
three fine lakes, which, with one near the
determination of our journey westward,
were the only considerable pieces of water
we bad yet seen; and I now estimated
that the river, from the place where first
made by Mr. Evans, had run a course,
taking all its windings, of upwards of 1200
miles, a length of course altogether un-
precedented, when the single nature of
the river is considered, and that its ori-
ginal is its only supply of water during
that distance.
“ Crossing at this point, it was my in-
tention to take a N.E. course to intersect
the country, and, if possible, ascertain
what had become of the Macquarie River,
which it was clear had never joined the
Lachlan. This course led us through a
country to the full as bad as any we had
yet seen, and equally devoid of water, the
want of which again much distressed us.
On the 7th August the scene began to
change, and the country to assume a very
different aspect; we were now quitting
the neighbourhood of the Lachlan, and
had passed to the N. E. of the high range
of hills which on this parallel bounds the
low country to the north of that river.
To the N. W. and N. the country was
high and open, with good forest land;
and on the 10th, we had the satisfaction
to fall in with the first stream running


northerly. This renewed our hopes of
soon falling in with the Macquarie, and
we continued upon the same course, oc-
casionally inclining to the eastward until
the 19th, passing through a fine luxuriant
country, well watered, crossing in that
space of time nine streams, having a
northerly course through rice valleys, the
country in every direction being mode-
rately high and open, and generally as fine
as can be imagined.
“ No doubt remained upon our minds
that those streams fell into the Macquarie,
and to view it before it received such an
accession was our first wish. On the
19th we were gratified by falling in with
a river running through a most beautiful
country, and which I should have been
well contented to have believed the river
we were in search of. Accident led us
down this stream about a mile, when we
were surprised by its junction with a river
coming from the south, of such width and
magnitude as to dispel all doubts as to
this last being the river we had so long
anxiously looked for. Short,as our re-
sources were, we could not resist the
temptation this beautiful country offered
us to remain two days on the junction of
the rivers, for the purpose of examining
the vicinity to as great an extent as
possible.
“ Our examination increased the sa-
tisfaction we had previously felt; as far
as the eye could reach iu every direction a
rich and picturesque country extended,
abounding in limestone, slate, good tim-
ber, and every other requisite that could
render an uncultivated country desirable.
The soil cannot be excelled; whilst a no-
ble river of the first magnitude afforded
the means of conveying its productions
from one part to the other. Where I
quitted it, its course was northerly, and
we were then north of the parallel of
Port Stephens, being in latitude 32® 45* S.
and 148° 58'E. longitude.
“It appeared to me that the Macquarie
had taken aN.N.W.course from Bathurst,
and that it must have received immense
accessions of water in its course from that
place. We viewed it at a period best cal-
culated to form an accurate judgment of
its importance, when it was neither swell-
ed by floods beyond its natural and usual
height, or contracted within its proper
limits by summer droughts. Of its mag-
nitude, when it should have received the
streams we had crossed, independent of
any it may receive from the east, which
from the boldness and height of the
country I presume must be at least as
many, some idea may be formed, when
at this point it exceeded in breadth and
apparent depth the Hawkcsbury at Wind-
sor. Many of the branches were of
grander and more extended proportion
than the admired one on the Nepean
River, from the Warrftgamba to Emu
Plains.
“ Resolving to keep as near the river as
possible riming the remainder of our
course to Bathurst, and to endeavour to
ascertain, at least on the west side, what
waters fell into it, on the 22d we pro-
ceeded up the river, and between the
point quitted and Bathurst, crossed the
sources of numberless streams all running
into the Macquarie ; two of them were
nearly as large as that river itself at Ba-
thurst. The country from whence all these
streams derive their source was moun-
tainous and irregular, and appeared equally
so on the east side of the Macquarie.
This description of country extended to
the immediate vicinity of Bathurst; but
to the west of those lofty ranges the
country was broken into low grassy hills
and fine valleys, watered by rivulets rising-
on the west side of the mountains, which
on their eastern side pour their waters
directly into the Macquarie. These wes-
terly streams appeared to me to join that
which at first sight I had taken for the
Macquarie, and, when united, fall into
it at the point on which it was first dis-
covered on the 19 th inst.
“ We reached this place last evening,
without a single accident having occurred
during the whole progress of the expedi-
tion, which from this point has encircled,
within the parallels of 34° 30' S. and 32°
S. and between the meridians of 149°
43' E. and 143° 40' E., a space of nearly
one thousand miles.
“ I shall hasten to lay before your Exc.
the journals, charts and drawings, ex-
planatory of the various occurrences of
our diversified route ; infinitely gratified,
if our exertions should appear to your
Exc. commensurate with your expecta-
tions, and the ample means which your
care and liberality placed at my disposal.
“ I feel the most particular pleasure in
informing your Exc. of the obligations I
am under to Mr. Evans, the deputy-sur-
veyor, for his able advice and cordial co-
operation throughout the expedition ; and
as far as his previous researches had ex-
tended, the accuracy and fidelity of his
narration was fully exemplified.
“ It would perhaps appear presuming
in me to hazard an opinion upon the me-
rits of persons engaged in a pursuit of
which I have little knowledge. The ex-
tensive and valuable collection of plants
formed by Mr. A. Cunningham, the king’s
botanist, and Mr. C. Frazer, the colonial
botanist, will best evince to your Exc.
the unwearied industry and zeal bestow-
ed in the collection and preservation of
them ; —in every other respect they also
merit the highest praise.
“ From the nature of the greater part
of the country passed over, our mineralo-
gical collection is but small. Mr. S. Part-


did as much as could be done in that
branch, and throughout endeavoured to
render himself as useful as possible.
“ Of the men on whom the chief care
of the horses and baggage devolved, it is
impossible to speak in too high terms.
Their conduct, in periods of considerable
privation, was such as must redound to
their credit; and their orderly, regular,
and obedient behaviour could not be ex-
ceeded. It may be principally attributed
to their care and attention that we lost
only three horses ; and that, with the ex-
ception of the loss of the dry provisions
already mentioned, no other accident hap-
pened during the course of it. I most
respectfully beg leave to recommend them
to your Exc.’s favourable notice and con-
sideration.
“ 1 trust your Exc. will have the good-
ness to excuse any omissions or inac-
curacies that may appear in this letter :
the messenger setting out immediately
will not allow me to revise or correct it.
“ I have the honor to remain, with the
greatest respect, your Excellency’s most
obedient and humble servant,
J. Oxley, Surv.-Gen.”
“ To his Excellency
Governor Macquarie, &c. &c. &c.”
(True copy) “ J. T. Campbell, Sec."
NAUTICAL NOTICES.
Madras. —We give the following ex-
tract of a letter from the Indus, convey-
ing information which may prevent ac-
cidents : —“ On the 4th of October, 300
miles from any land, in lat. 2° 30 7 N.,
and long. 90° 50 E. at daylight, we had
a narrow escape, having struck on a rock
concealed under the water, supposed
about seventeen feet deep, as that is the
quantity we draw, and we evidently
scraped over it for at least a minute with-
out sustaining any injury. We were much
alarmed till we ascertained that we had
received no damage.” This rock is not
laid down in any of the charts, and is in
the direct track of ships going to the Cape
and Europe.
The Ship Charlotte. —On the 22d Oc-
tober 1817, in attempting the passage
between the Catwicks and Po. Cecir de
Mer, and after getting as far west as to
bring Sapata to bear S. b. W. and Po.
Cecir de Mer in sight N, W.| W. was
horsed by a strong southerly current
down towards the little Catwick. The
wind having just become very light, we
got out our boats to tow, and had suc-
ceeded in getting far enough west to clear
the latter when we discovered the break-
ers on La Paix’s shoal, situated between
the great and little Catwick, which we
at first took for a rippling, but on ap-
proaching it, ascertained the danger, had
again to make every exertion to clear it
by towing, with which, and a light in-
creasing breeze, we cleared it by about
three quarters, or one mile, when we had
the following bearings, viz.
Po. Sapata - So. 56 E.
Great Catwick So. 68° W.
Little Catwick, just clear of the west
end of Sapata, and the high breakers on
the shoal So. 48° E. distant about one mile,
apparently extending about three-quarters
of a mile S.S.W. to N.N.E. and perhaps
about a foot fiom the surface.
The sea breaking so high prevented my
sending a boat to it: it seems about half
way between Sapata and the great Cat-
wick, as nearly in mid channel as possible.
I communicated the above to Capt.
Ross of the Bombay marine then in China.
I found he has also seen it, and made it
about the same situation as the above.
The Hannah, Capt. Heathorn, on her
voyage from England to this Port, had
a good view of the Churbaniana Banks.
Capt. Heathorn describes the rocks in
many places to be much higher than is
generally supposed. Bombay Gazette,
Jan. 7, 1818.
St. Helena.—Price of Provisions.
The following will give an idea of the
expense of living at St. Helena
“ We pay»a guinea and a half for our-
selves, and 15s. for each servant, a day ;
no wonder, when the price of provisions
is as follows: mutton, 18rf. per pound;
pork, 2Oaf.; grown fowls, 12s. each ;
turkies from 40$. to 3 1. ; geese, 30s. ;
ducks, 12.?. ; potatoes, 12s. per bushel;
eggs, 6s. per dozen ; salt butter (no
fresh) ss. a pound ; and so is every thing
in proportion.” Happy island !! !
Mauritius.—Cultivation of Cinnamon.
There is now every prospect of the
cinnamon tree having a fair trial at the
Mauritius ; his Exc. Sir R. T. Farquhar,
the governor of that island, having as-
certained that he had been led into the
same error as his predecessors, in sup-
posing that the true spice-yielding cin-
namon tree had been introduced into the
colony, lost no time in rectifying so im-
portant a mistake, by sending to the Bo-
tanical Garden at Calcutta for a few
plants of the same kind as is cultivated
at Ceylon for exportation, and he has had
the pleasure of announcing to the inha-
bitants of Mauritius, that Capt. Devon,
of his Majesty’s ship Icarus, has brought
to this island thirty plants in the highest
state of healthy vegetation, which have
been planted with great care in the king’s
gardens at Pamplemousses and the go-
vernor’s country residence at Reduit, from
which places they will be distributed whew
sufficiently large.
