

1857.
NEW SOUTH WALES.
Eegtolatibe Council.
SHIPWRECKS AND DISASTERS TO SHIPPING.
REPORT
FROM
THE SELECT COMMITTEE
OF THE
LEGISLATIVE COUNCIL
ON
SHIPWRECKS AND DISASTERS TO SHIPPING;
WITH THE
PROCEEDINGS OF THE COMMITTEE,
APPENDIX,
AND
MINUTES OF EVIDENCE.
ORDERED BY THE COUNCIL TO BE PRINTED,
7 January, 1857.
SYDNEY:
PRINTED BY WILLIAM HANSON, GOVERNMENT PRINTER,
PHILLIP STREET.
1857.


EXTRACTS FROM THE MINUTES OF PROCEEDINGS OF
THE LEGISLATIVE COUNCIL.
Minutes No. 13. Friday, 26 September, 1856.
8. Shipwrecks and Disasters to Shipping:—Mr. Towns moved, pursuant to amended
notice ;
(1.) That a Select Committee be appointed to inquire into and report upon the
number cf shipwrecks and other disasters to shipping, which have taken place in the
immediate vicinity of Moreton Bay and Newcastle, respectively, together with the
causes of such shipwrecks and disasters.
(2.) To inquire into and report upon the present working of the Light House
Establishment at Gabo Island (Gape Howe).
(3.) That such Committee consist of The Solicitor General, Mr. Hood, Mr. Tooth,
Mr. Lord, Mr. Montefiore, Captain Lethbridge, 11. N., and Mr. Towns.
The Question having been put was passed.
9. Buoys, Beacons, and Lights, in the Moreton Bay District, &c.:—Mr. Towns moved,
pursuant to notice, That there be laid upon the Table of this House, Copies of the
following Papers, viz. :
(1.) All Papers and Correspondence between the Resident and Harbour Master of
Moreton Bay, and the Authorities in Sydney, in reference to the Buoys, Beacons, and
Lights required in that district, especially in connexion with Buoy A of the Ship
Channel, said to have been missing since October last.
(2.) Also the Correspondence between the Harbour Master and others of the
Inhabitants of Newcastle, and the Authorities in Sydney, in reference to the
Navigation and Pilotage of that Port, and the dangers in that locality.
(3.) And further, the Correspondence between the Light-Keeper on Gabo Island,
(Cape Howe,) and the Authorities in Sydney.
The Question having been put, was passed.
10. The Solicitor General, hy Command, then laid upon the Table the Papers iust moved for
by Mr. Towns.
11. Mr. Towns then moved, without previous notice, That the Papers laid upon the Table
by the Solicitor General, be referred to the Select Committee just appointed; and
that three Members of such Committee form a Quorum, with leave to sit during any
adjournment.
The Question having been put was passed.
Minutes No. 19. Wednesday, 5 November, 1856.
3. Shipwrecks and Disasters to Shipping:—Mr. Towns moved, pursuant to notice, That in
addition to the papers now before the Select Committee on Shipwrecks and disasters
to Shipping, the following papers be laid upon the Table of this House—
(l.) All Papers in connexion with the Purchase of the Schooner “ Pearl,” as a Buoy
Boat for Moreton Bay.
(2.) All Correspondence in connexion with that vessel, both as to the purchase, and
the suitability of the vessel for the purpose, between the Authorities at Moreton Bay,
and Sydney.
The Question having been put, was passed.
Minutes No. 22. Thursday, 13 November, 1856.
2. Life Boat, Newcastle Mr. Towns moved, pursuant to amended notice, That the
following Papers be laid on the Table of this House, viz:—
(1.) All Papers and Correspondence with the Government, from whatever source, in
connexion with building and procuring the last Life Boat sent to Newcastle, including
Specifications, Tenders, Models, &e.,
(2.) A copy of the Minutes of the Pilot Board, in which it finally agreed to a Plan and
Model, to be recommended to the Government for adoption.
(3.) All Correspondence that has passed between the Pilot Board, the Port Master, and
the Authorities, in connexion with building the Life Boat lately sent to Newcastle.
(4.) All Correspondence and Reports on the subject of the late disasters at Newcastle,
from whatever quarter, to the Authorities in Sydney, and particularly in reference to
the performance of the Life Boat.
The Question, as amended, having;been put was passed.
Minutes


Minutes No. 25. Wednesday, 26 November, 1856.
4. Papers:—
The Honorable Mr. Deas Thomson laid upon the Table a further Return to the
Order made by this House on the 26th of September last, on the motion of Mr.
Towns, for copies of the Correspondence that has taken place between the Port
Master and the Harbour Master at Moreton Bay, respecting the Buoys, Beacons, and
Lights, at or near to Moreton Bay.
Ordered to be printed, and referred to the Committee on Shipwrecks and Disasters to
Shipping.
Minutes No, 40. Wednesday, 7 January, 1857.
2. Shipwrecks and Disasters to Shipping:—Mr. Towns, as Chairman, brought up the
Report from the Select Committee to which it was referred on the 26th of September
last, “ To inquire into and report upon the number of shipwrecks, and other disasters
“ to shipping, which have taken place in the immediate vicinity of Moreton Bay, and
“ Newcastle respectively, together with the causes of such shipwrecks and disasters,”
together with the Minutes of the Proceedings of the Committee, and the Evidence
taken before the same, and moved, That the said Report, and Minutes, and Evidence
be printed.
The Question having been put, was passed.
LIST OF WITNESSES.
Page.
Mr. H. O’Reilly .. .. .. .. .. .. .. 1
Mr. John Bingle .. .. .. .. .. ~ ~ 6
Mr. Angus Campbell .. .. 14
Mr. J. Brown .. .. .. .. 18
Mr. R. L. Pattison .. .. .. .. .. .. .. 20
Mr. William Mulhall .. .. .. ~ .. .. 23
REPORT


SHIPWRECKS AND DISASTERS TO SHIPPING.
REPORT
The Select Committee of the Legislative Council, appointed on the 26th September last,
“ to inquire into and report upon the number of Shipwrecks and other Disasters to
“ Shipping which have taken place in the immediate vicinity of Moreton Bay and
“ Newcastle, respectively, together with the cause of such ;
“ To inquire into and report upon the present working of the Light House at Gabo
“ Island, Cape Howe;
“ To whom were referred certain papers and correspondence between the Government
“ Resident and Harbour Master at Moreton Bay, and the Authorities in Sydney, in
“ reference to the Buoys, Beacons, and Lights, in that locality, and especially in
“ connexion with Buoy A, in the ship channel ;
“ All correspondence between the Authorities at Moreton Bay and Sydney, in reference
“ to the purchase of the 'Pearl/ Buoy Boat, and her suitability for the purpose;
“ Also, the correspondence between the Harbour Master and others at Newcastle, and
“ the Authorities in Sydney, in reference to the Pilotage and safety of the naviga-
“ tion of that Port;
“ And also certain correspondence between the Light Keeper at Gabo Island, and the
“ Authorities in Sydney,”—have agreed to the following Report:—
Moreton Bay.
1. Your Committee, having carefully gone through the various correspondence laid
before them, and having availed themselves of such evidence as could be obtained, without
incurring the expense of summoning parties from that remote district, have arrived at the
following conclusions.
2. With regard to the Shipwrecks and Disasters which have occurred in the immediate
neighbourhood of Moreton Bay, since 1847, they are the following :
1847.—Steamer “ Sovereign,” lost at the southern entrance, and several persons
drowned.
1853.—Barque “ Countess of Derby,” lost at the southern entrance.
Steamer" New Orleans,” (now the “ Governor General,”) from San Francisco, passed
through the southern entrance, assisted by the Blacks, the Captain mistaking
Point Look-out for Cape Moreton.
“ Aurora,” (German) lost at southern entrance, mistaking Point Look-out for Cape
Moreton.
“ Cambodia,” nearly taking southern entrance ; warned off by the Blacks.
“ Ramillies,” mistook Buoy B for Buoy A, (the latter being away), and nearly got
ashore on the west banks, only for Pilot Robertson arriving in time to pre-
vent it.
“ James Fermie,” taking southern entrance; warned off by the Blacks.
“ Phoebe Dunbar,” nearly lost at southern entrance ; one man drowned.
“ New Forrest,” mistook the south channel; taken in by the Blacks.
“ Courier,” burnt at Cleveland Point.
“ Caspar,” from Valparaiso, with flour, got ashore on the west banks, owing to Buoy
A being away.
“ Venus,” total loss at Freeman’s Channel, attributed to Buoy C being away.
“ Corsair,” from the Feegees, sprung a leak.
And from the evidence of Captain O’Reilly, of the steamer “ Boomerang,” and Captain
Brown, of the “ Raven,” who has had many years’ experience in sailing vessels on this coast,
and particularly in the Moreton Bay trade, it appears that the chief cause of such Disasters
has


lias been the absence of proper Land-marks, Buoys, and Beacons, which your Committee are
glad to find are now in course of erection, viz.:—A Light House at Cape Moreton, a Floating
Light Vessel moored in the ship channel, with the Buoy A placed in position. Had such been
in existence, there is every reason to believe that the above Disasters would not have occurred.
8. Your Committee observe that funds have been voted liberally for every purpose
necessary for the safety of the navigation in entering Moreton Bay, and that great desire and
anxiety appear to have been shewn on the part of the Executive, but unaccountable delays
have taken place in the particular department which, has the management and control of
these matters; —for instance, the Buoy A has been adrift since October, 1855 ■ and although
a new Buoy was ordered as far back as 16th June, 1856, it was only completed and sent on
26th September last, and your Committee have reason to believe that it is not yet in position.
4. The Light Vessel, which was removed from the Sow and Pigs as far back as 22nd
January, 1856, requiring only a trifling repair (judging from what has been done to her),
was only moored in her place on sth December' last, and to this circumstance may be attri-
buted many of the Disasters which have occurred during the past year.
5. With regard to the purchase of the “Pearl” as a Buoy Boat, your Committee
regret that so large a sum should have been lavished on a vessel which has proved utterly
unsuitable for the object intended. They recommend that she be exchanged for some
other vessel better suited for the purpose of a Buoy Boat.
6. Finally, with regard to Moreton Bay, your Committee are of opinion, that when
the Light is established on Cape Moreton, the Light Vessel properly moored in her position,
and the Buoys in the places assigned them, that harbour will be at all times safe to approach.
Newcastle.
7. Your Committee have had greater opportunities of examining witnesses in reference
to the Port and Harbour of Newcastle, which evidence is appended hereto, and without any
exception tends to prove the absolute necessity for a Steam Tug being provided, and forming
part of the Pilot Establishment at that port, and for the maintainance of which a small
increase on the present rate of Pilotage will be sufficient.
8. The attention of your Committee has been painfully drawn to the necessity of
this requirement from the late Disasters, which have occurred since the appointment of your
Committee, and have caused so much loss of property and fearful jeopardy to human life.
It is clearly proved by the several witnesses examined, that had there been a Steam Tug of
sufficient power in readiness, not only would the- vessels and property have been saved, but
the unparalleled exposure of human life, (as detailed in evidence) during the late Disasters at
that port, would have been avoided
9. Your Committee would therefore beg most emphatically to express their opinion
of the imperative necoessity for a Steam Tug being immediately attached to the Pilot Estab-
lishment at Newcastle, as from the increasing trade of that port it is evident to your Com-
mittee that the Steam Tug would in a short time be self-supporting, and save a repetition of
the enormous loss of property which has so repeatedly occurred in that locality.
10. With regard to the position for the permanent Light at Newcastle, your Com-
mittee may add that their opinion, as derived from evidence, is in favour of the outer point
of Nobby’s as the most suitable place to erect the Lighthouse.
Gabo Island, Cape Howe.
11. Your Committee have not entered upon this subject, finding that the Government
had appointed a Commission to inquire into the working of that establishment, whose
deliberations had finally determined the point your Committee had in view.
12. Lastly, your Committee urgently recommend the establishment of a Board of
Supervision (with a Branch at Newcastle and such other places as may hereafter be deemed
necessary,) analogous to the Trinity Board in England, composed of men of standing and
experience in nautical affairs, who will have the supervision and control over all the Lights
and Harbours on the coast, in place of the present Port Master’s Department, which appears
to your Committee to have been very inefficient in the discharge of those duties.
R. TOWNS,
Chairman
Legislative Council Chamber,
Sydney, 7 January, 1857.
c 10 —h
PROCEEDINGS


PROCEEDINGS OF THE COMMITTEE.
MONDAY, 29 SEPTEMBER, 1856.
IJmcnt
Mr. Towns, Mr. Montefiore,
Captain Lethbridge, 11. N., Mr. Tooth.
Mr. Towns was called to the Chair.
Certain papers were, by direction of the Council, laid before the Committee.
The Committee deliberated and adjourned till Monday, 6th proximo, at Three o’clock.
MONDAY, 6 OCTOBER, 1856.
Ilment =—
Mr. Towns, j Captain Lethbridge, R.N.
As there was not a quorum of Members present, the Chairman directed the Committee
to be summoned for Wednesday, the Bth instant, at Eleven o'clock.
WEDNESDAY, 8 OCTOBER, 1856.
IJmfUt; —
Mr. Towns in the Chair.
Mr. Tooth, | Captain Lethbridge, R.IST.
The Committee entered into a discussion relative to the various matters submitted
for their consideration, and directed a summons to issue for Mr. O’Reilly, Master of the
steamer “ Boomerang,” to attend to give evidence before the Committee, on Monday the
13th instant, at 10 o’clock.
The Committee then adjourned till Monday, the 13th instant, at Ten o’clock.
MONDAY, 13 OCTOBER, 1856.
lament
Captain Lethbridge, R.N., | Mr. Lord,
Mr. Montefiore.
In the absence of the Chairman, Mr. Montefiore was called to the Chair.
Mr O’Reilly was in attendance, but was not called upon to give evidence.
The Committee adjourned till half-past Ten o’clock on Friday, the 17th instant.
FRIDAY, 17 OCTOBER, 1856.
lament: —
Mr. Towns, in the Chair.
Captain Lethbridge, R.N., | Mr. Montefiore.
Mr. O’Reilly was called in and examined. ( Vide Minutes of Evidenced)
Mr. O’Reilly having retired, the Committee adjourned till Monday, 20th instant, at
Eleven o’clock.
MONDAY, 20 OCTOBER, 1856.
lament
Mr. Towns in the Chair.
Captain Lethbridge, R.N., | Mr. Lord,
Mr. Tooth.
Certain additional correspondence connected with the objects for which the Committee
was appointed, not having been received from the Colonial Secretary’s Ofiice, the Committee
directed that the Government be urged to supply the papers required, as early as possible.
Further papers, in connexion with the “ Pearl,” Buoy Boat at Moreton Bay, were also
directed to be applied for.
The Committee then adjourned till Monday, the 27th instant, at Eleven o’clock.
MONDAY,


MONDAY, 27 OCTOBER, 1856.
Mr. Towns, | Captain Lethbridge, R. N.
As there was not a quorum of Members present, the Chairman directed that the
Committee be summoned for Thursday, the 30th instant, at Eleven o’clock, and that Mr.
Mulhall, Master of the steamer “ Collaroy,” be requested to attend to give Evidence.
THURSDAY, 30 OCTOBER, 1856.
lament =—
Mr. Towns in the Chair.
Mr. Hood, | Captain Lethbridge, R. N.,
Mr. Tooth.
The Committee adjourned till Tuesday, the 4th proximo, at Eleven o’clock.
FRIDA Y, 31 OCTOBER, 1856.
Mr. Towns, ( Captain Lethbridge, R. N.
The Clerk of the Committee stated that he had received a note from the Chairman,
requesting a Meeting of the Committee to be called at 11 o’clock of this day, and submitted
that the Committee having adjourned until Tuesday next, he had no power to summon the
Members for a prior day.
The Chairman informed the Clerk that an arrangement had been made by the
Committee, subsequently to their adjournment yesterday, that in the event of the arrival of
Mr. Biugle in town, a Meeting should be summoned, and ordered that Summonses be issued
to Messrs. Single and Mulhall, for Eleven o’clock to-morrow, to give Evidence before the
Committee.
SATURDAY, 1 NOVEMBER, 1856.
Mr. Towns, | Mr. Hood.
As there was not a quorum of members present, the Chairman directed that the
Committee be summoned for Monday, the 3rd instant, at Eleven o’clock, and that Mr.
Bingle and Mr. Mulhall be requested to attend to give evidence.
MONDAY, 3 NOVEMBER, 1856.
Mr. Towns in the Chair.
Captain Lethbridge, R.N., | Mr. Hood.
Mr. Bingle was called in and examined. ( Vide Minutes of Evidence .)
Mr. Bingle having retired, the Committee directed that Summonses be issued
to Captain Campbell, of the “ H.M. Warfield,” Mr. Paine, of the steamer “ Illalong,” and
Mr. Mulhall, of the steamer “ Collaroy,” to attend to give evidence before the Committee on
Friday next, the 7th instant.
The Committee then adjourned until Friday, the 7th instant, at Eleven o’clock.
FRIDAY, 7 NOVEMBER, 1856.
Mr. Towns in the Chair.
Mr. Hood, | Captain Lethbridge, R.N.
Mr. Tooth.
The Clerk read the Minutes of Proceedings of the Committee at their previous
meeting, which were approved of by the Committee.
Mr. ( Angus Campbell, Master of the ship “ H.M. Warfield,” was called in and
examined.
Mr. Campbell having retired, the Committee adjourned till Tuesday next, the 11th
instant, at Eleven o’clock.
TUESDAY,


TUESDAY, 11 NOVEMBER, 1856.
present
Mr. Towns in the Chair.
Captain Lethbridge, R.N., | Mr. Lord.
The Clerk read the Minutes of Proceedings of the Committee at their previous
meeting, which were approved of by the Committee.
Mr. Brown, Master of the schooner “ Haven,” was called in and examined. ( Vide
Minutes of Evidenced)
Mr. Brown having retired, Mr. Pattison, Master of the steamer “Paterson,” was
called in and examined. ( Vide Minutes of Evidence .)
Mr. Pattison having retired, the Chairman handed in to the Committee a letter from
Captain Livingstone, Harbour Master at Newcastle. ( Vide Appendix A.)
The Committee directed that Mr. Mulhall, Master of the steamer “ Collaroy,” be
requested to attend to give evidence, on Thursday next, the 13th instant.
The Committee then adjourned till Thursday next, at Eleven o’clock.
THURSDAY, 13 NOVEMBER, 1856.
present
Mr. Towns in the Chair.
Mr. Tooth. | Captain Lethbridge, R. N.
The Clerk read the Minutes of Proceedings of the Committee at their previous meeting,,
which were approved of by the Committee.
The Committee directed that a letter be addressed to the Colonial Secretary, request-
ing that certain papers in connexion with the “ Pearl,” Buoy Boat at Moreton Bay, ordered
by the Legislative Council on the sth instant, to be laid upon the Table of the House, be
furnished to the Committee with the least possible delay.
Mr. William Mulhall> Master of the steamer “ Collaroy,” was called in and examined.
( Vide Minutes of Evidenced)
Mr. Mulhall having retired, the Committee adjourned till Wednesday next the 19th
instant, at Eleven o’clock.
WEDNESDAY, 19 NOVEMBER, 1856.
present
Mr. Towns in the Chair.
Captain Lethbridge, R.N., | Mr. Lord,
Mr. Hood.
The Clerk read the Minutes of Proceedings of the Committee at their previous meet-
ing, which were approved of by the Committee.
The Committee deliberated, and adjourned till Tuesday, the 25th instant, at Eleven
o’clock.
TUESDAY, 25 NOVEMBER, 1856.
present;—
Mr. Towns. ( Captain Lethbridge, E. N.
As there was not a quorum of members present, the Chairman directed the Committee
to be summoned for Monday next, at Eleven o’clock.
MONDAY, 1 DECEMBER, 1856.
present:—
Mr. Towns in the Chair.
Captain Lethbridge, R. N., | Mr. Montefiore,
Mr. Hood.
The Clerk read the Minutes of Proceedings of the Committee at their previous
meeting, which were approved of by the Committee.
The Chairman then informed the Committee that he had communicated a paper of
questions to Captain Clark, of the ship “ Lord Burleigh,” on the subject of the recent
Disasters at Newcastle, and that he had been furnished with answers thereto, which were
read to the Committee.
Motion made and Question put, —That the questions and answers be printed—agreed
to. ( Vide appendix B and (7.)
The Committee having decided that no further evidence be taken, requested the
Chairman to draw up a draft of a Report for consideration at a future day.
The Committee then adjourned sine die.
FRIDA Y,


FRIDAY, 2 JANUARY, 1857.
lament
Mr. Towns in the Chair.
Mr. Lord, | Mr. Montefiore,
Captain Lethbridge, R. N.
The Clerk read the Minutes of the Proceedings of the Committee at their previous
meeting, which were approved of by the Committee.
The Committee deliberated, and having agreed to the heads of a Report, prepared by
the Chairman, adjourned till Wednesday next, at Eleven o’clock, for final consideration of
their Report.
WEDNESDAY, 7 JANUARY 1857.
Ilrmnt
Mr. Towns in the Chair.
Mr. Tooth, | Mr. Hood,
Captain Lethbridge, R. N.
The Clerk road the Minutes of the Proceedings of the Committee at their previous
meeting, which were approved of by the Committee.
The Committee agreed to a Report.
APPENDIX A.
Neivcastle, 7 November, 1856.
Dear Sir,
I sco that you are Chairman of the Committee to inquire into the wants, &c.,
of the Port of Newcastle. I trust, from my long experience of that Port, that a few observa-
tions from me will not he deemed out of place.
Ist.—There is no doubt that a good steam tug is much required; the Government
must find it, and lay a small charge on every vessel. The expenses should not be heavy, as
I would propose that one of the Pilots, with his crew, should always be on board; let them
take it turn about. An engineer, one or two fireman, with a man to cook, would be all
that would be required. I may here observe, that the boat must be of good power; the boat
that we had there before was not heavy enough; she could not manage a vessel of any size,
with a southerly wind and heavy sea. The want of this tug must be obvious to you, when I
state that I have known large vessels laying for a week not been able to get out, being too
large to drop out; had there been a good tug we could take out twenty in a morning before
the sea breeze set in. You will see the importance of this, when I state to you that the
tonnage in and out of Port was upwards of fifty-five thousand tons, during the last quarter ;
this quarter will be considerably more.
2nd.—l think there ought to be a charge made for removing vessels ; the way it is
now, there is no end of removing, the masters not having to pay, they will not move the
length of themselves without a Pilot. Now, as it is, the Pilots have to move them, generally
five times —first, from sea to the Horse-shoe; second, from Horse-shoe to Ballast Wharf;
third, Ballast Wharf to the coal staiths; fourth, after loaded, down to the Horse-shoe to
prepare for sea, as the vessels generally are not trimmed, being on an even keel so to get over
the bar ; fifth, from the Horse-shoe to sea —this is all to be done by two men and myself.
I may here state, that in the winter time this is mostly done at flight, as the tides are much
higher than the day tides, and every inch is an object to them—having to pay four shillings
per ton for lighterage. We have twice as much work and more anxiety and responsibility
than any other part of the department; they now are reducing our pay below all the rest,
because we are the hardest worked.
3rd.—There is not the slighest doubt that we must have a dredging machine, and I
think that the shippers of coals ought to bear a portion of the expense, as it will be prin-
cipally for tjjeir benefit. They have all the wharfs which I have made with the ballast,
since I have been Harbour Master; they pay nothing for them. The Coal and Copper Com-
pany have four staiths, which are the length of four vessels; the Australian Agricultural
Company have two, but this I presume, is their own ground. I was sounding the other day,
and found only six feet water right under the staith, and nine feet at the two ends of the
vessel; this is filled up by the small coals dropping through the staith when the vessels
are loading. Buoys we are not deficient of just now, only it is almost impossible to keep
them right, as the steamers knock them all to pieces coming in, in the dark. A house for
the life boat, I believe, is to be built close to Nobby’s immediately. We then want something
to haul the vessels up to windward when they get nigh the Oyster-bank. I may here state,
that we often make a signal for the vessels to stand off, it being dangerous to approach the
Port. No attention paid, they being afraid to haul olf, not being half ballasted, or perhaps
no ballast in at all, they run in and let go their anchors close to the Oyster-bank; the
anchors seldom hold, being all a kind of shifting sand, when they get among the breakers
c 10 —c they


they then make a signal for assistance. I have lost one boat belonging to myself, and two
unfortunate men drowned; when if we had a good tug boat these vessels would be saved.
You are quite aware that the most of the coasters are very badly found, and many of them
old American crafts, that will not stand much. I hope you will excuse the trouble I have
given you, been very anxious about the Port, being I believe, about the oldest hand on the
Hunter River.
Believe me, &e..
ALEXANDER LIVINGSTONE.
Robert Towns, Esq.,
Sydney.
APPENDIX B.
Sydney , 26 November, 1856.
Dear Sir,
Availing of your kind offer, I now beg to forward a series of questions
approved by a quorum of the Committee of the Legislative Council now sitting on “ Ship-
wrecks and Disasters to Shipping,” of which Committee I have the honor to be Chairman ;
in which capacity I now beg the favour of your answers to the accompanying questions,
which you will please make as full or as brief as you think proper, and please return the
papers, questions, and answers, as soon as possible.
I am, &0.,
R. TOWNS.
Captain Clark,
“ Lord Burleigh.”
[Enclosure to Appendix B ]
1. Will you favour the Committee with your name, and the vessel you command,
stating her tonnage ?
2. How many years have you commanded a vessel to these colonies ?
3. Your vessel is at present in Newcastle—how many times have you entered the
harbour of Newcastle?
4. Were you present during the late gales, when the “Eleanor Lancaster” was
wrecked ?
5. Did you note particularly the circumstances under which she came to anchor ?
6. Supposing a Steam Tug of sufficient power had been in readiness, could her ser-
vices have been availed of in such a sea ?
7. Will you state to the Committee your opinion—being an eye witness—if such a
Tug had been in readiness, could the “ Eleanor Lancaster” have been towed into smooth
water, and thus saved ?
8. Have you seen vessels taken in tow in as much sea as when and where the “ Eleanor
Lancaster ” anchored ?
9. There were other two smaller vessels wrecked at the same time as the “ Eleanor
Lancaster”—would such a Tug, in your opinion, havebeenthe means of saving those vessels also?
10. Were you present when the Life Boat was manned and put off to rescue the
crew of the “ Eleanor Lancaster ?”
11. Will you state to the Committee the particulars of what occurred from that
time until the crew wore taken from the wreck ?
12. Have you seen the Life Boat since you were taken out of her ?
13. State to the Committee what you think of the construction of the Boat as a Life
Boat ?
14. Have you seen and been in Life Boats in England —if so, will you explain to
the Committee how the English boats differ from the one you were rescued from at Newcastle?
15. Did you consider your lives in danger when taken out by the boats of the
“ Collaroy”—please state the position you were in when rescued —how many of you ?
16. It has been stated the pumps were not in the Life Boat—would any pumps, in
your opinion, have been able to keep the Boat free from water when you were in her ?
17. Did you ever know pumps in Life Boats in England, and is it the case with a
properly constructed Life Boat—they not only free themselves of water, but if capsized in
the surf, will turn back and right themselves again ?
18. Did you see the Life Boat at Newcastle capsize, and what was done with her after ?
19. Did she go down as soon as you were taken out of her, and how do you account
for that—is it not most extraordinary for a Life Boat to sink ?
20. Will you explain to the Committee what, in your opinion, were the material
defects in the Boat ?
21. How many hours were the crow on the wreck before they were taken off ?
22. Did you ever hear or know of such a case, where lives were so long exposed on
a wreck so near the land, and in the presence of a civilized community ?
23. If the Life Boat had been properly handled in the first instance, do you think
the people might have been taken off in the first attempt ?
24. Was the Boat properly manned in the first attempt —if not, whose fault was it ?
25. I believe they were all volunteers, and knew well how to pull an oar —were they
not ?
26.


26. Would such Life Boats as you have seen and been in in England have lived in
such a sea or surf as surrounded the wreck, and capable of management if properly manned?
27. How many days had the “Eleanor Lancaster” been waiting to get out after being
ready for sea ?
28. If a proper Tug had been at hand, the vessel might have gone to sea at once,
and been out of harm’s way ?
29. Would a Steam Tug be serviceable in fine weather as well as bad for towing vessels
in and out, and removing them to and from the various stations in the harbour ?
30. Is there any other information you can give the Committee, or suggestions you
can offer, which will tend to the greater safety of ships entering the harbour of Newcastle ?
APPENDIX C.
To the Committee of the Legislative Council at Sydney,
Inquiring into the cause of the late Wrecks at Newcastle.
Gentlemen,
I beg to submit the following answers to the questions placed before me by
your Committee, which questions I have answered to the best of my ability, and beg to say
that I shall be happy at any time to give further information on the subject if required.
I am, &c.,
ALFRED C. CLARK.
1. Alfred C. Clark, Ship “ Lord Burleigh,” six hundred and twenty-two tons
Register N. M.
2. Between four and five years.
3. The “Lord Burleigh” is chartered by the Copper Mining Company, to load coals at
Newcastle, for Port Wakefield, from which port she returns to Sydney, with sufficient copper
ore, as dead weight for England. I have entered the Harbour of Newcastle twice in sailing
vessels.
4. I was present from the first anchoring of the Barque “Eleanor Lancaster,” watched
her coming in, and when she struck.
5. I noticed particularly the circumstances under which the “Eleanor Lancaster” came
to anchor that day. It was about four p. m., on Thursday, the 6th of November; I first saw
her returning to port; the wind at the time inside the harbour about S. by E., but outside
it appeared more from the eastward, blowing a fresh gale with violent squalls; she rounded
to abreast of the fairway buoy, and let go both anchors, with some of her sails clued up, but
none furled; before they had time to hand them, the vessel began to drive towards the Oyster
Bank and struck abaft.
6. Had a Steam Tug been in readiness, and stationed at the fairway buoy when the
vessel rounded the Nobby’s, she could have been towed in harbour without the slightest
difficulty.
7. My opinion is, that a Steam Tug, with even moderate power, could easily have
towed the “ Eleanor Lancaster ” into harbour, as the place where she first anchored was
under the lee of Nobby’s, and protected in a measure from the break of the sea. I think the
vessel would have rode safe had there been time to furl the sails, or the holding ground
good; the latter being loose sand renders the anchorage at all times very dangerous. It
unfortunately happens for vessels entering the harbour with the wind from the eastward, that
they invariably find on rounding the Nobby’s the wind hauled to the southward, and as there
is no room for working ships in the narrows, a Steam Tug here would indeed be invaluable,
especially as a vessel entering even with a southerly wind can always round the Nobby’s
sufficiently close to be taken in tow.
8. I have on several occasions entered the Harbours of Sunderland and Newcastle,
“ England,” in tow, when the sea has been even heavier than it was on the day the “ Eleanor
Lancaster ” wont ashore. The swell was heavy, but the sea did not break where the vessel
anchored; consequently there could have been no difficulty in towing her in.
9. As regards this question, there can be no doubt whatever, as both the Schooners
“ Rover” and “ Storm King,” were anchored inside the middle buoy, the water there being
perfectly smooth. The loss of these vessels was not so much owing to the violence of the
gale, as it was from the strength of the fresh in the river washing the sand from their
anchors, thus causing them to give way. lam convinced few persons, excepting perhaps the
pilots, were aware of their being in the slightest danger; I myself was at the middle buoy in
a small Life Boat, within twenty yards of the “ Rover,” and could easily have reached her,
had I known she was in danger.
10. I was not present when the Life Boat was first manned, being at that time
preparing to go in my own boat, which I did shortly afterwards.
11. It was shortly after the “ Eleanor Lancaster ” struck on the Oyster Bank, that
the Newcastle Life Boat was manned and proceeded to the wreck, accompanied by Mr.
Beachy, the pilot, in a Whale Boat, and myself in ship’s Life Boat: the Newcastle Life
Boat in charge of a Maori named Jerry. Mr. Beachy and myself made our boats fast to the
buoy, the “ fresh ” rendering it unsafe for small boats to proceed further. From what I
could see from where our boats were moored, about two hundred yards distance from the
wreck, the Life Boat appeared to get alongside very well, but not having a rope with them to
throw on board the opportunity was lost, and the boat swept away among the breakers, and
reached the shore safely, although nearly full of water, without capsizing. The gale at this
time had considerably increased, and the sea to break very heavily, although up to ten p. m.
the crew were enabled to walk the poop, and keep a fire in the galley. I mention this to
prove


prove that if means had been at hand, the crew could have been taken off the same night.
I cannot state what took place on shore after the Life Boat was beached, but was informed
that they freed her of water, and launched her again; in this attempt she capsized. Ido not
think that this was from any fault in the construction of the boat, but from the fact of her
not being fair!}' afloat. She remained on the beach all that night; two holes were bored in
her bottom with a centre bit, to let the water out, and afterwards properly plugged. About
four o’clock next morning, seeing I could not render any assistance to the “ Eleanor
Lancaster” with my small boat, returned to my vessel to procure other means. Daylight
shortly after this appeared, and revealed a sight truly fearful, and one which few will forget
who witnessed it. It was now blowing a terrific gale, and the sea one sheet of foam across
the entrance of the harbour, and making a clean breach over the wreck, sometimes reaching
as high as the leading blocks of her rigging, the crew at this time in the tops. The
Schooners “ Rover,” and “ Storm King,” had gone ashore during the night, the former being
completely buried in the breakers about a mile to the northward of the barque, and certainly
in more immediate danger of the three. I went over as soon as possible to her assistance,
taking with me lines, rockets, and other necessaries—found numbers of people endeavouring to
get a rope to the wreck. I fired several rockets, but found they were not strong enough to
take a line so far against wind and sea, they being common signal rockets. After some
considerable time a spar was floated ashore by a line from the vessel, and by these means the
crew landed in safety. I now turned my attention to the crew of the barque, and determined
on launching the Life Boat once again; this I accomplished with the assistance of my crew,
and several persons who were most indefatigable in their exertions, took the boat alongside
my vessel, to refit her with every requisite for the next attempt, feeling sure this time we
should be successful. Much to my surprise, I found the boat was leaking to a considerable
extent, but was assured by many gentlemen on the Quay that it was of no consequence, as
the boat would free herself, and I certainly had every faith in her so doing; judge my
astonishment when, shortly after leaving, tho boat gradually filled with us and began to float
very uneasily, in fact it soon became doubtful whether she would not go down altogether ;
the boat now being unmanageable and fast drifting towards the breakers, I lost no time in
letting go the kedge anchor, it being the only means of safety ; by the time this was done we
were within a few yards of the breakers, and about thirty yards from the wreck; our position
at this time was one of extreme danger, much more so even than that of the poor fellows on
board the wreck; in this state we remained nearly an hour, when the “Collaroy” fortunately
entered the harbour, and Captain Mulhall lowered one of his boats and took us out of the
Life Boat and landed us. After this second unsuccessful attempt with the Life Boat, it was
determined by us to drift a boat down to the wreck by means of long lines, which I supplied
from the “ Lord Burleigh.” A brave follow, by the name of Skelton, volunteered to go by
himself in the boat; he did so, and was happily successful in taking otf three of the crew ; he
made several other attempts to reach the wreck but did not succeed ; two other men volun-
teered to assist Skelton in managing tho boat, and were successful in rescuing the remainder;
they were landed about 7 p.m., after being in peril of their lives for the space of 27 hours.
12. I was one of the members of the Sub-Committee sitting at Newcastle, who went
down to survey the boat on the 15th of November, but declined making a survey, the boat
being buried in the sand.
13. I can state but little as regards the construction of the Newcastle Life Boat, as
I had no opportunity of examining her, but recommended to the Committee at Newcastle
the propriety of having the boat exhumed from the sand, that an eflicient survey might be
held on her; I believe this has since been done by Captain Livingstone, the Harbour Master.
14. I have on several occasions attended the Life Boats on their trial trips in many
parts of England, such as Newcastle, Sunderland, and Yarmouth, and noted particularly the
acting of those boats when filled with water. The principle on which they were built is,
that their buoyancy shall be such as to float the boat at a certain level, above which level
it is impossible for the water to reach inside, as it is immediately expelled through the sides,
and in some instances through the bottom. They are built very flat in the floors, and shallow',
which is now generally approved of; great spring at each end from the centre, with good
breadth of beam; these ends alone are made to contain sufficient buoyant properties to turn
the boat over again should she even capsize in the surf; this, together with the air boxes or
cork round the sides, render it impossible for her to sink more than a few inches below the
ordinary water line. In this particular the Newcastle Life Boat differs most materially, as
the whole time we were in her the gunwale in midships was under w'ater about a foot, a
matter of impossibility, had there been sufficient cork or air tanks to float her. By what I
saw of the boat she appeared too heavy, and not sufficient spring at the ends to be called a
safe boat in a sea way.
15. Most certainly we were in imminent danger the whole time, especially as no
means were taken on shore to rescue us from our perilous position. Strange to say, one of
the Pilot Boats was close to us and refused to take us off, which they could have done without
the slightest risk to themselves. After this we almost despaired of saving our lives; many
of us were so exhausted from being so long in the water, that had not the “Collaroy”
arrived when she did, the matter would have terminated fatally. We numbered fifteen hands
in all.
16. I believe there were two pumps in the Life Boat, but did not see them myself.
Had I done so, should not have depended on them to free the boat of water, especially as the
pumps were fitted in such a manner as not to be used without taking some portion of the
men away to work them, and this in a case like the present was utterly out of the question.
I do not think, in any case, the pumps would have kept the boat free.
17. In some of the old boats I have seen pumps fixed, but the new ones are con-
structed without them, and altogether on a self-acting principle; these boats will always
right them.Kclvej if capsized in the surf, and without they do this when tried, the boat is
condemned.


condemned. It is the admitted opinion of all practical men that pumps in a Life Boat are
useless.
18. I did not see the Life Boat capsize, but, as I before mentioned, I do not think
there is any fault to be attached to the boat for doing so, as any Life Boat, no matter how
well constructed, Will capsize in surf when once her bottom touches the ground, which was
the case when the Newcastle Life Boat capsized.
19. When we left her she was floating with her ends just level with the surface;
consequently, the centre of the boat, where the men were sitting, was about two feet under;
in this way she remained till the strength of the fresh came down, when she disappeared
altogether. It is most extraordinary that as a Life Boat she should have sunk, and I can
only account for it from the fact of the boat not being fitted with sufficient buoyant materials.
She was quite free of dirt or sand when I took charge of her, and not, as stated by the
builder, ten inches of wet sand in her bottom.
20. My answer to this is already given fully in number 14.
21. About twenty-seven hours.
22. I certainly never heard in all my experience a similar occurrence to the present
one, where the lives of so many were so long exposed to danger; but in justice to the
inhabitants of Newcastle, I must say it was not for the want of will to assist them, but merely
the means ; they did all that men could do under the circumstances.
23. Ido think so, as I have many times seen boats go out in much heavier sea; for,
as I previously mentioned, when the Life Boat made her first attempt, the sea did not break
over the vessel. Had they been provided with a good lino in the Life Boat, so as to have
thrown to the vessel, while along side, there can be no doubt the crew would have been taken
off the same day, but in the hurry of getting the Life Boat away, this all important matter
was overlooked.
24. I did not consider her properly manned; but it is difficult to say where the fault
lies, no regular crew having been appointed to her since her first arrival here. It was
proposed that Mr. Beaohy, the Pilot, was the most competent person to take charge of the
boat, but he declined doing so, I believe, on the grounds that she had never been properly tried.
25. They were all volunteers, and some of the crew were not over expert; but there
was some portion of them formed from the crews of the ships in port, —these men, of course,
knew how to pull.
20. Such Life Boats as I have seen and been in, in England, would, in my opinion,
live in a much heavier sea than that on the 6th November, and quite capable of management,
if properly manned,
27. I believe the “ Eleanor Lancaster ” was wind bound from Saturday till the
Thursday morning following,
28. Had a tug of moderate power been in Newcastle at the time, there can be no
doubt the vessel would have been taken to sea as soon as ready.
29. The services of a steam tug at the port of Newcastle would be invaluable at all
times, as from the peculiar situation of the harbour, and its very limited room, vessels are
obliged to wait for days, and sometimes weeks together, for a.wind to lead them out. I was
informed by the Captain of a vessel that some short time since he remained wind bound
thirty days and a fair wind blowing outside the whole time. Inside the harbour the tug would
also be of great use conveying the ships to and from the shoots, as the channel is too narrow
to sail in.
Before concluding, I must beg to draw the attention of your Honorable Committee
to the present inefficient state of the pilotage of this port, hich, as it affects the interests
of so many, and involves such immense risks of life and property, I think it advisable to
apprise you During my short stay here of one month, I have witnessed many vessels enter
the harbour without a Pilot, notwithstanding the usual signal was hoisted for their assistance.
In consequence of this want of attendance on behalf of the Pilots, I was nearly losing the
vessel I command. As usual, on arriving off the entrance of the port, I hove to, and waited
a Pilot coming off. After remaining some considerable time a Maori came on board to
inform me that there was no Pilot to be had, and that I had better go to sea again. I inquired
if he was able to take the vessel in, but he expressed himself to me as being unable to manage
a vessel of our size. Not knowing the port myself I had no alternative but to proceed to
sea; the wind, however, hauled more to the eastward and blew hard; we were obliged to
carry a heavy press of sail to keep the ship to windward. Unfortunately the jib-boom carried
away, and as I saw the vessel would not keep off the land, I determined to run for the har-
bour, and came to anchor safely. How we did so is as surprising to myself as to every one
else who witnessed the occurrence. Had the wind headed the ship off on rounding Nobbys,
like it did the “ Eleanor Lancaster,” nothing could have prevented us from sharing the same
fate. I ask your Honorable Committee if such unnecessary risk of life and property should
be passed over without public comment Ido think, without attaching any blame to Captain
Livingstone, more Pilots should be appointed; and not, as is now the case, when a Pilot is
wanted for a vessel entering the port, find them employed removing vessels in the harbour.
The sea Pilots should have nothing to do with transporting vessels to and from the Coal
Shoots. A Steam Tug of good power is, in my opinion, all that is necessary in this port to
prevent a repetition of the late disasters.
o 10— d


1856.
NEW SOUTH WALES.
LEGISLATIVE COUNCIL.
MINUTES OF EVIDENCE
TAKEN BEFORE
THE SELECT COMMITTEE
ON
SHIPWRECKS AND DISASTERS TO SHIPPING.
FRIDA Y, 17 OCTOBER, 1856.
Urgent:—
Mr. TOWNS, | Captain R. LETHBRIDGE, R.N.
Mr. MONTEFIORE.
It. TOWNS, Esquire, in the Chair.
Henry O’Reilly, Esquire, called in and examined :
1. By the Chairman : You command the “ Boomerang” steamer, trading between this port
and Moreton Bay ? Yes.
2. How many voyages have you made between Sydney and Moreton Bay ? I think I have
made about eighty.
3. That would be eighty times in and eighty times out ? Yes ; one hundred and sixty times
I have passed in and out of the harbour.
4. Have you navigated or entered all the various channels into Moreton Bay—that is, the
northern entrance ? I have entered them all.
5. Do you consider the entrance to the port of Moreton Bay, as it is at present buoyed and
beaconed, safe for strangers? With the buoys that are there now it is not safe, because a
stranger running in, in the evening, might mistake the buoy B for bouy A; but when buoys
A, B, and C are there, I consider it sufficient.
6. Is this chart, which you have kindly lent, a correct chart of the entrance to Moreton
Bay ? It is not correct now.
7. Is this a copy of the chart generally given to immigrant ships chartered at home ? Yes.
8. Upon this chart there are three buoys marked—A, B, and C—are they there at present?
No.
9. How many of them are there at present ? Only one—buoy B.
10. How long has such been the case ? Buoy C, I have never seen at all, and buoy A has
been away for twelve months, I think. Buoy B has always been in its place, but the one
there now is a new buoy ; it was formerly a small buoy; it is now a large one.
11. You have marked on this chart a red buoy that marks a channel, as it would appear
here, right over the bank ? Yes ; that is a chequered buoy, white and red.
12. You are aware that there is a light vessel going down now, to be placed in the channel ?
Yes.
13. Where is that to be placed ? I understand it is to be placed where buoy Bis at present
situated.
14. When that light vessel is placed, which we naturally conclude will be moored sufficiently,
will that render the navigation of Moreton Bay safe ? Ido not think it, at night. In the
daytime it will be perfectly safe, because of the colour of the water —that is, if buoy C is
in its place.
15. Then, when the light vessel is placed, as is intended, at buoy B, and buoy C is in its
proper position, the navigation in the daytime will be perfectly safe, you would consider ?
Yes, I should, because the water on the western bank appears quite a light pea-green, so
that if the flood tide is setting in a man can see if he is dropping down.
c 10—a 16.


16. When there is a strong sea on and an ebb tide, a tide against the wind, does not that
affect the discoloration of the water and make it all one colour? It docs ; but still you
would be able to distinguish the colour of the water on the west bank—it will appear of a
greenish yellow.
17. From buoy B, whore the light-ship is intended to be placed, I suppose they have leading
marks on the mainland ? I have heard no talk of them.
18. Did you ever take a pilot in going in there ? No.
19. You are not aware whether the pilots have a leading mark or not ? The pilots have
leading marks of their own, but they arc not generally known.
20. These leading marks are merely natural ones on certain points of land, but there are no
artificial land-marks ? There are no land-marks, except an old gum tree with a board nailed
across it, to indicate when abreast of the spit, in what used to be Freeman’s Channel.
21. 'You have placed upon this chart two leading lights ? Yes
22. What was your object in placing them there ? Just to load a vessel in at night time.
28. It weald be a very easy matter to stick up a few land-marks ? Yes. I know that
eighteen or twenty times I have been delayed twenty-four hours through not being able to
get in at night time. In the winter time the night tides are the highest, and if I could
have got to the bar by ten o’clock, I could have got to Brisbane that night, but there has
not been water enough at ten o’clock the next morning, and I have had to wait till ten
o’clock the following night to cross, keeping passengers and cargo on board, for there are no
means of communicating with Brisbane unless the Custom House officer comes down.
24. Have you ever entered the inner channel at the northern entrance, by Cumhoyuro
Point? Not with the “Boomerang,” hut I have with the “City of Melbourne ” ; that
channel is deepening now, I believe.
25. What sort of a channel is the one you at present use ? I find it very good; I have
three fathoms at low water.
26. Is it frequently used by other vessels ? Yes ; all the coasters use it to beat in and out,
because they can make good long stretches.
27. This sand ( pointing to the chart) docs not indicate any channel here? No, not at all.
28. Consequently this chart cannot be a true indication of the place? No.
29. By Captain Lethbridge: Do you not account for that by the shifting of the sand?
Yes; the banks are laid down correctly. That chart was taken in 1846—ten years ago.
30. By the Chairman : When the light-house is erected on Gape Moreton, and the floating
light is placed in the channel, you think Moreton Bay will then be sufficiently eared for with
regard to lights ? Yes, for the daytime, as marks.
31. But for the safety of vessels entering at night, you consider two lights on shore necessary ?
Yes; and then I do not think it could bo better marked.
32. How do strange ships coming there do—of course they make a signal for a pilot ? Yes,
fire a gun and hoist a light.
33. Is there any difficulty in getting off to them ? Yes; when it is blowing hard from the
north-east there is a strong sea there ; vessels have been beating about there for some time,
and the captains have in some cases concluded they had not got to the right place.
34. That is up to the present time ; but when a light-house is erected on Cape Moreton, and
a light vessel moored by buoy B, such a mistake cannot possibly occur ? No, it could not.
The only thing is, that with a lighthouse they would be able to have a signal to communicate
with the pilot.
35. By Captain Lethbridge : Where do the pilots generally board vessels ? Between Cape
Moreton and buoy A.
86. By the Chairman : You think that when the light vessel is established there, it would
be desirable to have a pilot on board at all times ? It would be bandy, because a captain
of a vessel, being acquainted beforehand that there is a pilot on board the light vessel,
could stand further in, and hack his maintopsail till he gets a pilot on board; whereas, if
waiting for a pilot, he will keep boxing about outside.
37. Have you ever been through the South Channel ? No.
38. During the time you have been in the trade to Moreton Bay, have there been many
mistakes made by ships going in ? I beg to band in to the Committee a statement, shewing
the number of mistakes that have been made, and giving some other particulars concerning
the navigation and trade of Moreton Bay. (7%e Witness handed in the same. Vide
Appendix A.)
39. These statements extend from the year 1847, from the wreck of the steamer “ Sovereign”
to the recent disaster to the “ Phoebe Dunbar” ? Yes.
40. The remarks as stated here are from yourself? Yes, from my own personal knowledge,
but not from 1847; from the year 1853, these arc facts which have come within my own
knowledge, but there have been accidents between 1847 and 1853, which I have not men-
tioned, as I did not know of them myself. I paid attention to the matter when I went into
the trade, for I found there was a want of the commonest marks ; if common pieces of wood,
in the shape of beacons, had been stuck up, they would have been sufficient, if large enough.
41. These letters bearing your name, taken from the newspapers, and appended to this
statement, were written by you? Yes.
42. Supposing the lighthouse or the lightship had been there, either one or the other, do
you think these accidents would have occurred ? No, Ido not.
43. From what you have seen of the entrance, do you think the pilots could be
placed in a better position than at present ? Yes, I think they could, —round Point
Moreton.
44. You said there should he a code of signals established at the lighthouse to communicate
with ships in the offing ? Yes; the same as at Newcastle
45. A code of signals to communicate with ships in the offing, to tell them that if they ran
for the light vessel they would get a pilot, could easily be established ? Yes. The pilots
have


have a sort of look-out place—four sticks—where one of the boat’s crew is stationed, and he
runs round two miles to the pilot’s house, to tell him a vessel is in the offing.
46. Do ships at present, in working in, anchor in the ship’s channel ? Yes.
47. Then, in the event of a vessel running for the light vessel, she could round to and
anchor, and be in safety, if the pilot did not like to take her in ? Yes. I have seen H.M.S.
“ Calliope” looking for bony A and could not see it, and had to send a lieutenant and boat’s
crew to find the buoy. I was in the “ City of Melbourne” at the time.
48. Was that at night or in the daytime ? In the daytime. That was before the new buoy,
B, was laid down. The new buoy is a fine large one. That was at the time Sir Charles
Pitz Roy went up with Captain Gcmiys.
49. Ships can ride in comparative safety in the worst of weather by running in and anchoring
there ? Yes ; but still I would rather lie under the lee of the land than under the lee of a
sandbank.
50. I ask the question with a view to an extreme case—in the event of a vessel not being
able to run in or lead in, there is safe anchorage ? Yes.
51. You have not had much experience among the pilots? No, I have not.
52. Have you anything you could suggest with regard to the arrangements of the pilots for
the safety of the navigation? No ; the only thing is having a pilot on board the lightship.
53. After vessels are once inside the channel they are in comparative safety? Yes.
54. Have you ever known ships, of your own knowledge, to be in,, .uvcnicnocd for want of
pilots from the bar anchorage ? I have known them to be inconvenienced as far as that
they have had to wait some hours for them ; but I have never b m looking for a pilot
myself. I have noticed vessels outside, perhaps to the northward of i ape Moreton, and have
seen the pilots’ boats both pulling and sailing across to got off to them.
55. Have you noticed vessels anchored at the harbour bar to lay there for any considerable
length of time without being able to got a pilot ? No, I never have; but there may be
cases; the pilots may have been away with other vessels, and these have had to wait till
their return.
56. Have you known any of the buoys to bo adrift ? Buoy A I have.
57. Have you seen the buoy boat “ Pearl” that they have down there ? Yes.
58. Is she considered suitable for the purpose? Not at all; she is a regular half-tide rock.
59. Do you know that of your own knowledge ? Yes; I have seen her when she has
anchored.
60. She breaches? Yes; she takes it in over the bows, and it goes out over the stern, and
vice versa.
61. By Captain Lethbridge : What, in your opinion, would bo the best position to place a
light vessel in ? As near to buoy Bas safety would admit; in fact I would keep her where
buoy B is.
62. By Mr. Montefwre: Do you sight the land in going in at the north entrance ? Yes.
63. Can you see it on the starboard hand at the same time as on the larboard ? On a very
clear morning.
64. Not easily ? Not easily.
65. You have been in by the south entrance? No, never.
66. In the south entrance the nearest land, you see is on the starboard, is it not ? No, on
the port side —Point Look-out; that is the north end of Stradbrooke Island.
67. You say several navigators have made mistakes between the north and south entrances ?
Yes,
68. The land is very near on the north side ? Yes; from the position of Moreton Island
from Point Look-out, it is nearer than the mainland from Cape Moreton.
69. How can a careful navigator make a mistake ? By taking Point Lookout for Cape
Moreton —if it should be thick or hazy on Moreton Island—and prevent him seeing the land
on the starboard bow. When he is in there lie is aware he will not get in so far before he
is aground.
70. But vessels have gone in without going aground ? That has been more by good luck
than good management,
71. What is the length of Moreton Island? It is twenty-four or twenty-six miles long,
72. Where the buoys are moored, do the sandbanks shift in the same way as they do in
other parts of the channel ? I only know where buoy B is; I do not think that hank has
shifted ; I have been over it several times and found three fathoms.
73. In the broad entrance laid down for ships, which is a mile wide, are you aware whether
the sands shift, so as to alter the entrance in any way —to alter the width or bearing of the
sandbanks ? No, I am not aware.
74. But the sandbanks do shift all round about ? All round about.
75. You cannot say whether they do or not in the channel which is buoyed down ? No.
76. By the Chairman: Are there any other buoys required, in your opinion, for the naviga-
tion of this bay, after ships are in? Yes ; there is one required at the Middle Bank.
77. Any other? No.
78. By Mr. Montefiove: Have you ever been to the anchorage at Cleveland? I have, hut
never with any vessel; I have been there to see the place.
79. Do you know whether the buoys, as laid down now, and the. additional ones jmu now
recommend, would be sufficient to lead up to the anchorage at Cleveland ? No.
80. Others would he required for that purpose ? Yes.
81. By the■ Chairman: You think that this buoy,;upon what is called the Middle' Bank, is
necessary, and would render the bay safe for navigation ? Yes.
82. Do you know, of your own knowledge, how much water is to be found in the ship
channel? Yes; six, seven, eight, nine, and ten fathoms.- Generally, when I have been
going into the big ship channel, I have told the man to keep six fathoms in his hand.
83.


83. Do you think there is anything more required at the entrance to the river Brisbane ?
Yes; there might be an improvement made in those beacons that are there now ; they are
only temporary.
84. If a distinguishing beacon were established, would that be any aid for a ship running up
to the anchorage at night time ? Yes.
85. Can you see a beacon at night ? We pick them up ; Igo myself in one boat, and send
my mate in another.
86. Is it not in winter time that you have night tides ? Yes; I have seen on that bar, in
the day-time, at twelve o’clock, noon, not more than eight feet water, and at ten o’clock that
night, I have seen ten feet; that would be two hours before high water. It is quite the
opposite in summer.
87. Do you consider the buoys and beacons, as at present placed in the River Brisbane,
sufficient for the purpose, as permanent beacons? No, they are not; they require to be
much larger and much stronger.
88. The fact is, they are mere bits of sapling stuck up 1 Yes
89. Have you any further remarks to make, for the information of the Committee ?
APPENDIX A.
MORETON BAY.
1847.—Steamer “Sovereign” lost at the southern entrance, and several persons
drowned.
1853. —Barque “ Countess of Derby” lost at the southern entrance.
1853.—Steamer “New Orleans” (now the “ Governor General”) from San Fran-
cisco, passed through the southern entrance, assisted by the blacks; the Captain mistaking
Point Lookout for Cape Moreton.
From August, 1853, to August, 1856 (3 years), 20 Emigrant vessels arrived from
Europe direct to Moreton Bay, and 1 from San Francisco, each with between two and three
hundred passengers on board, viz.—
“ Caroline.”
“ Genghis Khan.”
“ Monsoon.”
“ Esplendido,” from San Francisco, short of
provisions.
“ General Hewett.”
“ William Miles.”
“ Aurora,” (German), lost at southern en-
trance, mistaking Point Lookout for
Cape Moreton.
“ Marbs,” (German.)
“ John Davies.”
“ Truro.”
“ Cambodia,” nearly taking southern en-
trance, warned off by the blacks.
“ Grassboorh,” (German.)
“ Conrad.”
“ Ramillies,” mistook buoy B for buoy A
(the latter being away), and nearly got
ashore on the West Banks, only for
Pilot Robertson arriving in time to
prevent it.
“ Sabrina.”
“ Fortune.”
“ James Fermie,” taking southern entrance,
warned off by the blacks.
“ Johan Caesar,” (German.)
“ Caesar Godefroy,” (German.)
“ Phoebe Dunbar,” nearly lost at southern
entrance; one man drowned.
“ Persia.”
Vessels with cargo direct from England to Moreton Bay.
“ Advice.”
“ Blackfriars,” (twice.)
“ Himalaya.”
“ Mary Holland.”
“ Gazehound,” (twice), last time nearly
taking southern entrance, mistaking
Point Lookout for Cape Moreton.
“ Alecto.”
“ Chance.”
Vessels with cargo from South America, and vessels putting in for supplies, &c.
“ Courier,” burnt at Cleveland Point.
“ Pan.”
“ Vision.”
“ Regia,” (whaler.)
“ Emma,” from Valparaiso, with flour.
“ Caspar,” do. do. got
ashore on the West Banks, owing to
buoy A being away.
“ Venus,” total loss at Freeman’s Channel,
attributed to buoy C being away.
“ Corsair,” from the Feegees, sprung a leak.
“ Apprentice.”
Vessels going expressly from Sydney to Moreton Bay, to load for England.
“ Asa Packer.”
“ Henrietta.”
“ Forres,” only for Pilot Watson, would have
shared same fate as “Venus,” buoy C
being away.
“ Phoenician.”
Steamers


Steamers arriving at Moreton Bay within the last three years.
“ William Miskin,” passed through southern
entrance, assisted by the blacks ; Point
Lookout taken for Capo Moreton.
“ City of Melbourne.”
“ Iron Prince.”
“ Manchester.”
“ Shamrock.”
“ Boomerang.”
“ Tamar.”
“ Yarra Yarra.’*
“ Waratah.”
» Ballarat,”
“ Samson.”
“ Breadalbane.”
“ Forres,” “ Ramillies,” and “ Phoebe Dunbar,” all belong to Mr. Duncan Dunbar,
and all have had a narrow escape, owing to want of beacons and buoys.
Barques “ Acacia” and “ New Forest” both passed through the southern entrance
safely, assisted by the blacks; Point Lookout mistaken for Cape Moreton.
Buoy C has been away for three years. Buoy A has been away since last October (1855).
THE PORT OF MORETON BAY.
To the Editor of the Empire.
Sir,
The recent loss of the brig “ Venus,” with a valuable cargo of sugar from
Manila, in Freeman’s Channel, Moreton Bay, has very properly set enquiry on foot, as to
the cause of that disaster ; but, from what I have observed, there seems small prospect, at
present, of due provision being made against such accidents. The simple fact is, that masters
of vessels proceeding to the port of Moreton Bay are furnished with an Admiralty chart, the
latest edition, perhaps guaranteed by the names of Captain Wickham, Captain Stanley, and
the Hydrographer of the Admiralty ; yet, if he follow the directions of that chart, his vessel
will infallibly go on shore. First, there is the buoy G (red), at the western entrance of
Freeman’s Channel. This is clearly enough indicated in the authorized chart now in use,
and for this beacon the Captain of the “ Venus” was steering, in all innocence, when his
vessel grounded; yet no such buoy has been in existence for more than two years, to my
knowledge; and even if it had not been washed away, it should long since have been placed
in another spot, the banks having shifted.
Then, in the authorized Admiralty chart, we have, in the Ship Channel, buoy A
(black); and a mile and a quarter (south-west by west-half-west), buoy B (chequered, black
and white, when clean). How, a shipmaster standing in, would naturally, in pursuance of
his directions, stand over a mile and a quarter west-south-west, after passing the first buoy;
but this course would bring his ship up all standing on the west banks, for buoy A has long
since been carried away, and buoy B would naturally be mistaken for it; thus, like a
treacherous wrecker, carrying the ship in towards the shore, when she ought to haul up to
the south-east. In this way, the barque “ Caspar,” with flour from Valparaiso, had a narrow
escape about four months ago, having touched on the bank; and the “ Ramillies,” only
recently arrived with immigrants, was steering the same course, when the pilot boarded in
time to save her.
I may mention, that the barque “ Forres” was following the “ Venus” in by Free-
man’s Channel, and, in all probability, might have shared the same fate, if the pilot had not
got on board, and carried her through an inner passage but rarely used. This be could not
possibly have effected, if it had not been high water.
I am sure, Sir, that nothing I would say would make plainer than the above facts do,
the danger to shipping that is allowed to continue from day to day, and month to month,
through the merest neglect; Moreton Bay being as safe a port as a seaman could desire to
enter, if they only had a chart to depend upon, or channels and buoys to agree with the
chart.
I believe it is proposed to place a light-ship in the place of buoy B. This may be
more useful than a buoy in the day-time, being a larger object; but at night, it would not
be easy to keep in the channel by means of this light, after hauling up to the south and
east, for the channel is hut little more than a mile wide., and the strong ebb or flood tide-
setting across it would be very likely to drift the ship on either bank, as compasses vary, and
nothing but a double light on Moreton Island could serve as a check upon the single light
astern.
As to Freeman’s Channel, I have already said that there is no buoy there, and that
the bank has shifted. Any person who had faith in the Admiralty chart, (a virtue that has
long since forsaken me), would fancy that my course, as pencilled by myself, lies clean over
a sand-hank; and the faithful one would accuse me of trying to cut a canal with the
“ Boomerang” ; hut the fact is, that I find a very good channel for my vessel, west by south
half south from Point Moreton, going in, and clean through the Admiralty sand-bank;
a course south-west by west half west, as appears by the chart, would carry me just
where the “ Venus” is—not very comfortable quarters.
I conceive that the importance of this subject, involving the safety of human life and
the reputation of an excellent port, will be deemed a sufficient excuse for this communication.
I remain, &c.,
HENRY O’REILLY
Commander A. S. N. Co.’s steamship “ .boomerang.”
Sydney, 8 December, 1855.
c 10—b THE


THE ENTRANCE TO MORETON BAY.
To the Editor of the Empire.
Sir,
Some time has now elapsed since I addressed you on the subject of ths
entrance to the Port of .Moreton Bay. The loss of the brig “ Venus,” with a valuable cargo
of sugar, had then but recently occurred, and the mind of the public was prepared to receive
the explanation, which I ventured to offer, of the probable cause of that disastrous event.
Another shipwreck has now been very near taking place at the same port, and under
circumstances which might have been much more calamitous. The immigrant ship “ Phoebe
“ Dunbar,” with upwards of two hundred passengers, took the southern instead of the
northern entrance, and was with much difficulty saved from total loss. You will observe
that the Editor of the Moreliai. Bai/ Courier comments rather strongly upon the error com-
mitted by the Captain ; but without wishing to dissent from the remarks made in that
journal on the subject, I wish once more to draw public attention to the absence of proper
marks and beacons at the northern entrance, which, if they had existed, might have pre-
vented this unfortunate occurrence. It is true that there is now some prospect of the light-
house being built, but this work will probably be a long time in progress, and in the mean-
time, some kind of land-mark at the entrance would be the best and surest indication to a
shipmaster that ho was in the right place.
In my last communication on this subject, I mentioned that the buoy marked A in
the chart had long before been missing, and that the absence of this mark would bo likely
to cause a stranger to mistake buoy B for it, and to stand on west-south-west from that buoy,
until his ship was ashore on the western banks. Now this absent buoy has not yet been
replaced, and any strange ship entering, even by the northern passage, is still exposed to
this peril; more especially would this be the ease with a north-east wind and a flood tide, as
the pilot boat could not then get off to the ship.
It is thus plain, even at the proper ship channel, there is no security against ship-
wreck. Let it not be supposed that this is said in disparagement of the port; but every
seaman must feel, that masters of ships are placed in a most unenviable position, so long as
they are called upon to enter a strange harbour, with no land-marks in sight to guide them,
and without any agreement between the actual buoys laid down and those appearing on the
chart.
So long as these deficiencies remain unsupplied, there will be little cause to wonder
at mistakes, and a deep responsibility must rest upon the authorities who permit such a
state of tilings to exist. It behoves all who are interested in this matter, to take care, by
constantly keeping their complaints before the public, that the responsible parties shall not
be able to plead ignorance in excuse for their neglect.
I am, &0.,
HENRY O’REILLY
Commander A. S. N. Co.’s steamship “ Boomeranjr.”
May 24, 1856.
To ihe Editor of ihe Moretoa Bay Free Press.
Sib,
Having applied for a pilot to the proper authorities some four or five days
previous to the ship “ Persia ” being ready for sea, stating the day I wished to sail, a boatman
was sent on bejard to act as pilot. I believe the man did his duty to the best of his ability,
but he seemed quite ignorant of the duties of a pilot. He has caused me the loss of an anchor
and part of a cable, and ran the risk of losing the ship. If a proper pilot had been sent on
board, the ship ought to have been at sea throe or four days ago.
I do think that there is great need of reform in the pilot department of Moreton
Bay, On my arrival I was twenty-four hours between Cape Moreton and where Buoy A
ought to have been (as laid down in the chart sent to me by the Home Government) before
I could got a pilot. I was told by one party that Buoy A was in Sydney ; by another that
it was picked up in New Zealand. I think that all strangers coining to Moreton Bay ought
to be made acquainted that no dependence ought to be placed on buo} r s, beacons, or the pilot
establishment there, as they would then prepare for the worst.
I have, &c.,
JOHN PETERKIN,
Commander of the late Immigrant Ship “ Persia,” at anchor
off the Ship “Patch,” July 13, 1856.
MONDAY, 3 NOVEMBER, 1856.
prcetnt
Mr. TOWNS, Captain LETHBRIDGE, B.N.
Mr, HOOD,
R. TOWJsS, Esq., in tee Chair.
John Bingle, Esq., called in, and examined :
1. J)t/ ihe Chairman : You reside in Newcastle? I do.
2. I believe you are a merchant and commission agent there ? Yes, and Lloyd's Agent.
§. How many years have you been resident in Newcastle? Between five and six years.
4.


4. You were originally brought up to the nautical profession ? Yes ; both in the merchant
and East India Company’s sendee.
5. You have had, of coarse, since you have been resident in Newcastle, great opportunities
of witnessing the disasters that have taken place there to vessels entering and leaving the
harbour ? I have.
C. What wind do you consider the most dangerous and difficult for a vessel to enter that
port in ? A southerly wind.
7. When there is westing in it I suppose there is less sea ? Yes ; but you cannot got in.
8. What are the most prominent dangers in entering the harbour with a southerly wind ?
The Oyster Bank is right to leeward of you.
9. What time of tide is the most dangerous and difficult for vessels to enter? No particular
time of tide.
10. .During your residence in Newcastle have you seen any vessels wrecked there? Yes,
several.
11. Can you state to the Committee about how many vessels you have seen wrecked there,
or in any particular instances the circumstances under which they were wrecked? I must
have seen five or six, or more—l cannot tell you from memory.
12. Did it occur to you, in any particular instance, that had a different course been pursued
the accident might have been prevented ? Had there been a steam-tug, or, in some cases,
a life-boat, they could have been got out, and it would have been prevented.
13. Would it be desirable to have a steam-tug of moderate power stationed under Nobby’s
Island, in heavy weather, with the steam up ? Yes; that would obviate almost every difficulty.
14. There are buoys, I believe, at Newcastle ? Yes; there are some that have been laid
down lately.
15. Arc those buoys at present in the best positions in which they could be placed? Yes,
I believe they are; they are in mid-channel, where a vessel could be warped in safety.
IG. Have any shipwrecks or disasters taken place since the buoys were placed ? Yes, I
believe one or two. I was not there at the time. It was about a month ago. It would
require a steam vessel to take a hawser. The Oyster Bank is just to leeward. Generally
these vessels have not had good ground tackling; it has not been sufficiently heavy.
17. Will you explain what are the dangers to which a vessel is liable in entering Newcastle
from the southward —taking into account the position of the harbour, placing yourself on
board ship, and running in with a southerly wind ? A.s soon as you get off the Oyster Bank
you must let go the anchors, and clue up every thing, and if your ground tackling is good
you may hold on and ride out the gale ; but if your tackling does not hold, you will drive,
and go right on and over the Oyster Bank to the beach.
18. There is no space or distance to give a ship cable ? No ; because you are nearly on the
Oyster Bank when you let go the anchor. The winds that bring ships down are generally
southerly gales. A prudent man would lie off the moment he got in sight of the light, and
not run for the harbour until the weather moderated.
19. There is a light at Newcastle at present from sunset to sunrise ? Yes.
20. Is that light sufficient at present for the protection of shipping ? Yes, I think it is.
21. It is only looked upon as a temporary light ? It has been there upwards of forty years.
22. By Captain Lethbridge: It is still a heap of coals, burning day and night? Yes; it
docs not go out in the day time, and is just lighted up. in the evening. There is no alternative
when a man stands in with a southerly gale than to run under Nobby’s, and anchor there;
Port Stephens runs out so far to the eastward that he cannot clear it by lying off —he gets
into the bight.
23. Jig the Chairman: You say that if a moderately powerful steam-tug were stationed
under Nobby’s, in any weather, moored to a buoy, all ready to help a vessel entering the
Port, it would be sufficient, generally speaking ? Yes. There is a case mentioned in
to-day’s paper of two vessels which, if it had not been for the exertions of the pilots, would
have gone on to the Oyster Bank.
24. I suppose this steam-boat could be rendered available for other purposes besides bringing
ships in, in bad weather? Yes; it could be made available for bringing ships in and out of
the harbour, and taking them under the shoot, or elsewhere.
25. You think a steam-tug of that description not only desirable for the salvation of vessels,
but for its general utility ? Yes. I have known vessels to lie in harbour nine or ten days
with north-casters, which would have been a favorable wind if they could have got out
26. Do you think, from your knowledge as a shipping agent, and the intercourse you have
had with the owners of coasters, that there would be any hesitation on their part to pay the
expense of a steam-tug of that description ? I think not.
27. As a shipowner yourself, you would have no objection ? Not the slightest.
28. In point of fact, the services of such a tug would be paid for from an extra charge for
pilotage ? Yes; the present charge for pilotage is five shillings a foot, in and out; the other
would be a trifle in addition.
29. How many pilots are there at Newcastle at present? Two; one of them is sick—he
has been sick for the last three weeks or more.
SO. They have to do all the duty ? Yes, inside and out, harbour, and every thing.
31. Do you think that number of pilots sufficient for the wants of the Port? No; there
ought to be three outside pilots, as long as you have no steam-boats ; to allow one for sickness,
and contingencies of that sort; and there ought to be two inner pilots, as harbour pilots, to-
transfer ships from the shoots to the Horseshoe, and one river pilot for Morpeth.
32, That would be four altogether ? Yes, if you have a. steam-tug ; if not it would be five.
"33. In the event of a steam-tug being employed, you would have the master a pilot ? Yes,
one of the pilots should always be in charge of the steam-boat during the day, to go out,
under the Harbour Master’s direction.
34. By Captain Lethbridge : I suppose there is scarcely more than one vessel shifting at a
time ?


time? Yes, sometimes four or five. Now, there is a constant confusion, spars being carried
away, and damage done.
35. By the Chairman : Which you think would he obviated if there were a steam-tug ?
Yes. A vessel is first brought up in the Horseshoe, then she is removed to the Ballast
Wharf, from the Ballast Wharf to the Shoot, where she takes in, perhaps, a hundred and
fifty to three hundred tons of coals, and then she is brought down again and put into the
Horseshoe. I have known vessels to be delayed for days for want of a pilot. If there are
ships outside, with only two pilots, nothing can be done in the harbour.
36. When a vessel heaves in sight the pilot must leave off whatever he is doing to bring her
in ? Yes
87. Has the trade of Newcastle much increased of late? Yes; I should say the trade of
Newcastle has increased to nearly half the trade of Port Jackson ; the number of tons entering
in and out, as near as I can recollect, amounts to half as much as Port Jackson.
38. Have you any particular data, on this point, with which you can furnish the Committee ?
Yes, my Lloyd’s Book will show ; I think forty or fifty thousand tons a year without the
small coasters—an average of one vessel arriving and departing every day.
39. Will you furnish the Committee with a memorandum on that subject ? I will, (hide
Appendix A.)
40. How far do the pilots go out to sea to meet ships in moderate weather ? Some distance ;
according to circumstances,
41. Where are they able to board them in bad weather? Under Nobby’s.
42. They cannot look at a ship, I suppose, in bad weather, until she is in difficulty ? They
do so sometimes.
43. Have you a code of signals ? Yes, Marryatt’s.
44. To communicate to ships in the offing how to act according to circumstances ? Yes.
The first questions are —Where are you from ? what are you ? what is your name ?If it
is blowing from the southward they make the signal to stand off—it is more prudent than
letting them come to anchor under Nobby’s—-unless they have run in too close. A prudent
man, the moment he sees the light, should stand off the land at once, and wait for fine
weather before he comes in.
45. In bad weather a pilot cannot hoard a vessel until she is in the midst of danger ? They
do; I have seen our pilots venture out a long way; they have good boat’s crews, New
Zealanders; they go out a long way. If they are not engaged they manage to get on board
ships in some way or other.
46. Do you think a pilot boarding a ship, under such circumstances, can be of much service,
that is when rounding Nobby’s ? Not a great deal, unless everything on board is prepared.
47. Supposing a steam-tug were placed there by the Government, and a regular tonnage charge
were made on all vessels going in and out, with or without the use of the tug-boat, would
such a charge be cheerfully paid, do you think ? Yes, I think so.
48. Do you recollect a steam-tug that was at Newcastle at one time ? Yes, the “ Sophia.”
49. What was the reason that that tug-boat did not succeed as a private speculation ? She
came during the winter, and as during the winter months the winds are strong from the
westward, the ships did not require her to take them out. There was, besides, a great
dearth of shipping at that time; I never saw so slack a time as when she was there.
50. How long ago is it since she was there ? She arrived the Queen’s Birthday before last,
and, I think, she was there about six or eight months.
51. Bp Captain Lethbridge : She did not stay there the year round ? No.
52. By Mr. Hood: Were there any instances of ships being saved from going on the Oyster
Bank while she was there? Yes; one lost a rudder on Nobby’s, and Captain Pattison, who
formerly had the “ Bose,” took her out and fetched in the vessel.
53. By the Chairman: During the time the “Sophia” was there one vessel was saved?
One, I recollect; there might have been more.
54. Do you consider Newcastle a difficult port to enter and depart from ? No. It is not so
easy as many other ports, but speaking generally it is not a difficult port. It has its share
of difficulty, and the entrance is narrow, but if you have a fair or leading wind there is no
difficulty. The difficulty is to get out with a foul one ; you cannot get out with that.
55. IVas the steam-tug “ Sophia” of sufficient power for the purpose contemplated? Yes.
56. What was her power ?
57. Would a vessel like the “ Sophia ” be able to tow a ship to sea in an ordinary seabreeze ?
Yes, I have seen her do it. If you were purchasing a vessel I would prefer a little more power.
58. You would recommend more power for a vessel to be thoroughly adapted to the purpose ?
Yes; then let the weather be what it would she could either tow a vessel in or out.
59. Are the present buoys of any service—are you aware how they are moored, and whether
the anchors and chains are sufficient ? Yes, the anchors are quite sufficient, as far as weight
goes ;I do not know anything about how they are placed. I know there is one buoy under
Nobby’s.
60. Would it be possible to pull a hawser from that to a vessel anchored off the Oyster
Bank ? Yes.
61. Is there a life-boat at Newcastle? Yes.
62. Where is she kept or moored ? Close by the Harbour Master’s place, in the shed.
63. Is that, in your opinion, a proper place ? It was not for the other life boat, because she
could not be got under the bridge very readily; but Ido not see the utility of having the
life-boat at Nobby’s, as people would have to go that distance to man her; a life-boat could
be more easily manned from the Wharf.
64. In the position in which the life-boat is placed, at present, can she be made use of at all
times of the tide ? I cannot answer that question. The former life-boat could not, for she
could not be got under the bridge, and when she was wanted there were neither oars,
rowlocks, or anything else ready.
65.


<55. Is this boat in the same shed ? Yes.
66. And would be in the same position ? I cannot say; I have not seen her. The other
life-boat was far too largo.
67. Have you seen the life-boat go off to ships in distress ? Formerly.
68. Will you state to the Committee how things are managed on such occasions—say a ship
is likely to go on shore on the Oyster Bank, and the crew are in danger ? The pilot would
take the life-boat to her.
69. Under the directions of the Harbour Master? He stopping on shore, or going himself.
70. But the pilot acted under his directions ? Yes.
71. Have they found any difficulty in getting volunteers on such occasions? No; I have
seen men very readily jump in, in such cases, and a boat or two would convey parties to the
north shore with blankets, &0., to pick up men in the surf. I have generally been over there
myself on such occasions.
72. I suppose there are regulations for the harbour ? Yes.
73. Are those regulations, in your opinion, carried out ? No. I myself, with Colonel
McPherson, had the Harbour Regulations gazetted, and a board has since been erected on the
wharf.
74. Arc the regulations strictly complied with, and does the Harbour Master keep the
channel clear for the navigation of ships passing up and down ? No, it is not kept clear;
there is great difficulty in doing so, for the want chiefly of harbour pilots.
75. A steam-tug would be useful in that respect ? Yes; that would obviate all difficulty.
76. Is it the case, generally speaking, that vessels in the trade to Newcastle are badly found
in ground tackle and sails ? Ido not think it is a general thing. When wrecks have taken
place, it has been too often the case that the ground tackle has been too light, and when
they let go their anchors they did not hold; they were not heavy enough. In one case the
vessel turned over at the turn of tide at anchor, and part of her drove over the Oyster
Bank, and nearly every one on board was drowned.
77. Do you recollect a vessel called the “ Martha” being wrecked there ? No; I was away;
but that was, I believe, from a similar cause.
78. I think you are Chairman of the Chamber of Commerce at Newcastle ? I am.
79. In reply to a communication from myself, you kindly furnished me with the corres-
pondence between the Chamber of Commerce and the Government ? Yes.
80. Will you have the goodness to look at these papers, and say if they are the documents
you sent from the Chamber? They are. {Vide Appendices B, C, D, and E.)
81. Will you kindly state to the Committee any further information in your power, and
offer any suggestion that may strike you, which would be conducive to the safety of vessels
entering and leaving the port of Newcastle ? I beg to hand in various suggestions, which I
have committed to writing. ( The witness handed in the same. Vide Appendix Fi)
82. By Captain Lethbridge : Do you think a steam-tug would be self-paying ? I think it
would, although it did not when the “ Sophia ” was there, for the cause I have stated ; but it
would be far better for the Government to start it in the first instance, as was done at Ade-
laide; there the Government had a steamer; they found it answered, and now they have
sold it.
83. Now it has become a private speculation ? Yes, and I think it would after a year or two
here, if set going in the same way.
84. You have already stated, I think, that one great cause of disaster at Newcastle has been
from vessels being badly found ? Yes; the greater part of those that have been lost have
been badly found in ground tackling. Of course ships with the best ground tackling will
drive in some weather, and there is little room for them to drive when anchored in the
channel.
85. Since the breakwater has been completed, do you imagine the harbour of Newcastle bas
been filling up ? No, I cannot see much difference; I surveyed the harbour thirty-five years
ago, and I do not see much difference.
86. By the Chairman : In speaking of the steam-tug as a private enterprise, you seem to
think it would be better as a Government establishment ? I do.
87. Do you derive that opinion from the circumstance that some people would take the
steamer, and others would not, and thus leave the speculators unremunerated ? Yes. I
would have a tonnage duty.
88. Which you cannot apply to a private speculation ? You cannot do that.
89. If it became part and parcel of the pilotage, it would be an increase of pilot rates ? Yes.
90. If she were a Government boat, she would still be equally serviceable in the winter
season in towing vessels up ? Yes.
91. You think the reason why the “ Sophia” did not pay was, that there was no compulsion
that the steam-tug should be used ? Yes, and there was a greater dearth of shipping than
I have known at any other time.
e 10—c
APPENDIX


APPENDIX B.
Chamber of Commerce,
Aetocaslic, 15 September, 18oG.
Sir,
I am instructed to acknowledge the receipt of your communication under date
the 23rd ultimo, addressed to Mr. Single, relative to the required improvement of this
port, the subject of which he has deemed proper to bring under the consideration of the
Chamber of Commerce.
1 am desired, first, to state, that the Chamber suitably recognizes the friendly interest
you are disposed to take, in your seat in the Legislature, in the advancement of those
improvements which are urgently required for the accommodation of the trade of this place,
and that it sets due value upon that efficient aid in furtherance thereof, which, from your
position and experience, it will be in your power to give, and which they will bo happy
properly to acknowledge.
As the best means of placing the subject before you, in conformity with your desire,
I am instructed to enclose copies of correspondence with the Government on the different
heads under which the Chamber has classed the more immediate wants of this Port, and to
state, that as the Chamber hopes the subject will be developed in the correspondence, it believes
it will bo unnecessary to add more than that legal powers for the appointment of a local
Trinity and Harbour Board will have a large influence on the obtaiument of those other
requirements which form matters of detail, and that the former is, therefore, the first object
of the Chamber. Next in the order of necessity, the Chamber would rank powers for the
support of a powerful steam-tug, to be under the control of the Board, as stated in the
correspondence, which would bring the pilotage under such easy control as to dispense with
the necessity for an increase of pilots.
I am desired to say, that the Chamber will gladly supply you with such further
information as you may require, and that, under the circumstances that responsible Govern-
ment opens out a new page in the commercial and general history of the Colony, the Chamber
hopes that it will have your concurrence in thinking that, as its objects embrace new and
extended views, in which past personal matter has no place, these objects will be best served
by acting without regard to reminiscences connected with the system now gone by.
Before closing this letter, I am desired to request the favour of your attention to the
improvements required in the harbour of Newcastle, in connection with the “ Hunter
“ Tonnage Dues Act,” which improvements are pressingly required, and have no reference
to those works now being carried on above Newcastle for the improvement of the Hunter
River. The dues come into force on the Ist January next, and it was intended that the
improvements in deepening the coal channel, &c., should be effected before the dues were
collectable, notwithstanding which, nothing has as yet been done in this most urgent part of
the work.
Reference to the Tonnage Dues suggests the gpquiry, whether the principle under
which they are to be levied is to be applied generally in the other ports in this Colony in
future, as, at present, Newcastle is in this respect an exceptional case, which, were it to
continue so, would be an evident injustice to the shipping interest connected with this Port,
The Chamber observes that the information you require as to the mooring buoys,
has been promised by the Government. lam desired to conclude with the further expres-
sion of its thanks for your promised aid, of which the Chamber most gladly avails, and from
which it anticipates valuable results, in bringing the subject of the requirements of this
Port before the Government and the Colony in the present Session.
I have, &c.,
P. MACAULIFFE,
Kobert Towns, Esquire, M.L.C., Secretary.
Sydney.
APPENDIX C.
Chamber of Commerce,
Newcastle, 30 June, 1856.
. Sir,
As Chairman of the Newcastle Chamber of Commerce, and in conformity with
a resolution of the Committee of that body, I beg respectfully to submit to the notice of the
Government the urgent necessity which exists for the creation of a Local Board, with powers
to direct in matters concerning this Port, in order to a better provision for the safety and
accommodation of its trade, and for the improved regulation of its pilotage and harbour
generally.
Experience has shewn that the intentions of the Government for the improvement of
the Port of Newcastle, have been hitherto rendered ineffective by the difficulty which must
always occur in directing and supervising the affairs of an outport by a distant executive ;
a principle the objections to which it is unnecessary to detail, and which the Committee,
from their knowledge of its operation, feel warranted in stating has resulted here in a serious
destruction of life and property, which still continues to occur with a calamitous regularity
most prejudicial to the character of the Port.' It devolves on me to state, as the opinion of
the Committee, that these catastrophes are by no means beyond prevention, and that, under
local direction, precautionary measures might be successfully applied, which are now urgently
called for by motives of humanity, and by the interests of commerce; nor would, I am
desired to say, the improvements which such a Board would effect be confined to the preven-
tion of shipwreck only, but would extend to every other matter under their charge connected
with the business of the Port,
The


The addition of a powerful steam-tug to the Port establishment here, as is, I believe,
provided at Adelaide, is urged by so many considerations that the Committee are desirous of
placing particular emphasis upon it, as a measure inseparable from an effective system of
pilotage for this harbour, to which department the Committee conceive it more immediately
to belong, and out of which dues the necessary funds for the purpose might, if desirable, be
provided. In no instance, the Committee believe, would legislation be more beneficially
applied for local purposes than in giving this arrangement the sanction of law, and in sub-
jecting every sailing vessel entering the Port to a moderate proportionate charge for the
steamer, whether availed of or not, which would equalize the weight of its support, and
remove the inducement to incur a risk from those who would consult a hazardous economy
rather than the protection of life and property.
I have only respectfully to add, that the Committee deem it unnecessary to par-
ticularize those further reasons which would strengthen and confirm their application to the
Government on these points, as these reasons must already be familiar to Ministers to whom,
no doubt, the policy of a local administration of the public affairs of this Port will be recom-
mended by the custom, in similar cases, of the other commercial countries of the world. I
may, however, be permitted to state that, should the Government desire it, I shall be
happy, personally or by letter, to furnish such further information as they may desire on the
subject.
I have, &e.,
JOHN BINGLE,
Chairman of the Newcastle
The Honorable Chamber of Commerce.
The Colonial Secretary.
Colonial Secretary's Office,
Sydney, 25 July, 1856.
Sir,
In acknowledging the receipt of your letter of the 30th ultimo, representing the
necessity for the appointment of a local Board for the Port of Newcastle, I am directed to
inform you that your communication will be considered when the Departmental arrangements
of the Government are completed, and every attention paid to the suggestions therein con-
tained.
I have, &0.,
W. ELYARD.
John Bingle, Esquire,
Chairman of the Newcastle
Chamber of Commerce.
APPENDIX D.
Chamber of Commerce,
Newcastle, 23 July, 1856.
Sir,
I am instructed by the Newcastle Chamber of Commerce respectfully to bring
under the notice of the Government the subject of the steam-tug, which, in a letter addressed
to you on the 30th ultimo by the Chairman, it took leave to recommend be provided here as
part of the Port Establishment.
The Chamber, having been informed that the Underwriters have now refused to
accept further risks from here, believes that the additional necessity which therefore occurs
for remedying, so far as legislation may effect it, the existing causes of danger to shipping at
this Port, gives this subject a more immediate character, and claims for it more strongly the
attention and interference of Government, whose indulgence the Chamber hopes it will have
in its endeavour to prevent further injury to the trade of this place from the increased
reluctance which persons interested in shipping may be expected to have against sending
vessels hither.
The necessity of the case, the Chamber hopes, will justify it in stating that it is
informed that the “ Sophia,” steam-tug, now at Melbourne, is offered for sale, and may be
had for £3,000, which, considering that she is a nearly new British built steamer, and is
stated to have cost nearly £7,000 when built about five years since, the Chamber considers a
low price. The “ Sophia” is also recommended from the knowledge obtained of her qualities
here, where she was for some time employed as a steam-tug, on the private account of the
owners, about twelve months since. She has engines working up to seventy horse-power;
was built expressly for a tug; is adapted to the requirements of the Port, and is a most
desirable vessel for the purpose; besides that, the difficulty of procuring a suitable vessel out.
of England, renders it an important object to secure her. So impressed is the Chamber with
this, that I am desired to say, should the Government decline to purchase her for service
here, the merchants and others interested in the Port would buy her for the same duty, if
the Government will provide for her support by, Or out of, the pilot or tonnage dues, and
engage her from them as a tug-steamer in furtherance of the measures which, it is hoped,
they will introduce for the future regulation of the harbour of Newcastle; but, as will be
observed, in order to secure the “ Sophia,” an early communication from the Government on
the subject would.be necessary.
I have, &c.,
P. MACAULIFFE,
The Honorable Secretary.
The Colonial Secretary.
Colonial


Colonial Secretary's Office,
Sydney, 12 August, 1856.
Sir,
I am directed to acknowledge the receipt of your letter of the 24th ultimo, in
which the assistance of the Government is requested by the Newcastle Chamber of Commerce
to secure the steam-tug “ Sophia,” for the service of that Port, and to express the regret of
the Government that the application of the Chamber of Commerce cannot at present be
entertained.
I have, &c.,
W. ELYARD.
Mr. P. Macauliffe,
Secretary of the Chamber of Commerce,
Newcastle,
APPENDIX E.
Chamber of Commerce,
Newcastle, 11 July, 1856.
Sir,
By desire of the Committee of the Newcastle Chamber of Commerce, I beg
respectfully to request the notice of the Government to the necessity which exists for a
legislative enactment providing for the due weighing of coal delivered at this Port.
I am desired to say, that the short weights which frequently occur in the deliveries
of coal to vessels loading here, render it necessary, for the protection of the character of the
Port, that the matter should be provided for by law; and lam instructed to add, that the
necessity to which the Committee refers must be much increased by the larger quantities of
coal which will soon be shipped at this Port, consequent on the new communications about
being opened with it by Bailway.
I am also instructed respectfully to suggest, that the trellises, which the Committee
understand it is the intention of the Government to construct at this Port, would afford the
most convenient position for the weighing machines.
The Committee, not being aware that this subject is already under the notice of the
Government, would suggest it as one the importance of which has strong and early claims
on their attention.
I have, &c.,
P. MACAULIFFE,
Secretary.
The Honorable
The Colonial Secretary.
Colonial Secretary's Office,
Sydney, 19 July, 1856.
Sir,
Your letter, under date of the 11th instant, on the subject mentioned below, has
-been duly received, and referred for the report of the Honorable the Solicitor General.
2. As soon as the necessary information has been obtained, a further communication
•will be made to you.
I have, &c.,
W. ELYARD,
Under Secretary.
Subject. —Necessity for a legislative enactment providing for the due weighing of coals.
P. Macauliffe, Esq.,
Secretary to the Chamber of Commerce,
Newcastle.
APPENDIX F.
Having been called upon to give evidence on Shipwrecks and Disasters to
Shipping on the Coast, and also to suggest any means by which such losses may be lessened,
I do myself the honor to submit, for the consideration of the Committee, the following
observations: —
The first subject to which I would call attention is the imperative necessity of the
immediate purchase of a steam-tug of sufficient power for towing vessels in and out of the
Port, and moving them to and from the shoots and harbour. I would suggest that the tug
should be placed under the direction of a Trinity Board (as mentioned below), and
commanded and manned by the pilots and their crews.
That an active and efficient Harbour Master be appointed, under the Trinity Board,
and that a light tonnage duty should be levied on all vessels entering the Port, to defray the
expense of the tug.
That it is indispensable that a Local Trinity Board—on the same plan and principle
as those established in England—should be instituted at Newcastle, with full power to
regulate the Harbour Master and Pilot Establishment, there being at present no local
authority to investigate cases of misconduct or incapacity.
An


From Lloyd’s Book.
List of departures from 1st January to 31st October, 1856 ;—
Vessels.
Register Tonnage.
January
21
5,006
February .
21
4,629
March ....
26
5,869
Api'il
25
5,608
May
54
11,330
June
34
6,771
July
41
8,019
August ...
51
9,898
September
47
8,961
October...
38
7,551
358
63,637
An additional outside pilot should, at once, bo appointed, there being at the present
time but one to carry on the whole duty of the Port, the other being incapacitated by
sickness, and it is necessary that provision should be made for such a contingency. Two
inside pilots should also bo employed, and one river pilot for the service of vessels bound up
to Morpeth.
It is a matter of importance that a Lantern should be erected at the end of the
Queen’s Wharf, to serve as a guide for steamers coming into harbour after dark.
I would recommend the immediate erection of a Lighthouse upon the Flagstaff Hill,
(the site of the present Beacon), which situation I consider far preferable to that proposed
at Nobby’s, being visible at a greater distance from seaward. Should it be deemed necessary to
have a small Light at Nobby’s, it will serve well as a guide for vessels entering the harbour when
close in, or anchoring, which they arc obliged to do in strong southerly weather, while the
Lighthouse is specially needed by vessels running for the Port,
Additional moorings might be laid down with advantage in the Horseshoe, for large
ships to ride at while loading, by which arrangement much delay and inconvenience would
be avoided, and more security against driving, during westerly and southerly gales, obtained,
and a greater number of large ships accommodated.
I would recommend that an Act should be passed obliging all coasters and other
vessels at all times to carry a Mast-head Light, to prevent, as far as possible, collision. The
number of steamers constantly running on the Coast calls for such r measure.
In conclusion, I cannot refrain drawing your attention t. the relative advantages
enjoyed by Port Jackson and Newcastle; the former has an effiffient staff of pilots and
port officers, with a safe and easy entrance in all weathers, while the latter, with—(l speak
but from memory, not having my books with me)—half the tonnage of the elder Port, and
a dangerous entrance with certain winds, has an establishment of officers totally inadequate
to the requirements of the place; and to this want of officers and appliances I attribute
much of the loss of life, and property during the last two or three years.
JOHN BINGLE,
Lloyd’s Agent.
STATEMENT.
Vessels entered Coastwise at the Port of Newcastle, between the Ist January and the 30th
September, 1856, (9 months) :
Vessels from out of the Colony 194 ... 34,019
Do. Coastwise 820 ... 103,547
1,014 ... 137,566
The above includes three steamers entering twice a-week each here from Sydney, but
not the two steamers which enter at Morpeth, or the coasters there.
SINGLE & SON,
Lloyd’s Agents.
c 10—d
FRIDAY


FRIDAY, 7 NOVEMBER, 1856.
Mr. TOWNS, Mr. HOOD,
Mr. TOOTH, Captain LETHBBIDGE, R.N„
ROBERT TOWNS, Esquire, in the Chair.
Mr. Angus Campbell called in and examined: —
1. By the Chairman: You command the “ H. M. Warfield,” and are part owner of that
vessel ? Yes,
2. You are in the coasting trade between Sydney and Newcastle ? Yes, since 1842.
3. How many years have you followed the coasting trade in various vessels ? I have been;
twenty-eight years at sea; I have been at sea since I was nine years of age. I was a master
at home for some time, and I have been a master since I have been here, except for six.
months in one vessel.
4. For how many years have you traded to Newcastle ? I have been going to Newcastle
mostly since 1842; it is only now and again I go to the northward, or some other place.
I was at the opening of Wide Bay and Port Curtis. lam acquainted with the coast from
Port Curtis to Cape Howe.
5. Can you say about how many voyages you have made to Newcastle? It is impossiblej
I have been making eight voyages in a month there sometimes.
6. During your experience you must have entered Newcastle in all kinds of weather ? Yes,
both night and day.
7. Do you consider Newcastle a dangerous port to enter ? Well, there is very little room to
work into Newcastle; there is not much difficulty if you have a leading wind, but if the-
wind is right out of the port it is rather awkward for a vessel of any size to work in.
8. What is the most dangerous and difficult wind for a vessel to enter Newcastle with? A
south-west wind.
9. That is a fair wind from here taking ships down ? Yes. If the wind is from the south
a vessel will nearly get into smooth water when rounding Nobby’s; she will get in so as to
come upon good anchorage.
10. Have you ever met with any accident in entering Newcastle yourself? Never.
11. Have you seen other vessels in difficulty and danger? Yes, several times; in fact I
have put out to them in the life-boat myself. By the time I went out the vessel was right,
ashore. It -was one of Bussell’s, of Pynnont.
12. Then you have -witnessed several disasters occurring at Newcastle ? Yes.
18. And under different circumstances, I suppose ? Yes. It is very awkward coming out
with a north-easter, too; the tide sots on to the Oyster Bank.
14. Can you recollect about how many wrecks or disasters 30m have witnessed there ?I am
not certain of the number -within a few T , but I think I have seen eight or nine total losses.
15. Besides other disasters? Yes; I have often seen them getting ashore.
16. Will you be good enough to state to the Committee what, in your opinion, were the causcs-
of those disasters ? In one case two vessels got foul of one another, and that -was the cause
of their going ashore ; they took the port at ebb tide, and the wind failed them ; both of
them stayed and stood out to Nobby’s, but they fouled in stays and wont ashore.
17. By Captain Lethbridge : That has nothing to do with the port ? That has nothing to
do with the port,
18. By the Chairman : There are buoys laid down —warping buoys —are they of any use in.
the harbour ? I think not.
19. If a moderately powerful steam-tug -wore stationed under Nobby’s Island at all times,
would that be of any material service to the safety of navigating the port ? Certainly, she
would be of great service sometimes; the only thing lam afraid of is, that if there were a
steamer running there, there would bo two or three vessels wanting her at once and only one-
could got her; and if a vessel got on shore the steamer would have no power to pull her off.
A steamer would be very useful to take vessels both out and in. If she were a powerful
steamer she could take loaded vessels out against a north-easter, or in a light wind.
20. Do you think that, even in a gale of wind, a steamer lying under Nobby’s with the steam
up, and ready to drop down to a vessel when she rounded to—supposing her to be of sufficient
power to take hold of the vessel, and making every allowance for the difficulty of getting
hold of a tow-rope at such a time—-would be the means of saving vessels from shipwreck?
She would be a great deal towards it; if blowing hard she could render them great assistance,
but if the wind is south-west, with a heavy sea on, vessels will not look near the port.
21. Still the wind would be off the land ? We have a very heavy sea on with a south-west
wind.
22. It tumbles into the harbour? Yes; right across the entrance.
23. By Mr. Hood: Do you think any of the ships you have seen wrecked would have been
saved if there had been a tug-boat ? In such eases as that of the “ Canmore,” a steam tug
would be of great service. That vessel was capsized lying at anchor for two days under
Nobby’s, inward-bound; the captain and a seaman, I think, were saved, but the others were
lost. But after a vessel has gone on shore, Ido not think a tug-boat would be of much use.
24. By the Chairman : Will you be good enough to state to the Committee what measures-
would, in your opinion, be most desirable for the safety of ships entering the harbour ? I should
say there should be a large, powerful capstan on the outer point of Nobby’s, and the life-boat
should be stationed there, instead of being away up at the town, so that she might run a light
hawser to a ship in distress, by which the big warp might be hauled on board, and then they
might heave away with the windlass. I would have two capstans —one on the outer and one
on the inner point. I would have them so constructed that they would go either with horses
or


or with men. Always when a ship is in danger there are lots of sailors who would run to
work it. In case of a ship going ashore this capstan would have a steady strain on her,
which a steamer could not with the tide running against her. A steamer would be very
useful for taking ships out and in.
25. You think two capstans would be of greater service for the preservation of ships in
danger ? Yes.
26. Do you think, if a steamer were there, she could not steam down with this hawser and
take hold of the vessel also, —might she not run down with the main hawser at once, and,
having put that on board, take hold of a tow-rope and help her out ? I would not like to
run a steamer into broken water; the life-boat would be better.
27. A steamer could not run alongside a vessel in broken water? No, and it is for that
reason I speak of a capstan.
28. How many pilots are there at Newcastle ? Two, besides the Harbour Master.
29. Do you think that number sufficient for the wants of the port ? No. Sometimes these
pilots are taken outside with strange ships which have run down and cannot get in. Some-
times I have had to take ships out for Captain Livingstone myself. Sometimes there arc vessels
wishing to leave the coal shoots, which they cannot do except at the top of high water, while
others are ready to go outside at the same time, and they make complaints when they cannot
get pilots, I well know the pilots are it from daylight till dark.
30. If they had a steam-tug it would facilitate the clearing the channel of ships ? So it would.
31. Has the trade of Newcastle much increased of late? Yes, very much since I went
there first.
82. Within the last year or two has it increased materially? Yes.
33. Thus rendering more pilots necessary ? Yes, so that vessels might get quicker despatch.
At one time, although there were so many in port, they got loaded so slowly that the pilots
could take them in and out readily; but now the Coal and Copper Company can load 400
tons a day, and the other 300.
34. How long have you known vessels to be detained in Newcastle, windbound ? About a
week, or perhaps a little longer if the north-casters lasted.
35. If there had been a sufficiently powerful steam tug, could those vessels have been towed
to sea ? Yes, easily.
36. Thus clearing the harbour and facilitating the working of other vessels ? Yes. There
is so little room that I always back out myself; I drop out with the tide—the tide has been
so strong since the breakwater was finished.
37. How many pilots do you think would suffice for the wants of Newcastle? I should
say there should bo two more, to take vessels about the harbour to the shoots and down
to the fairway. The pilots there now have good experience in taking ships out and in,
which is very hard to got; and the other men might work the ships up and down from the
Horse-shoe to the shoot and back again,
38. Two more you think would be sufficient ? Yes, I should say so ; and now and again
they could take a ship out with a leading wind.
39. You think two more pilots necessary for the proper working of the harbour ? Yes.
40. Suppose they had a steam-tug in charge of a pilot, which of course she would bo, do you
think he would be able to do the work of more than two of them ? Yes, he ought to do.
41. Suppose there were one more pilot appointed, and ho were stationed on board the steam-
tug, and the Harbour Master and one of the pilots were specially employed in superintending
the mooring of vessels in the harbour, would that be sufficient ? Yes.
42. Is that your opinion ? Yes
43. How far do the pilots generally go out to meet vessels at sea? According to the weather.
They go outside the Bum Borers. If it is a southerly wind they like to take vessels before
they come too far down. Sometimes they have to stand out with them before they get the
sails set properly.
44. Where do they board ships in bad weather ? Inside, if a whale-boat cannot go out.
They will go out as far as they can go ; if they can board them they do so just as they are
beginning to haul up, but if not, they keep in the boat and show them the way into smooth
water, but they do not like to tackle them in bad weather; they signal them to stand off.
45. There is a signal post at Newcastle ? Yes. Sometimes the vessels do not take notice
of the signal, hut run round Nobby’s, and let go anchor as far as they can get up.
46. From the signal post they indicate, in bad weather, to ships in the offing, when they
ought to stand out to sea, but sometimes the signal is not attended to ? Yes. Sometimes
vessels will run round Nobby’s, fetch up as far as they can, and let go both anchors, and
then stand a chance of getting ashore.
47. By Mr. Tooth: That is inside Nobby’s ? Not exactly inside; I should say about
north-west.
48. By the Chairman: Do you think there would be sufficient employment for a steam-tug
in fine weather, in towing vessels in and out ? Well, there has been one tried, and it did
not pay. However, they would not take the steamer when they could do without it; then,
when they wanted the steamer, she charged so much for taking them out, that they would
sooner run the risk of waiting another day than take her.
49. Supposing a steam-tug were established by the Government, and additional rates of
pilotage were charged to defray the expense, making every vessel pay, whether she wanted
the tug or not, in order that the tax might fall lightly on the shipping in general, and
giving every vessel entering the Port a claim upon this tug, do you think the shipowners
would grudge the payment of such a tax ? If they could agree upon it, it would be all
very well; but there would be a difficulty if two vessels were going in at one time; of
course the steamer would take the larger ship, and then there would be great complaints.
50. That is a matter of detail. If such a steam-boat were established by the Government,
and


and every vessel were obliged to pay a tax towards lier support, do you think such an
arrangement would be agreeable to the shipowners, or would they find fault ? I dure say
the owners of small vessels would find fault with it, for there are sometimes as many as
fifteen going out at one time, and of course the steamer would take out a largo ship) first,
and the small ones might go out themselves.
51. Of course they would be taxed according to their tonnage. It would he simply a small
tax, in the shape of an additional pilotage fee ? If it were a moderate tax, paid every six
months, it would not be objected to.
52. Have you any idea of the amount of tonnage that enters Newcastle in a year? No.
53. Bo you think there would bo sufficient employment for a steam-tug —would there be as
much as she could do ? Yes, if they would all take her.
54. If they did not take her, they would pay for her. Would such a tug be equally
serviceable in moving vessels from the Horseshoe to the shoots and from the shoots to the
Horseshoe ? She would be very useful in taking them, both in winter and summer.
55. Would a powerful steam vessel bo able to tow vessels against a strong north-easter ?
With a nasty sea there might be a difficulty—there is such a ripple of the tide; the tide
runs out very strong there, and when the tide is running out, and it is blowing hard, it is
just as much as she can do to pull a ship up, if there is a gale of wind.
56. Are you aware how the buoys at Newcastle are moored ? Yes, with two anchors.
57. Are the anchors and chains with which they are moored sufficient to answer the purpose
of warping ships up in had weather ? The chains are ; they are very heavy.
SS. Do you know the weight of the anchors ? No.
59. Is there a life-boat at Newcastle ? Yes ; I brought one down about four months ago.
60. Where is she kept or moored? In the old boat-house, close to the Stockade.
61. Can she be got out at all times of the tide ? If there are plenty of men to carry her;
they must launch her a long way. It is not a fit place to keep the life-boat. I would have
the life-boat on Nobby’s, and the pilot’s crew there also.
62. Where do the pilots and their crews live now? Some of them where the life-boat is, in
the same house; they have a sort of shed at one end of it.
63. That is in the township of Newcastle? Yes, close to the Queen’s Wharf.
64. A pilot living on Nobby’s would be much handier to board vessels ? Yes. I would
keep the sea-pilots at Nobby’s, and the others in the town.
65. But in the event of their haying a steamer, you would keep a pilot at all times on board
her ? Yes.
66. Have you ever seen the life-boat required to go off to ships in distress ? The old life-boat
I put out myself once; I went through the breakers with her ; hut this boat has never been
out. The other boat, that was condemned, was put out and capsized, and they could not
right her.
67. What is your opinion of the present life-boat —is she suitable ? She has never been
tried, to my knowledge.
68. How are things managed when a vessel is seen in distress, and the life-boat is required?
If any vessel shows a flag of distress, Captain Livingstone is very ready to send assistance;
if he does not send the life-boat, he sends a whale-boat, if she can possibly go.
69. Are there Harbour Regulations for the Port of Newcastle ? Yes.
70. Are those regulations carried out by the Harbour Master —does he keep vessels in
proper positions, so as not to impede the navigation ? Sometimes it is hard to do so;
sometimes a vessel comes in at ebb-tide, and is forced to anchor where she can; but the
Harbour Master obliges her to move when she can do so. Supposing they pull home their
anchors they drift in the way of the steamers.
71. Do you think the general conduct of the Harbour Master is such as to give satisfaction ?
As far as I have seen he always endeavors to give satisfaction to all parties; he wants to
keep vessels out of the way, but there is so little room when one vessel after another comes
and lets go her anchor.
72. Is it the case that vessels generally trading to the Port of Newcastle are badly found in
ground tackling, sails, and hawsers ? No doubt a lot of them are very badly found.
73. Was it a fact, as stated in the case of the “Martha,” that that vessel had a foresail bent
partly split? Yes.
74. Which in working up split into ribbons, and was the chief cause of the vessel grounding?
Yes.
75. Had you any communication with the authorities upon the subject of that vessel ? Yes ;
Captain Livingstone asked me about it.
76. You have given a written account of the circumstances? Yes.
77. Will you kindly state to the Committee any further information you have to offer, or
any suggestion you may wish to make, which will be conducive to the safety of vessels
entering Newcastle ? I think what I have already stated is all they could do to the harbour
just now. Certainly, a steam-tug would he of great service, hut I think a capstan would
still be indispensable. If a vessel should get ashore the capstan would keep a good strain
on her.
78. By Captain Lethbridge : What is the smallest draught of water in the channel at dead-
water, spring tide ? I should say about twenty-three feet.
79. By Mr. Tooth : Then any ship that can enter Port Jackson can enter Newcastle? Yes,
if she has a fair wind, or is under steam. I think they have taken them out in very smooth
water there, drawing twenty-two feet.
80. Do you happen to know the depth of water at low tide at the new wharf at Newcastle ?
It is deep at the corner where the steamers go, but as you come round there is a shelf of
rock in a line from inside the corner of the wharf to the Black Buoy; where they are
running the wharf now it is quite shallow.
81. Will you state the greatest depth at any place at the new wharf they are constructing?
Where the cattle vessels lie there is seventeen feet. 82.


82. You say vessels drawing twenty-two feet liave entered Newcastle harbour? Yes.
83. Could such vessels go to the wharf at any part ? Not at any part.
84. At a particular place is there twenty-two feet of water ? Yes, but not at the wharf.
85. Which part of the wharf do you mean ? The corner where the Government men
finished the wharf —from there to the old wharf. At no part of the wharf is there more than
seventeen feet of water. I stated that there was twenty-two feet of water in the Horseshoe.
86. Have you any idea of the length of the wharf where there is this great depth you speak
of —is it half a mile long? No.
87. What extent of wharf is there maintaining a depth of twenty-two feet —could more
than one ship of that draught load at a time ? Ido not think more than one such ship
could load ; perhaps two small vessels of five bunded tons might.
88. Do you think the capstans you propose to erect would prevent accidents without the
steam-tug ? If the life-boat would run a warp to them when they came to anchor; and they
must be powerful capstans, too.
89. Then you think the life-boat, in conjunction with the capstans, would be sufficient to
secure all vessels coming to the Port? Yes; but they would not facilitate ships entering
and leaving the Port.
90. Do you think, considering the numerous trips the smaller coasters make in the year, the
saving of time which would accrue by their having a steamer to tow them in and out, would
indemnify them for the small extra charge put upon them for its support ? No ; because
they can beat out or in any time they go to sea; but perhaps it might sub the views of the
ship owners, for all vessels not actually taking the steam-tug, to pay half the tax charged
on vessels who had her employed.
91. So that, in point of fact, it would be a tax upon that class of vessels without adequate
return ? Yes, it would. But if at any time any of these vessels should come down with hot
sails split, or be in danger from any cause, this steamer would then save her, and that wouW
pay her for all that she had paid for six or twelve months. But vessels are paying very little
now in the coasting trade.
92. By Captain Lethbridge: Is the wind from the south-east a leading wind for the
harbour ? Yes. In a south-east wind, men acquainted with the place, when going in, do not
keep too far from Nobby’s, and having their sails properly trimmed they will fetch in all
right.
93. Where do you recommend that the light should be placed —near the the present light on
the hill or on the point of Nobby’s ? I would put it on the top of Nobby’s.
94. About the centre ? Yes, any place on the top; it would make very little difference to
me which place it was.
95. Supposing you did not know the port as you do—if you were going in as a stranger —
where do you think the light should be ? I think it should be on the top of the centre of
Nobby’s. The hill where it is now is higher, and it could be seen further off from that than
from Nobby’s.
96. Do you know any instances of the warping bouys having started their moorings when a
vessel was being warped in ? No. I think it is very seldom they are used.
97. What was the tonnage of the largest vessel you ever knew to enter the port ? I think
the “Ellenborough” of 1031 tons was as large a vessel as any; she came in with the
Railway iron.
98. What was her draught of water ? Ido not know.
99. By the Chairman : What is the rise and fall of the tide at Newcastle ? In spring tides
I should say 6 feet.
100. About the same as at Sydney ? About the same.
101. By Captain Lethbridge: Respecting these capstans, would the outer capstan be in a
position to expose men working it to the surf ? No, it would be under the lee of Nobby’s.
102. The outer capstan ? Yes. The reason I suggest two is, that the warp would not be
long enough to reach a ship on the bank from the inner capstan, but from the outer one it
could reach her, and then they could shackle her up to a buoy.
103. By the Chairman : Do you know the distance from Nobby’s to the Oyster Bank ? I
could not exactly say.
104. How many cable lengths ? About two —that is 240 fathoms.
105. By Captain Lethbridge : Do you conceive that the harbour is filling in consequence of
extending the breakwater ? No, I think if anything it is clearer. I used to come in at the
breakwater in a southerly wind; there were 10 feet of water there.
106. By Mr. Hood : Do you recollect the case of four or five vessels being lost going out of
the Richmond? Vessels loaded with cedar, —they capsized.
107. What was the cause of that ? They were taken with so sudden a squall that they
could not take in their canvas. There was an old hand that was master of one of those
vessels.
108. It was not caused by the want of buoys or anything that could have been obviated?
No.
109. I thought there was a spit, not buoyed? I think the buoys were not sufficiently
apparent.
110. By the Chairman : Is there a Pilot at the Richmond River ? I think there is.
111. Are Pilots of any use at such places ? They might be of use to lend a vessel a hand to
get out; but if I were going there, I would take myself in; for it is always a shifting bar,
and I never take the bar before I look round to see where the deep water is. The Pilots
may be useful inside the bar.
112. By Mr. Hood: Do you think there is any actual necessity for a Pilot at the Richmond
River at all ? I should say a Pilot is a good deal of use to many vessels there.
113. By the Chairman : Would a Pilot be of any utility at the M'Leay River ? Yes.
114. On the same principle ? Yes.
c 10—E TUESDAY,


TUESDAY, 11 NOVEMBER, 1856.
Captain LETHBRIDGE, R. N., | Mr. LORD,
Mr. TOWNS.
ROBERT TOWNS, Esquire, in the Chair.
Mr. John Brown was called in and examined as follows;
1. By the Chairman : Are you master and part owner of the “ Raven ?” I am.
2. At present trading between this port and Moreton Bay? Yes; and I have been in that
trade during the last twelve years.
3. Consequently you are well acquainted with all the dangers and difficulties attending the
navigation in and out of that place ? I am.
4. During the time you have been trading there, have you been aware of the disasters and
shipwrecks that have occurred at the entrance to Moreton Bay ? Yes.
5. Will you state, to the best of your recollection, how many such disasters, when and where,
have occurred ? The last wreck was that of a brig, the “ Venus,” laden with sugar, which
was lost in Freeman’s Channel.
6. Was there not a disaster later than that? Yes; there was the case of the “ Phcebe
" Dunbar.”
7. Do you recollect the Hamburgh vessel wrecked on the south end of Moreton Island ? Yes.
8. Do you recollect the “John Fermie ” making a mistake, and being taken out by a black,
“ Old Tommy” ? Yes. The “ Phmbe Dunbar” went in the same way. That is a good passage
if one looks to it; but people take it who never go aloft to look it out; and one part of the
spit overruns the other.
9. Prior to 1847, when the “ Sovereign ” was lost, and the loss of life was so great —was not
that the passage most used, and had not the Government a Pilot stationed on Amity Point?
Yes, Hexton, who held that post sixteen years.
10. Since the wreck of the “ Sovereign,” has that channel been abandoned ? I ran through
that for three years after, until I laid down the buoys in the passage.
11. Was not the southern passage generally abandoned after the loss of the “ Sovereign,”
because, in consequence of that wreck, underwriters would not insure vessels going by that
passage—did not the Steam Navigation Company give directions to the masters of their
vessels not to take it? Yes.
12. Will you have the goodness to state what part you had in buoying oft the other chan-
nel ? After the wreck, our coasting vessels used a passage called Freeman’s Passage, on the
north end of Moreton Island. I believe I took the first Immigrant vessel through that,
when the Captain was bad in bed ; it was the “ Artemesia,” Captain Ridley, of five hundred
tons. I beat her through Freeman’s Passage. Since that time, this passage has
been blocked up. There is water, however, if you have a fair wind to carry you through.
You go right across the bank instead of going into the main channel, and carry two-and-a-
quarter fathoms, and you save ten miles in going round to the northward to the first buoy
in the entrance to the big ship channel. That buoy is the only one left out of the three
originally laid down. There were three buoys laid down by me, in the first instance, under
the direction of Captain Freeman who was then Harbour Master, and I had to go down a
second time, by order of Captain Wickham, to lay down others. In fact I never expected
the buoys would stop there, for they were mushroom anchors, and they never stretched the
bridles out before they threw the buoys overboard. Buoy B was thrown down all in a bight,
I was ordered to “let go;” and let it go with a great deal of slack chain.
13. Then we are to infer from what you have stated, that the reason the buoys so soon drifted
was that proper care was not taken in the first instance, in mooring them? Yes.
14. You were twice engaged at the mooring of the buoys in the channel ? Yes; I moored
one buoy twice.
15. How long did they keep in position after you first took them down ? I could not say.
16. On the first occasion did.you take down the three buoys, A, B, and C ? Yes.
17. Do you recollect how long they remained in position before they drifted? I think it
was about twelve months before I went down a second time with the new buoy.
18. I suppose before you took down this second buoy the others had been adrift? Yes, two
out of the three; but Ido not know how long before I took down the new one.
19. How many did you find in position when you went down ? Only one ; there was a
second, but that had to be fetched from the Glasshouses. They were half full of water; you
could only see them occasionally; and that thing sent down to raise them, the yacht, is of no
use at all.
20. Do you refer to the “ Pearl” ? Yes.
21. Was the “ Pearl” sent when you went down to moor the buoys ? No ; I went down in the
“ Ann Mary.”
22. That was before there was any boat there specially for the purpose ? Yes.
23. Have you been in the channel lately ? Yes ; I came out through it the trip before last.
24. How many buoys did you find ? I found Buoy B.
25. Have you any idea how long A has been adrift from its moorings ? I should say three
years.
26. Not so long as that, I think ? It is a long while, but I cannot say positively.
27. By Captain Lethbridge : What buoy was it that was moored with a slack chain ? Buoy A.
28. By the Chairman: What channel do you pass through now? Igo in the middle
channel, unless I have fair wind; I come out mostly between the middle and eastern banks,
where the Buoy A was; the southernmost buoy of the three.
29.


29. That is the channel now used by the steamers? Yes.
30. The steamers have a buoy, I think ? Yes; that is upon the inner edge of the eastern
bank.
30. Are you aware that between the bank that formerly formed one side of Freeman’s
Channel and the main, there is deep water ? Yes; there are three fathoms water; I go
close in ; but there is not room to work.
31. There is room enough in the inner channel of all, to go in with a leading wind ? Yes;
there are twelve feet of water.
32. How long is it since you left Moreton Bay ? I left Brisbane last Saturday three weeks.
33. You have been out during all the late bad weather ? Yes.
34. Had the Light Vessel arrived before you left ? No. The “ Vanquish” and “ Don Juan”
arrived last Sunday.
35. What progress had they made with the Lighthouse when you left ? They were forming
the roof when I was there, getting the top up. I may state that they want a couple more
buoys farther to the southward.
36. When the Light Vessel is properly anchored in its position—that is, in the immediate
vicinity of Buoy B—will that be a sufficient and safe guide for the entrance of that channel ?
Yes, providing the ship rides there ; but she will ride very uncomfortably there. Not only
have they a heavy sea, but a tremendous current in the Bay. In spring tides it runs at six
or seven knots an hour.
37. When that vessel is placed in position you think there will be no difficulty? I do not
think there will be any fear of the vessel moving ; I was referring to the people in her.
38. You are aware that there have been a great many disasters to ships in the Bay, in con-
sequence of their taking the south instead of the north channel ? Yes.
39. If a light vessel had been placed in the north channel, near Buoy B, would there have
been any possibility of a vessel making a mistake as to the channel ? No.
40. If a light had been erected on Cape Moreton, could a mistake have been made then ?
No.
41. As the master of a vessel could not mistake Amity Point for Point Look-out, or Point
Look-out for Cape Moreton ? No ; and besides these rocks stand a good way to the westward
compared with Plinder’s Rock.
42. Do you consider that the chief cause of these mistakes which have led to shipwrecks, the
want of a light at Cape Moreton, or the want of a light vessel ? If a light had been upon Cape
Moreton they could always have seen it, and it would have enabled them to see which was
the channel.
43. If a vessel were moored there, there could be no mistake ? No.
44. You are aware where the pilot station is at present? Yes, round Cambula Point.
45. That is inside the danger, what we may call the entrance to the Bay? Yes,
46. Do you consider that to be their proper position ? Ido not.
47. Prom your long experience in trading to that place, where do you consider the best
position to be for a Pilot Station ? About a mile or two inside Cape Moreton.
48. Under Point Moreton ? Yes.
49. From that position the pilots could see everything at sea, and board vessels before they
got into difficulties ? Yes,
50. By Captain Lethbridge : If the pilots were there, would they have a good beach for
launching their boat? Yes, except when it is blowing hard from the north-east.
51. By the Chairman: Are you aware whether there is any landing place on the south-west
side of Cape Moreton ? Yes, there is a sandy bay up there.
52. Then you think the pilots in their present position are badly situated ? Yes.
53. Do you think it desirable that the master of the Light Vessel should be a pilot, or that
the pilots should take turn and turn on board the Light Vessel, so that a ship might run
down to buoy B and be picked up by a pilot in smooth water ? Yes.
64.. You are aware that a new buoy has gone down —did you see it ? No; it went down in
the “ Don Juan.”
55. You are aware that the Government have a vessel at Moreton Bay for the purpose of
attending to these buoys, should they again get adrift ? Yes, under the command of Captain
Geary, the Harbour Master.
56. Do you know anything of that vessel with respect to its suitableness for the purpose?
Yes. She draws nine feet of water, in the first place.
57. By Captain Lethbridge :Is that the “Pearl”? Yes.
58. By the Chairman: Is she a suitable vessel for the purpose of overhauling these buoys
and raising them ? I think not.
59. By Mr. Lord: What did she cost? ill,ooo.
60. By the Chairman : Were you there at the time the “ Vision ” was there ? Yes.
61. Would that vessel have been a suitable vessel for the purpose? A much better vessel
than the “Pearl.”
62 You know them both ? Yes, I think she is much more suitable, because the “Pearl”
has to wait till the top of high water before she gets over the bar. Some of our old cutters
would have been best suited to lift these buoys.
63. Do you think these sands shift a great deal ? Yes.
64. By Captain Lethbridge: Would not a good launch with a davit serve very well? Yes.
They should have buoys with holes to put a pump in.
65. By the Chairman : What water can be found in the great ship channel ? About seven
fathoms, and from Cambula to the Ship Patch there are about fourteen fathoms.
66. Are you aware how long buoy C has been missing ? That has not been there these many
years, better than four; that is the buoy that was on the south part of the middle bank.
67. Do you think there would be any difficulty in shipping coming in at night time with
a gale of wind from the north-east—would there be any difficulty in running to Cowan
Cowan ?


Cowan? No; a vessel has nothing less than two miles of width between the middle hank
and the west hank, and the least water there is, is two and a quarter fathoms.
68. By Mr. Lord: How far is it from buoy Bto Cowan Cowan? About six or seven miles.
They have the whole fetch there, hut they can lie safely as they have good holding ground.
69. By the Chairman : If there were two lanterns as leading marks upon the shore thtit
would be a better guide ? The pilots do now, when a ship is coming in, have lanterns burning
in their houses.
70. Do you think the importance of the jfcrt at present would require our going to the
expense of them ? Ido not see that it would.
71. If a vessel came in now at night time in a strong wind from the north-east, could she
anchor under the lee of the east bank, inside the position where the Light Vessel would be?
Yes, if she came inside where the Light Vessel would be, there is a good course; there is two
miles width of channel.
72. How does the tide set ? The flood tide sets from the northward towards Cape Moreton ;
and then, when they come to Freeman’s Channel, the sea and the tide meet each other,
73. Would not the tide be liable to lead a ship out of her course? I will mention what
■occurred on board a vessel: she anchored about five miles to the southward of the Ship
Patch, and had Robertson, the Pilot, on board; a man on the topsail yard said he thought
the vessel was drifting; “driftingbe hanged,” said the Pilot; well, they went down below,
and when they came on deck in the morning they had parted the chain, and the ship had
drifted round Moreton Island, towards Flinders’ Rocks, and, when daylight broke, they
were within a mile of Flinders’ Rocks; they had drifted twelve or fifteen miles during the
night; that was the “ Sarah Ann,” belonging to Mr. Stewart; it was the chain that she had
out that kept her head to the tide.
74. After you have entered the Bay fairly, and got to Cowan Cowan, what are the dangers
between that and the river bar? There is the West Bank, comes very narrow off to the south
end of Cowan Cowan. I think it is necessary to have a buoy placed on the bank abreast of
Cowan Cowan Point —the south-east part of the West Bank. When we come in at night we
work close to the island till we come to the Ship Patch ; you edge right away for the river
bar, south-west half south ; you could edge away west, and then there should be another buoy
there, so that a ship could edge right away at once.
75. I believe one of the Pilots (Robertson) put a small buoy there? Yes; it is gone now.
76. You think a buoy there is absolutely necessary for the safety of the inner waters ? Yes ;
there is no sea there.
77. It would also be a lead for ships coming down as well ? Yes.
78. Do you consider that the present beacons at the river bar are sufficient for the purpose ?
No. Many a time I have been hunting for them, and if it had not been for the marks I
have of my own, the hills inside, getting these hills in a line with Luggage Point, I could
not have found my way.
79. You consider the beacons quite insufficient ? Yes; they are just broomsticks stuck up,
with little bits of stick on them, and one of them is a coal basket stuck up on top of a stick,
and painted white. When you get that in a line with the land you cannot see it. I have
often thought there should have been a tun butt placed outside of the river bar, just to give
us a lead.
80. In your experience, have you found that at certain seasons of the year you have more
water at the night tides than the day? Yes.
81. Thus rendering it imperative to be under weigh at night time ? Yes. In the winter
time we have two feet more water at night; so you have at Sydney. I have many times
had to go with a boat and hunt for a beacon to put a lantern upon, and we cannot find them
at all sometimes.
82. By Mr. Lord ; Is a westerly wind a fair wind down this channel ? Yes.
83. By the Chairman : If the light vessel were moored in the same position as buoy B now
is, would she answer as a lead for a vessel to go by at any time of night ? Yes, if the wind.is
fair.
84. During the winter time, with a westerly wind, would that be a great advantage ? Yes.
85. Is there anything more you can suggest to improve the navigation ? They want a few
more beacons put up in the river.
Mr. Robert Lorn Pattison, called in and examined:—
1. By the Chairman : You are now in command of the “ Paterson ” steamer? Yes.
2. You have been for many years trading to the Port of Newcastle ? Eighteen or nineteen
>• years.
3. Chiefly in steamers ? Chiefly in steamers.
4. Of course you have entered the Port in all weathers ? In all weathers.
5. What do you consider the worst wind that a vessel could have when entering the Port of
Newcastle ? A west-north-west wind is dead out of the harbour.
6. Running in with a gale of wind, which is the worst wind to enter the harbour ? The
most dangerous is an easterly gale, because there is such a tremendous sea running.
7. Would you not lead up to smooth water with an easterly wind? You would, if jour
vessel would steer; but when a vessel is going in under such circumstances, the rudder is
out of the water at times, and you have no control over her; she takes a sheer, and a sea
takes her on her quarter, right for the Oyster Bank, and her head towards Nobby’s Island.
When I went in last. Thursday morning the sea was breaking right across Newcastle; the
wind a little to the southward of east; the sea caught the steamer on the quarter, and sent
her just to the rocks, and then went off to the Oyster Bank. The “ Illalong” was worse off
than I was.
8. You were present the other day at Newcastle, when those unfortunate wrecks took place ?
I was not present when the vessels got on shore. 9.


9. How was the wind then ? East-south-east. When the " Eleanor Lancaster” was entering
the Port the wind shifted to the S.S.E.
10. You came in while the vessels wore on the strand? Before they went on shore; but
I went up the river. I was there as a witness after they were ashore, the following morning.
11. W ere you present when the life-boat went to them ? Yes, and saw the life-boat go down.
12. Seeing, as you did, the positions of these vessels, and knowing, as you must have known,
the positions they occupied when they first entered the harbour, what means do you think
should have bean employed to save them, if they could have been saved at all ? When they
first entered the harbour during the gale, the “ Eleanor Lancaster ” let go her anchors in
smooth water, but the roll of the sea caused her to drag, and she continued dragging. Now,
if there had been a steam tug to have buckled to her, she could have been taken to a place
of safety.
13. You think that if a powerful steam-tug had been in readiness, with the steam up, and
sufficient hawsers for tow-ropes, ready to have caught hold of the “ Eleanor Lancaster,” that
vessel might have been towed into safety ? lam confident of it.
14. And the other vessels, I presume, in like manner? Just in the same way they might
have been drawn into smooth water,
15. Would there have been any danger or difficulty in getting a tow-rope to either of these
vessels at the time when the life-boat communicated for the purpose ? Not the slightest.
10. Could the life-boat have taken a rope down ? A steamer could have managed it with a
little boat. The life boat that saved the crew was a steamer’s life-boat, and the one that
went alongside was a ship’s jolly-boat, with a line fast to her from the life-boat.
17. You were present when the life-boat went off? I was up on the hill.
18. Had you examined her before she went off? Yes; I never thought her a nice boat.
19. You did not think her suitable? No; they were up to their knees in water. I saw
her go down about four feet, and then rise again, several times; the men waved their hats
for assistance, and managed to keep themselves up till the steamer took them off.
20. By Captain Lethbridge : Had she air-tight compartments ?
21. By the Chairman: She filled as soon as she got into the surf, did she not? She was not
in the surf at all—l mean the second attempt.
22. How did the men preserve their position and save their lives? Ido not know; I was
not there at that time; that was at night. I am told she rolled over, bottom up, and one
man under her for some time.
23. Are you aware whether it was light or dark when she first went ashore? About four
o’clock in the afternoon.
24. Do you know the cause of the disaster to the life-boat in the first instance ? The sea
breaking over her; she was never adapted to go through the surf, I would sooner go in a
whale-boat.
25. By Captain Lethbridge: Of what size and what power would you recommend the
proposed steam-tug to be ? She should not be under eighty or one hundred horse-power,
with a disconnecting shaft. It would require something of that kind, with a long hawser.
With a disconnecting shaft so that they could have a line aboard.
26. By the Chairman ; In addition to the steamer, a powerful capstan on the outer point of
Nobby’s has been recommended ? It would not be a bit of use. Whichever way the tide is
the scope would be too much for any hawser. The “ Sydney Griffiths,” (she is 500 tons,)
about two years ago, got on shore in the same position as the “ Eleanor Lancaster.” They
burnt a tar cask on deck to show the position she was in. Six hands and the mate came
ashore and said they wanted a steamer. I commanded the steamer “ Ben Bolt,” and went
out to them; I got a line on board, and they commenced unshackling their cable ; I called
out to them not to unshackle it in case my warps might part, but to do so the moment they
found we went ahead, and then if one anchor gave way there was the other to stand by; the
result was just as I remarked, my hawser broke after I got her in the fair way; however, it
was a flood tide, and I did not lay hold of her again ; she came to anchor in a safe position.
That ship was in the same position as the “ Eleanor Lancaster,” and it was a dark night.
27. By Captain Lethbridge: When you speak of a disconnecting shaft, you mean a vessel
that can turn one paddle without the other ? Yes. A steamer would be of no use without
that at Newcastle. With a disconnecting shaft, a vessel can turn round in its own length.
28. I suppose the tonnage of the vessel would be governed by her horse power? Yes.
29. By the Chairman : There are certain buoys at Newcastle now? Yes.
30. Are they useful ? For small vessels. All the boats that rendered assistance to the
wrecks hung on to one of them. The tide was running eight knots. One boat, belonging
to the “ Lord Burleigh,” got outside nearly among the breakers, and they were six hours
getting back.
81. By Mr. Lord: Are these good substantial buoys ? Yes, they are.
32. Do you ever get on the Plats going up the river with the steamer? No; if it is so
dark that I cannot see the buoys I do not attempt to go in.
33. By the Chairman: Have you seen other vessels, besides those that were wrecked the
other day, got ashore in a similar position ? Yes, the “ Tigress,” schooner, sprang a leak
inside Nobby’s in one of those gales like that on Wednesday, and they came to me for assist-
ance ; the ship was well to the eastward at the time, and the captain asked me if I would
tow her into port. I told him he could save the expense if he stuck her on Scott’s Point;
he did so and stuck her to the southward of Scott’s Point.
34. By Mr. Lord: I suppose the tug boat would be useful for towing vessels in ? Yes; I
have known vessels to be for three or four weeks with a beautiful north-easterly wind and
could not get out.
35. By the Chairman : Do you know how long the “ Eleanor Lancaster” was detained before
she got out ? Six days.
36. Is it possible, that if there had been a steamer to take her out, she might have been out
c 10—F of


of danger before tbe gale set in ? Yes, she might have been half way to Launceston, and
had a good offing.
37. By Captain Lethbridge : Are you aware whether a steam engine can be constructed in
Sydney with a disconnecting shaft ? Yes. They have one on the “ Yarra Yarra.” You can
hook on half a dozen vessels, and away you go.
38. By the Chairman : Has the “ Washington” sufficient power to answer as a steam tug at
Newcastle ? Yes. There would be no expense to the Government; she would pay her
expenses.
39. Do you recollect a steam tug being down there last year ? Yes ; I commanded her during
the absence of her captain at Melbourne.
40. What was the reason that vessel did not pay as a private enterprise ? There was
scarcely any thing doing at tbe time; every thing was very slack; there was a strike among
the colliers. She was started as a private enterprise by people at Melbourne. I had
instructions to tow vessels at so much per ton, but I found it would not do, and when the
steam was up, I made arrangements the best way I could, and made her pay very well.
41. By Captain Lethbridge : You think that on account of the charges being so high people
would not employ her ? No, they would not; but when the steam was up, I would go out
and make a lower charge and bring in three at a time.
42. By the Chairman : Is there anything else you could suggest to the Committee for the
safety and security of the navigation, and for the salvation of life and property ? The tug is
the only thing, having a disconnecting shaft and properly fitted with hawsers suited for the
purpose; and she should carry about a dozen life-buoys, and two or three handy life-boats to
run to a vessel in distress.
43. You think the present life-boat totally unsuited for the purpose ? Yes ; and it will be a
great pity if she is ever found again.
44. Do you know the number of men that went out in the life-boat ? Sixteen.
45. Did it require sixteen men to handle her according to her equipment ? Yes, with short
oars to meet the surf.
46. Were they double-banked ? Yes.
47. By Captain Lethbridge : Was she tried here? Yes; they tried to capsize her, but they
could not do that in smooth water.
48. By the Chairman : In your opinion, if a suitable steam tug, properly equipped and
manned, was kept at all times available for the purpose of rendering assistance to ships enter-
ing and departing from Newcastle, that is all you can recommend for improving the naviga-
tion ? That is all as far as that is concerned; but I would advise that she should be
managed by the pilots and their crews, except in the engine room.
49. Do you find the channel much impeded by vessels lying in it ? Very much.
50. In the event of their being such a steamer, I suppose she would expedite the moving of
them ? Yes; they are lying in the passage, waiting for a wind to get up to the shoots, but
the moment they came in the tug could take them right up to the shoots, without their
letting go anchor.
51. Independently of the salvation of life and property, it would be equally advantageous to
transport ships to and from the shoots, and to and from sea? Yes; it would be a great
boon to the shipping.
52. By Mr. Lord: The pilots have to move vessels four or five times, under present circum-
stances ? Yes.
53. By Captain Lethbridge: They are going to build a Lighthouse at Newcastle ? Yes.
54. What position would you recommend for it ? It should be on Nobby’s; that is the
proper position.
55. If carried up a good height, it would be on a level with the present light? Ido not
approve of a high light; there are so many fogs on the coast.
56. By Mr. Lord : Do the freshes change the bar? No ; I have known no difference in the
flats these eighteen years. I take old Captain Taggart’s landmarks, such as trees, &o.
57. By the Chairman: Has the trade of Newcastle increased much within these last few
years ? It has increased, immensely; but the produce from Morpeth is double what it is
from Newcastle.
58. Do you think there would bo employment for a steam-tug, of the power you have men-
tioned, constantly ? Yes; if it were only to go up the river and take vessels over the
flats, it would be of the greatest benefit.
59. Then you think you, yourself, having commanded the steam-tug that was at Newcastle,
as a private enterprise, that if a tug were established as Government property, and under the
surveillance of the pilots, all vessels being obliged to pay a tax or extra charge for pilotage,
that that would be the best mode of carrying it out ? Yes; and in fine weather, if the tug
is used a second time; except that in cases of distress, there should be no charge.
60. Do you think there is a sufficient number of pilots at present at Newcastle ? No;
there is one sick, just now, confined to his bed.
61. How many are there ? Three, with the Harbour Master, and he does as much work as
any of them.
62. In the event of having this steanntug, the number of pilots at present there would be
sufficient ? Yes.
63. By Captain Lethbridge: The smaller vessels can workout? Yes.
64. And if they were a little bothered, the tug could take a string of them ? Yes.
65. "Would it be fair to tax them? Yes, everyone; none would begrudge it; these ideas
are their own —what they said the other night.
66. By the Chairman: You think the smallest proprietors would not grudge it? No; the
smaller ones would not: the larger ones might.
THURSDA Y,


THURSDAY, 13 NOVEMBER, 1856.
Present
Captain LETHBKIDGE, K..V, | Mr. TOOTH,
Mb. TOWNS.
ROBERT TOWNS, Esquire, in the Chair.
Mr. William Mulhall, Master of the steamer “ Collaroy,” called in and examined :
1. By the Chairman : You command one of the A. S. N. Company’s steamers? Yes.
2. And have done so for many years ? About sixteen years—ever since they commenced.
o. And you have been constantly trading to the Hunter ? I have ; but I have been a few
trips to Moreton Bay.
4. You have, no doubt, entered the harbour of Newcastle in all weathers? Yes, in all
weathers.
5. What winds do you consider the worst for entering the harbour of Newcastle—what wind
raises the heaviest sea, and makes it most dangerous for entering. ? The wind at south
raises the heaviest sea, and a south-west wind is equally as bad.
6. From south to south-west is the worst wind a ship can enter the harbour with ? Yes.
7. During the time you have been trading there, have you seen many vessels stranded or
wrecked in entering the harbour of Newcastle ? A great many.
8. And under various circumstances, I suppose ? Yes.
9. Will you be good enough to state to the Committee what, in your opinion, has been the
chief cause of these shipwrecks ? You know the weather is so bad there sometimes that a
vessel has no business to attempt to enter at all.
10. But I suppose in such cases, when they get down to leeward they are afraid to haul out
again ? With the wind at south a vessel can always haul out, unless she is a very light
vessel; if in very light trim she might go to leeward; but with the wind to the eastward of
south she would not be able to haul out, especially a light ship, and they generally go down
there in ballast.
11. I suppose a vessel running down with a strong southerly wind, when she came to haul
round Nobby s, would have the wind right in her teeth ? Yes.
12. The channel is very contracted ? Yes; with the ebbtide they have no business to
attempt it, nor even with a flood tide when there is any sea on.
13. When they do attempt it, the difficulty of getting within the harbour is very great ?
Yes; they find they cannot work up, and let go anchor; and as the holding ground is not
good, the vessels drag, and get on the Oyster Bank. I suppose I have seen some dozens of
them there in my time.
14. Would a vessel running down with the wind at south carry way into sufficiently smooth
water to creep into safety ? She would not.
15. She would then be obliged to anchor ? Between the Oyster Bank and Nobby’s.
16. Where the sea runs high ? Yes.
17. If there were a steam boat of sufficient power to take hold of a vessel, and prepared, of
course, with tow ropes and a suitable boat to carry a rope out, do you think that in most cases
she would be able to tow vessels so situated into safety? Yes, I think there would be no diffi-
culty in it at all. She should be a proper steam-tug, of one hundred horse power at the
very least a short vessel with great beam, with engines having a disconnecting shaft, so
that she could go ahead with one wheel and astern with the other; such a vessel would be
much more manageable in a narrow place.
18. Were you ever in a vessel with such a shaft? Never; I only speak from what I have
heard. There is one at Port Phillip, I believe.
19. Would such a vessel as the “Washington” answer the purpose ? It should be a vessel
not longer than her; if she were even shorter she would be better, with a great beam,
because a short vessel will go round much quicker than a long vessel.
20. How many pilots are there in Newcastle ? I think there are only two now besides the
Harbour Master.
21. In the event of a steam-tug being sent to Newcastle, would a pilot’s crew commanded
by a pilot be sufficient to man her, with the exception of the engine room ? You would
require two engineers, first and second, and then a pilot’s boat’s crew would be quite suffi-
cient on board.
22. Then you think that a steamer so equipped and manned would be all that would be
necessary tor the safety of ships entering the port ? I think that is all that is necessary.
Tm iv • i" su S'S ested tllat a capstan, fixed on the eastern part of the point close
to -Nobby s, to be worked either by horses or manual labour, is desirable, so that if a hawser
could be passed to a vessel she could be moved up ? It would be a very good thing, but if
you have a steam-boat you will not require such a thing at all. You would require to have
heavy anchors to the steamer.
24. If a steamer were provided for the purpose suggested, would she not be otherwise useful in
towing ships to sea, and moving them from place to place ? Certainly,
n ■ F ° l r i ° stance > a vessel is fir st towed into the Horseshoe, from the Horseshoe to the Ballast
Ground, from the Ballast Ground to the Shoot, from the Shoot back again to the Horseshoe
and then out to sea ? Y"es.
and Gme* ? at done the steamer with greater facility, and great saving of expense
27. As the owner of a coasting vessel, do you think there would be any objection to paying a
small additional pilotage fee or tug tax, if such accommodation were afforded ? I think
they would be all willing to do so. I know when I had vessels I would have been very glad.
28.


28. From the immense trade of the Hunter, if every vessel had to pay, it would he a mere
trifle individually ? It would.
29. And you think it would not be looked on as an oppressive tax, but rather as an acquisition ?
Yes, I think so. It would enable vessels to run in with safety when they are now afraid
to go in.
30. I suppose it is not at all unusual for even small vessels to be detained in the harbour of
Newcastle after they are laden ? They are are very often detained with a flood tide and a
strong north-easter. I have been offered £5O to tow a large vessel out, but it was against my
instructions to do it.
31. If such a steam vessel as we have spoken of were placed in Newcastle, I suppose she would
clear the harbour in a very short time ? Certainly she would. Vessels would not be delayed
an hour after they had their cargoes on board. Especially in the summer season, when these
strong north-easters set in, it is impossible for a ship to get out.
32. And then they would be no sooner towed round Nobby’s than they would have a fair
wind ? Yes, and make their passage, while they would otherwise be lying in the harbour.
33. And double their voyages ? And double their voyages.
34. You recollect there was a steam tug at Newcastle as private property ? Yes, there were
two there; the “ Huntress ” was one, but she was of very little use—she had not power enough.
35. The “ Sophia ” was the other ? Yes.
36. Do you recollect the reason why that vessel, as a private enterprise, did not pay ? On
account of the charges being so high she was not employed except in oases of necessity. I paid
£l2 myself for towing a vessel of mine in, and she was only one hundred and twenty tons.
37. It would be necessary probably to put a limit on the tonnage dues to be collected for the
steam tug —a vessel under fifty tons would hardly require her ? She would hardly require
her certainly as a general rule; but I have oven seen them detained.
38. The tax on a fifty ton vessel would be very trifling in itself ? Yes.
39. Then you think even small vessels would not have any objection to pay their proportion ?
I should say not, if the tax be levied according tonnage. I may mention that I think it
would be very requisite to have a life-boat attached to the steamer.
40. In your trips to the Hunter do you find much inconvenience from ships lying in the
channel between the shoot and the other anchorage ? They are moored no way now—they
are lying all over the harbour; and sometimes it is a difficult matter to find the way to the
wharf.
41. The steamboat could easily keep the channel clear ? Yes, the channel need not be
interfered with then.
42. That would be a further convenience arising from the employment of the steam tug ?
Certainly it would. Very often I have seen the vessels moored so thick that you could not
get near the wharf at all.
43. Is it the case that vessels that generally trade to Newcastle are badly found in ground
tackling, sails, hawsers, and so forth ? I think they are generally pretty well found, because
they know the place well, and they have usually one heavy anchor of extra weight for lying
at Nobby’s. The “ Storm King,” which belonged to me at one time, had immense ground
tackling, but it would not hold her, and she went ashore.
44. jßy Captain Lethbridge : Did she break up ? No, they got her off again.
45. By the Chairman :Do you recollect the “ Martha ” that was stranded there ? Yes.
46. Do you know whether it was the fact, as has been stated, that she entered the harbour
with her foresail split, and in working in it blew to ribbons, and that was the cause of her
going aground ? I heard that all her sails were split; I did not see it.
47. Were you present during the last storm ? Yes.
48. And you witnessed the disasters that took place among the shipping ? Yes.
49. Did you, as was stated in the newspapers, rescue the crew of the life-boat ? Yes.
50. Will you state the particulars ? 1 was coming in round Nobby’s Island about two o’clock
in the afternoon ; there was a heavy sea breaking right across; the wind was about south-
south-east, and the life-boat was lying at anchor just inside the break ; the sea used to break
close to her stern each time; there were twelve men in her.
51. Was there a vessel ashore at the time? Yes, the “Eleanor Lancaster;” she was lying
about south-west from where this life-boat was, further in : the life-boat had drifted away to
leeward of her.
52. Could they not pull her? No; the men were up to the middle in water; you could not
.see the boat, only the men. I thought it was a raft at first, only seeing the men above the
water. Seeing they were in distress, I lowered my life-boat down, with four of the crew and
the chief mate in her, and they took all the men off, twelve of them. They had a kellick
down, or something of that sort, but the boat was dragging all the time out seaward. The
men would have been all drowned, as sure as the world, if I had not come in at the time.
The current was running so strong that the moorings were bringing the boat right under
water ; I should say her gunwale was a foot under water ; we could see nothing but the men,
and they were holding on to the oars.
53. At what rate was the current running ? The tide had only begun to ebb about an hour;
I should say it was running from four to five knots.
54. AVhat became of the life-boat after the men were taken out of her ? She sank directly
the men were out of her, the moorings took her right down, she disappeared directly; it was
a most extraordinary thing. She was afterwards found some four or five miles along the
beach, but she is all to pieces.
•55. Had you seen that boat before at Newcastle ? Yes.
56, As a practical man, what did you think of her ? I had not paid particular attention to
the build of the Boat.
57. But now you have seen her performance, what do you think of her? I confess I expected
more from a life-boat.
58.


58. What do you think was the cause of her behaving so badly? I think it was on account
of the boat not having sheer enough. I have seen a life-boat with a bow standing up an
immense height above the men’s heads, and they have such a sweep of keel that they will
turn as if on a pivot.
59. What description of boat did you lower to save the people? She was a very nice boat,
but not a regular built life boat; she was life-boat shaped and fitted with cork, and she
had more sheer than the Newcastle life-boat had.
60. Do you recollect her dimensions ? Twenty feet on the keel. She was built after the
whale-boat fashion ; I do not think she is as long as a regular whale-boat, but she has more
beam, and is much deeper ; Ido not think she is more than twenty feet on the keel, but then
she has a rake fore and aft, with a sharp stern like a whale-boat.
61. By Captain Lethbridge: How did your boat behave ? Very well.
62. Did she ship any water? Not a drop.
63. Do you think a small boat like yours would answer the general purposes of the Harbour
of Newcastle ? No; I would give her a great deal more sheer. If a boat happens to capsize it
is the sheer makes her right; a straight boat will never come back again; but the keel of a
boat with a great sheer is so far out of the water when she is capsized that she will turn again
immediately.
64. Has your boat a curved keel? Yes, she has got a very round keel; I think from each
end it drops six inches in the centre, and that is a great deal in twenty feet.
65. Was it in the smooth water or the surf where you found the life-boat ? Just at the very
edge of the break, not in the break; the sea use to break very near her every time, it might
break over her occasionally.
64. Did the people give any reason for the boat having filled in the first instance ? The
boat, I believe, was half full of water when they started.
65. Leaking ? Yes; she had been stove the day before, I believe.
66. By the Chairman; Do you recollect how long the crew of the “Eleanor Lancaster”
were on the wreck before they were taken off? The ship got ashore the evening previous to
our getting in ; —they were on the wreck about twenty-four hours, or more.
67. Were the people on board the wreck when you took the men out of the life boat ? Yes.
68. Did you see them taken off? No, I was gone when they took them off. I gave them
my advice how to manage it.
69. Will you describe the measures that were taken ? There were three Pilot boats, whale-
boats, and I told them to man these three boats, to take a small anchor with them, get the three
boats in a string, one after the other, and let go the kedge from the headmost boat. In this
way they were to get as near as they could to the wreck; then they were to drop an empty
boat, with a line right alongside, and if the boat got capsized, they could haul her back. This
was the plan, I believe, they adopted. One man volunteered to go in the empty boat, and after
he went alongside the first time, two others volunteered. He must have been a brave fellow;
for it was a most awful sea.
70. During the whole of the time these people were on the wreck, what efforts were made to
save them ? None at all, only by means of the life boat.
71. Do you know anything of the particulars of the first attempt? The life boat went
alongside the wreck, and the sea broke over the ship at the time, and sent the life boat
right astern. The boat was capsized after that —that is only what I heard.
72. Did the life boat capsize? Yes. The Captain of the “Lord Burleigh” was in the
boat each time, and he told me of it.
73. Have you ever seen any other life boat afloat attending a vessel in distress? Yes, I
have seen the old boat they had there ; the first one.
74. Do you think a life boat, properly constructed, could have rescued the “Eleanor Lan-
caster’s ” people from their perilous situation ? Certainly. I think there would have been
no risk in it in a properly constructed life boat. There was more sea when I went in than
the first day.
75. An- 3 you reckoned it then very bad weather ? Yes; it could not be worse.
76. What other vessels were ashore at the same time? The “Storm King” and the
schooner “ Rover.”
77. Were the crews of those vessels on shore then ? Yes; the crew of the “ Rover ” were
taken out by the life boat, and the crew of the other, I think, could nearly have walked
ashore.
78. By Captain Lethbridge: How was it the “ Eleanor Lancaster” got nipped in that posi-
tion ? She was too far to leeward; she had been out and was coming back again, and
dropped her anchor when she found she could not beat in; she was so deep, and being an
old ship, that they could not carry much canvas on her.
79. By the Chairman: Do you recollect how long she had been lying in Newcastle, ready
for sea, before she went out ? She was there a good while, but I cannot recollect how long.
She would have missed that gale if she could have got out.
80. You are aware they are about erecting a Light House at Newcastle? Yes, I have heard
of that.
81. Do you consider the position of the present light or Nobby’s the best ? I consider
Nobby’s to be the best place.
82. Are there any other suggestions you wish to make to the Committee ? I think it is a
very requisite thing to have a light at Port Stephens. On a dark night there is no guide
at all there. If there was a light at Port Stephens a ship could run for that port when she
could not make Newcastle.
83. By Mr Tooth : Do you know the quantity of tonnage that enters Newcastle during the
year ? I cannot tell.
c 10—G 84.


84. By the Chairman : Do you consider the trade of Newcastle very much increased within
the last few years ? Within the last two or three years it has very much increased. A
great number of vessels go in and out of Newcastle, small and large together.
85. Notwithstanding the “ Sophia” did not pay as a private enterprise, you are of opinion
that a Government steam-tug would pay very well if a small compulsory payment were
exacted from all vessels ? I should say it would more than pay her expenses.
86. And she would have constant employment? Yes. If the owner of the “Sophia” had
been a wise man and made reasonable charges, he would have got as much as he could do,
and it would have paid him well.
87. If there had been a steamer there at the time, could she, in your opinion, have saved the
“ Eleanor Lancaster,” by towing her into the harbour when she first went in ? I should say
so, because the steam-tug, seeing a large vessel making the port, would have been ready to
catch hold of her.
88. By Captain Lethbridge: What was the size of the ship? Close upon five hundred
tons.
