



‘ .
1 -.T'* \ V*
f * V
op\




REPORTS
ON THE
EPIDEMIC CATARRH OR INFLUENZA
PREVAILING
AMONG THE SHEEP
IN THE
COLONY OF NEW SOUTH WALES,
IN THE YEAR
1835.
BY
GEORGE BENNETT, EsQ.,
ANDREW GIBSON, Esq., J. P., AND
WILLIAM SHERWIN, EsQ.
SYDNEY:
PRINTED BY STEPHENS AND STOKES, GEORGE-STREET.
1835.




CONTENTS.
PAGE
Instructions to George Bennett, Esq. ------ 1
Report by George Bennett, Esq. - -- -- -- 3
Report by Andrew Gibson, Esq. - -- ----33
Report by William SLerwin, Esq. - -- -- - -40




By His Excellency Major-General Sir HtCIIARi)
Bourke, K. C. 8., Captain-General and
Governor-in-Chief of the Territory of New
South Wales and its Dependencies, and Vice-
Admiral of the same, Sfc . Sfc. Sfc.
Whereas a Disease, which does not appear to be woil
understood, has recently been very destructive to Sheep in
various parts of the Colony, I have thought fit to institute a
careful Enquiry into the symptoms, causes, diagnosis, prognosis,
and treatment of the said Disease, as well as the best preventive
measures to be used against it : And whereas I have a full
confidence in your qualifications, in a'l respects, to undertake
such an important Enquiry, I do hereby authorise and direct
you to proceed forthwith to the Counties of Argyle, Murray,
and Georgiana, and to such other parts of the Colony as you
shall learn that the Disease in question has appeared in, and to
make strict enquiry into the symptoms and other peculiarities
of the disease, specially keeping in view the several leading
Questions hereunto annexed.
You are, for this purpose, to visit the Establishments and
Sheep Stations, at which you are likely to obtain any informa-
tion, on the subject of the Enquiry in which you are engaged ;
and the Proprietors and Overseers of all such Establishments,
and Sheep Stations, are hereby requested to answer all such
questions as you may put to them respecting the said Disease,
and give you all other information in their power on the subject,
as well as to alford you all possible facility in the progress of
your Enquiry.
And you are hereby further required and instructed to report
your proceedings, weekly, to the Colonial Secretary, for my
information.
GIVEN under my Hand, at Sydney, this Twenty-
eighth day of August, One thousand eight
hundred and thirty-fee.
RICHARD BOURKE.
To George Bennett, Esquire,
Surgeon.
By Command of His Excellency,
ALEXANDER M'LEAY.
A


QUESTIONS
Respecting the Disease which has recently been so destructive
to the Sheep in various parts of the Colony.
1. —What are the first symptoms of the disease ?
2. —What are the changes of symptoms in the various stages
of it ?
3. —At what length of lime, after the first attack, does death
usually ensue ?
4. —What are the peculiar appearances on post mortem exa-
mination ?
5. —What are the various causes assigned, and what is your
own opinion on this subject ?
6. —At what season, and in what weather, did the disease
first appear ?
7. —ln what situations are sheep considered most liable to the
disease—whether high, dry, low, or marshy ?
8. —What is the diagnosis of the disease ?
9. —Does the disease appear to be noticed by any author;
and, if so, by whom, and under what name or names ?
10. —Does it appear to be contagious ?
11. —After attack is there any favorable prognosis ?
12. —What are the various modes of treatment; and what
success has hitherto attended the means pursued, whether
preventive or curative ?
13. —What is the result of your own observations on these
points ?


REPORT
ON THE
EPIDEMIC CATARRH, OR INFLUENZA,
PREVAILING
AMONG THE SHEEP IN THE COLONY
OF
NEW SOUTH WALES.
T H E first account I received, of the appearance of the present
epidemic in the Colony, mentions its occurring among the
flocks of Robert Campbell, Esq., at Burroica, about the middle
of June, 1834. The winter months previously had been very
dry, with severe frosts; and rain setting in, the sheep were
attacked by the present epidemic. The deaths were numerous
until about the middle of August, when it gradually diminished,
fine mild weather setting in about this time. The mortality
among the flocks was as follows ;
Out of 700 Wethers 400 died
2,600 Breeding Ewes 1,600 “
900 Weaned Lambs 500 “
Total loss 2,500
The situation of the run upon which the sheep fed was
lofty ranges, abounding in excellent pasturage and good water.
The sheep, it may also be remarked, had depastured in the same
locality for five or six years previous, and remained perfectly
healthy. When the sheep were first attacked with the disease,
they were removed to another run, but without any diminution
of the severity of the disease.
In the month of March, 1835, we find the present epidemic
made its appearance at Benbengulow, on the the River Lachlan,


among' some sheep folded on the brows of hills a little sheltered
from the cold winds; this flock consisted of maiden ewes
which had just commenced lambing. Before Mr. John Peter,
the overseer, saw them eighteen hours had elapsed, six had
died, and several fresh cases of the disease had occurred.
The weather had been fine and mild for some time before
the disease appeared ; but changed, two days before the flock
was attacked, suddenly to drizzling rain, accompanied by an
oppressive close atmosphere, followed by cold, strong westerly
winds and sharp frosts towards the morning.
The flock consisted of 600 maiden ewes lambing, of which,
most that had lambed were attacked by the disease, whilst few
that were in lamb were affected. Of this flock 165 were at-
tacked by the epidemic during the months of March and April,
out of which 30 died. It may be observed, that 18 of this
flock died in the month of March, after which they were re-
moved to low granite land, and remained there for eight days
perfectly free from the disease. At the expiration of this time
the disease re-appeared among the flock with increased severity,
and twelve died. The flock was then removed to red whin-
stone land on the brow of a hill, when the disease ceased, and
has not re-appeared in that flock since April. The flock, it
may also be mentioned, have often been changed from locality
to locality since that period.
The disease next made its appearance about the middle of
June, in a flock of ewe lambs consisting of 500. The im-
mediate cause of the disease in this instance was attributed by
the overseer to their being brought upon the same land which
the first diseased sheep had “ ran over” and folded for two
nights upon it. Of these, 40 were affected by the epidemic,
out of which 12 died; the remainder recovered, and no new
cases of this disease appeared. They were then removed to
low land abounding in fine green pasture; they remained nine
days perfectly healthy, after which time, the epidemic re-ap-
peared, twenty were attacked, out of which six died, but none
of those which had been previously attacked by the disease
were again affected. It may also be mentioned that the very
objectionable method of bleeding the whole of the flock as a
precautionary measure was in this instance resorted to. The
sheep were then removed to red whinstone land, on the brows
of hills, and the disease has not since re-appeared among them.
In the month of May, however, the disease had appeared in
a flock of aged ewes that had been folded on the same ground


as the first flock, they consisted of 550, of which ten only
were affected, out of which’ three died. This flock was not
removed to another run, but the shepherd was ordered to graze
them about the scrubby land, the feed being at this season of
the year greener in those places. After this the flock suffered
no more from the disease, and remains free from it to the
present day.
In the same month nine aged sheep, which,were unfit to
travel with the flocks, were folded in a small pen with seven
sheep just recovering from the disease ; the result was, that
two of the aged sheep were attacked by the disease, of which
one died, but none of the remainder were affected.
The flocks at this station remained free from the disease
until the 11th of August, and it may be important to remark,
that it usually occurred that the weather was cold, frosty, and
variable a day or two previous to the appearance or re-appear-
of the epidemic in any of the flocks; and it has also been’ ob-
served that after cold rain the disease was more severe and
more fatal.
On the 11th August the disease appeared in a flock of aged
ewes, at a station on Lambton Creek, distant five miles from
the station which had been previously affected; the land at
this place being on one side low and damp, and on the other
consisted of red whinstone land. The flock consisted of 411,
of which 13 were affected by the disease, of these three died,
but previous to their death, the whole flock was removed to the
station at Benbengulow, and the shepherd was directed to
graze the flock in the burnt feed* about the brushes or scrubby
land. The three sick sheep only died, and there was no re-
appearance of the disease, the flocks remaining healthy to the
present day. The whole of the sheep attacked by the epidemic
were bled, and most of the ewes in lamb that recovered “ cast
their lambs.”
On the 17th of August, two more of the nine aged sheep
before mentioned were attacked by the disease, which proved
fatal to them, but no more have been since affected.
The next appearance of the epidemic was in a flock of aged
wethers, on the 26th of August. This flock consisted of 681,
of these 90 were affected, and the malady proved fatal to 22
• By “ burnt food” is meant the young grass which springs up after
the oid grass has been burnt off. The Colonists call it also “ winter
food.” and cattle and kangaroos are usually found about those places.


within the space of a fortnight from that date. This flock was
stationed at the time at Grabbengullen, distant ten miles from
Benbengulow, and having no communication with any diseased
sheep. The flock was afterwards removed to the station at
Benbengulow, and turned into a wheat paddock for two hours
every day for the space of two days; once for an hour in the
morning, and again for the same length of time in the evening;
the result was, that it acted in a more effective manner upon
the bowels tnan salts or any other medicine. The diseased
sheep were also bled ; no new cases occurred after they had
the benefit of green food. They were then sent back to their
old station and have not since been attacked.
On the 28th of August the disease made its appearance in
another flock, consisting of 450 aged and maiden ewes, at the
station at Grabbengullen, of these eleven were attacked and
three died. The flock was removed to Benbengulow, but
previously when on the way to that station the sheep having
procured young grass for two days, from the shepherd having
lost himself in a scrub ; on arriving at Benbengulow all had
recovered except three. This flock still remains quite healthy,
and is now lambing at the station of Benbengulow,
On the 28th of August another flock of yearlings consisting
of 586 were attacked by the disease, of these six were affected,
and two died. The flock was at this time at the station named
Grabbengullen ; they were immediately removed to the station
at Benbengulow, treated in the same manner as the aged
wethers before mentioned, and the epidemic soon ceased. They
were then removed together with the aged wethers back to
their former station were they at present remain free from
disease.
About the 11th of April the disease commenced among the
sheep at Bureong, on the River Lachlan. The flocks were
folded on dry soil in the vicinity of the Lachlan, and sheltered
from the cold winds by lofty ranges. The weather about the
time that the epidemic commenced at this station was dry, but
some time previous there had been rain and variable weather.
The number of sheep attacked by the disease at this station
was 394 out of two flocks consisting of 943, of which 320
died and only 74 recovered.
The yearlings were first attacked and but few recovered;
some wethers in the same flock were also attacked at the same
time, but nearly a month elapsed before the breeding ewes
were taken, but the result was, that not so many of the latter


died as the farmer. At this station the pasturage was good,
with an abundance of excellent water. The cause of the
disease at this place was not attributed to contagion, as the flocks
could not have had any intercourse with sheep affected by the
epidemic. The disease ceased its ravages about the month of
July and has not since occurred.
The epidemic prevailed also in the same year among the
flocks of Messrs. Jamieson, Shepherd, &c. and latterly, also
among the flocks of Mr. Howey. About the end of May,
1835, Captain Rossi’s sheep were attacked by the epidemic.
It appears that the flocks were originally stationed at Breakfast
Creek on the River Lachlan, where the climate is described
as being at all seasons of the year very mild—at this locality
they remained perfectly free from the disease ; but the pas-
turage not being considered nutritious, they were removed
about the latter end of May to “ Crookwell River,” wliere
about 8 or 10 days after their arrival, the present epidemic
broke out amongst them, at which time there was a heavy fall
of snow followed by rain and very variable weather, which
continued for the space of several days. The mortality among
the flocks from the disease was very great, but it was remarked
that during fine and mild weather, the malady appeared les-
sened both in its mortality as well as new cases, indeed it may
be correctly said to have disappeared for a time, but on rain
or snow with variable weather again coming on, new cases of
the disease appeared and a number of deaths occurred.
For four or five months previous to the appearance of this
epidemic among the sheep, the sheep at Breakfast Creek were
quite healthy, the weather being very fine and mild at that
station, and 1 consider the appearance of the malady among
Captain Rossi’s flocks may equally be attributed to the changing
them from a mild climate to a cold, chilly, and variable atmos-
phere, as to contagion; it W'as considered the latter was the
immediate cause, from the flocks whilst on their journey from
the “ Breakfast Creek” to the “ Crookwell River,” having
passed through runs occupied by sheep belonging to Mr. Shep-
herd suffering at the same time from the epidemic.
At “ Crookwell River” the pasturage was green and nutri-
tious food with an abundance of excellent water, both in ponds
and running streams. The flocks were also equally attacked,
whether folded upon high or low land. They were always
folded in dry, warm, and sheltered situations, and, indeed it
was observed that the sheep always evinced an eagerness to


select (he most sheltered places ; but before the epidemic ap-
peared among the flocks, the sheep had been much exposed
to severe weather, and the overseer remarked to me, that ho
considered the “ Crookwell River” station very cold for
heep. At this place, the sick sheep were folded at night in
.sheltered spot, and protected from the inclemency of the
weather by branches of trees. After a great mortality among
the flocks, three were removed from the Crookwell to Rossi-
ville, Goulburn Plains, consisting of 1753; the disease still
continued its ravages among them and 749 died out of that
number after their removal.
The whole amount of loss sustained by Captain Rossi, from
this epidemic has been 2200, and a few deaths still occasionally
take place from the same disease among those sheep which re-
mained at the “ Crookwell,” more particularly after cold,
wet, and variable weather.
About the commencement of June, the epidemic appeared
in a flock belonging to Mr. Manton, at Yass Plains, and was
attributed by him to contagion as a diseased flock was not long
previous near the place, but he was not aware that they ever
mixed together. The whole of one flock consisting of 418
were attacked at the same time, and so rapid was the progress
and fatality of the disease that from 40 to 60 sheep died every
night, and the total amount of loss was 320 ; the remainder re-
covered and remain well to the present day.
The whole of the flock consisted of maiden ewes ; the
strong and healthy were equally attacked by the disease, as
well as the weak, and the former had it most severe, indeed
the few that recovered were weakly ewes. The pasturage at
this place was excellent, with abundance of good water. This
was the only flock belonging to this gentleman that was
attacked by the disease ; the other flocks were about five miles
distant. His flocks to the present day remain perfectly
healthy.
The flocks of Mr. W. H. Dutton, were attacked by the same
epidemic, and I copy his account of its origin and progress
from the clear written statement he had the kindness to furnish
me with. He observes “on my arrival from Sydney at Yass,
“ about the latter end of June, I found that a disease of a very
“ virulent nature had attacked one of my neighbour’s flocks,
“ and in an incredible short space of time had swept away
“ three-fourths of the whole. I examined several that had
“ just died, and saw numbers sick in the folds, but could not


vi iho i account for the sudden and rapid mortality. Indeed,
“ the reports I had heard of the symptoms of this malady were
“ so vague and contradictory, that I could come to no conclu-
“ sion as to its cause.
“ I had at the time 1700 ten months old lambs, and a few
“ breeding sheep grazing on the opposite side of the river to
“ which the diseased sheep were confined, but although I
“ did not then believe in the contagious nature of the disease,
“ I deemed it prudent to remove my flocks from the vicinity,
“ and acqordingly in two days they were taken to a station on
“ the other side of the plains about ten miles distant.
“ One of the animals died the night previous to the removal ;
“ on opening it, and finding strong appearances of inflamma-
“ tion of the bowels, I naturally attributed its death to that
“ cause, and having before lost a few animals occasionally
“ from that complaint, I took no further notice of it,
“ On the road to the new station two more sheep died—the
“ next day more were lost, this alarmed me, and on examining
“ the sheep I found they were attacked by the disease. The
“ weather was and had been for many months extremely dry ;
“ the grass was scanty and parched, both by drought and the
“ frosts, which latter had been very severe, still the animals
“ were in excellent condition, indeed I have rarely seen a finer
*’ or healthier flock of lambs.”
Mr. Dutton’s loss was to the following extent, out of 1700
sheep attacked 436 died, and 280 are now in the hospital
flock all doing well.
The presentepideraicfirstmade itsappearance amongthe flocks
at Lockyersleigh about the commencement of last July, the wea-
ther having been previously dry, with cold high winds and
sharp frosts, and on the day previous to the epidemic appear-
ing among the sheep, heavy showers of rain fell, continuing
also during the night, being the first rain they had had for a
considerable time. It is a curious circumstance, that at the
time of this catarrh commencing among the sheep at this farm,
the Aborigines had been attacked by influenza, which they
call in their language “ Kurra,” and accompanied by all the
usual symptoms attendant upon that disease, and the blacks
observed to the sheep overseer that a number of Aborigines
had died from the influenza up the country. The sheep
overseer informed me that he had doubts whether the blacks
communicated the disease to the sheep, or whether he ought to
attribute its origin to a flock of sheep affected by the epidemic
B


passing through the sheep run at this farm , leaving two dead
sheep upon the place. But the same diseased flock passed
through another sheep run belonging to Major Lockyer, at
Towrang, near Goulburn Plains, about the same time—at
which station there were four flocks—but without communi-
cating the disease to them. After the weather before alluded
to, the sheep commenced dying daily in great numbers ; some-
times no new cases would occur for a day ; but on rain, or any
variable state of weather coming on, the disease immediately
re-commenced. Sometimes the epidemic would cease for a
week in one flock, and appear in another with great mor-
tality ; the flocks being at the time folded upon the same
ground, but not having actual communication. It would then,
after the intermission of a week in the flock first attacked,
which then died off more rapidly than before. The sheep that
partially recovered from the disease were found occasionally
subject to relapses, but when perfectly well seemed to be free
from a re-attack of the disease during the present occurrence
of the epidemic; but it did not render them less liable to
another attack on the disease appearing at another season.
All the sheep on the “ run” were young, but the younger
the sheep, it was observed at this p!a;e that the disease was
more rapid in its progress. Only a week previous to this
epidemic making its appearance at the farm, the weaned rams
and wethers had been removed from this station to another,
about five miles distant, and as yet have escaped being attacked.
The diseased flocks were frequently removed from low to
high land, but without deriving any benefit to an extent suffi-
cient to be attributed to any local change. The pasturage in
the sheep runs about this farm is excellent, and much better
than is seen during the summer season at this station, and
abundance of excellent water, both in wafer-holes and a
running stream. I particularly remark the state of the wafer
and pasturage about the different localities where the disease
prevailed, as many attribute the epidemic to bad water and dry
pasturage, neither of which has yet been found where the
disease prevailed. The overseer at this farm assures me, that
about six years since the water holes were lower, and tilled
with bad water, and a very scanty herbage, yet the sheep at
at that period were not affected by any particular disease.
All situations have been found equally healthy, but the brows
of hills might be recommended, at all events for hospital flocks,
as that situation is always found to be milder than the low,


apparently sheltered, but, in reality, damp situations, or the
bleakness of the summits.
The number of deaths among the flocks at Lockyersleigh
have been 648, out of 1476, attacked by the epidemic.
About the middle of July the epidemic made its appearance
among the flocks of Mr. Bradley, at Goulburn, and the cause
was attributed to a diseased flock passing through his run.
One of the sheep from the affected flock mingling with Mr.
Bradley’s healthy sheep, the epidemic appeared almost imme-
diately after ; but it is a curious fact, that, in the flock sup-
posed to have received the disease from the affected sheep, only
one became attacked and died, the remainder being free from
the disease to the present day. But it happened that the same
flock of sheep passed through another run belonging to the
same gentleman, situated about a mile in another direction
from the former one. On this run three flocks were stationed,
but the diseased flock had no communication with them. One
was a flock of aged ewes, none of which were attacked by the
epidemic; the second was a flock of yearling sheep, out of
which five were affected, and all died ; the third was a small
flock of rams, seven of which had the disease, and all died.
About a week afterwards, another sheep died, and since that
time none of the flocks have been attacked, making the total
loss only 13. The sheep runs at Mr. Bradley’s have excellent
pasturage, and abundance of good water.
This epidemic commenced about the beginning of June at
Gonnong, a station belonging to Mr. Kennedy. The weather
was cold and frosty at the time. The disease continued among
the flocks to the middle of August, during which time 600
sheep died out of 850 attacked by the epidemic. Two flocks
of 1500 were on the station having communication with the
diseased sheep, and two flocks at a station about four miles dis-
tant, all of which remained unattached by the disease.
The flocks which were attacked by the disease, at this station,
consisted of breeding ewes, wethers, and lambs. About the
latter end of July, a flock of wethers was sent down the coun-
try to Appin, apparently perfectly free from the disease; at
Goulburn Plains they were attacked by it; the flock consisted
of 300, and 73 died from the disease on the journey to Appin,
and a few after their arrival at that place.
The stations at Gonnong have abundance of good pasturage
and water. About the middle of August, the mortality among
the sheep, from the epidemic, had almost ceased at this station.


one only dying about every fortnight, but only among the flocks
which were first attacked by the disease. The diseased sheep
were occasionally shifted to high and low land, sheltered situa-
tions, &c., but with no alteration in the fatality of the disease.
The sheep attacked by the epidemic at this station had no
communication with diseased flocks ; for although the sheep
were dying from the epidemic at the same time at Bureong,
on the Lachlan, yet there was a distance of six miles between
the flocks of the two stations.
About the beginning of June the epidemic made its ap-
pearance among the sheep at Lombraes, on the river Lachlan.
Sheep were attacked in five flocks ; altogether there were six
flocks, three on each station, but one station not having any
communication with the other.
In three flocks, on one sfation, sheep were attacked by the
epidemic in all; but of the three flocks, on the other station,
sheep were only affected by the disease in two flocks, the sheep
of the third remaining quite free from the malady. All the
sheep attacked died, but the number was exceedingly small,
the whole of the deaths only amounting to thirteen. The
sheep had no communication with any diseased flocks, and the
cause of the disease was attributed by the proprietor to dry food.
The water on the station was pure and wholesome. The wea-
ther, when the disease commenced among the flocks, was frosty,
with cold winds, occasionally variable and showery.
High or low land made no difference in the appearance of
the disease. Some sheep were attacked on high whinstone
land, and others on low moist land, and the sheep were folded
on warm sheltered situations.
At the Lachlan, the sheep at Benbengulow were first at-
tacked by the epidemic; it then appeared at Mrs. Wood-
house’s, distant ten miles; then at Gonnong, six miles distant;
and, lastly, at Lombraes, three miles distant, without the flocks
having had the slightest communication one with the other.
About the 18th of July, the sheep at a station at Bowgalong
Creek, twenty miles from Yass, were attacked by the prevail-
ing epidemic ; the nights frosty, but without rain. The flocks
at the time being on burnt feed, out of the flock only three
were attacked—these died. The disease then ceased, and re-
appealed about the middle of August. After two days heavy
rain two breeding ewes were taken with the disease ; one died
and the other recovered. The epidemic then again ceased,
but reappeared on the Ist of September, and on the 7th of that


month four died, and since that time a few have been dying-
daily, On visiting the station, I found it, although warm dur-
ing the day, exceedingly cold during the night. The pasturage
was excellent, abundance of burnt feed, and plenty of good
water.
The flocks on this station consist of ewes, of all ages, and
lambs both male and female.
About the commencement of August the epidemic broke out
among the sheep at Westwood, Yass Plains. The sheep were
at the time of attack, located on the plains, about half a mile
distant from Mr. Barber’s station, where the sheep at the same
time were dying from the same disease. They were separated
from each other by the Yass rivulet (a chain of ponds), and it
is not known that the sheep of either party had any communi-
cation. The sheep, at the time the disease appeared among
them, had what is called dry and short feed, located on lime-
stone soil, which is considered good for sheep, and abundance
of excellent water. The flock consisted ot breeding ewes and
a few lambs, amounting to 580 ; out of these 20 died. After-
wards the flock was removed to dry old feed, in more sheltered
situations ; the disease then ceased after four more deaths had
occurred.
The disease now ceased ; the flock was removed to burnt
feed, and remained in perfect health, until, on the 4th of Sep-
tember, after cold bleak winds, accompanied by sleet, showery
and unsettled weather, the disease recommenced ; and between
the 4th and 6th of the month, so rapid was its progress that
120 were attacked in that short interval of time, out of which
70 died.
The flock was then removed to other runs, and with benefit
to their health, as the number of fresh cases diminished, as well
as the daily deaths. The season, in this part of the Colony, is
considered unusually unsettled ; cold bleak winds, snow, sleet,
and rain, have been very prevalent. |
The same proprietor has six flocks depasturing on the
plains, at distances from each other of two and three miles,
but as yet none have been attacked by the epidemic.
The sheep at this station were still dying daily, but fewer in
number, to the time I left, the 11th of September.
Although this epidemic has prevailed at several other stations,
and even attacked flocks on the Hunter’s River, yet I have
limited myself in the history of the progress of the disease to
the localities which I visited.


SYMPTOMS,
The first observation I had of this epidemical disease, at
tockyersleigh, immediately led me to divide it into three
Stages ; but as I wish to impress on the minds of the persons
whose sheep may be suffering from this epidemical disease, the
importance of selecting and treating the sheep in the first
stage of the malady, it may be of consequence to remark, that a
careful observer may distinguish a sheep attacked by the dis-
ease, by its occasional sneezing nearly 36 hours previous to its
ceasing to feed, or exhibiting the more marked symptoms
which are placed under the first stage of the disease.
The disease commences with sneezing, more particularly at
night, followed by a general lassitude ; and although, at first,
the secretion from the nostrils merely bedews the surface, yet
it soon becomes of a thick glairy consistence, and is secreted in
a large quantity. The interior of the nose, at this stage, ex-
hibits but little increase of vascularity. The eyes are suffused,
and in some there is a profuse discharge of tears ; in others,
again, a discharge of matter from the meibomian glands is also
observed encrusting the eyelids. The animals cease to rumi-
nate, and drop the head. In some, the respiration was affected
immediately the attack came on. The tongue is parched ; the
secretions are diminished, except, in the inflamed membranes ;
perspiration is obstructed, and general fever accompanies the
attack. A restlessness is also perceived in the animals.
As the disease advances to the second stage, which varies in
the duration from four to twelve hours, all the foregoing symp-
toms have increased in violence. The interior of the nose ex-
hibits a florid hue, as if all the blood vessels had been filled
with minute injection ; the secretion from the nostrils now be-
comes thick, of a yellow colour, which frequently hardens upon
the orifices of the nostrils, impeding respiration.
The general fever is much increased ; there is suppression
of urine in many cases ; costiveness is also occasionally ob-
served, but is far from being general. The tunica conjunctiva
of the eye displays an inflammatory character. There was a
heaviness in the head, and an apparent desire on the part of
the animal to rest the head on the hurdles, evidently appearing
to suffer much pain. The respiration becomes more laboured,
and a cough is also occasionally perceived.
The disease now advances 'to the third and last stage, in
which the interior of the nostrils exhibits the highest state of


inflammation, (some parts displaying 1 a leaden hue,) and ex-
tending to the frontal sinuses ; the secretion from the nose now
becomes lessened, very thick, and occasionally streaked with
blood. The nostrils appear obstructed by the matter collected
about them, occasioning a very laboured respiration. The
animal now prefers lying down, and rests the head upon the
ground ; there is sometimes a troublesome cough ; but a cough
is found to prevail even in the animals recovering from the
disease, and in many, again, the cough was not observed as a
symptom. The eye becomes glassy; the animals appear
stupid, and unable to direct their steps; if permitted to leave
the fold they walk against a tree or into a water hole.
This stage may be regarded as fatal, and as death advances,
irregular but voluntary movements may still continue; the ap-
pearance of dullness and stupor is increased, and there is a
general diminution of the sensibility. A general trembling is
now observed in the animal, more especially in the fore ex-
tremities ; it kneels down, remains for about the space of a
minute in that position, falls down comatose, and after repeated
struggles, and sometimes with a very laboured respiration
expires.
The length of time the disease runs through its different
stages, or the intervals of time which elapse between each
stage varies. In some of the sheep attacked by this epidemic
death has occurred in six hours from the first appearance of
the symptoms ; sometimes in twelve hours, and sometimes the
animals died after three days illness; beyond that time they
usually recover from the disease.
It has been remarked that in the second and third stages
the nostrils and face are much swollen ; there is also a tume-
faction of the lips, and in many I have observed an enlarge-
ment of the submaxillary glands. In some of the sheep the
discharge was only observed to proceed from one nostril in
the first and second stages, but in the third stage the discharge
has flowed from both ; the animal at the time usually inclines
its body to that side on which the discharge from the nostrils
proceeds ; the highly inflammatory state of the nostrils is equally
observed in this, as in the form of the disease in which the
discharge proceeds equally from both nostrils,
A favourable prognosis may be formed when the animal com-
mences eating, raises its head, appears more lively; all these
symptoms indicate returning good health, and I have oh


served the disease in some of the sheep pass through the dif-
ferent stages in an extremely mild manner.
It is a curious fact that although b'eeding the ewes in lamb
was found to produce premature labour, yet the disease or high
fever which accompanies it when bleeding had not been re-
sorted to, seemed to produce the same effect in many of the
ewes, several of which recovered from the disease, and this
circumstance also obtains among the females of the human
race as pregnant women attacked by influenza, are disposed to
miscarry, and the flooding is in some cases fatal.
In many of the sheep that recover from this disease, the
general debility induced on the system remains for a long time,
and in all the animals recovering from the disease the high
state of fever which accompanied the attack occasions them to
lose all the wool, which readily falls off, leaving the poor animals
perfectly naked.
The strangles in horses, to which many have been lately
subject in the Colony, appears closely to resemble this epidemic.
The disease commences with tumefaction of the submaxillary
glands, general fever, discharge of thick mucus from the nose,
cough and sometimes the larynx and trachea is affected.
General bleeding and warm mashes are the usual remedies.
At Manilla, during the prevalence of the influenza in 1830,
I remarked that the dogs were equally affected by the epidemic
as the inhabitants, and the symptoms resembled those observed
in the sheep. When death occurred, I remarked the same
organic disease in those animals on dissection, as I have since
had an opportunity of observing in the pathological anatomy
of the sheep.
It has been observed to me that during the prevalence of the
epidemic catarrh among the inhabitants of this Colony, that
the cats were also affected by a similar, if not the same disease.
This epidemic catarrh differs from the common catarrh in the
abruptness of its incursion, severity of its symptoms, and the
rapidity of its transition ; but varies in the severity of its
symptoms according to the constitution of the animal, and is
liable to occur at every season of the year when atmospherical
changes are prevalent —which variability, I have had frequent
opportunities of observing, is very commonly the case in this
Colony.


DISSECTIONS.
On an examination of the bodies of the sheep which died
from this epidemic, the cause of death was found to proceed
either from inflammation of the immediate membranes of the
brain, or from pulmonary disease. On examining the brain,
the dura mater was healthy ; but on laying it back, the arach-
noid membiane was found with its blood-vessels highly in-
jected, both on the convexity of the hemispheres, at the
decussation of the optic nerves, and sometimes even in the
interior of the ventricles. In some cases I observed a serous
fluid secreted under the membrane, and then a small quantity
of similar fluid was found effused in the lateral ventricles.
Occasionally the vessels of the pia mater were found injected.
The tunics of the cerebral nerves—especially the olefactory—
displayed a beautiful ramification of injected blood-vessels
encircling them. The sinuses of the brain were filled with
clotted blood. The substance of the brain exhibited no trace
of any diseased structure. The frontal sinuses displayed
indications of intense inflammation having existed, a sero-
purulent matter being secreted, or the cavity was found filled
with black coagulated blood. The whole of the nasal cavity
presented in every case the most intense redness, from a florid
to a dark red, mingled with patches of a leaden hue ; the
turbinated bones were exceedingly florid throughout the whole
of their structure, as if they had been filled with an exceedingly
minute injection: this was not confined to the membrane
covering their surface, but extended throughout the whole of
their substance—and indeed the enlarged injected blood-vessels
extended throughout every part of the interior of the nasal
cavity, and a very thick viscid matter was effused in the
turbinated bones, as well as on the septum naris, which could be
scraped off with the knife. On cutting the substance of the
nostrils, a quantity of serous fluid or florid blood was dis-
charged.
These were the appearances, upon dissection of the brain,
when the cerebral organs were the seat of disease; but in
many cases, although the same inflammation of the nasal
cavity was found to exist in all that died from the present
epidemic, yet no cerebral disease was found, the membranes
being healthy, hut the immediate cause of death ex-
isted in the larynx, trachea, bronchia 1 , or the substance of
the lungs. In one case, I found both extensive pulmonary
c


disease, as well as cerebral: and from that circumstance we
may infer that disease might occur in both organs at the same
time, although such has been of rare occurrence. Indeed, I
should be inclined to adopt the opinion that influenza centres
(in the majority of instances) in the chest, although the whole
body is affected by it—the head particularly—and in most
cases the whole mucous lining of the throat, nares and eyes
participates in the affection ; the eyes becoming vascular, the
nose filled with a thick secretion. We also find in these animals,
as in human subjects, an unusual languor and debility, dis-
proportionate to the local affection. The heat of the animal is
increased, the breath is hot, and a chilliness is immediately felt
on exposure to a current of air ; the urine is scanty.
In some cases the pneumonic symptoms are severe, and in
other cases they are less urgent, whilst the pain and heaviness
of the head, and dullness of the sensorial powers is much
increased. In the first we may expect the lungs on dissection
to be found the seat of disease, and in the latter the cerebral
organs.
The heart, when cerebral disease was found, was gorged
with black blood, as well as all the large veins; but when
pulmonary disease existed, although all the large veins
were equally gorged, yet I invariably found only the right
auricle of the heart gorged—the left auricle, and right and left
ventricles, being empty.
When the lungs are found to be the seat of disease, it
evidently has assumed the features of acute pulmonary catarrh,
or inflammation of the pulmonary mucous membrane, varying
in its degrees of intensity, and attended with great bronchial
irritation. On dissection it is found tiiat the right or left lobes
of the lungs—l have observed the right more especially the
seat of disease than the left—have the mucous membrane red
to a greater or less extent, and with the appearance of a
number of small red points aggregated closely together. In
others, again, the lungs present an increase of weight and
density ; are infiltrated with a frothy serosity in some quantity;
the external surface is of a grey or violet colour; —and these
appearances indicate the disease to have been pneumonia.
And again, we observe all the anatomical characters of
pulmonary apoplexy in others, the lungs being of the degree
of density of an hepatized lung, and the vessels filled with
clotted blood. In many of the dissections a viscid mucus ob-
structed the bronchi;?, and the mucous membrane lining the


bronchi®, trachea, larynx, and extending even to the pharynx
Was found inflamed, and a frothy mucus was effused in those
passages.
The stomach was found healthy, and in the majority of
cases, filled with well digested healthy food, the whole of
the alimentary canal was perfectly healthy, and in very few
was any constipation observed ; but where it did exist, the
foeces had accumulated in both the large and small intestines
in large hard lumps, and evidently appeared both before or
after death to have produced abrasion of the mucous membrane
of the intestines.
The liver was perfectly free from disease, and gall bladder
filled with healthy bile; in some dissections I observed the
gall bladder very much distended with bile. The remainder
of the abdominal viscera healthy. Pelvic viscera also healthy,
and bladder usually undistended with urine.
TREATMENT.
It is only in the first stage of the disease that remedies can
be applied with the greatest probability of success, and as the
first appearance of the disease is indicated by frequent sneezing
>—more particularly at night—some time before any other of
the more violent symptoms mark the invasion of the disease ;
it is at this period that I should recommend more particularly the
treatment of the affected animals to commence, and no doubt at
thattime milder remedies willbe more successful before the inflam-
matory attack has advanced so far as to require severe treatment.
In the first symptoms of the disease blood may be abstracted
according to the age and constitution of the animal, and re-
peated should the increase of the inflammatory symptoms seem
to require it. After the venesection a pint of luke warm gruel
in which an ounce of salts has been dissolved may be adminis-
tered, and the luke warm gruel repeated occasionally.
The bleeding may be either topical or general ; the latter
would probably be most advisable, as the quantity abstracted
can be regulated when taken from the jugular vein, when by
topical bleeding a sufficient quantity cannot always be abstracted
in a sufficiently short period of time. The extent of bleeding
must in all cases be regulated by the severity of the disease or
the capabilities of the animal to suffer depletion. The ab-
straction of a small quantity of blood at an early stage of the


disease will probably mitigate the severe symptoms immediately;
for on account of the great depression of strength and dullness
of the sensorial powers, it would be advisable if possible not to
bleed largely, and perhaps occasion might not be required to
draw blood a second time. Warm gruel should be repeated
occasionally, and gentle exercise for the hospital flock will also
be productive of benefit to them.
In preference to the administration of any saline purgatives;
if possible, turning the hospital flock into a wheat paddock will
be productive of the same aperient effect, and prove of more
benefit to the sheep. I attribute the comparative very trifling
loss among the sheep attacked by this epidemic at the station at
Denbengalow, was from the circumstance of the sheep being
taken and treated in the first stage of the disease in the manner
I have just recommended ; the deaths that did occur were prin-
cipally among those that were not seen until the disease had
advanced even beyond the second stage.
The diseased sheep should also be separated from the healthy,
for whatever may be the opinion respecting the contagious or
non-contagious nature of the disease, they are then more
capable of being treated, and ought also to be classed according
to the stages o f the disease, and the convalescent sheep kept in
a flock by themselves.
Mr. W. H. Dutton’s plan of treatment was latterly effective;
but the first very objectionable precautionary method adopted,
of bleeding both the healthy and diseased sheep in the flocks,
was evidently injurious in the result; but when the affected
sheep were classed, and remedies applied in the first stage of
the epidemic, the mortality diminished. Mr. Dutton observed
in the statement he furnished me with, after alluding to the
great loss sustained by the method he first adopted—“ 1 formed
three small hospital flocks into which the affected animals were
drafted and treated according to the stage of the disease. To
this precautionary measure I attribute not only the saving of
many of the sheep attacked, but I also materially lessened the
accumulation of fresh patients.”
The water gruel may be composed of
lbs. of flour,
5 lb. of sugar,
30 pints of water boiled, and given lukewarm.
As a purgative—in the absence of green food as before recom-
mended, one ounce of Epsom salts may beadrninistered internally


combined with a drachm of nitre in a pint of water gruel given
luke warm, and the water gruel may be repeated three times
daily afterwards.
£he treatment of the disease will be much aided by the
diseased sheep being folded in warm, dry, and sheltered situa-
tions, and having young green food, which is not only a valuable
remedy when aperients are required, as in this malady, but the
invalid sheep require a lighter and more nourishing diet when
in a weak and languid state than when in the enjoyment of
perfect health.
When the inflammatory symptoms are not very severe,
topical bleeding, by opening a vein as near the seat of inflam-
mation as possible, may be recommended to subdue the in-
flammatory action, or by counter-irritants ; but as in this
epidemical catarrh the lungs and bronchi® are very liable to
be affected sooner or later, according to the idiosyncrasy of the
animals, it would be advisable by all means to closely watch the
progress of the disease, and either resort to active treatment by
the general abstraction of blood from the jugular vein, when
the inflammatory symptoms run high, or adopt milder measures
to subdue the disease when it assumes a more gentle form.
I should recommend the overseers on the appearance of this
epidemic among their flocks to frequently inspect all their
sheep, and noting the first symptoms which appear in this
epidemic, immediately separate the diseased from the healthy
sheep. This ought to be done at least three or four times daily,
which would enable remedies to be employed in time which
would materially diminish the mortality in the flocks, and be
attended with less trouble if there should be a want of men.
It has happened that a number of sheep have been treated by
bleeding, &c., in which the mortality was very great; but on
careful enquiry it appeared the animals were not treated until
they had reached the advanced or third stage, when all remedies
were useless. Again I have observed many localities although
good for healthy sheep, yet too chilly for animals suffering from
an epidemic attended with such languor, debility, fever, and
depression of the vital powers, as this ; consequently organic
disease rapidly takes place, terminating as speedily fatal. It
may be advisable, therefore, to give the sheep gentle exercise,
and this may be safely recommended as tending to promote
perspiration, more especially after warm internal remedies have
been administered. The sick sheep also ought to be prevented
from drinking cold water; with green food they would not


require so much water as when feeding upon drier herbage.
When water is given to the sick or diseased sheep, it should
be given tepid.
At Bureong, on the Lachlan, when the sheep were attacked
by this epidemic, they were bled from the vein under the eye,
in the ears, &c., and had lukewarm salt and water adminis-
tered internally, but the whole treated in this manner died.
Bleeding from the jugular vein was next resorted to, and
Glauber and Epsom salts, with warm gruel, administered inter-
nally. A number of affected sheep then recovered, but I could
not ascertain, (although I suppose they were), whether they
had been treated in t(ie first stage of the disease. Tobacco water
was also tried as an internal remedy, but the whole of the sheep
died to whom it was administered.
In a few instances some sheep proprietors injected spirits of
turpentine up the nostrils of sheep affected by this disease; the
result of which was, as may have been expected, almost imme-
diate death. Blisters applied over the nostrils proved equally
useless, because a local remedy was of little avail when the dis-
ease affects the general constitution.
Lambs of a few days to a fortnight old were also attacked by
the epidemic, and, on dissection, the same appearances pre-
sented themselves as in the old sheep. To most of the lambs
attacked the disease proved speedily fatal, as the same remedies
could not be so readily administered to them as to the older
sheep.
Although there is evidently much carelessness and want of
judgment displayed by many of the shepherds in separating the
sick from the healthy sheep, and treating the disease in the first
stage, still there is also occasionally great difficulty in treating
them, even when the shepherd devotes all his attention to it,
when a number of sheep in a flock—as has occasionally oc-
curred—are attacked by the disease at the same time, and the
required assistance of extra men cannot be procured.
Perhaps we may say that the sheep proprietors extend their
flocks too much, and leave them almost entirely to nature, so
that, on an epidemic disease breaking out among them, suffi-
cient attention cannot be paid to them. We find, indeed, when
there are great accumulations of cattle, or domestic animals of
any kind, in many countries, that they become more liable to
epidemic and endemic diseases ; and we may observe the same
circumstance obtain among human beings in popular districts.
However, it must be expected that among a number of sheep.


us among' a number of human beings attacked by an epidemic
disease, many forms of it appear of a milder or more violent
character ; and, in spite of every care and judicious treatment
adopted, either from constitutional causes or the unsubdued
severity of the symptoms, deaths will occur. But still the
treatment, in a majority of cases, will be successful, and the
disease be subdued, by remedies founded on an accurate know-
ledge of the nature of the disease, by a careful and judicious
observation of the leading symptoms ; as well as, if opportuni-
ties occurred, also on accurate pathological investigations.
It may be mentioned, that Epsom salts, when administered
in cold water to the sheep, proved injurious, but was beneficial
when given in warm gruel. Several of Captain Rossi’s flock
were bled, and Epsom salts, combined with a little nitre, given
cold ; but that mode of treatment was found to be injurious,
the sheep dying two or three hours after it had been adminis-
tered. The others were then treated with warm gruel and
sugar, with a little common salt, after venesection, and re-
peated for two or three days; this plan of treatment was found
beneficial. Some sheep that had been bled were afterwards
turned into a field of green barley ; the whole were purged ;
and, out of a hundred, seventy recovered from the disease. It
ought also to be mentioned, that this sick flock was taken from
the paddock, and placed, during the night, in the shearing
shed, with clean straw.
Another flock, effectively treated, was by bleeding in the
jugular vein, washing the nostrils clean from the discharge,
and warm gruel with common salt, sugar, and a little nitre,
administered internally ; the number of sheep treated in this
manner was 360, out of which 342 recovered. The flocks were
at the same time overlooked twice daily, and any that exhibited
symptoms of the disease were immediately removed, bled ac-
cording to the strength of the sheep, and the internal remedy
administered as I have just mentioned above.
THE CAUSES, CONTAGIOUS NATURE, &c.,
OF THE DISEASE.
Impressed with the importance and necessity of acquiring
ideas, as accurate as possible, respecting the immediate as well
as the predisposing causes of disease, more especially when it
prevails epidemically, we are anxious to seek for information.


and find ourselves involved in a subject of considerable diffi-
culty. In following up an investigation of this nature, com-
parative anatomy becomes an object of importance to the
medical practitioner, and he can observe a strict analogy ex-
isting between the constitution and diseases both of the human
and brute creation. Very correctly is it. stated, that medicine
is a science of facts, and owes its importance to observation,
for upon it rests our distinction and treatment of disease.
It is common to find a divided opinion exist among members
of the medical profession, whether a prevailing disease is
propagated through the medium of the atmosphere, or from
contagion ; and at the same time, it is not uncommon to find
that the disease may result from atmospherical vicissitudes,
although, to casual observers, its character may seem to be
contagious. I confess myself adverse to the theory of contagion,
it in a great measure prevents further investigation or enquiry.
The true cause of a disease, supposed to be contagious, will
never be ascertained, as long as medical men remain satis-
fied with that supposed origin of the disease ; no disease
originates in contagion, although it may be propagated by it,
and the epidemic, the subject of the present report, is widely
spread over the whole globe, and although by many it is not
regarded as contagious, is considered by others to be an
epidemic disease, originating from a peculiar state of atmos-
phere, but capable of being propagated by contagion.
To satisfy myself respecting the contagious nature of this
disease, I determined to have an experiment tried, du-
ring my engagement in investigating it among the sheep, to
set the question, if possible, at rest.
On the 4th of September, a healthy wether was procured
from a flock not suffering from the epidemic. Some mucus
was taken from a sheep labouring under the first stage of the
disease, and applied to the interior of the nostrils of the healthy
sheep. The next day, no symptoms of the malady manifested
itself. On that day, some of the yellowish discharge was
taken from a sheep labouring under the second stage of the
disease, and applied to the nostrils of the healthy wether.
On the 6th he was turned among the hospital flock ; he re-
mained in perfect health until the Bth, on which day he also
appeared well, fed as usual, but was observed to have a dis-
charge from the nostrils, but no other constitutional symptom
of the disease. The discharge from the nostrils continued,
(without running through the different stages], until about the


16th of the same month, when it was observed to have ceased;
the animal always appeared perfectly well during the time the
discharge continued, and did not exhibit the slightest con-
stitutional symptom attendant on the disease. The acrid
discharge seems merely to have acted as an irritant for some
days on the delicate mucus membrane of the nose, but did not
appear capable of producing the general constitutional effects
of the epidemic.
This disease supervenes without any assignable cause, except
that which can be attributed to particular chills, or exposures
to extraordinary atmospherical vicissitudes, occasioning sup-
pressed perspiration from cold; for we are aware, how sudden
cold upon a heated frame, checking perspiration, proves, by
its consecutive horripilations and chills, that its impression is
immediate and powerful upon the nervous system, and conse-
quently, through that system, the blood vessels, judging from
the intimate relations between the nervous and the vascular
systems, would equally stand affected. We may indeed find
ourselves that the application of cold to any part of the body
is depressing, and the next effect, in consequence of this
depression of the vital influence of the nervous system, is
constriction of the blood vessels, more particularly the veins.
When the application is continued for a short time, and only
to a part of the body, reaction soon follows ; but if long con-
tinued, very injurious effects may follow, from the depression
becoming too great for the constitutional powers to remove, or
else predispose to organic changes, as inflammation, &c., when
reaction supervenes. Thus, sudden chills may produce this
epidemic, and the continued change of atmosphere may caßise
the disease to assume a serious character, by the lungs,
bronchia?, and larynx becoming the seat of inflammatory
action.
It is not only important to ascertain the actual seat of the
disease, but its nature must be ascertained, and this can only
be learned through the medium of morbid anatomy, in this
epidemic. I had several opportunities of investigating the
pathology of the disease, the result of which will be found
under the head of dissections.
As far as regards the origin of disease, the ingenuity of the
human race has been amply exercised ; theories and opinions
have been promulgated, according to the intricacy and ob-
scurity of the subject, and it would extend this report to a
D


great length if I entered upon the various opinions expressed
upon it.
The causes of the present epidemic may be referred to
two sources, an immediate or exciting, and a predisposing
cause, and in the epidemic, the subject of our present enquiry,
as it appeared among the sheep a strict analogy in every
symptom, and in all its modifications, will be found as when
the same disease is found prevalent among the human race.
The first or immediate cause is to be attributed to the state
of the atmosphere; and all causes which operate to the injury
of the animal frame, may be correctly divided into external and
internal, and sometimes a combination of both may give rise
to many maladies. The principal external agencies are the
atmosphere, with all its varieties of temperature, moisture and
dryness, specific contagions, noxious exhalations, &c. The
internal causes are peculiarity of constitution ; hereditary pre-
disposition, all circumstances which produce debility, a super-
abundance or deficiency of the different secretions, &c.; and
these latter may be classed among the predisposing causes.
But some diseases are capable of being propagated, and the
external cause can be demonstrated in a peculiar specific virus,
capable of propagating that distinct and peculiar affection.
Thus small-pox, syphilis, &c., may be kept up, and disseminated
by their own original principle.
In support of my opinion, that atmospherical changes pro-
duce, or rather is the immediate cause of this epidemic, I may
remark that this disease prevailed to an alarming extent at
Manilla, in 1830, where I had an opportunity of observing it.
Previous to the appearance of this epidemic catarrh at Manilla,
the weather had been unusually hot and dry for the season of
the year, which, combined with a very variable atmosphere
during the day and night, was considered by the inhabitants
so unusual, that the occurrence of a severe hurricane or earth-
quake was predicted. The season of the year in which this
epidemic occurred, was what is termed the rainy monsoon, but
which, as has been before observed, was marked by an un-
common dryness. Persons were seized suddenly while at
work, and when remote from contagious causes. The true
exciting cause of the disease must therefore be assigned to the
variable state of the atmosphere.
If the state and variability of the atmosphere was more
studied during the visit, and previous to the appearance of


epidemical diseases, there would be much light thrown upon
that cause, which is at the present day so readily assigned to
contagion ; indeed, we find the idiosyncrasy of different indi-
viduals such, that during the time the wind blows from a
certain quarter, they feel indisposed, without any other assign-
able reason—and if wounded, the wound will not heal from
the same cause; that others again suffer violent head-aches
when the atmosphere is charged with an abundance of electric
fluid, and which subsides when that peculiar state of weather
has passed.
As connected with the variation of temperature in the atmos-
phere may be considered electricity ; and it has been remarked
by writers when alluding to electrical influence as a cause of
disease, that the different states of atmosphere with regard to
this fluid, may be noticed, its accumulation in certain situa-
tions—in elevated spots, and occasionally in valleys—when we
observe that the atmosphere is sometimes positive, at others
negative, that these changes are sudden and repeated—that
vapour has a great capacity for electricity—that it varies with
the rising and setting of the sun—that it is the weakest in the
evening, and during the prevalence of easterly winds, as shown
by Monsieur Cavallo—at all of which times we acknowledge an
atmospheric influence, which is sufficiently marked in some
persons in more disturbed electrical states, as during the pre-
valence of stormy seasons, and in those occasionally ascending
mountains. It was Decandolle that observed the influence of
this agent in the growth of the young shoot of a vine, which,
during a thunder storm, lasting an hour and a-half, grew more
than an inch. To the influence of all these causes combined
the effects of climate may be attributed, and explain many of
the varieties in the organization, as impeded growth, and many
of the peculiarities of the passions and dispositions of the
races of men, as well as the diseases to which he is incident.
These are the principal external agencies, which, with diet,
influence the body, and prove active excitants to disease,
whether in the human or brute creation. But it is useless to
follow up a subject which is involved in difficulty—but at all
events, even mere conjecture provokes discussion and inquiry,
and leaves experience to assign to each hypothesis its just value.
Although I look upon a peculiar state of atmosphere as the
immediate cause of this epidemical disease, yet the predis-
posing cause among the sheep may have originated in Ist,
breeding from ewes twice in a season; 2nd, the injurious


effects which result from breeding in the same flocks, or what
is technically termed “breeding in and in,” which, although
the quality of the wool may be improved, the constitution of
the sheep are so weakened as to render them very liable to
disease, and susceptible to the atmospherical changes; and
3rd, the constititutions of the sheep having been injured by
mercurial remedies used in scab, as well as from the effects of
that eruptive disease itself. We are also aware how different
the same disease is modified in the human frame according to
the idiosyncrasy of the individual attacked; how in some a
slight cold will produce dangerous organic disease, whilst others
will suffer but slightly from it, and some escape an epidemical
disease altogether.
According as we observe by intermarriages among families,
the human race become deteriorated and rendered more sus-
ceptible of disease, so we find that it necessarily follows, that ani-
mals degenerate by being long bred from the same family, without
the intermixture of any other blood, or from being what is tech-
nically called “bred in-and-in and the same circumstance is
well known to occur in the breeding of horses, dogs, &c. I
believe it was the eminent Surgeon Cline that observed it was
wrong to enlarge a native breed of animals, for in proportion
to their increase of size, they become worse in form, less hardy,
and more liable to disease.
When engaged in the present investigation a query arose,
whether fine wool sheep were more apt to suffer from the
present epidemic than coarse wool bred sheep ? and I found
that the finer vvoolled sheep had suffered severely, whilst the
coarser wool sheep had escaped entirely, or very slightly, ex-
cept in Mr. H. Hume’s flock, which consisted of second class
sheep, but then they principally consisted of aged ewes.
The result of the experiments made by Mr. Knight, in the
vegetable kingdom, seems to justify us in concluding that
occasional crossing may become not only advantageous but
even necessary, for the purpose of correcting defects. Cross
breeding appears no doubt more consonant to what takes place
in nature than breeding from very near relationship, but it
will only be skilful and experienced breeders that will be able
to produce beneficial results from the practice.
The vicissitudes of the climate in this Colony are found to
be very great. I have often remarked that the mornings
during the summer season were intensely hot, followed fre


quently during the afternoons and evenings with cold chilly
wind, the temperature suddenly varying from 10 ° to 20 ° .
It was therefore not uncommon for men working in the fields
during harvest nearly stripped of their clothing, when the
sudden change of temperature takes place, to be attacked by
head-aches, pains in the limbs, and general debility, frequently
followed by catarrhs. It is these sudden changes of atmos-
phere, which also act in so destructive a manner upon the vege-
table kingdom, in the form of blights ; and catarrhal diseases
in this Colony, are more usually observed during the change of
seasons, when sudden transitions are more liable to take place,
although it too often occurs at irregular intervals during the
whole of the year. In Captain Rossi’s flock, 1 am, inclined to
attribute one of the causes of the epidemic to the change of
locality, from a mild to a severe climate, exposed to a cold,
chilly, variable atmosphere, with rain or snow; the animals
being more predisposed to the disease by dry food, and being
“ bred in and in.”
I may remark that many of the localities that I visited
(where the disease had been or was prevalent), were found
chilly and damp, whilst but a short distance from those places,
in some even without any particular elevation of the land, the
atmosphere was dry and warm. But we also find that an in-
crease of deaths took place when cold rains and S. W. winds
prevailed, proving highly injurious, by depriving the external
surface of the body of heat more rapidly than it can be sup-
plied from within by respiration.
I may, perhaps, be excused in mentioning the advantages
which may confidently be expected to arise in the investigation
of epidemical diseases, by accurate meteorological observations
being kept at various parts of the Colony, it would probably
lead to results which at present can hardly be anticipated.
The object of true science is simply to investigate the facts
and relations of the phenomena of disease, in the form in
which nature has presented them to us ; we must not pene-
trate into mysteries, and find ourselves involved in a labyrinth
of perplexity, but endeavour to obtain successful results from
accurate observations ; therefore, to enter upon all the various
theories of contagion in epidemic diseases will be absurd. On
such a subject there will always be prejudice and party spirit,
with an adherence to opinions, perhaps too hastily declared, to
permit either party to submit to evidence.


CONCLUDING OBSERVATIONS.
Catarrhs among sheep, that is, in the form of what is called
common catarrh, is not uncommon either in this Colony or in
Europe. In Scotland, I understand it does not prevail so much
among native sheep, as in those brought from England into the
colder northern climate. But the appearance of this severer
form of catarrh, the Epidemic Catarrh, or Influenza, in which
the inflammatory symptoms are more increased than in the
common form of the disease, I regard as novel, and am not
aware that it has before appeared as an epidemic among sheep.
Before concluding this report, I may be allowed to recom-
mend to the sheep proprietor, that salt may be given to the
sheep regularly, and in small quantities, it tends to strengthen
the digestive organs, promotes secretion of bile, and is favorable
to their general health.
Indeed, there can be no disputing the importance of-salt to
animals. Even animals in a wild state, at certain periods of
of the year, seek the salt water or salt springs with great
avidity, and every settler may observe with what eagerness
cattle, horses, &c., evince for anything- saline, and how very
fond they are of licking the salt earth of the farm-yard, &c.
In Spain, they give their sheep sa’t with great regularity ; and
however imperfectly in this Colony it may be practised, the im-
portance of salt for sheep, &c., is incontrovertibly established.
I recollect reading from some work, and making an extract in
my note book at the time, that a gent'eman, resident in the
County of Cumber'and in England, employed salt among his
live stock daily for years.
For Horses he gives 6 oz. per day
Milch Cows 4 ditto
Feeding Oxen G ditto
Yearlings 3 ditto
Calves 1 ditto
Sheep 2 to 4 per week,
if on dry pastures ; but if they are feeding on turnips, &c.,
then they should have it more freely. Some give it to live
stock on a slate or stone, and others lay lumps of it in the
cribs or mangers. Many consider that if sheep are allowed
free access to salt they will never be subject to the disease
called the rot; and others again consider that it may even
prove a cure for that formidable disease, which is considered
to proceed from a worm of the class Entozoa ; —the Fas


ciola hepatica of Limieus —Disloma hepalicum of Ablldgaard,
and has received the common appellation of the Liver Fluke.
Among- the Tartars it is the custom to give salt in consider-
able quantities to their flocks of sheep, taking them in the
spring to hills where the vegetable food is of a saiine nature,
and after their return, giving them salt to eat twice or thrice a
week, throughout the summer, and during the seasons which
they pass in the mountains, they are twice a week driven to
salt water.
In concluding this report, I may observe, that to give direc-
tions for the treatment of any disease, whether found existing
among human beings or in the brute creation, the judgment of
the practitioners must be always called in action ; the habits
and constitution of the patient under treatment ought to be
minute!}' studied, and the practice to be modified according to
those observations, whether the symptoms of the disease
assume a severe or a mild character, in such a manner should
the practitioner direct his treatment. Indeed, the disease now,
the subject of this report, when it attacks human beings, as-
sumes a milder or severer character in its attacks, according to
the idiosyncrasy of the individuals, some hardly requiring any
medical treatment, whilst others, particularly those of full
plethoric habits, have the symptoms very violent, the lungs and
bronchia becoming affected, and the most decisive antiphlogistic
treatment must instantly be adopted to save the patient; and
the same circumstances will also be found to occur among the
“ fleecy population” of the Colony. In sheep of delicate
constitutions, or high bred sheep, a very moderate venesection—
if even abstraction of blood can be resorted to at all with
safety,—must be adopted, the animals carefully housed ; but the
coarse wool or stronger constitution sheep may receive, of
course, according to the severity of the symptoms, the
treatment before recommended ; but at the same time, the
sheep proprietor must observe the necessity of treating
the sick sheep according to their strength, classing them
in small flocks according to the stages of the disease;
housing them at night during the prevalence of the epi-
demic may also be advised. But I am fully aware that
all directions will be useless unless the shepherds will pay
minute attention to their flocks, which in too many instances
has not been done. I attribute much of the mortality to this
neglect of the men in charge of the sheep. Care being
taken to treat the animals in the first stage of the disease.


I have no doubt would reduce the rate of mortality from this
epidemic —should it re-occur, which is not at all improbable,—
to a very low amount.
GEORGE BENNETT, F. L. S., Z. S., &c.,
Surgeon.
Sydney, October 3, 1835.


LETTER
TO THE
COLONIAL SECRETARY,
FROM
ANDREW GIBSON, ESQUIRE, J. P.,
RESPECTING THE DISEASE, WHICH FORMS THE SUBJECT OF
THE FOREGOING REPORT.
Goulburn Plains, 2bth September, 1835.
Sir,
In compliance with the request of His Excellency the
Governor, I do myself the honor to transmit to you the
following observations, which I have been enabled to make
upon the disease lately prevalent amongst the sheep in Argyle
and the adjacent Counties :—
The first cases of the disease, 1 believe, appeared about the
beginning of April last, in some flocks near Burrowa River,
in the County of King. Its prevalence, however, does not
seem to have been very extensive; and, comparatively, it has
been confined to but a few out of the many flocks in these
districts. For several months it did not extend beyond the
Counties of King and Georgiana ; latterly it reached Argyle
and the north-west parts of Murray ; but it has not been met
with in any part of St. Vincent’s, nor in Camden.
At the present date it has nearly subsided, with the excep-
tion, perhaps, of some occasional cases appearing amongst
flocks formerly affected, and in their lambs now dropping.
The disease is ascertained to be a catarrh, and of that species
called influenza (catarrhus contagiosus), spreading epidemi-
cally, and affecting the flocks much in the same manner that it
is known to do the human race, though to a more violent and
fatal extent. ,
£


The general symptoms are—increased secretion of mucous
from the lining membranes of the nose, and fauces ; swelling of
the nostrils; inflammatory fever; constipation of the bowels;
and, towards the latter stages of the disease, loss of vision,
determination to and congestion of the brain, the lungs, or
some of the larger viscera.
As precursory symptoms, it may be stated that the animal,
when seized with the complaint, exhibits a dullness and indis-
position to feed, lingers behind the others in the flock, becomes
chilled, the wool clapped, the nostrils humid and hot; sneezing
is frequent at this stage, and constipation of the bowels is
almost invariably present.
As the disease advances, the symptoms first mentioned be-
come more apparent; and, if not subdued by early remedies,
often prove fatal in thirty-six or forty-eight hours from the com-
mencement of the attack.
The symptoms more immediately preceding death are—
blindness, vertigo, laying down and frequent turning round of
the body, or a wringing of the head, indicating the determina-
tion of the disease to the brain.
The principal diagnostic, or distinguishing symptoms, are—
the swelling of the nasal passages, and discharge of an acrid
fluid from them, at first thin and clear, but gradually becoming
thicker and of a yellow colour.
The prognosis may be deemed favourable whenever a very
profuse and free discharge of the mucous secretion takes place,
when the bowels become relaxed, and on a return of the appe-
tite with remission of fever ; —unfavourable, on suppression of
the secretion from the nose, continued costiveness, and the oc-
casion of those symptoms indicating determination to the head ;
or of others (which ought to have been stated above, as appearing
when the determination happens to be more especially to the
chest), such as obstructed respiration, wheezing cough, and
extreme restlessness.
For practical purposes, a more minute detail of symptoms
might be given ; but the foregoing enumeration includes all
that are important or generally met with.
The remote cause (considering the disease to be the epidemic
above stated), a specific contagion, or peculiar cause prevailing
in the atmosphere, probably dependent upon the extreme and
sudden changes of temperature ; the weather throughout these
districts, during the winter months, having been not only un-
usually cold and dry, but exceedingly variable ;, severe frosty


nights and hot days, constantly alternating, so as to effect a
change in the thermometer of from 32 to 65, or even 70 de-
grees, in the twenty-four hours.
There can be no doubts entertained of the disease being in-
fectious ; but, apparently, only through actual contact with the
morbid secretion, which seems to be of an exceedingly virulent
quality.
From experiments and observations, it is found that the in-
troduction of this morbid matter, from the nostrils of a diseased
sheep, into those of a sound one, produces the disease in the
latter; whilst an infected flock brought alongside (but not ac-
tually in contact) of a sound one, will not communicate it to
them.
The progress of the disease certainly led, in the first in-
stance, to the belief that the infection was conveyed through
the air from one flock to another, but from the above facts,this
could not have been the case. All attacked were, no doubt,
affected through the same prevailing atmospheric contagion ;
or in some particular instances, perhaps, from coming into
direct contact with the morbid secretion dropped on the herbage
from infected flocks near to them.
The predisposing causes are supposed to be various—as,
feeding on unsound runs, costiveness from eating hard dry
food, drinking stagnant water, or water impregnated with
tannin, and sudden removal from a warm or temperate to a
cold run.
Some few of these causes may, no doubt, have their predis-
posing influence to a certain extent, but none of them can be
admitted as satisfactory reasons to account for the very partial
attacks of the epidemic upon the numerous flocks exposed to it.
The very remarkable manner in which it has singled out the
flocks of particular settlers for its victims, and passed over so
many others depasturing on the same or contiguous runs, pos-
sessing similar qualities of soil and water, induces the belief
that some special predisposing cause exists in the constitution
of those so particularly attacked. And although it may be
difficult to obtain impartial evidence on this point from all,
enough has been elicited, from enquiry into the system of
breeding pursued by many, to prove that constitutional dete-
rioration from too close breeding, or breeding in-and-in, as it
is called, had been induced ; and that this has been the main
predisposing cause, if not generally, at least in all those flocks
which have suffered the greatest mortality under the disease.


Whether this or any other cause be admitted ultimately as the
predisposing one, it is at present important to know that the
heaviest losses occurred amongst sheep thus closely bred within
themselves for a period of six or seven years, without the inter-
vention of any fresh blood ; and, what is still worse, without
regard to that limited degree of crossing, which is attainable
on any establishment, by using the rams bred from one flock
with the young ewes produced from another—a system Judi-
ciously and invariably practised even by those who breed in-
and-in upon principle.
From the foregoing statement it seems, at all events justi-
fiable, and at any rate safe to assign as a main predisposing
cause to this disease—“ Constitutional deterioration, from too
“ close or injudicious breeding in-and-in, where the nearest
“ intercourse is permitted between sires and dams with their
“ immediate offspring, and this for a lengthened period.”
And perhaps as allied to this cause also, from “ excessive
breeding,” where two crops of lambs are produced and reared
in one year from the same ewe.
In addition to these two causes, and sometimes combined
with them, another source of diminished constitutional vigour
and lessened capability of resisting disease may arise from the
effects of previous bad management in the treatment of cuta-
neous affections by mercurial remedies.
It would not be correct to say that the two last mentioned
causes are applicable to many of the flocks which have suffered
under the epidemic now prevalent, but from what is known
respecting the general system of breeding followed in the
Colony by most inexperienced stock-holders, there are the
strongest grounds for believing that the first named cause, de-
generacy «f constitution, from injudicious breeding in-and-in,
has been the chief predisposing cause in the majority, and that
this first, combined with one or both of the two last named
causes, have been the predisposing ones in many others.
These views of the disease are strengthened by a knowledge
of the facts, that not only the regularly crossed sheep but all
coarse woolled sheep (which are seldom close bred) are less
subject to the disease than such as those just above described,
or if attacked, they either suffer less or more readily surmount
the effects of the disease.
Sheep of all ages are liable to the epidemic, but more parti-
cularly the young, and lambs when only eight days old, it has
been recently noticed, are attacked and die. This mortality


amongst the lambs, it is material to observe, is prevailing- un-
happily to a great extent amongst the flocks on that establish-
ment where the breeding in-and-in system has been so closely
pursued as above mentioned.
It is observed by some, that if constitutional deterioration
be present in those flocks principally attacked, it is not always
apparent, and that the strongest and best conditioned sheep are
found the most liable to this disease. The strongest indication
of their diminished constitutional vigour from breeding, is their
incapability of resisting disease, or bearing the remedies re-
quired to subdue it. When degeneracy however is caused to
a very great extent by breeding, it is always sufficiently
apparent in sheep by the loss of figure, size, and length of
staples.* But with regard to fatness or fine condition, it is
found to be by no means incomputable with a deteriorated
state of constitution; obesity is often a sign of an unhealthy
habit in the lower orders of anima's as well as in man. Thus, a
sheep for instance, labouring under the rot (to a certain extent)
is often considered in the fitest state for the market.
The objections to the system of breeding alluded to, as in-
and-in breeding, are to be understood as applying more espe-
cially to it when injudiciously followed, for if judgment and
skill be used in extensive establishments, degeneracy may be
prevented, or at least averted for a great length of time.
Future enquiry will no doubt fully decide the point, as to
the effects of breeding being at all a predisposing cause to this
or any other disease to which sheep may be liable, and as it is
of great importance, the subject will no doubt meet with due
attention from all interested.
The appearances after death are generally congestion in the
vessels, and coverings of the brain, and effusions of water into
its cavities—inflammation of the mucous membranes of the
nostrils—frontal cavities, and fauces—sometimes also of the
windpipe ; in other instances ulceration of those parts may be
met with when the disease has been of long duration. Con-
gestion of the lungs will be found where the disease has taken
a determination to the chest, and often effusion into the covering
of the heart, with masses of coagulated blood in its right
cavities. The immediate cause of death seems, in most cases.
* It may also exist in their constitutions, so as to predispose to disease
without being very obvious.


to be from congestion and effusion into the ventricles of the
brain.
With respect to the treatment, it is perhaps unnecessary for
me to enter into it in detail, there being but one opinion enter-
tained as to the most beneficial mode to be adopted, and as
this will, no doubt, be most fully given by Dr. Bennett (with
whose opinion on the disease I am happy to find my own very
nearly accord), I need only add, that early bleeding from the
jugular vein, to the extent of a pint or more, according to the
strength and age of the animal, together with the use of
Glauber or Epsom salts in thin gruels have effected many re-
coveries, and are the only means of cure to be trusted to.
In chronic cases, where ulceration is present in the nasal
passages, astringentand antiseptic injections may be beneficial—
tar water, or tobacco water, with turpentine, or weak solutions
of blue vitrol might answer this purpose. It is of importance
to pay attention to the food and drink of sick or convalescent
sheep—burned feed is the most desirable—tepid drinks, and
abstinence from cold water.
Relapses on change of weather are frequent, the conva-
lescent being for a long period exceedingly weak ; bleeding
all the sheep throughout the flock, upon the appearance of the
disease in a few as a preservative measure, is by no means safe
practice, unless the flock be in very high condition.
The use of tar, recommended by some as an application to
the nostrils of the sheep cannot be of much benefit, further
than that its antiseptic properties may, when applied to a
sound sheep, destroy the virus or morbid secretion which the
animal is liable to come in contact with when grazing amidst
an infected flock; and so far as this, it may be a means of
protection from contagion, but it can be of no use as a remedy
to the affected.
It is difficult to ascertain the actual numbers of sheep which
have been affected, died, and recovered, since the commence-
ment of the epidemic. But it is supposed that not more than
twenty-five settlers have had their flocks attacked—and that the
total of deaths from the disease has not exceeded six thousand.
On one establishment alone, where the greatest mortality (as
above noticed) was sustained, the loss is known to amount to
2,500 ; the number affected cannot be stated correctly, but the
total strength on the stations near the Crookwell River, was
about 7,500 sheep.


At stations where remedies were efficiently and skilftilly
administered, three out of five affected were generally saved,
but the proportions appear to vary exceedingly at different
places—perhaps in most instances they may be stated thus—
That in a flock of 300—the number
affected would be 100
Died 45
Recovered 55
I have the honor to be.
Sir,
your most obedient Servant,
ANDREW GIBSON.


REPORT
ON THE
PRESENT CONTAGIOUS INFLUENZA,
OR
CONTAGIOUS EPIDEMIC CATARRH
AMONG SHEEP.
The first authentic account I can obtain of the existence of
the disease in this Colony, is that of its appearance about
twelve months since, among some flocks at Burrowa, but I have
every reason to believe that it had appeared upwards of two
years before that period at Limestone Plains, and about Mudgee.
SYMPTOMS.
Ist. —The diseased animal separates from the flock, appears
listless, the eyes are watery, the membrane lining the nostrils
presents, instead of the pale pink hue of health, an increasing
redness, which afterwards becomes streaked with lines of a
deeper colour (marking the gradual progress of inflammation)
a glary clammy discharge, similar to the white of a fresh egg,
is perceptible in either one nostril (generally the left), or some-
times, though rarely, in both.
2ndly.—The eyes become reddened and more watery, the
membrane of the nose of an intense florid hue, the discharge
is thicker and of a yellowish tinge, and the internal membrane,
as well as the external surface of the nose become slightly
swelled —the breathing, if carefully observed, appears some-
what hurried, and the animal now seems in pain.
3rdly.—The membrane of the nose now assumes a dark
purple or leaden colour, the discharge forms a crust at the
edges of the nostrils, the breathing is more quickened, and
sometimes obstructed, the lips (particularly the upper lip),
nostrils, and sometimes the whole face and head are swollen,
the eyes are more and more inflamed, and there is a profuse
flow of tears (in a few instances the eyes are closed) and death
ensues—rapidly followed by putrescency of the whole body.


APPEARANCES AFTER DEATH.
The surface of the body (in many instances immediately)
after death, is of a dark purple or livid hue, and the wool,
contrary to what is observed in animals that have died in
health or from most other diseases, separates on the slightest
touch.
DISSECTIONS.
Abdominal and thoracic viscera healthy ; gall bladder in
general turgid; the membrane lining the nose and extending
thence to the several sinuses of the head, highly inflamed. The
membranes of the brain (particularly the two inner membranes,
those nearest the brain itself) also presented the appearances
of previous intense inflammation. Iri some few instances
there was a small effusion of fluid into the venricles.
In one instance, in which the respiration had been observed
to have been more than usually affected, the mucous membrane
of the lungs was found inflamed ; though even in this case, that
part of it which lined the upper portion of the windpipe was
the more intensely so, whence it may be infered that the disease,
in this instance, as in other cases, commenced in the membrane
of the nose,
TREATMENT.
This would primarily consist in the immediate removal of the
healthy from the diseased.sheep, and in keeping them separate,
and in the earliest possible detection of the disease itself. To
effect which objects, it is indispensable that the flocks should
be examined two or three times a day, or, what would be better
every four or six hours, as the success in preventing the spread
of the disease, as well as in the case of the infected animals, is
entirely dependent on the promptitude with which these pri-
mary observances are adopted.
The remedies themselves consist of bleeding, and aperients,
and the earlier these are had resource to, the infinitely greater
the chance of success ; but they may be used up to, or even
during the second stage of the disease with some possibility of
advantage.
r


In the third stage, no attempts at either relief or cure have
been found of any avail.
In the first instance, extract about one pint and a-half of
blood from the jugular vein, and as soon after as possible give
one ounce of Epsom Salts and about a drachm of nitre (salt
petre) in a pint of warm gruel, and repeat the bleeding, if
requisite, to about the same extent, in four or six hours.
OBSERVATIONS.
The want of success from bleeding seems in those instances
in which it has been observed to have arisen from two obvious
causes. Ist, The abstraction of too small a quantity of blood
to be of any avail (e. g, in most of such instances to the extent
of only a few ounces) instead of the copious extraction, and
the repetition of the same where required, as above mentioned;
and again, in a most destructive plan of employing bleeding
as a preventive of the disease, and thereby reducing the
strength of the animals, and rendering them not only more
liable to be affected with the disease itself, but also less able to
support its ravages, and still less so to sustain the means neces-
sary for its cure.
During the progress of the disease the bowels are sometimes,
though not generally, constipated, and in a very few cases
there was a frequent desire to void urine—but this symptom
did not appear in any way dependent on the disease, and was
perhaps not more frequent than under the ordinary circum-
stances of the animal.
The powers of ruminating and swallowing were unimpaired,
and the animals were able not only to stand but walk through-
out the disease.
The duration ot the Ist stage extends from about six to ten
hours; the 2nd stage is nearly of the same continuance ; the
last stage is more brief, and the average duration of the disease
may vary from twenty to twenty-four hours. The disease did
not appear to be preceded by any indisposition or other circum-
stances that might give notice of its approach, and where no
means of relief were employed, it has been almost invariably
fatal, in some instances destroying whole flocks.
A similar disease has, here and there, been observed among
horses from time to time, and as far as I have seen and can
learn has yielded to the treatment here adopted, with the addi


tion of warm mashes and copious tepid drinks, which, no doubt,
if practicable, might be used in the treatment of sheep with
infinite advantage, particularly the latter.
The cause of this disease, like that of most epidemics, is
obscure—but I am inclined to attribute its existence primarily
to the state of the atmosphere, and subsequently to the same
cause aided by contagion, and on this principle I ventured to
give it the name affixed to this report.
That the disease did not arise from the several causes to
which it has been generally attributed, viz.—the animals de-
vouring earth impregnated with nitre; the innutritions state of
the pasturage; or impure water; I have every reason to
believe, inasmuch as the disease was found equally prevalent
in the best, as in other pasturage ; the young sheep, and those
in the finest condition, were the greatest sufferers; and some
of the affected flocks not only enjoyed their accustomed and
good pasturage, but drank from running streams of the best
water, to which they had also been accustomed, and without
having been subjected to the possibility of being affected by
the nitrous impregnations.
I have mentioned as a precaution for obviating the spread of
the disease, the separation of infected from sound sheep. This,
however, must be done with due care, and without fatiguing
or distressing the animals by long or harrassing journies or
otherwise.
The epithet contagious applied by me to this disease, is sup-
ported by numerous well-authenticated facts, which if they do
not amount to demonstration, are, at least, I am of opinion,
sufficient to justify its use on the present occasion.
If contagious, it may be a question whether the herbage, in
those spots where the diseased sheep have been, becomes in-
fected, and, if so, how long it remains in such state, and
whether, where practicable, the burning of such herbage would
not be the most available and certain means of destroying the
infection.
WILLIAM SHERWIN.
Stephens §• Stokes, Printers , George-street.








