

1881.
WESTERN AUSTRALIA.
REPORT
BY
MR. ALEX. MCRAE,
OP A
TRIP TO THE FITZROY RIVER,
FROM ROEBUCK BAY,
IN THE YEAR 1866.
Presented to the Legislative Council hy His Excellency’s Command.
PERTH:
BY AUTHORITY: RICHARD PETHER, GOVERNMENT PRINTER.
1881.
No. 23.




Report by Mr. Alex. McRae of a Trip to the Fitzroy River, from
Roebuck Bay, in the year 1866.
No. 939. C.S.O. Colonial Secretary’s Office,
Perth, 39th August, 1881.
HIS Excellency the Governor directs the publication of the following Report, for general
information.
By His Excellency’s Command,
GIFFORD,
Colonial Secretary.
My Lord, Murray, sth July, 1881.
Herewith I have the honor to forward you a copy of a report of a trip to the Pitzroy River, in the
year 1866, by Mr. Alex. Mcßae. His starting point, Goldwyer Sheep Station, is about twelve miles E-
by N. from Cape Yillaret.
The object of the expedition was to find a good practicable route in view of the stock belonging
to the Roebuck Bay Company being taken to the Pitzroy; and in my opinion that travelled by Mr.
Mcßae is a good one, and far superior to any that can be found from Beagle Bay.
I forward it to you, so that you may use your judgment as to the advisability of publishing it or not.
It never has been published, but may be relied upon.
I have, &c.,
The Honorable the Colonial Secretary. JOSEPH LOGUE, Jtjn.
Sir, Roebuck Bay, 26th May, 1866.
Having received instructions from you to take charge of a party which you intended to explore
the country towards the Pitzroy river, I now beg to hand you an account of the trip.
On May the 6th the party, consisting of myself, W. S. Hall, J. McCourt, P.C. Toovey, and native
Gumming, taking five riding and two pack horses, with 14 days provisions, left Goldwyer sheep station.
Steering a general N.E. course we struck the plains below Vincent Springs, following them up to a place
known as Cockatoo Hill. We halted for dinner at 1 p.m. Resumed at 2'30, following the plain up to
Toovey Springs, where we watered the horses, and then went on and halted at 6 p.m. near Barlee Springs.
On the 7th left Barlee Springs at 6‘45 a.m., steering a course E. for five miles, then E. by N. nine
miles. We struck a small swamp with a good supply of water just now, but I think not permanent; here
we decided to halt for the night, at 1 p.m. The country along the line of march to-day was well grassed,
but beginning to dry up fast. There does not appear to have been so much rain here as in the neighbor-
hood of Cape Yillaret.
On the Bth we got under way at 6-80 a.m., steering E.N.E. for six miles, passed Tower Hill at
9 a.m., and took a course E. by N. for six miles, and then two miles N.E.; we halted for dinner at
1 p.m., without water. All the country passed over this morning was thickly grassed, and in some
places fit for sheep, the soil improving much. Resumed again at 2-30 p.m. on an E.N.E. course for six
miles, when we struck a dry creek, which we followed down to the IST. for one mile in the hope of getting
water, but were disappointed; and two miles on we struck a good sized river, with plenty of water
standing in pools; its course appears to be to the East; here we halted for the night, at 5’30 p.m.
Passed over three miles of strong land this evening, poorly grassed. The rest of the journey was over a
good description of country. The soil near the river is of a light alluvial nature. The grass has been
recently burned. I propose calling this river the Logue.
On the 9th our horses strayed five or six miles up the river, owing to the grass being burned. We
did not get away until 9 a.m.; we then followed the course of the river down for five or six miles, and
halted for dinner at 11 a.m. on a fine reach of water half a mile long and 50 yards wide; the country
along the river is lightly timbered and well grassed. Resumed at 2'30 p.m., still following the river down,
which was joined two miles further on by a large branch coming from the S.W., and a mile further on by
another from the same direction. The river now widens out into a clear broad reach 100 yards wide,
swarming with ducks and other wild fowl, of which we shot a good supply. Two miles further down
the river appears to terminate in this reach. There is no definite channel further down, but a broad
marshy flat extends to the N. by E.; here we camped for the night, at 5-30 p.m. The country passed
over this evening was mostly open plains, extending a couple of miles back from the river, well grassed.
There is a range of high land to the North, a remarkable flat-topped hill on it bore N.W. There were a
few natives on the river as we passed down, who were not a little surprised to see us, and made off
in great haste when we fired at some ducks.


On the 10th we started at 7 a.m. on an E. course; after going a mile we got on to a sand hill
and had a good view to the East. Before us a large open sheet of water stretched away to the N.N.E.
out of view, and, as near as we could guess, two miles wide. This I propose calling Lake Hall. We had
to alter our course to E. by S. to avoid the wet marshy land on its margin; continued on this course eight
miles across open level plains, well grassed, and halted for dinner at 11 a.m., near a fine swamp or clay
pan. Resumed at 3 p.m. After crossing a rich alluvial flat for a mile, where the grass grew so strong
that our horses had as much as they could do to wade through it, we struck the Fitzroy River running to
the N. by W. Here it is a fine river, 150 yards wide, with a current runfling about two miles per hour, quite
fresh. The hanks are about 20 feet high ; rode about three miles up the W. bank and halted for the night.
On the 11th started at 6’30 a.m., still on the river. Two miles up we crossed a small tributary
coming in from the South, and half a mile further we crossed a considerable branch that comes in from
the S. by E., the main branch now comes from the E.S.E. We took a course S.B. through a large open
plain ; two remarkable high hills were visible in that direction, distant about 20 miles. High land to the
S. of our course. Continued in this direction for 10 miles, and then halted for dinner at 11 a.m. on a
deep clay pan, with a good supply of water. The first two miles of country passed over this morning
were thickly grassed, and in many places six feet high; then seven miles over plains of a hard clayey
nature beautifully grassed, and intersected with long swamps and deep clay pans. The last three miles
were through a lightly timbered country which had been lately burnt and is now covered with fine green
grass six inches high; saw 18 or 20 natives on the plain, they were engaged burning the grass for pigeons’
eggs, which are very numerous. We rode up to some of them; they were not armed, and appeared very
frightened of us, and tried to hide themselves in the grass. Started on the return trip about 2 - 30 p.m.,
our stay out being limited to 10 or 12 days; took a course W.N.W. to strike the high land seen in the
morning on our right. Four miles on this course we struck the South branch of the river, and 2 miles on
camped at the foot of the hill, which we found to be of an ironstone formation and covered with spinifex.
The country passed over this evening was as good as crossed in the morning, but more clay pans were seen.
On the 12th got under way at 7 a.m., N.W. by W. course, and struck our night halt of the 9th, on
the Logue River, at noon, where we halted for dinner; travelled over six miles of plains well grassed and
of timbered country also well grassed, the soil of a light clayey nature. Resumed at 3 p.m., following the
river up to the W. Travelled three miles up one of the Southern branches, which we found to he better
grassed than the West branch. Struck the West branch again at 6 p.m., and camped for the night six
miles above our noon-day halt.
On the 13th got under way at 8 a.m., the horses having strayed some distance in the night, still
following the West branch up. We halted for dinner at 11 a.m. near a large pool in the river nine miles
above our night halt. Resumed again at 2 p.m., still on the river * a little to the IST. of W. Two
miles course it was joined by a large and the main branch from the S. by W we
found the river was running from so left it and took a course W.S.W. for when we again
crossed the Southern branch which was running at this point E. by FT. three miles course. We
halted for the night at 5 p.m. in an open flat, beautifully grassed but without water. Most of the country
passed over this evening was well grassed, and in most places thickly timbered.
On the 14th got under way at 7 a.m., on a S.W. course. A mile from our camp we again struck
an elbow of the river with plenty of water; its general course now seems to be from N.W. Three miles
further on we struck on our outward track, followed it to Tower Hill, and then on to our night camp of
the Bth, where we halted for dinner. Resumed at 3‘30 p.m., following our outward track; halted for
the night at 5 p.m., seven miles from Barlee Springs, without water.
On the 15th started at 5'45 a.m., still on our outward track. We halted to water horses at Barlee
Springs and went on to Toovey’s Springs to breakfast. Resumed at 11-30 a.m. and halted for the night
near Yincent Springs, at 5T5; here there is a good supply of water. Saw a number of natives on the
plains as we came down; they are not so shy as they used to be.
I may add in connection with the country seen on and about the Fitzroy River # is the
best I have seen on the N.W and I have since seen the DeGrey Tsin Bay, but not
much of the latter and possesses all the advantages sheep country excepting that
it perhaps too far North, but I do well in the same latitude in
The principal timber was white and flooded gum, with two kinds of wattle, the baobab also grows
here in great luxuriance, one monster measured 13- feet in diameter. The principal game seen was
ducks and other water fowl and pigeons; the former were found in swarms on every sheet of water.
The mosquitoes were very troublesome when camped near the river.
I have, &c.,
To Joseph Logue, junr., Esq.
A. McRAE.
* The omissions are where the original manuscript was illegible.
J. Ljunr.
Authority: Richard f ether, Government Printer, Perth,


