

1959.
THE PARLIAMENT OF THE COMMONWEALTH OF AUSTRALIA.
AUSTRALIAN BROADCASTING CONTROL BOARD.
REPORT AND RECOMMENDATIONS
TO THE
POSTMASTER-GENERAL
ON APPLICATIONS FOR COMMERCIAL TELEVISION LICENCES
FOR THE PERTH AND HOBART AREAS.
Presented by Command 30 th April, 1959; ordered to be printed, 14 th May, 1959.
[Cost of Paper: —Preparation, not given; 880 copies; approximate cost of printing and publishing, £75.]
Printed and Published for the Government of the Commonwealth of Australia by
A. J. Arthur, Commonwealth Government Printer, Canberra.
(Printed in Australia.)
No. 40 [GROUP H].—F.6824/58.-PRICE 1s.




AUSTRALIAN BROADCASTING CONTROL BOARD.
REPORT AND RECOMMENDATIONS TO THE POSTMASTER-GENERAL.
1. The Broadcasting and Television Act 1942-1956 provides as follows:
81. —(1.) The Minister may, subject to this Act, grant to a person a licence for a commercial broadcasting station
or for a commercial television station upon such conditions, and in accordance with such form, as the Minister
determines.
(2.)
82. —(1.) Before granting a licence under the last preceding section, the Minister shall, by notice published in the
Gazette , invite applications for the grant of the licence.
(2.) An application for the grant of a licence shall be in accordance with a form supplied by the Minister and shall
be made in such manner, and within such time, as the Minister specifies in the notice.
83. —(l.) The Minister shall refer applications made in pursuance of the last preceding section to the Board for its
recommendation as to the grant of the licence.
(2.) Before making a recommendation, the Board shall hold an inquiry in accordance with this Act into the
applications.
The provisions relating to inquiries by the Board are contained in Division 3 of Part 11. of the Act.
2. The Minister, on Ist October, 1957, approved of the form of application for the grant of a
licence for a commercial television station, a copy of which is set out in Appendix A.
3. Pursuant to section 82 (1.) of the Act, the Minister, by notice dated 17th October, 1957,
published in the Gazette on 24th October, 1957, invited applications, to be lodged with the Secretary
of the Board not later than 30th June, 1958, for the grant of licences for commercial television stations
in the Perth and Hobart areas.
4. In response to this invitation, applications were received from the following:—
(a) For the Perth area —
(1) TYW Ltd.
(2) Western Television Services Ltd.
(b) For the Hobart area —
(1) B. A. McCann and Metropolitan Broadcasters Pty. Ltd., on behalf of Hobart
Television Ltd. (a company to be formed).
(2) J. F. Clarke on behalf of Australian Features Television Ltd. (a company to be
formed).
(3) Tasmanian Television Ltd.
5. Pursuant to section 83 (1.) of the Act, the Minister, by instrument in writing dated 2nd July,
1958, a copy of which is set out in Appendix B, referred the applications specified in paragraph 4 to
the Board for its recommendation as to the exercise by him of the powers conferred by sub-section (1.)
of section 81 of the Act. The Board, having given notice of the time and place of the hearing of the
inquiry to each applicant and by public notice published twice in all daily newspapers in Perth and
Hobart, a copy of which is set out in Appendix C, held a public inquiry into the applications in Perth
on 28th to 30th July and in Hobart on 18th to 20th August.
6. On Bth August, 1958, the Board received notice that the application of J. F. Clarke on
behalf of Australian Features Television Ltd. (a company to be formed) was withdrawn by the
applicant. A summary of the remaining applications is contained in paragraphs 12 to 59 of this
Report.
7. Pursuant to section 22 of the Act, TVW Ltd. was represented by Mr. R. I. Ainslie and
Mr. H. V. Reilly; Western Television Services Ltd. by Mr. O. Negus, Q.C., and Mr. G. W. Gwynne;
B. A. McCann and Metropolitan Broadcasters Pty. Ltd. by Mr. R. Else-Mitchell, Q.C., and Mr. K. F.
Lowrie; Tasmanian Television Ltd. by Mr. F. M. Neasey and Mr. R. T. Holt.
8. At the commencement of the inquiry in Perth, the Board granted permission to Western
Press Ltd., a shareholder in Western Television Services Ltd., and Southern Television Corporation
Ltd., an applicant for the grant of a licence for a commercial television station in the Adelaide area,
to be heard on aspects relevant to the inquiry. These interests were represented by Mr. H. Aldermann,
Q.C. At the inquiry in Hobart, the Board granted permission to Mr. W. G. Wedd to be heard.


9. An official transcript of the proceedings was made by the Reporting Branch of the
Commonwealth Attorney-General’s Department and a copy has been made available to the Minister.
SUMMARY OF APPLICATIONS.
10. The form of application for the grant of a licence for a commercial television station
(Appendix A) required applicants to furnish detailed information in support of their applications
The information supplied was amplified during the course of the inquiry and, in the case of some
applicants, alternative proposals were made. All the applicants agreed that only one licence should
be granted in the Perth and Hobart areas at this stage, and their applications were conducted on this
basis.
11. In the following paragraphs a summary is given of each of the applications. These
summaries are not intended to include all the information contained in the applications or in the
evidence presented at the inquiry. In particular, only a brief summary is given of the technical and
programme proposals of the applicants. It is pointed out in this connexion that, pursuant to section
16 of the Act, the Board has determined Standards for the Technical Equipment and Operation of
Television Stations and Television Programme Standards with which the licensees of all commercial
television stations must comply. Detailed investigations of these aspects may be undertaken more
appropriately after licences are granted. It may be said, however, that the information furnished by
applicants was, in the main, adequate for the purposes of our inquiry.
APPLICATIONS FOR THE PERTH AREA.
TVW Ltd.
12. TYW Ltd. was incorporated in the State of Western Australia on the 25th June, 1958. The
authorized capital of the company is £1,000,000 divided into 2,000,000 shares of 10s. each. Initially
it was proposed to raise capital up to £700,000.
Proposed Constitution.
13. The application stated that West Australian Newspapers Ltd. had undertaken to take up
600.000 10s. shares at par in TVW Ltd., and the general public of Western Australia was to be given
the opportunity of subscribing £300,000 to £400,000 by applying for shares or registered unsecured
notes.
14. Prior to the commencement of the inquiry, the company filed a prospectus for the issue of
1.200.000 shares of 10s. each at par and £300,000 of 7 per cent, redeemable registered unsecured notes.
The public was invited to subscribe for 600,000 shares and for £300,000 of registered unsecured notes
redeemable on 31st October, 1968, and carrying an option to take up 100 shares at par for each £5O of
notes on the 31st October, 1961, 1962 or 1963. It was stated in the prospectus that it was the intention
to allot only sufficient registered unsecured notes to make up the difference between the nominal amount
of all shares applied for (including those for which West Australian Newspapers Ltd. had undertaken
to subscribe), and a maximum of £700,000. The prospectus also stated that, in the event of the
company not obtaining an initial sole licence before the 31st October, 1958, any moneys received
with applications for shares or notes would be refunded in full but without interest and all preliminary
expenses would be borne by West Australian Newspapers Ltd.
15. During the course of the inquiry it was stated that if, on the 31st October, 1963, the shares
which were being held in reserve to satisfy the requirements of the note holders were not taken up by
them, those shares would be offered to the public at par.
16. In evidence it was stated that applications had been received by the company from 427
applicants, all resident in Western Australia, for a total of 747,768 shares (including the 600,000 to be
taken up by West Australian Newspapers Ltd.) and from 1,649 applicants for a total of £504,475 of
notes. With the exception of four, all the applicants for notes were residents of Western Australia.
It was also stated in evidence that the company, if granted a licence, would allot in full the shares for
which application had been made and would allot the notes in such a way as to ensure participation
by all applicants; those applying for the smaller number of shares would receive preference.
17. By a deed executed on 26th June, 1958, between TVW Ltd. and The West Australian Trustee
Executor & Agency Company Ltd., the latter company will act as trustee for the holders of the unsecured
notes.
18. The Articles of Association provide that the directors may, in their absolute discretion,
decline to allot any shares in excess of 60,000 to any one person (this provision was understood not to
apply to West Australian Newspapers Ltd.). It is also provided that the number of directors shall be
not less than four or more than seven. The holders of unsecured notes are entitled to appoint two
directors when the principal moneys outstanding in respect of such notes exceeds £150,000 and one
director when the amount is less than £150,000 but exceeds £50,000.


The first directors are —
C. G. Friend (Chairman) .. Former Director, Posts and Telegraphs in Western Australia.
M, L. Fry .. .. .. Former Manager, Perth Branch, Bank of New South Wales
and now a director of a number of companies
R. A. Long .. .. Chartered Accountant and Director of a number of
companies, including West Australian Newspapers Ltd.
J. E. Macartney .. .. Managing Editor of West Australian Newspapers Ltd.
The first two named were appointed to represent the holders of unsecured notes.
Details of Principal Shareholder in the Company.
19. West Australian Newspapers Ltd. which will subscribe £300,000 of the £600,000 or £700,000
of issued capital of TVW Ltd., was incorporated in 1926 and publishes The West Australian (morning
daily newspaper), Daily News (evening daily newspaper), Weekend Mail (weekly newspaper),
and The Countryman (rural weekly newspaper). It has a paid up capital of £1,118,538 comprising
100,000 8 per cent, cumulative preference shares of £1 each and 1,018,538 ordinary shares of £1 each.
The shares are distributed among 2,261 holders, the largest shareholder being an individual holding 13,524
shares. West Australian Newspapers Ltd., holds 74,700 (1.6 per cent.) fully paid ss. shares in Advertiser
Newspapers Ltd., Adelaide, and half the shares in W. A. Broadcasters Pty. Ltd., the licensee of commercial
broadcasting stations 6IX, 6WB, 6MD and 6BY.
Financial Proposals.
20. It was estimated that the costs involved in the establishment of the station (including
miscellaneous expenses incurred to the date of commencement of operations) Would amount to £479,370.
The cost of operations for the first three years was given as £257,738; £269,838; and £319,418 respectively.
It was estimated that income would amount to £132,977 during the first year, £232,537 during the second
year and £378,976 during the third year. It was stated that the £600,000 to £700,000 capital which it
was proposed to raise should be sufficient to establish the station on a profitable basis. If necessary,
further capital would be secured by borrowing or by the issue of further shares or registered unsecured
notes.
Programme Proposals.
21. The company proposed, as a minimum, to provide programmes for 35 hours per week during
the first year, 42 hours per week during the second year and 50 hours during the third year. The
operating schedule for the first year would be as follows: —
Monday and Wednesday .. .. 5.30 p.m. to 10.05 p.m.
Tuesday .. .. .. .. 2.00 p.m. to 9.35 p.m.
Thursday .. .. .. .. 2.00 p.m. to 10.05 p.m.
Friday .. .. .. .. 5.30 p.m. to 10.10 p.m.
Saturday .. .. .. .. 6.00 p.m. to 11.00 p.m.
(plus afternoon sessions as warranted)
Sunday .. .. .. .. 5.30 p.m. to 10.00 p.m.
22. It was stated that during the first year the programmes would comprise hours (41 per cent.)
live productions; 4\ hours (13 per cent.) Australian kinescope recordings and 16 hours (46 per cent.)
of imported material.
Technical Proposals.
23. The technical proposals have been based on the use of transmitting equipment having an
effective radiated power of 100 kW. (vision) and 20kW. (sound). The transmitter would be located at
Bickley and the studios at a site at Mount Yokine on which an option to purchase has been secured.
Four image orthicon cameras would be provided for use in the studios. Provision has been made in
the estimates for an outside broadcast van equipped to use two of the studio cameras. Its purchase
is to be deferred until experience shows the need for this item.
Western Television Services Ltd.
24. Western Television Services Ltd. is a company incorporated in the State of Western Australia.
The authorized capital is £1,000,000 divided into 2,000,000 shares of 10s. each. Initially it was proposed
to raise capital of £600,000.
Proposed Constitution.
25. The company proposed to offer 600,000 shares to the public, preference being given to
Western Australian residents. Arrangements had been made for the proposed public issue to be jointly
underwritten by two Perth sharebroking firms. The remaining shares to be issued were offered to various


Young Australian League Inc. ..
£
60,000
Western Press Ltd.
60,000
Members of the W.A. Newsagents Association
20,000
Boans Ltd. ..
10,000
John Allen Ltd.
10,000
Aherns Pty. Ltd.
5,000
Peet & Co. Ltd.
4,000
Bairds Pty. Ltd.
1,000
Bunning Bros. Pty. Ltd.
500
170,500
interests in Western Australia. At the date the application was submitted, undertakings to subscribe
to the capital of the company had been received as follows: —
26. During the course of the inquiry, it was stated that additional applications from fifteen
persons or companies for shares to the value of £8,950 had been received since the application was lodged.
Western Press Ltd. had also informed Western Television Services Ltd. that it would make available
for a suggested period of five years up to a further 25 per cent, of the total paid-up capital, if required,
on the security of redeemable non-voting debentures.
27. The Articles of Association limit the voting power of any member of the company to 10 per
cent, of the votes at any meeting of shareholders. They also provide for the appointment of not less
than three or more than nine directors. The first directors appointed were—
Sir Alex Reid (Chairman) .. .. Chancellor of University of Western Australia;
Member, Commonwealth Grants Commission;
Chairman, State Electricity Commission and
director of a number of companies.
Rt. Hon. H. R. Howard .. .. Lord Mayor of Perth.
F. T. Boan .. .. .. Managing Director, Boans Ltd.
J. Thomson .. .. .. Former General Manager, Westralian Farmers
Co-operative Ltd.
V. L. Steffanoni .. .. .. Commonwealth Public Servant and Honorary
Treasurer of the Young Australia League Inc.
E. F. Shacklock .. .. .. Chairman of Directors of Western Press Ltd.
K. R. Murdoch (temporary Director) .. Director and Chief Executive, News Ltd., Ade-
laide ; Director, Western Press Ltd., and a number
of other companies.
It was stated that, on his return from abroad, Mr. J. F. Ledger, Managing Director of J. and E. Ledger
Pty. Ltd. and President of the W.A. Employers’ Federation would be appointed a Director, and during
the inquiry, evidence was given that Mr. K. R. Murdoch had resigned from the position of Director.
Details of Principal Shareholders in the Company.
28. Young Australia League 7/?c.—The League, a youth organization, was founded in Western
Australia in 1905 and incorporated in 1920. At the date the application was submitted, the League
held, directly or indirectly, 23 per cent, of the issued shares in Western Press Ltd. During the inquiry
it was stated that these shares had been disposed of to News Ltd., Adelaide.
29. Western Press Ltd— A company with an issued capital of 75,000 ordinary shares of £1 each
and 50,000 5 per cent, preference shares of £1 each. Call and Mirror Newspapers Pty. Ltd. holds
44,989 of the ordinary shares and News Ltd. 23,151. News Ltd., Adelaide, through its own
shareholding and through Call and Mirror Newspapers Pty. Ltd., in which it owns all the shares,
controls Western Press Ltd. In evidence Mr. K. R. Murdoch stated that he controlled News Ltd.
Western Press Ltd. publishes the Sunday Times and through a subsidiary company—Country
Newspapers Pty. Ltd. —publishes various country weekly newspapers.
Financial Proposals.
30. It was estimated that the capital costs involved in the establishment of the station, including
contingencies, would amount to £449,708. The cost of operations for the first three years was given
as £221,900, £226,350 and £231,450 respectively. It was stated that the estimated income during the
first year would amount to £159,003; during the second year to £250,380, and during the third year to
£303,732. The total expenditure to cover the costs of establishment and operation during the first
three years was given as £1,229,408. The estimated revenue for the first three years, £713,115, plus
the proposed issued capital of £600,000 would be sufficient to meet requirements. The Rural and
Industries Bank of Western Australia had also indicated its willingness to make a loan of up to £25,000
to the company if required.
6


Programme Proposals.
31. The company proposes to provide, initially, programmes for 30 hours per week. In the
second year of operation transmissions will be extended to 35 hours per week with a gradual increase
to, at least, 42 hours per week in the third year. The operating schedule proposed for the first year
is as follows :
Monday to Friday .. .. ~ .. 6.00 p.m. to 10.00 p.m.
Saturday .. .. .. .. .. 6.00 p.m. to 11.00 p.m.
Sunday .. .. .. .. ~ 5.00 p.m. to 10.00 p.m.
It was stated that the programmes would comprise 32.3 per cent, live productions and 67.7 per cent,
film material.
Technical Proposals.
32. The technical proposals have been based on the use of transmitting equipment having an
effective radiated power of 100 kilowatts (vision) and 20 kilowatts (sound). Three image orthicon
cameras are to be provided for use in the studios. An adapted vehicle fitted to use two of the studio
cameras would, initially, be used for outside broadcast work. The transmitter would be located at
Bickley and the studio on a site which has been acquired at Hurlingham.
APPLICATIONS FOR THE HOBART AREA.
B. A. McCann and Metropolitan Broadcasters Pty. Ltd. on Behalf of a Company to
be Formed.
33. This application was submitted on behalf of a company to be formed (Hobart Television Ltd.)
with a nominal capital 0f2,000,000 shares of ss. each. Initially it was proposed to issue capital of £300,000.
Proposed Constitution.
34. The application stated that, of the 1,200,000 shares to be issued initially, 500,000 would be
offered for subscription by the general public of Tasmania with a limitation of 40,000 shares to any one
subscriber. The remaining shares would be taken up as follows;
B. A. McCann .. .. .. .. ~ ~ 300,000
Metropolitan Broadcasters Pty. Ltd. .. .. .. .. 200,000
Australian Consolidated Press Ltd. .. ~ .. ~ 100,000
Amalgamated Wireless (A/asia) Ltd. ~ ~ .. .. 100,000
During the inquiry it was indicated that Consolidated Press Holdings Ltd. would subscribe to the capital
of the proposed company instead of Australian Consolidated Press Ltd. and that the investment would
be limited to £14,000 or such smaller amount as the applicant might be prepared to accept. In these
circumstances, it was stated that the additional 44,000 shares, thus available, would be offered to the
public or alternatively would be taken up by B. A. McCann and his associates.
35. The draft Articles of Association provided that the number of directors should be determined
by a majority of the subscribers to the memorandum of association and that the first directors would be—
B. A. McCann (Chairman).. Managing Director, McCann Bros. Pty. Ltd., and Chairman
of Directors of Metropolitan Broadcasters Pty. Ltd.
L. E. Benjamin .. Director of H. Jones & Co. Pty. Ltd.; of Metropolitan
Broadcasters Pty. Ltd., and a number of other companies.
L. C. McCann .. .. Director of McCann Bros. Pty. Ltd. and of Metropolitan
Broadcasters Pty. Ltd.
R. Morris .. .. Managing Director, 0.8. M. Pty. Ltd. (book retailers) and
director of Metropolitan Broadcasters Pty. Ltd.
In evidence it was stated that the constitution of the Board would depend upon the ultimate
structure of the proposed company.
Details of Proposed Shareholders.
36. B. A. McCann is Chairman of Directors of Metropolitan Broadcasters Pty. Ltd., the licensee
of commercial broadcasting station 7HT Hobart and Managing Director of McCann Bros, Pty. Ltd.
(music and radio warehouse).
37. Metropolitan Broadcasters Pty. Ltd. is the company holding the licence for commercial
broadcasting station 7HT Hobart. It has a paid-up capital of 50,000 shares of £1 each. There are
thirteen shareholders in the company, the principal being B. A. McCann, who holds 25,810 shares,
and H. Jones & Co. Pty. Ltd., which holds 14,250.
38. Consolidated Press Holdings Ltd. is a company incorporated in Canberra on 13th December,
1954. It has an issued capital of 950,000 ordinary shares of £1 each; 317,256 6 per cent, cumulative
£1 first preference shares; and 168,426 per cent, cumulative £1 second preference shares. The


major shareholder is Sydney Newspapers Pty. Ltd. (549,001 shares). Mr. D. F. H. Packer, through this
company and the members of his family, is in a position to control Consolidated Press Holdings Ltd
Consolidated Press Holdings Ltd. holds 855,825 ordinary shares of £1 each of the total of 862 500
ordinary shares in Australian Consolidated Press Ltd. This company publishes the Daily Telegraph
Sunday Telegraph, The Australian Women's Weekly, and, together with its subsidiaries, publishes a
number of books and periodicals. Australian Consolidated Press Ltd. also owns 32 per cent, of the
issued shares in Television Corporation Ltd., the licensee of commercial television station TCN Sydney
Consolidated Press Holdings Ltd. proposed initially to hold all the shares in Consolidated Television
Queensland Ltd. and Consolidated Television South Australia Ltd., applicants for licences for
commercial television stations for Brisbane and Adelaide.
39. Amalgamated Wireless (Ajasid) Ltd. is a major electronic equipment manufacturing company
with an issued capital of 8,903,452 shares of ss. each. The company has interests in a number of
commercial broadcasting stations and is a shareholder in Amalgamated Television Services Pty Ltd
the licensee of commercial television station ATN Sydney. Amalgamated Wireless (A/asia) Ltd was
also a proposed shareholder in Brisbane TV Ltd., an applicant for a licence for a commercial television
station in Brisbane.
Suggested Alternative Constitution.
40. During the course of the inquiry, alternative proposals for the constitution of the company
to be formed were suggested by the applicant. These were designed to bring about an amalgamation
of interests with Tasmanian Television Ltd., the other applicant for the grant of a licence. The
propositions, as put to the Board, were—
(a) Each of the groups to contribute £150,000 of the issued capital, any additional capital
required to be provided equally by each group. When a profitable stage was reached,
shares to be offered to the public either by the issue of new shares or by making
available an equal proportion of each group’s holdings.
(h) Each of the groups and the public to contribute £lOO,OOO of the issued capital. Two
directors would be appointed by each group and the public would be represented
by two directors. The proportion of the capital to be provided by the public might
be increased, on the understanding that each of the two groups would take up
equally any outstanding shares and meet any shortage of capital in the establishment
period.
In evidence it was stated that the latter proposal was preferred.
Financial Proposals .
41. It was estimated that the costs involved in the establishment of the station would amount to
£226,204 and that other costs incurred between the date of the grant of a licence and the commencement
of operations would amount to £24,165. The costs of operation for the first three years were set down
as £100,350, £BB,OOO and £86,100 respectively. It was estimated that income for the first year of
operation would be £76,500 rising to £102,000 in the second year and £127,000 in the third year It
was stated that the foregoing expenditure would be met from the subscribed capital.
Programme Proposals.
41. The company proposes initially to provide programmes for 28 hours per week, transmissions
being undertaken from 6 p.m. to 10 p.m. daily. The hours would be extended to 35 hours per week
when advertising revenue permitted. It was stated that the transmissions would comprise film material
(71.4 per cent.), five entertainment (10.7 per cent.), religious programmes (2.8 per cent.), women’s
programmes (2.5 per cent.), news (9.8 per cent.) and educational and children’s programmes (2 8 per
cent.). F
Technical Proposals.
43. The technical proposals of the company have been based on the establishment of the
transmitter and studio on separate sites, the power of the transmitter to be 50 kW. (e.r.p.). The use of
film scanning equipment and one vidicoh studio camera is planned.
Tasmanian Television Ltd.
44. Tasmanian Television Ltd. was incorporated in the State of Tasmania on 25th June 1958
The authorized capital of the company is £500,000 divided into 2,000,000 shares of ss. each.
Proposed Constitution.
45. It appeared from the application submitted that initially the issued capital of the company
would be £350,000 which would be underwritten by Davies Bros. Ltd., Robert Nettlefold Pty. Ltd
and Commercial Broadcasters Pty. Ltd. The application also stated that these parties did not desire to
retain more that! 30 per cent, of the issue and that the balance would be offered to other Tasmanian
interests and, at the appropriate time, to the public. -
8


46. During the inquiry it was stated that it was the intention to make a public issue of 600,000
shares of 10s. each, which would be underwritten in equal parts by four stock and sharebroking firms,
two of Melbourne and two of Hobart. The 600,000 shares would be allotted as follows: —
Davies Bros. Ltd. .. .. .. .. .. .. 75,000
Robert Nettlefold Pty, Ltd. .. ~ .. .. .. 25,000
Commercial Broadcasters Pty. Ltd. .. ~ .. .. 20,000
Tasmanian Public .. .. .. .. .. .. 480,000
If the public did not take up all the 480,000 shares offered, the subscribing companies would, in
accordance with the conditions of the undertaking to underwrite, subscribe for shares up to the following
limits:—
Davies Bros. Ltd. .. .. .. .. .. .» 115,000
Robert Nettlefold Pty. Ltd. .. .. .. .. ~ 65,000
Commercial Broadcasters Pty. Ltd. .. .. .. .. 20,000
47. The Articles of Association provide for the appointment of not less than three or more than
nine directors, the qualification of a director being the holding of at least 500 shares. The first directors
would be —
G. F. Davies (Chairman) .. .. Chairman and Managing Director, Davies Bros. Ltd.
L. Nettlefold .. .. .. Governing Director, Robt. Nettlefold Pty. Ltd., and
director of Davies Bros. Ltd.
L. G. Murdoch .. .. .. Solicitor-director of Davies Bros. Ltd., and of a
number of other companies.
Sir Geoffrey Walch .. .. Chairman of Directors of J. Walch & Sons (Printers
& Stationery Merchants) and director of a number
of other companies.
The Hon. G. H. Green .. .. President of the Tasmanian Legislative Council.
Details of principal shareholders in the company.
48. Davies Bros. Ltd. is a public company holding all the shares in “ The Mercury ” Newspaper
Pty. Ltd., which publishes The Mercury, a daily newspaper, and The Saturday Evening Mercury and in
“ The Mercury ” Press Pty. Ltd., a commercial printing business. The company has an issued capital of
280,000 ordinary shares of £1 each and 60,000 cumulative preference shares of £2 each. The major
ordinary shareholders are the Estate of late Sir J. G. Davies (43,695), N. G. Davies, C. E. Brown and
the Estate of late C. E. Davies (80,100), K. B. Davies (14,799), G. F. Davies (13,789), C. B. Davies
(15,007) and N. G. Davies (9,900).
49. Robert Nettlefold Pty. Ltd. is a motorcar distributing firm in which all the shares are held
by members of the Nettlefold family.
50. Commercial Broadcasters Pty. Ltd. is the licensee of commercial broadcasting station 7HO
Hobart. The shares in the company are held in equal proportions by Davies Bros. Ltd., Robt. Nettlefold
Pty. Ltd. and Findlays Pty. Ltd.
Technical Proposals.
51. The application included four alternative technical proposals which are summarized as
follows—
Proposal A 1 .. ..A high power transmitter of power of 100 kilowatts (e.r.p.)
located on Mount Wellington with studio located at a different
site to be selected.
Proposal A 2 .. ~ A low power transmitter of power of 2 kilowatts (e.r.p.) located
on Mount Wellington with studio located at a different site
to be selected.
Proposal A 3 .. .. A low power transmitter of power of 2 kilowatts (e.r.p.) located
on Mount Nelson, the studio to be located on the same site.
Proposal B .. .. A high power transmitter of power of 100 kilowatts (e.r.p.)
located on Mount Wellington with studio located at a different
site to be selected and relay stations to be established on Mount
Barrow and Mount Montgomery to provide service to the
Launceston and Burnie-Devonport areas respectively.
52. Reference was also made to the desirability of co-siting the transmitter and studio in or near
Hobart for the first three or five years of operation for the purpose of assisting the successful establishment
of the station in the early stages. At the expiration of that time, the removal of the transmitter to a site
on Mount Wellington might be undertaken. During the inquiry a further proposal for the use of low
power satellite stations to be used in conjunction with the main transmitter to be established at Mount
Nelson (Proposal A 3), was also made.
9


53. These alternative proposals are discussed in paragraphs 60 to 62.
54. It was proposed to provide at the studio two vidicon type cameras and film scanning equipment.
Financial Proposals.
55. Separate financial estimates were provided in the application in respect of each of the four
alternative technical proposals summarized above. The estimated costs of establishment were set down
as follows:
Proposal A 1 .. .. .. .. .. 273 991
Proposal A 2 .. ~ .. .. .. 244 991
Proposal A 3 ~ .. .. .. .. . ’ 189,599
Proposal B .. .. .. .. . ’ 335’,991
56. The operating costs for the first three years in respect of proposals A 1 were given as £150,775,
£162,220, and £172,755 respectively. It was estimated that these costs would be reduced each year by
£4,350 in the case of Proposal A 2 and by £10,170 in the case of Proposal A 3. The estimated revenue
for each of these three proposals was given as £91,418 for the first year, £133,598 for the second year and
£164,641 for the third year.
57. In the case of Proposal B, the operating costs were given as £174,825 for the first year, £190,420
for the second year, and £202,905 for the third year. The estimated revenue for the first three years was
given as £146,386, £214,886 and £257,489 respectively.
58. It was stated that the £300,000 capital which the company proposed to raise would be sufficient
to cover the cost of establishment and any initial losses over the first three years. If capital above
£300,000 should be found to be required, this would be secured by the issue of additional shares, by the
issue of notes or by bank overdraft.
Programme Proposals.
59. It is proposed to transmit programmes for 30 hours per week in the first year rising to 37 hours
in the second. The operating schedule for the first year would be from 5.30 p.m. to 10 p.m. daily.
It was stated that the programmes would comprise live entertainment (40 per cent.), film material (60 per
cent.); (education (10 per cent.), religion (3 per cent.), news (11 per cent.), interviews, &c. (6 per cent.)).
The Alternative Technical Proposals of Tasmanian Television Ltd .
60. It is necessary to make some reference to the alternative technical proposals submitted to the
Board by Tasmanian Television Ltd., which are summarized in paragraph 51. The application stated
that the concern of Tasmanian Television Ltd., “ is to maintain high standards at a proper economical
level, and it is because of this that we are putting forth more than one proposal for the consideration
of the Board ”. In evidence, the representative of the company agreed that it was concerned to keep down
capital costs at the beginning in order to ensure the economic survival of the company. It was, however,
made clear that, although the company preferred the proposal covering the establishment of a high power
station on Mount Wellington with relay stations on Mount Barrow and on Mount Montgomery and,
if that was not possible, the proposed co-siting of a low powered transmitter and studio on Mount Nelson’
it was prepared to accept a licence to establish and operate a station in conformity with such technical
conditions which might be determined by the Board.
61. The alternative plans of the applicant embrace two distinct propositions, namely ( a) the
provision of a service to the Northern and North-western areas of Tasmania as well as to Hobart by the
establishment of three transmitters; and (b) the provision of a service to the Hobart area alone. So
far as the first proposition is concerned, it is to be pointed out that the Government has not yet made
any decision to extend television services beyond the State capital cities. The applications invited by
the Postmaster-General and referred to the Board for inquiry, were confined to the grant of licences for
stations in the Hobart area. In these circumstances, it is inappropriate for the Board, in this inquiry
to consider the question of the establishment of stations in Tasmania in areas other than Hobart!
Moreover, it is obvious that other persons and organizations in Tasmania will be interested in participating
in the development of commercial television services in the Northern parts of the island, a fact admitted
in evidence by the representative of Tasmanian Television Ltd., and it would be unjust to deny them the
opportunity of making application for licences for stations to serve areas in which they may be interested.
It is also relevant to point out that section 91 of the Broadcasting and Television Act 1942-1956 limits
the number of commercial television stations which a person may own, or be in a position to control,
to two. Any decision taken now to grant a licence for a station in the Hobart area will not preclude the
consideration of the possibility of service being provided to other areas of Tasmania by means of some
arrangement of relay stations, if future inquiries indicate that such a method is the best way of developing
television services in the State. F 5
62. Alternative methods of providing a service in the Hobart area, including those suggested
by Tasmanian Television Ltd., had, prior to the commencement of the inquiry, been the subject of
consideration by the Board in pursuance of its statutory obligations to prepare plans for the provision
of television services and to determine {inter alia) the situation and operating power of all television


stations. As a result of the intensive studies which had been made, it had previously been determined
that the transmitting site of stations established to serve the Hobart area (including the national station)
should be on Mount Wellington. It was appreciated that this decision would involve some difficulties
of a practical nature but there is no doubt that, if the best possible service is to be provided to the
maximum audience, there is no satisfactory alternative to the use of a site on Mount Wellington. This
fact was not disputed during the inquiry, and it was admitted that the alternative schemes were put
forward on the grounds of their lower establishment and operating costs. It is to be pointed out in
this connexion, however, that, as between the two extremes, i.e., a high power station located on Mount
Wellington and a lower power station, co-sited with the studio on Mount Nelson, the difference between
the annual operating costs was stated to amount to only £10,170 per year, and that in the former case
profitable operation would be attained in the fourth year as against the third year in the case of the
latter. The difference in the estimated costs of establishment was given as about £90,000. The Board
does not consider that, when considered in relation to the needs of the general public in the area intended
to be served and the obligations of a licensee of a commercial television station, the variations in costs
referred to are of sufficient significance to justify any proposal which would result in a less satisfactory
service being provided, at least, to some proportion of the population. It is also to be pointed out that
the national station to serve the Hobart area is to be established on Mount Wellington and, consequently,
any proposal to establish a commercial station on Mount Nelson is not free of serious risks of a technical
nature. It was stated in evidence that such a course would involve special attention to receiving
aerials and no convincing evidence was forthcoming that reflection difficulties would not be significant.
The Board is satisfied that Mount Wellington is the most efficient site for a station to serve the Hobart
area and sees no justification for the adoption of any of the alternative proposals put forward by
Tasmanian Television Ltd. The question of the actual power to be used can only be determined after
a licence has been granted.
THE NUMBER OF LICENCES TO BE GRANTED.
63. As in the case of Brisbane and Adelaide, the Government, when it decided to extend
commercial television services to Perth and Hobart, did not specify the number of licences which might
be granted in those cities. During the inquiries in Brisbane and Adelaide, considerable evidence was
presented to the Board in favour, on the one hand, of two licences being granted and, on the other,
of one licence being granted. The arguments advanced were involved (as will be evident from
paragraph 111 of our Report of 25th July, 1958, in which they are summarized) as the issue basically
affected most, if not all, of the applications in Brisbane and Adelaide in one way or another. As was
announced by the Postmaster-General on 11th September, 1958, the Government, after examining the
Board’s report, decided that two licences should be granted in both Brisbane and Adelaide.
64. The position in respect of this particular aspect of the matter was entirely different in the
case of Perth and Hobart. At the commencement of our inquiry in Perth, counsel for each of the
applicants submitted that only one licence should be granted for the Perth area. They both agreed
that “ the public cannot be asked by responsible people to subscribe in the event of there being two
licences ”. Similarly, in Hobart, both applicants were satisfied that only one licence should be granted.
Indeed, much of the evidence presented to us was devoted to measures which it might be considered
desirable to adopt in order to ensure the operation in Hobart of one station on a satisfactory economic
basis. The representative of one of the applicants told us that his company would not be interested
if two licences were to be granted. Throughout the whole of the inquiries in Perth and Hobart, no
argument was advanced to support the view that there should be more than one station in those cities.
We are satisfied that licences should be granted for only one station in Perth and one station in Hobart,
and recommend accordingly.
QUALITIES TO BE LOOKED FOR IN APPLICANTS.
65. In the Board’s Report of 14th March, 1955, in respect of the grant of licences for commercial
television stations in the Sydney and Melbourne areas, the Board set out the qualities which it considered
should be looked for in applicants for licences. Experience since then has provided no grounds for
departing from the principles then adopted. We restate these principles hereunder: —
(a) Good character and high reputation.—This does not need any elaboration; very high standards may
reasonably be expected in a matter of this importance.
Cb) Directors and executive officers with a proper appreciation of the responsibilities imposed by a licence and
a willingness to comply with the conditions of the licence. —The directors of a company seeking a licence
should have the confidence of the community, and the capacity to direct a television service in
accordance with the high standard which will be required in the public interest. They should also
display a willingness to co-operate with this Board in a joint effort to ensure that their service is
commenced and maintained on a satisfactory basis, and to accept, in the spirit as well as the letter,
such guidance as seems necessary. To this end they should be prepared to employ executive officers
imbued with the same ideals.
11


(c) The genuine intention to commence on high standards even at financial loss.—The evidence given to the
Board suggests that, in the first two or three years, the income of commercial television stations will
be insufficient to meet the cost of the service. If this is right, conflict will inevitably arise between
the desire to maintain standards and anxiety to reduce expenses, unless the licensee has the genuine
intention to provide a high quality service from the outset even at a loss.
{d) Financial stability.—lt follows from the preceding sub-paragraph that an applicant should be able to
demonstrate that he has sufficient resources to commence a service on a high standard, if granted a licence
and to continue it during the early periods of loss. Television is a costly business and there should be
no doubt aoout the financial capacity of a licensee to discharge the responsibilities.
(e) A good record in allied fields. Whilst the Board agrees that television is different from any existing medium
it feels that experience in some other fields of communication and entertainment would be a useful
quality for an applicant to possess, provided the record of the applicant, or members of his company
m those other fields is such as to inspire confidence, ’
(/) Ability to provide a satisfactory service.—ln addition to the other requirements specified above, an applicant
should demonstrate special capacity to organize a television service of high standard and to provide
the necessary technical equipment and programmes.
OBSERVATIONS ON THE APPLICATIONS.
r A 6 r' T he purpose 1 of our j n q uirie . s was to examine the claims and qualifications of those who
applied lor licences so that we might be in a position to make recommendations to the Minister as to the
applicants who appeared to be best fitted to provide satisfactory television services to the public On
the assumption that our recommendation that only one licence should be granted in the Perth and
Hobart areas is accepted, it is necessary for us to select one of the two applicants who submitted appli-
cations m each centre. We nave summarized at some length in paragraphs 10-59 the applications
which were made and we now make some observations on particular aspects of each application.
Perth.
TVW Ltd.
•A appa J* ent fl *9 m paragraphs 12-19 that this company will be owned and controlled bv
Mptn* T llB ?[i WC | 1 tCrn Aastralia ; About half of the capital will be subscribed by the public of that State
(detafis of the share and note issue already made are given in paragraph 16), and the remainder by West
' ustrahan Newspapers Ltd., 83 per cent, of the shareholders in which reside in Western Australia The
apphcation has been promoted by West Australian Newspapers Ltd., a company with a lona historv
and high reputation m Western Australia. It is an independent newspaper company in the sense that
no other newspaper organization has any interest in the company and the interest of West Australian
Newspapers Ltd.’, * * t 0 1,6 PGr Cent ° f the paid " up Capital of Advertiser
company submitted a well considered application which indicated its appreciation of the
responsibilities of a licensee of a commercial television station. It has appointed two directors to
represent the public (one of whom is the Chairman of Directors) and two directors representing West
Australian Newspapers Ltd. (see paragraph 18). The company has at its disposal funds which in om
opinion are adequate to establish and maintain a service m accordance with the technical and programme
standards of the Board and the evidence given at the inquiry on behalf of the company waf such as to
satisfy us that this applicant would, if granted a licence, conduct the service in a satisfactory manner.
Western Television Services Ltd.
a , 69 ' proposals of this applicant also contemplated the issue to the general public of Wester,
Australia of hah of its issued capital, the other half to be subscribed by well known Western Australian
organizations and companies, none of which would be permitted to hold more than 10 ner cent of
issued capital. Whilst we were informed that the 600,000 10s. shares to be issued to the publt had been
underwritten, applications for only £179,450 of the remaining £300,000 of the issued capital had been
made at the time of our inquiry. Of this amount, £60,000 would be taken up by Western Press Ltd a
newspaper company which, though operating in Perth, is controlled by News Ltd Adelaide which
according to evidence submitted to us 25) was prepared, if required, to’provide
25 per cent, of the total paid-up capital, for a period of five years, on the security of redeemable non
votmg debentures. A further £60,000 of the capital would be subscribed by the Young Austraha League'
, i of T hIS PUrp0 T Se WCre SeCU f ed by the sale to News Ltd - of shares in Western Press Ltd formerlv
ArM tIC League ' In °V r supplementary Report on the applications for licences in Brisbane and
r d A?i C, 7 e arC r ec ?™ mendm g that a licence should be granted to Southern Television Corporation Ltd
of Adelaide, in which News Ltd. will originally hold 90 per cent, of the issued capital P ’
70. We have no doubt that a board of directors such as that already appointed by the companv
would desire to provide a completely satisfactory service. It must, however, be pointed out that Tone
o em has had experience in allied fields with the exception of the promoter of the company Mr K R
Murdoc of News Ltd., Adelaide, who, however, resigned from the Board of Western
Television Services Ltd. during our inquiry. western


Hobart.
B. A. McCann and Metropolitan Broadcasters Pty. Ltd, on behalf of a company to be formed.
71. In his original application, this applicant proposed an issued capital of £300,000, of which
£125,000 would be offered for subscription by the public of Tasmania, £125,000 would be subscribed by
himself and a broadcasting company in which he has a substantial interest, and £50,000 would be
subscribed by two Sydney companies. In the course of the inquiry, alternative proposals were submitted
by the applicant (see paragraph 40), the purpose of which was to bring about an amalgamation between
the two applicants in Hobart, a possibility which had been discussed by them before the inquiry
commenced. Following the breakdown of these negotiations, this application was prepared, but,
presumably because the time available to the applicant for this purpose was too short, the application
was deficient in some respects. No evidence was produced as to the applicant’s ability to secure
capital from the general public.
Tasmanian Television Ltd.
72. The proposal of this applicant is that this company should have an issued capital of £300,000 in
10s. shares, which would be allotted as follows: —
Davies Bros. Ltd. .. .. .. .. .. .. 75,000
Robert Nettlefold Pty. Ltd. .. .. .. .. .. 25,000
Commercial Broadcasters Pty. Ltd. .. .. .. .. 20,000
Tasmanian Public .. .. .. .. .. .. 480,000
If the public did not take up all the 480,000 shares offered, the subscribing companies would, in
accordance with the conditions of the undertaking to underwrite, subscribe for shares up to the following
limits:—
Davies Bros. Ltd. .. .. .. .. .. .. 115,000
Robert Nettlefold Pty. Ltd. .. .. .. .. .. 65,000
Commercial Broadcasters Pty. Ltd. .. .. .. .. 20,000
73. The promoter of the company was Davies Bros. Ltd., an old established family company and the
publishers of the Hobart Mercury, it is an independent newspaper company in which no other newspaper
company has any shares. It is apparent from the well considered application and from the evidence
given to the Board that the applicant had done a considerable amount of work in connexion with the
application and we are satisfied that this applicant would, if granted a licence, conduct a service in
Hobart in a very satisfactory manner.
RECOMMENDATION.
74. For the reasons mentioned in paragraph 64, the Board recommends that only one licence
should be granted in Perth and Hobart. With the considerations outlined in paragraph 65 in mind,
the Board has carefully considered the four applications and it has come to the conclusion that a
licence for a commercial television station should be granted—
For the Perth area —to TVW Ltd.
For the Hobart area —to Tasmanian Television Ltd.
The Board recommends accordingly.
75. It will be evident that the Board has experienced some difficulty in selecting TVW Ltd. and
Tasmanian Television Ltd. in preference to the other applicants in the Perth and Hobart areas
respectively. In the case of Perth, the local persons and organizations who were to constitute Western
Television Services Ltd. cannot be regarded as other than very desirable participants in the development
of television services in Western Australia in which State they, in the main, already have substantial
interests. It seems to be desirable that they should be afforded an opportunity of joining TVW Ltd.
as shareholders and the Board trusts that some means of achieving this will be explored by that company.
In our view, it is regrettable that the negotiations for an amalgamation of the two applicants for Hobart
did not succeed and we trust that the possibility of the unsuccessful applicant being admitted as a
shareholder in Tasmanian Television Ltd., which was discussed at the inquiry, will still be realized.
The attention of the two successful applicants might therefore be invited to these considerations.
76. It has been our experience with the existing television stations that it has been found necessary,
in several cases, for some variations to be made in the shareholding of the licensee companies as compared
with that shown in their applications for licences. In addition, some of the proposals as to shareholding
in the applications we have considered were necessarily tentative and depended to a considerable extent
on the amount of the shareholding which would be taken up by the public. We therefore recommend
that each of the applicant companies named in paragraph 74 should be informed that the Minister is
prepared to grant a licence to the company for the appropriate area on being satisfied as to the terms
of the memorandum and articles, and the shareholding, of the company. It may be added that once
13


a licence is granted, section 92 (c) will apply; this provides that substantial changes in the beneficial
ownership of the shares in a company holding a licence, or in the memorandum or articles of association
of the company, will not take place without the approval of the Minister.
77. As we indicated in our report of 25th July, 1958, we are of the opinion that in any case where
only one licence for a commercial television station is granted to serve a particular area, it should be
a condition of the licence that the licensee should not enter into any exclusive arrangement with any other
commercial television station for the provision of programmes or the sale of station time or advertising.
All of the applicants for licences in Perth and Hobart assured the Board that in the event of their being
granted a licence, they would not enter into any such arrangement. However, we consider that this
general principle should be established and recommend that the proposed condition be applied to the
licences which we have recommended should be granted to TVW Ltd. and Tasmanian Television Ltd.
Dated this 26th day of September, 1958.
R. G. OSBORNE, Chairman.
R. B. MAIR
R. A. YEO 1
J. R. DARLING f
RANDAL M. WHITE J
Members.
J. O’Kelly, Secretary.
14


APPENDIX A.
Commonwealth of Australia.
Broadcasting and Television Act 1942-1956.
APPLICATION FOR GRANT OF A LICENCE FOR A COMMERCIAL TELEVISION STATION.
The Secretary,
Australian Broadcasting Control Board,
497 Collins-street,
Melbourne.
In pursuance of the provisions of the Broadcasting and Television Act 1942-1956, application is hereby made for
the grant of a licence for a commercial television station to be situated at
Information in support of the application is attached in conformity with the requirements set out in the statement
appended hereto.
Name
Address
Signature.
Dated this day of 195
Commonwealth of Australia.
Broadcasting and Television Act 1942-1956.
APPLICATION FOR GRANT OF A LICENCE FOR A COMMERCIAL TELEVISION STATION.
PARTICULARS REQUIRED OF APPLICANT.
An applicant for a licence for a commercial television station should supply the following particulars, which may
be set out in separate numbered schedules of which six copies should be supplied—
(l) State whether application is made on behalf of an individual, a partnership, a company, a company to
be formed, or other combination of interests.
(2) If application is made by a company, state where incorporated, attach a copy of the Memorandum and
Articles of Association, and furnish full details of—
(a) financial position, including last balance sheet and a copy of the profit and loss account and
of the profit and loss appropriation account for the last five years;
( b ) shareholders, including the address and occupation of each, number of shares held and the
amount paid or deemed to be paid up on each share, and in the case of any company which
holds more than 5 per cent, of the shares, similar details with respect to the shareholders
in such company;
(c) names and occupations of directors and names of principal officers of the company;
{d) the association of the applicant or any shareholder holding more than 5 per cent, of the shares
in the company or any director or principal officer in any way with—
(i) any commercial television station;
(ii) person, firm or company carrying on any business,
(3) If application is on behalf of a company to be formed, state where to be incorporated, attach a copy of
the Memorandum and Articles of Association under which the company is to be formed, a copy of the
proposed prospectus or notice in lieu of prospectus which the company proposes to file, and any relevant
agreements, together with particulars of proposed capital, shareholding, first directors and information
in respect thereof required under paragraph 2.
(4) If application is made by an individual or partnership, or combination of interests (which is not a company
or a proposed company), supply information in respect of such of the matters specified in paragraph 2
as is applicable.
(5) State whether applicant is a subsidiary company or is, or in the case of a company to be formed will be,
controlled either directly or indirectly by any other company, organization or interest. If so, give
full details including extent of such control. If control is or will be exercised by any company which
is itself a subsidiary, full details must be given of the company or organization having final control.
(6) Give details of any documents, instruments, contracts, or understandings relating to ownership, operation
or control of the station or facilities or any right or interest therein.
(7) Give estimated costs, and details of basis on which costs are computed, of—
(a) establishment of station, including itemized costs of—
(i) technical equipment;
(ii) radiating structure;
(iii) land;
(iv) buildings.
ib) operation for first three years.
(8) Give estimated income for each of first three years, together with details of basis on which computed.
(9) Give details, supported by documentary evidence, of capital available for—
(a) construction of station;
(, b) operation of station for first three years.
Full particulars of sources from which capital is to be secured, such as subscribed capital, loans, &c.,
are to be supplied.


(10) Give details of technical and programme staff already engaged and proposed for recruiting and training
such staff, together with particulars of estimated staff required,
(11) Give details of proposed hours of operation.
(12) Give details of proposed composition of programmes, including—
(a) tentative weekly schedules;
( b ) percentage of time to be devoted to live entertainment, film material, educational and religious
items, news, &c.;
(c) sources from which programme material is to be secured, including details of any programme
material to be imported,
(13) Give details of technical equipment proposed, including—
(a) transmitting equipment and radiator;
( b ) studio equipment;
(c) outside broadcast equipment. 11l (111 |J| ( ini iin i ■ |j|||i ■ ■ ~.
(14) Give details of proposed buildings or other accommodation for— 111 111 I I 111 II I I I
(a) transmitter; 111 ill 111 I ill lIK 111 I I
( b) studios. II II 111 | 1111 I
Proposed location of transmitter and studios to be specified, II If 1111 I 111 I I
APPENDIX B.
Broadcasting and Television Act 1942-1956.
REFERENCE BY THE POSTMASTER-GENERAL.
In pursuance of the above Act, I, Charles William Davidson, Postmaster-General, hereby refer to the Australian
Broadcasting Control Board for its recommendation as to the exercise by me of the powers conferred by sub-section (1)
of section 81 of the Broadcasting and Television Act 1942-1956, the following applications made in pursuance of the
Notice published by me in the Gazette dated 24th October, 1957, for licences for commercial television stations in the
Perth area and the Hobart area respectively:—
Perth Area—
1. TVW Limited.
2. Western Television Services Ltd.
Hobart Area —
1. B. A. McCann and Metropolitan Broadcasters Pty. Ltd., on behalf of Hobart Television Limited
(a company to be formed).
2. J. F. Clarke on behalf of Australian Features Television Ltd. (a company to be formed).
3. Tasmanian Television Ltd.
Dated this Second day of July, 1958.
C. W. DAVIDSON, Postmaster-General.
APPENDIX C.
Broadcasting and Television Act 1942-1956.
NOTIFICATION BY THE AUSTRALIAN BROADCASTING CONTROL BOARD.
In pursuance of the Above Act, the Australian Broadcasting Control Board hereby gives notice that it will, at the
times and places specified hereunder, hold an inquiry into the applications received by the Postmaster-General for the
grant of licences for commercial television stations in the Perth area and the Hobart area respectively.
The inquiry in respect of the following applications received for the Perth area will commence at 10.30 a.m. on
the twenty-eighth day of July, 1958, at the Court Room, Federal Court of Bankruptcy, Manufacturers’ Building, Corner
of Adelaide-terrace and Hill-street, Perth:—
1, TVW Limited.
2. Western Television Services Ltd.
The inquiry in respect of the following applications received for the Hobart area will commence at 10.30 a.m. on
the eighteenth day of August, 1958, at the Board Room, Commonwealth Bank Building, Corner of Elizabeth and Liverpool
streets, Hobart: —
1. B. A. McCann and Metropolitan Broadcasters Pty. Ltd., on behalf of Hobart Television Limited (a company
to be formed).
2. J. F. Clarke on behalf of Australian Features Television Ltd. (a company to be formed).
3. Tasmanian Television Limited.
Any person (other than an applicant) wishing to be heard at any inquiry must give notice to me in writing not less
than seven days before the date of the inquiry at which he wishes to be heard.
Dated this second day of July, 1958.
J. O’KELLY, Secretary.
497 Collins-street, Melbourne, C.l.
Printed and Published for the Government of the Commonwealth of Australia by
A. J. Arthur, Commonwealth Government Printer, Canberra.
Appendix A— continued.
