

t
REPORT
OF THB
SPEECHES
Sill W. M. MANNING-, Q.C.; J. B. DARYALL, ESQ., Q.C.
ALEXANDER GORDON, ESQ.,
ROBERT M'INTOSH ISAACS, ESQ.,
IN THE
SCOTS CHURCH APPEAL CASE
SYNOD OP AUSTRALIA
AGAINST
REVEREND DR. LANG.
SYDNEY:
PRINTED BY HANSON AND BENNETT, <! EMPIRE” OFFICE




THE SCOTS CHUECH APPEAL CASE,
SUPEEME COUEI OF NEW SOUTH WALES.
Tuesday, May 1, 1860.
BEFORE THE FULL COURT-IN EQUITY.
PUEVES AND OTHERS V. LANG.
This was an appeal against a decree of the Primary
Judge in Equity, on a suit instituted by the Rev. W.
Purves, the Moderator of the Synod of Australia, the Eev.
Dr. Fullerton and others, as representing that Synod, on
behalf of themselves and the congregation of the Scots
Church, Jamison-street, against Dr. Lang, and Mr. Ram-
say, the two remaining and original trustees of that
church. The bill prayed for their removal, and that Dr.-
Lang might be declared no longer minister of the said
church, and that he (Dr. Lang) might be ordered to give
possession of the church and buildings to the plaintiff's
on behalf of the congregation.
Dr. Lang’s answer to this bill had been, that he in-
sisted on the right of the trustees to this church, and
the other buildings, on the ground that they held them
on the original trust, imposed by the grant from the
Crown, which had not been since in any manner altered,
and that he, being an ordained minister of the Church of
Scotland, placed him beyond the jurisdiction of any colo-
nial Synod.
After a lengthened hearing the Primary Judge had de-
creed that Dr. Lang and Mr. Ramsay should be removed
from being trustees of this church and the other build-
ings standing on the land contained in
the grant from the Crown, and that
it be referred to the Master to appoint five
new trustees. Other orders were also decreed,
namely declaring Dr. lang no longer minister of the
church, and restraining him from using it or exercising
the duties of minister of it.
This decision was now appealed against on numerous
grounds, which fully appear in the arguments of counsel.
Mr. Gordon aud Mr. Isaacs appeared for the appellant;
Sir W. M. Manning, Q.C„ Mr. Darvall, Q.C., and Mr’.
Broadburst, Q C., lor the respondents.
The case first came on on Monday, when the Court
was chiefly occupied in reading documentary matter
bearing on the case. On the Tuesday, the evidence of
Dr. Lang and other witnesses given at the suit in Equity
was read,after which, counsel for appellant opened their
case.


Mr. Gordon said he believed it was now his duty to
address the Court in support of Dr. Lang, and he had
purposely read the evidence of Dr. Lang, because he
would have to draw their Honors’ attention to different
parts of it in the course of his argument; and now having
read it he considered the Court would be perfectly in
possession of the parts to which he proposed to refer.
And, perhaps, in opening the case, he might say that al-
though there was no doubt a great deal of difficulty in
addressing himself to a case branching out into so many
subjects as this did, and of course ho felt some difficulty
after the great attention that was paid to it by bis Honor
the Primary Judge, yet ho must confess that difficulty
was in a great degree lessen d when he considered, as
all who had witnessed much Equity business
must have done, that the fact of appealing
against the decision of the Judge did not, in nine cases
out of ten, involve any actual d fference of opinion, but
that it arose out of the fact that more matter bad been
subsequently brought under the attention of the learned
Judge, which, if it had been properly sifted at the time,
would have probably induced him to take the same view
of the case as the counsel appealing, and that were he to
re-htar the case an appeal would be unnecessary. He
would also observe that, during the proceedings in
Equity, but one counsel addressed the Court for the de-
fendant, and that, however judiciously he might have
endeavoured to address himself to every point that was
susceptible of legal argument, he was totally unassisted
in the labour that devolved upon hm. In now address-
ing himself to the appeal before them, he would ender-
vour to avail himself of the judgment, against the con-
clusion of which the appeal was now made, and when-
ever he found anything laid do n in that judgment with
which he might venture to say he agreed, he would
adopt it as part of bis argument without any attempt to
elaborate it. And perhaps the key to the whole of this
case, and which his Honor had drawn attention to in
part of his judgment, and which he must with great sub-
mission also draw the attention of the Court to, was
this : as to the right the Synod here had to deal with the
property of the Scots Church in Jaraison-street.
The Chief Justice said it was a most extraordinary sta-
tutory provision thatja number of buildings should be under
the ecclesiastical and spiritual superintendence of a
synod. Something else must have been meant. Ha
could understand a minister being under ecclesiastical
superintendence, but how buildings could be so he
could not understand. Of course they must not confine
themselves tq the mere letter of this provision.
Mr. Gordon said it seemed to him that the main


portion of tbe case was to be determined by the con-
struction of these diff rent statutes (relative to the
Presbyterian or Scots Churches in this
colony), and whether they gave the plaintiffs
affecting to represent the Synod the power
to deal with the lands and buildings of the
church in Jamison-street. It would occur to the Court,
he had no doubt, that the Act by which it was supposed
this church was brought under the control of the
Synod gave a dis inct legal remedy for the enforcement
of the right which that Synod might have over churches
under i s control (and under which class of cases the
present application to the Court came), and in which
the Court was called upon to exercise a sort of ancillary
Jurisdiction, but where he contended the Court would
probably only interfere when the legal remedy was
insufficient or inadequate, such as would entitle and
Justify the interference of a Court of Equity. Their
Honors would see that by the Act 4th Victoria, section'
18, power was given to the Synod to provide a legal
remedy, by which their rights could be enforced, but
an application to remove trustees would not
be supported in the face of that legal remedy.
He merely ventured to submit this Just now, because
it was important in this point of view, that in sn appeal
to the Court in these cases it should exercise its dis-
cretion in looking at the conduct of the parties, before
it would exercise its jurisdiction. And their Honors
could not fail to see, in connection with this case, that
the aid of the Court that was now professed to be in-
voked for the Synod was to he invoked at a very lata
period, indeed,after therighthad arisen, which it was said
was as long back as 1842; and it was not umil thirteen
years afterwards that this suit was instituted ; and if the
Court, in the consideration of this appeal, could exercise
its discretion, it would not leave that element out of the
question, namely, that the plaintiffs to the suit had let
thirteen years lapse between the action on which they based
their right and the attempt to enforce that right; end
that, taken in connection with the circumstance, that a
legal remedy existed, was a farther matter to be consi-
dered in the exercise of the Geurt’s discretion. The
nxt point which the Court could not fail to have oh-
served already, was that this Bi.l professed to be filed,
not by tbe Synod alone, but it was professed to be filed
for it on behalf of the members of the Scots Church at
Jamison-street. After the evidence that had been read
there was riot the smallest ground for. saying
that the members of that Church bad taken
any part in- the Bill. Therefore, that
would be another point to be taken into consideration to


determine whether the Court had any right to interfere
in the case ; for this was a case where the plaintiffs had
literally come before the Court under false pretence.
Their Honors would not fail to have observed that if
the plaintiff cou'd have picked out a single member of
the congregation with whom they could have had com.
mon cause (which was not proved), the great proportion
of the congregation unquestionably altogether dissented
from this proceeding. Indeed they had no proof, with
all the evidence before them, that any one of the congre-
gation wished to get rid of the trustees, and yet that
was the object of the suit. It was therefore perfectly
apparent through the whole of this suit that the parties
interested were not represented before the Court.
Another point which he thought by no means unimport-
ant was, that every allegation on which the plaintiffs
based their equity, was negatived by the judgment of the
learned Judge from which they now appealed. And he
said so with confidence. The judgment of the Court
below had put the right of the plaintiffs on grounds
which they themselves had not taken—on grounds which
they themselves, by every act of theirs, had negatived in
every possible way. Their Honors would see the alleged
rights on which they plaintiffs relied were diametrically
opposed to the views taken by the learned Judge who tried
the cause; and if the views taken by the learned Judge had
been the views of the parties in this case, the bill would
have been perfectly different, and the whole history of
this transaction would also have been perfectly different.
There were two courses they could have taken, the one
to adopt the view of the Primary Judge, and admit that
it was consistent with their statutes, or that his view
was the wrong view of their statutes. He said that the
Court would take all those matters into consideration,
namely, the delay of 13 years in commencing the suit,
the absence of interest of the parties to it—the assump-
tion of representation which was untrue, and the fact
that the allegations on which the plaintiffs relied were
negatived by the judgment, and on these points he
thought he would be able to satisfy the minds of the
Court when he drew attention to the Bill. The first
paragraph had reference to their filing the bill on behalf
ef the members of the Scots Church. Many parts of the
evidence read had shewn that a large proportion of the
members dissented from the whole proceedings, and that
they were not represented there. And he might draw
their Honors’ attention to the rights of members of this
congregation. This Church had a fixed constitution and
trust deed, and so long as that constitution remained,
matters in any way in dispute, unless between those who
claimed rights under that constitution, gave them no


right to come into that Court. If the Court say that the
parties interested were not represented in that Court,
they would exercise their discretion on that point.
Sir. W. M. Manning objected that that objection was
not taken at the hearing.
Mr, Gordon explained that he said a great deal about
it. With the first six paragraphs he need not further
trouble their Honors just then. They then came to the
seventh paragraph of the Bill,which stated that “accord-
ing to the laws, ordinances, and practices of the Es-
tablished Church of Scotland, the said Presbytery had,
and exercised exclusive and paramount control and
superintendence in the spiritual affairs over all minis-
ters of the Church of Scotland in this colony.” It would
be seen by that paragraph, that the plaintiffs, who al-
leged they represented the Presbytery, claimed under
that which was called the Church of Scotland Act to
obtain jurisdiction over this particular Church. With
this allegation of the Bill he would compare the viewhia
Honor the Primary Judge took of that Act. (William
4th No. 7.) In reference to the ninth section, he said
this section could only apply to clergymen who should be
in future inducted to any chapel or church ; but that it
did not apply to the clergyman of the Church in ques-
tion—that was to Dr. Lang—so that he thought that al-
legation altogether negatived. Then the next paragraph
on which they tried to found their equity was the Bth, in
which they set forth that the vow taken by every mi-
nisterof the Church of Scotland, &c., rendered him sub-
ject to their judicature. The meaning of that allegation
was, that Dr. Lang, by virtue of his ordination
vow, brought himself within the control of
a subordinature judicature. The Court would see that
the Primary Judge took the view of the case that the
control arising out of this vow was confined to the estab-
lished Church of Scotland. It appeared that Dr. Lang
was ordained minister of the Church of Scotland by the
Presbytery of living of 1822, when he-made a vow that
he would submit himself to the judicatories of the Church
of Scotland. He thought their Honors would see that
a judicature, established in New South Woles by volun-
tary association, was no judicature of the Church of
Scotland in the ordinary sense of the term. It could
not be a question that the ordination vow of a clergy-
man of the Church of Scotland did not render him sub-
ject to a voluntary association that did not take its rise
out of the General Assembly of Scotland, and simply
because he happened to be in the locality where such
voluntaiy association obtained.
Mr. Justice Wise: But if he became a consenting


party, would his ordination vow extend to his voluntary
association with such a body ?
Mr. Gordon said his argument was this : That the
plaintiffs endeavoured to bring Dr. Lang under the con-
trol of this Presbytery absolutely, merely per force of
his ordination vow, which, they said, bound him to sub-
mit himself to all inferior judicataries of the Church
where he might be placed. He took issue on that, and
supported himself on the dictum of the Primary
Judge, who said the ordination vow, per se, did
not bring a clergyman of the Church of Scotland within
the judicature of any Presbyterian body of any part of
the world in which ffe might be placed.
The Chief Justice: Was it a positive law that the mi-
nister, when ordained, should make such a vow, or was
it merely the usage of the Church ?
Mr. Gordon said it was the law.
Mr. Justice Wise had met with such a form of oath,
dating as far back as 1711.
Mr. Gordon said that evidently the vow of that day
did not refer to the colonies.
The Chief Justice: In other words, colonial churches
were not contemplated by the framers of this vow.
Mr, Gordon: Not of these colonies. The passage he had
referred to in the judgment, taken in connection with
the evidence adduced, shewed ministers ofthe Church
of Scotland coming here were quite independent of this
body. Then the 9th paragraph of the bill was, that in
the month of October, 1840, the Pres> ytery, having pre-
viously agreed on the recommendation of the General
Assembly of Scotland, that a Synod should be formed,
did form the same. Now, either the plaintiffs had not
proved that the Synod was formed on the recommenda-
tion of the General Assembly, or if it was, they were
acting in defiance of such a recommendation, inasmuch
as that recommendation only referred to
Synods formed of minis'ers of the Church of
Scotland, whereas they admitted several laymen.
And if so, how could they affect the status of Dr, Lang,
in consequence of his ordination now ? The 10th para-
graph slated that, on the formation of the Synod, the
spiritual right*, functions, and powers previously vested
in and exercised by the Presbytery of New South Wales
became vested inand exercised by the Synod,&3. In that
paragraph the Court would see there was no allusion of
any kind to the s cond section of the Act (Vie. 4, No.
18), but that it relied on the first section. His Honor
in the Court below referring to this portion of the Act
said, “It was to be remarked as to the recitals of the
first section of this Act, that the Presbytery had agreed
to form the Synod, in pursuance of some recommenda-


tion of the Church of Scotland ; but of thia he had no
evidence unless it related to the declaratory Act of 1833,
with the description of which it did not agree.” And
furthermore, he said, “ This section of the Act did not
appear to bring Dr. Lang or the church in question more
under the jurisdiction of the Synod than they were un-
der that of the Presbytery. By his becoming a member
of the Presbytery, Dr. Lang had not altered, and could
not alter the original trusts of the g ant, and the origi-
nal constitution of the Church, of which be was the
minister,” That shewed the view taken by his Honor
as to Dr. Lang’s position, and the view he took of that
part of the Act on which the plaintiffs now founded their
rights to come to that Court. The next paragraph ill) in
the bill related to the Bond of Union. But they carefully
excluded the date thereof. That date was the sth
October, 1810, and of that the Court would
find no mention in the Bill. It would also be found
that the Ith Victoria, No. 18, was passed on the 7th 00-.
tober, 1810, and yet that was the Act on which they
mainly relied to give the Synod the power the plaintiffs
on hehalf of it claimed. At the time of the forma-
tion of the Synod Dr. Lang was absent from the colony,
but after he returned he signed a certain Bond of Union
that had been adopted by the ministers and elders of
the Synod of Australia, and they evidently relied on this
point. The Primary Judge dealt with it in this way : In
the bond, there was a power enabling a party signing it
to render it null to himself, but the power of the Synod
did notdepend on this bond.” It would be observed by the
12th paragraph of the Bill how completely the plaintiffs
were determined to tie themselves down to this allega-
tion, that Dr. Lang on signing this bond became a mem-
ber of the Synod of Australia. On the 13th paragraph
of the Bill he had nothing to remark. They now came
to the llth paragraph which was most important. It
was that at a certain meeting of the Synod, held on the
14th October, 1842, certain accusations were made
against Dr. Lang, by the Moderator and others, which
resulted in the sentence of deposing Dr. L'ng from the
discharge of his duties as a Christian minister for all
times to come, under pain of their highest censure, and
it declared the Scots Church in Jamison-street vacant
from that day.” Ha would, in passing, remark that,
supptsing this right of the Synod depended on the
vow, according to the construction his Honor put on it,
what had the Synod to do with deposing Dr.
Lang ? But the history of the allegations ha
bad pointed out was thia, that they traced dawn their
adjudicature from the Presbytery to the Synod, and
claimed to have the right of dealing with Dr. Lang, not


under the second clause of the Act, but treated him
completely under their control to the extent of getting
rid of him, so far as the sentence went, from the Scots
Church, in Jamison-street, and they deposed him from
his office as minister. The Primary Judge had, speak-
ing of the proceedings taken against Dr. Lang said,
“It was very doubtful whether they were in strict con-
formity with the practice of the Ecclesiastical Courts in
Scotland," and again “It may be that the Synod ex-
ceeded its power in passing a sentence of deposition from
the ministry on him, but it clearly had the power by the
4th Victoria, No. 18, 2nd section to depose him from the
Church. Now, what he said was, that his Honor did not
affirm the view taken by the plaintiffs. By the 14th
paragraph of the Bill they relied on getting possession of
the Scots Church, of Jamison-street. They also set out
that their own deposition of Dr, Lang was affirmed by
the Scots Church of Irving. The next paragraph set out
that immediately on such sentence being pronounced by
the said Synod, Dr. Lang lost all rights as a Scots minis-
ter, and he was ordered to give up the said church and
buildings occupied by him in virtue of his late office."
He (Mr. G.) submitted, with confidence, that it was
utterly impossible to read the 14th and 15th paragraphs
that were on the depositions on which the Synod pro-
ceeded and say that they relied on his
deposition for depriving him of his status, but
that it was obvious they took from him his status as
minister, as a means of getting him out of the church;
for they went on to say, that instead of so doing, the
said J. D. Lang, in defiance of the said sentence of depo-
sition, and in contempt of the laws of the said Synod,
continued, and still continues, to act as the said minister.
He wished to draw the attention of the Court to a part
of Dr. Lang’s evidence, about deposing and depriving
ministers both of office and benefice. It would be there
seen that when a minister was deposed, he, as a matter
of consequence from that act, lost the benefice of which
he was in possession; but if the deprivation of his
benefice was null and void, and was not regular and con-
stitutional, where then rested the deprivation ? He said,
in the 14th paragraph of this bill, the deprivation of Dr.
Ling was null and void ; for, as his Honor the Primary
Judge had said, it was proved to have been irregular, and
consequently of no effect. Deposition in itself involved
both itself and deprivation of benefice; and if it was
null and void, it must fall to the ground. And if the
Court saw that on this 14th paragraph the Synod had no
power in itself to depose Dr. Lang, and that
the power to do so rested with the Presby-
tery of Irving, the allegation with re-


gardtothat confirmation of that Presbytery having been
rendered null, then what became of the 14th paragraph ?
They had based the deposition on that confirmation ;
and as that confirmation was a myth, and
out of the case entirely, the consequence
was that the deposition and deprivation must fall to the
ground. This was no imagination of his own, or of those
who made this Bill, for the matter was very fully dis-
cussed by Mr. Justice Therry before the passing of the
Bill, and when an application was made for the ap-
pointment of a receiver of pew rates and other rents for
the Scots Church, Jamison-street, and the buildings
connected with it. The Bill was filed by a corporate
body, calling itself the Synod of Australia. The main
ground of that Bill was to depose the Eev. Dr. Lang,
one of the defendants, from administering the affairs of
that church. His Honor (Mr. Justice Therry) having
the Bill before him, had said the great object of it was the
deposition of Dr. Lang; and his Honor would not de-
cide whether he was deposed from his status; but through-
out although in the Bill the term “ Reverend” was
systematically dropped, would in speaking of him, treat
him as a minister of the Church of Scotland. His (Mr.
Gordon’s) only purpose in mentioning this was to shew
that the chief object of the promoters was the deposi-
tion of Dr. Lang, and that was what his Honor pro-
ceeded on. His Honor in that judgment said—“ I may
also mention that the said Bill is said to have been filed
on the part of the congregation. There was no evidence
that a single one of them consented; on the
contrary, there is strong reason that such was
not the case.” That was since confirmed.
He continued—“As to the legal estate it is my
present opinion that it is vested in Dr. Lang and Mr.
Ramsay." Further on he said “ Dr. Lang did not belong
to the Synod, nor did he at the time of his deposition.
That it was not obligatory on his part to remain a mem-
her. He had ceased some time before to belong to
them, nor did he commit any act subsequently to shew
that it was not so,” and his Honor added “ that he should
require further information to enable him to declare that
the plaintiff's were able to depose a minister of tte
Church of Scotland, and declare his church vacant.” His
Honor then went on to say “ that the decision of the
Synod must be confirmed by the Synod of Irving, and
that that step was taken," which it had since been shewn
it was not. Mr. Justice Therry then observed that nine
years had elapsed before proceedings had been taken, a
circumstance that must be taken into connection
with the fact, that Dr. Ling had been a minister for up-
wards of 30 years, when he (Mr, Justice Therry) was


asked to appoint a receiver.” New he (Mr. Gordon)
submitted that if Mr. Justice Therry had been aware of
the fact, that no c mfirmatioa had come from the Pres-
bytery of Irving, there could have been no doubt as
to his decision relative to the deposition, and, therefore,
the very ground on which that was based being invali-
dated, the whole proceeding was in effect swept away.
And his Honor the Primary Judge look much the
same view with regard to the formality
of the deposition. The Primary Judge treated the
deposition as a matter of no consequence. Mr. Justice
Therry treated it as a matter.cn which the case chiefly
relied—that was the deposition ; and if his Honor had
had then the evidence before him that was now before
the Court, the case would have certainly failed.
The Chief Justice: In common law pleadings, it was
allowed the plaintiff could not recover on grounds that
he 1» *d not put on the record; was there anything
analogous to that in Equity ?
Mr. Gordon said there must be. The question must
be decided on the point at issue. The specific right
must be set out.
Mr. Justice Wise would suggest that supposing the
Court saw soraeth’ng outrageously wrong which did not
appear on the plaintiffs’ bill, it would not prevent them
making the decree; although, perhaps, not the decree
asked for.
Mr. Gordon said here they had asked that the said
defendant might no longer be minister of the said
church; and if Mr. Justice Therry had known that the
Presbytery of Irving had not confirmed the deposition,
he would have said that Dr, Lang was still a minister of
the said church. He contended, as a general rule, that
the allegations on which the equity was founded must
be set out in the bill—the evidence must he confined to
them, and the issue take place on them.
The Chief Justice: Supposing the Court were of
opinion that this case of deposition must fail altogether,
were there not other questians as to other facts?
Mr. Gordon : The issue not having been put on that
ground, it would become a matter of discretion. He
only referred to Mr, Justice Therry to shew that the
case was put on deposition, and deprivation as a conse-
qnence of it. The deed required that any minister
otficiaiing in the Church should be a member of the
Church of Scotland. The plaintiffs said Dr. Lang was
still an ordained minister of the Church of Scotland,
and, th< refore, competent to preach in the Jaraiaon-
street Church, and that no authority in the colony could
prevent him He n<w proposed to discuss the ques-
tion of the effect of the Acta of the colonial Legislature


on the position of the Church in Jamis ;n.street; and how
far those Acts gave a status to the pla miffs here to
come an! ask the assistance of the Court. If he suc-
ceeded in shewing that the individuals who represented
the Synod had no status here, their Honors must dis-
miss the till. If this Church had no consii ution, no
deed by grant, it would have been a very different ques-
tion : if there bad been no Bond of Union, it would have
been a very different question.
Mr. Justice Milford did not recollect whether the right
of the plaintiffs to sue was raised before him.
Mr. Gordon : Ob, yes; he found from the notes of his
argument “ That the plaintiffs must fail if they could not
maintain their status under those Acts.” In looking
at those Acts they could not leave
cut the effect of the Deed of Grant,
the Constitution of the Church, and also the Bond of
Union. He put the question as if this deed had been a
bequest under a will to parties uniting together fora
common object. With regard tothe question oftheConsti-
tution, it became of peculiar importance, and his Honor
the Primary Judge shewed bow important the question
of Constitution really wa°, because he observed “ that
he trust deed spoke of a grant of land to trustees and
the congregation who had adopted that Constitution, and
it was not in the power of anybody holding those trusts,
or in the power of anyone else to alter them, although
the Legislsture might.” And in another part referring
to the same matter, his Honor spoke of the Constitution
in these terms The nature of the Pr. sbyterian form
of Government enables any body of Christians to adopt
that form, wherever they may be; they may form them-
selves into separate churches, governed by Kirk ses-
sions, Presbyteries, Synods, and general assemblies,
without any other connection with any other body of
Presbyterians. They, under this arrangement, would
form a separate Church, under any title they pleased to
give it.” He said in this Constitution it was clear, if the
deed bad been devised under a will, they had a Church
formally adopting the Presbyterian form of Government,
and calling itself by any name it liked, andhavingno con-
nection with other Presbyterian bodies. It was pecu-
liarly placed, and he said on the principle
on which the society was framed, it was
incompetent for any person or body but the Legislature
to alter it; and, therefore, ha said it was important to de-
termine whether the Legislature had intended specially
to bring within its enactments a body fixed under parti-
cular trusts, and to alter that to which none of the trus-
tees were able to give any consent.
Their Honors were quite aware that vested rights


could not be taken away by general words, and that
where Acts of Parliament dealt merely in general words,
they could not be applied so as to take away vested rights;
and, therefore, where his Honor [the Primary Judge said
Presbyterians might unite themselves without any con-
nection with other bodies of Presbyterians, it then fell
into a general principle which, he submitted, must be ad-
hered to, that general words under that Actmust be con-
sidered very cautiously as afiVcting vested rights, as for
.instance, where churches having constitutions had fixed
rights and certain trusts; and. as he had said, when
they endeavoured to deal with general acts, they must bo
extremely careful in applying them to specific trusts.
The constitution deed was set out in the bill in the
second paragraph, and there was a number of clauses in
the bill, and one or two of them were specially important
because the Court would see they varied considerably
from what would be the ordinary arrangement
of the Established Church of Scotland. The first clause
of the Constitution was as follows :—“The Westminster
Confession of Faith, and the other st andards of the Church
of Scotland, viz., the larger and shorter catechisms, the
directory of the public worship of God, and the form of
Presbyterian Church government, shall, in all time com-
ing, be the only standard of appeal in all matters what-
soever relative to doctrine, discipline, or worship.” And
the next was that the minister of this church should be
a regularly ordained minister of the Church of Scotland,
And therefore ho believed there were only one or two
parties before the Court competent to fill that post, and
that, he thought, went a long way to answer that portion
of the allegation, that if they did not bring Dr. Lang
under the dominion of the Synod, what would they do
with him ? Now, he said, it would be as difficult to find
a minister of the Church of Scotland for all time to come
for this appointment, as it would be monstrous to say
that a minister of the Church of Scotland here should be
not amenable to any other jurisdiction than that situated
16,000 miles off. His learned friend said they must submit
to the inconvenience, but they might remember that the
Master of Dulwich College must be of the name of
Alleyne, whence ever he might come. Here they were
tied down to a minister of the Church ef Scotland. That
was a greater inconvenience. Their Honors would see
how completely this point of the Constitution of the
Church bound them. They had special power to nomi-
nate a Kirk Session. It would be seen by the fourth
section that if Dr. Lang had been turned out at the in-
stance of the plaintiffs, (but one or two of whom could
fill bis position,) the right of appointing
a successor would vest in the congregation, who were


heads of families, and bad seats in the church. The fifth
paragraph said, “If on the death or resignation of any
incumbent a minister should not be found in the colony
duly qualified to undertake the office of pastor, the
members of Kirk Session for the time being snail be em-
powered by virtue of their office, and without being sub-
ject to any control, to take such steps in the name and
on behalf of the congregation as may be requisite for
the speedy appointment and settlement of a minister.”
This was not the constitution of the Church of Scotland,
but a Constitution by which they themselves had pro-
vided for the difficulty. In the sixth paragraph the
sums received from pew rents and legacies were directed
to be received and appropriated by the Kirk session, for
the support of the minister, and for various other pur-
poses. If the Act was to apply, this paragraph would be
done away with altogether. In another paragraph pro-
vision was made to receive Presybterians into full com-
munion with this Church. The eighth paragraph shewed
how completely they bad tied themselves to certain arti-
cles of the Church of Scotland. It said, “If any mem-
ber of the Kirk Session shall endeavour, on the ground
of the standard of the Church of Scotland being unscrip-
tural or inexpedient, to set aside the first of these arti-
cles, or on the ground of some alleged necessity to set
aside the second, that person shall ijpso facto cease
thenceforward to become a member of the Kirk Session,
and forfeit all right and title to vote at its meetings;
and any individual of the congregation so endeavouring
shall ijpso facto cease thenceforward to have a vote in the
election of a minister, or any other matter relating to
the Church. And by the last paragraph it was ordered
that if a division should ensue in the Kirk Session or
congregation, those members who adhered to the present
Constitution, although outnumbered by those who
wished to change or subvert it, should be held as the
Kirk Session, and exercise, &c. He submitted those
paragraphs of the constitution of the Church were a
direct answer to the remarks of the Primary Judge,as to
bodies forming themselves into religious societies,
without reference to any others they had here.
He now proposed to consiaer the Act which had more
or less reference to Presbyterians in this colony. And
at the outset, he would propose, in drawing attention to
the Act, to refer to the mode in which bis Honor the
Primary Judge had dealt with them; and he thought
their Honors would see, when read by the true principles
of interpretation, and particularly when read with the
Bond of Union, those Acts would be found of no effect
whatever as regards the defendant. The first
Act was the General Church Act, 7


William IV., No. 3, j assed in July, 1836; and the
Court would observe the way in which this was dealt
wits by the Primary Judge, who said “Provision was made
for the future erection of churches and payment of
stipends to ministers of religion in the colony; and so
far as this Church was concerned, the Act did not apply,
but by the 10th and 11th sections, provision was made
for the appointment of trustees to churches already
built, and of churches the ministers of which had salaries
from the Government, and thereby the Governor and
Executive Council were empowered to nominate trustees,
&o.” The Court would see, that except the 10th and
11th sections of this Act, the Primary Judge considered
it had no application ; end be thought his Honor would
see those sections did not apply to a Church with a con-
stitution like theirs. The 10th section of
William IV., No. 3, was for the nomination of
trustees to churches and chapels maintained at the
public expense, but he submitted that, looking at the
Grant, and at the Constitution of this Church, and seeing
no words in the section referring to a specific case, it
was impossible to hold that the Governor had the power
to turn all the trustees out and appoint new ones. He
submitted that it was utterly impossible to ho’d that the
10th section applied to the Scots Church, Jamison-
street. For in that very Deed of Grant the mode of
nomination of trustees was specified. He submitted
that it had never been intended that the Governor
should have such power in the case of a Church having
a specific constitution of its own, and which was
actually regulated by deed. If this h;d been the case
of a will, could it have been said that those general
words were intended to apply ?
The Chief Justice: By the preamble of the 10th
clause it would seem to apply to those chapels and
churches whose ministers were not yet appointed.
Mr. Gordon submitted that all contr 1 over them
had ceased, if that were the correct application; and
certainly the Act would not apply in cases where the
trustees were appointed under specific conditions. He
next came to the Btb William 4, No. 7, known as the
Church Temporalities Act; and their Honors would see
the way in which it was dealt with by the
Judge of the Court below. His Honor said: “It was
considered expedient that further provision should
be made, as well for the mode of their original nomina-
tion as for maintaining a proper number of trustees, and
for defining the trusts. It is enacted that the trustees
of Presbyterian churches as aforesaid should be elected
and appointed in the manner following, that is to say—
that whenever any person or persons should erect a


church to be approved of by tbe Presbytery of the colony
for the celebration of public worship, according to the
u-e of the Established Church of Scotland, or when a
certain sum should be contributed by any persons for
tnat purpose, such person or persons should send a list
of proposed trustees to the Presbytery, who were to
select not less than three, nor more than five, and were
toltransmit the names so selected for tbe approval of the
Governor and Executive Council.” This section clearly
only related to future churches, as was the case with
the next six sections. Then they came to the Bth sec-
tion. His Honor said this section applied to all
churches, whether already built or to be built. Now,
he submitted that could not be the case. Their Honors
had heard that all the trusts had been put in the bands
of certain parties named; and, therefore, if this section
applied, they would have the trustees appointed under a
grant abrogating the power given by the K>rk Session—
by the constitution deed, and without naming in any
way any one else. Supposing there had been a will
under which this specific trust had been granted, this
Act of Parliament would not have affected them, other-
wise there would be no safety, and these trustees would
be namrd, and this constitution would be given up.
But as that Act was in general terms, and in it this spe-
cific trust was not mentioned, there was nothing to leave
them to infer that it applied.
Mr. Justice Milford : But the act was to regulate the
Presbyterian Church.
Mr. Gordon said his Honor had then used tbe words
in a different sense when giving judgment. He then
said that the nature of the Presbyterian form of worship
: ' - r- nt .Christians, wherever they might be,
to form themselves info a sepa/aio uuuj, auuui
were Presbyterians in contradistinction to Episcopalians,
but not in any particular sense. He took it that general
words could not be said to take away a clear important
right, where they had a specific and fixed constitution.
The ninth section enacted “ that it shall be lawful for
the clergyman duly inducted by the Presbytery into any
church or chapel, so long as he shall be recognised as
such minister by the Presbytery, to have free access to
the church or chapel.” But Mr. Justice Milford said
that this could have no retrospective application. The
eighth section enacted that it was expedient for Presby-
ter! *n churches that their trustees should have their
powers more defined,and it went on to point out what
those duties were, being the collection of pew rents and
other matters relating to the temporal concerns of the
said churches and chapels. If the Court decided that
tha ninth section did not apply, it appeared


to him perfectly impossible that the eighth section
which referred to it in part, could apply. (This portion
of the Act will be found fully gone into at a later period
of the argument.) The 10th, 11th, and 13th sections
related to the powers and duties of trustees appointed or
to be appointed under the Act, including the trustees
mentioned ir the Bth section.
Mr. Justice Milford said after all this Act had very
little to do with the question, except inasmuch as it
appointed new trustees where it might be necessary.
Mr, Gordon said the Act did not affect his case much,
hut if he could come to this, that there was nothing in it
to affect the trustees of Jamison-street, it would support
his argument.
Mr. Justice Wise said the more he was convinced
that this Act did not apply, tbe more difficult would it ha
to convince him that the next Act did not apply.
Mr. Gordon said it might he, hut the truth was what
they wanted to get at. He took it that the Act could
not apply to this deed without much more specific refe-
rences than in any of tbe sections of the Act at which
they had been looking, and he argued, and in doi*ng so
hewas supported by his Honor the Primary Judge, who
said, that the fact of a Presbytery did not necessarily
involve any specific agreement in faith, with another
body. A Presbytery was simply a Church, governed by
members and not by a bishop. The 13th section of this
Act was thus referred to by the Primary Judge :—“After
reciting the 10th section of the General Church Act, and
that the trustees for Presbyterian churches were ap-
pointed without the selection of tbe Presbytery of New
South Wales, and that it is expedient to appoint new
trustees conformably to the provisions of this Act, enacts
that the former appointment pf
n tl oi ouuiuu avfLun ue void, and that the erection
and appointment of trustees for Presbyterian Churches
already built shall be made, as in
this Act is directed, within six months.”
Under this section his Honor said, that the trustees
ought to have been appointed in the manner laid down
in the first section, but it did not appear to have been
done. By that section they were left to the anomaly of
saying that those trustees appointed under the original
section were to be deposed, and that was the only way
they could get out of it.
The Chief Justice said if all the other sections refer-
red to did not apply, there was a strong inference that
the Bth section also did not apply.
Mr. Gordon having further reviewed the Bth and oth
sections, submitted on the whole construction of this
Act, it had nothing to do with them.


The Chief Justice said it was certainly reasonable that
the Legislature had in view the same idea throughout
this Act.
The business of the day concluded by an express de-
sire of the Court, that Mr. Gordon would more lully direct
himself to the Bth section on the following day.
"Wednesday.
Mr. Gordon resuming his argument said, their Honors
had been kind enough to say that they would liks to hear
him further on the Bth William IV. No. 7, and since then
he had noted down what additional matter occurred to
him in reference thereto. Their Honors would
find that the preamble contained two parts,
the first of which it would be seen referred
to churches and chapels to be built
here, and not to any religious denomination whatever.
Then it was provided in the second part, in reference to
those churches or chapels which were called Presby-
terian, and said what was to be done with them. There-
fore when the Court came to look at the declaratory
clause of the bill, whenever there was any reference
made to churches and chapels under the Act, it meant
Presbyterian churches and chapels to be built. They
had then stated the objects of the Act, first the original
nomination of trustees, and, secondly, provision for sup-
plying vacancies when those failed. The second, fourth,
fifth, sixth, and seventh clauses had no retrospective
effect. The application of the eight section was no doubt
not so certain, as it did not contain the words “as
aforesaid,” or words so strictly limiting it to the opera-
tion of thepreamble. But the ques ion was, whether the
omission of those words extended the section further
than was stated in the preamble, namely, to churches
and chapels to he built. He would call attention to
section 9in connection with section 8. In the latter
there was no word “ aforesaid” and if the Court looked
at section 11, they would find clearly carried out the
objects of section 8, and in the former it
was specifically tied down to the. trustees
as “ aforesaid, ” that was the churches
and chapels to be built. His Honor bad said this sec-
tion applied to all chapels, whether already built cr to
be built, but the word “ all" was clearly a mistake. He
would admit that this Act contained much surplusage,
but he thought it must shew there was nothing in it to
induce the Court to carry the eighth section beyond the
evident meaning of the rest of the Act, and certainly not
to the defendants who had been appointed under the
constitution deed. The 13th section said it should be
lawful for the Governor to nominate trustees within six


months, &3. He submitted that section could not have
any application to churches or chapels of which, at the
time of the passing of the Act, trustees were appointed,—
annul the appointment of trustees without a Presbytery ;
but it could not do so in this case. That section simply
amounted to this, that it was a power under the Act to
annul the appointment without the consent of the Pres-
bytery; but those appointments must have teen
made when the Presbvtery was in existence. Down to
the time of the 4th Victoria, he submitted there was
nothing that could interfere with the constitution of the
Church in Jamison-street. They then came to the Act
4th Victoria, No. 18, and that was the Act in which the
Primary Judge founded his judgment; but ha would be
able to satisfy the Court that if the plaintiffs rested on
that Act they must fail. He passed over the Act 2nd Viet.,
No. 18, his Honor deciding that it did not apply to
the case. The 4th Victoria, No. 18, appeared to be
the Act on which the matter must be determined. It
was passed 7th October, 1810, and was intended to regu-
late the affairs of certain churches and chapels. After
the recital that by the Church of Scotland Temporalities
Act, certain power?, privileges, and advantages were con-
ferred on the Presbytery of New South Wales, and the
ministers, and churches, end congregations thereof; and
that the sail Presbytery had, in compliance with the
recommendation of the Commission of the General
Assembly of the Church of Scotland, agreed that it is
expedient for the good government of the Presbyterian
Church, in the said colony that a Synod should be formed,
comprehending all the ministers and congregations in said
colony, in connection with the Church of Scotland, it was
enacted by the Ist section that the powers and privileges
conferred on the Presbytery of New South Wales and
the ministers of the congregations under its spiritual
superintendence by the recited Act, so soon as the Synod
of Australia should have been formed, and notice of such
formation should have been published by order of the
Governor, in the Gazette (which was afterwards donej
should be vested in the Synod and the ministers under
its spiritual superintendence, as if the Synod had been
named in the Act.” What that previous agreement was
they did not know. It was impossible to overlook the
fact that this Synod was acting under the recommenda-
tion of the Church of Scotland, and their Honors would
observe that the plaintiffs filed their Bill, setting forth
this was the case. Now, the plaintiffs had not offered
one tittle of evidence to shew that this Synod was formed
in compliance with the recommendation of the Church
of Scotland, but the defendants did produce, on the
other hand, the recommendation of the Church of


Scotland; and it wds not impeached
by the p;.ainliffs. The plaintiffs did either one of two
things—they formed the Synod in pursuance of these
recommendations or did not. Toe recommendation
was in evidence unchallenged by them, end they pro-
duced no other. Taat recommendation was that no
minister should be received as a member of the Synod
at its first formation who had not been admitted by
the Church ot Scotland. The formation cf that Synod
was gazetted 2nd November, 184.0, and the Act was
dated 7th October, 1840. The S>nod was duly formed
on the sth October, on which day the Bond of Union was
signed; and yet here was an Act of a later date, two
days, put forward to determine, as to the mode of form-
ing the said Synod, but the date of the Act was very
adroitly left out. The Bond of Union having recited the
nature of it, said the undersigned ministers promised to
follow the laws and discipline of the Church of Scotland
so far as they were applicable to this colony, f Now
they had the Synod, to which Act wt-s it applicable?
If they looked at the general recommendation it was to
be of a certain constitution. Those who united
together agreed to obey its commands, as long as they
were members of it. All that this
Act dil was to give them certain
power over members so long as they remained as such.
And his Honor the Primary Judgeinaddressinghimself to
the first section of the Bill, said it would have no appli-
cation to Dr. Lang’s church. His Honor also said this
section of the Act does not appear to bring Dr. Lang or
the church in question more under the jurisdiction of
the Synod, than they were under that of the Pn sbyiery.
By his becoming a member ot the Presbytery, Dr, Lang
had not altered end could not alter the original trusts of
tbs grant, and the original constitution of the church of
which he was the minister.” They then came to the
second section, on which his Honor relied in applying
the Act. His Honor said :—“ By the second section of
the Act it is enacted that the estate in all churches
and chapels, ministers’ dwellings, burial grounds, and
glebe lands, and the sites of the same, which had been
held, or were then held by trustees appointed under the
provisions of the Presbyterian Gturch Temporalities Act
in behalf of the several congregations under the spiritual
superintendence of the Presbytery of New Sou b SVales,
or by the trustees of any church in which it is required
that Divine service should be performed by art ordained
minister of the Church of Scotland (clearly including the
church now in question) should continue to be held by
the same trustees and their successors duly and lawfully
appointed in behalf of the same congregations (i e. those


under the Presbytery, and those in which a minister of
the Church of Scotland was to perform Divine service),
under the spiritual and ecclesiastical superintendence of
the Synod as fully and effectually in all respects as if the
Synod were specially named in the recited Act, and in-
vested with the powers of the Presbytery,” This Act
only gave the Synod, which was a voluntary association,
a certain amount of power, as long as parties remained
members of it, and members could withdraw when they
liked. But if they took the preamble that first of all the
Synod was to be formed on the recommendation of
the General Assembly, that was not done.
He took it for granted that the first section of the Act
did not apply, and therefore all they had to do was with
the trustees. The Synod was certainly not formed on
the recommendation, and it must be recollected that
the bond was signed two days previous to this Act being
passed, and therefore this Act must bo interpreted as
referring to the Bond of Union, and in reference to the
notice in the Government Gazette of its formation. If
that were so they got entirely out of the second section,
and it took Dr. Lang’s church out of the Act. The
Union was a voluntary agreement before the act was
passed, which Act tied it down most completely. He
said the property was to be held by trustees under
the spiritual superintendence and control of the Synod,
as it was formerly under the control of the Presby-
tery.
Mr. Justice Wise understood the argument to be that
in Dr. Lang withdrawing, their power over him ceased.
If at the same time he happened to be a trustee, did
he thereby put off his character as trustee to the con-
gregation?
Mr. Gordon : No, certainly not, but he withdrew from
the Synod the right to touch him.
Mr. Justice Wise: But the right to teach him as a
trustee.
Mr. Gordon: It would be seen there was no right of
the Synod, except so far as affected those under its
control. On ceasing to be a portion of that body, its power
ceased so far as affected theseceder. This was exactly the
same case as that of a number of parlies uniting together
for a company, and binding all who joined by their laws
and regulations so long as such parties remained
member?.
Mr. Justice Wise said he (Mr. G.) was confusing the
jurisdiction in personam with the jurisdiction in rem.
Mr. Gordon said his argument was that if their
Honors the construction of the agreement as
decisive, on the party withdrawing, control ceased.


Ha submitted that the Act only gave the Synod power
over those who belonged to it.
Mr. Justice Milford: Supposing that only three
names were on the Bond of Union, would not all others
in the colony belonging to the Church of Scotland he
subject to their control ?
Mr. Gordon : Oh no. All that those colonid Acta did
was to give the agreement certain force, and so long as
the party continued a member, so long was he sub-
jected fto their control. Supposing the second section
did apply, what were tne Synod to do under it ? Was it
to do anything more than this—to take care spiritually
and ecclesiastically of the trusts of this constitution
deed and fulfil them. He was assuming that up to that
time (the date of the bond) no Legislative
enactment applied to Dr. Lang’s church.
Assuming, as he had said, the Synod had that control,
was it intended to abrogate the whole of the trusts of
their constitution deed, or was it not this, that they were
to take care, both spiritually and ecclesiastically, that
those trusts were properly fulfilled? So that no ordi-
nary or general words enabled the Synod to place in this
Church a minister who was not acquainted with the
laws of the Church of Scotland, or who was only a part
qualified clergyman, according to (he terms of the deed.
He would submit that, under that bond, they were
bound to see the trusts of the constitution deed carried
out, and it would be for the Synod simply to superin-
tend the carrying out of these trusts, although they had
no control over them. Their Honors would see how that
view would operate immeliataly. The Synod were to
see the trusts carried out properly, and the only ground
jyhich Urejjc^uld^pre.q^i fiat ; flg w'as r e qiTflelT'tb 1
before he could act. If Dr. Lang had no right to interfere
in the way tUat was suggested, the Synod could have
come there. But Dr. Lang was not deposed, and if he
was a regularly ordained minister of the
Church of Scotland, where was the breach
of trust ? Dr. Lang used rather strong
words on one side, and they used pretty hard words on
the other side. It therefore came to a question as to
whether the breach of trust was made out; and they
then came to the deposi.ion. And he thought the Court
would quite agree with him that a breach of trust on
those depositions was not made out. He contended that
was not a suit for general administration, but it was a
suit relative to a specific trust, alleging a breach thereof,
which was not made out, the breach of trust being that
Dr. Lang was no longer fit to fill the pulpit because he
had been deposed from hia status as minister of the


Church of Scotland, The Synod said they had deprived
him of bis status as an ordained minister of the Church
of Scotland.
Mr. Justice Wise: They did not contend that.
Mr. Goidon : But they wanted to get the results.
Mr. Justice Wise: They did not wish to affect his
status as minister of the Church of Scotland.
Mr. Gordon wished to shew (hat an ordained minister
in Scotland was an ordained minister here. He would
call attention to the case Attorney-Gereral v. Stamford,
2, Swanston, p. 591, which was referred to in the case
of Attorney-General v. Warren, page 291. In the latter
case the Court had before it a particular ground of com-
plaint that was not proved, and in the answer there was
a matter set up which the Court might have dealt with.
Although the counsel there argued that the Attorney-
General might not be bound by the same strict rules as
other persons, yet they did not think he could claim in-
dulgence to the prejudice of the defendant. The Court
then said “ that all cases shewed that the Court is care-
ful not to do injury to the defendant by over-
looking the question of form.” He relied on
that case to shew that, whatever latitude was allowed in
the case of ths Attorney-Genera', that latitude was never
allowed so as to do injury to the defendant by over-look-
ing error ia the Bill. Here they had a suit by parties
who were claiming a title in it themselves. Here they
had no application for general administration—a special
breach of trust is alleged and disproved ; and to raise an
equity against the defendants on some other ease than
that which is not put in issue could not possibly be done
rifail way," Ist. Sf'fl ffflp Wt&Efgi o W,
to shew that the Court would not allow parties to link
themselves together who had no common rights. In
that case the relief prayed for it was decided must be
common to every one, assumed to be represented, and it
shewed (hat every party who was allowed to bo inter-
ested in the case, should he made a party to it. Here
they had plaintiffs, who affected to sue on behalf of the
congregation, but it was a farce to say so. Their Honors
would observe that there was not a single party to the
proceeding who represented the congrega ion except the
trustees. Supposing their Honors should consider that
the Synod had a locus standi here, and that this was a
specific suit for breach of trust; if that was not made out
they had to consider whether they would take a middle
view; if so, they must consider the case he had quoted.
He would say a few words more with regard to the depo-
sition. What they submitted was this, that Dr. Lang
was at the present moment just as competent to fill the


pulpit of the church of Jamison-streft as he had been at
any time since the formation of it. Just so long as Dr.
Lang answered the description contained in that deed, so
long was it impossible for anybody to complain of breach
of trust; and Dr, Lang would fill his ministry. In
spite of his having called the Synod a synagogue of Satan,
and they having quarrelled with him, the only
question was, had the defendant com-
mitted any breach of trust that would
justify the Court in interfering. Undoubtedly the de-
fendant was subject to the judicature of the General
Assembly in Scotland, who could affect his status as
minister, but there was nothing before the Court to
shew that the Synod which the plaintiffs alleged to repre-
sent, had co-extensive power with the ordaining jurisdic-
tion. On the contrary, as Mr. Justice Therry observed,
“it was incompetent for any local judicature to do that
which the ordaining judicature did,
and that was admitted.” He would
admit there were many things that would bring Dr. Lang
under the control of that Court; as, for instance, taking
trust funds for his own use, would be a breach of trust.
Here the alleged breach of trust was, that he had called
some persons a synogogue of Satan. Although it might
be wrong to do so, yet the Court had nothing to do with
that, xhe case of the Attorney-General v. Chapman,
M'Naughton, was an attempt on the part of a Wes-
leyan Conference to .get the control of a chapel built
and held by a deed of grant for a Wesleyan congregation,
There the Court dealt with the general" history of the
deed between the parties. This case was very similar.
The plaintiffs wished to avail themselves of what was
really a private Act of Council, and which was made for
one section of the community, to set aside certain spe-
cific trusts. In reference to the proceeding which had
been taken against Dr. Lang, very little need be said, but
he would refer their Honors to the important part of the
Act, which the Synod invoked. He said that this Act
the Synod were strictly tied down to follow the Synod of
Scotland in matters of order, ordinances, and discipline,
and if not they could not rest on the assumption that
they were a competent tribunal. Any mistake of form
would vitiate their proceedings. His Honor Mr. Justice
1 herry had treated the deposition as the most serious part
of the matter, and be could not fora moment understand
his learned friend would contend that the deposition of
the Minister wts not a matter of discipline of the Church
of Scotland. Their Honors would see that there was
certain evidence before them, which would vitiate the
plaintiffs’ proceedings. He submitted that the plaintiffs
had come there, not lor a general administra-


tion of this charity, but had come there alleging
a particular breach of trust; and that particular breach
of trust had utterly failed ; and therefore they were not
entitled to a decree, and that the bid should be dis-
missed ; that the Court had no materials before it for
going into any more extended investigation—first of all,
because to enter into that investigation could not be
done without passing over matters of form which must
he injurious to the defendant, and because the court had
not bad an opportunity of dealing with specific acts; and
because the case set up not only affected the rights of
the defendants, but the rights and interests of parties in
no way represented there. The bill alleged to be on be-
half of the congregation, but it was in effect altogether
opposed to them. He now went on the assumption that
the Court would consider the plaintiffs, had a locus standi
there. He submitted they had not, because none of the
Acts of Parliament previous to the Synod Act gave any
power or control whatever to this Presbytery. Their
Honors would see that the recommendation which the
plaintiffs professed to have adopted in their Bond of
Union was not carried out, and that in effect the parties
did not fill the character they professed to represent,
and if they passed over that, the Court would find that
parties could voluntarily withdraw from the Bond of
Union; and if so, they got rid entirely of the second
section, and if so, of the plaintiffs’ locus standi; and they
had no more right to come there and ask relief from the
Court than any person walking through the streets.
Then, if they were to allow that this Synod had the same
power as the Presbytery, that act gave the
legal remedy by which to carry out that
right, if they had to enforce it. Their Honors would
therefore see for the purpose of the present argument,
the Synod had the means of nominating trustees, and
therefore the interference of the Court was uncalled for.
Their Honors would see that the grounds en which the
p'ainliffs had chosen to institute their proceedings had
utterly failed, and therefore their Honors could not
grant them any assistance. Supposing that the plaintiffs
were quite right in their argument that they stood in
the place of the Presbytery, they bad no need to come
to that Court at all in its equitable jurisdiction, the Act
on which they relied, giving them the power, and there-
fore there was nothing toinduce the Court to shew them
any particular favour. Instead of this machinery being
employed, the plaintiffs had invoked that Court, after
having remained 13 years, and not having taken a single
step in the matter.
Mr. Justice Milford: That was immaterial as to
trusts.


Mr. Gordon : It was so as to right, hut it was a efr-
rntnstance to be t»k> n into in ihe discre*
tion of the Court (hat the Presbybry were bound to no-
ruinate trustees from the c ngregation; and why did
they not do so next day—and certainly before thirteen
years had elnps d ? And now tiny thought by hauling
in some o her ehaig s against this defendant, they
would get a decision. He trusted that the Court would
b nd the plaintiffs down to the case they had brought
forward, and which, he confidently submitted, had
utter y Jailed, t n the whole, he felt this case was very
impoit.nt; and however he might have felt indisposed
to trespa-8 on th. ir Honor.’time tosn.'h an extent, be
felt ihni he coni t not have done his duty to his client 't
himself unless be hid o-cupied every single moment ha
bad, boih out of and in Ihe Court. In oonclu ion, he
mbrnitn d that this bill mns , on the s veral grounds he
Lad urged, be dim-La. d, ami dismissed with costs.
Mr. lisae- 1 , in ii ing to adriiess the Court, said he felt
the magnitude of the leseoi s;hili«y that devolved upon
bun in dealing with this case, and which was by no
means diminished ty the able rrguments of his learned
friend ;in f.c , the difficulty was rather increased. The
plaintiff, came to ask that the present trusters of Jami-
son-street c nnh, mig t be removed, and that they
might le restrained by an injunction fiom interfering
with the said church ; and that proper persons might be
appointed tinst.es. They, secondly, asked that John
Du? more Ling might he restrained Irom using the
church, and pr vented from exe.cising any duties as
m'niste r thereof; and i hey prayed he might bo red 10
give up possess'on of ihe church to the plaintiffs, for
and on behalf of the congregation of the church. The
first portion of tie prayer was for the purpose
of carrying out the purposes aforesaid. It
was fm liter prayed, 11. at the Court might
make such inquiries as they might thinknecosaary, It
was therefore wot only a sun elf cling Dr. Lant in Lis
character o* ti uso e, but also in his character as minister
of the church. He thought it most essential to the pro-
per character ofth scase that the two di-tinclive posi-
tions that the Rev, Dr, Lang occupied might be con-
sidered separately. Accoid ng to the view he took of the
matter, it might be that the right was vested in tho
Presbytery, and it might have been in consequence trans-
ferred to the Synod, in connection with Dr. Lang as trus-
tee of the chuich ; and that no right ves ed in them as
affecting him as the minister. At all events there u «s
h distinctive remedy open to them in reference to his two
ceparate characters. The importance'f this su j et would
become appaieul ua be proceeded. With regard to iba


construction of the Acfr, his Darned Mend had gone
into the matter veiy fully : but he would also have to
call attention to portions of them. Ho would first
assume that the suspension of Dr. Lang, ns minister of
the church, was a remedy compe'ent for them to ask the
Court to grant. Of course he should submit afterwards
it was not. Now the remedy was clearly pointed out,
and was open to the plaintiff*, if they had any at all. It
was pointed out by the Blh William IV., No. 7. He re-
ferred to the fourth section. The tbitd section was not
unimportant. It piodded that trustees of the particular
congregation over which thrir an hority was intended to
be extended. It was not unworthy of lemark, that from
the first proceedings of the plainiffs throughout, they
bad acted with a most decided distrust of their own
position, power,«nd privileges, They had not proceeded
in the maiteras it miglr have been as-timed they would
under the 4th Victoria, No. IH, by which they chained
certain power over the trustees in question, and the
reverend gentleman as ninister, and jet they found the
plaintiffs cid not pursue a coarse that was pointed out
in the preceding Acts, to euetf wl ich he was now
refetriog, and to w hicb ref renee would necessarily be
made, if the 4th Victoria gave them eny power at all ;
ml that after assuming to themselves the right of de-
posing Dr. Lang from the ministiy. But perhaps it was
not much to be wondered at. although thej had procteded
to that (xtrerae slip with Dr. Lang, that they did not
avail themselves of the power given them to adopt the
remedial measur. s pointed out in the preceding Act,
when it was found they were so distrustful of their
power, that they referred to the Presbytery of Irving :
and although the reverend plaint ff was a D D. of the
Marisihal College of Al e deen, lie setmed of much fha
same stamp as Dugald Dalgetty, who would fight for
anybody for good pay, for on the formation of the Free
Kirk, be was prepared to join either assembly, always of
course bearing in mind which w< old pay best. He was
informed that the reverend jlaintiff was anxious to be-
long to both of them. However, this application to the
Presbylerv of Ir-ing, showed their distrust of their own
power. He merely tmntioned these c rcumstanees to
shew that the plaintiffs were not v- ry certain as to (he
course they should pursue, and it was veiy ft rtunate
when pron e were disposed to set aside technicalities of
law, that there might be t chnicalities of law on the
other side to upset them. The broad piinciple of justice
most mili'ate against them. He suhn,i tea that they
not Laving avaih d themselves o( the power they bad,
they could not apply to the Court for assistance.
But there ha other reasons which he


would submit woo'd influ ncs their Honors.
Tliere might be other reasons 10 forget (he rights they
bad by tha 8 William IV., N >. 7, and, it might be, rea-
sons which *o ild render such a procedure not exactly
suitable. They had but one object in vie*—to get pos-
session of the church and rid oi the defendant, and bow
that object was attain,d was immaterial; and their
Honors would see they came i ito G m-t and asked for
their interposition to au ex ent the plaintiffs never could
have done had th y kept within the terms of the Act.
They asked for the appointment of new trus ees, and hia
Honor decreed that it should be referred to the Master
to appoint five new trustees in the place of the original
five trustees. Ha submitted that the trustees could not
be appointed. Assuming there was any right or reason
for the removal of the old trustees, there was nothing to
shew that the new trustees could not be appointed in
terms of the Act, assuming they acted in accordance with
the original constitution of the church. But, of course,
trustees so appointed would not suit the convenience or
aid the obj-ots of the plaintiff t. He wou’d call to mind
the seventh section, that new trustees of any church
must be members of the said church. The fourth seo-
tim, their Honors would see, afford the qualification of
ministers, which was to be determined by the Presby-
tery, that was so far as regarded spiri ual matters. The
Kirk was to be elected by the pew-renteis and subscri-
bers of such church or chapel, one of the members of
which, however, was to be elected by the Presbytery.
All he subm tted the plain ilfs could have done in tha
case was to ask their Honors to take care that new trus-
tees should be rppointed iu the manner pointed out by
the Act. It afforded the defendant at once a clue to
their not having pursued that course. They could have
pursued the course suggested there, but he presumed
that Dr. Lang would Lave been iu a posi ion to have
asked for an injunction to prevent them proceeding ia
the matter, and then the whole q lestion won d have been
opened. On that point of the case ho felt mire confi-
dent than on almost any o her. That it was competent
for the Court to all >w the matter to be reopened, and if
the ends of justice should require it, the importance of
this case would demand that it should be reopened. Ha
knew that the feeling wight arise in their Honors’ mind
that one case was as impoitautas another, as regarded
the ends of justice, but at saran time he was aware
there were authorities for an opposite view. This case
bad been lik net to a chariiy, to which he would shew
their Honors there was no analoey what ver, but were
it so it would be a very xception 1 case. The Court of
Chancery might overhaul matters of this sort to see if


justice had not been done by hole and corner proceed-
ings in ano her Court, and if they loun i there ha’ been
In a subordinate Court a direct vi dal.on ot justice they
would go into the matter. And in this case the pi tin*
tiffs had ac ed in violation of the legal rood * of prooee.”*
ing, and they bad omitted some of the most irn or'ant
prelimiuaty proceedings. The plaintiffs having faTed to
pursue the remedy a lowed them, had no locus sta di in
that Court. The Court only came to aid
wh'realawdid not rxist, and where the principle of
equity shewed thab a remedy was required which the
Court could deal wi h.
Mr. Justice Milford took it as quite e’ear that the
jurisdiction of the Court of Chancery was not relieved by
some other Court of Jurisdiction, although power was
given the latter by an Act.
Mr. Isaacs would admit tha 1 the principle of the Court
of Chancery was not ousted by those remedies
being givm, although he thought much might to
said about that, if necessary. A greit di-tinction must
be drawn between the operalien of a private and of a
public Act. The former was not for the benefit of tha
community, but of a few, and its oljot had ref rence
to but some one sec ion of the oommuuity. If that were
so this was a priva'e Act.
Mr. Justice Wise : Supposing it were n private Aol ?
Mr. I.<,anC': Then it r. q tired a differ, nt rule of con*
struction, for there were iocidcn s connected with tho
administration of the law under private acts very diffe-
rest from publis acts. lie now cantn to a different con-
sideration. Wusre was the origi- a! jurisdiction of a
Court of Equity, that the plaintiffs should ask for its
interposition ? He now came to a point of diffi -ally that
must have presented itself to their Honors. This case
oarae clearly within some well ascertained legally
defined heads of Equity practice ; at they roust base
their case on the evidence which proved it. The plain-
tiff had no cl am f ir relief on any other ground than that
which was presented. Then what were the heads of the
equity on wh eh they asserted their right to come to
that Court to corn-ct a broach of trust ? And what was
tha breach complained of? He said the plain*
tiffs must stw that they came within
some one or otlnr of the lends which
gave the Court jurisdiction. He submitted that tha
defendant’s status coul I not be touched except on soma
clearly legally ascertained made of procedure; that ho
had not been deprived <*f this by the orda ning Preshy.
tery was clearly proved. Ha submitted that what took
place about the Presbytery of 1 >vmg as to bis deposi-
tion tfas of no op.ra.iou at all. Dr. Lang asserted that


no such proceeding was known t > him, and he stated
that he was in So'-Nmt, at sever..! periods subse-
quently and actually effi siaiod thor.* in various places,
without receiving th<- slightest i .liiua iou from that
Presbytery of such h fdo*.
The Cuief Ju'tice; For the purpose of argument
there was no evidtuce aa to hi deposition by the ordain-
ing holy.
Mr. Isaacs won’d now submit two things. Firstly,
that it was only rn Dr. Lang to he a minister of the
Church of Scotland ■ h.»t the Sy»o t could remove him, and
that the parties, relying 01 i"H , had token it up a* their
substantial ground. His Honor the Primary Judge bad
taken up the second s ■ettou i f the Act, on which it was
clear the plaintiff* did not rely at all. His Honor de-
creed they had lull power to decla>e ihe courch vacant.
Now, he (Mr. Isa c*' submitted th re was not one sylla-
ble in that second c'anse that gave the Synod power to
declare the Scots Church vacant; in other words, they
had no power to dtp-si Dr. Lin* «s minister of tha
Church of Sen-land. He wo it i admit tnat that Court
might decr e that Dr. Ling shou’d r>e removed from tha
trnstsbip; but the fact of so removing him would not
affect bis status as a mi .inter.
Mr. Justice MiHord apprehend d tint part of the
breach of trust against D-. Lang was that he, as a minis-
ter, allowed himself to remain as trusLe.
Mr. Isavcs: Whether the statute applied to Dr. Ling's
church or not, they must come round to the po nt of the
deposition, and it was competent for their Ilomrs to
ascertain whether rh u deposition had been really the
mockery and the fraud wiiich, he su v milled, he would
be able to sati-fy th< ir Honors it had bern from first to
last. Their Honor* were not now tr}ing tee question as
<o Dr. Lung’s ot nd icr, in order to determine whether he
ought to be deprived of the status ha occupied. The
principal pert of this cise w»< the declaring the trust
void, and the appointment of oil er trustees. It was the
principal question t« be ridded. The others were all
ancillary to it. He would not have ventured, under or-
dinary circumstances, to allude to the inconvenience
suffered by the ocnKiegaiiou in conse-
quence of this di-cree; but inasmuch as
the congregation had been wrongly included
in tbe Bill, it became hi* duty to do so. He suoraitted
that it was competent for their Honors to revoke the
decision of ihe Sjnod on 'his point, and to consider
whether tbe Sjnod had i xetched their proceedings pro-
perly. In the ose of B ake v. Midland Counties lUil way,
it was decided, tbut dec.s ous founded on the Scotch


Dw which was the same os the law of England, would
be equally binding in the ctln r country.
Mr. Justic ■ Milford sai l it had been he’d with regard
to Irish decision*, that they were not binding in Eng.
lan't, but that they were deserving of every respect.
Mr. Isaacs then referred to the Lev. Dr. Fullerton’s
evidence. That reverend gentleman had s.ii I
ho attended lectures on civil law in the
University of Glasgow, and that that was the way be
obtained his experience of the practice of the Conr*’.
And the reveiend gentleman a sorted that he never in-
tended to say that a formal depo ition was not preceded
by e formal citation, but that the Synod might declare a
minister no longer a minister of the Church of Scot,
land. The plaintiff asserted that the deposition was
legally pronounced. He had a’ready said t! ey seemed
to have great doubt about their power; but they no
doubt must have intended this sentence of depo ition to
le effectual; and if tiny were full* competent, as a
Court, to decide, then Dr. Lang ceased to be an ordained
minister of the Chuich of Scotland. The question was
whether they bad the powi r, end, if to. whether they
proceeded properly to exercise it ? The sentence
egainst Dr. Lane, he had no doubt, fell about a* inno-
ouous as the bull fulminated by the D p against Luther
in 1520. Dr. Fnllertin would sill pretend, notwith-
standing the proceiings of the Presbytery, of
proving that Dr, Lang would ceasa to enjoy
eny privileges as minister of the Chuich of Scotland,
hut yet he (Vlr. I.) contended that Dr. Ling’s pri-
vileges would not be thereby effected. The reverend
plaintiff asserted that the Synod could di-qualify Dr.
Lang without any citation. If it was intruded by the
Act to invest the Synod with any tuch power as the
Presbytery held antecedent to this, then he submitted
that deposition by the Synod cou d not affect him in his
position iu the church, and could not eff-ct his
status. In the first ph c * ihey were dealing wth that
plaintiff who appeared from the first to have b en the
moving spirit on the oth-r side. New, the 11-v. Dr.
Fullerton said he had mad some statuies relating to,
church disci; line, but be could not say be had read a l
end therefore, he could not have known all the forms
end proceedings of the said Chun h. The reverend plain*
t.ff also said the statu’es of the General Assembly wi re
only binding so far as their applicability was concerned,
lie thought their Honors must c’eaHy s. e that the plain-
tiff. had not carried out the ordinances of the Synod
atrictly.
Mr. Justice Milford : In the case of a Scotch n'ation,
If it required eight d.ys before appearance, and here only


six days before notice was given, would that render all
the proceedings unavailing?
Mr. Isaacs : No doubt. On the trial of Frost, for
high treason, ihere was a technical nbjec’ion in the ab-
sence of ten days’ char notice. But it was hardly a
question as to pointing out the flagrant departure from
the proper mode of procedure. For, no doubt, they all
would point out that the conduct of ecclesiasti :s of all
ages, and he did not think themuch calumniated Church
of the Roman Catholics, was worse than the rest—no
doubt ecclesiastics desired to have to themselves all the
power they could exerc se, and in the most tyrannical
manner. This case was no excep’ion, and as it had
assumed a most grievous aspect, they came to that Court
for redress. Having shewn that the reverend plaintiff
was not very conversant with the proper mode oi pro-
cedure, and that he had not shewn that he had pro-
ceeded in a proper manner, he now came to the consi-
deration of other portions of his evidence which went to
shew that ihey did not proceed in a proper manner. He
admitted that it was quite clear that the Presbytery pro-
ceeded without complaint. As their Honors’ would see
prosecutors and witnesses required to take the oath of
“ purgation in other words, the plaintiff, before taking
part in the matter, ought to have taken an oath that he
was not actuated by malice. The tailor, carpenter, and
cl rk, who Receded from the Church, and who gave evi-
denoe, had to tale the oath of purgation, hut they
were not the plaintiffs. Tbreughout the plain iffs' pro-
ceedings, the essential observances of the Church of
Scotland were dispensed wi h ; and the whole of their
conduct was grossly informal. If tha ! oath had been ad-
ministered with reference to the plaintiff themselves,
it would have appeared in the evidence, but it
d d rot appear, and, therefore, they were justified in sup-
posing that it was not so. He asserted that this proce-
dure was nece sary, and that it was di pensed with; and
that was enough to taint the wi ole character of thia
tianßacti n. It was a very suspicious tact, fiom which,
howsve r , he would not diaw au inference, but would
content himself with remarking that all the plaintiffs bad
in their bill argued that the irregnlaiity the defendant
was said to have commi'ied w.s ol “divisive couises.’
He was not aware in what part of the evidence their
Honors would find the charge made cut. As to the
charge of schism, there was no evidence, that he was
aw,ire of ihat deserved attention. If Dr, Lang was guihy
c.f ‘‘ devisive courses" it would be exceedingly strange to
their Honors that but three persons in the congregation
c uld be discoered who found his doctrines heretical
and heterodox, and only theio three could be found to


Jaive 1h« church, namely, MvoJonald, Stewart,
end Cochrane. The rao<t they could charge Dr. Lang
with w«a having used certain strong language,
but that, wi h repaid to this case amounted
to nothing; hut, with regard to the plaintiffs,
might be applicable; however that was not necessary to
be considered there; the probability was, if the words
wers nrt applicable they would not have be n used. The
Bev. gentleman stated *• That on ray examination, I did
not proceed on a complait, hut on a clamifamota.
Elsewhere the Rev. pl«intiff said this was first brought
under the not ice of the Synod, by the members themselves,
from a newspaper published by Dr. Lang calling the
Presbytery a Synagogue of Satan. According to the
evidence, when the matter was inquired into before the
Synod, the only ministers present were the Moderator
Dr. Tate, and the R. v. Dr. Fullerton, in his various
capauiiies as accuser, Ju ige and executioner, he was
going to say—and subordinate officer of the Court into
the bargain. At several of the meeting”, the Moderator
to whom be had alluded, and the reverend gentle-
man wero the oo'y clergymen present. He mid
such proceedings were to’ally o posed to the principles of
justice, and were wrong in their incep'ion,—wrong in the
way they attemp ed 'o carry them out, and t rot-sly ab-
surd, He »o •Id have thought that the smallest modi-
cum of informaiion would have deterred the reverend
gentleman from such a g'O-s attempt at it.j is l ice, and
his subsequent conduct shewed his u isgiving- about it.
No doubt the reverend Moderator was first, and Dr.
Fullerton second on the list on that occasion, but inas-
much as he was also last, it was net a very great honor}
and those were the two gen'lemen involved in the charge
which Dr. Lmg was said to > ave m de, in which there
appeared nothing against his ch«racter as n minister cf
the Gospel except that he withrrew himself u - >drr the
Bond ol Union, as well he might, and that be said they
were Synagogues ol S-itan.
Sir W. M. Manning: At. scire cf the meeting* only two
ministers were present But there whs h commie-ion to whom
the matter was teferred, which directed the libel to be filed He
would aomit the principle, emd »bien he s«i'*,ln this instance
was adheied to. that nnoo dibit jvdax in propria cansa.
Mr. Justice Wise: 11 members or the t>yn< d had no right to
appeal when charges were made against them, then no chatted
against that body could he investigated.
Mr.lsaacs: Hiscomp'aint again- t those get liemen wng not that,
being the tallies attacked by Lr. Lai g. lhe\ sat us bis judges, tint
that they were both accusers and judges, anel they diet
not wait to have their interposition iivned ah ertra. If
the accusation bad been preferred by imv one else, it mb hi have
been held firm tbenece ssiiy < f the ease, that they weie hound
to sit. Cut even then it n igbt lie o' jeoteri, there were peisuna
who were not included in the at atbema who w< u'el have consti.
luted much belter Judges than ihote reveiend gentlemen who


dM sit. H > said it wonll he a painful slate of things indeed If
no tribnnal existed to prevent such a groas violation of justice.
He thought their H in t s would see tutu la proceedings of tlie
Church of Scotland in such matters, even on a fim* clan sa,
some one was technica'ly aepninted to act as the accuser and ha
was purgated; but hero it was not convenient, becau-o one
revfrend gentleman was to be moderator, and the
other, clerk of the oouit. Teat spoke volume*
rgiinst their proceedings from first to last, end
spoke much in favour of the defendant. It was
also somewhat important that those plaintiffs should require, on
behalf of ihe oongreg uion. that Dr. Lang should give np the
church to those reverend p'«intiff-, and at the same time that
the laws of the Church by which Hie reverent plaintiffs should
have been aclmted, were utterly disynced by them. And this
was nreiended 10 be done on behalf of a congregation, not one
member of which would ever put his foot in the chit'ch after
their venerated pastor had been so treated, afier having diaoensed
lha ordinances of religion there f.ir more ihanathird of a cen-
tury, and where he hal di-p-nsed the ordinances-f religion 10
their emire satisfaction ; and yet Lli > c e gentlemen came there
and asked to be out in possession of ihat church, and that in
virtue of the practices an I laws of the Church of Scotland, which
many parts of the evidence went to shew they had utterly dis-
graced.
Thursday.
Mr Isaacs continued : He would proceed to notice the evi-
dence of Dr rullerton. As one of the principal witnesses, he
bad taken a most active part in those proceedings of the Synod.
He thought he would be able to shew their H mors that this
Presbytery had acted in gross violation of the principles of
justice; at any rats, not in -conformity with the policy of the
Church of Scotland It was quite e-idem from the rev rend
gout email's evidence, he was not very clear whether the Presby-
tery procee led on a f'lma cl imosa or otherwise. In one part of
bis evidence he stated that mere wi a certain representation
from the membersof Dr La ig's congregation on which 'hey
acted He afterwards admitted that they procee led on a famt
elannsa. of which he gave a definition directly in opposition to
thaiof other witnesses. He said they knew what Dr. Lang said
by a report from three of tho members oi his conyregaiion, who
could prove it on oath. Yesterday he bad 8 ibmiued, those per.
eons having been found, why shout I the reverend plaintiffs
become the accuser? and he poinied out had they could have
proceeded by spjoinuug one of their own members to make
the charge, tint who would inns way act as judge. Their Honors
would recollect at the vole of deposition of Dr Lang, there were
four votes in his favour, eight voted against ht n. and one did
not vote at all. And when it was reoo'lecied, that it was asserted,
that all those eight were included in the remarks of Dr Lang,—
they were not on y acting as judges, lint as actual accusers, and
he thought their Honors would allow their proceedings were a
gross violation of the ordinary principles of justice. Dr. Fuller,
ton said that “ be understood that the slander affected the whole
of the Presbyterv," and “ that there was no notice given to Dr.
Lang before the citation.” t-ealso said that Dr. Lang was sum-
moned “for a charge made against the Presbytery," and for
following “ devisive courses." E sewherethe reverend gentleman
aaid he was not summoned for any particular offence,but that ho
was summoned to alien i the Presbytery for following “ dev.sive
courses." Subsequently ha said “ the offence of Dr Lang was re.
ferred to a commissioner of ihe Synod. The resolution
was carried by tie casing vote <f Mr. 'fait,
there being five members present, snd three ministers.
Now. according to the laws of the Church of Scotland,such a
commission must consist of members of the Church of Scotland,


whereas none of them in this instance were. It was afterward*
objected that Dr. Lang did not allow Dr. Fullerton to enter into
bis pulpit to dispense the ordinances of religion, hut be Mr.
Isaacs did not think that a grave offence. Dr. Fubertwn also said,
he, the defendant, would not submit to thejudgment of the Synod
for acts subsequent to February I8t), whereas the reverend
plaintiff founded his who'e case on matters subsequent to the
withdrawal of Dr. Lang That portion of the proceedings would
almost induce him to believe that the reverend plaintiff was
brought up in the institutes of Loyola. The letter of withdraval
was sent in the first of Vlarch ; and the deposition on the Ist Oct.
He now came to the proceedings of the Synod on the occasion,
when they ultimately dealt wiih the matter. A libel was drawn
np, and they proceeded to support if. Tbev ought to have shewn
that the court was properly constituted. He submitted that, the
defendant was not deposed, but, that he simply resigned. Quite
irrespective of any offence on the part of ihe defendant, it was
for the Court to say, first o' all, whether the proceedings of the
Presbytery were not improperly conducted, or as he submitted,
whether they were so irregular as to render them utterly harm-
less. The occasion had now arisen in which a Court of Equity
would have to review this foreign tribunal to determine that
ques ion ; and even assuming their proceedings were correct,
to say whether the judgment was correct, assuming that the pro-
ceedings at Synod had not violated the first principles of justice
at all events. His H rnor’s judgment nega’ive i every allegation
on which they rested, and hid the plaintiff's case rested solely
on what they urged, it nrnd have entirely failed Thera
was, therefore, a very strong circumstance for the
consideration of the Court In its discretionary powers
No doubt, in this case, the Attorney-General has been made a
party to the suit, and, perhaps, one of the reasons for that was
that the Government had a mortgage on this Church. That
mortgage was contained in the Act of Council. There was evi-
dence that, there was power to mortgage the property, and that a
sum of money had been advanced, hut nothing beyond. As ho
bad said before, if Ibis were an action at law, and if, as in this
case, all the evb euoe was swept away, a nonsuit must follow as a
matter of course. He submitted inequity that the ruling and
pleading was certainly not to grant relief where the whole of the
rights claim-d were swept away, and that the very inmost relief
the Court could grant was to amend the Bill. He further submitted
that the matter went still farther than was stated by his Honor
the Primary Judge, who said it was very doubtful if
the proceedings of the Synod in this case were in
conformity wittt the law of the Church of Scotland.
He thought their Honors woul i go beyond that, and say that the
proceedings were not only not in strict conformity, but not in
any way in conformity, and that if not in violation of the first
principles of justice, that they were grossly irregular. Believ-
ing that the Court could exercise their discretion, he trusted that
their Honors, if persuaded that the proceedings bad not been
conducted as they ought to have bee 11 , would exercise great cau-
tion in determining this matter. He had stated that this evidence
was first introduced bv the plaintiff, and he found on examination
of Dr Fullerton that Dr. Lang was not present, and that certain
objections of Mr Barker on thepattofDr. Lang, were overruled;
thus shewing that the proceedings were not of the most regular
character. Their Honors required no evidence ; His Honor the
Primary Judge had disposed of every material clause, and he had
left the plaintiff not an inch of ground to stand on, and, in fact,
as regarded Dr. Fullerton, not more than the point of a needle.
The Chief Justice said that the judgment was partly founded
on certain statutes quite irrespective of So ito t law. It appeared
to him that Mr. Gordon did not seem inclined to argue in tho
words of the statute, “ Spiritual and ecclesiastical superintend


dence." His Honor, the Primary Judge, had thought that the
defendant bad declined 10 place himself under such superinten-
dence. ••
Mr. Gordon said that was a matter in which he had explained
he was not concerned. And he observed I bar if the words had
the force proiosed, they bad a rcrm dy irrespective of the satis-
faction demanded. He argued that < cciesiastical superinten-
dence did not apply to temporalities, but to the conduct of
persons.
Mr. Isaacs said in this case there were two sets of persons, the
trustees and the minister; and that the Synod
might well have a right to deal with the
trusters hut not with the minister. He ventured to submit to
their Honors tbat the Acts before them were private, and that
the fact of them being public or private df pended on their nature
and substance A ptivate Act refern ri ti only one portion of the
community. Ann his argument in this case was the stronger,
that (he Acts were fomide on pre-exi-ting rights between the
parties, the Act 4th Vic, No. lb. being passed, two days after the
Bend ol Union H's Honor the Primary Judge said of the Act
illiam VI. No T, tbat only the sec:ions 8, It), 11, a■ d 15!, bore on
the case. Vet it would be necessary to refer to other portions of
the Act. ‘the pan of the preamble refeiring to Pi esbyterian
churches, he submitted, it was clear, that, this Act did not in ary
way apply to the Scots Church, -lamtsi n-stn et, for the trustees
were already appointed, ami, therefore, c» nld not be nominated,
throughout the Act, the w> rds “ 611811“ or
‘as aforesaid ’ were so usi d as to shew
that the pt ean.b e governed the w hole in such a way as would
equally exclude the Btu, 10th, 1 Ih. and i2tb sections as w r ell as
the remainder, lire third siction was not very matenal except
that it referred to the preamble, and the same n mark would
apply to the first. The founh section pointed out a mode by
wbii h the Pi esbytrry shi u'ri judge of the qua ificalion of
ministers appointed, as his Honor the Primary Judgp raid, to
their churches ibeGfib section, from the very words of it, did
not apply, 'i he next two sections, it was not necessary to refer
to. With regard to the eighth section, he took it
that their Honors would not, in consi quence of the
vague way in which it was worded. drag it in, and apply it where
it was admitted. The pievous seciiot s did tot aptly. He
won d admit, and it was the most the section did, that u might
contain words which embraced the church in question. But ho
submitted that it was not. a proper kind of construction, that a
case of vested rights should be considered to come under the
operation of an Act which at the best was of a m si contused and
uncertain character. He certainly did not require mathematical
demonstration to bring the chmch within the ope ration of the
Act, hut he required reasonable gronnes for admitting as much
and in the pi culiar constitution of the Chinch, and beating in"
mind the previous clauses of the Act, be asst tied such reasi uable
ground did not exist. Was it at all likely that, alter having
named in the comtii ulion deed the persons who were trustees
investing them with certain powers, and aferthey bud been em,
powered by Act to mortgage the p epeny—and on that he much
relied—that the Legislature would interfere on such an applica-
tion ? He would further pi im oui that the minister was lo be a
trustee, which was another striking pectthriiy, and therefore he
trusted their Honours would not include this’ church in a gene,
ral Act, which made no distinct a lusiou to it at all.
Mr. Justice Milford said, supf osirg the argument good about
I)r. Langs Church not being included in the Act. how did it
affect the decree ?
Mr. Isaacs : But it was in his Honor’s judgment,
Mr. Justice Milford; The Act did not affect this decree at al)
He introduced it in connect on with the history cf the matter. *


Mr. Isaacs: Was very glad to hear of it. He won’t! row pass to
the 9th section, which his Honor said did not npoly to this
Church at all The Oih section did apply, so said his Honor,
and he considered it was riiffcu t. to undersiaui tbai toe several
sections applied to a different set of persons, which, if it were
B>, shewed a very clumsy Act, an i at least throw such an <b*
seurity over the case, as would induce their Honors to consider
that the Legislatu e never intended to deal with tins church.
The learned gentleman then colaled two cxpreasiona
in the Act, “ trustees appointed,'’ and *• _to be
appointed,"and shewec the obscurity arising frcm the diffeience
of verbiage and the ciffHrence of meaning aiising then from. On
those two foims of expressions he relied as answers to the asser-
tion that the I th section ef the Act. applied to the Scots Church.
Toe great question that arose frrra this Act w»s what powers
existed to bring the church in Jamison street under the Synod t
It was clear that no more power passed to the Synod than existed
under the Presbytery, which ce lived no power at all from the lllb
Victoria, No 18.
Mr Justice Milford: The plaintiffs did not touch the trusts,
they oi.Jy declared that the defendant had no power to preach
there.
Mr. Danes thought that a deposition from preaching wonid
much affect a minister's temporal position. Their Honors would
find that ibe date of the Bond of Umon was the Ist February,
1810. The date of the Act was the 7lh Pebiuary, 1840. Inasmuch
as the Bond of Union contained a clause enabling a memoer to
retire, and that Act must he lake in connection wilh that, iho
Ac: could not apply to persons who had ceased to be membeis oe
the Boi dof Union liso be eiihmiiud tr.at Dr. Lng voluntarily
with iiew, and ceased to be a member of the Bond of Uni n before
proceediogs ci mmenced, and that lb< refore the p'ainllffs hud no
power to proceed against, the defendant under this Act He also
eubmilli d that the plaintiff, did not, ptoceed against the defen-
dant in the due nicer of the discipline of ihs Chu>ch of Scot-
land, and that, therefore, tbeir Acts had no control over him. _ It
now became necessary to consider how fur the second and third
sections applied. Those sections referreu to trustees appointed
under the provisions of the said recited Act. Now
was it not eltar that no such trustees were
appointed under the manner described ; but tat
on the other hand the defendants were appointed by deed,
trustees lung before that or any of these Acts came into force.
And he submined that the Act gave no more power to the Synod
than was possessed by the Presbyterv over other churches. So
far as regarded the defendant's assuming that thee were two
considerations, Dr. Lang as a mb ister. and the effect of the Act
on Dr. Lang as a trustee,—he submitted (bat, if it could bo
shewn that the part of the Act referring to chinches and requir-
ing a minister of the Church of Scotland, included such
churches as that in which Dr. Lang preached, it did nut neces-
sarily include his. The third s ctinn. after reciting the Geneial
Church Act said it should he lawful for the Governor, miner the
advice ot the Executive Council, uuder certain cot.dil one, to ap-
point trustees. It the third section was i>.tenth d to apply to
Dr. Lang’s Church, the parlies hud no right to c> me to this court
and ask its assistance, when they bad a stituoiy mode of con-
quering the difficulty. He submitted it was absurd on I lie face
of it, to suppose that the Bill was flleel on
behalf ef the congregation of the Scots Church of Jamisou-
street. He farther submitted that seldom had a case ever come
Into Court where ihe pn ceedings are so illegal and unjust aa
those of the plaintiffs. Four crumbs at the most could Dr. fuller-
ton gather together from the rich man's table; «nd on the
strength of that, he assumed to act for the congregation.
Mr. Justice Wise .• Supposing in this Church the minority c*n-


eisted of one, and he was right, would he not represent the Kirk
Session ?
Mr. Isaacs thought-that was introducing the representation of
minorities with a vengeance. He asserted that the plaintiffs did
not represent the congregation ; he (Mr. Isaacs) and his learned
friend were the only parties wha did so ; and he asked their
Honors not to give up this church against the wishes of the con-
gregation, on the flimsy pretences put forward. But were the
Court to do so, and the congregation lost their church, they might
have to camp in the open air, as the Israelites did of old, and the
Scotchmen did in the days of persecution; and there they would
still have the spiritual guidance of their pastor, and their hymns
would ascend to Heaven with holy incense, instead
of reverberating through architectural vaults. But
he trusted their Honors would not permit
this gross injustice to be done, but would allow them still to
worship their Creator under the pastor who had guided some of
them for upwards of thirty years. Whatever orders their Honors
mightmake.Dr. Lang would still remain minister of the Soots
Church, Jamison-street, whoever might ha the trustees ap-
pointed. So that even should the decision of the Court be most
adverse, the plaintiffs would still be defeated in the main object
they had in view.
Mr. Milford said he appeared on behalf of Mr. Ramsay for the
other appeal. He had nothing to say then, but that he cast his
lot so far as the arguments had gone on the side of Dr. Lang.
Sir W. M. Manning would first of all call their Honors’ atten-
tion to the history of this case. It appeared that on the 6th Feb-
ruary Dr. Lang gave an address to his congregation, vituperating
the Synod in very strong terms, and he took it
that the opportunity was very admirable,
it being between the service, and the administering of the Holy
Communion. And this address appeared to have been published
by Dr. Lang. The learned gentleman then went on to explain the
proceeding that took place in the Synod thereupon. On the
first of March, Dr. Lang sent in his resignation, and sometime
afterwards he gave up the Government grant, but both he and
his congregation determined on maintaining the church at all
hazards. The Presbytery in receiving the letter, immediately
came to a resolution not to accept the resignation, inasmuch as
matters had come to their notice calling for an inquiry before-
hand. It was a question whether there were not two parties to
that Bond of Union. Three citations were issued for the appear-
ance of Dr. Lang. Dr. Lang not appearing was found guilty on
confession. Previous to this a libel had been prepared for
slander and schism and other charges. On the Ist October the
Synod sat, when it was ordered that Dr. Lang should appear
the next day. The defendant did so, and said, “ have you any
matters against me previously to the 6th February ? because if
not, I dissolved every connection with you on that day.” That
he considered was a mere sham. The libel was considered in
due time, and the oath of purgation was administered. Various
contumacious acts were proved, and it was shewn that the
defendant by devisive courses, actually, as one of the witnesses
said, “ caused a split in the congregation.” The Synod found
him guilty and proceeded to pass sentence of deposition. It was
doubtful whether that deposition extended to Scotland, but it
was clearly applicable so far as applied to this colony. They net
only deposed him but declared his church vac ant. There was
nothing like actual force, but within certain degrees there was a
retention of the church by Dr. Lang against the minister whom
the Synod had appointed. Another part that he wished to mention
was that Dr. Lang took the Government pay a month after his
letter of resignation was sent into the Synod, although he said he
received it from Earl Bathurst, but it was in reality a stipend
issued from the Colonial Treasury, and under the authority of a


Legislative enactment. That act of receiving a salary from the
Goverraent a month after the resignation was almost a with-
drawal of that resignation. The plaintiffs might have been in
error in allowing their rights to be delayed so long, but in point
of law and in equity, he contended that it made no difference,
and the defendant ought to have been thankful for the delay.
It was not the question that the decree reversed
some of the plaintiffs' arguments; the question was, whether the
Court were or not satisfied that the plaintiff was substantially en-
titled to such a decree? He trusted that the Court would allow
his learned friend, Mr. Broadhurst, who was, perhaps, better
versed in equity business than Mr. Darvall or himself, to address
their Honors as to the pleadings, even although he was the third
counsel. .
Mr. Gordon wished to know if the application was being made
now, because it was against the rule of Court that more than two
counsel on one side should address the Court.
The Chief Justice said the application had only reference to
one particular point, which Sir W. Manning did not propose to
address himself to.
Sir W. M. Manning did not intend to refer to it.
Mr, Gordon would then object to Mr. Broadhurst being heard.
Sir W. M. Manning then contended that the plaintiffs’ appeal
was of a public character, and that the Court should determine it
on its merits, although parts of the Bill might not be supported.
Further than that he submitted that the Court should grant them
relief. He took it that the Synod clearly had power to depose the
defendant from any office as minister of the Church of Scotland
in this colony. It was not necessary that the deposition should
have effect beyond the pulpit of Jamison-street, and inasmuch
as they had that power and they declared the church vacant, the
plaintiffs were entitled to the relief sought for. He believed that
the plaintiffs were quite right in setting forth that they repre-
sented the congregation of the Scots Church, Jamison-street,
f or who were the congregation ? Why the present attendants
were the schismatics. He contended that the grant was ob-
viously intended to include all Scots Presbyterians in the city of
Sydney and he contended that the whole of the Scots Presbyte-
rians in’Sydney were fair y represented by the plaintiffs, who
really sued on the part of the congregation. He con-
sidered it would have been quite sufficient
for the plaintiffs, if they had simply
come forward as representing the Synod. He would admit that
the congregation at present attending Jamison-street. should
have been more immediately before the Court. But that point
did not appear to have been taken before the other Court; he
therefore, thought that in such a point the Court would hardly
remit back such a case. In fact there could be no doubt that
they were fully represented by Dr. Lang, and for all practical
purposes there was no doubt that the battle of the congregation
had been as hard fought as if they had been
represented by their elders. Again, what right
had this bodv to be represented when they were secedera
and schismatics, and were merely a flock who followed the shep-
herd they had chosen ? He urged that the defendant and his
congregation had entirely seceded from a fundamental article of
their constitution, they having cast it off, and, therefore, all con-
nection with this church, and they consequently were not
entitled to be called the congregation. Although the constitution
defined no power of appeal to any Presbytery, he urged that it
possessed the germs of such power, when circumstances called
forth the existence of a local Presbytery, that being a necessary
consequence of their adopting the discipline and form of govern-
ment of the Church of Scotland.
The Chief Justice doubted whether that was the case when not
expressly stated.


Friday.
Sir W. M. Manning resumed: Thailand of this Church had
been granted by the Queen, and the allowance was paid by the
public treasurer, and he partly relied on the fact, that the minis-
ter thereof must be of the Church of Scotland. The constitution
recognised the fact that members might be admitted into the
Church who had not been previously strictly members of the
Church of Scotland. The constitution evidently shewed that it
was entirely in conformity with the Church of Scotland; and,
therefore, by that same constitution, the members who adhered,
however few, to the observances, laws, and discipline, of the
Church of Scotland, were empowered to hold the Church against
all seceders. Looking at the various facts of the grant from the
Queen, the consti ution, the support it received from the State,
and the Acts of Council, the Church in Jamison-street could
not have belonged to the Free Church, and must have been in
conformity with the Church of Scotland. He then proceeded to
argue that, by the Act of Council, there was an indissoluble con-
nection between the Church in Jamison-street and the Synod,
and that Dr. Lang and his congregation having seceded, by law,
they were no longer entitled to hold the Church. He contended
the relation between the Scots Church and the Synod was estab-
lished beyond all possibility of a doubt; and if the minister and
congregation ceased to hold such relations, they must clear out
and give up the land and Church. That was done throughout
the Free Church congregations in Scotland, who, on seceding,
vacated their churches and built others.
Mr. Justice Milford said, if he recollected the argument
aright, it was that Dr. Lang was still a member of the Church of
Scotland.
Sir W. M. Manning would deal with that matter afterwards.
The defendant’s argument was that Dr. Lang’s connection be-
tween the land and the Church was indissoluble, simply because
he remained a minister of the Church of Scotland ; and they
went further and said if he turned Roman Catholic, no power in
this colony could turn him out of the Church. That he con-
sidered an entirely unsupported assertion and a fallacy. The
Constitution simply required a minister of the Church of Scot-
and. Had it been the minister first appointed they would have
some argument; but as it n as, the term was simply a qualification
The Synod might even appoint the Rev. Mr. Mclntyre or the
Rev. Mr. Muckleworth. As it was, the defendant had not the
ghost of an argument. Another feature in the defendant's case
was, that having got up what he called the New South Wales
Synod, that body appointed the Rev. Mr. Reid to assist Dr. Lang,
while the former gentleman had boldly avowed that he
had ceased to have any connection with the Church
of Scotland, and that in the face of their constitution,
that rendered it essential that their minister should be of that
Church. It had been said why had they not appointed trustees
before? But they could not as the congregation and Kirk session
were seceders ; the first step was to appoint a minister, but until
they got rid of the minister in possession that could not be done.
He imagined if they could get a new minister in, they weuld soon
get rid of the seceding congregation. They had now io come to
that Court, to get rid of the minister, or of the trustees as the first
step, for if they once got new trustees, they would soon arrange
the other matters. The next question was whether Dr. Lang had
not done amply sufficient to cause him to be deposed from the
Church of Scotland, or any Church, and he submitted that he
had. Besides the various Acts of contumacy proved against
the defendant, they found him using most horrible language —
language such as they could hardly meet with in Scripture,
for the worst language found there, was when the
pharisees were cal ed a generation of .vipers. His language
shocked all decency and propriety, and amounted to calling the


Synod a collection of devils, and master devils, and having a
special mission from Satan. Such language, which was dreadful
to contemplate, deserved the utmost reprobation of all healthy-
minded men. He believed that the evidence given by Dr. Lang,
was given conscientiously, but it was strangely in opposition and
contrast to his conduct in instigating the deposition of the Kev.
Dr. McGarvie, and opposing the continuance of that gentlman’a
stipend. He thought the evidence, taken altogether, was amply
sufficient for their purpose. If Dr. Lang was deposed as a min-
ister in this colony, that was sufficient; if he was deposed as a
minister of this particular Church, that was sufficient. All that
Dr. Lang said was, that they could not depose him as a minister
of the Church of Scotland. With regard to the
allegation of not following the forms strictly,
that did „ not in any way invalidate the proceedings of
the Synod. In the case of the Attorney-General v. Bruce, the
'Vice-Chancellor said the difficulty was to know what the laws of
the Church of Scotland were, and he fSir W. M. Manning) wjould
submit that Court were not bound to be more strict as to mere
formalities, the alleged deviations from which in no way touched
the wants of the case. He might contend that the letter of
succession jutified the Synod in deposing Dr. Lang; nay, more
that the mere fact that Dr. Lang having sent a letter, saying he
seceded on those broad grounds, and that he and his congrega-
tion said they would maintain possession of the Church against
the Synod against all hazards, quite justified the Court of Equity
in giving the relief asked for. That quite justified the Synod in
coming to this Court, and putting down this rebellion, for it was
an act of open rebellion against the Synod.
Saturday.
Mr. Darvall said it was not his intentien to occupy the Court at
any length; the whole thing turned on a deed of grant, and as
subsequently affected by Acts of Council. The question was a
very short one, namely, as to the original trust, and whether it
had been properly carried out. They contended that the trusts
had been most outrageously carried out, and he contended if ever
there was a case in which the Court would interfere, this was a
most flagrant one. An objection was taken on a point of
pleading, and his friend, Mr. Broadhurst, had pointed out to him
that the prayer of the Bill was large enough to
entitle the Court to grant the rule prayed for. Whether Dr.
Lang was deposed or not from the Church, was immaterial ; the
Court was asked to deal with him as a trustee That was the only
question. Now, the Bill reciting the constitution of the Church
required that 'he minister should be of the Church of Scotland,
but the question was whether he remained a trustee.
In the ninth paragraph their Honors would see there was a
special provision made to preserve the existing laws of the
Church. It appeared by the constitution of the Church that the
members were conscientious, and almost intolerant, and it ap-
peared the congregation looked at schism as so dark an offence
as to be of the deepest dye. The question of the Free Church
separation arising out of a dispute ns to lay presentation,induced
those ’conscientious men to secede from the Church entirely.
It having been the condition of the Church that no schism should
be tolerated, by their just views as to points of difference, if the
Court liked—the Bill went on to shew that Dr. Lang had been de-
posed, and that the Court should grant relief as they thought fit,
and should appoint other trustees. He contended that the ques-
tion did not depend on the defendant being a Scotch minister,
except it was that his connection with the Church
was immaculate. The defendant admitted that for certain crimes
clergyman could be deposed. Here the power itself was ques-
tioned, and not the proper exercise of it. The main argument
they had to contend with was the want of authority on the part of
the Synod, but the plaintiffs’ witnesses recognised that power.


By the defendant’s own shewing the power existed, although they
quarrelled with the exercise of that power. Here they prayed
the Court to deal with Dr. Lang, because, they said a notorious
breach of faith had been committed, chiefly at the instigation of
Dr. Lang. He submitted that the relief they had prayed for in
the Bill must be granted, because they shewed that the defen-
dant as trustee was unfit for his duty, and that he had abused
that office. He submitted that it was quite sufficient for them
that they established a breach of trust, whether the removal was
of sufficient authority or not. He then submitted that the alle-
gations in the Bill were precisely in accordance with the allega-
tions that had been set up. He contended that tbe Synod had the
power to take the church of Jamison-street from Dr. Lang. And as
the defendant held the church against all authority, and refused
against all expressed d'-sires to give it up; he had now tainted
the congregation with heresy end left them without remedy.
The relief prayed for by the Bill was, that these trustees should
be removed in order that church should be put to its in-
tended purpose. The qualification in the constitution, that the
minister of the Scots Church should be a minister of the Church
of Scotland, never intended that the defendant was to be ex-
clusively that minister; and as to the congregation, by their
fearful iy strong and unchristian language, they could not be said
to be the congregation' to which the founders
alluded. It was a part of the constitution of
this congregation that the smallest schism was
fatal; and no conscientions men, after such an admission,
would keep possession of property to which they had clearly no
right. The founder of the church would never have contem-
plated a scene like this of which the defendant was the ptime
mover. The constitution was granted with the full knowledge
that the church would be assisted by State-aid ; and yet the trus-
tees and the congregation seceded and became (schismatics, on
grounds that would have startled the original founders, andin so
doing set up the grant, the provisions of which they regarded, as
opposed to all attempts to render justice to that grant. It ap-
apeared to him that the present congregation, admitting as they
did, that they professed different doctrines to the congregation
to which the grant was originally issued, were entirely out of
Court. The original constitutors contemplated State-aid and
various ordinances of the Church of Scotland, which the defen-
dant had entirely set aside. By the words ofj the grant, the
qualification required for the minister was, that he should be a
member of the Church of Scotland. That did not depend upon
his ordination, but upon defendant’s own shewing,
whether his ideas were still of such a character as
entitled him to be a minister of the Church of Scotland.
According to the law of the case, it was quite clear that Dr. Lang
was not now so justified, and therefore he did not answer the
requirements of the constitution. Toe .Reverend Mr. Reid
candidly admitted that he did not belong to the Church of Scot-
land ; and could Dr. Lang, who denounced the opinions of those
who held such views, as a synagogue of Satan, be considered as
holding the required views ? Certainly not. To suppose so
would be absurd, and it was obvious to every impartial mind
that the reverend gentleman no longer answered the requirement
of the constitution—a requirement to which his counsel seemed
to attach so much importance. He contended that the cestui que
points had been abandoned by those who ought to have
maintained them. It was all very well for his learned friend to
talk of the three stray sheep, but the fact was that the shepherd
had abandoned his duty and carried away his flock with him,
except those three’well-conditioned and right-minded sheep.
He argued that if there had been a substantial departure from
the intention of the judgment and the Acts of Council, it was the
duty of the Court to interfere. Another point was that the ap-


poinfment of theßev. Mr. Reid, a gentleman who admitted that
he did not belong to the Church of Scotland, yet officiated at the
Scots Church. This was a gross instance of direct breach of trust.
Mr. Justice Wise : Supposing that occurred after the alleged
deposition, could the Court take it into consideration ?
Mr. Justice Milford: It might be referred to the Master to in-
quire.
Mr. Darvall said that under existing conditions any minister
preaching in the Scots church, Jamison-street, could not belong
to the Church of Scotland. The Court would have to consider
whether the views entertained by Dr. Lang were a
novelty, and whether they were in conformity with the require-
ments of the grant or not, and on that point he submitted there
could be no doubt whatever. In fact were a decree carried out
with strict Justice, not only would the church have to be given
up to the phuutiffs, but an account would have to be taken of the
receipts for a large number of years, the amount of which would
have to be refunded by the defendant for the benefit of the
correct congregation, who had been ousted during that time.
The learned gentleman concluded by observing that the matter
had already been so fully gone into that it was hardly necessary
for him to say more on it.
Mr. Gordon said ilnow became his duty to reply on the whole
case. He would endeavour to confine his
observations as much as possible to the most
important points, which, he thought their Honors
would find, would ultimately resolve themselves into three or
four simple ones. In the first place he would call their Honors'
particular attention to the terms of Dr. Lang’s address on the 6th
February, 184?, and the terms of his letter of the Ist March, which
had been relied on specially for the breach of trust.
The Chief Justice thought the Court would not deal with the
terms ; they had to consider the effect.
Mr. Gordon would point out that much stress had been laid on
the letter, as shewing that Dr. Lang held views inconsistent with
the Church of Scotland. With regard to the address, the
language conscientiously used by the defendant to others, he be-
lieved, was no departure’from the strict duties of a minister of
religion ; it was not stronger than language used by favoured men
in apostolic times. With regard to the letter, it contained matter
of more importance for the purpose of their argument, inasmuch
as it was alleged the writer had materially departed thereby from
the Church of Scotland; but how could it be; when the mere
point of difference, State-aid, was rather an accident of the
church, and certainly not a principle ? He asserted there was
no inconsistency in the refusal, because the Church of Scotland
received State-aid from a Government which did not acknow-
ledge religious sects in general—at least by donation, —but
afforded State-aid to the Church of Scotland alone, whereas here,
the Government gave aid to all religions alike. The cases were,
therefore, far different—the Church of Scotland being the Estab-
lished Church of Scotland in the same way that the Church of
England was the Established Church of England, and the only
Church receiving State-support there. Having got rid of the
violence of the question, they had now to deal with the conduct
of the Presbytery. Dr. Lang sent in his resignation, and they
refused to receive it, on account of a certain speech. It was
clear that throughout the whole proceedings of the Presbytery in
this matter, Dr. Fullerton andMr.Tait were the prime movers. At
& later period. Dr. Lang attended the Synod and asked if there
were any charges having a reference previous to his depo l iiion,
and all that they could inform him was the reported items of his
address of resignation,and his letter to the same effect. Therefore
as to all previous offence the proceedings were a farce. Then
there was another matter, that Dr.’Lang took his salary for
another month after his deposition,but the fact was he went and


trot it on his own signature, and not on that of the Moderator’
Dr. Lang in hie evidence saying that before there was a Pres-
bytery and Synod. He of course-- got his salary without
the signature of the Moderator, and he did so
after he seceded. The fact was he drew a
month’s salary himself to shew his independence
of the Synod : he might have continued to draw it,but the object
he had in view was answered. With regard to what Dr Lang did
in the case of Dr. M'Garvie, the distinction was that that gentle-
man remained a member of Synod; whereas the defendant had re-
signed before proceedings were taken against him. And further,
the offence Dr. M'Garvie had committed was in the eyes of the
Synod the highest offence that mortal man could commit, he
appealed against the proceedings of the Synod to the Governor.
The fact was, it was impossible to shut their eyes to the fact that
there was a strong party feeling in the Synod, and that Dr. Ful
lerton headed one side, and that Dr. Lang represented the
other; and out of that the whole proceedings had
arisen. It was ridiculous to suppose that one side was all right
and the other all wrong. Then it was said they had made a free
Church of this. He said they had made nothing of the kind, and
that no point of difference between the Scots Church, Jami-
son-street, and the Church of Scotland, could be shewn. There
was another matter about which a great deal of confusion had
taken place, and that was what was meant by the connection
with the Church of Scotland. Now he contended, that in this
colony there was no Established Church of Scotland.
The Chief Justice—We are all agreed that there is no Estab-
lished Church of Scotland in this colony, in connection with the
Church of Scotland ; that is no part of the same body.
Mr, Gordon continued: Dr. Fullerton, in another part
of his evidence, in answer to the question “ how is
communion maintained said, “by official correspondence.
There has been communion between us and the Estab-
lished Church of Scotland, which has sent out minis-
erstous. We sent a deputation to the General Assembly, &c.
The Church in Ulster has a general assembly, with which the
Church of Scotland held communion before the disruption. The
position of the Church ef Scotland towards the Synod of Aus-
tralia is the same as that in which she stands to the Synod of
Ulster and to other Presbyterian bodies. That is communion.
Some bodies have connexion with the Church of Scotland. For
instance the Presbyterian Church in Indiahas such a connexion!;
for that Church sends representatives to the General Assembly.
So did some churches in Holland. That is what is strictly called
being connected with the Church of Scotland. Looking at the
constitution of this Synod as a voluntary association we come to
this question ; What was the formation of the congregation of
the Scots Church ? It was formed—not of Presbyterians of Jhe
Church of Scotland,—but of Presbyterians generally. A num-
ber of persons holding Presbyterian views formed themselves into
a Church. Another point is about the Reverend Mr. Beid. The
first remark I have to make about Mr. Eeid’s coming to
the Church is, that it has occurred since the insti-
tution of these proceedings ; and would require to be much more
specifically brought under the notice of ihe Court, before it can
be dealt with Then, if Mr. Reid had been appointed the minis-
ter of the church it might have been said that it was a breach of
the trust. But the seventh clause of the constitution deed admits of
any person holding the Westminster confession and catechism
entering into full communion. As long, then, as Mr. Beid does
not hold the position of “ the minis er ” of the church, he may
give whatever assistance is thought proper, as'ong as the minis-
ter is an ordained minister of the Church of Scotland. Mr, Reid s
position is justified by the opening section of ihe seventh clause.
He may preach, he may be a minister of the Knk Session; but


he must not be responsible as the minister of the Church. With
regard to the irregularity of the sentence of the Synod, the evi-
dence of Mr. Stenhouse (whom your Honors surely take to be
both competent and impartial) is that those proceedings were not
according to the rules of the Church of Scotland. The only
question is—Can you take notice of the irregularity ? His
Honor Justice Wise referred to Rymer v. Druse, 26 Law-Journal,
196, where the different cases I mentioned are referred to ; and
I think your Honors will gather from that case that there is a
distinction between oases in which parties coming into Court and
setting up a foreign judgment in the pleadings. The distinction
is this :—Where the reasons of the judgment in no way appear,
the judgment may be taken as it is ; but when the of that
judgment are set forth, that enables the Court to go into the
investigation of those reasons. In this case the
Court had everything, from beginning to end; therefore
I submit that your Honors are warranted
by the case of Rymer v. Druse, to investigate the grounds of the
sentence. Unnecessarily, I admit, the whole course of pro-
ceedings and the evidence on which the Synod acted, have been
brought before the Court by the plaintiffs. This gives the
Court occasion to investigate the whole case.
Mr. Justice Wise : This is not strictly a foreign judgment*
but a judgment of a co-ordinate court in this country.
Mr. Justice Milford : The probate of a will is conclusive.
Mr. Gordon continued ; If the judgment stood by itself, pos
sibly you could not go behind it. If we imagine a Probate Court
putting before us all the proceedings it had gone through in any
case, and the reasons of them ; if we saw that the ordinary rules
of that Court had been disregarded, we should justly take excep-
tion to the probate.,
The Chief Justice : There are several cases, in which the
question of “ prize” or “no prize” occurred. In these cases the
decisions of Prize Courts are conclusive. But when they stated
the grounds of their decision, and those grounds were inconclu-
sive, the Court of Equity took notice of them, and said, we accept
your statement of facts, and find that you discredit yourselvf I.
Mr. Gordon : This consideration no doubt determined the
Master of the Rolls in Rymer v. Druoe. I do not recollect any
case bearing directly on the point.
Mr. Justice Wiss : Suppose a party on bringing forward a probate
give evidence of the steps pursued by the Probate Court, would
not a Court of Equity take up the evidence, and investigate the
ground of the judgment ?
Mr. Gordon; Yes; and the plaintiffs in this case have chosen
to do so ; they have set out all the proceedings ot the Synod. I
do not say that if your Honors saw a flaw or two you must take it
up. Some learned person in Scotland —it was Mn George
Robertson—endeavoured to get a new Act passed applicable to
such cases.
The Chief Justice; In Kingston’s case, a question of probate was
raised. In the case of King v. Vincent the Court went into the
evidence of the probate. There was put in a will, and evidence of
the probate. He had been indicted for forging the will; yet the
probate was held conclusive, and Vincent got off. In that case
nothing but the probate appeared.
Mr. Gordon; In the case of Rymer v. Druse, a distinction is
drawn between the case of judgments in personam, and judgments
in rem.
Mr. Justice Wise: It would be a new head of fraud to say
that the Court had come to a wrong conclusion as to facts. It is
a remote probability that such a case should arise. The Court of
Chancery has the power of inhibiting every court in the country.
But if its prohibitory power is not enforced, of what avail is it?
Mr. Gordon: I leave that point with your Honors. The next
point to which I draw your attention is the Constitution of the


Church. My learned friends have endeavoured to make out that
this Constitution is the same as that of the Church of Scotland—
to “ tie it to the Church of Scotland, I venture to say that if
your Honors look through the Constitution you will find it has r o
actual connexion with the Established Church of Scotland. It
was simply a number of Presbyterians from different parts form-
ing themselves into a congregation, maintaining the Wester-
minster Confession and Catechisms. The Minister was to be an
ordained minister of the Church of Scotland. Thirdly, when,
ever circumstances permitted, a Kirk Session was to be formed ;
and the Minister was to have the sole power of nominating to
the Eldership, subject to the approval of the congregation. This
direction is limited to the Kirk Session. It dees not say any-
thing about the other judioatiories of the Church of Scot-
land, Presbytery, Synod, General Assembly; only that when
circumstances permit there shall be a Kirk Session.
Then it provides how the Kirk Session shall be formed ; the
Minister is to nominate. In Scotland the elders are chosen by
the voice of the Session. This difference shews that the Consti-
tution adopted was not strictly the Constitution of the Church of
Scotland. See compendium of the laws of the Church of
Scotland, p. 470.
The Chief Justice : What witness swears this to be a true state-
ment of the laws of the Church of Scotland ?
Mr. .Gordon: It is a book of common reference on both
sides.
Sir W. Manning objected.
The Chief Justice; We must deal with propositions in foreign
laws as facts, which must be proved by witnesses.
Mr. Gordon : I do not care about the support of the book;
at all events I submit that there is nothing to shew that the pro-
visions laid down in the Constitution deed are the provisions of
the Church of Scotland ; and without such proof the assump-
tion that this Constitution is identical witn the Church of Scot-
land cannot be sustained. Here is provision for the mode of
forming a Kirk Session. There is no evidence that this is the
provision the Church of Scotland lays down. I apply the same
remark to the 4th section. In the event of the
demise or resignation of the minister the right of
appointing a successor is vested in the heads of
families in the congregation. Your Honors observe how different
that is from the position of the Church of Scotland in the Auch-
terarder case ; how much it is like the position taken in that case
by the Free Church. In the sth clause, extraordinary powers are
given to the kirk session in case of the pulpit becoming vacant. A
duly qualified minister not being found in the colony, they are
empowered to delegate a representative to procure a minister, to
do everything required by the emergency. I specially rely on
this as shewing how little this constitution is identical with that
of the Church of Scotland. There is nothing before the Court to
shew that these powers in the kirk session are in accordance with
the rules of the Church of Scotland. The 7th section explains
those previous sections. Although the minister must be an
ordained minister of the Church of Scotland, yet all persons who
have lived in communion with any body of Presbyterians holding
the Westminster confession, are to be received into full commu-
nion with this Church. This 7th clause comprehends persons
whom the Church of Scotland would not acknowledge.
The Chief Justice: How do we get that in evidence 1
Mr. Gordon: “In the constitution deed a distinction is drawn
between the minister, who must be an ordained minister of the
Church of Scotland, and those other persons, of various Presby-
terian bodies. And the congregation who did, in fact, unite
themselves were composed of Presbyterians of different denomi-
nations. In the 9th clause it is declared it shall not be in the
power of the minister, kirk session, or members of the oongrega-


tion to dispense with the present constitution. I again respect-
fully call your Honors’ attention to the judgment of Mr.
Justice Therry on the question of the receiver, so far
as that applies to the pleadings. Having now dealt with
a number of points outside the case, I now
submit to your Hoaors the more specific grounds. And I mam-
tain that this Bill must be dismissed, having regard to the rules
and practice of Courts of Equity. First, I take the plaintiffs as
they represent themselves to be. And I observe that this Bill is
not for a general administration of the trust, but it is to correct
some particular breach of trust: it is, in fact, to prevent Dr.
Lang from exercising his functions as minister of the church,
and further to remove him and other trustees because they allow
him to retpain as officiating minister there. The Bill in tais case
is similar to that in Perry v. Shipwell, (28 Law Journal, 660 ) In
that case the defendant,Shipwell, was minister ; and there was a
deed constituting a Baptist congregation. A violent contest took
place for the possession of the church. The defendant had been
recognised as minister by a great part of the congregation, but
the others did not agree to it. fit was tried before Vice-Chancellor
Stewart and Vice-Chancellor Knight Bruce. It was a suit for
protection against a particular breach of trust; the action in-
cluded all the deacons and trustees. The question was whether
Mr. Shipwell’s continuing to officiate was a breach of trust. And
they decided to restrain him from officiating. The question was
raised whether the injunction would prevent the re-election of
Mr. Shipwell; the Court said No ;it would be no contempt of
Court to re-elect Mr. Shipwell. They kept only to the particular
alleged breach of trust, and said that if re-elected he would be
entitled to officiate. The difference between that case and this
is that instead of a violent contest for possession of the church
we have the question on the pleadings whether Dr. Lang is a
minister of the Church of Scotland. They say not; and that
therefore it is a breach of trust to al ow him to officiate. Accord-
ing to the view contended for in the 15th paragraph
of the Bill, immediately on the sentence of the
Synod being passed, John Dunmore Lang forfeited
his character as an ordained minister of the church,
of Scotland, and becamo disqualified to officiate such in any
manner. It follows that be could not officiate in the Scots
Church, Jamison-street. They put the breach of trust on the
ground of Dr Lang's having forfeited his status. Of any words
(short of the exclu-ion of any other meaning) that could be put
in, the pleader chose the most determinate. It is not a case for
the general administration of a trust, but for a particular breach
of trust, resulting solely from Dr. Lang’s alleged forfeiture of
his status. Sir William Manning has admitted that no other
ground appealed on the Bill. No facts come out which give any
effect to the deposition. The deposition might have been alleged
in the Bill on certain grounds; those grounds might have failed.
That would be a much more favourable case for the opposite
side than what can be made now.
The Chief Justice : Does the fact appear that Dr. Lang has
withdrawn from the spiritual jurisdiction of the Synod? Sup-
pose the Bill had run thus : That he did such and such things
under the jurisdiction of the Synod. And if it were proved that
some of these were done after he had withdrawn, the question
would be could we not adjudicate on the remainder?
Mr. Gordon : They might hfve put the Bill in a double aspect.
1. He is deposed, therefore unfit; 2. He has done other things
contrary to the law of the church, therefore he is unfit. But the
whole is placed on the deposition.
The Chief Justice: You attribute no force to the argumen
that this is a charity.
Mr. Gordon: That is what I am going to deal with.


Mr. Jus’ice Milford: Was it the deposition or the sentence
that disqualified him from officiating.
Mr. Gordon ; It is impossible to road the 15th clause without
seeing that it is the deposition, The character of a regularly or-
dained minister of the Church ef Scotland would not be lost ex-
cept by deposition. It is trifling to attempt to put the question
on any other grounds. It is said this is a case of charity on
which the Court may grant relief even if it be not asked. 1 take
the case of charities as strongly against myself as possible. It is
said that the Court will give relief in cases of charity though not
asked. (1.) I deny that this is a of charity in the sense of
that dictum. I will explain the difference. This is no more a
case of a charity than that of Perry v. Shipwell. That was a suit
for the administration of a trust; and so is this. The cases in
which indulgence is extended are those in which the Attornev-
General, on behalf of the public, files an information founded on
particular facts, as may seem to the Court necessary for the es-
tablishment of the charity If we call this a charity it is a charity
established, as far as it can be established, then the only thing
the Court has to do is to prevent breach of trust. Indulgence
has only been accorded for the sake of establishing a charity
(Lewin on Trusts, 779, note.) The terms of that note shew the
general ground on which I rely. When the management of any
charitable revenue is concerned, as in the case of a suit by
parishioners to set aside a clerk from an advowson, the Attorney-
General need not be a party to the suit. A Bill is the relief when
cestui qui trusts call on trustees to execute the trust. When the
Court deals with the revenue of a charity it must be by informa-
tion of the Attorney-General on behalf of the Crown. (See At-
torney-General v. Walley, Swanston.and Attorney-General v.
Parker. 1 Vesey sen. 43.) In this case the information prayed
the Court to set aside a clergyman. The Attorney-
General filed an information not a Bill —to
have a particular election set aside and a right election
carried out. Lord Hardwick said as to the question whether the
Court should make a decree, the general rule is so, but does not
hold here, for nethiug is a charitable use here but the pension
which is not in question. He therefore dismissed the informa-
tion. He did not think he cou'd go beyond the particular breach
of trust alleged. In page 72 of same report, Attorney-General v.
Stuart, an information to move surplus profits of a charity-school
applied for the benefit of the master, Lord Hardwicke said this is
a causeless information ; the doctrine is true in general, that
when there is an information it should not be dismissed, but a
degree should be given to carry out the will of the donor.’ But
this rule applies only to private charities, not to those founded
by the Crown and administered under the great seal of the
Crown. Indulgence is only given when the charity
is not established. Same report, 418, Attorney-
General v. Scott; and 2 Yes y sen. 327, Attorney-
General v. Middleton. At page 328 Lord Hard-
wicke says, “ I have often heard it said in this Court that if an
information is brought praying particular relief, the information
is not to be dismissed; there must be a decree
to carry out the design of the charity, whether
specially prayed for or not. But there is this dis-
tinction : this holds good where there is a charity at
large; but it is not so in established charities under the King’s
seal. And page 426, Attorney-General v. Britton. There was an
information for a right to a chapel, the incumbent bringing in the
Attorney-General. Lord Hardwicke said there were two objection •
1. “Ido not know that it belongs to the Court to settle ques-
tions of this kind. It should have been by Bill of the chaplain
in his own name. This is in the name of the Attorney General,
which can only be in case of a charily. (2 ) The relator founds’
his case on the fact that he was nominated by the vicar. Ha


must recover his rights by a Bill m his own name. Lord
Hardwioke then drew the distinction between a man bringing a
Bill in his own name, when he could not establish a right beyond
what he alleged ; and the cases where the Attorney-General files
an information ts establish a charity. The cases in which the
indulgence is given, the Court giving what is not asked, are cases
of charity. We thus test the charity by the Attorney-General
coming into Court. (See the Attorney-General v. Warren and
Attorney-General v. Stamper.) This is a suit not to establish a
charity, or to bring a charity under the control of a court. In
such cases, the way to proceed is by the Attorney General at suit
of parties interested, against the wrong-doers. But when the
charity has been established, a Bill is brought in to keep the
tiustees t,o the performance of their duties. On those grounds,
Atterney-General v. Stamper was dismissed with costs. the
next point is to consider the position of the parties. It is almost
amusing to observe how my learned friends dealt with the con-
gregation. What is the congregation? Is it the people who at
some future time are to be gathered together? There are two
parties to litigate this question, the persons who now fill, and
those for whom a claim is put in to fill the situation.
Mr. Justice Milford : How are the plaintiffs to know who fol-
lows Dr. Lang and who does not ?
Mr. Gordon : They have evidence of that given before this
Court The congregation are those who have seats in the church,
there'are elders, members of Kirk Session, parties who have a
real interest there. These are not the serial, mystical beings to
be created some time or other, but people who have been holding
office twenty-four years in this church, as I can shew from the
evidence. There is the evidence of Duncan Campbell, who says,
“I am a member of the congregation at the Soots Church. X
have been so for about twenty six years. I am an elder of the
congregation. I have been so for twenty-four years, there -is a
Kirk Session, formed of myself, Mr. George Brown, and Mr.
M‘Nab." We have the evidence of Mr. Brown. He says, lama
member of the congregation. I have been so i about sixteen
vears. I have been an elder four years.’ Mr. M Nab
has been also sixteen years a member, four years
an elder. It is impossible to overlook these parlies. These are
the cestui qui trusts. It has been spoken all .along as if the
Synod were cestui qui trusts. But that is not right. The real
cestui qui trusts not being here, the court according to the rules
of the Court, will not go on with those who are not really such,
(see in Maonought’s reports the case of Carlyle y. S. E. Railway
Company.) Patties who profess to sue on behalf of themselves
and others without knowing that the others consent to their
suing in their behalf, cannot obtain the aid of the Court, (see the
case of Mosely v Alston). When grievances affecting a large num-
ber of parties are complained of, the suit may be earned on by
one on behalf ef the whole; but it must be with their express
consent. Now, Campbell, Br./wn, Mas Nab, and all those people
who assemble as the congregation of the church are parties not
represented by the Synod, who are acting against their wish.
Mr. Justice Milford: If these gentleman are cestui qui trusts,
and there has been a breach of trust, they are injured; they are in
the same situation as Dr. Fullerton and the rest. Some may sue
on behalf of the rest, for all the cestui qui trusts have beemn-
Gordon : In the case of Carlyle v. S. E. Railway Co., it was
found that they had no common interest, and so here. Can it be said
that these people have a common interest with Dr. Fullerton;
He wants to turn out this minister and upset the constitution of
the church. In a case in England (Attorney-General v. Clapham,
Macnaught, and Gordon), the Attorney-General sued for the
public at the instance of some members of the congregation.
There was the Wesleyan Conference, part of the congregation


going with them, and the other part against them. The
defendants were the conference who claimed
a right to the charity, the' trustees who sided
with the conference and the trustees who sided against them.
All parties concerned in anyway were included. But in this suit
wo have none but the Synod and the trustees. It is a rule of the
Court not to deal with parties, unless they are in some way repre-
sented. It is impossible seriously to say that Dr. Fullerton re-
presents the claim of the eld rs and congregation who have been
enjoying the ministrations of Dr. Lang. The Court does not deal
with the interests of parties behind their backs. I am arguing
this as if it were an information by the Attorney-General. But it
is a claim between two parties which are to be trustees. The
Synod say, it is our right; the present trustees say it is ours.
-The plaintiffs in this case are more in the situation of visitors
than cestui qui trusts. How can the Synod be called cestui qui
trusts? They may have a claim to interfere, but
not as interested. The Bill was filed on behalf
of the Synod and the congregation at the Scots
Church. The members of the session and congregation
repudiated having anything to do with it. It becomes almost a
burlesque if these plaintiffs are turned into representatives of the
congregation. Putting aside any question of want of title, the
Bill must be dismissed having regard to the rules of court I
pass on to the second point. Taking any authority in the plain-
tiffs, under the Acts of Council, the Bill will fail. Supposing the
plaintiffs, under Acts of Council, have authority in anyway they
can put it, I bring it to this test; Suppose by the second section
of the Synod Act (4th Victoria, No. 18) the trustees are to continue
to hold the real estate, and their successors, duly and lawfully ap.
pointed on behalf of the congregation, under the spiritual super-
intendence of the Synod of Australia, what ground
is there for the plaintiffs to come here? I put
the case in this way. Supposing Dr. Lang had never
joined the Synod at all; that on returning to the colony
in 1841 he contniued to receive his salary under the old rule
and quietly told the Synod he did not want anything to do with
them, what could hare wanted the Synod in filing this Biil ?
The church is to be held by the trustees (according to the Act
referred to) under the spiritual superintendence, but not under
the control, of the Synod of Australia.
Mr. Justice Milford: Dr. Lang might have been under the
jurisdiction, though the jurisdiction were not used.
Mr Gordon: Before he could be brought under their interfe-
rence he must have done something. If he had been perfectly
passive, the Synod would have had no ground for filing the Bill.
They could not say you were bound to join our Synod on its for-
mation. At this moment it is impossible to say what the eccle-
siastical claim is. What greater equity is there now than there
would have been in that case? Dr. Lang has used violent words,
and said, with more emphasis than he ought to have done, “ I
have nothing to do with you." What has he said or done to bring
himself under the ecclesiastical jurisdiction? Supposing the
Synod have superintendence there are cases in which Dr. Lang
might be reached, but not in the way here assumed. They might
be accusing parties before the proper tribunal, that is the ordi-
nary Presbytery of Scotland, in the same way that a clergyman
here has an appeal to the Archbishop of Canterbury. There is
nothing more extraodinary in that than an appeal from your
Honors to the Privy Council in England. It is inconvenient in all
these cases. There was here no breach of trust; there would have
been if a judicatory in Scotland competent to do it declared him
no longer a minister of that church. Dr. Lang could do nothing
contrary to the trusts in the deed. The trustees are sufficient
guardians. If Dr. Lang did some outrageous act which required
his deposition by the competent tribunal, we must wait


till that tribunal could be brought to act in the matter.
Whatever Dr. Lang bad done, the Synod could onlyfapply to Scot-
land for bis deposition. Then if the trustees were contumacious
the Synod would have a right to come to this Court. The
Synod thought this, and sought to get Dr. Lang deposed in
Scotland; hut it turns out that their application has failed. They
have not relied on their own act of deposition, but went to Scot-
land, and sought to get the deposition confirmed there, hut failed.
They failed in the very part which they thought necessary before
filing this Bill. All they have done is afterthoughts brought in
to make up for their failure. If Dr.Langhad entered into any con-
tract which hound him irrevocably to the decrees of the Synod,
and had broken the contract, they would have a remedy. But he
bound himself only as longashe chose to remain a member of the
Synod. On retiring he is no more liable. If he had committed a
breach of contract their remedy was at law. The eighth section
of the Presbytery Act applies to the trustees temporally; the
second section of the Synod Act to the Synod spiritually.
The Chief Justice : It strikes me as a curious thing that there
should be a proceeding against Dr. Lang for breach of trust, not
a trust created by the original deed, but a trust imagined to be
superinduced by the Statute.
Mr. Gordon: That is a great difficulty. No doubt a statute
might change a trust. This statute seems to be so framed that
the trust continues the same, but comes under the superintend-
ence of the Synod of Australia.
The Chief Justice ; The creation of this superintendence is the
creation of anew trust. Ifhe does not comply with the will of
the superintendents, he commits a breach of trust.
Mr. Gordon: I have used the argument that the
Synod are not cestui qui trusts. The difficulty your
Honor feels indicates that the argument is cor-
rect, that this is not a fresh trust, turning the Synod into a
cestui que trust, but giving a certain visitorial power to see the
trusts carried out. That is all the Synod have to do; and
this gets rid of all the difficulty of supposing that any fresh trusts
were created by the Act. I pass to the third point which is this :
the better opinion is, that these doubtful Acts of Council do not
really affect the case of this church. This church is clear of
them. I have no intention of going through these Acts again.
The ground of my argument is, (I.)—Long before there was any
legislation in regard to the Presbyterian churches, all this matter
which the Legislature undertook to deal with had been provided
for by the constitution deed and grant of the church. The origi.
nal appointment of trustees was complete ; provision fer their
successors was complete ; all the duties were afterwards
regulated by Act of Parliament were provided for. Every-
thing requisite was provided for. (2)—-There is
no Legislative provision necessarily applicable to this church ;
though I admit there are some which might be applied to it.
(3.)—The several Acts referred to, though in name public Acts,
are in their application private Acts, and are to be construed ac-
cordingly. In support of this last argument, see Dawson v. Fa-
vor • 5 Hare 415 ; and 26 Law Journal (Chancery) 164; and 29 Law
Journal (C. P.) 34. These shew that the distinction between pub-
lic and private Acts depends not on words, but on the scope of
the Act. The 10 Geo. 4c. 7, removing disabilities imposed on
Catholics by general laws, was hf Id not to
remove disabilities imposed by private laws. This distinction
helps to determine how the operation of these statutes is to be
dealt with in reference to such a state of things as exists, the
fourth point is this,—supposing these acts to have a more ex.
tended operation than was considered by the Primary Judge, and
that the Synod was in every way to have direct controul over
this church ; a legal remedy is given by the Acts; and that legal
remedy ought to be used; and there is no reason for coming into


this Court. These are the four points on which I mainly rely 1.
That taking it for granted that these plaintiffs are in the position
they assume they are, their case fails on their own shewing ac-
cording to the rules of this Court. 2. If it were allowed that the
o n °j «k ac *’ *. n . terms of the second section of the
Synod Act, spiritual and ecclesiastical control oyer the
trustees, the case fails ; there is no case made for the exercise of
the ecclesiastical interference. 3. On looking into all the Acts,
this church is completely clear of them ; because before legisla-
tive action was attempted everything was amply provided for. 4.
-taking the widest range for the power given by these Acts, they
have provided a means of carrying out their jurisdiction, if it be
infringed without coming into a Court of Equity. Having cleared
the way of outside matters and put these points before your
Honors, which are the main points of the appeal, I
venture to submit that your Honors will be disposed
to reverse the decision of the Primary Judge; not that that de-
cision was not such as a 1 your Honors might have joined in at
that time, but that upon the further discussion of the case new
arguments and authorities have been brought to bear upon it;
so that, probably the Primary Judge himself, if he had been
alone rehearing this case, would have come to that conclusion,
and will now, I believe, join your Honors in so reversing the
former decision. With the interests of a large body of persons
who, for 32 years, have been worshipping in that place,—not
to be disturbed on such grounds as those alleged on the other
. e . :- 7 ,o °aing on the interests of those who really are the par-
ties interested in this case, who have been satisfied to remain
under the constitution, and that the minister should be allowed
to officiate, notwithstanding all these squabbles and disputes :
to taking ail these grounds into consideration, I submit that your
Honors will not sustain the judgment.
The Chief Justice said the Court would take time to consider
their judgment. He thought they could promise to give the
judgment before the next term began.
Some discussion thentook place as to the time when the case
of the Synod of Australia v. Ramsay should be heard, in conse-
quence of which, as the grounds of both cases were similar, the
Chief Justice intimated that he could not promise to deliver the
judgment in this case before the end of next term, though it
would be prepared.


'




