

1890.
VICTORIA.
BOARD OF PUBLIC HEALTH.
REPORT
ON THE
SANITARY CONDITION AND SANITARY
ADMINISTRATION
or
MELBOURNE AND SUBURBS,
BY
D. ASTLEY GRESSWELL, M.A., M.D.
PRESENTED TO BOTH HOUSES OE PARLIAMENT BY HIS EXCELLENCY’S COMMAND.
§S gUthoritg;
KOBX. S. BRAIN, GOVERNMENT PRINTER, MELBOURNE.
No. 205.—[15. 3d.]—11123.




BOARD OF PUBLIC HEALTH,
VICTORIA.
SANITARY CONDITION AND SANITARY ADMINISTRATION
OF MELBOURNE AND SUBURBS.
REPORT BY D. ASTLEY GRESSWELL, M.A., M.D., OXON.
Inquiry into the sanitary condition, and the mode of sanitary administration
of Melbourne and of the surrounding municipal districts has engaged me during the
greater part of the time that has elapsed since my arrival in Victoria, the months of
May, June, and July having been specially devoted to this work. This inquiry
is yet, however, far from being completed; but certain matters, indicated by data
already to hand, should, I think, be set out forthwith.
They are derived from investigations conducted in the municipal districts-
specified in the subjoined Table, to which reference may be made for information as-
to areas, populations, rateable values, and so forth.
These districts will not, however, be separately dealt with; and attempt will not
be made to particularize, further than may be necessary for purposes of illustration,,
the localities where the conditions referred to below may be met with.
A 2


TABLE
A.
Setting out various particulars (taken
iu chief part from the Statistical Register of the Colony of Victoria, prepared by H. H. Hayter, Esq., C.M.G., Government Statist) concerning
the Municipal Districts dealt with in this Report.
Shire,
Borough,
When Proclaimed a
Area.
O
I
Night
Population.
Houses.
May, 1890.
0>
£
-5 S-S
Jb||
tjoS o
<U
Total
Expendi-
ture
Municipal District.
hi
Ph
Annual
2,-ro .
’S 0-0
Total
Town, or
City.
o.2 2
Borough.
Town.
City,
Acres.
Square
Miles.
o .
® s
tD >
1881.
4)
«« 05
Total
Number.
Constructed
of—
Containing —
Rateable
Value.
•S-g
» 2 *- cj
Receipts d
from Rate
in the Pour
From
Rates.
SS
during
1889,
including
that out
of loans.
outstand-
ing
’S-gS
SQ c8
<U 4>
o a
CO
w
Wood.
Brick.
Stone.
land 2
Rooms.
3 and 4
Rooms.
Rates
Pounc
Rate i
l5S|
a|
o C
other
Sources.
Total.
£
pence.
£
£
£
£
£
£
£
Melbourne
City ...
1842
5,020
7-843
344
65,859
76,536
15,352
2,056
12,989
1,304
5,120
1,716,166
15
Rates
7,150
103,300
1,036
111,531
215,867
258,720
560,000
South Melbourne
City ...
1885
1872
1883
2,311
3-61
474 J
25,374
42,469
8,469
5,246
3,185
417
4,759
674,215
IS
Both
2,809
36,408
3,146
29,574
69,128
67,177
269,400
Fitzroy
City ...
1858*
1SC3
1870
1878
915
1-429
41
23,118
31,783
6,629
932
5,683
210
3,085
324,832
20
Rates
1,353
26,422
9,298
15,738
51,458
68,038
156,500
Richmond
City ..
1855*
1872
1882
1,430
2-234
190$
23,405
36,996
8,695
5,328
3,010
279
5,502
300,220
18
Both
1,250
20,814
998
14,146
35,958
50,723
91,109
Collingwood
City ...
1855*
1873
1876
1,139
1-779
39
23,829
34,395
7,516
3,778
3,727
273,961
18
Charge
1,141
19,172
1,659
8,399
29,230
28,038
78,400
Prahran
City ...
1856*
18G3
1870
1879
2,320
3-625
23
21,168
36,066
8,330
4,282
3,881
138
3,376
534,896
15
Rates
2,228
32,016
2,988
15,681
50,685
88,941
87,500
Hawthorn
Town ...
18G0
1887
2,389
3-732
15
6,019
16,436
1,958
1,700
202,874
18
Charge
845
15,125
9,859
14,317
32,301
51,346
47,000
Brunswick
Town ...
1857
1888
2,722
4-253
6,222
18,472
4,636
2,150
2,451
175
3,176
184,379
18
Charge
768
12,664
2,698
11,228
26,590
50,763
58,000
North Melbourne
Town ...
1859
1874
565
•882
9i
17,839
21,600
4,251
1,920
2,331
258
2,827
167,757
18$
Rates
69S
12,049
1,000
8,992
22,041
17,313
34,875
Footscray
Town ...
1859
1887
4,525
7-07
36
5,993
15,506
3,629
3,016
485
221
2,456
155,648
24
Rates
648
14,153
1,545
5,437
21,135
27,066
31,689
Williamstown ...
Town ...
1856
1886
2,540
3-937
446}
9,034
13,619
100,300
21
Charge
417
8,184
1,276
4,404
13,864
13.782
20,000
Essendon
Town ...
1889
3,756
5-868
54
| 5,061
r 9,226
2,652
1,569
1,070
63
1,034
180,732
18
Rates
753
9,022
1,998
8,200
19,220
17,281
49,000
Flemington and
Kensington
Borough
1882
1,078
1-684
306}
1 9,069
1,966
1,267
681
36
1,287
83,815
18
Kates
349
, 6,051
1,448
5,087
12,586
14,335
27,000
Northcote
Borough
1883
2,500
3-906
14 $
?
6,300
1,421
645
638
88,402
16
Charge
368
4,969
1,252
6,262
12,483
14,206
18,300
St. Kilda
Borough
1857*
1858
2,095
3-273
250
11,654
18,435
4,016
2,012
1,828
152
1,497
298,837
14
Charge
1,245
17,209
1,462
12,470
31,141
67,696
125,000
Port Melbourne
Borough
18G0
2,366
3-696
CO
o
•w-
8,771
12,629
101,289
18
Rates
422
7,417
1,277
3,780
12,474
13,164
22,000
Kew ...
Borough
I860
3,553
5-551
634
4,288
6,700
121,412
12
Charge
505
5,918
998
4,770
11,686
12,734
20,000
Coburg
Shire ...
1875
4,480
7-0
2,659
4,268
1,144
658
483
93,194
15
Charge
388
5,180
2,726
2,661
10,567
21,478
18,498
Malvern
Shire ...
1871
3,840
6 0
13
1,797
6,405
1,503
926
568
39
424
203,000
12
Charge
845
'7,491
5,568
7,782
20,841
25,480
14,271
Preston
Shire ...
1871
10,880
17-0
596
3,300
703
409
287
...
91,242
12
Charge
380
3,088
1,432
605
5,970
5,970
60,424
94-392
2,967$
267,686
420,210
5,906,171
24,562
366,652
'53,664
291,064
711,330
920,231
1,728,542


The municipal districts to which this Report refers enter, most of them, into
the formation of the lower part of the Yarra and Saltwater watersheds, where the two
rivers bearing these names discharge into Hobson’s Bay. They cover an area of
94-3 square miles, and embrace a population estimated in 1889 at 420,210. By far the
greater part of this area —fully three-fourths of it —is more than 40 feet, and about a
third of it is more than 100 feet, above low water-mark in Hobson’s Bay; but there is
a considerable population on parts less than 10 feet above that mark, for instance, in
Port Melbourne and in a large part of South Melbourne. The lower part of the
Yarra itself, and the northern portion of the bay, together with a fringe of land
bordering these waters, fall within the jurisdiction of the Harbour Trust, and are not,
therefore, under municipal administration (vide footnote, p. 28); and a considerable
area of low-lying land about the mouth of the Yarra has not yet been alienated from
the Crown; these several lands lie almost wholly at a level less than 10 feet above
low water-mark.
' The geological formation of these districts is upper Silurian, represented by
sandstones and shales, which, though exposed over a considerable area, are elsewhere
covered by bluestone (basalt) or by sand. The soil, consisting of sand, of loam, or of
clay, varies greatly in depth; over much of the basalt it is very thin, while some of
the sandy soils extend to considerable depths.
The population, estimated as already said at 420,210, in 1889, was found on the
occasion of the census of 1881 to be only 267,686, thus presenting a remarkable
rapidity of growth; in particular districts the increase was as much as threefold within
the period between the above-mentioned dates.
Traffic is provided for by roadways, for the most part of ample, if not of noble,
proportions, lying in the main east and west and north and south, and parallel roughly
with the general course of the Yarra, and of its larger tributaries. Many of the main
roads and streets are paved with wood down the centre for cable-tram traffic, their
lateral parts being in the case of several of the chief business streets wood-paved also, in
others either metalled or unmade. Most of the other roads are metalled (generally
with bluestone) down the centre, and perhaps two-sevenths of them from side to side.
In some districts it is only the chief business streets that are as yet metalled throughout,
even in districts which have been settled for many years, such, for instance, as Port
Melbourne and South Melbourne. Large sums of money are, however, being expended
yearly on street improvements; and yet great difficulty is experienced in keeping
abreast of the growing requirements as building operations extend, so that street-
channels and proper footpaths are still wanting in many localities, where they have
been urgently required for some years. Levelling of the surface has been carried on
in numerous localities in order to facilitate traffic and to afford sites for buildings,
house-refuse and garbage having been largely used for this purpose.
Blocks of land devoted to buildings, and enclosed, as the case may be, by three
or more streets, are in most instances divided and subdivided for drainage purposes,
and for access to back premises, by passages (right-of-ways), which, though circuitous
and not more than 2 or 3 feet wide in several localities first settled, range elsewhere
up to a width of 10 or 20 feet.
The density of the various groups of population differs largely; and there are
extensive tracts of open country separating many of the groups. Some localities present
the appearance of old country cities; and others, at the outskirts, are as yet of essentially
rural character. Marked crowding on area obtains only in the older parts of the city
of Melbourne, and in certain limited blocks of buildings, such, for instance, as the block
between Napier-street and Palmerston-crescent, in South Melbourne. Houses built
back-to-back, and others unprovided with any opening except in the front wall, I have
met with only in the city of Melbourne; several of these, it should be added, have been
built within recent years, such as those facing Latrobe-place and the Canton buildings,
the latter of which bear date 1888.
Building allotments are generally of good dimensions. In a large proportion of
cases, however, they do not exceed 16J or 20 feet in breadth, and 100 or 120 feet in
depth, and many measure less than 1,000 square feet.
Numerous allotments, as for instance in Footscray, of no more than 1,400 square
feet in area, were sold even as lately as two or three years back, a matter which gave rise
to statutory provision being made concerning the size of building allotments; but it is
satisfactory to find that generally either two such allotments were thrown into one, or
three were divided up afresh into two, prior to the commencement of building operations.


Buildings.
Tlie buildings are of very different sizes. Many are of six to twelve storeys in
the heart of the city of Melbourne, while a few consist of but a single small room.
In the large majority of cases they are one-storeyed, contain three or more rooms, are
unprovided with cellars, and are constructed in about equal numbers of either wood
or brick. Perhaps there arc two-fifths of them detached, and as many provided with
iron roofs. About two-thirds of them have been erected within the last fifteen years.
One-storeyed single houses, with frontages not exceeding 16£ feet in width,
which form no inconsiderable proportion of the total number of houses, are generally
three or four-roomed, the several rooms extending in single file from front to rear.
Such houses are frequently attached; but whether attached or not, the ventilation,
especially of the second and of the fourth rooms (frequently of very small size and used
as sleeping rooms) is frequently most inadequate; while the addition of a lean-to or an
annex alongside the third and fourth rooms not rarely met with—further interferes
with the ventilation of, as also with the access of light to, the back rooms, especially
the second room. In certain business streets, the back rooms of these houses
are miserably confined in order to set oif the front room to greater advantage as a shop.
Though crowding on area is not commonly met with, many of these long, low,
narrow, ill-ventilated houses repeat the evils attendant upon such crowding.
Inadequacy of ventilation is, moreover, to be observed in a large proportion of
small houses. It is especially marked where back premises are absent, very limited, or
roofed over; and in houses occupied by Chinese, even in those quite recently erected,
ventilation is so limited as to give rise to gross offensiveness and danger to health.
Apertures, each of about the size of a single brick, are generally now being
provided in the upper part of walls of brick houses; but commonly one such aperture
is the only outlet for vitiated air even in a bedroom, while no special inlet is provided
for entrance of fresh air. Chimney-flues, it may be noted, are somewhat rare in the
bedrooms of smaller houses, even in those now being built.
It is of importance that action should he taken under section 216 of the Health
Act 4890, to abate nuisances arising from inadequacy of ventilation; great improve-
ment could be readily effected in many cases by introducing the bead-sash , such as that
adopted in the Benevolent Asylum , while in other cases much more radical changes are
called for. The spouts of houses are, in numerous instances, defective, so that rain-
water soaks into the walls and foundations.
Some of the older houses are so dilapidated as to be unfit for habitation;
such houses, for instance, may be seen in the older parts of many of the municipal
districts. Active steps, it should be stated, are being taken in several districts to close
houses beyond repair. In the city of Melbourne, for example, there w r ere 650 con-
demned, and 500 taken down, between August, 1884, and May, 1890; and many have
been condemned since. In Fitzroy there have been condemned in successive years
commencing with 1886, the following numbers, viz.:—16, 27, 46, 68; and the
corresponding numbers for Prahran are—2, 3, 28, 19, 17. Action of this sort is
urgently needed in many localities.
It may also be noted here that houses as closely packed together as are those
which lie between Moray-place and Hanna-street (South Melbourne), should, in the
interests of health, be condemned, and the land be laid out afresh for building
purposes.
Moreover, though houses in such large numbers have been erected within
recent years, it is exceptional to find their sites prepared so as to afford the protection
which it is practicable to obtain against entrance into them of moisture, foul vapours,
and gases, from the ground. This matter derives additional importance from the fact
that houses are, as already said, for the most part but one-storeyed; and that they
stand, in a large proportion of cases, but a foot or so above the ground-water, and in not
a few localities, on or close by ground formed of materials originally consisting largely of
refuse, garbage, and even night-soil. In a large proportion of cases, too, the site upon
which the house stands is lower than the surrounding surface, so that it forms a receptacle
for stagnant and commonly polluted water. This condition may be observed perhaps
most frequently over the area surrounding the central elevated portion of South Mel-
bourne; but it is also met with in almost all of the municipal districts. It may have
existed at the time when the house was erected, swampy sites having been very
frequently built upon ; or it may have resulted either from the subsequent formation


of the streets and footpaths, or from the fact that, after the house was built, the
level of the outdoor premises was raised (it has .been raised as much as six inches,
or even two feet) above tbe surface of tbe soil under the house, or even to a higher
level than the damp-proof course in the walls of the house. Such elevation of level
has verv frequently been made; and- in passing it may be noted that, in the case of a
house built upon an improperly drained site, an impervious pavement over tbe out-door
premises, though good in itself, serves but to intensify the mischief arising from
entrance of effluvia from the ground into the house. Defective spouting, together
with overflowing gutter-drains, and leaking pipe-drains, add to the mischief resulting
from these receptacles under the floors of the houses. It is also to be observed
that damp-proof courses are absent, as w T ould naturally be expected, from many
of the older brick houses; that, though they are being inserted in the outer walls
of most of those now in course of erection, they are not in all cases; and that they
are frequently not introduced into the party-walls. It is, moreover, a common practice
in houses now being built, and provided with damp-proof courses, to support the joists
of the flooring on bricks below the damp-proof course ; and frequently the space under
the floor is not at all, or not efficiently, ventilated. These various conditions give rise
to dampness of the floors and walls, to mouldiness of them and of the carpets and
other articles in the house, to foul smells, and to ill-health of the inmates of the house;
indeed, there are not a few instances in which houses of quite recent construction are
already unfit for habitation, owing to damp and mildew. In many instances of this
sort, on the occurrence of illness in the house, the floor has been taken up, and the
hollows beneath have been filled up with clean earth to a level above that of the
surrounding surface; but nothing short of a practically impervious site , sloped to such
a level as to provide means for ready surface-drainage can be of real service.
It should be added that a tendency exists to enter upon the occupation of
newly-built small houses much too soon after the contractor has finished his
work; that, especially in small houses, there is a great want of cleanliness resulting
from sheer neglect of water and limewash; and that overcrowding is by no means
uncommon.
House-drains are for the most part gutters, in only a small proportion of cases
being closed; and open and closed drains alike generally discharge directly or indirectly
into the street-channels. The gutter-drains may be mere shallow depressions in the
bare earth, or more rarely in the tar-paving of the out-door premises; or they are
formed of wood or, as in perhaps the majority of cases, of semi-circular tiles or bricks,
the latter form of drain being frequently un-grouted and laid even in this condition
for houses now building. In addition to the danger attaching to all open drains, there
is to be noticed the fact that the gutters, here referred to, are in a very unsatisfactory
condition, allowing of stagnation in them, and of overflow and soakage from them
into the surrounding soil; that large numbers of the formed gutters are dilapidated;
and that most of those constructed of wood are in a rotting condition. The gutters not
infrequently are situated alongside the house, so that matters overflowing from them
are apt to pass under the house-floor, a condition frequently met with; in some
instances they are situated under the house.
The closed drains consist, most of them of earthenware or brick, some of
wood, a few of iron. It is exceptional to find them properly constructed, properly
situated, or properly related to indoor sinks and baths. They are but rarely properly
trapped or Many of them are connected directly with an indoor sink
or bath, so that drain air is continually being drawn through them into the house.
This unwholesome condition is common in the better class of houses, and it is to
be seen in process of repetition at the present time. Large numbers of earthenware
pipe-drains are situated under houses; and when, owing to illness or offensiveness
in the house, examination of them is made, they are commonly found discharging
their contents into the soil about them. The building surveyor for the city of
Melbourne states that in almost all instances when a building is pulled down, and a
pipe-drain is found under it, the soil about the drain is soaking with filth which has
escaped from the drain.
In addition to houses with drains, or with some pretence at drains, there are
numbers in low-rented localities without any drain whatever, the premises and
surrounding surfaces being mere bogs of rainwater and sewage.
* Of course it is not suggested that a few yards of closed out-door drain should be ventilated.


The soil under the houses is, in several instances, drained by agricultural pipes,
laid so as to discharge into trapped street gullies, or into trapped catchpits under the
pavement, and so into underground sewers; this practice is open to grave objection.
Out-door premises of perhaps half the houses are ample in size. On the other
hand, there are a feAV localities where they do not exist, and many where they are very
confined, comprising not more than a few square yards. This limitation of area of
out-door premises is met with in some part or other of many of the municipal districts,
even where a liberal allowance might have been expected; the mischief resulting from
it is, however, especially marked where, as in the centre of the city of Melbourne,
buildings are closely packed and of several storeys. Free perflation of air around the
house is seriously interrupted, also, owing to the roofing-in of large portions—it may
be almost the whole—of the back-premises, or by the erection thereon ..of annexes
and out-houses, such as stables and cowsheds. There can be no question as to the
advisability of forbidding such complete roofing-in of the back premises as is often met
with, or of removing stables and cowsheds from near proximity to the. back-door or
window. There should be at the very least 200 square feet of ground-surface free of
erections at the rear of every house; and in districts where a building by-law exists to
that effect it should be seen that no infringement of the by-law takes place after the
house is occupied.
For fully two-thirds of the houses the out-door premises are not paved; and
for two-fifths, or more, of them they are not properly levelled so as to provide means
for ready surface-drainage. In rainy times, as during this inspection, these non-levelled
yards are mud-bogs ; and owing to overflow and soakage from gutter-drains, large
numbers of them are in. a foul state. Pollution of the soil about the house is in-
creased in many cases by such matters as drain from stables, from cowsheds, and from
loose heaps of manure—matters which are allowed freely to soak into the soil.*
Unwholesomeness resulting from dilapidation or ill-ventilation of houses, or
from smallness of size, or foulness, of back-premises, is very frequently met with in
connexion with older properties in most of the municipal districts; and want of ventila-
tion and of proper drainage is common in connexion with smaller and recently built
houses.
Defects in house construction and maintenance, in house-drainage and in the
condition of the subsoil, and of out-door premises, such as those above mentioned,
exercise without question material influence for harm upon the public health. It can-
not be too constantly borne in mind that dwellings, which are damp or ill-ventilated,
of which the interiors are unclean with the condensed exhalations of the inmates, of
which the sites are damp and polluted, of which the drainage is such that the air inside
the building is contaminated with drain-air, or around which the soil is suffered to
become increasingly polluted, are unwholesome. The inmates of such dwellings suffer
from debility, and become the ready prey of disease, from which they would doubtless
be exempt, were they living in dry-walled and cleanly kept habitations over and about
sites properly prepared, and properly drained.
It is a matter of cardinal importance that such defects shall he remedied in such
a manner as to prevent likelihood of their recurrence; and that their repetition in
houses hereafter to be built shall be effectually guarded against. In order to bring to
light defects which already exist, it is essential that a house-to-house inspection, and a
detailed examination, be made by the health officer, the surveyor, and the inspector.
In order to remedy them so as to prevent likelihood of their recurrence, the statutory
powers already conferred on councils should be effectually exercised; and in this
connexion it may be specially noted that all indoor drain-pipes should be cut off from
direct communication with out-door drains , and be made to discharge into short open
channels leading to trapped drain-inlets.
In order, also, to prevent repetition of like defects in houses hereafter to be
erected, it is necessary, first, that the provisions of sections 105 and 106 of the Health
Act 1890, be enforced; and, secondly, that further powers be conferred on councils, so
that every important detail in house-construction may come under direct supervision.
The Board have already called the attention of councils to the importance of
seeing to the execution of the sections above mentioned. The necessity for this was
evidenced by the fact that on several occasions, in the course of my inquiries, it had
* Pig-keeping on private premises does not obtain, the statutory provisions relating thereto having been rigor-
ously enforced.


been stated by local officers that their councils had no power to prevent the building
of houses on boggy and undrained land, and that houses in their districts were being
built anywhere and anyhow.
In order that councils may have power to supervise all important details of
house-construction statutory provision should be made, so that a proper code of
buildino- regulations or by-laws may be brought into operation. It is true that in
many of the districts to which this Report refers, building regulations or by-laws have
been in force even for some years. These by-laws and regulations have, however,
been framed either under a special Act or under the Local Govei’nment Act, and do not
fall within the cognizance of the Board ;* indeed it is not competent to the Board to
require either that they be submitted to them for approval, or that they be carried into
execution. It is further to be observed that the building by-laws and regulations,
now in force, are not so complete or so perfect as it is desirable that they should be.
For instance, in those codes there is no provision as to ventilation or access of light;
in some there is no provision as to the insertion of a damp-proof course, the rendering
of the site impervious, or as to the distance from the house at which closets may be
erected. Provision for ventilation and for access of light is, accordingly, in many
instances seriously defective, even in houses erected under building regulations. As
already intimated in the case of the Canton buildings, erected in 1888 under the by-
laws of the city of Melbourne, buildings which are back-to-back, and which, indeed,
have no out-door premises within the ordinary meaning of the term, are occupied as
houses. A regulation concerning imperviousness of site is, it is true, to be found in
most of the codes; but it is in no case obligatory unless the surveyor.so decides, with
the result that such a decision, except in the case of cellars in the city of Melbourne,
has been altogether exceptional as regards the thousands of houses which have been
erected since the several codes of building regulations came into force. It is again
left optional, in instances in which a drain is laid under a house, whether that drain
be constructed of earthenware or of iron. It is provided in the Health Act that
councils may decide as to what kind of drain shall be laid under these circumstances;
but the by-laws generally leave it open as to whether earthenware or iron pipes shall
be used. The danger attaching to the use of earthenware drains under houses has already
been referred to; this danger is the greater when, as frequently occurs here, the founda-
tions are not put in at sufficient depth or on sufficiently firm ground to prevent that degree
of settlement which brings about leakage from such drains. In many of the codes,
again, the nature of the out-door house drain is not specified; so that even un-grouted
brick gutters are being constructed as house-drains at the present time in districts
where building regulations are in force. The regulations, moreover, do not require
that, prior to the occupation of the house, a certificate shall be given by the surveyor
to the effect that they have been complied with; and, as a matter of fact, houses
supposed to have been built in accordance with the regulations are now occupied,
though important provisions of those regulations have been contravened. In certain
municipal districts, again, as for instance in Brunswick, the, building regulations apply
only to particular localities; in other districts (St. Kilda, South Melbourne, Williams-
town, Flemington and Kensington, and Hawthorn) no building regulations have been
adopted ; while for shires (e.g., Malvern and Coburg) there are it appears no statutory
powers authorizing the making of such regulations. It is said that they have not
been adopted for certain districts through fear lest they would interfere with the
development of those districts. And yet in those districts they are specially required,
if the erection of unhealthy habitations is to be prevented.
Having regard to these and similar considerations, it appears to be advisable that
special Acts, in so Jar as they relate to building by-laws, and those portions of the
13th Schedule of the Local Government Act, 54. Viet. No. ///,?, which deals with the
construction of new buildings (as also, indeed, all those portions of the Schedule which
deal with matters essentially sanitary), should be brought under and cited as part
of the Health Act; and that they should be so amended that building by-laws, to be
framed by the Board, may become obligatory in all districts to which the Board
may deem it necessary to extend them. It is true that buildings are being erected in
great numbers, and that the work entailed in thoroughly supervising their construction
would, in many districts, engage a very considerable amount of attention. In the city
of Melbourne, for instance, there have been erected nine or more new buildings every
* It may be noted that by-laws relating to the drainage of building sites may be made under the Health, Act 1890.


week for tlie last six years. In Essendon, again, some 500 Louses were, it appears,
erected last year. The surveyor for that district states that the whole time of
one man would he required in order to see that the drains for all the houses in
process of erection are properly laid. It is, however, for precisely these and such
reasons the more important that the provision referred to should he made; and it may
he pointed out that building fees in some districts mount up yearly to very con-
siderable sums, sufficient in some cases to defray the expense of a thorough inspection.
These fees in Essendon last year reached the sum of £325, while in the city of Mel-
bourne they have, for some years, largely exceeded £I,OOO.
It must not, however, he supposed that the mode of erecting new buildings
is not receiving a considerable share of attention on the part of some of the authorities.
In the city of Melbourne a building surveyor and an assistant building surveyor
devote their whole time to it. All the same, if the regulations and the buildings to he
erected under those regulations are to be as they should be in the interests of the
public health, very much more attention will need to be given to this subject in the
future than has been in the past.
Methods oe Conservancy.
House-refuse is removed in the several districts, save only in Preston, by the
local authorities, the expenses being met out of the rates, and the removal being
conducted generally at weekly, though in particular districts (for instance, Fitzroy,
Prahran and North Melbourne) and in some portions of other districts, at more frequent
intervals. It, together with tlie sweepings from streets, from right-of-ways, and from
sewage-conducting channels, and with the contents of sewage-catchpits, with dead
carcases, and other such matters, is disposed of for the most part at the district depot
or depots, where also much of the manure from stables and cowsheds and of the trade-
and market-refuse is deposited.
Refuse from houses is placed in the first instance in any sort of receptacle ready
to hand, such as buckets, oil-tins, kerosene tins, foot-baths, casks, washing-tubs,
broken wood and even pasteboard boxes, and worn-out cesspans, properly constructed
receptacles being but rarely used, except in certain parts of the city of Melbourne and
elsewhere on good-class properties. These receptacles are generally not provided
with covers; and in some localities they are used for the reception of much liquid, as
well as solid, refuse. Most of the carts used in collecting house-refuse and street-
sweepings, allow free escape of the liquid filth from them.
Large accumulations of refuse on house-premises are of somewhat rare
occurrence; but free littering of it on house-premises and on surfaces round about
them is common enough, the refuse being thrown deliberately on to the hack
yard, over the boundary fence, or on to some near vacant land, or being swept from the
house or shop direct into the street-channel. This littering is a common feature of
almost all low-rented localities, where, in fact, hut few blocks of buildings and vacant
allotments ai’e free from it; while the sweeping of refuse into street-channels, though
no doubt most general in such localities, is met with to some extent over a large part
of the metropolitan district even in good-class streets. It seems that very many
householders are unwilling to go to the expense of providing a refuse receptacle,
especially one of proper construction ; and that the irregular disposal of refuse
here referred to is largely owing to this, as also no doubt in part to carelessness
of the scavengers. It should he noted, moreover, that while large accumulations
are on the whole of somewhat rare occurrence, they are not uncommon on
non-rateahle properties.* The latter, such for instance as public schools, are not in
some districts scavenged by the authority; nor are they so. supervised by the
authority as to insure that they shall be kept free from refuse by persons in charge
of them. This is a matter of special importance in connexion with schools, where risk
of transmission of communicable disease should he reduced by all practicable means.
The materials above specified, consisting in chief part of animal and vegetable
matters, have hitherto been, and are, in the majority of cases, still being, disposed ot
* Non-rateaMo properties are defined in the Local Government Act to bo:—Land, the property of Her Majesty, which
is unoccupied or used for public purposes ; land in the occupation of the Crown or the Government of Victoria; land vested
in the Victorian Hallway Commissioners; land vested in, or in the occupation of, or held in trust for, the municipality or the
council thereof; land vested in any municipality, or under the management and control of the council thereof, for the
purpose of water supply, commons, mines; places used exclusively for public worship, mechanics’ institutes, public
libraries, and cemeteries; land used exclusively for charitable purposes; laud vested in fee or for any lesser estate in the
Minister of Public Instruction.


on the nearest available spots of low-lying land. Owing to the cost of cartage, there
is a strong temptation to dispose of refuse-matters as near as possible to the place
Avhere they are collected: in this connexion it may be mentioned that Mr. Batson
estimates the cost of removing the yearly refuse of Fitzroy, for every mile over which
it is conveyed, at a sum exceeding £,500; and, again, that if the night-soil of
South Melbourne were dealt with on the site to be used for the refuse-destructor,
instead of removing it into the country, a saving of £3,000 yearly would be effected in
the carriage of it. In the more thinly inhabited districts, accordingly, these matters
are deposited almost anywhere; while in the more thickly inhabited districts, Avhere
dep6ts are not so readily got, the distance to be traversed to the district-depot may
be considerable, and under these circumstances scavengers are apt to deposit their load
on any vacant places inside or outside their districts, and so to give rise to grave nuisance.
It is stated, for instance, that the South Melbourne Council have “ had a terrible
experience of this; loads of decayed fish, street-sweepings, and most filthy collections
of rubbish, having been frequently carted into and deposited almost any Avhere” in their
district; and so serious did this offence become that they found it necessary to appoint
a man specially for the purpose of preventing further repetition of it; similarly refuse
from the north-eastern part of the city of Melbourne is frequently taken to Collingwood
instead of to the depot set apart for it.
The regular district-depbts, moreover, themselves constitute sources of the
gravest offence, nuisance, and danger to health. These depots are quarry- and clay-
holes, recreation reserves such as parks, svramps, and lands Avhich need to be raised
for making streets and building sites. The gravity of the mischief hence arising will
perhaps best be appreciated by reference to the folloAving details: —
The refuse from the city of Melbourne has for some time, and up to quite recently, been deposited
on several acres of the West Melbourne swamp, and to a depth of seven feet or more. It is mixed with
tons of sewage-sludge from street channels and sewage catch-pits, and has for a long time boon a source of
the gravest nuisance.
The refuse of St. Kilda for the past ten years or so has been deposited over about three acres of the
beach, which has thereby been raised four or five feet.
About 26 acres of the Edinburgh Gardens, Fitzroy, have recently been raised several feet with refuse.
A large surface of land behind the Military Barracks has recently been raised some feet with the
refuse of South Melbourne. This land is being raised expressly for building purposes, and the deposition of
filth there is still actively proceeding. It is true that a covering of clean earth is suppose! to be regularly
provided by the contractor; but it is not being thus regularly provided, and oven if it were, the filth
deposited will be in a state of putrescence for some years. It should, however, be stated that the South
Melbourne Council are urging forward the erection of refuse-destructors, which they hope to have in
operation in the course of a few months.
On the flats of Flemington and Kensington, again, land is similarly being raised to form building
sites. Near to one depot on these flats, a depot which has been raised a few feet over a surface of an
acre in extent, houses are being built in some numbers; and the refuse-raised plot, here referred to, will
doubtless be soon called into requisition for the same purpose. The various depots on these flats give rise to
gross nuisance. Typhoid fever, the health officer states, is unusually prevalent on these flats, whore there
are some 500 houses, very many of which have no means, of drainage.
At Footscray a largo surface near Parker-strect is being raised by, and a pit off Loek-strcet is being
filled with, refuse; the former in all probability, and the latter almost certainly, will ho built upon before long,
unless such a stop be forbidden. The Nicholsou-street tip, too, in that district"presents a deep and uncovered
face, and it drains directly into a swamp on the edge of the Saltwater River.
Close by the side of the Williamstowu esplanade a quarry-hole of about half-an-aero in size has been
constituted the receptacle for sowage matters and ship-refuse.
At Collingwood a largo clay-hole is being filled up with refuse to a depth, in places, of several feet,
about three acres of it having already been covered, and the whole of it draining into the Yarra. Dehnert’s
private tip (close by) is, it is said, resorted to by scavengers from the city of Melbourne. The old depot, too,
about the outlets of the main sewers of Collingwood, gives rise to great nuisance.
At Kew refuse, at the time of my visit, was actually being discharged into Connor’s Creek.
In North Melbourne about three acres of building land have recently been raised, it is said, several
feet with refuse.
The tip, again, on each side of the main drain of Port Melbourne, which has been used for the last
twelve months, and the esplanade on one side of it were, at the time of my visit, sources of great nuisance.
This filth, in fact, is being deposited in the near vicinity of inhabited houses, and it is
being used as material, Avhereby to form resorts (for instance, a sea beach or a park)
for pleasure and health seekers, or even sites for houses.
Though in several cases it is covered over, a satisfactory performance of this
operation is only rarely met Avith, scAvage-sludgc from street-channels and street-
scrapings often used for this purpose being inadmissible as substitutes for clean earth,
while in many instances no attempt is made to provide any covering, the filth being
thus left over acres' of ground to rot in the open. Children in considerable numbers


are allowed to frequent these depots, and to take to their homes the filthy things that
are to he found there—rags, bones, bottles, and the like. Milch cows and goats, too,
are to be seen feeding at some of these depots.
The offence and injury to health, which are the necessary outcome of this
system of disposal of more than a'thousand tons of these materials in the metropolitan
area weekly, are matters of the gravest concern. The authorities have, however,
for some time been desirous of adopting some system more in consonance with sanitary
principles. There can be no doubt that destruction by fire of these materials is the
only remedy , and no time should be lost in bringing into operation the machinery
necessary for carrying it out. The South Melbourne council, acting on the advice of Mr.
Thwaites, are now erecting a 12-celled Fryer’s destructor for their district. A 6-celled
Horsfall’s destructor is to be erected for the city of Melbourne; and it is ; confidently
anticipated that the refuse of the metropolitan area will shortly be regularly disposed
of by this, or by other equally effectual, method. It is , however , a matter of the first
importance that the councils concerned should at once put a stop to the mode of refuse
disposal , referred to above , in the following places, viz.:—Behind the Military Barracks;
in Leek-street , and near Barker-street, Footscray; on the beach of St. Kilda; and on
the flats of Flernington and Kensington; that they should cause these refuse-sites to be
thoroughly limed , and to be covered thickly over with clean material. At the earliest
practicable moment , the other depdts should be abandoned and be rendered innocuous , and
the projected improvements at the old depot about the outlet of the main sewers of Colling-
wood should be taken up. Every inhabited house should be provided with a covered
refuse-receptacle of appropriate construction , and the active attention of the inspectors
should be directed to carelessness of disposal of refuse on private premises and vacant
land. Scavenging carts should be practically impervious , and be provided with covers;
and they should be maintained in a more cleanly condition. Scavenging in the hot
season should be conducted at half-weekly intervals; and arrangements should be made
in districts where they have not already been made , so that scavenging of non-rateable
properties may not go amiss.
Excreta!, Mutters.— A single pan or pail service is in operation over a very con-
siderable portion of the area covered by this Report; in addition there are some 2,000
houses provided with underground cesspools, and about 700 (600 in St. Kilda, and 120
in South Melbourne) provided with a double pan-service. It should be stated that
underground cesspools were at one time as universal as now is the single service here
referred to; and that only after the most.persistent efforts on the part of the authorities,
commenced some ten or fifteen years ago, when statutory provision to this end was
made, were they in large part abolished in favour of the latter./ In this connexion it
is to be noted that old cesspools were not always properly cleansed prior to being
filled up, and that evidence is to hand of the fact that the soil of some localities first
settled is still strongly impregnated with the contents of old privy-pits.
The pans and pails are generally of galvanized iron, the rest being of wood. The
iron pans are of many sizes and shapes, and the iron is itself of several degrees of
thickness ; most of them being thin and poorly galvanized soon give ’way. In a con-
siderable proportion of cases they are worn out, and in not a few they are overflowing.
The midden stead* is generally of wood, and of such shape and size as generally to
admit the pan more readily in an improper than in a proper position; in numerous
instances the middensteads have no proper floor, and, owing to leakiness and improper
position of the pans, they often receive much of what should pass into the latter. It is
to be observed that the condition of the middensteads derives additional importance
from the fact that the small doors through which the pans are removed by the night-
man generally open directly on to right-of-ways, and that children, accustomed as
they are to frequent these passages, are subjected therein to danger of contracting
filth-disease not only from sewage wdiich stagnates there, but also from foul midden-
steads. The closets, which are also generally of wood, are in most instances well
removed from dwellings; but frequently, especially in crowded localities, they are
either under the same roof as the dwelling or the work-room, or within a few feet of
one or the other. Deodorants are not used in a fourth of the closets.
The emptying of the contents of the receptacles into the nightman’s tank is a
process which necessarily gives rise to grave offence and danger to health; ill-health
* The space containing the pan.


and typhoid fever are, in fact, in many instances attributed thereto by medical men.
The receptacles are replaced by the nightman in a foul condition, and very frequently,
or indeed commonly, without securing for them their proper position.
It appears, in short, that the structure and the shape of both the pan and the
middenstead, and the relation of the one to the other, have not been duly considered.
Moreover, while the single service is replete with faults under all circumstances, it can-
not be condemned in terms too pronounced in a country with conditions of climate
and prevalence of filth-disease such as obtain here.
-■ All the councils have made arrangements for conducting the removal each
week of the contents of the pans ; but, owing to the adoption of different systems of
payment, the work, which is carried out in some districts almost wholly under the
direct supervision of the councils, in others is only in part so carried out. This is in
a large measure the result of the adoption in different districts of different systems by
which the expenses involved in the removal are met. When these expenses are met
out of the rates, and equally so when they are met by a charge which is obligatory and
levied all round, it is obviously to the advantage of the householder to leave the matter
in the hands of the council. It is almost equally so when they are met partly by a
rate and partly by a charge, as they are, for instance, in Richmond * and South
Melbourne. When, however, the expenses are defrayed by a charge which is not com-
pulsorily levied, as in Brunswick, it is often to the pecuniary advantage of householders
to make their own arrangements; for though there may be but one night contractor
licensed for the district, it is frequently possible to make more advantageous terms
with him direct than through the council, both as to the amount to be paid and
the time of payment. Accordingly, in Brunswick only 196 out of the total of about
3,000 pans are scavenged by the council, and in Collingwood only about two-elevenths
of the pans are so scavenged. Under this system it is also to be noted that the council
have but little knowledge of the degree of efficiency, or of the frequency, with -which
the removal is conducted in cases for which they have not received payment. In
such cases they have no knowledge as to the length of time during which the material
is retained on the premises, and they need to exercise an amount of supervision, rarely
if ever observed, in order to see that scavenging operations are properly conducted.
This holds good, also, of many non-rateable properties in districts where the expenses
are met out of the rates, as, for instance, in the case of the hospitals in the city
of Melbourne, even though typhoid stools have necessarily to be disposed of in large
numbers from four of those institutions. It should, however, be stated that towards
meeting cases such as this, as also other cases in which removal is required more
frequently than once weekly, arrangements have been made by councils by which
the contractor is under obligation to render his services at a charge not exceeding
a certain fixed sum. Nevertheless, it is to be observed that any system which leaves the
scavenging of closets partly in the hands of householders and caretakers is to be
most emphatically condemned.
Defective pans, as would be expected where a single service is in operation, are
commonly not discovered, and certainly are but rarely replaced, until much mischief
has resulted from their defects, even in districts where the authorities themselves
supply new pans gratuitously; indeed, it is only by a double service, by which each pan
comes regularly under direct observation, that cleanliness can be maintained.
The contractors’ carts are most of them of iron, others are of -wood. It seems
that only in particular districts as, for instance, in the case of the city of Melbourne,
are they regularly cleansed.
* The material is variously disposed of, and in no case in a manner which
'pan be approved of. In a few instances it is trenched into loose soil; in other
instances, after being passed on to the surface of the land, it is ploughed or roughly dug
in, or left without covering of any sort, no covering being supplied in many cases even
when it has been passed on to the surface of orchards or of market gardens. In some
cases it is passed on to market gardens on which the market produce has already
grown to some size. ■ In one case which recently came before the Board, about a dozen
loads of it had been deposited without proper covering on five acres of orchard ground
from which fruit in large quantity would in due season be collected for the supply
of the market. It is especially to be noted that proper precautions are but rarely taken
even with typhoid stools. Moreover, the depositing of this material carelessly on soil
* For weekly removal per pan per year the Richmond Council pay X4s. or 14s. 6d. and charge the householder 10a.,
and the South Melbourne Council pay 14s. and charge 12s.


which in almost all cases is of a light sandy nature, is open to the objection that, when
desiccated' under a summer’s sun and subjected to strong winds it may be carried far and
wide, and that when subjected to the influence of heavy rains it is carried into water-
courses, which may become thereby most seriously polluted. In the instance of the
orchard, above referred to, the water of a shallow creek was so polluted by direct
drainage from the uncovered night-soil as to give rise to the gravest suspicion con-
cerning the wholesomeness of the milk furnished by cows wilich had access to it.
Then, too, the rapidity -with which land is being taken up for building purposes indi-
cates the possibility that land now or recently used as night-soil depots may be required
in the near future as building sites. The following facts will serve in illustration.
The health officer for Preston states that his district has been the receptacle for
night-soil from a large population for years; that over all the area used for this pur-
pose the inhabitants have suffered severely from typhoid fever; and that the land
comprised between Seymour-street, Bell-street, High-street, and Plenty-road, and into
which night-soil was years ago freely trenched, is the “ plague-spot of the place,”
typhoid fever having invaded almost all the houses situated there, and puerperal
septicaemia having lately manifested itself in three of them. [lt should be added
that this “ plague-spot ” is not drained, and that Seymour-street has not been even
channelled.] Again, at Essendon the night-soil of the Melbourne Hospital was trenched,
in spite of the protests of the health officer, for three years, it is said, to a very consider-
able depth into the soil of three or four acres off Firebrace-street, a covering of only
about half-a-foot of earth having been provided. At the present time the land round
about this old depot has been sold as building allotments, and the question now arises
as to building habitations over the site of the depot itself.
The contractors are under obligation in most cases simply to remove the
material out of the municipal district from which they collect it, the ultimate mode of
disposal being left in their hands. In some cases, however, they have been provided
with depots, and are required to dispose of the material in a fashion specially directed
by the councils (e.g., in Port Melbourne and in Williamstown); while in the case of
the city of Melbourne the work is carried out under a system of checks, which is
directed towards securing the delivery of the material on to cultivated land. There
can be no doubt that until recently nightmen very frequently disposed of the contents
of their carts in the most objectionable ways, giving rise to nuisance of the very
grossest character; and still the closest system of inspection is needed in order to
prevent such grave irregularities; even so recently as February of this year a night-
cart was, it is stated, emptied into a street-channel gully in Kensington. As already
stated, the hospital authorities demand no condition as to the mode of disposal of the
excretal matters removed from their institutions, though there can be no question as to
the necessity for incinerating these matters and all others derived from typhoid patients;
but this is a matter of which I shall elsewhere have more to say.
The dangers attaching to the single service are, it will be seen, both numerous
and grave in character; no matter how carefully the service is conducted it is replete
with danger. A douhle-pan service , combined with an effective method for rendering
the material innocuous , is urgently demanded in the interests of the public health and
safety; and no time should be lost in taking up this matter with the determination of
carrying it through. It is in no sense of less importance to introduce the double-pan
service than it is to render innocuous the material when removed. It is only by such
a service that the disgusting and dangerous condition of the present system of closet
accommodation and of removal of night-soil can be rectified; and it is only by some
special mode of treatment, such, for instance, as that of subjecting these matters in a
desiccating apparatus to a high temperature for a certain length of time that the grave
dangers attendant upon the present system of disposal of night-soil can possibly be put
a stop to. The adoption of these measures would not only be a means for remedying
a vast amount of mischief; but there is every reason for believing that, at any rate, as
compared with the present system, it could readily be made to be a decided financial
success. As regards the water-carriage system it is to be noted that several years must
necessarily elapse before it can be introduced; and that the double service must needs
remain in operation for a corresponding period, while pans, for which there will then be
no further need in loco , will go to meet the demand for them which will doubtless arise
in other districts. It may be mentioned that the double-pan service gives abundant


satisfaction in those localities in which it is carried out; and that the council of the
city of Melbourne have already ordered a desiccating apparatus for their district.
Besides the introduction of the methods mentioned above , attention should be given to
the following matters : —All middensteads should he formed of or be lined with
impervious material; they should be constructed so as to admit of being readily
cleansed, and so that the pans cannot he inserted except in the position designed for
them. In this position the front of the pan should be almost in contact with the
front wall of the middenstead, the upper edge should he but little below the seat,
and the orifice in the seat should he directly over the hinder part of the pan. Guards
should not he required. Special provision, too, should he made for the application
of dry earth or of some disinfectant to the pan contents. Attention needs in particular
to be oiven to the closet accommodation provided in factories, in railway stations, and
all places of public meeting, for in many of these places it is anything but what is
desirable. In all instances where there is absolutely no means of removing the closet
from under the roof of, or from near proximity to, the dwelling, a liberal supply of
deodorant, to be put in by hand, and a daily removal of the pan contents, together
with thorough cleansing of the pan, should be insisted on. Finally, it is to be
observed that councils should themselves carry out the removal and disposal of the
pan contents, special care being taken to see that they are thoroughly well covered
with clean earth, and that risk of pollution of water which may be used for domestic
purposes or for cattle shall be avoided.
Sewerage.
House-drains deliver for .the most part either directly or indirectly on to street
channels. When the surface of the building allotment slopes towards the street, their
fall is generally direct to the street channel; in other instances it is to the rear on to
right-of-ways, or on to meandering courses, which in turn open out into street channels.
The fall is generally to the rear; in, perhaps, a third of the cases it is to the front.
Right-of-ways constitute, as already said, a marked feature of the land devoted
to buildings. They are passages of from 2to as many as 20 feet in width at
the rear of a row, or more commonly of two rows, of buildings, and they alford
means for drainage and for access of the carts of the scavenger, the nightman, the coal-
and the wood-man, as also for access to stables and cowsheds on back premises.
They have generally been provided for rows of buildings where the fall of the surface
is to the rear, or where ample open space has not been left free at the sides of
buildings. There are, however, many instances in which, under circumstances such
as these, they have not been provided in connexion with old properties, many also in
which they are sadly needed in connexion with newly-built properties, and many in
which as yet they have not been paved or channelled.
Of the broader right-of-ways , those, say, of 10 to 20 feet in width, the surface
generally inclines from either side to a central shallow gutter, which is formed of three
to five pitchers (blocks) of bluestone, and on to which similarly constructed lateral
gutters deliver the sewage matters conveyed by house drains, the rest of the surface
consisting in, perhaps, four-fifths of the cases of bare earth or of bluestone metal, and
in other cases of a pavement of bluestone pitchers. Right-of-ways, however, of 20 feet
in width have frequently been formed as miniature streets—f.e., with side footpaths,
channels, and metalled crown. The pitchers have generally been laid simply in sand;
soakage of sewage matters into the spaces between the pitchers having been provided
against, appears, only in a very small proportion of the right-of-ways, as for
instance, in parts of the city of Melbourne, of Kew, Hawthorn, Malvern,
South Melbourne, and Footscray;* so that the soil between and under the
pitchers of fully 99 per cent, of the right-of-ways is soaking with decomposing sewage.
As already intimated, pitchering throughout from side to side has been provided in not
more than one-tenth of the right-of-ways. In other cases the pitchers, particularly those
forming the lateral gutters, are commonly out of position, having been displaced owing
to the passage of carts over them, and sewage is thus diverted from the course prepared
for it. Moreover, right-of-ways are, in many districts, still being formed with only a
small part of their surface paved, and with the pitchers laid merely in sand; and in
f * th ese cases the pitchers have been grouted in cement, sand and lime, or sand and tar. A few of the right-
weU^ 3 k aV6 6en *' ar 'P ave d throughout, and where well formed and too narrow to admit cart traffic they have stood very


certain other districts, though the whole of the surface is being pitchered, the joints
are not being rendered impervious. These methods of construction of right-of-ways
should certainly not be continued. The councils, as a matter of fact, generally them-
selves do the work of constructing these passages, and charge the cost to the owners
of properties abutting thereon. The surveyor may draw up plans and specifications
for completely pitchering the surface; hut agitation among the owners concerned is
got up, and the council is apt to submit to a reduction of the cost at the expense of
completeness of the work, and so the old faulty system is repeated. In the cities of
Melbourne and Prahran right-of-ways are now being constructed throughout of
pitchers grouted, in the one case, in cement, in the other, in tar and sand.
The fall of level in many of the right-of-ways is very slight, and it is very
commonly irregular; this is, perhaps, of most frequent occurrence in flat localities, such
as parts of Port Melbourne, of South Melbourne, of St. Kilda. In Port Melbourne there
may be a fall of only one and a half inches to the chain, and in several parts of .St.
Kilda the fall does not exceed two inches to the chain.
Of the narrower right-of-ways —those less than 10 feet in width—there are
numbers taking a long and circuitous course, and presenting a most neglected and
filthy condition
Right-of-ways, it is to be observed, receive, in addition to liquid refuse from
houses, such matters as drain from cowsheds and stables, and from loose heaps of
manure, as well as matters washed by heavy rains from unpaved and polluted premises,
together with much solid house-refuse, and in some localities even filth from foul
middensteads. As many as three cowsheds or stables may drain into one short right-
of-way.
Most of the right-of-ways are swept from time to time, in some districts at
regular intervals. The sweeping, however, is directed, for the most part, to the
gutters, very commonly only to the central gutter, and only to the grosser materials
that lodge there; so that these passages are in very many, indeed in the majority of
cases, very foul, notably so in low-rented localities. Of course it is impossible by any
amount of sweeping to maintain in a clean condition those right-of-ways which consist
largely of bare earth. The cleanest are those which are paved through from side to
side with pitchers laid in cement, as in certain parts of the city of Melbourne, and
those which have been paved with asphalt well laid; but these in all are only very few
in number. Cleanliness of these passages can be secured only by rendering them as
nearly as practicable impervious, and by flushing and thoroughly sweeping them down
at regular and frequent intervals.
There are, moreover, right-of-ways which are unmade, consisting simply of sand
or of bare earth. These are most numerous in connexion with newly-erected buildings,
but they are by no means rare about old properties, as, for instance, in South Melbourne.
In all such cases the right-of-way is a mere swamp of sewage. There are, too, many
localities where, owing to the absence of proper drainage, the grossest forms of nuisance
prevail. At the present time there are in the districts covered by this Report at least
three square miles of bare earth given up to soakage with sewage, owing to the want
of right-of-ways or of channelling either of these passages or of the streets into which
they open. As examples of this, the following instances may be cited:—
Coburg. —Sewage stagnant in right-of-ways between Railway-place and
right-of-way at back of Walker-street; sewage bogs at back of Brown-street, and
over area between Reynard, Loch, and Chandos streets; filthy right-of-way at back of
Sheffield-street. Footscray. —About a third of the right-of-ways unmade; large areas
given up to soakage with sewage from hundreds of houses; Windsor, Darling, Vigo,
King, William, James, and other streets in a most disgusting state ; foul sewage
stagnant in earth-gutters (they might be spoken of as ditches) by the side of the foot-
paths in a large number of streets. Port Melbourne. —Absence of right-of-way
between Station and Princes streets, between Cambridge and Albert streets, and
between Cambridge and Clark streets. South Melbourne. —Unmade right-of-ways
between Hambledon and Richardson streets, off Liardet-street, and off MacGregor-
street, and in other places. Collingwood. —An area of some size about Caroline-street,
Wright-street, and other streets given up to sewage soakage. St. Kilda. —Sewage
areas about May, Moore, Cyril, and Rainsford streets; foulness at back of Nightingale
and of Rosamond streets. Northcote. —A large number of houses to the east of High-
street (e.g., in Wimpole-street, &c.) practically without drainage; similarly about
Gladstone-avenue. Fiemington and Kensington. —Newmarket (Clarence, Glance,


Crown, and Coronet streets) without drainage; similarly on the flats, which are in a
horrible state of filth. Essendon. —The Lavinia, Bent, and Hoddle estates foul with
stagnant sewage. Brunswick. —About a thousand houses, it is stated, without proper
drainage, e.g.,°about Collier, Barry, Ryan, Nicholas, O’Connor, Laydon, Baydon, and
Edward streets; about an acre and a half of sewage swamp at the back of Edward-
street. Kew. —Want of drainage for Stansell and Mont Albert-street west. Williams-
town. Numbers of streets in a disgusting state, e.g., Douch, Princes, and Albert
streets, and parts about Hannan’s farm.
This list is merely illustrative; it represents many hundreds of acres of bare
soil soaking with sewage. The inhabitants of these localities speak of the condition
about their homes as “terrible,” “sickening,” “enough to breed any fever,” and
so on.
It is true that work is being done towards the amelioration of defects of
drainage in all the districts, but the most superficial survey suffices to indicate the
great extent to which even such sanitary works as the most elementary forms of
drainage have fallen into arrears. As indicative of the work in progress, reference
may be made to the synopsis of a loan appended to this Report. This loan was con-
tracted by the South Melbourne Council in 1889, and one-half of it has already been
expended. Several other such instances might be cited.
It may be here pointed out that a frequent cause of delay in the formation of
right-of-ways and of private streets is the fact that such formation is imposed as a
duty on the owners of land abutting thereon, the council being regarded merely as
an agent acting for them and doing the work at their expense. Accordingly, councils
refuse—and perhaps have not the power —to spend their ordinary revenue on such
work, and will not undertake the formation of right-of-ways and private streets until,
after notice served, every owner interested has paid his share of the cost in advance.
It thus very commonly happens that, owing to neglect on the part of one or more
owners to pay their shares, or owing to want of knowledge as to the addresses of one
or more owners, though the majority of the persons interested may be perfectly willing
to bear the expense, and may have even paid their quota to the council, the work remains
undone. The clauses in the last Health Act making these payments a charge upon
the land seem insufficient to meet this difficulty, for councils consider that such
expenses must be paid out of the year’s income, and that they would not be justified,
even with the security of the lien on the land, in incurring liabilities which it might be
several years before they would be able to meet. The provisions of the Local Govern-
ment Act also prevent councils from incurring liabilities (except out of loans) which
they are unable to meet out of the year’s income. It appears, in fact , that the law
as to the obligation of councils with respect to the formation of right-of-ways and
private streets needs careful consideration , with the view to seeing if amendment might
not be made for the removal of the causes of delay above mentioned.
Liquid refuse, consisting of chamber-slops, of bath and sink water, of drainage-
matters from urinals, from stables and cowsheds, from noxious trades, from stores of
green hides and skins, from manufactories, together with some amount of night-soil and
rain water, as well as materials carried off in this water from polluted back-yards—
liquid refuse of this composite character, on reaching the street-channels, courses over
them for long distances (even in localities, where sewers have been provided, for an
average distance of a half to a quarter of a mile) to some sewer, to some water-course,
or to some quarry-hole, swamp, or lagoon—that portion of it which has not evaporated
or soaked into the soil, or been allowed to remain as sludge on the way, being ultimately
discharged into the Yarra or the Bay.
Street-channels are in most instances formed of bluestone pitchers set in sand.
In some localities the joints have been rendered impervious. In the city of Melbourne
this is being effected by means of cement; in Hawthorn, Malvern, and Kew, by tar and
sand;* while in Footscray the whole channel has in some cases been formed of
asphalt, a kerbing having been provided on the outer side of it. The latter kind of
channel presents a neat appearance, and is said to have stood well. Impervious street-
channels are, however, exceptional; the soil in and about the large majority of them
is, in fact, impregnated with putrescent matter. Such impregnation is of course
increased—notably in flat districts—by insufficiency, and very commonly by irregu-
larity, of fall of the channel. Indeed, in many localities the sewage-matters which
* Three-fourths of the channels in Kew are stated to have been thus dealt with.
No. 205.-11123.
B


reach the street-channels simply stagnate there, and give off poisonous vapours, soak
into the soil, and becoming desiccated are blown about in all directions. Moreover,
streets in large numbers—at least two-thirds of them—are as yet not made in the
whole of their breadth from side to side; and the unmade portion at the sides consists
generally of loose soil. This loose soil, especially in sandy districts, is continually
being Avashed into the channels in rainy seasons, and being blown into them in dry
seasons; the channels thus become laden with material, Avhich in the first case brings
about overfloAvs, and in both cases a polluted condition of the atmosphere. In South
Melbourne the difficulty hence arising is a matter of such frequent repetition that
streets in that district are now being made of tar-paving carried through from side to
side. Many of the channels, again, are no sooner SAvept than they are littered with
kitchen-refuse and house-SAveepings, and many of them are much too narroAV for the
purpose for Avhich they have been designed. At a large number of street-crossings
the street-channels have been covered over, and their construction is frequently of the
very Avorst kind.
Cleansing of street-channels is at present conducted in chief part merely by
SAveeping, Avhich, as in the case of right-of-ways, is but a very rough and slipshod
process; the broom in nine cases out of ten is simply pushed forward along .the channel,
so that the swept portion is commonly left in a most mrwholesome .condition, coated
Avith slime, and evolving in some localities an overpoAvering stench. The more solid
of the materials Avhich accumulate before the broom escape over the edge of the
channel, or are pushed out of the channel to form little heaps, AA r hich are allowed to
remain in certain districts for some hours before they are removed. It is important
to observe that the portions of the channels which have been covered over are
generally in an exceedingly foul condition, oAving to their improper construction, to
want of flushing, and to the fact that many SAveepers push the sludge from the open
portions of the channels into them.
The unAvholesomeness of outdoor premises, of right-of-ways, of street-channels,
and of the loose soil bordering those channels, have naturally aroused a determination
that this condition shall be put a stop to. It is noAV generally understood that per-
manent and effectual relief can be afforded only by the introduction of a scheme of deep
seAverage. Still, the question needs to be considered lioav far it is practicable to
ameliorate the defects at present existing Avhile such a spKsme is being introduced.
The folloAving matters demand consideration in this connexion. In the first place,
there is the necessity for dealing at once with all such foul spots as those specified
above, and for insisting on imperviousness of all sewage-conducting channels in
connexion with properties hereafter to be erected. Secondly, it is necessary either
to render impervious as far as practicable the sewage-conducting channels at present
existing, or to divert the sewage from them into impervious pipes, which it may he
remarked need not of necessity be laid at a great depth. Thirdly, it is essential that
the depositing of house-refuse in street-channels should be put down; the excuse that
it is difficult to catch offenders is lame and idle. Fourthly, the sweeping-down of
right-of-ways and of street-channels must he rendered a much more effectual process
than that which is at present in operation; a heavy fine should he inflicted on sweepers
who push the sewage-sludge under cover, and this sludge should be removed into a
tank-cart closely following the sweeper. In certain districts it has been the practice
during hot seasons to distribute lime or iron sulphate in the right-of-ways and street-
channels, and a few hours afterAvards to SAveep them down. This is, no doubt, a good
measure. In all cases, hoAvever, the sweeping needs to he thorough, to be accompanied
by flushing, to be repeated at frequent intervals, and to be done without unnecessarily
fouling the water-table. It is to be hoped that means for this necessary flushing
Avill be provided Avhenever domestic requirements will not be prejudicially affected
thereby; and that, Avith the additional supply to be obtained from the Watts Eiver,
Avater in amount sufficient for this purpose may be available. Every opportunity
should be taken to thoroughly cleanse all seAvage-conducting channels'when there is
a floAv of rain Avater along them. Finally, it is to he noted that the water-tables which
are sodden with filth, as they are in very m.any cases, should he thoroughly well limed,
and the polluted soil be as far as practicable removed, or covered over with clay, or
properly metalled.
Attention may noAV be directed to the swamps, the lagoons, the ditches, and large
water-courses which receive seAA r age-matters. All of them, Avithout exception, give rise
to nuisance of the grossest character.


The Elwood Swamp and the Port Melbourne Lagoon, each of which covers
many acres and gives rise to gross nuisance, need not here be referred to in detail.
They are, it is said, to be reclaimed, while sewerage works are to be constructed for
rectification of the evils at present arising from them. It is important that no time
should be lost in connexion with these works.
Of the earth-gutters and ditches, which receive sewage, some are at the rear
of rows of houses (e.g., that behind Moore-street, St. Kilda), some are by the side
of streets (as, for instance, many of those in Williamstown and Footscray), or of
roads (as in Northcote), others again are at the sides of railroads.
Of the latter there are several in Footscray (e.g., the ditch between Victoria and Albert streets,
the ditch which receives sewage from houses about Hopkins, Shelley, Byron, and other streets, and which
gives rise to nuisance at the backs of the houses of Railway-place and at the lagoon into which this ditch
discharges, and again the ditch about the Yarraville Railway station), one in Kensington, which extends
aioncr Railway-place from Waltham-street to Newmarket station, and others near South-street and Park-
streel in Essendon. It may here be noted that sludge taken out of such ditches should not be left exposed
by the side of the railway, as it is at present.
Larger sewer water-courses are numerous. They constitute the main drains
of several populous districts. Mention may here be made of the main drain of Foots-
cray, of Northcote, of Preston (and the continuation of it through Northcote), of
Hawthorn, also of the Derby Gully at Kew, which receives drainage matters from
about 300 houses, of the Fleming, Melville, and Glenlyon Creeks in Brunswick,
and of the Reilly-street drain. Still larger water-courses carrying sewage are the Merri
Creek and the Moonee Ponds Creek, and finally the Saltwater and Yarra Rivers. '
The ditches and larger water-courses here referred to are throughout or in part
unformed; their banks and beds are irregular, consisting either of a soft crumbling
material or of natural basalt-blocks. The beds, moreover, are not only in most cases
irregular, but in certain cases (e.g., at Footscray and at Preston) they sink to some
depth at frequent intervals, while in the bed of the Merri Creek there are water-holes
of very considerable depth and size. Most of these water-courses in dry weather have very
little flow; they appear then as strings of open stagnant cesspools, connected by tracks
of exposed sewage-slime and sludge. The Merri Creek, which receives sewage from
a large population, is in dry weather nothing better than a series of gigantic open stag-
nant cesspools, and sewage-sludge in large bulk lies in it opposite the mouth of the
Reilly-street drain. The Moonee Ponds Creek is a shallow tidal creek with sandy bed,
covered thickly (a foot or two deep) with sewage-sludge, and forming a main trunk
outlet for sewage from Essendon, Flemington and Kensington, and Footscray on the
one side, and from Brunswick and much of North Melbourne on the other. These
foul creeks are bubbling with decomposition, and they are notorious for the insuffer-
able stench that arises from them. The Saltwater River, into which the Moonee
Ponds Creek discharges, is but little better in its character; and the Yarra, which
extends through the heart of the metropolitan area, receives sewage from almost every
quarter.
As already said, portions of a few of the above water-courses have been faced
with bluestone pitchers or with stone. In addition to these partly formed open sewer-
courses, there are several other open drains, such as those of St. Kilda, the main drain
of Prahran, the Hanna-street drain, and others which have been pitched in the greater
part, if not the whole, of their lengths. In some of these instances the pitchers have
been grouted in cement.
These open sewer water-courses, without doubt, maintain the atmosphere of
the district in a most unwholesome condition ; and the question arises as to the
measures to be adopted towards rectifying the mischief that results from them. This
is an engineering question, and one which, as a matter of expediency, must be
considered in conjunction with that of the sewering of the whole metropolitan district.
There can, however, be no question as to the pressing necessity for cleansing them, for
applying lime to them, and, where practicable , for thoroughly flushing and sweeping
them at regular and frequent intervals. A great amount of benefit w T ould be derived
from the prevention of further pollution of these water-courses by refuse from noxious
trade establishments. More radical measures are of course imperative; but, with the
promise of the deep sewerage scheme being shortly to hand, it will not be expedient to
engage with them in this Report. The works in progress under the direction of Mr.
Thwaites, in connexion with the Elwood Swamp and the Port Melbourne Lagoon, have
already been referred to. It should be noted, too, that the South Melbourne Council
B 2


have already appropriated a sum of £IO,OOO for improvements in connexion with the
Hanna and Roy-street drain, that the Preston Council meditate an expenditure of
£13,000 on their main drain, and that the Hawthorn Council intend, if possible, to
pitcher the remaining portion of the main drain of their district.
There now remain for consideration the underground sewers,* to which reference
has been made above. They are very considerable in their total length. A large
number of them have been constructed comparatively recently, and on modern approved
principles—such, for instance, as the extensive sewers of Richmond, those of Colling-
wood, Fitzroy, Prahran, and of certain parts of the city of Melbourne. Most of them
are of brick and cement, egg-shaped in section, and provided with man-holes and
surface-ventilators. Many are pipe-sewers. There are, however, not a few of the
sewers —some of them recently laid—which are wholly unadapted for carrying off
sewage matters, owing to the mode of their construction or to inadequacy of their fall.
It should be noted that, as already intimated, a few house drains and a few
drains laid in the soil under dwellings discharge into sewers. Wherever this occurs
complete air disconnexion should be insisted on. Catchpits in the inverts of sewers—
there are several in Fitzroy—should he filled up to a level with the inverts; they retain
decomposing matters , and so serve to add to the pollution of the sewer air.
The inlets to these sewers are, but with few exceptions, in the street channels.
In most cases they are provided with catchpits, and are trapped either by a fixed or
(as in some instances in Collingwood) by a swinging lip. Some of these catchpits are
of inordinate size, notably in Collingwood, and in Canning-street, Carlton—a matter,
hoAvever, which in Collingwood is being rectified. Certainly no such catchpit should
be in existence. Indeed , catchpits at the inlets of sewers , receiving as they do in the
metropolitan district sewage-matters already in a state of decomposition , should be of
the smallest proportions, and even then he very frequently flushed out , otherwise they
give rise to gross nuisance. The swinging lip, which may be made so as not to allow
of escape of sewer gas, affords a means for trapping and for readily sweeping out the
contents of the catchpit into the sewer. In many cases, however, the catchpit is intro-
duced for the express purpose of not allowing the heavier particles, silt and the like, to
pass into the sewer. If it be actually necessary to collect the silt in this fashion, in
order to avoid silting up of a sewer which has a bad scour, or silting up of a water-
course into which the sewer discharges, it is equally necessary that the catchpit used
for the purpose should be thoroughly cleansed at very frequent intervals.
Means for flushing the sewers have not in any case been provided. Adequate
provision for this purpose is urgently needed, and the more so in connexion with those
sewers which are not adapted for receiving sewage-matters.
Ventilation of the sewers is provided for generally by surface-grids, but in
several localities (for instance, in the city of Melbourne) only by untrapped inlets in
the street-channels. Where sewers receive , as all of them do here , decomposing sewage ,
and in particular where they are not of good construction , have not adequate scour , or
are not regularly flushed , the dependence on surface-openings alone , especially by the side
of the footpath , cannot he approved. Nuisance necessarily arises from them; and there
are, as a matter of fact, many localities where it is much complained of. Under such
circumstances it would appear to be well to erect exhaust-shafts, and to leave untrapped
only certain inlets to serve for admission of fresh air. The sewers of Collingwood are
practically without ventilation; and as regards them it is to be noted that, putting aside
the dangers attendant upon the escape of coal gas into them, there is danger, brought
about in various ways, of escape of sewer gas from them in directions in which it
may prove injurious to health —a matter of more importance where, as in Collingwood,
particular portions of the sewer system lie under the footpath alongside of dwellings, and
have so poor a fall as to rapidly silt up. It should be added that ventilation by means
of the tram-slots should not be allowed to continue.
The catchpits to the outlets of some of the sewers and of the open drains
demand attention. Several of these are of considerable size, for instance, those which
discharge into the Moonee Ponds Creek or into the Port Melbourne Lagoon, or those
near the lower end of Dudley, King, and Market streets. These catchpits give rise
to great nuisance. No doubt they serve the purpose for which they were designed,
that, viz., of holding back from the river, or creek, or lagoon into which the sewage is
discharged a certain amount of solid matter; but as against this there is to be set the
*lt should be observed that most of these sewers were designed simply for carrying off storm waters, and that they
will be devoted solely to this purpose when provision is made for dealing with sewage matters in the new sch eme.


oross offence to which they give rise. The contents of all catchpits and the deposit
which accumulates in certain sewers and open drains should be removed at very frequent
intervals- in the case of the catchpits such as those above mentioned they should be removed
daily. In all cases they should be as caref ully disposed of as excretal matters; and on
no account should they be used as sand for building purposes. It should here he stated,
also that the outlets of the Fitzroy sewers are apt to become choked in wet weather,
owilier to rise of water in the Reilly-street drain, and that the gully into which the
Colliugwood sewers discharge is in a most offensive condition. These matters demand
attention at the earliest practicable moment.
Water Supply.
Water used for domestic purposes has long been known to be one of the main
factors concerned in the determination of health. Extensive outbreaks of disease have
been directly traced to contamination of it, while on the other hand the most marked
improvement in the vital statistics of communities, in a large number of cases, has
quickly followed upon the substitution of a wholesome for a contaminated supply. The
condition of the drinking water, therefore, equally with the mode of disposal of all
waste matters, needs to be considered in this Report.
Seeing that all the water-courses of the districts covered by this Report are
polluted, and that the ground-water, owing to its saline character, is not potable, the
inhabitants are practically dependent upon water brought in from outside (from the
Plenty Ranges) in the so-called Yan Yean service; though in addition there is a con-
siderable number of instances in- which rain water collected in tanks, over or under
ground, is also used.
I have not, it is true, had opportunity for acquiring such knowledge of these
water supiplies as is necessary in order to examine into the part which they play in
determining the vital statistics of Melbourne; but there are certain questions to which
attention should here be directed.
Concerning the Yan Yean service, there need to be considered the character of
the collecting grounds,- of the reservoirs, and of the lands adjacent thereto, the method
of conducting the water from the collecting grounds to the main and to the subsidiary
reservoirs, and from these to the consumer. The matters of which lam able from
personal knowledge to speak refer, however, only to the reticulation and service-pipes,
to the fire-plugs, the tapping of the mains for making connexions; while, in regard of
the other points mentioned above, reference may be made to the observations and
recommendations made thereupon by the Sanitary Commission.
As regards the reticulation and service-pipes, it is to he observed that contami-
nation of the water in them may occur, under conditions of low pressure, in instances
in which the pipes are laid—as, in fact, they are here in a large proportion of cases —in
soil which is polluted. Any leak in the pipes—and leaks are hound to occur, and, as
a matter of fact, are of common occurrence—will, under the conditions just mentioned,
afford means for suction of polluting matters into the pipes from the soil.
So, too, pollution may occur owing to improper position or improper construc-
tion of the fire-plugs. In this connexion it is to be he borne in mind that, in order
that polluting matters shall enter the box overlying the ball-plug, it is not necessary
for them to enter through its upper opening. The box is retained in position merely
by the soil in which it is imbedded, and polluting matters which impregnate that
soil may, and do, find entrance into the box from below. Let the plug fall, as it does
under a variety of circumstances, and matters contained in the box and other matters
impregnating the soil about the box pass into the pipes. It is not necessary that the
fire-plug he situated in a sewage-conducting channel for this pollution to take place.
The fire-plug may be, as generally it is, three to six feet from the channel, and yet
pollution takes place—pollution derived from the washings of the roadways, from the
sludge which may at times be seen swept out of the channels directly over the
fire-plugs, and from sewage which overflows from the channels and impregnates the soil
.of and about those channels.
Again, when service-pipes are about to be connected with the mains, it is the
custom here to empty the main prior to making the connexion; and it is obvious that
foul matters may then enter the pipes from the soil both through leaks in the pipes
and through faulty fire-plugs. The danger attendant upon this may no doubt be in
some measure diminished if, on turning on the water again, the pipes are thoroughly


flushed out, a procedure, however, which is not, at least in very many cases, carried
out at present.
The importance attaching to these several considerations is enhanced by the
fact that the sewage of the street-channels contains, without doubt, the very agents
of typhoid fever, and in all probability those of other disease-processes. There
can be no question as to the pressing necessity for abolishing the fire-plug now in use ,
and substituting for it some safe appliance , such for instance as the hydrant-standpipe ,
or in certain localities the screw-down cock. It should also he considered whether ,
as in other towns and cities , the mains might not be tapped under pressure , when
service-pipes are being connected with them.
It should also be noted here that water is in very many instances laid on direct
to urinals, and in some cases even to closets, and that in this there is liability of the
water in the pipes to become contaminated when the pressure is low. A service-cistern
should in all such cases be provided.
Other questions concerning the Yan Yean service demand careful investigation
at the earliest opportunity for reasons already intimated, especially with the view of
determining as to the necessity or otherwise for passing the water through filter-beds
prior to its delivery to the consumer.
Attention may also be briefly given to water collected in tanks. In order to
secure wholesomeness of water thus collected, it is necessary to provide effectually
against the entrance of polluting matters into the tank. The latter, if below ground,
needs to be protected from the possibility of inflow of surface and subsoil water. If
it be rain water that is collected in the tank, it is essential that gutters and pipes
conducting the water from the roof should be frequently cleansed; and that after
intervals of dry weather the first washings from the roof should not be allowed to
enter the tank. Indeed , as long as sewage is allowed to flow in open street-channels , so
that when desiccated it may he blown on to the roofs of houses , the condition of roof-
water must be looked upon with suspicion. In all cases it is imperative that the
tanks be thoroughly cleaned out at frequent intervals.
Finally, it is to be noted that special attention needs to be directed to the
necessity for councils exercising vigilant supervision, and carrying out their powers
(under sections 241, 244, and 245 of the Public Health Act 1890) for preventing
pollution of water-courses from which water is derived for the use of man or of
domestic animals.
Milk Supply.
Not one of the forty-three milk establishments which I have visited was in a
satisfactory condition, and most of them were in a very unsatisfactory condition. Some
of the cows are in very poor condition, are fed on improper food, and are supplied
Avith water from filthy sources. Some may be seen wandering about refuse-tips; others,
again, drinking sewage from the street-channels or from open main drains. Cow-sheds
are generally badly paved and badly drained, in many instances they are thoroughly
foul; and the same is true of many of the stables on the premises of milk-vendors.
Milk-cans after being rinsed are left to dry commonly near to some foul scAvagc matters
or some heap of manure. One milkman turns them up on loose planking sodden Avith
drainage matters from his cow-sheds; another places them on a board over a dung-pit;
and several milkmen place them close by foul open drains. The milk atone establish-
ment is passed over a cooler in the coAv-shed. Milk and cream were found to be kept
in many places Avhere they would be most likely to become contaminated — e.g., in living
rooms, in a bedroom, in bath rooms, in spare rooms of the house along with stale and
mouldy food, in annexes in which bedding and clothing Avere being Avashed, in a
wooden out-house in and about which Avere numbers of foAvls, in several instances
under the same roof as a Avooden stable or coAv-shed, being thus exposed to a polluted
atmosphere. Many of the small establishments presented a picture of filth and poverty.
The improvements that are required, if dairies, coAV-sheds, and milk-shops are
to be placed on a proper sanitary footing, are indeed numerous, and some of them will
entail an expenditure Avhich it is perfectly evident the proprietors concerned are but
little able to afford. Though this be so, there is no doubt that persons umvilling or
unable to provide an adequate supply of Avholesome food and Avater together Avith
properly constructed sheds, or to ensure cleanliness of method of dealing Avith milk,
should not be alloAved to bring into consumption milk Avhich may owing to neglect
of these requirements become positively poisonous; and that the poAvers now possessed


in relation hereto by councils, which are by no means inconsiderable, should be
diligently exercised. The evidence that is accumulating as to the relation of milk to
tuberculosis, to typhoid fever, to scarlet fever, to diphtheria, and to other diseases in
man demands the exercise of the greatest care concerning the health conditions of
cows, and the mode in which milk is dealt with while in transit from the cow to man.
It should be stated that under the provisions of the Health Act of 1889 the Board
some months ago issued regulations concerning dairies ; and that several councils
having already instituted detailed inspection into the condition of these establishments
have effected considerable amelioration of the grosser defects, while legal proceedings
have been taken against the more flagrant offenders, and heavy fines have been
inflicted in not a few cases.
Stables, Lodging-houses, and Trades.
Stables in many districts are as badly kept as cow-sheds; they are allowed to
drain almost anyhow and anywhere.
Common lodging-houses in the city of Melbourne are all registered and regularly
inspected; but in several of the other districts there are buildings which, though coming
within the definition applied to common lodging-houses, have not yet been even
registered. The ventilation and the drainage of several of those which have been
examined are defective.* All the common lodging-houses should be carefully inspected
by the health officers, and directions should be given for such constructive works as
are required in order that their wholesomeness may be practically assured.
The back rooms of butchers’ shops , those in which sausage-making is conducted,
have in several cases been inspected. They are said to be fair specimens of a large
proportion of such places, and yet most of them were in a foul condition. It has
frequently been suggested that they should be placed under regulations. However
this may be, there can be no reason why nuisance from filthy floors and walls, and foul
sewage and foul closets, should be tolerated on these more than on any other premises;
and the provisions of the Act relating to wholesomeness of food need but be carried
into execution in order to secure cleanliness in the mode in which meat is handled
in the process of being made into sausages. So, also, it is with the sanitary
condition of some of the bake-houses.
The condition of market-gardens needs particularly to be kept in mind, and it is
satisfactory to find that attention is being directed to them. In this connexion it may
not be irrelevant to observe that all vegetables and all fruit should be most carefully
cleansed before being eaten. The extreme filthiness of the places from which some
of them are brought to the market indicates the necessity for the most scrupulous
care being exercised in this matter.
The noxious trades are being, in most cases, conducted apparently with a total
disregard of the feelings of the community at large ; and, except in the case of one or
two districts, there seems to be but little being done to see that the avoidable nuisance
to which they give rise is being mitigated. Notwithstanding that it appears to be
the intention of the Government to remove these establishments from the vicinity
of Melbourne, no forms of avoidable nuisance in connexion with them should be
allowed to continue even during the time which must elapse before they can be
removed from their present sites. This is a matter which demands the immediate
attention of the councils.
Management of Dangerous Infectious or Contagious Diseases.
In order that sanitary authorities may be in a position for coping with com-
municable disease, it is necessary that they be provided with information as early as
practicable of the occurrence of such disease in and about their districts; that they be
provided with means for isolating persons suffering from such disease, and with
powers to cause the isolation or destruction of animals, and the destruction of the
produce of animals when affected with disease communicable to man; and that they
have means for effectually disinfecting infected dwellings as well as infected articles of
bedding, of clothing, and the like, together with means for rendering innocuous the
discharges from persons affected with communicable disease.
* The Sailors’ Home is a notable example of neglect of ordinary attention to ventilation. Steps should, in fact, at
once be taken to remedy the nuisance hence resulting. " ' ‘ -


The system of notification of communicable disease at present in operation is
carried out under section 125 of the Health Act 1890. This section runs thus —
“ Whenever any place in or part of Victoria appears to be affected by any dangerous
infectious or contagious disease, the Board may, by notice, published in the Govern-
ment Gazette , require all medical practitioners to report •” The
Board must, therefore, first have evidence that a particular communicable disease
exists in the place ox part of Victoria, and then publish in the Government Gazette a
notice to the effect that they require notification of cases of that disease; it is only after
this publication has been made that the Board can claim such notification.
In this connexion it is to be observed that a disease may become widely spread
in a district before any evidence as to its occurrence is obtained by the Board; it may,
in fact, have gained such foot-hold that any action on the part of the Board can result
in but little advantage to the community at large. This is true of several communi-
cable diseases. There is, too, a difficulty as to the interpretation of the section. Seeing
that the words place and part are used, and not the term municipal district , it might be
argued that only the group of population infected —represented say, by the village or
the township—can be proclaimed. This, of course, would be of but little value. The
practice hitherto has been to interpret place and part as a municipal district , though
the infection may be limited to only a fractional part of that district. In the latter
case, much local feeling is at times aroused when the proclamation is made. Moreover,
acting on the same principle, a group of population, situate partly in one municipal
district and partly in another, and infected only in one of those parts, cannot be pro-
claimed as a whole, so that though there may be every chance of the disease being
communicated to persons of that group living in the adjoining district, the latter
must first become infected before notification can be got. Again, it seems to be neces-
sary to make a special proclamation in the case of each infectious or contagious
disease.
It is true that some of these difficulties are minimized by the practice
of the Board not to revoke a proclamation once made, so that where a second
outbreak occurs, local councils and the Board do receive notification of the-first cases.
Nevertheless, the system is very defective and cumbrous, and it is no less troublesome
to the Board than it is irritating to the local authorities. In any case notification, to
be put to any purpose in checking the spread of disease, must be concerned with the
earliest cases. It may be stated that an Infectious Disease Notification Act has
recently been brought into operation in England, and that, though at first it was
applied only to London, it has been adopted since for.a large number of sanitary
districts in the rest of the country, rural as well as urban. There can be no question
as to the advisability of similar provision being made for this country , so that notifi-
cation of the occurrence of all dangerous communicable diseases would be obligatory
throughout the colony at all times , and that the proclamation of districts as infected
would be rendered unnecessary.
It is desirable, moreover, that in order to take full advantage of the provisions
of section 300 of the Health Act 1890, councils should make arrangements with
deputy-registrars, so that returns of deaths shall be forwarded to them each week. In
several districts such arrangements have been made, but not in all.
Secondly.—lt is necessary that adequate permanent accommodation be provided
for persons who, when affected with dangerous communicable disease, cannot be
treated in their own homes without risk to themselves or to other persons.
Facilities, however, in Melbourne for isolating persons suffering from forms of
communicable disease other than typhoid fever are but few, and even the accom-
modation for typhoid fever is very limited. There are, in fact, only the general hospitals
to resort to. These are the Melbourne, the Alfred, the Homoeopathic, and the Children’s
Hospitals, furnishing the following numbers of beds respectively —viz., 324, 234, 100,
and 75, with a total of about 425 medical beds, the rest being for surgical cases. Of
the medical beds, 124 are provided in tents, huts, or cottages.
Scarlatinal patients are not admitted into any of these hospitals, except it be the
Melbourne; and yet scarlatina generally prevails, it is stated, to some extent, and at
times it assumes epidemic proportions, and causes considerable mortality.
So, too, it is with diphtheria. Cases of this disease have not for some time been
knowingly admitted at any but the Melbourne Hospital, except in instances of extreme
urgency; and yet it is almost invariable that diphtheria is rapidly transmitted to most
of the members of a household which it has invaded, During the first half of this


year there were, in the districts covered by this Report, as many as 607* persons notified
as affected with, and 201 as having died of, this disease, but only 72 were admitted to
hospital. It is, moreover, to be noted that 46 of these 72 patients _ were taken in at
the Children’s Hospital, and that the admission of such patients into that hospital,
though allowed in the period above-mentioned, has since been forbidden. It appears,
therefore, that by far the majority of the diphtheritic patients during this period were
treated at their homes. Many since the beginning of this year have been treated as
out-patients at the Homoeopathic and the Children’s Hospitals—6o or 70 at the
former hospital, and several almost every week at the latter —many at each of these
hospitals for some continued period. These patients attended in person at the
hospital. Some of them recovered. Others, becoming worse, were treated by pre-
scriptions based on reports given at the hospital by their friends; and iythree or four
such instances death certificates were signed from the Children’s Hospital. Others,
acrain, doubtless received local medical advice at the last moment. Moreover, though
it”is a fact that scarlatinal and diphtheritic patients are taken in at the Melbourne
Hospital, it needs to be stated that, owing to the limited accommodation there provided
for them, there are now under treatment in one tent diphtheritic along with two
scarlatinal patients, and in another tent four cases of diphtheria and one case of sore
throat, one of burn, and one of broken thigh.
Turning now to typhoid fever, it appears that during the first half of this year,
there were in all 2,363 persons (of whom 249 died) notified as suffering from
this disease in the several districts to Avhich this Report refers, and that only 995 of
these were treated in the hospitals above specified. Numbers of others, on making
personal application, were refused admission. For instance, of persons who applied at
the Melbourne Hospital during the twenty-two weeks ended May 21st, 1890, while
suffering from recognised typhoid fever, or from fever which no doubt in many cases
was typhoid, 263 could not be taken in; and of persons who, while similarly suffering,
applied with orders for admission at the Alfred Hospital during the first half of the year,
58 could not be taken in. It is said that within the latter period a hundred or more
Avere refused admission at the Homoeopathic, and considerable numbers at the Children’s
Hospital. It Avould not be possible to determine the total number of persons to whom
admission was refused, for it is said that persons Avere driven round from one hospital
to another; it appears also that many of them were admitted to hospital subsequently.
It is, nevertheless, true that large numbers were not able to gain admission at once, and
that many made repeated applications before they succeeded. At the Homoeopathic
and Children’s Hospitals numbers of persons suffering from typhoid fever were treated
as out-patients—many of them, it is said, for as long a period as tAvo or three Aveeks, the
patients having attended several times at the hospital in person. Some of them thus
treated, it is said, recovered. Of others Avho became worse, some Avere admitted; some
probably obtained medical advice at home. In one case the death-certificate was signed
from the Children’s Hospital. The fatigue and anxiety involved in this process of
seeking admission to hospital tax severely the powers of endurance of the patients, and
fatal results were no doubt in many cases thus brought about. KnoAvledgeof this difficulty,
moreover, no doubt deterred patients from making application who Avould othenvise
have gladly availed themselves of the isolation and treatment provided in a hospital.
Some persons in Footscray, the health officer states, have had to go to Geelong and
even to Ballarat to obtain hospital accommodation.
Despite this large number of refusals, it appears that generally in the typhoid
season as large a proportion as 50 or 60 per cent, or more of the medical beds in the
hospitals above-named is given up to typhoid fever. In order to give up so large a
proportion of medical beds, numbers of patients avlio apply for admission while suffering
from other disease, and Avho Avould under ordinary circumstances be at once admitted,
are, it is stated, excluded. The large percentage, too, here mentioned indicates the
temptation that exists to alloAV of overcrowding which admittedly takes place under
the press of circumstances in the typhoid season ; and yet experience has taught over
and over again the necessity for treating persons suffering from febrile conditions, so to
say, in the open. Dr. Molloy states, and Dr. Anderson confirms his statement,
that in their hospital experience Avhenever overcroAvding has taken place, ill-effects
have promptly manifested themselves in the patients, a sort of septic condition has
*No doubt the actual number of persons attacked was much larger than that here stated, for the notification of
diphtheritic cases did not become compulsory in half of the districts before March 7th, or subsequently. Further details
concerning diphtheria and typhoid fever are given in the Appendix, Tables C and D.


supervened, and the fatality among the cases has risen. There is, also, the question
to be considered as to the propriety of treating typhoid patients in hospitals into which
persons suffering from pulmonary tuberculosis (consumption) in the last stages of the
disease are so frequently taken in as they are at the Melbourne Hospital. It may,
however, be asked whether the accommodation could not be largely increased on the
grounds of the existing hospitals. It could, no doubt, on those of the Alfred Hospital;
it certainly could not on any of the other hosjhtals. This additional accommodation
might be obtained by multiplying the tents, or by building the wings which it is in
contemplation to add to that hospital. By multiplying the tents a large increase of
accommodation could almost at once be provided; but it needs to be borne in mind
that very considerable increase in the administrative staff and buildings would also be
needed if multiplication of tents were decided upon, with the view to providing for the
requirements in the typhoid season. And as regards the additional accommodation to
be obtained in the new wings here referred to, it must be remembered that in the
typhoid season the ordinary medical cases have heretofore been largely refused
admission; and that with increase of population there comes also increase of demand
for accommodation for other medical, as well as for surgical, cases.
In other words, it is impracticable to meet the requirements of typhoid fever
patients by the extension of the accommodation on the grounds of the existing
hospitals; and, even if it were not so, there would still remain the question as to the
provision to be made for persons affected with other communicable disease.*
There can be no question as to the urgency of the want of an Infectious
Diseases Hospital for Melbourne. It cannot be conceded that persons in poor circum-
stances, when affected Avith such communicable disease as scarlatina, diphtheria,
or typhoid fever, can, except in rare instances, be treated at their homes without risk
to other persons. A lai’ge number of cases of typhoid fever occurring here must be
attributed to the great difficulty, in numerous instances to the impossibility, of render-
ing innocuous the discharges of patients treated at their homes; Avhile diphtheria has
every opportunity for spreading, if not of developing its virulency, in the ill-ventilated
homes in which it is, of necessity, generally treated. There can, in fact, be no doubt
that a great amount of sickness and mortality from these diseases would be prevented
if adequate permanent means for isolation were provided. At the general hospitals
themselves and at other institutions, it may be added, the greatest difficulty is
experienced when cases of infectious disease occur among the inmates.
For reasons such as those above indicated , an Infectious Diseases Hospital
should be as soon as practicable provided , with 300 or more beds, and with grounds on
which additional accommodation can be supplied as occasion may require. No time
should be lost in setting apart a site or sites for this purpose , or in deciding as to how
means are to be provided for building the hospital , and for the administration of it. It
needs also to be pointed out that the means for isolating small-pox may at any time prove
disastrously insufficient. In order to be of real service to the community at large, it
is necessary that provision of this sort be made beforehand, so that no time shall be
lost in connexion either with the first cases in the district or Avith the first cases in the
household, or in determining from time to time as to the need for calling into requisi-
tion an additional hut or tent Avhile the disease-prevalence continues.
If the principle Avere adopted of providing, for isolation purposes, one bed for
every thousand of the population, a proportion generally deemed advisable in England,
about 500 beds AA r ould be required, i.e., more than the total of the tent-, hut-, and
cottage- beds, together with all the beds for medical cases, in the four general hospitals
of Melbourne.
Thirdly. —Efficient means for disinfecting infected bedding and clothing should
be provided. There is not, so far as lam aavare, a single apparatus for this purpose
in Melbourne or its suburbs. The above and other infected articles are, comparatively
speaking, but rarely disinfected; and it is said that they frequently find their Avay
into second-hand ftirniture shops without having been subjected to any process of
disinfection.
* It should here he stated that at the Melbourne Hospital the closets are not sufficiently separated off from the
wards ; that noxious gases necessarily find exit from the soil-pipes into the wards; that the tents are in a confined space, and
that the system of excrement disposal for the tents is defective. At none of the general hospitals are there means
for incinerating the discharges of the typhoid fever patients or for efficiently disinfecting infected articles of clothing and
the like.


Fourthly. —An ambulance service is required for conveying infectious patients
to hospital. Under present circumstances, the patients or their friends generally make
their own arrangements, resorting to the use of cabs, trams, buses, furniture-vans, and
such like vehicles, which, it appears, are but rarely disinfected afterwards. The want
of a proper service has been very generally felt, and suggestions on the subject are
already under the consideration of several of the municipal authorities.
Fifthly. —Mortuaries should be provided at convenient centres.
Sixthly. —lt is especially to be insisted on that the health officers shall receive
all notification returns as early as possible after they are sent in , and shall make
inquiries in person and give instructions as to the measures to be adopted , with the view
of preventing, as far as practicable , the transmission of the disease to other persons ;
also that the inspector , under the advice of the health officer , shall in each case visit as
frequently as necessary , so as to be able to satisfy the health officer that his instructions
are being carried out; and that the health officer shall give a certificate as to his
having satisfied himself that disinfection of the house and premises has been efficiently
performed , and that unwholesomeness in and about the house has been removed. At
present these steps are but rarely taken, and to want of care and system concerning
them much of the disease prevailing may reasonably be attributed.
Finally. —It is to be observed that there needs to be appointed some general
Board —a Metropolitan Asylums Board—charged with the duty of providing means
for isolation and treatment of persons suffering from dangerous infectious and con-
tagious disease in the metropolitan districts; and the question might be entertained as
to the propriety of such a Board undertaking also the supervision of the asylums
devoted to persons of unsound mind.
Sanitary Administration.
Administration of the Health Statutes, now consolidated in the Health Act 1890,
is conducted in the different districts with very varying degrees of efficiency. In
particular districts it is being conducted with a due sense of the responsibilities imposed
by those Statutes ; in others, though there is a general feeling and desire on the part
of the authorities that the sanitary defence should be sound, there is, nevertheless, but
slow progress made towards that end. The details above given as to the sanitary
condition and management of contagious and infectious disease will serve in illustra-
tion. It is true that, in the absence of deep sewers, difficulties of an almost
insurmountable character have in certain localities to be faced ; but this cannot be
pleaded in excuse for many of the shortcomings to be met with. Unwholesomeness
abounds in every direction. There is, too, as already shown, a very poor equipment
for carrying out the provisions of the Statute, which relate to communicable disease.
Health officers, too, in most districts are not required to make investigations into, and
to give instructions concerning, the several notification returns forwarded to the
authorities. In one district the health officer is, it seems, actually discouraged by the
authority from undertaking these necessary investigations ; and in another he is not
even apprised of the fact when notification returns are received. Supervision as to
isolation of infectious persons, as to disinfection of infected dwellings and of articles of
clothing and bedding, and as to disposal of infecting discharges was, at the time of my
inspection, being most negligently carried out. In several districts the management of,
and investigation into, cases of communicable disease was practically left to the
sanitary inspector; and in hundreds of cases of such disease no supervision of any sort
was being exercised.
It should be here stated that my inquiries having revealed this laxity concerning
the management of cases of communicable disease, it was thought desirable at once to
issue instructions on the subject to local authorities, at least in regard of diphtheria.
It is exceptional for health officers to undertake systematic periodical inspections
throughout their several districts, though without such inspections it is impossible to
acquire a knowledge of the weak points in the sanitary defence. Several of the health
officers take but little initiative in placing before the authorities the sanitary require-
of their districts. Not a few of them regard themselves merely in the light of
consultants, their opinion being given only on special application being made for their
services. In one instance this is, it appears, the view taken, if not expressed by the
authority concerning the functions of the health officer. With but few exceptions,
there, are no returns of vital statistics made by health officers which can be of


service either to the councils or to the Board, these statistics and the relation which
they bear to local conditions being in large part ignored. In several instances the
health officer has not even been supplied with a copy of all the Health Statutes under
which he is working. Of direct importance, also, there is the fact that not only do
health officers in no case regularly attend the meetings of the sanitary authorities, but
that in only a few districts do they attend more than two or three times in the course
of a year, Avhile in other cases the health officer does not attend from one year’s end
to the other. And yet at these meetings numbers of questions demanding special
knowledge, which he alone would possess, require to be dealt with.
Several factors militate against the full performance of the functions of health
officers. In the first place, health officers are subject to dismissal by the local authori-
ties; and this, it is well-known, is not conducive to candid and free expressions of
opinion regarding the sanitary shortcomings at any rate of smaller communities.
Secondly, all the health officers are engaged in medical practice in the districts for
which they are appointed ; and this again is not conducive to freedom of action.
Moreover, it is altogether impossible, if that practice be at all extensive, and the popu-
lation of the district be considerable, to attend to the various duties of the office-—in
particular to inquire thoroughly into disease-prevalences, and to act with the
promptitude that is required. There is, too, a great liability to friction between
health officers engaged in private practice and other medical practitioners, friction
which seriously stands in the way of a proper execution of the Health Statute. Several
instances of this have come under my notice. Thirdly, the salaries, which most of
the authorities have thought fit to grant to their health officers, are not such that a full
performance of the duties attaching to their office can be expected, the salaries being
wholly inadequate for the purpose. This is recognised and openly stated on all
hands, even by members of local councils themselves. It is no defence to contend that
applicants for the office are to be had at salaries of £2O to £7O. The authorities are
charged with the duty of seeing that the Health Statutes are properly administered. If,
as is no doubt a fact, the duties of the health officer are frequently not satisfactorily
performed, and if it cannot in reason be expected that they should be, having regard to
the amount of the salary, steps should be taken to see that the salary is increased so as
to command services of the nature and extent required.
The health officer should be placed in the position, so to say, of guardian of the
sanitary defence of his district. He should at all times be encouraged to point out to
his authority all defects in the sanitary condition and in the sanitary administration of
that district, his reports, which should be given full publicity, constituting a true x’eflex
of the sanitary condition and requirements.
Sanitary inspectors work, most of them, under a proper sense of their responsi-
bilities, and discharge their duties as efficiently as circumstances permit. They have,
however, great difficulties to contend with, and the results of their work are not so
thorough or so complete as they should be. Several causes contribute to bring about
this result. First, inspectors are not as they should be, and as most of them would
desire to be, placed under the direct instruction and guidance of the health officers.
Though their duties call daily for application of knowledge of a sort which the health
officer should impart, and for support which the health officer alone is in a position to
afford, they are in large part carried out independently of such instruction and
support, with the result that not only are many urgent matters not attended to, but
many conditions unfavorable to health are rectified in an indifferent manner.
Secondly, the performance of their duties is seriously interfered with owing to want of
time at their disposal. So numerous are the other duties exacted of them in many
instances that those which appertain to them as sanitary inspectors, and which, despite
their importance, are so readily shelved, are of necessity allowed to pass unheeded for
sheer want of time. For instance, in several districts the inspector is required to
collect the dog tax, to see that the by-laws and regulations under the Local Govern-
ment Act are carried out, to inspect weights and measures, and to attend to a large
number of other such matters, so that practically but little time is left for the discharge
of the duties of sanitary inspector. It is stated on the best authority that nine-tenths
of the time of the inspector at Essendou is occupied in looking after stray cattle and
in collecting the dog tax. At Brunswick, with a population of 18,500, the three
rate collectors are inspectors, each for his respective ward; and cases demanding
prompt attention, and even inquiries concerning infectious disease, are neglected
owing to the exigencies of their rate-collecting and account-making duties. In


three districts an officer, or a member, of the police force is the inspector, and it
is needless to say that in cities, towns, and boroughs time cannot he set aside from
police duties either for such study or inspection or inquiry in connexion with cases of
communicable disease as is demanded of the sanitary inspector. It is often said that
men who are constantly going over a district are in the best position for seeing that
the sanitary requirements of that district are attended to. Experience, however,
teaches that men thus engaged about one business —say, on police or rate-collecting
duties—are the very persons least likely to be paying attention to the duties of
sanitary inspector. Thirdly, the work of the inspectors is in but very few districts so
systematically recorded as it is desirable that it should be, in order that the authority
may he in a position for learning whether that work is being thoroughly done.
Fourthly, it must be confessed that inspectors in particular districts receive but scant
encouragement in the performance of their duties ; indeed the conditions of their
tenure of office are such that outspoken reports are not encouraged. Fifthly, the view
that the inspector should earn his own salary by fines derived from prosecutions is not
one to be approved. Not only is there in such cases a tendency to prosecute where
milder measures might suffice, but the tendency is apt to develop of paying less
attention to important matters, which, remediable at short notice and at little cost, are
not likely to issue in the infliction of a fine.
There are, no doubt, cases in which the suitability of the inspector for the post
which he fills may be open to question. But want of efficiency and of completeness of
the work done by inspectors is only rarely attributable to want of appreciation of the
responsibilities attaching to their office. It is, in the main, attributable to one or other
or several of the factors set out above, all of which admit of being readily rectified.
In order to secure an effective administration of the Health Statutes, it is in
the first place essential that the authorities should obtain full information of all the
sanitary requirements in their several districts, and judicious advice as to how these
requirements may best be met. For this purpose it is necessary for the health
officer to enter fully into the sanitary condition and shortcomings of his district at
least once a year; and at other times, as occasion requires, to undertake prompt
inquiries into all outbreaks of communicable disease in his district; and to study the
vital statistics of each group of population in that district in their relation to the local
conditions. It is further necessary for the inspector to act under the immediate
supervision and direction of the health officer. And, in order that the duties* of health
officers may be more systematically performed, the instructions issued to them by the
Board should be revised. As already intimated, it is practically impossible for a
health officer engaged in private practice to give the amount of time, and to attend
with the promptitude required, to the health conditions of a district such as are most
of those dealt with in this Ileport. It is strongly to be recommended that conjoint
appointments be made by the several municipalities , so that the health officer may he
able to devote his whole time to the duties of his office, receiving therefor a salary
commensurate with the importance of those duties. The question might be entertained
as to the advisability of the salary provided by local authorities being supplemented
by the Board, either directly or, for instance, by making the health officer a public
vaccinator for his district, the Board obtaining in these cases a voice in the dismissal
as well as in the appointment of such officer. However this may be, the present
system is one which does not bear critical examination, and the question as to the
re-modelling of it should engage early consideration.
There still remain to be considered three questions relating to methods of
sanitary administi’ation. First, the sanitary condition of the ships of the port, as also
that of the lands, wharves, and docks about the lower part of the Yarra watershed;
the nature of the food-stuffs, and of the other cargoes put ashore at those wharves and
docks; and the nature of the cases of disease (infectious or otherwise) on board the
ships moored there are not under such supervision as they should be. It is to be
noted that the lodging of sailors on board ship is almost of necessity most seriously
cramped; that the germs of disease brought from foreign countries may persist in the
berths and bedding of the ships, only requiring favorable conditions for their develop-
and that persons suffering from communicable disease are very likely to escape
detection on board ship; and yet it is not the duty of any person to take cognizance
as u^e3 °f health officers and of sanitary inspectors in England, reference may be made to the


of, or to report as to, most of these matters to the Board, the only body having control
over them being the Harbour Trust, which has not been constituted a sanitary
authority,* and has not sanitary officers corresponding to those of the munici-
palities. This exemption from sanitary supervision and control of so considerable an
area and population in the midst of a densely-peopled district is a matter of serious
concern; and provision should be made as soon as practicable for securing such super-
vision and control. The second matter to which attention needs to be directed relates
to the exemption or supposed exemption from local and central control of certain parts
of the municipal districts. It is commonly stated in the municipal districts referred to in
this Report that, though councils are charged with the duty of looking to the sanitary
circumstances in all parts of their districts which are not under governmental control,
they are not charged with the like duty as regards parts which are under governmental
control —such as State schools, railway stations, and lunatic asylums. It is needless to
say that the sanitary condition of places where large numbers of persons are lodged
together, as they are in gaols and asylums, and the mode of disposing of drainage and
refuse matters from such institutions, may exercise marked influence on the health-
conditions of the district; and that effectual control over these conditions cannot be
exercised so long as portions of the district are excluded from the jurisdiction of the
local authorities. It certainly seems necessary that there should be regular sanitary
inspection of every portion of each district; and that the local authority should be
empowered to order the rectification of all unwholesome conditions wheresoever occur-
ring. The third matter to which reference may be made is the question as to the
relation which the Board should hold in connexion with works of sewerage, of water
supply, of land reclamation, and- the like, works which are essentially sanitary, and
are being carried out without any consultation with the Board as to the methods to
be adopted in carrying out such works, and without intimation being conveyed to
the Board that such works are to be undertaken.
It will naturally be observed, in regard to the considerations brought forward in
this Report, that the expenses apparently indicated as necessary in order to place and to
maintain Melbourne and suburbs on a sound sanitary footing will be very considerable.
Of this there can be no question. But, on the other hand, there can be no question as
to the necessity for making provision for this purpose if the city is to come up to the
requirements of modern times. Under present circumstances there is an amount of
preventable sickness, and an amount of preventable mortality, which, as pecuniary loss
to the State, is to be estimated by hundreds of thousands of pounds sterling yearly.
A system, too, which subjects individual citizens to terrible and grievous losses, in
order that citizens in general shall not be taxed to an extent somewhat in advance
of what has been the custom, cannot be regarded as an equitable system. A sound
state of sanitary defence cannot be obtained without the expenditure of money; and
the choice lies between sickness and death on the one hand and what is, after all, a
relatively small outlay on the other.
The data upon which the foregoing remarks are based, and 'which, as already
stated, were obtained by personal inquiry in each of the metropolitan districts specified
at the outset, have been recorded in detail for future purposes. They afford a neces-
sary basis from which investigation may be made into the prevalence of typhoid fever,
of diphtheria, of infantile diarrhoea, and of other zymotic diseases in these districts—an
investigation which will be taken up as soon as circumstances permit.
In conclusion, I would express my grateful appreciation of the courtesy and
valuable help extended to me, while prosecuting this inquiry, by members of local
councils, by local officers, and by many private individuals.
D. ASTLEY GRESSWELL,
M.A., M.D., Oxon.
October 13 th, 1890.
* It should be stated that under section 163, Health Act 1890, a local council, whose district includes or is nearest
to the place where a ship is lying, has jurisdiction in certain of the matters referred to above. The duties of health
officers and of sanitary inspectors under port sanitary authorities in England are given in the-Appendix E.


TABLE B.
Summary of Loan Schedule, 1889, of the City of
South Melbourne.
Metalling of Streets
£6,589
Channelling of Streets
2,130
Forming, Metalling, and Channelling Streets
68,843
Asphalting sides of Roads
5,812
Wood-paving sides of Tramways ...
20,106
Drainage Works
15,510
Fencing Reserves, &c. ...
2,508
Asphalting Footpaths
...
5,446
Kerbing
...
881
Improvements to Bridges
...
875
£128,700
APPENDIX.


TABLE C.
Showing the Incidence of Typhoid Eever in, and the Number of Cases Admitted to Hospital from, the
Districts dealt with in this Report during the First Six Months of 1890.
Municipal District,
City, Town,
Borough,
or Shire.
Estimated Population, 1889.
notification made
Obligatory.
Number o£ Cases Notified,
1st January to 30th
June, 1890.
Number of Deaths Notified,
1st January to SOth
June, 1890.
Number of Cases admitted to Hospital,
1st January to SOth June, 1890.
Melbourne,
■O
<
Homoeopathic.
Children’s.
O
Melbourne
City
76,536
Prior to 1st January...
331
40
75
38
45
32
190
South Melbourne
42,469
342
37
17
33
119
9
178
Fitzroy
31,783
154
16
32
9
13
8
62-
liichinond
36,996
170
20
18
31
25
7
81
Collingwood ...
34,395
131
13
20
9
15
8
52
Prahran
36,066
202
21
2
63
10
1
76
Hawthorn
Town ...
16,436
7th March, 1890
85
8
4
21
3
2
30
Brunswick
18,472
Prior to 1st January...
207
12
22
6
14
9
51
North Melbourne
21,600
106
17
27
4
6
10
47
Footscray
16,506
it it
64
8
13
n
2
1
27
Williamstown ...
13,619
64
7
5
4
2
2
13
Essendou
9,225
7th March, 1890
25
1
5
5
i
11
Flemington & Kensington
Borough
9,069
Prior to 1st January...
58
4
6
7
2
3
18
Northcote
6,300
100
14
12
6
7
5
30
St. Kilda
18,435
83
10
1
22
7
30
Port Melbourne
12,629
87
8
12
14
13
3
42
Kew ...
6,700
17
3
3
5
8
Coburg
Shire ...
4,268
36
2
I
7
i
9
Malvern
6,405
67
7
20
5
1
26
Preston
3,300
» a
34
1
6
3
3
2
14
420,210
2,363
249
278
316
297
104
995
TABLE D.
Showing the Incidence of Diphtheria in, and the Number of Cases Admitted to Hospital from, the
Districts dealt with in this Report during the First Six Months of 1890.
Municipal District.
City, Town,
Borough,
or Shire.
1 Estimated Population, 1889.
1
Notification made
Obligatory.
Number of Cases Notified,
1st January to 30th
June, 1890.
Number of Deaths Notified,
1st January to 30th
June, 1890.
Number of Cases admitted to Hospital,
1st January to 30th June, 1890.
Melbourne.
Alfred.
o
IS
IS
a.
o
8
0
o
Children’s.
Total.
Melbourne
City ...
76,536
7tti March, 1890
83
30
5
i
17
23
South Melbourne
42,469
53
20
1
6
6
Fitzroy
31,783
Prior to 1st Jan., 1890
35
8
6
5
liichmoud
36,996
65
27
5
3
8
Collingwood
34,396
7th March, 1890
53
21
3
1
4
Prahran
36,066
Prior to 1st Jan., 1890
54
13
3
2
5
Hawthorn
Town ...
16,436
7th March, 1890
17
9
...
...
Brunswick
18,472
Prior to 1st Jan., 1890
46
12
2
2
North Melbourne
21,600
7th March, 1890
17
11
4
4
F ootscray
15,506
Prior to 1st Jan., 1890
10
6
1
1
Williamstown ...
13,619
7th March, 1890
13
4
...
Essendon
9,226
20
3
...
Flemington & Kensington
Borough
9,069
9
3
1
1
Northcote
6,300
27th June, 1890
11
3
St. Kilda
18,435
Prior to 1st Jan., 1890
90
24
5
5
16
Port Melbourne
12,629
7th March, 1890
8
4
i
1
2
Kew ...
Shire ...
6,700
Prior to 1st Jan., 1890
5
2
...
Coburg
4,268
5
...
...
Malvern
6,405
27th June, 1890
10
i
Preston
» •••
3,300
3
...
...
420,210
607
201
16
10
45
72
APPENDIX.


E.—DUTIES OF OFFICIALS UNDER SANITARY AUTHORITIES IN ENGLAND.
I.-OF A MRDICAL OFFICER OF HEALTH UNDER AN URBAN SANITERY AUTHORY.
1. He'shall inform himself as far as practicable respecting all influences affecting or threatening to
affect injuriously the public health within the district.
2. He shall inquire into and ascertain by such means as are at his disposal the causes, origin, and
distribution of diseases within the district, and ascertain to what extent the same have depended on
conditions capable of removal or mitigation.
3. He shall by inspection of the district, both systematically at certain periods, and at intervals as
occasion may require, keep himself informed of the conditions injurious to health existing therein.
4. He shall be prepared to advise the sanitary authority on all matters affecting the health of the
district, and on all sanitary points involved in the action of the sanitary authority ; and in cases requiring
it he shall certify, for the guidance of the sanitary authority or of the justices, as to any matter in respect
of which the certificate of a medical officer of health or a medical practitioner is required as the basis or in
aid of sanitary action.
5. He shall advise the sanitary authority on any question relating to health involved in the framing
and subsequent working of such by-laws and regulations as (hey may have power to make.
6. On receiving information of the outbreak of any contagious, infectious, or epidemic disease of a
dangerous character within the district, he shall visit the spot without delay and inquire into the causes and
circumstances of such outbreak, and in case he is not satisfied that all due precautions are being taken, he
shall advise the persons competent to act as to the measures which may appear to him to be required to
prevent the extension of the disease, and, so far as he may be lawfully authorized, assist in the execution of
the same.
7. Subject to the instructions of the sanitary authority, he shall direct or superintend the work of
the inspector of nuisances in the way and to the extent that the sanitary authority shall approve, and on
receiving information from the inspector of nuisances that his intervention is required in consequence of
the existence of any nuisance injurious to health, or of any overcrowding in a house, he shall, as early
as practicable, take such steps authorized by The Public Health Act 1875, in that behalf, as the
circumstances of the case may justify and require.
8. In any case in which it may appear to him to be necessary or advisable, or in which he shall be
so directed by the sanitary authority, he shall himself inspect and examine any animal, carcase, meat,
poultry, game, flesh, fish, fruit, vegetables, corn, bread, flour, or milk exposed for sale, or deposited for the
purpose of sale or of preparation for sale, and intended for the food of man, which is deemed to be diseased,
or unsound, or unwholesome, or unfit for the food of man ; and if he finds that such animal or article is
diseased, or unsound, or unwholesome, or unfit for the food of man, he shall give such directions as may be
necessary for causing the same to he seized, taken, and carried away, in order to be dealt with by a justice
according to the provisions of the statutes applicable to the case.
9. He shall perform all the duties imposed upon him by any by-laws and regulations of the sanitary-
authority, duly confirmed, in respect of any matter affecting the public health, and touching which they are
authorized to frame by-laws and regulations.
10. He shall inquire into any offensive process of trade carried on within the district, and report on
the appropriate means for the prevention of any nuisance or injury to health therefrom.
11. He shall attend at the office of the sanitary authority or at some other appointed place, at such
stated times as they may direct.
12. He shall from time to time report in writing to the sanitary authority, his proceedings, and the
measures which may require to he adopted for the improvement or protection of the public health in the
district. He shall in like manner report with respect to the sickness and mortality within the district, so
far as he has been enabled to ascertain the same.
13. He shall keep a book or books, to be provided by the sanitary authority, in which he shall make
an entry of his visits, and notes of his observations and instructions thereon, and also the date and nature
of applications made to him, the date and result of the action taken thereon, and of any action taken on
previous reports ; and shall produce such book or books, whenever required to the sanitary authority.
14. He shall also prepare an annual report, to be made to the end of December in each year,
comprising a summary of the action taken during the year for preventing the spread of disease, and an
account of the sanitary state of his district generally at the end of the year. The report shall also contain
an account of the inquiries which he has made as to conditions injurious to health existing in his district,
and of the proceedings in which he has taken part or advised under The Public Health Act 1875, so far as
such proceedings relate to those conditions ; and also an account of the supervision exercised by him, or on
his advice, for sanitary purposes, over places and houses that the sanitary authority have power to regulate,
with the nature and results of any proceedings which may have been so required and taken in respect of
No. 205.—11123 C
APPENDIX.


the same during the year. It shall also record the action taken by him, or on his advice, daring the year,
in regard to offensive trades, and to factories and workshops. The report shall also contain tabular
statements (on forms to be supplied by the Local Government Board, or to the like effect) of the sickness
and mortality within the district, classified according to diseases, ages, and localities.*
15. He shall give immediate information to the Local Government Board of any outbreak of
dangerous epidemic disease within the district, and shall transmit to the Board a copy of each annual and
ofany special report.
16. In matters not specifically provided for in this Order, he shall observe and execute the instructions
of the Local Government Board on the duties of medical officers of health, and all the lawful orders and
directions of the sanitary authority applicable to his office.
17. Whenever the Local Government Board shall make regulations for all or any of the purposes
specified in section 134 of The Public Health Act 1875, and shall declare the regulations so made to be in
force within any area comprising the whole or any part of the district, he shall observe such regulations,
so far as the same relate to or concern his office.
II. —DUTIES OF A MEDICAL OFFICER OF HEALTH UNDER A PORT SATNIARY AUTHORITY.
1. He shall inform himself as far as practicable respecting all influences affecting or threatening to
affect injuriously the health of crews and other persons on ship-board within the district.
2. He shall inquire into and ascertain by such moans as are at his disposal the causes, origin, and
distribution of diseases in the ships and other vessels within the district, and ascertain to what extent the
same have depended oh conditions capable of removal or mitigation.
3. He shall by inspection of the shipping in the district keep himself informed of the conditions
njufious to health existing therein.
4. He shall be prepared to advise the port sanitary authority on all matters affecting the health of
the crews and other persons on ship-board in the district, and on all sanitary points involved in the action
of the port sanitary authority ; and in cases requiring it, he shall certify, for the guidance of the port
sanitary authority or of the justices as to any matter in respect of which the certificate of a medical officer
of health or a medical practitioner is required as the basis or in aid of sanitary action.
5. He shall advise the port sanitary authority on any question relating to health involved in the
framing and subsequent working of such by-laws and regulations as they may have power to make.
6. On receiving information of the arrival within the district of any ship or other vessel having any
infectious or epidemic disease of a dangerous character on board, or of the outbreak of any such disease 6h
board any ship or other vessel within the district, he shall visit the vessel without delay and inquire into
the causes and circumstances of such outbreak, and advise the persons competent to act as to the measures
which may appear to him to be required to prevent the extension of the disease, and, so far as he may bo
lawfully authorized, assist in the execution of the same.
7. On receiving information from the inspector of nuisances that his intervention is required in
consequence of the existence of any nuisance injurious to health, or of any overcrowding in a ship or other
vessel, he shall, as early ns practicable, take such steps authorized by The Public Health Act 1873) in that
behalf, as the circumstances of the case may justify and require.
8. He shall perform all the duties imposed upon him by any by-laws and regulations of the port
sanitary authority, duly confirmed, in respect of any matter affecting the public health, and toUchihg which
they are authorized to frame by-laws and regulations.
9. He shall attend at the office of the port sanitary authority, or at some other appointed place, at
such stated times as they ma'y direct.
10. He shall from time to time report in writing to the port sanitary authority his proceedings, and
the measures which may require to be adopted for the improvement or protection of the health of crews or
other persons on ship-board within the district. He shall in like manner report with respect to the
sickness and mortality Of persons on ship-board within the district, so far as he has been enabled to
ascertain the same.
11. He shall keep a book or books, to be provided by the port sanitary authority, in which he shall
make an entry of his visits, and notes of his observations and instructions thereon, and also the date and
nature of applications made to him, the date and result of the action taken thereon, and of every action
taken on previous reports ; and shall produce such book or books, whenever required, to the port sanitary
authority.
12. He shall also prepare an annual report, to be made to the end of December in each year,
comprising tabular statements (so far as he shall have been able to obtain the necessary information) of the
sickness and mortality of persons on ship-board within the district, classified according to diseases, ages, and
vessels ; and a summary of the action taken during the year for preventing the spread of disease. The
report shall also contain an account of the proceedings in which he has taken part or advised under The
Public Health Act 1875, so far as such proceedings relate to conditions dangerous or injurious to health,
and also an account of the supervision exercised by him or on his advice for sanitary purposes, over places
and vessels that the port sanitary authority has power to regulate, with the nature and results of any
proceedings which may have been so required and taken in respect of the same during the year,
13. He shall give immediate information to the Local Government Board of any outbreak of
infectious or epidemic disease of a dangerous character on ship-board within the district, and shall transmit
to the Board a copy of each annual and of any special report.
_ * The forms here referred to are two tables in which entries are to he made setting forth full details as to mortality
and sickness from different diseases among persons of different age and sex in the various groups of population in the
sanitary district.


14. Where ahy vessel within his district has had dangerous infectious disease on board, he shall
give notice thereof to the medical officer of health of any port within the United Kingdom whither such
vesSel is about to sailv
15. He shall observe and execute, SO far as they may be applicable to his office, the rules and
regulations of the Local Government Board in force for the time being, and any instructions of the said
Board, and the lawful orders and directions of the port sanitary authority.
III.—DUTIES OF AN INSPECTOR UNDER AN URBAN SINITARY AUTEHORITY.
1. He shall perform, either under the special directions of the sanitary authority, or (so far as
.-authorized by the sanitary authority) under the directions of the medical officer of health, or in cases where
.no such directions are required* Without such directions, all the duties specially imposed upon an inspector
.of nuisanbes by the Sanitary Acts* or by the orders of the LOcal Government Board.
2. He shall attend all meetings of the sanitary authority when so required.
3. He Shall by inspection of the district, both systematically at certain periods, and at intervals as
Occasion hVay rCqUite, keep himself informed in respect of the nuisances existing therein that require
AbateiheHt uhd'er the Sanitary Acts.
4. On receiving notice of the existence of any nuisance within the district, or of the breach of any
■by-laws or regulations made by the sanitary authority for the suppression of nuisances, he shall, as early
as practicable, visit the spot, and inquire into such alleged nuisance or breach of by-laws or regulations.
5. He shall report to the sanitary authority any noxious or offensive businesses, trades, of
manufactories established within the district, and the breach or non-observance of any by-laws or regulations
made in respect of the same.
,6. He shall report to the sanitary authority any damage done to any works of water supply, or other
works belonging to them, and also any case of wilful or negligent waste of water supplied by them; or any
fouling by gas, filth, or otherwise, of water used for domestic purposes.
7. He shall from time to time, and forthwith upon complaint, visit and inspect the shops and places
kept or used for the sale of butchers’ meat, poultry, fish, fruit, vegetables, corn, bread, or flour, or as a
slaughter-house, and examine any animal, carcase, meat, poultry, game, flesh, fish, fruit, vegetables, corn,
bread, or flour which may be therein ; and in case any such article appear to him to be intended for the
food of man, and to be unfit for such food, he shall cause the same to be seized, and take such other
proceedings as may be necessary in order to have the same dealt with by a justice : provided that in any
case of doubt arising under this clause, he shall report the matter to the medical officer of health, with the
view of obtaining his advice thereon.
8. He shall, when and as directed by the sanitary authority, procure and submit samples of food or
drink, and drugs suspected to be adulterated, to be analyzed by the analyst appointed under The Adulteration
of Food Act 1872, and upon receiving a certificate stating that the articles of food or drink, or drugs, are
adulterated, cause a complaint to be made, and take the other proceedings prescribed by that Act.
9. He shall give immediate notice to the medical officer of health of the occurrence within his district
of any contagious, infectious, or epidemic disease of a dangerous character; and whenever it appears to
him that the intervention of such officer is necessary in consequence of the existence of any nuisance
injurious to health, or of any overcrowding in a house, he shall forthwith inform the medical officer
thereof.
10. He shall, subject in all respects to the directions of the sanitary authority, attend to the
instructions of the medical officer of health with respect to any measures which can be lawfully taken by
him under the Sanitary Acts, for preventing the spread of any contagious, infectious, or epidemic disease of
a dangerous character.
11. He shall enter from day to day, in a book to be provided by the sanitary authority, particulars
of his inspections and of the action taken by him in the execution of his duties. He shall also keep a book
or books, to be provided by the sanitary authority, so arranged as to form, as far as possible, a continuous
record of the sanitary condition of each of the premises in respect of which any action has been taken under
the Sanitary Acts, and shall keep any other systematic records that the sanitary authority may require.
12. He shall at all reasonable times, when applied to by the medical officer of health, produce to
him his books, or any of them, and render to him such information as he may be able to furnish with
respect to any matter to which the duties of inspector of nuisances relate.
13. He shall, if directed by the sanitary authority to do so, superintend and see to the due execution
of all works which may be undertaken under their direction for the suppression or removal of nuisances
within the district.
14. In matters not specifically provided for in this Order, he shall observe and execute all the lawful
orders and directions of the sanitary authority, and the Orders of the Local Government Board which may
be hereafter issued, applicable to his office.
IV.—DUTIES OF AN INSPECTOR UNDER AN URBAN SINITARY AUTEHHORTY.
1. He shall perform, either under the special directions of the port sanitary authority, or (so far as
authorized by the port sanitary authority) under the directions of the medical officer of health, or in cases
where no such directions are required, without such directions, all the duties specially imposed upon an
inspector of nuisances by the sections of The Public Health Act 1875, which shall apply to the port
sanitary authority, or by the Orders of the Local Government Board, so far as the same apply to his office.
2. He shall attend all meetings of the port sanitary authority when so required.


3. He shall, by inspection of the shipping in the district, keep himself informed in respect of the
nuisances existing therein that require abatement under The Public Health Act 1875.
4. On receiving notice of the existence of any nuisance on board of any ship or other vessel -within
the district, or of the breach of any hy-laws or regulations made by the port sanitary authority for the
suppression of nuisances, he shall, as early as practicable, visit the vessel, and inquire into such alleged
nuisance or breach of by-laws or regulations.
5. He shall give immediate notice to the medical officer of health of the occurrence within his
district of any infectious or epidemic disease of a dangerous character, or of the arrival within the district
of any ship or other vessel having such disease on board ; and whenever it appears to him that the
intervention of such officer is necessary in consequence of the existence of any nuisance injurious to health,
or of any overcrowding in a vessel, he shall forthwith inform the medical officer thereof.
6. He shall, subject in all respects to the directions of the port sanitary authority, attend to the
instructions of the medical officer of health with respect to any measures which can be lawfully taken by
him under The Public Health Act 1875, for preventing the spread of any infectious or epidemic disease of
a dangerous character.
7. He shall enter from day to day, in a book to be provided by the port sanitary authority,
particulars of his inspections and of the action taken by him in the execution of his duties. He shall also
keep a book or books, to be provided by the port sanitary authority, so arranged as to form, as far as
possible, a record of the sanitary condition of each of the ships or other vessels in respect of which any
action has been taken under the Sanitary Acts, and shall keep any other systematic records that the port
sanitary authority may require.
8. He shall at all reasonable times, when applied to by the medical officer of health, produce to him
his books, or any of them, and render to him such information as he may be able to furnish with respect to
any matter to which the duties of inspector of nuisances relate.
9. He shall observe and execute, so far as they may be applicable to his office, the rules and
regulations of the Local Government Board in force for the time being, and any instructions of the said
Board, and the lawful orders and directions of the port sanitary authority.
Authority: Kobt. S. Brain, Government Printer, Melbourne,
