

REPORT OF MEETING
ON
“proportional
Representation,”
OR EFFECTIVE VOTING,
HELD AT
RIVER HOUSE, CHELSEA,
ON
Tuesday, July 10th, 1894.
ADDRESSES BY
MISS SPENCE. MR. BALFOUR.
MR. COURTNEY. SIR JOHN LUBBOCK.
AND
SIR JOHN HALL.
London:
JOHN BALE & SONS,
87-89, GREAT TITCHFIELD STREET, OXFORD STREET, W.
1894.
[Price Sixpence.




REPORT OF MEETING
ON
“Proportional
Representation."
OR EFFECTIVE VOTING,
HELD AT
RIVER HOUSE, CHELSEA,
ON
Tuesday, July 10th, 1894.
ADDRESSES BY
MISS SPENCE. MR. BALFOUR.
MR. COURTNEY. SIR JOHN LUBBOCK.
AND
SIR JOHN HALL.
ILon&on:
JOHN BALE & SONS,
87-89, GREAT TITCHFIELD STREET, OXFORD STREET, W.
1894.




WHAT PROPORTIONAL REPRESENTATION
MEANS.
As the subject of Proportional Representation or Effective
Voting is new to the general public, it may be necessary
to define what it means, and wherein it differs from the
present method, which is supposed roughly to give the
strength of the two main parties. England is now divided
into one-member districts, and if there is one more vote
given for the Conservative than for the Liberal candidate,
the district is represented by a Conservative. If there is
one more Liberal vote than Conservative the district is
represented by a Liberal.
Proportional Representation demands enlargement of
electorates, so as to make them return from five to ten
members. Let us take as example the cities of Leeds
and Liverpool. If Leeds was taken as a whole, instead
of being divided into five electorates, then the elector
could vote for any candidate who was nominated, and
would probably have a choice of ten or twelve. He must
record his vote at the polling place where he is registered,
but he has absolute liberty of choice amongst all the
candidates for Leeds. Last election out of 57,629 regis-
tered voters 46,044 came to the poll, 24,649 were on the
winning side ; 21,395 voted for unsuccessful candidates and
were unrepresented. Divide 46,044 by 5, and it gives as
quotient 9,208 —which is the quota needed for the return
of any candidate offering for Leeds.
Liverpool is divided into nine separate districts, but a
catch or snatch plurality in these nine districts, does not
give the clear judicial voice of that great city as quota
representation would do. There were 52,323 votes re-
corded out of 77,785 on the rolls, and of these 21,095 were
given for unsuccessful candidates. The quota found by
dividing by 9 is 5,813 votes, which is the number of votes
needed for the return of one representative for Liverpool.
Gan any one say that Liverpool is equitably represented by


7 Conservatives, 1 Liberal and 1 Nationalist. 21,095 votes
were lost in minorities, and many of the 25,462 electors who
did not come to the poll would have recorded their votes
if they had been assured that these would have been
counted for some man of whom they approved.
Very popular candidates, however, are likely to have
more votes than the needed quota, and many candidates
may not be able to make up the required number; so in
order to make every vote effective, the elector has the power
of giving contingent votes in case his first choice does not
need his vote or cannot use it. He marks his first favourite
with the figure one, his second two, and so on through five
or six choices, on the same principle as a subscriber to a
circulating library, who has a right to one book, sends by a
messenger a list of five or six books in the order of his pre-
ference. If the messenger can obtain the first book he asks
no further, but if it is out he asks for the second, if that is
out he asks for the third, and so on. In like manner the
first man on the elector’s list who needs his vote and can
use it, has it counted for him as an integral part of his
quota.
In America and in Australia, I used the simple Hare
quota, dividing the votes given by the number of repre-
sentatives required. At the River House meeting, the
scrutineers used what is called the Droop quota, divid-
ing by one more than the number required, and adding
one to the answer. It probably makes no difference to the
result, but popular audiences prefer the simple quota of
Thomas Hare. In counting the votes, the surplus is first
allotted according to second and further choice, then the
votes given to the man lowest on the poll, who has no
chance of making up a quota, are distributed according to
contingent choice. This process is repeated, always taking
the lowest for distribution, till all are eliminated but the
number needed ; five, say, for Leeds, and nine for Liver-
pool, who are then declared elected, though one or two may
be short of the quota. The method may be seen in a con-
crete form in the explanatory note at the conclusion of this
report, in a scrutiny of 3,824 votes given in South Australia.
C. H. S.


REPORT
OF
DRAWING-ROOM MEETING ON PROPORTIONAL
REPRESENTATION.
On Tuesday, July 10th, 1894, a meeting of the Women’s
Liberal Unionist Association was held, by kind permission
of Mrs. Westlake, at Eiver House, Chelsea Embankment,
London. The object of the meeting was to hear an address
on “ Proportional Representation,” by Miss Spence, from
South Australia. Amongst those present were Lady
Stanley of Alderley; Viscount and Viscountess Morpeth;
Lord Rothschild; Rev. Dr. Story, Moderator of the
Church of Scotland; Lady Elizabeth Biddulph; Lady
Frances Balfour; Lady Laura Palmer ; Sir John Lubbock,
M.P., and Lady Lubbock; Arthur J. Balfour, M.P.; Leo-
nard Courtney, M.P., and Mrs. Courtney; W. Arnold
Foster, M.P. ; Mr. Jacks, M.P.; Mr. and Mrs. Charles
Booth ; Mrs. Fawcett; Miss Shaw; Sir John Hall, of New
Zealand ; Dr. and Mrs. Westlake.
Dr. Westlake, in introducing Miss Spence, said she had
devoted a large part of her life to what he believed to be
one of the most important causes that could be brought
before the people of this or any other country.
Miss Spence, who was very cordially received, said:


Mr. Chairman, Ladies and Gentlemen, —This subject is not
with me one of to-day or of yesterday. It is more than
thirty years since I was first attracted to what would make
the democracy that I love real and safe and progressive,
and would keep within it all those valuable conservative
elements of which all democracies have the greatest need.-
After thirty years of writing where I could get admission
into the columns of Australian newspapers, I was led to
abandon my position as an obscure, anonymous writer, for
that of a public speaker upon any platform open to me, by
the democratic developments in my own country of Aus-
tralia ; for although I was born in Scotland, I went out to
Australia at the age of 13, when South Australia was not
three years old, and I have watched the development of
Australian conditions and Australian Society with interest,
with anxiety, and yet with an overmastering hope. Now
when I reach England, the land in which this reform was
devised, now when I stand in the house of the daughter of
my friend, Thomas Hare, when I think he died without
seeing any fruit of his labours, I feel as if it were more and
more incumbent on me, and on all who think with me, to
carry on the campaign until we lead it to victory.
I feel more hesitation in speaking in England than I did
in America, because here is the birthplace of party govern-
ment ; here it has been elaborated to the greatest perfec-
tion ; and here it has been carried on with more honesty
and uprightness than anywhere else in the world. When I
spoke in my own colony of South Australia, and in Victoria
and New South Wales, people said to me : “ We are not very
bad, our politics are not corrupt. All sorts of people get
into our Parliaments; goto America.” When I went to
America people said ; : “ Oh, we are too bad, our politicians
are too strong, our bosses and our party machinery fight
against reform ; go back to Australia.” But there is such a
thing as evolution in a sound society, and where the


society is sound, and it can see what is for progress and
for truth and for justice, it can surely carry that out. And
there is also such a thing as revolution in an unsound society,
when things become so bad that they are past endurance.
Therefore on the two lines of evolution and almost of re-
volution I have spoken in Australia and in America. I have
made nearly sixty public addresses in Australia. I have
made nearly one hundred in America.
In studying the democratic developments which I think
enforce the need of Proportional Representation in Aus-
tralia and in America, I shall begin with Australia, because
there I consider that democratic development has been
more normal. It has not been checked in various ways by
a written constitution. There is an elasticity in our Aus-
tralian Legislatures and in our Australian politics which is
impossible in a land like America, where they are bound by
a written constitution. Now, for a long time our parties
were somewhat loosely held—not in any way organised.
Politics were very much personal, and ministries were out
and in with very little apparent cause, but of late years
there has arisen something like real organisation of parties,
these being Capital and Labour. Now the problem of our
time, the great problem that stands before you and me,
and all of us, is how to make Labour and Capital work
together in a friendly manner for the good of all. For they
are not .enemies, they ought to be friends ; and when I saw
in every constituency in Australia Labour and Capital
organised as enemies and fighting duels for victory, it
seemed to me that now was the time to speak, instead of
writing, and by my voice to urge the justice and the reason-
ableness of the reform, while by voting papers and by
the scrutiny after each meeting, I convinced my hearers
that the thing was simple and eminently practicable.
I changed the title of “Proportional Representation” for
that of “Effective Voting.” Under that title I have


spoken in Australia and in America, because I appealed to
the experience of every one of my hearers that so many
votes are ineffective, and that the politicians wish to have it
so. The business of party politicians is to make all votes
ineffective but those which are polled in their own favour;
the business of parties is too much “ a conspiracy on the
part of one half of the clever men in the world to prevent
the other clever half from having anything to do with the
matter, and the rightful office of the Opposition, which
should be that it should see that the Government does the
Nation’s work well, becomes in practice an endeavour to
prevent the Government from doing the Nation’s work at
all.” Well, we need all the elements in our society, all the
elements in the body politic, to make a true and a real
society.
Five years ago I was asked by a struggling San Francisco
journalist to go to America and help in the cause which he
considered the cause of civilization. The exclusion of
minorities from all representation, the dividing sharply into
two parties of Eepublicans and Democrats, with the divi-
sion of the spoils among the victors, was threatening the
liberty and the civilization of the United States. One
great war he firmly believed might have been averted if
minorities had been represented in Congress—the great
civil war. Slavery might have been abolished gradually
and peacefully without the cost of a million of lives and
two billions of treasure. But he said also that if there were
not means taken for educated and intelligent minorities to
have a voice in the legislature ; if the country were put into
the hands of the astute, wealthy minorities which stood at
the back of the wire-pullers and ticket preparers, he saw
before him a war more dreadful than the last terrible civil
war was.
I think that we must acknowledge that there is news
from Chicago and San Francisco showing that there is a


strong uprising amongst the people, who are dissatisfied,
discontented and rebellious, because the Labour party in
America really is quite helpless at the polls. Between the
upper and nether millstone of the Democratic and the
Republican parties, Labour, Temperance, Fiscal Reform,
and all other reforms are excluded.
There ought always to be, and there will always be in the
world two natural parties—the party of order and the party
of progress. It is a sad thing for any country when order,
caste or privilege stifles progress; it is a happy thing for
any country when progress moves on attended by order;
but the great American parties do not pretend, either of
them, to be the party of order or the party of progress.
True, they promise progress when they are out of office, but
so soon as they have the power they become the party of
reaction or of standing still.
Then why do we call America a democratic country?
Why do we call this the outcome of democracy ? America
is not democratic enough. In the first place she excludes
the voice of one-half of her citizens —the women —and
that in a more remarkable way than it is excluded in
England, because no woman has even a vote for the muni-
cipality, except in one or two States. Women pay heavy
taxes, and they have no voice in the choosing of those
people who spend or levy the taxes; while any boy of
twenty-one, who has not a sixpence or a stake in the
country has a municipal vote for dealing with millions of
money in such cities as New York, Philadelphia and
Chicago, so that the women certainly have a great grievance,
and I sympathise with it. None the less they are the
greatest social factor in the United States. Nowhere are
women so powerful socially as in America; nowhere are
they so weak politically. Not only are these women all
excluded except in Colorado and Wyoming, where they
have the full vote, but all intelligent minorities are excluded.


Owing to the uni-nominal (one-member) districts into which
America is divided for Congress, and owing to the law by
which a man cannot stand for any district in which he does
not reside, the best men are not induced to come forward,
and if they do come forward for one term, it is very
questionable if they will succeed in being elected for a
second time. For instance, Charles A. Sumner, of San
Francisco, had served a term in Congress with credit, and
when he sought re-election, his own party, the Democratic,
opposed him. Why ? Because in his place in Congress he
had advocated a genuine postal telegraph. In England the
postal telegraph belongs to the nation. You know the tele-
graph is a monopoly in America, and I think it is the most
mischievous monopoly that they have at the present time,
because it throttles the press. Any newspaper which op-
poses it or opposes the great magnates who own the rail-
roads, who hold mortgages on millions of farms or who are
concerned in the trusts and syndicates, are liable to be
boycotted by the telegraph, either by delay, or refusing a
message, or by putting high rates upon them. Well, Charles
Sumner, in his place in Congress, had advocated this public
utility being nationalised like the post office, and for that
reason he had made himself obnoxious to all the monied
interests in California, and he was defeated. He could not
stand in any other place, and that valuable man has been
kept out of Congress for ten years in consequence of this
action of his. Now there are thousands in San Francisco,
and tens of thousands in California who would have voted
for Charles Sumner on account of this very action, but not
any certain majority or plurality in any one of the seven
districts into which California is divided. Under propor-
tional representation Charles Sumner would have been sure
of re-election so that he might continue to advocate this
great reform.
Democracy rightly understood contains within itself the


saving salt of honesty and intelligence; but when it is a
mete question of numbers, when it is a mere question of
majority in separated districts such as you have divided
your beautiful England into—much to my sorrow—it is
very difficult for reforming elements to enter in. I was
very much struck with the fact that in America, with a
paid House of Representatives, with a paid Legislature,
and with absolute manhood suffrage, Labour is absolutely
unrepresented in the Congress and in State Legislatures.
Labour is defeated upon side issues. The Republican
party, which is the high tariff party, tries to persuade the
wage-earner that his high wages depend upon the protec-
tive tariff. The Democratic party appeals more to the
Western farmer, who has to send his produce naked and
unprotected into the markets of the world, while everything
that he buys, machinery or clothing, is loaded with high
duties. Therefore many vote for the Democratic party in
hopes of an improvement in the tariff, which I think has
been so far pretty illusory, because when the Democrats
get in upon this plea, they seem to wriggle out of their
promises to their constituents. Great is the “ machine ”
and the “boss” in America. This is partly owing to the
large number of voters to be handled, and partly to the
“ spoils ” system, which makes public offices the reward of
successful electioneering agents.
Of course, it was of no use for me to speak to the out-
and-out Democrats, or out-and-out Republicans. They
have the turn of the pendulum; they have their chance
of victory and spoils; and so I had to address myself to the
great and increasing army of the discontented—those who
are unrepresented and misrepresented, whichever faction
is uppermost.
I had the good fortune to be at Chicago when the Con-
gress for Proportional Representation was held last August.
We formed a league, then and there, for propagandism in


America and in Canada, and the result of our work for the
last eleven months has been that many voluntary organisa-
tions have adopted the system in their meetings ; that it is
being used at many primary meetings for the election of can-
didates ; and that the press, which had hitherto observed
a “ safe conspiracy of silence,” has found it necessary to
take some notice of what we are doing.
So long as the outside parties are contented with any
crumbs that may be offered to them from the dominant
parties, so long will we make very little progress. Third
parties in a majority representation are either hopelessly
weak or mischievously strong. They are hopelessly weak if
they try to run a candidate of their own; they are mis-
chievously strong when they sit on the fence and bargain
for the ends they have in view from either of the other
parties. To restore those outside parties to their proper
weight, no less and no more, is the aim of Proportional
Representation.
It has been suggested that Proportional Representation
will fill the Parliament with faddists. Now, faddists are
not bad things in their way, but still we do not want too
many of them in Parliament, and probably under Mr. Hare
and Mr. Mill’s great scheme, in which there was one con-
stituency for Great Britain and Ireland, it is very likely
that a good many extremists would have found their way
into Parliament; but under the modification which Sir
John Lubbock has presented to the world in England,
and which my friends and I have presented in America
and Australia, there is no fear of faddists. If you have a
constituency to return five, or six, or seven, the man who
gets the fifth, or sixth, or seventh of the votes can win a
seat, but the opinion which is held by such a proportion of
the constituency is not a mere fad, it deserves consideration.
While human life becomes more and more complex, here
we find the most enlightened nations in the world satisfied


with only two issues, and dividing up their country into
pens to fight a duel in between those two. We find that
life is not to be classified in that way. Great is the term
“Liberal”; great also is the term “Conservative”; but
they do not embrace all life; and there are some men in
our midst whose colours are not those of the party, and
whose weapons are not those of the duel, whom a better
system of representation would admit into our legislative
halls and into our municipalities, free and untrammelled to
speak the truth as it seems to them. We cannot have too
much of truth. We cannot limit the tides of the spirit, either
in religion, or in politics, or in sociology. In America I met
with people who were extremists, but what noble men and
women, full of the enthusiasm of humanity! So long as
they talk only to other extremists, so long they become
more and more extreme ; but admit them into practical
politics, and their corners will be rubbed off, and they will
see what they can obtain, and what they must submit to
have shorn off from their programme.
It was a revelation to me when I read Mr. Hare’s great
plan. Twenty years before, when I was a girl of 15, my
father was Town Clerk of the first Municipality of the
little city of Adelaide, and in the Act for that Municipality
there was a clause providing for quorum or quota repre-
sentation. A twentieth part of the ratepayers, by accumu-
lating their votes upon one man, could elect a common
councilman out of a council of eighteen. Two councillors
were elected by that method at the first election. My
father explained it to me. It was inserted by Rowland
Hill, afterwards the great Post Office reformer, as a con-
tribution to the science of representation. But in this
Adelaide Municipality, voters had to meet and to confer
together, and to decide for whom they were to vote;
whereas by Mr. Hare’s method, voters who never meet
can combine. People who agree in principle can give


tbeir votes to the man of their choice, and the thing
has an elasticity and a perfection which was absent from
this bill; but it seems to me as if my little colony and my
insignificant self had something to do with Proportional
Representation from that time when first I saw something
of it, at the age of 15.
In a free country the Government is both the master and
servant of the people. As our master, it is to be obeyed;
so long as laws are laws we must obey them, though we
may think them bad, and may do our utmost to get them
changed. But as our servant the Government must be
watched and checked. “ Eternal vigilance,” says Jefferson,
the great democrat, “is the price of liberty.” At present,
in America I saw this eternal vigilance was exercised by the
political machine, not by the citizens, and eternal vigilance
on the part of a machine means slavery for the citizens. I
went into Canada. Party politics there are certainly not so
corrupt as in America : they are more on the lines of our
Australian politics, but the great desire for appropriations,
the desire to get money into a district, or into a State, or
into a Province causes a great deal of dishonesty and waste
of, public money. Local influence, local pressure upon any
Government which is yielded to, in order to secure votes, is
a most demoralising thing; we suffer from it in Australia
too, I suppose there is such a thing as local appropriations
in England. Every place likes public money to be spent.
If: the thing is of no use it gives employment at the time
(Mr. Courtney : “ Dock yards ”), but if everybody clamours
for public money, and if everybody gets it, it is a very dear
business for the country.
In a country which is democratic such as mine is, and in
England the trend is unmistakably in the same direction,
it is of the greatest importance for the Conservative element
that it should be properly represented, and therefore that
minorities should be represented. You may say, “ Why


did you give manhood suffrage ? ” It may appear to many
well-meaning people that it would be much better to give
plural votes and treble votes, and all this sort of thing, but
it really would not be so conservative as setting free the
minorities, as Mr. Hare’s system can do. Ability, integrity
and experience would have far greater weight when repre-
senting a quota of equals than when representing a majority
due to plural voting. Truth is stronger than error, wisdom
greater than folly, when the field is free to all.
Another great benefit is that no one vote neutralises
another vote. When I shall ask you to vote this afternoon
you will find this is true. That any handful of votes should
neutralise a great many is unmoral and dangerous. Money
and promises can induce those votes to turn over to the one
side or to the other, so that a plurality-elected legislature
may really represent a good many of those wavering and
corruptible votes. Now come and let us reason togethei.
It is easier for a good man to get a quota in a large district
than a plurality in a small one, and he may get it in the
best way, by courage, by honesty, by character and by ex-
perience. It is easier for a bad man to get a plurality in a
small district than a quota in a large one, and he may get
it by appealing to passion and popular feeling, by mis-
representing his opponents, by inducing too many competi-
tors to enter the field, if not by bribery outright.
The importance of this reform to me is such that while I
have my breath I will speak for it, and so long as I live I
shall try to make my fellow-countrymen know that here
lies safety and honour and peace.
The Eight Hon. A. J. Balfour, M.P., said : Ladies and
gentlemen, —We must all have listened, I think, with the
profoundest interest to the fervent address in favour of the
principle of minority representation that has been just
made to us by Miss Spence. She has had an experience of
Democratic societies, all, no doubt, of Anglo-Saxon origin


and traditions, but which have risen and flourished under
very different conditions and in very different parts of the
world, and the strength of her convictions, which must
have impressed themselves upon every one of her hearers,
is a sufficient proof of the dangers that she has observed in
the modern development of democracy, and of the firm
conviction that she possesses, that the chief remedy for
these dangers is to be found in the full representation of
minorities. I shall hardly be asked to criticise what she
has told us, or to give at length my own views upon the
subject. I may go thus far, however: I may say that in
England it appears to me at present, whatever the future
has in store for us, we do not suffer under one particular
class of dangers which minority representation is calculated
to cure. We must all have been struck, I think, with the
concrete illustration Miss Spence gave of the manner in
which very distinguished political talent can be excluded
from American politics by the particular system adopted in
America, and she showed conclusively in my judgment that
that evil would be entirely removed if some form, even some
very crude and rough form of minority representation could
be adopted there. Ido not think at present that we suffer
from this in England. Ido not believe that there has been
a single man of real talent for politics who has ever found
himself very long excluded from the political arena by the
difficulty of finding a constituency to elect him. Such cases
may exist, but I cannot recall any at the present moment.
But if we do not suffer, as I think we do not, from this
particular evil, no doubt there is an evil from which we do
suffer or may suffer. It is that the men, when you have
elected them, will not feel themselves after their election in
a position of sufficient independence in Parliament to do
more than merely act as the mouthpiece of a certain section
of their constituents. You will get the men. I am not
sure that you will always endow the men when you have


got them with a sufficient independence of character, and
the double danger which we have got to avoid is, on the one
hand, electing Members of Parliament who, when elected,
become mere party machines; and on the other, electing
Members of Parliament who will feel themselves so inde-
pendent of party ties that the system of party government
will become an impossibility, and with the absence of a
system of party government, that comparative —I am afraid
I cannot use any other word—that comparative stability of
administration, which so far the English system has been
able to secure us may not remain. These are the dangers
on the one side and on the other which I think do lie in
wait in the future developments of democracy in this
country. Whether they would be entirely avoided by the
scheme which Miss Spence recommends, I do not venture
to say, but I am convinced that it is of great importance to
bring before the imagination of our countrymen the fact
that our so-called system of representation leaves un-
represented a very large number even of those who have
votes. Ido not talk of those who have not got votes, but
even of those who have votes, and that undoubtedly it may
be possible that a time will arrive when we shall feel that
what Miss Spence has called the “ machine ” has so driven
the individuality and the courage out of those whom the
constituencies have sent to represent them, that practically
Parliament will not consist of a series of comparatively
independent individuals attempting to do the work of the
country, but will simply consist of a series of mindless
units, bound by the very conditions under which they were
elected, to support, not a particular policy, but a particular
set of individuals, and any policy which those individuals
may adopt. Ladies and Gentlemen, I will not trouble you
more with any stray observations of my own upon this
important and this very difficult question; but lam sure
I am only representing the unanimous opinion which all


must have felt, when I express our sense of gratitude to
Miss Spence for the most interesting address which she has
been good enough to deliver to us this afternoon.
Here the audience were requested to vote on the following
ballot paper:
In this Test Election Five Representatives are to be elected.
Order of
Preference.
ASQUITH, Rt. Hon. H. H.
BALEOUR, Rt. Hon. A. J.
BURNS, JOHN
CHAMBERLAIN, Rt. Hon. JOSEPH
DILLON, JOHN
GORST, Rt. Hon. Sir JOHN
LAWSON, Sir WILFRED
LUBBOCK, Rt. Hon. Sir JOHN
VINCENT, HOWARD
DIRECTIONS TO VOTERS.
1. Each voter has one effective vote and votes by putting
the figure 1 against the name of the candidate he likes
best; 2 against the name of the candidate he likes second
best; 3 against the name of the candidate he likes third
best, and so on.
2. The vote will be given to the candidate against whose
name the voter has put the figure 1; but if that candidate
should not require the vote then it will be given to the
candidate against whose name the voter has put the figure
2, and so on.


3. The voting paper will be spoiled if the same figure is
put against more than one name.
While the votes were counted in another room, proceed-
ings were continued.
Sir John Lubbock, M.P., said : Ladies and gentlemen,—
I have been asked to say a few words as to the reasons
which have made me as zealous and earnest a supporter of
Proportional Representation even as our friend Miss Spence.
Now, in the first place, let me just recall to you what
happens when we have to decide an election. One man is
to be elected and the constituency is asked to decide
between, we will say, Mr. Brown and Mr. Jones. A
great many in the constituency do not care in the least
either for Mr. Brown or for Mr. Jones, and what, then,
are they to do? They are practically unrepresented,
and if Mr. Jones is elected all those who voted for Mr.
Brown are unrepresented and the result of that is, as Mr.
Balfour has said, even amongst those who have votes, by
far the greater number find that their votes have no effect
whatever in giving effect to their political wishes. Now,
what is the result from the point of view of the country ?
Well, I do think it is most unscientific and even almost
absurd. I do not know whether you have looked to see
what happened at the last general election, but you will find
that although several millions of votes were recorded, if you
had —any one of you in this room—been able to take five
hundred votes from the Gladstonians and handed them over
to the party represented in the House of Commons by Mr.
Balfour that would have been sufficient to turn the present
Government out of office and put in a Conservative or
Unionist Government. Is it not a ridiculous state of things
that in so large a country as this where there are millions
of voters we should devise a system by which such a small
handful of votes would have the effect of entirely altering
the whole course of our political life ? There is something


even more ridiculous than that, which is that the result of
a general election does not depend upon the total number of
votes which is given either for one side or the other: it is
perfectly possible—indeed, it has happened—already in the
past—that the party which got the smallest number of votes
in the poll got the largest number of representatives in
Parliament. Now, surely if we are anxious that every
person who has a vote should have an opportunity of giving
his vote, we must equally desire that when he has put his
voting paper into the urn it will have some desired
result. The effect of the present system is that whether
one party or the other is returned to power does not depend
upon the number of votes they receive in the country but
on the accidental manner in which those votes happen to
lie. If you have a majority which is spread evenly, prac-
tically over the whole country, as you have in the South
and West of Ireland, you have one party returning the
whole of the members to power and not a single represen-
tative of the minority, however large it may be. On the
other hand, if instead of being spread evenly the majority
is concentrated in particular districts, then the result may
be that the majority of electors will return a minority to
Parliament and the minority of electors will get a majority.
Now that is not merely a hypothetical case, that is what
happened, for instance, in the Canton Ticino. Now
for years and years the Liberals in the Canton Ticino,
although they were in a majority in the country, found
themselves in a minority in the Representative Chamber,
and at last having been able to get no redress at all they
made a revolution which called the attention of their
Government to the absurdity of the system and they are
now blessed with a system of proportional representa-
tion.* I do not doubt but one of these days we shall
* Something similar happened in Geneva. There are now four Swiss
Cantons, Ticino, Neufchatel, Geneva and Zug, which have adopted
Proportional Representation on the Free List system.


come to it, but I sincerely hope we shall come to it by
logic and reason and not by bloodshed and revolution.
Miss Spence has said one of the objections to Pro-
portional Representation is that faddists would be returned
by it to Parliament, but my objection to the present sys-
tem is that it gives too much power to faddists. lam the
onty person in this country, except Mr. Gladstone, who has
fought both county, borough and university. Therefore I
know something about a Parliamentary contest. What
happens if you are fighting a place in which parties are
evenly divided? You get one day a civil note from the
anti-vaccinationists, then they come and they tell you they
represent a hundred votes and if you will only vote against
vaccination they will return you at the head of the poll.
You are naturally in some little difficulty, then the next
day some other small minority comes to you with some
other proposal, and so the matter goes on. They are not
all so reasonable as my teetotalers were when I sat for
Maidstone. They asked me to see them and I consented,
and they appointed six o’clock. But they came at five
o’clock. This somewhat surprised me, and I said I thought
they were coming at six o’clock. They said “ Oh, yes, we
are coming at six o’clock and we are going to bring a re-
porter, and are going to press you very much to go in for local
option.” This puzzled me still more. The leader of them
said “ We had better tell you exactly how matters stand.
We are very keen teetotalers, but we are still keener
Liberals, and we are coming back at six o’clock with a
reporter, and we are going to press you very much to go in
for local option, and we are very much afraid you may not
know how very weak we are in Maidstone. We have come
in to put you on your guard.” I was extremely obliged to
them for putting me on my guard, and they went away.
In an hour they came back with their reporter and they
pressed me very hard, but I assure you I was as firm as a


rock. It is not always that minorities are so reasonable
as my friends at Maidstone were, and therefore I say, and I
think you will agree with me, that the present system, so far
from being opposed to faddists, really gives those w T ho are
faddists an immense advantage. But now let me point out
to you one other great inconvenience of the present system,
I do not know whether you are in favour of Home Rule or
not; naturally I am not going to say a single word which
would give you the slightest inkling as to what my views
are. How is that great question going to be decided ? The
Welsh send representatives in favour of Home Rule, not
that they care a button about Home Rule, but because they
want the Disestablishment of the Welsh Church; the
teetotalers send representatives in favour of Home Rule,
not because they care about Home Rule, but because they
want to get legislation in their own particular direction ; and
the result of it is that under our present system we may
pass some great organic measure like Home Rule, not
because there is a majority for it at all in the country, but
because a number of people who all want something else
combine together to give you Home Rule. Is that a reason-
able, is that a logical, is that a sensible system for a great
country like this ? Now we maintain and we hope to
convince you that by degrees this system which we are
advocating gives freedom to the electors, because it does not
confine them to Mr. Brown or to Mr. Jones, because they
have the choice at any rate between nine persons as you have
had to-day and because you have the power of selecting the
man you like. You may take, for instance, a Gladstonian
who is for teetotalism or a Gladstonian who is against it.
In every other way it gives you greater freedom in express-
ing your political wishes and desires, and it will secure
to the majority what is not secured to them at present,
that they should have the majority in the House of
Commons. The fact is, that, as Mr. John Stuart Mill pointed


out .sometime ago, we are ruled now, not by a majority, but
by a majority of a majority, and a majority of a majority
may be and generally is a minority. It is the extremists
of the dominant party who rule, although they really re-
present only a minority.
I should like to impress upon you as much as I possibly
can that we have no desire that the minority should rule.
It is essential in every country which is to be peaceably
governed, that the majority when they have expressed their
views, should be able to carry them into effect. But one
great disadvantage of the present system is that it does not
secure that great object, and what we desire in advocating
this system is that the electors should have freedom of
choice, and that the majority of the country should have
power to carry out its wishes. All we claim for the minor-
ity is that it should at least have an opportunity of being
heard.
Mr. Courtney : Ladies and Gentlemen, —I have not
much to say in addition to what has been already said by
those who have addressed you, and I would myself rather
have given way to a friend, whom we welcome also from
the other end of the world—not from Australia, but from
New Zealand—who is the leader of a party and the leader
of a Government there, and under whose auspices a bill
was brought into the New Zealand Parliament for the
adoption of this very system. I hope that before parting
we shall hear a few words from Sir John Hall, in explana-
tion of the attitude which he took towards it in New
Zealand ; but I cannot resist the request to say something
upon a subject which I hold so highly. Now, there are two
things to be observed with respect to this matter. In the
first place, we have to meet the charge that it is not a
practicable and workable scheme. I think that will
be effected by the experience of this afternoon. You
yourselves have voted; have you found it a difficult


thing to vote ? Surely, if you compare your position with
what it would have been if you were asked to vote under
the ordinary conditions of Parliamentary Election, you
will find that your position is not one of greater difficulty.
At the same time, it gives you an opportunity of choice, a
freedom, and a hope of representation which you could not
enjoy under ordinary conditions. Sir John Lubbock has
suggested what is too often true, that in a Parliamentary
contest for a single member seat, the struggle lies between
two men, neither of whom the elector cares a straw for,
and yet if he attempts to exercise the vote, he must give it
to one or the other; whereas, under a condition applying
to the election of five members, you have a possibility of
finding yourself one of a band of electors, who, by joining
together and giving their votes to the man they esteem, can
return a person who is really a representative of themselves.
Now 7 you have seen by your own action how simple the
voting is, and when the result is brought before you by the
analysis of the papers, which have been taken into the
other room, you will also see, I think, that this scheme
does realise the representation in their different divisions of
all the opinions which are held by the members of this
assembly. Well, then comes the other great question;
practical enough it may be; you show by experiment that
it is so, but is it worth while ? Is it worth while to adopt
it here in England ? Mr. Balfour said he thought that here
in England we do not suffer under the experience to which
they are subject in America, namely, that a man of real
political genius could recommend himself to a very large
proportion of the electorate and yet be incapable of entering
into the Legislative Assembly, because he cannot in any
given area command a majority of the electors in that area.
He may be the favourite of a fourth of the whole country,
but if he cannot pitch upon a particular constituency, the
majority of the electors of which unite in electing him, he


may be unable to get into the Legislative Assembly. Mr.
Balfour suggested that we, perhaps, have not reached that
position here. I am not sure that we could not cite
examples of eminence which would at least lead persons to
doubt whether we have not, and are not now suffering under
this very same evil. We had once in our Legislature a person
whose political genius will be undisputed, but recognised
everywhere. He came in having penned a world of litera-
ture, a man of political speculation, a man who commanded
authority amongst the students of his time , he came in foi
Westminster. I mean Mr. John Stuart Mill. He sat dur-
ing one Parliament, but he developed an independence of
party of such a character that he did not get returned again.
I doubt whether, although he was the recognised master and
teacher of the younger and more vigorous political leaders
of our time, he ever could have obtained the privilege of
being again returned by any constituency of Great Britain
or Ireland. He was indeed offered the opportunity of being
elected for an Irish constituency, if he failed at West-
minster ; but he was offered it under conditions which test
the truth of what lam saying. An ardent Irishman said
to him, “ Come over with me to Ireland, I will get you
returned; you have only got to say you are in favour of
denominational education.” That happened to be an im-
passable barrier, so the promise was entirely illusory. I
turn to a very different man, a man whose character and
opinions will be the subject of very different criticism on
the part of many here, on the part of many of the world, a
man who in the end got into the House of Commons, a
man who also demonstrated there that he was a master of
political problems; that he had studied them deeply ; that
he had made himself acquainted with the conditions of
political action in this country, and who, in spite of all
the prejudices which greeted him when he first entered
it attained a considerable position in the House of Com-


mons. I mean Mr. Bradlaugh. Mr. Bradlaugh, although
for years before he entered the House of Commons he
was the esteemed authority on the part of a large pro-
portion of the working classes of this country, who on a
plebiscite might have got a sixth of the electors to say he
was the man they desired to send in, yet tried democratic
constituency after democratic constituency, and failed
because he could not command a majority. I might refer
to other men, but I will only conclude with one who, I
think, really deserves to be cited as a kind of illustration of
this particular danger. There is now passing, perhaps we
may say, there has passed, from the political scene the
the greatest political genius of our time. For his eloquence,
his management of men, his power of appealing to the pas-
sions and sympathies of his audience, for his mastery of
details, for his grasp of political principles, nobody has
ever equalled Mr. Gladstone in our generation. Mr.
Gladstone, you say, would get in anywhere. Imagine
for yourselves, if you took the trouble of carrying your
intelligence so far; imagine to yourselves a young Mr.
Gladstone, without his past reputation, but with such
opinions as he has, presenting himself to any popular
constituency. They would say: “Oh, well! he goes pretty
well in Liberal sympathy, but he is so confoundedly
churchy.” Some would say: “ How can we have a man
with his reverence for authority, and his affection for tra-
dition? We cannot have a man like him.” If you could
get ,a new Gladstone, if you could get a man rising amongst
you with all his gifts, he would be an ugly duckling, not
recognised as the swan he was going to be; and, I think,
you would even find the greatest possible difficulty in
getting him into Parliament. Well, then, if this is true,
we are even now suffering from something of what Mr.
Balfour thought we were not suffering from; and this
really brings me to the second and what 1 consider the


vital part of this question: Did not this illustration show
that effective voting or proportional representation, whilst
it liberates the voters from a large part of the difficulties
which now environ them, and would even liberate the
party managers from the difficulties they now experience
from certain different candidates who appeal to them for
support; it would do away with the differences between
organised Liberalism and Labour; each candidate would
have his own chance, each would have his clientele, each
might go in and fight. Whilst effective voting would do
this, it has this value in itself, that it is a savour of life
unto life; it promotes, it upholds, it develops the living
political faculties which are daily coming into existence
among us. Heaven, with its wealth and its profusion,
sends us, from day to day, from generation to generation,
many a minister fighting to fill his place in the political
world, and to do service to his countrymen and to his
country. But now if he aspires to enter the political field,
he must adapt himself to the rigid conditions of one party
or another; his life must be dwarfed and cramped; he
must go along a political line; he cannot flash out as his
vitality would desire in many directions; he must be an
espalier or some other twisted tree growing in a particular
way, for he has to satisfy the conditions which alone can
secure him a position in political life. He has to practise
a great economy of his own convictions before he gets into
the House of Commons; he must not be too profuse in his
ideas, he has to accommodate himself to the prejudices of
each little section of the constituency whose votes he is
wooing. And if he gets into the House of Commons, what
kind of school of sincerity have we there ? He must belong
to one party or the other, although neither party has the
monopoly of the truth; he must give sympathetic votes ;
he must go with his people if he wishes to survive another
election, otherwise he will be condemned as a crank who is


not admissible in political life, and who cannot be a useful
factor in the government of his country. Now I believe
absolutely in life, and even in the risks which come from
life. Health will overcome disease if life is allowed freely
to work in the social community, as it will even in the
individual economy. Let us have all the means of life
which are given to us to cherish; let them be developed;
there will be plenty of conditions to keep them within the
limits of sanity. Let them be developed, and let them be
set up in the service of the country, and do not let us be
frightened by ignorant prejudice against new methods
founded on justice, common-sense, and arithmetic. All
real ability, real power, real genius for mastering political
problems, and directing the thoughts of the human mind,
excluded from the sphere of political life, takes refuge, as it
may, in the world of literature and of journalism ; but even
there is doomed to limitations, because your world of
literature follows the world of political action, is limited
much in the same way, and rarely goes beyond the condi-
tions which govern and restrain political life.
Ladies and gentlemen, I did not think I should have
spoken so long. When I began, I said I would prefer to
give way to one who could speak to you with experience of
a southern colony, and who there has supported the adop-
tion of Mr. Hare’s system of Proportional Eepresentation
in the Colony of New Zealand. I thank you very much
for the kind attention you have given me. Ido hope we
shall hear Sir John Hall, and I think when the results of
the election are brought in, you will be instructed not only
as to the way in which you have voted, but also the results
of your votes will demonstrate—as I am sure they will—
the representative character of the machinery which we
advocate.
Sir John Lubbock, M.P., now announced the result of
the election as follows :—First choice : Mr. H. H. Asquith,


9; Mr. A. J. Balfour, 52; Mr. J. Burns, 1; Mr. J.
Chamberlain, 10; Mr. John Dillon, 0; Sir John Gorst, 0;
Sir Wilfred Lawson, 2; Sir John Lubbock, 7; Col. Howard
Vincent, 0. Final result, by means of transfers: Mr.
Balfour, 14; Mr. Asquith, 14; Mr. Chamberlain, 14; Sir
John Lubbock, 14; Mr. J. Burns, B.*
Sir John Hall : I was taken by surprise by the request
of Mr. Courtney. I really came here to-day, thanks to Mr.
Courtney’s courtesy, as a listener, and not as a speaker, and
I am entirely unprepared for any speech upon this subject.
I should also be at an enormous disadvantage if I were to
follow the gentlemen whose earnest and eloquent addresses
you have heard. All that I can hope to do is to say a word
or two which may interest you as to the position of the
question in New Zealand. Well, we suffer in the same
way in New Zealand as you do here. We suffer, how-
ever, in a manner which Miss Spence has hinted at.
In New Zealand, as in most of the Australian Colonies,
there is a very large amount of public expenditure upon
public works in various districts, and the means by which
a member gets his seat and the means by which a govern-
ment maintains itself in office is largely—has been more
so in the past, I am bound to say, than it is now —
by means of government expenditure. Our experience
coincides with that of Miss Spence. In one respect our ex-
perience has been the same as that which has been
described by Mr. Courtney. We had perhaps the two most
distinguished men in New Zealand—men of the greatest
public service—Sir William Fox, who was one of the
earliest settlers, and has been Prime Minister of the Colony
for longer than any other gentleman, who was an ardent
Temperance advocate ; and another man of very com-
* The particulars of the scrutiny and transfers were not given, but
in the note in conclusion the process is shown on a larger scale.


manding ability, Sir Eobert Stout. He, though perfectly
anxious to do service to his country, was kept out of very
nearly two Parliaments by the operation of the present
system, although I venture to say that certainly one-half of
the whole electors of New Zealand, even those who did not
agree with him, would have been very glad to see him in
Parliament. With regard to Sir William Fox, the case is
stronger and sadder. As I said, he was an ardent
Temperance advocate, and he was bitterly opposed by the
publicans in the district which he represented, and he lost
his election by one vote. He took it so much to heart that
he never would contest a constituency again, and although
he was offered a seat in the Upper House more than once
by myself, he declined to accept it. So that shows you,
ladies and gentlemen, that the same evils which the present
system brings about in this country extend to the Colony
from which I come, and probably to all parts of the world
where this system prevails. Somebody took the trouble to
analyse the vote in one of the New Zealand provincial
districts, and he showed to demonstration that while the
27,000 electors in that Northern district were represented,
no less than 23,000 were absolutely unrepresented. I can
give you an amusing corroboration of what I think Sir John
Lubbock stated, or some speaker at any rate, to the effect
that a voter is bound to vote for some person whom he
does not like, perhaps. I fought a great many elections in
New Zealand, and in one of my latest I was canvassing a
rather curiously tempered elector, and he said to me :
“ Well, you know, there are two candidates, and I do not
think either of you are any good; but I think you are the
least bad of the two, and so I shall vote for you.”
Now, if you had had a system of minority representa-
tion, that elector would probably have been satisfied.
Mr. Courtney was not quite correct in stating that the
Bill which was largely discussed in 1887 was brought


in by the Government of which I was a member. Other
Bills were, but this last Bill was brought in by a Govern-
ment of which I was not a member, but of which I was a
supporter. It was brought in by the Government. The
Governments generally exist only as long as they have a
majority, and you will ask “ Why was it not carried?”
Well, there are two reasons why it was not carried. One
was that the Bill proposed to divide the Colony into two
large districts, and I may venture to suggest to the friends
of this system that that is a weak point of the system.
The average elector, if he is asked to vote for twenty
candidates, or at least for twenty members to be elected, is
naturally puzzled.* Necessarily they belong to so large
an area that he does not know them. He knows very few
of them, and although logically no doubt that system is
perfectly correct, still practically it is a very great difficulty
to the average elector, and that was one weak point in the
Bill. The Leader of the Opposition, who opposed the Bill,
said that if it had been for smaller districts it might have
worked, but as it was he thought it was quite unworkable.
Another reason why we did not succeed in effecting the
reform at that time was that it was introduced by a
Government which happened to be on its last legs. Of
course, the Opposition made it their business to oppose it
as much as they could, and the Government had to with-
draw it. That has been our New Zealand experience. I
have advocated this system since 1881. I have advocated
female suffrage since 1879. We have got that, and although
I have now retired, lam as earnest as ever. I quite agree
* Even if there were twenty candidates to be elected there is no need
to vote for twenty. It is not obligatory to vote for more than one.
The elector gives his first choice for his favourite, and his contingent
choice for four or five more men whom he knows. Other electors in
other localities act in the same way. But a five to ten man district
offers no difficulty whatever.


in all that has been said as to the importance of this
system of voting, and if I had remained in public life
there is no one question to which I should more abso-
lutely have devoted the energies that I possess than that of
obtaining a more fair system of giving votes. I was very
glad to hear—l heard to-day for the first time—that in
Switzerland this system has been introduced. It is coming
nearer home to us, and I hope we shall watch the working
of the system. I do not despair of it, although it is
opposed by party politicians. I think the difficulty which
now stands in the way, in New Zealand certainly and pro-
bably in this country, is this, that those parties in power
who think they have a numerical majority are anxious to
secure themselves the monopoly of power.
Well, there are a very large number of electors who are
not essentially party men. The average elector is, after all,
a fair man, and if the merits of the case are brought home
to him by meetings, by pamphlets, by newspaper writings,
I don’t despair of success. I do think I see the dawn of
better days for those countries which are now governed by
Parliamentary Government, and which suffer from many
evils which would be entirely removed by this system of
Proportional Representation. lam quite sure we shall not
drop the subject in New Zealand, and I hope Miss Spence
will not allow it to drop in South Australia, and then,
perhaps, once more the Colonies may lead the mother
country.


NOTE ON METHOD OF VOTING BY THE SINGLE
TRANSFERABLE VOTE.
The meeting at the Eiver House, Chelsea, was mainly of
Conservatives and Liberal Unionists. There were three of
the nine candidates at the illustrative election who did not
receive a single first vote, while the number polled for Mr.
Balfour —52 out of 81 —seemed to prove that the surplusage
was a greater factor than the eliminated votes. If there
had been a meeting of a Democratic or Liberal Club in
another part of Chelsea, the voting would have been very
different.
In every meeting I held in South Australia there was a
counting and allotment of the votes, and frequently there
was great surplusage ; but when I massed together the
results of nearly fifty such meetings for a public scrutiny,
I was surprised to find that one balanced another very
nearly. Every candidate had his adherents who preferred
him to the other eleven, and the transference of 940
votes given to unsuccessful candidates was the main factor
in making up quotas for four of the representatives, though
the 64 of surplusage were also utilised.
I append the tabulated result of this scrutiny, which was
taken at the time.


Scrutiny of 3,824 votes taken by Miss 0. H. Spence at various
meetings in South Australia for the election of six parliamentary
representatives out of twelve candidates, the quota of votes required
being 637, or the sixth part of the ballots taken :
Candidates.
First Voter.
Surplus
Eliminated.
Elected.
| 1. Charlston.
| 2. Magarey.
3. Robinson.
4. Harrold.
5. Guthrie.
6. Fowler.
7. Buttery.
| 8. Baker.
Angas (Capital)
419
2
4
10
7
44
12
139
637
262
1
1
10
6
47
15
Birks (Single Tax)
361
11
2
4
2
31
17
64
27
517
190
2
11
2
72
11
682
637
167
1
1
1
37
9
Glynn (Irish Catholic)
320
3
6
11
28
88
127
615
136
18
30
2
32
93
1
1
656
637
72
4
Stirling (Woman’s Suffrage)
466
4
13
17
21
22
63
31
637
Null
1
6
80
49
144
6)3,824
45
19
76
95
187
216
290
342
3,824
637-
-quota.
The instructions to voters were that they should mark,
with figures, in the order of their preference, the candidates
as far as six or fewer. This is all the voter has to do. His
vote is to be counted for one, and that one the first on his
list who needs his vote and can use it. If his first choice
has already reached the quota, or has too few votes even
with his aid to do so, the vote is transferred to his next, as
shown by his number, and used and not wasted.
The quota is found by Mr. Hare’s original method by
dividing the whole number of votes by the number of repre-
sentatives needed, in this instance six.* The votes should
be first mixed thoroughly together, and then taken out
* At the River House Meeting the Droop quota was used, that is,
the number of poles taken was divided by one more than the number
of representatives needed, which was five, and the quotient was in-
creased by one. Thus we had 81 -r 6 + 1= 14 which formed the
quota. My experience is that the simple Hare quota is the best.


one by one and numbered, and allotted according to first
choice, as shown in the first vertical column of the
table appended. The votes are found to be 3,824, which
divided by six, gives as a quotient or quota 637, leaving out
the fraction.
This shows that only Charlston and Magarey had any
surplus; and after cutting the pile of votes once, like a
pack of cards, so that there might be no arrangement of
preferred second choices, the forty-five and the nineteen
unneeded votes were taken from the top, and allotted
according to second choice, as seen by columns two and
three.
Next, the Returning Officer declares Robinson, the lowest
on the poll not elected, and proceeds to distribute his
original and transferred votes by second choice, or third, if
second is already elicited. (See column three.) Next,
Harrold is declared not elected, and his votes dealt with
similarly. Thus, step by step, six of the twelve candidates
are eliminated from the contest, leaving six elected.
Of these, two have quotas of first choice votes, two have
quotas of first and transferred votes, and two have what
Mr. Hare calls approximate quotas sufficient for returning
them.
At the point which decides the sixth man to be left in
and the seventh man to be declared not elected, the
difference between Birks and Baker was 148 votes. It is at
this point that the objection as to uncertainty comes in, as
it is supposed votes might be transferred to Baker instead
of Birks, from someone’s surplusage.
But in three test elections with more than a thousand
votes, the difference between the man elected and the man
rejected was so great that not even dishonesty in picking
and choosing contingent votes could have changed the
result.
When surplusage is small, it has no effect on the issue ;


when it is large, it follows the same trend. The appro-
priations of transferred votes may be followed in the hori-
zontal lines. At the foot we see a line marked Null ; these
were ineffective apparently more than in reality. These
144 voting papers could not be used because the voter had
marked the names of men who had already obtained the
full quota of 637 votes, or who had been eliminated as
hopeless.
But I believe there were only two unrepresented ; one
who had marked one name, and that one of the unsuccess-
ful candidates, while the other voter had ingeniously picked
out the six who failed to make a quota.
In all my meetings in Australia and in America whether
of 30 voters or of 220, the votes were collected and allotted
by myself and twelve scrutineers, in the presence and the
hearing of the audience who had voted, and so quickly as
to surprise them. At the drawing-room meeting at Chelsea,
they were counted in another room.
C. H. Spence.






