

fekhu €\nxth, Carlton
—— - -
(PRESBYTERIAN).
CORNER OF RATHDOWNE AND GRATTAN STREETS.
:r,:e:po:rt
Of the Proceedings of the Aberdeen Free Presbytery,
relative to the Call which the Congregation of
Erskine Church, Carlton, addressed to the Rev.
Alexander Yule, M.A., of Aberdeen, to become
their Pastor, and which he has accepted.
MR. YULE IS EXPECTED TO ARRIVE IN MELBOURNE ABOUT
THE END OF DECEMBER.
(Reprinted from the Aberdeen Daily Free Press, &c., for the information of
the Members and Adherents of Erskine Church).
(pi k
[_Pka v [\mA
/<?oG 7
The Aberdeen Free Presbytery met in the Session-House of the Free
West Church, Aberdeen, on the 24th September—Rev. J. D. Low,
moderator. There was a large attendance of members as well as of the
general public.
THE CALL TO REV. MR. YULE, RUTHERFORD CHURCH,
The Clerk (Dr. Spence) reported that he had received the various
papers in connection with the call from Erskine congregation, Carlton,
Melbourne, to the Rev. Alexander Yule, Rutherford Church, Aber-
deen. , , „ , .
Oii parties being called, there appeared for the Erskine congregation—
Rev. Mr. Balfour, Convener of Colonial Committee, and the Hon.
James Balfour, Melbourne ; and for Rutherford Kirk Session—Messrs.
G. Bisset and J. Gray, elders ; Deacons’ Court—Messrs. D. R. Halley
and J. Quinty ; and Congregation—Messrs. M. Edwards, W. Hird, and
J. Wyness.
Rev. Mr. Balfour said the circumstances under which he appeared
before the Presbytery were briefly these —Erskine Church, Melbourne,
was a church which, before the Union in Australia, belonged to the U.P.
Church. It was an old congregation of good standing. Since the Union
it had become part of the Presbyterian Church of Australia. Owing to
the illness of their minister, and his frequent absence from home and
from the colony, it had fallen into a somewhat low condition, and conse-
quently the membership is small. But the belief of the congre-
gation was that the field was very large and progressing, and that


if they had a minister imbued with an evangelistic spirit, and good pulpit
gifts, they would soon secure a revival of prosperity to the congregation.
The district of Carlton, in which Erskine Church is situated, contains a
population of about 30,000, and about a seventh of these are Presby-
terians, and there are only three Presbyterian churches in the district.
If they took in Carlton and Fitzroy, the population was about 45,000,
and 16 years ago there were three Presbyterian congregations in that
district. Since that time the population of the district had been nearly
tripled, and only one church had been added. Remembering that those
living there were mostly artisans, making very good wages, the Presby-
tery would see that there was an admirable field for such a labourer
as they believed Mr. Yule had proved himself to be. With respect
to the proposed financial arrangements, it was believed by the
congregation that their minister ought to have £BOO a year and
a manse. They had never been able to pay their minister more
than £SOO a year, and during the latter portion of his ministry
they were giving him even less than that. What they proposed
to do at present was to give Mr. Yule £4OO a year and a manse, which
they fully expected to be able to do. If the congregation thrive they will
increase it until it arrives at the point they had set before them as their
ultimate aim. He (Mr. Balfour) felt his present task a somewhat dis-
tasteful business, but he did it con amove, and he believed the congrega-
tion of Erskine Church were calling Mr. Yule to a position of at least
equal, he would say of more importance, than that which he now occupies
in Aberdeen. Mr. Yule’s special gifts would be of even higher service
to the cause of Christ and His Church in Melbourne than they acknow-
ledged they had been in Aberdeen. It might be said, why take a pastor
from a flourishing congregation in Aberdeen ? Why might not the Aus-
tralians have looked about among themselves for a minister ? Well, they
have given calls to two ministers in the colonies, and although both
ministers acknowledged the importance and hopefulness of the sphere,
difficulties were thrown in their way which they found it impossible to
surmount. Then again, the Rutherford congregation might say, why not
take a probationer ? Well, they felt that the work at Erskine Church was
not a work to be laid on a young and untried man. Mr. Balfour went on
to refer to the number of eminent and useful men who had left home
charges to go to Australia ; and said that in the district of Erskine
Church there was a large population lapsing from Christian ordinances
who might be recovered now, and if the time was allowed to pass the
chance would be gone, and it would be the extinguishing of a light in a
dark place. They were not proposing to take Mr. Yule from a more
important to a less important sphere of labour, but rather the reverse.
Mr. Yule’s reputation had gone before him, partly by his valuable book
on prayer, and partly by hearing about his work in Aberdeen, and conse-
quently the call had come direct. Some of the Rutherford congregation
might say that Mr. Yule’s translation would be fatal to his present con-
gregation. But he argued that translations were generally advantageous
to pastors and people, and he hoped and trusted that if the Rutherford
congregation could see their way to part with their minister in the spirit
of loyalty to the cause of Christ, and that if Mr. Yule saw it to be his
duty to accept the call, they would see no cause to throw any obstacles in
his way. He pleaded, therefore, for the translation on the ground that it
was of the utmost importance that a place like Melbourne should be well
supplied by ministers of the Gospel. They wanted men of proved piety
and talent and zeal, men of sound evangelical principles, to do the work


of the Lord in Melbourne. He urged, also, that such a change as was
now proposed would be an advantage to Mr. Yule himself. It would give
him a new start on his ministry. If the Presbytery saw fit to put the
call into Mr. Yule’s hands, he hoped and believed it would be a call from
God, and for the greater good of His Church, and for the greater good of
Mr. Yule himself, and ultimately for the greater good of the Rutherford
congregation—(applause).
Mr, George Bisset said —Moderator, in appearing before this Court
to-day, as representing Rutherford congregation, we feel some hesitation
as to how best to present our case —partly from difficulties attaching to
all such deputations, and partly also from the peculiar nature and circum-
stances of the call now before the Presbytery. In regard to the difficul-
ties common to any deputation in our position, I may mention first how
almost impossible it is to state anything in regard to the congregation, or
its claims on their pastor, which is not already well known—not only to
the minister called, but also generally to the other members of Presbytery
—so that anything stated is either arguing against a foregone conclusion ;
or, at best, little hope can be entertained of influencing the decision
much either way. Or, again, supposing the deputation should enter into
a full statement of the circumstances of their congregation, and its claims
on the continued services of their pastor, and detail the various gifts and
excellences of character which peculiarly fit him for occupying that
charge, it is somewhat mortifying to be told—as such deputations not
unfrequently are—by the parties prosecuting the call, that they are very
glad to have the favourable estimate they had formed of the minister so
fully confirmed by his own congregation, thus attesting in the most satis-
factory way his great suitableness for occupying the sphere to which
they are calling him. A still greater difficulty, however, presents itself
in the unusual character and circumstances of the call now presented.
In the case of ordinary translations from one congregation to another, in
our own Church, there usually exist elements of comparison which can
be easily stated and estimated. In the present case no such similarity
exists. Not only are the whole circumstances and position widely
different, but so many relative and private considerations present them-
selves (which may most legitimately influence a decision, although they
cannot easily be stated or explained), that this is eminently a case in
which the conclusion arrived at by Mr. Yule—after looking at all the cir-
cumstances known to him connected with both charges—should be re-
garded as final by all parties. No reasons for this translation have been
lodged with the Presbytery along with the call; but through the
courtesy of Mr. Yule a private statement, sent to himself, was
submitted to us, in which the claims of the congregation and
colony are very forcibly stated—and these have now been supple-
mented by the very powerful pleading of the gentlemen prosecu-
ting the call. I shall leave to other members of our deputation any
criticism of these statements which they may think called for, simply
remarking, meantime, that we have no desire to depreciate in any way
the strong claims which these colonial churches have on all the aid
which the mother churches can give, provided it is not done at the
expense of the vigour and efficiency of the home congregations. Our
object, however, in appearing before you to-day is not so much to pick
faults with the statements made in connection with the call, but rather,
by laying before the Presbytery a statement of the past history and
present position of Rutherford congregation, to show that the hope we
cherish that Mr. Yule may still see his way to continue his ministry


amongst us is supported by considerations, the strength and importance
of which may well make any servant of God pause, and solemnly consider
ere he accept another sphere of labour. Without anticipating further
what may be the result of our appeal, we regard it as a privilege to have
the opportunity of stating what we owe, under God, to Mr. Yule’s
ministry in the past, and what we may hope from it in the future should
he still continue to labour amongst us. As some who have recently
joined the Presbytery may not be conversant with the origin and progress
of the congregation, it will be necessary to the proper understanding of
our claims that I first give a veiy brief statement of these. About four-
teen or fifteen years ago the mission work in Northfield, which had for
several years previously been carried on by the private enterprise and self-
denying labours of Mr. Laing, was taken over from him by the Session of
Free East Church, with a view to foster it into a territorial mission
charge. The work had from the first the warm, earnest, and sustained
interest of the Rev. J. Calder Macphail, then minister of the Free East,
now of Pilrig, Edinburgh, to whom it is but justice to add the
mission owes its existence and name as a congregation of the Free Church.
Through his office-bearers and congregation, under the superintendence
of student missionaries and probationers, the work was carried
on for some years ; and it may interest some to mention that the Rev.
John Gibb, now Professor of Theology in the English Presbyterian
College, London, was the first of these student missionaries. But,
although much earnest and faithful labour was expended on the district,
the provisional character and uncertain tenure of these arrangements were
felt to be great hindrances to the prosperity of the mission, and it became
evident that an ordained minister must be appointed ere we could hope
for permanent success in the work. I shall not detail the singularly
providential way in which Mr. Yule was suggested to us, but can well
remember the thrill of joy which filled the hearts of those interested in
the work when we came to know that he was willing to leave an attached
congregation, in a very desirable locality, and against the advice of many
friends, and in the face of many discouraging circumstances, to undertake
the charge of our mission. Our anticipations of blessing on his ministry
were speedily realized. The little chapel soon became too strait for the
crowds who gathered into it, and best of all, it could be said of it, “ this
man and that woman was born thereand not a few will carry hallowed
memories of that little place into a blessed eternity. On the erection of a
church becoming absolutely necessary, it was resolved to place it between
the mission district and the outlying district of Rosemount, in the belief
that Mr. Yule was endowed with gifts, in somewhat rare combination, to
minister to both classes, and with the desire, as soon as possible, to have
the congregation self-supporting, both in means and workers; and the
wisdom of this arrangement was soon apparent. During this transition
period, the business abilities of Mr. Yule were of the utmost service to
the congregation, while his tact and discrimination were invaluable in
organizing the working strength of the congregation, as it gradually
increased into active work in the mission district. In the various agencies
of this work, animated by his example and encouraged by his never-
failing sympathy, perhaps a larger proportion of members than in any
other congregation in town are now engaged in Christian service of some
sort in the district. The history of the congregation since entering
the new building has been one of steady, solid progress, the sixty or
seventy members who constituted the church when Mr, Yule assumed the
oversight of it, having now increased to over 450 members, and above 70


adherents ; and while none of the eleven years of his ministry amongst
us have been barren of spiritual fruit, there have been seasons in which
showers of blessing have been given, and not a few souls—especially
young men and women—added to the Lord, several of whom are now
either office-bearers or doing other valuable service in the work of the
congregation. A most important feature of Mr. Yule’s ministry has been
the deep interest he has manifested in the young of the congregation and
district, not only in connection with Sabbath schools, but also in the
practical part he has taken in conducting our children’s church and Bible
classes, and to which a large measure of their success must be attributed.
Possessing rare evangelistic gifts himself, Mr. Yule has always fostered
and encouraged any measure of the same gifts in members of his congre-
gation by district meetings and otherwise ; and while fertile in devising
new plans of operation, and ready to adopt those of others, when proved
to be advantageous, he has never gone into them without first securing the
sympathy and hearty co-operation of his session—into which I have never
known a single element of discord to enter. It will not be supposed that
such a state of congregational prosperity could have been attained, and
certainly not sustained, without much pastoral visitation ; but I will
leave it to a brother deputy to inform you of this very important part of
Mr. Yule’s ministry. It is no uncommon thing to find that a minister
who may have been blessed to accomplish a work of ingathering, such as
I have indicated, has partially or wholly failed in feeding or training the
flock he has gathered. It has been far otherwise under Mr. Yule’s
ministry—those of us who have enjoyed the privilege of it longest seeming
to relish and profit by it the most, and characterized, as it has been, by
most careful preparation, over a wide range of scripture truth, and
evidencing a broad and intelligent acquaintance with the current
questions and religious literature of the day. It is chiefly on this
ground that we base our claim on Mr. Yule’s continued ministry
amongst us. A large band of workers, full of energy and zeal,
but many of them only partially instructed, are most willing to continue
to sit at his feet, as their spiritual instructor. Most of them he
knows intimately—knows their gifts—their special capacities and
defects—their circumstances and temptations in life. It has taken
eleven years to attain this knowledge and influence, and this is not to be
lightly thrown away. It would be long ere a stranger could acquire the
same influence; in some minds he never could acquire it. In view of these
considerations, and also remembering the immature years of the congre-
gation, the necessitous yet hopeful nature of the large mission district
under its charge, and the rapidly increasing population in the Rosemount
district, in the vicinity of the church (the extent and importance of both
which have yet to be submitted to you), it will be at once apparent how
desirable it is that Mr. Yule should remain, to consolidate and carry on
the good work which he has been blessed and honoured to accomplish.
After paying a warm tribute of personal regard for Mr. Yule, Mr. Bisset
proceeded to say—l shall not further detain you, sir, by remarks of mine,
except to say that, when Mr. Yule and the members of Presbytery have
considered, along with what I have stated, the additional particulars now
to be laid before them by my brother deputies, they will see that it is in
no spirit of narrow selfishness that we deprecate the thought of his leaving
us ; but only because we fear his departure would be a great loss to a
devotedly attached congregation, only still in its youthful years ; a great
loss to the community, amongst whom, but for his modesty and unob-
trusiveness, his ability, worth, and influence would have been sooner


appreciated ; and a great loss to the Presbytery, in whose proceedings and
discussions, as you know, he has taken no mean part. But, should he—
contrary to our hope and desire —see it to be the will of the Master whom
he loves to serve, that he should accept the call, we shall regard it as
another example of that self-denial for the good of others which he has
ever sought to teach us, both by practice and precept, and, emulating
somewhat of the same spirit, we will acquiesce in it ; and he will carry
with him the prayers and best wishes of his congregation that God may
more and more make his ministry fruitful to the winning of souls, and to
the up-building of the Kingdom of Christ in the distant land of his
adoption.
Mr. Gray spoke to the same effect, and earnestly pleaded for the con-
tinuance of Mr. Yule in his present charge.
Mr. Halley urged that it was essential that Mr. Yule remain in Aber-
deen for the purpose of consolidating the Rutherford Church. He
mentioned that in response to a circular issued about three months ago,
the congregational contributions had increased 33 per cent., which would
soon enable them to raise Mr. Yule’s stipend. He pointed out that the
position of the Erskine Church, almost in every respect, was less favour-
able than the Rutherford congregation.
Mr. M. Edwards briefly addressed the Court on behalf of the Ruther-
ford congregation.
The Hon. James Balfour, in replying to these arguments at some
length, contended that the claims of the colony upon a man such as Mr.
Yule were really stronger than those of any congregation could be in this
country, so well supplied with Christian ordinances. He pleaded
strongly in favour of the translation, on the ground that there was a
wider and more important field at Carlton than there could possibly be in
Aberdeen. Few fields were more important that the Presbyterian
Church could occupy. In a new community they should meet influences
adverse to religion, and to a sound commonwealth, by sending forth the
very best material to influence the public mind with regard to these great
principles. The Free Church of Scotland, he remarked, did a noble act
when it determined by a masterstroke to send out in one ship four or five
of their best men in 1853, because they did that which greatly tended to
the leavening and elevation of Melbourne from that day to this, and gave
a great impulse to the Presbyterian cause there. But what comparison
was there between occupying a place like Melbourne, with its 250,000 of
a community, and a place like Rutherford Church, when they had ten
men at home where Melbourne had not got one ?
Mr. Yule, who was then heard, said—l do not usually read any
remarks I have to make, and I would not on this occasion do so, unless it
just substantially expressed the views that I hold at the present moment.
However, I did draw out a few notes, and with your permission I should
read them, because I feel on the present occasion that perhaps feelings of
various kinds would render it not quite possible for me to speak so freely
as I think. The chief matters to be considered in connection with this
call have now for some weeks been before my mind, and I have had
abundant opportunity of carefully weighing them. I have held myself
open to information and light till the last moment ; and while I trust the
statements to-day on both sides have served to bring the circumstances
fully before the Presbytery, nothing that has been said has to any great
extent led me to modify the conclusion with respect to my duty to which
I have gradually come. The call has not been of my seeking. If feeble
health or the constraint of other necessity had obliged me to leave my


present sphere, I would have been glad enough to seek for an invitation
to work elsewhere ; but this has come unsolicited and entirely through
the recommendation of friends now in Melbourne. All the rather on this
account I have been constrained to give it my most earnest consideration.
I have endeavoured, however, first, fully and fairly, to give heed to the
claims of the field of labour in which lam presently placed. It is a very
good one. Indeed, with respect to the opportunity for gathering a congre-
gation and evangelizing a district, few places are superior to it. Our
success has been very encouraging, but I would desire to remark about it
that it has been largely owing to the co-operation of those friends who are
present to-day, and others who have been with us from the first, or who have
more recently joined our ranks. There is now connected with Rutherford
Church a considerable congregation, and an excellent staff of office-
bearers and other workers. The greatest harmony prevails among us,
and I feel bound to them by ties of love and esteem which it would be
very painful to sever. I know also that, if I leave, I cannot transport
with me almost anything of that personal influence which I like to think
I have gained in the district ; and I feel at this moment that if it were
God’s will that I should spend what remains of life and strength in work-
ing here, I would be doing something to me personally pleasant, and in
itself well worth doing. But I have now come to a time of life when
the question may be fairly and wisely entertained whether I shall con-
tinue to be able, in full efficiency, to do the kind of work which is abso-
lutely necessary in such a congregation and district as ours ; and when,
also, it is apparent to me that, if I am ever to contemplate a change of
sphere, I must do so very soon. And, seeing this call has come, I must
consider whether, by accepting it, I would not probably use the gifts I
possess to better effect than by remaining just where I am. I have
thought, and am to-day thinking, whether in a new sphere I may not get
a new blessing, such as I saw in connection with the earlier years of my
ministry, both in my former charge at Cargill, and again in this place. I
know that if I go to Melbourne I must expect hard work, but I have no desire
to be idle so long as my eye is not dim and my natural force not abated. But
there is a nervous strain and mental tension connected with work like ours
which I believe would be greatly relieved by just such a change of work
as is now proposed. Like all other untried things, my success in the new
land is problematic, and it may be fairly doubted by myself and others
whether I possess sufficient adaptability to a new country, and to the new
conditions of life and labour that I shall meet there. Still, as lam inclined
to think that I could adapt myself to the new circumstances, I am also
constrained to conclude that, if the call is otherwise clear, I am bound to
make the trial. Now, after considerable thought, and after asking the
Lord to guide me, I have come to believe that the call is pretty clear. It
is my conviction that there is greater need for workers, and for work such
as I believe I could supply, in that land than in this. Having Keen in
frequent correspondence with friends there, before this call to Erskine
Church was ever thought of, the idea impressed itself strongly upon me
that, considering that the opportunities and inducements of all kinds are
so great, ministers and preachers ought to be far more ready than they
are to respond to invitations to go out. And now, when this call has
come to myself, when I see that it is to a sphere which I think I could
occupy, and to a work which I think I could do, though it has come from
people whom I never saw, but supported by letters from several ministers
whom I know and can rely on, and who all urge me, saying, “Come over
and help us ! ” I have been obliged to come to the conclusion that, if the


Presbytery put it into my hands, I should accept it. 1 feel, on saying
this—and it would be strange if, at such a moment, I did not teel it—that
I must not boast myself of to-morrow. I may never see that land, or, if
I arrive there, I may disappoint the hopes of my friends—but if this is
the leading of the Lord, I cannot, by following it, do other than right;
and so I say, not without natural regrets, but certainly without
reasonable misgivings, that lam willing to go. It will be painful
to me to leave my country and kindred, and many dear mends
with whom I have for these many years been pleasantly associated.
Former experience tells me that the wrench will be sharp and
the pain of the parting deep. But I did not come to Aberdeen
to gratify myself, and I don’t think I am going away to gratify myself.
It is hard to persuade a certain section of the community that any change
like this is made except for personal considerations of a secondary kind,
such as love of gain or love of ease, but I think I can humbly say that it
is the desire to make the most of my little day and of the talents which
the Master has given me that mainly induces me to decide as I do 1 do-
not in all this forget what may be the effect of my leaving on Rutherford
Church. I expect that any fears they may entertain will be disappointed,
for I believe that if they are kept united, and are led to choose a suitable
minister soon, the church will prosper as never before. A younger man
than I am, bringing to the work some experience, and along with it fresh
ardour and energy, will find himself surrounded with hearty helpers, and
will, lam persuaded, soon see the church filled to overflowing with a
congregation who will be a permanent blessing to the neighbourhood.
The initial difficulties and the despised day of small things are past. Much
work there is to do ; much work there will always be to do, if the congre-
gation continues to be what it ought to be. I earnestly hope and pray
that for the sake of the Lord’s work in that splendid mission field the
members of the congregation will keep together and resolutely resist all
the mean appeals to their vanity or their selfishness which would detach
them from their brethren. With a new minister, a,nd the enthusiasm of
a fresh beginning, efforts will be redoubled, and faith kindled anew, and
a or 00 d harvest will be reaped from the field where, perhaps, we have been
for a while sowing in tears. I have no more to say, except that it this
call is put into my hands I will accept it and prepare to go out to Mel-
bourne hoping that the Lord has work for me to do there, and humbly
trusting that I have not mistaken the leadings of His providence.
Rev. J. Laidlaw engaged in prayer.
Principal Brown said he had been very much struck with the pleadings
of the Rutherford commissioners, with the excellent sense and force with
which they had expressed themselves, and also with the strength of the
argument for the retention of their beloved minister. So much moved
had he been that he had weighed the whole matter afresh in his own
mind, and he could honestly say that it had been his desire to come to a
right conclusion throughout the course of their pleadings. He had taken
an interest in this special district, and in the mission work of his friend
Mr Yule, from the very outset. He had watched its progress and success
with great satisfaction, and on one occasion, when he had been present as
a deputy from the Presbytery at the examination of the Sabbath schools,
he had been very much struck with the beautiful manifestation of the
highest and best work of any mission station, or of any congregation that
could be seen. He believed Mr. Yule had very special evangelistic gifts,
that he had a heart ready for any species of work however humble. Me
had seen him engaged in work of an exceedingly humble nature, and he


had felt that Mr. Yule had very much the spirit of one of our missionaries
who, when told that if he went to Pesth he could not go as a minister or
as a missionary, but as a teacher, replied that he was ready to go as a
shoemaker if he could accomplish the work he was sent to do. It was
very satisfactory to see the spirit that had been manifested by the congre-
gation—how difficult they had found it to part with him, how much they
esteemed his services, how anxious they were to retain him, and how they
pressed every conceivable argument for the non-removal of their minister.
While he had been struck with the strength of their arguments, he had
also been struck with this, that they spoke of the beautiful condition of
the mission work of the district and of the labours of those who are
assisting, and Mr. Yule had very modestly said that much of
his success was due to the persevering exertions of those who
worked along with him. That tended to show that there was
no reason to believe that Mr. Yule’s removal, however valuable his
services might be, would injure the congregation. Mr. Yule had been
there for eleven years, and that was a good spell of work and of ministerial
effort for any man ; and while it very much tended to enable him to go to
a new field with great resources of experience and materials, it also
tended very much to fortify the mission work itself against any possible
disaster from his removal. The only question for the Court to consider
was whether Mr Yule’s remaining more than these eleven years would be
a greater benefit to the church—for that must be their supreme considera-
tion—than his going away to Melbourne. He (Principal Brown) believed
that the well-known proverb had wide application far beyond that for
which it was immediately given : —“ There is that scattereth and yet in-
creaseth, and there is that withholdeth more than is meet and it ten-
deth to poverty. ” It was possible by close retention of those who have
long laboured in a place to weaken themselves, and it was possible by
giving away those who had worked long and admirably in the sphero in
which they moved for many years, to prosper more after losing him than
while he was with them ; and he (Principal Brown) believed in this case
that the congregation of Rutherford by scattering would increase, and
that by withholding what in this case he thought was more than meet,
would tend to poverty. He felt that Australia, and particularly Mel-
bourne, had vast claims upon the Free Church. It was not a struggle
between one denomination and another. It was not whether Presby-
terianism or any other denominations should go to the wall; it was a ques-
tion whether religion shall be beaten by irreligion or the reverse. On the
whole he could not help thinking that there was a divine call in this mat-
ter for the removal of their friend Mr. Yule, and he need not say that he
said this with no satisfaction at the prospect of losing Mr. Yule. Mr.
Yule had shown that he had considerable power of expression at public
meetings in various lines, and that being the case he might be useful in
that way besides using the peculiar evangelistic gifts he possesses. He
begged to move that the translation be agreed to—(applause).
Professor Binnie seconded the motion. He had not come up to the
meeting to-day with any foregone conclusion in regard to this particular
claim. He was not sufficiently informed in regard to either of the two
congregations concerned to warrant him coming to any such conclusion ;
but after hearing the facts of the case so very ably and fully stated from
both sides, he had not the least hesitation in the matter, and thought
they ought to put this call into Mr. Yule’s hands, and warmly encourage
him in accepting it, assuring him of their earnest good wishes in connec-
tion with his future welfare, if it pleased God to conduct him to the


Southern hemisphere. There was no doubt a great deal of force in what
Mr, Balfour had so ably stated about the supreme importance of a great
community being, so to speak, baptized in its infancy. The American
community had that baptism, and the fruits of it were everywhere seen
at this day. It was of extreme importance that a great community that
was destined evidently to fill the Australian countries be leavened effectu-
ally with the Gospel from the beginning. It was not weak men,
for whom no place could be found here, that were the sort of
men that were to occupy with effect pulpits in such a city
as Melbourne—a great city at present, but evidently destined to be the
capital of a very great country in some future time. He took an interest
in this colony ; there were some very dear friends of his—fellow-
students of his own, and those who had studied under him in the hall of
the Reformed Presbyterian Church—amongst the islands of the South
Pacific. To some extent these brethren had been in the service of the
Presbyterian Church of Yictoria, that had its headquarters in Melbourne.
It was quite plain that the evangelization of the Southern Seas in time to
come must fall into the hands of the churches of Australia, and it was of
very great importance that those churches, for that purpose as well as for
the leavening with the Gospel of their own proper territory, should have
able and experienced men in their ministry, especially at headquarters—
(applause).
Rev. Mr. Johnstone, Belhelvie, said he had known Mr. Yule since
they were fellow-students, and he could not trust himself to say what he
would say about his friend. He looked upon Mr. Yule as one of their
best ministers. In him they had the tine combination of scholarship and
earnest working for the Master. Mr. Yule was one of the most enter-
prising, useful, and hard-working ministers of the Gospel he had known.
They parted with their friend with deep regret, but confident that, if
spared to reach Melbourne, his new field of labour, he would, with God’s
blessing, work very successfully for the Saviour he loves so well.
Professor Salmon!) also wished to add his testimony on behalf of their
greatly esteemed friend, Mr. Yule. He thought the right course had been
proposed ; but he wished frankly to confess that he had had some difficulty
in making up his mind to that course. He thought they should be
slow to do anything that would tend to check the remarkable growth of
Rutherford congregation, so as not to interfere with the very solid work
that had been accomplished, by the grace of God, through his ministry
there. While fears were very natural on the part of congregations
under these circumstances, they usually found that these fears were
defeated. He thought they had every reason, after hearing what had
transpired to-day, to believe that there was every prospect of an equally
prosperous future before that flock. He should have had great hesitation
in going into the proposal for Mr. Yule’s own sake, but he was thankful
to Mr. Yule for the manly and frank way he had expressed his view of the
whole case, which, to his (the Professor’s) mind, had made the course of
duty plain. Mr. Yule possesses the chief qualifications that were necessary
for the work set before him in that distant sphere. They knew him to be
possessed of good pulpit gifts. They knew him also to be possessed of a
very great evangelistic capacity, and that was the very thing which the
congregation in Melbourne, in its present circumstances, seemed to
require. Then they had had some experience of Mr. Yule’s powers of
organization, and these would find a good field in Melbourne, During
recent debates in the Presbytery they had all been coming to value Mr.
Yule more than ever they had done previously—(applause). Whatever


difference there may have been amongst them on many questions, he was
certain there would be no difference amongst them in frankly admitting
that throughout the whole course of these debates Mr. Yule had acted in
an admirable way, and given very effective service to the matter in hand,
and displayed powers of ready debate that would be of great service in
public affairs in another sphere—(applause). They had perhaps been apt
to lose sight of Mr. Yule’s literary gifts. He (the Professor) had no
hesitation in saying that Mr. Yule was possessed of a remarkable literary
gift. They would all part with Mr. Yule with feelings of the deepest
regret, and he had no doubt that, under the blessing of God, he
would be privileged to do a great work, the work dearest to his own
heart, in the new sphere to which they proposed to send him—(applause).
Rev. Mr. Laidlaw felt great reluctance to part with Mr. Yule, but he
was constrained to agree with the motion, from the weighty considerations
that out in that colony they were making a nation ; that the making of a
nation was a most critical thing, and that this country would stand very
much in the way of the progress of the Kingdom of Christ if they grudged
the very best man they could send to aid in laying the foundation of a
great Christian empire.
The motion was then agreed to, and Mr, Yule formally accepted the
call.
The Presbytery then directed Mr. Yule to remain minister of Rutherford
Church till the first Sabbath of November.
From the Leader in the Aberdeen “ Daily Free Press," Sept. 25, 1878,
“ The circumstances of the call from Melbourne to the Rev. Alexander
Yule, of the Rutherford Church, will be clearly understood by the
pleadings pretty fully reported in another page ; and in offering the
remark that the Presbytery, in view of these pleadings—which did credit
to the ability and earnestness of all parties—and the straightforward and
explicit statement of Mr. Yule himself, had only one course open to them,
it is but right to say that, while Melbourne will obtain an able, earnest,
and accomplished minister, the Free Presbytery of Aberdeen will undoubt-
edly sustain a sensible loss by the translation. Mr. Yule undertook the
duties of his present charge when it occupied a very humble position
indeed ; and those who know the needy locality in which the Rutherford
Church is placed know that his labours there, while pursued in a very
unobtrusive way, have not only been carried on in the most earnest and
catholic spirit, but with a wise and intelligent knowledge of the varied
nee( l s —spiritual, moral, and physical—of those among whom he has
ministered, that have told to a very marked extent on the social, as well
as religious well-being, of the locality. This much is due to one whose
labours have been both arduous and self-denying in a high degree, while
his accomplishments as a Christian minister, fully furnished for his special
work, and abreast of the questions of the time, quite warranted his


assuming a more prominent position in many ways than he has sought to
do—or, indeed, would consent to do. He has the satisfaction of knowing
that his work in Aberdeen has been good and enduring work, accomplished
in the face of no ordinary difficulties ; and we have no doubt that, in his
new sphere of labour, his services will be equally satisfactory.”
Letters have been received from Mr. Yule and your Commissioners. The
following are extracted therefrom :
Mr. Yule says—“ I trust that if it is the Lord’s will for me to come to
Melbourne He will fit me for the work, and that I may come in the fulness
of the blessing of the Gospel of Christ. I have now only to hope that the
expectations of my friends, with regard to the acceptance of the call, may
not wholly be disappointed. I see well that your congregation will require
time and labour on the part of us all if it is to become numerous and
outwardly prosperous, but I trust that from the outset we may see that
the Lord is with us in the gathering of many souls to Himself ; and if we
get that blessing, I shall feel I have done right in coming to Australia,
whatever other fortunes await me. I have no doubt that I shall have
the prayers of all the friends of Erskine Church. ”
The Hon. James Balfour writes :—
“ In addition to what I had already ascertained about Mr. Yule’s good
qualities and suitableness, I learnt much at the Presbytery from the
strong attachment of his people, and from the evidently sincere tributes
he received from the very best men of that large and influential Presbytery.
Mr. Yule has excellent gifts, and those most required for your congre-
gation and for Melbourne. He is an excellent preacher (I speak from the
testimony of several), a thorough missionary, one who has great influence
with the young, and one who has done wonders among the lapsed and
fallen. lam confident you are getting a good and earnest man, and one
who, by God’s blessing, will be a great acquisition. ”
The Rev. R. G. Balfour writes in the same strain, and “ congratulates
the congregation on the success of their call,” and adds, “that in securing
Mr. Yule’s services the congregation is obtaining a gift from the Lord of
no ordinary value.”
November 14, 1878.
Walker, May and Co., Printers, 9 Mackillop-street, Melbourne.
