

[?]
COMMITTEE ON ALLEGED GERMAN OUTRAGES.
REPORT OF THE COMMITTEE
ON
ALLEGED GERMAN OUTRAGES
APPOINTED BY
HIS MAJESTY’S GOVERNMENT
AND PRESIDED OVER BY
THE RIGHT HON. VISCOUNT BRYCE, O.M., &C., &C.,
Formerly British Ambassador at Washington.
LONDON:
PRINTED UNDER THE AUTHORITY OF HIS MAJESTY’S
STATIONERY OFFICE
BY HAYMAN, CHRISTY & LILLY, LTD., E.C.
To be purchased, either directly or through any Bookseller, from
WYMAN & SONS, LTD., 29, BREAMS BUILDINGS, FETTER LANE, E.C., and
54, ST. MARY STREET, CARDIFF; OF
H.M, STATIONERY OFFICE (SCOTTISH BRANCH), 23, FORTH STREET, EDINBURGH; OF
E. PONSONBY, LTD., 116, GRAFTON STREET, DUBLIN;
or from the Agencies in the British Colonies and Dependencies,
the United States of America, and other Foreign Countries of
T. FISHER UNWIN, London, W.C.
1915.
PRICE (without Maps) ONE PENNY.


GOVERNMENT PUBLICATIONS
(with the under-mentioned exceptions)
can be purchased in the manner indicated on the hist page of this wrapper.
Booksellers, and the accredited agents of Free Public Libraries, are entitled to a
discount of 25 per cent, from published prices.
Hydrographical Publications of the Admiralty are sold by—
J. D. Potter, 145, Minories, London, E.C.
Patent Office Publications are sold at—
The Patent Office, 25, Southampton Buildings, Chancery Lane, London, W.C.
(N.B. —Classified Abridgments of Patent Specifications are sold also by
Wyman and Sons, Ltd.)
Ordnance Survey and Geological Survey Publications can be purchased
from—
The Director-General of the Ordnance Survey, Southampton ; or
The Superintendent, Ordnance Survey, Dublin ; or
Agents in most of the chief towns in the United Kingdom.
(N.B. — Small Scale Maps are, as a rule, procurable at Railway Bookstalls
in England and Wales.)
The Journal of the Board of Agriculture and Fisheries is published monthly
by the Board, at 4, Whitehall Place, London, S.W. Price 4 d. post free.
The London Gazette is published on Tuesday and Friday evenings by Wyman and
Sons, Ltd. Price I#.
The following is a list of some recent Parliamentary and Official Publica-
tions :
VIOLATION OF THE RIGHTS OF NATIONS AND OF THE LAWS
AND CUSTOMS OF WAR IN BELGIUM.
Reports of the Official Commission of the Belgian Government.
Preface, “ Pro luce et pro jure,” by Monsieur J. Van Den Heuvel,
Minister of State. Refers generally to:—Outrages committed by the
German soldiery; Proclamations issued by the German Commanders;
Denials of the Outrages in the Appeal made to civilised nations by German
Professors ; the uniform character of the Atrocities proving that they were
the deliberate manifestations of a policy and not the isolated acts of
irresponsible creatures; the Violation, by Germany and Austria, of the
Neutrality of Belgium ; Requisitions, by the Germans, of Belgian property ;
Unjustifiable Bombardments of towns; Airship Bombardments of undefended
localities ; Execution of Hostages; Fines levied on towns, &c., &c.,
Names of the Commission of Enquiry.
Report of the Commission: (1) Sack of Aerschot; Suburbs of
Aerschot; Rethy. (2) Sack of Louvain ; Suburbs of Louvain and of Malines.
(3) Sack of Louvain; Sack of Vise; Suburbs of Louvain, Malines, and
Vilvorde. (4) Sack of Aerschot; Evidence as to Damage. (5) Sack of
Aerschot and Louvain; Additional Evidence. (6) German Proclamations.
(7) The use of Expanding Bullets by German Troops (illustrated) ; Mal-
treatment of Prisoners and Wounded; Maltreatment of Hospital Staff and
Mis-use of the Red Cross; Maltreatment of the Civil Population ; Women
and Children placed in front of German Columns; Bombardment of open
and undefended places, (8) Pillage and Executions in Belgian Luxemberg;
Arrest of Hostages; Incendiarism; Executions; Rape. (9) Sack of
Terrnonde ( illustrated ) —First Bombardment, Sack, and Pillage ; Arrest of
Civilians, Murders and Executions; Re-occupation of Terrnonde by Belgian
Troops; Second Bombardment; Final Destruction. (10) Report of the
London Delegacy of the Commission of Enquiry ( illustrated ) —Civilians
driven into the Firing Line ; Imprisonment of Civilian Hostages ; Massacres.
(11) Incidents at Namur; Massacre at Tamines ; Pillage and Massacre at
Andenne ; Sack of Dinant (illustrated) ; Massacres at Hastieres and Surice.
(12) General conclusions, with reply to German accusations. Appendix:—
Instructions to Belgian Authorities issued on 4th August, 1914, and advice
to Civilians. Extracts from the Pastoral Letter of His Eminence Cardinal
Mercier, Archbishop of Malines, Primate of Belgium.
Price 6 d., post free Stpl.
(Continued on page 3 of wrapper.")




COMMITTEE ON ALLEGED GERMAN OUTRAGES.
REPORT OF THE COMMITTEE
ON
ALLEGED GERMAN OUTRAGES
APPOINTED BY
HIS MAJESTY’S GOVERNMENT
AND PRESIDED OVER BY
THE RIGHT HON. VISCOUNT BRYCE, O.M, &C., &C.
Formerly British Ambassador at Washington.
LONDON:
PRINTED UNDER THE AUTHORITY OF HIS MAJESTY’S
STATIONERY OFFICE
Bt HAYMAN, CHKISTY & LILLY, Ltd.. London.
To be purchased, either directly or through any Bookseller, from
"WYMAN & SONS, Ltd., 29, Breams Buildings, Fetter Lane, 8.C., and
54, St. Mart Street, Cardiff; or'
H.M. STATIONERY OFFICE (Scottish Branch), 23, Forth Street, Edinburgh; or
B. PONSONBY, Ltd., 116, Grafton Street, Dublin ;
or from the Agencies in the British Colonies and Dependencies,
the United States of America, and other Foreign Countries of
T, FISHER UNWIN, London, W.C.
1915.
PRICE (without Maps) ONE PENNY.






TABLE OF CONTENTS.
PAGE
Warrant op Appointment -4
Introductory Observations - 6
Part 1.-CONDUCT OF GERMAN TROOPS IN BELGIUM 9
Liege and District 9
Valleys op the Meuse and Sambre - - - - - 12
The Aerschot, Malines, Yilyorde and Louvain Quad-
rangle ... - 17
Louvain ---------- 23
Tbrmonde ----------28
Alost 29
Part IL—BREACHES OP RULES AND USAGES OP
WAR AND ACTS OF INHUMANITY IN
INVADED TERRITORIES - 36
1. Treatment op the Civil Population - - - - 36
(а) Killing of Non-Combatants ----- 36
(б) Treatment of Women and Children - - - 38
(c) The Use op Civilians as Screens - - -42
(d) The Looting, Burning, and Destruction op Pro-
perty 43
2. Offences against Combatants 44
(a) Killing the Wounded or Prisoners - - - 44
( b ) Firing on Hospitals 46
(c) Abuse op Red Cross and White Flag - - 47
CONCLUSIONS - 48
(1107.) Wt. 9188—892. 100,000. 5/15. H. C. &L. Ltd.


WARRANT OF APPOINTMENT.
1 hereby appoint —
The Right Hon. Viscount BRYCE, 0.M.;
The Right Hon. Sib FREDERICK POLLOCK, Bt., K.C.;
The Right Hon. Sir EDWARD CLARKE, K.C.;
Sir ALFRED HOPKINSON, K.C.;
Mr. H. A. L. FISHER,, Vice-Chancellor of the University of
Sheffield ; and
Mr. HAROLD COX;
to be a Committee to consider and advise on the evidence collected on
behalf of His Majesty’s Government as to outrages alleged to have been
committed by German troops during the present War, cases of alleged
maltreatment of civilians in the invaded territories, breaches of the
laws and established usages of war; and to prepare a report for His
Majesty’s Government showing the conclusion at which they arrive on
the evidence now available.
And I appoint Viscount Bryce to be Chairman, and Mr. E. Grimwood
Mears and Mr. W. J. H. Brodrick, barristers-at-law, to be Joint Secre-
taries to the Committee.
(Signed) H. H. ASQUITH.
15th December 1914.
Sir KENELM E. DIGBY, K.C., G.C.8., was appointed an additional
member of the Committee on 22nd January 1915,


To the Right Honourable H. H. Asquith, Ac., Ac., First Lord
of H.M. Treasury.
The Committee have the honour to present and transmit to you a
report upon the evidence which has been submitted to them regarding
outrages alleged to have been committed by the German troops in the
present war.
By the terms of their appointment the' Committee were directed “to
“consider and advise on the evidence collected on behalf of His Majesty’s
“Government, as to outrages alleged to have been committed by German
“troops during the present war, cases of alleged maltreatment of civilians
“in the invaded territories, and breaches of the laws and established
“usages of war; and to prepare a report for His Majesty’s Government
“ showing the conclusion at which they arrive on the evidence now
“available.”
It may be convenient that before proceeding to state how we have
dealt with the materials, and what are the conclusions we have reached,
W'3 should set out the manner in which the evidence came into being, and
its nature.
In the month of September 1914 a Minute Avas, at the instance of the
Prime Minister, drawn up and signed by the Home Secretary and the
Attorney-General. It stated the need that had arisen for investigating
the accusations of inhumanity and outrage that had been brought against
the German soldiers, and indicated the precautions to be taken in col-
lecting evidence that would be needed to ensure its accuracy. Pursuant
to this Minute steps Avere taken under the direction of the Home Office
to collect evidence, and a great many persons who could give it were seen
and examined.
For some three or four months before the appointment of the Com-
mittee, the Home Office had been collecting a large body of evidence.*
More than 1,200 depositions made ,by these Avitnesses have been sub-
mitted to and considered by’ the Committee. Nearly all of these were
obtained under the supervision of Sir Charles Mathews, the Director of
Public Prosecutions, and of Mr. E. Grimwood Mears, barrister of the
Inner Temple, whilst in addition Professor J. H. Morgan has collected a
number of statements mainly from British soldiers, Avhich have also
been submitted to the Committee.
The labour involved in securing, in a comparatively short time, so
large a number of statements from witnesses scattered all over the United
Kingdom, made it necessary to employ a good many examiners. The
depositions were in all cases taken down in this country by gentlemen of
legal knoAvledge and experience, though, of course, they had no authority
to administer an oath. They Avere instructed not to “ lead ” the witnesses,
or make any suggestions to them, and also to impress upon them the
necessity for care and precision in giving their evidence.
They Avere also directed to treat the evidence critically, and as far as
possible satisfy themselves, by putting questions Avhich arose out of the
evidence, that the witnesses Avere speaking the truth. They were, in
fact, to cross-examine them, so far as the testimony given provided
materials for cross-examination.
We have seen and conversed with many of these gentlemen, and have
been greatly impressed by their ability and by what Ave have gathered
as to the fairness of spirit AA'hich they brought to their task. Wo feel
certain that the instructions given have been scrupulously observed.
In many cases those who took the evidence have added their com-
ments upon the intelligence and demeanour of the Avitnesses, stating the
impression which each Avitness made, and indicating any cases in which
* Taken from Belgian witnesses, some soldiers, but most of them civilians from those towns
and villages through which the German Army passed, and from British officers and soldiers.


the story told appeared to them open to doubt or suspicion. In coming
to a conclusion upon the evidence the Committee have been greatly
assisted by these expressions of opinion, and have uniformly rejected
every deposition on which an opinion adverse to the witness' has been
recorded.
This seems to be a fitting place at which to put on record the invalu-
able help which we have received from our Secretaries, Mr. E. Grimwood
Hears and Mr. W. J. H. Brodrick, whose careful diligence and minute
knowledge of the evidence have been of the utmost service. Without
their skill, judgment, and untiring industry the labour of examining and
appraising each part of so large a mass of testimony would have occupied
us for six months instead of three.
The marginal references in this Report indicate the particular deposi-
tion or depositions on which the statements made in the text are based.
The depositions printed in the Appendix themselves show that the
stories were tested in detail, and in none of these have we been able to
detect the trace of any desire to “ make a case ” against the German army.
Care was taken to impress upon the witness that the giving of evidence
was a grave and serious matter, and every deposition submitted to us
was signed by the witness in the presence of the examiner.
A noteworthy feature of many of the depositions is that though taken
at different places and on different dates, and by different lawyers from
different witnesses, they often corroborate each other in a striking
manner.
The evidence is all couched in the very words which the witnesses
used, and where they spoke, -as the Belgian witnesses did, in Flemish or
French, pains were taken to have competent translators, and to make
certain that the translation was exact.
Seldom did these Belgian witnesses show a desire to describe what
they had seen or suffered. The lawyers who took the depositions were
surprised to find how little vindictiveness, or indeed passion, they
showed, and how generally free from emotional excitement their narra-
tives were. Many hesitated to spea'k lest what they said, if it should
ever be published, might involve their friends or relatives at home in
danger, and it was found necessary to give an absolute promise that names
should not be disclosed.
For this reason names have been omitted.
A large number of depositions, and extracts from depositions, will
be found in Appendix A., and to these your attention is directed.
In all cases these are given as nearly as possible (for abbreviation was
sometimes inevitable) in the exact words of the witness, and wherever a
statement has been made by a witness tending to exculpate the German
troops, it has been given in full. Excisions have been made only where
it has been felt necessary to conceal the identity of the deponent, or to
omit what are merely hearsay statements, or are palpably irrelevant. In
every case the name and description of the witnesses are given in the
original depositions and in copies which have been furnished to us by
H.M, Government. The originals remain in the custody of the Home
Department, where they will be available, in case of need, for reference
after the conclusion of the War.
The Committee have also had before them a number of diaries taken
from the German dead.
It appears to be the custom in the German army for soldiers to be
encouraged to keep diaries and to record in them the chief events of each
day. A good many of these diaries were collected on the field when
British troops were advancing over ground which had been held by the
enemy, were sent to Head Quarters in France, and despatched thence
to the War Office in England. They passed into the possession of the
Prisoners of War Information Bureau, and were handed by it to our
secretaries. They have been translated with great care. We have in-
spected them and are absolutely satisfied of their authenticity. They


have thrown important light upon the methods followed in the conduct
of the war. In one respect, indeed, they are the most weighty part of
the evidence, because they proceed from a hostile source and are hot
open to any such criticism on the ground of bias as might be applied to
Belgian testimony. From time to time references to these diaries will
be found in the text of the Report. In Appendix B. they are set out at
greater length both in the German original and in an English transla-
tion, together with a few photographs of the more important entries.
In Appendix C. are set out a number of German proclamations. Most
of these are included in the Belgian Report No. YI. which has been
furnished to us. Actual specimens of original proclamations, issued by
or at the bidding of the German military authorities, and posted in the
Belgian and French towns mentioned, have been produced to us, and
copies thereof are to be found in this Appendix.
Appendix D. contains the rules of the Hague Convention dealing with
the conduct of War on Land as adopted in 1907, Germany being one of
the signatory powers.
In Appendix E. will be found a selection of statements collected in
France by Professor Morgan.
These five appendices are contained in a separate volume.
In dealing with the evidence we have recognised the importance of
testing it severely, and so far as the conditions permit we have followed
the principles which are recognised in the Courts of England, the British
Overseas Dominions, and the United States. We have also (as already
noted) set aside the testimony of any witnesses who did not favourably
impress the lawyers who took their depositions, and have rejected hear-
say evidence except in eases where hearsay furnished an undesigned con-
firmation of facts with regard to which we already possessed direct
testimony from some other source, or explained in a natural way facts
imperfectly narrated or otherwise perplexing.*
It is natural to ask whether much of the evidence given, especially
by the Belgian witnesses, may not be due to excitement and overstrained
emotions, and whether, apart from deliberate falsehood, persons who mean
to speak the truth may not in a more or less hysterical condition have been
imagining themselves to have seen the things which they say that they saw.
Both the lawyers who took the depositions, and we when we came to
examine them, fully recognised this possibility. The lawyers, as already
observed, took pains to test each witness and either rejected, or appended
a note of distrust to, the testimony of those who failed to impress them
favourably. We have carried the sifting still further by also omitting
from the depositions those in which we found something that seemed
too exceptional to be accepted on the faith of one witness only, or too
little supported by other evidence pointing to like facts. Many deposi-
tions have thus been omitted on which, though they are probably true,
we think it safer not to place reliance.
Notwithstanding these precautions, we began the inquiry with doubts
whether a positive result would be attained. But the further we went
and the more evidence we examined so much the more was our scepticism
reduced. There might be some exaggeration in one witness, possible
delusion in another, inaccuracies in a third. When, however, we found
that things which had at first seemed improbable were testified to by
many witnesses coming from different places, having had no communica-
tion with one another, and knowing nothing of one another’s statements,
the points in which they all agreed became more and more evidently
* For instance, the dead body of a man is found lying on the doorstep, or a woman is
seen who has the appearance of having been outraged. So far the facts are proved by the
direct evidence of the person by whom they have been seen. Information is sought for by him
as to the circumstances under which the death or outrage took place. The bystanders who
saw the circumstances, but who are not now accessible, relate what they saw, and this is
reported by the witness to the examiner and is placed on record in the depositions. We have
had no hesitation in taking such evidence into consideration.


true. And when this concurrence of testimony, this convergence upon
what were substantially the same broad facts, showed itself in hundreds
of depositions, the truth of those broad facts stood out beyond question.
The force of the evidence is cumulative. Its worth can be estimated oidy
by perusing the testimony as a whole. If any further confirmation had
been needed, we found it in the diaries in which German officers and
private soldiers have recorded incidents just such as those to which the
Belgian witnesses depose.
The experienced lawyers who took the depositions tell us that they
passed from the same stage of doubt into the same stage of conviction.
They also began their work in a sceptical spirit, expecting to find much
of the evidence coloured by passion, or prompted by an excited fancy.
But they were impressed by the general moderation and matter-of-fact
level-headedness of the witnesses. We have interrogated them, particu-
larly regarding some of the most startling and shocking incidents which
appear in the evidence laid before us, and where they expressed a doubt
we have excluded the evidence, admitting it as regards the cases in which
they stated that the witnesses seemed to them to be speaking the truth,
and that they thems.elves believed the incidents referred to have hap-
pened. It is for this reason that we have inserted among the depositions
printed in the Appendix several cases which we might otherwise have
deemed scarcely credible.
The Committee has conducted its investigations and come to its
conclusions independently of the reports issued by the French and Belgian
Commissions, but it has no reason to doubt that those conclusions are in
substantial accord with the conclusions that have been reached by these
two Commissions.
Arrangement op the Report.
As respects the framework and arrangement of the Report, it has
been deemed desirable to present first of all what may be called a general
historical account of the events which happened, and the conditions which
prevailed in the parts of Belgium which lay along the line of the German
march, and thereafter to set forth the evidence which bears upon particular
classes of offences against the usages of civilised warfare, evidence which
shows to what extent the provisions of the Hague Convention have been
disregarded.
This method, no doubt, involves a certain amount of overlapping,
for some of the offences belonging to the later part of the Report will
have been already referred to in the earlier part which deals with the
invasion of Belgium. But the importance of presenting a connected
narrative of events seems to outweigh the disadvantage of occasional
repetition.
. The report will therefore be found to consist of two parts, viz.:
(1) An analysis and summary of the evidence regarding the conduct
of the German troops in Belgium towards the civilian popula-
tion of that country during the first few weeks of the invasion.
(2) An examination of the evidence relating to breaches of the rules
and usages of war and acts of inhumanity committed by
German soldiers or groups of soldiers, during the first four
months of the war, whether in Belgium or in France.
This second part has again been sub-divided into two sections:—
a. Offences committed against non-combatant civilians during the
conduct of the war generally.
b. Offences committed against combatants, whether in Belgium or
in France.


PART I.
THE CONDUCT OF THE GERMAN TROOPS IN BELGIUM.
Although the neutrality of Belgium had been guaranteed by a treaty
signed in 1839 to which France, Prussia, and Great Britain were parties,
and although, apart altogether from any duties imposed by treaty, no
belligerent nation has any right to claim a passage for its army across
the territory of a neutral state, the position which Belgium held between
the German Empire and France had obliged her to consider the possi-
bility that in the event of a war between these two Powers her neutrality
might not be respected. In 1911 the Belgian Minister at Berlin had
requested an assurance from Germany that she would observe the Treaty
of 1839; and the Chancellor of the Empire had declared that Germany
had no intention of violating Belgian neutrality. Again in 1913 the
German Secretary of State at a meeting of a Budget Committee of the
Reichstag had declared that “ Belgian neutrality is provided for by inter-
national conventions and Germany is determined to respect those
“conventions.” Finally, on July 31, 1914, when the danger of war
between Germany and France seemed imminent, Herr von Below, the
German Minister in Brussels, being interrogated bv the Belgian Foreign
Department, replied that he knew of the assurances given by the German
Chancellor in 1911, and that he “was certain that the sentiments
expressed at that time had not changed.” Nevertheless on August 2 the
same Minister presented a note to the Belgian Government demanding a
passage through Belgium for the German army on pain of an instant
declaration of war. Startled as they were by the suddenness with which
this terrific war cloud had risen on the eastern horizon, the leaders of the
nation rallied round the King in his resolution to refuse the demand and
to prepare for resistance. They were aware of the danger which would
confront the civilian population of the country if it were tempted to take
part in the work of national defence. Orders were accordingly issued by
the civil governors of provinces, and by the burgomasters of towns, that
the civilian inhabitants were to take no part in hostilities and to offer no
provocation to the invaders. That no excuse might be furnished for
severities, the populations of many important towns were instructed to
surrender all firearms into the hands of the local officials. 1
This happened on August 2. On the evening of August 3 the German
troops crossed the frontier. The storm burst so suddenly that neither
party had time to adjust its mind to the situation. The Germans seem
to have expected an easy passage. The Belgian population, never dream-
ing of an attack, were startled and stupefied.
LIEGE AND DISTRICT.
On August 4th the roads converging upon Liege from north-east,
east, and south were covered with German Death’s Head Hussars and
Uhlans pressing forward to seize the passage over the Meuse. From the
very beginning of the operations the civilian nopulation of the villages
lying upon the line of the German advance were made to experience the
extreme horrors of war. “On the 4th of August,” says one witness, “at
1 Copies of typical proclamations have been printed in L’Allemagne et la Belgique,
Documents Annexes, xxxvi.
2 The references are to the Appendices to be found in Vol. 11. of the Report. Those to
which a letter is prefixed, as in the present case, relate to the Appendix of Depositions (A)
which is subdivided into sections, each of which is so distinguished.


Herve” (a village not far from the frontier), “I saw at about 2 o’clock
“in the afternoon, near the station, five Uhlans; these were the first
“ German troops I had seen. They were followed by a German officer and
“ some soldiers in a motor-car. The men in the car called out to a couple
“of young fellows who were standing about 30 yards away. The young
“men, being afraid, ran off, and then the Germans fired and killed one
“of them named D . ... . The murder of this innocent fugitive
civilian was a prelude to the burning and pillage of Herye and of other
villages in the neighbourhood, to the indiscriminate shooting of civilians
of both sexes, and to the organised military execution of batches of
selected males. Thus at Herve some 50 men escaping from the burning
houses were seized, taken outside the town and shot. At Helen, a
hamlet west of Herve, 40 men were shot. In one household alone the
father and mother (names given) were shot, the daughter died after being
repeatedly outraged, and the son was wounded. Nor were children
exempt. * “About August 4,” says one witness, “near Yottem, we were
“pursuing some Uhlans. I saw a man, woman, and a girl about nine,
“ who had been killed. They were on the threshold of a house, one on
“ the top of the other, as if they had been shot down, one after the other,
“as they tried to escape.”
The burning of the villages in this neighbourhood and the wholesale
slaughter of civilians, such as occurred at Herve, Micheroux, and Sou-
magne, appear to be connected with the exasperation caused by the resist-
ance of Fort Fleron, whose guns barred the main road from Aix la
Chapelle to Li&ge. Enraged by the losses which they had sustained,
suspicious of the temper of the civilian population, and probably thinking
that by exceptional severities at the outset they could cow the spirit of
the Belgian nation, the German officers and men speedily accustomed
themselves to the slaughter of civilians. How rapidly the process was
effected is illustrated by an entry in the diary of Kurt Hoffman, a one
year’s man in the Ist Jagers, who on August sth was in front of Fort
Fleron. He illustrates his story by a sketch map. “The position,” he
says, “was dangerous. As suspicious civilians were hanging about—
“houses 1,2, 3,4, 5, were cleared, the owners arrested (and shot the
“ following day). Suddenly village A was fired at. Out of it bursts our
“baggage train, and the 4th Company of the 27th Regiment who had
“lost their way and been shelled by our own artillery. From the point
“D.P. (shown in diary) I shoot a civilian with rifle at 400 metres slap
“through the head, as we afterwards ascertained.” Within a few hours,
Hoffman, whilst in house 3, was himself under fire from his own com-
rades and narrowdy escaped being killed. A German, ignorant that
house 3 had been occupied, reported, as was the fact, that he had been
fired upon from that house. He had been-challenged by the field patrol,
aiid failed to give the countersign. Hoffman continues: “Ten minutes
later, people approach who are talking excitedly—apparently Germans.
“I call out ‘ Halt, who’s there? ’ Suddenly rapid fire is opened upon us,
“which I can only escape by quickly jumping on one side—with bullets
“ and fragments of wall and pieces of glass flying around me. I call out
«‘ Halt, here Field Patrol.’ Then it stops, and there appears Lieutenant
“Romer with three platoons. A man has reported that he had been shot
“at out of our house; no wonder, if he does not give the countersign.”
The entry, though dated August the sth, was evidently written on the
6th or later, because the writer refers to the suspicious civilians as having
been shot on that day. Hoffman does not indicate of what offence these
civilians were guilty, and there is no positive evidence to connect theii
slaughter with the report made by the German who had been fired on by
his comrades. They were “suspicious,” and that was enough.
The systematic execution of civilians, w’hich in some cases, as the
diary just cited shows, was founded on a genuine mistake, was given a
wide extension through the province of Liege. In boumagne and
Micheroux very many civilians were summarily shot. In a field belong


ing to a man named E . . . . 56 or 57 were put to death. A
German officer said: “You have shot at us.” One of the villagers asked
to be allowed to speak, and said: “If you think these people fired, kill
me, but let them go.” The answer was three volleys. The survivors
were bayoneted. Their corpses were seen in the field that night by
another witness. One at least had been mutilated. These were not the
only victims in Soumagne. The eye-witness of the massacre satv, on
his way home, 20 bodies, one that of a young girl of 13. Another witness
saw 19 corpses in a meadow.
At Blegny Trembleur, on the 6th, some civilians were captured by
German soldiers, who took steps to put them to death forthwith, but
were restrained by the arrival of an officer. The prisoners subsequently
were taken off to Battice and five were shot in a field. No reason was
assigned for their murder.
In the meantime house burners were at work. On the 6th, Battice
was destroyed in part. From the Bth to the 10th over 3uu houses were
burnt at Herve, while mounted men shot into doors and windows to pre-
vent the escape of the inhabitants.
At Heure le Remain on or about the 15th of August all the male
inhabitants, including some bedridden old men, were imprisoned in the
church. The burgomaster’s brother and the priest were bayoneted.
On or about the 14th and 15th the village of Vise was completely
destroyed. Officers directed the incendiaries, who worked methodically
with benzine. Antiques and china were removed from the houses, before
their destruction, by officers, who guarded the plunder revolver in hand.
The house of a witness, which contained valuables of this kind, was
protected for a time by a notice posted on the door by officers. This
notice has been produced to the Committee. After the removal of the
valuables this house also was burnt.
German soldiers had arrived on the loth at Blegny Trembleur and
seized a quantity of wine. On the 16th prisoners were taken; four,
including the priest and the burgomaster, were shot. On the same day
200 (so-called) hostages were seized at Flemalle and marched off. There
they were told that unless Fort Flemalle surrendered by noon they would
be shot. It did surrender, and they were released.
Entries in a German diary show that on the 19th the German soldiers
gave themselves up to debaucheiy in the streets of Liege, and on the
night of the 20th (Thursday) a massacre took place in the streets, begin-
ning near the Cafe Carpentier, at which there is said to have been a
dinner attended by Russian and other students. A proclamation issued
bv General Kolewc on the following day gave the German version of the
affair, which was that his troops had been fired on by Russian students.
The diary states that in the night the inhabitants of Liege became
mutinous* and that 50 persons were shot. The Belgian witnesses
vehemently deny that there had been any provocation given, some stat-
ing that many German soldiers were drunk, others giving evidence which
indicates the -affair tvas planned beforehand. It is stated that at
5 o’clock in the evening, long before the shooting, a citizen was warned
by a friendly German soldier not to go out that night.
Though the cause of the massacre is in dispute, the results are known
with certainty. The Rue des Pitteurs and houses in the Place de
PUniversite and the Quai des Pecheurs wore systematically fired with
benzine, and many inhabitants were burnt alive in their houses, their
efforts to escape being prevented by rifle fire. Twenty people were shot,
while trying to escape, before the eyes of one of the witnesses. The
Liege Fire Brigade turned out, but was not allowed to extinguish the
fire. Its carts, however, were usefully employed in removing heaps
of civilian corpses to the Town Hall. The fire burnt on through the night
and the murders continued on the following day, the 21st. Thirty-two
civilians were killed on that day in the Place de PUniversite alone, and


a witness states that this was followed by the rape in open day of 15 or
20 women on tables in the square itself.
No depositions are before us which deal with events in the city of
Liege after this date. Outrages, however, continued in various places
in the province.
For example, on or about the 21st of August, at Pepinster, two
witnesses were seized as hostages and were threatened, together with
five others, that unless they could discover a civilian who was alleged to
have shot a soldier in the leg, they would be shot themselves. They
escaped their fate because one of the hostages convinced the officer that
the alleged shooting, if it took place at all, took place in the Commune
of Cornesse and not that of Pepinster, whereupon the Burgomaster of
Coi ■nesse, who was old and very deaf, was shot forthwith.
The outrages on the civilian population were not confined to the
villages mentioned above, but appear to have been general throughout
this district from the very outbreak of the war.
An entry in one of the diaries says: “We crossed the Belgian frontier
“on 15th August 1914 at 11.50 in the forenoon, and then we went
“ steadily along the main road till we got into Belgium. Hardly were we
“there when we had a horrible sight. Houses were burnt down, the
“inhabitants chased away and some of them shot. Not one of the
“ hundreds of houses was spared. Everything was plundered and burnt.
“Hardly had we passed through this large village before the next village
“was burnt, and so it went on continuously. On the 16th August 1914
“the large village of Barchon was burnt down. On the same day we
“crossed the bridge over the Meuse at 11.50 in the morning. We then
“arrived at the town of Wandre. Here the houses were spared, but
“ everything was examined. At last we were out of the town and every-
thing went in ruins. In one house a whole collection of weapons was
“found. The inhabitants without exception were brought out and shot.
“This shooting was heart-breaking as they all knelt down and prayed, but
“that was no ground for mercy. A few shots rang out and they fell back
“into the green grass and slept for ever.” [“ Die Einwohner wurden samt
“ und senders herausgeholt und erschossen: aber dieses Erschiessen war
“direkt herzzerreisend wie sie alle knieten und beteten, aber dies half
“kein Erbarmen. Ein paar Schusse krachten und die fielen rlicklings in
“das grime Gras und verschliefen fur immer.”]
VALLEYS OF MEUSE AND SAMBRE.
While the First Army, under the command of General Alexander von
Kluck, was mastering the passages of the Meuse between Vise and
Namur, and carrying out the scheme of devastation which has already
been described, detachments of the Second German Army, under General
Von Btilow, were proceeding up the Meuse Valley towards Namur. On
Wednesday, August the 12th, the town of Huy, which stands halfway
between Namur and Liege, was seized. On August 20 German guns
opened fire on Namur itself. Three days later the city was evacuated by
its defenders, and the Germans proceeded along the valley of the Sambre
through Tamines and Charleroi to Mons. Meanwhile a force under General
von Hausen had advanced upon Dinant, by Laroche, Marche, and Achene,
and on August 15th made an unsuccessful assault upon that town. A few
days later the attack was renewed and with success, and, Dinant captured,
Von Hausen’s army streamed into France by Bouvines and Rethel, firing
and looting the villages_ and shooting the inhabitants as they passed
through.
The evidence with regard to the Province of Namur is less voluminous
than that relating to the north of Belgium. This is largely due to the


fact that the testimony of soldiers is seldom available, as the towns and
villages once occupied by the Germans were seldom reoccupied by the
opposing troops, and the number of refugees who have reached England
from the Namur district is comparatively small.
Andenne.
Andenne is a small town on the Meuse between Li&ge and Namur,
lying opposite the village of Seilles (with which it is connected by a bridge
over the river), and was one of the earlier places reached on the German
advance up the Meuse. In order to understand the story of the massacre
which occurred there on Thursday, August 20th, the following facts should
be borne in mind: The German advance was hotly contested by Belgian
and French troops. From daybreak onwards on the 19th August the
Bth Belgian Regiment of the Line were fighting with the German troops
on the left bank of the Meuse on the heights of Seilles. At 8 a.m. on
the 19th the Belgians found further resistance impossible in the district,
and retired under shelter of the forts of Namur. As they retired they
blew up Andenne bridge. The first Germans arrived in Andenne at
about 10 a.m., when 10 or 12 Uhlans rode into the town. They went
to the bridge and found it was destroyed. They then retired, but re-
turned about half an hour afterwards. Soon after that several thousand
Germans entered the town and made arrangements to spend the night
there. Thus, on the evening of the 19th August a large body of German
troops were in possession of the town, which they had entered without any
resistance on the part of the allied armies or of the civilian population.
About 4.30 on the next afternoon shots were fired from the left bank
of the Meuse and replied to by the Germans in Andenne. The village
of Andenne had been isolated from the district on the left bank of the
Meuse by the destruction of the bridge, and there is nothing to suggest
that the firing on the left came from the inhabitants of Andenne. Almost
immediately, however, the slaughter of these inhabitants began, and con-
tinued for over two hours and intermittently during the night. Machine
guns were brought into play. The German troops were said to be for the
most part drunk, and they certainly murdered and ravaged unchecked.
A reference to the German diaries in the Appendix will give some idea
of the extent to which the army gave itself up to drink through the month
of August.
When the fire slackened about 7 o’clock, many of the townspeople
fled in the direction of the quarries; others remained in their houses.
At this moment the whole of the district round the station was on fire
and houses were flaming over a distance of 2 kilometres in the direction
of the hamlet of Tramaka. The little farms which rise one above the
other on the high ground of the right bank were also burning.
At 6 o’clock on the following morning, the 21st, the Germans began
to drag the inhabitants from their houses. Men, women, and children
were driven into the square, where the sexes were separated. Three men
were then shot, and a fourth was bayoneted. A German colonel was pre-
sent, whose intention in the first place appeared to be to shoot all the
men. A young German girl who had been staying in the neighbourhood
interceded with him, and after some parleying, some of the prisoners were
picked out, taken to the banks of the Meuse and there shot. The colonel
accused the population of firing on the soldiers, but there is no reason
to think that any of them had done so, and no inquiry appears to have
been made.
About 400 people lost their lives in this massacre, some on the banks
of the Meuse, where they were shot according to orders given, and some
in the cellars of the houses where they had taken refuge. Eight men
belonging to one family were murdered. Another man was placed close
to a machine gun which was fired through him. His wife brought his
body home on a wheel-barrow. The Germans broke into her house and
*


ransacked it, and piled up all the eatables in a heap on the floor anu * elieved
themselves upon it.
A hair-dresser was murdered in his kitchen where he was sitting with
a child on each knee. A paralytic was murdered in his garden. After
this came the general sack of the town. Many of the inhabitants who
escaped the massacre were kept as prisoners and compelled to clear the
houses of corpses and bury them in trenches. These prisoners were sub-
sequently used as a shelter and protection for a pontoon bridge which the
Germans had built across the river, and were so used to prevent the
Belgian forts from firing upon it.
A few days later the Germans celebrated a Fete Nocturne in the
square. Hot wine, looted in the town, was drunk, and the women were
compelled to give three cheers for the Kaiser and to sing “ Deutschland
fiber Alles.”
Namur District.
The fight round Namur was accompanied by sporadic outrages. Near
Marchovelette wounded men were murdered in a farm by German soldiers.
The farm was set on fire. A German cavalryman rod© away holding in
front of him one of the farmer’s daughters, crying and dishevelled.
At Temploux, on the 23rd August, a professor of modern languages
at the College of Namur was shot at his front door by a German officer.
Before he died he asked the officer the reason for this brutality, and the
officer replied that he had lost his temper because some civilians had fired
upon the Germans as they entered the village. This allegation was not
proved. The Belgian army was still operating in the district, and it may
well be that it was from them that the shots in question proceeded. After
the murder the house was burnt.
On the 24th and 25th of August massacres were carried out at Surice,
in which many persons belonging to the professional classes, as well as
others, were killed,
Namur was entered on the 24th August. The troops signalised their
entry by firing on a crowd of 150 unarmed, unresisting civilians, ten alone
of whom escaped.
A witness of good standing who was in Namur describes how the town
was set on fire systematically in six different places. As the inhabitants
fled from the burning houses they were shot by the German troops. Not
less than 140 houses were burnt.
On the 25th the hospital at Namur was set on fire with inflammable
pastilles, the pretext being that soldiers in the hospital had fired upon
the Germans,
At Denee, on the 28th of August, a Belgian soldier who had been taken
prisoner saw three civilian fellow-prisoners shot. One was a cripple
and another an old man of eighty who was paralysed. It was alleged by
two German soldiers that these men had shot at them with rifles. Neither
of them had rifles, nor had they anything in their pockets. The witness
actually saw the Germans search them and nothing was found.
Charleroi District.
In Tamines, a large village on the Meuse, between Namur and
Charleroi, the advance guard of the German army appeared in the first
fortnight in August, and in this as well as in other villages in the district,
it is proved that a large number of civilians, among them aged people,
women and children, were deliberately killed by the soldiers. One
witness describes how she saw a Belgian boy of 15 shot on .the village
green at Tamines, and a day or two later on the same green a little
girl and her two brothers (name given), who were looking at the German
soldiers, were killed before her eyes for no apparent reason.
The principal massacre at Tamines took place about August the 23rd.


A witness describes how he saw the public square littered with corpses,
and after a search found those of his wife and child, a little girl of 7.
Another witness, who lived near Tamines, went there on August 27th,
and says: “It is absolutely destroyed and a mass of ruins.”
At Morlanwelz, about this time, the British army, together with some
French cavalry, were compelled to retire before the German troops.
The latter took the burgomaster and his man-servant prisoner and shot
them both in front of the Hotel de Yille at Pennine (Belgium), where
the bodies were left in the street for 48 hours. They burnt the Hotel
de Yille and 62 houses. The usual accusation of firing by civilians was
made. It is strenuously denied by the witness, who declares that three
or four days before the arrival of the Germans, circulars had been distri-
buted to every house, and placards had been posted in the town ordering
the deposit of all firearms at the Hotel de Yille and that this order had
been complied with.
At Monceau-sur-Sambre, on the 21st August, a young man of 18
was shot in his garden. His father and brother were seized in their
house and shot in the courtyard of a neighbouring country house. The son
was shot first. The father was compelled to stand close to the feet of his
son’s corpse and to fix his eyes upon him while he himself was shot. The
corpse of the young man shot in the garden was carried into the house
and put on a bed. The next morning the Germans asked where the
corpse was. When they found it was in the house, they fetched straw,
packed it round the bed on which the corpse was lying, and set fire to
it and burnt the house down. A great many houses were burnt in
Monceau.
A vivid picture of the events at Montigny-sur-Sambre has been given
by a witness of high standing who had exceptional opportunities of
observation. In the early morning of Saturday, August 22nd, Uhlans
reached Montigny. The French army was about 4 kilometres away,
but on a hill near the village were a detachment of French about 150
to 200 strong lying in ambush. At about 1.30 the main body of the
German army began to arrive. Marching with them were two groups
of so-called hostages, about 400 in all. Of these, 300 were surrounded
with a rope held by the front, rear, and outside men. The French
troops in ambush opened fire, and immediately the Germans commenced
to destroy the town. Incendiaries with a distinctive badge on
their arm went down the main street throwing handfuls of inflammatory
and explosive pastilles into the houses. These pastilles were carried by
them in bags, and in this way about 130 houses were destroyed in the
main street. By 10.30 p.m. some 200 more hostages had been collected.
These were drawn from Montigny itself, and on that night about 50 men,
women, and children were placed on the bridge over the Sambre and kept
there all night. The bridge was similarly guarded for a day or two,
apparently either from a fear that it was mined or in the belief that
these men, women, and children would afford some protection to the
Germans in the event of the French attempting to storm the bridge.
At one period of the German occupation of Montigny, eight nuns of the
Order of Ste. Marie were captives on the bridge. House burning was
accompanied by murder, and on the Monday morning 27 civilians from
one parish alone were seen lying dead in the hospital.
Other outrages committed at Jumet, Bouffioulx, Charleroi, Mar-
chiennes-au-Pont, Couillet, and Maubeuge are described in the deposi-
tions given in the Appendix.
Dinant.
A clear statement of the outrages at Dinant, which many travellers
will recall as a singularly picturesque town on the Meuse, is given by
one witness, who says that the Germans began burning houses in the
Rue St. Jacques on the 21st August, and that every house in the street


was burnt. On the following day an engagement took place between the
French and the Germans, and the witness spent the whole day in the
cellar of a bank with his wife and children. On the morning of the
23rd, about 5 o’clock, firing ceased, and almost immediately afterwards
a party of Germans came to the house. They rang the bell and began
to batter at the door and windows. The witness’s wife went to the door
and two or three Germans came in. The family were ordered out into
the street. There they found another family, and the two families were
driven with their hands above their heads along the Rue Grande. All
the houses in the street were burning. The party was eventually put
into a forge where there were a number of other prisoners, about a
hundred in all, and were kept there from 11 a.m. till 2 p.m. They were
then taken to the prison. There they were assembled in a courtyard
and searched. No arms were found. They were then passed through
into the prison itself and put into cells. The witness and his wife were
separated from each other. During the next hour the witness heard
rifle shots continually, and noticed in the corner of a courtyard leading
off the row of cells the body of a young man with a mantle thrown over
it. He recognised the mantle as having belonged to his wife. The
witness’s daughter was allowed to go out to see what had happened to
her mother, and the witness himself was allowed to go across the court-
yard half an hour afterwards for the same purpose. He found his wife
lying on the floor in a room. She had bullet wounds in four places,
but was alive and told her husband to return to the children, and he did
so. About 5 o’clock in the evening he saw the Germans bringing out
all the young and middle-aged men from the cells, and ranging their
prisoners, to the number of 40, in three rows in the middle of the court-
yard. About 20 Germans were drawn up opposite, but before anything
was done there was a tremendous fusillade from some point near the
prison and the civilians were hurried back to their cells. Half an hour
later the same 40 men were brought back into the courtyard. Almost
immediately there was a second fusillade like the first and they were
driven back to the cells again. About 7 o’clock the witness and other
prisoners were brought out of their cells and marched out of the prison.
They went between two lines of troops to Roche Bayard about a kilometre
away. An hour later the women and children were separated and the
piisoners were brought back to Dinant, passing the prison on their way.
Just outside the prison the witness saw three lines of bodies which he
recognised as being those of neighbours. They were nearly all dead,
but he noticed movement in some of them. There were about 120 bodies.
The prisoners were then taken up to the top of the hill outside Dinant
and compelled to stay there till 8 o’clock in the morning. On the
following day they were put into cattle trucks and taken thence to
Coblenz. For three months they remained prisoners in Germany.
Unarmed civilians were killed in masses at other places near the
prison. About 90 bodies were seen lying on the fop of one another in a
grass square opposite the convent. They included many relatives of a
witness whose deposition will be found in the Appendix. This witness
asked a German officer why her husband had been shot, and he told her
that it was because two of her sons had been in the civil guard and had
shot at the Germans. As a matter of fact one of her sons was at that
time in Liege and the other in Brussels. It is stated that beside the
90 corpses referred to above, 60 corpses of civilians were recovered from
a hole in the brewery yard and that 48 bodies of women and children
were found in a garden. The town was systematically set on fire by hand
grenades.
Another witness saw a little girl of seven, one of whose legs was
broken and the other injured by a bayonet.
We have no reason to believe that the civilian population of Dinant
gave any provocation, or that any other defence can be put forward to
justify the treatment inflicted upon its citizens.


As regards this town and the advance of the German army from
Dinant to Rethel on the Aisne, a graphic account is given in the diary
of a Saxon officer. 1 This diary confirms what is clear from the evidence
as a whole both as regards these and other districts, that civilians were
constantly taken as prisoners, often dragged from their homes and shot
under the direction of the authorities without any charge being made
against them. An event of the kind is thus referred to in a diary entry:
“ Apparently 200 men were shot. There must have been some innocent
“men amongst them. In future we shall have to hold an inquiry as to
“their guilt instead of shooting them.” The shooting of inhabitants,
women and children as well as men, went on after the Germans had passed
Dinant on their way into France. The houses and villages were pillaged
and property wantonly destroyed.
THE AERSCHOT, MARINES, VILVORDE, AND LOUVAIN
QUADRANGLE.
About August 9 a powerful screen of cavalry masking the general
advance of the first and second German armies was thrown forward into
the provinces of Brabant and Limburg. The progress of the invaders
was contested at several points, probably near Tirlemont on the Louvain
road, and at Diest, Haelen, and Schaffen, on the Aerschot road, by
detachments of the main Belgian army which was drawn up upon the
line of the Dyle. In their preliminary skirmishes the Belgians more
than once gained advantages, but after the fall on August 15 erf the last
of the Liege forts, the great line of railway which runs through Liege
towards Brussels and Antwerp in one direction and towards Namur and
the French frontier in another, fell into the hands of the Germans. From
this moment the advance of the main army xvas swift and irresistible.
On August 19 Louvain and Aerschot were occupied by the Germans, the
former without resistance, the latter after a struggle which resulted early
in the day in the retirement of the Belgian army upon Antwerp. On
August 20 the invaders made their entry into Brussels.
The quadrangle of territory bounded by the towns of Aerschot,
Malines, Yilvorde, and Louvain, is a rich agricultural tract, studded
with small villages and comprising two considerable cities, Louvain and
Malines. This district on August 19 passed into the hands of the
Germans, and, owing perhaps to its proximity to Antwerp, then the seat
of the Belgian Government and headquarters of the Belgian army, it
became from that date a scene of chronic outrage, with respect to which
the Committee has received a great mass of evidence.
The witnesses to these occurrences are for the most part imperfectly
educated persons who cannot give accurate dates, so it is impossible
in some cases to fix the dates of particular crimes ; and the total number
of outrages is so great that we cannot refer to all of them in the body
of the report or give all the depositions relating to them in the Appendix.
The main events, however, are abundantly clear, and group themselves
naturally round three dates —August 19th, August 25th, and Septem-
ber 11th.
The arrival of the Germans in the district on August the 19th was
marked by systematic massacres and other outrages at Aerschot itself,
Gelrode and some other villages.
On August 25th the Belgians, sallying out of the defences of Antwerp,
attacked the German positions at Malines, drove the enemy from the
1 A copy of this diary was given by the French military authorities to the British Head-
quarters Staff in France, and the latter have communicated it to the Committee. It will
be found in Appendix B, after the German diaries shown to us by the British War Office.


town and reoccupied many of the villages, such as Sempst, Hofstade, and
Eppeghem, in the neighbourhood. And just as numerous outrages
against the civilian population had been the immediate consequence of
the temporary repulse of the German vanguard from Fort Fleron, so a
large body of depositions testify to the fact that a sudden outburst of
cruelty was the response of the German army to the Belgian victory at
Malines. The advance of the German army to the Dyle had been accom-
panied by reprehensible and indeed (in certain cases) terrible outrages,
but these had been, it would appear, isolated acts, some of which are
attributed by witnesses to indignation at the check at Ilaelen, while
others may have been the consequence of drunkenness. But the battle
of Mhlines had results of a different order. In the first place it was the
occasion of numerous murders committed by the German army in retreating
through the villages of Sempst, Hofstade, Eppeghem, Elewyt, and else-
where. In the second place, it led, as it will be shown later, to the
massacres, plunderings, and burnings at Louvain, the signal for which
was provided by shots exchanged between the German army retreating
after its repulse at Malines and some members of the German garrison
of Louvain, who mistook their fellow countrymen for Belgians. Lastly,
the encounter at Malines seems to have stung the Germans into establish-
ing a reign of terror in so much of the district comprised in the quad-
rangle as remained in their power. Many houses were destroyed and
their contents stolen. Hundreds of prisoners were locked up in various
churches, and were in some instances marched about from one village
to another. Some of these were finally conducted to Louvain and linked
up with the bands of prisoners taken in Louvain itself, and sent to
Germany and elsewhere.
On September 11th, when the Germans were driven out of Aerschot
across the river Demer by a successful sortie from Antwerp, murders of
civilians were taking place in the villages which the Belgian army then
recaptured from the Germans. These crimes bear a strong resemblance
to those committed in Hofstade and other villages after the battle of
Malines.
Aerschot and District.
Period I. (August 19th and following days).
Aerschot.
The German army entered Aerschot quite early in the mornino-.
Workmen going to their work were seized and taken as hostages.
The Germans, apparently already irritated, proceeded to make a
search for the priests and threatened to burn the convent if the priests
should happen to be found there. One priest wqs accused of inciting the
inhabitants to fire on the troops, and when he denied it, the Burgomaster
was blamed by the officer. The priest then showed the officer the
notices on the walls, signed by the Burgomaster, warning the inhabitants
not to intervene in hostilities.
It appears that they accused the priest of having fired at the Germans
from the tower of the church. This is important, because it is one of
the not infrequent cases in which the Germans ascribed firing from a
church to priests, whereas in fact this firing came from Belgian soldiers,
and also because it seems to show that the Germans from the moment
of their arrival in Aerschot, were seeking to pick a quarrel with the
inhabitants, and this goes far to explain their subsequent conduct.
Hostages were collected, until 200 men, some of whom were invalids,
were gathered together.
Monsieur Tielmans, the Burgomaster, was then ordered by some
German officers to address the crowd and to tell them to hand in any
weapons which they might have in their possession at the Town Hall,


and to warn them that anyone who was found with weapons would be
killed. As a matter of fact, the anus in the possession of civilians had
already been collected at the beginning of the war. The Burgomaster’s
speech resulted in the delivery of one gun which had been used for
pigeon shooting. The hostages were then released. Throughout the
day the town was looted by the soldiers. Many shop windows were
broken, and the contents of the shop fronts ransacked.
A shot was fii’ed about 7 o’clock in the evening, by which time many
of the soldiers were drunk. The Germans were not of one mind as to
the direction from which the shot proceeded. Some said it came from
a jeweller’s shop, and some said it came from other houses. No one
was hit by this shot, but thereafter German soldiers began to fire in
various directions at people in the streets.
It is said that a German general or colonel was killed at the Burgo-
master’s house. As far as the Committee have been able to ascertain,
the identity of the officer has never been revealed. The German version
of the story is that he was killed by the fifteen-year-old son of the
Burgomaster; the Committee, however, is satisfied by the evidence of
several independent witnesses that some German officers were standing
at the window of the Burgomaster’s house, that a large body of German
troops were in the square, that some of these soldiers were drunk and
let off their rifles, that in the volley one of the officers standing at the
window of the Burgomaster’s house fell, that at the time of the accident
the wife and son of the Burgomaster had gone to take refuge in the cellar,
and that neither the Burgomaster nor his son were in the least degree
responsible for the occurrence which served as the pretext for their subse-
quent execution, and for the firing and sack of the town.*
The houses were set on fire with special apparatus, while people were
dragged from their houses already burning, and some were shot in the
streets.
Many civilians were marched to a field on the road to Louvain and
kept there all night. Meanwhile many of the inhabitants were collected
in the square. By this time very many of the troops were drunk.
On the following day a number of the civilians were shot under the
orders of an officer, together with the Burgomaster, his brother and his
son. Of this incident, which is spoken to by many witnesses, a clear
account is given: “ German soldiers came and took hold of me and every
“other man they could see, and eventually there were about 60 of us,
“including some of eighty ( i.e ., years of age), and they made us accom-
“pany them .... all the prisoners had to walk with their hands
“above their heads. We were then stopped and made to stand in a
“line, and an officer, a big fat man who had a blueish uniform , . . .
♦ This account agrees substantially with that given in a letter, written by Mine. Tielmans,
the Burgomaster’s wife, which is printed in the fifth report of the Belgian Commission. The
letter is as follows :
“ This is how it happened. About 4in the afternoon my husband was giving cigars to
the sentinels stationed at the door. I saw that the General and his Aides-de-Camp were
looking at us from the balcony, and told him to come indoors. Just then I looked towards
the Grand Place, where more than 2,000 Germans were encamped, and distinctly saw two
columns of smoke followed by a fusilade; the Germans were firing on the houses, and
forcing their way into them. My husband, children, servant, and myself had just time to
dash into the staircase leading to the cellar. The Germans were even firing into the
passages of the houses. After a few minutes of indescribable horror, one of the
General’s Aides-de-Camp came down and said: ‘ The General is dead, where is the
Burgomaster? ’ My husband said to me, ‘ This will be serious for me.’ As he went for-
ward, 1 said to the Aide-de-Camp, ‘ You can see for yourself, sir, that my husband did not
fire.’ * That makes no difference,’ he said, ‘he is responsible.’ My husband was taken
off. My son, who was at my side, took us into another cellar. The same Aide-de-Camp
came and dragged him out, and made him walk in front of him, kicking him as he went.
The poor boy could hardly walk. That morning when they came to the town the Germans
had fired through the windows of the houses, and a bullet had come into the room where
my son was, and he had been wounded in the calf by the ricochet. After my husband
and son had gone, I was dragged all through the house by Germans, with their revolvers
levelled at my head. I was compelled to see their dead General. Then my daughter and I
were thrown into the street without cloaks or anything. We were massed in the Grand
Place, surrounded by a cordon of soldiers, and compelled to witness the destruction of
our beloved town. And then by the hideous light of the fire I saw them for the last time,
about one in the morning, my husband and my boy tied together. My brother-in-law was
behind them. They were being led out to execution.”


“came along the line and picked out the Burgomaster, his brother, and
“his son, and some men who had been employed under the Red Cross.
“In all, ten men were picked out .... the remainder were made
“to turn their backs upon the ten. I then heard some shots fired, and
“ I and the other men turned round and we saw all the ten men, including
“the Burgomaster, were lying on the ground.” This incident is spoken
to by other witnesses also: some of their depositions appear in the
Appendix.
Gelrode.
On the same day, at Gelrode, a small village close to Aerschot, 25
civilians were imprisoned in the church; seven were taken out by 15
German soldiers in charge of an officer just outside. One of the seven
tried to run away, whereupon all the six who remained behind alive
were shot. This was on the night of the 19th August. No provocation
whatever had been given. The men in question had been searched, and
no arms had been found upon them. Here, as at Aerschot, precautions
had been taken previously to secure the delivery up of all arms in the
hands of civilians.
Some of the survivors were compelled to dig graves for the seven.
At a later date the corpses were disinterred and reburied in consecrated
ground. The marks of the bullets in the brick wall against which the
six were shot were then still plainly visible. On the same day a woman
was shot by some German soldiers as she was walking home. This was
done at a distance of 100 yards and for no apparent reason.
An account of a murder by an officer at Campenhout is given in a
later part of this Report, and depositions relating to Rotselaer, Tremeloo,
and Wespelaer will be found in the Appendix.
The Committee is specially impressed by the character of the outrages
committed in the smaller villages. Many of these are exceptionally
shocking, and cannot be regarded as contemplated or prescribed by the
responsible commanders of the troops by whom they were committed.
The inference, however, which we draw from these occurrences is that
•when once troops have been encouraged in a career of terrorism, the more
savage and brutal natures, of whom there are some in every large army,
are liable to run to wild excess, more particularly in those regions where
they are least subject to observation and control.
Aerschot and District.
Period 11. (August 25th.)
Immediately after the battle of Malines, which resulted in the evacua-
tion by the Germans of the district of Malines, Sempst, Hofstade, and
Eppeghem, a long series of murders were committed either just before
or during the retreat of the army. Many of the inhabitants who were
unarmed, including women and young children, were killed —some of
them under revolting circumstances.
Evidence given goes to show that the death of these villagers was due
not to accident, but to deliberate purpose. The wounds were generally
stabs or cuts, and for the most part appear to have been inflicted with
the bayonet.
Marines.
In Malines itself many bodies were seen. One witness saw a German
soldier cut a woman’s breasts after he had murdered her, and saw many
other dead bodies of women in the streets.


Hofstadb.
In Ilofstade a number of houses had been set on fire and many corpses
were seen, some in houses, some in backyards, and some in the streets.
Several examples are given below.
Two witnesses speak to having seen the body of a young man pierced
by bayonet thrusts, with the wrists cut also.
On a side road the corpse of a civilian was seen on his doorstep with
a bayonet wound in his stomach, and by his side the dead body of a boy of
five or six with his hands nearly severed.
The corpses of a woman and boy were seen at the blacksmith’s. They
had been killed with the bayonet.
In a cafe a young man, also killed with the bayonet, was holding his
hands together as if in the attitude of supplication.
Two young women were lying in the backyard of the house. One had
her breasts cut off, the other had been stabbed.
A young man had been hacked with the bayonet until his entrails pro-
truded. He also had his hands joined in the attitude of prayer.
In the garden of a house in the main street bodies of two women were
observed, and in another house the body of a boy of 16 with two bayonet
wounds in the chest.
Sempst.
In Sempst a similar condition of affairs existed. Houses were burning,
and in some of them were the charred remains of civilians.
In a bicycle shop a witness saw the burned corpse of a man. Other
witnesses speak to this incident.
Another civilian, unarmed, was shot as he was running away. As
will be remembered, all the arms had been given up some time before by
order of the burgomaster.
The corpse of a man with his legs cut off, who was partly bound, was
seen by another 'witness, who also saw a girl of seventeen dressed only in
a chemise and in great distress. She alleged that she herself and other
girls had been dragged into a field, stripped naked and violated, and .that
some of them had been killed with the bayonet.
Weerdb. —At Weerde four corpses of civilians were lying in the road.
It was said that these men had fired upon the German soldiers, but this
is denied. The arms had been given up long before.
Two children were killed in a village, apparently Weerde, quite
wantonly as they were standing in the road with their mother. They were
three or four years old, and were killed with the bayonet.
A small farm burning close by formed a convenient means of getting
rid of the bodies. They were thrown into the flames from the bayonets.
It is right to add that no commissioned officer was present at this time.
Eppeghem. —At Eppeghem, on the 25th of August, a pregnant woman
who had been wounded with a bayonet was discovered in the Convent.
She was dying. On the road six dead bodies of labourers were seen.
Elbwyt. —At Elewyt a man’s naked body was tied up to a ring in the
wall in the backyard of a house. He was dead, .and his corpse was
mutilated in a manner too horrible to record. A woman’s naked body
was also found in a stable abutting on the same backyard.
Vilvordb.—At Vilvorde corpses of civilians were also found. These
villages are all on the line from Malines to Brussels.
Boort Mberbebk. —At Boort Meerbeek a German soldier was seen to
fire three times at a little girl of five years old. Having failed to hit her,
he subsequently bayoneted her. He was killed with the butt end of a
rifle by a Belgian soldier who had seen him commit this murder from a
distance.


Hbrent. — At Herent the charred body of a civilian was found in a
butcher’s shop, and in a handcart twenty yards away was the dead body
of a labourer.
Two eye-witnesses relate that a German soldier shot a civilian and
stabbed him with a bayonet as he lay. He then made one of these wit-
nesses, a civilian prisoner, smell the blood on the bayonet.
Habcht. — At Haecht the bodies of 10 civilians were seen lying in a
row by a brewery wall.
In a labourer’s house, which had been broken up, the mutilated corpse
of a woman of 30 to 35 was discovered.
A child of three with its stomach cut open by a bayonet was lying near
a house.
Werchter. —At Werchter the corpses of a man and woman and four
younger persons were found in one house. It is stated that they had been
murdered because one of the latter, a girl, would not allow the Germans
to outrage her.
This catalogue of crimes does not by any means represent the sum
total of the depositions relating to this district laid before the Committee.
The above are given merely as examples of acts which the evidence shows
to have taken place in numbers that might have seemed scarcely credible.
In the rest of the district—that is to say, Aerschot and the other
villages from which the Germans had not been driven—the effect of the
battle was to cause a recrudescence of murder, arson, pillage, and cruelty,
which had to some extent died down after the 20th or 21st August.
In Aerschot itself fresh prisoners seem to have been taken and added
to those who were already in the church, since it would appear that
prisoners were kept to some extent in the church during the whole of the
German occupation of Aerschot. The second occasion on which large
numbers of prisoners were put there was shortly after the battle of
Malines, and it was then that the priest of Gelrode was brought to Aerschot
Church, treated abominably, and finally murdered.
One witness describes the scene graphically: “ The whole of the
“prisoners—men, women, and children—were placed in the church.
“ Nobody was allowed to go outside the church to obey the calls of nature,
“ the church had to be used for that purpose. We were afterwards allowed
“to go outside the church for this purpose, and then I saw the clergyman
“ of Gelrode standing by the wall of the church with his hands above his
“head, being guarded by soldiers.” The actual details of the murder of
the priest are as follows: The priest Avas struck several times by the
soldiers on the head. He was pushed up against the wall of the church.
He asked in Flemish to be allowed to stand with his face to the Avail, and
tried to turn round. The Germans stopped him, and then turned him Avith
his face to the wall, with his hands above his head. An hour later the
same Avitness srav the priest still standing there. He was then led away
by the Germans a distance of about 50 yards. There, Avith his face against
the Avail of a house, he was shot by five soldiers.
' Other murders of Avhich we have evidence appear in the Appendix.
Some of the prisoners in the church at Aerschot Avere actually kept
there until the arrival of the Belgian army, on September 11th, Avhen
they were released.. Others were marched to Louvain, and eventually
merged with other prisoners, both from Louvain itself and the surround-
ing districts, and taken to Germany and elsewhere.
It is said by one witness that about 1,500 were marched to Louvain,
and that the journey took six hours.
The journey to Louvain is thus described by a witness: We were all
marched off to Louvain, walking. There were some very old people,
amongst others a man 90 years of age. The very old people Avere drawn
in carts and barrows by the younger men. There was an officer Avith a
bicycle, who shouted, as people fell out by the side of the road, “Shoot
them! ”


Abrsohot and District.
Period 111. (September.)
It is unnecessary to describe with much particularity the events of
the period beginning about September 10th. The Belgian soldiers who
had recaptured the place found corpses of civilians, who must have been
murdered in Aerschot itself, just as they found them in Sempst and the
other villages on August 25th. Some of these bodies were found in wells,
and some had been burned alive in their houses.
The prisoners released by the Belgian army from the church were
almost starved.
At llabcht several children had been murdered, one of two or three
years old was found nailed to the door of a farmhouse by its hands and
feet, a crime which seems almost incredible, but the evidence for which
we feel bound to accept. In the garden of this house was the body of a
girl who had been shot in the forehead.
Capellb-au-Bois.— At Capelle-au-Bois two children w r ere murdered
in a cart, and their corpses were seen by many witnesses at different stages
of the cart’s journey.
Eppeghem.— At Eppeghern the dead body of a child of two was seen
pinned to the ground with a German lance. Same witness saw a mutilated
woman alive near Weerde on the same day.
Tremeloo. —Belgian soldiers on patrol’duty found, a young girl naked
on the ground, covered with scratches. She complained of having beon
violated. On the same day an old woman was seen kneeling by the body
of her husband, and she told them that the Germans had shot him as he
was trying to escape from the house.
LOUVAIN. AND DISTRICT.
The events spoken to as having occurred in and around Louvain
between the 19th and the 25th of August deserve close attention.
For six days the Germans were in peaceful occupation of the city.
No houses were set on fire—no citizens killed. There was a certain
afinount of looting of empty houses, but otherwise discipline was effectively
maintained. The condition of Louvain during these days was one of
relative peace and quietude, presenting a striking contrast to the previous
and contemporaneous conduct of the German army elsewhere.
On the evening of August 25th a sudden change takes place. The
Germans, on that day repulsed by the Belgians, had retreated to and
re-occupied Louvain. Immediately the devastation of that city and the
holocaust of its population commences. The inference is irresistible that
the army as a whole wreaked its vengeance on the civil population and
the buildings of the city in revenge for the setback which the Belgian
arms had inflicted on them. A subsidiary cause alleged was the assertion,
often made before, that civilians had fired upon the German army.
The depositions which relate to Louvain are numerous, and are
believed by the Committee to present a true and fairly complete picture of
the events of the 25th and 26th August and subsequent days. We find no
grounds for thinking that the inhabitants fired upon the German army on
the evening of the 25th August. Eye-witnesses worthy of credence detail
exactly when, where, and how the firing.commenced. Such firing was by
Germans on Germans. No impartial tribunal could, in our opinion, come
to any other conclusion.
On the evening of the 25th firing could be heard in the direction of
Herent, some three kilometres from Louvain. An alarm was sounded in


the city. There was disorder and confusion, and at 8 o’clock horses
attached to baggage wagons stampeded in the street and rifle fire com-
menced. This was in the Rue de la Station and came from the German
police guard (21 in number), who, seeing the troops arrive in disorder,
thought it was the enemy. Then the corps of incendiaries got to work.
They had broad belts with the words “ Gott mit uns ” and their equipment
consisted of a hatchet, a syringe, a small shovel, and a revolver. Fires
blazed up in the direction of the Law Courts, St. Martin’s Barracks, and
later in the Place de la Station. Meanwhile an incessant fusillade was
kept up on the windows of the houses. In their efforts to escape the
flames the inhabitants climbed the walls. “My mother and servants,”
says a witness, “had to do the same and took refuge at Monsieur A.,
“whose cellars are vaulted and afforded a better protection than mine.
“A little later we withdrew to Monsieur A.’s stables, where about* 30
“people, who had got there by climbing the walls, were to bo found.
“ Some of these poor wretches had to climb twenty walls. A ring came
“at the bell. We opened the door. Several civilians flung themselves
“ under the porch. The Germans were firing upon them from the street.
“Every moment new fires were lighting up, accompanied by explosions.
“In the middle of the night I heard a knock at the outer door - of the
“ stable which led into a little street, and heard a woman’s voice crying
“ for help. I opened the door, and just as I was going to let her in a
“rifle shot fired from the street by a German soldier rang out and the
“woman fell dead at my feet. About 9in the morning things got quieter,
“and we took the opportunity of venturing into the street, A German
“ who was carrying a silver pyx and a number of boxes of cigars, told us
“we were to go to the station, where trains would be waiting for us.
“ When we got to the Place de la Station we saw in the Square 7 or 8 dead
“bodies of murdered civilians. Not a single house in the place was
“ standing. A whole row of houses behind the station at Blauwput was
“ burnt After being driven hither and thither interminably by officers,
“who treated us roughly and insulted us throughout, we were divided.”
The prisoners were then distributed between different, bodies of troops and
marched in the direction of Herent. Seventy-seven inhabitants of
Louvain, including a number of people of good position (the names of
several are given), were thus taken to Herent. “We found the village of
“Herent in flames, so much so that we had to quicken up to prevent
“ourselves from being suffocated and burnt up by the flames in the
“middle of the road. Half-burnt corpses of civilians were lying in front
“of the houses. During a halt soldiers stole cattle and slaughtered them
“where they stood. Firing started on our left. W© were told it was the
“civilians firing, and that we were going to be shot. The truth is that
“it was the Germans themselves who were firing to frighten us. There
“was not a single civilian in the neighbourhood. Shortly afterwards we
“proceeded on our march to Malines. We were insulted and threatened.
“ . , . The officers were worse than the men. We got to Campen-
“hout about 7 p.m., and were locked into the church with all the male
“papulation of the village. Some priests had joined our numbers. We
“bad bad nothing to eat or drink since the evening of the day before. A
“few compassionate soldiers gave us water to drink, but no official took
“the trouble to see that we were fed.” Next day, Thursday, the 27th, a
safe-conduct to return to Louvain was given, but the prisoners had
hardly started when they were stopped and taken before a Brigade
General and handed to another escort. Some were grossly ill-treated.
They were accused of being soldiers out of uniform, and were told they
could not go to Louvain “as the town was going to be razed to the
ground.” Other prisoners were added, even women and children, until
there were more than 200. They were then taken towards Malines,
released, and told to go to that town together, and that those who
separated would be fired on. Other witnesses corroborate the events
described by the witness.


A woman employed as servant by an old gentleman living in the Rue
de la Station tells the story of her master’s death. “We had supper as
“ usual about 8, but two German officers (who were staying in the house)
“did not come in to supper that evening. My master went to bed at
“8.15, and so did his son. The servants went to bed at half-past 9.
“ Soon after I got to my bedroom I saw out of my room flames from some
“burning house near by. I roused my master and his son. As they
“came down the stairs they were seized by German soldiers, and both
“ were tied up and led out, my master being tied with a rope and his son
“with a chain. They were dragged outside. I did not actually see what
“happened outside, but heard subsequently that my master was
“bayoneted and shot, and that his son was shot. I heard shots from
“the kitchen where I was, and was present at the burial of my master
“and his son 13 days later. German soldiers came back into the house
“ and poured some inflammable liquid over the floors and set fire to it. I
“escaped by another staircase to that which my master and his son had
“descended/’
On the 26th (Wednesday), in the city of Louvain, massacre, fire, and
destruction went on. The University, with its Library, the church of
St. Peter, and many houses were set on fire and burnt to the ground.
Citizens were shot and others taken prisoners and compelled to go with
the troops. Soldiers went through the streets saying “ Man hat
geschossen.”* One soldier was seen going along shooting in the air.
Many of the people hid in cellars, but the soldiers shot down through
the gratings. Some citizens were shot on opening the doors, others in
endeavouring to escape. Among other persons whose houses were burnt
was an old man of ninety lying dangerously ill, who was taken out on his
mattress and left lying in his garden all night. He died shortly after in
the hospital, to which a friend took him the following morning.
On Thursday, the 27th, orders were given that everyone should leave
the city, which was to be razed to the ground. Some citizens, including a
canon of the Cathedral with his aged mother, were ordered to go to Hie
station and afterwards to take the road to Tirlemont. Among the number
were about 20 priests from Louvain. They were insulted and threatened,
but ultimately allowed to go free and make their way as best they could,
women and sick persons among them, to Tirlemont. Other groups of
prisoners from Louvain were on the same day taken by other routes, some
early in the morning, through various villages in the direction of Malines,
with hands tightly bound by a long cord. More prisoners were afterwards
added, and all made to stay the night in the church at Campenhout. Neat
day, the 28th, this group, then consisting of about 1,000 men, women
and children, was taken back to Louvain., The houses along the road
were burning, and many dead bodies of civilians, men and women, were
semi on the way. Some of the principal streets in Louvain had by that
time been burnt out. The prisoners were placed in a large building on the
cavalry exercise ground—“ One woman went mad, some children died,
others were born.” On the 29th the prisoners were marched along the
Malines road, and at Herent the women and children and men over 40
were allowed to go; the others were taken to Boort Meerbeek, 15 kilo-
metres from Malines, and told to march straight to Malines or be shot.
At 11 p.m. they reached the fort of Waelhem, and were at first fired on by
the sentries, but on calling out they were Belgians were allowed to pass.
These prisoners were practically without food from early morning on the
26th until midnight on the 29th. Of the corpses seen on the road some
had their hands tied behind their backs, others were burnt, some had been
killed by blows, and some corpses were those of children who had been
shot.
Another witness, a man of independent means, was arrested at noon
by the soldiers of the 165th Regiment and taken to the Place de la
• “ They have been sheeting.”


Station. He was grossly ill-treated on the way and robbed by an officer
of his purse and keys. His hands were tied behind his beck. His wife
was kept a prisoner at the other side of the station. He was then made to
march with about 600 other prisoners until midnight, slept in the rain
that night, and next day, having had no food since leaving Louvain,
was taken to the church in Rotselaer, where there were then about 1,500
prisoners confined, including some infants. No food was given, only
some water. Next day they were taken through Wespelaer and back to
Louvain. On the way from Rotselaer to Wespelaer 50 bodies Avere seen,
some naked and carbonised and unrecognisable. When they arrived at
Louvain the Fish Market, the Place Marguerite, the Cathedral, and many
other buildings were on fire. In the evening about 100 men, women
and children were put in horse trucks, from which the dung had not been
removed, and at 6 next morning left for Cologne.
The wife of this witness was also taken prisoner with her husband
and her maid, but was separated from him, and she saw other ladies made
to walk before the soldiers Avith their hands above their heads. One, an
old lady of eighty-five—(name given) —was dragged from her cellar and
taken with them to the station. They were kept there all night, but set
free in the morning, Thursday, but shortly afterwards sent to Tirlemont
on foot. A number of corpses were seen on the Avay. The prisoners, of
Avhom there are said to have been thousands, were not allowed even to
have water to drink, although there were streams on the way from which
the soldiers drank. Witness was given some milk at a farm, but as she
raised it to her lips it was taken away from her.
A priest was taken on the Friday morning, August 28th, and placed
at the head of a number of refugees from Wygmael. He was led through
Louvain, abused and ill-treated, and placed with some thousands of other
people in the riding school in the Rue du Manage. The glass roof broke
in the night from the heat of burning buildings round. Next day the
prisoners were marched through the country with an armed guard.
Burnt farms and burnt corpses were seen on the way. The prisoners were
finally separated into three groups, and the younger men marched through
Herent and Bueken to Campenhout, and ultimately reached the Belgian
lines about midnight on Saturday, August 29th. All the houses in
Herent, a village of about 5,000 inhabitants, had been burnt.
The massacre of civilians at Louvain was not confined to its citizens.
Large crowds of people were brought into Louvain from the surrounding
districts, not only from Aerschot and Gelrode as above mentioned, but
also from other places. For example, a witness describes how many
women and children were taken in carts to Louvain, and there placed in
a stable. Of the hundreds of people thus taken from the various villages
and brought to Louvain as prisoners, some were massacred there, others
were forced to march along with citizens of Louvain through various
places, some being ultimately sent on the 29th to the Belgian lines at
Malines, others were taken in trucks to Cologne as described below, others
were released. An account of the massacre of some of these unfortunate
civilian prisoners given by two witnesses may be quoted.
“We were all placed in Station St., Louvain, and the German soldiers
“fired upon us. I saw the corpses of some women in the street. I fell
“down, and a woman who had been shot fell on top of me. I did not
“dare to look at the dead bodies in the street, there were so many of
“ them. All of them had been shot by the German soldiers. One woman
“whom I saw lying dead in the street was a Miss J. . . . —about 35. I
“also saw the body of A, ... M. ... (a woman). She had
“been shot. I saw an officer pull her corpse underneath a wagon.”
Another witness, who was taken from Aerschot, also describes the
occurrence: “I was afterwards taken with a large number of other
“civilians and placed in the church at Louvain. Then we were taken
“to Station St., Louvain. There were about 1,500 civilians of both
“ sexes, and we had been marched from Aerschot to Louvain. When we


'‘were in Station St. I felt that something was about to happen, and
“I tried to shelter in a doorway. The German soldiers then fired a
“mitrailleuse and their rifles upon the people, and the people fell on all
“sides. Two men next to me were killed. I afterwards saw someone
“ give a signal, and the firing ceased. . I then ran away with a married
“woman named B. (whose maiden name was A.
“M. . . .), aged 29, who belonged to Aerschot, but we were again
“captured. She was shot by the side of me, and I saw her fall. Several
“other people were shot at the same time. I again ran away, and in
“my flight saw children falling out of their mothers’ arms. I cannot
“say whether they were shot, or whether they fell from their mothers’
“arms in the great panic which ensued. I, however, saw children
“bleeding.”
Journey to Cologne.
The greatest number of prisoners from Louvain, however, were
assembled at the station and taken by trains to Cologne. Several
witnesses describe their sufferings and the ill-treatment they received
on the journey. One of the first trains started in the afternoon. It
consisted of cattle trucks, about 100 being in each truck. It took three
days to get to Cologne. The prisoners had nothing to eat but a few
biscuits each, and they were not allowed to get out for water and none
was given. On a wagon the words “Civilians who shot at the soldiers
at Louvain ” were written. Some were marched through Cologne after-
wards for the people to see. Ropes were put round the necks of some
and they were told they would be hanged. An order then came that
they were to be shot instead of hanged. A firing squad was prepared,
and five or six prisoners were put up, but were not shot. After being
kept a week at Cologne some of these prisoners were taken back—this
time only 30 or 40 in a truck —and allowed to go free on arriving at
Limburg. Several witnesses who were taken in other trains to Cologne
describe their experiences in detail. Some of the trucks were abominably
filthy. Prisoners were not allowed to leave to obey the calls of nature;
one man who quitted the truck for the purpose was killed by a bayonet.
Describing what happened to another body of prisoners, a witness says
that they were made to cross Station Street, where the houses were
burning, and taken to the station, placed in horse trucks crowded
together, men, women, and children, in each wagon. They were kept at
the station during the night and the following day left for Cologne.
For two days and a half they were without food, and then they received
a loaf of bread among ten persons, and some water. The prisoners were
afterwards taken back to Belgium. They were, in all, eiglit days in the
train, crowded and almost without food. Two of the men went mad.
The women and children were separated from the men at Brussels. The
men were taken to a suburb and then to the villages of Herent, Yilvorde
and Sempst, and afterwards set at liberty.
This taking of the inhabitants, including some of the influential
citizens, in groups and marching them to various places, and in particular
the sending them to Malines and the despatch of great numbers to
Cologne, must evidently have been done under the direction of the higher
military authorities. The ill-treatment of the prisoners was under the
eyes and often by the direction or with the sanction of officers, and
officers themselves took part in it.
The object of taking many hundreds of prisoners to Cologne and back
into Belgium is at first sight difficult to understand. Possibly it is to
be regarded as part of the policy of punishment for Belgian resistance
and general terrorization of the inhabitants —possibly as a desire to show
these people to the population of a German city and thus to confirm the
belief that the Belgians had shot at their troops.
Whatever may have been the ease when the burning began on the


evening of the 25th, it appears clear that the subsequent destruction and
outrages were done with a set purpose. It was not until the 26th that
the Library, and other University buildings, the church of St. Peter and
many houses were set on fire. It is to be noticed that cases occur in
the depositions in which humane acts by individual officers and soldiers
are mentioned, or in which officers are said to have expressed regiet at
being obliged to carry out orders for cruel action against the civilians.
Similarly,°we find entries in diaries which reveal a genuine pity for the
population and disgust at the conduct of the army. It appears that a
German non-commissioned officer stated definitely that he “was acting
under orders and executing them with great unwillingness.” A com-
missioned officer on being asked at Louvain by a witness a highly
educated man —about the horrible acts committed by the soldiers, said
he “was merely executing orders,” and that he himself would be shot
if he did not execute them. gave less credible excuses, one
stating that the inhabitants of Louvain had burnt the citj themsebes
because they did not wish to supply food and quarters for the German
army. It was to the discipline rather than the want of discipline in the
army that these outrages, which we are obliged to describe as systematic,
were due, and the special official notices posted on certain houses that
they were not to be destroyed show the fate which had been decreed
for the others which were not so marked.
We are driven to the conclusion that the harrying of the villages in
the district, the burning of a large part of Louvain, the massacres
there, the marching out of the prisoners, and the transport to Cologne
(all done without enquiry as to whether the particular persons seized
or killed had committed any wrongful act), were due to a calculated policy
earned out scientifically and deliberately, not merely with the sanction,
but under the direction of higher military authorities, and were not
due to any provocation or resistance by the civilian population.
TERMONDE.
To uaderstand the depositions describing what happened at Termonde
it is necessary to remember that the German army occupied the town on
two occasions, the first, from Friday, September the 4th, to Sunday,
September the 6th, and again later in the month, about the 16th. The
civilians had delivered up their arms a fortnight before the arrival of the
Germans.
Early in the month, probably about the 4th, a witness saw two civilians
murdered by Uhlans. Another witness saw their dead bodies which re-
mained in the street for ten days. Two hundred civilians were utilised
as a screen by the German troops about this date.
On the sth the town was partially burnt. One witness was taken
prisoner in the street by some German- soldiers together with several
other civilians. At about 12 o’clock some of the tallest and strongest
men amongst the prisoners were picked out to go round the streets with
paraffin. Three or four carts containing paraffin tanks were brought up,
and a syringe was used to put paraffin on to the houses which were then
fired. The process of destruction began with the houses of rich people,
and afterwards the houses of the poorer classes were treated in the same
manner. German soldiers had previously told this witness that if the
Burgomaster of Termonde, who was out of town, did not return by
12 o’clock that day the town would be set on fire. The firing of the town


was in consequence of his failure to return. The prisoners were after-
wards taken to a factory and searched for weapons. They were subse-
quently provided with passports enabling them to go anywhere in the
town but not outside. The -witness in question managed to effect his
escape by swimming across the river.
Another witness describes how the tower of the church of Termonde
St. Gilles was utilised by the Belgian troops for offensive purposes.
They had in fact mounted a machine gun there. This witness was subse-
quently taken prisoner in a cellar in Termonde in which he had
taken refuge with other people. All the men were taken from
the cellar and the women were left behind. About 70 prisoners in all
were taken; one, a brewer, who could not walk fast enough, was wounded
with a bayonet. He fell down and was compelled to get up and follow
the soldiers. The prisoners had to hold up their hands, and if they
dropped their hands they were struck on the back with the butt ends
of rifles. They were taken to Lebbeke, where there were in all 300
prisoners, and there they were locked up in the church for three days and
with scarcely any food.
A witness living at Baesrode was taken prisoner with 250 others
and kept all night in a field. The prisoners were released on the following
morning. This witness saw three corpses of civilians, and says that the
Germans on Sunday, the 6th, plundered and destroyed the houses of those
who had fled. The Germans left on the following day, taking about 30
men with them, one a man of seventy-two years of age.
Later in the month civilians were again used as a screen, and there is
evidence of other acts of outrage. •
ALOST.
Alost was the scene of fighting between the Belgian and German
armies during the whole of the latter part of the month of September. In
connection with the fighting numerous cruelties appear to have been
perpetrated by the German troops.
On Saturday, the 11th September, a weaver was bayoneted in the
street. Another civilian was shot dead at his door on the same night.
On the following day the witness was taken prisoner together with
30 others. The money of the prisoners was confiscated, and they were
subsequently used as a screen for the German troops who were at that
moment engaged in a conflict with the Belgian army in the town itself.
The Germans burnt a number of houses at this time. Corpses of Id
civilians were seen in the streets on this occasion.
A well-educated witness, who visited the Wetteren Hospital shortly
after this date, saw the dead bodies of a number of civilians belonging to
Alost, and other civilians wounded. One of these stated that he took
refuge in the house of his sister-in-law; that the Germans dragged the
people out of the house, which was on fire, seized him, threw him on the
ground, and hit him on the head with the butt end of a rifle, and ran him
through the thigh with a bayonet. They then placed him with 17 or 18
others in front of the German troops, threatening them with revolvers.
They said that they were going to make the people of Alost pay for the
losses sustained by the Germans. At this hospital was an old woman of 80
completely transfixed by a bayonet.
Other crimes on non-combatants at Alost belong to the end of the
month of September. Many witnesses speak to the murder- of harmless
civilians.


In Binnenstraat the Germans broke open the windows of the houses
and threw fluid inside, and the houses burst into flames. Some of the
inhabitants were burnt to death.
The civilians were utilised on Saturday, the 26th September, as a
screen. During their retreat the Germans fired 12 houses in Rue des
Trois Clefs, and three civilians, whose names are given, were shot dead
in that street after the firing of the houses. On the following day a
heap of nine dead civilians were lyihg in the Rue de FArgent.
Similar outrages occurred at Erpe, a village a few miles from Alost,
about the same date. The village was deliberately burnt. The houses
were plundered and some civilians were murdered.
Civilians were apparently used as a screen at Erpe, but they were
prisoners taken from Alost, and not dwellers in that village.
This disregard for the lives of civilians is strikingly shown in extracts
from German soldiers’ diaries, of which the following are representative
examples.
Barthel, who was a sergeant and standard bearer of the 2nd Company
of the Ist Guards Regiment on Foot, and who during the campaign
received the Iron Cross, says, under date 10th August, 1914 : “A transport
“of 300 Belgians came through Duisburg in the morning. Of these 80,
“including the Oberburgomaster, were shot according to martial law.”
Matbern, of the 4th Company of Jagers, No. 11, from Marburg, states
that at a village between Birnal and Dinant on Sunday, August 23rd, the
Pioneers and Infantry Regiment 178 were fired upon by the inhabitants.
He gives no particulars beyond this. He continues: “About 220 inhabi-
tants were shot, and the village was burnt. Artillery is continuously
“shooting—the village lies in a large ravine. Just now, 6 o’clock in the
“afternoon, the crossing of the Meuse begins near Dinant. All villages,
“chateaux and houses are burnt down during the night. It is a beautiful
“ sight to see the fires all round us in the distance. ”
Bombardier Wetzel, of the 2nd Mounted Battery, Ist Kurhessian Field
Artillery Regiment, No. 11, records an incident which happened in French
territory near Lille on the 11th October : “We had no fight, but we caught
about 20 men and shot them.” By this time killing not in a fight would
seem to have passed into a habit.
Diary No. 32 gives an accurate picture of what took place in Louvain :
“ What a sad scene —all the houses surrounding the railway station com-
“pletely destroyed—only some foundation walls still standing. On the
“ station square captured guns. At the end of a main street there is the
“Council Hall, which has been completely preserved, with all its beautiful
“turrets; a sharp contrast: 180 inhabitants are stated to have been shot
“after they had dug their own graves.”
The last and most important entry is that contained in Diary No. 19.
This is a blue book interleaved w r ith blotting paper, and contains no name
and address; there is, however, one circumstance which makes it possible
to speak with certainty as to the regiment of the writer. He gives the
names of First Lieutenant von Oppen, Count Eulenburg, Captain von
Boeder, First Lieutenant von Bock und Polach, Second Lieutenant Count
Hardenberg, and Lieutenant Engelbrecht. A perusal of the Prussian
Army list of June, 1914, shows that all these officers, with the exception
of Lieutenant Engelbrecht, belonged to the First Regiment of Foot Guards. •
On the 24th August, 1914, the writer was in Ermeton. The exact
translation of the extract, grim in its brevity, is as follows: “24.8.14.
“We took about 1,000 prisoners: at least 500 were shot. The village
“was burnt because inhabitants had also shot. Two civilians were shot at
“ once.”
We may now sum up and endeavour to explain the character and
significance of the wrongful acts done by the German army in Belgium.
If a line is drawn on a map from the Belgian frontier to Lifege and


continued to Charleroi, and a second line drawn from Li&ge to Malines,
a sort of figure resembling an irregular Y will be formed. It is along this
Y that most of the systematic (as opposed to isolated) outrages were com-
mitted. If the period from August 4th to August 30th is taken it will be
found to cover most of these organised outrages. Termonde and Alost
extend, it is true, beyond the Y lines, and they belong to the month of
September. Murder, rape, arson, and pillage began from the moment
when the German army crossed the frontier. For the first fortnight of the
war the towns and villages near Li&ge were the chief sufferers. From the
19th of August to the end of the month, outrages spread in the directions
of Charleroi and Malines, and reach their period of greatest intensity.
There is a certain significance in the fact that the outrages round Liege
coincide with the unexpected resistance of the Belgian army in that
district, and that the slaughter which reigned from the 19th August to
the end of the month is contemporaneous with the period -when the
German army’s need for a quick passage through Belgium at all costs
was deemed imperative.
Here let a distinction be drawn between two classes of outrages.
Individual acts of brutality—ill-treatment of civilians, rape, plunder,
and the like—were very widely committed. These are more numerous
and more shocking than would be expected in warfare between civilised
Powers, but they differ rather in extent than in kind from what has
happened in previous though not recent wars.
In all wars many shocking and outrageous acts must be expected, for
in every large army there must be a proportion of men of criminal
instincts whose worst passions are unloosed by the ipimunity which the
conditions of warfare afford. Drunkenness, moreover, may turn even a
soldier who has no criminal habits into a brute, who may commit outrages
at which he would himself be shocked in his sober moments, and there is
evidence that intoxication was extremely prevalent among the German
army, both in Belgium and in France, for plenty of wine was to be found
in the villages and country houses which Avere pillaged. Many of the
worst outrages appear to have been perpetrated by men under the influ-
ence of drink. Unfortunately little seems to have been done to repress this
source of danger.
In the present war, however—and this is the gravest charge against
the German army—the evidence shows that the killing of non-combatants
was cai'ried out to an extent for which no previous Avar between nations
claiming to be civilised (for such cases as the atrocities perpetrated by the
Turks on the Bulgarian Christians in 1876, and on the Armenian
Christians in 1895 and 1896, do not belong to that category) furnishes
any precedent. That this killing Avas done as part of a deliberate plan is
clear from the facts hereinbefore set forth regarding Louvain, Aerschot,
Dinant, and other toAvns. The killing Avas done under orders in each
place. It began at a certain fixed date, and stopped (Avith some feAv
exceptions) at another fixed date. Some of the officers Avho carried out the
Avork did it reluctantly, and said they were obeying directions from their
chiefs. The same remax-ks apply to the destruction of pi'operty. House
burning Avas part of the programme; and villages, even large parts of a
city, Avere given to the flames as part of the terrorising policy.
Citizens of neutral states Avho visited Belgium in December and
January report that the German authorities do not deny that non-com-
batants Avere systematically killed in large numbers during the first Aveeks
of the invasion, and this, so far as Ave knoAV, has never been officially
denied. If it Avere denied, the flight and continued voluntary exile of
thousands of Belgian refugees Avould go far to contradict a denial, for
there is no historical parallel in modern times for the flight of a large
part of a nation befoi’e an invade! 1 .
The German Govern/lent have, however, sougjht to justify their


severities on the grounds of military necessity, and have excused them
as retaliation for cases in which civilians fired on German troops. There
may have been cases in which such firing occurred, but no proof has ever
been given, or, to our knowledge, attempted to be given, of such cases,
nor of the stones of shocking outrages perpetrated by Belgian men and
women on German soldiers.
The inherent improbability of the German contention is shown by the
fact that after the first few days of the invasion every possible precaution
had been taken by the Belgian authorities, by way of placards and hand-
bills, to w r arn the civilian population not to intervene in hostilities.
Throughout Belgium steps had been taken the secure the handing over of
all firearms in the possession of civilians before the German army arrived.
These steps were sometimes taken by the police and sometimes by the
military authorities.
The invaders appear to have proceeded upon the theory that any
chance shot coming from an unexpected placed was fired by civilians. One
favourite form of this allegation was that priests had fired from the
church tower. In many instances the soldiers of the allied armies used
church towers and private houses as cover for their operations. At
Aersohot, where the Belgian soldiers were stationed in the church tower
and fired upon the Germans as they advanced, it was at once alleged by
the Germans when they entered the town, and with difficulty disproved,
that the firing had come from civilians. Thus one elementary error
creeps at once into the German argument, for they were likely to con-
found, and did in some instances certainly confound, legitimate military
operations with the hostile intervention of civilians.
Troops belonging to the same army often fire by mistake upon each
other.. That the German army was no exception to this rule is proved
not only by many Belgian witnesses but by the most irrefragable kind
of evidence, the admission of German soldiers themselves recorded in
their war diaries. Thus Otto Clepp, 2nd Company of the Reserve, says,
under date 22nd of August: “3 a.m. Two infantry regiments shot at
“each other —9 dead and 50 wounded —fault not yet ascertained.” In
this connection the diaries of Kurt Hoffmann, and a soldier of the 112th
Regiment (diary No, 14) will repay study. In such cases the obvious
interest of the soldier is to conceal his mistake, and a convenient method
of doing so is to raise the cry of “ francs-tireurs, ”
Doubtless the German soldiers often believed that the civilian popula-
tion,, naturally hostile, had in fact attacked them, this attitude of mind
may have been fostered by the German authorities themselves before
the troops passed the frontier, and thereafter stories of alleged atrocities
committed by Belgians upon Germans such as the nn th referred to in one
of the diaries relating to Liege, were circulated amongst the troops and
xoused their anger.
The diary of Barthel when still in Germany on the 10th of August
shows that he believed that the Oberburgomaster of Liege had murdered
a surgeon generaL The fact is that no violence was inflicted on the
inhabitants at Li&ge until the 19th, and no one who studies these pages
can have any doubt that Liege would immediately have been given over
,io murder and destruction if any such incident had occurred.
Letters written to their homes which have been found on the bodies
of dead Germans, bear witness, in a way that now sounds pathetic, to
the kindness with which they were received by the civil population.
Their evident surprise at this reception was due to the stories which had
been dinned into their ears of soldiers with their eyes gouged out,
treacherous murders, and poisoned food, stories which may have been
encouraged by the higher military authorities in order to impress the mind
of the troops as well as for the sake of justifying the measures which they
took to terrify the civil population. If there is any truth in such stories,


no attempt lias been made to establish it. For instance, the Chancellor
of the German Empire, in a communication made to the press on
September 2 and printed in the “Nord Deutsche Allgemeine Zeitung,”
of September 21, said as follows: “Belgian girls gouged out the eyes
“of the German wounded. Officials of Belgian cities have invited our
“officers to dinner and shot and killed them across the table. Contrary
“to all international law, the whole civilian population of Belgium was
“called out, and after having at first shown friendliness, carried on in
“the rear of our troops terrible warfare with concealed weapons. Belgian
“women cut the throats of soldiers whom they had quartered in their
“homes while they were sleeping.”
No evidence whatever seems to have been adduced to prove these tales,
and though there may be cases in which individual Belgians fired on the
Germans, the statement that “the whole civilian population of Belgium
“wag called out ” is utterly opposed to the fact.
An invading army may be entitled to shoot at sight a civilian caught
red-handed, or anyone who though not caught red-handed is proved
guilty on enquiry. But this was not the practice followed by the German
troops. They do not seem to have made any enquiry. They seized the
civilians of the village indiscriminately and killed them, or such as they
selected from among them, without the least regard to guilt or innocence.
The mere cry “Civilisten haben geschossen ” was enough to hand over a
whole village or district and even outlying places to ruthless slaughter.
We gladly record the instances where the evidence shows that
humanity had not wholly disappeared from some members of the German
army, and that they realised that the responsible heads of that organisa-
tion were employing them, not in war but in butchery; “I am merely
“executing orders, and I should be shot if I did not execute them,” said
an officer to a witness at Louvain, At Brussels another officer says:
“I have not done one hundredth part of what we have been ordered to
“do by the High German military authorities.”
As w T e have already observed, it would be unjust to charge upon the
German army generally acts of cruelty which, whether due to drunken-
ness or not, were done by men of brutal instincts and unbridled passions.
Such crimes were sometimes punished by the officers. They were in some
cases offset by acts of humanity and kindliness. But when an army is
directed or permitted to kill non-combatants on a large scale, the ferocity
of the worst natures springs into fuller life, and both lust and the thirst
of blood become more widespread and more formidable. Had less licence
been allowed to the soldiers, and had they not been set to work to
slaughter civilians, there would have been fewer of those painful cases
in which a depraved and morbid cruelty appears.
Two classes of murders in particular require special mention, because
one of them is almost new, and the other altogether unprecedented.
The former is the seizure of peaceful citizens as so-called hostages to be
kept as a pledge for the conduct of the civil population, or as a means
to secure some military advantage, or to compel the payment of a contri-
bution, the hostages being shot if the condition imposed by the arbitrary
will of the invader is not fulfilled. Such hostage talking, with the penalty
of death attached, has now and then happened, the most notable case
being the shooting of the Archbishop of Paris and some of his clergy by
the Communards of Paris in 1871, but it is opposed both to the rules of
war and to every principle of justice and humanity. The latter kind of
murder is the killing of the innocent inhabitants of a village because
shots have been fired, or are alleged to have been fired, on the troops
by someone in the village. For this practice no previous example and
no justification have been or can be pleaded. Soldiers suppressing an
insurrection may have sometimes slain civilians mingled with insurgents,
and Napoleon’s forces in Spain are said to have now and then killed
promiscuously when trying to clear guerillas out of a village. But in


Belgium large bodies of men, sometimes including the burgomaster and
the priest, were seized, marched by officers to a spot chosen for the
purpose, and there shot in cold blood, without any attempt at trial el-
even inquiry, under the pretence of inflicting punishment upon the village,
though these unhappy victims were not even charged with having them-
selves committed any wrongful act, and though, in some cases at least,
the village authorities had done all in their power to prevent any
molestation of the invading force. Such acts are no part of war, for
innocence is entitled to respect even in war. They are mere murders,
just as the drowning of the innocent passengers and crews on a merchant
ship is murder and not an act of war.
That these acts should have been perpetrated on the peaceful popula-
tion of an unoffending country which was not at war with its invaders
but merely defending its own neutrality, guaranteed by the invading
Power, may excite amazement and even incredulity. It was with aniaze-
ment and almost with incredulity that the Committee first read the deposi-
tions relating to such acts. But when the evidence regarding Liege was
followed by that regarding Aerschot, Louvain, Andenne, Dinant, and the
other towns and villages, the cumulative effect of such a mass of con-
current testimony became irresistible, and we were driven to the conclu-
sion that the things described had really happened. The question then
arose how they could have happened. Not from mere military licence,
for the discipline of the German army is proverbially stringent, and its
obedience implicit. Not from any special ferocity of the troops, for
whoever has travelled among the German peasantry knows that they are
as kindly and good-natured as any people in Europe, and those who can
recall the war of 1870 will remember that no charges resembling those
proved by these depositions were then established. The excesses recently
committed in Belgium were, moreover, too widespread and too uniform in
their character to be mere sporadic outbursts of passion or rapacity.
The explanation seems to be that these excesses were committed—
in some cases ordered, in others allowed—on a system and in pursuance
of a set purpose. That purpose was to strike terror into the civil popula-
tion and dishearten the Belgian troops, so as to crush down resistance
and extinguish the very spirit of self-defence. The pretext that civilians
had fired upon the invading troops was used to justify not merely the
shooting of individual francs-tireurs, but the murder of large numbers
of innocent civilians, an act absolutely forbidden by the rules of civilised
warfare.*
In the minds of Prussian officers War seems to have become a sort
of sacred mission, one of the highest functions of the omnipotent State,
which is itself as much an Army as a State. Ordinary morality and the
ordinary sentiment of pity vanish in its presence, superseded by a new
standard which justifies to the soldier every means that can conduce to
success, however shocking to a natural sense of justice and humanity,
however revolting to his own feelings. The Spirit of War is deified.
Obedience to the State and its War Lord leaves no room for any other
duty or feeling. Cruelty becomes legitimate when it promises victory.
Proclaimed by the heads of the army, this doctrine would seem to have
permeated the officers and affected even the private soldiers, leading them
to justify the killing of non-combatants as an act of war, and so accus-
toming them to slaughter that even women and children become at last
the victims. It cannot be supposed to be a national doctrine, for it
neither springs from nor reflects the mind and feelings of the German
people as they have heretofore been known to other nations. It is a
specifically military doctrine, the outcome of a theory held by a ruling
*As to this, see, in Appendix, the Rules of the Hague Convention of 1907, to which
Germany was a signatory.


caste who have brooded and thought, written and talked and dreamed
about War until they have fallen under its obsession and been hvpnotised
by its spirit.
The doctrine is plainly set forth in the German Official Monograph
on the usages of War on land, issued under the direction of the German
staff. This book is pervaded throughout by the view that whatever
military needs suggest becomes thereby lawful, and upon this principle,
as the diaries show, the German officers acted.*
If this explanation be the true one, the mystery is solved, and that
which seemed scarcely credible becomes more intelligible, though not less
pernicious. This is not the only case that history records in which a false
theory, disguising itself as loyalty to a State or to a Church, has perverted
the conception of Duty, and become a source of danger to the world.
* Kriegsbraueh im Landkriege , Berlin, 1902, in Vol. VI., in the series entitled Kriegsge
schtchtliche Einzelschriften , published in 1905. A translation of this monograph, bj Professor
J, 11. Morgan, has recently been published.


PART II.
Having thus narrated the offences committed in Belgium, which it
has been proper to consider as a whole, we now turn to another branch
of the subject, the breaches of the usages of war which appear in the con-
duct of the German army generally.
This branch has been considered under the following heads:
First. The treatment of non-combatants, whether in Belgium or
in France, including—
(a) the killing of non-combatants in France;
(b) the treatment of women and children;
(c) the using of innocent non-combatants as a screen or
shield in the conduct of military operations.
(, d) looting, burning, and the wanton destruction of
property.
Secondly. Offences, committed in the course of ordinary military
operations, which violate the usages of war and the provisions
of the Hague Convention.
This division includes —
(а) killing the wounded or prisoners;
(б) firing on hospitals or on the Red Cross ambulances and
stretcher bearers;
(c) abuse of the Red Cross or of the White Flag.
TREATMENT OF THE CIVILIAN POPULATION.
(a) Killing of Non-Combatants.
The killing of civilians in Belgium has been already described suffi-
ciently. Outrages on the civilian population of the invaded districts, the
burning of villages, the shooting of innocent inhabitants and the taking
of hostages, pillage and destruction continued as the German armies
passed into France. The diary of the Saxon officer above referred to
describes acts of this kind committed by the German soldiers in advanc-
ing to the Aisne at the end of August and after they had passed the French
frontier, as well as when they were in Belgian territory.
A proclamation (a specimen of which was produced to the Committee)
issued at Reims, and placarded over the town, affords a clear illustration
of the methods adopted by the German Higher Command, The popula-
tion of Reims is warned that on the slightest disturbance part or the


whole of the city will be burnt to the ground and all the hostages taken
from the city (a long list of whom is given in the proclamation) imme-
diately shot.
The evidence, however, submitted to the Committee with regard to
the conduct of the German army in France is not nearly so full as that
with regard to Belgium. There is no body of civilian refugees in England,
and the French witnesses have generally laid their evidence before their
own Government. The evidence forwarded to us consists principally of
the statements of British officers and soldiers who took part in the retreat
after the battle of Mons and in the subsequent advance, following the
Germans from the Marne. The area covered is relatively small, and it is
from French reports that any complete account of what occurred in the
invaded districts in France as a whole must be obtained.
Naturally soldiers in a foreign country, with which they were un-
acquainted, cannot be expected always to give accurately the names of
villages through which they passed on their marches, but this does not
prevent their evidence from being definite as to what they actually saw in
the farms and houses where the German troops had recently been. Many
shocking outrages are recorded. Three examples here may suffice, others
are given in the Appendix. A sergeant who had been through the retreat
from Mons, and then taken part in the advance from the Marne, and who
had been engaged in driving out some German troops from a village,
states that his troop halted outside a bakery just inside the village. It
was a private house where baking was done, “not like our bakeries here.’'
Two or three women were standing at the door. The women motioned
them to come into the house, as did also three civilian Frenchmen who
were there. They took them into a garden at the back of the house. At
the end of the garden w T as the bakery. They suav two old men —between
60 and 70 years of age —and one old woman lying close to each other in
the garden. All three had the scalps cut right through and the brains
were hanging out. They were still bleeding. Apparently they had only
just been killed. The three French civilians belonged to this same house.
One of them spoke a few words of English. He gave them to understand
that these three had been killed by the Germans because they had refused
to bake bread for them.
Another witness states that two German soldiers took hold of a young
civilian named D. . . . and bound his hands behind his back, and
struck him in the face with their fists. They then tied his hands in
front and fastened the cord to the tail of the horse. The horse dragged
him for about 50 yards and then the Germans loosened his hands and
left him. The whole of his face was cut and torn and his arms and legs
were bruised. On the following day one of his sisters, whose husband
was a soldier, came to their house with her four children. His brother,
who was also married and who lived in a village near Valenciennes, went
to fetch the bread for his sister. On the way back to their house he
met a patrol of Uhlans, who took him to the market place at Valenciennes
and then shot him. About 12 other civilians were also shot in the
market place. The Uhlans then burned 19 houses in the village, and
afterwards burned the corpses of the civilians, including that of his
brother. His father and his uncle afterwards went to see the dead body
of his brother, but the German soldiers refused to allow them to pass.
A lance-corporal in the Kifles, who was on patrol duty with five
privates during the retirement of the Germans after the Marne, states
that they entered a house in a small village and took ten Uhlans prisoners
and then searched the house and found two women and two children.
One was dead, but the body not yet cold. The left arm had been
cut off just below the elbow. The floor was covered with blood. The
woman’s clothing was disarranged. The other woman was alive but
unconscious. Her right leg had been cut off above the knee. There
were two little children, a boy about 4 or 5 and a girl of about 6 or 7.


The boy’s left hand was cut off at the wrist and the girl’s right hand at
the same place. They were both quite dead. The same witness states
that he saw several women and children lying dead in various other
places, but says he could not say whether this might not have been
accidentally caused in legitimate fighting.
The evidence before us proves that, in the parts of France referred
to, murder of unoffending civilians and other acts of cruelty, including
aggravated cases of rape, carried out under threat of death, and sometimes
actually followed by murder of the victim, were committed by some of
the German troops.
( h) The Treatment of Women and Children.
The evidence shows that the German authorities, when carrying out a
policy of systematic arson and plunder in selected districts, usually drew
some distinction between the adult male population on the one hand and
the women and children on the other. It was a frequent practice to set
apart the adult males of the condemned district with a view to the execu-
tion of a suitable number—preferably of the younger and more vigorous
—and to reserve the women and children for milder treatment. The
depositions, however, present many instances of calculated cruelty, often
going the length of murder, towards the women and children of the
condemned area. We have already referred to the case of Aerschot,
where the women and children were herded in a church which had re-
cently been used as a stable, detained for 48 hours with no food other
than coarse bread, and denied the common decencies of life. At Dinant
60 women and children were confined in the cellar of a convent from
Sunday morning till the following Friday (August 28th), sleeping on the
ground, for there were no beds, with nothing to drink during the whole
period, and given no food until the Wednesday, “when somebody threw
“into the cellar two sticks of macaroni and a carrot for each prisoner.”
In other cases the women and children were marched for long distances
along roads {e.(/., march of women from Louvain to Tirlemont, 28th
August), the laggards pricked on by the attendant Uhlans. A lady com-
plains of having been brutally kicked by privates. Others were struck
with the butt end of rifles. At Louvain, at Liege, at Aerschot, at
Malines, at Montigny, at Andenne, and elsewhere, there is evidence that
the troops were not restrained from drunkenness, and drunken soldiers
cannot be trusted to observe the rules or decencies of war, least of all
when they are called upon to execute a pre-ordained plan of arson and
pillage. From the very first women were not safe. At Liege w'omen and
children were chased about the streets by soldiers. A witness gives a
story, very circumstantial in its details, of how women were publicly
raped in the market-place of the city, five young German officers assist-
ing. At Aerschot men and women were deliberately shot when coming
cut of burning houses. At Li&ge, Louvain, Sempst, and Malines women
were burned to death, either because they were surprised and stupefied
by the fumes of the conflagration, or because they were prevented from
escaping by German soldiers. Witnesses recount how a great crow T d
of men, women, and children from Aerschot w r ere marched to Louvain,
and then suddenly exposed to a fire from a mitrailleuse and rifles. “We
“were all placed,” recounts a sufferer, “in Station Street, Louvain, and
“the German soldiers fired on us. I saw the corpses of some women in
“the street. I fell down, and a woman who had been shot fell on top
of me.” Women and children suddenly turned out into the streets, and
compelled to witness the destruction by fire of their homes, provided a
sad spectacle to such as were sober enough to see. A humane German
officer, witnessing the ruin of Aerschot, exclaims in disgust: “I am a


father myself, and I cannot bear this. It is war, but butchery.
Officers, as well as men, succumbed to the temptation of drink, with re-
sults which may be illustrated by an incident which occurred at Campen-
hout. In this village there was a certain well-to-do merchant (name
given), who had a good cellar of champagne. On the afternoon of the
14th or 15th August, three German cavalry officers entered the house
and demanded champagne. Having drunk ten bottles, and invited five
or six officers and three or four private soldiers to join them, they con-
tinued their carouse, and then called for the master and mistiess of
the house“lmmediately my mistress came in,” says the valet de
chambre, “one of the officers who was sitting on the floor got up, and,
“ puttin o, a revolver to my mistress’ temple, shot her dead. Ihe officer
“was obviously drunk. The other officers continued to drink and sing,
“and they did not pay great attention to the killing of my mistress.
“The officer who shot my mistress then told my master to dig a grave
“and burv my mistress. My master and the officer went into the garden,
«the officer threatening my master with a pistol. My master was
“then forced to dig the grave, and to bury the body of my mistress in it.
“I cannot say for what reason they killed my mistress. The officer who
“did it was singing all the time.”
In the evidence before us there are cases tending to show that
aggravated crimes against women were sometimes severely punished.
One witness reports "that a young girl who was being pursued by a
drunken soldier at Louvain appealed to a German officer, and that the
offender was then and there shot: another describes how an officer of
the 32nd Regiment of the Line was led out to execution for the violation
of two young girls, but reprieved at the request or with the consent of the
o-iiis’ mother. These instances are sufficient to show that the maltreat-
ment of women was no part of the military scheme of the invadei s, how-
ever much it may appear to have been the inevitable result of the system
of terror deliberately adopted in certain regions. so much is
avowed: “ I asked the commander why we had been spared, says a lady
in Louvain, who deposes to having suffered much brutal treatment during
the sack. He said, “We will not hurt you any more. Stay m Louvain.
“All is finished.” It was Saturday, August 29th, and the reign of terror
was over. _ . .
Apart from the crimes committed in special areas and belonging to a
scheme of systematic reprisals for the alleged shooting by civilians, there
is evidence of offences committed against women and children by indi-
vidual soldiers, or by small groups of soldiers, both in the advance thiough
Belgium and France as in the retreat from the Marne. Indeed, the
discipline appears to have been loose during the retreat, and there is
evidence as to the burning of villages, and the murder and violation of
their female inhabitants during this episode of the war.
* In this tale of horrors hideous forms of mutilation occur with some
frequency in the depositions, two of which may be connected in some
instances with a perverted form of sexual instinct.
A third form of mutilation, the cutting of one or both hands, is fre-
quently said to have taken place. In some cases where this form of
mutilation is alleged to have occurred it may be the consequence of a
cavalry charge up a village street, hacking and slashing at everything in
the way; in others the victim may possibly have held a weapon, in others
the motive may have been the theft of rings.
We find many well-established cases of the slaughter (often accom-
panied by mutilation) of whole families, including not infrequently that
of quite small children. In two cases it seems to be clear that prepara-
tions were made to burn a family alive. These crimes were committed
over a period of many weeks and simultaneously in many places, and the
authorities must have known or ought to have known that cruelties of
this character were being perpetrated, nor can anyone doubt that they


could have been stopped by swift and decisive action on the part of the
heads of the German army. ~_h
The use of women and even children as a screen for the protection of
the German troops is referred to in a later part of this Report. From
the number of troops concerned, it must have been commanded or
acquiesced in by officers, and in some cases the presence and connivance of
officers is proved.
The cases of violation, sometimes under threat of death, are numerous
and clearly proved. We referred here to comparatively few out of the
many that have been placed in the Appendix, because the circumstances
are in most instances much the same. They were often accompanied with
cruelty, and the slaughter of women after violation is more than once
credibly attested.
It is quite possible that in some cases where the body of a Belgian or a
French woman is reported as lying in the roadside pierced with bayonet
wounds or hanging naked from a tree, or else as lying gashed and
mutilated in a cottage kitchen or bedroom, the woman in question gave
some provocation. She may by act or word have irritated her assailant,
and in certain instances evidence has been supplied both as to the provoca-
tion offered and as to the retribution inflicted:—
(1) “Just before we got to Melen.” says a witness, who had fallen
into the hands of the Germans on August sth, 'I saw a
“woman with a child in her arms standing on the side of the
“road on our left-hand side watching the soldiers go by. Her
“name was G. . . , aged about sixty-three, and a neigh-
bour of mine. The officer asked the woman for some water
“in good French. She went inside her son’s cottage to get
“some and brought it immediately he had stopped. The
“officer went into the cottage garden and drank the water.
“The woman then said, when she saw the prisoners, ‘ Instead
“of giving you water you deserve to be shot.’ The officer
“shouted to us, ‘March.’ We went on, and immediately I
“saw the officer draw his revolver and shoot the woman and
“child. One shot killed both.”
(2) Two old men and one old woman refused to bake bread for the
Germans. They are butchered. {See above p, 37.)
(3) 23rd August. I went with two friends (names given) to see what
we could see. About three hours out of Malines we were taken
prisoners by a German patrol—an officer and six men—and
marched off into a little wood of saplings, where there was a
house. The officer spoke Flemish. He knocked at the door;
the peasant did not come. The officer ordered the soldiers
to break down the door, which two of them did. The peasant
came and asked what they were doing. The officer said he
did not come quickly enough, and that they had “ trained up ”
plenty of others. His hands were tied behind his back, and
he was shot at once without a moment’s delay. The wife
came cot with a little sucking child. She put the child down
and sprang at the Germans like a lioness. She clawed their
faces. One of the Germans took a rifle and struck her a
tremendous blow with the butt on the head. Another took
his bayonet and fixed it and thrust it through the child. He
then put his rifle on his shoulder with the child up it, its little
arms stretched out once or twice. The officers ordered the
houses to be set on fire, and straw was obtained, and it was
done. The man and his wife and the child were thrown on the
top of the straw. There were about 40 other peasant prisoners
there also, and the officer said; “I am doing this as a lesson


“and example to you. When a German tells you to do some-
“thing next time you must move more quickly.” The regi-
ment of Germans was a regiment of Hussars, with cross-bones
and a death’s head on the cap,
‘ : . v'., - ' •
Can anyone think that such acts as these, committed by women in the
circumstances created by the invasion of Belgium, were deserving of the
extreme form of vengeance attested by these and other depositions?
In considering the question of provocation it is pertinent to take into
account the numerous cases in which old women and very small children
have been shot, bayoneted, and even mutilated. Whatever excuse may
be offered by the Germans for the killing of grown-up women, there can
be no possible defence for the murder of children, and if it can be shown
that infants and small children were not infrequently bayoneted and shot,
it is a fair inference that many of the offences against women require no
explanation more recondite than the unbridled violence of brutal or
drunken criminals.
It is clearly shown that many offences were committed against infants
and quite young children. On one occasion children were even roped
together and used as a military screen against the enemy; on another,
three soldiers went into action carrying small children to protect them-
selves from flank fire. A shocking case of the murder of a baby by a
drunken soldier at Malines is thus recorded by one eye-witness and con-
firmed by another:
“One day, when the Germans were not actually bombarding the town,
“ I left my house to go to my mother’s house in High Street. My husband
“ was with me. I saw eight German soldiers, and they were drunk. They
“were singing and making a lot of noise and dancing about. As the
“ German soldiers came along the street I saw a small child, whether boy
“or girl I could not see, come out of a house. The child w'as about two
“ years of age. The child came into the middle of the street so as to
“be in the way of the soldiers. The soldiers were walking in twos. The
“first line of two passed the child; one of the second line, the man on the
“left, stepped aside and drove his bayonet with both hands into the child’s
“stomach, lifting the child into the air on his bayonet and carrying it
“away on his bayonet, he and his comrades still singing. The child
“screamed when the soldier struck it with his bayonet, but not after-
“ wards.”
These, no doubt, were for the most part the acts of drunken soldiers,
but an incident has been recorded which discloses the fact that even sober
and highly-placed officers were not always disposed to place a high value
on child life. Thus the General, wishing to be conducted to the Town Hall
at Lebbeke, remarked in French to his guide, who was accompanied by a
small boy: “If you do not show me the right way I will shoot you and
“your boy.” There was no need to carry the threat into execution, but
that the threat should have been made is significant.
We cannot tell whether these acts of cruelty to children were part of
the scheme for inducing submission by inspiring terror. In Louvain,
where the system of terrorising was carried to the furthest limit, outrages
on children were uncommon. The same, however, cannot be said of some
of the smaller villages which were subjected to the system. In Hofstade
and Sempst, in Haecht, Rotselaer, and Wespelaer, many children were
murdered. Nor can it be said of the village of Tamines, where three
small children (whose names are given by an eye-witness of the crime)
were slaughtered on the green for no apparent motive. It is difficult to
imagine the motives which may have prompted such acts. Whether or
no Belgian civilians fired on German soldiers, young children, at any rate,
did not fire. The number and character of these murders constitute the
most distressing feature connected with the conduct of the war so far as
it is revealed in the depositions submitted to the Committee.


(c) The use of Civilians as Screens.
' p s' i' ( Ml ■ ‘I -v
We have before us a considerable body of evidence with reference to
the practice of the Germans of using civilians and sometimes military
prisoners as screens from behind which they could fire upon the Belgian
troops in the hope that the Belgians would not return the fire for fear of
killing or wounding their own fellow-countrymen.
In some oases this evidence refers to places where fighting was actually
going on in the streets of a town or village, and to these cases we attach
little importance. It might well happen when terrified civilians were
rushing about to seek safety, that groups of them might be used as a screen
by either side of the combatants without any intention of inhumanity or
of any breach of the rules of civilised warfare. But setting aside these
doubtful cases, there remains evidence which satisfies us that on so many
occasions as to justify its being described as a practice, the German
soldiers, under the eyes and by the direction of their officers, were
guilty of this act.
Thus, for instance, outside Fort Fleron, near Liege, men and children
w r ere marched in front of the Germans to prevent the Belgian soldiers
from filing.
The progress of the Germans through Mons was marked by many
incidents of this character. Thus, on the 22nd August, half a dozen
Belgian colliers returning from work were marching in front of some
German troops who were pursuing the English, and in the opinion of the
witnesses they must have been placed there intentionally. An English
officer describes how he caused a barricade to be erected in a main
thoroughfare leading out of Mons, when the Germans, in order to reach
a cross-road in the rear, fetched civilians out of the houses on each side
of the main road and compelled them to hold up white flags and act as
cover.
Another British officer who saw this incident is convinced that the
Germans were acting deliberately for the purpose of protecting themselves
from the fire of the British troops. Apart from this protection, the
Germans could not have advanced, as the street was straight and com-
manded by the British rifle fire at a range of 700 or 800 yards. Several
British soldiers also speak to this incident, and their story is confhmed bj
a Flemish witness in a side street.
On the 24th August, men, women, and children were actually pushed
into the front of the German position outside Mons, The witness speaks
of 16 to 20 women, about a dozen children, and half a dozen men being
there.
Seven or eight women and five or six very young children were
utilised in this way by some Uhlans between Landrecies and Guise.
A Belgian soldier saw an incident of this character during the retreat
from Namur.
At the battle of Malines, 60 or 80 Belgian civilians, amongst whom
were some women, were driven before the German troops. Another
witness saw a similar incident near Malines, but a much larger number of
civilians w T as involved, and a priest was in front with a white flag.
In another instance, related by a Belgian soldier, the civilians were
tied by the wrists in groups.
At Eppeghem, where the Germans were driven back by the Belgian
sortie from Antwerp, civilians were used as a cover for the German
retreat.
Near Malines, early in September, about 10 children, roped together,
were driven in front of a German force-


At Londerzeel 30 or 40 civilians, men, women and children, were
placed at the head of a German column.
One witness from Termonde was made to stand in front of the
Germans, together with others, all with their hands above their heads.
Those who allowed their hands to drop were at once prodded with the
bayonet. Again at Termonde, about September the 10th, a number of
civilians were shot by the Belgian soldiers who were compelled to fire at
the Germans, taking the risk of killing their own countrymen.
At Tournai, 400 Belgian civilians, men, women and children, were
placed in front of the Germans who then engaged the French.
The operations outside Antwerp were not free from incidents of this
character. Near Willebroeck some civilians, including a number of chil-
dren, a woman and one old man, were driven in front of the German
troops. German officers were present, and one woman who refused to
advance was stabbed twice with the bayonet, and a little child who ran
up to her as she fell had half its head blown away by a shot from a rifle.
Other incidents of the same kind are reported from Nazareth and
Ypres; The British troops were compelled to fire, in some cases at the risk
of killing civilians.
At Ypres the Germans drove women in front of them by pricking them
with bayonets. The wounds were afterwards seen by the witness.
(d) Looting, Burning, and Destruction of Property.
There is an overwhelming mass of evidence of the deliberate destruc-
tion of private property by the German soldiers. The destruction in most
cases was effected by fire, and the German troops, as will be seen from
earlier passages in the Report, had been provided beforehand with appli-
ances for rapidly setting fire to houses. Among the appliances enumerated
by witnesses are syringes for squirting petrol, guns for throwing small
inflammable bombs, and small pellets made of inflammable material.
Specimens of the last-mentioned have been shown to members of the
Committee, Besides burning houses, the Germans frequently smashed
furniture and pictures; they also broke in doors and windows. Fre-
quently, too, they defiled houses by relieving the wants of nature upon
the floor. They also appear to have perpetrated the same vileness upon
piled-up heaps of provisions so as to destroy what they could not them-
selves consume. They also on numerous occasions threw corpses into
wells, or left in them the bodies of persons murdered by drowning.
In addition to these acts of destruction, the German troops both in
Belgium and France are proved to have been guilty of persistent looting.
In the majority of cases the looting took place from houses, but there is
also evidence that German soldiers and even officers robbed their prisoners,
both civil and military, of sums of money and other portable possessions.
It was apparently well known throughout the German army that towns
and villages w'ould be burned whenever it appeared that any civilians had
fired upon the German troops, and there is reason to suspect that this
known intention of the German military authorities in some cases ex-
plains the sequence of events which led up to the burning and sacking of
a town or village. The soldiers, knowing that they would have an oppor-
tunity of plunder if the place w r as condemned, had a motive for arranging
some incident which would provide the necessary excuse for condemna-
non. More than one witness alleges that shots coming from the window
of a house were fired by German soldiers who had forced their way into
the house for the purpose of thus creating an alarm. It is also alleged
that German soldiers on some occasions merely fired their rifles in the
air in a side street and then reported to their officers that they had been


fired at. On the report that firing had taken place orders were given for
■wholesale destruction, and houses were destroyed in streets and districts
where there was no allegation that firing had taken place, as well as in
those where the charge arose. That the destruction could have been
limited is proved by the care taken to preserve particular houses whose
occupants had made themselves in one way or another agreeable to the
conquerors. These houses were marked in chalk, ordering them to be
spared, and spared they were.
The above statements have reference to the burning of towns and
villages. In addition, the German troops in numerous instances have
set fire to farmhouses and farm buildings. Here, however, the plea of
military necessity can more safely be alleged. A farmhouse may afford
convenient shelter to an enemy, and where such use is probable it may
be urged that the destruction of the buildings is justifiable. It is clearly,
however, the duty of the soldiers who destroy the buildings to give reason-
able warning to the occupants so that they may escape. Doubtless this
was in many cases done by the German commanders, but there is testi-
mony that in some cases the burning of the farmhouse was accompanied
by the murder of the inhabitants.
The same fact stands out clearly in the more extensive burning of
houses in towns and villages. In some cases, indeed, as a prelude to the
burning, inhabitants were cleared out of their houses and driven along
the streets, often with much accompanying brutality—some to a place
of execution, others to prolonged detention in a church or other public
buildings. In other cases witnesses assert that they saw German soldiers
forcing back into the flames men, women, and children who were trying
to escape from the burning houses. There is also evidence that soldiers
deliberately shot down civilians as they fled from the fire.
The general conclusion is that the burning and destruction of property
wdiich took place was only in a very small minority of cases justified by
military necessity, and that even then the destruction was seldom accom-
panied by that care for the lives of non-combatants which has hitherto
been expected from a military commander belonging to a civilised nation.
On the contrary, it is plain that in many cases German officers and soldiers
deliberately added to the sufferings of the unfortunate people whose pro-
perty they were destroying.
OFFENCES AGAINST COMBATANTS.
(a) The Killing of the Wounded and of Prisoners.
In dealing with the treatment of the wounded and of prisoners and
the cases in which the former appear to have been killed when helpless,
and the latter at, or after, the moment of capture, we are met by some
peculiar difficulties, because such acts may not in all cases be deliberate
and cold-blooded violations of the usages of war. Soldiers who are ad-
vancing over a spot where the wounded have fallen may conceivably think
that some of those lying prostrate are shamming dead, or, at any rate,
are so slightly wounded as to be able to attack, or to fire from behind when
the advancing force has passed, and thus they may be led into killing
those whom they would otherwise have spared. There will also be
instances in which men, intoxicated with the frenzy of battle, slay even
those whom, on reflection, they might have seen to be incapable of further


harming them. The same kind of fury may vent itself on persons who
are already surrendering; and even a soldier who is usually self-controlled
or humane may, in the heat of the moment, go on killing, especially in
a general melee, those who were offering to surrender. This is most likely
to happen when such a soldier has been incensed by an act of treachery,
or is stirred to revenge by the death of a comrade to whom he is attached.
Some cases of this kind appear in the evidence. Such things happen in
all wars as isolated instances, and the circumstances may be pleaded in
extenuation of acts otherwise shocking. We have made due allowance for
these considerations, and have rejected those cases in which there is a
reasonable doubt as to whether those who killed the wounded knew that
the latter were completely disabled. Nevertheless, after making all
allowances, there remain certain instances in which it is clear that quarter
was refused to persons desiring to surrender when it ought to have been
given, or that persons already so wounded as to be incapable of fighting
further were wantonly shot or bayoneted.
The cases to which references are given all present features generally
similar, and in several of them men who had been left Avounded in the
trenches when a trench was carried by the enemy were found, when their
comrades subsequently re-took the trench, to have been slaughtered,
although evidently helpless, or else they would have escaped with the
rest of the retreating force. For instance, a witness says: “About Sep-
tember the 20th our regiment took part in an engagement with the
“Germans. After we had retired into our trenches a few minutes after
“we got back into them the Germans retired into their trenches. The
“distance between the trenches of the opposing forces was about 400
“yards. I should say about 50 or 60 of our men had been left lying on
“ the field from our trenches. After we got back to them I distinctly saw
“German soldiers come out of their trenches, go over the spots where
“our men were lying, and bayonet them. Some of our men were lying
“nearly halfway between the trenches.” Another says: “The Germans
“advanced over the trenches of the headquarters trench where I had
“been on guard for three days. When the Germans reached our wounded
“I saw their officer using his sword to cut them down.” Another witness
says: “ Outside Ypres we were in trenches and were attacked, and had
“to retire until reinforced by other companies of the Royal Fusiliers.
“ Then we took the trenches and found the wounded, between 20 and 30,
“lying in the trenches with bayonet wounds, and some shot. Most of
“them, say three-quarters, had their throats cut.”
In one case, given very circumstantially, a witness tells how a party
of wounded British soldier s were left in a chalk pit, all very badly hurt,
and quite unable to make resistance. One of them, an officer, held up his
handkerchief as a white flag, and this “ attracted the attention of a party
“of about eight Germans. The Germans came to the edge of the pit. It
“ was getting dusk, but the light was still good, and everything clearly dis-
cernible. One of them, who appeared to be carrying no arms, and who,
“at any rate, had no rifle, came a few feet down the slope into the chalk
“pit, within eight or ten yards of some of the wounded men.” He looked
at the men, laughed, and said something in German to the Germans who
were waiting on the edge of the pit. Immediately one of them fired at
the officer, then three or four of these ten soldiers were shot, then another
officer, and the witness, and the rest of them. “After an interval of some
“time I sat up and found that I was the only man of the ten who were
“ living when the Germans came into the pit remaining alive, and that all
“the rest were dead.”
Another witness describes a painful case in which five soldiers, two
Belgians and three French, were tied to trees by German soldiers appar-
ently drunk, who stuck knives in their faces, pricked them with their
bayonets, and ultimately shot them.
We have no evidence to show whether and in what cases orders uro


ceeded from the officer in command to give no quarter, but there are some
Instances in which persons obviously desiring to surrender were neverthe-
less killed.
(b) Firing on Hosjiitals or on the Fed Cross Ambulances or
Stretcher-bearers.
This subject may conveniently be divided into three sub-divisions,
namely, firing on —
(1) Hospital buildings and other Red Cross establishments.
(2) Ambulances.
(3) Stretcher-bearers.
Under the first and second categories there is obvious difficulty in
proving intention, especially under the conditions of modern long range
artillery fire. A commanding officer’s duty is to give strict orders to
respect hospitals, ambulances, etc., and also to place Red Cross units as
far away as possible from any legitimate line of fire. But with all care
some accidents must happen, and many reported cases will be ambiguous.
At the same time when military observers have formed a distinct opinion
that buildings and persons under the recognisable protection of the Red
Cross were wilfully fired upon, such opinions cannot be disregarded.
Between 30 and 40 of the depositions submitted related to this offence.
This number does not in itself seem so great as to be inconsistent Avith the
possibility of accident.
In one case a Red Cross Depot was shelled on most days throughout
the week. This is hardly reconcilable with the enemy’s gunners having
taken any care to avoid it.
There are other cases of conspicuous hospitals being shelled, in the
witnesses’ opinion, purposely.
In one of these the witness, a sergeant-major, makes a suggestion
which appears plausible, namely, that the German gunners use any
conspicuous building as a mark to verify their ranges rather than for
the purpose of destruction. It would be quite according to the modern
system of what German writers call Kriegsrdson to hold that the con-
venience of range-finding is a sufficient military necessity to justify dis-
regarding any immunity conferred on a building by the Red Cross or
otherwise. In any case, artillery fire on a hospital at such a moderate
range as about 1,000 yards can hardly be thought accidental.
(2) As to firing on ambulances, the evidence is more explicit.
In one case the witness is quite clear that the ambulances were
aimed at.
In another case of firing at an ambulance train the range was quite
short.
In another a Belgian Red Cross party is stated to have been ambushed.
On the whole we do not find proof of a general or systematic firing
on hospitals or ambulances; but it is not possible to believe that much
care was taken to avoid this.
(3) As to firing on stretcher-bearers in the course of trench warfare,
the testimony is abundant, and the facts do not seem explicable by acci-
dent. It may be that sometimes the bearers were suspected of seeing
too much;.and it is plain from the general military policy of the German
armies that very slight suspicion would be acted on in case of doubt.


(c) Abuse of the Red Cross and of the White Flag.
The Red Cross.
Cases of the Red Cross being abused are much more definite.
There are several accounts of fire being opened, sometimes at very-
short range, by machine guns which had been disguised in a German Red
Cross ambulant;© or car; this was aggravated in one case near Tirlemont
by the German soldiers wearing Belgian uniform.
Witness speaks also of a stretcher party with the Red Cross being
used to cover an attack, and of a German Red Cross man working a
machine gun.
There is also a well-attested case of a Red Cross motor car being used
to carry ammunition under command of officers.
Unless all these statements are wilfully false, which the Committee
sees no reason to believe, these acts must have been deliberate, and it
does not seem possible that a Red Cross car could be equipped with a
machine gun by soldiers acting without orders. There is also one case
of firing from a cottage where the Red Cross flag was flying, and this
could not be accidental.
On the whole, there is distinct evidence of the Red Cross having been
deliberately misused for offensive purposes, and seemingly under orders,
on some, though not many, occasions.
Abuse of the White Flag.
Cases of this kind are numerous. It is possible that a small group of
men may show a White Flag without authority from any proper officer,
in which case their action is, of course, not binding on the rest of the
platoon or other unit. But this will not apply to the case of a whole unit
advancing as if to surrender, or letting the other side advance to receive
the pretended surrender, and then opening fire. Under this head we
find many depositions by British soldiers and several by officers. In some
cases the firing was from a machine gun brought up under cover of the
White Flag.
The depositions taken by Professor Morgan in France strongly
corroborate the evidence collected in this country.
The case numbered h7O may be noted as very clearly stated. The
Germans, who had “put up a white flag on a lance and ceased fire,”
and thereby induced a company to advance in order to take them prisoners,
“dropped the white flag and opened fire at a distance of 100 yards.”
This was near Nesle, on September the 6th, 1914. It seems clearly
proved that in some divisions at least of the German army this practice
is very common. The incidents as reported cannot be explained by un-
authorised surrenders of small groups.
There is, in our opinion, sufficient evidence that these offences have
been frequent, deliberate, and in many cases committed by whole units
under orders. All the acts mentioned in this part of the Report are in
contravention of the Hague Convention, signed by the Great Powers,
including France, Germany, Great Britain, and the United States, in
1907, as may be seen by a reference to Appendix D., in which the pro-
visions of that Convention relating to the conduct of war on land are
set forth.


CONCLUSIONS.
From the foregoing pages it will be seen that the Committee have
come to a definite conclusion upon each of the heads under which the
evidence has been classified.
It is proved—
(i) That there were in many parts of Belgium deliberate and
systematically organised massacres of the civil population,
accompanied by many isolated murders and other out-
rages.
(ii) That in the conduct of the war generally innocent civilians,
both men and women, were murdered in large numbers,
women violated, and children murdered. . '
<iii) That looting, house burning, and the wanton destruction
of property were ordered and countenanced by the officers
of the German army, that elaborate provision had been
made for systematic incendiarism at the very outbreak of
the war. and that the burnings and destruction were fre-
quent where no military necessity could be alleged, being
indeed part of a system of general terrorization.
(iv) That the rules and usages of war were frequently broken,
particularly by the using of civilians, including women and
children, as a shield for advancing forces exposed to fire,
to a less, degree by killing the wounded and prisoners, and
in the frequent abuse of the Bed Cross and the White Flag.
Sensible as they are of the gravity of these conclusions, the Committee
conceive that they would be doing less than their duty if they failed to
record them as fully established by the evidence. Murder, lust, and
pillage prevailed oyer many parts of Belgium on a scale unparalleled in
any war between civilised nations during the last three centuries.
Our function is ended when we have stated what the evidence estab-
lishes, but we may be permitted to express our belief that these dis-
closures will not have been made in vain if they touch and rouse the con-
science of mankind, and we venture to hope that as soon as the present
war is over the nations of the world in council will consider what means
can be provided and sanctions devised to prevent the recurrence of such
horrors as our generation is now witnessing.
We are, &c.,
BRYCE.
F. POLLOCK.
EDWARD CLARKE.
KENELM E. DIGBY.
ALFRED HOPKINSON.
H. A. L. FISHER.
HAROLD COX.


PROTEST BY THE BELGIAN GOVERNMENT
against the German allegation that Belgium had forfeited her Neutrality
before the Outbreak of War. Price Id., post free Lid.
BELGIAN REFUGEES.
Questions arising in connection with the Reception and Employment
of the Belgian Refugees in this Country.
First Report of the Departmental Committee appointed by the President
of the Local Government Board.
[Cd. 7750] of Session 1914-15. Price 6 id., post free Hid.
Minutes ok Evidence taken before the Committee.
[Cd. 7779] of Session 1914-15. Price Is. lOd , post free 2s. 2d.
COMMISSIONS AND COMMITTEES ON QUESTIONS ARISING
OUT OF THE WAR.
List of certain Commissions and Committees set up to deal with Public
Questions arising out of the War.
[Cd. 7865] of Session 1914-15, Price Id., post free Id.
FOREIGN OFFICE.
Treaty Series, 1915.
No. I.—Declaration between the United Kingdom, France, and Russia,
engaging not to conclude Peace separately during the present European
War. Signed at London, sth September, 1914.
[Cd. 7737.] Price \d., post free Id.
No. 2.—Convention between the United Kingdom and France relating
to Prizes captured during the present European War. Signed at London,
9th November, 1914.
[Cd. 7789.] Price Id., post free Lid.
No. 4.—Accession of Russia to the Convention of 9th November, 1914,
between the United Kingdom and France relating to Prizes captured during
the present European War.
[Cd, 7858.] Price \d., post free Id.
Miscellaneous, 1914.
No. 5. —Despatch from His Majesty’s Minister at Brussels enclosing a
copy of the Belgian Law of 26th May, 1914, respecting Belgian Nationality.
[Cd. 7464.] Price |d., post free Id.
No. 6. —Correspondence respecting the Europ an Crisis.
[Cd. 7467.] Price 9d., post free ll|d.
No. 7. —Notes exchanged with the Netherlands Minister on the subject
of Oil Properties in Mexico.
[Cd. 7468.] Price Id., post free Id.
No. B.—Despatch from His Majesty’s Ambassador at Berlin respecting
the Rupture of Diplomatic Relations with the German Government.
[Cd. 7445.] Price Id., post free 1 \d.
No. 9. —Despatches from His Majesty’s Ambassador al Berlin respecting
an Official Germ m Organisation for influencing the Press of other
Countries.
[Cd. 7595.] Price \d., post free Id.
No. 10.—Despatch from His Majesty’s Ambassador at Vienna respecting
the Rupture of Diplomatic Relations with the Austro-Hungarian
Government.
[Cd. 7596.] Price Id., post free IJd,
(Continued on j>a<je 4 of wrapper.')


FOREIGN OFFICE — cont.
Miscellaneous, 1914— cont.
No. 11.—Documents respecting the Negotiations preceding the War,
published by the Russian Government.
[Cd. 7626.] Price Bd., post free 4d.
No. 12.—Diplomatic Correspondence respecting the War, published by
the Belgian Government.
[Cd. 7627.] Price 4-]d., post free 6d.
No. 18.—Correspondence respecting Events leading to the Rupture of
Relations with Turkey.
[Cd. 7628.] Price 9d., post free ll^d.
No. 14. —Despatch from His Majesty’s Ambassador at Constantinople,
summarising events leading up to Rupture of Relations with Turkey, and
Reply thereto.
[Cd. 7716.] Price l|d., post free 2d.
No. 15.—Diplomatic Correspondence respecting the War, published by
the French Government.
[Cd. 7717.] Price Id., post free 4d.
Miscellaneous, 1915.
No. I.—Despatch to Sir Henry Howard containing Instructions respecting
his Mission to the Vatican.
[Cd. 7786.] Price Id., post free Id.
No. 2. —Despatch from His Majesty’s Ambassador at Petrograd enclosing
a Memorandum on the subject of the Temperance Measures adopted in
Russia since the outbreak of the European War.
[Cd. 7738 ] Price id., post free Id.
No. B.—Letter of 31st July, 1914, from the President of the French
Republic to the King respecting the European Crisis, and His Majesty’s
Reply of Ist August, 1914.
[Cd. 7812.] Price hd., post free Id.
No. s.—Correspondence between His Majesty's Government and the
United States Ambassador respecting the Treatment of German Prisoners-
of War and Interned Civilians in the United Kingdom.
[Cd. 7815.] Price Id., post free Lid.
No. 6. —Correspondence between His Majesty’s Government nnd the
United States Government respecting the Rights of Belligerents.
[Cd. 7816.] Price Bd., post free 4d.
No. 7. —Correspondence between His Majesty’s Government and the
United States Ambassador respecting the Treatment of Prisoners of
War and Interned Civilians in the United Kingdom and Germany,
respectively.
[Cd. 7817.] Price 91d., post free Is.
No. B.—Correspondence between His Majesty’s Government and the
United States Ambassador respecting the Release of Interned Civilians, and
the exchange of Diplomatic and Consular Officers, and of certain classes of
Naval and Military Officers, Prisoners of War, in the United Kingdom and
Germany, respectively.
[Cd. 7857. J Price 7]d., post free 9ld.
No. 9. —Notes exchanged with the Chilean Minister respecting the
sinking of the German Cruiser Dresden, in Chilean Territorial Waters.
[Cd. 7859.] "Price Jd., post free Id.
No. 11.—Reports by United States Officials on the Treatment of
British Prisoners of War and Interned Civilians at certain places of
Detention in Germany (in continuation of [Cd. 7817].)
[Cd. 7861.] Price 3d., post free 4d.
