

Internment Camp,
Holdsworthy,N. S. W,,
15th June, 1918
The Honourable the Minister of State for Defence,
Commonwealth of Australia,
MELBOURNE ,
Sir,-
We, the undersigned, Australian born British Subjects
interned in this Camp, feel it incumbent upon us to place
before the Honourable Minister, in somewhat comprehensive
form, a statement of facts relating to our internment. The
great majority of us have endured lengthy periods of imprison-
ment, and during that time, we have communicated, with the Honour-
able Minister in respect to various aspects of our position.
We regret that our efforts have borne little or no fruit, and
we are therefore submitting this recital of wrongs in the hope
that the Honourable the Minister, and together with his col-
leagues the Government as a whole, may be commensurately im-
pressed with the importance of the facts which are here adduced.
We propose, firs.tly, to discuss the policy which the Hovern-
ment has adopted, of causing the precipitate arrest of Australian
born persons, their deportation and. internment in this Camp,
Were this country situated close to the theatre of war, were
there any possibility of revolution or internal disturbance
or any other such circumstance, perhaps the temporary detention
of persons on suspicion could be justified, but the Australian
born persons of German descent have shown themselves, both
before the war and during its progress, to be most exemplary
citizens. We can quote a number of instances of "scare-mon-
gering" directed against German-Australians, which could be
regarded as humourous, were it not that the general public is
rarely acquainted with the full facts, and consequently, does
not always judge correctly. It is regrettable that a section
of people - some of whom have "oanded themselves together for
the very purpose - have sought, from the very outset of the
war, to inflame public opinion against Australians who are
descended from German ancestors. It is such persons as these,
perhaps, who have supplied the Minister with the fhlse and dis-
torted evidence, which has led him to intern Australian born
citizens. These despicable beings, who work under cover of
anonymity, have caused much sorrow and suffering in this country
by their activities, Unforturately, the very instructions
issued by the Defence Department in respect to this matter,
practically amount to an invitation to such persons to have
their social or political enemies or business rivals put out
of the way, since it is particularly stipulated in these in-
structions that the persons supplying evidence against citizens
of German origin, shall be protected in every way so that their
identity shall not be disclosed. This persecution has not
served Australia, but, on the contrary, has thrown a burden of
responsibility and expenditure upon the Commonwealth, If thsr#


is any bitter feeling amoi- 1 gst % ji. Ge.rma 11 -Austra 1 ian community,.
it is prompted by the treatment which has been meted out to
them: if their war effort has slackened to a greater degree
than that of any other section of the population, the fault is.,
not to be ascribed to them, but to those who have caused their.
humiliation,, High ecclesiastics and public men, who make the
most daring speeches, do so with impunity, but persons with
German names, who have committed no offence, are imprisoned
without any hesitation.
In May 1916 f the Minister announced that, in connection
with the Government's policy relating to internment, it was to
be distinctly understood that military necessity would be the
only cause for internment, and that the Government would not
be justified in interning anyone for social or industrial
reasons. It is very regrettable that this policy has not
been adhered to. Since that time, about 40 persons of Aus-
tralian birth have been arrested and confined in this camp.
These Australian citizens, few of whom have ever left Aus-
tralian shores, - and few of whose parents, if born in Germany,
have ever returned there even for visits - have been arrested
by Minister's warrant, under the authority of War Precautions
Regulation 56A, although in at least one case, no warrant was
produced at the time of arrest. In this instance, a copy of
the warrant was supplied to the internee two years after his
internment, but, strange to state, this copy disclosed that
the warrant was issued, on a date when the gentleman concerned
was not in Australia, yet described him as of a district in
which he had never resided,
These Australian born subjects have repeatedly sought
trial in open court, or some kind of enquiry where they would
have an opportunity of securing vindication: they have asked
to have definite charges laid against them, in order to be in
a position to disprove same: they have requested, for the
same purpose, copies of the evidence which the Minister may
have against them: they have challenged the Minister- to put
this evidence to the test, either in open court, or in a
magisterial inquiry c All such appeals have, however, fallen
upon deaf ears, The Minister will only say that they are
not entitled to any enquiry, or to know the charges against
them, or the reasons for their internment? that they are in-
terned for the reasons stated in the arrest warrant - which
are that they are of "hostile origin and associations:" that
it is against the public ibterest to grant any enquiry: that
they are to remain interned so long as the public interest
requires it. On an occasion when the Minister made an of-
ficial visit to this campf, a request was made for an inter-
view with him in order to bring the full facts before him,
but this request was rejectedc Me have requested the Minister
to enable us to take advantage of the final clause in Regu-
lation 56A of the War Precautions Act, which preserves to us
the right, granted in Regulation 56 to an enquiry before a
Justice of the High Court, The Minister stated, in reply,
that we were not entitled to make this appeal to the High
Courto The Chief Justice is now willing to allow the question
to be opened in the High Court, but the restrictions placed
upon interviews with solicitors debar action c Until quite
recently, consultations with solicitors were, for a long period,
forbidden, How, when legal action in the High Court is con-
templated, interviews with solicitors are permitted only at the
Camp, and in the presence of an officer, a, restriction which is


in keeping with the general attitude of the Defence Depart-
ment toward us. Owing to our handicapped position, there-
fore. it is impossible to obtain legal or any other form of
redress„
It ha.s been learnt indirectly, from one source., that these
Australians are regarded as having pro-enemy sentiments and
likely to be dangerous, yet during their internment, they have
been approached for subscriptions to the bar Loan o It lias
been suggested that their liberty is regarded as prejudicial
to recruiting: but it is an undoubted fact that their re-
moval from civil life has caused a revulsion of feeling, and
that j instead of assisting recruiting; it has retarded the
movement. It is known that, in some instances, internment
has been caused by statements made by business rivals, and
social and political enemies, but the Minister refuses any
enlightenment on this question.
The personal hardship, loss of health, and mental strain -
apart from financial considerations - involved by internment,
and the injustice of their treatment are very keenly felt.
The treatment which ha. s been accorded enemy subjects at other
Concentration Camps, from which the Australians have been ex-
cluded, has been far superior to that given them at Holdsworthy.
However, they feel more keenly still the suffering and hardship
which are caused their families, few of whom have been able to
see them during the last two years,,
It has been suggested to the Minister that, if he will
not grant their unconditional release, he could relieve their
lot by allowing them to reside in some district other than
that in which they normally reside: they would then be prepared
to wait until after the war for an opportunity to vindicate
themselves,, The Drench Government quite recently agreed that
German civilians interned in Trance should have the option,
either of being repatriated or remaining in France to reside
at a fixed address, If such liberties can be allowed enemy
subjects in a country which is actually invaded by the Germans,
surely there is no logical reason for refusing to Australian
citizens the ,f concession'' of enjoying similar restricted liberty
in their own country - so far removed from the seat of war.
This, howeverwas absolutely refused, as were all other minor
requests. such as removal to better camps, concessions at Holds-
wor-thy, and a request , supported by the Commandant of this
Camp; the, t the interne dA us tra lia n Sub joct s bo all owe d to
establish a separate camp, whore they could live a little more
comfortably and amidst surroundings more in keeping with their
sentiments„
Thus it is seen that, despite all protests, they have been
imprisoned without- any semblance of trials the reasons they
are not permitted to knew: for considerable periods they have
nor been allowed to secure legal advice regarding their intern-
ment: communication with Parliamentary representatives has
been intercepted. Correspondence addressed to the Australian
Datives 1 Association lias been absolutely stopped and seized:
and they are not permitted to conduct any correspondence which
might bo calculated to enlighten the Australian general public
as to the astounding acts of injustice which are being com-
mitted, strangely enough, in its name, These unfortunate
citizens are imprisoned for an indefinite period, simply because
they happen to be descended from German ancestors, and bear


German names. Some of their fathers and grandfathers were
expressly invited by the agents of the different Australian
Governments to make their homes in Australia, and they did so
in full confidence, never dreaming that their children would
be treated in such fashion. As has often been pointed out,
allies change to enemies within the century, and vice versa,
and it is to be wondered whether all Australian citizens, who
are descended from other than purely English ancestors, are ',
to be liable to such treatment in any future? war in which Aus-
tralia may ever be involved.
That such occurrences are possible in the twentieth cen-
tury in such an advanced democracy as that of Australia,
seems hardly credible. But so it is, and there is being
registered in Australian History a chapter which all real
Australians win some day heartily wish could be expunged.
Australian born citizens have, with complete disregard
for their personal, family or business interests, been liter-
ally torn from their homes and families, escorted by guards
with fixed bayonets through public streets of capital and
other cities: imprisoned in police cells, and in military
"clinks" intermingled with drunken soldiers: some-have ex-
perienced being conveyed through city streets in a "Black
Maria": have been led handcuffed through public thorough-
fares: have been imprisoned in detention cells previously
occupied by venereally infected soldiers: have had to utilise,
in common with them, lavatories and kitchens, Most of them,
in being treated as "prisoners of war" have been exposed to
the jeers and taunts of unthinking crowds, and in such a pur-
poseful manner that i't could only Mave been possible for some
guiding hand to have arranged such disgraceful exhibitions
which have occurred, obviously with the object of damaging, as
much as possible, these unfortunately situated citizens. A
few have escaped such treatment, but none have been able to
avoid the hardships consequent upo-n the confinement in this
camp under such unnatural conditions.
It is impossible to describe the mental suffering which
is associated with internment. If our internment is designed
as a punishment for some imaginary offence, the Minister need
have no doubts as to its effectiveness as directed not only
against ourselves, but also against our wives and families.
Visits from them are, in nearly every case, out of the question
on account of distance and expense, since some amongst us have
been deported over distances of up to 3,000 miles, writ-
ten words each week is the allowance which is made for the
maintenance of personal relationship between wife and husband
or parents and sons. The conditions prevailing in the Camp
impose a distinct hardship upon those who are accustomed to
Australian living conditions c It is regrettable to .have to
state that the barracks in which we are required to exist,
are quite inferior to housing which we have often seen pro-
vided for the accommodation of domestic cattle in this coun-
try. In a space 12ft . long by tyft 6 wide by Bft, 6in. high,
5 men are required to eat, sleep, and pass the time from one
year to another, This means that, in the wet weather, (which
sometimes rules continuously for a fortnight), one is con-
fined to a space approximately equivalent to that provided for
passengers on the railways, and one cannot venture out of
that scanty protection, except perforce to secure meals from


the kitchen,, Some of us have not yet been provided with
beds though we have been interned for periods of .up to 2
years and over,
been furni3hed =
In no instance have tables or chairs
It must be understood that each person
who is interned here is provided with a tin plate, mug,
spoon, knife, fork and 3 single blankets, and he is shown
the bare floor which is to serve him as his bed, table,
chair, etc. The huts are infested with vermin to such
a degree that the strongest counter measures are quite
futil.e: the huts, in addition, provide quite inadequate
protection from the weather: no artificial heating is
provided, the draughts rush from one end of the "barracks"
to the other, and the rain frequently makes its way inside
to such an extent that pools of water are formed on the
floors,
The food rations are inadequate, both in quantity
and va,riety, and owing to the poor facilities provided
at the kitchens, and the insufficient staffs, it is impos-
sible for the cooks to prepare the food in a satisfactory
manner; so far as green vegetables are concerned, we have
hardly seen any during the whole period of our internment,
despite the fact that a large portion of the surrounding
country is highly suitable for the cultivation of vegetables
and they could be cheaply produced with the camp labour.
The bathing and washing places are primitive and net
properly protected, and no hot water is provided even in
the coldest weather c 'The dust nuisance, it is almost
impossible to describe: the measures so far taken against
it have proved to be quite ineffective, and frequently, in
dry weather, the dust is raised in clouds which envelop the
whole camp, no place being immune from it, The dust laden
atmosphere has had a serious effect upon the health of many,
and the eyesight of numerous internees has been seriously
and permanently impaired. In vier of this, it is regrettable
that the hospital personnel do not treat the large number of
pa.tlents in a more sympathetic and scientific manner. Any
competent authority will agree with us that it is impossible
for a medical practitioner to prescribe for $0 cases in as
many minutes, and yet this' is almost a daily occurrence at
the Camp Hospital, The Dental Department, until recently,
was manned by a. staff whose inefficiency was only equalled
by the insulting behaviour which they displayed toward the
unfortunate internees who were compelled to suffer their
attentions treatment for which must be pa,id for. Little
care ha, s been paid in the past, by the staffs of these De-
partments, to the sterilisation or disinfection of the in-
struments us on the different patients.
There are many instances of .i.aasulting treatment accorded
to us : and worse. there are times when the lives even of
Australian born citizens have been endangered. On one
occa ai cn .. a rif 1 e shot which was fired into the camp by one
of the guards during the night quite a. common occurrence
in the earlier history of the camp buried itself in a spot
a few inches distant from where several of our number were
lying sleeping.
This is not in any way a
omp 1 cte sta ternent of the
conditlo us ruling here, but it
serves merely as an .indication.


Having carefully studied the foregoing, we claim that the
Minister cannot fail to give his earnest consideration to the
subjoined suggestions which are advanced with the object of
affording redress, or at the least some relief from the pur-
poseless persecution which we arc compelled to endure.
As it Ims been advanced that th> responsibilities and
pressure of work as-ociat/d with the Minister *s position
preclude hirn from giving full and prompt attention to our
cases, wo submit:
(l) that the Minister should observe the usual civil law
procedure and institute prosecutions against all those of us
whom ho deems to have committed any offence, or any act which
could be deemed inimical to the interests of Australia : that
those against whom he is unable to bring such charges be forth-
with released.
Such action would be welcomed by all of us, as an op-
portunity of vindicating ourselves, and any unbiassed, reason-
able person would pronounce it the only just method of settle-
ment.
If, however, the Minister should consider that such action
would be prejudicial to the public interest, wo would recom-
mend to his notice this 'alternative:
(2) that each individual case be made the subject of an
inquiry by a Supreme Court Judge - the enquiry to be hold in
camera, but each individual
to secur" legal assistance,
nesses.
to be afforded full facilities
and to summon all necessary wit-
fail to see how the
Minister can refuse to code to
us the right of either one or other of these alternatives,
but if he still maintains that we must remain interned
without opening any channel of redress to us, then wo propose:
(3) that we shall be returned to out* homo States without
delay, and interned there in such localities as may meet the
requirements of the Defence Department under conditions equal
to those which have been enjoyed by enemy army a neb ships }
officers at Berrima.
The Minister win concede that the responsibility rests
upon him to return us to Society in a physical condition as
sound as that which enjoyed when he removed us: this re-
sponsibility, up to the present, appears to have boon over-
looked, but it is not yet too late to ameliorate the con-
ditions of our confinement. The full investigation of the
circumstances surrounding our internment will no doubt be a
task for a Royal Commission - if not during the war, then after
its conclusion - and it will rc-dound to the credit of the Minister
if it can be said that he exercised some endeavour to ease our
lot in the unhappy position in which he has placed us.
t r e have the honour to be,
Bir,
Your obedient servants,


Correspondence conducted
"by the
Association of interned Australian Born Subjects
Up till November, 1916, various Australian born Internees
who were interned before that date, carried on correspondence
individually with the Minister for Defence, Members of Parlia-
ment and others, but it was not until then that any correspon-
dence was conducted collectively.
On November 14th, a petition signed by 23 Australian
born Internees was sent to the Minister for Defence,
denying any acts or words of disloyalty: pointing out the
injustice of internment without trial: requesting that define
ite charges be made, which could be refuted: stating that,
in many cases, there was little doubt that internment was
the result of personal animus or business jealousy: and
drawing attention to the consequences which would follow
from such unjustifiable imprisonment.
The Minister's reply to this petition stated that "You are
informed that each of you is interned for sufficient reasons
and that you must all remain interned."
After this, the following letter was sent to Senators
Mullins, Shannon, Heady, Millen and Lynch, and Representat-
ives Tudor, Corser, Watt, Yates, Atkins, Mahon and McWil-
liams.
Liverpool, 14th December, 1916.
Dear Sir,-
On behalf of the Australian Born Internees who signed
a petition addressed to the Minister of Defence, applying for
release, we desire to bring under your notice the following
We have been interned under War Precautions Regulation 56A.
The charges have never been made known to us, nor have we been
given an opportunity by the Minister to prove our innocence other
than by representations, which we have reason to believe have
never reached the Minister personally.
Both individually and collectively, appeals for release or
investigation to the Minister, have been replied to with the
words - "must remain interned."
We claim that we are not guilty of any breach or contra-
vention of the War Precautions Regulations, but on the other
tend are victims of malicious and untruthful statements made
by civilians in our respective districts with a viow of having
us removed from their spheres in order to benefit their own
selfish desires.
Our case was submitted in full to the Minister by peti-
tion on the 13th November, and we now appeal to you as repre-
sentatives of the people to move for an enquiry into our cases•
We assure you that some startling revelations in connec-
tion with our respective cases can be made, and we appeal to
you in the interests of British Justice, for the honor of the
Country which is dear to us, for the sake of our broken-hearted
wives and children suffering hardship and humiliation, and for
the re -establishment of our citizenship and reputations, that
you will have this matter investigated at the earliest possible
moment , We have done our utmost to move those responsible for
the administration of the War Precautions Regulations but without


therefore we appeal to Barl;i.anient, \mich is responsible
lor the Act itself, whether or net the Rogulations thereunder
have been too far-reaching.
If you desire any further- particulars wc sha 1?. be pleased
to make same available ,
j. v.; U. [ P -Lcl 1/214. U X j
Sgd 6 Ho 1., Eime Wt Ruhno
Pre sident Secretary
Association of interned Australian Horn
.Subjects o
rxT)g m &r*csxiv~*. -T-" *. -«• v vssyzjz: r-.i i ri»r>
The following replies were received from Br Shannon and
Reps c Corser and Mahott". Ho other replies were received..
Ho other replies were received..
The- Senate , Me 1 bourne ,
21 0 12 e l6 : ,
Mr, H, T. Eime,
Concentration Camp,
Liverpool 0 - - .
Dear .Sir., - . , Re mattWr' -of internment i ,
I have' y'our;s : of 14 inst a But '1 'am .quite unable to
see what I can do for ycu c kr ; / 'f?{ jj'" ':• ••
• i . - ' Yours faithful!■* ,
; • Sgdo He "Wo .Shannon,if b
- * rsa. TVJTT J wjsafcT.'w
House of RepreSerita t ive s ,
Me lb ourne , 1 9th Dec 0 1 §l6
Messrs o IL r ih Eime 8c William Ruhho. f
Con centrat ion Camps, Liverpool
Dear Sirs,-
I am in receipt of yours of the 14th inst,, and am
bringing the contents before the Authorities,
Yours faithfully.
Cf r*i* /"-! Tf "i\/r r\ yj c v T 5
bgCio J-j c m 6 oOXbuJ.
~t \ • rrzjtm:
Parliament House, Melbourne,
21 De.e c 1916 c
Messrs„ H, T, Eime and Wm, Ruhno ,
German Concentration Camp, Liverpool,
Dear Sirs,-
I am in receipt of your letter of the 14th inst» ,
asking for an inquiry into your detention and protesting your
innocence of any breach of the War Precautions Regulations o
To be effective,, the action which you ask me to take should
be initiated and supported by the Labour Party c X am therefore
forwarding your communication to the Secretary of our Phrty,
zi-th a request that it should be submitted to aur members at their
next meeting, :
Trust ing that this will be•satis fa ctcry 10 you, X remain,
Yours truly,
Sgd, He. Mahon
.-a ;.-?Jf*«tc rjsz?:
The letters from Reps e Mahon and Corser were duly acknow-
ledged and a further letter was despatched to Senator Shannon as
follows: but nothing further was ever heard from any of these
gentlemen '
Liverpool, January 3 rr X? 19X7 •
Dear Sir, ' -
I have to acknowledge yours .of the 21 at- ultimo, addres-
Boc, to Mr, Eime, and in reply beg to state that you can do a lot
for us Australian Born, of whom 23 in this Camp have petitioned
:he Defence Department for our release on -national grounds 0
fou, with other members to whom we have written, viz., Senators
lulling, Ready, Milieu, Lynch, and Reps e Tudor, Corser, Watt,
fates, Watkins and McWiiliams could move that a Royal Commission
oe appointed to inquire into the interning of Australian Born


as we are loyal, always have "been, and must remain so, as we
have no other country 0
Please go into the matter and do what you can for us.
Trusting to hear from you in the near future,
Yours fa ithfully,
Sgd, W, Ruhno,
Secretary,
Association of interned Australian Born
Subjects.
Liverpool, 12th February, 1918.
Dear Sir,-
In December, IJI6, our Association received a letter
from (then) Representative Mahon, stating that he was talcing
steps to hb,ve the matter of the internment of Australian born
Subjects brought before the Federal Parliamentary Party for
c ons i dera t i on e
Will you please inform us whether this was done, and if
so what was the result of the deliberations of the Party on
this matter?
Awaiting the favour of your reply,
W r e are ,
e
Yours sincerely,
Sgd, A, Wf R c Dechert E. Schrapel
Secretary President
Association of interned Australian born Subjects.
The Secretary,
Federal Parliamentary Labour Party.
■MHtrjll _^r«g ■ZWft
Liverpool, lBth March, 1918.
The Secretary,
Federal Parliamentary Labour Party
Dear Sir,-
Will you allow me to direct attention to the letter
which niy Association addressed to you under date of the 12th
February, and inform me whether the letter has been received by
you, and if so, whether it has been submitted to your Party for
consideration?
Yours sincerely,
Sgd, A c W, R, De chert
Secretary,
Association of interned Australian born Subjeots
yy* | Bill 1 1 1 1 .tvryvmmt —3.■Jiße'KCir:
House of Representatives,
Melbourne, 26th March, 1918.
Mr c Ac W 0 R, Dechert,
Secretary, Assn, of Interned Australian Born Subjects
Concentration Camp,
Liverpool, l! c S. W 0
Dear Sir,-
Yours of the 18th inst e duly delivered today, 26th inst.
In reply I beg to state I have not received a previous letter
from you.
Yours faithfully,
Sgd, J, H, Catts
Secretary
Federal Parliamentary Labour Pfeirty.


Liverpool 9 29th March 1918,
J". H # Catts, Esq,, M.H.R, ,
Secretary, Federal Parliamentary Labour Party,
Federal Parliament House, Melbourne,
Dear Sir,-
I have your letter of the 26th March, stating that
the letter from our Association dated the 12th February had not
reached you. It is possible that this may have gone astray
in the post, and I therefore enclose a copy.
Your early reply thereto will be much appreciated.
Yours sincerely,
Sgd, A. W 0 H 0 Deohert
Secretary
Association of interned Australian Born
Subjects.
Liverpool, 12th February, 1918
Will you be so good as to inform us whether con-
sideration has ever been given by your Party, to the ques.tion
of internment of Australian born Persons, without providing
them with an opportunity of answering the charges which have
caused their detention, and if so, what was the result of the
deliberations?
If the matter has never been discussed, we should be
pleased to hear that it will be brought up at some future
meeting of the Party for discussion o
We may add that we have communicated with the Honourable
the Prime Minister on the subject*
Awaiting the favour of your reply,
Yours sincerely,
Sgdo A, W 0 R c Dechert E, Schrapel
Secretary President
Association of interned Australian Born Subjects
Federal Parliamentary Rational Party,
Liverpool, 18th March, 1918,
Federal Parliamentary Ifetional Party*
Dear Sir,-
Will you allow me to direct attention to the letter
which my Association addressed to you under date of the 12th
February, and inform me whether it has been submitted to your
Party for consideration?
" 0 Your s. s s incerely,
Sgd 9 A. V, R," Dechert
Secretary
Association of interned Australian Born
Subjects.


German Concentration Camp,
August 30th. 1916 c
Lieutenant Col, Sands,
C '
Officer Commanding,
G. Concentration Camps
Sir,-
In consequence of the shooting incidents which occurred
in the G. C. C a of Liverpool during the night of the 29th inst,,
we, the under s i gne d, for C ompa ny 41, r eque st tha tan immediate
and exhaustive enquiry "be held into the matter, and the circum-
stances thoroughly investigated, We are concerned that from
the location of the "bullets and other evidence in connection
therewith, that the shooting was conducted ."by someone regardless
of the safety of the inmates of the 41st Company, which amounts
to culpable negligence and carelessness, and being presumably
directed against a person at the moment entering second half
of No. 2 Mess of the 41st Company e
Especially as British Subjects we resent these actions,
which we are firmly convinced amount to criminal intent on
behalf of a person or persons unknown to us,
We are informed further that the inmates of Company 14
had a similar experience a few moments before the incident
referred to.
Seeing that the safety of the internees is endangered,
we cannot do other than demand an exhaustive enquiry immediately
in the interests of humanity and the authorities in charge.
We are, Sir,
Yours obediently,
A. W. R. Drabsch
0 , H. T, Eime
ogcu W, R, Tummel
G, 0, Tummel
All the satisfaction that oould be obtained was that the
following receipt was given for the letter, and nothing further
was ever heard of the matter.
Received letter from
P/V Eime re shooting
30/8/16
Sgdo R. W 0 Street Lt.
m . 'jrr-.ey* n-~ x<rJtaa^r-*r»r*T>-*s zrih. r-.
wtrtikv — I "*'TTI-Mr-
Liverpool, 22nd September, 1917•
Sir,-
On behalf of a number of Australian born Internees, we
desire to make the following request:- That those who desire
to do so shall be permitted to return to the Internment Camps
in their respective States, either temporarily or for the remain-
der of their internment. We merely ask that we be given treat-
ment equivalent to that given to enemy officers and enemy aliens
of the educated class. The Detention Camps at Berrima and
Trial Bay, from which we are excluded, provide /treatment far
superior to that which we receive at Liverpool, and it is need-
less to enumerate the better conditions existing there which
are sufficiently known to yourself.
We, who are mostly from the States of South Australia
and Queensland, are denied the privilege of seeing our families
owing to distance and expenditure, and our allowance for cor-
respondence is so scanty that ar unscalable wall of separation
divides us from those who are dear to us. However, we hope


that this request may meet with favourable consideration, and
that some improvement in our treatment will resuiw#
We are etc c
Sgd, H. T. Eime A. W. R. Dechert
President Secretary
Association of Natural Born Subjects,
The Hon. Minister for Defence,
Liverpool. 22nd September, 1917.
Sir
' On behalf of the Australian born Subjects in this Camp,
we desire to draw the attention to the fact that
War Precautions Regulation , under the authority of which
such Australian born persons have been internedip. provides that
"nothing therein shall be construed to prejudice or restrict
the application of Regulation Regulation 56 provides
that an Australian-born pershn 8 tell receive a judicial enquiry.
The Aliens Instructions and the Suspected Persons Enquiry Order
provide that the Minister should grant an enquiry, and
should furnish the Internee with a copy of the evidence against
In the face of the above, we wish to know-
(a) Why has not this avenue of appeal already been made avail-
able to them. .
(b) Is it the intention of the Minister to provide the opportun-
ity for them to take advantage of the proviso in Regulation ooA .
(c) If so will the Minister inform us when he intends to grant
this judicial enquiry; and, if not, will the Minister advise
us what procedure is to be followed in order to make i-he appeal
to a Justice of the High Court on our own oehalr;
(d) Will, in either case, the full expense attached to SUCH en-
quiry be borne by the Ministerv . .
(e) Will the Minister, at a date as early as possible, furnish
the Australian born Internees with a copy of the evidence on
which they have been interned, vide, the Aliens Instructions
Since\he Minister ! s promise, given on the 3°"kh March through
the Hon. P. M. Glynn that full Cabinet consideration to Außtml-
ian born Internees would be given, has not been fulfilled, we
desire to possess the information asked for above in to
press our undisputed statutory rights for an enquiry before the
appointed tribunal and through legal channels.
We are etc.,
Sgd. H. T. Eime A. W. R. Dechert
President . Secretary
Association of Natural Born Subjects
The Hon. the Minister for Defence,
■,mrss ' 9
Department of Defence,
Melbourne, 3rd October, 1917.
Memorandum for
H. T. Eime and A. W. R. Dechert,
Concentration Camp, Liverpool,
With reference to your two letters of 22nd September, pur-
porting to be written by Australian born subjects in Liverpool
Concentration Camp, you are informed that the Department' s action
in regard to your internment, and in regard to any application
for a judicial inquiry, is in accordance with the law o
Your application for permission to be interned in the State
in which you were resident prior to your internment is refused.
Sgd, T, Trumble
Acting Secretary.


Liverpool, 20th October, 1917.
Sir,-
The meaomndum of the Hon e Minister's Secretary of the
3rd inst,, conveys the impression that you have misunder-
stood the purport of our letter of the 22nd ult. In ap-
proaching the Department in the matter, we had no: inten-
tion of seeking from the officers responsible for our in-
ternment, a legal opinion on the validity of their actions
in this respect; such opinion we have already secured
from other sources 6 Furthermore, neither did we seek an
opinion as to whether the Departments action in refusing
our applications for a judicial enquiry and supplying
copies of the charges and evidence against us was in ac-
cordance with the law, nothing need be said in this re-
spect beyond the fact that the instructions issued by the
Minister provide for such, although with one or two ex-
ceptions they have never been complied with,
On the other hand, questions clearly put before the
Minister remain unanswered, and as these should be regard-
ed as matters of policy, we ask that a reply may be fur-
nished by the Minister himself.
We are, etc. ,
Sgd. H e T. Eirne A e T ' T , R c Dechert
President Secretary
Association of Australian Born Subjects
The Hon. the Minister for Defence,
Department of Defence,
Melbourne. 31st October, 1917
Memorandum for
H. T, Eime and A, W, R, Dechert,
Concentration Camp, Liverpool,
In reply to your letter of 20th October, you are in-
formed that this Department's instructions do not pro-
vide that the Minister shall grant an inquiry into the
causes of persons interned under Regulation 56A of the
War Precautions Regulations or that any statement of evi-
dence be furnished to an internee,
The cases of all Australian born internees have
recently been considered by the Federal Cabinet and it
has been decided that they shall all remain interned.
Sgd 0 T a Trumble
Acting Secretary.
Copy of a letter despatched to the Minister of
Defence by individual Members c
Liverpool. October 1917 c
Sir, -
I wish to make formal application to the Hon, Minister
for a judicial enquiry into the circumstances surrounding
my internment, in accordance with the provisions of War
Precautions Act Regulations ITos c >6 and p6A, and in pur-
suance of the Aliens Instructions No, 2 of
Simultaneously, I desire to make a formal requisition
to be furnished with copies of the charges and evidonee
which have caused my detention.
My arrest and subsequent detention are doubtless
authorised by the Minister in the light of some evidence,
and if he considers this it Q tit t\tCit bis. he must surely be pre-
pared to put it to the test to which I challenge it,
X am etc.
The Hon, the Minister for Defence,


We have requested.
(1) that we shall "be granted a judicial enquiry oefcu-e
a Judge of the High Court in accordance with the previsions of
War Precautions Regulations ?6 and f'oJL,
(2) that we shall "be granted a magisterial enquiry
* ' - . V". _ • - / .. .1
Department of Defen
Me 1 "bou x' ne , Oct a"b
•\ r;
/
Meisomndum for
In reply to your letter of to the
Minister for Defence, you are informed that being internad under
Regulation 56A of the %r Precautions. Regulations you are not
entitled to a judicial inquiry into the circumstances of your
internment, and that neither in law nor under the Aliens in-
structions are you entitled to be furnished with copies of.
the evidence on which the Minister baseci his opinion cha o you
•hould be interned.
As it is not expedient in the public interest to reveal
the evidence to you, your request to be furnished with copies
of it is refused.
SgdL Tc Trumble,
Acting Secretary.
The above is a specimen reply to the
preceding letter.
ir* f't, iTt f-. tr . f .vrT
Liverpool, 10th January, 1918,
Sir,-
In previous correspondence which the members of our Assoc-
iation have conducted with your Department, we have individ-
ually and collectively sought to exhaust all avenues of redress
from our present persecution
under the provisions of the Suspected Persons inquiry Oruei
(3) that we shall be provided with copies uf the
evidence against us
(4) that we shall be furnished with a statement of
the charges which have caused our internment.
Each of these requests have met with an abrupt refusal,
and we have been informed that we can only appeal to the clem-
ency of the Minister according to the proviso of Regulation
56A, viz., "Provided that the order shall, in the case of any
perBon who is not a subject of a State at war with His Majesty,
include express provision for the due consideration by
ster of any representations he may make against the order., '*
Now *re desire to draw attention to the fact that, during
the period of our internment, never on one occasion have we
been able to secure a reply from the Minisjter, though in ful -
filment of the proviso quoted above, the Minister should undoubt-
edly reply personally to such representations as we are able to
make. These representations are of course limited by the ludi-
crous and totally unreasonable decision that the charges against
us cannot be made known to us.
If this decision is still maintained, will the Minister
adviss us what manner of representations we can make, or is he
prepared to straightforwardly admit that we have no re cress
whatever?
\v r e are,
Yours etc,,
Sgd. A. R. Dechert Schrapel
8 e c re ta ry Vice-President
Association of interned Australian born
Subjects,
The Honourable the Minister for Defence


Department of Defence.
Melbourne, 17th January, 191°»
Memorandum for
A.W.R.Dechert and E,Schrapel
Concentration Camp, Liverpool,
With reference to your letter of 10th January,
to the Minister for Defence, you are informed .ha 0 as the
same is not couched in proper language no further reply
than this acknowledgment will he sent to you,
' ' Sgd. T i Trumble
Acting Secretary,
C.aitaecrwit 1
Liverpool } 6th Eobr-uaryl9l6 e
Sir
We have the note of the Hon, Minister's Secretary, -
dated the 17th January, in reply to our letter 01 che iv.jh
idem, and learn with surprise that it is regarded »s vt,
couched in proper language," We hasten 10 assure <Ae iI .
Minister, therefore, that, if the conwrns, any ,
which he takes exception, itxs.ms included quiwe uncuiisci u y
on our part, and we can only attribute it to a duiled sense
of perspective caused by long confinement, if an apology
will meet the case, therefore, it is unequivocally tender
hereW We h merely desire to draw the Hon, Minister's attention
to the fact that, as j, % -j. ,
(a) he has refused us an enquiry by a Judge of the High
Court which we think is our right by virtue of the provisions
of r ar Precautions Regulations 5° and qoA, .
(b) we cannot be granted a magisterial enquiry under the
Suspected Persons Enquiry Order,
"(c) your Department will not supply a statement of the
evidence against us ? . ~ , ~ +
eviaeiiufc? U ? -^4-
(d"i the Minister's Secretary informs us that we are not
entitled to know the reasons for our irrcernnienr, ? .
though we have devotee] many hours of thought to me question
we ah quite unable to see any avenue of redress from our
present "position, Certainly, Regulation <?ak contains the
clause" "Provided that the order shall- in the case of any
pebßon Alt' is not a subject of a State at «r with Hie_ tatajestr.
include express provision for the due cone.td6t.a„ion • i c y
repre aenta t i ons he may make agaxns t c,he cuiei . u ' .
pears to us a very difficult proposition for our mem~e*s
make representations, (i.e. refutation of cnarges, ®vc,),
a®tinst their internment when they are .ignorant of the reasons
of their internment. Another insuperable oostacle is vhe
difficulty of securing personal consideration oi representa-
tions by the Hon, Minister, The Warrant authorising our
internment is made under his hand, and to oar eh mild
cally follows that representations against »nat urder sn ul
be considered also by the Hon, Minister, . ,
As a result of experience since our internment, wo have
acquired the impression that our confinement is intended by
the Minister as a punitive measure,, This being the case,
we consider that we are justified in asking: On what basis
are representations to be made, if stated charges a.e
made against us? Railing a solution to this problem we
can onlv conclude that no avenue of redress is left open to ue.
At"present, the position of our members m relation to
causes of internment, the question of trial, dura"Ciop of in-
ternment, and the attitude of the Government towards them i»
so obscure that a candid statement by the Hon, Minister on the
points referred to wouio. be wsj.corned.
We are, Yours etc,
Sgd, A, W. R,'Dechert E. Schrapel
Secretary Pre oidenb
Association of interned Australian Born
_ Subjects,
The Minister for Defence.


Be pa r tmen t of Bef eric e .
Melbourne, igth February. 193,8
Memorandum for
A,W.R,Deehert and E*Schrapel,
Concentration Camp, Liverpool
In reply to your letter of 6th February, you are informed
that all representations made by internees in regard to their
release are considered by the Minister, and that replies sent
from this office are sent under his direction and in accordance
with his instructions..
Public inquiries have been granted in certain cases. In
other cases, the public interest would be prejudiced by the
holding cf a.n inquiry, and in such cases no statement as to the
reasons for internment can be given.
In reply to your inquiry as to the duration of internment
and the attitude of the Government towards persons interned on
Warrant, you arc that the attitude of the Government
is that such persons will remain interned so long as the public
interest requires that this precaution be taken..
Sgd« T, Trumble
Acting Secretary,


Liverpool,
11th October, 1917=
Sir, -
The Australian Born Subjects interned atbtho above ad-
dress have read with the greatest interest the report of a
speech which you delivered at Maidon. Victoria on September
2oth, in which you are reported to have said - ~0 , * « - There
was only one hope for the community that there should be
tolerance and freedom of thought pervading all c.l&Bses . Their
motto should be 5 Justice tc all men, irrespective of their
situation'. 0 .. . . e • if
These words have reached us in our dire situation, and
have caused a flutter of hope amongst us. Such an utterance
coming from the mouthpiece of Australia ? s Government, we must
surely interpret as its avowed policy, Bull of trust, there-
fore, we address these lines in appeal for your influence to
secure for us that justice which should be the inheritance of
all sons of this Country, and which has hitherto been denied
us, - the enquiry or trial which we have constantly slough t
from the Minister of Defence ever since cur internment.
We are, yours etc o ,
Sgd, H. T. Eime A. VI. R. Dechert
Pros .1 den t Sec retary
Association of Australian Born Subjects.
The Hon, the Prime Minister,
Melbourne„
K rwffAs'Mrmi
Prime Mi nis te r ;
Melbourne, 19th October, 1917.
Sir, -
I have the honour to acknowledge the receipt of your
letter of the 11th instant, relative to the question of
enquiry by the Minister for Defence in connection with the
internment of Australian-born subjects, and to inform you
that the representations therein have been noted.
direction.
I have the honour to be, Sir,
Your most obedient servant,
Sgd, ' M„ L. Sheperd
Mr. A. W, R. Dechert, Secretary
Secretary, Assn o of Australian-Born Subjects,
Liverpool Concentrution Camp, S, W 0
R.RRVETT :N*UR<
>I MNIKANV.I
Liverpool, 10th January, 1918.
Sir,-
/
We are directed to draw your attention to a letter ad-*-
dressed to you by.our Association under date of the 11th October
1917> and acknowledged by your Secretary on the 19th idem.
Our members hope that you are now in a position to state
if even at this late stage, it is proposed to give us that
justice, which, as you have stated, is the right of all men,
irrespective of their situation.
Wo are, yours etc.,
Sgd. A. W a R. Dechert E. Schrapel
Secretary Vice-President
Association of interned Australian Born Subject#
The Honourable the Prime Minister*
z-mlxtt. JTNWRTSR' R
1 ?K*uua-~MnataLyu*c*c**.- 1
Liverpool, 12th February, 1918*
Sir,-
r e are addressing a letter to the Secretary of the l&tiOttal
Federal Parliamentary Party, asking whether consideration feftt
been or will be given to the principle of the internment Of
Australian Born Persons without trial,


Wo have already had some correspondence with you on this
subjoct, and should ho glad to hear from you that you will do
what you can to have this mattor favourably considered by your
Ifcrty, having in mind your public championship of tho principle
of w justice to all men, irrespective of their situation,"
We arc, Yours etc.,
Sgd. A. W. R. Dechort E. Bchrapel
Secretary President
Association of interned Australian Born Subjects
The Honourable the Prime Minister
Liverpool, lBth March, 1918.
The Socretary,
Federal Prime Minister.
Dear Sir, -
On the 10th January, and the 12th February, the
Association of Interned Australian Born Subjects addressed lot-
tors to the Honourable the Prime Minister, but as yet, no ack-
nowledgments thereof have been received.
Will you please inform me whether these letters have reached
you, and if so, whether the Honourable the Prime Minister has
yet been able to give consideration to them?
Yours sincerely,
Sgd, A'. W. R. Dechert
Secretary
Association of interned Australian Born Subjects
Prime Minister,
Melbourne, 28th March, 1918*
Sir,-
*
I have the honour to acknowledge the receipt of your letter
of the lBth inst. with reference to the internment of Australian
born subjects at Liverpool, and to inform you that the matter
has been referred to the Defence Department for attention.
I have etc.
Sgd. M. L. Sheperd
Secretary
The Secretary,
Asscn. of interned Australian Born Subjects,
Liverpool Concent-rat ion Camp.
Liverpool, 20th October, 1917*
Sir , -
In the interests of Australian Born Subjects interned in
this Camp, we desire to address a few questions to the Hon,
Minister in respect to their citizenship.
We consider the Minister must realise that, subjects of
Australia, who have secured their citizenship by birth in this
Country but who have been kept in close confinement for periods
varying from 12 to 20 months, during which time their persons!
and business interests have been completely ignored, commence to
have grave doubts as to whether their citizenship still rem*ins
an actuality.
The harsh treatment we have received, involving an absolute
of the dictates of justice, separation from our fami-<
lies, and the hardship and deterioration of health involved by
our confinement in this Camp, prompt us to ask whether we are
still citizens of Australia, and, if so, to *di&t dogrco wc re-
tain its privileges: also, whether our status is to bo fully
restored at the conclusion of the r 'ar, or if our prosont perse-
cution is to be replaced by some other form. Al2


We trust that the Minister will sec tit to furnish a
straightforward and conscientious reply to those questions,
in order that we may have the small consolation of knowing
in what grade our citizenship is now, an d will he 'regarded
after the VT av,
We arc, etc.
Sgd, H c T. Dime A, XI. R, Dochert
Pr cs i d ent Se crotary
Association of interned Australian Born
Subjects.
The Minister for Home and Territories.
-..wrvis: fIWD
Home and Territories Department,
Me I' h our n e f Ist IT ovomh or , 1917
H. T, Eime 41/2 and
A. W t R c Dochert 40/7,
Association of Australian Born Subjects,
Concontra t i cn Camp, Live reo cl O
Referring to your letter of the 20th October, addressed
to the Minister relative to.your citizenship, I have to state
that the representations made by you will receive consi deration o
Sgd, Atlee Hunt
Secretary o
r/Cir-,- AjKTVt JaHrrMT^*!
Liverpool, sth January, 1918,
Sir, -
I am directed by the Association of Interned Australian
Born Subjects to draw your attention to a letter addressed
to you by them on the 20th October last, and acknowiodged
"by your Secretary on the Ist Hovamber,
As the contents of that letter are of the utmost .
importance in relation to our position as British Subjects,
we hope that the Minister may see fit to furnish an early
reply setting out definite answers to the questions asked
in the letter referred to.
Yours 8 incerely,
Sgd s A. W. R e Dechert
Secretary
Association of interned Australian Bom Subjects
The Minister for Home and Territories c
:-v v-rx. UUP *nr •J<r;rt73ucJWT',r >-*ttrzs:^orvn»
Home and Territories Department,
Melbourne, 21st January. 1918 0
Mr, A. W, R, Dochert,
Secretary, Association of interned Australian Born Subjects,
German Concentration Camp, Liverpool, H, S. W 9
I am directed to acknowledge the receipt of your letter of
the pth January, referring to a previous communication, dated
20th October last on the subject of your statue as citizens o
The Minister, not being officially conversant with matters
which fall within the administrative functions of another
Department, is not prepared to admit that there has been any
harshness or injustice in regard to your treatments and is
consequently unable to discuss that aspect of your
but I am to say that no doubt arises concerning your citizen**
ship. You are still citizens of Australia, who are confined,
according to the laws of Australia. The duration, of that
confinement depends upon matters with which ths^ n i?^ r is riot
C f nYo / San > &s they come within the jurisdiction of his colleague
the Minister of Defence, to whom you should address any re-
presentations bearing upon that subject e


2 0 Aq to whether your statue as citizens will "be affected
at the termination of the war I am to say that the minister is
not aware of any action at present contemplate a whron would
have the effect of altering that sea ens,
Sgd e Atlee Hunt
Secretary o
Liverpool., 6th February,. 19l8„
Sir -
Wo have the letter of the Hon, Minister's Secretary, cated
the 21st January j in reply to ours of the 20th Ootoher iasb, and
tender our thanks for the information contained, bnorej.n,
Respecting the unjust and harsh treatment to whicn we
havo boon subjected. we fully realise that this question^ rails
primarily within the pi'ovince of the Hon. Minis wor- • s .^.OA.i.uagae,
the Minister for Defence. but at the same time, we e ia.on j.® t
all the members of the Government must share the responsibility,
a 8 w© understand that the internment ol Australian Bain .]cc s
is a step which is decided upon "by Cabinet, and as we were in-
formed in October last that Cabinet had given the decision that
we should remain interned, _ t
However, as the Minister for Home and Tern cones, entrusted
with the administration of that portion of the Government which
relates to the constitutional rights of citizens, we are ou:e
the Hon. Minister will be willing to help us arrive at a defi-
nite understanding of our situation,, following upon his state-
ment that there is no question but that we are citizens- of Aus-
tralia
As a corollary to that fact, we are indisputably entitled
to all the rights appertaining thereto, Those which we desire
to particularly refer to are: In the case of an alleged offence
against the law, the right to fair trial in open courw ana the
right to secure legal advice for defence against of
breach of law. These fundamental rights of citizenship, intro-
duced into the British Constitution centuries ago, have been
continuously maintained as basic principles in the administra-
tion of justice, and such rights are freely granted oo thejworst
types of criminals„ We. however, who have been imprisonea
periods varying up to two years, have net been able to secure
any trial, and we are not allowed to consult or correspond wit
any solicitor or lawyer in regard to any maiters relating to
our internment or treatment whilst interned. How, these two
facts alone, to our mind, seem to completely defeat your state-
ment that our citizenship is beyond doubt. To further illus-
trate our argument, we mention two more instances of violation
of citizen ? s rights: one of our members was called upon to
fill in an Aliens Registration Paper, which he refused 10 do
because he is a natural born Subject, and he was then requested
by the Registration Officer to supply proof of his Australian
birth: he then informed the officer that the Defence Depart-
ment was in possession of a copy of his birth certificate. In
spite of this fact, he was prosecuted by the Registration Of-
ficer, and was put to very heavy expense to defend his case m
the Liverpool Court where, however, he was able^ to vindicate
himself. Some of our members have been proclaimed for certain
purposes of the Attorney General, as (a) naturalized persons
of enemy origin, (b) as persons other than natural born British
subjects. Other numerous instances can be indicated to the
Minister if he so desires,
We fail to see how the Minister's statement chat wa are
citizens can be mads to conform with the "facts v »e men
and we would welcome a further explanation from the Hon c Mini-
ater o


Our action in bringing this matter again under the Hon.
Minister's notice, is prompted by our desire to Ci. '• .. V-' C ~.'*j \i CIO
frank understanding respecting the attitude of the Govern-
ment towards its citizens are so unfortunately situated.
We are . You r set c
Sgd 0 A. t;. h, be chert E. Schrapel
S e c re t a r y Pr e s i de nt
Association of interned Australian Born Subjects.
The Hon. the Minister for Home and Territories.
Melbourne,
.ll .li.'f *
Home and Territories Department,
Me lb our n e , 28 th February , 1918.
The Secretary,
Association of interned Australian Born Subjects.
Concentration Camps : Liverpool . XL S, W„
I am directed to acknowledge the receipt of your letter of
the 6th February, and in reply would point out that -
(l) You were informed by letter on 21st January that you
were still citizens of Australia confined according to the
laws of Australia 0 That imported, and the posi tion is,
that there are no fundamental unalterable rights of citizen-
©hip. All rights are conferred by law and may be altered
by law in accordance with the methods provided by the Con-
stitution.
(2) The Minister for Home and Territories is not. as you
appear to assume, controller of th e conolx turiona 1 rigrits of
citizens, Limitation of rights is a matter of policy for
Ihrl lament or, under the authority of an Act. for the Exe-
cutive, mot of administration by this Department.
(3 ) The Minister 1 jas n0 know 1 edga c f the prosecution or
the act ic n 0 f an 0 the r De par "Giro nt *oe wh xeh you refer I '. lie .is,
however. referring the matter to the Minister for Defence, to
whom,, as you were apprised in my letter of the 21st January,
representations bearing on the subject of your confinement
should be addressed.
Sg d „ At j. e e Hi" nt
Secretary,
Liverpool, Bth March, 1918.
Sir, -
P r e thank you for your j. efa ry'B communication of t he
28th ult „ and ha ve note d the content s thereoil
Your reply prompts us to direct attention to the fact
that, in respect of
/ . -L
(l) an examination of the Federal Constitution reveals
that certain rights in respeot 0f j ustics, franchise, etc.
are bestowed therein upon citizens, and these rights can only
be cancelled by amendment of such Constitution, Wo are suf-
ferers, however, in both these resweets mentioned. The sound
fundamentals established by Habeas Corpus, for example, have
been suspended in respect to a particular class, such as our-
selves, who are descended from German Ancestors v Yet the
paradoxical fact exists that one British Court at least has
ruled that, in respect of persons who are British Subjects
by reason of their birth, no distinction can be made, what-
ever nationality their parents may be t . or may have been.,
(2) Reference to our previous letter will make it plain
that we are net so misguided as to assume that the Minister
is controller of the constitutienal eights of citizens,, Such
rights, v."o are quite avenue, may be amended by Parliament ?
constitutionally. To a Parliament which embarked upon such
a policy of reduction or annulment of rights, however, the
question woul d as a nr • ural consequence present itself:
"Is citisenship an empty wcrd?" Wa v miM „
w p "a ** x 0 ~' p 11T- s ct' *
* 1 Cw %• v *>• V v-r O vv o
Sgd, A, tf, R< De chert E« Sehsrapel
Seer etary Prc s i den %
The Minister fcr Home and Territories.


Department of Defence,
Melbourne, Mar l 8 1918
Memorandum for
A. T. R. Dechert,
Concentration Camp, Liverpool.
With reference to your letter of 6th February, addressed to
the Minister for Home and Territories, in which you make a com-
plaint in regard to a prosecution by the Police for non-regio-
tration under the %r Precautions (Aliens Registration) Regu-
lations, you arc informed that the complaint is noted.
Sgd. T. Trumble
Secretary.
' mm
Liverpool, 10th January, 1918
His Excellency the Governor General,
The Commonwealth of Australia,
Melbourne.
Sir, -
We are directed by the Committee of our Association to
bring under your notice the serious trend of events caused by
the increasingly harsh administration of this Camp.
A number of our members who received visits from members
of their families on Christmas Ihy, were, in common with other
intornees, subjected to most revolting conditions, and as a
rosult of the callous disregard of the health of women and lit-
tle children which was exhibited by the responsible military
authorities, numerous reports are coining to hand of serious
cases of illness consequent upon the exposure to the severe
weather conditions which prevailed on that day.
To fully impress you with the serious aspect of the mat-
ter, it is unnecessary for us to say more than that the German
Subjects concerned are taking steps to recommend their Govern-
ment to institute reprisals against Australian Subjects interned
in Germany.
In view of this, we trust that the Secretary of State for
the Colonies will be fully acquainted with all phases of the
internment conditions in Australia, and that an inquiry will be
immediately instituted with the object of relieving the con-
ditions now prevailing and for the credit of Australia, to
establish conditions equal to the best of those existing in
the belligerent countries.
We have the honour to be,
Your Excellency's most obedient
servants,
Sgd, A. W.R. Dechert E.Schrapel
Secretary Vice-President
Association of Australian Born Subjects.
«K.tr«pr mm-i-i-m —n —' i.
.u. I"—:f.-%
Liverpool, 10th January, 1918*
Sir,-
I am directed by my Association to hand you herewith, for
your information, a copy of a letter which is boing addrosaed
to the Governor General, with reference to the harsh treatment
which has been recently experienced by members of our Association,
in common with other internees in this Camp.
I am, Yours etc.
Sgd. S. Gchrapel
Vice-President
Association of Australian Born Subjects.
His Honour Mr. Justice Harvey,
Official Visitor.


Federal Government House,
Melbourne , 18th Janus,r y, 1918.
Dear Sir,-
I am directed "by His Excellency the Governor-
General to acknowledge receipt of your letter of the 10th
instant, on the subject of the treatment of the wives and
families of Prisoners of War who visited the Concentration
Camp on Christmas Day,.which His Excellency has forwarded
to the Prime Minister for the attention of the Commonwealth
Government.
Yours faithfully,
George Steward Lt, Col..
Sgd.
Official Secretary to
H.E* the Governor-General
Mr. A.W.R.Dechert,
Secretary, Asscn. of interned Australian Born Subjects,
Concentration Camp, Liverpool, H 0 S, W,
verm*. -y. —.v-
Prime Minister's Department,
Melbourne P 11th February, 1918.
Dear Sir,-
With reference to your letter of the 10th January,
relative to the visit to the Concentration Camp at Liverpool
on Christmas lay of the wives and families of prisoners of
war, I am directed to inform you that it is reported that
during the afternoon a rain storm came on; that there was not
sufficient shelter for the visitors; and that; as the day had
been warm they were unprepared for rain,
It is further reported that previously there toad been
3 shelter shed, but that this load been blown down in a storm.
Steps have been taken to erect a new shelter shed to provide
sufficient accommodation for internees a.nd their t::,e:Ltovs ,
You r s fa .1. th f u 3.1 y,
Sgd. M« Lo Shepherd
Q rr-> r- "i*-f Q "r ; t r
'~S %« V H..» . •/
Mr. A. r h R. Dechert-,
Prisoner of War, Concentration Camp, Liverpool
?: :3*«rsrr-Tirci!*
Wir'Wl.'-KWt
Liverpool, 26th January, 1918.
The President,
Hew South Wales Branch of the
Australian Datives' Association,
Dear Sir,-
Although your Association may be somewhat surprised
at this communication, we feel that such astonishment sould
only be caused by a pardonable ignorance of the true state
of affairs in a metter with which we wish to acquaint you.
Firstly, it is desired to emphasize that the feelings
prompting this letter, coming fr'om the accredited officers
of the Association of Australian born internees - who though
of German extraction, have their permanent residence in Aus-
tralia, and who, in nearly every instance, have never placed
foot on other soil - are purely Australian* For this reason
we approach you.
We have always been fully aware of the influence exer-
cised by an Association such as your a f , whose functions aim
solely at the moulding of Australia and its citizens as a
nation, ideal in its principles of liberty f democracy and
justice, Although the subject of this appeal, it may be
argued ? is not directly 3, concern of your body, the principle#
underlying the matter, we assert ? have a direct bearing upon
tho aims and objects of the Austra 1 ian 23atites * Asooci&tion•
fe feel confident, therefore, that the information which we wMI
to reach your hands win not be thrust aside by your Conimitt##*


During s? period covering roughly eighteen months : the of-
ficers of the Defence Department, in exercise of powers granted
"by the Regulations under the v *ar Precautions Act, have ceiuvv-u
the detention of Australian horn persons on "charges"- stated
in the arrest warrant as "being of enemy origin and associat-
ions , 11 Our number now totals more than s'ome of whom have
not only been born in Australia, but whose parents have also.
Ho trial has been given any one of us,. A species of "inquiry
was granted in 3 cases, but in these instances, the liagistiate
was commissioned only to co3.loct evidence, the verdict and sen-
tence of internment being pronounced by the Minister of Defence.
Ever since our internment, numerous appeals have been made to
the Minister of Defence for the consideration of our cases.
A few months ago we were informed indirectly that Cabinet would
give consideration to the position of Australian born persons
in the German Concentration Camp, but we have since been noti-
fied that the Government had decided that all were to remain
interned. „
Strange to say, it is not the practice of the Defence
Department to supply the charges laid against or any reasons
for the arrest of detained persons beyond what is stated in
the Warrant as abovementionsd. Persistent efforts on our part
to secure this have generally elicited the reply that we "are
not entitled" to know the reasons or charges •• sufficient ground
in itself, we consider, to encourage us in the conviction that
our internment is unjustifiable, (We are prevented from securing
the services of a legal adviser, and at the present juncture
it seems our position is hopeless),
We recognise that it is difficult for anyone to realize
the dire situation in which we are p3.aced - "found guil'oy'* by a
Defence Minister who assumes the ro3.es of both accuser ano.
judge ; but we consider the Australian Datives 1 Asj-'ocia cion mould
announce its attitude, not in regard to cur cases in particular,
but towards the principle of the imprisonment of persons of Aus-
tralian birth without a stated charge, and without wis semblance
of a hearing.
An acknowledgment of this letter will oblige,
Yours sincerely
Sgd. E. Bchrapel A. W. R* Dechert
President Secretary
Association of interned Australian Born Subjects.
The Commandant refused to pass this letter, but in
an interview, he promised to allow it to pass with the
sentence which is shown above enclosed in brackets
emitted.
Head Quarters,
Liverpool, 30th January 1918
Prisoners/Mar
A .W.R. De chert & E.Schrapol,
'The attached letter addressed to the President, Australian
Native Association. Sydney, is returned and 1 have to inform
you that all complaints must be forwarded through the proper
channel viz,, the Defence Department or Official Visitor.
Sgd. R, Ilolman Lt o Colonel
■a Commandant, Concentration Camps
tr*r». .t v. ;* vJr.t.M !*•} "V.-wtcn-r«-~.k';v
Liverpool, Ist February, 1918.
Lieut, Colonel Holman,
Commandant. ooncantration Camps,
Dear Sir,-
Will you grant the undersighed the favour of an


interview with you in respect to your letter to us elated
30th- January, as there are aspects of the question referred
to therein ? which we desire to discuss pereonadLxy witn you.
"V* '-*■ "11"/* a \>* r*
JL U'»4. O O-7 V_, E «
Sgd. A, V. E. De chert E. Schrapel
Secretary It e 3 i dent
Association of intsrned Australian -som Subjects
Liverpool, 3rd February, 1918.
Memo for the Censor,
G. C, C, Holdsworthy.
The attached letter to the H. S. W. Branch of the
Australian Natives' Association is now returned for despatch.
Objections, Lie paragraph has now been omitted and the letter
is as was approved by Col. Hainan in our interview with him
to-day o
Sgd, A. R. De chert E. Schrapel
Secretary President
Association of interned Australian Boi'n Subjects
mm nn 11 m ~MIHI TT T ~r - wat >JANNYW»
Head Quarters,
Prisoners of War, Liverpool,. sth February, 191°.
A .W.R. De chert and E, Schrapel
Your letter of the 3rd instant,, addressed to the Australian
Hatives Association, Sydney, has been forwarded to the
Defence Department for consideration.
Sgd. Ho Hclman Lieut, Colonel
Commandant, Concentration Camps .
fv*.
;tscv.:<vsuv« v..
Liverpool, 22nd March, 1918,
Sir,-
On the 26th January, our Association communi-
cation to the Hew South Wales Branch of 'die Australian^ natives*
Association, which was returned to us with the intimation that
it could not be despatched, We interviewed the Commandant
in respect to the matter, and although he was unable to point
out any respect in which the letter did not comply with the
Regulations, we agreed to omit a paragraph therefrom, and the
Commandant informed us that the letter in that form would be
despatched, A few days later, however, we were notified^ that
the letter had been forwarded to your Department for consider-
ation, On the Bth instant, we reminded you that we were
awaiting your decision, but so far we have heard nothing.
We think that, in a period of nearly two months, it
should be possible for some decision to be arrived at, and
shall therefore be glad if we can receive some intimation at
an early date.
We are, Yours etc,
Sgd. A. W. R. De chert E, Schrapel
Secretary President
Association of interned Australian Born Subjects.
The Hon, the Minister of State for Defence.
: AA-BSTVJ
Department of Defence,
Memorandum for Melbourne, 3rd April 9 19l8»
A, W, R. Dechert & E,Schrapel
Concentration Camp, Liverpool 8
In reply to your letter of 22nd March, addressed to the
Minister for Defence, you. are informed that no information is
given as to the disposal of correspondence such as that to
which you refer.
Sgd, T, T rumble
Secretary


-
■
■
' .
'
.
,
'
'
.
.
■ - I
'
= r l


Liverpool, 3 r & February, 1918 c
Lieut c Colonel Holman,
Commandant, Holdsworthy Concentration Camp,
Dear Sir,-
As a result of our interview with you this after-
noon, we understand that we are permitted to correspond with
Members of Parliament and such bodies as the Australian Natives'
Association, as long as we avoid (l) complaint in regard to
our treatment whilst interned, (2) criticism of actions of
the Government: that consultation and correspondence with
solicitors or lawyers will be allowed only in so far as it
refers to private or business matters, and has no bearing on
internment or treatment whilst interned.
So that there may be no misunderstanding in this direc-
tion, we shall be glad of your confirmation,
Sgd, A. W. R. Be chert E. Schrapel
Secretary President
Association of interned Australian Born Subjects
awn— wan Wm an y*. i
Head Quarters,
Prisoners of War, Liverpool, 4th February, 1918.
A .W. R. Dechert & E.S'chrapel
With reference to your letter of the 3rd instant. I have
to inform you that all letters written by Prisoners of war
to whom-so-ever addressed must relate only to private affairs
or to business matters in which they have a personal interest.
Letters containing complaints of any nature cannot be for-
warded, unless addressed to the Department of Defence, the
Official Visitor, or in the case of Alien enemy internees, to
the Consular representative of the Neutral Power caring for
the interests of the enemy subject in question.
Consultations and correspondence with Solicitors is
permissible only in so far as it refers to private affairs
or businessstoatters and has no bearing on internment or treat-
ment whilst interned.
Sgd. R „ Ho lira n Lt, Col.
Comniandant, Concentration Camps.
The Associate Liverpool, pth February, 1918.
to His Honour the Chief Justice
High Court of Australia, Melbourne.
Dear Sir,~
Representing the interests of some thirty Australian
Born British Subjects interned in the Holdsworthy Concentration
Camp, we desire to approach His Honour the Chief Justice in res-
pect to the matter of judicial enquiry as provided for by Regu-
lations 56 and 56a of the War Precautions Act.
The Australian Born Subjects before mentioned are detailed
in military custody under the authority of 0. Warrant issued under
the hand of the Minister for Defence by virtue of the powers con-
ferred upon him by Regulation s6k of the War Precautions Act,
which reads as follows:-
56a. (1) Where,-in the opinion of the Minister, for securing
the public safety and defence of the Commonwealth, it is exped-
ient in view of the hostile origin and associations of any per-
son that he should be detained in military custody, the Minister
may, by warrant under his hand, order him to be. detained in mili-
tary custody in such place as he thinks fit during the contin-
uance of the present war:
Provided that the order shall, in trie case of any person
who is not a subject of a State at war with His Majesty, in-
clude express provision for the due consideration by the Mini-
ster of any representations he may make against the order c


(2) The Minister may telegraph a copy of any such Warrant
to the competent naval or military authority, and action may he
taken on such telegraphed copy as if it rr - ro t-ho original.
(3) Pothing in this Regulation stall he construed to re-
strict or prejudice the application and effect of Regulations 55
and 56, or any power of interning aliens v£lo are subjects of any
State at war with Hie Majesty.
As will he ohserved, the final clause of this regulation
provides tha.t nothing therein shall restrict the application or
effect of Regulation 56 which reads as follows :-
56. (l) Where the Minister has reason to "believe that any
natural-horn British subject one at least of whose parents was
or is a subject of a State which is at war with the King,
disaffected or disloyal, he may, by warrant under his hand,
order him to he detained in military custody, in such pLace as
he thinks fit, during the continuance of the present state of war
Provided that if any person 30 detained satisfies a Justice
of the High Court that he is not disaffected or disloyal, the
Justice may order him to he released and he shall he released
accordingly.
(2) The Minister may telegraph a. copy of such Warrant to
the competent naval or military authority, and action may he
taken on such telegraphed copy as if it were the original.
Wherefore are directed to ask whether His Honour will
ho good enough to indicate the procedure which we must follow
in order to have our individual cases brought before a Justice
of the High Court. It appears to us that, a Judge, acting
in this capacity, would assume the functions of. a Commission of
Enquiry, and that the employment of Counsel by the applicant
would he optional.
However, an indication by His Honour in the direction men-
tioned would he much esteemed.
Awaiting the favour of your reply,
We are, Yours etc.,
Sgd. A. F. R. Bechert E. Schrapel
Secretary President
Association of interned Australian Born Subjects
Head Quarters,
Liverpool, 7th February, 1918
Frisoners/Far,
A,F,R.Dechert & E.Schrapel
Your letter dated sth February, addressed to His Honour the
Chief Justice of the High Court of Australia will not he for-
warded in view of the fact that it is most improper practice
practice to seek legal advice from a. Justice of any Court in
the manner adopted in this case.
Ggd. J.P.Allsopp Major, for
Lt. CI.
Commandant Concentration Camps.
The Commandant, Liverpool, 12th February, 191&»
Concentration Chmp.
Bear Sir,-
have your letter of the 7th inst., informing us
that our letter addressed to the Associate to His Honour the
Honourable the Chief Justice of the High Court will not he for-
warded, for the reason that it is an improper practice to seek
legal advice from the Justice of a Court.
T v c wish to say that we are quite am re of the impropriety
of seeking legal advice from a Judge, hut an examination of our
letter will disclose that we merely seek guidance in regard to


procedure and no legal advice whatever is sought. However,
as you have definitely refused to despatch the letter, we are
submitting the letter to the Hon. the Minister for Defence.
Yours sincerely,
Sgd. A. W. R. Dechert E. Schrapel
Secretary President
Association of interned Australian Born Subjects.
Liverpool, 12th February, 1918.
Sir, -
" r e enclose herewith: (a) copy of a letter which the
undersigned addressed to the Associate to His Honour the
Honourable the Chief (Justice of the High Court, (b) copy of a
letter from the Camp Commandant in which he refuses to forward
this letter, (c) copy of a letter from the Commandant of the
Concentration Camps in respect to correspondence and interviews
with Solicitors and others,
Will the Minister please advise us whether the two letters
from the Camp Authorities are in accordance with his instruc-
tions, and, if not, whether he approves of the statements made
therein. It is, of course, self-evident that the letter
addressed to the Associate to His Honour the Chief Justice is
not written with the object of seeking legal advice, but merely
seeks guidance in regard to procedure,
Yours sincerely,
Sgd. A. Y. R, Rechert S. Schrapol
Secretary President
Association of interned Australian Born Subjects
The Hon. the Minister for Defence,
Department of Defence,
Memorandum for Melbourne, 21st February, 1918.
A,W o R.Dechert & E.Schrapel
Concentration Camp, Liverpool,
With reference to your letter of the 12th February, you
are informed that letters containing complaints should be
addressed to the Department of Defence or Official Visitor.
An enemy alien internee my address also the Consular repre-
sentative who is looking after the interests of such alien's
country. With regard to the statement set out in the last
paragraph of the Commandant's letter of the 4th February you
are informed that consultations and correspondence with Solici-
tors on private and business affairs are permitted on the con-
ditions as set out in the instructions as issued to the Camp
Commandant, but matters relative to the treatment of internees
whilst interned are not to be the subject of consultation or
correspondence with Solicitors, The action of the Commandant
in returning letter dated the sth February addressed to the
Chief Justice of the High Court is approved.
Sgd. T, Trumble
Secretary
Liverpool, Bth March, 1918.
Sir, -
In acknowledging of the Hon. Minister's letter
of the 21st February, we regret that the position in relation
thereto is not quite clear.
The Commandant, in his letter to us dated the 4th February
stated that consultations and correspondence with solicitors
must have no bearing on internment or treatment whilst internod.
The Hon. Minister's letter only debars reference to treatment
whilst interned/ Is the Commandant correct in stating that wo


are not permitted to consult or correspond with solicitors
on any matters relating to internment? We would appreciate
a copy of the instructions issued to the Commandant in respect
of this matter, so that we my be fully cognisant of the position
We are aware that enemy aliens have the right to address the
Consular representatives in charge of their Countries' affairs,
but we fail to see how this fact has any interest for our members
We shall be glad to be informed of the Hon. Minister's
decision with regard to the letter addressed by us to the Hew
South Wales Branch of the Australian Natives 1 Association, which
the Commandant informed us, had been referred to the Hon. Mini-
ster's Office.
We are, Yours etc.,
Sgd. AM W, R. Be chert 3. Schrapel
Secretary President
Association of interned Australian Born Subjects
The Hon. Minister for Defence* -
Department of Defence,
Melbourne, 10th April, 1918.
Mem ora n dum for
A. W. Pv. De chert,
Concentration Camp, Liverpool.
With reference to your letter of the Bth March, relative to
consultation and correspondence with Solcitiors, relative to
internment, you are informed that new instructions have been
issued to the Commandant bearing on this matter, and you are
referred to him for information with regard thereto.
Sgd. T. Trumble
Secretary.
The Commandant, Liverpool, 16th April, 1918.
Concentration Camp.
Dear Sir,-
I have received a letter from the Defence Department
stating that new instructions have been issued to you in the
matter of consutt-ation and correspondence with solicitors, and
also referring me to you for information on this subject.
I shall be glad, therefore, if you will let me have, as
soon as possible, a copy of these instructions, so that the
Australian born internees may be fully informed upon this im
Tiortant question.
Yours truly,
Sgd. A. W. R. Rechert
Secretary
Association of interned Australian Born
Subjects.
Head Quarters,
Liverpool, 19th April, 1918.
ris oner of %r,
A. v \ K. Dechert,
In reply to your letter of 17th instant. I have to
inform you that Internees may be allowed to consult Solicitors
in reference to their internment.
— J- —wm W
(2) If internees desire to make any representations with
the object of obtaining their release they may obtain legal ad-
vice and assistance on this matter.
(3) Interviews granted under these instructions will take
place at the Camp in the presence of an Officer.
Sgd. J. P. All3opp JSfe.jor
for Lt. Colonel
Commandant, Concentration Camps


Liverpool, 12th February, 1918.
Sir.-
y
In the interests of some thirty Australian Born British
Subjects interned in the Holdswcrthy Concentration Camp, we
desire to invite your a.ttention to the matter of judicial
enquiry as provided for by Regulations 56 and 56a of the War
Precautions Act.
The Australian born Subjects beforementi-oned are detained
in military custody under the authority of Warrants issued
under the hand of the Minister for Defence by virtue of the
powers exercised by him under War Precautions Act Regulation
56A . As will be observed, the right of a British Subject,
conferred in Regulation 56 > to clear himself before a Justice
of the High Court is preserved in Regulation 56a by its final
clause.
Therefore, we are directed to ask that you will indicate
the procedure we must adopt in order to have our. .indi vidua 1 -
cases investigated in this way. It appears to us that a
Judge, acting in this capacity, would assume the functions of
a Commission of Enquiry, and that the employment of Counsel
by the applicant would be, optional. Your ear 1 y consideration
of this matter win be much esteemed.
Yours etc.,
Sgd, A. W. R.Dechert E. 3 chrapel
S ecre tary President
Association of interned Australian Born Subjects
The Hon, the Attorney General,
Commonwea 11h of Australia t
AllO rne y - G-e nera 1 T s De pa r tme nt,
Melbourne, 28th February, 1918.
Sir,
I have the honor, by direction, to acknowledge the
receipt of your letter of the 12th instant, in regard to
Regulations 56 and s6a of the War Precautions Regulations,
and to inform you that the matter is one for the Department
of Defence, ana your letter has accordingly been referred to
that Departm en t.
I have the honour to be,
Sir, Your obedient servant,
Sgd-. R. R. Gar ran
Mr. A. VT . R. Dechert, Secretary
Secretary, Asscn. of Interned Australian Born Subjects,
Liverpool, IT. S. W.
Department of Defence,
Melbourne, 6th March, 1918.
Momo ran dum f0 r
A. W. R. Dechert,
Concentration Camp, Liverpool,
With reference to your letter of the 12th February
addressed to the Commonwealth Attorney General, relative to
War Precautions Regulations 56 & 56a, you are informed that
the final clause of Regulation 56A does not confer on you the
privilege of a judicial inquiry allowed to persons interned
under Regulation 56.
Sgd. T. Trumble,
Secretary.
The Registrar, . Liverpool, Bth Itaroh, 1918*
High Court of Australia,
Sydney.
Dear Sir,-
Acting on behalf of some 30 Australian Bom BMMoh


Subjects interned in the Holde-orthy concentiuuxon Canp, '-e
_ - R~> . _ ' F> 4- - «-T 4 4" VL
have "been advised to approach you for some information
reference to the subject of judicial enquiry as provided ,or
by the Regulations 58 and of the -ar Precautions Act.
The Australian Born Subjects whom T "e represent, have been
arrested and detained in military custody under tne authority of
a issued under the hand of the J. mister for UC fence, by
virtue of the- powers exercised by him under Regulation poA of
the "ar Precautions Act. As a study of these regulations vail
reveal, the right of a British Subject; conferred in rvCgula uon
56, to acquit himself before a Justice of the High Court, is pre-
served in Regulation ?8a by its final clause. . . ..
v?o are therefore instructed to ask that you vill indicate
the procedure we must follow in order to have our individual
cases investigated in this way: also whether such investigation
would be governed by ordinary court procedure, the
■oreßiding Justice would assume the functions ol a
of Enquiry, In the latter case,.we presume that the employment
of Counsel'by the applicant- would be optiona 1,
Yours sincerely,
Sgd, AC m R. Dechert 3. Schrapol
Secretary president
Association of interned Australian Horn Subjects
High Court of Australia,
Sydney, 19th march, 1918.
Sir -
I have the honor to acknowledge the receipt of your letter
of the Bth instant, and in reply thereto, I have to inform you,
that as there are at present no High Court Judges in Sydney, 1
have forwarded your letter to the Principal Registrar 01 one
High Court at Melbourne, so that the matter can be put before a
Judge of the High Court.
, - I have etc.
■ ■ Sgd. C. P.. Walsh
?,/:•*» t.p Schrmel - i)iy 4ri c 4 &t .
Pres i dont, Asscn, of 1 nter no d Austn . 1?0rn ouo j oct s
'IF-wmnwrrK •' nf-
High tfourt of Australia,
Six- - Sydney, 23rd March, 1918,
' w ith reference to your letter of the Bth instant, and my
letter to you of the 19th instant, I have now the honor in-
form you that I have received a reply to my letter uo uho frin-
cipal Registrar of the Court at Melbourne on the subject and he
informs me that your letter was submitted to His nohour Chief
Justice who has directed that the mat tor snould 00 brought oi-fOtu
a Justice in Chambers by the issue 01 an ordj.na.ry Chamoer .•.sum-
mons ™hi ch should be su - pported by alO a 1 r 1 da. fit or all rdavi ./ o
showing the grounds upon which the application is based,
I have etc.
Sgd. C. R. ""aloh
Mr. R. Schrapel, District Reglstrar.
President, Asscn. of interned Austn. Born Subjects.
) 'MKFLNNMKM*"*'' • * ll** «I
Liverpool, 29th larch, 1918.
The District Registrar,
High Court of Australia, Sydney.
Boa r Si r , - . _ _
• V 7 Q are directed to a cknowlodge re c oupt 01 your 1 e -»ocr s
of the 19th and 23rd inet, , having reference to the method of
procedure to be adopted in order to secure investiga our
cases before the High Court, and to thank you J. or Hie information
with which you have furnished us o
You r s since re 1 y ?
Sgd. A c '*a . Pi, Dechert RScnrapel
Association of interned Australian Born Subjects.


Liverpool, Bth Larch, 1918.
Sir, -
-k -r " G are oy the Committee of our Association to brine
ef ore the won. Minister's notice, she disability which Australian
corn internees suffer in comparison w it h other internees, with
beJJ'of th-^r 3 ffl°-i tage °I parcels despatched to them. The mem-
bers 0, .aailies who wish to send parcels to them are, of
t ? urss ! a resident in Australia, but owing to the fact that
tnese internees nave been forcibly removed from their homes
over distances of up to 3?000 miles to this Camp, full inter-
rates te?e to be paid on all such parcels as their
amlieo assire to send them. Other internees,/ however? receive
parcels from other parts of the wrold free of postage. rcc^lVu
cose 01 naving parcels sent from within Australia
under present conditions, is practically prohibitive, and A
bor^ e in^lSah et ti n put /° rward a request that each Australian
free oil'oTtlge': a±l0 "" 01 * t0 recolTC Wrcel every week,
consideration you will give t}lis request your favourable
, _ are, Yours etc,
Sgd, A. W. H. Lechert 3. Schrpp^l
Secretary President
~ v , , Association of interned Australian Born Subjects.
j.hw iion. minis oer for Defence,
Department of Defence,
memoranaum for Melbourne, 20th March,. 1918
A. ■ ,A.Dechert & 3.Schrapel
Concentration Camp, Liverpool.
~ ,h;h re^ ren 2° t0 your letter of Bth March, addressed to
-lrusoer xor Defence, relative to postage on parcels
h® 3 > t .h ?d t ° internees, you are informed that the suggestion
free postage of parcels is not approved
Sgd, T. Trumble
Secretary.


r
.
I
L.
jy
■ | Ij
I


Int e r nrne nt Camp ;
Hold s wo r th y . H. S 9 \7. ,
15th June, 1918
The Honourable the Minister of State for Defence,
Commonwealth of Australia,
>
MELBOURNE
Sir, -
We, the undersigned, Australian born British Subjects
interned in this Camp, feel it incumbent upon us to place
before the Honourable Minister, in somewhat comprehensive
form, a statement of facts relating to our internment,, The
great majority of us have endured lengthy periods of imprison-
ment, and during that time, we have communicated with the Honour-
able Minister in respect to various aspects of our position.
We regret that our efforts have borne little or no' fruit, and
we are therefore submitting this recital of wrongs in the hope
that the Honourable the Ministers and together with his col-
leagues the Government as a whole may be commensurately im-
pressed with the importance of the facts which are here adduced.
we propose, firstly, to discuss the 'policy which the Hovern-
ment has adopted, of causing the precipitate arrest of Australian
born persons, their deportation and internment in this Camp,
Were ohis country situated close to the theatre of war, were
there any possibility of revolution or internal disturbance
or any other such circumstance, perhaps the temporary detention
of persons on suspicion could be justified, but the Australian
born persons of German descent have shown themselves, both
before the war and during its progress, to be most exemplary
citizens« We can quote a number of instances of "scare-mon-
ger ing :i directed against German-Australians, which could be
regarded as humourous, were it not that the general public is
rarely acquainted with the full facts, and consequently, dobs
not always judge correctly. It is regrettable that a section
of people « some of whom have banded themselves together for
the very purpose - have sought, from the very outset of the
war, to inflame public opinion against Australians who are 4
descended from German ancestors. It is such persons as these,
perhaps, who have supplied the Minister with the fhlse and dis-
torted evidence, which has led him to intern Australian born
ci o These despicable beings, who work under cover of
anonymity, have caused much sorrow and suffering in this country
by their activities c Unfortunately,, the very instructions
issued by the Defence Department in respect to this matter,
practically^amount to an invitation to such persons to have
their social or political enemies or business rivals put out
of the way, since it is particularly stipulated in these in-
structions that the persons supplying evidence against citizens
of German origin, shal.l be protected in every way so that their
identity snail noo be disclosed. This persecution has not
serve 0. Aus era xia - but, on the contrary, has thrown a burden of
responsibility and expenditure upon the Commonwealth. If the^


is any bitter feeling amongst the German-Australian community,
io ,ib prunipLed by "die treatment which has been meted out to
them it their war effort has slackened to a greater degree
chan boaf of any other section of' the population, the fault is
not to be ascribed to them,, but to those who "have caused their
humiliation. High ecclesiastics and public.men, who make the
most daring speeches, do so with impuni ty. but perscns with
German names ? who have committed no offence, ore imprisoned
without any hesitation.
In May 1916 , the Minister announced that in connection
with the Government's policy relating to internment; it was to
be d.isll nctly un der slood tha tmi 1 i ta ry ne cess ity would be the
only cause for internment ; and that the Government would not
be justified in interning anyone for social or industrial
reasons, It is very regrettable that this policy has not
been adhered to. Since that* time, about 40 persons of Aus-
tralian birth have been arrested and confined in this camp.
These Australian citizens, few of whom have ever left Aus-
tralian shores, and few of whose parents, if born in Gernany,
have ever returned there even for visits ** have been arrested
by Minister As warrant, under the authority of War Precautions
Regulation 56A , although in at least one case , no warrant was
produced at the time of arrest In this instance, a copy of
the warrant was supplied to the internee two years after his
internment, but, strange to state, this copy" disclosed that
the warrant was issued on a, date when the gentleman concerned
was nOl 1 n Aus tra lia ? yet described .him as 0f a district in
which he had never resided.
These Australian born subjects.have repeatedly sought
trial 111 open court f or some kind..of enquiry where they would
have an opportunity af securing .vindication:: they have asked
10 ha ve de fin it e charge s la id a ga. ins t them. in order to be in
a position to disprove same? they have requested, for the
same purpose, copies of the evidence which the Minister may
have against them: they have challenged the Minister to pur
this evidence to the test,, either in open court,, or in a
magisterial inquiry. All such appeals have, however, fallen
upon deaf ea vs a !ne Mi n .1. ster wi 11 0h 1 y sa ytha t they are
not entitled to any enquiry, or to know.the charges against
them, or the reasons for their internment: that they are in-
terned for the reasons stated in the arrest warrant - which
are that they are 0f Hioslll e origin and assoclations t s ' that
it is against the public j.bterest to grant any enquiry: that
they are to remain interned so long as the public interest
requi res 11, On an occasion when the Minister made an of«
facial visit to this camp,, a request was ma de for an inter-
view with him in order to bring the full facts before him,
but this request was rejected. Ve have requested the Minister
to ena Die us to take advantage of the final clause in Regu-
lation f6A of the War Precautions Act, which preserves to us
the right, granted in Regulation 96, to an enquiry before a
Justice of the High Court, The Minister stated, in reply,
that we were not entitled to make this appeal to the High
Courto The Chief Justice is now willing to allow the question
to be opened in the High Court,, but the restrictions placed
upon interviews with solicitors debar action,. Until quite
recently, consultatlons with solicitors were, for a long period,
f or "bidden. How when legal action in the High Court is con-
t empla *G eA , interviews WITH SOLICIT or s are permitted only at the
Camp, ail a 1 n th e pr esence 0 f a n of f ice r , a, r estr iction which i s


in keeping with the general attitude of the Defence Depart-
ment toward uso Owing to our handicapped position, there-
fore, it is impossible to obtain legal or any other form of
redress.
It Ims been learnt indirectly, from one source, that these
Australians are regarded as having pro-enemy sentiments and
1i kely to be dangerous , yet during their internment, they have
been approached for subscriptions to the 'ar Loan. It lias
been suggested that their liberty is regarded as prejudicial
to recruiting: but it is an undoubted fact that their re-
moval from civil life has caused a revulsion of feeling, and
that, instead of assisting recruiting, it ha,s retarded the
movement. It is known that, in some instances, internment
has been caused by statements made by business rivals, and
social and politica.l enemies, but the Minister refuses any
enlightenment on this question.
The personal hardship, loss of health, and mental strain -
apart from financial considerations - involved by internment,
and the injustice- of their treatment ar„ very keenly felt.
The treatment which has been accorded enemy subjects at other
Concentration Camas, from which the Australians have been ex-
J, 9
eluded, 'has been far superior to that given them at Holdsworthy.
However, they feel more keenly still the suffering and hardship
which are caused their families, few of whom have been able to
see them during the last two years.
It has been suggested to the Minister that, if he will
not grant their unconditional release, he could relieve their
lot by allowing them to reside in some district other than
that in which they normally reside: they would then be prepared
to wait until after the war for an opportunity to vindicate
themselves c The French.-Government quite recently agreed that
German civilians interned Irr France should have the option,
either of being repatriated or . remaining in France to reside
at a fixed address. If such liberties can be allowed enemy
subjects in a country which is actually invaded by the Germans,
surely there is no logical reason for refusing to Australian
citizens the "concession" of enjoying similar restricted liberty
in their own country - so far removed from the seat of war.
This,hhoweve r was absolutely refused, as wore all other minor
requests, such as removal to better camps, concessions at Holds -
worthy; aftd a, request, supported by the Commandant of this
Camp, that the interned Australian Subjects bo allowed to
establish a so para, to camp, whore they could live a little more
comfortably and amidst surroundings more in keeping with their
sentiments,
Thus it is seen that, despite all protests, they have been
imprisoned without any semblance of trial: the reasons they
are not permitted to know: for considerable periods they have
not been allowed to secure legal advice regarding their intern-
ment : communication with Parliamentary representatives has
been intercepted. Correspondence addressed to the Australian
Hativcs' Association has been absolutely stopped and seized:
and they are not permitted to conduct any correspondence which
might be calculated to enlighten the Australian general public
as to the astounding acts of injustice which are being com-
mitted, strangely enough, in its name. These unfortunate
citizens are imprisoned for an indefinite period, simply because
they happen to be descended from German ancestors, and bear


German names. Some of their fathers and grandfathers were
expressly invited "by the agents of the different Australian
Governments to make their homes in Australia; and they did so
in full confidence; never dreaming that their children would
"be treated in such fashion,, As has often "been pointed out,
allies change to enemies within the century, and vice versa,
and it is to "be wondered whether all Australian citizens, who
are descended from other than purely English ancestors ; < are
to "be liable to such treatment in any future war in which Aus-
tralia may over be involved.
That such occurrences are possible in the twentieth cen-
tury in such an advanced democracy as that of Australia;
seems hardly credible 3 But so it is, a,nd there is being
registered in Australian History a chapter which all real
Australians will some day heartily wish could be expunged.
Australian born citizens have, with complete disregard
for their personal; family or business interests, been liter-
ally torn from their homes and families,, escorted by guards
with fixed bayonets through public streets of capital and
other cities : imprisoned in police cells, and in military
"clinks" intermingled with drunken soldiers: some have ex-
perienced. being conveyed, through city streets in a '"Black
Maria": have been led handcuffed through public thorough-
fares: have been imprisoned in detention cells previously
occupied by venereally infected soldiers: have had to utilise,
in common with them, lavatories and kitchens, Liost of thorn,
in being treated as "prisoners of war" have; been exposed to
the Jeers and taunts of; unthinking crowds, and in such a pur-
poseful manner the.t it could only have been for some
guiding hand to have arranged such disgraceful exhibitions
which have occurred,, obviously with the object of damaging, as
much as possible, these unfortunately situated citizens, A
few have^escaped such treatment, but none .have been able to
avoid the hardships consequent upon the confinement in this
camp under such unnatural conditions,
It is impossible to describe the mental suffering which
is associated with internment, If our internment is designed
as a punishment for some imaginary offence, the minister need
have no doubts as to its effectiveness as directed not only
against ourselves , but also against our wives and families.
Visits from them are, in nearly every case, out of the question
on account of distance and expense, since some amongst us have
been deported over distances of up to miles, writ-
ten words each week is the allowance which is made for the
maintenance cf personal relationship botwoen wife and husband
or parents and sens The conditions prevailing in the Camp
impose a distinct hardship upon those who are accustomed to
Australian living conditions o It io regrettable to .have to
state that the barracks in which we are required to exist,
are quite inferior to housing which we have often seen pro-
vided for the accemmcfetion of domestic cattle in this coun-
try, In a space 12ft, long by tyft 8 wide by Bfl 6 6in o high,
5 men are required to eat, sleep, and pass the time from one
year to another. This means that, in the wet weather, (which
sometimes rules continuously for- a fortnight ) 5 one is con-
fined to a space approximateXy equivalent to that provided for
passengers on the railways, and one cannot venture out of
that scanty protection, except perforce to secure meals from


the kitchen, Some of us have not yet been provided with
beds though we have been interned for periods of up to d
veers end over. " In no instance have tables or chairs
been furnished. It must be understood that each person
who is interned here is provided with a tin plate, mug,
spoon, knife, fork and 3 single blankets, and ne is shown
the bare floor which is to serve him as his bed, table,
cba.ir. etc. The huts are infested with vermin to such
a degree that the strongest counter measures are quite
futile; the huts, in addition, provide quite inadequate
protection from the weather; no artificial heating is
provided, the draughts rush from one end of tne barrack
to the other, and the rain frequently makes its way inside
to such an extent that pools of water are formed on the
floors.
The food rations are inadequate, both in quantity
and variety, and owing to the poor facilities provided
at the kitchens, and the insufficient staffs, it is impos-
sible for the cooks to prepare the food in a satisfactory
manner; so far as green vegetables are concerned v-e have
hardly seen any during the whole period of our internmen ,
despite the fact that a large portion of the surrounding _
country is highly suitable for the cultivation of vegetables
and they could be cheaply produced with the camp labour,
The bathing and washing places are primitive and net
properly protected, and no hot water is provided even m
the coldest weather. The dust nuisance, it is alrnos
impossible to describe: the measures so far taken against
it have proved to be quite ineffective, and frequently, in
drv weather, the dust is raised in clouds which envelop the
whole camp, no place being immune from it, ihe oust la den
atmosphere'his had a serious effect upon the health of many,
and the eyesight of numerous internees has been seriously
and permanently impaired, In vi rof this, it is regrettable
that the hosoita. 1 personnel do not treat the number
patients in a more sympathetic and scientific manner. Any
competent authority will agree with us that it is impossible
for a. medical practitioner to prescribe for 50 cases m as
many minutes, and yet this is almost a daily occurrence at
the Camp Hospital, The Dental Department, until recently,
was manned by a staff whose inefficiency was only equalled
by the insulting behaviour which they displayed toward the
unfortunate internees who were compelled to suncr tnoir
attentions - treatment for which must be paid for. Little
care has been paid in the past, by the staffs of those De-
partments, to the sterilisation or disinfection of the in-
81run^nts used on tne different pe.tiontb-
There are many instances of insulting treatment accorded
to us, and worse, there are times when the lives even of
Australian born citizens have been endangered. On one
occasion, a rifle shot which wa.s fired into the camp bp one
of the guards during the night - quit,- a common occurrence
in the earlier history of the camp - buried itsexf in a . p
a few inches distant from where several of our number were
lying sleeping.
This is not in any my a complete statement of the
conditions ruling here, but it serves merely as an indication.


Having carefully studied the foregoing, we claim that the
Minister cannot fail to give hie earnest consideration to the
subjoined suggestions which are advanced with the object of
affording redress, or at the least some relief from the pur-
poseless persecution which we arc compelled to endure.
As it has been advanced that th- responsibilities and
pros our e of work associated with the Minister's" position
preclude him from giving full and prompt attention to our
cases, wo submit:
(l) that the Minister' should observe the usual civil law
procedure and institute prosecutions against all those of us
whom ho deems to have committed any offence, or any act which
could be deemed inimical to the interests of Australia: that
those against whom he is unable to bring such charges be forth-
with released.
Such a.ction would be welcomed by all of us, as an op-
portunity of vindicating ourselves, and any unbiassed, reason-
able person would pronounce it the only just method of settle-
ment .
If, however, the Minister should consider that such action
would be prejudicial to the public interest, we would recom-
mend to his notice this alternative:
(2) that each individual case be made the subject of an
inquiry by a Supreme Court Judge - the enquiry 'to be hold in
camera, but each individual to be afforded full facilities
to secur legal assistance, and to summon all necessary wit-
nesses r
V7 o fail to see how the Minister can refuse to code to
us the right of either one or other of these alternatives,
but if he still maintains that we must remain interned
v ithout opening" any channel of rodross to us, then we propose:
(3) that we shall bo returned to our homo States without
delay r and interned there in such localities as may meet the
requirements of the Defence Department under conditions equal
to those which have been enjoyed by enemy army and ships'
officers at Berrima.
The Minister win concede that the responsibility rests
upon him to return us to Society in a physical condition as
sound as that which w o enjoyed when he removed us: this re-
sponsibility, up to the present, appears to have been over-
looked, but it is not yet too late to ameliorate the con-
ditions of our confinement. The full investigation of the
circumstances surrounding our internment will no doubt be a
task for a Royal Commission - if not during the mr, then after
its conclusion - and it win redound to the credit of the Minister
if it can be said that he exercised some endeavour to ease our
lot' in the unhappy position in which he has placed us.
T e have the honour to be,
Sir,
Your obedient servants,


Holdsworthy 9 25th July, 1918,
The Honourable the Minister
for Home and Territories,
Sir, -
In view of earlier correspondence which we have bad
with you, we are sending herewith for your information,
copy of a statement which our members have addressed to
your colleague the Honourable the Minister for Defence,
We have the honour' to be 5
Sir, Your obedient servant
(Signed) President Secretary A, 3, A e
V« (Id rum UL» Mjm ». Jt 9n kU <~rn Ml tjtrn 'AM Vtm ar.v V J tU
Holdsworthy 5 25th July, 1918 c
His Excellency the Governor-Generai c
Sir, -
w r e are enclosing for your Excellency's information
copy of a statement which has been despatched to the
Honourable the Prime Minister and the Honourable the Mini-
ster of State for Defence, coneerning the internment of
Australian born British subjects.
We are also enclosing herewith, in duplicate, a
letter addressed to the Honourable the Secretary of State
for Colonies, and we shall be glad if Your Excellency will
cause the same to be transmitted to him, together with the
enclosure thereto 3
We have the honour to be,
Your Excellency's most obedient servants
(Signed) President Secretary A, B 0 A e
.v» *• *. : ,3.» iiw:. m c«.i \
Holdsworthf, 25th July, 1918
The Honourable the Secretary of State
for Colonies ?
London,
Sir, -
We have requested His Excellency the Governor General
to transmit this letter with accompanying enclosure to you
for eonsidera tion c
The copy of the letter to the Honourable the Minister
for Defence is intended to serve as an explanation of the
position of between 30 and 40 Australian born citizens who
have been interned at the Holdsworthy Concentration Camp for
periods varying up to By years.
We understand that the Honourable the Secretary of
State for Colonies is prepared to recognise claims of
interned enemy subjects who have suffered through intern-
ment , end we should be pleased to learn whether he will
also'entertain such claims from British born subjects who
have been interne d«
We have the honour to be 9
Si r.
Your obedient servants,
( Signe d•' Pre si deni Secretary A 6 3 6 A.
H.* wi «»• ««»
i« M*"» (
Holdsworthy loth June, 19180
F s Tudor, Esq., Mi ILK,
Leader, Federal Parly,, Labour Party,
Melbourne,
Dear Sir,-
V/e arc enclosing herewith oovy of a letter which
' «M I
has been addressed to the Honourable the ..inister of
A3!?


Defence "by the Australian "born citizens interned in this
Camp,
The signatories to this letter v, ould "be glad if you
would submit this to your Party for consideration, and
such action as they may trunk fit e
Acknowledgment will oblige,
Yours sincerely,
(Signed) President Secretary A,B,A,
Returned on the 27th June, with note on the envelope
as follows: "Returned to Sender/ Letters to Members of
Parliament re release from internment are not to be for-
warded," Initials of Ca.pt, Fitzhardinge, Intelligence Offer,
Hoideworthy, 12th July, 191&.
His Honour Mi, Justice Harvey,
Official Visitor,
Sir, -
nr e desire to once more bring under Your Honour's
notice the difficulties which have confronted us in our
efforts to utilise one of the channels to which we should
have free access in our attempts to obtain relief from our
present painful position - we refer to correspondence with
our Parliamentary representatives.
In several instances recently,'correspondence, both
individual and collective, from Australian Born Subjects
has been stopped by the Censor. We submit for Your Hon-
our's informtion copy of a letter addressed to the Hon,
F c Tudor. M,H„R,, which has been returned to us with the
inscription: "Returned to Bender/ Letters to Members of
Parliament re release from internment are not to be for-
warded," A letter addressed recently by two of our
members to the Federal Parliamentary Representative of
their Pistrict, who is a member of the Ministry and
with whom they have been personally acquainted for a long
period of years, was returned to them, in spite of the
fact that they have been in almosjs constant correspondence
with him ever since their internment. The Intelligence
Officer has informed us that he is required to take this
acbtion in accordance with instructions received from the
Be fen c e Department,
while formally protesting to Your Honour regarding
this insupportable invasion cf our few remaining rights
and privileges, we would like to sa.y that we can see no
other reason far these instructions than a desire, on the
part of the Defence Department, to frustrate any efforto
we may make to enlighten our Parliamentary Representatives
and the Australian Public in respect of the treatment
accorded us at their hands.
This action of the Defence Department 3eeme the more
unjust - one might almost apply a stronger term - when one
considers that the enemy subjects interned here have the
right to appeal to their respective Governments through
the representing Consuls, We t however« have no parallel
means of securing relief from the conditions which are
imposed upon us in common with other internees.
Most respectfully yours c
(Signed) president Secretary A,B,A,
A3*
tm l-m M tm M*
•r» ul V« M


Holdsworthy, 10th August, 1918„
His Honour Mr, -Justice Harvey,
Official Visitor,
Sir,--
We are submitting herewith copies of coiTSsjionclence, .
which the Association of Interned Australian Born Subjects
has conducted with the Minister for Defence and other Author-
ities regarding the internment and conditions appertaining
thereto of Australian Born citizens.
This correspondence has been conducted collectively,
as it was thought that the interests of these Australians
would be better represented in that way., and that the eluci-
dation of the matters brought forward would be facilitated.
There are three questions of outstanding importance
dealt with in the matter submitted;.-
(1) The attitude of the Minister of Defence in refusing
any trial or judicial inquiry into the circumstances
surrounding the internment of these citizens.
(2) The effect of the censorship in relation to the
representation of cases to Members of Parliament and
others,
(3; The conditions governing interviews with solicitors
which debar any legal action calculated to afford means
of redress through legal channels,
Although we have endeavoured to exhaust every avenue which
lay open to us, the "hemming in" attitude of the authorities
makes our position appear to us to be absolutely hopeless.
We trust that Your Honour will be able to find time to
peruse the correspondence submitted, and we need not say how
welcome a.ny advice or suggestions would be, which Your Honour
might be able to make as a result of such perusal.
Yours respectfully,
(Signed) President Secretary A e E,A,
Supreme Court, Sydney,
the Official Visitor
to Concentration Camps 1\ T , S,V,
to Messrs, Paech & Dechert
Holdsworthy
1 have read and considered carefully your letters of
the 10th August, also the correspondence attached, and am
sending your letters of that date on to the Department for
consideration, asking whether ycu may not be allowed to
interview solicitors in private. As soon as any reply is
given you will be advised.
(Signed.) J, M„ Harvey
27th August. 1918 c
Supreme Court, Sydney
From the Official Vi si 10r
to C once lit ra ti on Camps IT ~ S, V
to Pa ech and De chert
Holdsworthy o
I wrote to the Department sending on the letters
received from Messrs. Paech and Dechert dated the LOth
August last, and especially suggested that naturalised
and British Born subjects be allowed to see their solici-
tors in pr 1 vate .
I have now heard from Headquarters that the matters
referred to in the letters which I sent on have received
careful consideration, but it is not considerod desirable
to make any alteration in the present conditions,,
A 37
. A. ,
(.Signed) J - . * Ha r vey
21st De ptember , 1916.


Holdsworthy, 25th July, 1918.
The District Registrar,
High Court of Australia, Sydney,
Dear Si r«. w
Reverting to the subject ref rred to in your let-
ters of the 19th and 23rd March 1918, *>eg to inform you
that, at the time we received these communications, the
Commandant of this Camp refused to permit us to consult
any Solicitors in regard to any matters relating to intern-
ment c As it appeared to us that it was impossible to
take any steps in the matter until we could secure legal
assistance,, we made representations to the Minister of
Defence, and as a result we received a letter from the
Commandant, which laid down certain conditions governing
interviews with solicitors„
We have made the strongest possible protest against
the application of such conditions, a.nd we have once more
requested the Minister to facilitate the High Court Inquiry
which we claim is. our right. The Minister has replied,
however, that he 'will not relax the conditions relating
to interviews with advisers, and states that we are
not entitled to any judicial inquiry, or to know the
reasons -for our internment^
We enclosing copies of correspondence which we
hove conducted with,the Defence Department bearing on
this subject, and as we consider that the obstacles placed
in our way prevent ds from initiating proceedings in the
ordinary manner, we are desirous of learning whether the
preliminary steps in regard to a judicial inquiry could
be taken without legal assistance, i, e, will you inform
us: what is a Chamber Summons? Could it be prepared by
us in the Camp? Could the initial proceedings before a
Judge be conducted without legal representation?
In giving consideration to these questions, we feel
sure you will not overlook our handicapped situation and
the fact that we are absolutely laymen in these matters.
Yours sincerely."
(Signed) President Secretary A t ß,A v
• «*«•> *v* m •• •**
High Court of Australia,
Sydney. 21st August., 1918
The President or Secretary.
Australian Horn Subjects' Asscn. :
Concentration Camp*
Sir,
I have the honour to acknowledge the receipt of your
letter of the 25th July, and in reply thereto to inform you
that a Chamber Summons is a document which requires the
attendance before a Judge in Chambers of the person called
upon,. Such a document could be prepared in Camp by a
person who had the necessary legal knowledge,, out it would
be extremely difficult for anyone without such knowledge
to prepare it,
It is not possible for the proceedings to be conducted
before a Judge by a litigant in person except when he is a
free agent hpSi able. to attend before the Judge*
The High Court on one occasion refused to take steps
which would, allow a person under confinement to appear per-
sona. 11y for'the purpose of conducting his own proceedings.
Yours faithfully*
(Cigne d) C, R. Ma lsh
District Registrar*
A3*


Holdsm-orthy, 28th ay, 1918.
The Honourable the Minister for Defence,
lie lb ourne„
r>ir,
\/e have your letter of the 10th ultimo, and. have
secured from the Commandant a notification that internees
arc permitted to consult solicitors regarding oheir
internment, "but that such interviews must talce place at
the Camp in the presence of an officer,
Y'e are directed to bring under your notice two im-
portant aspects of the conditions which are imposed.
Firstly, the expense involved in engaging
a competent legal adviser to visit this Camp from
is very considerable, and preparations for legal proceedings
will demand a number of such visits, creating expenses which
would be absolutely prohibitive, A solicitor would also
be considerably handicapped in giving advice at the Camp,
since he would not have at tend books of reference and
other facilities which such consultations would require.
Secondly, ethical' we cannot help thinking that,
when the Minister has carefully considered the matter,
he will rea,lise what an astounding condition he is imposing
in stating that interviews must take place in the presence
of an officer. Mo greater contravention of the ethics of
justice can be imagined than that the representative of one
party in a legal action should be entitled to be present
at the legal consultations of the other party. Such a con-
dition implies the absolute subjection of civil law to rnili
tar y di cta tio n,
In our opinion, the Minister is justified in stipu-
lating only such conditions which provide for the prevention
of the escape of internees during such interviews, but the
actual presence of an officer, who - would acquaint himself
with the full details of the proceedings is quite indefen-
sible.
hope to hear from the Honourable Minister that he
is prepared to relax these conditions f and in respect to
our rights in this regard, to place us on a just and equitable
footing*
We are etc
(Signed) President Secretary A/H.A.
Department of Defence.
Me lb ourn e , 11 th June 1918
Memorandum for:
P, Schrapel. Holds^orthy,
wfth reference to your letter of the 28th ultimo,
relative to the instructions regarding the conditions
under which solicitors may interview internees, you are
informed that your representations have received con-
sideration. and it is not proposed to alter the conditions
alreadv existing.
( Signed) T ?rumble
Secretary o
Holdsworthy. 28th ..lay, 1918
The Honourable the Minister of Defence,
Melbourne,
On ~;
Oi -i.
• ith reference to the memorandum, of the minister's
Secretary, dated February 19th, there appear to be some


aspects of the correspondence preceding that letter which
the Hon. Minister has not fully realised,
_ -* • in n 0 J /T6v .-• inister lias not yet
explamed why he has so far prevented us from securing a
judicial inquiry in accordance with the provisions of
regulations 56 and 56a of toe Precautions Act.
Regulation 56a - under which the Australian born sub-
joc s nave een interned providesfor the consideration by
the Minister of representations for release imde by such
internees, but the Minister has completely defeated this
proviso by refusing to furnish the internees with any
against them, or copies of any evidence'upon
'hich uhe Minister "ha s based his action. As we have
previously pointed out., it is impossible for any person to
refute charges, the nature of which he is kept in ignor-
tlfs a PP ears to be the attitude which has been
adopted by the Minister,
It is evident that the Minister no longer subscribes
1 reafson for our detention "the public safety and defence
of the Commonwealth from the point of view of military
necessity, but applies the vague term "public interest."
+ P +D e S 1 " 1 ' 1 the Minister would supply an expiana-
of .his. .ana state whether our internment is designed
as a punitive measure for some alleged breach of the law.
1? e are, yours etc.
(Signed) President Secretary A.B.A.
*■--* J %rX+
Defence Department ;
, Melbourne. 6th June. 1916.
Memorandum for " y
A„ W. R f De che r t & B, 3 chra pe 1,
Holdsworthy
. _ In to your letter of the 26th May. you are again
informed that you are not entitled to any judicial inquiry
as to the reasons for your internment,
•? t l 18 . nc b in the Public interest that these reasons
should be disclosed to you
A Itnough you cannot , without knowledge of these
reasons, give information to rebut them, you are at liberty
to make any representations you think proper as to your
navmg been loyal subjects. Such representations will be
_ c °nßiaerod f especially if supported by evidence that
you have actively and wholeheartedly supported as loyal
citizens the cause of the British Empire in the present
war,
(Signed; T, Trumb 1 e
Secretary,
* *««• « i >. m w
mi tt Ho Ids worthy. 28 th June 1 918
Honourable the J ; !inister for Defence '
Melbourne 0
Sir, -
*
■ " l f ave the -Honourable Minister's letter of the 6th
and welcome the third paragraph thereof as an
indication that the Minister is now willing to entertain
aay.be mad. by our members - limited
tnougn. obey be by one decision conveyed in the first two
paragraphs.
< + PbDPP 1 - C n lris le tter of the 11th instant,
internal.as tnat ho does not propose to alter the existing
conditions governing interviews with solicitors.
A4O.


As far as we are amre, there is no statutory authority
for the imposition of such conditions, but their enforcement
by power of arms closes to us all means of redress through
judicial channels. For that reason we welcome any 3ign
of conciliation on the part of the Honourable Minister, and
we are recommending our members to act upon your suggestions,
as far as possible. It would, however, be of considerable
assistance to them if the Minister is able to lay down more
definitely the lines on which these representations are to
be made - just what facts would be accepted as evidence of
loyal support of the Empire in the present war.
We have the honour to be, etc.
(Signed) President Secretary A.B.A.
Department of Defence,
Melbourne, sth July, 1918.
Memorandum f or:
A.W. R. Deche rt and. E. Schra pe 1
Concentration Camp, Liverpool.
In reply to your letter of 28th June, you are
informed that it is not considered necessary to give you
any assistance as to the nature of evidence that would be
accepted as evidence of loyalty to the Empire. ldo loyp-1
subject should need any assistance in deciding what acts
are indicative cf his loyalty.
(S igne d) 1. T r urab 1 e
Secretary,
Departrient of Defence,
Melbourne, 161h July, 1918,
Memo ran duin for:
E. S chra pel, Concentration Camp, Liverpool.
With reference to the letter of 15th June, signed by
yourself and other internees at Liverpool Concentration
Camp, a ddre sse d to the Mini st er of Defence, you are
informed that the Minister does not propose to vary the
conditions laid down in regard to the matters to which you
refer which are considered necessary for the protection of
the C omm onwea 11h.
(Signe d) I. Trumble,
Secretary,
.
Holdsw 0 r thy, 26 th Augu st, 1918.
The Honourable the Minister of State for Defence,
M elbourne
Sir, -
We, the under s i gne d, Aus t ra, 1 ia. n3o rn Ci t i zens ,
interned in the Concentration Camp, Holdsworthy, hereby
make application for a judicial inquiry in accordance
with the War Precautions Act Regulation recently pro-
claimed, and request that the necessary order under this
regulation be speedily gazetted in order that our appli-
cation be complied - Tr ith.
Since the Minister replied to our petition of the
lsth June, the Government has passed the Regulation referred
to above, and inquiries have already been granted to in-
terned Australian Born persons of Irish descent. If the
Defence Department does not make a clear line of dema rasa ti on
between ourselves and descendants of other nationalities
who are born citizens of this Country, it is morally bound,
on the grounds of consistency, to grant our request.
A4l


A type of inquiry has been granted in the cases of
only a very small proportion of those Australian Born
Citizens interned here , The reason why similar con-
sideration has not been extended to the remainder is not
clear to us, but we would support our request by reference
to a case which has recently come under our notice. Our
information - which we have the best reason for believing
to be quite accurate - indicates that an Australian Born
Subject interned in one of the other States was charged
with, disloyalty before a magisterial tribunal c Two persons
who. had sworn declarations against him were summoned as
witnesses, and their cross-examination revealed that their
testimony was inaccurate and unreliable. As a consequence,
the internee promptly regained his freedom and status in
civil life, It is known to'some of our number that similar
depositions made against them are also untrue and cannot
be substantiated, Others, of course, have not the slightest
inkling of the reasons for which their internment has been
authorised.
We claim to be Australian Born Citizens, with rights
and privileges equal to those of all other Australian
citizens. We are prepared to prove that no act or word
of ours can in any way be construed to indicate that we
are a menace to the safety of tha. Cormnonwee Ith.
The mental torture and resultant failure of physical
health is so pronounced in the case of those who are un-
fortunate enough to have been interned for any lengthy
period, that the time has arrived when an urgent appeal
on the grounds of humanity must be made for the consider-
ation of our cases with, some sense of fair play and justice.
All we ask is a civi 1 tria 1
VT e make this appeal especially in view of the fact
that the Imperial Authorities of all combatant nations
in this terrible war have agreed to relieve the mental
and physical sufferings of their subjects who are interned,
and we hope that cur Government will give some measure of
consideration to its subjects who have suffered still more
keenly during their internment o
We have the honour to be, etc.
U-n v* r »
Be par tme nt of Defence,
Melbourne, 11th September, 1918,
Mem ora n dum for
A. Schwan,
Concentration Camp. Liverpool
With reference to the letter of the 26th August
from yourself and other Australian born internees asking
for a civil trial regarding their internment, you are
informed that the request contained in such letter cannot
be granted.
You are requested to convey this refusal to the
other signatories,
(Signed) ?. Trarable,
Secretary,,
Holds-worthy, 27th August, 1918 0
The Honourable the Minister of Defence
Sir,
As certain information has reached me in regard
to the affidavits (and the signatories thereof), which
A 43


induced the Honourable Minister to oi % der rny internment,
I beg to ask the permission of the Honourable Minister
to take legal proceedings with a view to setting the civil
law in motion against the parties concerned e
Thanking the Honourable Minister in anticipation of
a favorable reply.
I have the Honour to be, etc.
(Signed) W, A e K,
Department of Defence,
Melbourne; 4th September, 1918.
Memorandum for:
W. A. K,
Concentration Camp, Liverpool.
With reference to your letter of the 27th August,
asking for permission to institute legal proceedings against
certain persons for alleged actions by them in connection
with your internment, you are informed that this Department
is not prepared to give any permission for any such action,
(Signed) T. Trumble
Secretary,
Holdsworthy, 28th May, 1918.
J. H c CattS'y Esq, , M.H.R, ,
Secretary, Federal Parliamentary Labour Party,
House of Representatives. Melbourne.
Dear Sir,-
I am wondering whether my letter of the 29th March
together with enclosure, has reached,y, or whether it is
another victim to the vagaries of the po6t f If you have
received it. our members will be pleased to hear what is
the result of the deliberations of your party on the question
referred to therein.
Awaiting the favour of your early reply,
(Signed) Secretary A.B.A
"««» %W» *«• mm c» mm mm %-m
Holdsworthy, 28th fey, 1918.
The Honourable the
Acting Prime Minister„
Sir, ~
We are sending herewith copies of correspondence which
we have conducted with Mr. Hughes in respect to the prin-
ciple of internment without trial of Australian born citi-
zens, and we are hoping to have from you an expression of
your views or your policy in regard to this important question.
We are, etc,
(Signed) President Secretary A.B.A,
mm mm in %*<«* M mm mm
Prime Minister,
Melbourne, h June, 1918.
The President and Secretary,
Asscn. of Interned Australian Born Subjects, Holdsworthy,
Gentlemen,
I have the honour to acknowledge- the receipt of
your joint letter of the 28th fey, relative to the internment
Of Australian born citizens, and to inform you that the xratter
is receiving attention. By direction.
I have the honour to be, etc.
(Signed) M. 8, Shepherd
Secretary.


Pr irne .. inister : s De pa rtrue nt f
Melbourne. l r /th June, 1918,
The Secretary.
4/ .
Assen c ot Interned Australian Born Subjects, Holdsworthy,
Dear Sir. ~
With reference to the joint letter signed by
..he President and yourself on the subject of the internment
oi Australian born citizens . I am directed to inform you
your represen tations have been considered, but that in view
of the decision of the Cabinet in the case of yourselves and
others, the matter can only be re-opened if you are able to
submit further evidence in support of your applications for
release,
Yours fa i thfully,
(Signed) J e H. Starling
pro Secretary,
•• £>"«* M tW U » »' « r>• t)*'
Holdsworthy, lBth June, 1918.
The Honourable the
Acting Prime Minister
Sir , -
Me are enclosing herewith copy of a petition which
is being addressed to the Minister of Defence bv Australian
born Subjects interned in this Camp.
Me hope that you ill be able to spare time to
examine this petition, and recommend the members of your
Cabinet to give their earnest considers,tion to the
suggestions which are made therein,
he have the honour to be, etc c
(Signed) President Secretary A,B,A,
'«• •*>» • t«® r»» \r% i* % tn* !" «•
Prime Minister,
Melbourne, 29th l9lB,
The Se ere tary,
Asscn, of Interned Australian Born Subjects, Holdsworthy.
Sir. ~
I have the honour to acknowledge the receipt of your
letter of the 18th instant, covering copy of a petition, which
you are addressing to the Minister for Defence, on behalf of
the members of your Association.. By direction.
I have the honour to be, etc.
(Signed) j. H. Starling
pro Secretary,
Holdsworthy. 28th June. 1918.
The Honou ra b i e the
Acting Prime Minister,
Sir, -
Me have to thank you for your letter of the 17th June,
and we thinx that <are entitled to make some explanation
in connection therewith. On the lßth instant, we addressed
to you- & copy of 9, petition despatched to the Honourable
the Minister of Defence by Australian Born Subjects interned
in this Camp, which should supply some- enlightenment in
regard to the efforts we have made to secure our release,
ihe main facts are, that we have been interned without
trial: that the Minister of Defence intimates that our only
channel of redress is to make representations to him, but in
this direction we are confronted by the difficulty that the


Minister, in the public interest, refuses to disclose to
us the reasons for our internment.
We have read in the daily press quite recently a state-
ment made by you in connection with the internment of persons
suspected of implication in the Irish Rebellion movement,
that, in the interests of justice and for the public infor-
mation, these persons would be granted an inquiry before a
Judge of the High Court, which you also stated was in accord-
ance with the War Precautions Act Regulations.
We are convinced that the ventilation of our cases would
not prejudice the public interest to a greater degree than in
this instance, and we therefore think that we are justified
in laying claim to similar consideration.
We have the honour to be. etc,
(Signed) President Secretary A. B. A.
»•* IMb V. A »*, Ml M M M •«) M bM*
Prime Minister.
Melbourne, 4th July, 1918,
The Secretary r
Association of Interned Australian Born Subjects,
Internment Camp, Holdsworthy,
Sir, -
I have the honour to acknowledge the receipt of
your letter <bf the 28th June, having further reference
to the internment of Australian Born Citizens,
direction.
I have the honour etc.
(Signed) li. s, Shepherd
Secretary.
MM b. » MM fw MM M« »«> MM


I
. • .
.
< ' %
.
'
t
' ' "
v - '
, ' '
. ' • " ' ' • ' '
'• . .
• • . -
- . ...
* «-
■ ■ • -
« •
• ■ • :
/ •
.
...
'
•t
.
.
•* ' "
. .■
• «
• ■>
■ i >
.
» •
- ... . s *
v • •
" , .. •
*
\
I •'
, • ■
.
"
.
■
.
'
1
.
-
.. . ,
'
'
- v
■ .
V- • •.
.
. •
■
• •
•- • ' V
V
• t
'
.
.
'
■
• /
"
.
■
|
r
,.' . >
-
,
• ■
«
*
.
i.
■
.
■
,
.
• •
-
■ »


1
1
1
I XL
I . 1rS 1 | 1'.
, *
ft*
■
,
■
- ■ .*» J X nS Ji jsL.-lJf iivJ i. - «*>
• • • * ••• iVir-aoi,.. <#^4 3. „ - .
ilcHS I4. 0::; t-O W O'H*
- pt3ni ro1 firmly cow in-
. - -ig j 1
0#d t at voia ifourq<;if a,> 1 .
•
—« Of *»• , ho are ,.> :
".' * or AjTii ab
•
/' x * «u#rel i iniatary. -if t*isr® «r™»i ? * «
' * Uv " rt "■ mX • '** :t s >** iaolf u .
.
.
>- llrt ■ t' j ,} •&' ▲ t- fc y- ;y y - .
. i.o c t .u«d Ui* rsrmrs t;i~ bt-. oALo.;« of tft# . ma »~t • '*
.
• v "•"'•■ ' • uab.1# t/ns oi i --?•
■ ' * ~ *'' ■'"'"w~Q& it i nmtk
■ <>-i -Jp COiil-t Bttl t Qct * 3i>*. 1 .» 4
* ' " G<u ' • to tiragra$«.
1
i
1


to this co i try toy issurirg - destriluti gi •, Gern*iy numerous
.i t s prin tod in the German d ©von s no* iig itrjlss
i.iOTLc a. I^,.:it pictures in different csotros in Germanv.
:*'■•¥ of «■ later.ad here now, were induced -to. emif-wie »his
Sovernement Propaganda sfc certanly now expect a find help from
that Qowerne t«
<e tic undersigned w. ,re either - jtsd * suhae<;;uc it!-'
vU u.ndfclf tae ■nr he igtiMtlow or force of
circumstances compelled no to take * #«g 3 in the damp.
. Shose of us who were interns forcibly wish to be relea.
sad u con!ittonally or to be broua,.,w before a oronerly consti*
tutM tribunal to be ableto repute a y alleged' charges 'laid
«gainst tncn. if however this dsnsnui of ours should not bo
acceded to, we most emphatically! request you tp use your in -
rluence as the head of our (feverl&aat with the i'aderel ...jtno-
'" st 0 us tre s; errod into an ihter-tme.it camp i „u. Os s-
;ia.
I his® of us voluntarily int&v>Aid wish to rat urn to
ueo \sia ni provided wa can i. work thore, a right which is
•jxtw*iu.au to those lutornsia' bilomging to a vout-iarr utat© #
illof u s from ~u tnslaid nave tho wish to be interaed
in our own -tats if iitarvfini must be.
io substantia to this claim wa , ba g to submit taiow a
detailed dascriptioj; of ioldswortay bainp' Sohditfo is;
he r>a iitary ofc aygisni c conu.ition3 are so unbearable
that an# further prolonged Confinement horo icust iscassaarily j
;x*a v --1 j o t•.ia ir our **•a x tu. i , fact th© co,idit iOrg are suc• -
that tne dUlster foor -efaaos; uas already been p©tiUo.**A to
ra * 3A •; 2 ' " P'h" it iO'kha , ma.iy of whom are vu«e?.sj.a ndars of
u .fxarrdsued character,, ..lafaft, ft g lit,.A in order to be able
to live under hygienic d sanatory conditions.
f# are herded togather- in half - opart sheds, each inter*
nee being allotted a floor space of 2,4 by 9* to live In
o store his possessions in, to sleep 1 to eat in. inese sheds
are vermin infested 1 the Summer tne bugs, fleas and.
mosquitoes oat us alive, in spite of all remonstrances we are
-ot allowed,, mora for ovary 6th Mr. about one half pjfit of'
" £° r tziightly to combat tne ever increasing v in piugue.
-no most obvious pi ecautionary measure would leea'ss i-tf te'the
spraying of tne sheas fo regular intervals * tne literal aistri-
but xo i uj ac« Infe ctaritw on : ppl icat lo i.
■ haavy rein trenwforwa the camp into 'a quagmire *
hu ma n".• ia b'i ta ti o B * W ' iS 3b301ut3i '" nt lor 1
inere is no free not bath, such iiot baths as exist
\t\f L ™ C9 3 torprisa - their cost is prohibitive for most
of the intern9os,who ha*a had to spend the it savinos by now.
'."■P-f.!f«w e to *asn ourselves on ope.,;; covered washplaces,
hfnl rf? t i iav ® to d 0 •» washing,no free hot water over
hal?L 2 * t or th *s-purpose. 54 fixed tubs or -ashing
faJ to f.r%h!**>£!. T!; Uia;i 80 !»'***£••* - t i • uimitfedJy
f Br t0 £ «*» 119 snower bath- with 42 showers as one for more


tfo&n 100 Internets are roof loss & both washing pieces arid
• ? ' u - v - ~*' thi* ao io.t, give any nrotact lor* a•.:? i- nt biting winds
a- d are withoufcamy furnishings for hanging on clothes ate.
but are just nirr.oiyc t floored*
4b provision whatever eyist to nrot- us frorr, tne sun
or rain, * we have either to be out in*H> rain or broiling
sun.or have to be in our overcrowded i lis oontinoil
presence of a multitude ox so very .*ine4e soace, counled
-it,-, tn* din of continual sawing/ S ?!l
sands working or railing music to la away their time is of
cause severely trying our nerves a is doubtless the cause of
tiie many cases of csntsl aberration tost he V.e airesdy occurred
-he sligxitest wind raises clouds of dust x this dust
n err c-at - stie s.ieds our am bsdujL>ig all our fie 10' stings,
i'h&ae continsil duet storms -aturai.iy severely trysail our
lungs and eyes, and branchial a lung troubles as well as
inflammation* of the eyes 4» worse are rampant. - ? oi - the
worst I matures is tat ail our food jets aa jly - if it is
ot rai il'ig - co-.tdmiiati i with tnis"bacteria* «
dust, xhe half open public convlnience. - arinelfaSl tne
-... raj. big ail open urj isl sta .a just between tic two • i' 1 «
c.lons in which the food of t*c t drds of toe i .ternees is"
cooked. As all these kitchens ere half ops." too,the dust
clouds sweep right over the camp, through* the couvs'niencea <*
urinals straight into the kitchensi hut to make rm tiers stil
torse our food is ladled out in the open and *a have to
carry it, uncovered - the authorities refusing to autroly each '
inter oe a secot d ti; plate, which could be used as' cover -
up to too yards-: more through dust*toriss,rHi:i into the dust-
y-" v «rea < ... by * 3to space to eat it. x m ; »n Dt rw jracti-
caily daily ce cause just about noon a breeze spring ub which
rh ifs .i clouds of dust just duri ;g the time of distributive
the One_hot teal of tne day, - if we further remark that
ar ! ®* Ao * ed in yov will understand
.-ut ; .0 .ace oj mis aust plague to our healt i.
Aiw scuko.ns utc- .sil.-s in which our food la being coon-
fiJStJ? 611 *® ' ir ' s u-aer t;v. *ue« island iealth «
t" ® " f O, * Vegetables «tc. b«ing cooked in iinked
iron ota. xiia result of this is of course txiat nraetlcwllv
every ohe df the u,.der S igned has fc-en suffering with acute
complaints through ooisinipg with mus these •
bowel cu-.. 'laints have already become cnronic. And' these am g
ie conditions although the kitchens Xxx have been built &
n« p iSrS'?, !**JS <* -««» v» .JL":
•Ire"!" 'i' 1 ?i G t ay Sydney hs 11 .ShwtFebrldj ,
nere w« ave to buy everything or to Which «e had to my
f ice . of we get direct from
•i®f* hep ®' •• 18 6 ' is .eve- collected m or.ess where
Itt - : £? S o ***''-*** Wd* i'Ued by the necessary
uOihdiDaicxas x ooa o& x*u.
Q..* , , : t Gn P iaCd ® °i' SKUSemeht recreation as exist are
inS«ls «Tf r " oaly for tm v ' jr y lifted number of
ij&t&rsXsss * iu; privs to a&ans,


Correspondence conducted jointly
Associations of Naturalised British Subjects
and Australian Born Subjects 6
'.•SE%WR.X«
14th May, 1917.
Lieutenant Colonel Holman, B. S, 0. ,
Holdsworthy
Sir,-
On behalf of the Naturalized and Australian born Internees,
and with reference to our personal interview with you on the 12th
instant, we beg to make application to you for the purpose of
being exempted from the recent order issued with regard to being
photographed,
We assign the following reasons as sufficient evidence that
we should net submit to .this order:-
• That as Australian Subjects, it is an interference with cur
liberty. Enumerated photographs are to us suggestive of the
keeping of a record by the Defence Department of Australian Citi-
zens, which can only be construed as a preliminary shadowing, and
eventually leading to persecution of interned Australians o
That it savours of the methods employed by Criminal Investi-
gation Departments for the tracing of criminals, and that we
naturally resent such procedure, not being guilty of a breach cr
contravention of any Law bringing us within that category.
Not being acquainted with the reasons for this procedure,
we can only assume that the photographs would be used in the man-
ner described, and would be a menace to the resumption of our citi-
zenship in the Commonwealth after our release,
We shall be pleased if you will communicate our objection
and our application for an exemption to the Hon, the Minister of
State for Defence,
Yours etCc
(Sgd) A. Hersten
(Sgd) H, T, Eime
Representing Naturalized Subjects
Representing Australian Born
Subjects
Head Quarters,
Liverpool, fey 18th, 1917
Prisoner/War
A, Kersten,
40/10,
With reference to your letter of 15th instant, I have to inform
you and those whom you represent, that the matter of photographing
Naturalised and Australian-born internees has been referred to the
Defence Authorities and the instructions are applicable to all
persons,
(Sgd) R, Holman
Lieut 0-Colonel,
Commandant, Concentration Camps.
1 irTT'TI nfflr —iritmi N 'VR r i r' -MI r IHI—IIIBH I i I IJLI U. N ■ MJ il l
German Concentration Camp, Liverpool
23rd, fey 1917.
To His Excellency
The Right Honorable Sir Ronal Crawford Monro Ferguson P.C.,
Governor General of the Commonwealth, (C.M.G,


Your Excellency,
We, the undersigned, representing the Naturalised
and Australian Born British Sub je ct s a t present interned in the
Liverpool Concentration Camp, humbly desire to record our most
emphatic protest against an order of the Defence Department, which
compelled us to submit to photographing in batches with numbers
attached to each of us.
We had previously appealed to the Minister through the Camp
Commandant and the Official Visitor for an exemption from this
order, expressly because we consider that such order is an un-
warranted encroachment on our liberty, and savours of methods
employee! " Criminal Investigation Departments,
We fear that these Photographs will be used for the purpose
of shadowing and persecuting us after our liberation, and their
reproduction in Australian arid Foreign publications would be high-
ly damaging to cur future welfare and reputation in the eyes of
our fellow citizens, as well as a standing menace to the resump-
tion of our citizenship in the Commonwealth after our release,
We therefore humbly pray, that Your Excellency may inter-
vene en our behalf, with a view of having the exemption asked for
placed in force, and the respective plates destroyed,
We beg to remain, Your Excellency's
obedient servants,
(Sgd) H 0 T, Eime W 0 Ruhno A c Kersten J„Gloe
President Secretary President Secretary
Australian Native Association Association of Naturalised
British Subjects.
Federal Government House,
Melbourne, Bth June,l9l7
Dear Sir,
I am directed by His Excellency the Governor-General
to acknowledge the receipt of your letter of the 23rd ultimo, pro-
testing against an order of the Defence Department compelling a
number of prisoners of war to be photographed in batches, with
numbers attached, which His Excellency has forwarded to the Prime
Minister for the attention of the Commonwealthe Government,
Y ou r s fa ith f u 11 y,
Mr c H. T„ Eime, Sgd, George Steward
German Concentration Gamp
Liverpool 0
■rsmrww'
• -T*tun~r T .vr^rt: v-#«c*3.- t* j-tirxr'.sir*
Liverpool, 20th October, 191?.
Dear Sir,-
Referring to your communication of June Bth ; in which
you state that His Excellency had forwarded to the Prime Minister
for the attention of the Commonwealth Government our letter of
protest against an order of the Defence Department, with regard
to the photographing of Australian Subjects who are interned, I
desire to draw His Excellency T s attention to the fhet that nothing
further has been heard of the matter.
We regard the question as a serious menace to the dignity and
future protection of the persons in question, and are, therefore,
still strongly of opinion that the plates should be impounded, if
not destroyed, to prevent their being used as explained in our
earlier communication to His Excellency,
Yours faithfully,
The Official Secretary
Sgdc Ho T, Eime
His Excellency the Governor
for the Australian Subjects
interned at Holdsworthy,
Gene ra 1 of Austra 1 ia ,
Melbourne e
crgrra-rsasxrv r. «


Federal Government House,
Melbourne, 29th October, 191?
Dear Sir,- directed ky His Excellency the Governor-Geneial
to acknowledge a. receip? of year letter of the 20th instant,
which His Excellency has forwarded to the Prime Minister for
the attention of the Commonwealth Government.
Yours faithfully,
UV U T ■R'-IMFL (Sad) George Steward Lt.-Col.,
Geraan" Concentration Official Secretary to
Cam p j H. E. the Governor-General,
Liverpool, Hew South Wales.
Federal Government House,
Melbourne, 17th November. 191?
T)gQ w Six*
'in continuation of my letter of the 29th ultimo
regarding the reppesentation contained in your letter of rhe
20th October and on a previous occasion, I have to
inform you that-the Government have notified that ir is nor
proposed to take any action in connection therewith.
* ' * Yours faithfully,
Sgd. George Steward
Mr w T Fime Lt,-)Col.
* German"concentration Camp, Official Secretary to
Holdsworthy. H.E. the Governor-General.
Liverpool. 29th October, 1917-
S i TT
We are desirous of taking advantage of the opportunity
of your visit to this Camp to secure a personal interview with
y ° U 'There are important and urgent matters affecting Australian
Subjects interned in this Camp which we desire to place
you, and which we are informed by the Hon, P. M. Glynn are to
be given early Cabinet consideration.
As a result of such interview, we are confident, that you
will be in a better position to deal effectively with these
matters when they are brought up before Cabinet,
Hoping that this request may be favourably considered,
We have the honour to be,
Sir,
Your obedient servants.
Sgd, A, W, R, 3D©chert A. Kersten
On behalf of interned Australian Subjects,
The Hon. the Minister of State for Defence,
care the Commandant,
Liverpool Concentration Camp c
Concentration Camps, Australia#
Liverpool, Ist November, 1917.
Prisoner/ War,
A< Kersten, 4Q/lO„
I have to inform you for future guidance that all correspon-
dence to the Minister of Defence should be forwarded througa
the proper channel. Letter returned herewith.
* Sgd. R. Holman, Lt. Colonel
Commandant, Concentration Camps.
The Commandant. _ Liverpool, 2nd November, 1917.
Concentration Camps,, Liverpool.
S*" r
We have your letter of the Ist inst,, returning our
letter of the 29th tub., addressed to the Hon. the Minister for
X)ef»rice. in your care, and we regret very much thaw our requos*


$o interview the Minister ms not delivered to him.
There is nothing in the Gamp Regulations to the effect that
requests for a personal interview should net "be s&di to S3? glaeed
■before the Minister or any other Government Offiaial whilst h§
may "be officially visiting the Camp s and w® thsvafere do not ®Offl-
,l4x*tr*.-«»,w »■, -rs _ __ % 1 1 . _ 1- X V-
prehend your reference to forwarding correspondence through the
proper channel.
We shall he obliged if you will point out in which respect
we have failed to observe the Quaternary prosodura,
Yours sincerely s
(Sgd) A. W, R. Dechart A . Kersten
On behalf of interned Australian Subjects
The Commandant, Heldeworthy, November 26th, lfl7«
Concentration Camps, Liverpool *
Sir
'We beg to confirm our letter of the 2nd inst, and shall b®
glad to receive your early reply.
Yours faithfully,
(sgd) A. w, R, Dochert A, Kerstan
On behalf of interned Australian Subject®,
1 '-.ifcj f'-** >£***£* "li
Liverpool, I",S*W« f tfovembe? 28th* 1917*
Prisoners of War,
Dechert & Kersten*
With reference to your letter of the
26th instant , I have to inform you that letters to the Minister
for Defence should "be addressed to him at the Be fence Department *
Melbourne * when they will be forwards & by post in the usual tajf# •
Sgd, J. P, Allsopp
Ifojor for Lt* Colonel
Saraantot, C ohc&ntv&ll on Camps*
»«V **v»
Tile Commandant,, Liverpool; Bth Be comber # 1917♦
Concent rat ion femes , Liverpool,,
Dear Sir,-
-MIM" WVV 4M Vw*' ..U* «• W.
¥3 thank you for your letter of the 28th ts.lt* s having
reference to ours of the 2nd and 26th Movemter* We
however, to again ask whether any regulation exists which pre-
cludes our addressing, in care of the Commandant f the Minister
or any other Government Officer, who may he on an offleial visit
to this Camp, a request for a personal interview*
The sub ject of our letter to the Hon* Minister an im~
pcrtant one, and, as under the cirenmstancas * and in view of it#
contents , the letter could he addressed in no other wagr wo feel
that we are justified in seeking a sound reason for it# non~-
delivery.
Yours sineerely*
A* W* B* Beekerfc A* ISeretie®
On behalf of interned British Saahjeet#
Prisoners of War, Liverpool* 12th Beeeatotf,, 1917*
A, Be chert and A. Eersten
With reference to your letter of the Sth instant re nosn-«^6#livW?3r
of letter addressed to the M&ndLster for Befemee* Iff Sw-V#
any complaint to male non-felivery of the lett## 1®
'ouesti'on., yoa should f»arl arame to Befenoe
S©&» 1*
fejor. 5 for It* ©olenel
<3&ngs«


The Commandant Liverpool? i/-uu 7
Concentration Camps 0
-J ;"•> r"V
Dear Si^ 1 *"*
'' we have ycur letter of the 12th inst,, hut it-
to us that our previous letters have not "been fully ccxnprenericiea,
Our original letter to the Minister- was re turn gat« us : >.tn one
intimation that for our future guidance. all correspondence
the Minister should he forwarded through the proper channel-
We have ashed to he informed in which way we have faixeu
comply with the regulations governing correspondence, buc nave
so far received no enlightenment o
If we have transgressed the regulations, we have no com-
plaint to make, hut for our future guidance we desire to know
in which respect we have failed to observe them.
Yours sincerely,
Sgd. A. W, R. Dechert A. Kersten
On behalf of interned Australian Subjects
rxandw-' * —t •r.ra-rr:y.':
vxr. xr~*zz**r*
The Commandant. Liverpool,, 4th January. 1918 c
C oncen tra ti on Camps .
Dear Sir 5 - n ~ n „
Our letter addressed to you unuer c.a c,e of the l/tii
December. on the question of correspondence with the Minister
for Defence, remains unanswered, %
Before taking the matter further, we await the courtesy
of a reply thereto o
Your H sincerely s
Sgd 0 AW. O H ; Dechert A, Kersten
On behalf of interned Australian Subjects
CT'IX v~.7iVTXJonrr.rrv.rx~z:<sx- - ' r ~ " r ■ rr "- ...ST
Liverpool r 12th February, 1918•
Sir, -
On the 29th October last, anticipating the vi n., 0 %hi ch y osr
made to this Camp a few days later, we a dares sea a leuter 10
you in care of the Ccramanda 11 1 c agking for an 1 nrerv leww 1 th
you' to discuss important and urgent matters affecting the in-
terests of Australian Subjects interned here, A copy of this
letter and the succeeding correspondence with the Camp Comman-
dant is attached hereto,
VIC* 2.4 V r- KJ V.-V v vw . - - . «
We shall be glad to learn whether our original j.erter of the
29th October was returned to us under your instructions. and, if
not, whether you approve of the action of the Commandant m so
intercepting our representations to you.
Yours etc.
Sgd, A, W e Rc Dechert A, Kersten
On behalf of interned Australian Subjects,
The Hon the Minister for Defence.
Melbourne
evr • w. XITXT. jwrariuv'xr- "rvi.
■ J- " :•
Memorandum for Department of Defence,
A.W.R.Dechert & Melbourne, 19th February, 1910.
A.W,HeDechert &
A e Kersten
Concentration Camp, Liverpool,
7/ith reference to your Retter of the 12th February, you are me
formed that letters intended for the Minister of Defence, Mel-
bourne. should be sent to the Department of Defence., Melbourne
through the post,
Sgd, To Trumble
Secretary,
rr- ■.TZzrv-arr- -JZTXZTZ~\±±mmm). tju&uatmtsa


Liverpool, 22nd February, 1918.
His Honour Justice Harvey,
Offioial Visitc r e
Sir,- Re Canteen Prices*
We are instructed "by the Executive Committees of our
Associations to complain to you about the exorbitant price
charged by the Canteen for letter paper., nsunely, one penny for
two sheets and two envelopes, * Thin is about .three times the
price ruling in Sydney for similar quality paf»er, We cannot
understand the motive which prompts the Authorities to make suoh
an absurd charge, and will thanH you to have thS matter"-en -
quired into.
Respect fully yours,
Sgdc A 0 Xsrsten .X,A a M„" Schulz E* Schra pel ~A, W,R. Lecher t
President pre Secretary
Association of HaturaUsed
& & 4" r\'& yo
«•- J* U-Oli ' J
Secretary
Ass ocia ticn
Australian
British Subjects
Born Subj
• V -r -TZMSCs zrstzzrxr.? r.rx.z r .tsrr:: ,r> c*Jgy-r: t- T *
Liverpool. 22nd Eebrua vy 1918.
His Honour Mr. Justice Harvey,
Official Visitor Q
Sir,- Re C ens orship,
hear c .'-Us \> *.51- oy on s Executive Committees of our
Associations to bring under your notice the * correspondence
we have had with the Camp Commandant relating to communi-
cations addressed to Members of Parliament and political
Associations c We ar 0 fur ther dire cte dlO submit to you
two letters stopped by the Commandant P namely, a letter dafed
January 14th to the Editor of the "Sunday Times"
and February sth to the Associate of the Chief Justice of
the High Court, designated by the Commandant as improper.
We are instructed to protest to you against the deci-
sion of the Commandant in this matter, and to ask you to be
good enough and impress' upon the Defence Department that
the Camp Commandant must not be permitted to interfere with
this which is one cf our constitutional
righto,
As the doosisions of the Camp Commandant in these mat-
ters are. now apparently .subj eat to review by your Honour,
we trust that you will find a way out of the difficulty,
which will allow us free intercourse with our parliamen-
tary representatives o
Respectfully yours ?
Sgd. A o Herat en K„A,M c S ohul& E 9 S ohra pel A ,W t R.De chert
President for Secretary President Secretary
Association of naturalised • Association of Australian
British Subjects 0 Born Subjects,


Correspondence
conducted "by the
Association of Naturalized. British Subjects
Before the Association of Naturalized British Subjects
was founded in the Holdsworthy Camp, several interned Natur-
alized Australian Subjects had made representations to the
Official Visitor to the Camp, and to the Defence Department.
In these representations ; they had asked for an inquiry or
proper trial, and for re-consideration of the Government's
internment policy, They had also demanded preferential
treatment during the period of their internment, Some of
these letters, which all proved to be fruitless 5 are here-
with reproduced,
Holdsworthy ? May 27th. 1916.
Mr. Justice Ferguson.
Official Vis it Camp 0
O •» V.
oir,
I beg to ask for the following preferential treatment
and I think that in this respect I am speaking for most of
the Naturalized British Subjects who have been interned
through no fault of their own,
fl) That the space and accommodation afforded to me
should at least be the same as that given tc German and
Austrian Officers, that is to say.. I should be allowed at
least the space of a quarter mess instead of being crowded
together with others, ten in a mess, as at present. This
is asking for very little, as the Government provides only
the bare barrack space, without any furniture, not even a
' V ✓
bed or a stretcher being provided.
(2) That the courtesies of ordinary life should be
observed by officers and soldiers, I resent being called
"Kersten" or "that fellow Kersten", I am entitled to be
addressed as "Mr. Kersten" and I must ask for the same
respect which the Military Authorities expect from me.
At present, the internees are treated sometimes like school-
boys, and sometimes like criminals, and I for one object to
such Regulations as for instance the one compelling internees
to wear closely cropped haii%
(3) That interned business men like myself should be
allowed to write up to seven letters per week of not more
than 3 pages teach. As the Regulations stand at present,
I have either to neglect my business interests or my family,
not to speak of correspondence with foreign counties.
It is true that the Camp Regulations state that an exception
may be made with business correspondence„ This, however,
has not been done in my caee c One week I was 'Compelled by
the Commandant to reply direct to a business letter received
by him from Messrs. Grant, Meudell, and Smyth, Melbourne,
after I had already sent two letters to my family r and this
letter was not allowed to go as third letter for the week,
but counted as one of the two regulation letters for the
following week.,
(4) That kerooine .Of other heaters should be allowed
in the winter, ae the only protection the open barracks have


'erfrSP — -- unijr
-*' " " ' " ~ "Sl ~
against draught and cold, consist of the thin front blind.
If this should be impracticable, hot drinks should be given
out again at night-time. Under present conditions, the last
hot meal of the day is served at 12.45 p.m., and the last warm
drink at 4 e 45 p.m. Another alternative would be a limited
allowance of alcoholic stimulants for the winter nights, to
be bought, if necessary, at internees' own cost.
(5) That better lighting arrangements should be made.
The camp is in darkness at night-time, and only one lantern
is given out to each mess, which does not give enough light
for half the number of the mess to read or write,
(6) That in accordance with the British practice, as
described in the daily papers some time ago, two days per
month excluding time taken up by travelling should be allowed
to interned business men to attend to their business at their
domicile, the fares and guards'expenses for such journeys to
be borne by the Government.
Yours respectfully,
Sgd, A. Kersten.
G.C.C. Liverpool, 12th August 1916
The Hon, The Minister for Defence,
Senator G t F, Pearce, Melbourne.
Sir;-
Re 65943
I am in receipt of yours of July 31st 1916, stating that
because of being a British Subject my requested repatriation
cannot be granted.
In consequence a British Subject is to remain a Prisoner
of War in British territory.
Your letter gives food for much thought and offers great
scope for convincing argument to prove the immorality and .in-
justice of your action interning naturalised British subjects
without trial and international consequences bound to arise
therefrom. With the material thus thrust into my hands, I hope
to be able tc appeal to your reason even at this late date and
to show how the interests of Australia and the British Crown
are being endangered by the principle adopted by you. imprison-
ing me without trial and confiscating my property.
I trust you will give this letter your personal attention
unci hand it tor perusal and consideration of its contents to
the Hen, the Prime Minister in order that your Government may
see itself in the light the present neutral, hostile and allied
miiona view your actions, bound to be remembered by them for
all time to come, and by which the .Australian people are in-
evitably' to judge the labour Party after the war, when the facts
are lucidly presented to them by your political opponents.
Your letter says, in effect, that because I am a British
subject„ lam to continue to suffer the intolerable hardships
of imprisonment I needed no longer suffer had I remained an
alien subject of the Austrian-Hungarian Crown: because lam
a British Subject, interned, in British territory, I cannot now
enjoy and participate in the advantages and protection the
Aus t r ian -H.un.ga.. r ian. Crown is able to offer and extend, to its
mm interned subjects in British (enemy} territory. It is
fence patent that by siting: a naturalisation contract with
„whe of Australia I signed away at the same time
my 1 iborty and "property and the happiness of may family.
Because 1 trusted implicitly - in all good faith - my
welfare and the welfare of nay wife and children to the pro-
tection of the British Grown, promising and giving in return
loyal, service beyond any dispute to the British Crown, I am
to be continued to be treated by the British Grown as a crimi-
nal; and outlaw and an outcast of all nations, a latumlised


British Subj ec t,
And, as if that in itself were not sufficient, my
family in addition must continue to suffer as in the past.
They have been treated as criminals by you, as the conditions
you continue to offer me and to my family, if they should
ever forget themselves and visit me again, are conditions
worse than offered to convicted felons confined in a .peni-
tent iary^
All that I have endured and must continue to endure,
because I am a loyal British Subject, living under the
British Blag, having become prominent in the mercantile
community of the Southern Hemisphere as a successful and
respected business man with not a blemish on my character.
Enemy Origin,
In spite of being a naturalised British subject, despite
the fact that you cannot prove against me one act of disloyalty,
and I challenge you to do so, you imprison me and confiscated
my business and possessions in Australia because « as you say-
i am of enemy origin.
Has it ever occurred to you that the countries of their
origin of -almost all Naturalised British subjects have at one
time and another, even within the last century, been enemy
countries as well as allies of Great Britain?
And is it not possible that even in the near future,
especially if Britain should win this war, history will
repeat itself, and that Britain's present allies may become
her future enemies, and that her present enemies may again
be her allies?
And, in view of Great Britain's policy, latterly evolved
to treat her naturalised subjects of temporary enemy origin
as enemies, to imprison them without trial, to confiscate
their property and outlaw them, does not this fact force
every naturalised British subject, of whichever country of
origin, to reconsider his position, and weigh carefully the
value of that protection by virtue of his naturalisation,
in case of war between his adopted and home country? Must
not, in consequence of that policy evolved, and in view of
the facts, every naturalised British subject consider the
risk he runs remaining such?
Will-not every naturalised British subject say to
himself that it is dangerous to remain such, that the pos-
sibility exists ; in case of war between Britain and his country
of origin, that he may lose all his possessions without a
chance of recovery by virtue'of - being a naturalised British
subject that his Tights and person and family may be out-
raged by the British-'Crown, and .by natural born British sub-
jects, with impunity - become an outcast of the family of
nations, to rot in prison camps, outlawed and forsaken by
all nations?
You have deliberately taken from me besides my liberty
and property the right of appeal to the law courts under
■Habeas Corpus Act; you have prevented me under the clause
of the Mar Precautions Act from seeking legal protection and
redress from persons who have slandered and libelled my fair
name, and thereby encouraged others to indulge in that heroic
an d na tio na 1 pa sti m e e
Bo not all these facts serve as a warning to the subjects
of all nations in future never to trust themselves to the
British Flag as a thing too dangerous to embrace?
Is it not the duty of the Governments of all nations,
when in future you send your immigration agents t.o their
respective countries to endeavour to persuade likely emi-
grants to come to your shores,, to warn their subjects likely
to emigrate of the visk 'they run, the likely loss of liberty


and of all that they may possess, by becoming naturalised under
the British Blag?
i i « i
Is it not the duty of all foreign Governments to prohibit
the landing of your agents in their countries to protect their
likely emigrants in view of the fact that not in one instance
were you able to prove, and did not attempt to prove that a
naturalised British subject interned during the war without
trial, had broken his oath of allegiance either by word oi
mouth or deed?
Irrespective of the facts that the United Kingdom Has
not interned its naturalised British subjects, the British
.Flag - as nailed to the Australian Flagpole by you
must
nevertheless meet with universal censure wherever it flies
for permitting a section of its possessions 9 to wit" Australia,
to withold liberty and justice without tenable reasons from -
and to persecute, malign and s.lander - persons, and confiscate
their property, who by accident of birth ami misled by a belief
in British fairplay, emigrated to these shores and became natural-
ised British subjects,
The sub-leader of the Sydney.. "Morning Herald" of August
9th say the Prime Minister recognises the necessity of organi-
sation" to increase the population of Australia by immigration
from five to even a hundred millions to help carry the burden
of war., and that M he is determined that no obstacles shall be
thrown in the way of a rapid increase in our population," But
the greatest obstacle in the way to realisation of his dream
will prove to be the treatment, of. naturalised British subjects
in Australia, when war hysteria of this nation permitted its
Goverranent to p ev petrate deeds centrary to the morals of all
nations c Do you" think European and American likely immigrants
will find an extra inducement, besides helping you to carry the
war burden. in. the knowledge that at the same time the more
than likely possibility .exists, if they do come here f to be out-
lawed and outraged when Britain is again at war? Is it not
an insult to the intelligence of nations to invite them to send
you immigrants, may your promises and contracts offered be ever
so favourable?' They will, by that time for certain, have abun-
dant evidence in their possession that the Australian Government
is permitted by its people to break the most sacred promises and
contracts whenever the time of war seems advantageous for them
to reap where others sowed, that the result of an emigrant's
life's labour may be wiped out by the stroke of a pen, that the
origin and aim of the Australian Government, i,© 6 security and
protection of property, applies only to natural born British
subjects of fourth generations and upwards, a special code of
laws subject to the whims of these natural born, being applic-
able to the naturalised British subjects even unto the third
generation, Is it reasonable to assume that upon such inequity
this fair Country can afford to build?
It appears to me that it is high time that you retrace your
steps and'alter them before it is too late and make good the
damage you have done now before this war is over, thereby proving
that you admit a wrong done, giving evidence of good faith that
these deplorable conditions will never happen again.
But all the promises you make, all the damages you may pay
after the war can never help you to influence likely emigrants
of foreign nations that they may think themselves secure under
the laws of the Coramonwealth should they come here.
Should your Government, however, decide even in view of
all these facts stated.- nor/to alter its policy in the treatment
of naturalised Britishbubjects t . I beg :taave to ask whether it
has ever occurred to you that after all the responsibility of
all the unjust and immoral actions of your Government in the
light of international Jaws and usages, all the illtreatment of N4


naturalised British subjects, must fall to one discredit o
the Labour Party, that after the national hysteria
has subsided, the facts as stated still remain, and that
these facts in the hands of skilful political opponents
will eventually and inevitably be used against you, and
your political" undoing, as in a time of crisis, when absolute
powers vere thrust into your hands, you were incapaole oO
cherish the trust and abused the powers given you, thereby
hindering the future development of this Country, having
brought upon Australia ostracism of all nations "by them
witholding you emigrants.
It is always well to remember that nations whether
they win or lose in war, do not die, that Australia will
flourish again - hungry for workers ~ and that on its few
pages of history as few discrediting records should appear,
as is humanely possible. ,
I therefore write you this letter with all trie sincerity
and frankness one man owes another and that ycu reconsider your
actions of the past and adjust your future conduct so that
Australia may be able to stand the keen criticism of all
nations in the happier days to come,
I have the honour to be, Sir,
Yours faithfully,
Sgd. Julius Blau
UiiWinr:?' 1
Liverpool, August 1916.
The Secretary,
Department of Defence, Melbourne
Si r *■" ?
I received your memorandum of the 24-th August, 1916,
in which you informed me that copies of certain acts of
Parliament ounv.v. •». ci - ' J ' * ,« /-># _" ' ._ „. _
by m y letter of August jbh ipib. addressed to "one Government
Printer "are not availably " Does this mean that the Govern-
ment Printer has at present" stock 01 t/iese copies, and vhat
X can get them when available, or am .1, as a Britisn subject
not allowed by the Defence Department to have copies of these
Acts and Regulations, which may be of vital importance to me
and my business?
Awaiting the favour of any early reply,
Yours truly,
8g d < A « Ke rst en
[■*- • W .T
Teh Secretary, L3.verpoo3.Septemoe L 10on, 1910.
Department 0f Defence ;J Melbourne c
Sir -
I beg to confirm my let.rer 01 August 3b th, relating to
copies of certain Acts of Parliament and Regulations I desire
to obtain j and would be glad, to receive your early reply.
There are so many of these Regulations coming ouo that
it is impossible for an interned business man to keep pace
with them, How is an internee to mow whether he has to
put in re turn 0 under these regmm ulO ns or whether he must
do this or not do that- if there are no copies availaole to
him. The Camp Commandant does not know anything about them,
and no Commonwealth or other Government Gazettes are kept
here for the use of internee 3 v/e can no al/v&gb make vr ips
to our solicitors and .such, trips• ecus**, money,. uiercfol e
kindly let me have the con. ; .. c A ... nave asveG tor or 00 s u up a
notice in the Camp the. t wo ' vves ana cegv.icu * . 'Us vo no 0 apply
to interned civilians, AR. - A"' *0 NEED V " DU r aoout them,
unless the Camp Oommar iv u res tuiw. instructions the
contrary in writing,
Yours truly
Sgd 5 A. Kersten


Department of Defence,
Melbourne, 29th Septemberl9l6.
Memorandum for
A. Kersten,
40th Company 10th Mess,
Concentration Camps, Liverpool,
In reply to your letters of the 3°th August and lBth
September, I beg to inform you that the information you.equire
will be found in the Manual of Emergency Legislation with sup-
plement, published by Critchley Parker, The price of the Manual
is 7/6 and of the first supplement 5/~ and there is no objec-
tion to your sending an order to any Bookseller.
Acting Secretary
Koldsworthy, l6th November, 1916.
Lieut. Col. Holman, D. 8.- 0, ,
Commandant, Camp.
Sir,-
There is a general feeling of unrestrained dissatisfaction
existing amongst the naturalised Australian subjects interned
in this Camp. In the great majority of cases, these internees
are not aware of the reason wiay they have been deprived of their
liberty and practically no one has been given an opportunity to
show cause why they should be kept here.
Those concerned are mostly farmers and business men whose
sole interests are in this* country. As the Hon. the Minister
for Defence stated to the Conference of Premiers in Adelaide in
May last that military necessity would be the only cause for
internment, and that the Government was not justified to intern
anyone for social or industrial reasons, we now beg to ask you
to put before the Minister our plea for release.
The state of public opinion and the recruiting campaign
in the earlier phases of the war probably were factors in prompt-
ing the Minister to sanction the internment of many of us. The
mind of the general public has, however, calmed down consider-
ably and our fellow citissra throughout Australia are largely
convinced of our loyalty to this country. They now recognise
the needless hardships placed upon us and upon our families by
our internment - also the huge financial losses already caused
to us and to the Gos»onwealth,
In view of these fticts, we hope that your representations
will induce the Minister to favourably consider our early release
Most of us naturalised internees have farms or homes to go
to - sadly needing our presence - and we as a body would loyally
submit to any reasonable restriction of our movements I'f our
unconditional release should be ddemed inadvisable.
For and on behalf of over 100 natur-
alised internees
Carl Zteller
Sgd, F. W. Meyer
A. Kersten
The following correspondence was conducted
on behalf of the Members of the Naturalised
British Subjects Association.
G. C. C. 4th January, 1917.
Lieut. Col, Kolman, D.5.0.,
Head Quarters.
Sir, -


I e That thoy are now allowed to write four letters of
words weekly
11, That they may receive visitors every second Sunday from
10 a.m, to 5" p.m. under the same happy conditions as arranged
by you on Christmas lay
With reference to the proposed new Camp for Australian
subjects, we noted the following general conditions:
(l) That our Committee should submit a plan of the new
Camp, showing provisions made for families - for single men
and for utility purposes
(2) That the eastern boundary of the Camp should be the main
Liverpool Road, the internees to be allowed a two-mile radius
north, south and west
3) That water be laid on to the Camp by the Authorities
4) Rations to be supplied on the same scale as at Bourke -
A cook and a butcher to be paid by the Government
(5) That available second-hand building material and timber
from the saw-mill be provided as well as needful tools end
the assistance of practical carpenters when necessary - the
saw-mill to provide firewood also
(6) That the expense of bringing the families of internees
to Holdsworthy bo borne by the Government as far as is prac-
ticable.
(7) Thmilies at present in receipt of an allowance to continue
receiving same
(8) That arrangements be made for free medical and dental
treatment at the Camp, and that a nurse be provided when
necessary
You will find the above to cover the points so far
raised, and conceded by you, and we will be glad to receive
a confirmation thereof so as to avoid any possible misunder-
standing ,
Yours respectfully,
Sgd, President Secretary.
Head Quarters,
Liverpool, March §3rd, 1917.
Prisoner of War J, w, Staub,
Secretary, Australian naturalized British Subjects,
I have to inform you that the relaxation of the Regulations
affecting the correspondence of Naturalised British Subjects
is now withdrawn, and accordingly all correspondence will need
to comply with the provisions of Rule 31 the rules for the
custody of, and the maintenance of discipline among prisoners
of war. Please notify ail the persons concerned.
Sgd, J, P. Alisopp, Major
for Lt, Col. Commandant.
Liverpool, 28th February, 1917.
Mr, Adrian Knox, K 0 C. ,
Northfield Chambers,
Philip St, , Sydney.,
Sir, -
Further to our discussion of a vital question concerning
us, during our interview on Saturday last, we beg novr to put
before you our views in the matter in writing, and we shall
be grateful if you will take the matter to the Adjutant-General
in Melbourne for consideration.
There are a number of Naturalized British subjects in
this Camp, who have been brought here by the Authorities from
the different States of Australia. Some of them have not
seen their families for years. Although the general rule of
centralisation has been adopted by the Defence Department, it


is that Camps are still in existence in all States,
not only as collecting stations, out also containing men
arc kept there for special reasons.
The great majority of married, naturalised subjects natur-
ally wish for nothing better than to be at least sent back tp
their original States to be nearer to their families and. able
to see them once in a while . There cannot be more than about
from 60 to 80 men in all t who would be affected; so the central-
isation scheme would certainly hardly be disturbed.
We shall be glad if you will plead for us in this matter,
which we have very much at heart.
We are, Sir,
Yours most respectfully,
For the A. IT. B< S,
' • -yjrniw ■ nwi-Jif
Liverpool, 28th February, 1917.
Mr, Adrian Knox K c C,,
ITorthfield Chas„, Philip St. Sydney
Sir
Reverting to our interview of Saturday last, we beg to
submit to you the various points discussed, and _ e shall b«t
glad if you will lot us know at your earliest convenience if
wo have understood you correctly as to your decisions a.i.m
answers o ,
(1) You have received an answer from the Defence Depart -
ment with regard to special treatment of the Naturalised British
Subjects, which says that the matter has been considered and
cannot be granted, x
(2) The Department has decided to spend sol S pOO to ligJio
the dust nuisance in the Gamp
(3) Iron beds will be provided as fast as possible to com-
bat the vermin
(4) You say that it would be quite useless to bring again
up the question of doe entaa lis&tion of camps. You agree now ever
to receive a memorandum from us on the matter and you will be
good enough to put it before the Adjutant eeneral, Melooume
during your ensuing visit,
(?) Our request to shift persons suffering from-eye troubles
over to a dust free place near the hospital you agre-o also to
bring before the same authority if a memorandum is sent to you
in time, _
We shall be much obliged if you will kindly con f Grip the
contents of this letter c
We are. Sir,
Ycurs most respectfully
for the A, IT, 3 C 3,
'-v» ryiMTi
Sydney. 3 r Ma r ch, 1917 •
Memorandum
Mr, J, 01oe
Sir, -
I acknowledge receipt of your letter of the 28oh mst,
with two (2) memoranda enclosed.
I confirm your statement therein of the result of cur
interview on the 24th ultimo.
Yours truly,
8g d, Adr ia n Kn ox
Official "Visitor.


Liverpool, Marj Ijth, 1917 «
Lt , Colonel Hclman,D.S.O
C omma n da. Nt, Camp.
Sir. -
We have been instructed by our Association to enquire
if the Military Authorities are contemplating any modific-
ations in the treatment of interned naturalised Australian
subjects, and if there is any likelihood of any of our members
being released, and on what terms. We have noticed that,
almost every week internees are released and we are anxious
to -know whether now that the elections are over there is
a chance for our members.
w© understand that a number of civilian internees in
England are being released on parole and given such employment
as enables them to maintain themselves and their families,
and not to be a further drag on the Government resources.
Awaiting the favour of your reply,
Yours respectfully,
Sgd. A. Kersten J. Gloe
Pre s i den t Se creta ry
A 0 IT, 3. S,
Head (Quarters,
Liverpool, May lBth 191$
Mr. Zimmerman,
Chief Company Commander, G c C. C,
Please inform the representatives of the Australian and
naturalised subjects that - the matter of separate or pre-
ferential treatment has been several times represented to
the authorities by me, and I have been informed in no doubt-
ful way that the persons referred to are to receive no special
privileges 0 Persons are sometimes released for medical and
other particular reasons ; but it is considered that the con-
ditions or circumstances as outlined would have no influence
on the Government, and I am not prepared to recommend any
further consideration of the matter in view of the decisions
already arrived at,
Sgd. R, Holinan,
Lieuto Colonel
Liverpool, 31st 1917.
The Honourable Minister of State for Defence,
Melbourne.
Sir, -
We beg to draw your attention to a report on the "Booth-
Gruban Case," published in the "Sydney Morning Herald" of May
l6th, 1917* which we beg to enclose a copy. We should be
glad if you would kindly give the following requests your
favourable consideration.
(l) As there is apparently a Court of Appeal in existence
in Great Britain, which has power to investigate the circum-
stances leading to the arrest and internment of naturalised
British subjects - to use your power conferred on you under
the War Precautions Act to follow the British example, and
have a similar court introduced here.
(2) To direct such court or Board of Enquiry to make
full enquiries into the cases of any naturalised internee
who desires such, investigation f to hear the internee's defence
against any charge* thai your Department or the At tor ney-Genera lb
Department may lay against him, in justification of his arrest


and internment, or detention,
(3) To confer on such tribunal power to -order the release
of any naturalised person, against whom no offence against the
public interests cr the .safety of the empire can be proved,
(4) To authorise your subordinate military officers to
give immediate effect to such release on receipt of the tribunal's
order - either absolutely - or on just and reasonable terms, if
an unconditional release should be considered undesirable in the
public interest.
We may mention that we have approached the Gamp Commandant
and the Official Visitor on the subject, but they were unable to
give -us any satisfaction.
Thanking you in anticipation of your early reply,
Yours respect fully,
Sgd, A, Kersten J 0 Gloe
Pr e s i de nt Secretary,
A, H. B. S.
Copy of "Sydney Morning Herald" 16th fey. 1917
8.0 OT H-7 G R U B A IT CASS
£4,750 damees allowed
London p May 14th
The action was concluded in the King's Bench division to-day in
which John Gruban sued Handel Booth M C P, for damages in depriving
him of his business connection with the firm of Haigh and Gru-
ban of Oldham of which plaintiff was chairman c
A verdict ms returned for the plaintiff, the damages being
assessed a t £47 70,
The jury found that Handel Booth had falsely and fraudulently
representaed he could, prevent Gruban being attacked, and had
fraudulently represented that the Ministry of Munitions-had.
informed him Grubah would Ve' interned unless he resigned from
the Ccnmny, The' jury .did not find that Booth had caused, plain-
tiff to be interned,
% •
Mr c 'Justice Coleridge Ain summing up. said there was little
doubt that Booth strove to'prevent Gruban's appeal (against his
internment as a German) before a tribunal being successful, al-
though Booth knew the tribunal had decided upon his release,
He spoke about the spy cupboard in Gruban's office. The cup-
board was a perfectly harmless thing, and fed nothing to do with
Germany.
In concluding his summing up, His Honour impressively re-
minded the jury that tire Germans were ruthless, barbarous foes,
but the plaintiff was entitled to an unbiassed judgment,
■" 1 >.::
Department of Defence,
Memorandum for Melbourne, 6th June, 1917*
A, Kersten, Concentratio
With reference to your letter of the 3 ls * addressed to
the Minister for Defence, relative to a report on theßooth-
Gruban case, and asking for the institution of a court ap-
peal here, you are informed thai t it is not proposed to make any
Alteration in the present system "with regard to the internment
or release of internees.
Sgd. T, Trumble,
iScting Secretary.
mz.-X&riT?. %*
?risomer 0f War H-ead Quar~o©rs $ Lx v erpoo.t 8 xJuly _l7
A. Kerstea
The enclosed letter addressed to the Secretary of Defence and
sued'by vou and Prisoner of War Gloe on behalf of the Hafur-
CO v U


a Used British Subjects interned at this Camp has "been re-
turned by the Department with instructions .that same be
returned to you and that you be informed that letters
couched in such terns will not be received by Head Quarters.
Sgd, Ro Holman Lt t Col.
C omraa ndant. Cone en tration Camps.
Holdsworthy, June 30th, 1917.
Memorandum for Acting Secretary Trumble £
Department of Defence, Melbourne.
We acknowledge receipt of your memo dated June 6th..
and note that it is not proposed to make any alteration in
the "present" system of internment or release. Does this
mean that no court of appeal for internment cases will be
established here before the war has come to an end? If
this is the meaning of your reply, will the Minister of
Defence and the Attorney G-eneral permit an appeal to the
British Tribunal and give uo every facility to reach that
tribunal?
We may say, that we have no grievance against the
"present" interning system, The mere fact that very few
people have been interned during the last twelve months
shows that saner counsels are prevailing now. Personal
animosity, business and trade jealousy and the deliberate
lies and hysterical outbursts of newspapers like the "Mirror"
the "Australian Mining Standard" etc. are evidently no
longer considered sufficient reasons to deprive an Australian
subject of his liberty, as under the "old" system of intern-
ment .
In our opinion the British Government has only acted in
a humane and just manner in allowing their own subjects an
appeal against the British warrant,
If the Commonwealth Minister of Defence denies us an
opportunity to ventilate our grievances in an Australian
Court, will he then at least facilitate our Appeal to the
British Tribunal?
Sgd. A. Kersten J, Gloe
Preside nt Sec ratary
Association of Naturalised British Subjects
The Secretary, Liverpool, July 19th, 1917«
Department of Defence, Melbourne,
Sir,-
Our letter of June to you was returned to us
through the Camp Commandant, tfho informed us that the
Department of Defence would not receive letters "couched
in such terms". The Official Visitor has been good enough
to-day to enlighten us on the subject, to explain to us
that two wrongs do not make a right, and to advise us to
carry on our correspondence in a courteous manner, though
that rule might not always be observed by our correspon-
dents. As Mr. Knox's views are usually sound, we have
decided to follows hie advice.
In that last letter of ours, we had asked the Minister
of Defence and the Attorney General for permission and for
facilities to apply to the British Court of Appeal for
internment oases, if the Minister refuses us an opportunity
to ventilate our grievances in an Australian Court, We here-
with beg to repeat our request, and shall be glad to receive
your early reply.
Yours faithfully.
Sgd A c Kersten J 0 Gloo
Pros iden t Soereta ry
Association of Naturalised British Subjects.


The Naturalised German
I» m*m >«• *•» ««• trt tr-% t:kjl •» 4 t »:»
Dealing with the question of Naturalised Germans in
Australia. Colonel Lyster writes;-
"Pending the amendment of the British and Australian
Naturalisati on Law, we must take prompt auction' to eradicate
the danger of intrigue and place all German-horn subjects
Naturalised in Australia, and Australian subjects of German
parentage above suspicion. It is to their interest as much
as our own that action should be taken e I therefore submit
a suggestion - i Is it not desirable to ascertain from every
German (male or female) in Australia, whether he (or she) is
a Naturalized British Subject, and whether he has, subsequent
to becoming a British Subject : complied, with the recent
German Law and signed .'any undertaking t"6 retain his German
Nationality? If the British and Australian Laws do not at
the present moment prescribe that such action on the part of .a
German resident, Naturalised in Australia, is an offence, it
cannot perhaps be difficult to prove that during war ; intrigu-
ing with evil intention .with the King's enemies is a criminal
offence under The War Precautions Act, ■ < It is without question
our duty to protect ourselves against any ingenious device to
disturb the loyalty of Naturalized Subjects, If there is a
shadow of doubt in our minds, and if the War Precautions Act
does not provide the power, I would not hesitate to advocate
the immediate introduction of a special Act conveying power to
compel every German-born subject, Naturalized under British or
Australian Law to swear an oath that since the date of British
Naturalisation he has not signed any document on the invitation
of the German Government or any other authority f which would
enable him at any time , whether in or beyond Australia, to
reclaim his former German Nationality, "
\"V •».» Mi IM tX» OUJt MM* «U •«*»
Liverpool, May 7th., 1917,
To Colonel Lyster Esq,,
Challis- House, Sydney,
Sir,
Ale have read your letter, published in "The Daily Telegraph"
of May 2nd, referring to Natura 1 ized Germane „ Your suggesti.on
regarding a sworn statement to be signed by Naturalized Germans
that they have not since their Naturalization foresworn their
allegiance tc their country of their adoption,, and that all
Germa.ns wiio make suoh do clara ti on chou 1d be placed above
suspicion, is an excellent an idea indeed,, 7/e would gladly
co-operate with you to have the suggestion carried out, if
adopted by the Govemment, The scheme &hou 1d ? howevor be
supplemented by an undertaking given. by the Government to
release all interned Naturalised /Germans, who have thus
cleared their character, to compensate them for the losses
sustained through the internment and prolonged captivity and


to use all the Grown 5 o influoneo with the various State and
Federal Government departments and private employers to
reinstate these Naturalised Australian subjects in their
former or equally lucrative' pesi tiensv
. We may mention that one - third of the hundred members
of our Association took refuge in this Camp to-.escape
starvation, as they 1 ost th.eir sourc;e cf x ricorae t>n v ough the
hostile attitude of .their employers or fellow ..-.workers, and
were refused any opportunity to place themseives above sus-
picion, The remainder were interned by-warrant of the Min-
ister of Defence under Regulation 55 and 56a of The War
Precautions Act, In spite of the many and repealed applic-
ations for a full and.public enquiry into their cases, and
in spite of the Regulations .of the Suspected Inquiry Order
1915; no charge was ever laid against them, and no oppor-
tunity was ever given to them to defence, themselves against
such charges and pfcit themselves right .in the eyes of their
fellow-citizenso We strongly resent the attitude of the
Government, towards cur members, most of' whom have been
Australian, Citizens and taxpayers. for fifteen years and
longer' (thirty-five for more than twenty five years), and we
would welcome any preposition, such as the one put forward
by you that, would enable us to regain our liberty.
Yours truly,
Assn. of Natur,. Brit'. Subs.
The President, Sydney, 10th May 1917*
Assn. of Naturalised Germans,,
Sir
Your letter of the 7th instant to hand. As the purport
of my remark in the i; Daily Tele graph 5 * has been evidently
mis-interpreted, I am forced to explain that Naturalised
Germans residing in British Territory form two classes:
(1) those interned for sound reasons
(2) those not yet interned, although tinged with suspicion.
My remarks in the newspaper apply to the latter? The
policy of Germany is responsible for the situation?
Your
Association in my opinion has no claim to considerarion c
You are provided with the necessaries of life, and only suffer
from temporary loss of freedom,.whereas the whole British
-Empire, in order' to protect, the liberties oi small- nations
and her own territory and people, which includes Naturalised
Subjects, is suffering cruel and wicked torture, GO the
apparent satisfaction of a Nation .who glories in the expression-
"Gott strafe England*' e
Yours., J, S. Lyoter.
*v> l-O MM •?'» l-.» V.I V-l MM (>.» O*
Col c J, So Lysfer, Liverpool, May lsth 1917.
2 Ocean house, Sydney?
Sir.
' 'ln reply to, your letter of the 10th instant, you are
well aware of the fact that the Naturalised Germans in
Australia are unable to dictate, and'powerless to interfere
with the policy of Germany or Great Britain. Your remarks
in this connection, as applied to members of our Association
are therefore beyond the mark?
It appears- that we have indeed misinterpreted the purport
of your letter to the "Daily Telegraph 11 , When xve decided to
write to you. we were under the :i,mpres si on that the propo-
sition put forward by. you wa-s- prompted by an honest desire
to show the Naturalised -Germagis - 'and incidentally the
members of our Association ' a way out of the awkward
position in which they are-finding themselves to-day. Your
letter to the President of.our Association has convinced us,
however, that your real intention was apparently to cast a slur
on all Naturalized Germans 'independent of their standing, their
clean and honorable records as' Australian Citizens and any
services of lasting merit they have rendered to this country.


Jfle regret that we cannot accept your verdict 0 that we have "been
"interned for sound reasons, and that our Association has no
claim to consideration,. You are no judge to decide such a
question. You have not seen the charge that was made
against us and led to our internment, which charge, "by the way,
is unknown to ourselves 5 and. you have not heard us in defence,
and your letter proves that you are not impartial and free from
"bias,
We do not think that any good purpose; would be served by
continuing this correspondence with you e But kindly allow us
to say that we took out our Naturalisation rape rs and sw ore
the oath of allegiance in the one firm belief, viz; that the
principles laid down in Magna unar oa , che Ba bea s oor pus Act,
the Bill of Rights and the Federal and State Constitution,
would be strictly observed by the Federal Government, as long
as we did not, by word or deed, forfeit our claim to the
rights and privileges of a British Subjoctc
Instead, we have been arrested and interned without
charge, without trial or proper investigation, and have
been denied every opportunity to prove any suspicion against us
as groundless c
How do you make this state of affairs agree with your *
statement that the British Empire protects "the liberty of
her own peoples, which includes Naturalized Subjects"?
Yours truly 5
Assn, of Nat, British Subjects.
mm rm mm mm mm mn --m <rm f« s*» «n
The President, Sydney, 20th May, 1917•
Assn, of Nat„ British Subjects,
Sir,
Your letter of the 15th instant to hand, I have no
desire to continue this correspondence, It is natural that
you should decline to accept my verdict, and I a rim it that I am
not called upon to investigate) the conditions and circumstances
affecting the actions of disloyal subjects. The onus of proof
of loyalty rests with yourselves. What action, if any, have
you tedcen in that direction? You possess the power to disavow
any sympathies with Britain's enemies, You can renounce and
show your disapproval of the intention.of the German Govern-
ment which seeks to ignore the sacred British Oath, which
accepted you as a British Subject c . Have you attempted to prove
your loyalty? You are undoubtedly under suspicion with thousands
ofmothers of German birth, residing in the land of their
adoption, and it is not considered necessary to intern them,
because so far their loyalty is not questioned c
In my opinion you aggravate the suspicion, attached to
Naturalized subjects of German birth by adopting and maintain-
ing an unnecessary and incorrect association, There is no
necessity for an association of Naturalized British Subjects,
and I cannot believe that subjects born in France, Italy. Russia,
and America are admitted as members 5 If the organisation is
for Naturalized subjects born in Germany, then it is easy to
understand -that in time of war,- such institutions exclusive
in their nature are fa USL 3. o o the preservation of the privileges
which loyal subjects enjoy.
"V T* Q A 'f, r»
fSgdc} J 3 So Lyster,
Col, J, So Lyster 9 Liverpool, May 251h 1917 .
ocean Kouse ? Sydney,
Sir,
W.o Y'a * c- "TV? 4 >v' *. *i csV> i'i o ' : '~V' !'• *1 -,-t ca c? v* J " nvi H
* * U .-1 ul> vy „ U- C.' •*#>' u. _V • »- • v v» A OJ. •) i •d- - r t ; M -.1 X*.V «► cl XX LX
. c'
yirifo . r-. v ' r Y\':' r '- ,"• - i r,o c-I V-r ": Cl '!* "i fil oq'n i ■*; r- n o ';" i i'"! C- V ) •' s u
We are sending you this final cemmun'icat:Lon because we think


that in viof the prominent and influential position you
are holding, T e should answer the pertinent questions you are
asking in your last letter, and try to correct your erroneous
conception of our Association and the position of its members.
Our Association was ostablisifflin this Camp about six
months ago, for the purpose of protecting the interests of
the interned naturalised British Subjects, independent of
their country of origin, to represent them with the Camp
and Federal authorities, and facilitate the work of the
Camp Commandant. We have no conneotion or affiliation with
any Naturalized person or body of such persons or any polit-
ical or other association outside the Concentration Camps.
Our rules are approved by the Camp authorities, and the
Intelligence Department. The rules do not exclude any
British subjects born in France, Italy, Russia or America
from membership. However, we do not know of any interned
Australian, whose country of birth was one of the countries
mentioned.
Very few of our members were interned under Regulation
55 of the War Precautions Act (Suspicion of disloyalty or
disaffection). A large number came into the Camp voluntarily-
in order to escape starvation, or the violence of certain
sections of the community. Now they find they cannot get
out again, All the others were interned without warrant,
or under Regulation (Hostile Origin or associations).
With the majority of our members, their release therefore
does not depend upon any proof of loyalty at all, but on
other circumstances about which we are absolutely denied
information.
We have almost exhausted the means at our disposal to
secure an investigation of our cases. Those interned under
Regulation 55 have asked that full and public enquiry may
be granted them under the Suspected Persons Fnquiry Order 1915*
Those interned under Regulation have repeatedly made
representations to the Minister of Defence, and have also
asked for an enquiry into their cases, All these steps,
all the respective applications to the Camp Commant^nt,' the
Official Visitor and the Minister of Defence, have been with»
out avail. We are now petitioning His Excellency the Govern-
or General, but if, with the Representative of the King, our
appeal should also fall on deaf ears, what should you advise
us to do then?
We do not understand your remark - "that we can renounc.e
and show our disapproval of the intention of the German Gov-
ernment, which seeks to ignore the sacred British oath which
accepted us as a British Subject". Apart from the remarkable
fact" that, by swearing the; oath of allegiance you do not become
a British Subject, but that you are dependent on the decision
of the Governor GenersLl, who may reject you or accept you as
a British Subject., as he thinks fit, the German Government has
apparently not the intention to ignore Naturalisation in a
British Dominion.. It is an undisputed fact that every male
British Subject born in Germany, and found within Germany
during the war, was interned there as an enemy.
Finally, kindly allow us to say that your letters have
been-•.of grsat interest to us , in spite of your obvious
ignorance of the recognised British tradition to consider a
fellow-citizen, so long as honorable and innocent, as he has
not been proved guilty of any offence against the community.
Under present circumstances, we do not blame you for your
sentiments. But perhaps you will now understand the strong
objection we are taking to the lack of fairplay, as shown in
our treatment as, Australian Citizens and taxpayers by the
responsible Federal Ministers. We feel confident that the
time will not be far distant when they will recognize the enorm-
ity of the mistake thoy have made in their internment policy.
Yours truly, Assn. of Nat, Brit, Subject#.


To His Excellency the Right Honourable Sir Ronald Crauford
Munro Ferguson, Governor-General of the Commonwealth.
The humble petition of the undersigned
showeth -
(1) That your petitioners are members of an association of
Naturalised British Subjects interned in the Gorman Con-
centration Camp at Liverpool, under the name of "The Associ-
ation of Haturnlised British Subjects."
(2) That the Association consists of about ICO members of
whom one-third have their homes in New South Wales, one-third
in Queensland, twelve come from Western Australia, eight from
Victoria, and four from South Australia. 46 members are over
45 years" of age - one having attained the age of 75 years -
35 members have boon in the country for 25 years or longer, 15
members have lived hero between 15 and 25 years, whilst the
abhor 50 have lived in Australia from sto 15 years, 65 arc
married, the great majority to women of Australian or British
birth, and in only 3 cases were the children of such unions
born in foreign countries; all others arc Australian born.
28 members have real property in the Commonwealth, whilst 15
own shares in Australian or British Companies. Six have boon
interned for more than two years, and 68 for more than 12 months
31 members were forced to go into Camp owing to stress of cir-
cumstances; either they could not find work, or were forced
out of positions through the hostile attitude of their fellow-
workers or had no means to enable them to continue their work
on their farms, and wore compelled to seek the protection of
the camp from the abuse and violence of hostile sections of the
community. Of the other 69 members nearly two-thirds were
arrested and interned under Regulation S&A (Hostile origin and
associations), four under Regulation 55 (Suspicion of disloyalty
or disaffection), 2 under both Regulations, whilst in twenty
cases no warrant was produced by the military or Civil Police
Of.ficcr making arrest. In cases the families of members
receive a separation allowance from the Government of ten shil-
lings for the wife and two shillings and sixpence for each child
per week.
(3) That your Petitioners ovw since they wore interned
have boon smarting under a keen sense of humiliation and in-
justice owing to the following facts :-
(a) Your petitioners consider that, being either natural
born or naturalised British subjects they should at all
times be treated as British subjects in; BO far as the .ex-
igencies of the times allow, instead of which they complain
that they - including men of repute ,in the, business com-
munity - were subjected to many indignities•such as being
handcuffed on arrest and were treated harshly by the Officers
who dealt with them.
(b) That requests (under Pa.re graph 55 of the fer Precautions
Act 1914-1916) that an investigation should tee held under the
Suspected Persons Enquiry Order 1915 have either boon refused
or ignored by the Department,and when in an.exceptional case
an enquiry has been granted and it has led to the temporary
release of the person, such person has after a short period
of liberty again been interned under Regulation S&A of the
Bar Precautions Act 1914-1916.
(c ) That representations made to the Minister of Defence
under Regulation 56k of the Par Precautions Act 1914-16 nave
in,variably invoked the same reply from '-the Secretary- of the.
Defence Department, viz., that the matter had been con-
sidered and that the applicant must remain interned. No
enquiry has been granted to any of the Bombers of the Assoc-
iation interned under this Regulation,


(&) That the Camp Regulations are unnecessarily harsh
and humiliating and have in the past been enforced in
an unnecessarily harsh mnnen and that the Authorities
a dminister ing those Regula.tions - a Ithough they rea liee
and oome are oympa the tic as to our grievances - inform us
that they are unable to give us any redress c
(4-) Li out. Col, Kolman in December last informed us in reply
to our joined demand for release that the Department had in-
vestigated our cases, but that decided that we must remain
into rno d, an d. that the offi c ia 1 Vi si 10 r Mr c Adrian Kn ox in -
formed us that the Defence -Department would not grant pre-
ferential treatment to interned Australian Subjects and that
your petitioners could not even be placed on the same footing
as interned Enemy Naval and. Military Officers at Trial Day or
the Officers and Engineers of enemy Mercantile vessels in-
turned a t 3 errima 0
(5) That th e Camp Re gu la tions provido.- t ha., t i f re dress for
alleged grievances cannot be obtained from the Camp Comnian- (
dant... the Officia 1 Visit or and the Minister for Defe.nce , an
application should be made to your Excellency,- Application
has been made to each of these Authorities for redress of
grievances which we have" been unable to obtain,
(6) Your Petitioners beg to point out' that with reference to
the claim of those who were not under arrest when they came
into this Camp but took refuge here by force of other cir-
cumstances ; such internees should be allowed to leave the
Camp when they wish to do so,' Many of them were told by
the Intelligence Officer who granted their applications for
internment that they could, leave the Camp whenever they liked,
yet when the application for release was made it was refused
by the Defence Department, As no warrant ha.s ever been shown
to them in justification of their prolonged detention their
internment appears to be illegal and unfair in view of the
assurances given by the Intelligence Officer on whose word
the internee relied before going into Camp,
(7) That your petitioners submit that the detention of 20 of
the members of this Association to whom no warrant of arrest
tog shewn when arrested and no reason given'for their intern-
ment. sticch internment was in the first instance illegal and
their continual internment a matter of grave injustice,
(8) That regarding the & ix menibors of the Association who
wore arrested under Regulation 55 of the War Precautions Act
1914-16 (Suspicion of disloyalty or disaffection) they should
bo afforded a full opportunity before a properly constituted
Court of Enquiry to defend themselves against the charges
laid against them, and the Suspected-Persons Inquiry Order
1915 put into operation when it is claimed -that these members
would, be able to disprove any. charge of disloyalty or dis-
affection. and that this was not the real reason for their
internment,
(9) Your petitioners respectfully beg to point out that when
the War Precautions Act was before the House of Representat-
ives , the then Prime Minister. Mr, Fisher f gave the House
definite assurances that evefv precaution would be taken to
7 «r. .
prevent mistakes and unjustifiable hardships in the intern-
ment' of any per son, and thsfct no person should be interned
as a result of'business jealousy or personal animosity and
that no person should'-'be deprived of his liberty for trade
or .-social reasons . and that Senator P'earce, the Minister for
Defence ,in May X 9.16 in Adelaide s ma,de similar assurances,
and it is contended that a, proper investigation into the facts
would disclose a number of instances in which this has happen-
ed' and that not only those interned under Regulation 55 hmt
also many of those interned under 56A were the victims of
busin-e-.ss j ealousy, •'«persona 1 hatred. or hasty and unconsidered
actions of members of the. community, and in this connection
your petitioners would respectfully refer your Excellency to
Regulation 3 ; subsections (l), (2) <& (3) which read as follows:


SURA T U !vl
W-i-5 r*V"\ v-i vr\ A H
" (l) The ordinary avocations of life and the -enjoyment
of property shall "be interfered with as little as may
be permitted by the exigencies of the measures required
to be taken for securing the public safety and the defence
of the Commonwealth, and ordinary civil offences dealt
with by the civil tribunals in the ordinary course of law."
"(2) nothing in these Regulations shall be construed as
- Subsection (2j line 2 after ""persons" in
• other than alien enemies or persons"
associations is made, has resulted in great injustice, and no
justification has ever been shewn how, out of a population
of some 60,000 within the Commonwealth who are born in a country
at present at war with Great Britain, or whose parents were
subjects of such country, a few hundreds were selected for
internment without there being any act or circumstance
connected with by far the larger number of them from all the
thousands who are still at large. It is recognised that
under this Regulations nearly any business person in the
community might have been interned, and it is submitted
that the greatest care should have been shewn in the admin-
istration thereof, and that at least after two yearn when the
turmoil inseparable from the beginning of hostilities had
calmed down, an enquiry should be held to erable those who
had a case to put themselves right in the eyes of the comm-
unity. Your petitioners also submit that even in those
cases where an internment has been made as a punishment for
something alleged to have been done or said to the detriment
or to the safety of the Empire, the person charged should
now have an opportunity of rebutting the charges made against
him-before a properly constituted court.
(11) That in those cases where the internment is a precaution-
ary measure only, the time ha.s now arrived when these persons
should be placed in a position to free themselves from suspic-
ion before such a tribunal.
(12) That your petitioners who have always regarded their
Naturalisation papers as a contract, under which they would
be protected from injustice of any kind, have found that no
discretion is apparently made between -enemy subjects and an
\ustralian subject of enemy origin as prisoner of war. Your
petitioners beg to point out that the Hague Convention pro-
Tides that after the outbreak of war, reasonable time must be
illowecL to enemy subjects to leave the country, and that the
Commonwealth has not observed this provision. This action
British subjects of long standing to the status of an
anemy subject although the German Government treats every
Naturalized British subject as an enemy from the outbreak of
var, so that many, of your petitioners are in the position of
enemies of both belligerent parties, and there is at
present interned at the Camp a Naturalised Australian Subject
)f German origin who was interned in Germany at the outbreak
)f war, released on account of ill-health, returned to Aus-
ralia by the High Commissioner at the expense of the Common-
ealth and interned here under Regulation 56a.
13) Your petitioners also submit that have been treated
r ith little consideration in respect 'lxrthe families of many
)f them, in not being given sufficient time or opportunity
.0 regulate their business. That sufficient facilities are
tot given for intercourse with their families, and as a conse-
uence their businesses have been in many cases ruined and their
amilies have become destitute.


,f (l) The ordinary avocations of life and the - enjoyment
of property shall be interfered with as little as may
be permitted by the exigencies of the measures required
to be taken for securing the public safety and the defence
of the Commonwealth, and ordinary civil offences dealt
with by the civil tribunals in the ordinary course of law."
"(2) Nothing in these Regulations shall be construed as
affecting the right to trial by a civil court of persons
subject to Naval Discipline Act or to Military law, for
offences against the Act."
"(3) The Naval and Military Boards, and Members of the
Nhval and Military Forces, aad other persons executing the
following Regulations shall, in carrying these Regulations
into effect, observe these general principles."
(10) That Regulation 56a of the War Precautions Act 1914-16,
under which internment ofm persons of hostile origin or
associations is made, has resulted in great injustice, and no
justification has ever been shewn how, out of a population
of some 60,000 within the Commonwealth who are born in a country
at present at war with Great Britain, or whose parents were
subjects of such country, a few hundreds were selected for
internment without there being any act or circumstance
connected with by far the larger number of them from all the
thousands who are still at large. It is recognised that
under this Regulations nearly any business person in the
community might have been interned, and it is submitted
that the greatest care should have been shewn in the admin-
istration thereof, and that at least after two years when the
turmoil inseparable from the beginning of hostilities had
calmed down, an enquiry should be held to erable tho.se who
had a case to put themselves right in the eyes of the comm-
unity. Your petitioners also submit that even in those
cases where an internment has been made as a punishment for
something alleged to "have been done or said to the detriment
or to the safety of the Empire, the person charged should
now have an opportunity of rebutting the charges made against
him-before a properly constituted court.
(11) That in those cases where the internment is a precaution-
ary measure only, the time has now arrived when these persons
should be placed in a position to free themselves from suspic-
ion before such a tribunal.
(l2) That your petitioners who have always regarded their
Naturalisation papers as a contract, under which they would
be protected from injustice of any kind, have found that no
discretion is apparently made between -enemy subjects and an
Vustralian subject of enemy origin as prisoner of war. Your
petitioners beg to point out that the Hague Convention pro-
vides that after the outbreak of war, reasonable time must be
iHowed to enemy subjects to leave the country, and that the
Commonwealth has not observed this provision. This action
reduces British subjects of long standing to the status of an
anemy subject although .the German Government treats every
Taturalized British, subject as an enemy from the outbreak of
;ar, so that many, of your petitioners are in the position of
3'eing enemies of both belligerent parties, and there is at
present interned at the Camp a Naturalised Australian Subject
)f German origin who was interned in Germany at the outbreak
)f war, released on account of ill-health, returned to Aus-
ralia by the High Commissioner at the expense of the Common-
ealth and interned here under Regulation 56a.
13) Your petitioners also submit that they have been treated
y ith little consideration in respect torn:he families of many
>f them, in not being given sufficient time or opportunity
.0 regulate their business. That sufficient facilities are
iOt given for intercourse with their families, and as a conse-
quence their businesses have been in many cases ruined and their
amilies have become destitute.


(14) Your petitioners submit that whilst they admit the
necessity for discipline in the Gamp, consideration should
be shewn by those controlling the Camp to internees •'.•ho have
not forfeited the right to it. It is complained that res-
pectable citizfns can be and have been treated either like
school-boys or criminals by some of the officers, and some of
the former officers have exceeded indignities which any decent
man T ould inflict on a criminal.
0-5) Your petitioners beg to point out that in the case of the
Torrens Island Camp investigations disclosed a very bad
state of affairs, and that investigation was not only necessary
for the benefit of the internees, but necessary in the
interests of the Department; that, although the conditions
of the Liverpool Camp have very much improved during the past
two years, it would be to the interests of the Department,
as well as ah act of justice to a great number of the internees
that enquires should, be made into the actions of a number of
the officers who have in the past administered the affairs of
the Camp, and that even now little fault be found in the con-
duct of the Superior Officers, such enquiry '"ould mdiow the
necessity for a revision of the Camp Regulations and the
Administrative staff, and in this connection your Petitioners
wish to place on record their appreciation of the manner in
which the Commandant of the Camp, Major Allsop, and Lieut.
Col. Holman have endeavoured to ameliorate the condition of
internees and to see that they are treated with decency and
are not subjected to insults which were the rule under the old
regime. In this connection it is still noticeable that
although other Government Departments address individual
internees as "Mr." the Defence Department still refrains
from doing so.
(l 6) Your ptetitioners complain that they have in the past
suffered by the pilfering of their parcels forwarded to them;
that thousands of pounds worth of luggage, railway and p>ostal
parcels and letters were lost in transit, whilst in military
custody or after their arrival at Liverpool, and they submit
that in cases where this can be shewn to have occurred,
reparation should be made, while it is submitted that parcels
have been received with reasonable certainty under the present
administra ti on.
(17) Your petitioners complain that the Camp is unsanitary,
the barracks being much too close to each other and over-
crowded, and the Camp is infested with vermin of every kind,
and that the dust is so bad as to be a menace to the health
of the whole of the internees, and they submit that this
matter should be remedied without loss of time, as a great
number of internees are suffering from severe affections of the
eyes, nose, throat and lungs in consequence.
(18) Your petitioners wish to point out that the prolonged
captivity, the scarcity of suitable work, the vermin trouble,
the dust nuisance, the lack of congenial company is leading to
an alarming increase of mental disturbances. Added to this
is the anxiety by the prolonged separation from homes and
families, the difficulties of obtaining leave to attend the
outside business interests, the knowledge that their- businesses
are going to ruin, the knowledge that their families are fre-
quently subjected to indignities and persecution from neigh-
bours, that in many instances their families are in want, are,
your petitioners respectfully submit, sufficient to justify an
enquiry into the administration of the gamp, and as to whether
a large number of the internees are not Reasonably detained,
(19) Your petitioners submit that the wives and families of
many internees are subject to insult rand humiliation through
such causes as the compulsory use of envelopes disclosing
their position of internment, the cost of their attending to
visit internees and to send parcels to them (international
parcels for prisoners of war carried free by all belligerent


), Difficulties put in the v 'ay of realisation of the
property of internees, the administration of the hospital, the
prohibition against the importation of ordinary household
remedies, such as Aspirin, lodine, laxatives etc., the inade-
quate arrangements in respect of facilities for having dental
work done, the regulation allowing only two letters per week
to be sent out by internees, restrictions on the visits of
families to the Camp every second Sunday afternoon, and then
only for a short time and under unsatisfactory conditions,
the restrictions on visits by internees to their homos, the
detention of internees in this Camp whose families are living
in other States, thus separating them altogether from their
families, are all serious injuries under which a number of
internees are suffering,
Your petitioners therefore humbly pray -
(l) That the members of yournpetitioners' Association, who
are not arrested but were driven into Camp by force of circum-
stances and against whom no definite charge has been or can be
made, should at once be restored to liberty, if they desire
to leave the Camp.
(2) That in accordance with the Suspected Persons Enquiry
Order 1915? & n enquiry should be granted to all members of
this Association who are interned under Regulation 55 of the
War Precautions Act 1914-16,
(3) That against the other members of your Petitioners 1
Association, who were interned under Regulation 56a. or any
other War Precautions Regulation, a definite charge should
be laid which the Minister of Defence considers a sufficient
justification for their internment, or .that they should be
plainly informed that their internment is a precautionary
measure only 0
(4) Tha.t members of your Petitioners' Association should be
afforded every opportunity to defend: themselves against any
charges before a properly constituted Court,
(5) That members, against whom no charges can be proved in
such Court and who wish to leave the Camp, should be released
without further delay absolutely, or on just and reasonable
terms if the Military authorities should consider their
unconditional liberation undesirable.
(6) That all invalids or naturalised internees over 45 years
of age should be released forthwith and unconditionally if
they wish to go out.
And your petitioners will as in duty bound ever pray etc.
Signature Occupation Residence State
Governor General's Office,
Dear Sir, ' Melbourne, 25th July 1917.
With reference to your letter of the 25th May last,
covering a petition signed by a number of Naturalised British
subjects interned at the Concentration Camp, Liverpool, I am
directed His Excellency the Governor General to inform you
that he is advised that the action of the Commonwealth Govern-
ment in interning British Subjects, and their subsequent
treatment, lias been in strict accordance with the law.
Except in the case of those who have offered themselves
for internment,, warrants have in each case been signed by
the Minister for Defence (thus' complying with the requirements
of the law), and instructions have in each case been given that
the original warrant be shown to the person arrested and a copy
handed to him o
Applications for enquiry as to the grounds of internment
have been granted in a large number of cases f and in several
instances persons have been released when the enquiry showed
that this could be done without danger„ No application for
enquiry has been refused except when the holding of an enquiry
would bo prejudicial to the public interest.
In considering all cases suggested for internment, special


cars has been taken to exclude any evidence that w&o likely
to be coloured by businaos jealousy or personal animosity.
Prior to IT or ember 1915» p-roons offered themselves
for internment w sro allowed to leave the Camps again they
desired. As permission to leave the Camp again at VT ill was
found to lead to abuooo, »and in some cases to bo dangerous,
instructions vorc given in that month that all persons
voluntarily interned, rr ho wor* thon-in the Camps, wore to
bo nil to l\ave if they wished, but that those rho did
not then lvoavo, and also any persons who subsequently offered
themselves for internment, * r cro to bo told that they would be
detn ined during the Minister's pleasure. Nevertheless, it
is the practice to grant applications for release made by
voluntary internees, if their conduct has been satisfactory,
and if they are offered permanent work by an approved employer.
It is not considered that any general enquiry into the
administration of the Camps, or any enquiry into social
cases in which enquiries have already been refused, should bo
granted.
It is true that the Camp has become crowded, but stops
are being taken to give more space. The very low sickness
rate at the Internment Chmps shows, however, that there is little
ground for complaint as to sanitary conditions. Internees
doubtless experience a certain amount of discomfort, out
this is inevitable. It is the constant aim of the adminis-
tration to diminish any discomforts that occur, and to en-
courage any activities in the Camps which will interest and
occupy the time of internees.
Applications for release on the ground of ill-health are
frequently received, and in each case a report is ootainod from
the Medical Officer, and the case dealt with after consider-
ation of his recommendation. This practice applies to
British subjects who arc interned as well as to other intern-
ees, and the Department of Defence is not prepared to author-
ise in their cases any general release based on age or general
conditions of health, which does not apply to other classes
of prisoners.
In regard to the treatment of the class of internees,
to which most of the petitioners belong, it has always
been the policy of the Defence Department, as those men
were interned because they were regarded as having pro-
onomy sentiments and as likely to be dangerous, to treat them
in the same way as persons of enemy origin or descent who
had not acquired British Nationality, They do nor therefore
enjoy any special privileges in regard to their businesses
or seeing their families. Sufficient facilities are,
however, allowed, to enable them to attend ro Dieir affairs
by correspondence or by interview with solicitors or others.
Yours faithfully, a
(Sgd.)- George Stewart,
Official Secty. to Govr. General.
Liverpool, September 20th 1917*
Mr James \7. Abigail,
77 Elizabeth Street,
Sydney,
Dear Sir,
Me are in receipt of your favor of the 17th
September, th ; contents of which we note. The copy of
"Hansard" must have been lost in transit. We shall make
further enquiries in the Censor's Office, and sha.il let you
know if we require another copy.
With rogard to the Commission on Naval and Defence
Administration, you have cvid- ntly misunderetood the purport
of our suggestion. Be merely wanted you to make an appoint
n nf


77u*+iC for us 9 so. that our Executive could discuss the various
™ovkz propositions, (see item 7 of our letter August 9th) with
the Commissioners when they come out to the German Concen-
tration Camp. Your presence would not be necessary,
Kith regard to your proposed inspection of the Camp, we
shall bo glad to hear what reply you have received from Mel-
bourne. ' <T e are sorry you have boon unable to get a copy of
the Aliens Instructions from Head Quarters,
T > T e are sending you herewith registered 32 statutory de-
clarations in duplicate. Kindly attach one copy of each to
the reply to the Governor-General, and file the other for future
reference.
(Then follow the names and corresponding numbers of
the statutory declarations ).
We shall send you another batch of statutory declarations
tomorrow,
Yours faithfully,
Sgd. A, Kersten K. A. M. Schulz
President for Secretary A.N.B.S
(Registered)
Mr. J. W. Abigail, Liverpool, September 24th, 1917
77, Elizabeth St., Sydney.
Dear Sir,-
Wo beg to confirm our letter of the 20th inst, and
to hand you enclosed another batch of statutory declarations
in duplicate signed by the following members of our assoc-
iation.
(Then follow the names and corresponding numbers of
the sta t uteery de clarat ion s) a
You will find ample material in the 60 declarations we
have now sent you to substantiate all the statements made .in
our previous letters, We beg to draw your special attention
to the remarkable state of affairs disclosed in declarations
Hos. 58, 59 and 60. Two Camp Officers, who are Justices of
the Peace, namely, Captain L&lton and Lieut, Poolman of the
Dental Corps, have both refused to witness the signatures on
Declarations Nos. 59 and 60, Has a Justice of the Peace a
right to such a refusal?
You may point out in your letter to His Excellency the
Govern or-Genera 1 that we can supply a great deal of further
sworn evidence if required, and if there should be aamy doubt
regarding the truth of our statements,
Wo should be greatly obliged if you would now draw up
the final reply to His Excellency, and forward it to us for
approval at your earliest convenience„
Yours faithfully,
Sgd, A, Ker&t&n K. A, M, Schulz
President p Secretary
A ■ IT, 3 1 S,
(Registered) Liverpool, September 27th, 1917
Mr. James W. Abigail,
77, Elizabeth St,, Sydney.
Dear Sir,-
Re letter to His Excllency the Governor-General.
In reply to your favour of the 24th September, 1917, we beg
to hand you herewith copy of a letter from the Camp Commandant,
dated 26th September, 191?> which will explain why the statutory
declarations referred to have not reached ycu c
The Commandant has been good enough to allow us to for-
ward our letters of September 20th and 24th to you, which you
win find enclosed.
IT 2 2


The Commandant has promised to forwara the originals
of the Statutory Declarations direct to his excellency t
Governor-General in accordance with our request as per our
letter of to-day's date, of which we enclose a copy,
the signed copies were given back to us, and will oe kept
our reply t0 His Excellency., you should of course
refer to the various declarations as explained m our letters
of September 20th and 24th respectively, and_ you should alao
ask His Excellency the Governor-General u o give the necessa y
instructions to enable us to supply you direcu with a °°Py
of the statutory declarations, When you comment on nospital
conditions, we think it only fair that you should mention
the marked improvement lately in the of 1 p=.
which now leaves hardly any .ground for complaint.
We must also -mention-that yesterday the whole camp was
supplied with towels of satisfactory size and quality, and
that some internees have now even received SOCKS.
Yours faithfully,
President Secretary A, A. B. o.
Head Quarters,
Liverpool, 26th September, 1917.
Prisoner War A. Kersten,
•Prest o Hatd. Brit c Sub&s, Asscn. , Camp, ,
• r - r ith reference to your letters of the 20th and 24th
with enclosures addressed to J e W, Abigail, Esq., I
inform you that the same cannot be delivered oO
but have been, in accordance with instructions, forwarded to
Head Quarters, Melbourne,
Sgd, Ro Holman Lt. Col.
Commandant, Concentration Camps,
*y-» C*J «■'->
v*# c-.t r-o vjM* UJ iR. i'-»
Liverpool, 27th September, 1917.
Lieut, Col. Holman, D.S c O,,
C omma nda nt, Camp „
Q • _
In reply to your letter of the 26th inst,, Ho, Al7/3213*
addressed to our President, we would be greatly obliged if
you would kindly forward the originals^of the 60^ Statutory
Declarations handed over to the Intelligence Officer, Lt.
Lloyd, direct to His Excellency the Governor-General, and
inform His Excellency that he will receive^ shortly a detailed
letter from our Solicitor; Mr, J : W. Abigail, which will
fully explain the purport of these declarations^
We beg to hand you herewith 60 copies not signed, as
requested, "for Departmental reference.
Yours faithfully,
President Secretary A, H. B. o.
Liverpool, 6th October, 1917.
The Visitor,
Mr. Adrian Knox K.C.,
Camp,
Sir
On behalf of the Association of Naturalised British
Subjects o we wish to lodge a complaint of unexplained and
unexpected obstructions, that the Camp authorities are putting
in our way in our efforts to secure legal a.ud o
(lj We had been asked by cur Solicitor to supply him with
sworn declarations on all points which are going to be raised
in our second letter to the Governor-Genera 1 0 _ H r e went
to considerable expense, and spent much work in the pre-


para, t ion of a number of these declarations, only to find that
the Camp Authorities not only refused to send them on, "but
confiscated the originals and sent them to Head Quarters, Mel-
bourne, (See attached copy of letter from the Colonel). We
asked to be allowed to send copies of the originals to our law-
yer at once,
(2) Further, we want to complain about the stringent way
in which the Camp Regulations are being at present time
handled by the Ca.mp Authorities. Nobody is allowed to go
to Sydney and we consider it essential to have a. final inter-
view with our Solicitor before the reply is sent to His Excel-
lency the Governor-General.
(3) M r e have to thank you for your letter of the
and we shall be glad to be supplied with a copy of War Finance
Regulations 74 and amendment of it.
We are, Yours respectfully,
President Secretary A. N. B. S.
77, Elizabeth Street, Sydney.
Mr. A, Korsten, G. C. C. Liverpool.
Dear Sir,-
I am today in receipt of a letter from the Camp
Commandant- in which he states that permission cannot be given
you to visit my office, but that a representative of my Firm
may interview you at the Camp 0
This is very unfortunate, as I cannot deal efficiently
with your business by correspondence, and it would be
to you for mjr representative who is dealing with your affairs
to visit the Camp, I also wish to go into the question of
the Governor-General ! s replies to Petition of the Association,
which I find considerable difficulty dn dealing with as the
ground to be covered is so large, and condensation in a mat-
ter of the kind is so necessary that I fear I may not be able
to put the matter as you would desire it without a further
interview. However, I will do my best in regard to the pet-
ition, and you will hear from me again in a few days.
Sgd, J. \7, Abigail.
Liverpool Ist November, 1917.
Th e Off ici a 1 Sec r o to. v y
to His Excellency the Governor-General^
Federal Government House, Melbourne,
Den. r Sir,-
/
v/ith reference to your letter of the 25th July last
re a. Petition signed by a number of Naturalised British Sub-
jects interned in the Concentration Camp at Liverpool N.S.W,
which came to hand in due course, I have now been asked by my
clients to make the following reply thereon
I may explain tha.t a numbor of Declarations have been
made by Members of the Association and it was intended that they
should accompany this letter but by direction of the Camp Auth-
orities they have been forwarded direct to Military Head-Quar-
ters in Melbourneo I.beg to refer His Excellency to them and
notes at bottom of pages' indicate where matters herein touched
on are doa 11 wi th in the & e Doc Lara t. i ons „
The instructions which His Excellency's advisers state
were given in November. 1915 with regard to Voluntary Inter-
nees have not been carried out e The Executive, of the Assoc-
iation of Naturalised British Subjects, for whom I am acting,
lias made most careful inquiries and has found that neither in
the Liverpool,. Langwarrin, Enncgera, Rottnest or Fort Largs
Internment Camps, nor at the New South Wales, Victoria, South
Australia or Queensland Military District Headquartors, or


Detention Barracks have voluntary intornooo boon told in the
month of November 191? or since that date that they v - f ould be
allowed to leave camp if they rT ieh > d but that those ho did
not then lea vg wo uld be dola incd dur ing th O us.ini •../I g r ' s
pleasure *X Nor wore poroons who offered themeolveo oub-
ocquontly for internment at any of the above places told
that they would be detained at the Minister's pleasure,
with the exception of two internees, to whom ouch a warning
was given at the Victoria Barracks, Brisbane. But against
thip, my clients state, stands the undioputable fact that
several members of the Association for whom I am acting who
offered themselves for internment in Queensland in 1916
were clearly told that they would be allowed to leave Camp
again if they could find work later on and to be
relons g d, In s eve ra 1 ca se s member s 0 f the Associa t i on wh 0
belong to this class of internees have been refused relrnsc,
even in case of severe illness or other grave dieoreoe in
their families B xx An it has evidently been the Minister's
intention to give all voluntary internees a chance to regain
their liberty, it is suggested that the order intended by
the Minister to be given in November 1915 should now be put
into operation forthwith, and that rail voluntary internets
-hould be given the option to leave camp at once, or to
remain interned during the Minister's pleasure. My clients
v COOP t the statement that no fewer than 20 of them were
arrested and interned without any warrant being produced. XXX
Their prolonged captivity, and the forcible detention of the
voluntary internees who wish to leave the Camp, constitute
a gra v 0 in j uoticc for which immodia tre dr s should
given,
My clients deny that the Department of Defence has re-
liable 1 evidence in its possession to justify the view taken
by the Department that most of these naturalised nrioisn
subjects had pro-enemy sentiment, and were likely to be
dangerous o They have not been chargad with any
and contrary to the principles laid down in the Aliens in-
structions No. 2 1915» no written statement Was supplied oo
them of the information laid against them, on which their
internment had been decided. No opportunity Ibb been given
thorn to enable them to rebut evidence that they say must
be false, as they state that neither by word or deed have
they given any grounds for suspicion, XXXX Most of them
sav they can bring a number of reputable Australian corn
subjocts of British orig.in to te3lify as 10 tileir intgrity
in every respect, and if necessary to give guarantees as to
their good conduct if the Department should decide to release
them, or grant them special privileges, my client;., nave all
along been desirous of having a chance to meet any charges
that could, be levied against them in respect of ul; loyalvy
or any other respect, end it is submitted that sov f after
many of them have been interned for a v«ry considerable period,
they should be given an opportunity to clear themselves^ by
appearing before a judicial board or tribunal, such *%, <.• na. 0
beoneetabl i a he d in En gla nd, In this c 01 miction, Ibe g to
k-4 CUB f«(t «r--* ■» .M UB UB I*l «•• r» w * ** ** ■* "* /
k.. CUB nn «r--* ■* ub «*• «•• r» •* /
X a Sec statutory decla rations Nob . 1,6,7,11,3 2 ,33,41,43, 46,47,
48, 54, 55? 56/59, signed by members of the Association and
forwarded to you by the Camp Coinincb.no through the De-
partment of Defence, Melbourne on Dip tomb or <r. 7 th, 1917*
XX, See statutory doc la. rat ions Hob, 6,7,32,33,41,43,47 , 4<b,54,
55 56 0
XXX So ! statutory declarations Hoc, 9^16, 14,21,2&,34,45,*9, s°,
57 >■ 59 v
XXXX See statutory declarations Hoc, 2,4,8,9,12,13,15,21,23,29,
31,34?35 5 37 5 40,42,44,45,49,51,53,57,59,60,


quote from the "London Times" report the speech delivered by
r, Asquith the la-te . Prime Minister of Great Britain, in the
House of Commons in May 19-15 in which he said:-
"With regard to the argument that -we should deal in a much
more severe way with naturaUsed Germans who are British
subjects and who have the guarantee of an Act of Barlia-
ment that they will have all the rights of British subjects
that we ought to treat them as if they were prima fa,cie spies
or enemies to our country, I refuse to do anything of the
kind # If a man is a British subject with the statutory
rights of a British subject, the prima facie presumption
is that he is going to perform his duties to the Crown,
But, in the exceptional circumstances in which we are now
placed, I also feel that there ought to be the opportunity,
as there will be, under the proposal of the Government- if
there is a well-grounded suspicion against a man of hostile
origin, who has become naturalised,, through the Judicial
procedure of this advisory body, to use exactly the same
power as if he had not been naturalised.
I was very much shocked at the case cited by my honour-
able friend of British workmen refusing to work side by side
w ith a naturalised German, now a British subject, who has 2
or 3 sons fighting at the Front* I believe that the working
classes of this country would repudiate that attitude and
regard it as a stain on their class. I regret that such a
thing should be possible at this moment, but it shows the
extreme importance, when you have an excited state of public
feeling - naturally and legitimately excited - of handling
matters of this kind with discretion and tact, not in the
spirit either of panic or vindictiveness, I am ail in favour
of taking every reasonable step necessary to secure our-
selves from the danger arising from the presence of a body
of persons of*alien birth and now hostile subjects within
our shores a But you must remember that the great body of
these people - not very numerous- are decent, honest, res-
pectable people, who ? have given' hostages to fortune 1 in
this country, and who are carrying on legitimate trades,
some of them professional men, some of them employed in our
most technical industries, where their services can ill be
spared* To initiate or countenance anything in the shape of
v o "] Ml r* i
a vendetmja *Blass of that kind would, I think, be not only be
disgraceful, from a moral point of view but most impolitic
from the point of view of the best interests of this Country.
If you take measures for segregat!.on, internment and repat-
. riation, you must, at the same time, be careful that you
'provide an outlet, an elasticity and a power of relaxation,
and discrimination, lest you do irreparable hardship to in-
dividuals, and "serious injury to the State,"
My clients, inform me that in certain Crown Colonies,
the Straits Settlements, for instance, no naturalised citi-
zens have been-Interned at all, and that, in a debate in
the House of on March 2nd 1916 (according to the
"Manchester Guardian History of the War"), Mr, Samuel, the
Home Secretary stated that / on that date, there were interned
in G.£eat Br;rtap.n- : jhnder Home Secretary's Warrants issued
under %ir'Precahti%ns Regulations ITc t 148 (hostile origin
and assod%a.tJbnsy. only 19 naturalised British subjects of
en©my • 6rigin, Grwa t Br itai n, Ira vi ng a t tha,t time a, total
of'about 26a 000, civi 1 ian internees , whorea s in Australia
"oyer 300 Australian subjects of German or Austrian descent
are interned under the corresponding Regulation S&A of the
Australian War Precautions Regulations out of a. total of
about 5;• QOO civilian internees. In this connection, the
distance of Australia from the seat of hostilities' in Europe
1126


it submitted, is a large feature in my clients' favour.
They also state that a great number of naturalised, persons
of enemy origin in Australia are persons who had come to
this country, settled here, married Australian women, and
have to a large extent severed their relations with the coun-
try of their origin.
Many of the internees can only account for their having
been interned to the jealousy, business rivalry, or spurious
loyalty of persons who have made accusations against them.
The mere fact of the Defence Authorities admitting that they
had occasion to exclude evidence coloured by business jealousy
or personal animosity shows the necessity of acquainting my
clients with the whole of the evidence submitted, against them
that led to their internment. The attached extract of the
report of the commission appointed by the New Zealand Govern-
ment to enquire into the Aliens problem in the north of Auck-
land (published by the Auckland "Star" of September 19th 1916
by authority of the New Zealand Minister of Justice) gives
several remarkable examples of how persons of enemy origin are
usually slandered, and what means are employed by interested
persons to secure their internment. My clients have no doubt
that hundreds of inoffensive and law-abiding Australian subjects
were deprived of their liberty as the result of similar mis-
representations, Some members of the Association state that
they have been informed by high Military Officials that they
have been interned at the request of the Attorney General's
Department for trade reasons only and in this connection your
attention is drawn to a statement .bade by the Minister for
Defence at the Premiers' Conference in Adelaide in May 1916,
"that only Military necessity justifies internment,"
'Pith regard to the statement that "an enquiry has only
"been refused and the holding of such an enquiry would be pre-
judicial to the public interests" my clients point out that
of the members of the Association interned under Regulations
55 ft rid 56a not a single one lias been granted a proper inquiry
as provided in The Suspected Persons Inquiry Order 1915
and it is submitted that rhe appointment of a tribunal to
enquire into the internment and the many appalling incidents
surrounding their and subsequent treatment in the
Internment Camps If could lead to no harm, as unless the
internee could make out a case for release or different treat-
ment, his liberty would still be curtailed.
It is also pointed out that Naturalised and Australian
Born internees are not even given the same preferential
treatment as some classes of interned enemy subjects enjoy
at Trie,]. Bay and Berrima, My clients claim that the matter
of preferential treatment could be managed in such a way as
not only to give relief and a much greater liberty of action
to a class of internees who claim that they are strictly
entitled to such consideration as Australian subjects and
tax-payers s but that their services could be availed of in
such a manner as to a large extent to enable them to support
themselves and their families, Amongst my clients are a
number of able business men capable of mapping out schemes
for. providing work and serving money in the actual working
of the. Camp as at present in existence, further in road
building pn.Federal Territory on Military reserves, clearing
and. prepa.ri ng Crown land for agric u 1 tural purposes , river
improvements 5 rabbit and mice destruction, prickly-pear de-
X See Stat, Declns, ITos, 2, 4„ 8, 9,12 ,13 ,15-29 .31,34-40, 42, 44,
45,49,51-53*57*
XX See State Declns. Ncs, 2,4.8,13-15,17,20,-22-25,28-30,33-40,
42; 4 4.4 5,46,48,49,51,5 2. ■ 5 4,56,57,59 Jo


X See Staty, Declns, Nos, 2~5. 7, 8,14-3.6. 20,24, 26-28,31~33>36,
/,. 2,43,4 5,4 9,51, 52;5 5,5 85 9 , 6 o.
XX See Staty, Declns, Nos, 12,13,l6-l8,21,22,24,27,28,29,31,
32,40,50,56,59,60.
struction, harvesting work, etc. There are a large number of
Architects; Engineers and Craftsmen in the Camp whose work
could be availed of, and also many fruitgrowers and farmers who
would be only too wining to occupy their time in work to which
they are accustomed, It is admitted that these matters would
involve a great alteration in the existing methods, but it is
submitted that the saving to the Commonwealth alone would justify
such an alteration. Firstly, an inquiry such as is suggested
would enable the Authorities to get the necessary information
on which the internees could be classified, both as to their
abilities and character, such an inquiry would show that a number
of my clients could safely be released, ' Then voluntary inter-
nees unable to support themselves, and all those others about
whom there was less suspicion, might be allowed to live in
homes with their families, subject to such guarantees as it might
be thought necessary to impose. Separate Camps for married and
unmarried men coming under this class might be started in Fed-
eral Capital Territory or on other Crown Land where they would
work under supervision with restricted liberty on parole. For
prickly-pear destruction, rabbit and mice destruction, such
internees might be hired out by the Defence Department to State
Governments, or to approved private employers at prevailing union
wages, and the Defence Department might retain half the dif-
ference between the union and camp wage (2/- -per day) as a re-
fund for the food and accommodation to be provided for these
men. The voluntary internees might be let out first to build
the working camps for themselves and for such other internees
as the Defence Department might decide to bring under this
scheme. Special provision might be made by which the services
of those having professional and techniochal knowledge might
be utilised by the Government, It might be further pointed
out that a great number of internees under these circumstances
would be living far from any place where they could, be a source
of mischief to the Commonwealth, Under such a scheme the
Federal Government would be relieved of a large portion of the
money now expended in keeping internees; many Australian sub-
jects would be taken away from the unsanitary conditions and the
filth and dust of the Hcldsworthy Camp and that is slowly but
surely undermining their health, and would be freed from the
most objectionable company including a number of professional
thieves, criminals and other undesirables, X The wives and
families of these ihternees would be relieved of the necessity
of endeavouring to live on the very inadequate sums now allowed
for their maintenance. XX Lastly schemes could be arranged
under which those whom it was thought necessary to keep interned
in the Holdsworthy Camp could be allowed such work and pay as
under the circumstances and under good business advice could be
arranged, In this connection it is stated on^y.Recently
detailed propositions and estimates of costs/for 1 a number of
Camp industries, such as bread-making, soap-making, boot and
shoe making, vegetable farming, piggery and poultry farms, &c,
ceo, have been submitted by my clients to the Military Authori-
ties, My clients are not opening up new matter, as considera-
tion has given to and most of the suggestions herein made
have been worked out in Great Britain and indeed, it would seem
that the internees are allowed more freedom and treated in a
more liberal spirit generally at the seat of war than they are
here, where opportunities for mischief are comparatively few.
It is still 'contended that the regulations regarding


correspondence and the opportunities for elding t>uoinose with
solicitors and other business nien ; and for visiting their
families and disposing of their business interosts^that are
subject to depreciation are unsatisfactory. My clients
complain that especially the intercourse with solicitors is
deliberately obstructed by a regulation of the Defence Depart-
ment ordering that interviews them should take place at
the camp, which would involve heavy expense for the inter-
nees and would altogether prevent many from getting any legal
advice at all X and that great loss is unnecessarily being
inflicted upon internees x and much unhappiness on them and
their families c XX
The conditions of the Camp have certainly improved
under the administration of the pre sent Commandant but in
the matters wherein my clients complain their liberty of
action is restricted and the accommodation and surroundings
leave much to be desired. It is only by a thorough inquiry
into these matters by able and sympathetic men, including
some men of business, and a revision of the whole of the ideas
on which the Internment Camps are worked, that the condition
of the internees can be immensely improved and at the same
time the expenses of administration can be vastly reduced.
In conclusion I beg to state that I have been severely
handicapped in the preparation of my clients ' case by the
following facts:-
(a) I have been refused permission to go through the
Holds worthy Camp which would have enabled me to speak from
personal knowledge of the Camp conditions,
(b) I have been refused a copy of the Official Regula-
tions (especially the Aliens Instructions No, 2, 1915)
governing the arrest and. internment of British subjects,
and the administration of internment camps and my clients
state that important rules laid down in these instructions
which might have secured an inquiry into their cases, have
not boon observed by the Defence Department c
(c) Letters written to me by my clients, and containing
instructions for the reply to be sent to you were repeatedly
stopped by the Camp Commandant on the grounds that letters
containing complaints must be forwarded to Head quarters
(see enclosed copy of a letter written to the President
of the Association of Naturalised British Subjects by the
Camp Commandant dated September 26th 1-917,)
(d) Sixty Sta t ulory Dec la rat ions wh Ichl re que s t.e dmy
clients to send me in support of statements made in the above
letter wore stopped by the Camp Commandant and sent to Mel-
bourne. I*would be obliged if you would kindly ask His
Excellency the Governor General to cause permission to be
given to my clients to send.me direct a signed copy of each
of these sixty Dec ra ra 110 ns 0
(c) The two Camp Officers who arc Justices of the
Peace refused, according to my clients' statement, to sign
five Statutory Declarations, on the ground that they con-
tained complaints about Camp Officers!
The President of the Association of Naturalised
British Subjects ha s been refused leave to visit my office,
in order to discuss with me the.final draft of this letter.
I have therefore been unable to deal properly with several
impo r ta nt ma tters which requi rc d a verbal discussion wi th one
1,1 *"* * v-c * ur * w *•-* ««.»> «r» •».» », ■% 1 at.» ~* aett (•» i M m - - _
u-» ««.» «.» », ■% iim tt.» iwt .n* *<l wj» am »~i mm t«» «■-» w* » » ti.» •>. 10 mm i-w m-m rmm »-» mj» mm mmm mm mm mm mm mm mm
X Sec 3taty Doclns . No -3, 6,13,18, 22, 23, 28,33,35,36,4,1,42,
46,4-8, 58-60.
XX SCO Btaty, Doc ins. Nob. 12,13', 15,22,24,26.32,36,42,49, 56,
and 53.


of the Officers of the Aasoci tion •nd he he Ibo been re-
fused permission to attend tmy office upon import- nt mat-
ters connection with the re*lis r tion of his ssets permission
for which has been obtained from the Attorney General.
I have the honour to be, 3ir,
Your obedient servant,
Sgd. J. V, Abigail.
Aliens in the llorth.
The report of the Commission appointed
to enquire into the alien problem.
Reprinted from the "Auckl-nd Star" Tuesday Geptr. 19,1916
EXTRACT
"The statements widely circulated that they were armed
end drilling and menacing settlers, were conclusively proved
to be utterly baseless, 'Ye visited the pieces where these
occurrences were reported to have trken place, -nd searched
out the witnesses who were supposed to be able to give evi-
dence of disloyal acts or words. In every case there was
nothing whatever to support the ala.rming reports. As ex-
amples:- A riot w s supposed to have taken place at Carga-
ville as a result of racial feeling, and some feared a repe-
tition. The facts discovered by us were these:- An inoffen-
sive Seryian boardinghouse-keepor was sitting in his house
fondling his little child. A number of British and Maoris
under the influence of drink rushed in and. asked him what he
and his countrymen would do to their people when they (his
questioners) had gone to the bar. "'ithout provocation they
then assaulted him, striking him over the head with a bottle
and wounding him severely. They were prosecuted by the Police
and fined £lO each. Pi rearms were alleged to have been used
in :h rge ville, but trie only man who came forward to give evi-
dence against them admitted th-t the only case where he had
kno ,r, n of their use was where an Austrian had committed suicide
by shooting himself. His grievance age,inst then was not that
they were arming and drilling, but that they sometimes tendered
for contracts at a lower figure the n he. did. he visited Ka ihu
where a meeting had been held urging the Government to take
•• ction about the reported acts of disloyalty, but although we
summoned -those who took pa rt in organising the meeting, and
moving and seconding the resolutions, we completely failed to
find any proof of the allegations made at that meeting. In-
deed the assertions were completely disproved. The only par-
ticle of evidence as to arming was that a bullet was reported
to have been fired into the wall of a who.re, empty at the time.
It could not be said when this took place, or even conjectured
whether it was fired, if at all, by a Haori, Briton or Austrian,
Another example of how these men wore misrepresented wis
furnished by a witness at Auckland, who swore he hoard one
of them (named) refuse to give a contribution to a patriotic
fund. The evidence of the lady who asked for the money,
and a companion who was with her, proved that there was no
refusal, and that the man who was asked explained that he had
no money on him, but that he would give something later. This
he did, giving more then he was asked for and without being
asked a. second time to contribute. A still more glaring
case of misrepresentation is this: A man wrote to Mr. Poole


M.r. a letter, y*mi read in the Hou-e. It contained
the? following r v/cll, 1 can inform you that every
'Austrian in thio district still pos&csfscs firuarms, and a
♦good supply of ammunition. tyuitv- rocontly I sa*? oix of
♦them all in possession of drowning Automatic shot gund>.. ♦
On being examined, tho oritur knew nothing of any arms or
ammunition, and said thu; six ♦Austrian' ho oav/ had only
t**o gund them - shot guno - on-..' of mich ho examined
and the other ho did not, After t'm most searching examin-
ation, '• e feel convinced that these men ponsqeo no arms,
except some shotgun*, and old pen-rifle, * Ith rome revolvers,
all of tku*y willingly handed over to the? eolico to
be kept until after the that thoy do not drill, and
instead of being a monaco to the settlers, their behaviour
towards the British has been most exemplary. Another and
final example of how these men may be slandered and mis-
understood may be given, A petition ?*as sign.d by 370
persons, including members of local bodies, Justices of the
Peace, and others, rho might be expected to consider before
acting in such a manner. We examined as many of them r,s
could find, and not one of them, even those who drew up
the petition, could be found to justify the charges therein
made against tho Ihlmations. Those statements included,
amongst others, the assertion that many of tho ITaturalization
pnpers granted to them were obtained by fraud; that the maj-
ority of them trained to arms, and in the event of a
reverse to our Forces in Europe, these "Austrians" would be
a serious danger to us. Various excuses, mostly apologetic,
-'ore given by those who signed the petition for having done
so. None of the allegations v/ere supported by any evidence*
The men who originated the petition said they merely "anted
the gumfields to be reserved for the British-born. We
found that nofclO p'r cent of these Dalmations have done
military service; the great majority of them had left .
their country when youths, and many for the express purpose
of evading military service in tho Auotro-Hungarian amy or
navy. ♦♦
77-79 Elizabeth Street,
Mr. Albert Kcrsten, Sydney, 22nd November 1917.
G.C.C., Liverpool.
Lear Sir,
In compliance with your telephone meseago, I
herewith encloeo copy of my reply to the letter received
from the Secretary to His Excellency, and I have so far
received no reply thereto.
' ith reference to your application to see me,
Mr. Justice Harvey's intimation that he has requested the
proper authorities to alio 1 " you to visit me, seems to mo fin-
al so far as he is concerned. He has done what he consid-
ers his duty in respect to the matter, and if the Military
authorities ignore his request I cannot very well ask him
to go further, as he has no power to do other than ho has
done. Should he.notify me that his request had been
acceded to, I will at once let you know, I have written
to the Camp Commandant again, referring to Mr. Justice
Harvey's request, and asking that you be allowod to visit
mo at an early date.
I have again written the Public Trusted in res-
pect to the winding up of your affair's.
Ifours truly, (Sgd. )- J. W. Abigail.
*3l.


77- 7 9 -31 i za. bv- th Stro e t,
Sydney 3.Bth January 1918.
Mr c Albert Kersten,
G- O CoC f , Liverpool,
Lear Sir,
I am in receipt of a letter from the Official
Secretary to His Excellency the Governor General, copy of
which I enclose herewith, , r , _ / , _, „
Yours truly, (Sgd 0 )-J e V.Abigail
'B9/87/1 Federal Government House,
Sir, Melbourne, 14th January 1918
In continuation of my letter of 21st November last
98/642/7, acknowledging receipt of your letter of the 11th
idem, reference to petitions signed by a number of
prisoners interned in the Concentration Camp, Liverpool, I
Have the honor to inform you that His Excellency the Gov-
ernor General has been notified by his responsible advis-
ers that the proper channels, through which complaints of
this character should bo made, are by letter to the Official
Visitor to the Camp, or to the Defence Department,
The Governor General is informed that the petitioners
have received a reply, and that the complaints cannot be
further discussed with the petitioners through you. I
am. to add that many of the complaints referred to in the
Statutory Declarations have already been inquired into,
and such of the others as appear to have any foundation
will receive due attention.
You r 8 fa ithf u 11 y,
J.W.Abigail Usq., (Sgd,)- Goo, Steward,
Stephen Court, Official Secty 0 Govr, Genl.
Sydney.
Holdsworthy, 29th January 1918.
Mr. J. V. Abi ga il,
Elizabeth St., Sydney.
Dear Sir,
'
We are instructed to ackno wledgo roceipt of your
letter of January lBth, covering a copy of a letter rec-
eived by you from the Official Secretary to H.E. the Gov-
ernor General, for which we thank you,
In view of the fact that our last letter to you,
dated January 14th, was stopped by the Camp authorities,
we refrain from commenting on the Governor General 5 s letter
beyond stating that the direct reply, mentioned by the Of-
ficial Secretary to His Excellency; has-not reached us and
that nothing is known to members of our Association
concerning an enquiry into the complaints made.in the
Statutory Declarations. .
Yours faithfully,
President. Secretary. A.N.B.S
mm WM» mm mm M* mm m* mm mm mm mm
The Commandant, Liverpool, January 23rd 1918.
Camp.
We beg to inform you that the Executive of the Assoc-
iation of Naturalised British Subjects of this Camp has
been in communication with H.E, the Governor General with
a view to securing an enquiry into their cases, an improve-
ment of their.treatment and, if possible, their release.
The replies received from H,E C to the various points
submitted by us for consideration are not considered tombe
satisfactory. The members of our Association therefore
now desire to, bring these matters before their Parliament-
ary Representatives, i.e. to submit their grievances to
State Members as well as to Federal Representatives. We
have been instructed to communicate with a number of these
Parliamentarians on behalf of our members and supply them


with copies of the correspondence. exchanged between our
solicitor (Mr, JM .Abigail) and H c E e the Governor General,
and copies of some of the correspondence we had with you,
wit.n the Official Visitor and the Defence Department on
questions concerning our arrest,, internment and treatment,
v *h i 1 st int e rn ed.
Before write letters, as instructed, we would like to
hoar from you whether there is any objection to the course
of action we intend to adopt as explained above, and whether
such material, as has already been passed by the Gamp Censor,
on previous occasions, will be allowed to be forwarded to
our Parliamentary Representatives, without being interfered
with in any way, Awaiting your .reply,
You r s fa ithf u 11 v.
to /
Assn. of Nat, Bfit, Subjects.
•*"»» mm am w* am wn» rm am
Association -of Liverpool, 24th January 191 S.
27a t, Br iti sh Sub jec t s ,
C a m p.
With reference to your letters/of the 23rd
January, relative to the writing of lellers by you to
Members concerning your treatment whilst
interned, I have to inform you that your application
cannot be approve d 6
iou shou 1 d make your representations
through the proper channels, namely the Official Visitor
or the Dofence Dopartment.
(SgdJ - RJ-lolman
Lt, Col c C ommandant.
•u* am am mm na -r. m» am «a» r-jl
Lt, Col, Dolman, Holdsworthy, 29th January 1918.
Commandant. Ca m pu-
Sir,
We are in receipt of your letter of the 24th instant,
no ce that we will not be allowed to write to members of
parliament, concerning our treatment whilst interned,
four reply deals only vieh part of our letter of
January 23rd.
1, We are instructed by our Association t'o draw the
attention of members of parliament to the general policy
adopted by the Australian Government, and in particular
oy the Defence Department, in dealing with Naturalized
Subjects of enemy origin, as compared with the measures
of the British Government, repeatedly explained by •
British cabinet Ministers an the British Parliament *
Die ooject of our Association is to have the Australian
piac vice of arrest, internment, trial and release of suspect-
ed persons of enemy origin brought into line with the
British syst em c
2, we are further instructed to bring under the notice of
members of parliament the treatment of arrested Australian
subjects before they reach the internment Camp*
3'- Finally, we are to explain to our Parliamentary
Representatives the miserable position of some of the
Australian families, the heads of which are interned, and
to sol ic i t the i r as sis ta nc e in secur i ng relief ,
Will you please let us know whether we can place full
details of the matters mentioned, subs, 1, 2,. and 3, before
members o.c Parliament, and if not, to which of the three
items you object. Yours faithfully.
President, Secretary, A.N.B.S?
mm -_m cr. , . n«> »
Assn. of Natl. Liverpool, 30th January 1918.
British Subjects. ' ■ " "
G a rn p.
With reference to your letter Sf
'


29th January, ,
The matters you mention canno, be reierita
to individual Members of Parliament but should oe
ed" for consideration to the Official Visitor or tne defence
De'partment, ( # Holman , Commandant.
His Honour Liverpool, 22nd February 1910.
Mr, Justice Harvey,
Official Visitor c
Referring to the Governor General-s letter 01 January
14th, addressed to our solicitor, Mr, J and the
Camp Commandant 7 s letter to us of January 3^th ; . wax on v- 9
submit herewith for your information, we would liwe to learn
your views on the subject referred to,
\>*o mav mention that we appealed to H,<Ph aie eofeixior
General after having submitted our grievances to the damp
Commandant, the Official Visitors, and the Minister oi
Defence. We therefore do not understand why we are now
being referred back to your Honor o x .
We may also state tliat we have been repeatedly told
by your predecessors that they could, only deal wiuii com-
plaints about the treatment in the Internment Camps, ana the
General administration of the Camps, ana that they coul -
not di a cuss the general principles 01 internment enquiry,
trial or and the hardships resulting from our
unjustifiable internment,
Has this rule now been altered?
Res pe (31 fu 11 y you r s ,
Presidsnt, Secretary , A JT.B, 3,
.....— •»


Liverpool, September 9tb, 1917•
The Visitor, _
Mr. Adrian Knox, K.C. , Samp.
Sir '\-e are instructed by the Association of Naturalised
British subjects to make representations to you on t.ie
following matters : . j; G n n cqp(i
(1) We have repeatedly discussed
this proTieirwith you, and have asked you to ne3p us in our
efforts to secure an all-round increase ox Reallowance.
T i that so far only the Commandant 01 tne jut
Mh Military District has been instructed by Head
to pay an «t» 2/6 per '.eek t. tte m of
the allowance up to per ue ,x c •- n +v»<a-r
♦ v*r* V» CTy*i *t" C\ 1 PTI *V 0 X ' -X3»S 0 xilG r
gSe. tto %r.£Sr?e fr aS"»C« !? -vid kindly
thL After is put right and the increase . ho made
irt the other States as from the same date as m I,OV oOu -
?al< (2) Work: Our members are pleased to note that the
Commndant"is now endeavouring to provide permaneno buoh-
cien.rin"' work for married internees. Is there no
ye? of IxtdndiL this privilege to all Auetralian internee,
and to other classes of labour, inciuding cleri p
t-i\ a nans Instructions. Order ho. *. q9.-L2i« Ar - '.-,1 +nr
nade in"the"' last letter of the Camp Commandant to our
had drawn our attention to these inbtructi u. ' y
op ems to be known about them in the Camp, out froiu >hat
have heard from various sources, we have reason to
that they contain certain which aie of vi oal 11
portance to interned Australian suojects we Se'subiect
viewed the Intelligence Officer, kt, Lloyd, on tne subject,
who informed us that these instructions are for^^^enwal
and administrative use only and tnat the ful- -
disclosed to us, As the Camp Commandant has, however,
advised our Solicitor to get a copy from Melbourne
should be no objection to our being acquaintßd >ith a - 1»b
nn extract of those sections that might ht-i-p Uo to ob.ai
our release or secure the inquiry into our cases which we
have been trying to obtain for tne last twelve
Apart from the Camp Regulations, in which oui oohcxtor
is interested, our Association would like torhave a copy
an extract of the sections (if any) of the Aliens i 9 struc~
tions ae,! ing internment of British Subjects
(■X'bff "aeon to believe that the Alien. Instruction,
lay down the rule, for instance, tnav a British ouojv
interned on the Arrant of the Minister ot x«ter.oe,
should be supplied with a written statement of t.xe in
formation on which his internment d ®" ci :* t " n )
hns never been done with any member of oui Association;.
(b) The terms /on which an interned British Suoject may
be released agfe allowed to reside in the Commonwealth.
classes of'interned British subjects which may
be allowed to leave the Commonwealth and gc> to °ther
parts of the British Empire or to neutral Cou.itxies.
Our reason for soliciting this information " •
viously many instructions have been
of Defence with a view to give us_ an opp<or ~ r( f d
mir cases or secure our release, out the letter - - /
•us from.His Excellency the Governor-General proves a
number of these instructions have never been ca^r ;
non-observance has caused us and our -afflJ-xw &reat
hardships and losses which might otherwise nave seen avt
Yours faithfully,
President Secretary A. U. B, b.


Philip Street; Sydney,
October 2nd; 1917.
Messrs. Kersten & Grloe,
Concentration Camp.
With reference to your request made to rae on the 9th
September last, I have to inform you that, on the 6th July
last, instructions were issued to all districts notifying
that the increas*e from 10/~ to 12/6 could be anticipated.
On 2/8/17: War Financial Regulation 74 was. amended as
above, and made the increase payable from l/7/l?' •
Sg dA dr ia n Kin ox
Official Visitor,
m-m mm mm »•?* wm < R*» »«» T«• <~mm w* «M» P« **m W cr»
Liverpool, Bth October, 1917.
The Provost Marshall,
Hobart.
rr e have been informed by our Tasmanian members
ask you why the increase of 2/6 in the allowances to wives
of destitute internees has so far been withheld from the
women who reside in Tasmania 0 We have been, informed by
the Official Visitor that War Financial Regulation 74 was
amended on the 2nd August, 1917* As far bask as July 6th
instructions were issued to you that the increase could be
anticipated. Hew South Wales has paid the increase from
the day of issue of the new instructions and according to
these instructions has made the increase payable from the
Ist July, 1917. Even Western Australia lias paid for some
weeks now.
Yours obediently,
President Secretary A.N.3.5,
mm mm mm mm mm mm -a* mm mm mm xm mm m*j
The Secretary, Liverpool, October 23rd, 1917.
Asscn. Natd. British Subjects,
Gamp.
With reference to your letter dated Bth October, ad-
dressed to Provost Marshall. Tasmania, I have to inform you
that Head Quarters 6th Military District now notify that
the question of granting allowances to the wives of de-
stitute internees is at the discretion of the District
Commandant, and that the extra allowance of 2/6 per week
has already been granted in cases where circumstances war-
ranted it.
Sgd. R. Ilolman Lt. Col.
Commandant.
Liverpool, Bth October, 1917.
The Provost Marshall, Adelaide^
V T e have been instructed by our S, A, Members to akk you
why the increase of 2/6 in the allowances to wives of de-
stitute internees have so gar been withheld from the women
who reside in S a A." V7e have been informed by the Official
Visitor that har Financial Regulation 74 was amended on
the 2nd August 191?. As far back as July 6th, instructions
were issued to you that the increase could be anticipated.
New South Vales has paid the increase from the day of issue
of the new instructions, and according to these instructions
has made the increase payable from the Ist July, 193-7. Even
Western Australia has paid for some weeks new ,
Yours obediently,
President Secretary A.N,3,8,


Liverpool, Ist Uovember, 1917.
Prisoner vr ar A. nerstcn. ,
""ith reference to your letter of btn October* ad-
dressed to the Provost he retell Adelaide re allowance
wives of-destitute internees, I hf.ve to inform you that
Head Quarters 4th Military District state that it is -ho
custom to pay up to 10/- .per week if it can tot
tte circumstances warrant same, and m accoi dance wivh t
authority recently given, an increase of 2/6 per week v:hen
that Department is satisfied that the payment of such increase
is warranted. ~
Sgd. R; Holman Lt. Col.
Commandant.
Liverpool, November Ist, '1917.
The Honourable the Minister of State for Defence,
Melbourne.
•
•"p have 'been informed toy several members of the Associ-
ation of Naturalised British Subjects of this Camp, that
thev have been in communication witn the
De-fence with a. view to obtain a written statement ox tne
evidence on which you decided to have them interned. It
is stated that the replies received from your Department say.-
That the arrest and internment of these persons was strictly
within tho law, or n , . r /, «
that the applicant was interned under Regulation ;6A of
the- Car Precautions Regulations and neps no, entitled
to the information which he desires to ootain, or
that the Defence Department has evidence in its possess-
ion tha.t the applicant has pro-enemy sympathies ana is
regarded as likely to be dangerous, and that he is not en-
titled to be supplied with the information desired oy .iim.
V- T e have now been instructed by the executive of our Associ-
ation to make representations to you as follows :-
It a opears that the officers of your Department who have
signed most of the' replies, on behalf of the Acting oecretary,
have misinterpreted the regulations, -and^ instructions re-
lating to such applications. Me may point out tnao all no
applicants are naturalised or natural born oubjecto ,
arrested and interned on a Harrafct, bearing your signature
or that of a Cabinet Minister or Officer delegated oy you.
when the Members of our Association asked to be supplied
in addition to the copy of their arrest and internment warrants
with a written sta t ement con ta ining' tno specific reasons io r
their internment as supplied to you in the sworn evidence of
certain informants, they relied on the rules laid do*m by
Mr. Trumble in the Aliens Instructions Ho. 2 191;, wnich
instructions were, wo understand, issued by your authority
(for the guidance of all concerned), and. parti eala ~iy on e
following section, which we have been told, is Section - 17P
of Part V of tho said instructions, and which we believe,
reads as follows:- , r , T ,
"whenever a person is arrested on the Minisoer s warrano,
he should be supplied"with a- statement in writing of the
evidence against him, and he should be informed that Hie
Minister may, if ho so requests, 'Authorise an inquiry
to be held under the Suspected Persons Inquiry Order
1915. -The statement should follow, as nearly as possible,
the language of tho statutory declaration on which his
internment has been recommended, but the names of the per-
sons giving information should not bo given, and,^ if neces-
sary, the language of the statement should be varied, so
as not to disclose who wore the informers.


*Te beg to draw your attention to the fact that this
c-Ocrtion (if correctly quoted) refers to all persons arrested
on Minister's warrant. It does not distinguish "between
natural corn and naturalised suojects, nor between persons
arrested under section 55 and 56 or 56a of the War Precau-
tions Regulations. Of course, this section of the Aliens
Instructions Ho. 2, 191? may since have been repealed or
amended, but it is positively'stated that it was in force
at the time when most of the members of our Association wore
arrested and interned.
In view of the importance of the matter and of the great
principles of justice and of liberty of the subject involved
(and we have no doubt that the insertion of this section in
the Aliens Instructions was prompted by a keen sense of
justice), we would bo" most grateful to you if you would
kindly £>rdor a full investigation of this matter, and if
such an inquiry should bear out our statements, instruct the
officers of your Department to comply with the requests made
by our members and supply them with a statement in writing
of the evidence against them.
We note that section 17D of the Aliens Instructions 170.
2, 1915 provides that "the names of the persons giving in-
formation should not be given and if necessary the language
of the statements should be varied so as not to disclose
who were the informants." Section 6A (3) of the Natural-
isation Act, 1903-17» contains a similar rule with regard to
the disclosure of the names of persons who have made repre-
sentations with regard to applicants for naturalisation, how-
ever, in that section there is an important proviso stating
that the contents of the statutory declaration embodying
such representations may be disclosed without the consent of
such parson for the purpose of prosecution for perjury. May
we suggest that it would be in the interests of justice to
have section 17D of the Aliens Instructions No, 2, 1915, (if
still in existence in the original form as quoted above), amen-
ded to make such a prosecution possible where there is a well-
founded reason to believe that perjury lias been committed for
the purpose of having a British subject interned.
Awaiting the favour of your early reply,
Ne have etc.
President Secretary A.N.B.'S
Department of Defence,
Memorandum for Melbourne, 12th Novr. 1917.
A. Iters ten and J. Gloe, Concentration Camp.
In reply to your letter of November Ist, addressed to
the Minister for Defence, you are informed that ' • the
passage you quote from the Aliens Instructions omits the
words which limit the application of these instructions to
persons interned under Regulation 55 or Regulation 56 of
the War Precautions Regulations 1915.
The instructions do not provide that persons arrested
under Regulation shall be furnished with a statement of
evidence against them.
Sgd. T. Trumble,
Acting Secretary.
The Secretary, Liverpool, 18th Hovr. 1917.
Department of Defence, Melbourne.
Sir, -
We are in receipt of your letter No. 84-087 of the 12th
inst., from which we take it that paragraph 17D of Section 5 N3B


of the Aliens Instructions Ho, 2,1915? has now "been amended
so as to apply only to persons interned under Regulation 55
or Regulation 56 of the War Precautions Regulations 1915*
We would "be greatly obliged if you would kindly let us have
a copy of this amended paragraph so that we know exactly where
we stand.
In the meantime, we shall advise those of our Members
who have been interned under Regulation 55 or Regulation 56
to communicate with you in order to obtain a statement of
the evidence against them.
Yours faithfully,
President Secretary A. Hi B. S.
Department of Defence,
Memorandum for Melbourne, 28th Hovr. 1917.
A. Kersten and P. Gloe,
In reply to your letter of the lBth November 1917> y° u
are informed that the document entitled "Aliens Instructions
Ho, 2, 1915" is published for "official use only" and its
contents are not intended for general use.
As regards your request to be informed how those
stahd, who are interned under War Precautions Regulation 56a,
your attention is invited to the following statement at the
foot of the Warrant "Provided that any representations
agains.t this order by the said (a ,, eJOO: , (os ,shall be forth-
with transmitted to and will be duly considered by me 0 "
Such persons are therefore at liberty to make represen-
tations to the Minister,
Sgd, T, Trumble
Acting Secretary.
mm 'mm •*» c* mm r-» i-« r»o «♦ «■•*> trjn iwj
Liverpool, 22ndPebrua ry t , 1918 ,
His Honour Mr. Justice Harvey,
Official Visitor.
Sir,-
I beg to submit herewith the correspondence I have
had with the Defence Department regarding the circumstances
surrounding my internment, and in view.of the Minister's
evasive replies, I would thank you to ascertain from the
Minister for Defence, with what intention Section 17D of
the Aliens Instructions 1915 No. 2 was framed.
Besides my own, numerous other applications were made
for a statement in writing of the evidence on which the
internment was decided, but the rules laid down in the above
Section have not been observed by the Department in a single''
instance,
Hespectfully yours,
Sgcl. A, Kersten,
*».-*• V* »U> w «» ia «.» sr» t~» tr;« W.» at* w»> ca» «TJ»


y-
• •
.
.
.
-ill
.
i


Liverpool, 24th October,
1917.
The Consul for Sweden,
Sydney.
Sir, -
We beg to hand enclosed copy of a letter which we
addressed to-day to the Consul for Switzerland, on behalf of
the majority of the voluntary internees of this Camp.
As many Austrian Subjects are included in their number,
we would be grateful to you if yo l ' would also communicate
with the Honourable the Minister of State for Defence,
Melbourne, with a view to giving our proposition your fullest
support.
Yours faithfully,
Ac Nr- L. 4
Liverpool, 24th October, 19^7•
Marc Rutty Esq,,
Consul for Switzerland, Sydney,
Sir, -
Referring to the interview we had with you yesterday,
on behalf of the majority of the voluntary internees of this
Ghmp, we beg to reiterate herewith the scheme of securing
conditional release and work for these internees as ex-,
plained to you in detail verbally, which we would thank you
to give your fullest support with the Federal Minister of
Defence a
Our porposition is to allow voluntary internees who
are willing to go and are capable of doing the work to live
in separate camps in New South Wales or Queensland, where
they'might be employed with a restricted liberty on parole,
in bush clearing, prickly pear destruction, rabbit and
mice destruction, etc, For such purposes, the internees
might be used by the Federal Government or be hired out by
the Defence Department to State Governments or to approved
private employers at prevailing union wages, and the Defence
Department might retain half the difference between union and
camp wages (2/- per day) as a refund for the food and accommo-
dati on and outfit to be provided for these men.
For your guidance, we beg to state that so far about
700 able bodied men have declared their willingness to sign
on for this class of work, on the terms mentioned, This
number may include a certain percentage of men who are not
voluntary internees and who have handed in their names by
mistake. Of these 700 internees, 74 are Austrians, 65
naturalised Germans, and the rest German subjects; about 40
have their families residing in Australia, As many of them
would like to have their wives and children' near them, it
is suggested that the Defence Department might give them the
option of living together with their families at their
place of work, and that therefore a separate camp for these
married men with families shoulcpSe established. Considering
their small number, this should not be a difficult matter
to arrange 0 The families living in the married men 1 8 camp
might be deprived of the separation allowances and be gramted
the ordinary rations as distributed to women and children
at Bourke«
If these voluntary internees ' camps are a success,, the
Defence Authorities might decide to bring under the scheme
those other internees formerly resident in this Country against
whom they have less suspicion, subject to such undertakers as
they may think necessary to impose c
Wo may point out that under such a scheme, these in-
ternees would be living far from any place whore the Government


might regard them as a possible source of mischief. The
Government would save a portion of the money now expended
in keeping these men: and those of their families who are
residing in Australia would be relieved of the necessity .of
endeavouring to live on the very inadequate sum now allowed
by the Department for their maintenance o
We understand that thousands of internees have been
released under similar conditions from the camps in the
belligerent countries in Europe as well as in Canada,
South Africa, etc, f and there is no reason why the scheme
should not work out satisfactorily here.
Thanking you for the assistance you so kindly pro-
mised to give in the matter and awaiting the favour of
your early reply,
Yours fa .1 th fu 11 y
Sgd, Ac kersten
Mr. A. Kersten Sydney, 27th Novr. , 1917.
Concentration Camp.
Sir, -
With reference to my communication of the 27th ult s ,
No. 1321, I have to inform you that the Department of Defence
at Melbourne, has intimated as follows concerning the appli-
cation for conditional release and work under certain con-
ditions : -
"With further reference to your letter No, 1321 of the
sth inst,, forwarding communication from xnternees of
the German Concentration Canro at Liverpool relative to
their desire for conditional release and work under the
conditions in their communication., I have the honour to
inform you that this matter has received careful con-
sideration, but the request cannot be acceded to 0"
Res pect fully yours,
S g d 0 Marc Rutty,
Consul for Switzerland
in charge of German interests.
The Editor, Liverpool, 4th January, 1918.
"Sunday Times",
Sydney t
Sir,-
In your issue of December l6th, 1917? you published an
article dealing with the Holdsworthy Camp, and the possibi-
lities of making use of the internees' labour for improving
certain sites and creating national parks or recreation re-
serves .
It may be of interest ,to you to hear that for some con-
siderable time, the executive officers of our Association have
been working hard to .find a" solution of this problem, En-
closed you will find a copy of the proposal we made to the
Military Authorities last months We regret to say that the
Defence Department did not approve of our scheme,, We under-
stand of course that there were certain difficulties in the
way, and that, whilst the referendum campaign was in full swing
the Minister of Defence was not prepared to make any alter-
ations in the internment conditions and' to embark on work
propositions which might lead to controversy and criticism in
the newspapers c There can be no doubt that public opinion,
as voiced by the majority of Australian newspapers and maga-
zines, has always been advocating a severe treatment of all
people of enemy origin, in particular of the interned section,
and has been adverse to an employment of the labour of inter-


nees in any other locality but the Koldsworthy Camp and
its immediate surroundings. You have non published the first
commonsense article on the subject, and as we believe that, you
mean what you write, we are sending you the enclosed copy of
the work propositions we have already made, which may be use-
ful to you if you intend to follow the matter up.
Will you at the same time kindly allow us to correct a
few erroneous ideas, According to the Hague Convention, only
a small percentage of the internees at Holdsworthy could be
forced to work, Fully 90 per cent in this and the other
Australian Internment Camps, (Trial Bay, Berrima and Bourke),
are civilian internees, Germany and Austria-Hungary do not
compel their civilian internees to work, There are several
hundreds of voluntary internees in this Camp and more than
300 internees arc naturalised or natural born British subjects,
interned to a large extent for reasons unknown to themselves..
For their internment, there is no precedent at all and no rule
laid down in international conventions. These people come
from all classes of society and all stages of life. Most
of them would be willing to do suitable work in order to es-
cape from the dangerous monotony of the Camp life, and assist
their families financially, but they would only consent to
do such work on fair and equitable terms, not merely in return
for their keep.
Yours faithfully,
President Secretary A. IT. B. S.
(This letter was returned with a note from the Intelligence
Officer that "letters to newspapers are not allowed").
WORK PROPOSITIONS,
A, Camp.
1, Piggery and Poultry ihrm
2, Vegetable Farm
3. Soap ]&ctory
4, Bakery
1 5. Boot and Shoe making (Note by mil-
) o. Thctory for ammonia compounds from Urine(itary offic-
ifenual / 7, Lime Kiln (er -"300 tons
\ 8, Ife.t-weaving (from 5,000
9, Basket-making (people."
10, Manufacture of nets and tents and Kit-bags
11. Broom making
i 12 r Wood-turning and general wood-working
Knitting socks and jerseys (knitting machines?)
ni . ,/14. Canteen, store and office work
Government statistics
b.iects)
B. Outside the Camp (Baroling Australian sub.i
1, Roadbuilding on Crown Land and military reserves
2, Clearing and preparing for'agriculture of Crown land
3• River improvements
4. Rabbit and mice destruction
5. Prickly pear destruction
o. Harvesting work.


Gross profit for 12 months
Less expenses:
£ 2,162:10:
Plant,, including -wages for erecting etc.
Incubators £10. fuel for same £10
Permanent wages @2/- per day
Interest on £600
Grain and other additional feeding
material
£75
20
365
45
250
• - • -
Hett Profit for 12 months
£1,407:10:
Amount at present realised by sale of
refuse (according to figures supplied
by Gapt. Stewart Septr. 29th 191?)
52 weeks @ £12/10/-
650:-:-
Surplus for 12 months -
£.... -
£757:10:
I 'L) rr CT v if* <■> *i
• x i.y a ♦ -*- 1 --
The offal of the Internment Camp, the guard's quarters,
officers' mess, Sing-Sing, Hospital and special camps is
sufficient to feed 100 store pigs and 1,000 fowls.
The fattened pigs could "be sold every second months
The profit for twelve months would work out as follows :-
6 x 100 store pigs sold would redliee at £4 £2,400:-:.»
1,000 fowls would supply about 15,000 doz,
eggs at say l/~ 7
they would further produce for sale 900
roosters at 2/6 112:10;
whilst 900-1 s OOO fowls would "be added to
stOGh at about 2/- each 100:-:-
plus value of original stock (1,000 fowls
@ 2/6) 125i:v.Lr:
Value of sales plus stock at end of 12 months £ 3,4b7:10:
Less pigs purchased 6 x 100 @ £2 each £l2OO
» fowls fl I*ooo 2/6 " 125
men
ll♦ Vegetable. Farm,
It is proposed to utilise 42 acres of land in the
vicinity of the old Light Horse Camp as follows:
For Acres Estiirated crop At Value
for 12 months.
Potatoes 20 200 tons £5 per ton £l,OOO
- / oA no ii <i OA ft
Turnips 6 80 fi 3 11 "
Cabbage 4 24 c 000 heads 34. per head 300
Pumpkins 8 75 tons <£3 p er on
Onions 2 6 " £7/10 w 45
Tomatoes &
C\x cumbers 2 about ™I9J2
Total yield Value about £2 P llO


*
£1.645: L.
£ 465: :
£2,110
Value brt. forward
Cost of Seeds
£75
Potatoes
1:10:
Turnips
Cabbage
Others
12:10:
Working Expenses
tenure 75"
Wages 1,000:
Horses 100:
Depreciation of
Watering plant
(Est inflated at £lOOO
inclo installation) :
Repairs and sundries 50:
Interest r /i% on
£1 p 000 Hi—L.
Nett profit per year
Employiiient for 25 -30 en
111. Soa-p Eactor
According to figures supplied by Captain Stewart, 29/9/1?,
ivc npr month or 906 cases 75 lbs.
The camp uses s;°7° ooap ijio.iwi ui 7
per year at 44-/2 per case £2,005: 3:
The fat available from the internment camp
amounts to 24 cwt, 1 qr. 0 37/9 P er CVft • =
£45:15 : 5 P er nfionth or per year
549: 5:
The nett cost of the soap required per
£1,455:18
year is therefore
7 lbs. fat plus Caustic Soda and water ma±ce
about 12 lbs. soap ,
2,716 lbs, fat therefore make about ±o».
Soap or about
745 ca.ses x>er year
The expenses of a soap factory for working ui
the above quantity of flat would be:
(2 men at 2/- per day for 180 days ~3°
%gea q mn ~ 4/. -- « » 180 36
the above quantity ox iau uo.
(2 men at 2/- per day for 180 days
'feges mn .. 4/. « « >' 180 " 36
{Buildings <£3o )
lrt "" t IfooLn 8 3 ; 15 ;
Depreciation) J )
£5O
Q.
o • •
Fue l " _ _
Caustic Soda at the rate of 1 lb. per ,
every 7 lbs. fot -42 cwts „ 75/- °wt. ley:10- ■
Total manufacturing cost £266. 5-
for 74-5 case s
Plus 163 cases to be bought « Q . IQ! 2 £626: 4:2
at 44/2 per case ")?7* x
, r\r\o. cnc ono n VeaT £829:13*1^
Nett saving on 908 cases soap per year
ilovment for
m <— ri
11 W » 1 p


Wages and fuel for 3 ovens
9 men @4/- £1:16:
3 men @ 5/~ :1?:
Managing, recording, buying &c.l: J:
"Pi rfiwood :12:
4: 8:
Total cost of 3,000 loaves per day
or per year
Plus depreciation and interest on cost
of 3 ovens, estimated at £800 including
installation
£50:18:
£18,578:10:
500: :
Total cost per year
£19,078:10:
(To cater for ID. 000 consumers at 1-^lbs. per
head and day).
Quantity of bread required per day about 12,000 lbs.
© 4 lbs, per loaf - loaves.
Cost of Material * (l bag of 1?0 lbs, Flour will
11 i In i i mi —in i "fcii iil rL*-.wrwr»a«iiiuii»-i m '«f-y> / «
make $0 loaves per day: 60 bags about
4 tons 2 cwts. © £ll per ton • •
Yeast (l 5 lbs, © 3-/6) and sundries 1:10:
According to figures supplied by the Quarter Master, Capt,
Stewart on Septr 0 29th, 1917; Defence Department pays
at present 14/3 per 100 lbs. This would mean, at the rate
of 3,000 loaves per day, 12.000 lbs £^1 : 207:10:
per year as compared with 19?076»1Q_>
Saving per year £12,129:
Emplovment for 12-15 men
V. Boot and Shoe Makingo
Cost of Making Handsewn
Canvas boots or shoes.
l7 t
1/6
1
3/~
3
£1,125:
Cost per pair
7/6
3,000 pairs cost
as compared with 3»000
military boots © 13/"
1-950: t
£ 825:
Saving
Less 20 pairs lasts © 5/-
£5
Tools 25 •
Nett saving on 3,000 pairs £ 795 :
Emelovment for 20 men,
ii i ■ ■ ■
Holdbworthy, October 14th 1917.


The Secretary, Liverpool, sth Hovember 1917*
Department of Defence, Melbourne.
Sir, -
On the 26th March, 19&7 t we submitted 5 claims for lost
parcels on behalf of members of our Association to a Com-
mission which was at that time sitting at this Camp, to en-
quire into the lost luggage and parcels- question*
Our claims have never been acknowledged and. verbal en-
quiries have not given any satisfaction*
We have, now been instructed.by the Executive Committee
to,ascertain from you.what decisl on ; that Commission lias arrived
at and when compensation.will be paid*
Awaiting your reply,
Yours faithfully,
President Secretary A. N. B. S.
Department of Defence,
Memorandum for Melbourne, 27th Novr, 1917.
A. Kersten and P. Gloe
Concentration Camp,
With reference to your letter of the sth November, you
are informed that claims in regard to losses of parcels are
recorded by the Board individually
•' The Department has nothing to report in regard to the
matters mentioned in your letter,
Sgd. T. Trumbie
Acting Secretary,
Memorandum for Sydney, 26th June, 1917.
A s Kersten, Concentration Camp,
With reference to your request made on the 20th May last,
and'.forwarded by me to the Department cf Defence, I have to
inform you that I have received the underwritten reply thereto.
Sgd. Adrian Knox
Official Visitor.
"With reference to your Liverpool 20th May, I have to inform
you that, after consideration, it has been decided that
internees will be permitted to obtain copies of the War Pre-
cautions Acts or Regulations from the Government Printer.
The Regulations or Acts required must be purchased by the
prisoners themselves."
The Official Visitor, Liverpool, 26th November 1917.
His Honor Mr. Justice Harvey,
Camp.
Sir,
Referring to the ma.tters we submitted to you, under
instruction from the Association of Naturalized British
Subjects, when you visited this Camp last month, we should
be glad to hear from you whether the following requests of
the Association have been granted;~
(a.) Permission to obta in - delivery of the two parcels of
The Commonwealth Gazette sent to us by the Government Print-
er Melbourne on an order f initialled and approved by the
Camp Commandant, paid for by the Association, and now held
up by the Military Censor at the Camp,
(b) Permission to obtain delivery of the Commonwealth
Gazette for the current quarter of 1917? .for which period
we sent a subscription, fully paid up and initialled by the
Camp Commandant, ; to: Melbourne 0 A considerable number of
copies have been.delivered to us against this subscription,
but delivery has been withheld for the last four weeks,
N45.


evidently under orders from the Camp Commandant.
(cj Permission to subscribe and obtain delivery of any
future Commonwealth ahd State Government Gazettes „
(in this connection, we again strongly emphasize the point
that as British Subjects we are, entitled to order and receive
copies'of these Gazettes, and of any Commonwealth or State
Acts or Regulations that apply to us, - If the Military
authorities persist in their present attitude we must hold
them responsible for a.ny breaches of the law that might
result # from our ignorance.)
(d) Payment of the extra allowance of 2/6 d. per week, as
from July Ist 191?* in all Australian States to all the wives
of internees,.who have been receiving the separation allow-
ance o
(e) Supply of a copy of the War/Financial Regulation 74,
and of the amendment of this Regulation, dated August 2nd
19170 • ' "
(f) Leave to be granted to our President (Mr. A c Kersten)
to visit ciur solicitor, Mr o J.W.Abigail at his Office in
Sydney in connection with the Association's petition to His
Exce 1 l'ency the Governor Genera 1 0
Referring to the annexed copies of our letter to the
Minister, dated November Ist and his reply dated. 12th
instant, we shall be glad to be supplied with a copy of the
amended section, 17D of section 5 of the Aliens Instructions
No* 2 ? 191;'0 Yours respectfully,
Pre si d e nt. Secre ta ry „ A.H r 3. S,
Memo for . - •> * Supreme Court,
Mr 0 AKe-rs ; teiX" S ydn ey ,
r\ n r\
cve - -
On enquiry at the Censor Is Office, I was told that
so far as he is aware, there is no objection to the intern-
ees i"e oeiving cop las of" the Govsmurent Go, zette ,
Signed)- J, M, Harvey,
Official Visitor.
22nd Janua r y 1918,.
mrnt txm mm
His'-Ilo'ndr •: Liverpool, 29th January 1918,
Mr, Justice. Harvey, •
Sydney,
Sir,
We are instructed to acknowledge the receipt of your
letter of Jphe 22nd. Vnstant f addressed to our President
regarding; the. delivery -of the Commonwealth Gazette e The
Camp. osnsor does not regard your communication as a suffic-
ient authority to deliver the Gazette, to.us, and we have
been instructed, by him to apply to the Defence Department
f0 r a spe c- if i c perm it, w-hl oh we ha v e done, • "
1 We bog to confirm our letter of January 12th re
censorship, and shall be glad to receive your early reply,.
Re s pe c tfully yours,
Pr es ident c Seqretary. A JST.E.S.
w.» W-Ji cm «•>. MM Cl* M MM r~m' M».
. . " . ' . ■ • '
The Secretary. Liverpool,.29th. January 1918.
Defence Department,
Melbourne,
Sir s
On. November 26th .1917? we wrote .to the Official Visit-
or as : follows:-. : .
(See previous page to end Part c.)
v The only reply we received to the above letter was. a
communication from the Honorable Mr J Justice Harvey, dated
N46,


2 2nd January 1918, reading as follows:- "On enquiry at the
Censor's Office, I was told that so far as lie is
there is no objection to the internees receiving copies of
the Government Gazette" o
The Camp Censor does not regard this communication as
a permission to obtain delivery of the Commonwealth Gazette,
We therefore beg to ask you for a specific permit and a clear
answer to the three points we submitted to the Official
Visitor on November 26th *
Thanking you in anticipation of an early reply,
You r s fa ithf u 11 y,
President* Secretary, A.N.B.S
Memo for Department of Defence,
A * Kers ten and J.Gloe, * Melbourne, 11th February 1918.
G, C. C. .
In reply to your letter of the 29th January, you are
informed that permission has been given for Government Gaz-
ettes to be allowed to enter Concentration Camps.
(Sgd)- J* Trumble,
Acting Secretary.
Prisoners of War Liverpool, 14th December 1917*
A« Kers ten and G.Gloe c
I have to inform you that in acc or da,nee with
instructions received from the Defence Department, permiss-
ion cannot be given for you to interview a solicitor unless
you desire to do so in connection with business or
private affairs*
(Sgd 0 ) - J o P,Allsoph,
Major for Commandant.
The Commandant, Liverpool, 4th January 1918-
Camp,
Sir,
We dulynreceived your letter of the 14th ultimo, from
which we take it that we can individually or jointly inter-
view a solicitor in Sydney, when we consider it necessary
to do so in connection with our business -or private affairs,
but that we are not allowed to discuss with him verbally the
affairs of the Association of Naturalized British Subjects
of 'this Camp, or those of its members,
Kindly confirm that this interpretation of your letter
is correct.and oblige.
Yours faithfully,
President 0 Secretary
A.N.B.S*
Memorandum for
Supreme Court,
A.Kersten & P o Gloe.
Sydney,
I am in receipt of copies of instructions forwarded
from the Adjutant General, from which I gather that instruct-
ions have been issued to the Commandant at the Concentration
Camp with respect to future arrangements as to interviews
between internees and their solicitors, and dealing in
particular with the request of Kersten and Gloe to see Mr.
Abigail. . \ - TIT „
(Sgd.) - J, M 0 Harvey,
Official Visitor.
_l7th December 1917.
His Honor Liverpool, 4th January 1918.
Mr c Jus ti ce Harvey,
Sydney.
N47 0


Sir,
We are in receipt of your letter of the 17th ultimo,
referring to interviews with solicitors,, The information
received from the Camp Commandant on the subject is not
satisfactory to us $ and we shall be pleased to discuss the
matter with you verbally when you come out again.
We are somewhat surprised to be without any reply to
all the other points submitted to you in writing on the
occasion of your October and November visits to this Camp,
in particular to the requests made to you on November 26th,
We shall be glad if you will kindly give these matters
your early attention, and return to us the copy of Mr.
Abigail's last letter to H, E. Governor as promised.
Yours respectfully.
Presidento Secretary, A 0 N.8.5.
«■» mm mm ram m:m rem tr* je-n am
Prisoners of War, Liverpool, '/ih Ja-nuary 1918.
A. Kersten and G.Gloeh
With reference to your letter of the 4th instant
I.have to inform you that you may each individually inter-
view a solicitor concerning your business and private
affairs at this Camp, if you satisfy me that it is necess-
ary for you to do so o
You will not be permitted to consult a solicitor
concerning your treatment whilst interned,
(Sgd„)~ R 0 Holman,
Lto Colonel. Commandant.
mm r_«> .•» *j, «r» tn» a * MM u a
ihe Honorable Liverpool, 11th January 1918.
Mr." Justice Harvey,
Official Visitor. Cam p„
Sir,
We are insuiucced by the Executive of the Association of
Naturalized British Subject's of this Camp to submit to you
the attached letter from the Commandant, dated 7th January
191 o <
You vil.<_ notice that in this letter the Commandant refus-
es us permission to consult a solicitor concerning our
treatment whilst interned,
We do not know of any law that would give the Command-
ant power to make such an order, and it would interest
us to learn on what Act or War Precautions Regulations the
Military authorities are relying in this matter,, If the
Commandano were to prevent us by force from consulting our
solicitors individually on any matters connected with our
liberty or any occurrences that w e might consider to be
illegal acus or violations of our Constitutional rights,
he-would, in our opinion, commit a serious offence (See
Commonwealth Crimes Act N0.12 1914, section 28)„
We trust that Your Honor has a Judge of the Supreme
Court of this state,' will, not tolerate such a flagrant abuse
of the fundamental principles- of British Law and and.
that you will be good enough, to recommend to the Military
.authorities to refrain from any such attemtpto interfere with
our citizen rights, T ~ , „
Re spe ct fu J. 1 y yours ,
President, Secretary. A.N.B.S.
• • Have the Military authorities any intention, in a
similar way u) inuert-e-ro with letters addressed by us to
our Parliamentary Representatives?
"•* i"* «»• » < I m CKI IV irv
The Honorable
Holdsworthy ? 12th January 1918.
Mr, Justice Harvey.
Sydney.


Sir,
A3 requested, we beg herewith to hand you copy
of the Camp Commandant f b letter of January 7th ±9lB,
referring to coisultati ons with solicitors, and we shall be
glad if Your Honor will be good enough to. our com-
plaint to the proper authorities together with your recom-
mendations„
We sincerely trust that you have not carried out your
intention to resign, as under the present circumstances,
it would be a calamity for us if we were to lose the help
and support which your unbiassed and sympathetic advice
will always mean to us.
Respectfully yours.
President. Secretary. A.H.8.3,
P.H.~ v/e p es ted the above letter in accordance with your
instructions in a closed envelope, but had it promptly return-
ed to us with a pencil note by the Censor's Office - "Returned
Letters must not be sealed up, R,W t " We then explained
to the Censor's staff what you told us, regarding the
censoring of your correspondence, but they insist that
letters to you must be left open. The last letter received
from you was opened. The envelope bears the Official
Censor's stamp and the initials of the Intelligence Officer
and the stamp has been torn off to see^ whether there was any
communication from you underneath. Were the remarks you
made abort the censorship made in error or are the Camp
officers and the Censor(s staff overstepping their author-
ity? Kindly explain and oblige. G.C.C. l6th January.


r
i
'
■
■■
>
■
i
■ . • - • .
i
■
■
■
-
■
*
■ * ■
■ •
■ - . ■ - ■
.
-
.
:
.
.
*
.
\
'
.
-.
v
'
■" *: V, .. • . V '■ - , - ' *
:
■ t
]
I
"
1
I
m
1
I
I


Liverpool 5 January 14th, 1918.
Mr. Jame 0 W 0 A"biga il,
77-79> Elizabeth Street, Sydney
Sir, -
We beg to hand you enclosed copies of the correspondence
we had with the Military Authorities and the Official Visitor
concerning consultations with you 0
You will take it from this correspondence that the
Camp Authorities or Headquarters 'Melbourne seem to be deter-
mined to prevent us from obtaining your advice regarding
questions of internment and on our trea tinent a s internees .
This would mean that we could no longer avail ourselves of
your services in our efforts to 'have our position and treat-
ment improved*
You will notice that we have lodged a protest against
this remarkable order with the Official Visitor who has
promised to look in to the matter. We- shall let know
the result.
We further beg to enclose copy of a letter written by
a number of our members to the Official Visitor, Mr. Justice
Harvey, on the subject of visits to this camp. This letter
will shew you that matters are'getting from bad to worse.
The only answer the Defence Department .has so far given to
this complaint consists in a restriction of visiting days
from one per week to one per fortnight,
To illustrate the callousness of the treatment meted
out to our families and ourselves we might mention that the
direct result of their experience at the Camp at Christmas
were more than 40 cases of sickness of women and children.
Kindly file all this material for future reference.
Have you had a reply from the Official Secretary to the
Governor-General?
Youi-s faithfully,
Sgd 6 A 0 Ker st sn J c Gloe
President Secretary
4 enclosures A 0 N, 3 e S 0
mm mm r** m-» «r*» amn «V* lyi Co fcrj r« *««» mm
Prisoners of War Liverpool, 15th January, 1918.
A t Kersten and J, Gloe o
Your letter to J c W. Abigail Esq. of 14th January is
re turne dhe r ewi th„
You are referred to my A/18/93 °f 7th January, in
whichr/you were informed that you would not be permitted to
consult a Solicitor concerning your treatment whilst interned.
As the matter has already been referred by you to the
Official Visitor it will receive due consideration.
Sgd„ R, Holman Lt. Col.
Commandant.
%
l<) *B> t*a» »if CJ» r.-» *-» r»» tJT» *%» • c«« »wi i«r »;m
Liverpool, January l6th, 1918.
Lt. Col c Holman, D„ S c 0.
C omma ndan t, Ca rnp, -
Sir,- ■;
In reply to your letter of the Ijth inst,, we beg to
say that we do not profess to be authorities on the English
language and that we always most carefully avoid doing any-
thing against your orders. We therefore looked up Annan-
da 1e ! s English Dicllonary before w0 wrole our letter to Mr.
Abigail and in this Dictionary we found the meaning of the
word "consull" deflned as foilows:- ■
:i to take advice of, to seek the opinion of as a guide to
"one's own judgment, to have recourse to for information
"or instruction, to regard or have reference or respect to
"in judging or acting (to consult one's safety or one's
"means j. "


You will admit that none of these definitions could
poMtbly apply to our letter. We therefore return the let-
ter to Mr. Abigail with enclosures and trust that you will now
forward the whole to the addressee or otherwise state more
fully what you are objecting to. Surely it cannot be your
intention to stop our correspondence with our solicitor al-
together.
Yours faithfully,
Sgd. A, Kersten J. Gloe
President Secretary
A. IT. B. S.
Prisoners/ War Liverpool, lBth January 1918
A. Kersten & G. Gloe.
With reference to your letter of the l6th inst., I have
to inform you that your letter of the 14th instant to Mr,
J. f, Abigail will not be forwarded and is returned herewith.
Sgd. B. Holman Lt. Col.
Commandant.
Liverpool, January 14th 1918
Mr. James W. Abigail,
77-79 Elizabeth St., Sydney.
Sir, -
We beg to hand you enclosed copies of the correspondence
we had with the Military Authorities and the Official Visitor
concerning consultations with you.
You will take it from this correspondence that the Camp
Authorities or Headquarters Melbourne seem to be determined
to prevent us from obtaining your advice regarding questions
of internment and on our treatment as internees. This would
mean that we could no longer avail ourselves of your services
in our efforts to have our position and treatment improved.
You will notice that we have lodged a protest against
this remarkable order with the Official Visitor who Ims pro-
mised to look into the matter. We shall let you know the
result o
We further beg to enclose copy of a letter written by a
number of our members to the Official Visitor, Mr. Justice
Harvey, on the subject of visits to this Camp. This letter
will show you that matters are getting from bad to worse. The
only answer the Defence Department has BO far given to this
complaint consists in a restriction of visiting days from
one per week to one per fortnight.
To illustrate the callousness of the treatment meted out
to our families and ourselves we might mention that the direct
result of their experience at the camp at Christmas were
more than 40 cases of sickness of women and children.
Kindly file all this material for future reference.
Have you had a reply from the Official Secretary to the
Governor-General?
Yours faithfully,
Sgd. A. Kersten J. Gloe
President Secretary
A . N. B. S.
Prisoners/War, Liverpool, 7th January 1918.
A, Kersten & G. Gloe.
With reference to your letter of 4th instant I have to
inform you that you may each individually interview a Solici-
tor concerning your business or private affairs, at this Camp,
if you satisfy me that it is necessary to do so.
You will not be permitted to consult a solicitor concern-
ing your treatment whilst interned, __„ Hnlmn „ n.M.
Sgd. R. Holman Lt.Col.
Commandant


Liverpool, January llth # 1918,
The Honorable Mr, Justice Harvey,
Official Visitor, Camp.
Sir,-
We are instructed by the Executive of the Association
of Naturalised British Subjects of this Camp, to submit to
you the attached letter from the Commandant, dated January 7th
1918,
You will notice that, in this letter, the Commandant ,
refuses us permission to consult a Solicitor concerning our
treatment whilst interned.
We do not know of any law that would give the Comman-
dant power to make such an order and it would interest us to
learn on what Act or War Precautions Regulation the Military
Authorities are relying in this matter. If the Commandant
were to prevent us by force from consulting our solicitors
individually on any matters connected with our liberty or
any occurrences that we might consider illegal acts or
violations of our constitutional rights, he would in our
opinion, commit a serious offence (see Commonwealth Crimes
Act No o 12, 1914-, Section 28), We trust that your Honour,
as a Judge of the Supreme Court of this State, will not
tolerate such a flagrant abuse of the fundamental principles
of British laiv and justice, and that you will be good enough
to recommend to the Military Authorities to refrain from
any such attempt to interfere with our citizen's rights.
Respectfully yours,
Sgd. A, Kersten J. Gloe
President Secretary
A, N, B. S,
P. S. Have the Military Authorities any intention in a
similar way to interfere with letters addressed by us
to our I&rliamentary Representatives?
Liverpool, December 28th, 1917.
The Official Visitor,
The Honorable Mr. Justice Harvey, Sydney.
Sir, -
Following the complaints which have been made to you
on behalf of the internees receiving visitors, we, the
undersigned Australian subjects herewith beg to record our
most emphatic protest against the treatment meted out to our
families and ourselves on Christmas Day, Tuesday, the 25th
of December, 1917.
The conditions, imposed on that day by the Military
Authorities, were simply disgraceful and a serious menace to
the health of the internees and their visitors alike,
The week before Christmas, the whole visiting ground
was cleared by order of the Commandant. All scrub and bushes
were removed. Only a few trees were left standing, but they
afforded very insufficient shelter only to a few internees
and their families, whilst the great majority of those who
came out on Tuesday were absolutely without protection and
had to sit on the bare ground. No fixtures such as seats
or benches were allowed to be erected, and the putting up of
any tents, blankets or flies as a protection against wind, sun
or rain was strictly prohibited.
Up to two o'clock, the day was very hot and sultry and
the direct heat of the sun very trying. Then rain set in
and continued to fall all the afternoon. Most of the ladies
and children had come out in light summer dresses. We tried,
of course, to shelter them, by using the scanty means permitted
by the Military Authorities, viz., putting up umbrellas, and
covering them with blankets brought from the Camp. These


measures, of course, proved of no protection at all c Most
of those who remained on the ground as well as those who took
refuge under the few trees were soon wet through. There is
no sheltering shed or hut on the visiting ground or nea-£ it.,
and even those few who had "been cautious eho ugh to bring
rain coats out soon had entirely wet feet etc, , from the long
grass e The result was that most of the visitors, some of
whom ha.d specially come over for that visit from other States,
had to prepare for departure an hour earlier than usual, as
they were afraid of catching a severe cold.
The Camp Commandant, Major Allsopp, inspected the visit-
ing ground during the afternoon and evidently had no fault
to find.
It was bad enough for us to-be drenched to the skin,
then to march back to the over-crowded barracks and be unable
to find any place wherein to change and dry the wet clothes
and the blankets which had to be used again for the night c
But for most of the ladies, the experience involved a serious
menace to their health and the well-being of the children, as
they had several hours i journey back to their homes in the
suburbs of Sydney, We are now anxiously awaiting for news
from them. Most of the children who came out on Tuesday last
were under the age of ten,
To allow such vicious and callous treatment, even to
be meted out to enemy subjects and their visitors aDf enemy
nationality would be a disgrace for a Government which always
claims to uphold the cause of humanity and civilisation.
But to submit their own subjects most of whom, have innocently
suffered long years of captivity and most of whose wives
and children are Australian born, to such ruthless and vin-
dictive 'treatment is an abominable outrage which requires an
immediate and full investigation.:
By Act of Parliament , the Military Authorities have been
given the power to intern anybody,. would be folly for,,
us , for cbvious reasons, to cha 11 enge s cluring the war , the
validity of the respective Acts and Regulations 0 But the
Commonwealth Parliament has never given or intended to give
the Defence Department or the Camp Authorities the right
to..abuse that power of internment in the incredible way 'in
whi.ch it is continually being done , and to disregard all the
elementary orules of fairness., decency .and humanity. We will
not' speak of chivalry and courtesy, fOr the treatment metd
out .to our wives and ourselves and our experience of and
contact - with the officers of the Defence Department and of
.the Camp Administration compels us to think that many of them
have either never known or have altogether forgotten what
.those -two' qualities mean.
We understand that the married enemy subjects in this
.Camp will immediately communicate, through the Swisss and
Swedish Consuls with their Home Governments and urge them
to take drastic counter measures. The Commonwealth Govern-
ment is well aware of the fact that we are not in a position
to safeguard bur interests in a similar manner. Therefore,
the attitude adopted towards Australian internees is all the
more despicable, However, we would be obliged to you if
you would make if quite clear to our Commonwealth Govern-
ment that, in spite of all disabilities P we and our families
are not prepared to submit to these indecencies and gross
violations of our citizen rights any longer.
We demand an immediate and full- enquiry to trace the
person or persons who ordered this new atrocity. If a Camp
Officer is directly responsible, we demand that he be repri-
manded and, if. practicable, removed from the Camp, If,
however, the culprit is at Headquarters Melbourne, as we h&Yt


every reason to believe i we would, thank you for a direct
recommendation; addressed to the Minister for Defence
personally- that that man be relieved of any work in con-
nection with internment matters, We think the Minister's
sense of honour and fairness will cause him to admit that
it ca.n serve no good purpose and that it is of no credit
to the Australian Government to have men in charge of in-
ternment affairs who are continually a.cting in a spitifc
of panic and vindi ctiveness and are giving vent to their own
bitter and antagonistic feelings by submitting us and our
families to the most dishonourable, humiliating, and savage
maltreatment they can think of.
In conclusion, we beg to mention that a large section
of internees are in a state of great excitement over the mat-
ters just described and that there is no telling where this
will lead to if immediate redress is not given, There is
a limit to the endurance of even the most strongrainded person,
Years of unwarranted captivity generally tend to increase
the well-founded indignatiop and bitterness and create a
danger ams and mutinous frame of mind.
If our demands should not be promptly acceded to.
we and our families shall find ways and means to put before
the Parliamentary Representatives and the Public the full
details, not only of this la,test outrage, but the continual
insult offered to interned Australian Subjects, Efforts
may then be made to gag us, as has already been attempted,
but for any developments that may then happen, the-Federal
Authorities must take the responsibility. They have now
been warned often enough Up to now they have ostrich-like
buried their heads in red tape and professed to be ignorant
of what is going OIL It is high time the Minister of Defence
used the broom and made a clean sweep in his Department.,
so that tills intolerable suspicion and unfairness is removqd
from the Australian Government's delaings with its own sub-
jects, even if they are interned 'subjects 0
Kindly acknowledge receipt of this letter and oblige,
Yours faithfully.
-x» *>» CB* t~m tu •« i -rt.y :**» rp» I n .am em »u t"ji» 9km uj»
Liverpool, 11th January, 1918.
The Honourable Mr, Justice Harvey.
Camp 0
Si r , -
*
We have been instructed to inform you that the follow-
ing resolution has been carried at the last meeting of the
Association of Naturalised British Subjects on Sunday January
6 th, 1918 s -
"'That this Association places on record its protest
against the unwarranted and ruthless ill-treatment'to
which many of its members and thMr families were sub-
jected by the Camp Authorities on the occasion of their
families ? visit to this Camp on Christmas Day, December
25th 191?; and that this Association urges the Commonwealth
Government,, in view of the large number of cases of sick-
ness resulting from such ill-treatment - to take prompt
step's to have the occurrence fully investigated and to
prevent a repetition of such an outrage
We further beg to advise you that we have been instructed
to forward copies of this resolution to the Prime Minister of
the Ccmmonwea Iththe Leader of the Federal Opposition and the
Premiers of all the Australian States,
Yours vespe ct fu 11 y,,
President Secretary A, 17. B. S.


Memo Sydney,
Mr, Julius Blau
The complaint with reference to visiting conditions at
Holdsworthy has been forwarded on to the Department of
Defence 0f f >
Sgd-. J. M. Harvey,
Official Visitor
3/1/18.
Liverpool, January 11th 1918.
The Honourable Mr. Justice Harvey,
Camp.
Sir. -
With reference to the complaint of the Australian mar-
ried internees, whom we have been asked to represent before
you, we desire to make a personal explanation in order to
define our attitude and justify the outspoken letter which
bears, amongst others, our signatures.
We are suffering too keenly under the harsh and in-
considerate treatment by the Military Authorities to be
indifferent to it, The officers in charge of internment
affairs do not deal with us as we would expect to be dealt
with as peaceful citizens with a clean record as such, but
they are continually submitting us and our families to humi-
liation, abuses and sufferings, which would be sufficient
■punishment for a serious criminal offence, and if w© remon-
strate we are reprimanded like schoolboys 0 Whilst, in
other belligerent countries the treatment of civilian in-
ternees is continually improving it is getting worse and
worse here/, - / We, and many of our friends, strongly resent
the attitude of the Military Authorities o We have done
nothing and said nothing that would justify our internment
and time and again we have challenged the Defence Authori-
ties to prove the contrary. The replies to our letters as
**ell as to similar applications from friends of ours, have
always been evasive, Hot one answer has been received from
the Department that was straightforward and to the point.
On the contrary, the officers of the Defence Department have
taken good care that the taint of suspicion that was put
upon us by our internment should be well preserved, 'And
so successful have they been in these efforts that every
person net acquainted with the facts, including all the
Camp Officers and guard, appear to be firmly convinced that
are guilty of some offence against the interests of this
country or the British Empire and that otherwise we would not
be here 0 Because they do believe that, they seem to think
that^ the worst treatment is just good enough for us and our
families, and this attitude of our custodians naturally leads
to ever-increasing friction and bitterness.
We repeat that our conscience is clear. Can the Camp
officers and the officers of the Defence Department say the
same? If so, why do they suppress every attempt to get
justice, to have the full details of our treatment en-
quirea into and nave the truth brought to light, even if it
might oe an unpleasant truth for some persons concerned?
1 hy were the sixty statutory declarations concerning the
treatment of Australian internees not allowed to pass on to
a solicitor in Sydney? And why is an attempt now being
made to prevent us altogether from consulting a solicitor'
regarding our treatment whilst we are interned?
We signed the letter of complaint, because we are cer-
tain that all the matters described above do not meet with
your Honour's approval, and we were impelled to adopt the


plain and outspoken language in the knowledge that all our
previous efforts to secure an enquiry and improvement,
efforts that re all couched in extremely moderate terms,
ha.ve proved to "be of no avail ; and that our families have
been caused so much misery and suffering. We repeat that
we would welcome the fullest enquiry into the whole matter
and it goes without saying that we are fully prepared to
stand by every statement we have made,,
Respectfully yours.
«« «* «.-• ra ». » t i» iv» r tm r«a 4r» Ln i.H» O* k>» f*» CV» n«
Department of Defence,
Memo • Melbourne, 11th January, 1918.
C. P. Eisele, Concentration Camp,
I am directed to return herewith your letter of the 28th
December, 1917; forwarded through the Official Visitor to
the Concentration Camps, and to inform you that communications
of this nature couched in language which is both abusive and
threatening will not be received by the Department 0 Any
representations which you my wish to make will be considered
if made in proper form and expressed in decent and becoming
language„
Sgd. T c Trumble
Acting Secretary.
•• *» tr> w* ar> uv t > W ■» V-J« tu MM 11,1 t?T C*iJ rv» t+rj j.3
Memo for Sydney,
Messrs s Kersten and Gloe,
4
Concentration Camp 0
Visiting Conditions,
J am in receipt of a further communication from
the Department in answer to my letter dealing with the
visiting conditions at Holdsworthyu This communication
encloses fresh instructions which have been issued to the
Commandant at Holdsworthy r and I presume the new regulations
have been published in the Camp,
I pressed upon the Department the desirability of
allowing wives and children to visit every Sunday, if pos-
sible, and the Department has framed new regulations with
this object.
Sgdo J, M. Thrvey
Official Visitor
14th February 1918*
mm m «e,
:t*> ««.Ti ra i'» t cva • KsC*
Liverpool, lBth February, 1918.
His Honour Mr„ Justice Harvey,
Sydney.
Sir, -
Vfe beg to acknowledge receipt of your letter of the
14th insto,. re visiting conditions (which letter has again
been opened by the Camp Censor) and thank you for the trouble
you have taken in the matter o ' The fresh instructions y§u
are referring to have been published in the Camp on the 13th
inst. They contain the following two -paragraphs:-
4, "Any prisoner who attempts, to evade any censorship
regulations will be deprivedLo.-fithe privilege of seeing
visit or So 15
5c "In the event of a prisoner being apprehended in an
attempt tc eva.de censorship or camp regulations by
means of visiting facilities, the present visiting
privileges will be withdrawn and. regulations will be
imposed whereby visitors will be interviewed only
across a barrier € i:
6, "All previous instructions are hereby cancelled."


We understand that the whole matter will be discussed
with you in full when you are corning out to the Gamp again#
In the meantime. we are instructed by the Executive of our
Association to direct your Honour's attention to the un-
fairness of the threat contained in section 5 0 f the new
instructions. Again and again we have protested against
the unjust principle adopted by the Military Authorities
to punish all forrnan offence committed or attempted by one.
In our opinion, justice is done if the offender is punished
individually. One internee has no power of control or
punishment over a fellow internee and it is neither in our
nor in the camp administration's interests to revert to the
intolerant conditions which caused so much suffering,
friction and bitterness in IQl6#
We beg to confirm our letters of the 12th and 29th ult.
As we have received no acknowledgment of these communications
we can only presume that they have been stopped by the Censor,
In that case, we shall be pleased to submit copies to you
personally, when you next visit the Camp,
The Commonwealth Gazettes have now been delivered to us,
Respectfully yours
President Secretary
Ac B u S
*ir% 'i_a i'Jt -jui
T-*% it % is~»
Liverpool, 22nd February, 191$
His Honour Mr c Justice Harvey,
Official Visitor c
Sir, -
We beg to confirm our letters of the llth ; 12th and 29th
January, and 18th February, and shall be glad to receive from
you a full reply in writing regarding the matters mentioned
therein, namely.
1) Correspondence with Solicitors
2) Censoring of communications to and from your Honour,
the Minister of Defence,.and the Governor-General.
(3) Visiting conditions,
In connection with Item Ho, X, we.beg to submit herewith
the correspondence exchanged with the Camp Commandant from
the ljth to the lBth January, and letter addressed by us to
Mr, J 3 W ; . Abigail, dated January 14th
Regarding Item Ho, 2, we beg to mention that letters
from your Honour received at this Camp this week were again
opened by the Censor, ■
Visiting conditions, The signatories of the letter of
complaint sent to you on December 28th, received a rebuke
from the Secretary of the Defence Department as expected,
v,r e beg to submit his letter to Mr, C„ F, Eisele herewith,
for your info vma tio n, \7 e re fra ined fr orn rep Iyi ng 10 the
Defence Department 9 as we presumed that you bad. in the mean-
time, forwarded to the Department the explanatory letter of
January 11th,, signed by Mr, J, Blau and Mr, A, Kersten, and
as we wished to avoid further friction,, Your Honour will
admit, however 3 that this is not the? way to deal with a serious
complaint; though it may have been worded in somewhat strong
language c
Re spe ct ful 1 y you rs ,
Sgd c A, Kersten J* Glee
Pre side nt Sec re tar y
A C H, B; B,
aw u>» u •*» w»
'-a -■»>


Liverpool, February 10th, 1918.
The Commandant, Camp.
Sir,-
He are instructed by the "Executive of the Aesoci*
ation of Naturalised British Subjects to demand an immediate
and full inquiry into the circumstances surrounding the bayo-
netting of one of our members, Mr. J. Zebisch, Bth Company,
Bth Moss, which occurred to-day at the Camp,
rr o are further to ask that the officer %*ho gave the
order to charge, Major Baxter, be suspended from duty
pending the result of the inquiry.
Finally we are instructed to ask you for the favor to
allow Mr. Zebisch to have one of the officers of our
Association with him at the inquiry.
Please give this your prompt attention and oblige
Yours respectfully,
President Secretary
A. N. 3, S.
Headquarters, .Liverpool, 16th February 1918.
Prisoners / Har
A, Kersten & G. Gloe, Camp.
V'ith reference to your letter of 10th instant the matter
referred to mil receive attention.
Sgd, J. P. All sopp Ma jo r
for Lt. Colonel, Commandant.
Liverpool, 22nd February, 1918*
His Honour Mr. Justice Harvey,
Official Visitor.
Bir,- re Bayonetting of Internees
" r e are directed by the Executive of the Association
of Naturalised British Subjects to submit to you a copy of
our letter to the Camp Commandant, dated February 10th,
a. n d of th e C omma ndan t 1 s reply of the 161 h ins t. , re la ting
to the excess that took ala c e at this Camp on Bun day the
J. V
10th inst., when a member of our Association and five other
internees were bayonetted by the guard.
He are instructed to complain to you that no enquiry
Ims so far been held, and that the officer and the sergeant
alleged to have been directly responsible for the incident
have not even been suspended from duty.
•"e would be obliged to you if you would promptly bring
this ma,tter under the notice of the Canister for Defence, and
if the Minister would give your Honour full authority to
enquire into the matter and take evidence on oath.
Respectfully yours,
President Secretary A. N. 3, S,
Liverpool, March 23rd, 1918.
His Honour Mr. Justice Harvey,
Official Visitor, Camp,
Sir,. Re Bayonetting Incident,
Referring to our complaint of February 22nd and the
promise ma.,de by you that an outside Commission would inquire
into the matter, we are directed to draw your Honour's atten-
tion to the fact that no inquiry Mas taken place yet. In
the interest of the member of our Association who was etabbed
during the incident we are instructed to ask you what etepe
the Military Authorities intend to take.
Respectfully yours,
President Secretary A, N. B, S %


' >
t i
' - »
• < -
c ; ■
* ?
/ r J .. , .
' 1 t
' V
I
• ♦ ■
r #
• • " » - • V
♦
.
*- .
' ' ■ - ' ' •
«. i' 0
i
s I
* «
.
v ' < ' /
* , •
• •
• ' • ' L. *
• #
-
' 4 «*
. •
«
/
i •
.
• ' • # ' ,
* • x • .
' • . *
t _ ».
« ' • * _
• -' J x -
• . .. • •- •
i
j
• •
• *
— ■«
r : X '' •
* *
I •
.. . - ,/
* •. •
x /
• *
4 * •
t
V
f ■+, - ■» " '
■ -*
. ; - - - *" - . i


Hea d tyua rte v s s
Liverp o o 1, 14th Ma r ch, 1918 „
Prisoners / War
A, Kersten &K, A, M s Schulz.
In reply to your application of 6th instant relative
to the erection of a. building c 1 am not prepared to do
anything in the direction indicated. There are premises
already in Camp where your hooks could he housed and as
regards the other matters it is not considered advisable
to make any alterations to the existing conditions which
should he controlled as far as possible by the Camp Committee
Sgd, R„ Holman Lt t Col o
Commandant,
«jw* MM. «rr» MM W» MM MM H* O* H Ma MM M( M» %-M W. MM
Liverpool, lBth March, 1918,
Lieut. Colonel Holman D 0 S 0 0 o
Commandant, Camp.
Sir,-
We are in receipt of your letter of the 14th regarding
the erection of a committee building for our Association,
As directed by you, we have discussed the matter with the
Camp Committee and we have been given to understand that the
only buildings which might be suitable for our purposes would
be the new school buildings. We have been told, however,
that it would not be possible to allot space to us in these
buildings for regular or permanent use as office or library.
The Camp Committee has also informed us that we could not use
the Camp Library as storing or reading rooms for our books
and documents, as that building was already too small
and overcrowded during the few hours it is kept open.
The Camp Committee has advised us to apply to you for
permission to use the present school tent when it will be
no longer required for educational purposes or to get a
sufficient quantity of timber from the bush to erect our
own building of the size of a messo
We ago.in beg to remind you that we are constantly doing
work for hundreds of internees, free of charge, and that
much of this work would be a burden for your Inquiry and
Intelligence Officers if we did net attend to it.
Trusting that you will favourably reconsider the matter,
Yours respectfully.
President Vice-President
A c H 0 Bo S,
MM U» mm cm U* M IM M UJ U U» t»a» 'xJ * <*» I*.a lit CM * U tx.)


z
-
■
.
,
■
V
T
'
.
,
-
• "
.
.
. • ■ r,
~ • - - . - - X
-
I
. " .
-
- ** " "*
.
- . . - ' . " ' ■
«
-
•
«... -
'
• *. ' * - . ' - ."*»
i ■
-
-
.
.
Nc


EXTRA CTS
from
STATUTORY DECLARATIONS
The Declarations of which the following are extracts,
form a portion of thoseattached to the letter written by
Mr. J. W, Abigail to the Secretary to His Excellency the
Governor-General on the Ist November , 193-7? the numbers
shown on the declarations are those referred to in Mr.
Abigail's letter.
These statutory declarations were made on the following
from and duly sworn before Justices of the Peace.
Statutory Declaration.
I, of in the State of New South Wales
do hereby solemnly and sincerely declare as follows:
And I make this solemn declaration conscientiously
believing the same to be true and by virtue of the pro-
visions of the "Oaths Act 1900*" and the Statutory De-
clarations Act 1911 o
Subscribed and declared at
this day of
one thousand nine hundred and
before me
I*j CT» u» vtt r.-r»
No. 12
I was'.born in Austria in I came to Australia
in 1902, and was naturalized in 19140 I am a bookseller
by profession* I am married to a woman of Australian birth,
and I have one child born in this country.
I was arrested on September 16th 191$ on warrant (under
Regulation 56k of the War Precautions Regulations) I was
only allowed a couple of hours before I was transferred to
Langwarrin, and I was unable to arrange my private and busi-
ness affairs in that time*
I applied for an inquiry into my case but was refused,
When at the beginning of 1917 wife was ill in hospital
in Melbourne after a serious operation, I applied-for leave
to visit her, but leave was refused by the Defence Department.
In consequence of the bad accommodation in the Camp,
the draughts in the barracks, and the insufficient clothing
and bedding supplied, I acquired bad rheumatism.
I consider the separation allowance of 12/6 per week
paid to my family absolutely insufficient. My wife has to
rely upon her relatives to look after her and sujjply the
persona,! needs*
I have always loyally fulfilled my citizen's duties,
and have not done or said anything that might be detrimental
to the interests of the Commonwealth, or the safety of the
Realm, . , 4
I have never been granted a full inquiry, or been given
an opportunity to ascertain the real cause of my internment »
or to disprove any charge that might have been laid against
crJ i» u M ca cm OJ «• aa CJ ea «■ • ivi r.s> cii TJ* t.3


No o 17
I was "born at Stuttgart Germany in 1872, came to
Australia in 1881, and was naturalized in 1896, lam a
married man s and follow the calling of farmer and contractor.
I was a member of the State School Committee at for two
years and also a member of the Progress Association there.
I own land at Queensland.
I was interned on warrant (under Regulation 56a of the
Y-ar Precautions Regulations) on the Bth March 1916. I was in
the police cells at for twentyfour hours. I was trans-
ported handcuffed to Ipswich, and put into the police cells
there s I was then taken handcuffed to Victoria Barracks,
Brisbane, wherever I was thus paraded, I was subjected to
the jeers and other remarks of the onlookers. When arrested
I was given no chance to put my business in order, or attend
to family or other matters, I was not even allowed to take my
horse home.
I was refused an inquiry into my case at Enoggera Camp.
I have contracted Rheumatism since my arrival in the German
Concentration Gamp,
Belays in connection with my correspondence have occur-
red, I have esren not received some of it. The separation
allowance is quite inadequate for the needs of my family, and
I have to contract debts to enable to keep them supported.
I have a stainless record as a citizen of Queensland.
I have always loyally fulfilled my citizen's duties, and
have not done or said anything that might be detrimental to
the interests of the Commonwealth, or the safety of the Realm.
I have never been granted a full inquiry, or been given
an opportunity to ascertain the real cause of my internment,
or to disprove any charge that might have been laid against me.
No. 20,
I came to Australia in 1885 at the age of l 8 years,
with my parents from the United States of America, where I
was born in l 868„ I have never seen Germany, I was natur-
alized in 1891. lam married to a woman of Australian birth.
I have been a Justice of the Peace for about, fifteen years.
I own land in Queensland, I am a journalist by profcssisn*
1 was arrested in Brisbane under warrant (under Regu-
lation 56a of the War Precautions Regulations) on the 14th
February 1916. I consider I had not sufficient time allowed
me to put my business in order. All my effoots to obtain
redress with the authorities were completely ignored by Lieut.
Col. Sands and Major Griffiths, who had not even the courtesy
to reply to my letters concerning my personal security in
German Concentration Camp, at a time when I was threatened with
personal violence, and actually assaulted,
A letter in which was a bank note sent me from Brisbane
was never received by me. Since I have been in the German
Concentration Camp, I have almost lost the hearing of my right
ear, suffered much owing to bad teeth, bad colds, and on ac-
count of living conditions generally.
I have been robbed of my good name, honor and liberty,
people naturally believing I had a trial of some sort, and
found guilty of disloyalty.
I consider it most humiliating. t,a be compelled to mix
with a number of "the element in the German Concen-
tration OamiJ, . .. .
I have always loyally fulfilled my citizen's duties, and
have not done or said anything that might be detrimental to the
interests of the Commonwealth, or the safety of the Realm. »o4


I have never been granted a full Inquiry, or- been given an
•opportunity to ascertain the real cause of my internment, or to
disprove any charge that might have been laid against me ,
I am looked upon with disfavour by internees, on account
of my being a naturalised British subject, and on account of
my birthplace.
■xm «r.» mm w 9m m mm ua» rrm tern ym ..*•
Ho. 24.
I was born in Germany in l8 r /2, came to Australia in
1885 , and was naturalised in 1.893" lam married to a woman
of Australian birth, who has been an inmate of an invalid
institution of Queensland for 13 years, I own land in Queens-
land. I was arrested in duly 1915; 1 was in the police
cells at for four days, and accommodated like a criminal,
I was allowed no time to attend to any business, family or
other matterso When arrested, I was net told that I was to
be interned, but only to appear before the Court; I therefore
considered it safe to let my two children (a girl of fifteen
and a boy of thirteen) alone on the farm. As I did not, how-
ever, return in reasonable time., my children were left to starve
in the bush, being eleven miles from the nearest station.
They were thus dependent on the neighbours; 1 was refused,
whilst at Enoggera Internment Camp, to see my family; or to
arrange for them whilst they were in such distressed, circum-
stances; as described above. Owing to distance and expense
it is impossible for me to see my family At the early part
of my internment, an allowance was made to my children, but
I understand it has ceased, for reasons unknown to me Whilst
my children were left alone and unprotected on the farm as
described, my daughter was seduced and became a mother; and
when I heard this terrible news and that my child was very ill,
I represented the facts to Captain Griffiths and asked for
leave to proceed and see her. and take any steps for adjusting
her affairs, in consequence of her confinement. When at
Enoggera Internment Gamp I asked to be advised of the time of
my departure to the German Concentration Camp, to enable me
to inform the guardians of my youngest child, aged eleven
years to bring her 10 a railway station through which I had
to pass, to enable me to see her; but I was given no infor-
mation, The accommodation at the Barracks is too confined,
exposed to dust, cold, windy and vermin-infested.
I have always loyally fulfilled my citizen ? s duties, and
have not done or saiid anything that will be detrimental to
the interests of the Commonwealth or the safety of the Realm.
I have never been granted a full inquiry or been given
the opportunity to ascertain the real cause of my internment
or to disprove any charges that may have been made against me.
ivt HI %.«■> v* rvw «-*»
Ho. 25.
I was born in Germany in 1878. came to Australia
in 1882, was naturalized in 1900 repeated my oath of allegianee
to the British Sovereign when I was sworn in as special constable
during the strike. Am married to a woman of Australian
birth, whose father was a Portugese and mother Australian born,
and have three Australian born children,,
I was a Public Servant employed by the Government from
1895 to 19l6 :
I was arrested on warrant (under Regulation £6a of the
%r Precautions Regulations) on llay, IQI6 O 1 was detained
in the police cells at for about four hours until the


.oo aee.,.. ding .eat
•« r +h- -
departure of the train for I was compelled to empty
the sanitary receptacle, the use of which I required whilst
in the cells 0 I was handcuffed and thus led into the train
accompanied by the police sergeant and two constables, one
being the armed escort who took me to , and viewed by a
gathering of townspeople. On arrival at I was again
handcuffed and thus led by armed police escort across the
crowded platform, placed into the prison van and taken into
Victoria Earracks where my handcuffs were removed, copy of
my mrrant taken from me, and I was put with another internee
into a small cell, which long before morning became quite
crowded with a,bout fourteen drunken soldiers. I was detain-
ed alternately in cells and a small filthy yard at the Bar-
racks until the following afternoon, when I was transported
to the Internment Camp at , and required to pay motor
hire for myself the other internee and two escorts, amount-
ing-" to 5/-, When arrested at I was not permitted to
return home or leave the cells for my personal effects or
any other reason. I have been refused particulars of the
circumstances that led to my internment.
I have repeatedly but in rain asked for release, one
reason being a chronic bowel complaint, with which 1 still
am, and was afflicted when I was interned. I was on ac-
count of this trouble twice a patient at the German Concen-
tration Hospital, on the last occasion for seventeen weeks.
I have repeatedly but in vain asked for transfer to
another Camp where better conditions prevail. Though 1
have been told that there was no room at Berrima or
Trial Bay, yet numbers of transfers to these camps have
taken place subsequently. There being only manual labor
available which I am unable to perform, I have been unable
to earn anything during my internment.
I have always cheerfully loyally and efficiently served
the country of my adoption, and my record as a citizen there-
of was untarnished, but in consequence of my internment,
and owing to the conspicuity attending my arrest in two
towns, by the most degrading features having been added
thereto as is the vogue in the cases only of the very worst
felons and criminals, I and my family's social and material
future has been entirely ruined.
No. 26.
I was born in Germany in 1879* came to Australia
in June 1905, and was naturalised on the Ist February 1912.
I am married, and am a Minister of the Lutheran Church,
I own land in Queensland.
I was arrested on warrant (under Regulation 56a of the
v T ar Precautions Regulations) on the 23rd February, 1916,
I was confined in police cells at for one night, I was
allowed insufficient time (about one hour) to adjust my pri-
vate affairs.
Since being in the German Concentration Camp, I have
contracted rheumatism, and suffered from stomach trouble
and sleeplessness. I have no confidence in the dental
treatment in the German Concentration Camp, as on one
occasion the dentist made three attempts to pull a stump for
me., and then assured me it was removed, and on my protest
chased me out of his chair: although I require other den-
tal treatment, I prefer to dispense therewith.
WV.V «•*« •» *» V- V w ••• -V— - - w t • 1 ~ JU
Repeated, applications made by my wife, who has been ill
for years, and myself for release, have been refused.


In consequence of holding the allowance from my wife,
she is obliged to exist on charity, and has often suffered
want through my internment, My son who is afflicted with
Infantile Paralysis and who was treated and massaged by me,
now quite masses this beneficial treatment owing to my
internment <
I have had much trouble whilst in the German Concentra-
tion Camp, owing to the dust nuisance. For a part of the
time, I was compelled to live with most unsuitable surroundings,
In 1916 the Doctors and Clergymen protested to the Minister
for Defence against their internment and later we clergymen
renewed our protest, but both were rejected, the latter
even very abruptly and discourteously,
I have never been granted an inquiry, or been given an
opportunity to ascertain the real cause of my internment, or
to disprove any charge that might have been laid a.gainst me.
%m. «k« MM ita trt
No. 38.
I was born in Germany in 1859* I arrived in
Australia in 1865.- and was naturalised in 1883, I am
married to an Englishwoman, I own land in Queensland.
I have been a Justice of the Peace in Queensland for about
14 years, I have been a member of the Australian Auxiliary
forces for 22 years and hold the Long Service Medal, When
the war broke out, my family and myself took a very active
part in the matter of help and comforts for the Australian
wounded. I was correspondent for the " Bulletin" and
the " Observer" for a considerable time, and any of my
writings my be turned up, which will prove my loyalty,
I was actively connected with every send-off to enlisted
soldiers from my district. The people generally in the
district knew my loyal feelings, and were greatly astonished
at my arrest, I was arrested at my home on warrant (under
Regulation 56a of the War Precautions Regulations) on the
26th April 1916, I xvas taken to by the morning train,
and placed in the police cells for 24 hours. I was locked
up at night with two or three blankets, reeking with urine.
On the next day I was conveyed to Brisbane, together with
5 lunatics. On reaching Brisbane, I was put in the prison
van, and taken to Victoria Barracks, handed over to the
Military Authorities, and placed in the cells there.
I was then conveyed to the Bnoggera Internment Camp. After
being there for four weeks, I was transported to the German
Concentration Camp c I repeatedly personally and through
Senator Ferricks asked for an enquiry into my case, but
without success.
No. 39.
I was born in South Australia in 1876, My
parents were also born in South Australia. I am a Lutheran
Minister and am married to a woman of Australian birth.
I was arrested on the 26th May 1916 at Queensland
under warrant (Regulation 56a of the War Precautions Regu-
lations) taken to the police station the same night and
placed in a cell, given two blankets, and had to sleep on
the floor. The night was very cold, About 7-30 next
morning I was taken to police station where I arrived at
about 10 a ,m e and was again placed in a cell with criminals
and a drunken woman in the same compartment, I had to pay
for my lunch, I was taken by the train from to Brisbane,


where I arrived at about 6 p,m, On leaving the train I was
put into the prison van in company the criminals. Ar-
riving at the Victoria Barracks. I was placed in a cell for
the night, had to pay for my tea- received two blankets,, and
had to sleep on the damp floor* next morning, two guards
took me out, and I was asked to pay the fare for myself, the
guards and the luggage to the Brisbane Railways Station. I
was then taken to Enoggera by rail to the Internment Camp
there. I had to pay for myself and the guards. I arrived
at the Camp in the afternoon, received two blankets, a tin
plate a knife and a fork, and a stretcher to sleep on„ During
the 14 days I was at that Camp, I suffered considerably with
colds, I was then transferred with 14 other prisoners by rail
to Liverpool, and then to the German Concentration Camp,
Holdsworthy, had to pay expenses for ourselves and our guards.
At this place I received the usual clothing outfit and a
little straw, I was then placed in one of the Barracks amongst
rowdy people, and had to eat and sleep on the floor, as nei. *
ther bed nor anything else was provided for me., I have ap-
plied to the Minister for Defence for release, and the reply
was that owing to my influence amongst the German population
at it had been decided that I cannot be released.
I have always loyally fulfilled my citizen's duties,
and have not done or said anything that might be detrimental
to the interests of the Commonwealth or the safety of the
Rea Im.
I have never been given a full inquiry., or been given
an opportunity to ascertain the real cause of my internment,
or to disprove any charge that might have been laid against me.
ea* «p* u> cat* CJB «-*: u* itm tc; iuu
No. 45,
I was born in Germany in 18.56, came to Australia in
October 1876, and was naturalised in 19H, I am married to
an Australian born woman of English parentage c - I am a far-
mer and own land in South Australia. I was arrested on the
28th April, 1915, and taken to Keswick and later to Torrens
Island, For four nights I was left without any blankets, and
had to sleep in a tent on the bare ground. On the fifth night
I got two blankets, and ten nights later I received a bag of
straw to lie on o This treatment resulted in my contracting
severe rheumatics, with which I still suffer, and at times I
cannot lift my arms for weeks.
The sanitary accommodation and the life itself at Tor-
rens Island was horrible* The Military Authorities brought
a court case against me : On opening the case, the Military
Authorities asked for an adjournment, whereupon I pointed out
that I had to bring a witness from a place 50 miles distant;
the Judge ruled that the Military Authorities had to pay the
witnesses expenses for the day. The captain in charge gave
me his word of honour that he would pay the witnesses later
on, but the money has not been paid c I was accused on two
charged, and both charges were dismissed by the Judge, where-
upon I was released by the Military Authorities without a
stain on my charac was discharged, from the Camp
on the lQth August 191.5. When in camp at Torrens Island,
I was brutally treated throughout.
On noon on the 24th. Macroh 1916, I was re-arrested at
Mannum, where I was on business, I asked for the warrant
of my arrest, but the police had none* In spite of this
I was taken to the Police Station, and put- in a cell; about
nine o'clock on the next morning the police handcuffed me
and I was sent in that state by the mail ccach to Adelaide. N6B


The handcuffs were only taken off for lunch o On arrival
at Adelaide in the evening the handcuffs were removed, to
enable me to get from the coach, I was immediately
handcuffed again, I was then taken by train to Keswick
where 1 was relieved of the handcuffs in front of the
barracks, I got nothing to eat that evening, and had to
sleep on a cement floor 5 with a couple of blankets, The
next morning I was taken to Fort Largs where I had to sleep
on the floor. Three days later I was removed to the German
Concentration Camp at Holdsworthy where on arrival I received
three blankets., a little straw, and had to eat and sleep on
the floor, I consider the treatment meted out to me, an
old man of 60 as most brutal and disgraceful, I demand
an immediate inquiry into these brutalities, to which I
consider I am entitled as a British Subject,
I have always loyally fulfilled my citizen's duties,
and have not done or said anything that might be detri-
mental to the interests of the Commonwealth or the safety
of the Realm,
I have never been granted a full inquiry or been given
an opportunity to ascertain the real cause of my internment,
or to disprove any charge that might have been laid against
me c
My eyesight has suffered greatly in the Liverpool Camp,
and is continually getting worse, but I am not allowed to
consult a Specialist in Sydney.
sAi c. A «r« m m t«n '.M mm mm mm tm <jmm vm mm vn mm
No, 46.
I was born in Germany in 1863? and arrived in
Australia in lBB^ a I 'was naturalised in < My wife
who was of English birth, died last year. My children
are all born in Australia , I have been a resident of
New South Wales for many years prior to my internment.
I went into camp after the Defence Department had,
for no obvious reasons, given orders to the Bank of New
South Wales Sydney, to stop payment of any cheques drawn
by me, and. this stepped my source of income.
I repeatedly applied to the Commandant of the
New South Wales military district, and to the Minister
for Defence for release.
Col, Sands, (the officer comma,nding the German Concen-
tration Camp) twice offered to give me permission to leave
the Camp, and go to the United States of America, if I
agreed to sell my rights in my explosives patent to him
privately, for which he was prepared to pay £6,000 on my
arrival in America, and give me a free trip to the United
States of America, and further to pay me £4,000 for a new
detonator invented by me, on the same terms„ I refused
these offers, and I was finally informed by the Camp Com-
mandant that I would be released if I would sign a statement
to the effect that I would make no claim against the Common-
wealth or Imperial Government, and obey certain restriction!
regarding my place of residence,-; I refused to sign such
a statement, and remained interned.
Letters sent to me by my friends were repeatedly with-
held from me, but part of the contents were sometimes read
to me by members of the Censor's staff at the Camp Post
Office,
I consider the quality of the food leaves much to be
desired, the draught in the barracks is seriously menacing
my health.


I have always loyally fulfilled my citizen ? ? duties, and
have not done or said anything which might be detrimental
to the interests of the Commonwealth or the safety of the
Rea Im,
I have never been granted a full enquiry or been given
an opportunity to ascertain the real cause of my intern-
ment or to disprove any charges which might have been made
against me.
I am a naturalised British subject born in Germany
in 1889. I arrived in Australia in 1909» and- natur-
alised in 1913« I lived in New South Bales before I went
into Camp. In consequence of lack of work, I asked for
permission to be interned at the German Concentration Camp
Liverpool, This was granted, and I was sent there on
December 21st, 1915- I was told by the police constable
at and the Intelligence Gffic r at Victoria Barracks
Barlinghurst that I could leave the Camp at any time, but
repeated applications made through major Griffiths (the
officer commanding the Holdsworthy Concentration Camp),
were refused, B.y papers and documents were taken from me
at the Victoria Barracks when I was interned, and repeated
enquiries made from the Camp 3mve failed to trace them. I
lost 3 fingers of my right 3mnd in a windmill accident in
Queensland, by which my earning capacity is greatly im-
paired, yet I am only receiving Id per week compensation
for this, by order of the Police Bagistrate, This
order was based on false evidence, and was made during my"
internment, and without any opportunity being given to me
at the hearing of the case to give evidence, I cannot do
the "hard manual work of the Camp, but the Defence Depart-
ment prevents me from getting more suitable employment
outside, I consider this a grave act of injustice.
I have always loyally fulfilled my citizen duties,
and have not done nor said anything that might be detri-
mental to the interests of the Commonwealth or the safety
of the Realm.
I am a naturalised Australian subject. Was born
in Austria in 1884, arrived in~Australia in 1911# ? ~ind was
naturalised in 1914.
I was arrested without warrant in Sydney on November
Bth. 1914, and during the first months' of my internment, I
was forced to work.
As the result . repeated applications for release,
I was informed by District Headquarters Sydney that my
release would bo granted, provided 1 could/produce a guaran-
tee of constant employment. I recei.v'e.d such guarantee
from but Imjor Griffiths kept the original of
the letter and I was later on informed by District Head-
quarters that I could not be released, and no reasons were
given to me.
I have always loyally fulfilled my citizens duties and
have not done or said anything which might be detrimental
to the interests of the Cornmonwoa Ith or the Realm 6
I have never been granted a full enquiry or been given
the opportunity of ascertaining the real cause of my intern-
ment or to difs prove any charges which may have boon laid
again- t me.
I*7o


V s "-
Nt>.
We are naturalised British subjects, and are
born in Germany and Austria respectively, We were both
arrested and interned under of the minister of
Defence, (Regulation s&a of the War Precautions Regulations).
We have always been subject to most severe restrictions
whilst in this Camp, we are not allowed to go outside the
barbed wire fence except under guard, and we are forbidden
any exercise outside the barbed wire compound even under
escort. We are not permitted to visit our families, except
under very exceptional circumstances.
We must get our meals from one of the three kitchens in
all kinds of weather, even in the rain or in one of the
frequent duststorms. The food is usually half-cold when
we get back with it to the huts in which we are living.
The kitchens are exposed to the dust which is being driven
through the Camp in dense clJuds nearly every second day.
The food is distributed from open receptaoles and exposed
to dust and flies. The rations are insufficient for any
internee who wants to do an honest day's work.
The supply of clothing has always been insufficient.
The issue of winter clothing was delayed for several months
this year, and up till today the majority of internees
have not received warm (moleskin) trousers. Do under-
wear whatsoever and no socks have ever been issued, and
the last brown military boots issued were secondhand.
Only three blankets are supplied to each internee,
many of them dirty and worn out. Ho warm overcoats or
greatcoats have been issued this winter. Ho mattresses
have ever been supplied, but internees can get a piece of
hessian and some straw to sleep on. Ho beds were original-ly
supplied, but iron bedsteads are now (after three years)
gradually being fixed up in the huts. These bedsteads
(size 9in. by 2ft. 2in,) are far too small and uncomfort-
able for many internees, and the fact that 10 of them are
suspended on the same frame, and that there is only lft„
lOin, space between an upper and a lower bunk, does not make
matters any better.
The huts are unfurnished throughout, no chairs, tables,
or other furniture being provided, and the supply of brooms,
wash basins and buckets is hopelessly inadequate. The towels
supplied measure only 2ft. 2 in, by Ift, 2in. , and most of
the internees have not received a new towel since the mids-
die of 1916. Ho tooth brushes, or brushes of any other
description are supplied.
The huts are covered with corrugated iron sheeting,
they are cold and draughty in the winter, and too hot in
the summer. They have no doors or windows, and are open in
front, they are provided with blinds, but offer all the same
no protection against the dust, which i 3 penetrating every-
where and ruining every decent article of clothing or bedding.
The huts are placed much too close together. They are
3ft. 6in. high and 9ft., deep, the floor space allotted to
each internee is only 9ft. by 2ft. 4in, Internees are
thrown together indiscriminately in the huts as spaoe offers,
without any consideration being given to their wishes or those
of the men whom they are ordered to join. The result is
that many internees are herded together with filthy, rowdy
or otherwise most undesirable persons, and live a very un-
happy life indeed. The misery is made worse by the insanitary
conditions of the Camp., All the huts are infested with
vermin of every kind, especially bugs and fleas, and this
plague is getting worse every summer on account of the over-


crowding, and the absence of all effective counter--measures #
During the summer months there is alec an abundance of moi-
quitces 0 The authoraties tolerate the breeding of cats and
dogs in the Camp, of which there are dozens, and a good many
of them live and sleep in the internees : huts and even in
their bunks.
Only one stable lantern is supplied for a mess of ten,
with the result that many internees ruin their eyesight. No
street lamps or other lighting are provided in the Camp,
There are no sheltered places, like Reading, Dining or general
recreation rooms in existence-, where internees who have to
live with disagreeable mess-mates could take refuge in bad
weather., or devote their time to serious study,.
Internees are compelled to go to latrines where thirty
or more pans are used in the same shed, without -any partitions
between them, The number of douches and water taps is in-
sufficient, There are only J? 6 taps with washing troughs,
and 35 without, and 44 cold douches provided for 4,300 in-
ternees, The douche places are without roofs, and without
gratings, this means that internees have to stand on cement
floors,, and are exposed, to all the inclemencies of the weather.
No warm douches or bath of any description, and no wash-houses
are provided, Washing in the barracks is strictly prohibi-
ted, and severely punished, and even eld men and invalids
are compelled tc go to the douches In every sort of weather.
There are a great number of old men over 50 years of
age, and invalids and many cripples in this Camp,
The dust is next to the vermin, the greatest abomination
in this Camp, There are a multitude of internees suffering
from affections of the eyes ears nose, throat and lungs as
a result of the dust. There are further hundreds of more or
less severe rheumatic and sciatic cases. The hospital treat-
ment leaves much to be desired, and many internees are afraid
of having the complaints attended to on an open and draughty
verandah, as it is the rule for out-patients at the Gersoan
Concentration Camp Hospital.,
The dental arrangements are faulty, If a man has not
enough money to pay for the dental treatment, he can only get
his teeth extracted but he has no chance of having them saved
by filling. Some internees get-all the facilities they want
with regard to difficult fillings : crown and bridge work and
so on, by being allowed to have the work done by their own
dentists in Sydney., whilst others are refused'this concession,
and have to rely on the often insanitary, and slipshod meth-
ods of the Military dentist. The Dental Officer in charge
at Ho 1 dsworthy is notcr 1 ous .1 n th:Ls Camp for his obscene
language., and hi.d indifference towards the internees.
We are officially only allowed two letters per week, of
150 words each ; which is absurd for a man who has his busi-
ness and family interests 'to look after, The ordinary cour-
are not observed by the Defence Department, or the
Camp* officers and guards in their dealings with us. Inter-
nees have often to wait for an hour or more at the gate, and
this sometimes on several days in succession before they are
attended to by the Military police, or can see the officer
they want to interview.
Only married internees are as a rule allowed to receive
visitors, and this only once a fortnight under disgraceful
conditions on open ground near the Camp There is no. pri-
vacy. and hardly any shelter no tents or fixed seats., or
other permanent fixtures being allowed There is a sort of
•shed as protection against rain, but the whole arrangement is
anything but decent and considerate,


The prices charged by the Canteen are exorbitant, No
regard is being paid to the maximum prices fixed by the
Necessaries Commodities Commission, Commission is being
charged on almost every article that is brought into the
Camp, even if it is intended for private use only.
The accommodation and treatment on the whole would be
bad enough for a punitive establishment, but we, and many
other Australian citizens with a clean and honourable record,
have yet to learn that we have been brought here for punish-
ment, We have always loyally fulfilled our citizens' duties
and have not done or said anything that might be detrimental
to the interests of the Commonwealth or the safety of the
Realm, r e have never been acquainted with the nature of
the information laid against us, on which our internment
was decided. We have repeatedly asked for an inquiry, but
have always been refused without any reason being given for
such refusal.
No. 60.
I was born in Germany in 1876, I came to Australia
in 1906, I was naturalised in 1909. I am a married man,
and have one child born in Australia, I own land in Wes-
tern Australia <
On February 23rd 1917, I was asked by a Military detec-
tive to go with him to the Perth Prill Hall, After waiting
there for about one hour, I was brought before Capt, Guest,
who said he was glad they had me now, and I would not get
home again, I wanted to know why 1 was to be interned,
and he replied that I must know the reason, of which, however,
I am still ignorant 0 About 6 months later, I happened to
meet Mr, of Perth, who told me that I had been
interned at the request of two of my neighbours, and that
he was willing to prove it, Capt, Guest refused me permis-
sion to see my wife again, and said that he would see to it
that I would get everything that I needed. No arrest or
internment warrant was shown to me. The same day I was
taken to the Fremantle Barracks, where I was detained until
August 15th 1917, when I left with other internees for the
Holdsworthy Camp,
The day after my arrival at Fremantle I was allowed by
Major Griffiths to go home to arrange my affairs. Thinking
I might be released again? I waited until the 2nd March 1917
before I xorotested to the Minister for Defence against my
arrest, and asked for the reasons of my internment. Under
date of the 21st March 1917 the Acting Secretary of the
Defence Department advised me that in view of the evidence
in the Department's possession it was not proposed to release
me, in the meantime I had received a copy of my internment
warrant dated "March 1917." 1 have never been granted a full
inquiry, or been given an opportunity to disprove any charges
that may have been laid against me. I have always loyally
fulfilled* my -citizen' s duties, and have not done or said
anything that might be detrimental to the interests of the
Commonwealth or the safety of the Realm*
On July 4th 1917? I applied again for my release, this
time to Ma jor Corbett, but was told that my case could not
be re-considered ; and that I could not be released, I did
not get a reply in writing from him, After I ha.d been inter-
ned for four months I was allowed out on parole without es-
cort whenever I Mad any business to attend to in Perth,
I left Fremantle with 15 other internees by steamer
(A 15) on August 15fth 1917. The floor space allotted to


the l 6 of us on this steamer about 13ft, by 24ft,, The
room we were put in was badly cleaned and ventilated; the
floor was covered with a layer of citronella oil about 2
inches thick, which we had great trouble in removing. In
this room and in this atmosphere we had to live and sleep
all the time with the exception of about two hours per day,
during which time, we were allowed on the deck under guard.
On arrival in Melbourne we were removed from the ship
handcuffed two and two together, and marched in that
to the detention cells at the Victoria Barracks, St o Kilda
Road, V T e had to stay in these cells during the night, and
were marched back to the railway station the next afternoon.
This time only the two internees at the head of our column
were handcuffed together, We arrived the same night at
the Langwarrin Soldiers Venereal Camp, and there again were
given no tents, or other decent accommodation, but placed in
the ordinary arrest cells. We were compelled to go to the
same latrines, and use the same wash basins as the venereal
patients, and the blankets given to us showed traces of having
been used by some of their class, We had to stay in the
cells from o p.m. till 7 a,,m c but were allowed to move about
in front of them during the day. The cells were cold and
draughty, and most of us acquired rheumatism or bad colds as
a result. Venereal soldiers were employed in the kitchen,
and they did not clean their hands properly before they worked
on the food. The latrines and the space in front of our
cells were swept with the same broom as our cells, and as
the latrines were being used by the venereal patients, there
was always a danger of infection, I complained personally
to the Commandant at Langwarrin, Capt, Condor, but nothing
was done to abolish these disgusting practices, Prom Lang-
warrin I was transported together with 25" other internees
to Sydney in the same ship and the same room, I had to
pass one night at the Darlinghurst detention cells and ar-
rived at Holdsworthy on September 14th 1917<>
On my transport from Langxvarrin to Melbourne my trunk
was completely broken up. I claimed damages for this on"
September lsth„
The food at Fremantle was unsuitable for me, in con-
sequence of which I have now severe stomach trouble.
The separation allowance paid to my wife and child is
quite insufficient a
'-«*» *n «*• *-* «vb tsu WM u» ua *» rr» ir» w* «» iJ?4


SUPPLEMENTARY STATUTORY USCIA RATIONS,
AO '.•* t<« VM t! • •• w»
(l) I was "born in Germany in 1870 I teve "been residing
in Australia since 1888, where I "became naturalised in 1899,
I am married to an Australian-born woman, I have been in
the. constant employ of one firm in Sydney r but j. lost my job
in 19.1.5 on account of my enemy origin, As I was unable to
find other work, I went to the internment camp voluntarily
jn the same yearn
(2) ."During my internment, I have repeatedly asked to be
allowed" to visit my home in Sydney and to see my daughter who
was seriously ill. but my applications were always refused.
(3} On October 26th 1917. my daughter was again taken
ill and was brought to the Sydney Hospital, a few days later.
Mobs 3 of Maintain, who was in charge of the case, informed
my wife that he thought it advisable that I should visit my
daughter and he gave my wife a letter to that effect, This
letter, as well as a letter from my wife, I brought under the
notice' of Lieut Lloyd and asked him for permission to see
my daughter c I was referred to Major Allsopp who refused
my request adding;; !! I will not let you go even should she
die c !i He said something else which I believe referred to
telephoning to the hospital, but I was so perturbed in mind
that I ** r a Ik e d away u
(4) On ITovember 13th 1917, I was informed that, on the
preceding Saturday, November 10th p my daughter's illness
had taken a serious turn and that, on receiving the bad news,
my wife had fallen downstairs and broken her arm. I pro-
duced the letter containing the information to Major Allsopp
and repeated my request for leave to go to Sydney. He did
hot even look at the letter and abruptly refused my request,
(5) On November 14th, my wife accompanied by her sister,
went to'the Victoria Barracks and saw two of the officers, who
I believe were Colonel Boyle and Major Wilson, She told
them that my daughter had died. The officers investigated
my wife's statements and in the presence of the ladies,
telephoned to Lt, Colonel Holman asking him to allow me to
come to Sydney, as my daughter had died and as my help was
necessary I to make the funeral arrangements, This was pro-
mised by the Camp Authorities and my wife was assured by
Major Wilson that a wire to me confirming the message, as
well as acquainting me with my daughter's death was not neces-
ss rv n s I wou' d come without fail'. I received no message of
O C'J i. )' -*> £? i* > Wi v-t. -> „ 1.1 |«|« »»|| I—l IT-»Mumrl ■ Mrnrir—'ft
any deaorirrtion from tiie Camp Authorities and ms kept in
total ignorance of my daughter's death until I was told on
Friday, Ho v ember l6th : by a fellow-internee who had read the
death notices in the newspapers, on that day, I then saw
Lieut Lloyd and asked him whether any message had come for
me whereto" he answered that I could go to Sydney by the next
train, but he refused to ansvrer my question.
(6) 1 met my daughter's funeral accidentally in the
street while waiting for the tram to take me home, and I
allendo d the funera 1, According to the escort ! s ill structions ,
I was only allowed to stay at my home for 3° minutes, after
the funeral, but in fact I was made to return from the
cemetery direct to the camp
N75
•„J.A w* rti «.«•
«j« *.-■» mm —*


r
-
' • - .
•• -t-* " - * •
.
-
*
k
' T.
,
*
.
1
'
• * '
.
'
■ ' • - -
-
-
'
-
:
■
-
- . . - ,
: . ■ , : .... •
... ...
. •
••
.
■ ■ ■ •
■
■ -
■
• ' • - ■ . *Z-\
:•
.. . , .....
"
.
'
*
■ -
I
I


Statutory Declaration No. 31,
I was born in Germany in 1875, came to Australia in
1904, was naturalised in 3.911, I am a married man, I was
arrested at Brisbane cn variant (under warrant regulation
56a of the War Precautions Regulation) on the 17th March 1916.
I had no time or opportunity allowed to put my business in
order, and thus I have lost all my belongings.
As a member of the-Association of Naturalized British
subjects in the German Concentration Camp, Holdsworthy,
Z along with other members was refused an inquiry. Owing
to my internment, my wife has been deprived of all opportun-
ity to see me, and in consequence thereof I could not adjust
my business affairs, even had I obtained leave to do so.
I have not received four parcels, of three of them only the
wrappers were shown me by Sergeant Major Walker,\one of them
disappeared completely. My claims for damages on this ac-
count have been without result. On my arrival a, z the Ger-
man Concentration Camp some tools were taken from mo, 1 re-
ceived no receipt for them, nor have the articles been re-
turned to me. For twelve months I have suffered with Rheu-
matism in my right shoulder and pains in my throat and ears,
certainly the result of draughts here. Owing to experience
I had and observations I made whilst being treated for a bad
finger in the early months of my internment at the Camp
Hospital at the German Concentration Camp, for instance,
painting of the throats of six or more men in a row with the
same brush without disinfecting it, the careless lying about
ofminstruments on the table, and their repeated use without •
being disinfected,, robbed me of all confidence in the Army
Medical Corps Staff as well as in the medical officers. In
April and May 1917 Eiy wife ? s and my own letters were delayed
so that my wife being very concerned about me, was about to
come from Brisbane at great expense to get information about
me, A letter posted to rue by my wife on the Ist of May
1917 reached me on the 29th of that month, that is, after
four weeks. The allowance of 10/- per week for my wife is
quite insufficient, and in spite of bad health she is obliged
to do hard work.
CONTINUATION OF CORRESPONDENCE.
Holdsworthy, April 26th, 1918.
The Honourable Mr, Justice Harvey,
Official Camp Visitor.
Sir,-
Referring to the interviews we had with you on the
Occasion of your last two visits to this Camp, we shall be
glad to know:-
(a ) If Your Honour has communicated with the Editor of the
Sunday Times, or other representative men or public bodies
regarding the question of work and with what result?
(b) If Your Honour has succeeded in securing office accom-
odation for our Association?
(c) If there is any likelihood of the internment of Australian
families being favorably considered by the Defence Authorities?
(d) In what manner members of our Association, injured at
Ckmp work can present their compensation claims to the
Defence Department?
(e) If the publication in the Camp of the essential parts of
the "Aliens Instructions No, 2 of 1915" is being regarded
with favour by the -Defence Department?
We rem in, yours respectfully,
(Signed) President A.N.B.S*


Department of Defence,
Melbourne, 24th December, 1917•
F. B.
Concentration Camp, Liverpool.
In reply to your letter of 14th November, addressed to the
Minister for Defence, you are informed that you are interned
as an alien enemy and that you must remain interned.
(Signed) Acting Secretary.
Holdsworthy, 14th September, 1910.
Defence Department, Melbourne t
Mr, P, B. a member of our Association has asked us
to write to you to learn your views regarding his national-
ity, He was naturalised in Melbourne, on March 26th, 1906
and was interned in Queensland on June 22nd 1917, on the
Minister's warrant, under W, P. Regulation 56a, but was
subsequently informed by you fsee your letter of December
24th 1917 f No, 95859) that he had been interned as an
alien enemy and must remain interned. What he definitely
wants to find out now is whether he is interned as a natur-
alised British subject or as an alien enemy.
Your early reply will oblige, yours faithfully,
(Signed) President Secretary
A. N. B. S,
Department of Defence,
Melbourne, 25th September, l9lB.
Concentration Camp, Liverpool.
With reference to letter dated the 14th September
sent on your behalf by Mr. H, Bruggemann, relative to
your internment, you are informed that it was inadver-
tently stated in this Department's No, 95859 of the 24th
December that you were interned as an alien enemy instead
of which the letter should have stated that you were in-
terned under Minister's Warrant issued under War Precaut-
ions Regulations 58a,
(Signed) T. Trumble
Secretary,
•U. IM vm mm mm mm mx» -.*>
'rn :•« M
Holdsworthy, 14th Septr, 1918
Department of Defence, Melbourne,
T " T e have been instructed to ascertain the views of
your Department on the subject of release of our members
in case ?»n agreement for the exchange of civilian inter-
nees should be arrived at between the British and the German
and Austrian Governments respectively. Will you kindly
let us know if in that case the Commonwealth Government
will allow
(l) those naturalised internees who are desirous to return
to the land of their birth to join their compatriots who
N7B


are eligible for repatriation, even if naturalised British
subjects do not come within the scope of such an exchange
of prisoners agreement,
(2) the other section of naturalised internees whose whole
interests are in this country and who have made up their
minds to stay here for good to return unconditionally to
their families and live together with them or do so under
special restrictions as regards the place of residence?
Awaiting the favour of an early reply,
Yours faithfully,
(Signed) President Secretary A.iT.B.S.
Department of Defence,
Melbourne, 25th September, 1918.
Memorandum for:
H. Bruggmann,
Concentration Camp, Liverpool,
With reference to your letter of the 14th September,
you are informed that applications from naturalized subjects
whether for repatriation under clause 1 or for release under
clause 2 of your letter can only be considered individually
and not collectively.
(signed) T. Trumble,
Secretary,
Liverpool, 7th October, 1918.
The Hon. the Minister of State
for Defence,
Sir ,-
Recent press comment regarding impending peace, ex-
change and release of prisoners, politics after the war,
etc, induces us to again approach you for and on behalf of
our members and ask you to end our sufferings and release
us from these miserable and humiliating surroundings,
It is useless to dwell on the reasons for our internment,
the majority of us don't know them ; in fact, you yourself
are the only one who knows or ought to know, but all our
frantic attempts to get a fair trial have been met with cold
indifference and scorn, He do not even know whether we are
Germans or Australians, from a legal point of view at least
the law does not protect us. Our families are mostly
living as paupers? shunned by hostile neighbours, and many
women have broken down in health completely from worry and
grief. Some have not seen their husbands for close on four
years, Many of us are in a pitiable condition of health,
and the nerves of all of us have been and are still under a
heavy and continuous strain. The future is a blank to
most of us, gum*, homes are broken up and 'wrecked, our posi-
tions occupied, and our credit and our good name have been
taken amy from us. He were honest and honourable citizens
before the war. we helped to build up this country, and now
we are held in bondage for nothing and treated worse than
criminals and traitors.
oir, what have we done to deserve this abominable treat-
ment, how long is it going to last and what is to become
of us when it does end? v? e earnestly ask you to bring
our ca.se before your Cabinet and come to a just decision as
to our fate and let us have relief at once : else it will be
too late for many of us and our families,
v, e av e , Si v , Y0 uu s f
(3 igne d) Pr eside nt Be ere ta ry A e IT, B e 3,


Department of Defence,
Melbourne, l6th October, 1918.
Memorandum for :
H. Bruggemann,
Concentration Camp, Liverpool,
,T ith reference to your letter of the 7th October
you are informed that applications for release must be
made individually and can only be considered individually.
(Signed) T, Trumble,
Secretary,
4th November, 1918.
The Honourable the Minister of State
for Defence,
Melbourne.
Mr. Emil i-lein, a member of our Association,
notified by the Camp Authorities on the 17th October
that his w iCe died on the 7th October, the same month,
ihough incredible it may seem, Mr, Hein «as only
informed oen da.ys after this sad occurrence.
Me beg to record our most emphatic protest
against the treatment meted out to our member and
earnestly hope that, in future, anybody of this Camp
will be notified at once, so that he can attend the funeral
of his beloved one. Trusting that you will hive this
your consideration,
w e are, Sir,
Yours,
(Signed) President Secretary
A. IT, 2/3.
NBO
«•* •'-*> • • • ' m '—■>


%
c-*
Cone ontration Camp,
Holdsworthy ,* Ist May, ± c jls.
M S M. 0
The accompanying 24- sheets comprise the first
instalment of the correspondence conducted "by the re-
spect ive Associa ti ons.
The subscription charge for each complete copy is 5
and 2/6 is payable on receipt of the present instalment;
the sheets necessary to complete the file will be supplied
when ready. This charge will entitle subscribers to copies
of all additional correspondence conducted by the respective
Associations up till the end of the present calendar year
Blank pages and spaces signify the incompleted sections of
the correspondence.
Subscribers are rccjuosted ; until tne correspondence is
complete. to bind the sheets in a temporary manner only in
order that incompleted sheets may be called in by the Com-
mittee for the insertion of copies of supplementary cor-
respondence , Tho numbering on pages is only pro v isional
and a ro-numbering will be required on completion.
