

REPRINTS OF PAPERS
FROM
THE SCIENCE LABORATORIES
OF THE
UNIVERSITY OF SYDNEY,
1894-5.
PART I.
FROM THE DEPARTMENTS OF ANATOMY, BIOLOOY,
GEOLOGY" AND PHYSIOLOGY,
iW Private Circulation only.
Sydney. 1896.


REPRINTS OF PAPERS
FROM
THE SCIENCE LABORATORIES
OF THE
UNIVERSITY OF SYDNEY,
1894-5.
PART I.
FROM THE DEPARTMENTS OF ANATOMY, BIOLOGY,
GEOLOGY AND PHYSIOLOGY.
For Private Circulation only.
Sydney, 1896.




CONTENTS.
I. David (T. W. E.), Contribution to the Study of Volcanic Action
in Eastern Australia
11. Sketch of our present knowledge of the Geological History
of Australia, &c.
111. Hill (J. P.), A Contribution to a Further Knowledge of the Cystic
Cestodes
IV. On a New Species of Enteropneusta (Ptychodera Aus-
traliensis) from the Coast of New South Wales
V. and Martin (C.J.), On a Platypus Embryo from the Intra-
uterine Egg
VI. Martin (C. J.), On the Physiological Action of the Venom of
the Australian Black Snake (Pseudechis Porphyriacusj
VII. and Tidswell (F.), Observations on the Femoral Gland of
Omithorhynchus and its Secretion ; together with an ex-
perimental enquiry concerning its supposed Toxic Action
VIII. Smeeth (W. F.), A Perlitic Pitchstone from the Tweed River,
New South Wales, with remarks on the so-called Perlitic
Structure in Quartz
IX. Smith (G. E.), An Account of some rare Nerve and Muscle
Anomalies, with remarks on their significance
X. A Preliminary Communication upon the Cerebral Commis-
sures of the Mammalia, with special reference to the
Monotremata and Marsupialia
XI. The Morphology of the Smell-Centre
XII. Notes upon the Morphology of the Cerebrum and its Com-
missures in the Vertebrate Series
XIII. Jacobson’s Organ and the Olfactory Bulb in Ornithor-
hynchus
XIV. Wilson (J. T.), On the Myology of Notoryotes Typhlops, with
comparative notes
XV. Description (with figures) of a Young Specimen of Omi-
thorhynchus Anatinm, from the collection of the Aus-
tralian Museum
XVI. Observations upon the Anatomy and Relations of the
“Dumb-bell-shaped” Bone in Omithorhynchus, with a
new theory of its Homology ; and upon a hitherto unde-
scribed character of the Nasal Septum in the genera
Omithorhynchus and Echidna
XVII. and McKay (W. J. S.), On the Homologies of the Borders
and Surfaces of the Scapula in Monotremes
X VIII. and Martin (C. J.), Further Observations upon the Anatomy
of the Integumentary Structures in the Muzzle of Omi-
thorhynchus


[Read at the Adelaide Meeting of the Australasian Association for the
Advancement of Science, held September, 1893,']
CONTRIBUTION TO THE STUDY F YOLCANIC ACTION IN
EASTERN AUSTRALIA.
By T. W. E. DAVID, B.A., F.G.S.,
Professor of Geology, University of
Sydney.
Plate XV.
This short paper is intended to supplement the remarks con-
tained in my Presidential Address to Section C at Hobart last
year. The oldest volcanic rocks will he referred to first, and the
paper will be confined chiefly to researches made since the Hobart
meeting.
In New South Wales eruptive rocks, of an age probably earlier
than that of Upper Devonian, have recently been discovered in
the Braidwood district by Mr. William Anderson, late Geological
Surveyor to the Department of Mines, New South Wales, and Mr.
P. T. Hammond, his field assistant. These rocks are described in
Mr. Anderson’s preliminary report on the Major’s Creek and
Braidwood districts.* The type locality near Major’s Creek,
where these rocks are developed, is a hill near Back Creek, about
three miles distant from the township of Major’s Creek. The
rocks are essentially quartz-felsites, and an examination of their
relation to the associated rocks shows that they are certainly older
than the overlying sedimentary strata, and also older than the gold-
bearing granite of that district.
In company with Mr. W. Anderson and Mr. E. F. Pitt-
mann, A.11.5.M., I lately examined the locality, and we entirely
agreed with Mr. Anderson in his interpretation of the section, the
principal features of which are shown on sketch section (Plate XV.).
Section 1 represents a mass of quartz-felsite, occupying an area
of several square miles. The' junction line between it and the
overlying sedimentary rocks is an eroded one, and there is no
evidence of the felsite having anywhere intruded them.
The lowest stratum of the sedimentary rocks is formed of a thick
bed of basal conglomerate, composed chiefly of pebbles of quartz-
felsite imbedded in a matrix of finer material derived from the
disintegration of the same rock. The pebbles composing such
portions of this basal conglomerate as have filled in hollows in the
eroded surface of the quartz-felsite are coarse, being several inches
in diameter. The conglomerate graduates upwards into a reddish
• Annual Report Department of Mines, 1892, p. 121-125.


grit, with layers of reddish-purple shale and grey sandstone, in
the first and last of which beds several obscure casts of brachiopods
were observed. About 60ft. above the surface of the quartz-felsite
Lepidodendron australe occurs in situ in a bed of grey sandstone,
and also in some hard sandy shales on a horizon about 40ft. above
the preceding. At the top of the hill, at a total elevation of about
200 ft. above the surface of the quartz-felsite, Lepidodendron aus-
trale was found in situ associated with marine fossils, one of which
closely resembles Spirifera disjuncta.
The dip of these sedimentary rocks is very low, and in places
they are nearly horizontal. The whole series of sedimentary rocks
is quite conformable, and probably belongs throughout to one
period of deposition. This section proves the quartz-felsite to be
older than the Lepidodendron australe beds with their associated
marine fossils. As regards the age of these latter, it is probable
that they are referable either to the top of the Devonian or to the
base of the Carboniferous series. Lithologically the beds closely
resemble the Mount Lambie beds, near Rydal, in New South
Wales, which are in part Upper Devonian, and the Avon River
sandstones and shales of Victoria, which also contain Lepido-
dendron australe, and which have been doubtfully referred by
Mr. R. A. F. Murray, the Government Geologist of Victoria, to
the top of the Upper Devonian or to the base of the Carboniferous
System.
An examination of the section further to the cast in the direction
of the Clyde Mountain showed that a series of sedimentary rocks,
probably once continuous with those overlying the quartz-felsite
near Major’s Creek, contained Rhyncnonella pleurodon in enor-
mous numbers.
At Mount Lambie Rhyncnonella pleurodon is abundantly asso-
ciated with Spirifera disjuncta, and may therefore be of Upper
Devonian age, at the Clyde Mountain, near Braidwood.
Evidence has not yet been obtained as to whether the quartz-
felsite of Back Creek, near Major’s Creek, is a lava or a plutonic
laccolite. Its age is clearly older than either Upper Devonian or
Lower Carboniferous.
The possibility suggests itself of this quartz-felsite being homo-
taxial with the Snowy River porphyries, which are probably of
Lower Devonian age, according to A. W. Howitt and R. A. F.
Murray. The gold-bearing granite of Braidwood and Major’s
Creek is of later origin than the quartz-felsite and also than the
Upper Devonian (?) sediments, which latter have been much
altered and considerably disturbed by the granite. The granite is
almost certainly of contemporaneous origin with the gold-bearing
hornblendic granites of Hartley and Bathurst, which are later than
the Upper Devonian and older than the Permo-Carboniferous (as
that term is used in New South Wales), that is, older than the
strata containing Glossopteris- bearing coal measures associated


with a marine fauna, which has affinities partly with the Permian
and partly with the Carboniferous of Europe. [The Queensland
geologists include under the term Permo-Carboniferous the Lepi-
dodrendon ausirale beds occurring in the Star and Gympie Forma-
tions in that colony. Beds containing similar fossils in New South
Wales are referred either to the Carboniferous or to the top of
the Upper Devonian rocks.]
As regards the intrusion of the granite near Braidwood it is
interesting to note that it has forced a passage for itself through
the outer portion of the earth’s crust almost entirely at the expense
of some sediments lying to the east of the quartz-felsite, and
apparently unconformable to the overlying rocks of Upper
Devonian age, whereas it has disturbed the quartz-felsite on its
western margin near Back Creek to only a very limited extent.
Probably the quartz-felsite resisted the lateral thrust of the granite
more successfully than did the sediments.
The purple shales associated with the Lepidodendroti beds at
Back Creek show that lithologically as well as palx-ontologically
they are related to the Upper Devonian at Mount Lamhie, for at
the latter locality Mr. Pittman and I lately observed that purple
shales several hundred feet thick are interstratified with the
Spirifera disjuncta beds fv. Plate XV., section 2). My field
experience in New South Wales has led me to the conclusion
that most of such purple shales result from the alteration of fine
tuffs, and their presence is therefore an indication of probable
contemporaneous volcanic action. Near the Avon River in Victoria
the purple shales associated with the Lepidodendron beds are
evidently related to volcanic rocks, as they are there intimately
associated with sheets of melaphyrc, as described by Mr. R. A. F.
Murray, Government Geologist of Victoria.*
The quartz-felsites of Rock Creek, whether plutonic or volcanic,
are certainly older than the diabasic and felsitic tuffs interstratified
with the Rhncopteris beds of the Stroud district, in New South
Wales, the latter rocks at the time of the meeting of the Associa-
tion at Hobart being the oldest known representatives of the
volcanic division in New South Wales. The credit of this
discovery belongs to Mr. W. Anderson, late of the Geological
Survey of New South Wales. • With the exception of the above
felsitcs no important additions have of late been made to our
knowledge of the volcanic rocks of New South Wales, as far as
the author is aware. In Queensland Mr. R. L. Jack, F.G.S., the
Government Geologist, has supplied me with information, which
enables me to make important additions to my previous summary
of the volcanic rocks of that colony. In the valley of the Reid
thick beds of brccciatcd volcanic ash are interstratified with Pre-
Devonian greywackes. In the Burdekin formation (Devonian)
reddish-purple shales are somewhat extensively developed, and
• Geology and Physical Geography of Victoria, pp. 66-69.


may indicate contemporaneous volcanic action. In the Gympie
series a chloritic rock with amygdaloidal cavities, probably an
“ amygdaloidal diabase,” has been described by Mr. W. H. Hands.
This lava, or tuff, was probably of Carboniferous age. In the
Star beds (formerly known as the Dotswood beds), probably of
Carboniferous age, but grouped under the broad term I’ermo-
Carboniferous, Mr. R. L. Jack has recorded the occurrence of
interbedded amygdaloidal porphyrites. In my previous paper due
importance was not assigned to the strong evidence of contem-
poraneous volcanic action at or near the base of the Ipswich coal
measures (Triassic) near Brisbane (v. Plate XV., section 3). Mr.
Jack recently conducted me over a few of the best sections
of these volcanic rocks near Brisbane, and I quite concur in the
views already expressed by himself and Mr. W. H. Rands, F.G.S.,
that they are certainly contemporaneous tuffs, probably subaerial.
This rock has been well described by Mr. W. H. Rands,* and I
cannot do better than quote his description:—“ A rock occurs
running in a north and south direction through Brisbane. It is a
good building stone, and has been employed in most of the
principal buildings. ... It has hitherto been classed as a
porphyry, which has been intruded into the micaceous schists.
Were this the true nature of the rock one would expect to find the
schists in its vicinity altered, in much the same manner that we
find them changed to hard lydianised slates, where they border on
the granite. No such change is seen, although the junction of this
rock with the schists is visible in several cuttings in and about
Brisbane. The rock consists of a. felspathic matrix with blebs of
quartz and some crystals of orthoclase felspar ; its color is generally
white or a yellowish-white, though in places it has green, purple,
or brown tints. It contains throughout it small particles of
micaceous schist and quartz, which towards its base attain the size
of pebbles or boulders. It has also near its base pieces of silicified
and also of carbonised wood.
Taking into consideration the nature of the rock, its being full of
angular particles of other rocks, the absence of any change in the
surrounding schists, and, lastly, its position relatively to the other
formations, I have come to the conclusion that it is a volcanic ash,
and not a porphyry, and that it lies at or near the base of the
Ipswich beds.” It appeared to me that these tuffs in places must
be probably not less than 500 ft. thick at Brisbane. Traced in a
southerly direction they thin out rapidly. At Corinda, however, a
few miles further south-west, the tuffs are replaced by a sheet of
amygdaloidal lava of basic or intermediate composition.
Mr. Jack has drawn my attention to the fact that on a much
higher horizon in the Ipswich coal measures, and above that of the
productive coal seams of Ipswich, a considerable thickness of con-
• Report to accompany Geological Map of the City of Brisbane and its Environs, by
William H. Rands, Assistant Government Geologist. Government Printer, Brisbane, 1887.


temporaneous lavas and volcanic ash are intcrstratified with the
coal measures. Probably at least three groups are represented.
The horizon of the principal group is just above that of a strongly-
developed sandstone, which Mr. Jack considers may possibly be
the equivalent of the Hawkesbury Sandstone of New South Wales.
This series is typically developed at Toowoomba. Overlying this
volcanic series are the thin coal seams, interbedded with shaly
rocks, of Brackets, Gowrie, Jimbour and Clifton.
These may be on the same horizon as the Wianamatta shales of
the Sydney coal basin, and may therefore be of Upper Triassic or
of Jurassic age, as in Queensland they pass conformably under the
Rolling Downs formation (Lower Cretaceous). For the horizon of
this volcanic series see “ Geology of Queensland,” by R. L. Jack
and R. Etheridge, jun., Plate XLIX., Fig. 2, to which I am largely
indebted for the information on Plate XV., section 3.
Mr. Jack considers the Toowoomba lavas somewhat uncon-
formable to the Ipswich Series both above and below it.
Near Wycarbah, twenty-four miles from Rockhampton, on the
Central Railway, tuffs and basaltic rocks are developed homotaxial
with some portion of the Ipswich coal measures. In my previous
paper I stated that, with the exception of some comparatively
insignificant tuffaceous beds in the Desert Sandstone of Queensland,
which is considered to be of Upper Cretaceous age, there is no
evidence, as far as the author is aware, of contemporaneous volcanic
action in Australia in Mesozoic rocks of Jurassic or of Cretaceous
age. It is possible, as above suggested, that the Toowoomba
basalts may be Jurassic, and the fact should be mentioned that,
although the passage just quoted is true generally of the Queens-
land Desert Sandstone, the researches of Mr. Gibb Maitland,
Assistant Government Geologist of Queensland, have demon-
strated that in the Mackay District there are extensive sheets of
sanidine-trachyte and agglomerates referable to the horizon of the
Desert Sandstone.
As regards Tertiary volcanic rocks, Mr. Jack distinguishes at least
two series—an older and a newer. The series were erupted at
a time when the Desert Sandstone had undergone very little
denudation, and the newer when the Desert Sandstone had been
considerably eroded, as the newer lavas are found filling valleys in
the Desert Sandstone.
These two series might be homotaxial with the older volcanic
and newer volcanic rocks of the Victorian Survey, the former of
which must now be regarded, in part at all events, as Eocene and
the latter as Pliocene.
Evidence of the most recent volcanic action in Queensland is
observable at the Endeavour River, north of Cooktown, where
volcanic necks and traces of craters are well preserved with their
radiating sheets of lava. It is doubtful, however, whether even
these are newer than Pliocene.


Hot springs, such as those of the Einasleigh River, are the only
evidence to show that Queensland still possesses volcanic poten-
tialities. The temperature of the Einasleigh Springs, as described
by Mr. Jack, approaches that of boiling point.*
In Victoria the recent researches of Professor R. Tate and Mr.
J. Dennant, F.C.S., have facilitated the correlations of the Tertiary
volcanic rocks of Victoria with those of New South Wales. In
their paperj- on correlation of the Marine Tertiaries of Australia
these authors have shown that nearly all the so-called Miocene
beds, composed chiefly of hard polyzoal limestones, must now be
referred to the Eocene Period, and the age of their associated
volcanic rocks must therefore be altered correspondingly, and the
rocks originally classed as “older volcanic” (Miocene) by the
Victorian Survey must be now considered Eocene, and may be
homotaxial with the Older Tertiary basalts of New England,
which are there associated with a contemporaneous flora considered
by Baron Ettingshausen to be Eocene.
The remainder of the Victorian volcanic rocks newer than
Eocene are probably either Pliocene or Post-Pliocene. Those
which are of Pliocene age are probably approximately homotaxial
with the widely-developed Pliocene lavas of New South Wales,
which at Gulgong are associated with a contemporaneous flora of
Pliocene age, in the opinion of Baron F. von Mueller. Remains of
Meiolania, consisting of a small horn core, the greater part of a
caudal vertebra, and two portions of two of the annular segments
of the tail sheath, have been found in the Canadian Deep Lead,
near Gulgong, in drifts, probably on the same horizon as those
associated with the basalts at Gulgong, and therefore Pliocene.
(On the occurrence of the genus Meiolania in the Pliocene Deep
Lead at Canadian, near Gulgong, by R. Etheridge, jun., Palaeon-
tologist, Records Geological Survey of New South Wales, vol. 1.,
part iii., pp. 149-152.)
In the volcanic geology of Tasmania, as far at I am aware, there
have not of late been any important discoveries which necessitate
alterations or additions to my previous paper. The fact, however,
might be recorded here that subsequent to the Hobart Meeting of
the Association I have further examined the so-called diabasic
greenstones in the neighborhood of Hobart, in Tasmania, and
find them to be gabbros, as suggested by Captain Hutton, the
principal constituent minerals being diallage and triclinic felspar
with magnetite.
This confirms the conclusion (already in my opinion sufficiently
clear upon stratigraphical grounds) that, as maintained by Mr.
Thomas Stephens, M.A., the “ greenstones ” of Hobart are intrusive
masses, probably of the nature of laccolitcs, which are certainly of
• Report of the second meeting of the Australasian Association for the Advancement of
Science, 1890, vol. n., p. 458.
+ Transactions, Royal Society of South Australia, 1893, p.p. 203-226.


newer age than either the Permo-Carboniferous rocks of Hobart, or
than the Mesozoic coal measures of Newtown, Jerusalem, Fingal,
&c. ‘
It remains to summarise briefly the evidence bearing on the
questions discussed in my former paper as to whether volcanic
action was, in Australia, directly related to heavy sedimentation.
The newly-discovered quartz-felsites of Back Creek do not as
yet afford evidence of any value, the conditions relating to their
development not yet having been determined. The felsitic tuff
bed at the base of the Ipswich coal measures seems at first sight
an exception to the general rule that volcanic action has usually
followed close upon the heels of heavy sedimentation. The fact,
however, must be borne in mind that it is more than probable that
previous to the outbursts which produced the Brisbane tuff
Permo-Carboniferous rocks were deposited to a considerable thick-
ness along a shore line, perhaps somewhat east of the present
shore line. In the Bowen River coalfield these sediments attain
a thickness of several thousand feet, and in the Hunter River
District of New South Wales are upwards of 10,000 ft. thick-
Stratigraphical evidence points strongly in this direction, so that
the Brisbane tuffs were probably erupted subsequent to con-
siderable sedimentation, though long before the downward move-
ment of the earth’s crust in that locality had ceased.
Probably upwards of 3,000 ft. of Ipswich coal measures were
then formed, and after some outbursts of Java, such as those
represented at Ipswich, and possibly also those of Rosewood, the
lower division of the Ipswich coal measures was slightly upheaved,
and the Toowoomba basalts then flowed over an eroded and
slightly inclined surface of these Mesozoic sediments. Sub-
sequently the upper division of the Ipswich coal measures was
deposited with slight unconformability on the Toowomba lavas, and
further overflows of lava look place subsequent to or about the
conclusion of the period of deposition of this upper division of the
Ipswich.
Members of the Association visiting Brisbane at the next annual
meeting will, of course, have every facility for studying the highly
interesting volcanic rocks at Brisbane and in its neighborhood, and
further evidence may then be- adduced to explain the apparently
anomalous position of the Brisbane tuffs at the base of a great
sedimentary series.






A SKETCH OF OUR PRESENT KNOWLEDGE OF THE GEO-
LOGICAL HISTORY OF AUSTRALIA, TASMANIA AND NEW
ZEALAND, FROM ARCHAEAN TIME DOWN TO THE COM-
MENCEMENT OF THE PERMO-CARBONIFEROUS PERIOD
BEING THE
PRESIDENTIAL ADDRESS
TO THE
Linnean Society of New South Wales,
BY
T. W. EDGEWORTH DAVID, B.A., F.G.S.,
Professor of Geology, Sydney University,
29th, 1894.
[From the Proceedings (Vol. VIII., Series 2nd), November
29th, 1893.]


ANNUAL GENERAL MEETING.
The President, Professor David, 8.A., P.G.S., in the Chair.
Messrs. \V. R. Morgan, J. Nisbet, W. F. Smeeth, and Captain
Shuttleworth were introduced as visitors.
The Minutes of the last Annual Meeting were read and
confirmed.
PRESIDENT’S ADDRESS.
The Society has now completed the nineteenth year of its
existence, and in conformity with the custom followed by my
predecessors in this office, I propose first to review the history
of the Society during the past year. I shall then give a short
summary of the present state of our knowledge of the geology of
Australasia during the greater part of the Palfeozoic Era.
During the Session of 1893, the full number of Monthly
Meetings (nine) was held, at which forty-eight papers were read,
showing that the Society is maintaining its reputation for work
and progress.
The special efforts made to finish the Macleay Memorial Volume
necessitated keeping back the publication of Parts ii.-iv. of the
Proceedings for 1893. The delay so occasioned has been increased
through the printer’s being fully occupied with the usual rush of
work about Christmas time, and by the time required for the
preparation of the plates to illustrate the Parts in question.
Matters now, however, have so far progressed that the
Parts will be ready for issue at no very distant dates.
WEDNESDAY, MARCH 28th, 1894.


As nine ordinary monthly meetings now make up a session, the
Council has decided that the Proceedings for the year shall, under
ordinary circumstances, and as far as possible, take the form of
three bi-monthly and one quarterly part. It is hoped, therefore,
that as soon as the arrears into which the issue of the Proceedings
has of late fallen, firstly, through the necessity for carrying on
simultaneously for about eighteen months the publication of both
the Memorial Volume and the Proceedings, and secondly, through
the subsequent setting aside of the latter to allow of the comple-
tion and issue of the former, have been worked off, that the
majority of the Parts will in future be issued at shorter intervals
than has been possible in the past, but otherwise with the same
commendable regularity, and with as little unavoidable delay as
possible.
The attendance at the meetings, all things considered, has
been quite up to the average. The Ocean-street Tramway, to be
opened for traffic in the course of the next few months, will make
the Society’s Hall much more conveniently accessible than
formerly to the bulk of the members ; and it is not too much to
expect that the usefulness and prospects of the Society will be
proportionally benefited in consequence.
Eleven new members and two corresponding members have
been elected. It will be remembered that a year ago a new rule
relating to the amount of subscription was passed, and which for
a number of members takes effect from the commencement of
1894. It may be well to remind the members of the Society that
in common with Governments, Corporations, and individuals, the
Society has to cope with a reduced income by reason of the wide-
spread commercial depression now prevailing in the colonies ; that
chiefly due to the same cause, and partly due to the passing away
of old members, there has been a falling off in point of numbers,
so that at present the number of effective members on the books
is smaller than usual ; and that though the course adopted will no
doubt at first, but it is hoped only temporarily, result in some loss
of revenue, it was felt that, in view of Sir William Macleay’s
liberality to the Society, it was a wise course to take in the


interests of the welfare of Science, and of an extension of the
Society’s sphere of usefulness.
Two resignations have been received, and Mr. E. C. Merewether,
one of our members, has been removed by death. Mr. Mere-
wether was a foundation member of this Society. He arrived in
the colony in 1838, as A.D.C. to Sir George Gipps, and was
afterwards A.D.C. and Private Secretary to Sir Charles Fitzroy,
and Sir William Denison. On relinquishing this last position,
he was appointed Commissioner for Crown Lands and Goldfields
in the New England District. Subsequently he held the post of
Clerk to the Executive Council, and in 1859 was entrusted with a
mission to the British Government from the Government here.
On his return in 1860 he took the general superintendentship of
the business of the Australian Agricultural Company at Newcastle,
which he retained for about 16 years. He occupied the position
of President of the N. S. Wales branch of the Royal Geographical
Society of Australasia, and was always deeply interested in the
progress of geographical science.
Death has also removed during the past year one who, though
not a member of our Society, deserves special recognition by us
on account of his long and useful life devoted largely to the study
of Natural Science. Dr. George Bennett was born at Plymouth
in 1804 and lived to the advanced age of 89. His connection
with Australia dates back for nearly 70 years. At the early age
of 15 he made a voyage to Ceylon, and on his return to England
devoted himself to the study of medicine. After taking the
degree of M.R.O.S. he gratified his desire of seeing the world by
becoming surgeon of a vessel sent out on an exploring expedition.
It was during this voyage that the Doctor visited Australia and
began his observations on its peculiar mammalia. In 1832 he
re-visited this country in order to investigate further the habits
and anatomy of the Monotremata, as well as other features of our
natural history. His travels extended to Java, Singapore and
China, and on his return to England he published the results of
his researches in a volume entitled “Wanderings in N. B*-Wales,
Batavia, Pedir Coast, Singapore and China, being a Journal of a


Naturalist in these Countries during 1832-4.” This volume was
issued in London in 1834, and daring the same year “Notes on
the Natural History and Habits of the Ornithorhynchus para-
doxus,” was also published. Amongst the other works written by
Dr. Bennett may be mentioned “ Gatherings of a Naturalist in
Australasia” (1860); “Acclimatisation: its eminent adaptation
to Australia” (1862) ; “A trip to Queensland in search of fossils”
(1871); and a pamphlet on “The Introduction, Cultivation, and
Economic Uses of the Orange and Others of the Citron Tribe,”
published in Sydney in 1871.
In 1833 Dr. Bennett finally determined to settle in N. S.
Wales, and began a successful career as a medical man. Although
he soon secured a large practice, the doctor still devoted much
time to his scientific work, which obtained world-wide recognition ;
and for fifty years he kept up a constant correspondence with Sir
Richard Owen, who was his college companion and intimate
friend. Darwin was also among the deceased doctor’s friends,
and Darwin’s methods of investigation were closely followed by
him. In 1859 Dr. Bennett became an F.R.C.S. and an M. D. of
Glasgow University.
From the time of his arrival in Sydney he took the keenest
interest in our Botanic Gardens, and did much to advance them
towards their present state of perfection. He was one of the
chief founders of the Australian Museum ; he acted for sometime
as its secretary, and afterwards became one of the Board of
management. The now defunct Acclimatisation Society owed
much to his friendly aid, and he was also one of the Vice-Presi-
dents of the Zoological Society. During the whole of his resi-
dence in the colony he kept up an active scientific correspondence
with friends at home, particularly with the Linnean Society, of
which he was one of the oldest members. On the 11th of
December, 1889, the Council of the Royal Soc. of N.S.W. awarded
him the Clarke Medal for 1890, in recognition of his meritorious
scientific labours, and more particularly on account of his very
valuable contributions to the Natural History of N. S. Wales


The library is steadily increasing in importance by additions—
during the past year for the most part received in the way of
exchanges. Societies in Europe and America which, more par-
ticularly of late, have adopted the plan of sending their publications
by post, and in some cases have asked that our despatches may be
sent through the same channel, are requested to note that though
New South Wales is nominally a member of the Postal Union,
yet for some occult reason* the rates chargeable on postal matter
other than letters leaving the colonies for transmission to Europe
and America are higher—by as much as fifty or one hundred per
cent.—than on those which reach us from the countries mentioned.
The event of the year has of course been the issue of the
Macleay Memorial Volume.
The editorship of this work has been undertaken by our
Secretary, Mr. J. J. Fletcher, M.A., B.Sc., and carried out in a
manner which merits the highest praise. The idea so happily
conceived by our late President, Professor Haswell, of gathering
together an opus magnum of recent research in Natural Science
to commemorate the founder of our Society has been carried
into execution with eminent success, and the ready response to
the appeal to the most eminent scientific authorities in Austra-
lasia to contribute papers was proof in itself of how widespread
throughout Australasia was the appreciation of the work which
Sir William Macleay had done to advance Natural Science in all
its branches.
* Thus subsequently officially explained: “This colony does come within
the Postal Union ; also the minimum rate of postage fixed by article 5 of
the Vienna Convention for printed matter is per 2oz. ; but union
countries have the right when such correspondence is conveyed by sea for
a distance of over 300 miles, and is subject to a charge for such conveyance,
to levy a postage not exceeding a penny per 2oz, Great Britain and the
United States of America, as well as a number of other union countries, levy
the minimum rate of postage, whilst New South Wales and all the other
Australasian colonies (excepting Fiji and New Zealand) levy the maximum
rate of postage to protect their revenues from loss; hence the difference in
the postage pointed out.”


As regards the work done at the Museums during the last year
Mr. J. H. Maiden has kindly furnished me with the following
note relating to the Technological Museum :
“ The Technological Museum, housed in temporary premises in
the Outer Domain since the destruction of its former collections
in 1882 in the Garden Palace fire, has during the year removed
into a spacious aud handsome building erected in Harris Street
at a cost of £20,000. The specimens, which number about 35,000,
are arranged on three main floors, which are divided transversely
by numerous brick partitions, thus enabling classification to be
readily carried out. Provision has been made in the building for
workshops, laboratories, and offices. The removal and rearrange-
ment of the specimens have left the Curator and his staff very
little time for original work during the year, but some contribu-
tions have nevertheless been made to the Proceedings of the
Linnean Society by the Curator (Mr. J. H. Maiden), the Assistant
Curator (Mr. R. T. Baker), and Mr. W. W. Froggatt. Another
member of the staff (Mr. H. G. Smith) read a paper before the
Royal Society of N.S.W. on the ‘ Occurrence of Evansite in
Tasmania,’ while Mr. Maiden read a paper, by invitation, before
the Sydney Architectural Association, on ‘lronbarks,’ in which
he endeavoured to make clear the characteristics, the properties,
and the geographical distribution of each of these interesting
species of Eucalyptus, which are usually difficult to discriminate.”
At the Australian Museum during the past year the work of
the Museum staff has been mainly connected with the care of the
Collections. Preparations are being made as opportunity offers
for the contemplated new work on the Snakes of Australia. Two
numbers of the “Records” have been issued (Yol. ii. Nos. 4 and 5).
Since the suspension of the “Records” some papers emanating
from the Museum have been contributed to the Linnean Society.
Other publications have been—Part 3 of the Catalogue of Marine
Shells of Australia and Tasmania ; The Muricidce, by J. Brazier;
Part 4 of the continuation of Scott’s Australian Lepidoptera, by
A. S. Olliff and Mrs. Ford ; and a Catalogue of the pamphlets in
the Museum Library.


At the Macleay Museum, at the University of Sydney, Mr.
George Masters, the Curator, has cleaned and sorted a large
number of specimens of Australasian, <kc., insects in the fine
collection at the Museum, which is available for Members of the
Linnean Society and for all students of Natural History.
At the Department of Mines the Curator of the Geological
Museum, Mr. G. W. Card, has been engaged of late principally
in the removal of the collections of rocks, minerals, and fossils
from the old Museum at the Department of Mines to the building
in the Domain formerly occupied by the Technological Museum
Collections.
The following are a few notes relating to scientific work other
than that done at the Museums :
During the September Vacation a biological expedition was
organised by Professor Haswell to Jervis Bay, where a supply of
material was obtained for the investigation of the development
of the Port Jackson shark, Cestracion. The original work done
during last year at the Biological Laboratory at the University
related chiefly to the tape-worm larva ( Polycercus) found in the
“ squirting earthworm ” of the scrubs of Illawarra and the Blue
Mountains. Dr. Martin’s important researches at the Physio-
logical Laboratory at the University Medical School on the
effects of snake poison necessitated his further investigating the
phenomena of the clotting of the blood, and he has contributed
two valuable papers on this subject during the past year to the
Journal of Physiology.* f
The issue of a new geological map of New South Wales
prepared by Mr. E. F. Pittman, the Government -Geologist, and
* “Does the non-coagulable Blood obtained by Injections of Wooldridge’s
Tissue Fibrinogen (Nucleo-Albumens) contain Peptone or Albumoses ? ” by
C. J. Martin, M. 8., B.Sc., Journal of Physiology, Vol. xv. No. 4, 1893,
pp. 375-379.
+ “On some Effects upon the Blood produced by the Injection of the
Venom of the Australian Black Snake (Pseudechis porphyriacus ,
VoL xv. No. 5, 1893, pp. 380-400.


published last year by the Department of Mines, is an important
event in the annals of Australian geology. The map is a great
advance on its predecessors, and presents a harmony of colour
and clearness of delineation which make it at once artistic and
intelligible.
The paper by Professor Tate and Mr. J. T. Dennaut, “ On a
Correlation of the Marine Tertiaries of Victoria and South Aus-
tralia,” contains much new material, and has quite reconstructed
the classification previously adopted for those formations. The
Records of the Geological Survey of N. S. Wales, published by
the Department of Mines last year, give an account of nearly
all the additions made to our knowledge of the geology of New
South Wales during 1893. Two very useful papers for reference
purposes deserve special notice: “ The Australian Geological
Record for the year 1892, with addenda for the year 1891,” by
R. Etheridge, Junr., Palaeontologist and Librarian, and W. S.
Dun, Assistant Palaeontologist and Librarian* ; and “ A Locality
Index to the Reports of the Geological Survey of N. S. Wales,
from 1875 to 1892 inclusive,” by W. S. Dun, Assistant Palaeon-
tologist and Librarian.!
It is to be hoped that these authors may continue to follow this
good precedent during this and succeeding years.
The special subject of this address is a sketch of our present
knowledge of the Geological History of Australia, Tasmania and
New Zealand from Archaean Time down to the commencement of
the Permo-Carboniferous Period. Special reference will be made
to the folding which the earth’s crust has been proved to have
undergone in that portion of the Australasian Region within the
above-mentioned limits of geological time.
* Records of the Geological Survey of New South Wales, Vol. ill. Part iv.
pp 132-153.
+ Ibid. pp. 154-191.


I. Archaean.
In Australia and Tasmania rocks have been discovered of Pre
Cambrian (Archjsan) Age, as old therefore, perhaps, as any rocks
known in any part of the world.
In New Zealand Archsean rocks are doubtfully represented. It
does not, of course, follow that the areas now occupied by these
rocks are absolutely the oldest portions of the Australian Conti-
nent ; they are, however, absolutely the oldest known to us.
In South Australia this group is developed (1) on a large scale
on either side of St. Vincent’s Gulf near Adelaide, and forms the
basis of the Mt. Lofty Range.
The rocks consist of gneiss, mica schist, slates, and reddish-purple
jointed micaceous shales.
Professor Tate informs me by letter that there is a conglomerate
of gneissic pebbles in mica schist six to ten feet thick on the north
coast of Kangaroo Island and elsewhere. He also states that
graphite occurs in the Archsean rocks of the St. Vincent’s Gulf
area, and that ilmenite forms a constituent of the gneiss at Hack’s
Bridge, between Adelaide and Strathalbyn.
The rocks are in places remarkably free from alteration, not-
withstanding their immense antiquity. It is these rocks which
have been powerfully glaciated at some unknown period of
geological time, as described by Professor Tate, of Adelaide
University.* f +
Their general strike is N.E. and S.W., the dip being chiefly to
S.E. at high angles, but reverse dips occur in places.
At Mt. Lofty Mr. Brown states§ that their dip is chiefly south-
easterly for a distance of twenty miles.
The steeper sides of the folds face the S.E., in which direction
they are bounded by a mass of granite evidently of considerable
extent, though hidden for the most part under Tertiary limestones.
At Ardrossan there is an immense unconforraability between these
* Trans. Roy. Soc. S. Australia, Vol. ii. p. 64.
f Ibid. Vol. viii. p. 49, 1886.
X Aust. Assoc. Adv. of Science, Vol. i. p. 231. Sydney, 1887.
§ S.A. Ann. Rep. of Govt. Geologist, 1882-83. Adelaide, 1884. p. 10.


Archsean rocks and the overlying Lower Cambrian Limestone, the
Parara Limestone as figured by Mr. Otto Tepper.*
In the above section the Parara Limestone is shown dipping at
an angle of only 15° off the Ardrossan marble, which dips at 59 J°.
In a subsequent report, f however, Mr. Tepper expresses his belief
that the Ardrossan marble is probably of Cambrian Age and
passes up conformably into the Lower Cambrian Parara Limestone.
No organic remains have hitherto been detected in these rocks.
A specimen exhibiting a structure somewhat resembling macrosco-
pically that of Eozoon Canademe was collected by Mr. C. S.
Wilkinson, the late Government Geologist of New South Wales,
from these Archseans, but proved on microscopic examination to
differ from that supposed organism, and was certainly inorganic.
The marble limestone of Ardrossan, however, is very suggestive
of contemporaneous life, but it may be of Cambrian Age.
These rocks were folded on N.E. and S.W. axes before the
commencement of the Lower Cambrian Age, and as both con-
glomerate beds and ripple marks are met with in the Archsean
Group as well as in the succeeding Cambrian formation, it is
almost certain that a land surface existed in the neighbourhood
of Adelaide before the close of Pre-Cambrian time.
These north-easterly axes of folding can be traced from near
Adelaide to Thackaringa and Broken Hill, though it is by no
means certain as yet that all the rocks folded on these axes within
the above limits are Archsean,
(2) The Musgrave Ranges, which in Mount Woodroffe attain
an altitude of 5,120 feet, are composed of crystalline schists,
gneiss and various eruptive rocks, together with considerable
deposits of magnetite and titaniferous iron, but it is not stated
by Mr. Brown} whether the last-mentioned deposits are contem-
* Trans. Phil. Soo. Adelaide, 1878-79, pp. 76-79, pi, i.-ii. Government
Printer, Adelaide, 1879.
t Trans. Proc. and Report Roy. Soo. S. Australia, Vol. iv. (for 1880-81),
p. 61. Adelaide, 1882.
+ South Australia. Report on Journey from Warrina to the Musgrave
Ranges. H. Y. L. Brown. By authority. Adelaide, 1890. p. 2.


poraneous or subsequent. These rocks are perhaps on the same
horizon as the Archaeans of the Macdonnell Ranges about to be
described.
(3) In the Macdonnell Ranges on the upper part of the Finke
River micaceous and hornblende schists, dolomite and crystalline
limestone, and gneissic and granitic rocks have been provisionally
referred by Mr. Brown* to ArchEean time, on the ground that
they are strongly unconformable to the overlying formation, and
the latter is in turn capped unconformably by a series of rocks,
the ago of which has lately been proved to be Lower Silurian.
These Archaean rocks were strongly folded along E. and W.
axes previous to the deposition of the overlying Cambrian rocks.
No conglomerates nor ripple-marks are recorded in the Cambrian
rocks, so there is no absolute proof that the M acdonnell Ranges
were a land surface in Pre-Cambrian time. It is certain, however,
that as proved by the immense beds of altered sandstone in the
neighbouring Cambrian rocks that land could not have been very
far distant, or, at any rate, if there was no land, the ocean there
must have been very shallow.
(4) In West Australia, Mr. H. P. Woodward,f the Government
Geologist, has identified certain rocks as Archaean in the Kim-
berley District, as he considers them older than the Lower
Cambrian of that locality, characterised by Salterella and Olenellus.
These rocks are of a schistose and gneissic character, and extend
from near the Denham River to Mount Dockrell, forming the
Mueller Range, a little further west, and striking in a N.W.
direction through the King Leopold Range to King’s Sound.
• South Australia. Report of Geological Examination of the country in
the neighbourhood of Alice Springs, by H. Y. L. Brown. By authority.
Adelaide, 1890.
And also—Further Geological Examination of Leigh’s Creek and Hergott
Districts, and General Geology on the Finke River, by H. Y. L. Brown.
By authority. Adelaide, 1892.
+Report on the Goldfields of the Kimberley District by H. P. Woodward.
By authority. Perth, 1891. p. 10.


This belt of metamorphic rocks is from 10 to 30 miles wide as
described by the late Mr. Hardman*, and at least 120 miles in
length.
Mr. Hardman describes! the metamorphic rocks of part of the
Kimberley District as consisting of mica-schist, andalusite schist,
epidote rock, chlorite schist and talcose schist, and at Bald Rook,
one mile N.E. of Mount Philip, he mentions a pink granite
containing much olivine, a truly remarkable rock, if the descrip-
tion of it be correct. Its relation to the Archsean (1) rocks of
that district is not known.
As for as I can gather, no actual junction line has as yet been
observed between the Archsean rocks and the Olenellus and Salterella
rocks, so that the classification is provisional only, as the schistose
and gneissic rocks may represent portion of the Cambrian rocks
highly metamorphosed. That there should be Archsean rocks,
however, in a district where there is a considerable development of
fossiliferous Lower Cambrian rocks associated with a highly
metamorphic series is more than probable.
At the Kimberley District, therefore, there must have been
either land or shallow ocean in Pre-Cambrian time.
(5) In Tasmania certain rocks on the west coast and in the
north and north-east portions have been described by Mr. R. M.
Johnston, F.G.S.J, &c., as being probably of Pre-Cambrian Age
on the evidence of an apparently strong unconformity between
them and the rooks of the Upper Cambrian Series in the Mersey
District of that island.
The rocks consist of quartzites, tourmaline quartzites, sand-
stone, conglomerate, mica-schist, chlorite schist, gneiss, crystalline
granular amphibolite, granite, topaz-porphyry, diallage rock and
* Report on the geology of the Kimberley District, Western Australia,
by Edward T. Hardman, F.R.G.5.1., Assoc. Roy. Coll. Science, Dublin.
By authority. Perth, 1884, p. 21.
+ Lot. cit. p. 10.
X Geology of Tasmania, by R. M. Johnston, F.G.S., &c., pp. 16-32. By
authority. Hobart, 1888.
38


serpentine, with massive deposits of haematite and magnetite. In
the Meredith Range limestone is mentioned* as forming the
uppermost member of the Archaean Series.
The eruptive rocks are not necessarily contemporaneous with the
metamorphosed sediments, and the iron ore deposits occur as true
mineral lodes near Yorktown,t and rest on a floor of serpentine.
The presence of from three to five per cent, of chromium sesquioxide
in the Yorktown iron ore shows that the ore has probably been
derived from the serpentine. The iron ore deposits are probably,
therefore, of later origin than the Archaean rocks, and not con-
temporaneous like those of the Archaean region of North
America.
The limestone, however, if its age be truly Archaean, of course
implies the probable contemporaneity of animal or plant life as
does the dolomite and limestone of the Macdonnell Ranges of
South Australia.
Their thickness has not yet been calculated. Their general
strike is N. 25- W., and they are foliated, the folia dipping gener-
ally at steep angles. As the Cambrian rocks of the Mersey
District are not foliated but simply steeply inclined and folded,
it is probable that the Tasmanian Archseans were disturbed and
thrown into folds before the Upper Cambrian strata were laid
down.
(6) In New Zealand the crystalline and foliated schists of the
Southern Island may be in part Archaean. In the Otago District
they cover an area of 8000 square miles, and are considered by
Sir James HectorJ to be chiefly altered Silurian or even Car-
boniferous rocks.
Sir James Hector states§ that in the Nelson and Westland
Districts granites occur of Pre-Silurian Age. They may, of
* Loc. cit. p. 20.
+ f. Gould, quoted by Johnston, loc. cit. p. 27 onwards.
J Indian and Colonial Exhibition, London, 1886, New Zealand Court.
Detailed Catalogue and Guide to the Geological Exhibits, by Sir James
Hector, F.R.S. By authority. Wellington, 1886. t
§ Loc, cit. p. 85.


course, be Cambrian instead of Pre-Cambrian, and cannot there-
fore at present be classed as Archsean.
As shown on Sir James Hector’s Section* the metamorphic
schists near Collingwood, at the north-west end of the South
Island, are strongly uncomformable to the overlying Lower Silu-
rian rocks.
Captain F. W. Hutton, F.R.S., in his excellent paper on the
Geology of New Zealand, f classes as Arohsean the bulk of the
crystalline and foliated schists already referred to by Sir James
Hector, calling them the Manapouri System. The rocks consist
of “ grey and red gneiss, garnet-bearing schist, hornblende schist,
mica schist, quartz schist, and occasionally granular limestone.
Scales of graphite have been found in the mica-schist at Dusky
Sound.” Eastwards the Series is bounded in Otago by the great
Te Anau Fault, which has an immense downthrow to the east, and
strikes north and south.
In the Riwaka Mountains Captain Hutton shows on his
a strong unconformability between the rocks classed as Archjean
and those of the Aorere Series classed as Ordovician.
With regard to the thickness of the Archtean rocks in Otago,
Captain Hutton states§ ;—“We can only escape from the conclu-
sion that these rocks have a thickness of many miles by supposing
either that the plane of foliation does not always coincide with
the original plane of bedding, or that a series of reverse folds
occur, neither of which has as yet been proved.”
I believe Captain Hutton has subsequently obtained evidence
which has led him to modify this opinion, and he now considers a
large portion, at all events, of these crystalline rocks to be
intrusive rocks with a superinduced foliation.
* Loc. cit. p. 82.
+ Geology of New Zealand. By Captain F. W. Hutton, F.G S., Professor
of Biology in the Canterbury College University of New Zealand.
Q.J.G.S. for May, 1885, pp. 194 and 198.
t Loc. cit. p. 200.
§ Loc. cit. p. 198.


In the Otago District the folia have an almost constant dip to
the west at from 45° to 80°. Northwards from the Otago District
to Tasman’s Bay at the north end of the South Island, their strike,
as far as can be judged from the Geological map, is approximately
parallel with the principal axis of the South Island, that is S.W.
and N.E.
It may be concluded that in the South Island of New Zealand
there is a thick series of crystalline rocks partly eruptive partly
metamorphic, which in places, as near Collingwood, are strongly
unconformable to the overlying Lower Silurian rocks, and such
portions of them, therefore, must be Pre-Silurian, and therefore
either Cambrian or Pre-Cambrian, probalily chiefly the latter in
view of their extreme regional metamorphism, as compared with
the comparatively slight alteration of the Lower Silurian (Ordo-
vician) rocks in their neighbourhood. There is no evidence to
show that any portion of New Zealand was a land area in Pre-
Cambrian time.
Summary of Archcean Group. —The total superficial area at
present known to be occupied by Archcean rocks in Australia
perhaps does not exceed about 20,000 square miles (about T -]- r of
its whole area). This estimate is only very approximate, and
subsequent explorations may necessitate its being considerably
increased. In New Zealand the crystalline schists have an area
of 8,000 square miles, but only a small portion of this, if any,
may prove to bo Archcean. In Tasmania no data are available
for calculating even approximately the area of the Archcean rocks.
In Victoria, New South Wales, Queensland and the Northern
Territory of South Australia no Archcean rocks have as yet been
proved to exist, though hereafter it is possible that some of the
crystalline schists known to be developed in those portions of
the Australian Continent may have to be referred to the Pre-
Cambrian Group.
The Australasian Archcean rocks consist of gneiss, mica schist,
chlorite or talc schists, hornblende schists, quartzites, conglome-
rates, micaceous red mudstones, marble limestone, hceipatite,
ilmenite, and graphite.


In the Mount Macdonnell Ranges the Archaean rocks attain an
altitude of from 3000 feet up to 4000 feet, and possibly 5000 feet,
at Mount Woodroffe, in the Musgrave Ranges.
Their thickness has nowhere been accurately measured in the
Australasian region, but, as I am verbally informed by Professor
Ralph Tate, it is very vast near Adelaide, perhaps as much as
50,000 feet.
The marble at Ardrossan, the thickness of which is said to be
considerable (to judge from Mr. Otto Tepper’s sections,* it appears
to be not less than 100 feet), is of special interest, the immense
unconformability between it [together with the conformable (?)
Parara limestones, containing abundant fragments of Archceocya-
thince, Olenellus Pritchardi, and Salterella planoconvexa\ and the
underlying rocks proving the age of the latter to be undoubtedly
Archtean. The marble of the Macdonnell Ranges, the limestone
in the Archaean rocks of Tasmania, and the graphite associated
with the Archaean rocks of S. Australia are very suggestive of
contemporaneous animal or plant life.
The scales of graphite recorded by Captain Huttonf as occurring
in the mica schist of Duskey Sound, New Zealand, might also be
taken as evidence of probable contemporaneous life in Archaean
time, but, as has been shown, it is not yet certain that those schists
are truly Archaean.
That the movements of the earth’s crust, which laid the founda-
tions of the Australian Continent, commenced in Pre-Cambrian
time is conclusively proved by the vast amount of folding to
which the Archaean rocks at Ardrossan and in the Mount Mac-
donnell Ranges were subjected before the deposition of the earliest
Cambrian sediments.
In Tasmania the crumpling of the crust took place between
E.N.E. and AV.S. W. directions, so that the axes of the folds trend
N.N.W. and S.S.E.
At St. Vincent’s Gulf, near Adelaide, the folds run chiefly
N.E. and S.W., and N.N.E. and S.S.W., so as to meet, if produced,
* hoc. cit. pi. n. between pp. 80 and 81.
+ Loc. cit. p. 198.


a prolongation of the Tasmanian axes towards the N.W., nearly
at right angles. In the Macdonnell and Musgrave Ranges the
trend is E. and W., and in the Kimberley District of West Aus-
tralia N.W. and S.E., with a secondary folding S.W. and N.E.
It is not certain whether, either in Australia or Tasmania, theie
was any land surface in Archajan time, but the conglomerates in
the Archaean and in the succeeding Cambrian, and the ripple-
marked flaggy quartzites (if they are Archaean or Cambrian and
not Lower Silurian) imply shallow seas, with probably a neigh-
bouring land surface. It is improbable, too, that the Archaean
strata should have been as powerfully folded, as observation shows
them to have been, in Pre-Cambiian time, without some areas
being elevated sufficiently to form land.
In Australia, therefore, there was probably land and probably
contemporaneous life, at all events in the seas, in Pre-Cambrian
time, the latter assumption being rendered probable by the occur-
rence of the beds of limestone and contemporaneous (!) iron ores
and graphite in the Archrean rocks of South Australia, and of
limestone and contemporaneous (1) ironstone in the Archtean rocks
of Tasmania, and also by the great diversity of forms of animal
life met with in the succeeding Lower Cambrian rocks.
11. Cambrian.
In South Australia Lower Cambrian rocks are now known to
exist at (1) Ardrossan, Patara, and Curramulka, in Yorke’s Penin-
sula, on the west side of St. Vincent’s Gulf, Wirrialpa, Blinman,
Kanaka, Parachillna, and near the Ajax Mine between Beltana
and Leigh’s Creek over 300 miles north of Adelaide.
In the type district at Parara and Ardrossan in Yoike’s Pen-
insula the Cambrian rocks, as described by Mr. Tepper, consist in
descending order of the Ardrossan sandstone showing false
bedding* occasionally coarse, and even passing into conglomerate.
Beneath it lie a variegated and dark limestone and white and
yellow marbles, dipping S. 27° E. at 15°. Below the raarbl§£ is a
* Loc. cit. p. 76.


light coloured and variegated siliceous rock (f. Tepper) resting
perhaps conformably on Ardrossan marble.
Judging from Mr. Tepper’s section their thicknesses are as
follows :
Ardrossan sandstone ... ... 15 feet
Parara limestone ... ... ... 40 feet
Siliceous rock ... ... ... 18 feet
In the Mount Lofty Ranges is a vast thickness of rock, the
exact horizon of which has not yet been determined. Mr. R.
Ethridge, junr., informs me that he considers a portion of this at
any rate to be Cambrian.
Mr. H. Y. L. Brown* describes these rocks as consisting of two
series, the lower composed of quartzites, sandstones, clay shales,
and conglomerates, the last-mentioned at Sturt’s Creek, containing
pebbles of granite and quartzite, and the upper of crystalline
limestones, flaggy ripple-marked quartzites and sandstones, and
massive quartzite. The upper series may possibly be Lower
Silurian, though Mr. Brown does not mention any unconformability
between them. Near Parachillna and at the Blinman Mine, to the
South of Leigh’s Creek, and about 260 miles northerly from
Adelaide, quartzites, claystones, conglomerates, dolomite, and
limestone have been described by Mr. Brown.f These rocks have
been strongly folded, the axes trending W.N.W. and E.S.E.
Representatives of the oldest known fauna of Australia are met
with in the Cambrian rocks of Yorke’s Peninsula above referred
to. They have been described by Professor Tate, Mr. 11. Wood-
ward, Mr. R. Etheridge, Junr., and Mr. Howchin. The following
have been recorded by Professor Tate in his succinct account of
the Cambrian Fossils of South Australia.]: The extreme interest
which attaches to this the oldest known fauna of Australia is my
excuse for quoting at length from this paper.
* South Australia. Annual Report of the Government Geologist, Dec.
Ist, 1882, to Deo. 31st, 1883, p. 10.
+ South Australia. Report on the gold-bearing area in the neighbour-
hood of Leigh’s Creek. By authority. Adelaide, 1891, p. 1.
+ Trans. Roy. Soc. South Australia, 1892, pp. 183-189.


Foraminifera (1). — Girvanella sp., R. Etheridge, Junr., Trans.
Roy. Soc. South Australia, Vol. xiii. p. 19, tab. 11. fig. 8.
Spongida. — Hyalostelia sp., W. Howchin, F.G.S., Trans. Roy.
Soc. South Australia, 1892, pp. 188-189.
Zoantiiaeia (1). — Protopharetra (?) Scoulnri, R. Etheridge, Junr.,
Trans. Roy. Soc. South Australia, Vol. xiii. p. 18, t. ii. figs.
5-7, 1890.
Ethmophyllum Hindei, R. Etheridge, Junr., loc. cit. p. 14,
t. ii. figs. 1-4 ; t. iii. figs. 9, 10.
Coscinocyathus Tatei, R. Etheridge, Junr., loc. cit. p. 17,
t. iii. figs. 3-5 (non figs. 1,2, and 6-8).
Coscinocyathus (?) Etheridgei, spec, nov., Tate, loc. cit.
p. 188.
Entojiostraca. — Lcperditia spp.
Teilobita. — Dolichometopus Tatei, H. Woodward, GeoL Mag.
Aug. 1884, t. xi. fig. 3, p. 343.
Conocephalites australis, H. Woodward, loc, cit. t. xi. figs.
2a, 2b.
Olenellus (?) Pritchardi, spec, nov., Tate, loc. cit. p. 187,
pi. ii. fig. 11.
Microdiscus subsagittatus, spec, nov., Tate, loc. cit. p. 187,
pi. ii. fig. 12.
Gen. (?), sp. (?), Tate, loc. cit. p. 187, pi. n. figs. 9 and 13.
Brachiopoda. — Orthisina compta, spec, nov., Tate, loc. cit. p. 185,
pi. ii. figs. 6-6 a.
Orthis (?) peculiaris, spec, nov., Tate, loc. cit. p. 185, pi. n.
fig. 5.
Lamellibranohiata. — Ambonychia macroptera, spec, nov., Tate,
loc. cit. p. 185, pi. ii. fig. 10.
Gastropoda. — Stenotheca rugosa, Hall, var. paupera, Shaler and
Foerste, Tate, loc. cit. p. 183, pi. n. fig. 4.
Ophileta suhangulata, spec, nov., Tate, loc. cit. p. 184, pi. u.
figs. Ba-Bb.
Platyceras Etheridgei, spec, nov., Tate, loc. cit. 184,
pi. ii. figs. 7a-7c.


Pteropoda.— iS 'alterella planoconvexa, spec, nov., Tate, loc. cit.
p. 186, pi. 11. figs. 3-3 b.
Salterella sp., Tate, Trans. Roy. Soc. South Australia, 1890,
p. 249.
Hyolithes communis, Billings; Tate, loc. cit. p. 186, pi. 11.
fig- 2.
Hyolithes conularioides, spec, nov., Tate, loc. cit. p. 186,
pi. ii. figs. 1-la.
This list of the Lower Cambrian fauna of Australia might be
completed by the addition of Salterella Hardmani and Olenellus
Forresti, both from the Lower Cambrian rocks of the Kimberley
District of West Australia.*
Professor Tate states! that no less than twenty-three determin-
able species from the Lower Cambrian rocks of Australia have
been elaborated, and four or five additional ones are represented
by forms too obscure for description.
Of the seven sub-kingdoms of the animal kingdom therefore
(if Girvanella be referred to the Foraminifera and the Archceo-
cyathince to the corals), no less than five sub-kingdoms are
represented, the Echinodermata, and the Vertebrata alone being
unrepresented.
(2) At the Macdonnell Ranges, in Central South Australia,
quartzites, conglomerates, dolomitic limestone, limestone, sand-
stone and slate have been described by Mr. Brown J § as resting
unconformably on the A rchrean series, and being capped uncon-
formably by Lower Silurian strata. No fossils have hitherto been
found in these Pre-Silurian rocks.
* Geol. Mag. No. 309, New Series, Dee. 111. Vol. vii. No. in. ; Notes on
the Palaeontology of Western Australia, by Dr. H. Woodward, F. R. S., and
A. H. Foord, F.G.S., pp. 98-100, pi. iv. figs. 1, la, lb, and 2,2 a, 2b.
+ Loc. cit. p. 183.
+ South Australia. Report on the Coal-bearing area in the neighbour-
hood of Leigh’s Creek, by H. Y. L. Brown. By authority, Adelaide,
1891, p. 13.
§ South Australia. Further Geological Examinations of Leigh’s Creek
and Hergott Districts. H. Y. L. Brown. By authority. Adelaide, 1892,
p. 7.


They have been strongly folded along persistent east and west
axes, and are vertical in places.
(3) In the Kimberley District of West Australia the Cambrian
rocks are described by Mr. H. P. Woodward* as forming a belt,
which strikes N.E. and S.W. from the Burt Range to the south-
ward of Mt. Dockrell. They consist of crystalline limestones,
sandstones, grits, quartzites, clay slates and sandy flags.
The principal gold deposits have been discovered in this forma-
tion, which, as already stated, contains &'alterella Hardmani and
Olenellus Forresii.
(4) In Tasmania a considerable thickness of rocks has been
classed by Mr. R. M. Johnstonf and others as Cambrian. They
are probably Upper Cambrian. He divides them into three
groups, arranged in the following descending order;—
(a) Primordial Calci/erous Group. Limestones of the Chud-
leigh, Belvoir, Ilfracombe, &c.
(b) Magog Group. Sandstones and alum schists of Chudleigh,
Magog Range, &c.
(c) Dikellocephalus Group of Caroline Creek, near Latrobe.
The latter group alone has yielded fossils. It consists of rusty
quartzites with abundant casts of fossils, micaceous purple clay
slates and breccias, and purplish-grey quartzites.
At Caroline Creek I observed the dip to be about S.W. at 33°.
Mr. Johnston gives | the general dip in the same locality as
E. 30° N. at 45°. Mr. Gould states that the general dip is
northerly, differing from that of the neighbouring Archsean schists,
whose strike is generally West of North.
As far as my own limited observations extended, the general
trend of the folds in this series agreed approximately with that of
the Archsean Series.
* Western Australia. Report on the Goldfields of the Kimberley
District, by Harry Page Woodward. By authority. Perth, 1891, p. 10.
f Geology of Tasmania, by R. M. Johnston, F.G.S., &c. By authority.
Hobart, 1888, pp. 16-32. *
X Loc. cit. p. 36.


The following fossils have been recorded by Mr. E. M. John-
ston* :
Annelida. — Scolithus Tasmanicus.
Trilobita. — Conocephalites Stephensi.
Loganellus or Conocephalites.
Bathyurus (I) sp.
Asaphus sp.
Dikellocephalus Tasmanicus.
Braciiiopoda. — Leptcena sp.
Orthis triangularis, (?) Sow.
Lamellibranchiata. —Gen. ? sp. ?
Gastropoda.— Ophilela spp., K. Etheridge, jun., Proc. Roy. Soc.
Tasmania, 1863, t. 2, figs. 13 and 14.
Pteropoda.— Tentaculites sp.
Mr. Etheridge expresses the following opinion with regard to
their geological age :
“ Accepting therefore the determination of the foregoing
trilobites as approximating to the truth, it appears more than
probable that the age assigned to the fossils from the Caroline
Creek beds by Messrs. Etheridge and Lesquereux is correct, and
that this may be looked upon as that of the Lingula flags or
Menevian beds of Great Britain and the Potsdam sandstone of
North America.”!
Summary of Cambrian Period. —The superficial area occupied by
the Cambrian rocks in South and West Australia and Tasmania, and
their thickness, is considerable, but has not been measured as yet.
They were laid down in seas of moderate depth, as proved by
the current-bedded sandstone at Ardrossan, the beds of con-
glomerate at Mount Lofty and in the Macdonnell Ranges.
The ripple-marked quartzites of the Mount Lofty district, if
they belong to the Cambrian rather than the Lower Silurian, also
of course imply deposition in shallow water. The granite and
* Loc. cit. pp. 33, 37, 38.
t A Description of the Remains of Trilobites from the Lower Silurian
Rocks of the Mersey District, Tasmania, by R. Etheridge, Junr. Papers
and Proc. Roy. Soc. Tasmania, 1882, pp. 150-163.


quartzite pebbles in ttie conglomerate at the Sturt Creek must
probably have been derived from Pre-Cambrian rocks, but no well
marked basal breccia has as yet been found.
The fossiliferous limestones of the Olenellus-Salterella zone in
South Australia show that the seas in Cambrian time teemed with
various forms of marine animal life, all the sub-kingdoms being
perhaps represented except the Echinodermata and the Verte-
bra ta.
The Cambrian strata in the Macdonnell Ranges, where they are
seen in contact with the Lower Silurian rocks, were considerably
folded before the latter were formed, the axes of folding corre-
sponding closely with those of the Archaean Group.
In Tasmania the folds run north-westerly. In South Australia
at Yorke’s Peninsula their trend is N.E. by E. This N.E. folding
continues towards the N.E. until it meets the main axes of
folding coming from Tasmania from the S.E. and trending towards
the N.W. The folds, then, as they near Leigh’s Creek trend
north-westerly, and as they approach the Macdonnell Ranges
swing round gradually to an east and west direction.
In the Kimberley district the principal axes of folding appear
to run N.E. and S.W. parallel with part of the Archaean rocks in
the same neighbourhood.
It must be borne in mind, however, that the principal direction
of folding of the Archaean rooks at Kimberley is N.W. and S.E.,
but Cambrian rocks have not been identified in this particular
locality, the King Leopold Range area, where the main axes of
the folds of the Archaean are visible. If hereafter Cambrian
rocks be found to exist there, their folds will no doubt be found
to correspond with those of the Archaean rocks, as is certainly the
case in the Macdonnell Ranges. The folding of the Cambrian
rocks and further simultaneous folding of the Archaean rooks
before the commencement of the Silurian Period must have had
the effect of increasing the land area, or area of very shallow
ocean. The sediments of the succeeding system the Silurian, of
vast area and thickness, imply an extensive surface brought
within reach of natural denuding agencies.


111. Silurian Period.
Whereas the superficial area occupied by Cambrian rocks in
Australia and Tasmania does not perhaps exceed about 10,000
square miles, or about Ts^tr , in round numbers, of the whole com-
bined area (2,944,600 + 24,500 = 2,969,100 square miles), the
rocks which have been provisionally referred to the Silurian
Period cover perhaps ten times as much area, or approximately
of the whole area of Australia.*
. A. Lower Silurian. —Rocks of Lower Silurian Age have been
identified in Tasmania, Victoria, and South Australia, and also in
New Zealand.
(1) In Tasmania Mr. Johnston has described! the Lower Silu-
rian rocks of Tasmania, which he has referred to two groups in the
following descending order :
(a) Gordon River Group.
(b) Auriferous Slate Group.
East of the Tamar in Tasmania Gould estimated that 1000
square miles were covered by Lower Silurian rocks. The lower
series consists of soft black and blue slates, grits, sandstones, and
conglomerates, and in the western area at Middle Arm Creek,
Beaconsfield, are estimated by Gould to be at least 2000 feet
thick.§ They contain Licrophycus and Graptolites. Mr. Thureau
has referred|| remains of Graptolites from the Beaconsfield slates
to Didymograptus nodosus.
A species of Orthis is also stated to have been found in these
rooks. At Cabbage Tree Gorge in the Eastern Lower Silurian
area in Tasmania, Mr. Johnston recordsll the occurrence of Licro-
phycus sp. almost identical in appearance with L. Ottawensis from
• The above areas, especially that given for the Cambrian, are only
extremely approximate. The area quoted for the Silurian rooks may be
too much or too little by about one-quarter of the area suggested.
f Loc. cit. pp. 54-63.
t Quoted by Johnston, loc. cit. p. 53.
§ Quoted by Johnston, loc. cit. p. 60.
|| Quoted by Johnston, loc. cit. p. 52.
TT Loc. cit. p. 52.


the Trenton Limestone (Lower Silurian) of Canada. This is
associated with remains of Orthis and with annelid tracks. Mr.
Johnston, following the classification adopted at that time, refers
Licrophycus to the algae, but recent observations of course prove
that it was probably merely the casts of worm burrows, with
radiating trails.
The upper group consists of quartzose sandstones, conglome-
rates, limestones, slates, and grits.
The limestones are largely formed of corals, including the widely
distributed genera Halysites, Favosites, Syringopora, Phillipsastrcea,
&c.; but these have not yet been specifically described.
The earliest recorded cephalopods from Tasmania and Australia
belong to the horizon of the Gordon River Limestone, in which
they occur in some abundance, e.g.—Lituites Gouldii, Salter ;
Orthoceras antilope, Salter; 0. Murchisoni, Salter; 0. theca,
Salter; 0. Youngii, Salter. No less than eight species of the
lamellibranch Cyrtodonia and two of Tellinomya have been
described by Mr. Salter (MS.),* and Mr. Johnston records
thirteen species of gastropods, including the characteristic Lower
Silurian genus Raphisloma. Baphistoma in Europe ranges up to
the middle of the Upper Silurian, but is more characteristic of
the Lower Silurian. Three genera of brachiopods, Orthis sp.,
Betzia mima, Salter, and Bhynckonella sp., are also mentioned by
Mr. Johnston as occurring in these rocks, and also an undescribed
calcareous sponge (1), occurring in the Gordon Limestone.!
The Sandstones of the Tasmanian Lower Silurian rocks are
finely laminated and ripple-marked.} With regard to the condi-
tions under which these rocks were formed Mr. Johnston states § :
“The laminated slates, with their graptolites, testify of fine muddy
sediments formed in the deep sea bottoms far removed from the
disturbing action of the surface waves; the limestones composed
of corals and crinoids tell of quiet intermediate depths, where
* f. Johnston, loc. cit. p. 63.
t Loc. cit. pi. ii. fig. 13..
J f. Johnston, loc. cit. p. 44.
§ Loc. cit. p. 44.


generation after generation undisturbedly lived and died ; while
the sands and gravel, now consolidated into sandstones, grits, and
conglomerates, bespeak ancient shorelines and sandbanks, where
littoral forms of life, such as Orthis, Cyrtodonta, Scolithus, and
various Trilobites, swarmed much in the same manner as the
cockle, lampshell, sandhopper, and lugworm upon our shores at
the present hour.”
Mr. Johnston evidently therefore considers the Lower Silurian
rocks of Tasmania of littoral origin, or as having been formed in
seas of moderate depth.
(2) In Victoria the total aggregate thickness of the Upper and
Lower Silurian rocks has been estimated by Mr. A. R. C. Selwyn*
as 35,000 feet.
Mr. R. A. P. Murray, P.G.S., the Government Geologist of
Victoria, has divided the Silurian strata of Victoria into the
following three groupsf :— (a) Metamorphic rocks and crystalline
schists, (b) Lower Silurian, (c) Upper Silurian.
The first group probably represents altered Lower Silurian rocks
chiefly, but may include Cambrian and even Pre-Cambrian rocks.
It is chiefly developed (1) between the Wannon and Glenelg
Rivers near the west end of the Main Divide, and is in the
line of strike of the Archaean, Cambrian and Silurian rocks of the
west side of Tasmania, and (2) at the north-east end of the Main
Divide between the Ovens and Murray Rivers, on the line of
strike of the Archaean and Lower Silurian rocks of the east side
of Tasmania.
The rocks consist of quartzites, granulite, foliated micaceous,
talcose, chloritic, and serpentinous schists, chiastolite schist, lep-
tynite schist, with garnets, hornblende schist, &c.J
• Notes on the Physical Geography, Geology, and Mineralogy of Victoria,
by A. R. C. Selwyu and G. H. F. Ulrich, Intercolonial Exhibition Essays,
1866, p. 11. Melbourne, 1866.
t Victoria. Geology and Physical Geography, by Reginald A. F. Murray.
By authority. Melbourne, 1887. pp. 33-47.
JR. A. F. Murray, loc. cit. pp. 37-38, and A. \V. Howitt, “Rocks of
Noyang,” Trans. R. Soc. Victoria, xx. p. 18, and “Metamorphic Rocks of
the Omeo District, Gippsland,” Austr. Assoc. Adv. of Science, Vol. i.
Sydney, 1887. pp. 206-222.


(b) The less altered Lower Silurian rocks are sandstones,
slates, shales, and mudstones, with a few beds of conglomerate
and breccia. Graptolites are so abundant in the shales as to
make them carbonaceous. Over twenty-four species have been
recorded,* and in addition the brachiopods Siphonotreta micula,
McCoy, and Lingula, and a sponge, Protospongia. Two phyllo-
pods have also been recorded —Hymenocaris Salieri, McCoy, and
Lingulocaris McGoyi, R. Etheridge, Junr.f
(3) In South Australia at the Mount Macdonnell Ranges, Mr.
H. Y. L. Brown has § rocks which Mr. R. Etheridge,
Junr., considers to be Lower Silurian, as lying unconformably on
Cambrian (1) strata.
The Lower Silurian rocks consist of sandstone, quartzite, and
shale, with thin bands of fossiliferous limestone. The following
fossils have been recorded and described from these rocks by Mr.
R. Etheridge, Junr.ljH :
Stems of Crinoids.
Asaphus (Megalaspis) Thorntoni, R. Etheridge, Brown’s Leigh’s
Creek and Hergott Springs Reports, 1892, p. 8, pi. I.
Asaphus illarensis, spec, nov., R. Etheridge, Additional Silurian
and Mesozoic Fossils from Central Australia, p. 5, pi. I. fig. 1.
Orthis leviensis, R. Etheridge, Junr., Brown’s Leigh’s Creek
Report, 1891, pp. 13-14, pi. I. figs. 5-7, and Additional Silurian
* “ Prodromus of the Paleontology of Victoria,” by Frederick McCoy,
Decade I. pp. 5-20, pi. I. and n. ; ibid. Dec. 11. pp. 29-37, pi. xx. ; ibid.
Deo. V. pp. 39-41, pi. L.
+ Records Geol. Survey New South Wales, Vol. iii. Pt. 1, t. 4, fig. 2.
J South Australia. Report on the Coal-bearing Area in the Neighbour-
hood of Leigh’s Creek, by H. Y. L. Brown. By authority. Adelaide,
1891. p. 13.
§ South Australia. Further Geological Examination of Leigh’s Creek
and Hergott Districts, and General Geology of the Finke River, by H. Y.
L. Brown. By authority. Adelaide, 1892. p. 7.
|| Loc. cit. Brown’s Report, 1891, pp. 9-14, pi. I. and loc. cit. Brown’s
Report, 1892, pp. 8-9.
*1 South Australia. Additional Silurian and Mesozoic Fossils from
Central Australia, by R. Etheridge, Junr., H. Y. L. Brown, Government
Geologist. By authority. Adelaide, 1893. pp. 5-8 and plate, figs. 1-13.


and Mesozoic Fossils from Central Australia, pp. 5-6, pi. I. figs.
2-5.
Ophileta Gilesi, spec, nov., R. Etheridge, Junr., ibid. pp. 6-7,
pi. i. figs. 6-8.
Raphistoma Brownii, R. Etheridge, Brown’s Leigh’s Creek
Report, pp. 9, 10, and 13, pi. I. figs. 1-3.
Murchisonia sp., Brown’s Further Report, Leigh’s Creek and
Hergott Districts, and Geology of Finke River, 1892, p. 9.
Pleurotomarioid univalve, Brown’s Further Report, Leigh’s
Creek and Hergott Districts, and Geology of Finke River, 1892,
p. 9.
Trochoid univalve, Brown’s Further Report, Leigh’s Creek and
Hergott Districts, and Geology of Finke River, 1892, p. 9.
Orthoceras Tatei, spec, nov., R. Etheridge, Additional Silurian
and Mesozoic Fossils, &c., p. 7, and Brown’s Leigh’s Creek Report,
1891, p. 10, t. i. f. 4.
Orthoceras Gossei, spec, nov., R. Etheridge, Junr., Additional
Silurian and Mesozoic Fossils, <tc., p. 7, pi. I. figs. 9-10.
Endoceras Warburtoni, spec, nov., R. Etheridge, Junr., ibid.
p. 7, pi. I. figs. 12-13.
(4) New Zealand. Sir James Hector describes Lower Silurian
rocks in the north-western area of the Nelson District,* termed
by him the Aorere Series. Captain Hutton describes these same
rocks.f Both these authorities show a strong unconformability
between the Aorere Series and the schists of the underlying
Manapouri System.
The rocks are dark bituminous slates with blue or grey lime-
stones and cherty sandstones. Stems of Crinoids, several species
of graptolites, related to the Victorian Lower Silurian forms, and
one species of coral have been recorded by Sir James. J
Folding. —The Lower Silurian strata of Tasmania are strongly
folded. One very strongly developed anticline, described by
Johnston, trends from Elliott Range in the south-west portion
* Catalogue and Guide, &c., to New Zealand, loc. cit. pp. 81-82.
t Loc. cit. Q. J.G.S. Vol. xli. p. 199.
t Loc. cit. p. 82.
39


of Tasmania for over fifty miles in a direction N. 7° W.* The
axes of the Lower Silurian in the north-west of Tasmania conform
with those of the Archrean Group, which strike, as already stated,
N. 25° W.
In Victoria the Lower Silurian sediments have been very
strongly folded, their strike varying from N. to N.W., the preva-
lent direction being N.N.W., and their dip being from 60° to
vertical. This folding took place partly before the deposition of
the Upper Silurian strata,! though no marked unconformability
is visible between the two series. It is noteworthy that the trend
of these folds is nearly at right angles to the trend of the Main
Divide.
In the Mount Macdonnell Ranges the axes of folding strike
persistently E. and W., but no evidence has as yet been obtained
to show exactly when this folding took place. The absence, as far
as is known, of Lower Silurian strata from New South Wales is
probably due to the fact that its Main Dividing Range lies to the
east of the general strike of the Lower Silurian strata of Victoria,
which trend towards the flat country between Wagga and Hay,
which is largely covered by Tertiary and Post-Tertiary deposits,
which would conceal from view the underlying rocks, possibly of
Lower Silurian Age.
In New Zealand the Aorere Series was certainly folded and
denuded before the deposition of the Maitai rocks, approximately
along axes parallel to the principal axis of the South Island.
Summary of Lower Silurian Epoch. —The sediments of this
portion of the Silurian period show that in New Zealand and
Victoria there were seas of some depth, on the floors of which at
some distance from land the skeletons of graptolites accumulated
in such numbers as to blacken the marine muds. The earliest
Australasian Phyllopods are represented by the Victorian forms
Ilymenocaris and Lingulocaris.
* Loc. cit. p. 64.
t f. Murray, loc. cit. p. 43.


In Tasmania the earliest Silurian sediments are graptolite
shales similar to those of Victoria and New Zealand, and formed
in seas of moderate depth.
There is then distinct evidence, as afforded by ripple-marked
sandstones and beds of conglomerate, of shallow-water conditions
and probable proximity to shore-lines. Temporary local cessations
of sedimentation were marked by the accumulation of coralline
and cephalopodan limestones, the corals and cephalopods specially
distinguishing this Lower Silurian fauna from the preceding
Cambrian fauna.
In the Macdonnell Ranges the conditions of accumulation of
the Lower Silurian strata were probably similar to those of the
Tasmanian Lower Silurian rocks, as shown by the nature of the
sediments and by that of their contained fossils.
The New Zealand Lower Silurian rocks were folded on N.E.
and S.W. axes, the Tasmanian on N. by W. to N.N.W. axes, the
Victorian chiefly on N.N.W. axes, and the Mount Macdonnell
rocks on E. and W. axes.
Amygdaloids are mentioned by Mr. Brown* at Wooltana and
in the Arrowsmith Ranges and at Mount Jacob. It is uncertain,
however, whether these are Cambrian or Silurian. If contempo-
raneous they represent the oldest known lavas in Australia. At
Mount Jacob boulder conglomerates occur, blocks four to five feet
in diameter being imbedded in limestone, quartzite, sandy shale,
and clay slate.f The age of these boulder conglomerates is, how-
ever, doubtful.
B.> Upper Silurian.—Rocks of this age have been identified
in Victoria, New South Wales, Tasmania and New Zealand.
(1) In Victoria they consist of sandstones, mudstones, rubbly
shales, and occasionally slates, schists, and limestones, the last
being partly crinoidal and partly coralline.
* South Australia. Government Geologist’s Report re Visit to Far North.
By Authority. Adelaide, 1884. p. 4.
t f. Brown, loc. at. p. 4.


At Cape Liptrap and Turton’s Creek are bands of volcanic and
calcareous sedimentary material. This is perhaps the first ceitain
evidence in Australia of contemporaneous volcanic action. The
Pre-Devonian volcanic ash beds of the Reid River in Queensland,
described by Mr. R. L. Jack, F.G.S.,* may, however, be as old, if
not older.
Taken in conjunction with the Lower Silurian rocks, these Upper
Silurian have a thickness, as already stated, in Victoria of 35,000
feet. The Lilydale limestone and Moonee Ponds strata have
yielded an abundant marine fossil fauna. The Echinodermata
are represented by at least three species of ophiuroid starfish and
two crinoids, and corals and trilobites (Phacops, Lichas, Homalo-
noCus, Bronteus, and Calyniene, Ac.) abound. The interesting
gastropod Tremanotus has lately been described from the Lilydale
limestone by the Rev. A. W. Creswell, M.A.f
(2) In New South Wales, strata of Upper Silurian age are
typically developed at Yass, where they are upwards of 3000 feet
thick. They consist of sandstones, grits, conglomerates, olive-
brown and blackish clay shales, and limestones. The lower strata
of this series exhibit suncrack, and ripple-mark very perfectly, as
described in my report.J
The sun-cracks in these rocks afford the first-known conclusive
proofs of the existence of land in the Australian region. The
pebble conglomerates of course imply a pre-existing land, so that
portion of New South Wales must have been a land area, at least
as far north as Mudgee, before Upper Silurian time. Halysites
has been recorded from Bombala, from near Yass, from Welling-
ton, and from near Molong, some beautifully preserved specimens
having lately been obtained from the last-mentioned locality by
the Rev. J. Milne Curran.
• Geology and Palaeontology of Queensland and New Guinea, by K, L.
Jack, F.G.S., F.R.G.S., and E. Etheridge, Junr. Text, p. 19. Brisbane,
1892.
f Notes on the Lilydale Limestone, Proo. Roy. Soc. Victoria, p. 42,
pi. vni. fig. 1.
% Annual Report, Department of Mines, 1882, p. 148. By authority.
Sydney.


Three species of Receptaculites have been recorded from the
Upper Silurian rooks of New South Wales— R. australis, Salter,
R. Clarhei, Salter, and R. Neptuni (]).* The doubtful occurrence
of a single specimen of a graptolite is mentioned by Mr. Clarke,f
and another specimen has been recorded by Mr. J. Mitchell, the
latter from Yass.
Mr. R. Etheridge, Junr., considers the Yass rocks about homo-
taxial with the Wenlock Series of England.
At Wellington what is probably the oldest remains of a verte-
brate yet found in Australia was discovered in the Cave limestone
of that district by my late colleague on the Geological Survey of
New South Wales, Mr. William Anderson. This appears to be a
spine of a genus allied to Onchus. It has not yet been described.
Mr. Clarke mentions;]: a plate of Coccosteus resembling McCoy’s
C. trigonaspis, and an Ichthyodorulite from the Murrumbidgee,
and Mr. J. A. Watt, M.A , a member of this Society, last year
discovered a fossil fish plate at Coodra Yale. The exact horizon
of both these localities is not yet known. The horizon is probably
higher than that of Yass, and may prove to be Lower or Middle
Devonian.
(3) In Queensland Mr. R. L. Jack has desoribed§ Pre-Devonian
schistose rocks at Charters Towers and in the valley of the Reid,
contemporaneous volcanic breccias occurring at the latter locality,
and on p. 23 he quotes the statement made by Mr. W. H. Rands,
F.G.5.,1) that the Pre-Devonian schists at the Cape River are from
five and a half to six miles in thickness. There is room, therefore,
in this vast thickness for Silurian and perhaps Cambrian or even
Archaean strata.
No fossiliferous sedimentary rocks, however, have as yet been
found in Queensland older than Middle Devonian (Burdekin).
* Remarks on the Sedimentary Formations of New South Wales, by the
Rev. W. B. Clarke, M.A., F.R.S., &o. Fourth edition, Sydney, 1878.
p. 16.
t Loc. cit. p. 12.
+ Loc. cit. pp. 17-18.
§ Loc. cit. p. 19.
II On the Cape River Goldfield. By authority. Brisbane, 1868.


(4) In Tasmania Mr. Johnston refers to the Upper Silurian
epoch (a) hydro-mica slates, and white gritty sandstones, with
Orlhis Jlabellum and Spirifera plicatella, Linn., and (b) the Table
Cape conglomerates (?), composed partly of rolled fragments of
limestone containing Pentamerus Tasmaniensis; (c) the Eldon
Valley clay slates and mudstones, containing Galymene, and (d)
the Fingal slates (1).
A single fossil, an Anodonta closely resembling A. Jukesii, has
been obtained by Mr. Johnston from the Eingal slates. If this
determination is correct, this is the earliest example of the occur-
rence of a shell of freshwater habit in Australasia, and is indicative
probably of contemporaneous lacustrine or estuarine deposits.*
In New Zealand Sir James Hector classesf the Baton River
Series as Upper Silurian, but it is more convenient here to include
this and the overlying Te Anau and Reefton Series as part of the
great Takaka System of Captain Hutton.
Folding. —ln Tasmania the rocks classed as Upper Silurian
occupy synclinal troughs in the Lower Silurian rooks and have
partaken, partly at all events, in their folding, and presumably
are folded along axes parallel or subparallel with those of the
older rocks.
In Victoria the folds are less sharp than those of the Lower
Silurian strata. Their axes have a general strike from N.N.W.
to N.W., but at Cape Liptrap the strike is from N. 10° E. to
N. 30° E.
In New South Wales the strike is nearly meridional fiom
Mount Kosciusko to Bathurst, and possibly as far as Mount
Stuart to the north of Mudgee. This meridional line of folding
must have been developed in time antecedent to that of the Upper
Silurian, as conglomerates occur in the Upper Silurian Series as
well as suncrack, both indicative of neighbouring land.
In Queensland the schists at the Cape Gold-field dip S.S.W. at
30° to 35°, the axis of upheaval striking therefore W.N.W. and
* R. M. Johnston, loc. cit. p. 67.
t Loc. cit. p. 81.


E.S.E.* At Charters Towers the strike of the Pre-Devonian
quartzites, greywackes, slates, and shales has been carefully
determined to be N.W. and S.E., the rocks being folded.f At
the Gilbert the Pre-Devonian slates strike W.N.W. to W.S.W.J
At Peak Downs foliated and contorted micaceous and hornblende
schists (Pre-Devonian ?) strike N.E. and S.W. The last-mentioned
locality is on the line of strike of the great line of folding, which
may be termed the Adelaide Axis, trending from St. Vincent’s
Gulf to Broken Hill and thence through Girilambone north-east-
wards. The dominant strike of the Pre-Devonian schists in
Queensland and of their axes of folding lies between N.W. to
W.N.W.
As regards the date of the folding of the Upper Silurian strata
in Tasmania, it must have antedated the Permo-Carboniferous, as
the latter are not folded. The Upper Silurian rocks in Tasmania
are not seen in contact with Devonian strata, the existence of this
system not yet having been proved in that island.
In Victoria a considerable amount of folding of the Upper
Silurian rocks took place before the Middle and Lower Devonian
rocks were formed.§
In New South Wales the folding antedated certainly the close
of the Devonian or commencement of the Carboniferous Period,
and the folding of these Upper Silurian strata was probably the
chief factor in the production of the southern portion of the Main
Dividing Range in New South Wales.
In Queensland the folding of the Pre-Devonian rocks took
place for the most part in Pre-Devonian time.
IV. Devonian.
No rocks of undoubted Devonian Age have as yet been deter-
mined in Tasmania or in South Australia, but in Queensland,
* Jack and Etheridge—Geology and Palaeontology of Queensland and
New Guinea, 1892, p. 20.
t Loc. cit. p. 27.
X Loc. cit. p. 29.
§ f. Murray, loc. cit. p. 56, and plate facing p. 51.


Victoria, and New South Wales they are well represented, and
in New Zealand the Te Anau and Reef ton Series of Sir James
Hector* are referred by him to the Devonian Period.
In Victoria rocks of Lower Devonian and Middle Devonian
Age rest unconformably upon Upper Silurian rocks, and in turn
are capped by strongly unconformable strata of Upper Devonian
or Lower Carboniferous Age.
A. Lower Devonian. — The Lower Devonian rocks consist
chiefly of a volcanic series, the Snow'y River Porphyries. These
consist of felstone porphyries, felstone ash, and agglomerates, the
upper 2000 feet being tuffaceous and the lower 1000 to 1500 feet
being chiefly massive felstones. This series is 20 miles wide, 60
miles long, and attains an altitude of 6000 feet near the Cobberas.
This volcanic seriesf is situated over a meridional fissure, on
which a series of volcanoes was built up in Lower Devonian time,
comparable on a small scale to the Andes of South America. As
the denuded stumps of these volcanoes now rise over 6000 feet
above the sea, their original summits must have been far higher.
That the volcanic series is older than part at all events of the
Middle Devonian Epoch is proved by the fact that the Buchan
and Bindi Limestones of Middle Devonian Age occupy areas of
erosion in the volcanic series. } §
No rocks analogous to the Snowy River Porphyries are known,
in New South Wales, unless the felsites of Major’s Creek, near
Braidwood,|| may be referred to a similar horizon.
It may be noted that in Lower Devonian time fractures of the
earth’s crust took place in Eastern Victoria parallel to the meri-
dional folds of the southern half of the New South Wales Main
* Loc. cit. pp, 79-80.
t f. Howitt, quoted by Murray, loc. cit. p. 51.
% Murray, loc. cit. plate facing p. 51, and pp. 51-56.
§A. W. Howitt, Report Austr. Assoc. Adv. Sci., Metamorphic Rocks of
the Omeo District, Gippsland. Sydney, 1888. p. 209. Geological Survey
of Victoria, Progress Report, iii. p. 181.
II Annual Report, Department of Mines. Sydney, 1892. p. 121.


Dividing Range, and also that the volcanic outbursts succeeded
the period of heavy sedimentation when the 35,000 feet of Silurian
rocks were deposited.
B. Middle Devonian.— (l) Victoria. After the eruptions
ceased subsidence followed to the extent of at least 3000 feet.
This must have depressed the greater part of the south-east of
Victoria, from Forest Hill to Cape Howe and thence at least as
far as Sale, below sea-level. On the sinking sea-floor were laid
down, first, coarse angular breccias, representing perhaps a shore-
line, and composed of volcanic material indicating sub-marine or
littoral volcanoes, probably the latter, as they are mixed with
fragments of slate and sandstone belonging to the older Palaeozoic
rocks. Felsite, basalt, red rubbly beds, limestones, and yellow
beds representing consolidated felsite mud follow,* the total
thickness being from 700 to 1000 feet. Compact limestones, 400
to 500 feet, succeed, indicating a cessation of volcanic activity
and suggestive of clear and warm sea-water free from much
sediment.
The Tabberabbera shales and the Cobannah quartzites were
probably formed contemporaneously with the Buchan limestone
just described.
Among the fossils found in the limestones may be mentioned
a ganoid placoderraatous fish, Asterolepis ornata, Eichwald, var.
australis, McCoy. Among the brachiopods, Spirifer Icevicostata
is specially characteristic.
Mr. George Sweet of Melbourne has been indefatigable in
collecting remains of fossil fish from the Middle Devonian rocks
of Victoria, and the publication of Professor McCoy’s memoir on
them, which has been in preparation now for several years, is
being anxiously awaited by Australian geologists.
(2) In New South Wales Middle Devonian rocks have not yet
been recognised, though it is probable that the limestones of
Coodra Vale, near Yass, with remains of Coccostean fish, are
homotaxial with the Asterolepis limestones of Victoria.
* Murray, loc. cit. p. 55.


(3) In Queensland the Middle Devonian (Burdekin) formation
consists of limestones, conglomerates, white siliceous sandstone,
and red and green shales.
On the track from the Broken River to the Gilbert Diggings,
the late Sir Richard, then Mr., R. Daintree, described the type
section of the Middle Devonian rocks,* and Mr. R. L. Jackf
describes the excellent section observable there in detail. The
series commences with 300 feet of basal conglomerate, and com-
prises eight beds of coralline limestone having an aggregate
thickness of between 2000 and 3000 feet. The total thickness of
the strata is estimated at 20,782 feet. As the lower portion of
the series, 10,000 feet thick, is not fossiliferous, it may belong to
Lower Devonian or even in part to Upper Silurian time.
Mr. Gibb Maitland, F.G.S., the strata of Middle
Devonian Age on the Upper Burdekin as consisting largely of
red shales, and east of the station at the Valley of Lagoons he
states that the fine-grained sandstones of this series are crowded
with suncracks, and are interstratified with beds resembling fine
volcanic ash, testifying of course to contemporaneous volcanic
activity.
East of the Fanning River the Middle Devonian limestone
attains the enormous thickness of 7000 feet.§
These limestones, composed chiefly of corals (Heliolites, Favo-
rites, &c.) and hydrocorallines (Stromatopora, Slromatoporella,
&c.), have all the aspect of ancient coral reefs. The ancient
history of this region may therefore be repeating itself to-day in
the adjoining areas of the Great Barrier Reef of Australia.
The oldest land plant yet found in Australasia, Dicranophyllum
australicum, Dawson, was discovered by Mr. R. L. Jack in this
Middle Devonian Series, |{ and has been described by Sir William
♦ Q.J.G.S. Vol. xxviii. pp. 290-291.
t Geology and Palaeontology of Queensland, pp. 36-38.
% Report on the Geology and Mineral Resources of the Upper Burdekin
Beds, by A. Gibb Maitland. Brisbane, 1891.
§ f. R. L. Jack and R. Etheridge, Junr., loc. cit. p. 36.
|| Loc. cit. pp. 36 and 49.


Dawson.* If this fossil plant be referable to the Coniferas, it
forms the first conclusive evidence of the existence of a contem-
poraneous land flora in Australasia, and confirms the proofs of
the existence of a contemporaneous land surface afforded by the
suncracks in the sandstones.
Messrs. Jack and Etheridge consider! the Burdekin Formation
(Middle Devonian of Queensland) to be homotaxial with the
Buchan and Bindi Limestones of Victoria.
C. Devonian, Lower, Middle or Upper,—(l) In New Zealand
from Silurian time up to the commencement of the Permo-Carbo-
niferous (?) Period sediments were continually deposited, without
marked unoonformability, until the system termed by Professor
Hutton the Tdkaka System had attained the almost unprecedented
thickness of about 100,000 feet in Otago, f This immense system
of rocks, having a thickness of nineteen miles and now uplifted
and so denuded that what were the lowest beds are now exposed
to view, should afford very important evidence as to the thickness
and constitution of the earth’s crust.
It might naturally have been expected that such a vast amount
of sedimentation by its downward bulging of the earth’s crust
would lead sooner or later to exceptional volcanic outbursts.
■The Dun Mountain eruptive series, which Sir James Hector
considers contemporaneous with the upper part of the Takaka
(Upper Devonian), or with the base of the Maitai Series (Carbo-
niferous), consists of the unique ultrabasic rock, dunite, and an
enormous thickness of “ greenstone breccias, aphanite slates,
diorite sandstones, &c.”
(2) In West Australia Mr. E. T. Hardman has described § rocks
of Devonian (?) Age at the Rough Range in the Kimberley Dis-
trict as containing Stromatopora, corals, Spirorbis, Serpulce, &c.,
some of Devonian, others of Carboniferous affinities. In his later
* Q.J.G.S. 1881, xxxvii. p. 306, t. 13, tig. 15.
t Loc. cit, p. 45.
J Q.J.G.S. May, 1885, p. 199.
§ Report on the Geology of the Kimberley District, West Australia, p. 17.


report* made in 1885 he states that the total thickness of hard
grits, conglomerates, limestones, and slaty shales of Devonian Age
is 10,944 feet, as developed at Mount Kinahan in the above
district.!
Mr. H. P. Woodward Devonian rocks as being
largely developed in the Carr-Boyd Ranges of Kimberley, and in
a belt 200 miles long from the Saw Ranges to the Lubbock Range.
The Albert Edward and Barrier (at Kimberley) Ranges are also
probably formed of Devonian rocks. Near Dillon Springs, Kim-
berley, the Devonian rocks are formed of quartzites and slates.
They strike N.E. and S.W. and have been much folded, dipping
in places at 70°, whereas the adjoining Carboniferous strata are
nearly horizontal. The Devonian rocks are described by Mr.
"Woodward as consisting of sandstones, coarse grits, conglomerates,
shales, slates, and hard limestones, with veins of agate and chalce-
Mr. Hardman also mentions || contemporaneous dolerites,
aname-site, volcanic breccias, ash beds, &c., in the Devonian Series,
the basalt being estimated to be 1000 to 1100 feet thick. The
lavas are stated to show distinct bedding in places at 5° to 10°.
The tuffs are composed of basalt and Devonian grit.
The statement, however, made by Mr. Hardman in his 1885
Report, p. 19, that these basalts pass into diorite in places, horn-
blende replacing augite, and his statement in his 1884 Report,,
p. 18, that immediately over the basalts the carboniferous lime-
stone passes into red jasper, are very suggestive of these basic
and intermediate rocks being intrusive laccolites, like the gabbros
of portions of the Tiers of Tasmania, the intrusive character of
which has been ably proved by Mr. Thomas Stephens, M.A.
Summary of Devonian Period. —ln Victoria in Lower Devonian
time extensive volcanic eruptions took place of subaerial or
* Loc. cit. p. 20.
+ Geol. Mag. No. 309, pp. 100-102, and No. 311, pp. 193-199.
J Report on the Goldfields of the Kimberley District. By authority.
Perth, 1891. p. 10.
§ Loc. cit. p. 9.
II Loc. cit. p. 18, and Report on the Geology of the Kimberley District,
Western Australia. By authority. Perth, 1885. p. 19.


subaqueous tuffs and lavas of an acidic character, the series, about
3000 feet in thickness, being strongly unconformable to the Upper
Silurian Series, and the eruptions being probably consequent on
the prolonged subsidence, during which the 35,000 feet of Silu-
rian (Upper and Lower) sediments were laid down in Victoria.
Erosion and subsidence followed, to the amount of 4000 feet in
places, considerably reducing the land area in Eastern Victoria.
Felsitic and basic eruptions on a progressively diminishing scale
upwards prove that the great chain of meridional volcanoes which
produced the Snowy River Porphyries was becoming moribund
and eventually became extinct long before the Buchan and Bindi
limestones, with their remains of bony-plated fish, were deposited
in the eroded hollows of the volcanic series.
In New South Wales also about Middle Devonian time there
was probably considerable subsidence, the Coodra Vale limestones
with fossil Coocostean fish being now over 1000 feet above sea-
level.
In Queensland during prolonged subsidence over 20,000 feet of
strata accumulated, of which at least half, perhaps the whole, are
Middle Devonian, the Fanning limestone alone having a thickness
of 7000 feet, and being chiefly formed of corals and corallines.
The first evidence of a contemporaneous land flora in Australasia
is afforded by the plant Dicranophyllum australicum, Dawson, of
the Queensland Middle Devonian Series. The abundant suncracks
in the sandstones also prove contemporaneous land areas in
Queensland, though the prolonged subsidence must have much
restricted the land area in the Burdekin and Fanning River
Districts. Contemporaneous volcanic eruptions are evidenced by
interbedded tuffs.
In the Kimberley District of West Australia the conglomerates
in the Devonian Series imply neighbouring land areas, and there
is evidence (f. Hardman) of extensive contemporaneous basaltic
eruptions, the basalt sheet being over 1000 feet thick. Airypa
reticularis, Jthynchouella pugnus, an Orlhoceras, and two species of
Goniatite.s are recorded from these beds at Kimberley.*
• Annual General Report for 1890, bj' H. P. Woodward. By authority.
Perth, 1891. p. 17.


In New Zealand the Te Anau and the Reefton Series complete
the sediments constituting Hutton’s Siluro-Devonian Tdkaka
System, nineteen miles in thickness. Extensive contemporaneous
eruptive rocks, including the rare ultrabasic rock dunite, are
stated by Hector to have been erupted in Devonian time, but
Captain Hutton questions the contemporaneity of the eruptive
series.
Folding. —ln Victoria the Middle Devonian rocks, as repre-
sented by the Bindi limestones, have a general N.W. and S.E.
strike. The Tabberabbera shales and Cobannah quartzites have
been highly folded subsequent to the folding of the Silurian rocks.*
This folding was almost completed before the deposition of the
overlying Lepidodendron beds, probably of Lower Carboniferous
Age, as has been proved by Mr. A. W. Howitt. f
In New South Wales nothing is yet known about the folding
of the Coodra Vale Middle Devonian (?) limestones.
In Queensland the Middle Devonian rocks at Burdekin Downs
strike N.E. and S.W., and are folded. On the Broken River the
folds trend N.E. by N., the dip varying from 20° to 75°. At
Kangaroo Hills the axes run N.E., and at Chillagoe E.S.E.
Mr. R. L. Jack has kindly informed me by letter “that there
is no evidence as to when this folding took place in Queensland,
as the Devonian is not seen anywhere in contact with newer
rocks, and so we cannot tell whether they have been folded
together or not. The hiatus, however, between Middle Devonian
and our next series (Gympie) itself implies an upheaval and in
all probability a folding prior to Gympie times” (Carboniferous. —
T.W.E.D.).
If the Middle Devonian of Queensland is the equivalent of the
Buchan and Bindi limestones of Victoria, and liiese rocks in
Victoria were folded before the deposition of the Lower Carbo-
niferous or perhaps even Upper Devonian rocks, it is highly
* Murray’s Geology of Victoria, p. 56.
+ Geological Progress Report, No. iii. p. 214 and following; and Murray’s
Geology of Victoria, pp. 51-64, pi. 13, 15, and 16.


probable that the first foldings of the Middle Devonian rocks ot
Queensland antedated the commencement of the Carboniferous or
the close of the Devonian Period in Australia.
Whereas the principal axes of folding of the Middle Devonian
in Victoria strike N.W. and S.E., those of the Queensland Devo-
nian rocks strike principally N.E. and S.AV.
In the Kimberley District of West Australia, N.E. strikes
prevail, and, as already stated, whereas the Devonian rocks are
much folded, dipping at 70°, the contiguous Carboniferous strata
are almost horizontal, showing that most of the folding took place
between the close of some portion of the Devonian Period and the
commencement of the Carboniferous Period.
One of the most striking features in the folding of the Aus-
tralian Palaeozoic sediments in Victoria and West Australia is the
immense contrast between the amount of folding to which the
Middle Devonian rocks have been subjected as compared with the
Carboniferous. No true folding appears to have taken place in
Victoria or at the Kimberley District of West Australia since the
close of the Devonian Period.
In New Zealand the vast Tdkaka System was much folded and
eroded before the deposition of the succeeding Maitai System,
as shown on Captain Hutton’s section* and Sir James Hector’s
section.f The great Te Anau Fault| was formed probably, but
not certainly, before the Maitai System was deposited. There is
no evidence of any land occupying the present site of New Zealand
up to the close of the Takaka System, the deposits resembling
those laid down on the shores of a continent in seas of moderate
depth. There is a marked absence of conglomerates and of any
evidence, such as ripple-mark, suncrack, current bedding, &c.,
indicative of shallow water conditions, and in the succeeding
Maitai System portion of the deposits are considered by Hutton §
to be probably abysmal.
• Loc. cit, p. 195.
t Loc. cit. p. 80.
t f. Hutton, loc. cit. p. 196.
§ Lee. cit. p. 201.


V. Carbonifero-Devonian or Upper Devonian.
Eocks of this age, characterised specially by Spirifera disjuncta,
Rhynchonella pleurodon, and a Pteronites, which Mr. R. Etheridge,
Junr., is now describing as a new species, P. Pittmani, have so
far been observed only in the Mount Lambie District of New
South Wales*
In the type district at Mount Lambie they consist of a marine
and of a freshwater series, the latter being uppermost. No
unconformability, however, has been observed between the two
series, and Mr. Wilkinson grouped them together as Devonian.
The lower series consists of quartzites containing abundant fossils,
especially Spirifera disjuncta and RhynchoneUa pleurodon, reddish
purple shales, and beds of conglomerate, grit, and hard dark mud-
stones. The rooks of the upper series are chiefly argillites, shales,
mudstones, and reddish-purple shales, with bluish-grey felspathic
quartzite and white quartzite. The thickness of the whole series
is estimated by Mr. Wilkinson as about 10,000 feet. Possibly
the upper aeries may hereafter be referred to the Carboniferous,
and only the lower to Upper Devonian or Carbonifero-Devonian.
Near Rydal a strong unconformability is observable between
the marine Permo-Carboniferous strata and the freshwater series
of the Upper Devonian, the latter dipping at angles of from 30°
to 40° to the E., 15° N. or W., 15° S. ; while the former has a
gentle north-easterly dip of not more than 4°.
The base of these Upper Devonian rocks is not seen near
Mount Lambie, but on the road to the Jenolan Caves, six and
nine miles from the caves towards Mount Victoria, a coarse
conglomerate, perhaps representing the base of this series, appears
to rest unconformably on the Cave Limestone Series (Upper Silu-
rian), as has lately been observed by Messrs. W. F. Smeeth, J. A.
Watt, and myself. A Ileliolites and casts of crinoids have lately
been discovered by Mr. Voss Wyburd in this conglomerate.
* Remarks on the Sedimentary Formations of New South Wales, by the
Rev. W. B. Clarke. Fourth edition, 1878, pp. 17 and 22. And Geological
Map of the Districts of Hartley, Bowenfels, Wallerawang, and Rydal, with
Notes and Sections, by C. S. Wilkinson. By authority. Sydney, 1875.


At Yetholme and at the limekilns near Bathurst Mr. Ciunies
Ross, B.Sc., has lately described* a junction between the Upper
Devonian rocks and the limestone series near Bathurst, and he
considers the general evidence to show that there too the junction
is unconformable. The upper series of the Carbonifero-Devonian
contains Lepidodendron australe, which occurs in numbers along
certain horizons. In the, lower series Lepidodendron australe was
discovered for the first time by Mr. Ciunies Rossj - in Winburndale
Creek, J and by Mr. Pittman and the author at Mt. Lambie; in
both cases the specimens were obtained from the horizon of the
Spirifera disjuncta sandstone. The marine series contains
Spirifera disjuncta in vast numbers, as well as Ithynchonella
pleurodon and Pteronites Pittmani. § These fossils occur in pro-
fusion both above and below the horizon where Lepidodendron
was found by Mr. Pittman and myself, and Spirifera disjuncta is
bedded in the same block with Lepidodendron australe (I) in Mr.
Ciunies Ross’ specimen.
At Mt. Lambie and Winburndale Creek, therefore, there is
evidence to show that the land flora represented in Queensland jn
Middle Devonian time by Dicranoph.yllum was represented in
New South Wales in Carbonifero-Devonian time by early types
of Lepidodendron allied to L. australe. These Devonian rocks
near Mt. Lambie have been folded, the axes of folding striking
about N. 15° E. and S. 15° W.
Near Capertee the axes of folding strike N. 40° W.
* Read before Geological Society of London, November Bth, 1893.
Abstract given in Geol. Mag. No. 354. New Series. Decade 111. Vol. x.
No. xii. pp. 573-574.
fLoc. cit.
+ Also Proo. Aust. Assoc. Adv. Sci. 1892, iv. pp. 332-337. On the occur-
rence of Lepidodendron near Bathurst, N.S.W., by W. J. Ciunies Ross,
B.Sc., F.G.S., &c.
§ Records Geol. Survey New South Wales, Vol. iii. Pt. iv. 1893, p. 199.
On the occurrence of Lepidodendron australe (?) in the Devonian rooks of
New South Wales, by T. W. E. David and E. P. Pittman, with plates
xvn.-xix.
40


As regards the date when this partial folding of the Upper
Devonian of New South Wales took place, it certainly was earlier
than the Permo-Carboniferous Period in New South Wales, and
was perhaps contemporaneous with a portion of the Permo-
Carboniferous Period of Queensland.*
VI. Carboniferous.
(1) Victoria. In Victoria rocks of Carboniferous (possibly
Upper Devonian) Age, though inclined and undulating, are in
some places horizontal, and have nowhere been folded or meta-
morphosed to the extent observable in the older rocks.
Rocks referable to the above horizon are developed chiefly in
two areas, in the east and western portions of Victoria respectively.
The eastern development forms an immense trough, extending
in a N.W. and S.E. direction from Mansfield to Gippsland, 100
miles in length, and averaging 20 miles in width. The Iguana
Creek beds, typical of this series, are composed of bedded felstones,
conglomerates, quartzose sandstones, reddish sandstones and shales.
The following fossil plants have been recorded from them ;
Cordaites australis, McCoy, Archwopteris Howitti, McCoy, allied
to the Canadian Upper Devonian A. Jacksoni, and to the A.
* Unfortunately the expression Permo-Carboniferous is used with two very
different meanings by Queensland and New South Wales geologists respec-
tively. In New South Wales the term Permo-Carboniferous is applied to a
group of rocks partly marine partly freshwater, the freshwater beds being
specially characterised by the prevalence of Olossopteris and Gangamopteris,
while the marine beds contain a fauna partly of Permian and partly of
Carboniferous affinities. This is the equivalent of the Middle and Upper
Bowen Series of Queensland, but in the latter colony an immense series of
older beds is included under the term Permo-Carboniferous, as for example
the Lower Bowen, the Star, and the Gympie Series. Probable equivalents
of all these are found in New South Wales, but as in New South Wales the
junction between the Glossopteris group and that immediately below it
appears to be unconformable, and there is certainly a very strong break in
the flora, the underlying group has been separated from the overlying and
is provisionally called Carboniferous, as the fossils contained in it, both
plant and animal, are simply of Carboniferous types, without any important
admixture, as far as at present known, of Permian forms.


Ilibernica of the Upper Devonian of Kilkenny, Ireland, and
Sphenopieris iguanensis, McCoy.
At Tabberabbera Mr. Howitt describes* these Carboniferous
rocks as dipping at a low angle off the almost vertical strata of
the Middle Devonian rocks. At Snowy Bluff Mr. Murray
describes this series as being 2000 feet thick, with sheets of con-
temporaneous felsite near the base, and at least seven distinct
sheets of contemporaneous basalt in the middle and upper portion
associated with beds of red shale and red sandstone.
The Avon River sandstones, which lie at the S.E. end of the
basin, contain Lepidodendron (Bergeria) australe, considered by
McCoy to be Lower Carboniferous. Murray states! : “I am
inclined to believe that the beds in which it is found are among
the uppermost of the group, and younger than, though conformable
with, the Upper Devonian beds of Freestone and Iguana Creeks.
It is highly probable, therefore, that the Avon sandstones are—
as indicated by Professor McCoy on paleontological evidence—of
Lower Carboniferous Age, or passage beds in that direction
upwards from the Upper Devonian beds.” In the section given
by Murray! a considerable thickness of Upper Devonian (Carbo
niferous.—T.W.E.D.) conglomerates, melaphyres, sandstones, and
red shales are shown to underlie the Lepidodendron sandstones
of the Avon River. A thick red breccia conglomerate usually
marks the junction of this formation with the Upper Silurian
rocks. The prevalence of red material in this formation is due
probably to the oxidation of fine volcanic, dust, resulting from the
eruptions which produced the contemporaneous basalts, such as
those at Snowy Bluff.
The Victorian Carboniferous rocks strikingly resemble litho-
logically the Carboniferous rocks of New South Wales, as developed
in the Braidwood district near Major’s Creek and at the Clyde
Mountain. Spirifera disjuncla has not yet been found in the
Victorian rocks.
, * Geological Progress Report, No. iii. p. 214 onwards. By authority.
Melbourne.
+ Loc. cit. p. 67.
X Loc. cit. p. 68.


The general dip of the Upper Devonian rocks near the Avon
River is S.E. at a low angle. Where, however, the rocks have
been locally folded, the axes of folding strike N.N.W. and S.S.E.
At Mt. Tambo the series is 1500 feet thick and has been folded
on a N.W. and S.E. axis.
In the western area of Victoria Carboniferous (1) rocks attain a
thickness of over 2000 feet in the Grampians, and are chiefly
sandstones and sandy flags. A syncline, having a N.N.W. and
S.S.E. trend, is developed between the Grampians and Mount
Dundas, both of which are composed of these rocks. No evidence
has been obtained to show the upward limit in geological time for
the folding of the Carboniferous rocks of Victoria.
(2) In New South Wales the sandstones and conglomerates of
the Clyde Mountain, near Braidwood (the former crowded with
innumerable casts of Rhynchonella pleurodon), and the marine
sandstones and rubbly red grits, in which’ Lepidodendron australe
was found by Mr. W. P. Hammond and Mr. W. Anderson* at
Back Creek, near Major’s Creek, may be referred to some horizon
in the Carboniferous provisionally, though it is quite possible that
they may be hereafter referred to some part of Carbonifero-
Devonian, or Upper Devonian, time. At Back Creek the dip is
S. 20° E. at 8° and at the Clyde Mountain it is E. 20° S. at 45°.
It is not yet known whether these rocks are older or newer than
the Gympie Series (Carboniferous. —T.W.E.D.) of Queensland.
The presence of Rhynchonella pleurodon is inconclusive, as at Mt.
Lambie it is associated with Spirifera disjuncta, and in the Star
Series of Queensland it occurs in strata newer than the Gympie.
Until lately the Gympie Series had not been identified in New
South Wales, though traced from Queensland to the borders of
New South Wales between Ballendean and Bonshaw. I have,
however, lately come to the conclusion that the whole of the
Palaeozoic sedimentary rocks of the Vegetable Creek district,
provisionally classed by me as Upper Silurian or Siluro-Devonian,
* Annual Report Department of Mines, pp. 121-125. By authority.
Sydney, 1892.


are referable rather to the Gympie horizon, as they contain a form
closely allied to Protoretepora ampla,. and also a small species of
Productus not determinable specifically. The rocks are chiefly
unfossiliferous dark grey claystones alternating with harder and
more quartzose bands with occasional bands of gritty sandstone
and pebble conglomerate, though the latter is absent from the
lower part of the series, which is also unfossiliferous. Near
Ashford a bed of limestone, perhaps a thousand feet thick, occurs,
possibly interstratified in this series.* The thickness of the
whole series has not been determined, but it must be many
thousands of feet. These rocks have been much folded. Their
prevalent strike in the Vegetable Creek district is N.N.W. and
S.S.E. They are far more strongly folded than the Lepidodendron
australe beds which dip off them and may be unconformable to
them, and, what is important, the author last January observed
that at Fraser’s Creek, near Ashford, they were strongly uncon-
formable to the rocks of the Permo-Carboniferous System. The
Gympie beds in that locality must have been tilted into a nearly
vertical position before the Gangamopteris coal measures (Permo-
Carboniferous) were deposited upon their eroded surface. The
basal conglomerates of the Permo-Carboniferous rocks there are
almost wholly composed of rolled fragments of felspathic quartzites
and hardened claystones derived from the Gympie Series.
The Gympie Series has not yet been identified on the eastern
side of the great granite plateau of New England, but judging
from the lithological character of the rocks between Tentorfield
and Tabulam, I think they might provisionally be referred to the
Gympie horizon. The calcareous shales and mudstones of Upper
Muswellbrook, containing Productus semireticulatus and Phillipsia,
are probably homotaxial or perhaps a little higher in the series,
and may belong to a horizon homotaxial with that of the Star
Series of Queensland. The clay shales in the upper portion of the
* Mr. G. A. Stonier, E.G.S., of the Geological Survey of New South
Wales, however, informs me that he is extremely doubtful as to these thick
limestones in the Bingara district and elsewhere in New England being
interstratified with the Gympie Series.


Mt. Lambie Scries, which overlie the Spirifera disjuncta beds, are
lithologically much like the Gympie rocks of New England and
may perhaps hereafter have to be referred to that horizon. At
Barraba the Lepidodendron australe beds appear to me to be
probably nnconformable to the Gympie, as they are simply inclined
at moderate angles dipping off the much folded Gympie rocks. No
actual section, however, has been observed showing an unconform-
able junction.
In the Stroud district, associated with a marine Carboniferous
fauna, Lepidodendron volkmavnianum and L. veliheimianum and
Rhacopteris have been recorded.*
These strata have been estimated by Mr. J. Mackenzie, F.G.S.,
the Government Examiner of Coal-fields, to have a thickness of
about 10,000 feet, as shown on his unpublished sections. The
thickness was stated by me to be 11,300 feetf, but I have since
seen evidence which necessitates the removal of the upper 1309
feet from the top of that section and joining it to the Permo-
Carboniferous System, which reduces the thickness of Carbonifer-
ous rocks in the Stroud District to that originally mentioned by
Mr. J. Mackenzie. The lower half of the section is partly marine
and partly freshwater, containing L. veliheimianum associated
with Jihacopteris and Galamites. The strata are chiefly arkose
sandstones and conglomerates, with thiu beds of crinoidal lime-
stone oolitic in places. The upper half is partly volcanic and
partly freshwater, consisting of conglomerates, sandstones, and
cherty shales, containing Jihacopteris and Galamites in profusion
to the entire exclusion of Lepidodendron , and associated with
contemporaneous felsites and melaphyres and felsitic and basic
tuffs and purplish red shales. These Rhacopteris shales are the
last and newest of the Carboniferous rocks of New South Wales,
* Geological and Palaeontological Relations of the Coal and Plant-bearing
beds of Palceozoio and Mesozoic Age in Eastern Australia and Tasmania, by
Ottokar Feistmantel, M.D., &c., Sydney. By authority. 1890. pp. 37,
139-141, 169.
f Report of the Australasian Association for the Advancement of Science,
Melbourne, 1890, p. 405.


and are probably on a somewhat higher horizon than that of the
Star Beds in Queensland. Lepidodendron australe has not yet
been discovered in the Stroud District.
(3) Queensland. Although Queensland geologists group all
their Carboniferous and Permo-Carboniferous rocks together under
the term Permo-Carboniferous, I propose, for the purposes of this
paper, to class as Carboniferous their Gympie, Star and Lower
Bowen Series, and to apply the term Permo-Carboniferous to the
Middle and Upper Bowen Series only, the two last being charac-
terised by the abundant association of Glossopteris with a Palaeozoic
fauna, more Permian than Carboniferous, Productus hrachythcerus
and Strophalosia being specially characteristic.
In the older group, however, comprising the Gympie and Star
beds, the marine fauna is more Carboniferous than Permian, the
trilobites Phillipsia and Griffithides being of not uncommon
occurrence together with Productus cora, Productus subqaadratus
and Productus semireticulatus. It is stated* that in this older
group ninety-five species are peculiar to the Gympie beds, twelve
are common to the Star beds, seventeen to the middle series of the
Bowen River coalfield, and two to the upper series. The flora in
tie upper series of the older group, the Star, is decidedly Carboni-
ferous, containing an abundance of Lepidodendron australe.
A. The Gympie Series, in the type district at Gympie, has
bun well described by Mr. W. H. Rands in his elaborate report.f
Tie thickness of the Gympie rooks is estimated at 2000 feet, at
Gynpie and 21,000 feet at the Hodgkinson goldfield. The rocks
at lympie consist of grey wackes, altered sandstones, carbonaceous
shaes, grits, conglomerates, breccias, limestone, volcanic tuff and
amygdaloid. At the Hodgkinson goldfield they are chiefly shales
ant conglomerates. The chief fossils are : — Cordaites australis,
McCoy (f), Protoretepora ampla, Martinia subradiata, Productus
con, D’Orb. Lepidodendron australe, McCoy, has been found
asseiated with Protoretepora at the Training Wall Quarries,
* Geology of Queensland, Jack and Etheridge, p. 96.
+On the Gympie Goldfield- Brisbane. By authority. 1889.


Rockhampton, and in marine strata of Gyrapie Age at the Hodg-
kinson goldfield.*
B. The Star Formation.— ln the type district shales, con-
glomerates, sandstone and thin limestone attain a thickness of
1353 feet. Lepidodendron australe, McCoy, occurs throughout
half that thickness, and at the junction of Corner Creek with the
Great Star River L. veltheimiatium, Sternb., is associated with it.
The oldest foraminiferal limestone at present known in Australia
occurs in this formation at Bogantungan. It is only about one
foot in thickness, and is composed chiefly of shells of undescribed
foraminifera.f
At the Keelbottom River contemporaneous amygdaloidal dole-
rites and porphyrites are interbedded with the Star Series. The
porphyrites contain large masses of native copper, like the dolerites
of the Lake Superior Region of North America.
At the Cape River Lepidodendron australe, Cyclostigma sp.
and a Fakconiscid fish, probably Palceoniscus itself, have been
found in rocks belonging to the Star Series. J In the Drummond
Range at Bogantungan these beds are at least 2000 feet thicl
and contain § abundant fish remains in nodules. These have beei
described by Mr. R. Etheridge, junr.||
The late Mr. James Smith of Rockhampton is quoted by Mess s.
Jack and Etheridgell as stating that these fish must have beenin
incredible numbers, like a herring shoal.
Among the fossil plants of the Star Series may be specidly
mentioned** Lepidodendron australe, McCoy, Catamites varicns,
Germar, Gyclostigma australe, Feist., (?) Gyclostigma sp., Feist,
* Geology of Queensland, Jack and Etheridge, loc. cit. p. 115.
t Geology of Queensland, Jack and Etheridge, p. 131.
J Geology of Queensland, Jack and Etheridge, p. 136.
§ Loc. cit. p. 138.
H “ Note on the Occurrence of Fish Remains in the Rocks of the Dam-
mond Range, Central Queensland,” by R. Etheridge, junr. Records Geol.
Survey, New South Wales, Yol. ii. pt. 2, 1890, p. 72.
IT Loc. cit. p. 139.
** Loc. cit. p. 141.


allied to G. Kiltorkense. Stigmaria sp. ind., Tenison-Woods,
Cordaites australis, McCoy, Fhillipsia dubia and Ehynchonella
pleurodon may be specially mentioned amongst the associated
fossil fauna. The Star beds have not a single species, as far as
known, common to the Burdekin beds (Middle Devonian).
The absence of both Rhacopteris and Archmopleris from the
Queensland Carboniferous Flora is worthy of comment. Both are
found on homotaxial horizons in New South Wales and Victoria,
and the former fern occurs in great abundance, to the almost
entire exclusion of every other kind of plant but Calamites. In
New South Wales it ranges at least as far north as Branxton.
(4) West Australia. Mr. W. H. Huddleston has described
Carboniferous fossils from the Gascoyne River.* Mr. A. H. Foord
has described fossils from the Kimberley District.! Mr. Hardman
has described rocks of Carboniferous Age as covering an area of
at least 1500 square miles in the Kimberley District of West
Australia. They consist of a lower series of limestones from 1000
to 1300 feet in thickness, with red shales, marls, occasional layers
of gypsum and traces of rock salt, and an upper series of fresh-
water sandstones, 1500 feet in thickness. The Carboniferous
system is stated to owe its preservation in this district to a strong
N.W. and S.E. fault.J This limestone dips at from 5° to 35°, but
for the most part is only gently inclined. It forms bold precipi-
tous escarpments, such as those in Geikie Ranges and the Napier
Ranges. Hardman states, § “At Geikie Cation, on the Oscar
Ranges, in places these (limestone cliffs) come down sheer to the
water’s edge, and everywhere they are crowned with the semblances
of ruined turrets and battlements that one could well imagine to
be the relics of some mighty Cyclopean fortress of the olden time.”
It is dolomitic in places, in colour varying from light grey to pink.
* Q.J.G.S. Nov. 1883, p. 582.
+ Geol. Mag. New Series, Dee. 111. Vol. vii. No. iii. pp. 97-105; and ibid.
No. iv. pp. 145-155; and ibid. No. v. pp. 193-204. H. A. Nicholson and
G. J. Hiude.
t Report on the Geology of the Kimberley District, by E. T. Hardman.
By authority. Perth, 1884. p. 20.
§ Loc. cit. p. 17.


In the Carboniferous rocks at Agate Hill Mr. Hardman describes*
a bed of white chalcedony 100 to 150 feet thick.
Amongst the fossils recorded may be mentioned! Producta
gigantea, P. semireticulata, Streptorhynchus crenintria, Rhynchonella
pleurodon, Spirifera lata, Poteriocrinus, Stenopora Tasmaniensis,
Zaphreniis, Stromatopora. The sandstones of the Upper Series
pass downwards into conglomerates. They contain much nodular
haematite. At Yarralla Hill Mr. Hardman the occurrence
of Lepidodendron, Lepidostrobus, Lepidophyllum, Sigillaria and
Sagenaria; and Mr. H. P. Woodward also mentions the occur-
rence of Gyperites. §
I am informed by Mr. R. Etheridge, junr., that the specimens
of Lepidodendron collected by Mr. Hardman were presented to the
Imperial Institute. It is much to be hoped that they will shortly
be described and compared with East Australian forms. A brief
description has already been published by Mr. A. H. Foord.|| from
which it would appear that the specimens are unlike L. australe,
but they were mostly very imperfectly preserved.
Folding. —ln Victoria the general direction of folding of the
Lepidodendron Series appears to have been N.N. W. and S.S.E.,
both in the Eastern and Western areas, but there is no evidence
to show when this folding took place, as regards upward limit in
geological time, in Victoria.
In New South Wales, in the Southern portion, the Carboniferous
rocks are highly inclined at the Clyde Mountain, but we have not
sufficient evidence yet to admit of generalising on the direction of
folding. The tilting almost certainly antedated the Permo-
Carboniferous Period, as in neighbouring areas the Permo-
Carboniferous strata are nearly horizontal.
* Loc. cit. Report 1884, p. 18.
t Report on the Geology of the Kimberley District, by E. T. Hardman.
By authority. Perth, 1885. p. 26.
X Loc. cit. 1884 Report, p. 19.
§ Western Australia. Annual General Report for 1890. By authority.
Perth, 1891.
11 Geol. Mag. No. 309, New Series, Dec. 111. Vol. vii. No. hi. pp. 102-103,
pi. iv. figs. 4-80.


In the Stroud district the whole of the Carboniferous rocks are
highly folded on nearly meridional lines inclining slightly to west
of north. The folding here may have commenced in the Permo-
Carboniferous, but for the most part it took place subsequent to
the deposition of the Permo-Carboniferous rocks, as the latter
have been involved in the folding.
In New England the Gympie Series has been highly folded
along axes striking between W.N.W. and N. by W., the general
direction appearing to be about N.N.W.
In Queensland the rocks of the Star Series do not appear to
have been much folded, and this is also the case with their
equivalents in New South Wales.
The general lines of folding of the Gympie in Southern Queens-
land appear to have been nearly N. and S., and in Northern and
Central Queensland N.W. and S.E., with occasional N. and S.
folds. Mr. Jack writes to me—“ The folding of the Gympie
formation must have been the chief factor in the evolution of the
eastern coast range. That it took place before the deposition of
the Star formation I have little doubt in my mind, as the latter,
though nowhere observed in contact with the Gympie, is compara-
tively undisturbed.” The folding therefore probably took place
some time anterior to the existence of the Glossopteris flora in
Australia, the earliest traces of which have been found in Permo-
Carboniferous rocks, as the Permo-Carboniferous strata are for
the most part only gently inclined.
The Carboniferous rocks of the Kimberley District in West
Australia have been tilted locally but not folded.
C. Lower Bowen Formation. —This formation in the type
district in Queensland consists of coarse volcanic agglomerate
and conglomerate capped by yellow siliceous sandstone and soft
sandstone, the aggregate thickness being about 1000 feet. These
are capped by the interbedded porphyrites and basalts, typically
developed at Mount Toussaint and Mount Devlin. The exact
thickness of these contemporaneous lavas is not stated by Mr,


Jack,* but his sketch section would lead one to infer that the
thickness is probably between 500 and 1000 feet.
In New South Wales the strata which immediately underlie the
Lower Marine Series (Permo-Carboniferous) and overlie the Lepi-
dodendron veltheimianum beds may be homotaxial. In the Stroud
District they attain a thickness of over 5000 feet. They consist
of tuffaceous conglomerates, basic and felsitic tuffs, with some
contemporaneous lavas, purple shale, and cherty shales containing
abundant Bhacopteris.
Summary of Carboniferous Period. —ln the present state of our
knowledge we are unable to correlate accurately the Carboniferous
formations of Australia, nor is it probable that they admit of
accurate correlation, though they may be ranged in homotaxial
groups. For the first time in the geological record of Australia
terrestrial and freshwater formations play an important part.
The Gympie series represents sediments laid down in seas of
moderate depth for the most part, but in the New Engl md district
of New South Wales possibly the red jasperoid shales of the
Nundle and Bingara districts with the associated serpentines may
represent altered abysmal deposits, as has been suggested by
Captain Hutton for similar rocks in the Maitai Series of New
Zealand, unless the red claystone represents rock locally meta-
morphosed where in contact with the serpentines. The greatest
paleontological interest centres in Lepidodendron australe and its
allies in the contemporaneous flora. That this plant had a con-
siderable vertical range is certain, for it has been found associated
with Upper Devonian or Carbonifero-Devonian fossils at Mt.
Lambie, in New South Wales ; it is found in the marine Gympie
series at Gympie, and at the Hodgkinson goldfield in Queensland,
and ranges through that series to the top of the Star series, and
throughout a considerable thickness of rocks at Barraba and
Goonoo Goonoo in New South Wales, which are probably newer
than the Gympie Series. It is therefore very difficult to correlate
’Report on the Bowen River Coalfield, by R. L. Jack, Government
Geologist. By authority. Brisbane, 1879. p. 4.


terrestrial or freshwater deposits in Australia by the aid of the
distribution of Lepidodendron australe alone.
In Queensland land must have existed in Gympie time as the
drift specimens of Lepidodendron in the series of that age prove.
Contemporaneous volcanic eruptions took place producing basic
amygdaloids and tuffs. Cordaites australis, McCoy (t), is found
in association with Lepidodendron australe. It will be recollected
that both these forms occur in the Iguana Creek beds of Victoria,
which are probably on a somewhat lower horizon than the Avon
River sandstones, and they may possibly be on the same horizon
as the Gympie. It must be remembered, however, that there is
an enormous gap in Queensland between the Middle Devonian
and the Gympie, not one single species of the Middle Devonian
ascending into the Gympie Series ; and although there is also an
enormous gap in Victoria as indicated by the strong unconforma-
bility between the Avon River sandstones (Carboniferous 1) and the
Tabberabbera shales (Middle Devonian), in the absence of marine
fossils from the Lepidodendron Series of Victoria it is by no means
certain that the interval of time represented by the physical break,
the unconformability in Victoria, is greater than that indicated by
the biological break in Queensland.
In the Star Series of Queensland, which succeeds the Gympie,
the strata are partly marine, partly freshwater, and partly volcanic.
The earliest foraminiferal limestones known in Australia occur in
these beds, and abundant remains of Palceoniscid fish. Lepidoden-
dron australe, McCoy, L. veltheimianum, Calamites varians,
Germar, Cyclostigma australe, Feist., (1) Stigmaria sp. ind., Tenison-
Woods, and Cordaites australis, McCoy, form the chief con-
stituents of the flora. In Queensland, as in New South Wales, it
will be observed that L. australe appears to have preceded L. vel
theimianum, a fact already commented upon by Mr. Clunies Ross.
The Rhynchonella pleurodon occurring abundantly in the Star
beds suggests a relation between them and the Rhynchonella
pleurodon beds of the Clyde Mountain, near Braidwood, in New
South Wales, in the lower representatives of which Lepidodendron
australe is met with.


That contemporaneous volcanic eruptions took place during the
Star epoch is proved by the interbedded amygdaloidal dolerites
and porphyrites, the latter containing large masses of native
copper. It is just possible that these eruptions may have belonged
to the same period as that of the contemporaneous melaphyres
and red shales in the Avon River rocks of the Victorian Lepido-
dendron Series. In Eastern Victoria the Lepidodendron Series is
largely composed of contemporaneous volcanic rocks, Lepidoden-
dron australe, Archceopieris and Rhacopleris occurring higher up
in the series. In New South Wales the formation in which
Lepidodendron has been found in the Northern Districts is pro-
bably on the horizon of the Star Series, as the strata, with which
it is associated, appear to be less folded than those of the adjoining
Gympie Series. In the Stroud District of New South Wales
Lepidodendron veltheimianum and L. volhmannianum are found
in association with Rhacopleris on a horizon at least as high as
that of the Star Series, and the upper portion of this series,
which contains Rhacopleris and Catamites alone, associated with
basic and felsitic tuffs and basic and felsitic lavas, is perhaps
newer than any portion of the Carboniferous formations known
in Queensland or Victoria, except the Lower Bowen Series.
In New South Wales Rhacopleris clearly survived Lepidodendron
during the volcanic epoch which closed the Carboniferous Period
in New South Wales.
In West Australia in the clear water of a sea of moderate depth,
and shallow occasionally, as proved by the lenticular beds of gyp-
sum and traces of rock salt, magnesian limestone and ordinary
limestone were formed, the fossil marine fauna of which show them
to be homotaxial with the Carboniferous limestones of Europe.
Lacustrine and terrestrial conditions succeeded, attended by a
luxuriant growth of Catamites and Lepidodendron, but there, as
in Eastern Australia, the Lepidodendron Period was not marked
by the formation of any seams of coal.
It is evident that in Carboniferous times the land area of the
Middle and Upper Devonian was probably considerably increased,
and Western Australia was perhaps united to Eastern Australia,


but in the absence of a description of the varieties of Lepidoden-
dron met with in West Australia, this cannot be considered an
established fact. It is certain, however, that at the close of the
Carboniferous Period in Australia the Main Dividing Range of
Eastern Australia occupied approximately its present position,
and in places, as near Mount Lambie, the land probably stood far
higher than it does now, as proved by the great anticlinal curves,
now deeply denuded, though still in places between 3000 and
4000 feet above sea-level. In Tasmania Carboniferous deposits
and Lepidodendron are wholly wanting as far as known at present,
but it must be remembered that much of that island, especially
the western area, has not yet been geologically examined in detail.
There is no proof at present that this Lepidodendron Flora ever
reached either Tasmania or New Zealand.
General Summary.
The observations recorded in the above paper, if correct, and
I have done my best to try and arrive, at the truth, may warrant
the following conclusions:—ln Pre-Cambrian (Archaean) time
strata were deposited remains of which have been preserved, (1)
in Tasmania, (2) near Adelaide, (3) in the Mount Macdonnell
Ranges, (4) in the Kimberley District of Western Australia, and
(5) perhaps in the Southern Island of New Zealand. The best
evidence for the Pre-Cambrian age of this group has been
obtained in Yorke’s Peninsula, near Adelaide, where the
Archaean rocks are strongly unconformable to the Olenellus-
Sallerella zone of the Lower Cambrian Series.
The beds of limestone and dolomite at the Macdonnell Ranges
in South Australia, interstratified with the Archaean rooks, and
the graphite and contemporaneous (?) ironstone are strongly
suggestive of contemporaneous life in Pre-Cambrian times in
the Australasian region, and the high differentiation of animal
life in the succeeding Lower Cambrian rocks points to the
same conclusion. Before the Lower Cambrian rocks were
deposited in Yorke’s Peninsula and the Mount Macdonnell


Ranges, the Archaean sediments were strongly folded. The axes
of the folds in North Western Tasmania strike N. 25° W. towards
the Western portion of Victoria, and trending towards Leigh’s
Creek, in South Australia, where north-westerly axes of folds are
strongly developed in the Cambrian rocks. A short distance
S.W. of Silverton these north-westerly axes of folding meet
almost at right angles a strong N.E. and S.W. axis, the Adelaide
Axis, which runs from Yorke’s Peninsula to beyond Silverton.
Following the north-westerly axis, which may be termed the
Tasmanian Axis, towards the Musgrave and Macdonnell Ranges,
the strike changes to due E. and W. There is evidence there too,
as at Yorke’s Peninsula, to show that the folding of the Archaean
rocks was Pre-Cambrian, as there is an unconformability between
the Archaean group and the Cambrian system. From the west
end of the Macdonnell Ranges, it would seem that the Archaean
folds swing once more back on to their former bearing ; as in the
Kimberley District there are strong N.W. and S.E. folds in the
Archaean group, with, however, a N.E. axis crossing it and strik-
ing towards the Ord River. No conclusive evidence has been
obtained to show when this folding took place at Kimberley, but
it was probably chiefly Pre-Cambrian. In Tasmania the general
evidence shows that the folding of the Archaean was earlier, at all
events, than Upper Cambrian, as the Caroline Creek beds, of the
latter age, are considered unconformable to the Archaean group.
The general features of the axis of folding in Archaean time in
Australasia appear to be as follows :—A long shallow loop, like
a railway curve, commencing in Tasmania and trending thence to
the Macdonnell and Musgrave Ranges, the convexity of the
curve facing N.E., then a reverse curve from the Macdonnell
Ranges to Kimberley. To the S.W. of Silverton, this doubly
curved Tasmanian Axis is crossed by the Adelaide Axis from S.W.
to N.E.
This powerful folding in Pre-Cambrian time, considered in
conjunction with the fact that in the Pre-Cambrian as well
as in the succeeding Cambrian System there are conglomerates
and ripple marks (?) indicative of shallow water conditions,


render it probable that there was land in Australia in Archasan
time, the twilight of geological history. No evidence has yet
been obtained in Australasia to prove unconformabilities in
the Archaean Group, as has been done in North America
and Canada, where the Pre-Cambrian Group contained in the
Algonkian and Fundamental Complex is now known to comprise
no less than four unconformable systems. In the succeeding
Lower Cambrian formations, typically developed at Yorke’s
Peninsula, a highly interesting contemporaneous marine fauna is
developed, with the character of which the labours of Professor
Tate and Mr. R. Etheridge, junr., havb. now made us well
acquainted. No less than four or five of the seven subkingdoms
of the animal kingdom are represented in that life zone, which in
Australia, as well as in Europe and North America, is charac-
terised by the trilobite Oknellus, and the pteropod Salterella,
In the Macdonnell Ranges Mr. H. Y. L. Brown’s evidence
shows that the Cambrian sediments were folded partially at all
events before the deposition of the succeeding Lower Silurian
sediments. The axes of folding of the Cambrian strata in
Australia and Tasmania appear to have followed approximately
the direction of the Tasmanian and Adelaide Axes,
The frequency of conglomerate beds in the Cambrian rocks of
South Australia implies probable proximity of land. In New
Zealand the Pre-Silurian schists and other crystalline rocks of
the North-West end of the South Island and in Otago were
folded along the N.E. and S.W. axes chiefly, swinging round to
S. and S.S.E. at the S.E. end of the South Island, as shown by
Captain Hutton. The close of the Cambrian Period, therefore,
in Australia witnessed the second folding to which the earth’s
crust in Australia was subjected. This second folding probably
increased the land area, as the next system of rocks, the Silurian,
covers an extensive superficial area and attains in places an enor-
mous thickness, which implies an extensive land surface, from the
denudation of which its materials were derived. The superficial
area covered by Cambrian rocks in Australia and Tasmania, as
far as at present known, is perhaps not more than about 10,000


square miles, about of the whole area of Australia and
Tasmania.
Lower Silurian rocks have been identified in Victoria, Tas-
mania, Central South Australia, and > New Zealand. They are
characterised by abundant graptolites, and trilobites, with the
addition, in Tasmania, of corals and cephalopoda. Ripple-marked
sandstones and conglomerate beds indicate shallow water condi-
tions for their accumulation in Tasmania, and at the Mount
Macdonnell ranges conglomerates indicate similar conditions,
temporary cessation of sedimentation on deepening of the ocean
being marked by beds of limestone. In New Zealand, on the
other hand, the Lower Silurian sediments may have accumulated
in seas of some depth.
The amygdaloids of Wooltana and the Mt. Arrowsmith Ranges
in South Australia may represent contemporaneous volcanic
outbursts. The folding in Tasmania was on axes N. by W. and
N.N.W., in Western Victoria on N.N.W. axes, and in the Mac-
donnell Ranges on E. and W. axes.
It was perhaps during this epoch that a third axis commenced
to develop which may be termed the Kosciusko Axis having
approximately a meridional trend. There was probably land at
this time in the Southern portion of the Cordillera region of New
South Wales, and in Victoria,, Tasmania, and South and West
Australia. In New Zealand the Lower Silurian were folded on
the same axes as the Pre-Silurian following for the most part the
trend of the Southern Island, but the date of the folding in Few
Zealand cannot be determined further than that it took place
before the Carboniferous or Permo-Carboniferous Period.
Rocks of Upper Silurian age are known to exist in Tasmania,
Victoria, New South Wales, and possibly in New Zealand. In Vic-
toria their thickness added to that of the Lower Silurian has been
estimated by Mr. Selwyn as 35,000 ft. The sun-cracked flaggy
sandstones in the Yass district of Upper Silurian Age prove con-
clusively that there was some land in the southern portion of New
South Wales during that epoch. The missing sub-kingdoms of
the animal kingdom, the Echinodermata and the Vertebrata, are


made up respectively by the abundant crinoids and starfish of the
Victorian rocks and the spine of a fish, probably Onchus, found
by Mr. \V. Anderson in the limestone of the Wellington Caves in
New South Wales. The well known Silurian Coral Halysites
occurs in several localities in New South Wales. In Victoria these
Upper Silurian strata were strongly folded along N.W. and S.E.
axes principally, following the Tasmanian Axis, which perhaps had
altered in direction slightly, becoming more westerly in proportion
as the Kosciusko Axis became more pronounced. In New South
Wales folding took place along axes approximately meridional.
In Victoria the folding antedated the commencement of the next
geological period, the Devonian, and in New South Wales it partly,
at all events, preceded Upper Devonian time. This is now the
fourth folding of the Australian rocks, or as the folding was only
slight in the Lower Silurian rocks before the deposition of the
Upper Silurian rocks, it may be considered as the third important
folding.
The earliest freshwater deposits known in Australasia are
recorded by Mr. R. M. Johnston as occurring in the Fingal
District of Tasmania, where an Anodonta (?) has been discovered.
In Lower Devonian time in Victoria there were extensive
eruptions, as described by Messrs. A. W. Howitt and R. A. F.
Murray, of lavas and tuffs of an acidic character, the products of a
chain of large volcanoes, of one of which the Cobboras, 6000 feet
high, form the denuded stump. This volcanic series is known as
the “ Snowy River Porphyries,” and is, perhaps, about 4000 feet
thick. The volcanoes which produced them are considered by
Mr. Howitt to have established themselves upon a meridional
fissure parallel, therefore, to the Kosciusko Axis.
Middle Devonian rocks are represented in Victoria by the
Buchan and Bindi limestones and some underlying tuffaceous
beds, the thickness of the whole series being about 1300 feet.
The Tabberabbera shales also belong to the same horizon. The
South Eastern portion of Victoria was submerged to the extent
of at least 3000 feet during this period. Remains of the bony-
plated Coccostean fish are plentiful in the Buchan limestone, and


have been described by Professor McCoy. In New South Wales
Middle Devonian rocks are doubtfully represented by the Coodva
Vale and Cave Flat limestones, near the Murrumbidgee, in
the Yass District, where remains of Coccostean fish have been
obtained.
In Queensland the Burdekin formation, of Middle Devonian
Age, is estimated by Mr. R. L. Jack to be upwards of 20,000 feet
in thickness, and comprises an ancestor of the Barrier Reef of
Australia in the form of a massive bed of coralline limestone 7000
feet in thickness in places. Some of the sandstones in this forma-
tion are crowded with suncracks. A few beds of contemporaneous
volcanic ash are interstratified. The oldest known terrestrial plant
from Australasia [a Conifer (f/\, Dicranophyllum Australicum,
Dawson, has been discovered in the Burdekin strata. In the Kim-
berley District of Western Australia the late Mr. E. T. Hardman,
the discoverer of the Kimberley Goldfields, describes Devonian
rocks exceeding 10,000 feet in thickness. In New Zealand Captain
Hutton groups in his Takaka system all the sediments between
the Lower Silurian and Devonian, and assigns to this system, as
developed in Otago, the astonishing thickness of 100,000 feet,
that is about 19 miles. As the lowest of these strata are now
visible at the earth’s surface, and do not show evidence, in spite
of their having been buried to such a depth, of having been
liquefied, they afford interesting proof as to the probable minimum
thickness of the earth’s crust, and their evidence agrees fairly
well with that deduced from earthquake observations, which show
that there is material in the earth’s crust sufficiently solid to crack
and so produce vibrations at a depth of 20 and even 30 miles;
in one observed case, in America (the Owen’s Valley earthquake),
of 50 miles. There is no evidence of any land having appeared in
New Zealand up to to the close of the Devonian Period. There
is a singular absence of conglomerates and all indications of
shallow water conditions. Indeed, in the next formation, the
Maitai, some of the red jasperoid claystones are thought by
Professor Hutton to represent abysmal deposits, the equivalents
of the red clays of modern deep oceans.


There is no evidence of any Palaeozoic Flora in New Zealand,
and it may be doubted whether there was any land at all within
the present area of New Zealand before the commencement of the
Mesozoic Era when for the first time coarse conglomerates and a
land flora make their appearance. Land must, of course, have
existed in the neighbourhood of New Zealand, the denudation of
which supplied the material for the Takaka rocks. Portion of
this may possibly be represented by the crystalline schists of
Otago, but probably a considerable area of land lay to the west
of the South Island, and has since been denuded away. The
eruption of the rare ultrabasic rock dunite is noteworthy as
occurring at the close of the prolonged sedimentation of the
Takaka system, according to the view of Sir James Hector. The
axes of folding in Victoria in the Middle Devonian are very
sharp, and their trend was still N.W. and S.E. In Queensland
and in the Kimberley District N.E. and S. W. strikes predominated.
This is the fifth folding, or fourth important folding, of the
Australasian rocks. In Victoria the folding, preceded almost
entirely the deposition of the Lower Carboniferous rocks, and at
Kimberley preceded the Carboniferous Period.
In the. Upper Devonian or Carbonifero-Devonian rocks of
Winburndale Creek, near Bathurst, and at Mt. Lambie, near
Eydal, Upper Devonian Beds occur with abundant Spirifera
disjuncta and Rhynchonella pleurodon. The earliest type of
Lepidodp.ndron australe was found last year by Mr. Clunies Ross,
of Bathurst, Mr. E. F. Pittman, the Government Geologist, and
myself in those beds. The classification and correlation of the
Carboniferous rocks of Australia is complicated and is still
nebulous. In Queensland, where the group has been best worked
out, there are at least two well marked divisions, the Gympie and
the Star, which I think may be referred for purposes of comparison
to the Carboniferous Period, although included by the Queensland
geologists under the term Permo-Carboniferous. They have not
a single species in common with the Burdekin formation (Middle
Devonian). The Gympie, the older division, is developed in New
South Wales as well as Queensland. It contains Cordaites


Australis, McCoy, and Lepidodendron australe, McCoy. Both of
those plants are also found associated with a marine fauna,
Productus cora, Protoretepora ampla, Martinia subradiata, in the
Iguana Creek Series of Victoria, which may be homotaxial with
the Gympie Series. Interstratified tuffs, and lavas occur in the
Gympie Series at Gympie, and also in the Iguana Creek Series as
developed on the Avon River in Victoria. In the Hodgkinson
Goldfield, in Queensland, the Gympie Series is 20,000 feet thick.
No Lepidodendron is as yet known to have been found in the
Gympie in New South Wales.
The Gympie rocks have been strongly folded along the
Kosciusko Axis, which at the close of the Gympie epoch appears
to have extended itself across the New England • District of the
northern portion of New South Wales, and into Queensland at
least as far north as the Palmer Goldfield. The folding took
place chiefly before the close of the Carboniferous Period, as the
Star Series, which overlies the Gympie, is far less folded than the
latter. The folds strike N.N. W. chiefly, in New England, N. and
S. in the type district at Gympie, and N.N.W. to N.W. in
Central and Northern Queensland. Mr. Jack considers that the
folding of the Gympie was the chief factor in the evolution of the
Main Dividing Range of Queensland, as it certainly was in that
of the New England District of New South Wales. At the close
of the Gympie epoch the Main Dividing Range of Eastern Aus-
tralia probably occupied approximately its present position, but
was situated further west in New South Wales than it is at
present and probably was much higher. In the next formation,
the Star, there is evidence of an abundant land flora, comprising
L. veltheimianum in Queensland, in addition to L. australe,
Gyclostigma Australicum, Catamites varians, Cordaites Australis,
McCoy, and Stigmaria (1), Tenison-Woods. A similar flora occurs
in New South Wales, but in addition the fern Bhaeopleris is very
abundant, especially in the Hunter District. The same fern
occurs in similar strata in Victoria. It is abundantly associated
with Lepidodendron veltheimianum in the Stroud District of
New South Wales.


Either probably the Gympie Ocean, which covered New
England previous to the great uplift of the granite masses, barred
its migration into Queensland northwards, or it was a hardy
form which flourished better in the cooler climate of New South
Wales and Victoria than in the more tropical climate of Queens-
land ; but the assumption that there was much difference of
climate between these countries at so remote a period seems
hardly warranted by this slender evidence.
The Star Series contains thick interbedded dolerites and
porphyrites, the latter containing masses of metallic copper.
The abundance of Rhynchonella pleurodon in some of the Star
beds suggests that they may be homotaxial with the Rhynchonella
pleurodon sandstones of the Clyde Mountain, near Braidwood in
New South Wales.
The Star beds are rich in remains of Palrconiscid fish, and con-
tain thin foraminiferal limestones. The Star beds of Queens-
land are probably represented in New South Wales by the
Lepidodendron beds of Barraba and Goonoo Goonoo. The Stroud
beds of New South Wales, estimated by Mr. J. Mackenzie, F.G.S.,
Government Examiner of Coalfields, to be 10,000 ft. thick, are
probably higher than the Star Series, and are perhaps homotaxial
with the Lower Bowen. They represent perhaps the latest
deposits of the Carboniferous Period in New South Wales. Their
upper portion is largely composed of volcanic ash and contem-
poraneous lavas. Evidence shows that in this locality Rhacopteris
considerably outlived Lepidodendron. These rocks have been
folded strongly in Post-Permo-Carboniferous time, but this folding
is only local, it is nearly meridional, inclining slightly to west
of north.
There is no proof as yet that Lepidodendron ever entered
Tasmania.
In West Australia the massive carboniferous limestone described
by Mr. E. T. Hardman and Mr. H. P. Woodward, E.G.S., is
1000 to 1300 feet thick, a pink to grey dolomite and ordinary
limestone, containing Productus cora, P. semireticulatus, Rhyn-
chonella pleurodon, &c. These limestones are capped by about


1500 feet of sandstones, containing undescribed specimens of
Lepidodendron, Lepidostrobus,Lepidophyllum,Sigillaria, Sagenaria,
Catamites, and Cyperiles.
It is probable that Eastern Australia was united to Western
Australia during some portion of the Carboniferous or of the
Devonian Periods.
With regard to the inferences which may be deduced from the
folding, it is clear that (1) the earliest known folding of the
Australasian region took place in Pre-Cambrian time in Australia
and Tasmania, and at least as far back as Pre-Silurian time in
New Zealand. In Victoria, South Australia and Tasmania the
original lines of folding along the Tasmanian and Adelaide Axes
continued to' be developed all through the Cambrian, Silurian and
part of Devonian time, and along the Tasmanian Axis during
portion, at least, of the Carboniferous Period. The Kosciusko
Axis, however, would appear to be of somewhat later origin than
the Tasmanian and Adelaide and New Zealand Axes. I would
suggest tentatively that this axis became developed in the middle
of the V-shaped area enclosed between the Tasmanian N.W. and
S.E., and the New Zealand N.E. and S.W. axis, and in propor-
tion as the Kosciusko Axis developed and extended itself into
Queensland, so the Tasmanian Axis was less used for expending
the contractile energy of the coast.
(2) Possibly an extension northwards of this Kosciusko Axis
in Carboniferous time reclaimed for the Australian continent an
area in New England, part of which had formed the floor of an
ocean of moderate depth. The unfossiliferous dark clays with
siliceous bands and jasperoid red claystones, with manganese in
places, and belts of serpentine, may possibly represent deep sea
deposits and associated eruptive rocks, and the siliceous bands
might, with advantage perhaps, be searched for radiolaria.
(3) The burying of sediment under 19 miles of rock material
was not sufficient in the case of the Tdkaka system to bring about
a liquefaction of the lower layers. This proves a considerable
thickness for the solid crust, if it be assumed that the isogeotherms
recovered their normal position before elevation ensued.


(4) At least five important foldings have taken place in the
Australasian region between Pre-Cambrian and Carboniferous
time inclusive, and each has had an important influence on the
evolution of the continental area of Australia, but the last exten-
sive folding, that of the Gympie, which took place in Carboniferous
time, has been the chief factor in the evolution of the Main Dividing
Range of Eastern Australia in the northern portion of New South
Wales and in the greater part of Queensland.
(5) The folding along the New Zealand Axis which commenced
in Pre-Silurian time was continued, as shown by Captain Hutton,
up to the close of the Mesozoic Era.
In preparing the above address T have availed myself freely of
the labours of others, but much as is due to each one of them I
feel that most is due to a working member of this Society, Mr. R.
Etheridge, junr., whose unremitting and systematic studies in the
field of Australian Geology for the past thirty years are enabling
us to correlate the geological formations of Australia on a sound
and enduring basis. Through him the Linnean Society in the
past has been identified with most of the important slops in the
progress of Australian Geology, and that it should be so identified
in the future is, I am confident, as much the wish of the present
members of this Society as it was the wish of our generous
founder.
EXPLANATION OF PLATES.
Plate xxvii. —Map showing the chief Directions of Folding at present
known in Australia, Tasmania, and New Zealand. [The Anticlines
of theNewZealand Folds are reproduced from the Sketch by Captain
Hutton, F.R.S. (Quart. Journ. Geol. Sc. May, 1885, p. 195).]
Plate xxvm.—Generalised Geological Sketch Section showing the succes-
sive Foldings of Australia from Pre-Cambrian Time to the close of
the Permo-Carboniferous Period.


GH Barrow, del.
MAP SHOWI NG CHIEF. DIRECTIONS O F FOLDING AT PRESENT
KNOWN IN AUSTRALIA. TASMANIA. AND NEW ZEALAND.
The Anticlines o f the New Zealand folds are reproduced
from the Sketch by Cant[?]. (Ouart Jour, Geol. s o c. Mow 885 p.195)






[ From Vol. IX. (Series 2nd) of the “ Proceedings of the Linnean
Society of New South Wales ” (April 25th, 1894)■]
A CONTRIBUTION TO A FURTHER KNOWLEDGE OF
THE CYSTIC CESTODES.
By JAS. P. HILL, F.L.S.,
Demonstrator of Biology, Sydney
University.
m.-v.)
The following paper may for convenience be divided into three
parts.
Part i, includes the descriptions of two new species of the
genus Piestocyslis, Diesing,—the first from the copper-head snake,
llojdocephalus siiperbus; the second, a somewhat remarkable
proliferating form from the lizard Lialis —and the general consi-
derations following therefrom.
Part ii. is a description of a new species of Monocercus from
the earthworm Didymogaster sylvatica, FI.
Part iii. contains an account of the development of the scolex
of Synbothrium, a genus of Tetrarhynchidai.
I must here express my great indebtedness to Prof. Haswell
for his ever ready advice, and for much valuable assistance during
the course of my work ; and also my best thanks are due to Mr.
Masters, Curator of the Macleay Museum, and to Mr. H.Throsby
for the material in which the cysts described in Part i. were found;
also I have to thank Herr W. Musmann for much assistance with
the literature.
PART I.
1. On a new Species of Piestocystis from lloplocepiia lus
suPEitnus.
The cysts on which the following account is based were found
imbedded in the peritoneum surrounding the intestine of a single
specimen of the “ copper-head ” snake, Hoplocephalus superbus,
4


common in certain parts of New South Wales. The cysts when
fresh appeared as opaque oval bodies, the largest of which mea-
sured 5 mm. in length and 4 mm. in breadth. Each cyst encloses
a single Cysticercus, which tills up almost completely the cavity
of the cyst, in this respect contrasting strongly with the Lialis
cyst, in which, as will be seen in the following, the cyst cavity
is very large and the one or more Cysticerci lie perfectly free
within it.
Structure of the cyst wall. —ln section (Fig. 1) the cyst wall
is found to be of considerable thickness and to differ in struc-
ture in its inner and outer regions. The inner part, which
immediately encloses the Cysticercus, is composed of a homo-
geneous layer (Fig, 1, h. I.) very similar in appearance and mode
of staining to the cuticle of the Cysticercus. External to this
homogeneous layer and occupying the central part of the cyst
wall is a region (I. I.) having an irregularly laminated appearance
and containing large spaces, probably lymph spaces. External to
this and forming the outer layer of the wall is a feebly staining
region of a fibrous nature (/. I.) and with numerous spaces. In
the fresh cyst the outermost layers of the wall can be easily
removed with needles, leaving the inner layer as a clear mem-
brane closely surrounding the Cysticercus.
Seeing that the cyst wall is marked out by its optical characters
and its histological structure into these two regions, I am inclined
to attribute to each a distinct origin. The outer region, consisting
of the laminated zone and the fibrous zone, is, I believe, derived
from the peritoneum of the host by pathological change, while the
inner homogeneous layer probably represents a direct derivative
of the six-hooked embryo, and corresponds to the lining of the cyst
in Lialis, to the so-called cyst of Monocerci —in a word, to what
Yillot* terms the blastogen or blastogenic vesicle.
Structure of the Cysticercus. —When the Cysticerci are liberated
from the cyst, they are found to be somewhat pear-shaped bodies
• sur lea cystiquea des Tanias.” Ann. dea Soi. Nat. Zonl.
6me a4rie, Tome xv. (1883).


broader at the anterior end, in which the head lies inverted, and
tapering to a blunt rounded posterior end. They varied somewhat
in size, the largest measuring 3 mm. in length and 2 mm. in thick-
ness at the broader anterior end, while the smallest were 1-5 mm.
in length and 1 mm. in thickness, exactly half the size of the
largest. When examined under compression the Cysticercus is
seen to possess numerous close-set calcareous corpuscles, uniformly
distributed over the body. They are mostly in the form of short
rods with rounded ends, measuring in greatest length -04 mm.;
others have a more oval or rounded outline. At the .broad end
the head lies invaginated. It is provided with four large suckers
whose cavities communicate with the cavity of invagination of the
head. Hooks are altogether absent, but at the bottom of the
invagination cavity of the head, situated centrally in what will in
the everted condition form the apex of the head, is a small rounded
body, representing a rudimentary frontal sucker (Fig. 2, f. s.).
As the head was not readily everted in water, I have not been
able to examine a completely everted Cysticercus. This is the
more to be regretted, for in the everted condition the relations of
the frontal sucker could have been more easily made out. It
appears from the examination of preserved specimens that the
suckers can be protruded separately. Fig. 2 represents a nearly
median longitudinal section through such a Cysticercus with
partially evaginated head, the knob-like mass projecting at the
anterior end being one of the protruded suckers in section. In
this section the invagination cavity appears as a wide opening,
but transverse sections of a Cysticercus with the head fully
inverted show that it is comparatively narrow and lined by cuticle
continuous with the external cuticle of the body. It is filled up
with a granular deeply staining material which is apparently
derived from the coagulated fluid which surrounds the Cysti-
cercus. Fig. 3 represents a section through the inverted head
of a Cysticercus at the level of the suckers. Their walls are
composed of numerous small radially elongated cells and their
cavities open into the invagination cavity. The ground tissue
immediately surrounding the suckers is seen to be disposed in a


circular manner, giving rise to a definite sheath (Fig. 3, r. c.)
which surrounds the inverted head. This sheath represents the
“ receptaculum capitis” of Leuckart, concerning which he says,*
“The receptacle has least independence in the bladder worms
with parenchymatous bodies such as we have seen in Cysticercus
(Piestocystis) variahilis and its allies, for there it is not only
connected with the mass of the head, but, like the ordinary body
muscles, bound up with the tissue of the bladder.” Along with
the receptacle, mention must be made of the numerous muscular
or elastic fibres which run through the body tissue. They are
composed of a homogeneous substance which stains uniformly and
shows no trace of cellular structure. In Fig. 3in the receptacle
they are seen to be more or less radially arranged, while in Fig. 2
some of the fibres are seen to take a longitudinal course, passing
forwards like the similar fibres in the Lialis Cysticercus, to be
inserted into the head.
The bladder cavity in this form is represented by an irregular
cavity occupying the centre of what represents the caudal bladder
of ordinary Cysticerci, and not distinctly marked off from the
surrounding ground tissue. The cavity is filled by a granular
material consisting of a homogeneous matrix with granules which
stain deeply with cochineal, and which represent the products of
degeneration of the original central tissue, which in the Cysti-
cercus from Lialis ( seq .) persists unaltered.
Frontal sucker. —The frontal sucker is situated medianly in the
inner part of the invaginated head, in what will in the evaginated
condition be its apex. In sections (Figs. 2 and 4), both by its
structure and staining properties, it can readily be distinguished
from the surrounding tissue. At its narrower anterior end is a
slit-like aperture which places the cavity of the sucker in commu-
nication with the cavity of invagination of the head. The sucker
cavity (Fig. 4, «. c.) is much wider than its opening, but is very
shallow, so shallow, indeed, that the aperture and the cavity only
* “ Parasites of Man,” English Edition, p. 347.


extend through three thin sections, of which the middle one is
represented in Fig. 4., The cavity is lined by a delicate layer of
cuticle just as Monticelli describes* for the terminal sucker of
Scolex polymorphus. The wall of the sucker he describes as
consisting of radial fibres similar to those of the suckers of Tre-
matodes. In the form under consideration, nuclei are readily
visible in the wall, but the cell boundaries could not be made out,
nor were the radial fibres distinguishable.
In the tissue surrounding the sucker are numerous radially and
circularly running fibres. The radial fibres correspond to what
Monticelli callsf the retractors of the terminal sucker. Like the
latter the radial fibres pass out from the central sucker and some
of them can be traced to the inner sides of the lateral suckers.
According to Monticelli, the retractors of the terminal sucker in
Scolex polymorphus are inserted into the dorsal side of the four
suckers. That the structure here termed the frontal sucker
represents the similarly named structure in Scolex polymorphus,
though in a somewhat reduced condition, is evident from the
foregoing.
The morphological value of the frontal sucker of Scolex poly-
morphus is considered at some length by Monticelli in the paper
already referred to.J He regards the frontal sucker and its
retractors as homologous with the frontal sucker and its muscula-
ture in Amphilina, and as homologous with the buccal sucker of
Trematodes, as representing in fact the lost digestive tract of
Cestodes.
1 quote his conclusions in full: —“In breve, saremno per tutti i
fatti esposti indotti ad ammettere una forma ancestrale primitiva
trematodiforme di (Jestode fornita di bocca ed intestine, il quale, e
a poco a poco scomparso per effetto del parassitismo. Ead attestare
* “ Contribuzioni alio studio della fauna elmintologica del Golfo di Napoli,’
Mitt. Zool. Stat. Neap. B. viii. 1888, p. 114.
+ Loc. cit. p, 118.
J Loc. cit. pp. 118 and 121.


la presenza di questo intestino scomparso, vi h in alcuni Cestodi
adulti, molto semplici, una ventosa boccale con le sue glandole
salivari e la sua inusoolatura, come condizione permanente (Am-
philina) ed in altri Cestodi: (1) alio stato larvale, in Cestodi
nieno differenziati, evvi una ventosa anteriore per strnttura e
funzione paragonabile alia ventosa dei Trematodi, con una musco-
latura propria (scolici di Tetrabothridsc : Call., Tetrab., Phyll.)
ed in quelli piu differenziati (Tetrarhynchidoe) un rudimento di
ventosa sotto forma di fossetta ( Anthocephalus elongatus) nel
quale sboccano le glandole salivari, e rudimenti muscolari alia
estremita dello scolice (Anth. elongatus et Ant. reptans); (2)
alio stato adulto poi vi sono ora dei rudimenti di ventosa ante-
riore (G. corollatum, G. filicolle, Rhynchoh. corollatum), ora delle
glandole salivari (Tetrabothriun longicolle), Zschokke, ora dei
rudimenti muscolari (Calliohothrium e Tenie).”* In view of
these observations of Monticelli, it is interesting to find Grassi
and Rovelli,! from a totally different standpoint, viz., that of the
development of the Cysticercus of Tania elliptica, instituting a
comparison between the rostellum of certain Cestodes and the
pharynx of Trematodes.
That the rostellum and frontal sucker are homologous structures
is strikingly borne out by Lenckart’s of the rudimen-
tary rostellum of Tania saginata. He says:—“ So far then the
rostellum of Tania saginata, in spite of its comparatively weak
development, possesses essentially the structure seen in the hook-
bearing cystic tapeworms. But, while in the latter the rostellum is
covered by a prominent layer of parenchyma in which the anterior
processes of the hooks are embedded, this coating is represented in
T. saginata only by an annular diaphragm, which lies as a lip on
the outer wall of the above-mentioned lenticular mass. This is
more or less markedly arched according to the curvature of the
* Loc. cit. pp. 122-123.
t Embryologisohe Forschungen an Cestoden, Centralb. f. Bact. u. Parasit.
B v. 1889, p. 376.
' X Loc. cit. p. 434.


latter, and has in its centre an opening which is expanded below
and appears sometimes rather deep, since the lenticular body has
not unfrequently a depression in its anterior surface. This is the
opening long since observed by Bremser and occasionally by other
observers, and the appearance of which has given rise to the
formerly prevalent idea that the tapeworms possessed a mouth
opening between the suckers,” and further he regards “this pore
(frontal sucker), along with the muscular apparatus lying below it
(the rostellum or bulbus), as the morphological equivalent of that
sucker which is found between the lateral suckers, not only in
Rudolphi’s Scolex and the associated Phyllobothria, but also in
some Tseniadm.”
Admitting then that the structure under consideration in T.
saginata is the homologue of the frontal sucker, found in a
more highly developed condition in other forms, and accepting
Leuckart’s further observation, viz., that the rostellum in the
hook-bearing cystic worms passes through a developmental stage
similar to that which is retained as the permanent condition in
Tcenia saginata, we have clear proof of the homology of the two
structures. The disappearance of the hook-fundaments which
surround the pore of the sucker in T. saginata is certainly due to
degeneration, but in the sucker itself we have clearly the persis-
tence in the adult of a developmental stage, early lost in the other
hook-bearing Tseniadce. These facts tend clearly to show that
phylogenetically the frontal sucker is the older of the two struc-
tures, and that as specialisation has proceeded it has been replaced
by the rostellum.
If this be so, then we must regard the condition in Polycercus
Didymogastris, where, as we have shown,* the head,- with the
rostellum, arises in the centre of a cellular mass, as an example
of the most highly specialised condition in the series.
Excretory System. — ln the living Cysticercus examined under
compression, the longitudinal trunks of the excretory system were
* “On Polycercus,” P.L.S.N.S.W. (2), Vol. viii. p. 373.


readily visible. Two large vessels are present on either sice and
extend throughout the whole length of the body. Numerous
smaller canals were also visible, which seemed to communicate
with one of the main trunks on either side. The canals contained
a liquid in which were suspended bright refractive granules,
rounded or oval in form, in rapid circulation. The direction of
the currents in the compressed Cysticercus was of an inconstant
character; at one moment the liquid with the granules might be
seen flowing towards the head, then the direction of the current
would be reversed and the granules flow towards the posterior
end.
These observations, taken from my rough notes made at the
time of examination, do not agree with Monticelli’s account* in
Scolex polymorphus. Whether this reversal of the direction of
the current is a normal feature in our Cysticercus or abnormal
and due to the great compression to which it must be subjected
before any of the internal details can be made out, I am unable
to say. But Monticelli’s observation that by an undulatory move-
ment of the walls of the descending trunks the contained liquid
transports the calcareous corpuscles to the head, inclines me to
the latter belief.
The refractive granules, referred to above, represent calcareous
corpuscles similar to those Monticelli has described as existing in
the descending trunks of Scolex polymorphus, and which he regards
as similar to those described by Fraipont in the accessory branches
of the great trunks of the excretory system of Diplostomum.
Fraipontf in Scolex trygonis paslinacce describes two longitu-
dinal vessels on either side, of which one is smaller than its
neighbour! The two larger vessels open posteriorly into the
pulsatile vesicle, while anteriorly they curve back to form the
smaller vessels which at the posterior end resolve themselves into
* Loc. cit. p. 126.
f “ Recherohes sur 1’ appareil des et dea Cestodea,”
Archivea de Biologie, T. ii. 1881, p. 5.


a network around the pulsatile vesicle. The larger vessels he
terms the descending trunks, and the smaller the ascending.
Monticelli confirms* Fraipont’s description as to the difference in
size of the vessels and also as to the mode of termination of the
vessels.! Pintner,J on the other hand, maintains that all the four
canals in the young forms terminate in the contractile caudal
vesicle, and such is the condition in the Cysticercus under consi-
deration. In sections, the larger descending (Fig. 3, d. v.) and
the smaller ascending canals ( a.v .) can be readily distinguished,
two on each side. They differ not only in size but in the thickness
of their walls. Both are lined by a cuticular membrane, which,
however, is thicker and much more distinct in the case of the
smaller ascending canal. Posteriorly the two vessels on each side
unite with each other, then pass inwards and backwards to open
into a short terminal canal which communicates with the exterior.
The terminal canal is lined by a very definite cuticle, which when
traced back is found to grow thicker and to become continuous
with the external cuticle of the Cysticercus.
Structure of the cuticle and the subcuticular layer. —The cuticle
(Figs. 5 and 6) consists of a thick layer of uniform depth, which
with cochineal shows a differentiation into an outer thicker layer
and an inner thinner more deeply staining layer. The external
surface is smooth, no hair-like appendages being present, as
Monticelli§ describes for Scolex polymorphus.
As Leuckart describes || for Cestodes generally, there is, imme-
diately below the cuticle and in close contact with it, a thin layer
of circularly disposed elastic fibres (Figs. 5 and 6, c. /.); internal
to this circular layer is, in transverse sections, a layer of bright
refractive bodies (Fig. 5, l.f), separated from each other by inter-
spaces. They represent the transverse sections of a layer of
* Loc. cit. p. 124.
+ Loc. cit. p. 127.
t As quoted by Montioelli.
§ Loc. tit. p. 133.
“Parasites of Man,” p. 290.


longitudinally running elastic fibres. The outer circular layer
and the inner longitudinal together constitute the “ musculo-
dermal ” layer of Leuckart, but which is perhaps here better
termed a “ dermo-elastic layer.” Griesbach describes* in Soleno-
phorus megalocephalus, below the cuticle, a similar layer of circular
elastic fibres, while the longitudinal fibres correspond to his sub-
cuticular “ Langsmuskeln.”
Internal to the “dermo-elastic” layer is the layer termed by
various authors subcuticula, subcuticular or hypoderm layer, or
the layer of matrix cells.
The subcuticula of the Hoplocephalus Cysticercus is composed
of a layer of radially elongated cells, which appear somewhat
triangular in transverse section (Fig. 5, s. c.), with their broad
ends directed outwards and their narrow ends inwards ; in longi-
tudinal section (Fig. 6, s. c.) they appear more spindle-shaped and
their narrow ends are prolonged for some distance into the body
tissue. They possess deeply staining nuclei, which, as Steudener
has noted generally for Cestodes, may be situated in any part of
the cell, sometimes near the middle, at other times nearer the base
or apex, “ so that they appear not in a line but alternating in a
somewhat broad zone.”f
As RobozJ finds in Solenophorus megalocephalus, the cells com-
posing the subcuticula do not abut directly on one another or on
the “dermo-elastic” layer, but are separated from each other and
from the dermo-elastic layer by a finely granular matrix (Fig. 5,
m.). Monticelli,§ apparently not recognising the existence of this
intercellular matrix, inclines to the belief that the spaces between
tne cells are due to the effect of the reagents used, and very pro-
bably also, as Pintner says, to the state of contraction or extension
* “Beitrage sur Kenntniss der Anatomie der Cestoden,” Archiv f. Mik.
Anat., Band xxii. 1883, p. 571.
+ Leuckart, “ Parasites of Man,” p. 288.
+ Zeit. f. wiss. Zool. xxxvii.; Abstract Journ. Roy. Micr. Soc. Vol. ii.
Ser. 2nd, 1882, p. 785.
§ Loc. cit. p. 136.


of the body. No doubt the latter factor does, to some extent,
influence the closeness or remoteness of the subcuticular cells, but
that it does so in only a very slight degree is shown by the fact
that in invaginated Cysticerci (i.e., in the most contracted condi-
dion) these spaces are always recognisable between the cells.
Ground tissue. —The ground tissue (the ground parenchyma,
ground substance, body parenchyma, of various authors) consists,
as Griesbach describes* for Solenophorus and Hamannf for Taenia
lineata, of a granular matrix, in the outermost part of which the
subcuticular cells lie embedded. It contains, internal to the
subcuticula, numerous rounded, fusiform or stellate cells, the
nuclei and cell bodies of which are clearly distinguishable.
Certain of these cells lying nearer the subcuticula have an oval
nucleated cell body, which is produced on opposite sides into two
narrow processes, the outer of which can be traced into the space
between two adjacent subcuticular cells and is probably inserted
into the “dermo-elastic” layer; the inner process passes for some
distance into the ground tissue. These cells probably function
as muscular cells. Zograf, | in Solenophorus megacephalus and
Tricenophorus nodulosus, describes and figures cells “de forme
etoilee, avec leurs longues excroissances en forme de rayons qui,
d’un c6te, s’elevent entre les cellules de la matrice jusqu’ & la
cuticle, et, de I’autre, s’enfoncent dans le parenchyma du ver et
s’y rattachent aux cellules semblables du tissu conjonctif du
parenchyme.” These star-shaped cells closely agree in their
relationships with the cells described above. With the exception
of the elastic fibres already described as occurring in the ground
tissue, no distinct bundles of longitudinal muscle fibres were
recognisable.
* Loc. cit. p. 527.
+ Zeit. it wisa. Zbol. xlii. 1885; vide Rolleston’s “Forms of Animal Life,”
2nd ed. p. 226.
Les Cestodes, offrellt-ils des Tissus ectodermiques ? ” Archives Zool.
Exp. et Gen. 2nd Set, T. x, 1892, No. 3, p. 339.


The inner region of the matrix contains scattered nuclei, the
cell bodies of which were not distinct. 111-defined spaces occur
here and there in the matrix, but the definite lacuna; figured by
Griesbach* for Solenophorus do not exist in this form.
Calcareous corpuscles occur throughout the whole thickness of
the body tissue, but are specially aggregated in a zone situated
some distance below the subcuticula.
In Cysticerci which have been stained by an acid fluid, such as
Ehrlich’s acid heematoxylin, and afterwards treated with acid
alcohol, these bodies are dissolved and for the most part disappear.
Their position is, however, indicated by circular spaces (Fig. 5,
r. c. c.) surrounded by a wall and clearly marked off from the
surrounding matrix.
Prof. Haswell,t in reference to the calcareous corpuscles in the
parasitic flat-worm from the frog, says:—“From their appearance
when acted on by dilute acid, it would appear that the two parts
of the corpuscle are of different composition, the inner part
becoming, before it is entirely dissolved, converted into a cluster
of granules, while the outer part never becomes granular, but
only gradually becomes less and less distinct till a fine outline
alone remains.” In sections treated with acid reagents, the
cluster of granules representing the inner part of the corpuscle
can in many cases be distinguished lying in a cavity which is
bounded by a wall representing the wall of the cell in which the
corpuscle is formed. At one point on the wall the original cell
nucleus can be recognised.
Immediately external to the zone containing the calcareous
corpuscles, in sections from Cysticerci which have been stained
with a neutral fluid such as cochineal, numerous round spaces can
be seen, containing a number of rounded or oval granules (Fig. 6,
c. n. c.), similar in optical characters and staining properties to
* Loc. eit. Taf. xxi. figs. 1 and 2.
t P.L.S.N.S.W. Vol. v. (2), p. 664.


the ordinary calcareous corpuscles. In some cases the spaces
contain one or more large granules with a number of small ones,
in others the small granules are alone present. Their very
definite form goes against the belief that they are due to the
action of the fixing fluid (corrosive sublimate) or the staining
fluid (cochineal). It may be that they represent cells which
produce instead of one large corpuscle, a number which lie free in
their cavities.
2. On a proliferating Species of Piestocystis from Lialis.
A living specimen of the widely distributed but somewhat rare
lizard Lialis Burtonii, Gray, for which I am indebted to Mr.
Masters of the Macleay Museum, was found on dissection to be
infected with cysts of a somewhat remarkable character. Each
cyst contained from one to three Cysticerci, which lay quite free
in the cavity of the cyst. In the fresh condition the cysts
appeared as vesicular elevations of the wall of the small intestine,
along the whole length of which they were found, usually placed
singly, but in some cases two occurred in close apposition, with a
common wall between them. The largest cyst observed measured
T 75 mm. in diameter. Through the kindness of Mr. R. Etheridge,
Junr., Acting Curator of the Australian Museum, and of Mr.
Masters, I had the opportunity of examining six spirit specimens
of Lialis, and in two of these the cysts were again encountered,
occupying the same position as described for the living form.
When the living cysts are removed from the wall of the intestine
and the cyst wall ruptured with needles, the cyst collapses owing
to the escape of the Cysticerci and the fluid which surrounds
them. In the fresh specimen examined, two Cysticercoids were
found in the greater number of the cysts, one usually larger than
the other; in a few one Cysticercus only was found, but seeing
that in cysts containing two Cysticerci one was larger than the
other, and also judging from certain appearances seen in entire
cysts mounted in glycerine and in a series of sections, I am
inclined to believe that the cysts with only one Cysticercus had


not advanced so far in development as the cysts containing two.
In one of the spirit specimens examined, a cyst was found con-
taining three equally and fully developed Cysticerci (Fig. 7).
Structure of the cyst wall. —The outer wall of the cyst is com-
posed of a fibrous layer (Fig. 8, f. I.) continuous with the muscular
layer of the wall of the intestine and doubtless formed from it by
the replacement of its muscular elements by fibrous tissue. It
contains scattered cells, blood vessels, and lymph spaces and is
covered externally by peritoneum. Internal to this fibrous outer
wall and lining the cavity of the cyst is a thin layer of slightly
staining homogeneous substance, with flattened nuclei on its inner
face (A. I.). As in the case of the cyst wall of the Cysticercus
from Hoplocephalus, I attribute to these two well-defined parts
of the wall a distinct origin. The outer wall is a product of the
tissues of the host, while the thin inner lining of the cyst cavity,
together with the cellular network in its interior ( seq .), are the
direct derivatives of the six-hooked embryo, representing the
proscolex or blastogen of Villot.
The cavity of the cyst is occupied by a branching network of
cells, the nucleated cells from which the anastomosing processes
arise being situated irregularly in the angles between the meshes.
Round the periphery of the cavity of the cyst the processes of
these branching cells become continuous with the inner lining of
the cyst wall, a fact which supports the view expressed above,
that the inner lining of the cyst is an integral part of the parasite
and not derived from the host.
Structure of the Cysticerci. —The Cysticerci lie embedded in this
network, and, as they occur naturally in the cyst, are small rounded
or oval bodies, about '75 mm. in diameter, and with the head
invaginated at the broader anterior end (Fig. 9). When the cyst
wall is ruptured and the Cysticerci allowed to escape in a drop of
water, the head is immediately evaginated and they begin to creep
about actively; the change of shape is so remarkable that the
movement might almost be described as amoeboid.


The evaginate Cysticerci (Fig. 10) measure from 1'25 to 2 mm.
in length. In each can be distinguished an anterior or head end,
conical in form and provided with four large well-marked pro-
trusible suckers, which passes gradually, by way of a narrow neck
region, into the posterior much wider and longer region, which
Lenckart considers as the homologue of the caudal bladder of the
ordinary bladder worms.
The whole body is invested in a layer of cuticle which in the
head region is covered by numerous very minute backwardly
directed spinules -002 mm. in length. Hooks are altogether
absent. Numerous minute black points are visible all over the
cuticle. These may be the external openings of pore canals, but
sections did not reveal their existence in the cuticle. The pos-
terior part of the Cysticercoid contains very numerous uniformly
distributed calcareous corpuscles, which are most abundant in the
superficial layers of the body tissue, but occur in the more centra
tissue as well. They vary in shape from round to angular and
are almost entirely confined to the posterior region, only a few
being found between the suckers of the head.
The excretory system opens at the posterior end of the Cysti-
cercus by a short tube, which in the living form is seen to be
pulsatile. It is lined by a continuation of the outer cuticle and
in sections is visible as a minute tube with a cuticular wall passing
forwards for a short distance.
In the inverted Cysticercus the head lies inverted in the central
tissue of the body, and, as in the typical bladder worm, the cavity
of invagination is in free communication with the exterior, and
into it the cavities of the four suckers open. Fig. 11 represents
a transverse section at the level of the suckers. Just as in the
case of the Hoplocephalus Cysticercus, the invaginated head is
surrounded by a thick envelope of circularly arranged tissue
representing the receptacle of the head. In the superficial region
of the body tissue in the posterior part of the Cysticercus, and
especially clear in Cysticerci preserved in Flemming’s Fluid, are
bundles of elastic fibres which run towards the head, and as they


do so widen out to become inserted into it. They, like the similar
longitudinal fibres in the Cysticercus from Hoplocephalus, probably
have to do with the invagination of the head.
In histological structure the Cysticercus under consideration
agrees closely with the Cysticercus from Hoplocephalus, in which
I have gone into detail more fully. Below the cuticle the outer
circular and inner longitudinal layers of elastic fibres can be
recognised, and internal to these the subcuticula, consisting of a
richly nucleated layer of radially elongated cells, whose outlines,
however, owing to the small size of the Cysticercus, are difficult
to make out.
The ground tissue is composed of a matrix with scattered nuclei,
but here, as distinguished from the Hoplocephalus Cysticercus, the
posterior part is solid, there being no indication of a central cavity.
In this respect it agrees with two forms mentioned by Leuckart,*
“one from the sub-epidermal tissue of the nightingale and another
from the body cavity of Lacerta vivipara (Piestocystis Dithyridium,
Diesing),” in which no bladder cavity is present.
As to the development of the Cysticerci, the material at my
disposal did not offer any certain developmental stages, but it
seems probable that the Cysticerci arise by a process of prolifera-
tion from the thin inner lining of the cyst cavity, which, together
with the cellular network in the interior of the cyst, I interpret
as the direct derivative of the six-hooked embryo, representing
the blastogen of Yillot. The small mass of cells attached to the
lining of the cyst in Fig. 8 probably represents the first stage in
development of one of the Cysticerci. This bud probably increases
in size, becomes separated from the wall, and comes to lie free in
the cavity of the cyst, forming a mass of cells such as are seen in
the right hand corner of the cyst cavity in Fig. 8. Later, round
this mass the cuticle is differentiated, and finally by an invagina-
tion at one end the head is developed, the suckers developing on
the interior of the invagination cavity.
* “ Parasites of Man,” p. 343.


General Considerations.
Diesing* divides the cystic forms into four genera :—(1) Echi-
nococcus, (2) Canurus, (3) Cysticercus, (4) Piestocystis. With the
two latter we are for the present alone concerned.
According to Diesing the presence or absence of hooks serves to
distinguish the genus Cysticercus from the genus Piestocystis; the
Cysticerci are armed forms, the Piestocystes unarmed, and it is
clearly among the unarmed Piestocystes that we must look for the
relationships of the two forms described in the foregoing; they
are both the cystic forms of hookless Taeniae.
Villot,f basing his classification on the mode of formation of
the caudal bladder, has divided the cystic forma into two groups.
His first group includes cystic forms whose caudal vesicle arises
from the proscolex by simple growth and modification of structure,
without, strictly speaking, the production of any new part. His
second group includes cystic forms in which the caudal vesicle
arises from the proscolex by a process of budding, i.e., by the
addition of a new part. In the first group he includes the three
genera, Cysticercus, Echinococcus, and Coenurus, and it is with the
first of these genera, with the Cysticerci properly so-called, that he
classes the forms included in Diesing’s genus Piestocystis. He
saysj :—“ L’etat inerme, pas plus que I’etat arme, ne peut carao-
tferiser une coupe generique parmi les Cystiques; et il est bien
evident que le groupe des Piestocystis doit disparaitre de la
nomenclature.” In support of this view he instances the case of
Tania saginata, a form which in the adult has no hooks and only
a rudimentary (persistently embryonic) rostellum, but whose
affinities structurally are with the armed Tcenise.
Leuckart,§ however, has shown that the Cysticerci of this form,
“ although the descendants and young forms of a bookless tape-
• Systema Helminthum, Yol. i. p. 478.
+ Loc. cit. “Cystiques des Tdnias.”
t Loc. cit. p. 6.
§ Loc. cit. p. 463.
5


worm, are furnished with a distinct though small rostellum and
with the rudiments of hooks” ; and further Nitsche, according to
Leuckart,* has occasionally observed, in the adult form, these
rudimentary hooks. In view of these facts, Yillot’s opinion, in
so far as it rests on the case of T. saginala, loses its value.
It may now be well to institute some comparison between the
Cysticerci properly so-called and the two forms described in the
foregoing as representing the genus Piestocystis.
The unarmed Piestocystes are not only sharply marked off from
the Cysticerci properly so-called by the absence of hooks, but also
by their general structure. The retractile more or less conical
head,'destitute of hooks and provided with four large and well-
marked suckers, is characteristic, as also is the elongated posterior
portion usually interpreted as representing the caudal vesicle.
According to Yillot, four parts can be distinguished in an
ordinary Cysticercus: (1) the cyst, (2) the head, (3) the body, (4)
the caudal vesicle. The cyst is in the Cysticerci properly so-called
an adventitious structure derived from the host, and having no
genetic connection with the enclosed Cysticercus, and so may be
left out of consideration in the present connection. The Cysti-
cercus itself consists of the three parts —head, body, and caudal
vesicle. If we, with Leuckart and other observers, consider the
posterior part, in which the head is invaginated, in these unarmed
forms, as representing the caudal vesicle, what corresponds to the
body of the ordinary Cysticercus 1 It seems to be represented by
the muscular sheath which immediately surrounds the invaginated
head and which has in the foregoing been regarded as comparable
to the “ receptaculum capitis ”of l.euokkrt. The “ receptaculum
capitis” of Leuckart is, as Yillot has shown,! formed by the
internal of the two layers into which the somato-cephalic bud of
the developing Cysticercus separates. From the internal layer
(the receptaculum capitis) the inner wall of the body is derived,
while from the external are derived the outer wall of the body
• Loc. cit. p. 435.
t Loc. cit. p. 14.


and the head of the Cysticercus. In the forms under considera-
tion, these two layers enclosing an interparietal cavity do not
appear to be represented, and further, as Leuckart states,* the
sheath or so-called receptacle is in these forms “not only connected
with the mass of the head, but, like the ordinary body muscles,
bound up with the tissue of the bladder.” Hence, if this sheath
be taken as representing the body of the Cysticerci properly so
called, we may take it as characteristic of the genus Piestocystis
that the body, unlike that of the Cysticerci properly so-called, is
not represented by a part distinct from the caudal vesicle.
The absence of a well-marked bladder cavity containing fluid is
also a noteworthy feature and one which has given rise to the
name parenchymatous bladder worms for these forms. The
cavity may be entirely absent or it may be represented by an
irregular space bounded by thick walls. With reference to this
feature Leuckart saysf :—“With the loss of the bladder cavity
most of the characteristic peculiarities of the bladder worms have
been also lost, so that it is hardly possible to distinguish these
forms from developed bladder worms with evaginated heads. In
fact, even in spite of the attached caudal bladder, such a form as
that represented on Fig. 185 c looks exactly like a young still
unsegmented tapeworm.”
The Cysticercus which most closely approaches these parenchy-
matous forms in the absence of a distinct bladder cavity is that of
Tania elliptica (cucumerina), but it is at once distinguished from
them by the possession of hooks, and further, as Grassi and Rovelli
have shown,J the fully formed Cysticercus represents only the
anterior part of the six-hooked embryo, the posterior part which
forms the tail being lost on the Cysticercus reaching maturity.
As one of the characters of the genus Piestocystis, Diesing
gives the absence of a rostellum, but its homologue, the frontal
• Loc. cit. p. 347.
t Loc. cit. p. 343.
X “ Embryologisohe Forschungen an Cestoden,” Centralb. f. Bakt. n.
Parasit., Band v. 1889.


sucker, is found in the form from Hoplocephalus, and Van
Beneden* in a form, Milina grisea, from the intestine of Vesper-
tilio murinus and serotinus, and which evidently belongs to the
genus Piestocystis, describes an unarmed bulb as existing between
the four suckers, and also Bellingham, t in a Cysticercus from
Gohitis barhatula, has observed a similar unarmed proboscis, so
that this character of Diesing no longer holds. The presence of
a posterior pulsatile excretory tube and of numerous calcareous
corpuscles in the caudal vesicle are features of lesser importance.
Thus, in the absence of hooks, of a distinctly differentiated
body, and of a proper bladder cavity, these forms are sharply
marked off from the Cysticerci properly so-called.
Returning now to the consideration of the cyst, in Cysticerci
properly so-called it is, as already remarked, a wholly adventitious
structure, being derived from the tissues of the host and having
no genetic connection with the enclosed Cysticercus. In the
unarmed forms considered in the preceding, the inner lining of
the cyst in that from Hoplocephalus and the inner lining of the
cyst, together with the cellular network in the interior of the
cyst from Lialis, are, in our opinion, the direct derivatives of the
six-hooked embryo, and correspond to the so-called cyst of Mono-
cercus arionis and of M. glomeridis, and to the cellular cyst of
Monocercus Didymogastris (of Partii.), representing in fact the
proscolex or “blastogen ” of Villot.
This consideration, viz., that, in the unarmed forms under
consideration, we have, surrounding the Cysticerci and forming
part of the cyst wall, a part which is the direct derivative of the
six-hooked embryo, and which is not found in any Cysticercus
properly so-called, is alone sufficient justification for removing
them from Villot’s genus Cysticercus, and they certainly have no
genetic connection either with Echinococcus or Ccenurus.
* “Les Parasites des Chauves-souris de Belgique,” M6m. de 1’ Acad. Roy.
de Belgique, T. xl. 1873, as quoted by Moniez, “ Essai Monographique sur
les Cystiques,” p. 144.
f “ On Irish Entozoa,” Ann. Mag. N.H. Vol. xiv, p. 398.


Superficially there is a slight similarity between an isolated Echi-
nococcus head and, say, the Cysticercus from Lialis, but detailed
comparison shows they have little in common. Leuckart,* after
referring to the similarity in disposition between the enclosing
portion of the Echinococcus- head and the caudal bladder of a
Cysticercus, says:—“Nevertheless it is impossible to regard the
capsular envelope of the retracted Echinococcus-hea.A as a caudal
bladder, and that not only because it forms an integral part of
the head, and is included in the body of the future tapeworm, but
more especially because of its entirely different origin.” In the
foregoing we have considered the part in which the head is
invaginated in these forms as representing the caudal vesicle and
body, and that it does not become part of the future tapeworm,
YonLinstow’sf observation of the commencement of segmentation
in the part immediately succeeding the head in Cysticercus (Pies-
tocystis) Dithyridium strikingly bears out.
Multiplication in the genus Piestocystis takes place, according
to Diesing, by a process of external proliferation from the caudal
vesicle. This method of multiplication certainly does not hold
good for the forms under consideration, and Villot| agrees with
Leuckart § in believing that the so-called buds are malformations
due to purely mechanical causes; still it is possible that certain
species do multiply by external proliferation. In the two forms
under consideration internal proliferation undoubtedly takes place,
in the first one Cysticercus only is formed, in the second three
may be thus formed. Here the caudal vesicle does not proceed
from the proscolex by simple growth and modification of structure
as in Villot’s genus Cysticercus, but it represents a secondarily
formed structure derived by internal proliferation from the pro-
scolex, which remains persistent in the form from Hoplocephalus
as the inner lining of the cyst cavity, and in the form from Lialis
* Loc. cit. p. 604.
+ “Neue Beobachtungen an Helminthen,” Arohiv f. Naturgeach., B. i.
1878, p. 222.
t Loc. cit. p. 22.
§ Loc. cit. p. 356.


as the inner lining of the cyst cavity together with the cellular
network in the interior of the cyst.
The two forms under consideration are thus brought into close
relationship with certain forms included in Yillot’s second group,
but they agree so closely with one another and differ so widely in
other respects from the Cysticercoids that it seems advisable to
associate them together in Diesing’s old genus Piestocyslis.
Leuckart* regards these parenchymatous forms as in many ways
connecting the Cysticercoids with the ordinary bladder worms,
and this is the view we here adopt. In their general structure
they are certainly more nearly related to the Cysticerci properly
so-called than to the Cysticercoids, while at the same time the
presence of the surrounding blastogen is a character they share in
common with certain of the latter.
Finally, then, we hold the genus Piestocyslis to include unarmed
forms, intermediate between the Cysticerci properly so-called and
the Cysticercoids; and which are produced, one or more in number,
by proliferation of the blastogen (proscolex).
The Lialis Cysticercus may be termed Piestocyslis Lialis, and
the Hoplocephalus Cysticercus Piestocyslis lloplocephali.
PART 11.
On a Monocercus from Dirymoo aster.
While examining specimens of the earthworm Didymogaster
sylvatica, FI., for the Polycercus described by Prof. Haswell and
myself in a previous part of these Proceedings,! one individual
was found to be infected by a Cysticercoid belonging to the allied
genus Monocercus, for which I propose the name of Monocercus
Didymogastris. The generic name Monocercus was proposed by
Yillot! for cystic forms of the type of Cysticercus arionis, in
* Loc. cil. p. 655.
+ P.L.S.N.S.W. Vol. viii. p. 365.
t “ sur les Cystiques des Tanias,” Ann, des Sci. Nat. (6), T. xv.
1883, p. 35.


■which the blastogen (proscolex) gives rise by endogenous budding
to a single caudal bladder, as distinguished from the genus Poly-
cercus, in which, according to Yillot, a number of caudal bladders
are similarly produced.
Structure of Monocercus Didymogastris. —The Monocerei lie
embedded in the wall of the intestine, generally in the superficial
layers. They appear to the naked eye as small rounded elevations
of a whitish colour, which vary considerably in size, the largest
observed measuring '5 mm, in diameter and the smallest 'lB mm.
Each (Fig. 12) consists of two very distinct parts: (1) An outer
clear cellular portion which we may provisionally term the cyst,
and which surrounds (2) a central more opaque portion, the
Cysticercoid proper. Considering these two parts separately, and
first as to the outer portion. In section it is found externally
to consist of a homogeneous membrane apparently of a cuticular
nature and which stains more deeply than the cuticle of the
Cysticercoid. Internal to this cuticular membrane is a single
layer of large cells, each containing protoplasm with refractive
granules and a nucleus ; their walls are continuous with the outer
membrane and stain similarly to it. In the possession of this
well-defined surrounding layer of cells, in the fully developed
Cysticercoid, Monocercus Didymogastris appears to differ from all
previously described forms belonging to this type. In Gysticercus
arionis, Leuckart* describes the Cysticercoid as surrounded by a
true connective tissue cyst derived from the host. But Moniezf
says;—“ Le kyste dans lequel est enferm6 le Cysticerque de
VArion est pour nous, un produit du parasite lui-meme et non une
secretion de I’hote.” He, however, describes the cyst as consisting
of concentric layers, an observation which Villot shows, f from the
study of 0. arionis and C. glomeridis, to be incorrect. According
to him—“Le soi-disant kyste des Monocerques est, en realities, une
* “The Parasites of Man,” English Edition, p. 361.
+ “ Essai Monographique sur lea Cysticerques,” Travanx de I’lnstitut
Zoologique de Lille, T. iii. fasc. 1, p. 74.
t Loc. cit. p. 38.


enveloppe tres fragile, composee d’une mince cuticule et d’une
couche sous-jacente de nature cellulaire.” This subcuticular
layer he describes as consisting of small groups of fine granules,
separated from each other by a hyaline border and evidently
representing a layer of cells in process of degeneration. Villot’s
observations receive ample confirmation from the form under
consideration. There is here, just as in G. arionis, a layer of
cuticle externally, and an underlying cellular layer, which, how-
ever, in the case of our Monocercus, shows no signs of degeneration.
Accepting Moniez’s view that the cyst belongs to the Cysticercoid
itself, what does it represent! With Villot I agree in regarding
it as the blastogen or blastogenic vesicle (proscolex), which by
internal differentiation, either by budding or some process of
separation, gives rise to the Cysticercoid proper. The Cysti-
cercoid, then, together with the outer cellular layer, the blastogen,
represent the entire product of the six-hooked embryo.
We pass now to the consideration of the second part of our
Monocercus, the Cysticercoid proper.
Each is an ovoid body measuring from •15- - 3 mm. in diameter.
It lies perfectly free in the centre of the surrounding layer of cells.
There is no connection nor any sign of connection between the
outer wall and the Cysticercoid. Yillot* believes that in Cysti-
cercus arionis he has seen, at the posterior part of the caudal
vesicle of the Cysticercoid and the cyst, traces of an original
connection in the form of “ une sorte d’ombilic ou de depression
infundibuliforme.” No such indication of an original connection
is to be seen in the case of Monocercus Didymogastris; if it ever
existed no trace of it remains in the fully-formed Cysticercoid.
This fact suggests that the Cysticercoid, instead of arising from
the proscolex by a process of budding, arises by the separation of
the more central cells from a peripheral layer. The latter forms
the outer layer of cells, while the central mass gives rise to the
Cysticercoid by differentiation, probably in a manner similar to
* Loc. cit. p. 38.


what we have described* in the development of an individual Cysti-
cercoid in Polycercus. And I may here add that our observations
on the development of the Cysticercoid in Polycercus Didymo-
gastris strikingly confirm Villot’s view that the position of the
head in Cysticercoids of the type of Gyslicercus arionis is the
primitive one and not secondary as Leuckartf believes.
When the Cysticercoid is examined in the fresh condition, it is
seen to possess numerous uniformly diffused calcareous corpuscles
•01- - ol2mm. in diameter. At one end, the anterior, is a slight
depression indicating the aperture of evagination of the head.
In sections the three parts found in all Cysticercoids of this
type can be readily distinguished. J These parts are: (1) the
head, (2) the body, (3) the caudal vesicle. The head forms a
somewhat conical mass lying invaginated in the body, and with
the blunt apex of the cone pointing to the aperture of evagination
of the head. It bears on its sides four large and well-marked
suckers, and in its centre lies the retracted rostellum, the anterior
end of the latter forming the blunt apex of the head.
The head is covered by a definite cuticle and is composed of a
dense mass of small-celled tissue. The suckers are composed of
rounded cells, radial and circular fibres not being recognisable.
The rostellum is stout, thickest in its middle region, and with
blunt anterior and posterior ends. It extends to near the pos-
terior end of the head, terminating on a level with the posterior
border of the suckers. It is composed of rounded cells larger and
clearer than those of the rest of the head. Surrounding it is a
thin sheath of a cellular nature, apparently corresponding to the
muscular receptacle of other forms (cf. Polycercus DidymogasirisJ,
but distinct muscular fibres were not recognisable in it. At the
anterior end of the rostellum are the small hooks, sixteen to
* P.L.S.N.S.W. 2nd Series, Yol. viii. p. 365.
+ Loc. cit. p. 362.
+ Villot, “Metamorphoses des Tenias des Musaraignes,” Ann. des Soi.
Nat. (6), T. viii. 1878, p. 5.


twenty in number, and arranged in a single row. Each hook
(Fig. 13) has a total length of -03 mm. and is provided with an
internal root (“dent,” “ Hypomochlion,” or “talon”) and an
anterior root (Leuckart’s “posterior process,” Yillot’s “manche”).
The anterior root, which is inserted into the tissue of the ros-
tellum, runs forwards in a line with the free part of the hook
(Yillot’s “ lame ”), while the internal root runs backwards almost
parallel with the free part. The free part of the hook is -018 mm,
long, the internal root -0125 mm., and the anterior root -012 mm.
The great development of the internal roots of the hooks of
Monocercus Didymogasiris may be taken as their most striking
characteristic, and that they differ most markedly in form from
those of Monocercus arionis and M. glomeridis a comparison of
Fig. 13 with Villot’s figures* will clearly show.
The posterior part of the head, behind the posterior end of the
rostellum and the suckers, may be taken to represent the neck..
This neck region becomes continuous with a thin layer of deeply
staining small-celled tissue, which passes forwards, completely
enclosing the head. This represents the second part of the Cysti-
cercoid—the body. Anteriorly it becomes continuous at the
aperture of evagination with the outer wall of the Cysticercoid.
The outer wall represents the third part of the Cysticercoid—the
caudal bladder. In sections it is to be clearly distinguished from
the layer forming the body. It is composed of a larger-celled
tissue and does not stain so deeply with haematoxylin, and to it
the calcareous bodies, distributed throughout its thickness, are
almost entirely confined. Externally it is covered by cuticle,
which, at the aperture of evagination, turns in, becoming con-
tinuous with what will, in the evaginated Cysticercoid, be the
external cuticle of the body. Both in its histological structure
and in its relations to the other parts of the Cysticercoid, this
outer wall clearly corresponds to the caudal bladder of the ordi-
nary Cysticerci.
• Loc. cit. pi. xii. figs. 10 and 11,


Grassi and Rovelli* regard the outer wall as formed by the tail,
the part on which in the Cysticercus of Taenia elliptica they find
the hooks of the embryo are borne. “In ihnen (C. arionis) ist
die aussere Wand, unserer Meinung nach, vorzugsweise von dem
Schwanze gebildet, da sich die Haken auf der ausseren Wand oder
auch auf dem Grenzpunkte zwisohen der ausseren Wand und
inneren Wand befinden (Meissener, Leuckart, Moniez).” They
base their belief on the observations of Meissener, Leuckart,f and
Moniez, J who assert that they have seen the hooks of the embryo
lying on the caudal vesicle or on the body. With reference to
these statements, however, Yillot remarks § :—“ Nous sommes
persuade qu’ on a pris pour les crochets de I’hexacanthe quelque
portion des fibres elastiques, trfes refringentes, que I’on observe
sous la cuticle de la vfeioule caudale.”
If we regard the so-called cyst (blastogenic vesicle) as the direct
derivative of the six-hooked embryo, then, as Yillot further says,||
“Les viritables crochets du Proscolex doivent etre cherches sur
le kyste.” In view of these considerations, Grassi and Rovelli’s
interpretation falls to the ground.
Finally, it may be added that the hosts of Cysticercoids of this
type have now been found among the Mollusoa, the Myriapoda,
and the Chmtopoda.
PART 111.
On the Development op a Tetrarhynch Scolex belonging
to the Genus SyxnoTiiiumr.
The cysts on which the following account is based were taken
from the peritoneum surrounding the intestine of the jew-fish,
Scitena aquila. The form under consideration closely agrees with
* “ Embryologische Forschungen an Cestoden,” Centralb. f. Bact. und
Parasit., Band v. 1889, p. 404.
+ Loc. cit. p. 361.
J Loc. cit. p. 74.
§ Loc. cit. p. 39.


a cyst from the liver of Cyhium regale , described by Linton* under
the name of an embryo Tetrarhynchohothrium, and is probably
identical with an immature Synbolhrium from the spiral valve of
Trygon centrura, which the same author describes! a s a new
species under the name of Syndesmobothrium filicolle. In view
of Linton’s descriptions and figures I have not thought it neces-
sary to describe the structure of the fully-formed scolex, but
proceed at once to the description of the developmental stages I
have been able to examine.
Fig. 14 represents a median longitudinal section of the youngest
blastocyst observed. It had an elongated form of uniform thick-
ness, except for a slight constriction near its middle, and measured
7 - 5 mm. in length by 1 mm. in breadth. The blastocyst in its
natural position is surrounded by an outer fibrous layer derived
from the peritoneum, and representing the cyst of the Cysticerci
properly so-called. The part enclosed by the cyst, and here, after
Linton termed the blastocyst, really represents the caudal vesicle
of these forms, and is, without doubt, the direct derivative of the
embryo. The blastocyst is in the fresh condition of an opaque
whitish colour and contains scattered calcareous corpuscles.
The structure of the blastocyst is comparatively simple. It is
invested by a thin layer of cuticle ; below this is a thin granular
layer with scattered nuclei. Internal to this is a vacuolated
tissue, with here and there scattered nuclei, calcareous corpuscles,
and a series of longitudinally running fibres, by means of which
the contractile movements of the living blastocyst are probably
performed. The central mid-portion of the blastocyst is occupied
by a somewhat irregular cavity. Two well-marked excretory
vessels with thin cuticular walls run along, one on either side of
the blastocyst, to its posterior end, where they unite to open to
the exterior by a short terminal canal.
* “ Notes on two Forma of Ceatode Embryos,” American Naturalist, 1887,
p. 199.
+ “ Notes on Entozoa of Marine Fishes,” United States Commission of
sh and Fisheries, 1891, p. 861, pL xv. figs. 2-4.


The first stage in the development of the scolex is the appear-
ance, at what will become the anterior end of the blastocyst, of
a narrow involution. It is lined by a thin cuticle continuous
with the outer cuticle, while the granular layer below it is likewise
continuous with the similar layer below the external cuticle, only
here it is somewhat thicker and contains a large number of small
deeply staining nuclei. The first stage in the development of the
Synbothrium scolex is thus identical with the corresponding stage
in the development of the Cysticerci properly so-called.
Fig. 15 shows a further stage in the development of the invo-
lution. It is now considerably larger, and the granular layer
surrounding it is thicker and contains far more numerous small
nuclei. The internal tissue of the blastocyst now forms a more
compact mass around the involution, while the central cells have
for the most part disappeared. At the bottom of the involution
cavity, which now communicates with the exterior by a narrow
opening, is seen a small elevation, probably the first indication of
the scolex.
Fig. 16 is a longitudinal section of an older cyst, about 5-5 mm.
in length by 1 mm. in breadth at its anterior end. This anterior
or scolex-containing end is broader than the posterior end of the
blastocyst, and is now marked off from it by a well-marked con-
striction. The involution cavity is now very much larger than in
the preceding stage and communicates with the exterior by a
well-marked though narrow canal. The involution cavity is lined
by a very thin cuticle, and arising from its bottom is a knob-
shaped mass, the rudiment of the scolex. That this knob-shaped
mass gives rise to the whole of the scolex is evident when we
compare the mode of attachment of the fully-formed scolex (Fig. 5)
with that of the scolex bud. In both cases they are attached to
the centre of a saucer-shaped area of tissue, which thins out at
the edges and has the concavity directed towards the aperture
of invagination. The Synbothrium scolex does not then arise
directly from the invagination sac, but by the differentiation of a


bud which arises from its floor, thus confirming Hoek’s* view that
“ Der Scolex ensteht dan bei Tetrarhynchus auf dem Boden dieser
Einstulpung aus knopfiormiger Anlage,” and also Wagener as
quoted by Leuckartf —“ If we imagine the thimble-like projection
from the base of the sac broadened out above like a mushroom,
we have the head of a Dibothrium, which might become a ‘ dibo-
thrian ’ Tetrarhynchus by the addition of proboscides.”
Lcuckart,J on the other hand, considers “that it is the sac-like
invagination of the bladder itself which produces the head. The
elevation always appears only as a secondary structure of subordi-
nate morphological importance, and is, moreover, by no means so
widely distributed as the statements of some investigators would
lead one to suppose.” He bases this view on an examination of
young Tetrarhynchus bladders from Lophius piscatorius, in which
he finds, “that the elevation only takes place at a time when the
suctorial cups and proboscides are already formed and when the
head, with its different parts, is thus essentially mature.” If this
be so in the case he examined, then we must admit that in the
Tetrarhynchidce, as among the Tmniadm, the head may arise in
two distinct ways. It may arise directly from the invagination
sac or it may arise as a bud from the bottom of the invagination
sac. The occurrence of the latter of these two methods is denied
by Leuckart, but Moniez,§ from the examination of Cysticercus
pisiformis, is convinced “que la tete du Cysticerque bourgeonne
au fond de I’invagination comme I’avait indique Wagener,” and
HamannH has also described and figured (cf. especially his fig. 5,
taf. i.), in the development of the Cysticercoid of Tcenia sinuosa
from Gammarus pulex, a plug-shaped structure which arises by
* “ Ueber den enoystirten Scolex von Tetrarhynchus,” Niederliiudisches
Archiv ftir Zoologie, B. v. p. 3.
+ Loc. cit. p. 374.
J Loc. cit. p. 375.
§ “ Essai Monographique sur lea Cysticerques,” p. 36
II “ In Gammarus pulex lebeude Cysticerkoiden rait Schwanzanhangen, ”
Jenaische Zeitachrift, Bd. xxiv. p. 2-3, taf. I. figs. 4-8.


the inturning of a cushion-like thickening of the bottom of the
invagination sac into its interior. Concerning the further develop-
ment of the plug he says : “An diesem Zapfen spielen sich die
weitereu Veranderungen ab, an ihm bilden sich die Saugnapfe
und der Hakenkranz.”
The matter is well summed up by Villot*; “La verity est que
la tele des Cystiques peut se d6velopper de deux manures bien
differentes,” and we can now extend Villot’s view to the Tetra~
rhynchidce.
Returning now to the scolex-forming bud in Synhothrium, at
the stage under consideration the bud is typically knob-shaped,
being attached to the bottom of the involution sac by a narrow
stalk, which widens out into an expanded and rounded head. It
consists of a fairly compact mass of small rounded cells, such a
tissue among the Cestodes having, according to Moniez,t all the
characters of cells in process of reproduction. In the anterior
broader portion of the bud there are large clear spaces, and the
small cells are not so numerous; in the stalk the tissue is of a
denser character, the cells being more numerous and larger. In
the anterior region are seen two denser areas radiating outwards.
These are in all probability the fundaments of the proboscides.
Below the cuticle of the blastocyst at this stage an external layer
of circular fibres and an internal layer of longitudinal fibres can
be recognised ; then internal to these is the granular layer con-
taining nuclei lying at some distance from each other ; the cell
boundaries are not distinct.
Fig. 17 is a longitudinal section of the next stage I have been
able to obtain. It is separated by a somewhat wide interval from
the preceding stage, for the knob-shaped process has not only
given rise by elongation to the external form of the adult scolex,
but internal differentiation has advanced to a considerable extent.
The cyst, of which Fig. 17 is a longitudinal section, had a length
of only 3'smm., so that the size of the cyst is evidently not
• Cystiquea des Tanias, p. 20.
+ Loc. cit. p. 37.


indicative of the stage of development of the scolex. In this stage
the three parts into which, after Lang,* the adult scolex can be
divided can readily be distinguished. These parts are: (1) The
anterior or head region, which carries the bothridia; (2) The
middle or neck region, through which run the proboscis sheaths ;
(3) The posterior region, in which the proboscis bulbs are situated.
The internal parts, however, are still in process of differentiation,
and the cuticle investing the scolex is still a comparatively thin
layer.
In the posterior part of the scolex the proboscis bulbs are
represented by non-staining tracts apparently of a fibrous nature
and surrounded by deeply staining cells. Such cells occur along
the whole course of the proboscides and sharply mark them off
from the surrounding cells. In the middle region of the scolex
occur longitudinally running cellular strands surrounded by deeply
staining cells similar to those round the bulbs. These cellular
strands probably give rise to the retractor muscles of the probos-
cides, while the deeply staining cells form the sheaths of the
proboscides. Anteriorly the proboscides themselves (Fig. 17,
prb.) are seen to be hollow structures with well-defined cuticular
walls and surrounded by deeply staining cells. On the interior
of the hollow proboscis the hooks appear as small inwardly-pro-
jecting conical processes of its cuticular wall.
In sections of a cyst slightly older than the preceding, the
proboscis bulbs are now found to possess very definite fibrous
walls, enclosing a cellular strand, from which the retractor muscle
will be developed. The wall of the bulb is very much thicker on
its inner face than externally and closely surrounds the cellular
strand, the large cavity found in the bulb of the fully-formed
scolex being not yet formed. The proboscis, surrounded by a
layer of deeply staining rounded cells, is now found to lie in a
definite cavity, the cuticular wall of which forms the proboscis
sheath. Posteriorly the sheath becomes continuous with one of
• MT. Zool. Stat. Neap. ii. 1881, pp. 372-400; see resume, Journal of the
Royal Microscopical Soc. 2nd Ser. Vol. ii. part 1, 1882, 51.


the bulbs, while anteriorly it opens to the exterior beside one of
the bothridia. The hook fundaments have now become separated
off from the cuticular wall of the proboscis and appear as short
inwardly-projecting processes with rounded ends. These by sub-
sequent elongation give rise to the long and slender hooks of the
adult scolex. The cellular strands in the bulbs are continuous
with similar strands which run through the hinder parts of the
proboscis sheaths and become continuous with the proboscides
themselves. As development advances, well-marked obliquely-
crossing fibres are developed in the walls of the bulbs, which now
enclose large cavities. From the cellular strand the retractor
muscle is developed; anteriorly it is continuous with the proboscis,
while posteriorly it passes back to become inserted into the pos-
terior end of the cavity of the proboscis bulb.
The blastocyst, when the scolex has reached the fully-formed
state, has an elongated club-shaped form, the largest found mea-
suring 14 mm. in length. The anterior club-shaped end contains
the scolex, attached by its posterior end to the bottom of the
invagination sac. Round its point of attachment a number of
minute hair-like processes of the cuticle are developed. The
scolex is surrounded by a fluid containing granules and probably
nutritive in function. As the scolex lies naturally in the invagi-
nation cavity, its parts have the following disposition : the
posterior part lies in a line with the long axis of the blastocyst;
the neck curves round, forming a loop lying on the straight
posterior portion, while the head lies on one side.
I append some notes from Linton’s*'description of the scolex as
explanatory of fig. 19, which is a drawing of the adult scolex freed
by mechanical means from the blastocyst:—The head is tetra-
gonal, transverse, cruciform. Bothria four, subcircular, convex,
cup-shaped, each the termination of a short cylindrical pedicel.
They are arranged in a cruciform manner, but also somewhat in
pairs, and capable of being directed either forwards or backwards
in pairs. Proboscides very long and slender, each one running
Lac. cit., “ Notes on Entozoa of Marine Fiahea,” p. 861.
6


through a pedicel and emerging at the apex, apparently beside the
bothrium proper; neck very long and slender, cylindrical, enlarging
slightly at the contractile bulbs and rounded at the base, tapering
to a point where it is connected with the body (blastocyst); proboscis
sheaths spiral, contractile bulbs linear, oblong ; booklets long and
slender, falcate. Size of scolex 4 - 60 mm. Hooks near the middle
■O6 mm. long.
RESUME.
(1) The so-called blastocyst or endocyst is the serial homologue
of the caudal vesicle of the Cysticerci.
(2) The wall of the invagination sac represents the body of
these forms.
(3) The scolex, consisting of head and neck, arises from the
bottom of the invagination sac as a knob-shaped process, which,
by subsequent elongation and internal differentiation, gives rise
to the fully-formed scolex.
EXPLANATION OF PLATES.
Plate in.
Figs. 1-6. —Piestocystis Hoplocephali.
Fig. I.—Transverse section of the wall of Hoplocephalus cyst. Zeiss. D.,
oc. 1, cam. luc. A. 1., homogeneous inner layer of wall (“ blas-
togen ”) ; I. 1., middle laminated zone ;/. 1. , outer fibrous layer.
Fig. 2.—Longitudinal section (nearly median) of Cysticercus from Hoplo-
cephalus, with partially evaginated head. From a specimen
preserved in corr. subl. and stained with cochineal. Zeiss. A.,
oc. 1, cam. luc. /. »., frontal sucker; h. c., bladder cavity ; 1,/.,
longitudinal elastic fibres ; t. c., terminal canal of excretory
system.
Fig. 3.—Transverse section of a Cysticercus with invaginated head, at the
level of the suckers. Corrosive sublimate and Ehrlich’s Hema-
toxylin. Zeiss. A., oc. 1, cam. luc. ; details with Zeiss. D.
c. , cuticle; s. c. , subcuticula ; r. c. , “ receptaculum capitis ” ;
e./., elastic fibres ;a. v., ascending vessel of excretory system
d. v., descending vessel; i. v., invagination cavity of head.


Fig. 4.—Portion of a transverse section (slightly oblique) of a Cysticerons
with invagiuated head, passing through frontal sucker. Chrom-
osmic acid and Ehrlich’s Hcematoxylin. Zeiss. C. and oc. I,
cam. luc. f. s., frontal sucker; c. s., cavity of sucker; c.f,
circular fibres ; r.f, radial fibres ; I. s., lateral sucker.
Fig. s.—Outer portion of a transverse section of a Cysticercus about its
middle region. Corrosive sublimate and Ehrlich’s Haematoxylin.
Zeiss. I)., oc. 1, cam. luc. ; details with Zeiss. F. c., cuticle;
c. /. and I. f. , circular and longitudinal fibres of dermo-elastic
layer; s. c., subcuticula; r. c. c., cavity with remains of cal-
careous corpuscle; g. t. c., cells of ground tissue; m, matrix;
e./., elastic fibres.
Fig. 6.—Outer portion of a longitudinal section. Corrosive sublimate and
cochineal. Zeiss. F., oc. 1, cam. luc. c.' c.", outer and inner
layers of cuticle; c. n. c., cavities containing a number of small
calcareous corpuscles.
Plate iv.
Figs. 7-11. — Piestocystis Lialis.
Fig. 7. —Cyst from Lialis containing three Cysticerci { x 50).
Fig. B.—Longitudinal section of cyst ( x 10Q). f. 1., fibrous outer layer of
wall; h. homogeneous inner wall; c. n., connective tissue
network ; ct., Cysticercus cut obliquely; c. ct. , cells attached to
inner lining of cyst and probably representing the first stage in
the development of a Cysticercus; c. cp., columnar epithelium
of intestine.
Fig. 9.—lnvaginate Cysticercus, from a specimen preserved in Flemming’s
Fluid (x 80).
Fig. 10.— Piestocystis Lialis with evaginated head; partly from living speci-
men (x 50).
Fig. 11.—Transverse section of invaginate Cysticercus at level of suckers
( x 260). c., cuticle; s. c., subcuticula ;I. f. longitudinal fibres
of dermo-elastic layer; g. t., ground tissue ; i. v., invagination
cavity of head.
Plate v.
Figs. 12-13. — Monocercus JHdymogastris.
Pig. 12.— Monocercus Didymogastris in optical longitudinal section ( x 250).
bl., “blastogen”; c. v., caudal vesicle; 6., body; r., rostellum;
s. r. , sheath of rostellum ; s. , sucker.


Fig. 13.—Isolated hook of M. Didymogastris Zeiss. F., oc. 3, cam. luc.
(x 900). a. r., anterior root; i. r., internal root; j. p., free
part of hook.
Figs. 14-19.—Development of Scolex of Synhothrium.
Figs. 14-18 are longitudinal sections of the anterior ends of blastocysts of
different ages. Drawn with Zeiss. A., oc. 1, cam. luc.; details with Zeiss.
D., oc. 4.
Fig. 14. —Longitudinal section of youngest blastocyst observed, with
developing invagination cavity.
Fig. 15.—Further stage in development of same.
Fig. 16. —Longitudinal section of blastocyst, with the knob-shaped process
arising from bottom of invagination cavity.
Fig. 17.—Longitudinal section of blastocyst, with developing scolex. prb. ,
proboscis with developing hooks.
Fig. 18. —Longitudinal section of blastocyst, with fully-formed scolex in
invagination cavity, br., bothridium ; pr., proboscis lying in
cavity of proboscis sheath ; pr. h., proboscis bulb ; r. msc.,
retractor muscle ; i. v. , invagination cavity; to. i. v. , wall of
invagination cavity.
Fig. 19. —Fully-formed scolex of Synbothrium. separated mechanically from
the blastocyst ( x about 30).




R.L.S.N.S.W. ( 2".,d Ser) VOL. IX,


P. L.S.N.S.W. ([?]? Ser) VOL, IX,


PEOCEEDINGS
OF THE
LINNEAN SOCIETY
OF
NEW SOUTH WALES.
WEDNESDAY, NOVEMBER 28TH, 1894, Continued.
ON A NEW SPECIES OF ENTEROPNEUSTA (PTYCHO-
DERA AUSTRALIENSIS) FROM THE COAST
OF NEW SOUTH WALES.
BY JAS. P. HILL,
Demonstrator of Biology, University op
Sydney.
(Plates i.-vm.)
In a preliminary note communicated to this Society in Septem-
ber of last year I recorded the discovery of a species of Enterop-
neust at two widely separated localities on the coast of New South
Wales, viz., at the ocean beach nearly opposite that part of
Broken Bay known as Creel Ba}', and also'at Jervis Bay. Since
the publication of the preliminary note I have found the same
species on the beach nearly opposite Newport, N.S.W., and it may
thus be looked for along the whole coast line of New South
Wales. An examination of the form has shown that it is a new
species belonging to the genus Ptychodera, and since it is the first


recorded from Australia, I propose for it the specific name
australiensis.
The publication of Spengel’s beautiful Monograph on the
Enteropneusta* has rendered it unnecessary for me to enter into
details of histology and the like, and also I do not propose, in
this paper, to enter into the much discussed question of the
affinities of the group. In the description, then, only points of
specific difference are insisted on. I have adopted, generally, the
terms proposed by Spengel, and my indebtedness to his mono-
graph will be readily apparent from the sequel.
The species occurs in considerable abundance in a rocky corner
of the ocean beach nearly opposite Creel Bay and a little to the
south of the well known Hole in the Wall. Since the discovery
of the species there in August of last year I have made two
subsequent expeditions to the locality for further supplies of
material, once in January and again in May of this year, and
only on my last visit did I succeed in finding sexually mature
individuals, so that the breeding season may, approximately, be
given as the end of autumn.
During my visit to the locality I was very kindly accommodated
by Mr. Chas. Hastie, of Creel Bay, and I must here take the
opportunity of expressing my thanks to him. for this kindness,
and also to his family for much help in collecting specimens.
Further, I must again acknowledge my indebtedness to Herr W.
Musmann for much assistance with the literature.
Mode of Occurrence and External Characters.
like the other species of the genus Ptychodera, Pt. australiensis
is littoral and confined to very shallow water. It is found, at low
water, most abundantly in the loose gravelly sand at the bottom
of the shallow pools, and especially in such sheltered situations as
the gravelly sand under and around the large atones occupying
the area included between high tide and half tide marks, very
few specimens (if any) being found close to the low water mark.
* Fauna und Flora des Golfesvon Neapel. xvii. Monographic : Enterop-
neusten, von Dr. J. W. Spengel.


The largest specimen found during my last collecting trip in
May was a sexually mature male, measuring, in the living condi-
tion and when only very moderately extended, about 12 cm. in
length with a breadth in the tail region of 7 - 25 mm. In August
of last year, I found another large specimen which measured in
the contracted condition about 18 cm. In the fully extended
condition, this specimen, now in the teaching collection of the
Biological Department of Sj’dney University, reached a length of
over 25 cm. The majority of the animals were, however, very
much shorter and thinner. They are capable of very considerable
extension; for example, one specimen whose tail region had a
transverse breadth of only Hamm, reached in the fullyextendeil
condition a length of 11*7 cm.
Proboscis: The proboscis is relatively short like that of Pi.
minuta and Pt. sarniensis. It varies in shape and length during
life; when the animal is progressing it is more or less elongated,
and when at rest generally somewhat egg-shaped, the latter being
the shape it almost invariably takes when the animals are
preserved in chrom-osmic acid. The proboscis of the first largo
specimen referred to above had a length of about 10 mm. in the
living condition.
Collar: In the living animals the surface of the collar is smooth
and in them, as well as in preserved specimens, it can readily be
divided into the five characteristic regions (fig. 1). The first region
includes slightly more than the anterior half of the collar, and is
formed by the anterior free part of the latter. It spreads out
anteriorly, investing the neck and base of the proboscis like a
frill with margins crinkled as well during life as in preserved
specimens. Behind the frill-like anterior region the collar is
strongly contracted to form a well marked circular groove—the
second region [figs. 1 and 15 (2)] —the anterior margin of which
lies immediately above the mouth aperture. This groove is
slightly more marked on the ventral side than on the dorsal.
The groove is followed by a prominent circular cushion of a
lighter colour forming the third region [figs. 1 and 15 (3)]. Behind


this is found the typical ring furrow forming the fourth region
[figs. 1 and 15 (4)], and this is separated from the trunk by a
narrow projecting circular rim—the fifth region—which forms the
posterior boundary of the collar, and is somewhat wider than the
succeeding trunk section. The collar may reach a length of
9 mm. with a transverse breadth in the third region of 9 min.
also, so that in the living animal the collar may be said to be
about as broad as long, but in preserved specimens the transverse
breadth, owing to the strong contraction of the longitudinal collar
musculature, considerably exceeds the length, and also the ventral
length slightly exceeds the dorsal.
Trunk.
(1) Brnnchiogenital Region; This region may reach a length
of from 3G to 40 mm. and a breadth of 7 mm. Pi. auslrafiensis
is especially characterised by the great development of the genital
wings—the duplications of the dorso-lateral regions of the body 7 in
which the gonads are situated—and in this respect the species is
to be associated with Ft. aperta, clavigera, gigas, and aurantiaea,
in Spengel’s provisional genus Tauroglossus. The anterior ends
of the wings are continuous with the posterior rim of the collar,
and immediately behind the latter their free edges may either
slightly overlap each other or they 7 may be infolded, and the wings
then are in contact in the median line by 7 their outer surfaces.
The wings continue posteriorly in this condition and reach their
maximum size somewhat posterior to the gill region. This con-
dition is retained, in a slightly varying degree in different
individuals, to within a short distance of the most anterior
liver sacs, which are more or less completely hidden from view by
the wings. Beyond this point the wings decrease rapidly 7 in size
and form two ridges lying at first laterally to the liver sacs but
which are finally covered by the outer overhanging ends of the
larger liver sacs (fig. 24, gw.), and which disappear altogether in
the posterior part of the hepatic region.
When the wings have the position just described no part of
the gill area is visible externally 7 , and the most anterior small liver


sacs are also concealed from view. The gonads in sexually
mature animals are found in the wings almost immediately behind
the posterior rim of the collar, and they extend in the ridges far
into the hepatic region. In sexually mature individuals the gonads
may distend the genital wings to such a degree that they stand
out almost horizontally to the body (fig. 23, gw.) and leave the
gill area exposed, but the usual condition is the one first described
where the gill area is completely concealed.
The gill area may reach a length of 15 mm., and is thus
relatively very short. It is broadest just behind the collar, and
narrows slightly posteriorly; laterally it is bounded by two longi-
tudinal grooves which become gradually shallower posteriorly and
terminate <at the end of the gill area. Into these the gill pores
open.
(2) Hepatic Region: varies in length according to the
size and age of the animal. In one of my largest preserved
specimens it measured over 20 mm. in length with about 50 liver
sacs on each side. The number of sacs averages between 40 and
50 on each side, but there may be as many as 60. In fully
extended animals the liver sacs present a distinctly paired
arrangement in two longitudinal rows. They begin as small
elevations in contact with each other, and covered by the genital
wings; posteriorly they gradually increase in size, and attain
their maximum development just beyond the point where the
genital wings are reduced to ridges. Behind this the sacs
gradually ■ decrease in size to the posterior end of the region,
finally being represented by two rows of small tubercles which
become gradually reduced until they disappear altogether. Each
sac arises by a narrow base which widens out into an antero-
posteriorly compressed end, which in the region of the larger sacs
overhangs the reduced genital wings. The form of the sac in this
region is shown in fig. 24, hep.
Variation in Hepatic Region. The sacs are
usually in close contact with each other by their anterior and
posterior faces, but occasionally some of the casca present the


appearance as if they were pressed out of position and overhang
the sides of the body more than the others, giving the rows
a slightly irregular appearance. I have also met with two
specimens in which as a further result of displacement two
rows of alternating sacs were formed on each side in the middle
part of the hepatic region. Both these specimens had lost
the whole of the body anterior to the liver sacs, and a new
proboscis was in course of formation at the anterior end of the
hepatic region. In a third specimen the sacs were normal in
arrangement up to the larger sacs, but the succeeding sacs
presented a very irregular appearance, forming two lateral masses,
composed of irregularly arranged sacs, on either side of the dorsal
median line, and not showing the alternation of the sacs seen in
the other two specimens. It might be that this irregularity is
the result of regeneration of the posterior part of the body.
(3) Tail Region: varies greatly in length in different
individuals, but is usually about three times as long as the hepatic
region. Its outline varies according as it is empty or full of
sand; in the former case it is flattened, and in the latter more or
less tubular.
The median dorsal line in preserved specimens is occupied by a
dark ridge extending to the posterior end of the body, and
marking the position of the dorsal nerve stem; on the ventral side
the ventral nerve stem occupies the bottom of a shallow longitu-
dinal groove. The tail region in this species is especially
characterised by the presence of two dorsally situated longitudinal
epidermal stripes (fig. 2) running parallel with the dorsal nerve
stem and at a short distance from it. Appearing in the hepatic
region just external to the posterior small liver sacs they extend
over about the anterior two-thirds of the tail region, and are
situated immediately above the ciliated grooves of the intestine.
The epidermal stripes can be distinctly seen not only in preserved
specimens but also in the living animal. Indeed, I observed and
figured them in the latter before I knew of the existence of the
two ciliated grooves in the intestine. The two epidermal stripes
appear as two longitudinal interruptions of the island-like groups


of epidermal gland cells. The groups occupying the dorsal surface
of the body extend between the upper margin of the epidermal
stripe and the dorsal median line, while those occupying the
ventro-lateral regions of the body terminate on its lower margin.
According to Spengel, a similar epidermal stripe exists in Pt.
minuia, but in correspondence with the single ciliated groove on
the left side, only on that side, so that the presence of two
epidermal stripes in Pt. australievsis may be taken as a character
of specific value.
Behind the termination of the epidermal stripes the tail region
becomes gradually somewhat narrower to its posterior end, in
which is situated the terminal anus of varying outline.
Colouration: The sexually mature males and females can
very easily be distinguished from each other by their different
colouration. In _ both sexes the proboscis is of a light yellow
colour, while the collar is of a slightly deeper yellow. In the
males the testes are of a very deep yellow colour, or less frequently
in some individuals of a deep orange. In the females the ovaries
are of a very light yellow or almost whitish colour. The females
are on the whole of a lighter colour than the males.
The most anterior liver sacs are of a brownish colour which
passes posteriorly into slaty green, and this again into a deep
brown in the region of the larger creca, this brown colour being
retained more or less completely in preserved specimens, while the
other sacs lose their colour entirely. Posteriorly the sacs again
assume a slaty green tinge. The tail region is whitish in colour
and its walls transparent, readily allowing the sand particles in
the intestine to show through.
This species is destitute of any odour. Incidentally it may be
here mentioned that a large proportion of the individuals of this
species are infested by a parasitic Copepod belonging to the genus
Ives of Mayer,* but whether it is identical with the single
member of the genus hitherto described, Ives balanoglossi, I am
*Em neuer parasitischer Copepode. Mitth. Zool. Stn. Neap. Bd. i. p.
515.


as yet in doubt. The large female with its attendant small males
is usually found in a very prominent tubular enlargment of a part
of the free edge of one of the genital wings.
Anatomy.
Proboscis : The epidermis of the proboscis (fig. 5, ep.) is some-
what thicker than in the case of Pt. minuta measuring Timm.
It is separated from the underlying musculature by the limiting
membrane, composed of two layers, the outer attached to the
nerve fibre layer of the epidermis, the inner to the circular
muscular layer. Between these two layers run the capillaries of
the vascular net of the proboscis (fig. 5, cnp.}. Below the limiting
membrane is the thin layer of circular muscle fibres, also some-
what thicker than in the case of Pi. minuta, viz., - 023 mm. The
circular muscular layer gradually becomes thinner towards the
neck of the proboscis, and finally thins out altogether. The
delicate membrane limiting the circular muscular layer internally
can readily be recognised especially in horizontal sections. On
the inner side of the membrane, and at a little distance from it,
there is <an irregular cell layer, the nuclei of which are very
distinct in luematoxylin preparations.
From the outer side of this limiting membrane there pass
through the circular muscular layer numerous fine fibres to the
inner layer of the limiting membrane of the proboscis, while on
its inner side the fibres of the longitudinal musculature are
inserted.
The fibres of the longitudinal musculature are related in their
mode of origin from the proboscis base and in their course from
there exactly as in Pt. minuta, and they show the same separation
in preserved specimens into radial masses (fig. 5, bn.). The
muscle fibres are embedded in a very fine connective tissue which
anterior to the proboscis organs occupies the central region of the
proboscis, muscle fibres being there absent. The connective tissue
here presents a spongy appearance with a few very small nuclei
situated in the course of the connecting strands or in the angles
between the meshes. The splanchnic epithelium of the proboscis


cffilom (figs 4,6, 7,8, sp.) is related exactly as in the described
species. It appears, in my preparations, when it comes to lie
directly on the sides of the proboscis gut as a deeply staining
layer with dark staining nuclei in its middle region (fig. 7, sp.),
the cell bodies of which are not recognisable. On the surface of
the glomerulus it presents essentially the same appearance of a
deeply staining granular layer with numerous dark staining nuclei
on its inner face (fig. 6, sp.).
On the outer side of the splanchnic epithelium there is a layer
of tissue of a spongy appearance (figs. 6 and 7, ct.) which is
directly continuous both above and below with the fine connective
tissue of the proboscis ccelom (fig. 4, cl.). This layer corresponds
to the characteristic layer described by Spengel* on the surface
of the glomerulus in Ft. sarniensis, and which he considers as
the inner limiting layer of the connective tissue of the proboscis.
Round the central proboscis organs there is always in sections, as
in the described species, a space free from connective tissue and
representing the proboscis coelom (figs. 5 and 8, phc.). Posteriorly
towards the proboscis neck the proboscis coelom is divided, as in
the other species, on the dorsal side through the heart bladder
into two dorsal proboscis pockets (fig. 9, dp.), and on the ventral
side through the ventral septum into two smaller ventral pro-
boscis pockets (fig. 9, vp.). The ventral septum (figs. 3-5, 8, vps.)
has in this species anterior and posterior free edges which run
obliquely backwards, while its dorsal and ventral edges are
attached to the proboscis gut and the outer wall of the proboscis
respectively so that the septum is here four-sided and not
triangular as in Ft. minuta. In its structure it is essentially
similar to that of Ft. minuta. It consists of a central membrane
carrying blood vessels, on either side of which there is a layer of
muscle fibres—the ventral portion of the fibres of the dorso-ventral
muscle plate; on the dorsal side, the fibres of the same plate can
be distinctly recognised on the lateral walls of the heart bladder,
below the splanchnic epithelium (figs. 3 and 5, dsc.).
* Loc. cit. p. 101.


The splanchnic epithelium continues on the surface of the
ventral septum which, as Spengel has shown, represents a median
fold of the ventral proboscis wall, and is connected at intervals
with the limiting membrane of the epidermis. The two ventral
proboscis pockets separated from each other by the ventral septum
are usually filled by a loose connective tissue; however, in some
cases, a distinct space bounded by this tissue may appear (fig. 12,
vp.) Behind the posterior free edge of the septum the ventral
pockets unite to form the ventral unpaired portion of the proboscis
cielom.
Exceptionally two folds may arise from the limiting membrane
of the epidermis to form the proboscis septum; the two folds
enclosing a median pocket between them unite with each other
along the mid-ventral line of the proboscis. gut. Further pos-
teriorly the point of union of the two folds gradually passes
ventrally until the median pocket is obliterated, and the septum
assumes the normal condition. On the dorsal side the two
proboscis pockets separated by the heart bladder are in different
individuals of this species very varied in their relations. The
proboscis pore may be single or double, and occupy a median
position or it may be single and situated on the right side of the
median line.
(а) In the majority of individuals the proboscis pore occupies a
median position (fig. 12, p.) and it may then be formed in three
ways — v 1) The two dorsal proboscis pockets may unite with each
other behind the heart bladder to form a single median proboscis
canal which opens by the median proboscis pore; (2) the left
pocket alone may form a proboscis canal, the right ending blindly;
(3) the right pocket may form the canal, the left ending blindly.
(б) There may be two proboscis pores, the two dorsal pockets
giving rise to two proboscis canals (fig. 10, pc.) which both open
to the exterior (fig. 11, p.).
(c) The proboscis pore may be single and open on the right
side; in this case the left pocket ends blindly while the right
continues posteriorly, taking an almost median position above the


heart bladder to form the proboscis canal which opens on the
right side.
With regard to the behaviour of the dorsal proboscis pockets,
Ft. australiemis appears to be the most variable of all the
Enteropneusts hitherto described.
Notochord (Eichel-darm of Spengel): In shape the notochord
of this species essentially resembles that of Pt. minuta. Imme-
diately anterior to the point of opening of the lumen of the
notochord into the mouth or throat cavity, its narrow neck portion
is dorso-ventrally compressed, with a convex dorsal wall and a
concave thin ventral wall composed of a single layer of low
columnar cells resting on the proboscis skeleton (fig. 16, div.).
Anteriorly in the region of the proboscis neck the neck portion of
the notochord is not so much dorso-ventrally compressed, but
somewhat higher and with a more or less triangular lumen. The
dorsal wall of the neck portion of the notochord is very much
thicker than the ventral and is composed of long narrow epithelial
cells which radiate outwards from the lumen and have central
generally narrow rod-like nuclei. Between these elongated cells
there occur nurilerous clear oval bladders which Spengel well
regards as the secretory holders of gland cells. Some appear quite
empty, others again show a network in their interior similar to
that in the epidermal mucous glands and which stains in the same
diffuse manner. They thus conform, as Spengel has shown, to the
structure of the “goblet cells;” on the ventral side where the wall
is composed of a single layer of columnar cells, these gland cells
are entirely absent. The neck portion of the notochord is thus
distinctly epithelial in character.
Anteriorly the dorsal wall increases considerably in thickness,
while the cells of the ventral wall lose their distinctly columnar
quality. They become longer and narrower, gland cells appear
between them, and they finally pass over into the chorda-like
tissue forming the wall of the ventral blind sac of the notochord.
The lumen of the notochord extends obliquely downwards into
the ventral blind sac (fig. 14), then in this the lumen extends


transversely outwards, reducing the lateral walls of the blind sac
to a thin layer, while the hind and middle portions of the wall
are somewhat thicker, as in Pt. minuta. From the transverse
lumen of the blind sac there passes forwards laterally a short horn
on each side (fig. 9, lb.); a section passing through the proboscis
neck just anterior to the passing down of the ventral blind sac
lumen thus shows three cavities in the notochord (fig. 9), two ventro-
lateral belonging to the horns of the ventral blind sac lumen and
o o
a median situated near to the .dorsal side of the notochord, the
■main notochordal lumen now considerably reduced in size and with
numerous gland cells opening into it. Anteriorly the lumen
comes to occupy a more nearly central position (fig. 8, div.); it
finally becomes reduced to a narrow slit (fig. 4, div.), which can
be traced to a slightly varying distance from the apex of the
notochord (fig. 14, div.). The lumen varies somewhat in position
and shape in different individuals, being in some situated nearer
the dorsal side, in others nearer the ventral side of the notochord;
its ‘outline also varies—it may be circular or form a narrow
vertical or horizontal cleft. The lumen in this species has on the
whole a more median position than in Pt. minuta, and con-
sequently the dorsal and ventral walls are more nearly equal in
thickness. In fig. 14 the lumen of the notochord is represented
somewhat diagrammatically as a continuous wide canal, but as in
Pt. minuta it is interrupted by occasional bridges of tissue, and
also as in that species the dorsal wall of the lumen is smooth,
while into the ventral there project short processes of the lumen
(Jig. 14, div.). With the exception of the anterior part of the
lumen numerous gland cells open into it, testifying to the epithe-
lial nature of the whole structure. Numerous gland cells exist in
the dorsal wall of the neck portion of the notochord and they
extend for a considerable distance into the head region, being
specially abundant round the part of the lumen situated just
anterior to the point of origin of the ventral blind sac lumen.
The lumen is, in some preparations, almost filled’ up by a diffusely
staining network, apparently derived from the secretion of the
gland cells opening into it. Numerous elongated cells, between


which the gland cells are situated, radiate outwards from the
lumen. They have elongated, rod-like nuclei situated at about
their middle region, and on the dorsal side their outer ends come
into connection with processes from an irregular layer with
rounded nuclei situated immediately below the limiting membrane
of the notochord. On the ventral side the passing oyer of these
distinct epithelial cells into the chorda-like tissue can be distinctly
recognised (figs. 9 and 12, dv.).
In correspondence with the widely diverging legs of the proboscis
skeleton the opening of the proboscis gut lumen into the mouth
cavity, at first narrow, becomes eventually a very wide transverse
opening, in the anterior part of the mouth cavity. I have also
encountered in the proboscis gut the yellow granules which
Spengel regards as excretions.
Proboscis Skeleton: it consists, as in the described
species, of a main body, a keel-like ventral portion, and two
posterior diverging legs (fig. 13). The anterior portion of the
body is formed by the funnel-like “ end plate ” which invests the
ventro-lateral regions of the ventral blind sac of. the notochord.
The lateral edges of this plate extend somewhat in front of the
ventral, so that they appear first in sections as two thin plates
investing the lateral faces of the blind sac (fig. 9, eps.). The
anterior “end plate” gradually narrows posteriorly, its dorsal
edges unite with each other in the median line, and it passes into
the body proper. By the union of the dorsal edges of the “ end
plate ” there is sometimes formed a blind canal continuing for a
short distance into the body proper, and occupied by a prolongir-
tion of the “chorda-like tissue” of the hind wall of the ventral
blind sac. The “ keel ” first appears at a short distance behind
the anterior edge of the “ end plate ” in the form of a small
V-shaped structure with widely divaricated legs. It is separated
from the end plate In- a thin band of “chondroid tissue.” .Then
gradually the ventral apex of the keel thickens and gives rise to
a distinct ventrally projecting tooth-like portion, the keel now
having in section the form of a Y (fig. 10, kps.). • The “body”
has at first a semilunar outline, with the flat side immediately


adjoining the ventral wall of the neck of the notochord and the
curved side above the divaricated legs of the Y-shaped “ keel.”
At this point there passes in the “ chondroid tissue ” between the
“ body ” and “keel” a vessel connecting the two efferent proboscis
vessels (fig. 10, ev.) Immediately behind this vessel the “body ”
becomes triangular in outline and its apex gradually approaches
and finally fuses with the median portion of the “ keel ” between
its divaricated legs which now give rise to two lateral “ wings.”
Anterior to and at the point of fusion the body is much stouter
than the keel, the “wings” of the latter only projecting a very
little beyond the lateral surfaces of the body, but posterior to this
the body gradually decreases in breadth and also in height, while
the keel thickens greatly, forming in transverse sections much the
bigger half of the whole structure. The “ wings ”of the “ keel ”
at the same time reach a greater lateral extension and form two
distinct lateral projections below the middle region of the body
when the entire skeleton is viewed from above (fig. 13). Poste-
riorly the wings become gradually smaller and finally disappear,
while the body becomes reduced to a narrow somewhat convex
plate separated from the keel by two small vertical half moon-
shaped masses with their convex faces touching each other.
These are the first indications of the two “ legs,” and for them
Spengel adopts Bateson’s term “ nuclei.” After the first appear-
ance of the “ nuclei ” the keel gradually becomes reduced in size,
the “nuclei” at the same time becoming larger and more distinct.
The place where the “nuclei” first touch in the middle line corre-
sponds, as Spengel has shown, to the most anterior point the
opening of the notochordal lumen into the mouth cavity has
occupied. In transverse section the proboscis skeleton has, just
after the proboscis neck has fused with the collar, a triangular
shape, but gradually as the “ keel ” is reduced in size and the
“ nuclei ” become larger and more distinct, the shape becomes
quadrangular and the skeleton then consists of a dorsal plate,
representing a continuation of the “ body ” and derived from the
notochord, a middle portion formed by the two semilunar
“nuclei” derived from the throat epithelium, and a ventral plate


thicker in the middle—the continuation of the “ keel ” —derived
also from the throat epithelium as the opening of the notochordal
lumen gradually moved posteriorly (fig. 16, lps'.). Towards the
posterior end of the skeleton the “keel” disappears entirely, the
two “ nuclei ” separate from each other ventrally, and the
epithelium of the throat extends up into the cleft between them.
The continuation of the body lying above the nuclei then- thins
out, and the “nuclei” separate completely from each other, giving
rise to the “ legs ” proper which lie under a fold of the throat
epithelium. The “legs” may pass out at once almost transversely,
or they may diverge more gradually in different individuals.
They terminate considerably in front of the middle region of the
collar.
The proboscis skeleton is composed of a cuticular substance
which shows in this species a very distinct stratification, indicat-
ing the mode of origin of the mass by the deposition of successive
layers, and the direction of these layers indicates very clear!}’
from what source they are derived. As Spengel has shown, the
“end plate” is derived from the ventral blind sac of the notochord,
while the “ body” is derived from the neck of the same. The
“ keel ” on the other hand is formed from the epidermis of the
proboscis neck, and its posterior continuation from the epithelium
of the throat.
In this species the “ end plate ” and the anterior portion of the
“ body ” are separated from the keel by chondroid tissue, and the
direction of the lines of stratification in these parts indicates
clearly enough their distinct origin. The relations of the skeleton
to the limiting membranes are essentially those of the described
species. The body passes over at its edges into the limiting
membrane of the notochord, while the wings of the keel pass
over into that of the epidermis.
In the proboscis skeleton of this species there occur a few
small oval cells with non-staining cell bodies and deeply staining
small nuclei. They are situated between the layers of stratifica-
tion. Such cells occur in the proboscis skeleton of Ft. clavigera,
gigas and aurantiaca, and with Spengel I believe they are cells


which have become enclosed during the formation of the skeleton,
and not cells which have immigrated later.
“ Chondroid tissue": As in the genus Ptychodera generally the
“ chondroid tissue ” of the proboscis neck is not greatly developed,
and the cell strands appearing generally in transverse sections as
small isolated masses are derived as Spengel has shown mainly
from the epithelium of the proboscis pockets. As in Pt. clavigera
a band of “ chondroid tissue ” continuous with the lateral tissue
is present between the “ end plate ” and “ keel ” of the proboscis
skeleton. The cell strands of this ventral portion are very richly
developed, and are derived from the epithelial cells lining the ventral
proboscis pockets and behind the posterior edge of the proboscis
septum from the continuation of the same epithelial cells lining
the ventral unpaired portion of the proboscis cielom.
Heart-bladder: The heart-bladder is esentially similar in its
general relations to that of Pt. minuta. It is a completely closed
sac, having no connection either with the vascular system or with
the proboscis coelom. On its lateral walls the muscle fibres
belonging to the dorso-ventral muscle plate are very well marked
(fig. 5, dsu.), but as in the other species of the genus they do not
possess a musculature of their own. On the ventral wall there is
present as in the described species a very distinct single layer of
transverse muscle fibres which, so far as I have observed, are
entirely confined to this wall. In this species the ventral wall of
the heart-bladder is infolded into the cavity of the bladder in a
very characteristic manner. In its posterior part the central
blood space of the proboscis is a transverse cleft between the
ventral wall of the heart-bladder and the proboscis gut just as in
the species previously described, and varies in size according as it
is filled with blood or empty. In its anterior region, however,
the ventral wall of the heart-bladder is infolded into the cavity
of the bladder along the median line so as to give rise to a tubular
cavity which communicates with the central blood space by a
narrow longitudinal slit (fig. 4, ivw.). Then posteriorly to the
infolding by the gradual receding of the two edges of the slit, the


tubular cavity merges gradually into that of the central blood
space. Anteriorly, however, the anterior end of the tubular
infolding projects towards the end of the heart-bladder as a short
free blind sac which extends into the cavity of the heart-bladder
beyond the anterior end of the longitudinal slit placing the
tubular cavity in communication with the proper cavity of the
central blood space. Consequently in a series of transverse
section this free end first appears as an apparently isolated cavity
with muscular walls lying in the cavity of the heart-bladder and
quite independent of its ventral wall (fig. 3, ivin.).
The only parallel for this condition in other Enteropneusts
appears to exist in Bnlnnoylussu* canadensis, which, according to
Spengel, possesses a similar infolding of the heart-bladder wall,
although it is still more complicated in other respects.
According to Spengel the ventral wall of the heart-bladder
serves to furnish the central blood space with the musculature by
whose contraction the blood is forced out of the central blood
space into the sinuses of the glomerulus, and thence into the
efferent proboscis vessels. We have therefore to regard this
infolding of the ventral heart-bladder wall into a tube free
anteriorly, inasmuch as it increases the power of that wall, as a
special modification to ensure the better performance of its pro-
pelling function. I have found this condition so frequently in
this species that it may be taken as a character of specific value.
In the interior of the heart-bladder a space exists in its greater
extent (figs. 3,4, 5 and 14, h), but at its anterior and posterior
ends the cavity is obliterated by a cellular tissue. Anteriorly
this tissue has the appearance of a spongy connective tissue with
numerous nuclei in its connecting strands, and I have not been
able to observe in this any distinction into two portions, one
derived from the dorsal, the other from the ventral wall, such as
Spengel describes for Pt. minnta. An irregular cavity appears
in the dorsal part of this mass, a short distance behind the anterior
end of the heart-bladder, and the loose tissue below it gradually
becomes reduced in size passing into an irregular layer of
endothelial cells on the ventral wall of the heart-bladder. These
B


cells do not form in this species, so far as I have observed, a
definite layer, hut are irregularly disposed (figs. 4 and 5), and
very frequently some of them are of an elongated form with one
end attached to the heart-bladder wall. The portion of the
anterior cell mass above the cavity continues as a narrow strand
occupying the apex of the cavity of the heart-bladder, and limited
from it by a very tender membrane (fig. 5). This dorsal strand
of tissue passes on either side into the flattened endothelium
which lines the lateral walls of the heart-bladder. The rounded
nuclei of this endothelium can he readily recognised, placed at
fairly regular intervals from each other, hut the cell bodies are
not distinct in my preparations. As the heart-bladder decreases
in size posteriorly the cells of the dorsal strand unite with
processes from the irregular endothelial cells of the ventral wall,
and eventually the posterior part of the cavity is filled up as in Ft.
minuta by a mass of tissue denser than that of the anterior end
(fig. 9, h.), and through which there pass between the lateral
walls of the heart-bladder fine transverse fibres which Spengel
regards as muscular.
Yellow granules may sometimes be observed in the cellular
tissue in the heart-bladder.
Glomerulus: The glomerulus will be dealt with in connection
with the vascular system, and I need only mention here one point
in connection with it. Lying on the splanchnic epithelium and
internal to it between the glomerulus vessels I have observed, in
some individuals of this species though not in all the series I
have examined, some bundles of parallel muscular fibres (fig. G,
film.). They very often have the appearance of being inserted
into the tender membrane forming the walls of the vessels of the
net at the periphery of the glomerulus. The fibres also frequently
project beyond the outer surface of the splanchnic epithelium,
and readily give one the impression that they were during life
continuous with similar bundles which lie at the inner edges of
the radial masses bounding the space surrounding the proboscis
organs, and from which they are separated only by a very narrow
interval. These muscular fibres in the glomerulus of this species


appear to correspond to the fibres Spengel lias observed in
llalanor/losHiis canadensis and li. kupfferi, and which he regards
as having been carried in, by the infolding of the splanchnic
epithelium.
Collar : The epidermis of the collar can, like that of the other
species of Ftychodera, be divided into five zones (fig. 15 [l-s]).
Of these the first formed by the anterior free rim of the collar is
the largest; the second occupies the region of the circular groove;
the third, that of the circular projecting cushion; the fourth, the
bottom of the typical ring furrow; while the fifth is formed by
the narrow projecting rim forming the posterior boundary of the
collar. The second and fourth zones are similarly constituted;
they stain darkly with lucmatoxylin, and as in Ft. minuta they
contain in their whole depth numerous gland cells; the remaining
zones contain gland cells only in their outer regions, and stain of
a lighter colour.
Collar musculature : It is in this species in its general relations
essentially similar to that of Ft. minuta.
In the outer wall of the anterior part of the collar there is the
usual external layer of longitudinal muscle fibres (figs. 14,16, Ifw.)
which spring in the posterior part of the collar between the
longitudinal muscle bundles of the inner wall. Internal to these
there is the layer of circular fibres which terminate at the
beginning of the second epidermal zone (figs. 14, 16, cfu\). The
longitudinal muscles of the inner wall of the collar springing from
the region of the collar trunk-septum are, as in Ft. minuta ,
separated in the posterior part of the collar into distinct bundles
by radial fibres passing between the outer and inner walls of the
collar. The ventro-lateral bundles terminate behind the circular
vessel fold of the collar, while those more dorsally situated pass
towards the neck of the proboscis, and are inserted, as in Ft.
minuta, mainly into the boundary membrane of the notochord
(fig. 16, ilm '.; fig. 11, cap.). The dorsal portion of the longitudinal
musculature extends, in the posterior region of the collar, round the
lateral surfaces of the periluemal spaces, and partly on to the dorsal


surface of the collar cord. Anterior to the circular vessel fold
there occurs a fairly thick band of muscle fibres which arise from
the sides of the proboscis skeleton, and surround the mouth
aperture circularly, and from this layer there pass up the longi-
tudinal fibres of the fore wall of the collar (fig. 14, ifw.). The
radial fibres passing between the fore and outer walls of the
anterior margin of the collar have the usual intercrossing arrange-
,ment (fig. 14, rf.).
The extensions of the trunk coelom into the collar—the peri-
hamral and peripharyngeal spaces—are related essentially as in
the known species of Ptychodera. As in Pt. sarniensis and aperta,
the perihremal spaces, with the exception of their anterior portions
which are situated entirely below the collar cord (fig. IG, phs.),
enclose between them a groove in which the ventral two-thirds of
the collar cord is situated (figs. 17 and 18, phs.). The greater
portion of their cavities is occupied by the longitudinal muscu-
lature of the dorsal wall, which is inserted anteriorly in greater
part into the boundary membrane of the epidermis behind the
proboscis canal. On the ventral wall of each space there is a
single layer of longitudinal fibres, while between dorsal and
ventral walls there pass radial fibres. The peripharyngeal space
(figs. 17, 18, pps.) is related exactly as in Pt. minulo. As in that
species, there pass across the circular fibres which it contains
numerous connecting strands between its inner and outer limiting
membranes. Anteriorly it terminates on the dorsal side about on
a level with the opening of the notochordal lumen into the throat
(fig. 14, pps.), while ventro-laterally it terminates along the point
of origin of the circular vessel fold.
Collar Coelom: In the anterior part of the collar the spongy
connective tissue containing radial muscle fibres fills up the coelom
.almost completely, but posteriorly where the fibres are arranged
in the form of radial strands there remain between adjacent
strands spaces free from connective tissue just as in Pt. minuta
(fig. 18, cce). Ventrally a longitudinal space exists, into which
the ventral vessel fold projects, and on the dorsal side, just


anterior to the internal openings of the collar canals, two distinct
spaces exist.
With regard to the division of the collar coelom into two halves,
considerable variation exists in this species. Dorsal and ventral
septa may be entirely absent, the two side halves of the coelom
then standing, as in Balanoglossus kupfferi according to Spengel,
in open communication.
The dorsal septum when present differs from the normal
condition in Pi. minuta vtiih regard to its relation to the “roots.”
In that species, according to Spengel, the dorsal septum only exists
in the posterior part of the collar; two “roots” are situated
anterior to it, and its anterior free edge always appears to corre-
spond to one of the “roots.” In this species the septum may arise
in the anterior region of the collar and in front of the most
anterior root as a fold projecting from the dorsal surface of the
collar cord and with a free anterior edge, and which reaches the
outer wall where the first “root” fuses with the collar epidermis.
The septum then passes between the remaining “roots” to the
posterior end of the collar. Over part of its course it may be
interrupted: the ventral connection with the dorsal surface of the
cord is lost, the septum at the point of interruption appearing as
a free fold projecting from the inner surface of the outer collar
wall. Further, in other individuals the front edge of the septum
may coincide with either the first or the second “root.”
As to the ventral septum (fig. 19, vcs.) when present, it exists
only in the most posterior part of the collar and there only for a
vej*y short distance. It may be present when the dorsal is absent.
In fig. 18 a section passing just anterior to the ventral septum is
represented. The vessel fold ( slv.) arising from the subepidermic
collar capillaries exists only for a short distance in the posterior
region of the collar, and is not always so distinct as in the series
from which this section is taken; posteriorly it unites with one of
the longitudinal vessel folds to give rise to the ventral septum
(fig. 19, vcs.). The collar canals and the collar-trunk septum are
related in this species exactly as in Pt. minula.


Nerve Cord of Collar: The collar nerve cord (figs. 16, 17, 18,
cnc.) varies in shape in transverse sections in different individuals
and in different parts of the same individual, from band-shaped to
almost circular. In its general features the cord of this species
agrees with that of Ft. minuta as described by Spengel. An
axial canal is not present in the cellular part of the cord, and
the “cord hollows” are not so numerous as in that species. Two
lateral longitudinal rows of “cord hollows” exist, while smaller,
less regularty arranged hollows may be present in the central
region. The entire number of hollows appearing in one section
is seldom greater than four. These “cord hollows” are related to
each other exactly as in Ft. minuta.
I have never observed an anterior insinking of the epidermis
into the cellular part of the cord to form an anterior epidermal
pocket, but a very short and narrow epidermal pocket may exist
at the posterior end of the cord.
As in all other known species of the genus, the fibrous layer of
the cord completely surrounds the cellular portion.
With regard to the histology of the cellular part of the cord, I
have never been able to observe in any of my preparations the
giant ganglion cells described and figured by Spengel. I can
clearly distinguish, however, large granular nuclei, rounded or
oval in form, and with distinct nucleoli, which belong probably to
what Spengel regards as the proper nerve cells. They occur
especially above the ventral portion of the nerve fibre layer and
also in the middle region of the cord and below the thin dorsal
portion of the fibre layer. Round these nuclei there may some-
times be seen an ill-defined little staining cell body, apparently
branching.
The “stalked cells,” with their elongated, deeply staining,
narrow nuclei can also be readily distinguished. They radiate
outwards from the thin cuticular lining of the “cord hollows,”
and their fibre-like ends penetrate the nerve fibre layer. Also
there occur throughout the cellular part of the cord, but especially
above the ventral portion of the nerve fibre layer, numerous
deeply staining rounded nuclei, with ill-defined cell bodies.


11l the nerve fibre layer, below the cellular part of the cord,
nuclei are found, with small oval non-staining cell bodies which
are produced at either end into fibre-like processes. Clear oval
spaces also occur in the fibrous layer, but I have not been able to
convince myself that these form continuous tubes, and they never
possess an}' protoplasmic remains in their interior such as Spengel
describes for the processes passing into the fibrous layer from the
giant ganglion cells. These spaces appear to be simply lacume
between the ramifying fibres composing the fibrous layer.
Roots : In this species the most anterior “ root ” may arise from
the anterior region, i.e., in front of the middle point of the collar
cord, contrary to Spengel’s statement that the roots always spring
from its middle or posterior end. Generally, however, the first
root is situated about the middle region of the cord. The roots
vary in number from one to four, the latter number being the
usual one. In one series five roots arose from the collar cord, but
I was unable to find the dorsal point of union of the fifth with
the epidermis. As in the described species, the roots vary greatly
in direction; sometimes they pass straight between the collar cord
and the epidermis, but generally they take an oblique course,
forwards or backwards, to their point of union with the epidermis.
In one series the first two roots fused with each other midway
between the collar cord and epidermis, while in another series
two of the roots arose from the collar cord by a short common
stem. Each root consists as in the described species of an outer
limiting membrane carrying blood vessels, and continuous at the
one end with the limiting membrane of the dorsal cord, at the
other with the limiting membrane of the epidermis. Internal to
this is a thin fibre layer continuous ventrally with the nerve fibre
layer of the collar cord. The interior of the root presents a
varying appearance at different parts; in some sections, and
especially in those of the first root, a distinct central cavity may
exist limited by a delicate membrane from which processes radiate
outwards. These processes apparently belong to cells, the nuclei
of which are situated just internal to the fibrous layer, the whole
structure recalling the appearance of the stalked cells radiating


from the “ cord hollows.” I have never been able to trace these
hollows in the roots as continuous canals throughout the whole
length of even the first “root,” and am convinced that in none of
the “ roots ” of this species does a continuous canal exist such as
Spengel describes for the first “roots” in Ft. minuta, clavig-ra,
aperta, and hahamxnsis. Similar though smaller hollows may
exist in the “ roots ” succeeding the first, but just as in the first
“ root ” the hollows do not stand in continuous connection, but
are interrupted by anastomosing strands or in some cases by
branching cells with large nuclei. I have likewise never observed
the “ collar hollows ” to pass into the roots.
The roots end dorsally just as Spengel describes (fig. 16, rt.).
The outer limiting membrane and the fibrous layer of the root
unite with the similar layers of the epidermis; while the cellular
tissue of the root projects in a cone-like mass between the epidermal
cells, the apex of the cone reaching to within a short distance from
the outer surface. The apex of this cone-like mass of tissue is
composed of a network of fine strands enclosing clear spaces, and
with a few very small nuclei in the angles where the strands meet.
Below this clear tissue and continuous with it, there occur more
deeply staining branched cells which are directly continuous with
the central tissue of the “roots.”
Nerve Stems of Trunk: These are related exactly as in the
described species, and the circular commissure placing the fibrous
layer of the collar cord in connection with that of the ventral stem
can be readily seen in horizontal sections occupying the deep
groove between collar and trunk. The cells covering the circular
fibre ring are entirely destitute of gland cells, and consequently
are sharply marked off from the adjacent epidermal cells.
The dorsal stem in the branchial region is situated somewhat
below the level of the adjacent epidermis (fig. 20, dnv.), but
posterior to this region it forms a distinct ridge. The ventral
stem, on the other hand, occupies over its whole extent the bottom
of a shallow longitudinal groove (figs. 20, 24, vn.). The fibrous
layer of the dorsal stem is, as in Ft. minuta, somewhat triangular
in’transverse section; it is thickest in the middle, and laterally


tapers off gradually into the fibrous layer of the epidermis. That
of the ventral stem is more band-like in form, and laterally passes
over suddenly into the epidermic fibrous layer. In the cellular
portion of the dorsal stem gland cells are comparatively few in
number, while they are altogether wanting in the ventral. Of
the two stems the ventral is the more strongly developed, and
towards the posterior end of the body it remains more distinct
than the dorsal.
In my preparations, and especially in the ventral cord, the
“ stalked cells ” of Spengel can readily be distinguished. They
are elongated fibre-like cells with generally long deeply staining
nuclei. These cells are specially developed at the lateral margins
of the ventral stem. Their fibre-like basal processes traverse the
fibrous layer, while their outer ends converge towards the middle
line of the stem, thus enclosing a central space largely occupied by
the nerve cells. The nuclei of these latter are easily distinguish-
able by their large size and rounded appearance; they do not stain
very deeply, possess distinct nucleoli, and exactly resemble
the nuclei of the nerve cells in the collar cord. The nerve cells
lie immediately adjacent to the fibrous layer, and this fibrous
layer as well of the collar cord as of the trunk nerve stems is to
be regarded, according to Spengel, as made up of the ramified and
interlaced processes of these nerve cells. Here, as in the collar
cord, I have never succeeded in observing the giant ganglion cells.
Trunk.
(1) Branchial region: As in all known species of
Ptychodera there is below the epidermis a delicate layer of
circular muscle fibres, in this species only a single fibre in thick-
ness. The longitudinal musculature internal to this is strongly
developed and as in the described species is interrupted dorsally
and ventrally by the vessel stems. The longitudinal musculature
of the outer wall of the genital wings is considerably stronger
than that of the inner wall. The latter is interrupted in the
region of the sub-median lines in whose course the openings of
the ducts of the gonads are situated. Numerous radial fibres


pass from the limiting membrane of the epidermis through the
muscular layers to be inserted into the ventro-lateral portions of
the walls of the cesophagus and into the lateral regions of the gill
pockets. Laterad of the (esophagus a free space is left as in the
described species, and this contains in sections a coagulated fluid
in which cells are embedded. The two halves of the trunk coelom
are completely separated from each other ventrally by the ventral
vessel which extends between the limiting membrane of the
epidermis and that of the gut. On the dorsal side the dorsal
vessel may occupy the whole height of the mesentery or only its
dorsal half.
Gut Canal of Branchial region: As in all the known species of
the genus Ptychodera the gut canal in this region is separated
into two passages—a dorsal or branchial canal (fig. 20, gg.) and a
ventral or cesophagus (fig. 20, os.). They communicate with each
other by a narrower or wider cleft according as the two limiting
cushions (fig. 20, Ic .) are approximated to or remote from each
other. Except for the much greater development of the genital
wings in this species, a transverse section through its branchial
region (fig. 20) agrees almost exactly with a similar section of
Pt. minuta. The gill skeleton is composed of three-pronged forks
which are related just as in Pt. minuta; the number of “ Synap-
tikels” (fig. 20, «n.) varies from seven to ten.
The epibranchial stripe forming the median dorsal boundary of
the branchial canal is composed of numerous relatively very long
and narrow cells ; and its middle region does not stain so deeply
as the lateral regions in which gland cells are situated. The
lateral regions pass over opposite the “gill tongues” into the high
epithelium (fig. 21, gib.) of the “tongue back” (the inner wall of
the tongue next the gut canal). The gland cells are specially
abundant in the middle region of the epithelium of the “tongue
back,” and not placed nearer its front face as in Pt. minuta. This
epithelium passes over into the narrow strand of “intermediate
epithelium” (fig. 21, ies.) composed of small non-ciliated cells
which furnishes the low epithelial covering of the “Synaptikels.”
The lateral walls of the tongue and of the gill pocket are lined


by a layer of columnar cells with long cilia just as in the described
species, and the “tongue floor” composed of cells poor in proto-
plasm is also, as in them, infolded into the cavity of the “tongue.”
This cavity (fig. 21, ytc.) just as in Pt. minuta is lined by an
irregular peritoneal layer, and also contains fibres which stretch
across between its opposite walls at a short distance below the
“tongue back.”
The gill pores (fig. 20, gp.) are narrow slits slightly oblique!}'
placed, which open into the longitudinal grooves bounding the
“gill area” laterally, and as in the described species the longi-
tudinal muscles lying laterally to the pores give off fine bundles
which pass between adjacent pores to join the longitudinal
muscles on the inner side of the gill pores.
The anterior ends of the gill rows project for some distance
into the posterior region of the throat (fig. 18, ag.), hut owing to
the oblique direction of the most anterior gills the posterior rim
of the collar forming the so-called “operculum” of Bateson covers
at most only the first gill pore. The conditions are essentially
the same as in Pt. clavigera since the genital wings do not possess
free anterior edges, but are united with the hind edges of the
collar, thus enclosing between them and the “gill area” the space
for which Spengel adopts the term “atrium.” It is into the
narrow anterior projection of this space below the posterior edge
of the collar that the first gill pore opens.
The number of gills varies according to the age of the animal,
since new ones are being continually formed during life at the
hind end of the gill region. As in Pt. minuta the number of
gills never appears to exceed 40 pairs, but in the majority of
individuals the number is very much less than this. The gill gut
is not closed blindly behind as in Pt. minuta, but passes directly
over into the gut of the succeeding genital region.
(2) Post-branchial region.—Genital region : The mus-
culature and the dorsal and ventral vessel stems are essentially
related as in the branchial region. The wall of the gut (fig. 23, i.)
in this region is usually folded, and lies at a varying distance,
usually small, from the longitudinal musculature, and there pass


from its ventro-lateral region to the limiting membrane of the
epidermis numerous radial fibres. The trunk coelom represented
in the branchial region by the spaces situated laterally to the
oesophagus is here considerably reduced and represented by
irregular spaces.
The lateral septa (figs. 22, 23, Is.) are related essentially as in
the described Ptychodera species. In the middle of the genital
region the septa are of considerable breadth, and pass between
the dorsal comer of the gut and the submedian line, which is
here situated at about the middle of the internal face of each of
the genital wings (fig. 23, Is.). Anteriorly the point of attach-
ment of the septum to the gut gradually passes medianly (fig. 22,
Is.) until at the level of the last developing gill pocket it passes
over to the skin, to which it is then attached at both ends. In
the branchial region the ventral point of attachment of the
septum gradually approaches the lateral, which always remains at
the submedian line until the two unite. Posteriorly to the
middle of the genital region the submedian line gradually passes
down from the mid-region of the inner face of the genital wing,
and takes a position close to its base, and at the same time the
septa are reduced gradually in breadth and finally end with a free
edge in the anterior portion of the" hepatic region. The lateral
septa thus separate off from the main trunk cadom two dorsal
chambers which anteriorly end blindly in the posterior part of the
branchial region, while posteriorly they communicate with the
main trunk coelom by their narrow openings. These dorsal
chambers Spengel regards as blind-sac-like outgrowths of the
trunk coelom arising in the anterior part of the hepatic region.
Gonads: The gonads begin in the “genital wings” immediately
behind the posterior rim of the collar and continue for a con-
siderable distance into the hepatic region. As distinguished from
Ft. miuntn , in which the gonads are simple unbranched sacs, they
are in this species, in correspondence with the greatly developed
“genital wings,” much branched, and are here more complexly
branched than is usually the case in Pt. clavigera. As in these
species, only primary gonads and primary genital pores exist. In


the branchial region, as is characteristic of the genus Ptychodera,
the gonads only exist laterally to the gill pores, and consist of
dorsal and ventral gonad branches which are each again sub-
divided into lesser lobes: the dorsal usually into two long lobes
which occupy the uppermost portion of the cavity of the genital
wings, the ventral into a number (3-4) of shorter and smaller
lobes.
In the genital region proper, as in Pi. cJavigera, each gonad
consists of three main branches: (1) a dorsal (figs. 22, 23, d;/b.)
occupying, as in the branchial region, the dorsal part of the cavity
of the “genital wings,” and divided into two long lobes or in some
cases into two long lobes and one short one; (2) a ventro-lateral
branch situated on the outer side of the lateral septum, between
it and the outer body wall, and also subdivided into two lesser
lobes (figs. 22, 23, vgb.); (3) a median lateral branch occupying
the cavity of the dorsal chamber of the trunk coelom, enclosed by
the lateral septum and extending in it above the gut towards the
median dorsal line (figs. 22, 23, mg.). This median ventral
branch is also subdivided into two. In this species, then, there
are in connection with each genital pore at least six lesser
branches. In fig. 23, a section from about the middle of the
genital region is represented which has passed through one of the
genital pores {gap.) filled up by a mass of spermatozoa. The
specimen from a series of which this section is taken was preserved
while in the act of extruding the ripe spermatozoa in the form of
whitish filmy masses.
Structure of Gonad*: According to Spengel the wall of the
gonads consists of three layers—an outer peritoneal layer, a middle
limiting membrane and an inner germ layer. The outer peritoneal
layer is in my preparations very indistinct, and represented by
some small flattened nucleated cells more or less remote from
each other and closely applied to the middle limiting membrane.
In the latter there is situated a well marked blood sinus. I have
never been able to observe a layer of longitudinal muscles in the
wall of the gonads in this species. Also, I have not been able to
distinguish the germ layer as a distinct layer, but certain small


rounded cells lying irregularly internal to the limiting membrane
in young gonads doubtless belong to it. In the young gonads
there is present a distinct central cavity filled up in some cases by
a deeply staining homogeneous substance. As in the other species
of Ptychodera, the gonads contain large numbers of rounded or
cubical masses of a peculiar substance which in the sexually
immature animals fills up the gonads almost completely. It is
found in the young gonads, both male and female, but it persists
for a much longer time in the case of the ovaries than in the
testes. Even in the mature ovaries traces of it remain, while in
the mature testes no trace of it is left. Spengel regards this
substance as nutritive in function, and the presence of the
abundant deutoplasm in the ova readily accounts for its greater
persistence in the ovaries.
The ova of this species are essentially similar to those of Pi.
minuln. They average about mm. in diameter, and
possess very abundant granular deutoplasm. The germinal
vesicle is very large, and contains a spongy nucleoplasm in which
there is situated one large nucleolus and several smaller masses.
The ripe ovum is invested in a thick egg membrane attached to
which there may be a few very small flattened nuclei apparently
representing the follicular layer. The heads of the ripe sperma-
tozoa are somewhat ovoid or rounded in form, and the flagellum
is very long and slender (fig. 26).
I/epatic region: With the exception of the presence of two
ciliated bands in the gut, Spengel’s description of this region in
Pt. minuta applies generally to that of this species. The liver
sacs (fig. 21, hep.) communicate with the gut by narrow transverse
clefts bounded by anterior and posterior lips. The wall of the
gut is thrown into obliquely transverse folds which are interrupted
on the dorsal side by the two longitudinal grooves, while a well
marked furrow occupies the median dorsal region of the gut.
The liver sacs are lined by a layer of close-set long narrow cells
with long nuclei in a row near their base (fig. 24, ehep.). The
cells contain numerous yellowish-brown granules, which also occur
less abundantly in the somewhat shorter but otherwise similar


cells lining the gut. The cells of the liver gut, possess distinct
cilia, and in accurate sections through its lining epithelium which
are met but seldom, the outer surfaces of the cells form a sinuous
line, and no vacuoles are visible in them, so that, as Spengel
remarks, the vesicles he has observed in them are probably the
result of the action of reagents. On the outer side of the epithe-
lium of the liver sacs and the gut wall there is a rich system of
capillary vessels. As in other species of Plychodnra, except Pt.
minnta and sarnienxis, two ciliated grooves are present in this
species, and they show the usual structure. Each consists of a
special ciliated band of long columnar cells sunk below the level
of the gut epithelium and bounded on its dorsal or median side
by a projecting conical mass composed of elongated cells, the
“covering pad.”
The ciliated grooves extend for a considerable distance into the
genital region proper, and they are there situated somewhat below
the points of attachment of the lateral septa to the gut wall, and
are separated from the epidermis by the thick layer of longitudinal
musculature. Posteriorly, about the middle of the hepatic region
where the liver sacs are largest, the genital wings are reduced to
mere ridges, overhung by the outwardly extended ends of the liver
sacs. In fig. 24, the left half of a section about the middle of the
hepatic region is represented, and the ciliated groove ( egr .) is seen
to lie just below the outer wall of the reduced genital wing {gw.)
and now quite close to the epidermis, being separated from it only
by a thin layer of the longitudinal musculature which becomes
thinner just at this point. The genital wings can be traced as
mere elevations of the epidermis below which the ciliated grooves
are situated to near the posterior end of the hepatic region.
Hind Body; The course of the ciliated grooves behind the
hepatic region is marked externally by two longitudinal epidermal
stripes which, commencing laterally to the posterior small liver
sacs, extend over the anterior two-thirds of the hind-body region.
The hind body can thus be divided into an anterior abdominal
region characterised by the presence of the two epidermal stripes


and the underlying ciliated grooves, and into a posterior caudal
region.
In the abdominal region the ciliated grooves may be situated
directly under the epidermal stripes or may be remote from it by
a short distance, but always the portion of the longitudinal
musculature between them is somewhat thinner than elsewhere.
The cells of the epidermal stripes usually stain darker, and are
somewhat lower than the adjacent cells, and in one case where the
groove was situated immediately under the epidermal stripe there
existed what appeared to be a special differentiation of the cells
of the latter in the form of a small mass of cells with rounded
nuclei and distinct nucleoli. In other respects the abdominal
region of this species closely agrees with that of Pt. minuta. The
wall of the gut in this region (fig. 25, i.) is thrown into numerous
somewhat irregular transverse folds, and it becomes further removed
from the longitudinal musculature so that the coelom is very much
more distinct than in the liver region and, as there, divided into
two distinct halves only, however, in the anterior part of the
region. The band-like cellular mass which Spengel has found in
Pt. minuta and sarniensis in connection with the dorsal vessel and
lying along the dorsal median line of the gut also exists in this
species. It has here the form of a low band of cells of varying
height lying as in the described species between the two lamella;
of the boundary membrane of the gut and not limited laterally.
Between the dorsal vessel and the cellular mass there passes a
short mesentery, and by the separation of this into two lamella;
the cavity of the dorsal vessel comes into direct connection with
the cellular mass. At these points the cells of the mass are not
closely packed, and have a branching character exactly like the
endothelial cells of the dorsal vessel with which they seem to be
continuous.
The caudal region of the hind body is essentially similar to that
of Pt. minuta. As in the posterior part of the abdominal region,
the two halves of the c<elom here stand in connection below the
dorsal vessel. On the ventral side the ventral vessel disappears
as a distinct structure at the beginning of this region, while the


dorsal vessel retains its lumen to near the posterior end of the
body.
As Spengel has found in Pt. minnta, the place of the ventral
vessel is taken by the keel-shaped process of the gut epithelium.
As in Pt. minuta, a very delicate musculature is found on the gut
in this region, and as in that species a distinct sphincter derived
from the circular musculature exists round the anus.
Vascular System-—Dorsal vessel: In the post-branchial
region the dorsal vessel is related essentially as in Pt. minuta.
It can be traced as a vessel with a distinct lumen to near the
posterior end of the body; it appears, however, to end as a solid
structure at its extreme posterior end just as in Pt. minuta. In
the branchial region the dorsal vessel may occupy the whole of
the mesentery or only its dorsal portion. Between the perihsemal
spaces the dorsal vessel usually occupies the whole extent of the
partition wall, but just as in Pt. minuta it may only occupy the
dorsal half of it, and the ventral part of the wall may then either
persist as a low wall of partition below the vessel, or it may
disappear entirely and place the two periluemal spaces in com-
munication.
At the anterior end of the periluemal spaces, the dorsal vessel
opens, as in the described species, into a lacuna (figs. 11, 12, 14,
cl.) between the organs in the proboscis neck and which stands in
connection with the central blood space of the proboscis by a
narrow cleft. From the lacuna there passes away dorsally a vessel
(fig. 10, oav.), the afferent skin vessel, which Spengel regards as
carrying blood to the capillar}' net of the proboscis. Where two
proboscis canals are present it passes between them (fig. 10);
where there is only one canal, along one side of that. It then
passes into the limiting membrane and runs in that anteriorly for
a short distance, finally dividing as in the described species into
two branches which divide up again to form the capillary net of
the proboscis.
Proboscis glomerulus: The glomerulus of this species essentially
resembles that of Pt. minuta. It covers the anterior ends of the
c


heart bladder and the proboscis gut, but just behind the anterior
ends of these it becomes limited to two lateral masses lying on the
heart bladder and the notochord, and to a small median portion
on the dorsal side of the heart bladder. This median portion
which stands in connection with the lateral portions by vessels on
the walls of the heart bladder posteriorly gives rise to two or
three large longitudinal vessels which finally unite to form one
main vessel (fig. 3 , mgl.) which passes obliquely backwards and
upwards along the dorsal edge of the heart bladder (fig. 5, esv.),
and comes into connection with the capillary net of the proboscis.
Yentrally, also, the lateral masses stand in connection with the
capillary net by a network of vessels in the ventral septum of the
proboscis. According to Spengel, these vessels, dorsal and ventral,
probably act as the efferent skin vessels, i.e., they probably convey
the blood from the capillary net of the proboscis to the glomerulus.
The glomerulus vessels themselves are similar in their relations to
those of Pt. minuta. As Spengel has shown, these vessels
represent a honeycomb-like system. As in that species corre-
sponding to the floor of the honeycomb there is a sinus on the
lateral walls of the heart bladder which communicates with the
central blood space by narrow clefts. From the sinus there
radiate outwards vessels which, in longitudinal vertical sections,
are readily seen to be connected in a net-like manner, and at the
periphery of the glomerulus they give rise to a network of much
larger vessels (figs. 3,4, 5,6, gl.). The latter opens into a
longitudinal vessel occupying the ventral corner of each half of
the glomerulus, and which in this species can be traced to near
the anterior end of each half of the glomerulus (figs. 3,4, 5, epv.).
These vessels Spengel terms the efferent proboscis vessels, and
according to him they arise at the posterior end of the glomerulus.
In this species they certainly become distinct at the posterior end
of the glomerulus (fig. 8, epv.), but the} - can be followed up from
here as distinct vessels lying in the ventral corner of each half
of the glomerulus to near its anterior end.
From a comparative study of the glomerulus, and from its
histology, Spengel is led to regard the glomerulus as a system of


infoldings of the splanchnic epithelium, the spaces between these
infoldings being filled with blood and representing the glomerulus
vessels. For this view speaks the arrangement of the nuclei
which occur more-or less regularly along the course of the vessels.
Round the nuclei an oval non-staining cell body can frequently
be recognised, and they can in some places, as Spengel has
observed, pass directly over into the splanchnic epithelium;
Efferent Proboscis Vessels: The efferent proboscis vessels after
they leave the glomerulus are essentially similar in their course
and disposition to those of Ft. minuta. However, as Koehler* has
found in Ft. sarniensis, the two efferent proboscis vessels are
connected with each other in the proboscis neck by a well-marked
vessel (figs. 10, 14, cv.) which passes, in the “chondroid tissue”
occupying the space between the anterior portion of the “keel” of
the proboscis skeleton and the posterior portion of the “end plate.”
I have met this connecting vessel not only in transverse series,
but also in both vertical and horizontal longitudinal series, and
there can, in my opinion, be no doubt as to its existence in this
species. Spengel, however, asserts that the efferent proboscis
vessels “never stand in connection with each other,” and believes
“Koehler has been apparently deceived through the intense
colouration with carmine of certain parts of the skeleton which
thereby become very similar to the blood fluid.”f A series of
transverse sections through an individual of the species under
consideration, whose vessels were richly filled with coagulated
blood, leaves me in no doubt on the matter, and the appearance
presented by the vessel as seen in two adjacent sections is
represented in fig. 10 {cv.). The specimen was stained with
cochineal in 70% alcohol with the result that the coagulated blood
stained a much deeper tint than the proboscis skeleton, allowing
the two to be very easily distinguished, and moreover the
coagulated blood in the connecting vessel could be distinctly seen
to pass over at both ends into that in the efferent proboscis
* Contribution ii 1' otude des Entdropneustes. Internal. Monatsschrift
f. Anat. u. Histologie, Bd. iii. 1886, p. 174.
t Loc. cit., p. 633.


vessels. Further, the “keel” and “body” of the proboscis skeleton
are at this point quite distinct from each other and separated by
the narrow ventral band of “chondroid tissue,” and there is
certainly no median prolongation anteriorly from the point of
fusion of the “body” and “keel” of the proboscis skeleton which
takes place just behind the connecting vessel, and which could be
mistaken for the vessel in question.
We may then take it as characteristic of Ft. australiensis, at
least, that the efferent proboscis vessels are united by a connect-
ing vessel passing in the “chondroid tissue” between the “body”
and “keel” of the proboscis skeleton.
Further, in this species the capillary net of the proboscis comes
directly into connection with the efferent proboscis vessels in
the proboscis neck, and indeed anteriorly to the connecting vessel.
In sections through the proboscis neck, in the region of the
ventral blind sac, vessels are found in the here commencing
“chondroid tissue” which, as Spengel has shown, is simply the
thickened limiting membrane of this region into which cellular
strands derived mainly from the proboscis pockets have penetrated.
Some of these vessels enter the efferent proboscis vessels (fig. 91,
and they thus serve to place the capillary net of the proboscis
directly in connection with the efferent proboscis vessels, while
the dorsal and ventral efferent skin vessels, since they return the
blood first to the glomerulus, do so indirectly.
Vessels of Collar : The efferent proboscis vessels are continued
into the collar, and are related there essentially as in the
described species of Plychodtra. They appear on their entrance
into the collar as clefts in the limiting membrane on either side
of the proboscis skeleton, and have at first a longitudinal direc-
tion. Very soon they diverge outwards in a fold of the limiting
membrane and finally pass downwards round the mouth cavity in
a fold of the limiting membrane of the inner wall of the collar—
the circular vessel fold. Their dorsal portions are formed of
single vessels (fig. IG, eve.) which ventro-laterally give rise to two
capillary nets (fig. 17, cvc 1 .) which unite in the mid-ventral line of
the anterior part of the collar to form the longitudinal ventral


vessels of the collar, formed by folds of the outer limiting mem-
brane of the peripharyngeal space.
The circular vessels stand in direct connection as in the
described species with the capillary net in the outer limiting
membrane of the peripharyngeal space, and also anterior to the
line of termination of the latter with the capillary vessels below
the epithelium immediately' surrounding the mouth aperture.
The ventral longitudinal vessels generally consist in this species
of two distinct folds which may be secondarily branched (fig. 18,
Ivc.). The longitudinal vessels may, however, be represented by
a single simple or much branched fold, or of three or four distinct
folds.
As in the described species the ventral longitudinal vessel folds
open at their posterior ends into a lacuna in the collar-trunk
septum, into which the circular vessel passing in the septum
immediately below the circular nerve ring opens laterally, and
from which the ventral longitudinal vessel of the trunk takes its
origin.
Capillary System of Collar is related essentially as in the
described species. On the dorsal side, the vessels in the limiting
membranes of the “roots” placing the outer and inner capillary
nets in connection are strongly developed (fig. 15). Ventrally, in
the hind half of the collar by the formation of a longitudinal fold
of the limiting membrane of the epidermis, a median longitudinal
subepidermic vessel (fig. 18, slv.) may in some cases be formed
opposite the ventral longitudinal plexus. Posteriorly, the former
fuses with one of the folds of the latter, and the capillary net of
the inner collar wall is thus brought on the ventral side into
direct connection with that of the outer. In some individuals,
however, the ventral mesentery may be entirely absent, and no
such connection established.
The capillary net surrounding the dorsal cord is in this species
strongly developed, and especially on its dorsal side (figs. 15 and
17) well-marked vessels (fig. 17) pass off, from the dorsal side of
the dorsal vessel, in the limiting membrane between the perihiemal
spaces and the collar cord. These laterally pass upwards in the


limiting membrane of the collar cord to form the capillary net on
on its dorsal surface, and branches also pass downwards in the
boundary membrane laterally to the perihsemal spaces and come
into direct connection with the capillary net of the inner wall of
the collar. Very few vessels leave the ventral side of the dorsal
vessel in this species, and the capillary net of the inner wall of
the collar thus appears to stand mainly in connection with vessels
derived from the dorsal side of the. dorsal vessel, in common with
the capillary net of the collar cord.
Ventral Vessel of Trunk: The ventral vessel is related exactly
as in Ft. minuta. It does not extend so far posteriorly as the
dorsal, but disappears at the point of origin of the keel-shaped
process of the gut.
Lateral Vessels: The lateral vessels are essentially similar to
those of the described species. In the branchial region they
occupy the usual position just below the submedian lines (fig. 20,
llv.). Then when the lateral septa appear, they run in these (fig.
22, llv.). Towards the ends of the septa the vessels gradually
pass downwards towards the point of attachment of the septa to
the gut, and then behind the termination of the septa they con-
tinue as free vessels lying in the interior of the now greatly
reduced genital wings (fig. 24, llv.) and which finally about the
middle of the hepatic region pass over into the gut capillaries.
In this part of their course the vessels possess, as in the other
species, circular muscle fibres in their walls, and also from the
latter there radiate outwards fine fibres (fig. 24, llv.), probably
functioning as expansors.
Gill Vessels: My observations on this very complicated set of
vessels confirm, so far as they go, those of Spengel. The afferent
gill vessels arising from the dorsal vessel vary according as the
dorsal vessel occupies the whole of the mesentery or only its
dorsal half. In the former case the afferent vessels pass off
directly from the ventral side of the dorsal vessel; in the latter
they diverge outwards and downwards from its ventral side, the
mesentery being apparent]}’ absent at this point. The afferent


vessels arise from the dorsal vessel opposite the gill tongues. Each,
according to Spengel, divides soon after its origin into two vessels
—one of which passes into the tongue and divides again to form
the two vessels running along the tongue prongs, the other passes
to the gill septum in front of the tongue which received the first
vessel, and probably becomes continuous with the septal vessel. I
have not been able to make out from my preparations the above
described connections to my complete satisfaction. Each of the
afferent vessels seems to stand in connection with a vessel lying
just above the line of attachment of the gill tongue, and this
vessel extends on to the dorsal edge of the succeeding septum, and
is situated just above the dorsal end of the gill skeleton. Through
this vessel there is doubtless established the connection between
the blood flowing in the gill tongues and that in the septa.
The vessels in the tongue are exactly as described by Spengel.
In transverse sections through the branchial region the capillary
net in the tongue situated immediately below the peritoneal
covering of the tongue cavity (fig. 20, cnt.) can be distinctly seen,
and especially in horizontal sections the larger vessels of the net,
viz., the large vessel situated immediately under the epithelium of
the “tongue back” and the two smaller vessels along the inner-
side of each tongue prong (fig. 21, tp.) can be distinctly recognised
(fig. 21). In each of the gill septa the septal vessels (figs. 20, 21,
ngs.) can readily be made out running just external to the septal
prong ( spr .). At their ventral ends the septal vessels stand in
connection with the “limiting vessel” below the boundary cushion
between the branchial canal and the (esophagus, and this “limit-
ing vessel” stands in the usual connection with the capillary net
on the wall of the oesophagus.
Though none of my preparations show a distinct capillary net
in the gill septa, in some I have observed small branches passing
from the septal vessel, and these probably represent part of the
capillary net Spengel has found so richly developed in the gill
septa of Ft. mrniensis.


EXPLANATION OF PLATES.
Reference Letters.
ag. Projections of the anterior ends of the gill rows into the throat.
nv. Afferent skin vessels of proboscis, bps. Body of proboscis skeleton.
hv. Limiting vessel of branchial region, cbs. Central blood space of pro-
boscis. ccp. Prolongations of collar ccclom into the proboscis neck. efir.
Circular musculature of outer wall of anterior rim of collar, cgr. Ciliated
groove, ch. “ Choudroid tissue.” ctn\ Capillary net of inner wall of collar.
cl. Cleft into which dorsal vessel opens, cm. Circular musculature of pro-
boscis. cnc. Collar cord. cnp. Capillary net of proboscis, cnt. Capillary
net of gill tongue, cce.. Collar ccelom. ccx. Parts of collar ccclom into
which collar pores open. cp. Covering pad. ct. Inner layer of connective
tissue of proboscis on the splanchnic epithelium, cr. Vessel connecting the
two efferent proboscis vessels in the proboscis neck. crc. Dorsal
portion of circular vessel fold of collar, crc'. Ventral plexus of circular
vessel fold of collar, dgh. Dorsal gonad branches, dir. Notochord.
dn. Dorsal nerve stem of trunk, dp. Dorsal proboscis pockets, due.
Fibres of dorso-ventral muscle plate, dv. Dorsal vessel of trunk, ehep.
Epithelium of liver sac. eji. Epidermis, eph. Epibranchial strand, eps.
“ End plate ” of proboscis skeleton, epih. Epithelium of throat, epv.
Efferent proboscis vessels, esv. Efferent proboscis skin vessels on front
edge of heart bladder, g. Gonads, gap. Genital aperture, gc. Gill cleft.
gg. Branchial canal, gl. Glomerulus, glm. Muscle fibres of glomerulus.
gp. Gill pore. gs. Gill septum, gl. Gill tongue, gth. Epithelium of gill
tongueback. gtc. Gill tongue cavity, gir. Genital wings. A. Heart bladder.
hep Cavity of liver sac. i. Intestine, ies. Intermediate epithelial stripe
of gill tongue, ifw. Musculature of fore wall of anterior rim of collar.
Urn. Inner longitudinal musculature of collar, ilm '. Portion of same passing
to the proboscis base. ivw. Infolding of ventral wall of heart bladder.
ivw'. Anterior projection of the same into the cavity of heart bladder.
kps. “ Keel ” of proboscis skeleton, lb. Anterior horn of blind sac lumen.
lbs. Ventral blind sac of notochord. Ic. Limiting cushions between
branchial canal and oesophagus. Ifw. Longitudinal musculature of outer
wall of anterior rim of collar, llv. Lateral longitudinal vessel. Im. Longi-
tudinal musculature of proboscis. Imt. Longitudinal musculature of trunk.
Imr. Longitudinal musculature of ventral wall of perihsemal spaces. Ips,
“Legs” of proboscis skeleton. Ips'. “Nuclei” of proboscis skeleton.
Is. Lateral septa of trunk, hr. Longitudinal ventral vessel folds of inner
wall of collar, mg. Median gonad branches, mgl Vessel passing from the
median dorsal portion of the glomerulus, if. Nerve fibre layer, nrg.
Nerve fibre ring of proboscis ueck. oav. Dorsal prolongation of the blood
cleft in proboscis neck to ’form the afferent skin vessels. </'. (Esophagus.


01. Opening of lumen of notochord into the throat, p. Proboscis pore.
phc. Proboscis cavity, pc. Proboscis canal, phs. Periluemal spaces, pps.
Peripharyngeal space. rf Radial fibres passing between the outer and
fore walls of anterior rim of collar, rt. “Roots.” sen. Subepidermic
capillary net of collar, sic. Median longitudinal vessel of the subepidermic
capillary net in the posterior ventral part of the collar, sn. “ Synaptikel.”
sp. Splanchnic epithelium of proboscis oadom. spr. Septal prong of gill
skeleton, thh. Throat or mouth cavity, tpr. Tongue prongs of gill skeleton.
trc. Trunk ccelom. ves. Ventral collar vcjh. Ventral gonad
branches, vrjs. Septal vessel, vn. Ventral nerve stem. rp. V T entral pro-
boscis pockets, vps. Ventral septum of proboscis, cr. Ventral vessel of
trunk, vie. V entral wall of heart bladder.
Ptychodkka australi kxsis.
Plate I.
Fig. I.—Enlarged dorsal view of a small preserved specimen.
Fig. 2. —Dorsal view of a portion of the abdominal region showing the two
epidermal stripes, (x 3.)
Fig. 3.—Central part of a transverse section of the proboscis passing
through the anterior free projection of the infolded ventral
wall of the heart bladder. Zeiss A., oe. 1., cam. luc.
Fig. 4. —Transverse section slightly posterior to fig. 3, but from another
series especially showing the infolding of the ventral heart
bladder wall. Zeiss A., oc. 1., cam. luc.
Plate ii.
Fig. 5. —Transverse section passing through about the middle region of
the proboscis organs. Zeiss A., oc. 1., cam. luc.
Fig. 6. —Portion of glomerulus in transverse section. Zeiss D., oc. 1.,
cam. luc.
Fig. 7. —Transverse section of the splanchnic epithelium on the notochord.
Zeiss D., oc. 1., cam. luc.
Plate m.
Fig. B.—Transverse section through the beginning of the proboscis neck.
Zeiss A., oe. 1., cam. luc.
Fig. 9.—Transverse section of proboscis neck posterior to fig. 8 and pass-
ing through the ventral blind sac of the notochord. Zeiss A.,
oc. 1., cam. luc.
Fig. 10. —Transverse section of proboscis neck passing through the pro-
boscis canals and the connecting vessel between the efferent
proboscis vessels. Zeiss A., oc. 2., cam. luc.


Plate xv.
Fig. 11.—Transverse section of proboscis neck of an individual with two
proboscis pores. Zeiss A., oc. 2., cam. Inc.
Fig. 12. —Similar section of an individual with a single median proboscis
pore. Zeiss A., oc. 2., cam. luc.
Fig. 13.—Dorsal view of proboscis skeleton. ( x about 30).
Fig. 14. —Vertical longitudinal section (nearly median) through the point
of union of the proboscis neck with the collar. Zeiss A
(without lowajst lens), oc. 1., cam. luc.
Plate v.
Fig. 15. —Vertical longitudinal section through the dorsal region of collar
Zeiss A., oc. 1., cam. luc.
Fig 16.—Dorsal median portion of a transverse section through the anterior
region of collar. Zeiss A., oc. 1., cam. luc.
Plate vi.
Fig. 17. —Transverse section through the collar passing through the opening
of the notochord into the throat and through the circular
vessel fold. Zeiss A (without lowest lens), oc. 1., cam. luc.
Fig. IS.—Transverse section through the posterior region of collar. Zeiss
A (without lowest lens), oc. 1., cam luc.
Plate vii.
Fig. 19.—Transverse section of ventral part of collar slightly posterior to
fig. 18, showing the ventral septum. Zeiss A., oc. 1 , cam luc.
Fig. 20.—Transverse section (slightly oblique) through the branchial region
of a sexually immature individual. Zeiss A (without lowest
lens), oc. 1., cam. luc.
Fig. 21.—Section of a single gill from a vertical longitudinal series. Zeiss
C., oc. 1., cam. luc.
Fig. 22.—Transverse section of a sexually immature individual, just behind
the branchial region. Zeiss A (without lowest lens), oc. 1.,
cam. luc.
Plate vm.
Fig. 23. —Transverse section through the genital region of a sexually matme
male, passing through a genital pore. Zeiss A (without
lowest lens), oc. 1., cam. luc.
Fig. 24.—Transverse section through the hepatic region Zeiss A., oc. 1.,
cam. luc.
Fig. 25. —Transverse section through the abdominal region showing the two
ciliated bands. Zeiss A , oc. 1., cam. luc.
Fig. 26. —Ripe spermatozoa. Zeiss D., oc. 4 , cam. luc.




















[From Vol. IX. (Series 2nd) of the “ Proceedings of the Linnean
Society of New South Wales ” (November 28th, 1894).]
ON A PLATYPUS EMBRYO FROM THE INTRA-
UTERINE EGG.
BY JAS. P. HILL,
Demonstrator of Bioi.ooy, and
C. J. MARTIN,
M. 8., B.Sc. (Bond.), Demonstrator or Piiysiolooy, in
the University of Sydney.
(Plates ix.-xm.)
Introduction.
The following paper is based on the. examination of two embryos
taken from the intra-uterine eggs of a Platypus. Beyond the facts
that Monotremes are oviparous and the ovum is merohlastic the
material collected by Caldwell in 1884 has afforded us very little
information, and wo have thought that a description of a
Platypus embryo of this stage may not be unwelcome to
zoologists. In this paper we necessarily confine ourselves to a
description of the structure of the embryo lying before us. Next
year, now that we know the exact breeding season of Platypus
in certain convenient localities in New South Wales, we shall
endeavour to obtain the stages intermediate between the earliest
we now possess and the embryo described in this paper.
The female from the left uterus of which the two eggs were
taken was shot on Ist October of this year. The general external
characters of the egg have already been sufficiently accurately
described.* The eggs were both exact!}' of the same size and
spheroidal in shape. The egg shell is, as Caldwell described, of
an opaque white colour and quite soft, presenting a general
resemblance to the shell of a lizard’s egg.
The eggs measured 18 mm. in their long and 13-5 mm. in their
short diameter. They are thus somewhat larger than the eggs
secured by Caldwell, who gives the measurements of the egg when
* Caldwell, Phil. Trans. 1887, p. 473.


laid as 15 mm. by 12 ram. Three other females were shot on the
same date, and these had obvious!}' just laid their eggs, as
evidenced by the emptiness and large size of the left uterus and
by the presence and condition of corpora lutea in the ovary.
Moreover, the mammary glands in all four females were of
approximately the same size. The tubules were arranged in a
fan-like fashion, radiating outwards from the, at this stage, very
small bare area of the ventral abdominal wall, and measured 5 cm.
in length.
From the size of these eggs as compared with Caldwell’s, and
from the condition of the other three females shot on the same
date, we may reasonably conclude that the}* were just ready to be
laid.
The only other recorded measurements besides Caldwell’s of the
size of the Platypus eggs when laid are contained in a paper by
GeolTroy St. Hilaire published in 1529.* The eggs, nine in
number, were, found lying on a rough nest in a small burrow on
the banks of the River Hawkesbury, X.S.W., and measured
lj| inches (3-1 mm.) long by - of an inch (19 mm.) broad. The
eggs here described were probably not those of Platypus at all:
as St. Hilaire himself afterwards pointed out, they could not on
account of their size pass through the pelvis, and he then came to
the conclusion th.it in Platypus the eggs must be hatched inside !
The eggs were opened immediately after the animal was shot
and their contents preserved in picro-sulphuric acid. The embryos
were stained with borax-carmine, imbedded in paraffin and cut
into serial sections with the Cambridge microtome.
To our friend, Prof. J. T. "Wilson, we are indebted not only for
many valuable suggestions but for much kindly criticism during
the course of our work, and we desire here to tender him our
sincere thanks. We have also to thank Messrs. Shewen and
Grant, assistants in the Physiological Laboratoiy, for much assist-
ance in the preparation of the photo micrograph accompanying
this paper.
• Ann. des Sic. Nat. T. xviii. p. IG2.


General Description of the Embryo as seen in Surface View.
On opening the egg, the embryo was found lying on the surface
of a thin-walled vesicle, with its long axis corresponding to the
long diameter of the egg. It extended over the surface of the
vesicle almost from pole to pole. The vesicle completely filled
the interior of the shell. It contained a thin whitish transparent
fluid of an albuminous nature which was precipitated in picro-
sulphuric acid. Immediately below the wall of the vesicle there
appeared a thin hiyer of yolk granules which was somewhat
increased over a small area at the ant-embryonic pole. The
embryo measured 19 mm. from the anterior end of the medullarv
plate to the extreme posterior end of the primitive streak. This
hinder point of measurement is I'D mm. behind the blastopore.
A photo-micrograph of the embryo from the dorsal side magnified
fit diameters is shown in PI. ix. Outside the elongated and
somewhat fiddle-shaped contour of the embryo is seen a lighter
more transparent zone (PI. ix. am. a.) corresponding to the amniotic
area of other mammals. In the fresh condition no trace of a
vascular area was visible, though in the hardened blastoderm
developing vessels were indicated by a mottling both in and
around the amniotic area. Immediately in front of the anterior
end of the embryo there was to be seen a lighter area—the
proamnion--(PI. ix., prn.) into which the mesoderm had not yet
extended. The antero-lateral portions of the embryo were almost
entirely occupied by two sharply limited patches situated one on
either side of the anterior region of the medullary plate, opposite
the position of the. future first and second cerebral vesicles. The
outer contours of these head plates are posteriorly in lino with
the forward continuations of the outer borders of the proto-
vertebral zones of mesoderm. The outer margins of these head
plates mark the lateral limits of a very considerable mesodermal
thickening in this region, and we may for convenience of descrip-
tion term them the head plates of mesoderm. Their relations to
the general mesoderm will be described later.
The commencing separation of the embryo from the vesicle is
indicated by the presence of a sulcus, the so-called head-fold, which


passes back for a distance of approximately 'l7 mm. below the
anterior end of the medullary plate and thus separates the latter
from the underlying proamnion. This sulcus we must suppose
has arisen as in other forms by the forward growth of the anterior
end of the medullary plate over this bilaminar portion of the
blastoderm.
Lateral and tail folds are not yet developed.
The medullary plate is still flat with the exception that along
its mesial line a definite groove (the “Iliickenfurche”) is developed.
Medullary folds are absent throughout except in the region of the
future fore-brain.
In the head region the three future cerebral vesicles are
indicated by widenings of the medullary plate. The first is
separated from the second by a well marked constriction, while a
loss marked constriction situated somewhat anterior to the
posterior margins of tin; mesodermal head plates separates the
second from the third.
The upgrowths of the medullary folds in the lateral regions of
the fore-brain are very apparent in the photo-micrograph as two
dark lines (PI. ix., md.f.). The continuation of these lines across
the front of the medullary plate is produced ly the thickening and
duplication of the medullary plate at the head fold (PI. xi.,
figs. 15 and IG cp.).
The medullary plate in the region of the hind-brain is especially'
characterised by the presence on each side of four oblong meta-
merically arranged opaque masses extending from the outer edges
of the medullary plate to within a short distance of the mesial
line. These, as will be shown later, are local thickenings of the
medullary plate, and are therefore true neuromeres. The neuro-
meres are arranged in bilaterally symmetrical pairs, and adjacent
ones are separated from each other by well marked transverse
constrictions. The first pair (PL ix., n '.) are situated entirely in
front of the auditory plates. They are narrow and transversely
elongated. The second pair are not so distinct, and do not extend
quite so far mesially as the first. The third pair are very distinct
and somewhat broader than the first. They are directed slightly


backwards. The fourth pair are much less distinct than the
others, and in surface view are not so sharply limited from the
medullary plate.
In the anterior region of the mid-brain, a pair of neuromeres
(PI. ix., X.) occur, but they are much less distinct than those of tin;
hind-brain, appearing merely as local thickenings of the medullary
plate in that region, without any accompanying constrictions.
Opposite the second and third neuromeres of the hind-brain
there is on each side a somewhat triangular thickened patch of
ectoderm—the auditory plate (PI. ix., and.). The mesoderm in
the region of the auditor}' plates is very thin, hence they stand
out very distinctly. The anterior margin of each plate is on a
level with the front edge of the second neuromere; indeed the
greater portion of the plate is situated opposite this neuromere.
Each plate is roughly triangular in shape, with the base of the
triangle adjoining the medullar}- plate, and with a deep bay in
the middle of its posterior margin.
The hind-brain region narrows gradually posteriorly and passes
into the medullary plate of the future spinal cord. Themedullary
plate widens out towards the posterior end of the embryo into a
well marked sinus rhomboidalis which completely surrounds the
primitive streak. The primitive streak is just visible in the photo-
micrograph (PI. ix., pr. s.) as a faint linear thickening enclosing
a whitish axial line—the primitive groove—at the posterior
end of the embryo. The anterior end of the primitive streak
exhibits a distinct thickening, to one side of which the blastopore
(PI. ix., hi.) is situated. This thickening is continued forwards
as the head process of the mesoderm which passes into the hinder
end of the notochord. The notochord is very distinct in the
photo-micrograph as the longitudinal line running along the
middle of the medullary plate. At its anterior end it broadens
out, and terminates about the middle of the future fore-brain.
T 1 le bilateral Anlagen of the heart are very noticeable in surface
view (PI. ix.,/on.) as two tubular-looking structures lying external
to the auditory plates, and extending backwards from them along
the outer edges of the forward extensions of the lateral zones of


mesoderm, nearly up to the first somite. They are thus situated
in greater part opposite the hind-brain region.
In the trunk region, on either side of and extending below the
medullary plate there are seventeen pairs of somites; the first pair
situated relatively far back with regard to the auditory plates,
and separated by a considerable space from the last neuromere.
The anterior somites are square in shape with their borders at
right angles to tbe axial line. They become successively broader
and shorter towards the posterior end of the embryo, where they
are placed obliquely to its long axis.
On each side just external to the outer edges of the somites
(with the exception of the first three) and between them and the
lateral zone of mesoderm there occurs a narrow intermediate
zone containing the Anlage of the, Wolffian laxly (PI. ix., w.h.).
Beginning as a faint line opposite the fourth somite, it becomes
more distinct opposite the seventh, and from thence backwards as
far as the fifteenth somite it exhibits an irregular linear thicken-
ing. Over this posterior part of its course the Wolffian duct
occurs as a distinct structure. Behind the fifteenth somite the
intermediate cell mass extends backwards as a narrow strip some-
what beyond the last somite;.
Caldwell* compared the Platypus embryo from an egg just laid
to a chick of about 36 hrs., but beyond the number of somites
being about the same in both, there is hardly an}’ other point of
comparison. In a chick of this age the medullary groove is
closed right down to the sinus rhomboidalis, the head is covered
by the amnion, the three cerebral vesicles and the optic vesicles
are well developed, the heart is formed and already bent, the
vascular area differentiated and tbe blood circulating; whereas in
the Platypus embryo at about the time of laying, the medullary
plate is practically flat, vascular area and amnion are non-existent,
while the heart is represented by two lateral Anlagen at the
periphery of the anterior extensions of the lateral plates of
mesoderm.
* Proc. Roy. Soc. X.S.W. Vol. xviii. 18S4, p. 120.


In fact we are not acquainted with any embryo which reaches
the dimensions mentioned above and is possessed of such a number
(17 pairs) of somites and which yet remains, with the exception
of a slight head fold, absolutely flat.
Selenka’s* figure (fig. 1 Taf. xxi.) of a three days’ Didelphys
embryo does however present considerable points of resemblance to
the Platypus embryo under consideration, though it is very much
smaller (4 - 5 mm.) and possesses only fourteen somites.
In both embryos the medullary plates are practically flat,
double heart Anlagen are present, and head fold formed. The
appearance of the anterior end of the medullary plate of the three
days’ Opossum closely resembles that of the Platypus embryo; and
further, in the region of the future mid-brain the same lateral
mesodermal thickenings occur (vide Selenka’s fig. 4, Taf. xx. y.) as
we have described above, though in the Opossum they are not so
marked as in our embryo. According to Selenka these mesoder-
mal thickenings “gehoren offenbar zur Urwirbelplatte des Kopfes.”
In the Opossum embryo neither the "Wolffian body nor the
auditory plates are indicated, nor are there any neuromeres
described. It however seems highly probable to us that the
structures situated in the region of the hind-brain which Selenka
regards as the anterior five somites are in reality not somites at
all but true neuromeres. A comparison of his fig. 4, Taf. xx.,
which represents a slightly younger embryo, with the above-
mentioned figure renders this view still more likely. In his
figures the structures regarded as the anterior five somites extend
inwards from the edges of the medullary plate to within a short
distance of the mesial line, and in surface view appear related
essentially as are the neuromeres in our embryo; while the
remaining somites of the trunk, instead of ending on a level with
the edges of the medullary plate, extend out beyond them.
Further, his transverse section (fig. 3, Taf. xxi.) through the
region of the hind-brain and passing through one of these
supposed somites shows no mesodermal differentiation which could
* Studien iiber Entwick. der Thier. iv. Lief, i Abt.
D *


give rise to the appearance seen in surface view. The mesoderm
extends out as a continuous plate of uniform thickness beyond the
edge of the medullary plate, whereas the medullary plate itself
shows a very noticeable thickening as compared with that of the
other sections figured.
The marked retardation in the formation of the medullary folds
and in the folding off of the embryo is one of the most character-
istic features of the embryo at this stage. This may be due, as
suggested by our friend Prof. J. T. Wilson, to the mechanical
effect of the rapid imbibition by the ovum of nutritive fluid
secreted by the uterine glands.
The mature ovarian ovum, according to Caldwell,'* measures
only 2 - 5 to 3 mm. in diameter. After the entrance of the ovum
into the Fallopian tube the shell membrane and proalbumen are
added externally to the vitelline membrane, and at the same time
the ovum is increasing in size by the absorption of fluid. The
youngest stages in our possession are eggs in which segmentation
has advanced to some extent; they measure 5 mm. in diameter,
and possess a distinct and resistent shell membrane separated
from the vitelline membrane by a thin layer of proalbumen. As
development proceeds this layer of proalburnen is soon wholly
absorbed, and in the eggs under consideration the blastodermic
vesicle tightly distended with fluid fitted closel}’around the inner
surface of the fully formed shell, the vitelline membrane being no
longer recognisable. During the rapid imbibition of fluid by the
blastodermic vesicle, and the consequent increase in size of the
whole ovum, the wall of the vesicle including the embryonal area
is closely pressed against the surrounding vitelline and shell
membranes. It therefore seems reasonable to suppose that under
such conditions, only those structural features of the embryo are
produced which do not involve any upgrowths of the wall of the
vesicle. Once the definite shell is fully formed around the egg
and no possibility exists of its obtaining a further supply of
maternal nutritive material, the normal development of bodily
* Phil. Trans. 18S7.


form by folding of the blastoderm is enabled to occur by the
embryo making room for itself, so to speak, by the using up of
the fluid contents of the vesicle.
Against the view here put forward, it may be urged that in
certain other forms there is a similar rapid increase in size of the
blastodermic vesicle by the absorption of fluid, and yet there is
no retardation in development. In Didelphys, for example, the
blastodermic vesicle, according to Selenka, increases in one day
from a diameter of 6 mm. to one of 15 mm., and at the end of this
time the embryo is folded off, the medullary groove is closed and
the amniotic folds developed. All these processes can, however,
easily occur on an expanding blastodermic vesicle lying naked in
the cavity of the uterus and devoid of any such mechanical
obstacle as would be presented by the presence of a resistent shell
membrane.
Ectoderm.
The ectoderm forms a continuous covering for the whole of the
blastodermic vesicle. It consists, except in the regions to be
subsequently mentioned, of a single layer of polygonal cells. Over
the greater portion of the embryonic area the cells are much
flattened, while in the head region of the embryo and in the
extra-embryonic region of the wall of the vesicle they appear
cubical in section.
Medullary plate. —The medullary' plate is, as already
mentioned, still practically flat. Medullary folds are only present
in the anterior region of the future fore-brain ; their appearance
in this region is probably to be associated with the very early
appearance of the optic grooves. The plate consists of elongated
cells, the nuclei of which are situated at different levels simulating
the appearance of several lay'ers of cells. The lateral portions of
the plate are thickest, and are connected by' a median much
thinner portion which sends down a keel-shaped process in
some parts to meet the notochord. Along the median portion of
the plate there runs a distinct groove —the “ Riickenfurche.”
.Beginning as a shallow groove slightly behind the anterior end of


the medullary plate, it gradually becomes deeper posteriorly,
attaining its maximum depth just anterior to the Ist pair of
somites, where it is distinctly V-shaped (fig. 7 ,d.fr.). Behind
this point it gradually becomes shallower again until in the region
of the Bth somite the medullary plate is almost flat, and much
thinner than anteriorly (figs. 9 and 10, md. p.). Posterior to the
somites the plate gradually increases in breadth to form the sinus
rhomboidalis which invests the primitive streak. The extreme
anterior end of the medullary plate is quite flat, destitute of a
median groove, and separated from the underlying proamnion by
the head fold. It therefore consists of two layers, a thicker
upper and a thinner lower layer, separated from each other b} r a
narrow space (figs. 1, 15 and 16).
Immediately behind the anterior end of the medullary plate its
margins become upturned to form the medullary folds which are
conspicuous in the photo-micrograph as the two dark lines on
either side of the future fore-brain. A transverse section through
the middle region of the fore-brain is shown in fig. 2. In the
middle of the section is a well-marked groove (d. fr.) separated by
elevations of the medullary plate from two lateral grooves (op. yr.)
bounded externally by the medullary folds which curve slightly
inwards above the grooves. The median groove will form the
future first cerebral vesicle, while the lateral grooves we regard as
the Anlagen of the future optic vesicles. Ileape* figures a section
very similar to our fig. 2 through the optic grooves of the Mole
(Stage R), and comments on their very early appearance, while
the medullary groove is still widely open. Posteriorly each optic
groove deepens, becomes somewhat V-shaped in section, and at
the sgme time its floor thickens, eventually forming a hollow out-
growth which arises from the bottom of the groove and proceeds
outwards and downwards (fig. 3). An appearance similar to this
has not been described, so far as we are aware, for any other
embryo, and from the evidence at our disposal it would be rash
to speculate too far as to its probable significance. The whole
* Quart. Jour. Micros. Science, Vol. xxvii. ISB7, fig. 16, PI. xi.


appearance somewhat suggests a precocious formation of the
secondaiy optic cup, but whether this is so or not can only be
settled by the examination of older stages. We are convinced,
however, from the examination of serial transverse sections
through the region in question, that the appearance is not caused
by any artificial folding. Longitudinal sections of our second
embryo also exhibit a series of appearances contradicting such an
interpretation.
X eur o me r e s. —As already mentioned four distinct pairs of
neuromeres are present in the hind-brain and a less marked pair
in the anterior region of the mid-brain. The mid-brain neuro-
meres are not so distinctly marked off from the medullary plate
as those of the hind-brain. It is, however, obvious in longitudinal
section as a distinct local thickening of the medullary plate (fig.
16, N.) corresponding to the region marked N in the photo-micro-
graph.
In longitudinal section the neuromeres exhibit the character-
istic arc-shaped form originally described by Orr* in the Lizard
(Anolis), and afterwards by McCluref in the Chick, in Amblystoma
and Anolis, and by Watersf in the Cod.
The neuromeres in the hind-brain of Platypus exhibit very
closely the characters described by Orr for those of the hind-brain
of the Lizard. It must, however, be remembered that in the
embryo Lizard, to which Orr’s description applies, the medullary
canal is closed, while in the Platypus embryo the medullary plate
is still flat, so that the outer surface of the medullary canal of the
Lizard corresponds to the undersurface of the medullary plate in
our embryo, and his inner surface to our upper surface.
Each neuromere as seen in longitudinal section (fig. 16, N.) is
formed by an arc-shaped bulging on the under side of the
medullary plate. Adjacent neuromeres are separated from each
other by well-marked constrictions on the under side of the
* Orr, Jouru. Morphology, Vol. i, 1887, PI. xn. fig. 5.
t McClure, Journ. Morphology, Vol iv. p. 35-SS.
X Waters, Quart. Journ. Micros. Science, Vol. xxxiii. p. 457-47‘i.


medullary plate, while on the upper side, opposite the constric-
tions, there are slight transverse ridges.
The elongated cells of which each neuromere is composed are
distinct from those of its neighbours. The cells are arranged
radially from the upper surface of the neuromere, and their nuclei
are slightly more numerous just below that surface (fig. 18). In
the hind-brain of the lizard, on the other hand, according to Orr,
the nuclei are more numerous towards the outer surface of the
neuromere, i.e., towards the undersurface in the medullary plate
stage.
In transverse sections the first neuromere of the hind-brain
appeal’s as a thickening of the medullary plate with two bulgings
on its ventral side—a smaller one situated near the middle of each
half of the medullary plate, and a larger one at the outer edge of
the plate [fig. 19 (2)]. The outer bulging projects considerably
beyond the lateral margins of the medullar}' plate in the inter-
neuromeric region.
The second neuromere [fig. 19 (I)] is less marked than the first,
but also possesses mesial and lateral bulgings. The third
neuromere [fig. 19 (6)] is on surface view the most distinct of the
four. It possesses a single large bulging at its outer edge. The
fourth neuromere [fig. 19 (8)] is the least distinct; it possesses,
like the first and second, two enlargements of which the lateral
one is the larger (fig. 17). Immediately behind the fourth pair of
neuromeres of the hind-brain the medullary plate is thickened, but
the thickenings are not limited behind by constrictions, and for
the present we leave it an open question whether these are to be
regarded as a fifth pair of neuromeres or not.
Neuromeres in the fore-brain were not observed. All that we
can definitely say at present, then, is that in the head region of
the Platypus embryo of this stage a single pair of neuromeres exist
in the mid-brain and four distinct pairs in the hind-brain. As
Locy* has observed in Squalus ncanthias, and Amhlystoma , so in
Platypus the neuromeric segmentation appears very early, indeed
• Anat. Anz. ix. Bil. p. 393-415.


before the formation of the medullary folds. The same observer
has also insisted on the fact that the neuromeric segmentation is
primitively ectodermic and entirely independent of any meso-
dermic segmentation—a view with which the conditions in
Platypus are in complete agreement. '
Auditory plates : The auditory plates are situated laterally to
the neuromeric region of the hind-brain, their anterior edges being
on a level with those of the second pair of neuromeres. Each
consists of a thickening of the ectoderm which is distinctly
grooved longitudinally (fig. 6, and.). The appearance of the
auditory plates in Platypus while the medullary plate is still flat
is noteworthy.
Cranial ganglia are not yet developed. However, in the
interval between the third and fourth pairs of neuromeres and
opposite the posterior portions of the auditory plates there occurs
on each side a distinct downgrowth of the ectoderm just external
to the outer edge of the medullary plate. This downgrowth is
similar to the “Zwischenrinne” described by His* in 1879. Beard,f
Rabl,+ Chiurugi,§ and others have observed a similar structure,
but do not regard it as concerned with the development of the
cranial ganglia, Goronowitsch,|| indeed, being of the opinion that
it is an artificial production of the paraffin bath.
There remains to be noticed a longitudinal strand of cells on
each side lying close beneath the ectoderm just external to the
edge of the medullary plate and passing slightly inwards below
its outer margin (figs. 8 and 9, le.). The strands are found in the
trunk region of the embryo extending from the first pair of somites
anteriorly to about the fourteenth pair posteriorly. They are
much larger and more distinct anteriorly. Whether these strands
are ectodermal in their origin and ganglionic in their significance
• His, Untersuohungen iiber die erste Anlage des VVirbelthierleibes—
Leipzig.
f Beard, Quart. Journ. Micros. So. Vol. xxix.
% Eabl, Morphol. Jabrb. Bd. xv.
§ Chiurugi, Arch. Ital. de Biologie, Bd. xv.
II Goronowitsch, Morph. Jahrb. Bd. xx. Heft 2, p. 201.


could not with certainty be determined at this stage. They
exhibit no cellular connection with their surroundings and may
possibly represent the detached neural crest (“Zwischenstrang”) of
which no other representative is present.
Entoderm.
The entoderm of the embryonic area presents no very special
features. It is a single layer of flattened cells, the nuclei of which
are fairly close. Laterally the cells become more elongated and
the nuclei consequently are further apart. Here and there in the
embryonic area these flattened entodermal cells are interspersed
with large cells distended by the presence in their interior of
several yolk spheres (cf. fig. 22, vit. ent.). Further out these yolk-
containing cells become more numerous and eventually form the
entire inner lining of the blastodermic vesicle. Their structure is
described later in connection with that of the vesicle. The only
differentiation of the embryonic entoderm is found in the region
of the future pharynx. The cells lying just internal to the amnio-
cardial vesicles have assumed a cubical shape, and form a narrow
thickened band on each side extending hack to the region of the
heart Anlagen (fig. 5, ent. ph.). These two bands represent the
pharyngeal entoderm of this region.
Notochord: The notochord in surface view is seen to
terminate about the middle of the future fore-brain, and sections
through this region show that the notochord is here represented
by a thickening of the entoderm forming a median band with
which the mesoderm is continuous laterally. Many of the cells
in this anterior region of the notochord exhibit mitotic division
(fig. 14, nch.). This median thickening as traced back becomes
more marked and more sharply limited laterally though it is not
yet distinct from the entoderm. It is in contact above and for
some distance behind this point with the keel-shaped process of
the medullary plate. Then just posterior to this the notochord
becomes distinct as a small rounded mass closely connected with
the entoderm below and in contact with the keel-shaped process
of the medullary plate above (fig. 4). Then, from about the


middle region of the mid-brain up to a short distance in front of
the first somite, the notochord lies below-the keel of the medullary
plate and is connected with the entoderm by a thin cellular
filament (fig. 5). Somewhat anterior to the first somite the
notochord becomes entirely free from the entoderm, and continues
in this condition to its posterior end where it passes into the head
process of the primitive streak. The notochord increases in size
somewhat after becoming entirely free from the entoderm. It is
then distinctly rod-shaped, while anteriorly it is somewhat oval in
section.
The notochord is relatively of very small size in Platypus.
Heape* has also noticed a similar condition in the Mole, and he
regards it as* due to the very early appearance of the nervous
system.
Mesoderm.
The mesoderm is at this stage established as two lateral wings
distinct from the ectoderm and entoderm except at certain regions
in the axial line, viz.:—At the anterior flattened-out end of the
notochord, in front of the blastopore in the region of the head
process, and behind the blastopore in the region of the primitive
streak. As already mentioned in the description of the surface
view of the embryo, the mesoderm lying on either side of the
anterior end of the embryo forms two sharply limited plates to
which we have given the name of mesodermal head plates as dis-
tinguished from the mesoderm of the rest of the body.
The head plates of mesoderm (PI. ix., Lp. mes.) are lateral
thickenings on either side of the future fore-and mid-brains, and
show no signs of segmentation. Their outer contours are directly
continuous with the forward continuation of the outer boundaries
of the protovertebral zones of mesoderm. Their very distinct
posterior boundary is not due to the entire disappearance of
mesoderm at this point, but to a very marked thinning of the
same.
* Quart. Journ. Micros. Science, Vol. xxvii. 1887, p. 139.


A transverse section through the middle region of the head
plate is shown in fig. 4. Here, below the medullary plate, the
mesoderm exists in the form of scattered stellate cells, while
laterally to the outer edges of the medullary plate the cells are
more numerous and more closely packed, especially immediately
lielow the ectoderm and at the outer rim of the head plate. This
thickened rim marks the outer contour of each plate as seen in
surface view. Beyond this rim the mesoderm is divided by the
development of a coelom into two layers, an upper thin layer of
flattened somatic mesoderm cells and a lower thicker layer of some-
what cubical splanchnic mesoderm cells. The narrow ccelomic
spaces thus enclosed when traced posteriorly are found to be the
most anterior parts of the body cavity, and for them we adopt
-Minot’s* term amnio-cardial vesicles.
The amnio-cardial vesicles extend forwards as two horns beyond
the anterior end of the embryo. They converge towards the
median line without, however, uniting, and practically limit a
small area (the proamnion) in which mesoderm is absent. The
proamnion is of very small extent and lies immediately in front
of and below the anterior end of the medullary plate (figs. 1 and
15, pra.). Behind the posterior limits of the head plates the
mesoderm becomes reduced to a very thin layer, and is absent
altogether over a limited area just anterior to the outermost
portion of each auditory plate (fig. 5), and here ectoderm and
entoderm come into contact as in the proamnial region. The thin
areas of mesoderm behind the head plates are very obvious in the
photo-micrograph as the lighter areas in the middle of which the
auditory plates are situated. These thin areas are wholly confined
to the forward continuations of the protovertebral zones of meso-
derm. Externally to the thin areas are the forward extensions
of the lateral trunk zones of mesoderm, along the outer edges of
which are situated the symmetrical heart Anlagen.
The mesoderm in the hind-brain region is entirely destitute of
segmentation. It consists, below the medullary plate, of scattered
* Human Erabyology, 1892, p. 198.


stellate cells which become somewhat more compact below the
ectoderm and immediately external to the edges of the medullary,
plate. The outer margin of this more compact portion of the
mesoderm corresponds to the outer limit of the forward prolonga-
tion of the protovertebral zone of mesoderm,' and is visible in
the photo-micrograph as the dark contour bounding this area.
Beyond this line the mesoderm is split into the somatic and
splanchnic layers. The somatic layer is composed of a single
layer of cells and is closely applied below the ectoderm; the
splanchnic layer is thicker, especially where it is inbulged over
the heart endothelium (figs. 5 and 6, sj)L). The two layers unite
again into a single layer a little way external to the lateral heart
Anlage. The lateral extension of the unsplit mesoderm beyond
the heart Anlage is, however, very small, so that the lateral
extent of the coelom practically corresponds in this region with
the lateral extent of the mesoderm. From this point backwards
the mesoderm gradually extends more and more outwards until it
reaches its maximum extension opposite the posterior end of the
embryo.
Behind the heart Anlagen proper the somatic layer of mesoderm
becomes very much thicker than the splanchnic (figs. 7,8, 10 and
12), and it continues in this condition to the posterior end of the
embryo. At the same time the two layers become more closely
applied to each other and the ciclom is reduced to a narrow cleft.
Just over the venous trunks leading to the heart Anlagen the
two layers are unsplit, thus dividing the coelom into a more mesial
and a more lateral portion.
The splitting of the more mesially situated part of the lateral
mesoderm becomes more indistinct posteriorly, so that opposite
the anterior somites the mesial part of the ventral coelom is largely
obliterated and there exists external to the somites a mass of
unsplit mesoderm (fig. 8).
The par-axial mesoderm immediately in front of the first pair
of somites, though not transversely limited in front as a distinct
segment, has essentially the same appearance in section as that of
the first somite. It forms on each side a distinct and compact


plate lying close below the ectoderm immediately external to the
edge of the medullary plate. Beneath it there exist looser stellate
cells which are continuous with it at both ends (fig. 7, mes. ax.).
Mesodermic somites: The appearance of the seventeen pairs of
somites as seen in surface view has already been described. With
the exception of the first three and the last three the somites are
practically identical. In transverse sections (figs. 8 and 9, m.s.)
they present an oblong form compressed dorso-ventrally and
extend some distance beneath the medullary plate. They possess
in their whole breadth very distinct myotomic cavities bounded
b)’ dorsal and ventral walls composed of somewhat stellate cells.
The cavity is sometimes interrupted by strands of cells passing
l>etween the two walls.
The ventral walls of the first three pairs of somites have
become converted into stellate mesenchyme cells, and in the first
at least the myotomic cavity is no longer distinguishable (fig. 7).
Their dorsal walls form a somewhat arched plate of closely
compacted cells.
The last three pairs of somites do not possess well marked
cavities. They consist of about two layers of cells connected by
cellular bridges (fig. 10, m.s.).
Lateral trunk mesoderm and ventral cmlom : The lateral meso-
derm appears directly continuous with the first three somites,
without any intermediate cell mass, while from the 4th onwards
a distinct intermediate cell mass is present between the two (figs.
8 and 9).
Except opposite the posterior somites the cleavage of the lateral
mesoderm does not extend right up to the somites, the cmlom
only appearing some distance out. The splanchnic layer is only
one cell thick, while the main portion of the mesoderm continues
out as a thick somatic layer. This gradually thins as it passes
out, becomes reduced to a single layer of cells, and ultimately
fuses with the splanchnic layer to constitute a single mesodermal
layer marginally.


The dark area in the photomicrograph just external to the
somites is the optical expression of this thick somatic layer of
mesoderm. The outer limit of the dark area marks the place
where the latter becomes reduced to a single layer.
The ventral ccelom is, in the region of the Ist somite and just
anterior to it, coextensive with the thickened portion of the
somatic mesoderm seen in surface .view, while posteriorly it
extends out beyond the point where the latter becomes thin.
Further back still the ccelom gradually becomes reduced in extent
until in the region of the 9th to the 13th somites the mesoderm
is no longer split (fig. 9, mes.).
Opposite the 14th or 15th somites the mesoderm again becomes
split, the ccelom extending close up to the intermediate cell mass
(fig. 10).
Behind the somites the protovertebral zones of mesoderm are
directly continuous with the lateral plates, while the splitting of
the mesoderm does not occur until some distance out (fig. 12).
The mesoderm continues some distance beyond the hinder end
of the primitive streak, and here the endemic cavities gradually
extend inwards towards the mesial line and fuse with each other,
so that the ccelom forms a continuous space. In this region the
tail fold of the amnion will probably be developed.
Primitive streak : In surface view the notochord is seen to
become gradually thicker at its posterior end and to terminate
finally in a distinct longitudinal thickening situated about the
middle of the sinus rhomboidalis. The continuation forwards of
this enlargement to join the notochord is the head process of the
primitive streak, while behind it is the primitive streak itself,
just visible in the photomicrograph as a whitish line.
Sections through the primitive streak show that mesodermal
cells are being rapidly proliferated off from the ectoderm forming
the floor of the primitive groove along its whole extent, and that
the lateral wings of mesoderm are directly continuous with this
axial streak of cells (figs. 12, 13, and 24). At the anterior end
of the primitive groove ectoderm, mesoderm and entoderm are
fused together in the axial line (figs. 23 and 24) and form the


enlargement already referred to which projects as an elongated
eminence composed of rounded cells at the anterior end of the
primitive groove (figs. 11 and 23). In the hollow at one side of
this eminence the blastopore ( hi .) is situated. The blastopore
leads into the blastoporic canal which runs forwards in the head
process for a distance of 16 mm., and opens by a lateral
opening into the cavity of the blastodermic vesicle (fig. 21,
hi. op.). The inner opening of the blastoporic canal appears
as a break in the entoderm. The walls of the canal are
wholly composed of mesoderm. The lumen of the blastoporic
canal is not a single one, but is divided up by bridges of
cells into two or three smaller canals (fig. 22, bl. c.). A similar
duplication of the canal has been observed by Kdlliker* in
the rabbit, by Bonnetf in the sheep, by Zumsteinj: in the chick,
and by Spee§ in the guinea-pig; hence the latter observer regards
it as probably of general occurrence in the formation of the
chorda in mammals.
The head process runs forwards from the front end of the
primitive streak, distinct from the ectoderm though closely applied
below it. Laterally it is continuous at intervals with the meso-
derm, while below it exhibits traces of cellular connection with
the entoderm. This connection with the entoderm is interesting
in view of the observations of Carius|| that the head process is
free at first and only subsequently unites with the entoderm.
Just anteriorly to the inner opening of the blastoporic canal the
head process is connected with the ectoderm by a narrow median
strand exhibiting a similar appearance to that shown by Graf
SpeelT for the guinea-pig. Two small lumina at this stage not
continuous with the blastoporic canal occur in the head process
just anterior to the inner opening of the canal (fig. 20, nch. c.),
* Sitzmigsber. Fhys-med. Gesellseliaft in Wiiizburg. ISS3.
t His’s Archiv. 1884.
% Mesoderm. Bvo. Hern, 1887.
§ Anat. Anz. iii. Jahrg. 1888.
|| Bvo. Marburg, 1888.
IT Anat. Anz. 1888, p. 319 (et fig. 2).


while a short distance further forward a single distinct lumen
occurs, but it is confined to one section. Apparently we have
here to do with the last traces of the notochordal canal.
The head process diminishes in thickness anteriorly and finally
passes into the posterior end of the notochordi'
Wolffian duct and body: The appearance of the Anlagen of the
Wolffian duct and body has already been described in surface
view. In sections of its anterior region from the 4th to the 7th
somites the united Anlagen of the Wolffian duct and body appear
as a solid cord of cells projecting from the intermediate cell mass.
The greater part of the cord lies free between the outer edges of
the somites and the lateral mesoderm, while its dorsal surface
approaches within a short distance of the ectoderm (fig. 8, w. h.).
As the cord is traced backwards it is found to become gradually
constricted in its middle region, while its dorsal portion broadens
out, until it becomes somewhat dumb-bell-shaped in form. Its
basal portion is now very distinctly connected with the lateral
mesoderm on its outer side. On its inner side, however, the
connection with the somites is not now so well marked, and in
places this connection is completely lost. At about the level of
the 6th somite the constriction of the middle region of the cord
is much more marked, and it here consists of a ventral larger
rounded mass connected by a narrow isthmus with a dorsal much
thinner flattened band. The upper portion is the Anlage of the
Wolffian duct, while the lower is the Anlage of the Wolffian
tubules. Then, by the gradual disappearance of the connecting
isthmus the mass comes to consist of a dorsal band-like Wolffian
duct Anlage (fig. 25, w.a,), united at its mid-region to the under-
lying Anlage of the tubules ( w.t .). Finally, opposite the 7th
somite the narrow connection between the duct Anlage and the
Anlage of the tubules is lost altogether, and the two become
separate (fig. 26).
The outer edges of the duct Anlage lie close below the ectoderm
which, just over the duct, is very thin and delicate, and with very
few nuclei as compared with the rest of the ectoderm. Very


often it is broken in the process of section cutting—a feature
Martin*’ has also met with in the case of the rabbit (cf. his fig. 7
A-D. Taf. vii. in this respect with our figs. 25 and 26).
The Wolffian duct Anlage is now distinct not only from the
somites and lateral mesoderm, but also from the Anlage of the
tubules. However, it does again become connected with the
tubule Anlage, and also with the lateral mesoderm at its outer
edge, over a very short distance. The Anlage of the tubules
consists of a somewhat rounded mass in transverse section, with
its cells arranged in a radial manner round its somewhat clearer
centre. In this in some sections a distinct lumen occurs (fig. 26,
w.t.) The tubule Anlage is now only distinctly connected with the
lateral mesoderm, the connection with the somites being lost rtiore
or less completely. Some sections indeed (fig. 26) show the
tubule Anlage as an isolated rounded mass, below which passes
a thin layer of loose cells of the intermediate cell mass.
The duct varies somewhat in width in different sections, and
this gives rise to the irregular linear thickening previously
mentioned as seen in surface view. As it is traced to its distal
end the duct is found to be become gradually reduced to a thin
flat plate somewhat thicker in the middle and thinning off
laterally, and separated by a very small interval from the over-
lying thin area of the ectoderm. At the same time the Anlage of
the tubule becomes reduced in size and its differentiation from the
rest of the intermediate cell mass largely disappears, though it is
still distinguishable as a compact mass of rounded cells forming a
projection from the loose cells of the mass.
In its posterior region the outer edges of the now very thin
Wolffian duct curve slightly upwards towards the ectoderm, and
thus the entire Anlage has here a somewhat arc-shaped appearance.
The duct is here of considerable width, though not more than two
cells in thickness in its middle region. Finally, with the upturned
edges of the Anlage, the ectoderm becomes continuous by means
of fine but very distinct strands (fig. 27, w.d.), and there is thus
* Archiv f. Anat. 1888.


enclosed between the two a small space. Behind the point where
the connection of the edges of the Wolffian duct with the
ectoderm is first seen, the duct rapidly becomes reduced in size
and approaches closer to the ectoderm (fig. 28, w.d).
Finally it is reduced to a single cell, which passes directly over
into the ectoderm (fig. 29, w.d.).
From these observed facts we are inclined to believe that the
Wolffian duct in Platypus has an ectodermal origin. We cannot
assert this dogmatically from the examination of one stage; yet
the balance of evidence is in favour of this view, and indeed from
the facts at our disposal it is the only view we can put forward.
The duct certainly does not grow backwards by proliferation
from its posterior end as Martin states to be the case in the
rabbit, for as opposed to the condition in that animal, where
according to Martin the Wolffian duct at its extreme posterior
end is thicker than just anterior to that point, in Platypus the duct
gradually becomes thinner posteriori}', and as we have described,
passes directly over into the ectoderm. Nor can the duct grow
backwards by the addition of cells from the mesoderm, for as we
have shown the Wolffian duct is quite distinct posteriorly from the
Anlage of the tubules and from the adjacent mesoderm. We are
therefore inclined to believe that the Wolffian duct in Platypus
grows backwards by separation or delaraination of cells from the
ectoderm.
Just as the differentiation of the Anlage of the Wolffian duct
from the ectoderm is lost as it is traced posteriorly, so the
differentiation of the Anlage of the tubules from the intermediate
cell mass is also lost. The Anlage of the tubules can, however,
be traced behind the termination of the Wolffian duct as a narrow
strand of rounded cells readily distinguishable from the looser
branching cells of the rest of the intermediate cell mass. The
relations of the Anlage of the tubules to the intermediate cell
mass in Platypus is thus essentially the same as Martin has
described for the rabbit.


In its topographical relations the Wolffian duct in Platypus
agrees with the conditions described by Meyer* in man, where
according to him the proximal part of the duct leads back from
the mesoderm while its distal portion is connected with the
ectoderm. Both Meyer and Martin agree in describing the
proximal part of the duct as mesodermal in origin, but as to this
we are not in a position to speak with certainty. However, in
Platypus the proximal part of the united Anlagen of the Wolffian
duct and tubules is related essentially as Martin describes for the
corresponding portion in the rabbit, and it might well be that as
in that animal the proximal portion of the Wolffian duct Anlage
arises from the intermediate cell mass in common with the
Anlagen of the Wolffian tubules.
Vascular System.
Heart Anlagen: The symmetrically placed heart Anlagen have
already been described in surface view as situated in greater part
opposite the hind-brain region. Sections, however, show that
their anterior ends extend somewhat beyond the posterior limits
of the head plates of mesoblast, and we may therefore look upon
these head plates as the regions in which the future aortic arches
will be developed.
The heart Anlagen at this stage in Platypus are essentially
similar to those of a rabbit of about nine days.
As the amnio-cardial vesicles are traced from their anterior
ends backwards, they gradually increase in lateral extent, and at
the same time towards the posterior limits of the head plates the
thick splanchnic layer of mesoderm separates from the entoderm.
In the space thus formed on each side, rounded vasifactive cells
appear. Posteriorly these vasifactive cells have formed the
vascular endothelium of the anterior cardiac region, and this lies
in the gutter-like groove —open towards the entoderm—formed
by the inbulging of the thick splanchnic mesoderm into the amnio-
cardial crelom. Each heart Anlage consists anteriorly of several
* Arch. f. Mikr. Anat. Bd. 3G, 1890.


(2-3) endothelial tubes (fig. 5, ht. end ) which about the middle
region of the Anlage unite into a single tube (fig. 6, ht. end.).
Traces of a septum are, however, still present in the single tube,
showing that it has arisen, as Rabl* has observed, by the fusion
of at least two smaller ones. On the ventral wall of the single
endothelial tube there is a distinct cell mass projecting into the
cavity of the same (fig. 6): it apparently represents the ventral
part of the septum above mentioned. The endothelial wall is
separated by a considerable space from the (splanchnic) meso-
dermal wall of the heart Anlage. In the middle region of the
Anlage the latter exists in the shape of a semi-tubular canal open
ventrally (fig. G, spl. ), while both in front and behind the groove
becomes shallower and more closely applied to the somatic
mesoderm.
Posteriorly, at the same time the endothelial tube is reduced in
size and is continued backwards as the Anlage of the sinus
venosus and ornphalo-meseraic vein, and with this other endothelial
tubes unite. Hear its posterior end each venous Anlage consists
of one or two small vessels which disappear finally just anterior
to the first somite.
Endothelial vessels have already begun to appear in other parts
of the embryonic region, e.g., in the mesodermal head plate and
especially where that underlies the medullary plate (figs. 3,4, 5
and G). These are not jet connected with the anterior prolonga-
tions of the heart Anlage, nor do they appear to contain blood
corpuscles. It is worthy of note that the endothelial vessels may
also occur in the somatic mesoderm, between it and the ectoderm.
Bonnetf has also observed vessels in the somatic mesoderm in the
sheep, but according to him thej T soon disappear. As already
mentioned, a vascular area was not visible in the fresh condition,
but sections reveal the presence of vasifactive cells and actual
vessels in the extra-embryonic region (figs. 10, 12, 30, vas. c., h. v.).
Both the vessels and the vasifactive cells become more numerous
opposite the posterior end of the embryo. The vessels exist in
• Morph. Jahrb. Bd. xv. p. 226.
+ His’s Archiv. 1889, p. 56.


the form of endothelial tubes which may enclose a number of
vasifactive cells.
The vasifactive cells constituting blood islands occur in great
numbers opposite the posterior region of the embryo between the
more compact superficial layer of mesoderm and the entoderm
(figs. 12, 30, vas. c.). In the mesial portion of this region the
vasifactive cells appear to be differentiating to form vessels,
while further out they occur in larger or smaller undifferentiated
blood islands. The vasifactive cells possess each a large rounded
nucleus with a very thin surrounding layer of protoplasm (fig. 30,
vas. c.).
Structure of Blastodermic Vesicle.
The oval vesicle on which the embryo lies is comparable at this
stage to a typical mammalian blastodermic vesicle, and forms in
some respects a striking connecting link between the conditions
obtaining in the Sauropsida and in the Placental Mammals.
The for the most part flattened ectoderm cells of the embryonic
area pass into the more cubical cells forming the outer layer of
the wall of the vesicle. Both ectoderm and entoderm form
perfectly continuous layers all round the vesicle (fig. 32).
The vesicle, as already described, contained a thin albuminous
fluid, while below its thin wall there existed a layer of yolk
spheres. Sections and preparations of the wall of the vesicle
mounted whole show that these yolk spheres are all intracellular.
They are contained in large cells—vitelline entoderm cells—which,
as has been already stated, are sparsely present among the
flattened entoderm cells of the embryonic area, and immediately
outside this are more abundant; while throughout the rest of the
non-embryonic portion of the vesicle they constitute the entire
inner entodermic lining of the latter.
The vitelline entoderm cells are of great size and are almost
entirely occupied by large yolk spheres (figs. 30-33, vit. enl.).
Each cell contains a large nucleus rendered somewhat irregular
by internal compression by the yolk spheres. The nucleus is
generally situated on the side of the cell next the ectoderm (fig.


33). The greater part of the chromatin of the nucleus is con-
tracted into a star-shaped mass in the centre, while smaller
particles of chromatin occur sparsely around this.
The mesoderm extends round from a quarter to a half of the
circumference of the vesicle in the posterior region of the embryo.
The lateral extension of the mesoderm diminishes gradually as
one proceeds forwards, so that in the region of the heart Anlagen
it extends only a short distance laterally to them, while in the
region of the head plates of mesoderm the amnio-cardial vesicles
form its outermost limit. In front of the embryo beyond the
point where the amnio-cardial vesicles converge to limit the pro-
amnion, mesoderm is entirely absent.
Beyond the crclom there extends out a layer of flattened meso-
dermal cells between which and the vitelline entoderm is a hiyer
of numerous rounded vasifactive cells (fig. 30, vas '.c.). Further
out these two mesodermal layers are continued into a layer of some-
what spindle-shaped cells with large rounded nuclei which forms
the outermost portion of the extra-embryonic mesoderm (fig. 31,
men.). It is from the relatively very early great lateral extension
of the mesoderm and from the presence of a very distinct yolk-
containing entoderm that we regard the vesicle of the Platypus
embryo of this stage as transitional between the yolk sac of
Sauropsida and the typical mammalian blastodermic vesicle.
In the Sauropsida it is only after most of the yolk has been
absorbed that the yolk sac is completely lined by discrete ento-
dermal cells; in the higher mammalia, on the other hand, in the
absence of yolk, the entoderm—the homologue of the yolk mass
of Sauropsida—is very early able to completely enclose the cavity
of the blastodermic vesicle—the homologue of the yolk sac cavity
of Sauropsida. The ovarian ovum of the Platypus is as is well
known a typical yolk-laden egg, yet at this stage the embryo,
instead of overlying a mass of unsegmented yolk, lies on the
surface of a two-layered vesicle containing fluid, which is only
distinguishable from a typical mammalian blastodermic vesicle
through the fact that instead of having a yolk-free entoderm, it
possesses an entoderm composed of large yolk-containing cells.


EXPLANATION OF PLATES.
Reference Letter «.
am. a. Amniotic area. amc. v. Amnio-cardial vesicle, and. Auditory
plate, hi. Blastopore, hi. c. Blastoporic canal. hi. op. Internal opening
of blastoporic canal. h.v. Blood vessels. cm. Coelom. d. fr. Median
sulcus of medullary plate (“ Kiickenfurche ”). tel. Ectoderm, ent. Ento-
derm. ent. ph. Pharyngeal entoderm, ha. Heart Anlage. h.pr. Head
process of primitive streak, hp. mes. Head plate of mesoblast. ht end.
Heart endothelium, le. Longitudinal strand of cells lying just external to
the edges of medullary plate, m.s. Somite, m.s.c. Cavity of somite.
md. f. Medullary fold. md. p. Medullary plate, mes. Mesoderm, mes.
ax. Paraxial mesoderm in front of Ist somite, mes. I. Lateral mesoderm.
N. Neuromere of mid-brain, n'-n.’ 1 ' Neuromeres of hind-brain. nch.
Notochord, nch.c. Remains of notochordal canal, op, gr. Optic groove.
pra. Proamnion, pr. g. Primitive groove, pr. s. Primitive streak, som.
Somatic mesoderm, spl. Splanchnic mesoderm, vas. c. Vasifactive cells.
vit. ent. Vitelline entoderm, w. h. Anlage of Wolffian body, w, d. Anlage
of Wolffian duct. w. t. Anlage of Wolffian tubules.
Plate ix.
Photo-micrograph of Platypus embryo from the egg just ready to be laid.
From the dorsal surface, (x 5\.)
Plates x.-xm.
The positions of the sections from which figs. 1-13 are drawn are indicated
in the photo-micrograph by corresponding numbers.
All the drawings were made with a Zeiss’ camera lucida.
Plate x.
Fig. 1. —Transverse section through the anterior end of the medullary plate,
showing its separation from the vesicle, the proamnion (pra.)
underlying it and the amnio-cardial vesicles (amc. v. ) laterally,
(x 70.)
Fig. 2.—Transverse section of the middle region of the future fore-brain
passing through the commencement of the optic groove (op. gr,).
The median sulcus (d.fr.) will form the future medullary groove
proper, (x 70.)
Fig.'3.—Transverse section slightly posterior to fig. 2 showing the hollow
outgrowth from the floor of the optic groove. ( x 70.)


Fig. 4.—Transverse section passing through about the middle region of the
head plate of mesoderm (lip. met.]. The amnio-cardial vesicles
( ante . c. r.) form its outer limit. ( x 70.)
Fig. 5. —Transverse section between the posterior limit of the head plate of
mesoderm and the auditory plate. The section passes through
the anterior end of the lateral heart Ahlage—the endothelium
(lit. end.) of which here consists of two tubes. Mesially to the
heart Anlage the pharyngeal entoderm (ent. ph.) is visible.
Mesially to the latter the mesoderm is interrupted over a small
area. (x 70.)
Fig. 6. Transverse section through the middle of the lateral heart Anlage.
The endothelium here forms a single tube, though traces of a
septum are still visible in it. The (splanchnic) mesodermal wall
(xpl.) of the heart has here a semitubular shape. The section
also passes through the 3rd neuromero of the hind-brain (n'". )
apparent as a thickening of the medullary plate and through the
grooved auditory plate (and.). ( x 70.)
Fig. 7. —Transverse section through the region immediately in front of the
Ist somite. The paraxial mesoderm (mes. ax. ) here exists in the
torm of an arched plate, below which are numerous stellate cells.
The lateral mesoderm is not completely split, the coelom being
represented by several interrupted spaces. The median sulcus
(Riickeufurche) (d. fr.) of the medullary plate is here very
marked and the notochord is now quite free from the entoderm,
(x 70.)
Plate xi.
Fig. B.—Transverse section through the 6th somite. The somite somewhat
oblong in section, is seen to extend mesially below the medullary
plate and to possess a very distinct cavity ( m. n. c.). The somite
is separated from the lateral mesoderm by the Anlage of the
Wolffian body (w. h. ) Ventrally the latter is distinctly connected
with the lateral mesoderm, while the connection with the somite
is not so distinct. The lateral mesoderm splits some distance out
into a thick somatic layer ( som.) and a thin splanchnic layer
(spi.). The longitudinal strand of cells (le.) immediately
external to the edge of the medullary plate and passing inwards
below it is also visible. ( x 70.)
Fig. 9.—Transverse section through the 7th somite. In this section the
Anlage of the Wolffian duct (tc. d.) is seen to be distinct from
the Anlage of the tubule (w. t.) underlying it. The latter is


more or less distinct both from the somite and the lateral meso-
derm. The lateral mesoderm is not split, the ventral ccelom
being absent in this region. The other relations are the same as
in fig. 8. (x 70.)
Fig. 10.—Transverse section passing through both the 16th and 17th
somites owing to their oblique direction. The somites in this
region no longer possess distinct cavities —they consist of an
upper and lower layer connected with each other by processes of
the cells. Between the somites and the lateral mesoderm there
is present the Anlagen of the Wolffian tubules in the form of a
strand of cells (w, t.) slightly projecting from the intermediate
cell mass. The ccelom (ere.) is of great lateral extent, and
numerous endothelial vessels (b. v.) are visible in the outer part
of the section, (x 70.)
Fig. 11.—Transverse section through the blastopore {bl.) which is situated
to one side of a longitudinal eminence at the anterior end of the
primitive groove (<■/. also fig. 23). The mesoderm is unsplit for
a considerable distance out. ( x 70.)
Fig. 12.—Transverse section through the primitive groove (pr. g.) slightly
behindfig.il. (x 70.)
Fig. 13. —Transverse section through the hinder region of the primitive
streak {pr. s.). (x 70.)
Fig. 14. —Median portion of fig. 2 more highly magilified. The section
passes through the anterior end of the notochord where it
spreads out and is represented by an axial thickening of the
entoderm. With this thickening the mesoblast is continuous
laterally. ( x 280.)
Fig. 15. —Longitudinal section of anterior end of embryo passing through
the optic groove ( op. gr.) and the head fold. ( x 180.)
Fig. 16. —Longitudinal section of anterior region of the embryo, passing to
one side of the median line, especially to show the mid-brain
neuromere {N.) and the four hind-brain neuromeres (n'-n iv ).
(x 70.)
Plate xii.
Fig. 17. —Transverse section through the anterior portion of the 4th
neuromere showing the .mesial and lateral bulgings on its under
side—the lateral one much the larger of the two and projecting
outwards, (x 180.)
Fig. 18.—Longitudinal section through the 3rd and parts of the 2nd and 4th
neuromeres especially to show their arc-shaped form. ( x 280.)


Fig. 19 (1-9). —Series of transverse sections through the neuromeric region
of the hind-brain. Sections 2,4, 6 and 8 pass through the
neuromeres (n'-n™-), while 1,3, 5, 7 and 9 show the normal
thickness of the medullary plate in front of and between the
neuromeres. (x 70.)
Fig. 20.—Transverse section through the anterior portion of the head
process of the primitive streak. Three sections in front of the
internal opening of the blastoporic canal. The lumina {neh. c.)
in the head process represent the last traces of the chorda-canal,
(x 340.)
Fig. 21.--Transverse section through the internal opening of the blastoporic
canal {hi. op.) into the cavity of the vesicle. ( x 340.)
Fig. 22. —Transverse section through the head process of the primitive
streak (h.pr.)-9 sections behind fig. 21. The blastoporic canal
is represented by three lumina (bl. c.). The head process (h.pr.)
is distinct from the ectoderm, but shows traces of cellular con-
nection with the entoderm. It is more or less continuous with
the mesoderm laterally. ( x 340.)
Fig. 23 Transverse section through the blastopore (bl.). It opens to one
side of a longitudinal projection at the front end of the primitive
groove Ectoderm, mesoderm and entoderm are fused with each
other in the axial line. ( x 340.)
Plate xm.
Fig. 24.—Transverse section through the anterior end of the primitive
groove {pr. g.) immediately behind fig. 24. As in that fig. the
three germinal layers are continuous with each other axially,
(x 340.)
Fig. 25. —Transverse section through the united Anlagen of the Wolffian
duct and tubule in the region of the 7th somite. The Wolffian
duct Anlage (w. d.) is semilunar in form and is connected at the
middle of its ventral side with the tubule Anlage («•. t.). The
latter possesses a small lumen and is distinct from the somite
{m. «.), but connected with the lateral mesoderm (men. I.).
(x 340.)
Fig. 26.—Transverse section through the Anlagen of the Wolffian duct and
tubule some distance behind fig. 25. The Wolffian duct Anlage
{w. d.) now exists as a flattened band overlying and distinct from
the rounded tubule Anlage. Its outer edges are closely
approximated to the ectoderm which immediately over the


Anlage of the duct is very delicate, and, as in the preceding
figure, has been broken in the process of section cutting. The
tubule Anlage is rounded in shape, and consists of radiating cells
surrounding a small lumen. It is now free from both the somite
and the lateral mesoderm, (x 340.)
Figs. 27, 28 and 29 represent three successive sections through the posterior
end of the Anlage of the Wolffian duct. As compared with fig.
26, the Wolffian duct Anlage in fig. 27 is now considerably
smaller and thinner, and is connected at its outer edges with the
ectoderm. In fig. 28 the Anlage is still more reduced in size,
consisting of a single layer of cells, while in fig. 29 it is reduced
to a single cell, connected at both ends with the ectoderm.
Behind the section from which fig. 29 is drawn there is no longer
any trace of the Wolffian duct Anlage. The Anlage of the
tubule in fig. 27 appears as a rounded projection of the inter-
mediate cell mass, with radially arranged cells, but in figs. 28
and 29 this radial arrangement is lost, and the Anlage appears
as a slight elevation of the mass. ( x 340.)
Fig. 30. —Transverse section through the wall of the blastodermic vesicle
some distance beyond the amniotic area, showing the ectoderm
itet.), vitelline entoderm (rit. ent.) and mesoderm. The latter
consists of a layer of cells below which occur numerous
vasifactive cells (ros. c.) ( x 320.)
Fig. 31.—Transverse section of the wall of blastodermic vesicle some
distance further out than fig. 30. The mesoderm here consists
of a single layer of spindle-shaped cells, while vasifactive cells
have almost entirely disappeared, (x 320.)
Fig. 32.—Transverse section of wall of blastodermic vesicle at the ant-
embryonic pole. Ectoderm and vitelline entoderm are alone
present. ( x 200.)
Fig. 33.—Vitelline entoderm cells of blastodermic vesicle drawn as seen
through the ectoderm. They are filled up almost entirely by
yolk spheres; their large and somewhat irregular nuclei are
generally situated on the outer sides of the cells next the
ectoderm, (x 200.)






INTRA-UTERINE EMBRYO OF THE PLATYPUT












PHYSIOLOGICAL ACTION OF VENOM OF
AUSTRALIAN BLACK SNAKE.


On THE PHYSIOLOGIGAL ACTION OF THE VENOM OF THE
AUSTRALIAN BLACK SNAKE (Pseudeehis porphyriacus).
By C. J. MARTIN, B.Sc., M.B. Land.
(From the Physiological Laboratory of the University of Sydney.)
[Read before the Boyal Society of N. S. Wales, July 3, 1893.']
I. —lntroduction.
The mechanisms associated with the life of higher animals are so
complicated and at the same time so interdependent, that it is
always a matter of extreme difficulty to ascertain, with anything
approaching to precision, which part or parts of the intricate
machinery are influenced by the introduction of a disturbing
element from without. When such disturbing element in the
form of a poison is introduced, the observer can see without
difficulty the end result, but the unravelling of the process requires
the closest observation and the assistance of every method of
analysis known to the physiologist. Even then, how far we are
from a complete understanding of the process ! Our conception
•of the method of operation of any particular poison is necessarily
ilimited by the present condition of physiological science, and the
most an observer working in any particular corner of this great
field can do, is to attempt to bring the level of knowledge of the
particular phenomena he is studying up to that of the science
generally, and perhaps to elucidate in some small way by obser


rations on particular cases, the larger problems with which
physiology is concerned.
The research, the results of which form the subject of this paper,
was conducted entirely by experiments upon the lower animals.
Conclusions as to exact physiological action drawn from the
observation of cases of snake-bite in the human subject, while of
great importance, are necessarily unsatisfactory owing to ignorance
and want of control of so many factors concerned. When con-
fronted with a case of snake-bite our 'principal duty is to treat
the patient, and although we may carefully observe clinical
symptoms, the employment of those more accurate analytical
methods which can be performed on the lower animals, is im-
possible. Another disadvantage is that no single observer can
hope to witness a sufficient number of cases of snake-bite, but
must base his conclusions to a large extent upon the observations
of others.
On the other hand, it is true, that it is a mere inference that
results obtained upon lower animals can be applied to man.
Nevertheless when one considers the identity of mechanism which
underlies what differences do exist, together with the fact that the
higher mammalia react to snake poisons with striking similarity
to mankind, the inference would not appear to be an unfair one.
ll. —Methods of Introduction op the Venom.
Venom may enter the body by a variety of channels. The time
of onset and the train of symptoms vary according to the rapidity
of its absorption. Usually in cases of snake-bite the poison is
deposited in the subcutaneous tissues, whence it reaches the
general circulation principally by absorption through the blood-
vessels. In some experiments I made with.the object of determin-
ing the relative absorption through the blood-vessels directly, and
through the lymphatics, I found that the symptoms of poisoning
were not appreciably delayed by previous ligature of the thoracic
duct. The poison was in each case injected into the subcutaneous
tissue of the thigh. The venom is more rapidly absorbed when


introduced into a serous sac, such as the pleural or peritoneal
cavity, and its effects are most rapidly manifested when it is
introduced directly into a vein. Absorption of venom takes place
from such mucous surfaces as the corneal conjunctiva.
Whether venoms can be absorbed by the mucous membrane of
the alimentary canal has been much discussed. Weir Mitchell 1
came to the conclusion from numerous experiments on pigeons,
that Crotalus-venom was not absorbed from the crop. If however
abrasions were artificially produced, symptoms of poisoning result-
ing in death occurred. Fayrer 2 and Richards, 3 on the other
hand, found cobra-venom was absorbed to some extent, from the
alimentary canal. Mitchell has confirmed these statements of
Fayrer and Richards, but found that absorption through this
channel was very slow.
I have repeated Mitchell’s experiments, to determine whether
Pseudechis venom was absorbed from the alimentary canal. In
my own experiments I used rats instead of pigeons.
Two white rats were fed daily for one week on bread and
milk, containing one hundred times a fatal dose of venom,
supposing it to have been administered- subcutaneously. At
the end of the week both rats were in excellent health. Within
half an hour after partaking of the last poisoned meal, the
mucous membrane of the stomach of one of them was artificially
abraded. This rat died in two hours thirty-five minutes after-
wards with the usual symptoms of snake poisoning. Similar
abrasions produced in a rat on unpoisoned diet were followed
by no untoward symptoms. The whole of the fames of these
rats were collected and examined for venom. The filtrate was
treated with a large excess (ten volumes) of absolute alcohol, and
the precipitate which formed allowed to remain under the
alcohol fourteen days. The precipitate was then extracted with
1 Researches upon the venoms of poisonous serpents.”—Smithsonian
Contributions to Knowledge,- Vol. xxvi.
* " Thanatophidia of India.”—Churchill, London, 1872.
s « On the nature of snake poison and its action on the blood.”


dilute saline solution. The extract which contained some
proteid was quite harmless when injected under the skin of
frogs and mice.
If any quantity of the venom had been absorbed by the rats
from the amount contained in their meals, they must have shown
symptoms, and had the fceces contained any of the venom, symptoms
of poisoning would have occured in the small animals injected
with the last saline extract, for Pseudechis venom is unaltered by
sojourn under absolute alcohol. Accordingly, one must conclude_
that the venom was either not absorbed, or if so only to a small
extent, and that the greater part was destroyed in the alimentary
canal. The venom is destroyed by artificial.pancreatic digestion,
and that the same happens in the intestine is extremely probable.
The toxic properties of this venom are however' not destroyed by
artificial gastric digestion, and the results of the experiments on
the rats show that the poison exists in the stomach in an active
condition. The walls of this organ are lined by a continuous
layer of living epithelium cells, and cannot be reckoned with as
if they were composed of a dead membrane. Indeed there is
abundant evidence to show that in the process of absorption from
the alimentary canal physical processes (osmosis, diffusion) are
overborne by physiological ones, 1 and that the lining cells exercise
a selective control over the process of absorption. 2 The toxic
proteids of some of the infectious diseases also, are not absorbed
from the alimentary canal, for Tizzoni has shown that the most
virulent tetanus toxines produce no ill effects when administered
by the mouth. Absorption does however probably occur to a
small extent, for the remaining white rat, was after the lapse of
a week, injected with one and a half times a lethal dose of venom,
from the effects of which it recovered after suffering slight malaise.
1 Leubuscher, Jenaische Zeitschrift, Bd. xviii., 1885; Eohmann,
Pfliiger’s Archiv., Bd. xli. 1887; Heidenhain, ibid., Bd. xliii., 1888 j Bd.
Ivi., 1894.
2 Tappeiner, Wien. Sitzungsberichte, Bd. Ixxvii., Abtheil. iii., 1878;
Edkins, Joum. of Physiol., xin., 1892 j v. Mebring, Yerhand. d. iii..
Congress f. innere Med. z. Wiesbaden, 1893, p. 471.


This resistance may be accounted for by the immunising effect of
the absorption of small quantities of venom from its food during
the previous week.
Before considering the experimental results obtained upon
animals it is necessary to emphasise the fact that the effects -of a
venom introduced directly into the circulation may be very
different to those which follow subcutaneous inoculation. These
differences although no doubt essentially dependent upon the
varying rapidity with which the poison reaches the blood, are from
the peculiar nature of its action on this fluid, of such a kind as to
be misleading. On reference to the portion of this paper devoted
to the consideration of the action of snake-poison on blood-plasma
it will be seen that the venom of Pseudechis if introduced with
sufficient rapidity into the circulation, occasions extensive intra-
vascular clotting. The venom may reach the blood with a rapidity
adequate to cause thrombosis, either when directly introduced
into the circulation or if subcutaneously injected in sufficient
quantity in a situation favourable for absorption.
When one sees an animal, within a few seconds or minutes
after the introduction of the poison, seized with convulsions over
which artificial respiration has no influence, and closely followed
by death or a condition of profound depression, one might naturally
imagine that the poison had exerted its influence directly upon
the nervous system. In the case of such symptoms following the
introduction of the venom of the species of Australian snakes I
have hitherto examined, such a supposition would be erroneous,
for by opening the animal just prior to death, the venous system
would be found to be the seat of more or less extensive thrombosis.
■ Intravascular clotting is also in my opinion the explanation of
the convulsions which have been observed by Wall 1 and others,
to rapidly follow the introduction of viperine venom into mammals,
and which form such a marked feature in the experiments with
1 Wall, Indian snake poisons, their nature and effects. —Allen & Co.,
London, 1883 j Proc. Eoy. Soc„ Lond., Vol. xxxn., 1881.


the venoms of this class of snakes. Such early convulsions must
not be confused with those due to failure of the respiration, which
immediately precede death from cobra poisoning.
With subcutaneous injection, the venom does not, as a rule,
reach the bloo'd with sufficient rapidity to occasion any extensive
thrombosis, but under these circumstances the blood is found to
have its coagulability greatly diminished or lost. These opposite
conditions are in reality two phases of the same operation.
As thrombosis in different regions of the circulation produces a
great variety of sudden and surprising effects, which are generally
absent after subcutaneous injection of the poison, the comparison
of results obtained by the two’methods of introduction of venom
must be made with a due amount of caution.
lll.— Action of Yenom on the Blood and Blood Yessels.
Through whatever channel the poison may be absorbed it sooner
or later reaches the blood stream, and is distributed thereby
through all the tissues and organs of the body. Accordingly it is
necessary to ascertain in the first place what changes it may
occasion in the blood itself. Without such knowledge it would
be impossible to differentiate those effects produced on the various
organs of the body which are to be attributed to the primary
operation of the poison from those which are secondary to its
interference with the normal constitution of the blood.
When the literature of this part of the subject is examined, one
notices the entirely different results obtained by observers experi-
menting with various kinds of snake poison. Cobra poison would
appear to exert little effect upon the blood, but that it does have
some action is evidenced by the fluidity of the latter in the human
subject, after death from cobra-bite. Occasionally too, the mucous
discharges from the body are stained with blood. These blood
changes are however relatively unimportant, and if an animal
survives the nervous symptoms it at once passes into a condition
of complete health. With the poison of the viperidre, and to a
less extent with that of most colubrines, other than cobras, the


blood and blood vessels are considerably affected. These changes
in the blood include both the corpuscular element and the plasma,
and also that little known relationship which normally obtains
between the blood and its containing vessels.
(a) —Effect of venom on blood corpuscles, in vitro.
Brunton and Fayrer 1 were unable to discover any change in
the blood corpuscles of mammalia, when their blood was mixed
with a solution of cobra poison in isotonic salt solution, except
an occasional crenation of the corpuscles which might have been
due to some concentration of the salt solution by evaporation.
Ragotzi, 2 however, who has more recently experimented with
cobra venom, found that it produced considerable changes on the
corpuscles. He says—“ Saugerthierbliit war stets verandert, sei
es, dass man das Gift subcutan.injicirt hatte oder eine Giftlosung
dem Blute zusetzte. In beiden Fallen war die Tendenz zur
Rollenbildung vollkommen verschwunden. Die Blutkorperchen
waren nur zum geringeren Theil normal. Die meisten hatten
ihre biconcave Gestalt mit einer biconvexen vertauscht. Diese
Veranderung trat augenblichlich ein, wenn man einer normalen
Blutprobe unter dem Mikroskop ein Tropchen Giftlosung (in 0 , 6%
NaCl) zusetzte. Eine vollstandige Auflosung der Saugethier
blutkorperchen durch Zusatz von Najagift kam erst nach mehreren
Stunden zu Stande.
Setzte man dagegen zu einer normalen Froschblutprobe etwas
Gift zu, so blassten fast augenblicklich die korperchen ab; das
stroma wurde vollkommen unsichtbar bezw. aufgelost. Der Kern
blieb noch einige Zeit erhalten. Das aufgeloste Blut besass
zunachst noch die oxyhamoglobinstreifen, doch verschwanden
dieselben nach einiger Zeit, wahrend die Losung noch ihre rothe,
klare Farbe beibehielt (die zum Zusatze verwendete Giftlosung
reagirte vollkommen neutral).”
1 Proc. Boy. Soc. Lond.
2 Virchow’s Archiv. Bd. 122, s. 230.


Weir Mitchell and Reichert 1 found that in a drop of mammalian
blood mixed with “ a minute quantity ” of crotalus venom the
activity of the leucocytes absolutely ceased. The red corpuscles
lost their biconcave form and became spherical and sticky, so that
they adherred together in strings. Ultimately the haemoglobin
dissolved out and they became invisible. When pigeon’s blood
was subjected to the action of the venom, the nuclei of the cor-
puscles appeared to undergo a rapid necrotic change, which finally
gave rise to a granular albuminoid material which was seen float-
ing in large quantities between the corpuscles.
Feoktistow 2 who worked with the venoms of Crotalus and Pelias
berus found that 2% solutions of these venoms produced dissolu-
tion of the corpuscles after 18 - 24 hours.
The first animal the blood of which I submitted to the action of
Pseudechis venom was the frog. A drop of frog’s blood was mixed
with an equal bulk of a -7% solution of Nad containing -1% of
venom. The mixture was made on a slide, and speedily covered
with a cover glass and the edges smeared with oil to prevent con-
centration of the salt solution by evaporation. Within a few
moments a disintegration of the red cells occurred. They lost
their shape, their nuclei became apparent, and the haemoglobin
dissolved out; afterwards they appeared larger and circular, and
became more and more indistinct, until finally nothing could be
seen of them, but shrivelled granular nuclei. These shrivelled
nuclei soon began to swell, the granules became less distinguish-
able and eventually disappeared. The disappearance of the red
cells was so complete that at the end of fifteen minutes there was
nothing except the slight -colouration of the field, to distinguish
the preparation from one of lymph.
The action on the white cells was much slower. For the first
fifteen minutes I could discover no change in them, but they
1 Loc. cit. p. 143.
2 “ TJeber die Wirkung des Schlangengiftes auf den thierischen
Organismus.”—Memoires de TAcad. imp. d. Sc. de S. Petersbourg, YII.®
Serie, Tome xxxvi., No. 4*


exhibited no amoeboid movements. At the end of this time the
nuclei in some of them were very distinct, as if fixed by acetic
acid. They then became intensely granular, and soon began to
swell and their outlines to grow less distinct until they disappeared,
leaving a small heap of granules to mark their grave. During
this time, control specimens situated under similar circumstances
showed no change, and the leucocytes were exhibiting active
amoeboid movements.
The action of the poison on the corpuscles of pigeon’s hood is
similar to the above, but the dissolution of the red cells, with
poison of this concentration proceeds more slowly.
The blood corpuscles of different mammals present remarkable
diversity in their power of resisting the destructive effects of the
venom. Dog’s blood is much more sensitive to this action of the
venom than that of any other animal I have experimented with.
The readiness with which the corpuscles of this animal are des-
troyed approaches that of the frog.
Some idea of the small quantity of venom which is necessary
to determine the destruction of the red corpuscles of dogs may be
gathered from the fact that if 1 c.c. of fresh defibrinated blood
be mixed with an equal volume of -9% NaCl solution containing
•0000002 gramme of venom, and allowed to stand for four hours
at the temperature of the laboratory (15° 0.) the serum which
covers the corpuscles becomes deeply stained with haemoglobin,
and if a little of the sediment be examined under the microscope,
numbers of crystals of haemoglobin are to be seen, together with
some corpuscles. A control specimen under similar circumstances,
except that the salt solution contained no venom, showed the
corpuscles to be well preserved and the serum was only slightly
tinged with haemoglobin.
If the concentration of venom in the solution be increased, or
the blood be kept at body temperature, the haemoglobin dissolves
out much more readily, and in a few hours no corpuscles can be
found.


Haemoglobin which has been dissolved out of the corpuscles
under the influence of the venom possesses a more than ordinary
tendency to crystallize, as is exemplified by the following experi-
ment :—lO c.c. of defibrinated blood of a dog were poured into
a dry test-tube containing "0001 gramme of venom, and placed
in an incubator at 38° G. over-night. When examined in the
morning the contents of the tube were solid with haemoglobin
crystals, so that the mass could only be removed with a spoon.
The haemoglobin in the crystals was in part converted into
methaemoglobin. A solution of well washed crystals showed the
absorption spectrum of methaemoglobin as well as oxyhaemoglobin,
so that it would appear that both derivatives of haemoglobin were
present together in the crystals. As time went on, the amount of
oxyhaemoglobin in the crystals diminished and that of methaemo-
globin increased.
This conversion of oxyhaemoglobin into methaemoglobin does
hot occur under the influence of the venom itself but is due to
organisms. It occurred in all the control tubes which were not
sterile, but took place in these much later than in those that con-
tained venom. This is probably to be explained by a much greater
growth of the organisms in the blood which had received a small
admixture of venom. I shall presently show that venom destroys
the power possessed by normal serum to inhibit the growth of
some micro-organisms, which would explain why they should
grow more readily in those test tubes to which venom had been
added.
The process of corpuscle destruction can be observed on a warm
stage under the microscope, in the same way as with frog’s blood.
When mixed with salt solution containing ’Ol% of venom the
field is markedly coloured with haemoglobin after thirty minutes.
In two hours the corpuscles are largely destroyed, and in ten
hours have entirely vanished and numerous crystals of haemoglobin
are seen. They do not swell up, but become globular, the haemo-
globin passes out of them and the stromata become less and less
distinguishable until they can no longer be discerned.


As I shall presently point out the same extensive destruction
of corpuscles occurs when the venom is injected into dogs in
quantities of 'OOOl gramme per kilogramme of the animal’s weight
or even less. The lowest limit of concentration necessary to pro-
duce this destruction is about the same both within the body and
in vitro, viz.:—"00001 gramme of venom per 100 0.0. of blood. 1
The corpuscles of rabbits, guinea-pigs, cats, and white rats are
much less easily destroyed by the venom than those of dogs, and
human blood is particularly resistant to its action. A concentra-
tion of venom of "005% produced no destruction of corpuscles in
my own blood, even when this was kept at body temperature.
When the strength of the venom was increased much beyond this
amount, disintegration of corpuscles occurred, but proceeded slowly.
The disparity in the amount of blood destruction following
injection of the venom into animals of different species, produces
a corresponding variation in symptoms, and is associated with a
marked difference in their susceptibility to the occurrence of
intravascular clotting. Dogs are, weight for weight, about ten
times as sensitive to this action of the poison as any other mammal
with which I have experimented.
(6) —Examination of the blood of animals after the injection of
venom.
The injection of much above a minimum fatal dose of venom
produces some destruction of red corpuscles in every animal with
which I have experimented. When dogs are the animals used,
however, destruction of red corpuscles is very considerable even
with one-fifth a minimum fatal dose, and the escaped haemoglobin
presents the same increased tendency to crystallize as I have des-
cribed to be the case in vitro. The haemoglobin crystallizes even
within the body. The urine nearly always contains such crystals,
and on three occasions an animal has died two or three days after
the injection of the poison with suppression of urine, and micro-
' l ln arriving at this conclusion I have assumed that one-thirteenth of
the animal’s weight consisted of blood.—(Welcker)


scopic examination of the kidneys has shown the tubules to be
completely blocked with haemoglobin crystals.
Haemoglobinuria is a frequent symptom with animals of other
species, except with minimal or sub-minimal doses.
Professor Halford and Dr. Ralph many years ago noticed
changes in the corpuscular elements of the blood of animals
which had died from the bite of the Australian tiger-snake
(Hoplocephalus curtus). Their attention was particularly drawn
to the enormous number of leucocytes together with granular
debris present under these circumstances. They described the
leucocytes as frequently heaped together like masses of grapes.
Halford also described some large transparent nucleated cells
which he found in the blood of animals eight to twelve hours
subsequent to death from snake-bite, but which were not present
immediately after that event. Halford at one time attached
considerable importance to these cells, which are indeed swollen
leucocytes, the condition of which must be attributed to post-
mortem phenomena. They are, moreover, as was first pointed
out by Dr. Ralph, of Kew, Victoria, also seen in the blood of
animals poisoned by prussic acid, when it is examined at a similar
interval after death and cannot therefore be considered as patho-
gnomonic of snake poisoning.
On examining the blood of animals, immediately subsequent to
death from the injection of Pseudechis poison I have, except in
those cases which have succumbed within a few hours after the
injection, always found increase in the number of leucocytes and
the occasional gathering together of these in grape like masses.
(c) — Observations on the number of corpuscles after injection of
venom.
To obtain a measure of the extent to which the red cells aro
destroyed, and also of the progress of the leucocytes, under the
influence of Pseudechis poison, I have made a series of observations
on the number of both the red and the white corpuscles present
in the circulating blood before, and at different periods subsequent
to the injection of the poison.


The animals used were dogs and in all cases the number of the
red corpuscles was diminished. The diminution commenced
directly the poison reached the circulation, and progressed to such
an extent that in some cases the number of the red cells was
reduced within a few hours to less than one half of that originally
present.
As regards the leucocytes, I expected to obtain evidence of some
degree of leucocytopenia immediately following the injection of
the poison, and preceding the onset of the leucocytosis which had
been observed in the later stages of poisoning. I was surprised
however to find that when the venom was introduced directly
into the circulation a great decrease in the number leucocytes,
amounting in many cases almost to their complete disappearance,
occurred immediately after the injection. This disappearance of
the leucocytes from the circulating blood was, however, only
temporary, and, in a time varying from one-half to five hours,
their number in samples of blood slowly increased until it reached
and often far exceeded the quantity originally present. I have
always observed this extensive diminution in the number of the
leucocytes in those cases where the poison was introduced directly
into the circulation.
Such a sudden disappearance of leucocytes from the circulation
is not, however, peculiar to snake venom. A precisely similar
result has been observed to follow the intravenous injection of
peptone (albumoses), and Sampson Himmelstjerna, 1 a pupil of
Alexander Schmidt, attributed the diminished coagulability of
peptone blood to this absence of leucocytes. Lowit 2 and Wright 3
have also drawn attention to the same fact. Both of these authors
were of opinion that the diminution of leucocytes was to be
accounted for by active leucolysis. Leucocytes are, however, not
disintegrated in vitro by solutions of venom or of peptone of much
greater concentration than they would ever encounter in the cir-
cumstances under which these bodies were injected into the veins.
1 Inaug. Diss. Dorpat., 1882.
2 Stud, zur Physiol, u Path, des Blutes, Jena, 1892.
s Proc. Boy. Soc. Bond., Vol. lii., 1895.


. Rieder 1 has, on the other hand suggested, and Bruce 2 has
adduced evidence to show, that these cells are not destroyed but
only temporarily withdrawn from the circulation, and are to be
found crowding the tissues of the liver, lungs, and medulla of
bone. A similar temporary disappearance has also been found
to follow the intravenous injection of a variety of other bodies
among which may be mentioned nucleo-albumens, 3 nuclein, 4 tuber-
culin, 6 bacterial proteins, 6 and carmine in suspension. 7 With all
these bodies the leucocytopenic phase is soon followed by one in
which the number of leucocytes is increased.
The cause of this disappearance of leucocytes after intravenous
injections of venom, I am inclined for the following reasons to
attribute to their collection in the tissues, and not to their rapid
destruction :
(1) Solutions of venom one thousand times as strong as any they
could possibly come in contact with in the blood-stream, under
the conditions of the experiment, exert no disintegrating effect
upon them in vitro.
(2) It is almost inconceivable that the rapidity of their dis-
appearance and reappearance can be explained, if one supposes
them to be destroyed. In one of my experiments, a sample of blood
taken immediately after the venom injection was so devoid of
white cells, that it was necessary to search through many hundred
squares of the haemocytometer in order to find one ; whereas a
a sample of blood taken fifteen minutes after from the same
animal contained nearly as large a number as was found previous
to the injection.
(3) Sections of the organs especially the liver and lungs appear
to contain an excessive number of leucocytes. (I have not made
any accurate quantitative observations.)
1 Beitriige z. Kenntniss d. Leucocytose, Leipzig, 1892.
2 Proc. Roy. Soc. Lond., lv., 1894.
3 Halliburton & Brodie—Journ. of Physiol., 1894.
4 Horbaczewski, M. f. Cbem., Vienna, 1891, Vol. xn., p. 221.
5 Tchistowitscb, Berlin Klin. Wocb., 1891, p. 838.
6 Buchner. 1 Werigo, Ann. I’lnst’ Pasteur, 1892.


(4) It occurs to a trifling extent only, when the poison is sub-
cutaneously injected.
Sherrington 1 pointed out that most of the substances which
when intravenously injected occasion marked leucocytopenia are
also lymphagogues. Bayliss and Starling 2 demonstrated that
lymph flow was a function of capillary blood pressure and that
the latter depends much more upon venous than on the arterial
pressure in the region concerned. The injection of venom into the
circulation produces an immediate diminution of blood flow, with
low arterial and high venous pressures, and it appears to me not
improbable that such a condition of diminished flow together with
high pressure, is accompanied by greatly increased diapedesis and
corresponding decrease'of circulating leucocytes. If the animal
continues to live, the arterial blood pressure, after an interval, of
a few minutes, steadily rises and the number of leucocytes in the
blood concurrently increases. A mechanical explanation is,
however, insufficient, for the introduction of fine particles of
carmine produces no alteration in the circulation, but is never-
theless the cause of the collection of leucocytes in internal organs.
The experiments form two series : (1) In which the venom was
introduced directly into a vein; arid (2) In which the venom was
injected subcutaneously.
Enumeration of the corpuscles was accomplished in the following
way;—o's c.c. of blood just withdrawn from an artery, was sucked
up in a carefully graduated pipette and mixed with 99'5 c.c. of an
8% solution of MgSO t slightly tinged with methyl violet. A few
drops of the mixture were placed in the cell of a haemocytometer,
and the red corpuscles in ten squares and the leucocytes in one
hundred squares of the instrument, counted by two observers. 3
The numbers counted by each observer usually agreed fairly well,
and the numbers given in the protocols are the means of the two
1 Proc. Boy. Soc. Lond., lv., p. 197.
1 Journ. of Physiol, xvi., 1894.
3 The number of corpuscles in ten squares multiplied by ten thousand
gives the number in one cubic millimetre of blood.


Number of Corpuscles.
Time.
Red in 10
White in 100
squares.
squares.
Before injection of venom
5 JO
24-5
37 minutes after first injection of venom...
466
35
3 hours 15 minutes, do. do. do. ...
296
2
6 hours do. do. do. ...
254
17
Number of Corpuscles.
Time.
Ked in 10
White in 100
squares.
squares.
Before injection
003
10-5
10 minutes after injection
517
*5
20 minutes after injection
497
1-5
2 hours after injection
414
7-5
5 hours after injection
305
12-5 .
K—July 3,1895.
observations. In those few cases where there was any marked
disagreement, two more counts were made, and the average of
the whole four observations was adopted.
Protocols of Series I.
Ex. I. —Slut, weight 6'B kilos. ; grain 1 of morphia acetate sub-
cutaneously injected.
4-10 p.m., samples of blood drawn.
4-20 ~ -000025 gramme of venom per kilo, of body-weight
injected into jugular vein.
4'35 ~ same quantity injected.
4-55 ~ same quantity injected.
4-57 ~ sample of blood drawn.
7'35 ~ sample of blood drawn.
10'0 „ sample of blood drawn.
Ex. II. —Dog, weight 8-2 kilos.; 2 grains morphia acetate.
3- p.m., sample of blood taken.
4- ~ '000025 gramme of venom per kilo, of body-weight
injected into jugular vein.
4-10 „ sample of blood drawn.
4- ~ sample of blood drawn.
5- „ 'OOOl gramme per kilo, injected.
6 0 „ sample of blood drawn.
9'o ~ sample of blood drawn.


Number of Corpuscles.
Bed in 10
"White in ICO
squares.
squares.
Before injection of venom
084
21
15 minutes after injection
550
16-5
35 minutes after injection
504
14-5
Number of Corpuscles.
Red in 10
White in 100
Time.
squares.
squares.
Before injection...
564
15
10 minutes after injection
483
1
1 hour after injection
421
6-5
2 hours after injection ...
369
3-5
3 hours after injection
322
10
4 hours after injection
297
15-5
Ex. lll.—Dog, weight 15 kilos.; 2 grains of morphia acetate
injected subcutaneously.
12-35 p.m., sample of blood drawn.
12-40 „ -000025 gramme of venom per kilo, of body weight
injected into jugular vein.
12-55 ~ sample of blood drawn.
1 0 ~ -00005 gramme venom per kilo, injected.
1-15 ~ sample of blood drawn (coag. 38 rains.)
1-20 ~ -00005 gramme venom per kilo, injected.
1-22 „ dead.
Ex. IV.—Dog, weight 10 3 kilos.; 2 grains morphia acetate
injected subcutaneously.
12-50 p.m., sample of blood drawn.
1-0 „ -000025 gramme venom per kilo, of body weight
injected into jugular vein.
1-10 ~ sample of blood drawn.
2 0 ~ sample of blood drawn.
3-0 „ sample of blood drawn.
4 0 „ sample of blood drawn.
5 - 0 „ sample of blood drawn.


I next made some observations on the number of red and white
corpuscles in animals which had received a much larger quantity
of venom, but in which the poison was subcutaneously introduced.
The amount given was such that some of the animals recovered,
while others succumbed. The experiments show the same diminu-
tion in the number of red corpuscles. The quantity of white
corpuscles increased almost immediately after the injection of the
poison. The leucocytosis reached a maximum on the second or
third day of illness, when the leucocytes were often present in
four or five times the normal amount. The number from this
time onward gradually decreased, but the leucocytosis persisted
to some extent, in the single case in which observations were
taken over so long a period, for a fortnight after the complete
recovery of the animal.
The number of the red cells was least, twenty-four to thirty-six
hours after the introduction of the poison, at which time they
were reduced to about one half their normal number. This
decrease in red corpuscles was associated with the passage of a
large quantity of haemoglobin into the urine. The urine often
had the appearance of blood, but contained few or none of the
red cells. The bile also, in those cases which died contained
haemoglobin.
Series 11.
In these experiments 5 cub. m.m. of blood were taken from the
ear and mixed with 995 cub. m.m. of the MgS0 4 solution and the
corpuscles counted as before.
Ex. I.—Dog, weight 7-7 kilos.
Sep. 21, 1D25 a.m., sample of blood taken.
~ ID3O ~ injected subcutaneously in lumbar region
with -023 gramme venom.
~ 12'0 „ sample of blood taken.
„ 3-0 p.m., sample of blood taken (urine contained
. haemoglobin).
„ 5-0 ~ sample of blood taken (walks with difficulty).


Number of Corpuscles.
Time.
Ked in 10
squares.
White in 100
squares.
Before injection
583
20
30 minutes after
503
18-5
3!. hours after
427
36
5J hours after
365
43-5
1 day after
202
465
2 „
217
65
3 „
197
80
4 „
237
73-5
5 „
264
79
6 „
294
54
7 „
342
48-5
8
346
49
10 „
358
48
14
402
39
Sept. 22, B*3o a.m.,(more lively, had passed half a pint of haemo-
globin stained urine during night).
„ 12-0 mid-day, sample of blood taken, (drank one pint
of milk, diarrhoea).
~ 23 (lively, runs about, drinks plenty of milk,
urine contains haemoglobin).
„ 12'0 mid-day, sample of blood taken.
~ 24, „ (quite lively but weak, urine contains
haemoglobin; eats well), sample of
blood taken.
~ 25, ~ (urine contains haematin and albumen),
sample of blood taken.
„ 2G, „ apparently well, urine albuminous, sample
of blood taken.
~ 27, „ (urine albuminous), blood examined.
~ 28, ~ (urine contains a trace of albumen),
blood examined.
~ 29, „ urine normal, blood examined.
Oct. 1, „ blood examined.


Number of Corpuscles.
Red in 10
White in 100
squares.
squares.
Before injection ...
540
12
If hours after
492
15
4 hours after
441
31
51 hours after
402
33
Number of Corpuscles.
Time.
Red in 10
squares.
White in 100
squares.
Before injection ...
548
16
7-i hours after
367
34
24
287
57
GO
245
67
72 ..
203
83
Ex. ll.—Dog, weight 11-5 kilos.
11-25 a.m., sample of blood taken.
11-30 a.m., -0065 gramme venom injected in lumbar region.’
1-0 p.m., sample of blood taken.
3-30 ~ sample of blood taken.
5-0 ~ sample of blood taken.
Ex. 111. —Dog, weight 11-2 kilos.
Sept. 29, 10-30 a.m., sample of blood taken.
„ 10-35 ~ -01 gramme venom injected in lumbar
region.
5-0 p.m., sample of blood examined (had vomited,
and passed urine stained with haemo-
globin).
~ 30, 10-0 a.m., sample blood taken, (very ill, refuses
food but drinks eagerly; can walk
with difficulty. Urine contains
haemoglobin).
Oct. 1, 10-0 a.m., sample of blood taken, (condition the same).
~ 2, ~ sample of blood taken, (condition worse, urine
intensely coloured by haemoglobin).
The dog died during the day.


Number of Corpuscles.
Time.
Ked in 10
squares.
White in 100
squares.
Before injection ...
546
15-5
2 hours afterwards
471
25
5£ hours afterwards
382
27-5
hours afterwards
361
31-5
Ex. IV.—Slut, weight B'4 kilos.
10-0 a.m., sample of blood taken.
1030 „ '01625 gramme of venom subcutaneously injected
in lumbar region.
11'50 ~ (very drowsy, vomited, shivering).
12'30 p.m., sample of blood taken.
3'30 ~ delirious, temperature 904, heart irregular.
4'o ~ sample of blood taken, (comatose).
6-0 ~ (comatose, temperature 95-6)
8- „ sample of blood taken.
9- ~ (comatose, temperature 90-3).
10'0 „ died.
I have mentioned that venom, when mixed with blood on a
slide prevents the display of amoeboid activity on the part of the
white cells. That the same interference with the vital activity
of the leucocytes occurs in the body is shown by the following
experiment, which is one of a series with similar results.
Two small pieces of sterilised sponge about 1 m.m. cube were
aseptically introduced into the abdominal wall of a guinea-pig.
One of these little sponges had been soaked in a '7% solution of
NaCl containing 1% of venom, the other in the saline without
the venom. Both sponges were pushed about a centimetre away
from the incision, which was afterwards drawn together by a
horse-hair suture, and covered with collodion. After two hours a
swelling arose round the venom-containing sponge, whereas the
other remained of the original size. At the expiration of five
hours the animal was killed and. both sponges very carefully
withdrawn and plunged into absolute alcohol.


Sections of the two sponges treated in the same way presented
very different appearances. The control was infiltrated with
leucocytes which stained well with ordinary nuclear stains; the
other contained leucocytes only n?ar the margins, and many of
these were broken down and took the stain badly, or not at all.
From these sponge experiments I conclude that whereas into
the control sponge the leucocytes could by their amoeboid move-
ments penetrate unharmed, in the other their activity was
paralysed, they succumbed, and were eventually disintegrated by
the solution of the venom.
To recapitulate : the effects of the venom when introduced into
the body on the blood corpuscles are :
(1) More or less destruction of the red corpuscles, the haemo-
globin of which escapes by the urine.
(2) A great increase in the number of leucocytes which may be
preceded by a certain amount of diminution.
(3) Inhibition of the vital activity of those white cells which
come into contact with the venom in sufficient concentration.
Alterations in the hlood-plasma after the injection of venom.
In the previous section of this paper I have shown that venom
exerts a destructive action upon the red blood corpuscles whereby
their disintegrated products are' set free in the plasma. The
haemoglobin circulates in solution in the plasma and is eventually
discharged by the urine and bile. Ido not know that there is
any evidence that haemoglobin exercises any baneful influence
by its presence in plasma, and I have not noticed any ill effects
to follow the injection of two or three grammes of well washed
crystals, dissolved in - 9% NaCl solution, into the circulation of
dogs. The remaining portion of the red blood, corpuscle, the
stroma, consists of a highly complex substance which by various
methods of handling may be made to yield products which are not
so innocent.
By extraction with various solvents, stromata yield cholesterin,
lecithin, a globulin, and a proteid compound of nuclein, which is


compared by Wooldridge, 1 who first separated it from stromata,
to the substance found by Plosz in liver cells, and named by him
nucleo-albumen. Wooldridge refers to this body as. —“ Ein
Eiweisskbrper der mit einem anderen an phosphor reichen moleciil
verbunden ist.” He came to this conclusion from the fact that
by digesting this body with gastric juice, peptone, and a phosphor-
ous-containing body which he compares with Miescher’s nuclein,
were formed.
It would be an unwarrantable assumption to suppose that when
venom is injected into the blood stream, it produces precisely the
same decomposition in the stromata as can be effected by extract-
ing blood corpuscles with ether, alcohol ,and sodium chloride
solution outside the body. Nevertheless we have evidence, as will
be seen shortly, that bodies of the nature of nucleo-albumens are,
under these conditions the part result, and that some of the
changes which the plasma undergoes, after the introduction of
snake venom into the circulation, are to be attributed to the
presence of these particular products of the disintegration of the
red corpuscles.
Effect on the coagulability of dog’s blood.
In the general enquiry, I have frequently had occasion to use
such methods as are commonly employed for obtaining graphic
records of the blood pressure in arteries and veins, and have been
struck with the remarkably satisfactory manner in which the
blood has behaved as regards clotting. On more than one occasion
a tracing of the venous pressure in a dog has continued for some
hours, without coagulation occurring in the cannula.
This behaviour suggested some inhibition of the normal clotting
power of extravascular blood. During several experiments, I
accordingly drew samples of blood. In all of these coagulation
was retarded, the specimens clotting only after the lapse of one
to twenty hours, or not at all. At this time I was working with
1 Du Bois Raymond's Arehiv. 1881, p. 387.


the intravenous injection of very small quantities of the poison,
viz.—O'OOOOl to 0-00002 gramme per kilogramme of body weight. 1
I am aware that such an observation on the fluidity of the
blood, following the introduction of snake poison into the system,
is by no means new.
Fontana, 2 more than one hundred years ago, noticed that the
blood remained fluid in animals dead of viper bite, and Brainard, 3
writing forty years back, states, that when death occurred im-
mediately (the italics are mine) in animals bitten by rattle snakes,
the blood was found at the post mortem examination to be clotted,
but if some time elapsed before the animal succumbed, the blood
remained fluid in the vessels. These observations of Brainard
were confirmed by Weir Mitchell 4 in 1860, who explained the
difference by the hypothesis that in cases of very rapid death the
poison had not had time to affect the blood. A few years later,
Halford 5 observed the same continued fluidity of the blood to
follow the injection of the venom of some Australian species. 6
More recently Feoktistow 7 has confirmed Fontana’s observation
on the condition of the blood after the injection of viper poison
(V. ammodytes and V. berus). The continued fluidity of the blood
after death from the bite of the Indian viperine snakes, has been
frequently noted during past years by numerous observers in that
country, and contrasted with the negative results in this respect
following the injection of cobra poison in animals. In death from
1 The weights refer to the poison in the dry condition. The method of
acquiring the venom has been described in a previous communication in
conjunction with Mr. McGarvie Smith.—Proc. Boy. Soc. N.S.W. 1891.
2 “ Fontana on Poisons,” Translated by J. Skinner, London, 1787.
3 “ Smithsonian Reports,” 1854.
4 “ Smithsonian Contributions to Knowledge,” Vol. xn.
3 “ Medical Times and Gazette,” 1873, Yol. n.
6 Quite recently Dr. Skinner of Beechworth, Victoria, has recorded
diminished coagulability of the blood during life, in a case of snake bite
which occurred in his practice.—“ Australian Medical Gazette,” March
15, 1893.
7 hoc. cit.


cobra bite in the human subject the blood is however very
frequently fluid, and non-coagulable.
On other occasions, when taking carotid pressure tracings during
the injection of larger doses of venom (0 - 0002 gramme per kilo,
or above this quantity), within a minute of the time when the
poison was introduced, the record of the rise in pressure due to
the heart’s beat disappeared, but the pressure in the manometer
remained considerably above zero. On investigation it was found
that there were no clots in or near the cannula, but in each case
the artery, at some little distance from the cannula, contained a
solid core of clot extending into the aorta, and left ventricle. On
further dissection, the blood in the whole vascular system, except-
ing only the pulmonary veins and the left auricle, was found to
be solid. The clot in the portal venous system was particularly
hard. These experiments I have repeated very many times, in
fact one or the other phase of coagulability occurs every time this
snake poison is injected into a vein of a dog.
Fseudechis venom is not the only kind of snake poison which
influences the coagulability of blood-plasma. From the examina-
tion of the literature of snake poison in the light of knowledge
gained from the above experiments, I felt convinced that some of
the results obtained by other observers working with different
venoms, which results they attributed to quite other causes, were
in reality due to intravascular clotting. Within the last month
also, I have had the opportunity of reading a paper by Heidenschild 1
dealing with the same subject. This author found that Grotalus
venom first raised the tendency of the blood to coagulate, and
that this increase was followed by a diminution in coagulability.
He was of opinion that an excessive increase of coagulability could
occasion considerable thrombosis and the death of the animal.
Heidenschild considers that the sudden death from large doses of
venom which has been observed by so many experimenters would
be explained in this way.
1 Untersuchungen fiber die Wirkung des Giftes der Brillen und der
Klapperschlauge—lnaug. Dissert. Dorpat 1886.


Owing to the fact that Heidenschild’s results formed the subject
of an inaugural dissertation, and were not as far as I am aware,
published in any journal, I had not the advantage until recently
of consulting his paper in Sydney, and I regret that on this
account I omitted to mention his work in a previous publication
of my own on this particular aspect of the physiological effect of
the injection of Pseudechis venom. 1 We were however, both
forestalled by Fontana, 2 who more than one hundred years ago
noticed that in those experiments which were followed by the
sudden death of the animal, the blood was solid throughout the
greater portion of the venous system, and who expressed his
opinion that the clotting of the blood in the living animal caused
death by arresting the circulation. Fontana, as previously
mentioned, also noticed the permanent fluidity of the blood in
other cases of viper poisoning, and he would appear to have
wondered greatly that two such apparently opposite effects could
be produced by the operation of the same agency.
Immediately after the introduction of the venom into a vein,
the coagulability of the blood increases, and this increase of
coagulability, in the case of moderate or large doses (more than
O'OOOI gramme per kilo.), culminates in intravascular clotting of
greater or less extent. The smallest dose which I have found
to produce complete clotting in the systemic circulation was
O'OOOIS gramme per kilo. Such a dose, however, usually in dogs
gives rise to thrombosis limited to the portal vein and its branches,
and inhibition of coagulability elsewhere.
The injection of small doses, — i.e., below O'OOOI gramme per
kilo.—also gives rise to a condition of increased coagulability of
the blood. This increase however, only manifests itself for an
extremely short time, and samples must be drawn within two
minutes from the time of the introduction of the venom, in order
to observe it. This transient positive phase is succeeded by. a
1 Journal of Physiology, Vol. xv., p. 380.
2 Loc. cit. —This observation of Fontana’s was also unknown to me until
quite recently, as a copy of his work was not procurable in Sydney.


negative phase, for blood drawn three minutes after the injection,
either fails to clot at all, or does so only after the lapse of several
hours. The negative phase continues for one or two days after
the introduction of the poison in dogs which have received a nearly
fatal dose of the venom subcutaneously.
It is interesting to note that the duration of the phase of
diminished coagulability corresponds under such circumstances
with the period of blood cell destruction. When this cell destruc-
tion ceases, the coagulability of the plasma rapidly returns to the
normal. The blood in all parts of the vascular system does not
exhibit the same tendency to clot in the vessels. When dogs
are the subjects of experiment, coagulation, when present, always
occurs in the portal venous system, and the thrombosis is
frequently confined to this area. It also occurs more readily
with venous than with arterial blood.
Dogs evince varying degrees of susceptibility in this respect,
the same dose per kilo, producing in one animal intravascular
clotting, in another inhibition of the coagulation of the shed blood.
Eesults with animals other than dogs.
I have examined the condition of the blood after the intravenous
injection of snake poison in rabbits and cats. In these animals
both positive and negative phases occur as with dogs. Cats appear
more resistant to the action of the venom than dogs and rabbits.
Conditions modifying the effect upon the blood plasma of the
injection of venom.
(1) Influence of Respiration.
I have previously mentioned that I have on no occasion observed
the blood, which has just traversed the capillaries of the lungs, to
participate in an otherwise general thrombosis. Whatever changes
may be effected in the plasma during its passage through the
pulmonary veins and left auricle, where it remains fluid, are only
transient for the blood in the left ventricle and aorta is often solid.
When complete clotting of the blood in both systemic arteries
and veins follows injection of the poison, respiration continues


often for a minute or more after the circulation is at a standstill.
If records of the arterial blood pressure and of the respiratory
movements be taken in these experiments, the moment of clotting
in the arteries is indicated on the tracing, by the disappearance
of heart-beats, and the straight line described by the style some
distance above the abscissa. I have in my possession a number
of tracings showing the continuance of respiration for periods up to
two minutes after the circulation must have been completely
blocked.
These experiments show that as long as the blood will flow
through the pulmonary artery and its branches, there is nothing
to prevent its normal gaseous interchange, as far as the respiratory
movements are concerned. That it takes up oxygen as usual is
seen by the colour of the blood in the left heart.
To ascertain whether the modification of the coagulability of
the blood during its passage through the lungs depended on its
altered gaseous condition, I followed the method which Wright 1
used, to determine the cause of the distribution of thrombosis
after injections of Wooldridge’s tissue fibrinogen. This observer
rendered animals dyspuoeic by compression of the trachea previous
to the injection of doses, which, as he had determined would,
without this treatment, only give rise to a very limited intra-
vascular clotting. The results of injecting “tissue-fibrinogen”
into the circulation when in this venous condition were strikingly
altered. My experiments were performed on rabbits of like
weight. Several were intravenously injected, under exactly
similar circumstances, with gradually decreasing doses of venom,
until a dose was found which produced a very limited clotting or
none at all. Other rabbits of the same weight were then rendered
dyspnoeic by compression of the trachea continued for one minute
before the subminimal dose of venom was introduced. These
subminimal doses produced in every case complete clotting
throughout the whole vascular system.
1 Journal of Physiology, Vol. at., No. 2.


Professor Wright has recently extended his observations and
shown that it is the increase in C0 3 and not the diminution in
the contained oxygen, which determines the greater tendency to
coagulate which occurs in venous blood. 1
(2) Influence of Digestion.
I find I have records of eleven experiments in which 0-0002
gramme per kilo, was injected into the jugular vein of a dog.
Seven of these animals died within eight minutes, from extensive
venous and arterial thrombosis. Three others died within two
hours, and one lived for upwards of four hours. The post mortem
examinationof this last animal discovered no intravascular clotting,
and the shed blood remained fluid until it putrefied. In the three
which lived from one to two hours after the injection, there was
more or less thrombosis of the portal venous system, but the blood
from the rest of the body remained fluid for several hours.
These experiments were not performed with the sole object of
observing the effect of venom on the clotting of the blood, and in
every one of them records, including one of arterial blood
were taken on a kymograph. Consequently I have in each case
the exact time and duration of the injection to refer to. In all
the experiments the above mentioned amount per kilo, was
dissolved in 2 c.c. of a -7% solution of NaCl, and the time occupied
by the injection, as registered on the tracing, was from five to
eight seconds. The importance of the knowledge that the rate of
injection was fairly constant, I shall discuss later on.
At the time of these experiments I attributed the variations in
results to idiosyncracies in the dogs. On reconsidering the matter,
however, I am inclined to attribute them to the effect of digestion.
The seven first mentioned experiments were performed in sequence,
and the four last also in sequence. During the former series I'
was working in the afternoon, whilst the experiments forming the
latter series were performed in the forenoon, and I find that the
dogs have always been fed at 11 a.m. Thus, for the first series,
1 Proc. Roy. Soc. Lend., Yol. lv.


dogs which had had a meal three hours previously were used,
whereas the last four experiments were made upon animals which
had fasted for nearly twenty-four hours.
(3) Influence of Rapidity of Injection.
The variations in effect caused by alterations in the rapidity of
injection are very marked. So much so, that it is impossible to
compare the results from different experiments, unless the rate
with which the poison is introduced is a constant factor. Intra-
vascular clotting is produced most readily if the dose be rapidly
thrown into a vein near the heart {e.g. the jugular). On increas-
ing the time of delivery of the poison into the circulation, either
by employing diluted solutions, or by pressing down the piston of
the syringe more slowly, the positive phase (increased coagulability
of the blood), is less and Jess pronounced. If the duration of the
injection be still further prolonged, the positive phase, if present,
is so rapidly succeeded by tbe negative variation that this latter
appears to be the only result. The negative phase becomes more
and more pronounced as larger quantities of the venom are allowed
to slowly enter the circulation. For slow injections I have con-
nected a burette containing a very dilute solution of venom in
•7% NaCl with the cannula in the vein, by a piece of rubber tube,
the calibre of which was controlled by a screw clamp. With this
arrangement I have been able to introduce large doses (0 005
gramme per kilo.), without producing intravascular clotting.
The discovery that the effects on the blood plasma after slow
injections, are vastly different from, in fact exactly opposite to,
those following rapid introduction of the venom, explains why, in
my earliest experiments, I did not obtain the same fluid condition
of the blood as Halford, 1 who used either subcutaneous injection
of the venom, or else allowed a snake to bite the dog. By these
methods delivery into the circulation would necessarily be slow,
and comparable with results obtained by intravenous injection
only in cases in which such injection was very gradually
accomplished.
1 Loc. cit.


(4) Influence of previous injection of the venom into an animal,
on the result of a subsequent injection.
If a small dose of venom (less than O'OOOI gramme per kilo.) be
introduced into a dog, the blood, as previously mentioned, exhibits
for about two or three minutes after the completion of the injec-
tion, an increased coagulability. That is to say, samples drawn
during this period clot sooner than control samples taken previous
to the injection. At the same time the arterial blood pressure
falls to one half or one third of its former height. After twenty
or thirty minutes the pressure begins slowly to rise, and thirty
minutes to one hour from the time of the injection may have
reached or even exceeded its original height. During the whole
of this period, with the exception of the first two or three minutes,
samples of blood taken from an artery show very marked retarda-
tion in coagulation.
If now, one hour or more after the first injection, a second
injection containing a much larger quantity (ten or twenty times
the first dose) be made, the introduction of this second dose
increases the coagulability of the blood during the subsequent few
minutes, but samples of blood drawn five or ten minutes after the
second injection clot however only after the lapse of several hours,
and in many cases spontaneous coagulation is altogether in abey-
ance. I have always introduced, at the second injection, a quantity
of the venom which would inevitably produce complete arterial
and venous thrombosis in an animal which had not been pre-
viously subjected to an injection of a dose sufficient to establish a
negative variation.
On other occasions I have given a dog yet a third injection,
containing comparatively speaking, a very large dose, viz.;—-002
gramme per kilo. This amount, dissolved in 3 c.c. of -7% NaCl
solution was injected, as rapidly as possible, into the femoral or
jugular vein. This third injection failed to produce any increased
coagulability of the blood, and the samples drawn immediately
after the injection did not clot at all.


It would thus appear that the establishment of a negative
variation confers an immunity, as far as intravascular clotting is
concerned, against further injections of the venom. This immunity
is very speedily produced ; how long it may last lam at present
not in a position to say.
These facts explain how it is that one can introduce large
quantities of the venom into the circulation, provided this be done
slowly, without producing intravascular clotting. The first portion
of the injection causes a transitory positive phase, i.e., increased
coagulability, but not sufficient to cause actual thrombosis. This
is immediately superseded by a negative phase and the establish-
ment of this inhibitory phase confers immunity against the
remainder of the injection.
Before discussing the bearings of these facts, I shall indicate
the results of an examination of shed blood which has been sub-
jected to the action of the venom, and of some of the reactions of
the non-coagulable blood, itself.
Action of a solution of venom on the coagulation of shed blood.
To determine whether a solution of venom were capable of
exerting any influence upon shed blood, I dissected out three
inches of the femoral artery of a dog, and bled from this directly
into a solution of the poison. The cut end of the‘artery was
immersed in a ‘9% solution of 'NaCI, containing o‘l% of venom.
By relaxing the compression of the fingers, a small amount of
blood—equal to the volume of the salt solution —was allowed to
flow into the vessel. The two fluids were at the same time freely
mixed by agitating the end of the artery. The blood began to
thicken in fifty-six seconds, but clotting did not proceed in a
normal manner. At the end of an hour, a small soft clot formed,
which on shrinking failed to entangle all the corpuscles. The
vessels containing the mixture of blood and venom solution could
at no time be inverted without upsetting the contents, as could
be done to the vessel in a control experiment with salt solution
alone.
L —July 3, 1895.


On no occasion have I been able to prevent coagulation altogether,
as was done by Weir Mitchell and Reichert 1 with the venom of
the rattle-snake. These authors drew the blood directly into a
vessel containing a solution of venom (a stronger solution than
mine), surrounded by a freezing mixture. On allowing the
temperature of the blood to rise gradually they found it remained
permanently fluid.
Examination of samples of blood exhibiting the negative
variation.
Negative phase blood always shows marked retardation in
clotting. The delay is so great in some cases that putrefaction
sets in before coagulation has occurred. The loss of coagulability
is the more pronounced the greater the amount of venom which
has been introduced. There is not the slightest difficulty in pro-
ducing this negative phase ; it is only necessary to introduce the
poison sufficiently slowly at first, in order that the initial positive
variation may not reach the pitch when intravascular clotting
occurs.
The blood of the negative phase takes up oxygen and gives it
up in the usual manner, and with the exception of its loss of
spontaneous coagulability, and the fact that some of the haemoglobin
is dissolved in the plasma, does not obviously depart from the
normal. In my examination of this blood, the corpuscles were
separated from the plasma by the centrifuge. The extent to
which the coagulability of the plasmas was diminished varied,
according to the amount of venom which had been introduced,
and also, to some extent, according to the time which had elapsed
between the injection of the venom, and the withdrawal of the
sample of blood. In most cases I found that the greatest delay
in clotting occurred in blood drawn about an hour after the intro-
duction of the poison. By increasing the dose of venom, I have
been able to obtain plasmas in which coagulability was diminished
to any degree, from slight delay in the onset of clotting, to absolute
1 Loe. eit.


disappearance of spontaneous coagulability. Those samples in
which clotting is delayed for a few hours, but which subsequently
clot well, I shall refer to as “weak negative phases,” while those
in which spontaneous coagulation is entirely in abeyance, and
which can only be made to clot under a few special conditions, I
shall designate “ pronounced negative phases,” but it must be
borne in mind that individual samples show every degree of loss
of coagulability between these extremes.
In plasmas which exhibit only a weak negative phase, clotting
can be induced more or less readily by the addition of the following
(1) Solution of nucleo-albumen (Wooldridge’s tissue-fibrinogen).
(2) Calcium chloride.
(3) Dilution.
(4) Passage of C0 3 through the liquid.
(5) Alexander Schmidt’s fibrin ferment.
These are arranged in the order in which they are most active.
As the negative phase becomes more and more pronounced, they
lose their capacity to hasten or occasion clotting usually in the
inverse order, although exceptions are not infrequent. In a really
pronounced negative phase, each and all of these additions are
incapable of inducing coagulation.
Such plasmas contain fibrinogen, for by heating, after previous
neutralisation, they yield a considerable precipitate at 55° C. The
fibrinogen would appear, however, to be present in a somewhat
altered condition, for it is now no longer thrown out of solution
by half saturation with NaCl.
These plasmas although absolutely devoid of spontaneous
coagulability, can be made to yield fibrin, though the amount
yielded appears to me to be very much less than that obtainable
from an equal quantity of blood plasma, previous to the injection
of the poison; but as I have not made any quantitative determin-
ation of the amounts, I am unable to speak with certainty on
this point.


Plasmas which have lost all spontaneous coagulability may
however be made to clot by the following means—
(l) Addition of a saturated solution of NaOl up to an equal
volume.
(2) Addition of an equal volume of a saturated solution of
MgSO*.
(3) Addition of acetic acid, until the plasma is just faintly acid.
(4) Similar addition of weak sulphuric, hydrochloric, or phos-
phoric acids. (Oxalic acid is ineffectual).
The addition of the saturated solutions of NaOl and MgS0 4
occasions a faint turbidity, and the plasma clots on standing a
few minutesy The acids must be carefully added, just to acidifi-
cation, when turbidity occurs. Until this point is reached, no
clotting ever occurs, and if too much be added, the fibrinogen is
precipitated. This precipitate readily redissolves in excess of the
acid, and when so redissolved I have never succeeded in producing
coagulation. The fibrin formed under these circumstances has all
the appearance of ordinary fibrin. It is insoluble in weak saline
solutions, or dilute HCI ( - 2%), but swells up in the latter. On
digesting with pepsin it dissolves, leaving a perfectly clear solution.
Since the observations of Arthus and Pagtis 1 the influence of
calcium in coagulation has been recognised to be of the highest
importance. Blood, decalcified by drawing it into a solution of a
soluble oxalate, or fluoride (Arthus and Pages), has lost its capacity
to clot, although this may be restored by the further addition of
calcium salt. The intravenous injection of sodium oxalate
(Halliburton and Brodie), 2 or soap (Munk), also renders the blood
incoagulable. Pekelharing 3 is of opinion that the diminished
coagulability of blood after the intravenous injection of peptone
and sometimes of nucleo-albumens is to be explained in the same
way.
1 Archiv. de Physiol., Ser. v., T. n., 1890, p. 739.
2 Journal of Physiology, Yol. xvn., 1894.
* Centrhl. f. d. Med. Wiss., Bd. 45, 1892.


■As the fluid plasma of the negative phase after venom injections
presents, in many respects, the closest analogies with the plasmas
obtained by both of these means, I made a series of experiments
to determine the influence of calcium on the coagulability of the
blood of animals after injections of venom. The effect of calcium
salts on plasmas in vitro, has already been mentioned.
I found that the results of these experiments could be arranged
in three classes—
(l) The cases where only a very moderate negative phase has
been produced, and the clotting of the shed blood is delayed
from thirty minutes to two or three hours.
(2) Cases in which the negative phase is more pronounced and
the shed blood clots only after some hours or days.
(3) Very pronounced negative phases in which the blood never
clots spontaneously, and in which the addition of saturated
solution of sodium chloride etc. only occasions a very small
amount of coagulum.
The addition of a few drops of calcium chloride to a sample of
blood from the first class, causes almost immediate solidification
and if a few cc. of a 1% solution of this salt in '9% NaCl be
injected into a vein, the coagulability of the blood is raised above
the normal, and very frequently the animal dies in a few minutes
from extensive thrombosis.
With the second class, the calcium chloride is without influence
upon the extravascular plasma, but raises the coagulability of the
circulating blood towards the normal.
With the third class, CaCl 3 has no effect either when injected
or added to the plasma in vitro.
The following three experiments, chosen from a large number,
illustrate these effects of calcium salts. In these experiments the
carotid artery and jugular vein were dissected out, and cannulas
tied in both. The former was used for taking samples of blood,
and the latter for the introduction of the venom and calcium


chloride solutions. After the withdrawal of each sample of blood
from the artery, the cannulse was carefully cleaned out.
Experiment I.—Dog, weight 4-8 kilogrammes.
11 - a.m., 043 gramme of morphia acetate subcutaneously.
12 - p.m., -000025 gramme venom per kilo, of body weight
(dissolved in 5 cc. of -9% NaCl solution)
injected slowly into jugular vein.
1-0 „ -00035 gramme venom per kilo, injected into jugular
vein.
I-10 „ sample of blood withdrawn. (A)
1- ~ 5 cc. of 1% solution of oao1 3 in -9% NaCl solution
injected into jugular vein. This was followed
by immediate thrombosis and death.
Sample A centrifugalised.
(1) Plasma clotted alone in thirty-five minutes.
(2) Plasma + 4 drops of -5% solution GaGL clotted almost
immediately.
Experiment ll.—Dog, weight 5-3 kilogrammes.
11 a.m., 0-13 gramme morphia acetate'subcutaneously.
12 p.m., -000025 gramme of venom per kilo, of body weight in
5 cc. -9% NaCl solution, slowly injected into
jugular vein.
1 p.m., -00035 gramme of venom per kilo, injected into the
jugular vein.
2- sample of blood withdrawn. (A)
2-50 10 cc. 1% solution CaOl, in -9% NaCl solution injected
into jugular.
2-55 sample of blood withdrawn (B), which clotted in five
minutes; the clot was a soft one, and never became
a firm jelly.
Sample A centrifugalised.
Plasma A clotted slightly and spontaneously after 20 hours.
Plasma + CaCl a , clotted in the same time.


Experiment lll.—Dog, weight 14‘4 kilogrammes.
11 a.m., (H 5 gramme morphia acetate.
12‘10 p.m., ‘000025 gramme venom per kilo of body weight in
5 cc. - 9% NaCl solution slowly injected into
jugular vein.
2‘o „ ‘00035 gramme venom per kilo, injected into jugular.
2‘15 „ sample of blood withdrawn. (A)
2‘30 „ ‘00035 gramme venom per kilo, injected into jugular.
3‘o „ sample of blood withdrawn, (B)
3‘lo „ 10 cc. 1% solution of CaCl, in 9% NaCl solution,
injected into jugular.
3‘30 „ bled to death. (0)
All the samples of blood were centrifugalised. The plasmas
A, B, C clotted under the following circumstances:—
A—Plasma clotted spontaneously in 4 hours 14 minutes
Plasma diluted with water, in 2 hours 30 minutes
Plasma + CaCl 3 in 4 hours.
B and O—Plasma did not clot spontaneously, nor on dilution.
Plasma -f CaCl 3 no clot.
Plasma + OaCl 2 and 1 cc. of nucleo-albumen solu-
tion (from testis) —precipitate, which next
morning was partially converted into fibrin.
Plasma acidified with acetic, hydrochloric, sulphuric
and phosphoric acids until turbidity was pro-
duced, clotted in less than fifteen minutes.
Plasma + equal volume saturated solution NaCl, clotted in
ten minutes.
Plasma + equal volume saturated solution MgS0 4 , clotted in
twenty-two minutes.
As in those cases where the negative phase is well pronounced,
calcium is ineffectual in producing coagulation, both in intra- and
extra-vascular plasma, it cannot well be maintained, as Pekelharing
supposes to be the case with peptone blood, that this disappearance


of clotting power is due to the absence of free calcium salts from
the blood.
The analogous behaviour of blood after snake venom injection
with peptone blood, is not however, in this respect departed from;
for I find that both peptone plasma and the plasma obtained after
the slow injection of nucleo-albumens, behave in a manner
identical with snake venom plasma, provided a sufficient quantity
of these bodies have been introduced to produce a complete
disappearance of all tendency to spontaneous coagulation. As
Pekelharing’s inviting hypothesis only explains the partial
phenomena of peptone injection, one cannot accept it as ah inter-
pretation of the facts.
Significance of these phenomena.
These phenomena of intravascular coagulation exhibiting
positive and negative phases, together with the conditions which
I have found to modify the result, show the closest parallelism
with the effects observed by Wooldridge, I Wright 2 and Halliburton 3
to follow the introduction of tissue-fibrinogen (nucleo-albumen)
into the circulation. This parallelism is still further evident when
one compares the behaviour of the fluid blood, drawn from an
animal poisoned with venom, in which the negative phase is pro-
1“ On intravasc. coag.” —Proc. Eoy. Soc., 188 G. " TJeber intravasc.
Qerinnung”—Dußois Keymond’s Arch., 1886. “ TTebersicht einer Theorie
der Blutgerinnung ” —Ludwig’s Festschrift, 1887. “On haemorrhagic
Infarction of the Liver”—Proc. Path. Soo. 1887. ‘‘The Nature of
Coagulation ” —Hainsworth & Co., London 1888. “ Ueber Schutzimpfung
auf chemischem Wege”—Du Bois Raymond’s Arch. 18S8.
2 “On the conditions which determine the distribution of the coagula-
tion following the intravascular injection of Wooldridge’s tissue-
fibrinogen.”—Journal of Physiol., Yol. xn., No. 2. “ A study of intra-
vascular coagulation produced by the injection of Wooldridge’s tissue-
fibrinogen.”—Proc. Eoy. Irish Acad., 3rd Series, Vol. n.. No. 2. “On
tissue or cell fibrinogen in its relation to the pathology of blood.”—
Lancet, Feb. 27 and March 5, 1892.
3 “ The proteids of kidney and liver cells.” —Journal of Physiol., YoL
xixi.. Supplement Number. “ The chem. physiol, of the animal cell.”—
Goulstonian Lectures, lecture 3, 8.M.J., March 25, 1893.


nounced, with the reactions which have been found to characterise
the blood drawn during the corresponding phase following the
intravenous injection of “ tissue-fibrinogen.”
Wooldridge in one of his papers 1 thus summarises the results
obtained by injecting tissue-fibrinogen :—“ If a solution of tissue-
fibrinogen be injected into a dog in varying quantity, the effects
observed are : with very small quantities no discoverable intra-
vascular clotting occurs, but the blood drawn off after the injection
clots very slowly, 1 2 hours intervening; with larger quantities
intravascular clotting takes place, being, as a general rule, chiefly
confined to the, portal venous system—the extent of clot being
greater as more tissue-fibrinogen is injected. The shed blood
(from other areas) will not clot. The more tissue-fibrinogen there
has been injected, the more complete is this prevention of the
(extravascular) clotting—the interval between the drawing off
and the clotting varying from two to thirty hours. In most
cases the blood can be readily made to clot firmly by additions,
such for instance, as the ordinary fibrin-ferment, and in the great
majority of cases it clots firmly on standing.”
A few pages further on in the same paper, he says : —■“ Further,
the injection of a very large quantity of tissue-fibrinogen always
leads to the production of a shed blood entirely noncoagulable,
either spontaneously, or on addition of leucocytes or tissue-
fibrinogen. The only difficulty is this, that frequently the circu-
lation is arrested before the required quantity is got in, and then
only marked slowing of the shed blood is produced.”
A summary of my experiments, showing the effect on the
coagulability of the blood from the intravenous injection of
different amounts of venom, could well enough be given in the
same words as those used by Wooldridge, substituting only,
“venom ” for “ tissue-fibrinogen.”
Wooldridge also found that variations in the condition of an
animal were followed by alterations in the amount and distribution
1 “Nature of Coagulation," p. 31.


of the thrombosis, and Wright, 1 in following up the researches of
this observer, has very considerably extended our knowledge in
this respect, as regards both dogs and other animals.
One of the modifying conditions observed by Wooldridge was
that in fasting dogs, unless large quantities of the “tissue-
fibrinogen ” were injected, the intravascular clotting was limited
to the portal area ; whereas the same dose given to an animal in
full digestion produced clotting extending to the general venous
system, right heart, and even into the arteries. I have shown
reasons for believing that the blood of animals in full digestion
exhibits the same increased sensitiveness towards the action of
the venom.
I have previously had occasion to mention an experiment of
Wright’s, in which he rendered an animal dyspnoeic by compression
of the trachea before injecting tissue-fibrinogen. Wright found
that the injection of an amount of “ tissue-fibrinogen ” which
would, in an animal not so treated, give rise to clotting only in
the portal venous system, under these circumstances followed by
intravascular clotting throughout the whole vascular system.
Similar experiments with venom produced results corresponding,
in every case, with those detailed by Wright.
Another experimental condition which influences in an exactly
corresponding manner the results from injections of both “tissue-
fibrinogen ” and venom, is the rapidity with which they are
introduced into the circulation. Wright 1 has already drawn
attention to this factor as influencing the results from the injection
of “ tissue-fibrinogen.” I have experimented with “ tissue-
fibrinogen ” in order to determine this point, and I find that as
I have indicated to be the case with venom, one can produce at
will the positive or negative phase by the injection of the same
amount of “ tissue-fibrinogen,” simply by varying the rate at
which it is allowed to enter the circulation. Both “ tissue-
1 Loc. cit.
1 Proc. Eoy. Irish Acad., 3rd Series, Yol. n.. No. 2.


fibrinogen,” and venom may be introduced in great quantity,
without increasing the coagulability of the blood, once the initial
positive phase is passed, and a negative phase established, if the
solution be allowed to flow very slowly into a vein.
In .1888 Wooldridge 1 published a remarkable result he had
obtained with the injection of his “ fibrinogens ” viz.—that the
injection of one dose conferred upon the animal immunity from
further injections. Exactly the same occurs with the venom.
The first injection produces an immunity, as far as the clotting
of the blood in the vessels is concerneJ, from the effects of
future doses, even when those are very large.
I have had many opportunities of confirming this statement of
Wooldridge. An analogous result has been obtained with the
intravenous injection of albumoses, although the effect of these
upon the blood is of the reverse order. Schmidt Mulheim 2 found
that when the coagulability of the blood had reappeared after it
had for the time being vanished owing to a first large injection of
albumoses, it was not influenced by a second injection. The
first injection must however be a full one or the immunity is not
complete.
The parallelism, as far as the coagulation of the blood is con-
cerned between the results of the injection of “ tissue-fibrinogen”
and of venom, is, as has been pointed out, maintained when one
examines the conditions" under which the two kinds of fluid blood
may be induced to clot.
Both these kinds of blood remain fluid, or clot only after the
lapse of some hours, the time intervening before the onset of
coagulation depending in both cases on the amount of the agent
injected ; and by injections of nucleo-albumens and of venom, one
can obtain a series of plasmas which, as regards the circumstances
under which they may be made to yield fibrin, exactly correspond.
1 “ Sehutzimpfung auf Chemischeu Wege.”—Du Bois Eeymond’s Arch.
1888.
2 Du Bois Eeymond’s Arch., 1880, S, 52.


So close is the parallelism between the two series of phenomena,
that one is inevitably driven to enquire whether after all there
may not underlie both an actual identity of process. But
in thus enquiring, one is confronted by the very striking fact that
in the venom experiments, only an exceedingly small quantity of
the active agent is required to produce an effect negative or
positive on the coagulability of the blood.
Wooldridge stated that it required l - 5 to 2 grammes of his
“ tissue-fibrinogen ” to produce intravascular clotting, in a medium
sized dog. This I imagine, from my own experiments with
“tissue-fibrinogen,” is a rather high estimate. However this may
be, it is certain that in the one case we are dealing with the
injection of grammes, and in the other with thousandths, or ten-
thousandths of a gramme. He also found that his “ fibrinogen ”
disappeared in the process of coagulation and presumably took
part in the formation of the clot. 1
On account of the minute quantity of venom required to pro-
duce the intravascular clotting, it is hard to conceive that it can
operate by any such direct action. An important difference
between the two series of phenomena which I have always noticed
is, that whereas with injections of “tissue-fibrinogen” the clotting
occurs practically instantaneously, so much so, that it frequently
causes blocking in the vein before one has had opportunity to
finish the injection, with venom injections there is an interval of
at least 90 - 100 seconds before clotting occurs in the arteries,
but notwithstanding this delay in onset, the clotting in cases of
venom injections is much firmer and more extensive than I have
ever been able to obtain with “ tissue-fibrinogen.”
Pekelharing, 2 Wright, 3 and Halliburton, 4 have recently shown
that the bodies Wooldridge designated “tissue-fibrinogen” consist
largely of nucleo-albumens, and that these nucleo-albumens are
the active agents in producing intravascular clotting.
1 “ Nature of Coagulation,” and “ Ueber intravasc. Gerinnung.”
2 “ Virchow’s Festschrift,” Bd. 1.
3 “ Proc. Hoy. Irish Acad.” 3rd Series, Yol. n.. No. 2.
4 “Jour, of Physiol.” Yol. xm.,Supplementary Number.


The venom of the Australian black snake does not contain any
body of the nature of a nucleo-albumeh. If a clear solution of
venom be subjected to artificial gastric digestion, it is quite
unaltered in appearance (no precipitate of nuclein). Moreover,
by such treatment it is not deprived of its toxic properties.
The question has now to be answered whether, notwithstanding
this negative result, there is yet any source from which through
the direct or indirect action of the venom (e.g. the production of
this substance within the organism itself, under the influence
of the specific toxic activity of the venom), a sufficient supply of
nucleo-albumen could be derived.
I have already shown that this venom is a powerful agent in the
destruction of red blood corpuscles, and evidence exists that bodies
like ether and tannatcs, I .sodium chlorate, glycerin, toluenediamine,
arsenic and phosphorus, 2 which when injected into the circulation
disintegrate red cells, and occasion haemoglobinuria, also produce
thrombosis.
Wooldridge 3 and Nauck 4 produced intravascular coagulation by
injecting the stromata of mammalian blood corpuscles, and the
similar results of Kohler 5 obtained by injection of the hiemaglobin-
stained fluid expressed from warm blood clot, may no doubt be
explained as due to broken up corpuscles. Kruger has confirmed
Wooldridge’s results as regards the stromata of bird’s blood.
Groth 6 and Kruger 7 , have found intravascular coagulation to
follow the introduction of a saline extract of lymph-glands, con-
taining leucocytes, into the circulation. Wooldridge criticised
these results of Groth and Kruger on the ground that well-washed
1 Naunyn, Ueber den ncuen Standpunkt in derLehre von Thrombose.—
“Ber. Klin. Woch. No. 24, 1886.
2 Silbermann —“ Yirch. Arch., Bd. 117, S. 288.”
3 “ Practitioner,” 1886. * Diss. Dorpat. 1886.
5 " IJeber Thrombose etc.” Inaug. Diss. Dorpat. 1887.
6 " Ueber die Schicksale der farblosen Elemente im kreisenden Blute.”
Dorpat. 1884.
7 " Zeitschr.'f. Biologie,” Vol. xxiv.


leucocytes have no such effect, and he ascribed the consequences
of their injection to the fluid and not to the cells. As nucleo-
albumens are set free by the disintegration of cells, Wooldridge
would by his washings separate the products of disintegration,
whereas Groth and Kruger would inject them.
There is then abundant evidence that the disintegration of both
kinds of blood cells outside the body sets free nucleo-albumens,
which if introduced into the circulation may give rise to intra-
vascular clotting; and also that some bodies which when injected
into the blood stream, cause destruction of the red cells, also
occasion thrombosis. lam therefore of opinion that the effect of
venom on plasma is a secondary one, and due to the presence of
nucleo-albumens in the circulation. This opinion is supported by
the fact that in two cases, after the injection of a comparatively
large dose of venom, in which the shed blood did not clot spon-
taneously at all, I was able to separate from the plasma, a small
quantity of nucleo-albumen.
Five per cent, acetic acid was carefully added to the plasma,
until the precipitate, which was at first produced, almost entirely
disappeared. This precipitate by acidulation with acetic acid or
other weak acids has generally been considered to be fibrinogen.
Lilienfeld maintains however, that Hammarsten’s fibrinogen is
by this means split up into two bodies : (1) “Thrombosin,” which
invariably clots in the presence of calcium, (2) a proteid, which
he regards as an albumose, and which itself, hinders coagulation.
“Thrombosin” is readily dissolved by excess of the acid. Nucleo-
albumin is not dissolved by this strength of acid.
A few more drops of the acid were then added without dissolv-
ing what remained of the precipitate. This was then separated
by filtration, and thoroughly washed with water. It was now
insoluble in water or dilute saline solutions but dissolved readily
in 1 % sodium carbonate solution. Five cc. of this solution were
introduced into the jugular vein of a rabbit, and in less than a
1 •* Zeitschr. £. Physiol. Chem./’ Bd. xx.


minute the animal died with complete thrombosis of the whole
venous system. Another portion of the precipitate was dissolved
in -2% HCI, and pepsin added, and kept at 40° C. overnight. In
the morning there was a precipitate of nuclein in the vessel.
From experiments with “tissue-fibrinogen” which I have quoted
in this paper, it will I think be obvious, that if by the action of
this agent, the coagulability of the blood is to be so increased as
to cause intravascular clotting, it must first be present in the
blood in some quantity. Even when large areas of cells are
disintegrated, as in pneumonia, the rate of absorption is so slow,
that this condition is not usually fulfilled, though Wright has
suggested that it may explain the increased coagulability of the
blood which has been observed in this disease. The more or less
extensive ante-mortem clots which are so frequently found in the
right ventricle after death from pneumonia, are probably to be
explained in the same way.
It would be quite otherwise, were the nucleo-albumens the
product of disintegration of cells in, or in proximity to the blood
stream, as the corpuscles or the endothelial cells lining the whole
of the vascular system. In such a case the conditions would be
practically the same as if these toxic agents were injected from
without.
We have already seen that in disintegration of the red corpuscles
by the venom, we may have an available source of nucleo-albumens.
Moreover, as I shall point out in the next section of this paper,
the venom also exerts a destructive action upon the endothelium
of the whole vascular system, whence a possible additional supply
of these proteids may be derived.
I am not aware of any instance in which sudden death from
thrombosis of an extensive character, has in the human subject
followed the bite of one of our Australian colubrines; To occasion
such an event it would be necessary for the poison to be injected
subcutaneously in a very considerable dose, or else for it to be
discharged into a vein. The most rapid death >of which I have


obtained a record, occurred in thirty minutes after the infliction
of the bite. The patient was an adult, and post mortem examin-
ation revealed decolourised (ante mortem) clots in the right
ventricle with a fluid condition of the blood generally. In this
case it would appear that death was directly due to intravascular
clotting, and it is possible that thrombosis in smaller areas of the
circulation may be responsible for some of the symptoms which
occasionally occur.
The fact that after death from poisoning in man the blood is
almost invariably fluid, together with the frequent occurrence of
hsemoglobinuria in severe cases, shows that the venom produces
similar effects on human blood as on the blood of the lower
animals; and though these blood changes are not so obvious in
the human subject as in the dog, this fact is owing partly to the
relatively smaller doses inoculated, and partly to the lesser sensi-
tiveness of the blood of man to the action of the venom.
When small animals, such as birds, rats, mice, and frogs, are
bitten by Pseudechis, they run about for a period varying from a
few seconds to two or three minutes ; their breathing then
suddenly becomes dyspnceic, and convulsions and death speedily
follow. If, just before death they be withdrawn from the cage,
and opened, the whole venous system and right heart will be
found full of clot.
The injection of a virus which occasions a sudden arrest of the
circulation is one of the means acquired by this reptile for securing
its prey. It would be hard to imagine a quicker or more effectual
method. After a small animal has been bitten by a snake, the
latter would appear to recognise that it will not have long to wait
for its meal. During the interval which precedes the death of
the bird or mouse, the snake carefully watches it, and as soon as
the little animal is prostrate, proceeds, if hungry, to swallow it.
It is possible that the instances when an agitated bird has
been seen to “ flutter from a bough, almost into the mouth of a
snake,” which instances have frequently been mentioned as
proof of the reptile’s power of fascination, may more correctly be


spoken of as cases in which the bird lias been bitten, and the
snake is biding his time, until, from the sudden operation of the
poison, his victim falls dead beside him.
(e) —The gases of the Mood after venom injections.
The analogy between the fluid condition of the blood which
may obtain after the injection of the venom, and its condition
subsequent to the intravenous injection of a solution of commercial
peptone has been pointed out. It must, however, be borne in
mind that this condition is produced in the case of peptone
injections only after the introduction of large quantities, e.g , ‘3
gramme per kilogramme of body-weight; whereas the amount of
venom required to produce the same result is ‘OOOO5 grammes
per kilo.
It has been shown that after peptone injection, the quantity of
C0 3 in the blood is altered. Lahousse, 1 Salvioli, 2 and Blachstein 3
have drawn attention to the fact that the total amount of CO a
contained in the blood of an animal after the injection of peptone
is very considerably decreased. Grandis 4 has also shown that at
the same time the actual tension of CO a is considerably increased.
The CO 2 , combined with the sodium carbonate of the plasma is,
to a very large extent, carried by the blood from the tissues as
sodium bicarbonate. Solutions of sodium bicarbonate at the
temperature of - the body very readily part with CO a to an
atmosphere in which the partial pressure of this gas is low.
Accordingly in the pulmonary circulation the CO a is to a large
measure discharged. When the partial pressure of a gas in a
fluid is higher than usual, though at the same time the actual
quantity of such gas is diminished, the only explanation of the
facts is, that the capacity of the fluid to dissolve or combine the
gas has been lessened. Salvioli 5 pointed out that the alkalinity
of the blood of an animal, injected with peptone, was less than
1 “ Du Bois Eeymond’s Arch.,” 1888.
2 “Arch. Ital. de 8i0].,” Yol. xvn.
3 “Du Bois Eeymond’s Arch.,” 1891.
4 “ Du Bois Eeymond’s Arch.,” 1891. 5 hoc. cit.
M—July 3,1895.


that of the same blood previously ; and he indicated the analogy
between the effects of peptone on the amount of CO, combined
in the plasma, and on the alkalinity of the blood, with the results
obtained by Walter 1 by the introduction of acids into the circula-
tion. Grandis 2 showed that the decrease observed in peptone
blood was due to the diminution in that portion only of the CO,
which could be withdrawn by the gas pump, and that the amount
of fixed CO, was the same as in normal blood.
The conclusion arrived at is that peptone diminishes the capacity
of the blood to carry away the CO, from the tissues. This
impediment to the removal of CO, has been considered to be the
probable cause of the narcosis which invariably follows the intro-
duction of peptone into the circulation. The general features of
the narcosis which follows the injection of very small amounts of
venom into the circulation, present a striking similarity to this
effect of peptone injections. Moreover in those conditions when
considerable destruction of blood corpuscles is occurring, the
normal alkalescence of the blood has been found to be diminished.
In fever Geppert, 3 Minkowski, 4 and v. Jaksch 5 have recorded that
the blood is less alkaline than normally. Kraus 6 examined the
alkalescence, and amount of CO, contained in the blood after the
intravenous injection of pyrogallol, ether, glycerin and other
substances which exert a destructive influence on blood corpuscles.
In every case he found a considerable diminution in both the
alkalescence and the contained CO a .
I have already shown that venom does destroy blood corpuscles,
and that as regards the production of intravascular clotting its
behaviour is analogous to that of the above mentioned corpuscle-
1 Die Wirkung der Saurer auf de thierisohe Organismus.—“ Arch. f.
exper. Path.,” Yol. vn., 1887, p. 148.
2 “ Du Bois Eoymond’a Arch.,” 1891, p. 499.
■ 3 “ Zeitsch. f. Klin. Med.,” Bd. n., S. 355.
4 “ Archiv. f. Exper. Path.,” Bd. xix., S. 209.
■5 “ Zeitsch. f. Klin. Med.,” Bd. xm.. Heft 3.
6 “Archiv. f. Exper. Path.,” Bd. xxvi., S. 186.


destroying agents, and it appeared to me advisable to ascertain
what the amounts and tensions of the gases in the blood of animals
poisoned by venom were. I have not made any direct quantitative
observations on the alkalinity of the blood under such circum-
stances, because the determination of this point presents in this
case especial difficulties, owing to the fact that the plasma is
invariably more or less coloured by the presence of hfemaglobin
in solution, so that the range of experimental error is considerable.
This is not, however, a very serious omission, for the determination
of the amount of CO a contained in the blood is after all probably
the best indication we possess of its relative alkalinity.
Methods of Experimenting.
The experiments were made upon large dogs, which were pre-
viously rendered anaesthetic by the subcutaneous injection of
morphia. On two occasions about 30 cc. of blood was drawn;
once previous to, and once at an interval after the injection of
the venom. For purposes of comparison the first sample was
employed to determine the amount of the gases in the normal
blood. As the blood drawn subsequent to the injection of venom
did not clot, the coagulation of the first sample was prevented by
drawing the blood into a suitable amount of 1% potassium oxalate
solution, which had been previously boiled under diminished
pressure. In order that the results from the two samples should
be strictly comparable, the same course was adopted with the blood
withdrawn after the venom injection.
The samples of blood were collected over mercury in the usual
manner; the connection between the blood vessel and the receiver
was filled with the oxalate solution. In most cases the samples
were taken from the external jugular vein, but occasionally from
■the carotid or femoral artery. They were then transferred from
the vessels into which' they had been drawn, to the exhausted
receiver of a mercury pump, containing a small quantity of a
•solution of oxalic acid. During the exhaustion of the gases from
the blood the receiver of the gas pump was maintained at 37° C.


by means of a water bath. The gases were analysed by Bunsen’s
method, and the quantities found, reduced to their volumes at a
temperature of 0° 0., and 760 mm. of mercury pressure. In the
tables of experiments the amounts of gas are expressed in volumes
per hundred volumes of blood.
The determination of the partial pressure of C0 2 in normal
blood was not undertaken. The exhaustions, and analyses required
to ascertain the absolute amount of gases in two samples of blood,
and of the tension in the poisoned blood, together with the other
details of the experiment, occupied the entire day, and did not
allow time for any further aerotonometric observations.
The averages of the results arrived at by Strasburg 1 and
Nussbaum 2 for the tensions of C0 3 in arterial and venous blood
for the dog are—2 - 8% and 4'f)% of an atmosphere respectively,
and I have used these numbers for purposes of comparison.
In determining the tension of the gases in the blood of dogs
poisoned by venom, I have taken advantage of the fact that the
coagulability of the blood is under these circumstances either
greatly diminished or altogether in abeyance. The method is a
modification of that used by Leon Fredericq 3 to ascertain the
tension of the gases in peptone blood.
The apparatus consists of two glass tubes A and B of about
1 c.m. internal diameter and 25 cc.ra. capacity. These two tubes
are surrounded by a larger tube through which a current of water
at 40° 0. is kept circulating. At both ends the tubes A and B
are attached by india rubberjtubing f to Y shaped glass tubes.
1 “ Pfluger’s Arch.,” Bd. vi., S. 65. 2 Ibid., Bd. vn., S. 296.
3 “ Centrbl. f. Physiol.,” vn., N. 2.


The third limb of the Y tube is connected in the one case to the
central, and in the other to the peripheral end of a vein by means
of another rubber tube and suitable cannula. At the end of the
instrument which is attached to the central end of a vein a piece
of glass tube bent in the shape of a horse-shoe is inserted in the
position h. Screw clamps c, c', d, d', are applied in the positions
indicated in the diagram.
Before using the apparatus, A and B were filled, one with air
and the other with a mixture of gases containing 5 vols. each of
oxygen and carbonic acid and 90 vols. of nitrogen, and all the
clamps tightened. The rubber connections between the clamps and
the bloodvessels were filled either with blood or salt solution, and
the cannnuho tied in their respective vessels. I have found it
most convenient to connect the tube (a) to the peripheral end of
the femoral vein, and the tube (b) to the central end of the jugular
vein on the same side. The whole apparatus is inclined at a small
angle and by relaxing the screws dor d' and c or c and then
removing the clamp forceps on the veins, blood is allowed to enter
the tube (a) and trickle down the glass tube A or B which contains
the mixture of gases, and eventually escape through (b) into the
circulation again. The horse-shoe shaped tube of glass (A) is
necessary in order that it may be seen at once if bubbles of air are
carried along with the blood and that they may be prevented
from entering the circulation. There is after a little practice no
difficulty in preventing this accident. The rate of flow of blood
through the apparatus could be regulated with nicety by means
of the screw clamps d and d'. Throughout the experiments the
loss of heat to the blood which took place during its passage
through the rubber tubes was minimised by enveloping these
tubes in cotton wool
As the blood trickles through, it is spread in a thin layer over
the interior surface of the tube and so presents a considerable area
for gaseous interchange with the mixture of gases above. This
interchange proceeds until the partial pressure of the gases in the
tube is the same as that of the blood. When a sufficient time


has elapsed for this to occur, the clamps (c) and ( d) are tightened
and (c') and {d') opened and the blood allowed to flow through the
tube B for a similar interval of time. The screw clamps c and d'
are now closed, the clamp forceps replaced on the veins, and the
whole apparatus disconnected and placed in a vertical position.
By connecting one of the Y tubes with a pressure bottle contain-
ing mercury the gas first in A and then in B is driven over into
separate burettes and analysed.
Sometimes however, instead of using the apparatus to obtain
two estimations of the tension'of the gases in venous blood, the
Y tube at the upper end of the instrument has been discarded
and the two tubes A and B connected with the femoral artery and
vein respectively. The procedure has then been exactly the same
as described above, but in these latter cases the tensions of the
gases both in arterial and in venous blood under the same circum-
stances were determined. From a few preliminary experiments
it was ascertained that the interchange of C0 2 between the blood
and the mixture of gases contained in the tube was complete in
five minutes when the mixture of gases contained s°/ 0 of C0 3 at
the commencement of the experiment, and in ten to fifteen minutes
when the tube contained air. In the accounts' of individual
experiments the tension of C0 3 found is expressed in percentage
of an atmosphere. The numbers found when the aerotonometer
tube was filled with air at the commencement of the experiment
are marked (A), those in which the tube contained 5% of C0 2 to
begin with are marked B.
In every experiment -000025 gramme of venom per kilogramme
of body-weight was at the commencement injected into the jugular
vein. After an interval of one hour an amount of venom varying
in individual cases from -0001 to -001 gramme per kilo, was
further injected. The reason this particular procedure was
adopted was in order that the first small injection might produce
a sufficiently marked negative phase of coagulability in the blood
and that the larger injection might not occasion sudden death by
thrombosis.


Experiment I.
Weight
of
animal.
Condition.
Quantity of
venom
injected.
Yols. of gases reduced to
0° and 760 mm. in 100
yols. of arterial blood.
C0 3
O
Kilos.
10
Before venom injected
•0065 gramme
38-43 '
21-30
1 hour after injection.
Blood pressure fairly
high, respiration shal-
lower than previously.
35-75
1943
Experiment II.
Weight
of
animal.
Condition.
Quantity of
venom
injected.
Vols. of gases at 0° and
760 mm. in Hg in 100 vols.
of blood from femoral vein
co 3
O
Kilos.
14
Before injection
30 minutes after injec-
tion ; circulation and
respiration much en-
feebled.
•0105 gramme
44-56
49-24
6-35
4-60
35 - 45 minutes after the injection the tension
of C0 2 in the blood from the femoral vein
was found to he
A 8'8°/o of an atmosphere
45 — 55 minutes after it was ...
B9-17,
>*
Mean'8‘957.
>»
Experiment III.
Weight
of
animal.
Condition.
Quantity of
venom
injected.
Yols. at 0° and 760 mm. .
in 100 vols. of blood
from femoral' vein. |
co 2
0 1
Kilos.
5-2
Before injection
30 minutes after
2 hours after ...
Respiration and circu-
lation well maintained
•001 gramme
4013
40-40
39-92
7-73
9-25
30 minutes after injection tension C0 2 in femoral vein A = 263 }
45 minutes „ „ ~ » B = 2 p B2J
2 hours „ „ „ » A = 4 - 0310.n fi
2 hours 15 minutes „ „ „ B = 3'90(
2 hours 50 minutes „ „ „ A= 3 63) g.ygg
3 hours after injection „ „ „ B = 3'78 i
In this experiment the dose of venom introduced was much less.
The animal was in a narcotic condition and the respiration though
slow was deep. The blood pressure was normal.


Experiment IV.
Weight
of
animal.
Condition.
Quantity of
venom
injected.
Vols. at 0° and 760 mm.
in 100 vols. of hlood
from femoral vein.
co 2
0
Kilos.
65
Before injection
40 minutes after
Respiration and circu-
lation fairly good.
•0001 gramme
40'23
41-24
9-60
5-39
1 hour after injection tension of C0 3 in femoral vein A =6-35 i r . Cl >-oi
70 minutes „ „ ,, „ B = 5’30/ D / '°
Experiment V.
"Weight
of
animal.
Condition.
Quantity of
venom
injected.
Vols. at 0° and 760 mm.
in 100 vols. of blood
from carotid artery.
C0 2
0
Kilos.
14-5
Before injection
20 minutes after injec-
tion, respiration and
circulation failing.
2 hours 20 minutes after
injection, respiration
very shallow and blood
pressure low.
•005 gramme
39 50
43-
44-
20-26
12-44
8-125
1 hour after injection tension of C0 2 in femoral artery = 7‘42°/ 0
„ „ vein = 8-58%
1 hour 30 minutes ,, „ „ artery = 6’65°/ 0 *
* During this last determination artificial respiration was maintained. The lungs
were well inflated with warmed air 15 times per minute.
In this experiment the aerotonometer tubes contained air at
the commencement.
With the exception of Experiment I. the absolute quantity of
C0 2 contained in the venous blood was not decreased. On the
contrary, the amount of C0 2 was, in those cases where the animal
was severely affected by the venom injections, considerably in
excess of that found previously. Under the same circumstances
the tension of C0 2 was very much higher than has been found
for normal venous blood. In most of the experiments the numbers
representing both the absolute amount and the tension of this gas
rose together as the condition of the animal became worse and
worse. After peptone injections, whilst the tension of C0 2 rose,


the absolute amount of the gas contained in the blood was on the
contrary, decreased. I therefore conclude that although the
capacity of the blood to carry C0 2 may be, as one might expect
from the analogy to other blood-corpuscle-destroyers, somewhat
diminished, this is not a prominent feature of poisoning by the
venom, and is entirely masked by the operation of other and more
potent factors. The gradual increase in both the tension and
amount of C0 3 in the venous and also in the arterial blood of
the poisoned animal is to a large extent accounted for by the
enfeebleinent of the circulation and respiratory movements.
Before this occurs it is not manifested, but afterwards it progresses
hand in hand with the circulatory and respiratory depression.
The exudation and haemorrhage into the lungs which is almost an
invariable sequel to the injection of the poison, and whereby con-
siderable areas are for the time being rendered useless, does no
doubt also contribute in some degree to the same end. The
existence of this factor is indicated in Experiment V., in which
artificial respiration was ineffectual in reducing the high tension
of CO 3 in the blood of the femoral artery to any great' extent,
and it is interesting to note that examination of the chest of this
dog immediately after the experiment, discovered very extensive
oedema and haemorrhages throughout the greater part of the lungs.
This pathological condition had evidently so curtailed the avail-
able respiratory surface, that the larger portion of the blood
passed through the lungs without an opportunity of coming in
contact with the air in the alveoli. So that although the alveolar
air was maintained of a high degree of purity by artificial inflation,
the blood was not enabled to rid itself of its contained C0 2 .
{/) —Influence of the venom on the germicidal action of serum.
Weir Mitchell has drawn attention to the fact that the bodies
of animals dead from rattle-snake poisoning putrefy with extreme
rapidity, and that during life the local extravasations which are
characteristic of this class of snake poisoning, as a general rule
suppurate, or become gangrenous. Feoktistow 2 also made the
1 Loc. dt. 2 Loc. dt.


interesting observation that the bloody effusions in the pleural
and pericardial sacs sometimes contained organisms immediately
after death, and that cultures of these organisms when injected
into healthy animals produced no effect. Last year Dr. Ewing 1
repeated some of Nuttall and Buchner’s observations on the
germicidal power of serum, and instituted a series of comparative
experiments with the serum of animals poisoned with Crotalus
venom. Ewing found that the normal germicidal power of serum
was entirely lost after poisoning with Crotalus venom.
To ascertain whether the same loss of germicidal power was
occasioned by Pseudechis venom, the following experiments were
made : —A healthy dog, weight 10 Kilos., was injected under the
skin of the back with -0065 gramme of venom, dissolved in 2 cc.
of weak salt solution, at 11-30 a.m. At 3 p.m. he was etherised
and blood taken from the fem'oral artery. In the mean time he
had vomited considerably, and at 2-45 p.m. he was very sleepy
and weak, although he could still walk. The blood was drawn
into a sterilised jar under conditions of the strictest asepticism.
At the same time the blood of another dog was drawn under
exactly similar conditions, except that this animal had not received
a venom injection. Both samples of blood were placed in an ice-
chest for forty hours. The venom sample clotted feebly after
some hours, and the exuded serum was stained with haemoglobin.
Microscopic examination of both kinds of serum discovered no
contamination with any micro-organisms. 5 cc. of each kind of
serum were then placed in two sterilised test-tubes.
The test organism employed to determine the relative germicidal
powers of the two serums was a twenty-four hours’ growth of a
broth culture of Bacillus anthracis. This was a pure culture of
the organism and contained no spores. Each test-tube was
inoculated with a platinum wire loopful of the culture and well
shaken up. The serum tubes containing the organisms were kept
at the laboratory temperature 24 - 25° C. The effect produced
1 “ Med. Record,” May 26,1894.


I.—After Five Minutes So;
ourn in Serum.
Number of Colonies after
18 hours.
21 hours.
43 hours.
Normal serum
22
109
123
Yenom serum
39
464
560
II.—After One Hour’s Sojourn in Serum.
Number of Colonies after
17 hours.
20 hours.
42 hours.
Normal serum
Venom serum
12
987
672
2000
912
countless
III. —After Two Hours’ Sojourn in Serum.
Normal serum
Venom serum
Number of Colonies after
16 hours. 1 19 hours.
41 hours.
5
1450
560
2416
976
countless
upon the organism by sojourn in the serums, was ascertained
from time to time by withdrawing a wire loopful and mixing this
with 10 cc. of nutrient gelatine and making a plate cultivation
of the mixture. An indication of the extent to which the growth
of the bacilli had progressed in the serum tubes was obtained by
counting the number of colonies appearing in the plate cultivations
after definite intervals.
■ The following notes represent some few of the results of these
experiments in tabular form, and clearly show that whereas the
growth of the organism was as usual hindered by the normal
serum, on the other hand the serum from the poisoned animal
formed an excellent culture medium. In this particular case the
damaging influence of the normal serum was less than is usually
the case.
The tables represent the number of colonies of the organism
which developed in the plate cultures after various intervals of
time. 1
1 For the performances of greater portion of the troublesome details
of these experiments I am indebted to my friends Dr. F. Tidswell and
Mr. E. Grant.


IV.—After Three Hours’ Sojourn in Serum.
Number of Colonies after
15 hours.
18 hours.
40 hours.
Normal serum
Venom serum
19
2120
4244
countless
countless
Other agents which cause destruction among the blood corpuscles
would appear to produce a similar result. Gottstein 1 found that
the injection of pyrogallol and acetyl-phenyl-hydrazin into the
circulation of animals naturally immune against definite micro-
organisms rendered them susceptible to invasion. Under the
same circumstances pathogenic germs which locally affect the
organism are capable of spreading throughout the whole body.
Action of Venom on the Blood Vessels.
The situation in which the poison is injected is always the seat
of some oedema. On cutting into the oedematous tissues, a serous
fluid, more or less stained with hemoglobin, escapes. This in
itself is an indication of some alteration in the walls of the blood
vessels in the vicinity of the injection, by which the normal
transudation processes are affected. Rattle-snake venom produces
changes which are of a similar nature, but in which the degree of
damage to the endothelial lining of the vessels is much greater.
That this venom was capable of playing considerable havoc with
the cells lining the blood vessels, was demonstrated by Weir
Mitchell and Reichert. 2 These authors moistened the mesentery
of animals with Crotalus venom and observed under the microscope
the rapid formation of extensive capillary I Hemorrhages. In a
few minutes the whole mesentery became by the coalescence of
the numerous haemorrhagic foci absolutely infiltrated with blood.
I have repeated these experiments, using Pseudechis venom,
and although the action of this poison is less rapid than was the
case in Mitchell and Reichert’s experiments the results were
identical. The mesenteries of cats and dogs were arranged under
the microscope so as to obtain a good view of the circulation in
1 “Deutsche Med. Woch., 1890, 24. 2 Loc. cit.


the capillaries. A minute fragment of the poison was then placed
near to that portion of the mesentery in the field of the microscope.
In a few moments without any previous clouding of the field, or
stasis, small haemorrhages appeared. These invariably occurred
first in those positions where the hydrostatic pressure was greatest,
viz., from the wall of the capillary near to its origin from an
arteriole, and where these capillaries branched or joined one
another at right angles. These tiny haemorrhages increased in
number and extent until the whole field was one mass of corpuscles.
These appearances are very characteristic and altogether distinct
from the escape of corpuscles in diapedesis, and I think there is
no doubt that the venom first damages the capillary wall, and
that the pressure within causes an actual solution of continuity,
the blood escaping through this rupture.
One of the prominent symptoms in animals, after the intraven-
ous injection of a small dose of venom ( i.e ., so small that the
animal may live a sufficiently long time, for the full development
of the symptoms), is the occurrence of extensive haemorrhages. I
have often seen more than half the substance of the lungs solid
from hemorrhage into the alveoli and inter-alveolar tissue. If
such an affected lung have its blood vessel washed out with saline
solution immediately after removal from the body and be then
injected with some colouring matter such as indigo-carmine, the
fluid injected will not enter the haemorrhagic portions of the organ
to any extent, so that it is probable that thrombosis in the small
branches of the pulmonary artery plays some part in these lung
haemorrhages! Silbermann 1 has described an analogous condition
in the lungs after intravenous injection of various corpuscle
destroying agents. Ragotzi, 2 using the same method as Silbermann,
found small thrombosed areas in the lungs of animals poisoned by
cobra venom.
Haemorrhages of greater or less extent are nearly always to be
found in the kidneys, liver, and the walls of the alimentary canal,
1 Ueber das Auftreten multipler intravitaler Blutgerinnungen nach
Arsen, Phosphor, und einige Blutgifte.—“ Yireh. Arch.” Bd. 117, 1889.
2 Loc. cit.


and the intima of the aorta and large blood vessels. There is
also another situation where a small haemorrhage is almost invari-
ably found, viz.: under the endocardium of the left ventricle.
Teoktistow 1 mentions the constant occurrence of a htemorrhage in
this situation in his experiments with viperine venom.
The full development of all these haemorrhagic phenomena
requires some hours. When venom is intravenously injected, the
immediate great fall in blood pressure prevents for the time being
the damaged condition of the vascular walls being demonstrated.
Subsequently, the escape of blood takes place more and more as
the pressure gradually rises after the initial fall.
All kinds of snake venoms which have hitherto been examined,
have been shown to contain in varying amount amongst their
albuminous constituents a proteid or proteids coagulable by heat.
It is of considerable interest that the viperine poisons which contain
coaguable proteids in largest amount, exercise this destructive
■action on blood corpuscles and the walls of blood vessels, to the
greatest extent, whereas cobra venom, which contains less than
2%0f coagulable proteid, only exerts such action to a comparatively
slight extent. Boiling, or indeed raising the temperature of the
solution to 80 - 85° C. deprives venoms of much of their action in
this direction, and at the same time largely does away with the
capacity of Fseudechis poison to produce intravascular clotting.
The power of this venom to both destroy blood cells and occasion
thrombosis is however not entirely lost, for by increasing the
dose of heated venom to at least five hundred times that of the
unheated poison which is required to produce instant death by
thrombosis, the same result is attained. The whole toxic power
of the venom is not however attenuated to this extent. By a
large series of experiments on rabbits I found that the minimal
dose of Fseudechis poison which when subcutaneously injected
was sure to occasion a fatal issue, was ’OOO5 gramme of venom
per kilogramme of rabbit. When the solution of the venom was
i Loc, cit.


previously [heated to 85° C. for five minutes, the corresponding
amount required to kill was 'OO3O gramme.
These observations show that either
(1) Heating to 85° destroys the component of venom which
possesses the power of destroying corpuscles to the greatest
degree,—or
(2) Heating attenuates the toxic properties of venom in this
particular direction to a much greater extent than it does'
its toxic power generally.
Heating to 85° C. does indeed separate one of the proteid con-
stituents which at this temperature is coagulated and rendered
inert. It is therefore quite possible that the difference in the action
of venom before and after heating to 85° 0. may be so explained.
We must however bear in mind that the action of heat on solutions
of toxic proteids is a twofold one—
(1) By converting some of the proteids into an inert precipitate.
(2) By impairing their toxic power, without influencing their
solubilities, or indeed changing them in any way recog-
nisable by chemical tests.
The first method of action is sudden. When the solution is
raised to a definite temperature, some portion of the proteid con-
stituents is coagulated. The second is gradual, and the extent of
attenuation depends on the duration of the heating, and the
temperature and dilution of the solution.
In the case of Crotalus venom Mitchell and Reichert have shown
that the coagulable proteids are the constituents which produce a
destructive effect on the blood cells and vessel walls to the greatest
extent, but I have not yet determined for Pseudechis poison to
what extent the difference in physiological action between venom
previously heated to 85° C. and unheated venom is to be attributed
to precipitation of one of the constituents or to gradual attenu-
ation of its power in a particular direction.


IY. —Effect op Venom on the Circulatory Mechanism.
The poisons of all snakes with which experiments have hitherto
been made, depress the circulatory mechanism. Different venoms
however exercise this action in different degrees, so that whereas
interference with the circulatory apparatus plays a very important
role in the general phenomena of poisoning by some species of
snake, with others such interference is, compared with its action
in other directions relatively unimportant.
In experiments with the frog’s excised heart, when the organ
is fed with a solution containing detibrinated blood, by means of a
Ludwig and Coat’s apparatus, the introduction of all kinds of
venom into the feeding mixture, soon brings the contraction to a
standstill. If this has once happened, the further substitution of
fresh defibrinated blood for the venom-containing solution does
not effect a recovery.
By direct observation of the heart in the opened thorax of
mammals, in which artificial respiration was maintained,
Eeoktistow 1 observed great diminution in the cardiac contrac-
tions, after the introduction of the venoms of Grotalus and
Vipera herus. When these poisons were intravenously introduced,
the contractions of the heart were at first diminished, and after-
wards increased in number, becoming at the same time weaker
and weaker until death occurred.
The best indication we possess of the efficiency of the circula-
tion is the arterial blood pressure curve. A variation in any of
the factors concerned in the general circulation will sooner or
later bo manifested in this curve. It possesses the additional
advantage that it lends itself in an admirable manner to the
method of graphic record. A tracing of the pressure of an artery
may be allowed to run for hours, and at the end of the time we
are in possession of a record of every change of pressure which hag
occurred. Of course the chart has to be interpreted, and into that
interpretation errors may creep, but by simultaneous observations
1 Loc. cit.


of the .volumes of abdominal organs such as the kidney and
spleen, and by judicious variation of the conditions of the
experiment, by means of which the operation of a particular
factor can be eliminated, one is generally able to ascertain to
which of the factors concerned in the maintenance of the blood
pressure the change is to be ascribed.
The effect of several kinds of snake venom upon the blood
pressure in the higher animals has been investigated. Brunton
and Fayrer, 1 and Ragotzi, 2 worked with cobra poison. Mitchell,
and Reichert 3 made a large series of experiments with the
venoms of species of Crotalus and Ancistrodon, Daboia russellii,
and also cobra. Feoktistow’s 4 observations were made with the
poisons of Crotalus and Vipera berus.
Weir Mitchell and Reichert confirmed those results which had
already been obtained by Brunton and Fayrer, with cobra poison;
and the more recent work of Feoktistow and Ragotzi entirely
supports the older observations as regards the main characteristics
of the blood pressure curve after poisoning with either rattlesnake
or cobra venoms. The work of Weir Mitchell and Reichert is the
most important as they pursued their investigations with the
venoms of a very large number of different species of snakes,
thereby giving us the opportunity of comparing the action, in this
respect, of a variety of poisons. The results of these observers
possess the additional advantage of having been obtained from an
admirably varied and extensive series of experiments.
They found that when the venoms of all these species of serpents
were intravenously introduced, there was a distinct lowering of
the blood pressure. It fell immediately after the injection, and
indeed sometimes before this was completed; and the fall was
generally so marked as to indicate a most profound action of the
poison upon some part or parts of the circulatory apparatus. If
the dose were not immediately fatal, the pressure gradually rose,
but finally underwent a more or less steady decline until death. At
1 Loc, cit, 2 Loc, cit, 3 Loc, cit, * ioc. cif.
N—July 3, 1895.


other times the pressure sank without subsequent rise until death
ensued.. With subcutaneous injection of the venom, the primary
sudden fall was in most cases absent.
The tendency in cobra poisoning was to a decided rise of pressure,
following the primary fall. In five out of six experiments with
the venom, the primary fall was followed by a rise which went
above the normal during the asphyxial condition preceding death.
After section of the pneumogastrics, they found that the same
alterations occurred in the blood pressure as those observed in
animals in which these nerves were intact.
When the cord was severed in the cervical region, the primary
fall of pressure was not so marked, but the subsequent slow, yet
deadly fall occurred. In experiments with cobra poison, on the
contrary, even under these conditions, a rise in blood pressure
usually preceded death.
Feoktistow found that when a very large dose of the venom of
Crotalus, or Viper a herus was subcutaneously administered, the
blood pressure fell as suddenly as when the poison was intra-
venously introduced. After the pressure had been greatly lowered
by the poison, he was unable to produce any effect by stimulating
the peripheral ends of the splanchnic nerves, from which he con-
cluded that the peripheral ends of these nerves were paralysed.
This he considered was the explanation of the “ collosale ”
sinking of the blood pressure.
Brunton and Fayrer found that the intravenous injection of
cobra poison occasioned a sudden temporary drop in the arterial
blood pressure, which, under most circumstances speedily regained
the previous height. Sometimes, however, this fall was not
recovered from, and the animal died in less than sixty seconds
from the time of the injection, but the arterial blood pressure
remained considerably above zero. This was considered noteworthy
toy these authors, and they thought it showed “ that the arteries
or capillaries must have been much contracted, thus opposing a
barrier to the exit of blood from the arteries into the veins.”


In a previous section I have mentioned a similar occurrence in
many of my experiments with the intravenous injection of
Pseudechis venom. At first this maintenance of a considerable
pressure in the arteries after the sudden death of the animal
puzzled me greatly. There could be however only one explanation
of the phenomenon, viz.: that the blood could not empty itself as
usual into the veins. In my experiments the reason was that the
arterial system was blocked by the occurrence of intravascular
clotting, and it is quite possible that this was also the explanation
in Brunton and Fayrer’s experiments.
In the experiments made by these observers death usually
occurred from asphyxia, during which the blood pressure curve
exhibited the same rise of pressure above the normal as obtains
when an unpoisoned animal is asphyxiated.
Speaking of this maintenance of circulatory efficiency, Brunton
and Fayrer say,—“ The long continuance of the cardiac pulsations
after apparent death excludes failure of the circulation as the
usual cause of death ; and we are thus brought, by exclusion, to
regard death caused by the bite of the cobra, or by its poison
introduced into the body in any other way, as death from asphyxh.
The truth of this view is well illustrated by a series of experiments
which show that the vitality of the heart may be retained for a
considerable time if the respiration is kept up. It shows also
that the convulsions which have been remarked by Russell and
all subsequent observers as almost always preceding death are not
due so much to the action of the poison itself on the nervous
centres, as that they depend on the irritation which is produced
in them by the venosity of the blood.”
(a) —The effect of Pseudechis venom upon the excised heart of cold-
blooded Vertebrates,
I have experimented with the excised hearts of frogs and turtles.
In the case of either of these animals a perfusion cannula was
inserted in the ventricle and tied. The cannula was connected
with a Ludwig and Coat’s apparatus, and the record of the heart


beat taken on a slowly moving cylinder covered with smoked
paper. One of the Marriott’s tubes of the apparatus was pre-
viously filled with a mixture of defibrinated mammalian blood
one part, and "65% sodium chloride solution, containing 1 in
1,000 Na 3 CO s , two parts. The other tube was filled with a
similar solution containing a known proportion of venom. The
amount of venom contained in the solution was either 0 - l or 1%.
The former appeared to at first stimulate the heart, but it speedily
began to beat more slowly, then became irregular and feeble, and
eventually stopped in diastole after about thirty minutes. The
stronger solution of venom produced immediate slowing and
enfeeblement of the contractions, which became diminished in
rate and extent until in a few minutes the heart ceased to beat.
If the stronger venom-containing solution was allowed to flow
through the heart for only ten seconds, the substitution of the
unpoisoned feeding mixture failed to produce any recovery of the
cardiac contractions.
Two experiments were made with the hearts of small turtles by
means of a Ludwig and Coat’s apparatus. In the former •!% of
venom was employed, and in the latter a feeding solution con-
taining 1% of the venom was allowed to flow through the heart
for one hundred seconds, and then replaced by the blood solution
only. This had however, no effect, and the beats became rapidly
less and less apparent until they were imperceptible in twelve
minutes from the introduction of the venom.
(6) —Effect on Mammals.
I commenced my investigations into the action of the venom on
the circulatory apparatus, by taking tracings of the pressure in
an artery, both during and after the introduction of the poison.
The venom was introduced by injection subcutaneously, into the
peritoneal cavity, or directly into the circulation through a vein
or artery. I chose intravenous injection to Begin with, because
the method of subcutaneous inoculation introduces an unknown
quantity—viz., rate of absorption. This method has however,


the disadvantage that the injection of even very small quantities
of the venom directly into the circulation occasions so great an
increase in the coagulability of the blood, that this fluid frequently
clots in the vessels. When this occurs at all extensively the
circulation is speedily terminated and death ensues. It is indeed
very difficult to prevent intravascular clotting, and before we can
draw conclusions as to the action of the venom upon the heart or
other portion of the -vascular mechanism we must be sure that
thrombosis has not occurred. 1 In my earlier experiments I was
not aware of this action of venom upon blood plasma, and the
inconsistent results I obtained puzzled me greatly. The whole
matter was however cleared up when I discovered that the
extraordinary lack of uniformity in, and frequent sudden termin-
ation of my experiments, was due to the arrest of the circulation
by solidification of the blood.
The animals used were dogs and rabbits. The results were
substantially the same with both animals. The effect of the
poison on the blood pressure was investigated under a variety of
experimental conditions with and without curari. In some
experiments the vagi were previously severed, in others not.
Two experiments were made on animals in which the cord had
been divided at the level of the third cervical vertebra. In five
cases a simultaneous record of the volume of either the kidney or
the spleen was obtained, and in nearly every case the condition
of the respiration was recorded at the same time by connecting
the trachea with a Marey’s tambour and writing lever. The
records were taken on a Hering’s kymograph. In those experi-
ments which lasted many hours a continuous record was not taken,
but the kymographion was stopped, and set going again for a few
minutes at intervals of fifteen or thirty minutes, or less as occasion
demanded.
The general features of the blood pressure record following the
intravenous injection of Pseudechis venom are the same as those
1 Many of the results of previous experimenters with snake poisons
are vitiated by their ignorance of this possibility.


observed by Weir Mitchell and Reichert, and Feoktistow, to
follow the introduction of the venom of Grotalus, Ancistrodon,
Dahoia russellii, and Vipera berus into the circulation. Directly
the venom reaches the heart there is a sudden great fall of the
arterial blood pressure. This fall is accompanied by diminution
in the extent of the accession of pressure due to each beat of the
heart, and is the more marked the greater the rapidity with which
the solution of venom is introduced, and the nearer the vein chosen
for its introduction is to the heart. The extent of this fall is
dependent on the degree of concentration with which the poison
reaches the heart. When its dilution with blood is accomplished,
by introducing it into a vein far removed from the heart, its effect
is lessened, and if the injection be carried out sufficiently slowly,
this steep descent is absent, and the pressure declines slowly and
steadily until death.
Also when the venom is injected into the carotid or vertebral
artery, so that it is carried away from the heart and well diluted
with blood before it is returned to this organ, the effect is
diminished, notwithstanding the fact that under these circum-
stances the poison reaches the nervous system in the greatest
concentration. If the fall in pressure is to be ascribed (as
Mitchell and Reichert concluded was the case in their experi-
ments) to the sudden relaxation of the arterioles in the abdominal
area, by paralysis of the vaso-motor centre in the medulla, one
would expect to obtain the most marked result when the poison
was enabled to operate upon the medulla in greatest concentration,
and not the reverse result, as I have always obtained.
The initial fall of pressure may be only temporary, and in the
course of a few minutes to one hour may rise again to nearly the
normal, as is shown in the majority of the experiments.
This recovery, when it occurs, does not however last long if a
fatal dose has been injected. After remaining as high, or nearly
as high as before the injection, for a period varying from a few
minutes to some hours, according to the dose which has been


injected, the pressure begins to slowly decline, and continues to
do so until it is only equal to a few millimetres of mercury, when
the enfeebled circulation is no longer adequate to support life,
and the animal dies.
This fatal fall of blood pressure also invariably occurs in those
cases where artificial respiration is maintained. Without this
assisted respiration the pressure declines more quickly as the
cardiac depression is accentuated by a diminished supply of oxygen,
due to simultaneous failure of respiration.
Up to within a very short interval before death, when the cir-
culation is almost ended, vagus stimulation produces ■ the usual
slowing or stoppage of the heart, {of. Exs. 10, 11, and 14.)
The intravenous injection of the poison, however, neutralises
that normal retarding influence which is exercised by the vagus,
and is so marked in some dogs. In these animals the large slow
cardiac contractions are almost immediately superseded by con-
tractions increased in rate, and much diminished in force after the
injection of venom. Section of the vagi under these circumstances
is without effect.
When the venom is subcutaneously injected, the decline of the
blood pressure is more gradual, and the primary sudden fall so
characteristic of intravenous injection is absent. The time which
elapses before the pressure begins to fall depends upon the amount
injected and the rapidity of absorption. A small dose (-005
gramme per kilo.) when introduced under the skin, may not
materially affect the blood pressure for three hours subsequent to
the injection, whereas the same amount introduced into the
peritoneal cavity may cause a marked fall in pressure during the
first fifteen minutes. Larger doses however act much more rapidly,
and if a sufficient quantity is injected the blood pressure often
falls to one half of its previous height in three or four minutes
after the introduction of the poison.


(c) —Explanation of the fall in blood pressure.
Weir Mitchell and Reichert, who observed the same diphasic
character in the blood pressure curve after intravenous injection
of various kinds of snake poison, were of opinion that the primary
fall was chiefly due to the depressant action of the venom upon
the vaso-motor centres in the medulla oblongata, and slightly
upon the heart, but that the ultimate fall of pressure was cardiac
in origin.
From the results of experiments the details of which are given
at the end of this section of the present paper, I have come to the
conclusion that in both cases the fall in pressure is mainly due to
a direct action of the poison upon the heart. The most important
evidence which has led me to this conclusion is drawn
(1) From observations on the blood pressure in experiments in
which the cervical cord had been previously divided, and
(2) From those experiments in which observation of the volume
of the spleen or kidney were made at the same time as a
record of the arterial blood pressure.
In experiments 16 and 17, the intravenous injection of ‘OOO5
and 'OOOB gramme of venom into two dogs with severed cervical
cord, produced precisely similar results to those which I have
frequently obtained with normal dogs. The only difference was
that in the experiments in which the cord had been previously
divided the blood pressure was reduced to almost one half its
original height before the introduction of the venom. In experi-
ment 16 the larger dose killed the animal in ten minutes, and the
pressure fell steadily until death, whereas in experiment 17, in
which the dose was smaller, the animal lived for nearly two hours,
and the blood-pressure record exhibited the same temporary
recovery as had been observed in the majority of the experiments
with moderate doses of the poison. Were the numbers tabulated
in these two experiments multiplied by two, they would correspond
exactly with those of experiments in which the cord was intact.
Experiments 30, 31, 32, and 33, in which a simultaneous record
of the arterial blood pressure and the volume of the kidney or


spleen’ was obtained, show that both curves decline and rise
together. The fall in pressure is accompanied by a simultaneous
and equally abrupt diminution in the volume of the spleen and
kidney, and in those experiments in which the arterial pressure
recovered, the volume of these organs increased at the same time,
and again diminished as the pressure in the arteries finally fell.
Had vascular dilatation (provided it affected these organs), been
the explanation of the fall in pressure, the two curves would have
crossed one another and not run in a parallel direction.
I think these organs, and especially the spleen, may be taken as
fair samples of the area in which vascular dilatation due to vaso-
motor paresis would occur, and this evidence, taken in conjunction
with the results of the experiments on animals with divided spinal
cords, justifies the conclusion that the fall in blood pressure is
cardiac in origin, and that any result of vaso-motor paralysis is
insignificant in comparison with the direct weakening of the
cardiac contractions. Such a direct effect upon the heart would
not be unexpected, for, as I have mentioned, all venoms act as
cardiac poisons when supplied to the excised heart of cold blooded
vertebrates.
Diminished peripheral resistance, owing to vaso-motor paresis,
does no doubt contribute a share to this final fall in pressure, but
that vaso-motor action is not altogether in abeyance, and may
still be called into operation by sufficient stimulus is shown by
the effect of asphyxiation on a curarised animal in which the
pressure has sunk to less than one-half its previous height. In
experiments 14 and 15, the pressure was in both instances, under
such circumstances, doubled by suspension of the artificial respir-
ation. In other experiments upon rabbits, as soon as the respir-
ation showed signs of'incipient failure, artificial inflation was
employed. Directly this was discontinued, and the animal had
to depend on its own inadequate respiratory movements for a
supply of oxygen the pressure rose at once. The only cause of
such a rise is that brought about by the vaso-motor mechanism.
This is still capable of about doubling the arterial pressure for


the time being, even within a few minutes of the death .of an.
animal.
Far from considering interference with the vaso-motor centre
important, in the phenomena of poisoning by this venom, I think
that the manner in which this centre, and also the vagus centre
escapes, when, as I shall presently show, the activity of a closely
situated group of cells, the respiratory centre is absolutely in
abeyance, is one of the most remarkable instances of the selective
operation of a poison, with which I am acquainted.
Ragotzi 1 has pointed out that the vaso-motor and vagus centres
enjoy the same comparative immunity from the action of cobra
poison.
That the enormous fall in blood pressure is not due to paralysis
of any peripheral termination of the splanchic nerves as Feoktistow 2
believed was the explanation of the corresponding fall in his experi-
ments with Grotalus poison, is shown by Experiment 5, in which
stimulation of the peripheral ends of tljese nerves, produced in the
late stages of poisoning, as great a rise of pressure proportionately ,
as under normal circumstances. Feoktistow does not give a
detailed account of the experiments from which he drew his con-
clusions, but it is not improbable that he had occasioned extensive
thrombosis in the portal area by his intravenous injection, which
would be an excellent reason why any further peripheral resistance
in the same area, should not be manifest in the blood pressure
curve.
There is a further interesting point shown by the blood pressure
record, in those experiments in which I have given at intervals
two or three injections of venom intravenously. The injection of
a very small quantity of venom ( - 00005 gramme per kilo.) pro-
duces a very considerable and immediate fall of blood pressure,
which is, however, recovered from. If, after the lapse of one hour
when the pressure has regained, or almost regained its former
1 Virchow’s Archiv., Bd. cxxn., S. 232.
2 Zoc. cit.


height, a further injection, containing ten or twenty times the
former quantity be made, this causes a second drop in the blood
pressure. The fall is, however, in no way so great as in the
first instance, notwithstanding the fact that the quantity injected
is so much larger, and whereas the recovery from the cardiac
depression due to the first dose, was not complete until from forty
minutes to one hour, the pressure regains the normal, or about
the normal, in fifteen minutes after the second injection. If, after
this second recovery, a third dose of the poison, of the same quantity
as the second injection (or even double that quantity) be introduced,
it has little or no effect upon the blood pressure. The only explan-
ations of such results are either that the cardiac muscle has
become much less sensitive to the operation of the poison, or that
in the meantime, some body possessed of properties which interfere
with the operation of the poison, has become present in the blood
plasma. This point, however, opens up the whole problem of
immunity and the protective reaction of the organism against the
poison, which I hope to discuss at some future time.
Precisely the same result was observed by Wooldridge when
nucleo-albumens were repeatedly injected, and the enormous fall
in blood pressure produced by injecting albumoses into a vein,
does not occur if a second injection be made after the animal has
recovered from the first.
Protocols of Experiments showing the influence of the Venom upon
the Arterial Blood Pressure.
These experiments were performed on dogs and rabbits. The
poison was introduced either intravenously, subcutaneously, or'
into the peritoneal cavity. Most of the experiments in which the
poison was injected into a vein were made upon dogs, whereas in
those cases where subcutaneous injection was employed, rabbits
were used. Graphic records of the blood pressure were taken
upon a Hering’s kymograph by means of a mercury manometer.
The time and duration of the injection was indicated by raising
the signal line. Underneath the signal line a time marker con-
nected with a seconds clock gave the value of the abscissa. In


Experiment 1—Dog, weight 4 - l kilogrammes, '065 gramme of
morphia injected hypodermically ; ether during operation.
Time,
hrs. mins. secs.
Blood pressure
in mm. of
mercury.
Eemarks.
Normal
144
injection of -0002 gramme per kilo, of body
0 5 30
122
weight into the external jugular vein.
Injection lasted 5 minutes.
0 10 0
104
0 15 0
72
0 30 0
82
0 45 0
118
10 0
98
1 15 0
78
1 30 0
65
1 45 0
37
2 0 0
30
2 20 0
34
2 40 0
15
3 0 0
13
3 20 0
13
dead
Experiment 2—Dog, weight 3'i kilos., '065 gramme morphia
hypodermically ; ether during operation.
Time.
Blood pressure
hrs. mins. secs.
in mm. of
Remarks,
mercury.
Normal
124
injection of '001 gramme per kilo, of body
weight into jugular vein. Injection lasted
35 minutes.
0 3 30
48
0 5 0
34 •
,080
' 44
dyspnoeic struggles
0 10 0
14
0 11 0
10
dead '
those experiments which lasted some hours, a continuous record
was not taken, but the kymograph was stopped and set going
again for a few minutes, at intervals of fifteen or thirty minutes
or less as occasion demanded. In tabulating the curves, the
height of the pressure tracing at any particular moment above the
ahcissa was measured in mm. and this number doubled. In every
case the mean pressure between the limits of the respiratory and
cardiac undulations was taken.
(1) Experiments with dogs in which the vagi had been previously
severed.


Time,
bra. mins. secs.
Blood pressure
in mm. of
mercury.
Bemarks.
Normal
108
•00005 gramme per kilo.
of body weight
injected into jugular
vein. Injection
lasted i minute.
0
1
0
90
0
2
0
66
0
3
0
54
0
4
0
55
0
5
0
64
0
6
0
72
0
7
0
78
0
8
0
83
0
9
0
90
0
10
0
94
0
15
0
114
0
20
0
122
0
25
0
124
0
30
0
116
0
35
0
. 113
0
40
0
112
1
0
0
102
bled to death.
Experiment 4—Dog, weight 5-5 kilos., -0G5 gramme of morphia
hypodermically ; ether during operation.
Time.
Blood pressure
in mm. of
Eemarks.
hrs. mins. secs.
mercury.
Normal
180
•0005 gramme per kilo, injected in external
jugular vein. Injection lasted 50 seconds
0 10
118
0 2 0
94
0 5 0
90
0 10 0
112
0 15 0
178
0 30 0
172
0 45 0
156
10 0
114
1 15 0
80
1 30 0
81
1 45 0
64
respiration greatly diminished in extent
2 0 0
30
2 10 0
14
dead. Respiratory gasps after cessation of
circulation.
Post mortem examination revealed clots in the vena cava
inferior and portal vein.
■ Experiment 3—Dog, weight s’i kilos. ‘065 gramme of morphia
hypodermically ; ether during operation.


Time,
hrs. mins.
secs.
Blood pressure
in mm. of
mercury.
Remarks.
Normal
136
■0004 grammes per kilo, of body weight
injected into right carotid artery. Injec-
tion lasted 30 seconds.
0
0
30
120
0
1
0
96
0
5
0
85
0
15
0
64
heart beat very small
0
30
0
72
heart beat improved
0
45
0
100
heart beat improved
1
0
0
108
respiration much slower
1
10
0
63
respiration very slow
1
15
0
48
respiration very slow
1
30
0
38
left abdominal splanchnic stimulated
1
30
10
61
1
31
0
40
1
45
0
31
-
2
0
0
26
2
30
0
18
2
40
0
14
dead
Experiment 6 —Dog, weight 4 kilos., -065 gramme of morphia
hypodermically ; ether during operation.
Time.
Blood pressure
in mm. of
Remarks.
hrs. mins. secs.
mercury.
Normal
142
•0003 grammes per kilo, of body weight
injected in external jugular vein. Injec-
tion lasted 61 minutes.
0 7 0
68
respiration slow and slight
0 10 0
42
respiration slow and slight
0 15 0
39
respiration very slow and slight
0 20 0
46
respiration very slow and slight
0 30 0
49
10 cc. l°/ 0 solution of CaCl 2 injected into
jugular vein, caused immediate throm-
bosis of the whole vascular system.
Experiment s—Dog, weight 3*2 kilos., ‘075 gramme of morphia
hypodermically ; ether during operation.
When the pressure had been reduced from 136 to 38 mm,,
stimulation of the left splanchnic at its entrance into the abdomen
by a faradaic current caused the pressure to rise to 61 mm.
This experiment was terminated after thirty minutes by inject-
ing a solution of Cao1 a which occasioned extensive intravascular
jclotting.


Experiment 7—Dog, weight 7‘7 kilos., *1 gramme morphia
hypodermically ; ether during operation.
Time,
lire. mins. secs.
Blood pressure
in mm. of
mercury.
Bemarks.
Normal
204
•0006 gramme per kilo, injected into jugular
vein. Injection lasted 1J minutes,
respiration increased
0 2 0
105
0 3 0
139
0 10 0
181
-0 35 0
194
respiration slower than normal
10 0
160
respiration inspiratory in character
1 30 0
126
diminished respiration inspiratory in character
1 45 0
108
2 0 0
103
i< ft a f t
2 15 0
97
respiration nearly ceased
2 16 0
95
asphyxial convulsions during which pressure
2 17 0
135
rose to 143
2 18 0
21
dead
Experiment 8 —Dog, weight 15 kilos., *15 gramme morphia
hypodermically ; ether during operation.
Time,
hrs. mins. sees.
Blood pressure
in mm. of
mercury.
Remarks.
Normal
186
■00005 gramme per kilo, injected into jugular
0 2 0
127
vein.
0 3 0
114
0 4 0
99
0 5 0
• 89
0 10 0
92
0 15 0
105
0 30 0
127
. 0 45 0
158
1 0 0
164
•0005 gramme per kilo, injected
12 0
101
15 0
83
1 10 0
130
1 20 0
159
1 30 0
162
2 0 0
156
•0005 gramme per kilo, injected
2 10
142
2 5 0
140
2 10 0
118
2 15 0
148
2 30 0
151
3 0 0
153
bled to death
In this experiment the respiration was affected to a much
greater extent than is usual with dogs under the experimental
conditions, and the animal died of asphyxia. During the
asphyxia the pressure rose considerably.


(2) Experiments on dogs with vagi intact.
Experiment 9 —Dog, weight 9| kilos., •! gramme morphia
hypodermically ; ether during operation.
Excursion
Time,
hrs. mins. secs.
Blood
of the stile
pressure
in mm.
at each
heart beat
in mm.
Remarks.
Normal
95
21-0
•00001 gramme per kilo, injected into
jugular vein; injection lasted 2J
minutes.
0 2 30
64
1-0
0 5 0
52
•8
0 10 0
65
1-0
right and left vagi cuts no effect
0 10 30
65
10
Experiment 10—Dog, weight 4 kilos., - 065 gramme morphia
hypodermically; ether during operation.
Excursion
Time,
hrs. mins. secs.
Blood
of the stile
pressure
in mm.
at each
heart beat
in mm.
Remarks.
Normal
152
8-0
•0008 grammes per kilo, of body weight
injected into jugular vein. Injection
lasted 10 minutes.
0 10 0
90
20
0 12 0
94
20
right and left vagi cut. No effect.
0 13 0
94
20
peripheral end of right vagus stimulated,
pressure fell to 30 mm.
0 22 0
116
2-5
0 45 0
76
2-0
10 0
40
•7 -
1 15 0
41
•7
1 30 0
32
•4
1 53 0
18
less
1 56 0
14
less
dead
The restraining effect of the vagus on the heart beat was very
marked in this dog. It disappeared in one minute after the
injection of the poison, and when the vagi were severed this was
followed by no alteration in heart beat or blood pressure.
Shortly after introduction of the poison the vagus beats dis-
appeared. Subsequent section of vagi produced no effect.
Stimulation of peripheral end of right vagus stopped the heart.


Experiment 11 — Dog, weight 13’5 kilos., - 15 gramme morphia
hypodermically ; ether during operation.
Time,
hrs. mins. secs.
Blood
Excursion
of the style
pressure
in mm.
at each
heart beat
in mm.
Remarks.
Normal
92
90
■00003 gramme per kilo, injected into
jugular vein.
0 2 0
58
1-5
0 5 0
46
10
0 20 0
0 22 0
68
170
■75
trachea clamped.
0 25 0
85
*0
0 45 0
74
•5
right and left vagus cut.
0 46 0
75
•5
0 50 0
70
*5
peripheral end of right vagus stimulated-
caused pressure to fall to 26 mm.
10 0
74
■7
•00045 gramme per kilo, injected
12 0
54
•5
15 0
40
•4
1 20 0
68
•5
1 40 0
71
•5
2 0 0
80
•5
•0005 gramme per kilo, injected
2 10
56
•5
2 2 0
36
•4
2 20 0
67
•5
2 40 0
69
•5
3 0 0
65
•5
3 30 0
42
•4
4 0 0
34
•3
4 30 0
31
f nearly
5 0 0
19
>• imper-
5 10 0
13
\ ceptible
dead
Vagus beats disappeared in two minutes after the injection
of the venom. Twenty minutes after injection of poison pressure
equalled 68 mm., and clamping trachea raised it to 170 mm.
Severing both vagi produced no effect. Stimulation of peripheral
end of right vagus stopped the heart.
O—July 3, 1895.


Experiment 12—Dog, weight 15 - 8 kilos., - 15 gramme morphia
hypodermically; ether during operation.
Time,
hrs. mins. secs.
Blood
pressure
in mm.
Excursion
ofthe style
at each
heart beat
in mm.
Remarks,
Normal
110
28
•00003 grammes per kilo, injected into
jugular vein. Injection lasted 1
minute.
0 0
30
146
32
0 1
0
96
22
0 2
0
83
7
0 3
0
74
3
0 4
0
66
1
0 5
0
60
1
0 10
0
48
•25
0 15
0
59
•75
0 30
0
84
1
0 40
0
114
2
0 49
0
113
2
•0005 gramme per kilo, injected
0 60
0
114
1-5
0 51
0
76
1
0 52
0
58
1
0 53
0
64
1
0 54
0
74
1
0 55
0
80
1-2
0 56
0
88
1-5
1 0
0
108
1-5
1 7
0
114
1-75
•0005 gramme per kilo, injected
1 7
30
112
1-5
1 8
0
110
1-5
1 10
0
105
1-25
1 15
0
108
1-5
1 20
0
113
2
bled to death
Experiment 13 — Dog, weight 6’8 kilos., -1 gramme morphia
hypodermically; ether during operation. Curare injected into
jugular vein.
Time.
Blood pressure
in mm. of
Eemarks. .
hrs. mins. secs.
mercury.
Normal
150
•001 gramme per kilo, injected into jugular
vein. Injection lasted 10 seconds.
0 10
90
0 2 0
40
0 3 0
70
0 4 0
92
intravascular clotting occured
0 6 0
85
dead


Experiment 14 — Dog, weight 102 kilos., ’125 gramme morphia
hypodermically; ether during operation. Curare injected into
jugular vein.
Time,
hrs. mius. secs.
Blood pressure
in mm. of
mercury.
Remarks.
Normal
150
•000075 gramme per kilo, of body weight
0 10
101
injected in jugular vein. Injection lasted
50 seconds.
0 2 0
90
0 3 0
88
0 4 0
92
0 5 0
94
0 6 0
95
0 7 0
104
0 15 0
130
0 30 0
142
0 45 0
136
10 0
135
1 30 0
140
2 0 0
127
2 30 0
110
3 0 0
122
3 30 0
97
4 0 0
91
4 30 0
82
6 0 0
70
5 30 0
64
6 0 0
62
6 30 0
48
artificial respiration suspended
6 31 0
101
artificial respiration continued
6 32 0
56
7, 0 0
41
peripheral end of right vagus stimulated.
7 30 0
33
pressure fell to 20 m.m.
8 0 0
27
8 10 0
21
dead
(3) Experiments on curarised dogs, with artificial respiration, and
vagi severed.
Suspension of artificial respiration for one minute raised the
pressure f»om 48 to 101 mm.


Time,
brs. mins. secs.
Blood pressure
in mm. of
mercury.
Eemarks,
Normal
13G
•00005 gramme per kilo, of body weight
injected into jugular vein.
0 0 30
100
0 10
78
0 2 0
62
0 3 0
56
0 10 0
40
0 15 0
64
0 30 0
103
10 0
128
•0025 gramme per kilo, injected
110
76
12 0
65
13 0
54
1 15 0
71
2 0 0
62
artificial respiration suspended
2 10
128
artificial respiration continued
2 2 0
90
2 5 0
53
2 30 0
37
2 40 0
28
2 43 0
19
dead
Time,
hrs. mins. secs.
Blood, pressure
in mm. of
mercury.
Remarks.
Normal
101
cord severed at level of 3rd cervical vertebra
0 5 0
50
•00008 gramme per kilo, injected into jugular
vein.
0 5 30
42
0 6 0
36
0 7 0
30
0 8 0
29
slight inspiratory gasps.
0 9 0
20
» it it
0 10 0
14
dead
Experiment 15—Dog, weight 15 - 9 kilo., '2 gramme morphia
hypodermically; ether during operation. Curare injected into
jugular vein.
Suspension of artificial respiration for one minute raised the
pressure from 62 to 131 mm.
(4) Experiments on dogs after severing the spinal cord in the
cervical region.
Experiment 16—Dog, weight 6 - 6 kilos., T gramme of morphia
given hypodermically ; ether during operation.


Experiment 17—Dog, weight 7 kilos., -1 gramme morphia
hypodermically ; ether during the operation.
Time,
brs. mins.
secs.
Blood pressure
in mm. of
mercury.
Remarks.
Normal
127
cord severed at level of 3.d cervical vertebra.
0 2
0
68
■00005 gramme per kilo, injected into Jugular
0 2
30
54
vein.
0 3
0
47
0 4
0
41
0 5
0
34
0 10
0
40
0 15
0
45
0 20
0
48
0 30
0
56
0 45
0
57
1 0
0
44
1 15
0
38
1 30
0
33
1 40
0
26
1 50
0
22
1 52
0
13
dead
(5) Experiments on rabbits, vagi intact; without artificial'
respiration.
Experiment 18— Rabbit, weight 1 kilogramme; ether during
operation.
Time.
Blood pressure
in mm. of
•Bemarks.
lira. mins. secs.
mercury.
Normal
107
•00006 gramme per kilo, of body weight
injected into external jugular vein. In-
jection lasted 30 seconds.
0 0 30
70
0 10
29
intravascular clotting.
0 2 0
27
dead
Experiment 19—Rabbit, weight l - 2 kilogrammes; ether dur-
ing operation.
Time.
Blood pressure
hrs. mins. secs.
in mm. of
Remarks.
mercury.
Normal
105
■00004 gramme per kilo, injected in jugular
vein. Injection lasted 30 seconds.
0 0 30
83
0 10
49
0 2 0
53
0 5 0
64
0 6 0
69
intravascular clotting.
0 7 0
48
dead


Experiment 20—Rabbit, weight 1 kilo.; ether during operation.
Time.
Blood pressure
in mm. of
Eemarks.
hrs, mins.
seos.
mercury.
Normal
97
•00002 gramme per kilo, injected into jugular
vein. Injection lasted 30 seconds.
0 0
30
76
0 1
0
64
0 2
0
51
0 5
0
53
0 10
0
60
0 15
0
74
0 30
0
68
0 45
0
71
respiration increased in rate and extent.
1 0
0
62
1 15
0
54
1 30
0
45
J> it if
1 45
0
44
>* if a
2 0
0
40
respiration diminishing.
2 15
0
33
respiration still greater in both rate and
extent than normal.
2 30
0
27
convulsions.
2 38
0
20
dead.
Experiment 21—
operation.
Rabbit,
weight
1-6 kilos.; ether during
Time
hrs. mins.
secs.
Blood
pressure
in mm.
Eespii
amplitude
in mm.
ation.
rate per
minute.
Eemarks.
Normal
126
15
58
•00002 gramme per kilo, of body
weight slowly injected into
jugular vein.
0
1
0
114
17
72
0
1
30
106
16
66
0
15
0
124
52
52
0
45
0
130
42
84
'00003 gramme per kilo, in-
jected into jugular vein.
1
0
0
84
48
56
1
15
0
95
51
60
1
45
0
92
50
60
2
15
0
65
45
55
2
30
0
40
40
53
2
42
0
26
—
—
convulsions.
2
43
0
21
65
12
2
43
30
16
27
21
2
44
0
13
—
—
dead.
iln the next two experiments the amplitude and rate of the
respiratory excursions of the tambour-lever is placed opposite the
numbers representing the arterial pressure at the time being.
Prom these it will be seen that the fall in blood pressure is not
in any way dependent upon diminished respiratory efficiency.


Experiment 22—
operation.
Rabbit,
weight
1'75 kilos,; ether during
Time
hrs. mins.
secs.
Blood
pressure
in mm.
Respii
amplitude
in mm.
ation.
rate per
minute.
Remarks.
Normal
107
13
72
■000005 gramme per kilo, in-
jected into jugular vein.
0
3
0
96
11
60
0
18
0
84
11
69
0
48
0
80
10
52
1
8
0
82
9
44
1
23
0
72
10
36
1
38
0
80
11
40
•000015 grm. per kilo, injected.
1
40
0
55
11
45
large slow vagus beats.
1
41
0
23
50
67
convulsions.
1
41
10
58
65
71
1
41
30
20
12
52
1
43
0
12
64
2
1
43
20
11
55
4
1
43
40
8
—
—
dead.
Time,
hrs. mins. secs.
Blood pressure
in mm. of
mercury.
Remarks.
Normal
106
injection of ’0035 gramme per kilo, into
external jugular vein.
0 10
88
0 2 0
74
0 3 0
68
0 5 0
78
0 10 0
104
0 30 0
112
10 0
105
2 0 0
102
3 0 0
106
killed by bleeding'.
In this experiment the respiration was well maintained for two
hours forty-two minutes, when asphyxial convulsions occurred,
due to the feeble circulation.
In this experiment the respiration showed signs of failure, but
the asphyxial convulsions must be attributed to the simultaneous
enfeeblement of the circulation.
In the next two experiments the venom solution was raised to
the temperature of 85° C. for a moment previous to injection.
Experiment 23—Rabbit, weight l - 4 kilos.; ether during
operation.


Experiment 24 — Rabbit, weight 1 -8 kilos. ; ether during
operation. Venom solution heated to 85° C. previous to injection.
Time.
Blood pressure
in mm. of
Remarks.
hrs. mins. secs.
mercury.
Normal
102
•01 gramme per kilo, injected into jugular
vein. Injection lasted 3 minutes.
0 3 0
82
0 4 0
80
0 5 0
70
respiration doubled in rate and extent.
0 6 0
44
ti ft )i
0 7 0
36
0 8 0
40
respiration diminishing.
0 9 0
33
respiration diminishing but greater than
normal.
0 10 0
56
convulsions.
0 11 0
12
long slow gasping respiration.
0 12 0
8
dead.
In this experiment when the pressure had fallen to 33 mm.,
asphyxial convulsions occurred, although the respiration at the
time was above the normal, both in rate and extent.
Observations on the blood 'pressure after subcutaneous injection of
the poison.
When the poison is subcutaneously introduced, the effect upon
the blood pressure is complicated by the results of simultaneous
paralysis of the respiration, to a much greater extent than under
the previous experimental conditions. The cause of this differ-
ence will be discussed in the section devoted to the consideration
of the effects of the venom on the respiratory mechanism, but it
is necessary to mention the fact now. Blood pressure records
taken from an animal into which the poison has been subcutane-
ously injected exhibit the effects of the primary asphyxial
stimulation of the vagus and vaso-motor centres, and the final
paralysis of both of these, together with the weakening of cardiac
contractions owing to diminished oxygenation.
Accordingly, in studying the effect of the poison upon the blood
pressure when subcutaneously or intra-peritoneally injected, it is
necessary to eliminate these secondary results due to its operation
at the same time upon the respiratory mechanism, by means of


artificial inflation of the lungs. The effect upon the blood
pressure without artificial respiration can, however, be seen on
reference to the experiments at the end of the section on the effects
of the venom upon the respiration. In the detailed account of
those experiments, the pressure in the carotid artery at intervals
during the course of the experiment, is enumerated, together with
the rate and amplitude of the respiratory movements. On com-
paring the experiments with and without artificial respiration, it
will be seen that life is only prolonged to a very short extent by
maintaining the respiratory efficiency of the animal by mechanical
inflation.
If death from asphyxia be prevented by such means, the animal
succumbs within a few minutes from heart failure. Experiments
26, 27 and 28, in which the artificial inflation was suspended for
a few seconds at intervals in order to ascertain the extent of the
action of the poison on the respiratory mechanism, show that
the heart ceased to beat within five minutes from the time when
natural respiration had completely ceased.
The animals upon which these experiments were performed
were rabbits. They were amesthetised with ether, and the carotid
artery connected with a mercury manometer. The trachea was
connected with a Marey’s tambour and the artificial respiration
pump. The air was warmed by being passed through coils of
lead pipe immersed in hot water before being pumped into the
lungs. The arrangement of these connections was such as to
admit of changing from artificial to natural respiration or vice
versa by turning a tap, and without interfering with the registering
tambour. A tracing of the normal blood pressure was first obtained,
and then the poison dissolved in 1 cc. of normal salt solution,
injected. Further tracings were taken at intervals of fifteen
minutes or less, during the course of the experiment. The poison
was injected into the peritoneal cavity in two experiments and in
the others under the skin of the abdomen. The result of all the


Experiment 25—Rabbit, weight 1*3 .kilos.
Time,
hrs. mins. secs.
Blood pressure
in mm. of
mercury.
Remarks.
Normal
90
•01 gramme of poison per kilo, of body weight
0 10 0
61
injected into peritoneal cavity.
0 25 0
59
0 35 0
25
0 40 0
22
0 55 0
23
0 57 0
31
15 0
24
1 15 0
13
dead.
Experiment 26—Rabbit, weight 1‘6 kilos.
Time.
Blood pressure
hrs. mins.
in mm. of
Remarks.
secs.
mercury.
Normal
94
•0075 gramme per kilo, of body weight in-
jected into peritoneal cavity.
0 10
0
89
0 15
0
94
0 30
0
82
0 45
0
88
1 0
0
74
1 10
0
50
artificial respiration suspended for 7 seconds
natural respiration slight and inadequate
1 10
10
89
vagus beats.
1 15
0
51
1 20
0
44
artificial respiration suspended 5 seconds.
Natural respiration just perceptible.
1 30
0
28
artificial respiration suspended 5 seconds.
Natural respiration absent.
1 32
0
10
dead.
experiments was the same. The pressure fell slowly at first, and
rapidly at the end of the experiment. With large doses, Experi-
ments 25, 26, 27, it fell considerably, even during the first ten
minutes, but with the smaller quantities it remained nearly at the
normal for the first two hours and then fell rapidly until death.
At the same time the excursions of the style occasioned by each
beat of the heart were very greatly diminished until they became
imperceptible.


Experiment 27 — Rabbit, weight ,1'25 kilos.
Time.
Blood pressure
in mm. of
Remarks.
hrs. mins. secs.
mercury.
Normal
91
•0075 gramme per kilo, injected subcutane-
ously into abdominal wall.
0 8 0
85
0 10 0
90
0 15 0
94
■ 0 30 0
88
0 45 0
87
10 0
82
1 15 0
73
artificial respiration suspended during' 7
seconds. Natural respiration very feeble.
1 30 0
71
1 40 0
64
1 50 0
55
2 0 0
42
artificial respiration suspended during 7
seconds. Natural respiration absent.
2 5 0
28
2 10 0
20
2 13 0
14
dead.
Experiment 28—Rabbit, weight 1-75 kilos.
Time,
hrs. mins. secs.
Blood pressure
in mm. of
mercury.
Remarks.
Normal
98
•0035 gramme per kilo, of body weight in-
0 30
0
99
jeoted under skin of abdomen.
0 45
0
90
1 0
0
89
1 15
0
88
1 25
0
92
1 45
0
92
artificial respiration suspended 5 seconds.
2 0
0
91
Natural respiration feeble.
2 15
0
96
2 30
0
92
2 45
0
84
artificial respiration suspended 5 seconds.
3 0
0
56
Natural respiration very feeble,
artificial respiration suspended 5 seconds.
3 15
0
22
Natural respiration just perceptible,
artificial respiration suspended 5 seconds.
3 16
0
6
Natural respiration absent,
dead.


Experiment 29—Rabbit, weight l - 2 kilos.
Time,
hrs. mins. secs.
Blood pressure
in mm. of
mercury.
Remarks.
Normal
102
•0035 gramme per kilo, of body weight in-
0 15 0
100
jectcd under skin of abdomen.
0 30 0
97
0 45 0
97
10 0
93
1 15 0
90
1 30 0
87
1 45 0
89
2 0 0
84
2 15 0
78
2 30 0
75
2 45 0
75
3 0 0
69
3 15 0
52
3 25 0
31
3 30 0
26
3 35 0
22
3 40 0
17
3 44 0
15
dead.
Simultaneous observations on the arterial blood pressure and the
volume of the kidney or spleen following the intravenous
injection of the venom.
These experiments were performed on dogs. The animals were
given a hypodermic injection of morphia half an hour previously,
and inhaled ether during the operative procedure. The carotid
artery and jugular vein were dissected out. The former was
connected with a mercury manometer, and a cannula tied in the
vein by means of which the venom containing solution was intro-
duced. The kidney was reached through the loin, and placed in
a Roy’s oncometer and surrounded by hot cloths. Instead of
using oil as Roy originally did, hot water was used and the
membranes enclosing the organ were previously soaked in oil.
The oncometer was connected to the piston-recorder by an india-
rubber tube with stout walls. Unfortunately the range of move-
ment of the piston-recorder I have worked with is insufficient to
register the great variations produced in the volume of the kidney
by the injection of snake venom. The spleen was reached by a


long incision at the outer border of the rectus muscle, and placed
in Roy’s spleen box. Hot water was used to surround the organ,
which was prevented from cooling in the same manner as before.
In these experiments, however, the piston recorder was discarded
owing to its insufficient range, and the end of the rubber tube
farthest from the spleen box was connected with a small burette
graduated in of a cc. The level of the water in the burette
was adjusted so as to be three inches above the level of the spleen
box, in order that the pressure on the outside of the organ should
approximately equal the pressure in the splenic vein. During
the progress of the experiment, the graduation opposite the level
of the water in the burette was read off by an assistant, and at
the same time an indication was made on the blood pressure record
by raising the signal line. An increase in volume of the organ,
due to increase in the capillary pressure within the organ, is
indicated by the water flowing into the burette. Diminution in
volume is indicated by a corresponding flow out of the burette.
By reading off the increase or diminution in the water in the
burette, a measure of the alteration in volume is obtained.
In tabulating the graphic records, the height of the arterial
pressure curve has been measured as before, and in the spleen
volume experiments, the volume in cc. by which the organ was
diminished, has been placed opposite the value of the arterial
blood pressure at the moment. With the kidney experiments the
value of the ordinates on the curve in cc. was ascertained by
observing the extent of rise or fall of the lever of the piston
recorder which corresponded with the entrance or exit of 1 cc.
of fluid into the piston box. This tabulation is not quite accurate,
owing to the lever moving in an arc, and therefore the value of
the ordinates is not uniform, but this error may be neglected
for the present purpose.
In observing the volume at any particular time, the maximum
value and minimum value of the respiratory undulations were
both recorded and the mean taken. With the spleen experiments
the variations in volume caused by the rhythmic contraction of the


Experiment 30 — Dog, weight 13 - 5 kilos.; curarised ; artificial
respiration ; carotid connected with a mercury manometer; vagi
cut; poison introduced through a cannula in the external jugular
vein ; right kidney placed in oncometer.
Time.
Blood
Volume
pressure
of
Remarks.
hrs. mins. secs.
in mm.
kidney.
Normal
146
normal
•000035 gramme per kilo, injected into
jugular vein.
0 0 30
103
-1 cc.
0 10
81
- 2'1 cc.
0 2 0
64
#
0 3 0
55
*
0 4 0
52
*
0 5 0
44
#
0 6 0
40
#
0 10 0
32
*
0 15 0
30
*
0 17 0
18
#
dead
Time,
hrs, mini, sees.
Blood
pressure
in mm.
Volume
of
kidney.
Remarks.
Normal
• 120
normal
•000015 gramme per kilo, injected into
jugular vein.
0 10
96
- rs cc.
0 5 0
73
*
0 10 0
75
*
0 20 0
90
*
0 25 0
106.
- 1'8 cc.
0 30 0
112
-6 cc.
0 42 0
108
-7 cc.
animal bled to death.
organ itself, were accounted for in the same way. These contrac-
tions diminished or disappeared when the arterial pressure sank
greatly after the introduction of the poison, and reappeared in
those cases in which the pressure temporarily recovered, to vanish
again as the pressure finally sank.
* Denotes that the diminution in volume of the organ is greatep
than the piston-recorder could indicate.
Experiment 31—Dog, weight 9 kilos.; hypodermic injection of
2 grains of morphia acetate; ether ; vagi cut; carotid connected
with mercury manometer; poison introduced through a cannula in
external jugular vein; right kidney placed in oncometer.


Experiment 32—Dog, weight 3-6 kilos.; \ grain morphia
injected hypodermically; ether; vagi cut; carotid connected with
a mercury manometer; poison introduced through a cannula in
external jugular vein ; spleen placed in oncometer. Volume of
spleen when dead = 30 cc.
Time.
Blood
pressure
Volume
of
Remarks.
hrs. mins.
secs.
in mm.
spleen.
Normal
133
normal
•0001 gramme per kilo, injected into
jugular vein.
0 0
30
112
-0-8 cc.
0 1
0
82
-1-8 „
0 3
0
58
-2-1 „
0 5
0
52
-2-0 „
0 10
0
79
-1-6 „
0 20
0
105
-0-9 „
0 30
0
122
-0-4 „
0 45
0
101
-0-8 „
1 0
0
95
-0-8 „
1 30
0
63
-1-6 „
2 0
0
41
-19
2 10
0
31
-2-0 „
2 15
0
28
-2-0 „
2 17
0
23
-2-0 „
dead.
Experiment 33 —Dog, weight 4'3 kilos., 1 grain morphia hypo-
dermically ; ether; vagi cut; carotid connected with a mercury
manometer; poison introduced through a cannula in the external
jugular vein ; spleen placed in oncometer. "Volume of the spleen
when dead = 36 - 5 cc.
Time.
Blood
Volume
hrs. mins. secs.
pressure
of
Remarks,
in mm.
spleen.
Normal
120
normal
•000075 gramme per kilo, injected into
jugular vein.
0 0 10
107
-0’5 ce.
0 10
73
-20 „
0 3 0
58
-31 „
* Denotes that the diminution in volume of the organ is greater
than the piston-recorder could indicate. During this time its
lever described a straight line on the drum. As the pressure
again rose the piston recommenced to describe the characteristic
volume curve, exhibiting the cardiac and respiratory undulations.


lirs.
Time.
mins.
secs.
Blood
pressure
in mm.
Volume
of
spleen.
Remarks.
0
10
0
102
-0-8
ft
0
15
0
no
-0-3
0
30
0
108
-03
tt
0
45
0
103
- 0-4
ft
1
0
0
96
-0-9
1
30
0
97
-0-9
2
0
0
91
-1-0
«
2
30
0
65
-2'2
ft
2
40
0
58
-2-9
ft
2
50
0
54
-31
3
0
0
50
-3-3
ft
3
30
0
42
-40
ft
3
40
0
36
-40
ft
3
50
0
31
-4'0
ft
4
0
0
27
-4-1
4
13
0
18
-4'2
dead.
V.—Effect of Yenom on the Nervous System.
The venoms of all snakes directly, or indirectly affect the nervous
system. The introduction of snake poison is followed by depression,
faintness, loss of co-ordinating power, and ultimately by paralysis.
These symptoms point to alteration in either the nervous centres
or the peripheral nerves.
Brunton and Fayrer concluded, from their experiments, that
the peripheral termination of the motor nerves were actually
paralysed by cobra venom. These authors repeated Claude
Bernard’s classical experiments by means of which he demonstrated
that curare paralysed the peripheral terminations of motor nerves.
The results with cobra venom showed that this poison exerted a
similar effect. They were however, of opinion that paralysis of
motor nerves was not the only effect of cobra poison on the
nervous system, but that the spinal cord was also paralysed. In
some instances paralysis of the spinal cord appeared to cause
death, when little or no affection of the motor nerves could be
observed, but in other cases the peripheral paralysis was strongly
marked. They thought it was doubtful whether the cerebrum
was directly affected by the poison, as the intelligence both in
man and in animals often remained unimpaired to the last, and


the stupor and drowsiness which were sometimes noticed, might
have been caused indirectly.
According to Wall, 1 the principal action of cobra poison on the
nervous system, consists of an extinction of functions extending
from below upwards, of the various nerve-centres constituting the
cerebro-spinal system; and though, no doubt, other parts of the
nervous system suffer, this poison acts especially on the respiratory
centre, and on those other ganglia allied to it in the medulla
oblongata, which are in connection with the vagus, the spinal
accessory, and the hypo-glossal nerves, and it is directly to this
destructive action that we have to attribute death in most cases
of cobra poisoning.
Wall found, however, that there were marked differences
between the actions of the poison of the cobra, and Daboia
russelii, (a viperine snake) upon the nervous system. The poison
of the latter almost always occasioned violent convulsions, which
were not due as in cobra poisoning to failure of the respiration.
They occurred quite suddenly, and were in no way obviated by
artificial inflation of the lungs. Sometimes the animal died at
once, sometimes after a partial recovery. Wall thought these
convulsions were caused by the direct operation of the poison on
the nervous system and not by asphyxia. Nevertheless, I feel
convinced that they were in reality asphyxial convulsions, and due
to intravascular clotting, whereby the circulation was impeded, or
altogether stopped.
Another very interesting fact discovered by Wall was that if
Daboia venom was heated to 100° C. its power of producing these
convulsions was abolished. Injection of the boiled poison caused
a gradual cessation of the respiration, followed by a few convul-
sions, due to respiratory failure.
Exactly the same result is obtained by heating Pseudechis
venom to 85° C., and I have already shown that this is because
its capacity to occasion intravascular clotting has thereby been
almost destroyed.
1 “ Indian Snake Poisons.”
P—July 3, 1895.


Feoktistow on the other hand, experimenting with the venoms
of Crotalus and Vipera berus, found that even when complete
paralysis of the extremities had occurred, faradisation of the
peripheral end of a nerve produced perfectly normal contractions
of the muscles, and he was unable to find any interference with
the passage of nerve impulses to voluntary muscles. (No curare
effect).
These venoms produced a gradual paresis, involving, as a rule,
the hinder extremities first, and soon passing into a condition of
complete paralysis. The reflexes disappeared either before, or at
the same time as the onset of paralysis. He was unable to restore
the diminished or lost reflex activity of the cord by even intra-
venous injections of strychnine ; nor could he produce any move-
ment of the opposite limb by faradaic stimulation of the central
end of the sciatic nerve, even when the paralysis of the hind limbs
was still incomplete. During the later stages of poisoning he
observed dilation of the pupil.
Ragotzi 1 has recently, by an extensive series of experiments on
frogs, confirmed the results obtained by Brunton and Fayrer, as to
the action of cobra venom on the peripheral termination of the
motor nerves. He has also by some ingenious experiments shown
that the same occurs in mammals, and is of opinion that to this
peripheral paralysis the nervous symptoms are almost entirely due.
In summing up the results of his experiments he says—“ Ich
glaube daher, dass durch das Najagift eine specifische primare
Lahmung der nervdsen Centra nicht hervorgebracht wird. Triff
sie irgendwo in die Erscheinung, darm ist sie wohl nur secundarer
Natur, d. h. die Folge von schweren Circulationstbrungen.”
When Pseudechis venom is introduced into an animal, after a
period of uneasiness which varies according to the amount injected,
it becomes sleepy and lethargic, and if a dog, it vomits. The
lethargy increases, and is succeeded by weakness, which is at first
in the hind quarters. The animal remains quiet,
1 Loc. cit.


and disinclined to move. If made to walk its gait is unsteady,
and accompanied by incoordination of movement. At the same
time it responds less readily to any form of stimulation, and its
senses appear dulled. Later it is quite unable to stand, the
pupils become dilated and insensible to light, and the breathing
shallow and slowed. In this condition it responds sluggishly to
painful stimulation, although the skin and corneal reflexes, and
movements evoked by stimulation of the sensitive hair of the snout,
are still rapidly produced. Eventually no response can be evoked
by stimulation from any of the surfaces, and the corneal reflex
disappears last. By this time the respiratory movements have
become very sluggish, and with the exception of occasional long
inspiratory gasps, greatly diminished in extent. The respiration
ultimately ceases when with or without a few feeble convulsive
movements, the animal succumbs.
I have already shown that the venom paralyses the heart, and
thereby gradually depresses the circulation, and it is quite con-
ceivable that all these nervous symptoms could be produced by a
gradually diminished blood supply to the central nervous system.
Accordingly, before we can draw any conclusions as to how far
these results are due to a direct interference with the function of
the nervous system, it will be necessary to eliminate the operation
of this factor.
By varying the conditions of the experiment, it is however easy
to show that, although in many cases the circulatory depression
contributes to the gradual extinction of function of the nervous
system, the venom does itself exert a very powerful action upon
the medulla and cord, and more especially upon the respiratory
centre.
When the venom reaches the circulation •in a considerable
quantity at one time, the heart is the more affected, whereas the
respiratory centre is sensitive in a higher degree to the continuous
operation of the poison in small concentration. This conclusion
was arrived at from the fact that in those cases where the poison
is rapidly introduced into the circulation, as when small quantities


intravenously, or large quantities subcutaneously, are injected,
the more obvious effect is that produced upon the heart, but if
the delivery of the venom be slower, as when it is subcutaneously
injected, in not too large amount, the function of respiration is the
one more particularly interfered with, whilst the circulation may be
well maintained. In fact, were two separate observers to experi-
ment, the one with intravenous, the other with subcutaneous
injections, the conclusion of the former would be that the principal
action of the venom was that of a cardiac poison, while the latter
might consider that any interference with the circulation was
altogether subsidiary to the action of the poison on the respiratory
mechanism.
Different species of animals also exhibit some variation in the
relative degree of sensitiveness of their vascular and respiratory
mechanisms to the poison. In dogs the effect on the vascular
mechanism is, under similar conditions, generally more manifest
than in rabbits, whereas the latter appear to be particularly
sensitive to the influence of the poison in that portion of the
nervous system connected with respiration. It must, however, be
distinctly understood, that in all animals the venom produces a
profound paralysing effect upon the heart, and even in rabbits,
life can be prolonged but a few minutes by means of artificial
respiration. In those experiments in which immediately any
signs of diminished respiratory activity were obvious, artificial
inflation with warmed air was resorted to, the blood pressure fell
to within a few mm. of zero, and the animal died very shortly
after extinction of ordinary breathing had occurred.
It would appear as if the poison must reach a certain proportion
in the circulating blood, before it can seriously interfere with
cardiac contractions, but once this proportion is reached, the heart
is very speedily and profoundly affected. When the absorption
of the venom is slow, it may however effect a gradual paralysis of
the more sensitive respiratory nervous mechanism, before it is
present in the blood in sufficient concentration to produce any
appreciable diminution in cardiac activity.


It is not, however, so easy to eliminate the influence of deficient
circulation, as a possible cause of the symptoms of general paralysis
of the cord which occur in poisoned animals, because the rest of
the nervous system does not exhibit the same degree of sensitiveness
as the respiratory centre. Nevertheless, one may infer that a
poison which produces so deadly a paralysing effect upon a special
group of nerve cells, will exert the same influence though in lesser
degree upon the rest of the nervous system. There is indeed
absolute evidence of this, in the case of cold-blooded vertebrates,
such as frogs, and although with mammals the evidence is not so
completely satisfactory, it nevertheless leaves no reasonable doubt
that a diminution of the reflex activity of the cord, due to the
direct action of this venom on the nerve cells, exists after the
injection of the poison.
In the section devoted to the consideration of the effect of the
poison on the circulation, I stated that after the introduction of
venom into a vein, a great fall of blood pressure occurred, which
was accounted for by a direct paralysing effect of the poison upon
the heart. When, however the quantity injected was a small one,
the blood pressure very soon regained its former height, and the
circulation was as well maintained as previously. Nevertheless
the condition of the nervous system of the animal is very different
to that immediately preceding the injection. When removed
from the table it shows great weakness, and is often unable to
walk, or even to stand, but lies helplessly in any position in which
it may have fallen after a few incoordinate attempts to regain
a normal attitude. Its tendon reflexes are feeble or altogether
absent, and it reacts sluggishly to any form of cutaneous
stimulation.
Rabbits of about two kilogrammes in weight, which have
received -01 gramme of venom subcutaneously, die in from two to
three hours. The immediate cause of death, as I shall presently
show, is due in most cases to respiratory failure. If, directly the
respiration becomes shallow, artificial- inflation of the lungs be
employed, they live some fifteen or twenty minutes longer. In


three experiments in which under these conditions a tracing of
the arterial blood pressure was taken, this was maintained at, or
a very little below the original height, for some ten minutes after
the power of the animal to breathe, had absolutely disappeared.
In these experiments shortly before the cessation of ordinary
respiration the abdominal skin reflex which is so strongly marked
in rabbits could no longer be elicited, and its disappearance was
followed by that of the corneal reflex also, while at the same time
the efficiency of the circulation was maintained, as was shown by
the blood pressure remaining as high, or nearly as high as at the
commencement of tho experiment.
(a) —Effect oj venom on the reflex activity of the spinal cord in frogs.
After the introduction of -01 gramme of venom into the dorsal
lymph sacs of frogs, the animals soon show signs of advancing
paralysis. In about ten to fifteen minutes after the inoculation,
the respiratory movements become slow, and eventually cease.
It now responds only sluggishly to cutaneous stimulation, and if
turned over on its back can with difficulty regain the prone
position, on account of the incoordination of its efforts. A few
minutes later the animal is quite unable to turn over, when placed
on its back, and responds slightly or not at all to every form of
cutaneous stimulation. In about twenty minutes it is absolutely
paralysed, and even stimulation of the central end of a divided
sciatic nerve is unable to produce the slightest reflex response.
If a frog in this condition be opened, the heart may be beating
feebly, but in most cases the whole circulation is thrombosed.
Now it is obvious that one cannot draw any conclusions concern-
ing the direct action of the poison upon the nervous system from
such an experiment, as suspension of the circulation produces the
same result. Thrombosis may however be obviated, as I have
previously mentioned by raising the temperature of the venom
solution to 85° C. before injecting it. In the remainder of my
experiments on frogs this was done ; 'Ol gramme of this heated
venom never produced thrombosis, but the animals showed the


Time.
Frog 1
Frog 2
FrogS
Frog 4
Frog 5
Frog 6
Frog 7
Seconds
Seconds.
Seconds
Seconds.
Seconds.
Seconds.
Seconds.
3 p.m
2 6
1-8
20
2 0
20
1G
2-4
3'5 ,,
10
2-2
2-4
1-2
1-2
1-4
1-6
310 „
0-8
2'8
2 G
•8
1-2
•8
1-8
315 „
heartcut
heartcut
01 gram mo heated venom
out
out
injected into lymph-sac.
3-20 „
•o
3 0
28
1-0
1-4
10
1-8
3-25 „
1-0
28
2-4
1-0
1-2
1-8
22
3-30 „
•G
2-2
26
1-2
4-6
34
4-0
3‘35 ,,
•c
2-2
5-2
40
no response
50
no response
3-40 „
30
to response
G-8
*i
no response
>t
3 45
•8
30
io response
,,
,,
i i
Nextday
34
4 2
n
,t
>.
..
same symptoms of gradual extinction of function of the nervous
system as those inoculated with the unheated venom. When the
animals were completely paralysed, the heart was found to be still
beating fairly strongly.
To test the effect of venom on the reflex activity of the cord,
Turc’s method was employed. The brains of seven frogs were
destroyed, and the animals were then hung up in a row by the
lower jaw. About every five minutes the foot of each frog was
dipped in a '4% solution of sulphuric acid. The moment the foot
touched the fluid a chronograph was started, and the moment
there was any movement of the leg, it was stopped. The
chronograph measured to one-fifth of a second.
The time intervening between the commencement of the
stimulation and the beginning of response, (latent period of
response), was then noted, and the foot of the frog washed in a
beaker of water. The whole process was then repeated with the
next frog. As the activity of the cord diminished, the latent
period increased. When the seven frogs had been tested three
times in this way, -01 gramme of venom dissolved in -5 cc. salt
solution, and previously heated to 85° C., was injected into the
dorsal lymph sac of three of them, and the hearts of two were
cut out, while the remaining two served as controls. The effect
of the poison, and also the effect of cessation of all circulation
upon the latent period of response is shown in the following
table, where the columns of figures represent this latent period of
response in seconds.


While with the control frogs there was no very marked altera-
tion in the reflex excitability of the cord until the next day, those
frogs in which the circulation was abolished failed to respond in
twenty-five and twenty minutes after the suspension of the circu-
lation. For the few minutes previous to the absence of response
to stimulation, the latent period was increased. The poisoned
frogs whose hearts were still beating moderately after the cessation
of all reflex activity, however, ceased to respond after fifteen and
twenty minutes ; that is sooner than those in which the cord was
deprived of all blood supply. Under these circumstances the
effect on the nervous system must have been a direct one, and
wholly independent of any interference with the vascular
mechanism.
(5) —The effect of the venom on motor nerves.
The general features presented by an animal poisoned with the
venom are strikingly similar to those which follow the injection
of curari. The gradual cessation of all motor phenomena either
of a spontaneous or reflex origin might very well be due to the
poison operating in this way. The conclusion of Brunton and
Fayrer, and Eagotzi, that cobra poison paralysed the peripheral
ends of the motor nerves, lends additional support to such a view.
With the object of investigating this point, I made a number
of observations on frogs poisoned with the venom, in the same
way as the action of curari was determined by Claude Bernard.
I also determined whether there was any evidence of such inter-
ference with the terminations of the phrenic nerves, and also
with the motor nerves of the brachial plexus of rabbits. Ragotzi
found that the terminations of the phrenics were more sensitive
to the action both of curari and of cobra poison, than the other
motor nerve endings ; and he sees in this increased sensitiveness
the reasoji why so many observers have attributed a selective
action upon the respiratory centre to cobra venom.
I have both with frogs and mammals been quite unable to
discover any indication that Pseudechis venom produces an effect


upon motor nerve terminations. The symptoms of interference
with the nervous system cannot be accounted for in this way.
(i.) —Experiments with Frogs.
In all these experiments the sciatic nerve on one side was
dissected out for a length of about 1 cm. and a ligature passed
under it and tied around the limb, but so as to exclude the nerve,
The poison was then introduced either into the dorsal lymph sac,
or into the peritoneal cavity, and was unable to reach the ligatured
limb which was cut off from all circulation. As soon as all move-
ment either voluntary or reflex had ceased, the lower half of the
frog was cut off at the waist, the skin removed from the lower
half of the body and the sciatics of both sides stimulated as they
lay beside the urostyle in the abdominal cavity.
The capacity of the nerve to conduct impulses to the muscle,
was ascertained by stimulating it with the induced current from
a Du Bois Reymond’s coil, and recording the greatest distance of
the secondary from the primary coil when a contraction of the
gastrocnemius was caused by breaking the primary circuit. This
circuit contained one Daniel cell, and a moderately constant
rapidity in opening the circuit was obtained by allowing a rotating
cylinder to make and break a metallic contact. The cylinder was
kept rotating at a uniform speed, and made and broke circuit with
each revolution. The secondary circuit was short circuited by a
Du Bois Reymond key. This was opened, when it was wished to
stimulate the nerve, during one revolution of the cylinder, and
then closed again. As only the minimal stimuli requisite to pro-
duce a contraction were employed, the closing of the primary
circuit just previous to its opening, failed to cause any contraction
of the muscle.
Experiment I.—Large male frog, weight 21 grammes ; left leg
ligatured but so as to exclude the sciatic nerve.
2 - 37 p.m., - 25 cc. of al% solution of Pseudechis venom injected
into dorsal lymph sac.
3 ’2O „ both legs kicked when foot was pinched.


• Maximum distance of secondary from primary
coil when gastrocnemius contracted.
Electrodes on
sciatic nerve.
Electrodes on
dorsal cord.
Ligatured limb...
47 cm.
32 cm.
TJnligatured limb
58 cm.
38 cm.
4- p.m., both legs kicked when foot was pinched.
5- „ ditto ditto
7 - 0 „ responds sluggishly to stimulation; recovers with
difficulty when placed on back.
Next morning the frog was quite lively.
In this experiment the condition of the nerves was not tried as
an insufficient amount of venom had been inoculated.
Experiment ll.—Sturdy male frog, weight 18 grammes prepared
as in Experiment I.
12-2 p.m., -5 cc. of 1% solution of venom injected into dorsal
lymph sac.
12-20 ~ respiratory movements ceased ; pinching foot of un-
ligatured limb causes it to be drawn away slowly.
12-21 ~ when turned over on its back makes no attempt to
regain the prone position.
12-24 ~ corneal reflex gone.
12-25 „ sciatic nerves prepared for stimulation.
Experiment lll.—Large female frog, weight 19 grammes, prepared
as before.
12-40 p.m., -5 cc. of 1% solution of Pseudechis venom injected
into dorsal lymph sac.
12'56 „ respiratory movements ceased,
1-0 ~ when turned over on back unable to recover prone
position.
1-5 „ all reflex movements absent; sciatic nerves prepared
Maximum distance of secondary from primary
coil when gastrocnemius contracted.


Electrodes on
sciatic nerve.
Electrodes on
dorsal cord.
Ligatured limb...
Unligatured limb
22 cm.
62 5 cm.
10 cm.
27 cm.
I found that the venom had occasioned intravascular clotting
in both these frogs. The blood in the whole vascular system was
coagulated, except in the ligatured limb. It therefore appeared
quite likely that the venom had not been circulating sufficiently
long to produce any influence on the nerve terminations. In the
remainder of the experiments intravascular clotting was obviated
by using venom which had previously been heated to 85° C. for. a'
minute. Nevertheless the same paralysis followed, but it took
considerably longer to develope when the same weight of poison
was employed.
Experiment IY.—Large male frog, weight 20 grammes, prepared
as usual.
12T5 p.m., •5 cc. of 1% solution of venom previously heated to
85° 0. injected into dorsal lymph sac.
4- „ respiratory movements feeble; recovers with diffi-
culty when placed on back.
5 - „ respiration ceased.
7 - 0 „ no response to stimulation ; sciatics dissected out.
Maximum distance between coils wben gastrocnemius
contracted.
Experiment Y.—Lusty frog, weight 18 grammes prepared as usual.
3 - 20 p.m., -75 cc. of al% solution of venom previously heated
. to 85° C. injected in dorsal lymph sac.
3-30 „ respiratory movements ceased. Moves both legs
slowly when feet are pinched; turns over with
difficulty when placed on back.
3-34 „ remains on back without attempting to recover.
3-37 ~ all reflex response gone; sciatics dissected out.
Maximum distance between coils when gastrocnemius
contracted.


Electrodes on
sciatic nerve.
Electrodes on
dorsal cord.
Ligatured limb...
TTnligatured limb
75 cm.
79 cm.
37 cm.
34 cm.
Electrodes on
sciatic nerve.
Electrodes on
dorsal cord.
Ligatured limb...
TJnligatured limb
61 cm.
58 cm.
32 cm.
33 cm.
Experiment Yl.—Erog (male), weight 20 grammes, prepared as
usual.
4-30 p.m., -5 cc. of a 2% solution of venom previously heated to
85° C. injected into dorsal lymph sac.
4-45 „ respiratory movements ceased; recovers with difficulty
when placed on back.
4-50 „ all reflexes absent; sciatics prepared for stimulation.
Maximum distance between coils when gastrocnemius
contracted.
Experiment Vll.—Erog (female), weight 18-5 grammes, prepared
as usual.
4 - p.m., -5 cc. of a 2% solution of venom previously heated
to 85° 0. injected into dorsal lymph sac.
4'40 ~ respiration shallow; reflexes dull; recovers with
difficulty when laid on back.
5 - ~ no reflex response; soiatics dissected out.
Maximum distance between coils when gastrocnemius
contracted.
In nearly the whole of these experiments the contraction of the
gastrocnemius was induced by a less stimulus in the poisoned than
in the unpoisoned limb. Had the poison exerted any effect
analagous to that produced by curari, the opposite result would
have been observed. The diminished sensitiveness of the muscles
in the ligatured limb is explained by the fact that all circulation
had been cut off since the application of the ligature. The longer
the time which had elapsed since the limb was tied, the greater
was the difference in sensitiveness between the two sides.


Experiments to determine whether the venom affects the motor
nerve terminations of mammals.
Eagotzi came to the conclusion that the terminations of the
phrenic nerves in the diaphragm were more sensitive both to the
action of cobra venom and curari than the endings of the motor
nerves in the muscles of the limbs. I accordingly chose the,
phrenics for the purpose of ascertaining whether Pseudechis venom
in any way affected the passage of nervous impulses through
motor-nerve terminations.
When a dose of - 005 to - 01 gramme of venom per kilogramme
of the animal’s weight is injected either subcutaneously, or into
the peritoneal cavity of a rabbit, within a few hours the respiratory
movements are much diminished both in rate and in extent The
diaphragmetic contractions become progressively weaker, until
they disappear altogether, and after a few feeble convulsions, the
animal dies of asphyxia. If artificial respiration be resorted to,
the convulsions speedily cease. Nevertheless, artificial inflation
does not prevent the death of the animal, which occurs within a
few minutes from circulatory failure.
I have already shown that this gradual failure of all respiratory
movement is not essentially dependent upon any alteration in the
circulation. It might however, be occasioned either by paralysis
of the respiratory centre, or by interference with the passage of
nerve impulses along the phrenics to the diaphragm, as Eagotzi
maintained was the case in cobra poisoning.
To test the latter alternative, I arranged a series of experiments
in which I determined the least stimulus which, when applied to
the phrenic, would cause a contraction of the diaphragm, both
before injection of the poison and at intervals afterwards, until
spontaneous respiration had entirely disappeared.
As the venosity of the blood from the failing respiration would
itself produce a diminution in the excitability of the muscular
fibres of the diaphragm, the complete aeration of the blood was
secured by artificial inflation of the chest with warm air, and as


enfeeblement of the circulation -would also operate in the same
manner, a simultaneous record of the blood pressure was taken in
order to keep a check on this possible source of error.
Rabbits of about 1J kilogrammes in weight were used. The
carotid artery was connected with a mercury manometer, and a
glass cannula tied into the trachea. The glass cannula communi-
cated with a Marey’s tambour, the artificial respiration apparatus,
and the external air by three taps. By means of the tap connected
with the respiration apparatus, artificial inflation could be turned
on or off at a moment’s notice. The lever of the tambour and a
float with scribe on the mercury manometer registered on a travel-
ling surface, the respiratory movements and the blood pressure
respectively. The left phrenic nerve was dissected out in the
neck, and placed upon electrodes. The nerve was prevented from
drying by being, together with the electrodes, again covered with
the skin. The phrenic was stimulated by the induced current
from the secondary terminals of a Du Bois Reymond’s coil,
and the primary circuit was broken by the same arrangement, as
was used in the experiments with frogs, described above. In the
primary circuit was a Daniel cell. At the commencement of
each experiment a record of the respiration, blood pressure, and
the greatest distance between the coils of the inductorium when
a contraction of the diaphragm followed stimulation of the phrenic,
was obtained. It was not found necessary to open the abdomen
and observe the diaphragm directly, as when a contraction of the
left half of the diaphragm occurred, there was an unmistakeable
sharp movement of the fur on that side, owing to the sudden
retraction of the lower ribs. The same series of observations
were made every fifteen minutes after the injection of the poison,
and as soon as the respiration exhibited any signs of failure,
artificial inflation was brought into action by turning the tap
connected with the respiration pump. The animal’s capability
to breathe by itself was recorded every fifteen minutes by turning
off the artificial respiration for a few seconds. In the tabulated
account of experiments I have employed the extent of the respi


Experiment I.
Distance
between
coils.
Amplitude of
respiratory
record.
Eemarks. •
Before injection...
IS minutes after
30
45 ,,
46 cm.
12 mm.
15 „
X hour 10
47 cm.
„ 15
tt
49 „
10 mm!
respiration slowed.
„ 30
tt
49 „
8-5 „
it tt
„ 45
tt
49 „
6 „
tt tt
2 hours 0
it
49 „
55 „
„ very slow.
„ 15
45 „
4 „
circulation began to fail.
„ 30
tt
44
2 „
„ 45
3 hours 0
tt
42 „
•5 „
tt
36 „
0
Experiment II.
Distance
between
coils.
Amplitude of
respiratory
record.
Remarks.
Before injection
15 minutes after
35 cm.
14 mm.
20 „
30
14 „
respiration much slower
45
36 cm.
15 „
if if
1 hour 0
36 „
14-5 „
„ very slow.
15
))
29
2 „
blood pressure fallen;
corneal reflex gone;
respiration very slow.
„ 30
»»
30 „
■5 „
„ 35
a
30 „
0
Experiment III.
Distance
Amplitude of
between
respiratory
Remarks.
coils.
record.
Before injection...
41 cm.
15 mm.
15 minutes after
17 „
30
41 „
22 „
45
23
1 hour 0 „
40 „
26 „
„ 15
42 „
26
42 „
14 „
»t >y
42 „
10 „
respiration slowed.
ratory excursions of the tambour, as a measure of the condition
of its respiratory mechanism. This does not however, indicate
the total disablement, for the respirations were diminished in
number as well as extent.


Experiment III.— continued.
Distance
between
coils.
Amplitude of
respiratory
record.
Remarks.
2 hours 0 minutes after
42 cm.
10 mm.
respiration slowed.
ft IS ft
42 „
7 „
„ 30
40 „
4 „
„ 45
41 „
3-5 „
3 hours 0 „
40 „
•5 „
corneal reflex gone.
ft is „
41
0
blood pressure as high
as at beginning of
experiment.
„ 30
36 „
0
blood pressure falling.
Experiment IV.
Distance
between
coils.
Amplitude of
respiratory
record.
Remarks.
Before injection
15 minutes after
30
45
42 c.m.
43 „
16 mm.
19 „
11
10 „
blood pressure falling.
1 hour
0
40 „
4 „
15
37
2 „
abdominal reflex gone.
it
30
ft
30 „
•8 „
corneal reflex gone;
pressure fallen to half.
a
45
ft
30 „
0
In all of these experiments, the strength of the stimulus requisite
to cause a contraction of the diaphragm, when applied to the
phrenic nerve, was slightly greater at the end of some hours. The
difference was however, very slight, and it is noteworthy that in
the only case where the circulatory efficiency was maintained, the
strength of stimulus required was the same as at the beginning
of the experiment three and a half hours earlier, whereas all
spontaneous respiratory movement had ceased fifteen minutes
before. One would expect to find that the mere fact of having a
nerve on electrodes all this time would in itself have produced a
diminished sensitiveness to stimuli. The experiments I think,
show conclusively that Pseudechis venom in no way affects the
transmission of impulses from nerve to muscle.
Vl.—Effect of the Venom on the Respiratory Mechanism.
The effect of cobra poison on the respiration has been carefully
investigated by Wall who has published some interesting stetho-


metric charts, taken from animals injected with this venom. The
first change he noticed in an animal after the introduction of
cobra poison, was a decided quickening and deepening of the
respiratory movement. This increase was no longer to be seen
after the section of the vagi. The quickening was only temporary,
and after an interval of uncertain duration, the respiratory move-
ment, became slower, and less in extent. This diminution con-
tinued until the blood was no longer oxygenated, when the animal
died with the usual symptoms characteristic of asphyxiation.
When a large dose (1 cc. of fresh venom), was introduced directly
into the circulation of a dog, Wall found that thirty seconds after
the injection, the animal was suddenly seized with asphyxial con-
vulsions, in which it died in about one hundred seconds. Wall
attributed these convulsions to a stimulation of the respiratory
centre prior to extinction of the function of the same. This may
be the correct explanation of the phenomena, but the injection
of Pseudechis venom directly into the circulation produces pre-
cisely the same series of events, and the explanation in this case
is that the whole vascular system is quite suddenly thrombosed.
The gradual extinction of all respiratory movement is, accord-
to Wall, due to paralysis of the respiratory centre. Brunton and
Fayrer 1 ascribe it partly to this cause, and partly to a curare-like
action of the poison on the terminations of the phrenics in the
diaphragm, whereas Ragotzi is of opinion that it is due to the
latter alone.
Wall 2 has also investigated the action on the respiration, of
the poison of the viper Daboia russellii. Its action in producing
convulsions has already been discussed. If only small doses are
subcutaneously injected, or if the venom be previously boiled, the
respiration, after a preliminary acceleration, becomes slower and
slower, until death occurs.
Mitchell and Reichert 3 found that the venoms of Crotalus and
Ancistrodon caused a primary increase in the number and extent
1 Loc. cit. 2 Loc. cit. * Loc. cit.
Q—July 3,1895.


of the respirations, followed by a decrease in both. These
venoms affected the respiratory rhythm to a much greater extent
than the respiratory excursus in the majority of cases.
Feoktistow 1 found a tremendous increase in respiration, followed
by asphyxia, after intravenous injection of the poisons of Crotalus
and Vipera berus. His conclusions as to the explanation of these
phenomena are not very valuable, as he was undoubtedly dealing
with cases of intravascular clotting, although he was quite
unaware of such a contingency. He does not appear to have
made any observation on the respiration after the subcutaneous
injection of the poisons.
After injection of Pseudechis venom the respiratory movements
become less and less, and ultimately cease. As I have shown
that this action of the nervous system may occur independently
of any effect on the circulation, and also that the venom has no
effect on motor nerves, or their endings in muscle, it must exert
its action directly upon the respiratory centre in the medulla.
Its action in this respect is best seen when the venom is sub-
cutaneously introduced in rabbits. Under these conditions, the
paralysis is often preceded by a period in which the respirations
are increased both in number and in extent. The period of
increased respiratory activity is much more strongly manifested
in some experiments than in others, and is indeed not infrequently
entirely absent.
Both Brunton and Fayrer 2 and Mitchell and Eeichert 3 state
that the primary acceleration of the respirations was absent after
cutting the vagi, and the first mentioned observers accordingly
attribute this increase in respiratory rhythm to the operation of
the poison upon the peripheral terminations of the vagi in the
lungs. My results with Pseudechis poison are however not in
accordance with such a view. The primary acceleration is often
absent both in animals with severed, and in those with intact vagi,
but occurs with about equal frequency under both conditions. In
1 Loc cit. 2 hoc. cit. * Loc, cit.


experiments in which the acceleration in rhythm and increase in
amplitude of the respirations have been very pronounced, sever-
ance of both vagi has had no influence upon the amplitude, and
only a slight retarding effect upon the rate. The diminution in
frequency of the respirations so produced, have not however been
proportionately more than occurs after severance of the vagi in,
unpoisoned animals. I therefore conclude that the increase in
respiratory activity which so frequently occurs after inoculation
with Pseudeehis venom, is due to a primary stimulating effect of
this poison upon the respiratory centre.
Sometimes these two phases of increased activity and diminished
activity alternate, but the latter gradually obtains the ascendency.
Eventually the respiratory movements become imperceptible, and
unless artificial respiration be immediately resorted to, the animal
flies of asphyxia. Just previous to the final cessation of all
respiratory movement, it is not infrequently the case that the
respirations occur in little groups separated by periods when the
breathing is in abeyance.
When the respiratory movements have ceased, the animal is
usually seized with a few feeble convulsions during which it makes
some inspiratory gasps of very considerable extent, showing that
although the respiratory centre fails to respond rhythmically to
the stimulus of blood of such venosity as to powerfully stimulate
both the vagus and vaso-motor centres, it does still respond when
this becomes excessive.
The more rapidly this cessation of the respiration is effected by
the operation of the venom, the more powerful are the convulsive
movements just preceding death. In cases of slow poisoning they
•are altogether absent.
In Experiment 1 of this section, the respiration ceased before
the efficiency of the circulation was in any way diminished. This,
.however, is not generally the case, and although suspension of the
respiration usually precedes cessation of the heart-beat, the activi-
ties of both these mechanisms decline together. The -gradual


enfeeblement of the circulation contributes to the respiratory
failure, and vice versa, and the simultaneous paralysis of the
rest of the nervous system prevents in most cases any marked
indication of its asphyxial condition.
Details of experiments to ascertain the effect of the venom upon the
respiratory mechanism.
The experiments with this object were performed upon rabbits
and dogs. The results were substantially identical with both
animals, but the former are much more suitable for the determin-
ation of this point, as their respiration is, under normal circum-
stances, more regular, and the individual respirations do not exhibit
the same variations in amplitude as is the case with dogs. Eight
experiments on dogs, in which the vagi were previously divided,
were made. Of these, only two are here tabulated; the remaining
six curves exhibit the same general characteristics as those tabu-
lated, but the respiration both before and after the injection of
the poison was so irregular, that although the general effect of the
venom is clearly enough seen on looking at the curves themselves,
these are unsuitable for reduction to a numerical form. This
difficulty is chiefly owing to the fact that after the vagi were
severed the respirations occurred in groups. Four or five small
respirations occurred together and were succeeded by a deep ’
sighing respiration. In making a table it would be necessary
to state the variations in amplitude and rhythm of both kinds
of respiratory efforts. Such a table would be difficult to follow,
and I have therefore decided to omit the records of these
experiments.
The animals were anfesthetised with ether, and the carotid artery
connected with a mercury manometer, and the trachea with a
Marey’s tambour. The style of the manometer and the lever of the
tambour wrote upon a Hering’s kymograph. The experiments are
arranged in three groups: in the first the venom was injected under
the skin, in the second into the peritoneal cavity, and in the third
series it was introduced directly into the circulation through the


Experiment 1—Rabbit, l - 6 kilos.'
; vagi intact.
Time.
Respiration.
Amplitude
Rate per
pressure
Remarks.
lirs. mins. secs.
in mm.
minute.
Normal
17
68
106
•005 gramme per kilo, injected
under skin of abdomen
0 15 0
15
84
106
0 30 0
10
68
101 •
0 45 0
9
32
96
10 0
7
28
95
1 15 0
8
28
99
1 30 0
12
30
97
1 45 0
23
21
108
large slow cardiac contractions
(vagus)
2 0 0
9
28
96
2 15 0
12
32
91
2 30 0
11
36
86
2 45 0
5
33
92
3 0 0
2-5
24
113
large slow cardiac contractions
(vagus) .
3 15 0
•5
20
112
ditto
3 17 0
101
ditto, slight convulsions
3 20 0
68
ditto, convulsive inspiratory
movements
3 23 0
33
ditto, occasional inspiratory
gasps
3 26 0
0
0
16
dead
jugular vein. In some cases the vagi were previously severed,
in others left intact, or cut during the course of the experiment.
Graphic records were obtained in each case, both before and
after the injection of the poison, and these curves have been
measured and the numbers tabulated. Opposite the time
indicated in the first column are placed the amplitude of the
respiratory excursion of the tambour-lever, and the number
of respirations per minute, together with the blood pressure
for the time being.
(a) —Observations on the respiration after subcutaneous injection
oj the poison.


Experiment 2—Rabbit, 1‘1 kilo,
artificial.
; vagi intact ; respiration
Time.
Respiration.
Blood
Amplitude
Rate per
pressure
Remarks.
hrs. mins. secs.
in mm
minute.
Normal
ii
72
94
•005 gramme per kilo, injected
subcutaneously.
0 15 0
13
76
98
0 30 0
8-5
56
91
0 45 0
90
artificial respiration
10 0
88
ditto
1 15 0
9
48
92
ditto, suspended for 20 seconds
1 30 0
8
40
92
ditto, ditto
1 45 0
6
40
92
ditto, ditto
2 0 0
5
40
93
ditto, ditto
2 15 0
4
35
91
ditto, ditto
2 30 0
1-7
30
85
ditto, ditto
2 45 0
•4
26
56
ditto, ditto
3 0 0
0
0
23
ditto, ditto
3 10
0
0
• 7
dead
Experiment 3—Rabbit, weight 1 - 5 kilos.; vagi cut.
Time.
Respiration.
Blood
Amplitude
Rate per
pressure
Remarks.
hrs. mins. secs.
in mm
minute.
Normal
14
44
86
•004 grammes per kilo, injected
under skin of abdomen
0 30 0
22
32
86
10 0
20
28
94
1 30 0
43
40
87
2 0 0
16
32
90
2 30 0
14
36
94
3 0 0
13
36
95
3 30 0
7 ■
34
91
3 40 0
5
26
94
3 45 0
2
22
76
3 50 0
64
convulsions
3 52 0
0
0
20
dead
In this experiment as soon as the respiration showed signs of
failing, artificial respiration was employed. This was discontinued
for twenty seconds at intervals during the course of the experi-
ment, and the animals natural respiration recorded. The arrange-
ment of the tubes leading from the artificial respiration pump
allowed this to be done, by merely turning off a tap connecting
the pump with the trachea.


Experiment 4—Rabbit, weight 1-4 kilos.; vagi cut.
Time.
Respiration.
Blood
Amplitude
Kate per
pressure
Remarks.
hrs.
mins.
secs.
in mm.
minute.
Normal
18
40
88
•005 grammes per kilo, injected
under skin of abdomen
0
30
0
20
34
89
1
0
0
32
44
89
1
30
0
38
40
90
2
0
0
28
36
89
2
30
0
15
36
88
3
0
0
13
45
92
3
30
0
8
37
94
3
35
0
7
32
95
3
40
0
6
18
95
3
41
0
3
12
108
3
42
0
3
17
118
3
43
0
2
16
92
3
44
0
1
20
74
3
45
0
64
slight convulsions
3
46
0
0
6
21
dead
Experiment 5—-Rabbit, 1'6 kilogramme in weight; vagi intact.
Time.
Respiration.
Blood
Amplitude
Bate per
pressure
Ee marks.
hrs. mins. secs.
in mm.
minute.
Normal
17
52
04
•005 gramme per kilo, injected
into peritoneal cavity
0 15 0
10
52
90
0 30 0
15
101
88
0 45 0
8
45
81
0 55 0
5
44
83
10 0
6
49
76
1 10 0
3
35
01
large slow contractions (vagus)
1 15 0
2
32
55
ditto
1 17 0
89
convulsions
1 20 0
42
occasional convulsive gasps
1 21 0
17
dead
( b) —Observations on the respiration after introduction of venom
into the peritoneal cavity.


Experiment 6—Rabbit, weight 1 kilogramme; vagi intact.
Time.
Respiration.
Amplitude
Rate per
pressure
Remarks.
hrs. mins. secs.
in mm.
minute.
Normal
17
52
94
•01 gramme per kilo, injected
into peritoneal cavity
0 5 0
10
56
60
0 20 0
8
44
41
0 30 0
7-5
40
26
0 35 0
13
32
21
0 50 0
8
27
20
artificial respiration started
15 0
30
artificial respiration
17 0
27
ditto
1 15 0
19
ditto
1 25 0
12
dead
Experiment 7—Rabbit, weight 1-3 kilogramme; vagi intact.
Time.
Respiration.
Blood
Amplitude
Rate per
pressure
Remarks.
lirs. mins. secs.
in mm.
minute.
Normal
13
76
90
•01 gramme per kilo, injected
into peritoneal cavity
0 10 0
12
74
88
0 20 0
17
76
78
0 50 0
15
48
88
15 0
15
40
76
1 15 0
3
31
50
1 25 0
2
32
42
1 30 0
1
30
40
1 36 0
36
convulsions
1 37 0
0
0
13
dead
Experiments—Rabbit, weight 1-5 kilogramme; vagi intact.
Time.
Respiration.
Blood
Amplitude
Rate per
pressure
Remarks.
hrs. mins.
secs.
in mm.
minute.
Normal
25
44
no
•01 gramme per hilo. injected
into peritoneal cavity
O 10
0
38
60
98
0 20
0
54
76
96
0 50
0
9
40
143
0 51
0
10
37
114
0 53
0
8
29
118
0 53
20
125
convulsions
0 54
0
4
30
51
0 55
0
0
■ 0
10
dead


(c) — Observations on the respiration after intravenous injection.
Experiment 9—Rabbit, weight 1 •! kilogramme ; vagi intact.
Time,
hrs. mins.
secs.
Eespil
Amplitude
in mm.
•ation.
Bate per
minute.
Blood
pressure
in mm.
Remarks.
Normal
15
37
98
■01 gramme per kilo, of venom
0
3
0
14
64
86
previously heated to 85° C.
injected into external jugu-
lar vein; injection lasted
three minutes. --
0
4
0
6
48
80
0
5
0
30
81
66
0
6
0
35
86
44
0
7
0
15
56
36
0
8
0
10
40
40
heart heat imperceptible
0
9
0
11
28
34
0
10
0
42
convulsions
0
11
0
55
i'6
8
0
11
30
5
dead
Experiment 10 — Dog, weight 5 - 75 kilos., - 065 gramme morphia
hypodermically ; vagi uncut; ether during operation.
Time.
Eespiration.
Blood
Amplitude
Kate per
pressure
Remarks.
hrs. mins. secs.
in mm.
minute.
Normal
24
12
124
00075 gramme per kilo, injected
into jugular vein
0 10
32
14
67
0 15 0
33
12
32
heart heat nearly imperceptible
0 30 0
16
12
44
heart beat increased
0 45 0
14
11
94
ditto
10 0
14
8
111
1 15 0
12
5
48
1 30 0
10
4
41
1 40 0
11
3
38
1 45 0
8
3
37
1 50 0
7
2
33
1 51 0
• •
27
occasional inspiratory gasps
1 52 0
0
0
21
dead
In this experiment the activity of the respiration was rhythmical
after the injection of the poison. It first became increased in
rate and extent, and then diminished in both until it was nearly
obliterated, and then again increased (Cheyne-Stokes respiration).
The period of these rhythmic alternations was about forty seconds.
The effect of intravenous injection of very small quantities
(■OOOO2 gramme per kilo.) of the unheated venom, is precisely
similar to the above experiment both upon the blood pressure and
upon the respiration. (Compare experiments in the section
“Effects of venom on the circulatory mechanism,” where the
amplitude and rate of the respiratory movements are recorded
together with the blood pressure.)


Experiment 11—Dog, weight 5'5 kilos., -065 gramme morphia
hypodermically ; ether during operation ; vagi cut.
Time.
Bespii
Amplitude
*ation.
Bate per
Blood
pressure
Remarks.
tars. mins. secs.
in mm.
minute.
Normal
31
6
180
•0005 gramme per kilo, injected
into external jugular vein
0 5 0
40
7
90
0 10 0
42
7
112
0 15 0
44
8
178
0 30 0
46
8
172
0 45 0
46
15
156
10 0
47
16
114
1 15 0
34
13
80
1 30 0
25
10
81
1 45 0
15
11
64
2 0 0
11
9
30
2 10 0
0
0
14
dead; respiratory gasps after
cessation of the circulation
Experiment 12—
morphia hypodermic
■Dog, weight 6 kilogrammes, -065 gramme
ally ; ether during operation ; vagi cut.
hrs.
Time.
mins.
secs.
Respi
Amplitude
in mm.
ration.
Rate per
minute.
Blood
pressure
in mm.
Remarks.
Normal
22
7
1G3
■0005 gramme per kilo, injected
0
5
0
50
5
90
into external jugular vein;
injection lasted five minutes
0
10
0
40
10
110
0
20
0
41
6
151
0
30
0
44
4
146
1
0
0
38
4
108
1
30
0
26
5
76
1
45
0
10
6
59
2
0
0
9
5
56
2
15
0
6
4
44
2
30
0
5
4
33
2
40
0
5
3
28
2
42
0
26
slight convulsions
2
44
0
22
occasional inspiratory gasps
2
45
0 '
6
0
20
dead
Yll.— Effect of the Venom on the Body Temperature.
After the injection of the venom into a warm blooded animal,
sometimes a rise, at other times a fall in temperature is observed.
The explanation is that the poison influences temperature in two


ways, (1) there is a distinct thermogenic effect which is best seen
if a dilute solution of venom in a piece of sterilised sponge, be
aseptically inserted under the skin. Under such circumstances
absorption is very slow, and one obtains a maximum of local, with
a minimum of constitutional effects, and the temperature is
invariably raised a few degrees Fahrenheit.
(2) A diminished production of heat under the influence of the
profound depression and muscular resolution which usually follow
the injection of the poison, so that the temperature may often be
observed to be below 90° just previous to death.
As found by Sewall 1 with Crotalus poison, an animal rendered
resistant to this venom by repeated injections of small non-lethal
doses, is able to withstand the effects of a quantity which would
inevitably cause death in an animal not so treated. The injection
of the lethal dose may under these circumstances be followed by a
considerable rise in temperature instead of the depression, which
occurs in animals which have not been accustomed to the poison.
Calmette 2 has recorded the same fact from his experiments, with
cobra poison.
Vlll. —Further Pathological Effects.
If the nervous symptoms which result from cobra poisoning are
recovered from, convalescence is wonderfully abrupt. With the
exception of the local blood-tinged oedema in the subcutaneous
tissue, which does occasionally suppurate, there would appear to
be no further pathological effects. The excretion of the poison by
the kidneys does not excite pathological changes in these organs,
as witnessed by the absence of albuminuria, and the fact that no
alteration in kidney structure has been observed.
With the viperine snakes the case is very different. After the
immediate danger of cardiac and respiratory paralysis has passed,
the animal suffers from great local and wide spreading haemorrhage
and oedema, which almost invariably suppurates, or becomes gan-
1 Journal of Physiology, Vol. vm.
2 Ann. de 1’ Institut Pasteur, May, 1895.


grenous. The victim is, in addition subject to hsemorrhages in
nearly all the organs, and from all the mucous membranes of the
body, together with bloody effusions into cavities such as the
pleura and pericardium.
Weir Mitchell and Reichert, in their monograph on snake
poisons, have given an extensive record of the various situations
in which they have found haemorrhages after the injection of the
poisons of Crotalus and Ancistrodon. Their observations on the
mechanism of these hsemorrhages have already been referred to.
In cases in which the animals died some days after the injection,
the post-mortem examination disclosed extensive ecchymoses in
the viscera, and hsemorrhages at the base of the brain, and into the
serous cavities and lungs.
Wall 1 found that even in rapid cases of Dahoia poisoning,
hsemorrhages into viscera, and from mucous membranes were
exceedingly common. When small doses of the venom were sub-
cutaneously inoculated, it was not unusual for an animal to die
in consequence of these secondary pathological changes alone, and
when not a single nerve symptom had occurred. In contrast to
cases of cobra poisoning, albuminuria, or hsematuria, usually
resulted, if the victim lived any time. Speaking of poisoning by
Indian viperine snakes, Wall says—“We may conclude then,
that in this form of poisoning, when the nerve effects have passed
away, there remains a period of blood poisoning, as fatal to life
as the nerve symptoms themselves.” Wall found that the poison
of the Bungarus fasciatus produced a form of chronic poisoning,
which was remarkable for having an incubation period of from
two to six days. After recovering from the immediate depressing
effect of the poison, the animal enjoyed a period of perfect health.
Then occurred loss of appetite, great depression, and diminution
of urinary secretion, with rise of temperature and great muscular
weakness. Purulent discharges took place from the eyes, nose,
and rectum, but there was no tendency to haemorrhage. The
1 “ The Nature of Snake Poison, &c. J ’


urine was albuminous, but contained no blood pigment. Death
occurred from exhaustion.
These observations of Wall are very interesting, and in no way
resemble the operation of any other snake venom so far recorded,
but as he points out, remind one of some infectious disease.
Perhaps they are indeed directly attributable to the
of some organisms, which have gained access, owing to diminished
resistance caused by the venom. In this respect Ewing’s 1 obser-
vations on the disappearance of the germicidal properts of serum
after poisoning by Crotalus venom, are suggestive.
Feoktistow 2 confirmed Mitchell’s observations on the extensive
haemorrhages in many of the organs, after the introduction of
Crotalus poison, and he found the same conditions followed, when
the poison of Vipera herus was used. This observer never saw
any haemorrhages in the central nervous system, but the conditions
of the brain and cord were very seldom investigated. He came
to the conclusion that the severity of the haemorrhagic process was
dependent upon the quantity of venom introduced, and the time
which elapsed before death occured; and he summed up his
remarks on this subject with the following statements :
(1) “By poisoning with large doses of concentrated venom,
haemorrhages were very severe and extensive, even when
the animal only survived a few seconds.”
(2) “ By medium doses which killed in two to three hours, the
haemorrhages with cats were usually confined to the endo-
cardium and lungs; whereas with dogs, extensive haemor-
rhages were to be found in nearly all the organs.”
(3) “By minimal lethal doses the pathological changes are
greater the longer the animal lives.”
(4) “Intravenous injection is much more active in causing
haemorrhages than when the poison is subcutaneously
introduced, whereas, after the bite of the reptile (concen-
trated venom) the haemorrhages are as marked as after
intravenous injection.”
1 Loc. cit. 2 Loc. cit.


The, further pathological effects of Pseudechis venom arise in
three ways—
(l) Those due to the direct action of the venom on the cells of
the affected part.
(2) Those secondary to haemorrhage.
(3) Those secondary to thrombosis.
As regards its power to induce anatomical changes in the victim,
Pseudechis venom appears to occupy a position about midway
between cobra poison and the poison of the viperine snakes.
Its action in separating the haemoglobin from the corpuscles
has already been described. The free haemoglobin finds its way
out of the body, through the kidneys and liver, and so is found
staining the urine and bile, in the former of which it is often
present in crystalline form. It also passes into the fluid contained
in the pericardium, and other serous sacs, and even into the
aqueous humour. The staining of all these fluids is independent
of any haemorrhagic action of the venom, and has been of almost
constant occurrence in my experiments with different kinds of
animals, whenever they have lived more than one to two hours.
I have already shown that this venom affects the endothelial
wall of the blood vessels, so as to permit of the escape of their con-
tents, and although it does not appear to be nearly so active in
causing haemorrhages as that of Crotalus, or other viperine snakes,
extravasations of blood into important organs and haemorrhages
from the mucous surfaces, do however sometimes play an important
part in the symptoms of poisoning. The distribution and extent
of the haemorrhages vary under the different experimental con-
ditions in exactly the same way as Feoktistow (whose description
I quote above), has observed the haemorrhages following Crotalus
poisoning to vary. As was found to be the case with the latter
poison, dogs are particularly sensitive to this action of the venom.
Haemorrhages are most marked in those animals which live about
fwo days. The operation of the venom in other directions is also
most favourable to the occurrence of haemorrhages, in addition to


the alteration of the vessel wall, the coagulability of the blood is
greatly diminished, or altogether in abeyance, so that the blood
whi£h escapes clots slowly, or not at all. In addition, the veins
in some areas are often thrombosed, thus raising the pressure in
the capillaries of that area, and so increasing the extravasation.
I have elsewhere mentioned that when dogs are the animals
experimented with, the blood in the portal vein is particularly
liable to be coagulated by the action of the poison. When this
has happened the whole of the alimentary track is the situation
•of extensive hsemorhages, and during life the animal passes blood
by the rectum, and vomits blood-stained fluid. When the portal
vein has not been thrombosed, the alimentary tract does not suffer
more than the rest of the organs.
Unless the poison be injected subcutaneously in large amount,
■or else introduced directly into the circulation, the extravasation
■of blood into the organs does not play a very important role in
poisoning by Pseudechis venom. There is however one organ
which has, in my experiments with mammals never escaped, viz.,
the lungs. These have invariably been the seat of haemorrhages
of greater or less extent. Sometimes a considerable portion of one
or both lungs has been found more or less solid from extravasated
blood. Microscopical examination of a luernorrhagic lung of an
animal which has succumbed in a few hours from the injection of
the poison, shows portions of the organ infiltrated with blood.
The alveoli, interalveolar tissues, and small bronchi appear one
mass of blood corpuscles. A similarly affected lung from an
animal which had survived two or three days, shows patches of
lung, in which the tissues are barely recognisable, and are
imbedded in a mass of fibrin, and more or less altered blood
pigment. These necrosed areas are surrounded by a ring of small
•celled infiltration separating it from the healthy lung around.
It is quite possible that some of the hsemorrhagic extravasation
into the lungs is associated with thrombosis in the smaller branches
■of the pulmonary artery.


On two occasions I have seen some rather interesting patho-
logical changes in the liver following injection of the poison.
Wooldridge, 1 in 1888, described some changes in the liver, which
he had obtained by producing thrombosis of the portal vein
through the injection of nucleo-albumens (tissue-fibrinogen). If
the animal was killed a few days after the injection, a clot was
found in the portal vein, and the liver showed more or less
extensive infarctions. When examined after a fortnight, the clot
in the portal vein had completely disappeared, and to the naked
eye there was no trace of the haemorrhages, but microscopical
examination revealed scattered patches of early cirrhosis of a
greater or less extent.
Precisely the same result occasionally follows the injection of
venom. Two dogs which were killed by a second subcutaneous
injection of poison fourteen days and twenty days respectively
after they had received the first, both showed interstitial cirrhosis
of the liver. I was not certain at the time of the first injection,
that the portal veins of these dogs had been thrombosed. Such
an event is, however a not uncommon occurrence in dogs after the
injection of the poison. There was unmistakable evidence that
luemorrhages had occurred in the liver, as the sections showed
quantities of altered blood pigment. The pigment was intra-
cellular, and was scattered through the lobules, but was present
in greatest amount at their external margins. I think, from the
remarkable analogy between these experiments and those of
Wooldridge, one may safely conclude that the portal veins had
been thrombosed. The dogs were very ill for two days and passed
bloody urine, and in one of them a large quantity of blood-
stained mucous escaped per rectum. They were both apparently
well on the fourth day, and the urine was normal again on the
sixth.
There is some evidence to show that cobra poison escapes by
the kidneys. lam not yet satisfied that this is the case with
Pseudechis poison, but my experiments so far, point to this method
1 Trans. Path. Soc., Lond. 1888.


of exit. When a few milligrammes of venom are injected into a
rabbit, it is not an easy matter to find it again, even supposing it
has all passed through the kidneys, especially as in these circum-
stances the urine always contains albumen. The very simple
method which has been adopted with cobra poison of inoculating
frogs with the urine itself is open to the objection that '5 cc. of
rabbit’s normal fresh urine kills the frogs we have in this part of
the world with symptoms of paralysis, exactly resembling the
effect of venom. Moreover, these frogs are actually more resistant
to Pseudechis venom than rabbits, notwithstanding the fact that
the latter are nearly one hundred times as heavy. Accordingly,
even supposing all the venom to have passed into the urine, it
would, in most cases, be necessary to inject the whole amount of
this fluid, to produce a fatal result, and although one could easily
drown the frog in the urine, the other alternative would be an
obvious impossibility.
Whether the poison makes its exit through the kidneys or not,
these organs are always more or less affected. It is not uncommon
to find radial haemorrhages in the cortex, from the interlobular
vessels. The kidneys undergo a further important pathological
change which is confined to the cortical portion, and consists in an
acute necrosis of the epithelium lining the convoluted tubes. The
epithelial cells of these tubes become vacuolated, and then burst,
leaving the tubule to a large extent bare of epithelium.
Yet another affection of the kidney remains to be mentioned.
The haemoglobin from the disintegrated corpuscles exhibits an
abnormal tendency to crystallise, and this sometimes happens in
the tubules of the kidney to such an extent as to block the greater
number.
The urine in animals poisoned with Pseudechis venom always
contains albumen. Very frequently it contains haemoglobin, and
in the more serious cases, blood. Fibrinogen also passes through
the kidneys, and in three or four cases of severe poisoning in dogs,
I have been able to cause the urine to clot solidly by the addition
of a few drops of acetic acid. The blood of these dogs, at the
E—July 3, 1895,


time, had lost its spontaneous coagulability, and the fibrinogen in
the urine did not clot spontaneously, but only after the manipula-
tions which I have already described to induce coagulation in the
blood itself under the same condition.
Brief Summary op the Action op Pseudechis Poison.
Pseudechis venom is comprehensive in its action. It affects
principally the three most vulnerable points in a higher organism;
the blood, the heart, and the respiratory centre in the medulla.
Its method of destroying life essentially depends upon the con-
centration with which the venom reaches the circulation. When
this concentration attains a certain limit, death may be almost
instantaneous, from coagulation of the blood in the vessels termin-
ating the circulation. This happens when small animals are
bitten, or when the poison is introduced in adequate amount
directly into the circulation. When the concentration falls short
of that necessary to raise the coagulability of the blood to such an
extent as to occasion thrombosis, the blood shortly afterwards
loses its capacity to clot when shed. In this condition any further
injection of venom is unable to produce thrombosis.
The action of the poison upon the heart and respiratory centre
is usually simultaneous. With higher concentration of venom the
heart is the more rapidly affected, but the continuous operation of
the poison in small concentration more quickly affects the
respiratory centre in the medulla; so that, by varying the rapidity
with which the poison reaches the circulation, the death of an
animal may be compassed in any one of three ways: either by
clotting the blood in the vessels, cardiac failure, or respiratory
paralysis.
Further, if the victim escapes the three possibilities of a fatal
issue above mentioned, it may succumb to the effects of the patho-
logical changes in the lungs and kidneys. This last risk is how-
ever, not a large one, except with dogs, and if the animal survives
the nervous and circulatory depression, it usually recovers with
wonderful rapidity.


IX.— Comparison or Experimental Results with the
Symptoms of Pseudechis Poisoning in Man.
In comparing the results obtained by these experiments on
animals, with the clinical symptoms manifested by patients bitten
by this snake, the important fact which I have endeavoured to
emphasise, viz.:—that the symptoms depend to a large extent upon
the rapidity with which the venom reaches the circulation, must
be carefully borne in mind. If this is remembered, I think it will
be obvious that every observation from experiments oh the lower
animals has its counterpart among the symptoms of some cases of
snake bite. Corpuscles are to some extent broken up, for I have
myself found hsemoglobin in the urine. There are numerous
records of cases where the urine has been stated to be bloody, but
I am not aware that the reporter has taken the trouble to ascertain
whether the colouration of the urine was due to hsemoglobin or to
corpuscles. In the cases which I myself examined, there were no
red cells at all, but only pigment. The positive phase of the
effect of Pseudechis venom on the coagulability of the blood of
animals, has been shown to be produced only when the venom
reaches the circulation rapidly, as when intravenously introduced,
or injected subcutaneously in large doses. In cases of snake bite
in man, such conditions are very rarely satisfied, for the poison
is usually deposited in the subcutaneous tissue and not directly
into a vein, and in the former case is, relatively to the size of the
victim, not sufficient in quantity to produce thrombosis. There
exist, however, records of cases where the individual has died in
less than half an hour, and in one of these cases there was a white
(ante-mortem) clot found in the heart at the autopsy. In this
case death was very possibly due to intravascular clotting.
Although the conditions are unfavourable for the manifestation
of a pronounced positive phase of coagulability which would
occasion intravascular clotting, the after negative phase is always
more or less present. It has long been known that the blood
after death from the bite of this snake, clots only feebly, or else


remains permanently fluid, and Dr. Skinner of Beechworth, 1
has also recorded the fact that the coagulability of the blood
appeared, during life, to be considerably diminished.
As regards the action upon the circulatory-mechanism, experi-
mental results are in accord with clinical observations. Faintness,
feeble rapid pulse, with cold extremities, and blanched skin have
been usually recorded. The description of the nervous symptoms
coincides absolutely with the results of experiment. Thus the
respiration is usually described as being at first slightly quickened,
and then becoming progressively shallower. Sensation is blunted,
and eventually stimulation of the nerves of special sense fail to
evoke any reaction. The pupil is dilated, and insensible to light.
The patient becomes comatose, and death generally occurs from
failure of the respiration. All these symptoms occurred in those
experiments on animals in which the conditions are at all
comparable.
Furthermore, haemorrhages from the kidneys, and from mucous
tracts, are not uncommon in severe cases of bite from this snake,
and are generally looked upon as very unfavourable symptoms.
Experiments on animals show that the severity of these symptoms
varies with the concentration with which the poison reaches the
circulation. Albuminuria has been found when looked for, and
has persisted for some few days after the apparent convalescence
of the patient, so that it would appear as if the venom exerted
the same pathological effect upon the kidneys in man, as upon
those of the lower animals.
I am not aware of any record of symptoms of lung complication.
Even in animals, the actual condition of these organs was not
suspected until after death. The lungs have however been
found after death from the bite of this snake to be the seat
of haemorrhages.
1 “ Austr. Med. Gazette,” March, 1893.


Cobra
4,000,000
Hoplocephalus curtus
3,450,000
Pseudechis
800,000
Pelias berus
250,000
Diptheria toxine
... 4,000,000 (about)
Anthrax albumoses...
80
Toxo-peptone
!.. 3,000
Appendix—The Toxic Value op Venoms.
Calmette 1 has worked out a table of the relative toxicity of
venoms, as Roux and Vaillard have done for tetanus toxines,
based on the number of grammes of an animal (rabbit) killed by
one gramme of dry poison subcutaneously introduced. He found
the toxic value calculated in this way was represented by the.
following numbers:
My own experiments with rabbits place the toxic power of the
two Australian venoms higher, viz.:—
Hoplocephalus curtus ... 4,000,000
Pseudechis ... ... 2,000,000
That is to say that -00025 gramme of the former invariably
kills a rabbit of 1 kilogramme weight, and -0005 gramme of the
latter is required to effect the same end. This is a very high
virulence, and much exceeds that of most of the poisonous proteids
of zymotic diseases hitherto separated, and is about the same as
the diptheria toxine of Roux and Yersin. 2 I append the toxic
values of albumoses from diptheria and anthrax toxine, 3 and toxo-
peptone 1 from cholera cultures, calculated in the same way for
comparison:






In the year 1801 Sir Everard (then Mr.) Home examined
some specimens of Platypus sent to England by Sir Joseph Banks,
and remarked* as follows with regard to the spur :
“In the male, just at the setting on of the heel, there is a
strong crooked spur an inch long, with a sharp point, which has
a joint between it and the foot, and is capable of motion in two
directions It is probably by means of these spurs or
hooks that the female is kept from withdrawing herself in the act
of copulation, since they are very conveniently placed for laying
hold of her body on that particular occasion.”!
In 1817 an extract from a letter written by Sir John Jamieson
was read to the Linnean Society of London, J in which, in refer
ence to Ornithorhynchus, he writes: —
*A Description of the Anatomy of the Ornithorhynckm paradoxus. Phil.
Trans. 1802, p. 72.
t Home’s Comp. Anat. Vol. iii. p. 3GO (1823).
{ Note on the Vertomous Nature of Wounds inflicted by the Spurs of the
male Ornithorhynchus. Trans. Linn. Soc. Vol. xii. p. 584 (1818).


“ The male of this wonderful animal is provided with spurs on
the hind feet or legs like a cock. The spur is situated over a
cyst of venomous fluid, and has a tube or cannula up its centre,
through which the animal can, like a serpent, force the poison
when it inflicts its wound. I wounded one with small shot, and
on my overseer’s taking it out of the water, it stuck its spurs into
the palm and back of his right hand with such force, and retained
them in with such strength, that they could not be withdrawn
until it was killed. The hand instantly swelled to a prodigious
bulk ; and the inflammation having rapidly extended to his
shoulder, he was in a few minutes threatened with locked-jaw,
and exhibited all the symptoms of a person bitten by a venomous
snake. The pain from the first was insupportable, and cold sweats
and sickness of stomach took place so alarmingly that I found it
necessary, besides the external applications of oil and vinegar, to
administer large quantities of the volatile alkali with opium,
which I really think preserved his life. He was obliged to keep
his bed for several days, and did not recover the perfect use of
his hand for nine weeks. This unexpected and extraordinary
occurrence induced me to examine the spur of the animal; and
on pressing it down on the leg, the fluid squirted through the
tube: but for what purpose Nature has so armed these animals
is as yet unknown to me.”
This letter of Jamieson’s induced Blainville to examine two
specimens which were in the Paris Museum, and in May, 1817,
he communicated the result of his observations to the Philomatic
Society of Paris.*
Blainville commented on the similarity between the spurs of
Ornithorhynchus and Cock Birds ; but from their different position
and connections in the Platypus, he considered it was neither a
spur, a sixth toe, nor even a nail, but an apparatus peculiar to
this particular animal. He described the canal of the spur, and a
cyst at its base. He suggested that the latter was probably
only a receptacle for poison manufactured elsewhere ; but the
* Bull. Soc. Philomatique, 1817, p. 82.


imperfect state of his spirit specimens did not permit him to
determine this point. He regarded the apparatus as a weapon
compensating for the otherwise defenceless condition of a small
animal destitute of teeth.
In 1822 Dr. Patrick Hill, of Liverpool, N.S.W., recorded* having
examined a specimen which he shot. He found the spur was-
perforated, and had a cyst at its base. He mentioned being told
by an aboriginal that a wound from the spur of the male is
followed by swelling and great pain, but although his informant
had seen many cases of it, he had never known it fatal.
In 1823 Home published his “Lectures on Comparative Ana-
tomy.” After describing the spur he refers to Jamieson’s letter
in which he narrated the finding of the canal in this structure.
Home failed to find this in the first specimens he examined;
subsequently however he succeeded. He says ;—■
“ Upon examining the spur in a state of better preservation, I
not only find a membranous tube passing through the spur, which
has an orifice on one side near the point, but Mr. Clift succeeded,
in my presence, in injecting a duct leading to a gland which lies
across the back part of the thigh, over the muscles, an inch or
more in length, and half an inch broad ; the excretory duct passes
like one ureter of the kidney, out of one side near the middle.
The quicksilver injected immediately pervaded every part of the
gland, and when the point of the pipe was turned downwards,
ran readily to the root of the spur, where the duct made a turn,
and formed a small reservoir. After a little time, however, the
mucus being gently squeezed and pressed forward, we saw the
mercury in the spur, and at last it came out of the orifice. When
I first saw the spur, I had no doubt from its situation but that
one of its purposes was to prevent the escape of the female during
the act of the coitus; in this I was confirmed when I found in
the female, exactly in the same situation, a regular socket, lined
with strong cuticle, adapted to the reception of the spur.”
*On the Ornithorhynchus paradoxus : its Venomous Spur and General
Structure. Trans. Linn. Soc. Vol. xiii. 622 (1822).


Home, after referring to other animals as frogs, sharks, earth-
worms, insects, &c., which also possess accessory copulatory
organs, continues as follows :
“ Having ascertained that a secretion is emitted through the
spur of the male into this socket, and the parts being so minute
as to require glasses of considerable power, I got Mr. Bauer to
examine the socket in the female ; and after overcoming consider-
able difficulties, the parts being very much corrugated, and yet
retaining their elasticity, he made out the form of this socket,
which corresponds exactly in shape to the spur itself: so that,
when completely introduced, it must be so grasped that the male
would be unable to withdraw it when coitus was over; in this
respect resembling the effect of suction. The male, it would
appear —at least this is the best conjecture I can make by reason-
ing from analogy, there being no facts to guide us—by throwing
some of the secretion of the gland in the thigh into the socket,
dilates it, and releases the spur; the liquor injected being acri-
monious, will also irritate the female, and make her use efforts to
escape.”
In 1823 Meckel described* the femoral gland and its duct
communicating with the spur. He showed that the cyst described
by Blainville and Hill was in reality the dilatation of the duct
just before entering the canal of the spur.
He afterwards (1826) published a monograph! on the anatomy
of the Ornithorhynohus, in which he gives a complete account,
together with several drawings, of the femoral gland and spur.
In 1824 R. Knox published an account): of these glands, in
which, however, we have been unable to find any points of import-
ance not treated of by Meckel.
» Ueber den Btachel und das Giftorgan des Onuthorhynehus. Dent.
Archiv fiir Physiol. Bd. viii.
t Descriptio anatomica Ornithorhynchi paradox!. Lips. 1826.
% Observations on the Anatomy of the Duckbilled Animal of N.S.W.—
the Ornithorhynohus paradoxus of Naturalists. Mem. Wernerian Soc.
Nat. Hist. 1824.


In another paper* he quotes Home’s theory that the spur was
used during copulation, being then received into a socket in a
similar position in the female.
Knox was opposed to this view of Home’s, as he had found a rudi-
mentary spur in the corresponding position in a female Echidna.
It was situated in a small cavity, and of the same texture and
about | the size of a full grown male spur. The other parts of
the poison apparatus are wanting in the female. He considered
this rudimentary spur to have the same relation to the male spur,
as the male breast has to the female breast.
In 1828 f Thomas Axford wrote as follows ;
“It is my firm conviction that the animal has not the power of
instilling poison by its spur ; and I believe this appendage is used
principally for securing the female in the season of love, though
it may be useful in enabling the animal to climb the steep banks
of rivers. I have taken several large females, and I suppose old
ones, with the hair worn off, and only a fine fur left on their
rump ; and although I have killed very large males, never found
one in that state. The moment I saw the first old female thus
denuded, it struck me that the denudation must arise from the
action of the spur of the male in holding the female. If this be
the principal use of the spur, and if it contained poison, I think
it would be apt to wound the female at such times. lam so
convinced that the spur is harmless that I should not fear a
scratch from one. However, I will try and set the matter at rest
the first opportunity, by causing a male to scratch a chicken.”
In 1835 OwenJ found in yqung specimens of Ornithorhynohus
the spur more prominent and pointed in the female, and he
remarked that this is in accord with the fact that secondary sexual
characters are not available for distinguishing sex before puberty.
* Notice respecting the presence of a rudimentary spur in the female
Echidna. Ediu. New Phil. Journal I. 1826, p. 130.
t Edin. New Phil. Jonrn. vi. 1829, p. 399.
XOn the Young of the Ornithorhynohus. Trans. Zool. Soc. Vol. i. 1835,
p. 221.


In the same year (1835) Dr. G. Bennett gave an account* of a
specimen he shot in September. It was wounded only, and
brought in by the dog. It made no attempt to use its spur, even
when handled in such a way as to enable it to readily use it if it
had wished to do so. He states that the blackfellows were not
afraid of handling the animal alive. He ;—“ lam convinced
some other use must be found for the spur than as an offensive
weapon.” He found a small impervious depression in the female
shot on the same day, situated in a position corresponding to that
of the spur in the male. There was no rudimentary spur. He
thought this might serve for the reception of the spur of the male.
In 1859 the same naturalist published some observations! on
two of these animals {£, $) which he had kept in captivity, in
which he makes the following statement:—
“ From my recent observations I consider the question of the
spur in the male being a poisonous weapon as now decided : for
the living male specimen, though very shy and wild, can be
handled with impunity. Although making violent attempts to
escape, and even giving me some severe scratches with the hind
claws in its attempts, still either in or out of the water he has
never attempted to use the spur as a weapon of defence.”
Under the heading, “ The Poison of the Platypus,” the follow-
ing extract is quoted in the Australian Journal of Education):
from the “ Maitland Mercury ” : —“ On Tuesday, the 9th instant,
when Mr. E. was fishing in the river near his residence, he
found that a Platypus had got entangled in the net, and upon
catching the animal it immediately struck the two spurs attached
to its two floats or arms into the forefinger of Mr. E.’s left hand,
with such force that they penetrated through the skin and into
the muscles of the finger, and it was with great difficulty that
Mr. E. at last succeeded in ridding himself of his unwelcome
* Notes on the Nat. Hist, ami Habits of the Ornithorhynchus paradoxus.
Trans. Zool. Soe. Yol. i. 1835, p. 229.
+ Notes on the Duck-Bill (Ornithorhynchus anatinus). Proe. Zool. Soc.
1859, p. 213.
J Auat. Journ. Educ. Sydney, 1869.


intruder and eventually killed it. Mr. E. all the time suffered
intense pain, and presently the wounded finger, then the hand,
and ultimately the whole arm up to the shoulder swelled to a
serious extent. The symptoms usually following snake bite also
set in, and after a day or two Mr. E.’s state became so serious as
to alarm his friends for his safety, and Dr. G. having been sent
for, he applied ammonia and the usual remedies against snake
poison, and we are glad to learn that Mr. E. has now entirely
recovered.”
In 1876 Creighton,* writing on the Mammary Glands of
Echidna and Ornithorhynchus, refers to the femoral gland in the
following terms;—
“The mammary gland is found only in the female Ornitho-
rhynchus and Echidna. But the males of Ornithorhynchus
and Echidna have also a gland peculiar to them, which resembles
the mamma in being a sexual gland, and in being subject to
periods of expansion and functional activity from season to
season. This gland is the glandula femoralis, situated on each
side of the back of the thigh, and discharging by a long duct
which runs down the leg and opens on the plantar aspect at
the ‘ spur.’ There is a certain probability of this gland being
the homologue of the female gland, and when the very singular
differences between the mammse in the male and female Cetaceans
are observed, this probability becomes much stronger. I am
indebted to Prof. Flower for pointing out to me the peculiarity
of the mamma in the male porpoise as shown in preparations
made by himself. Instead of there being a'pair of ducts, one on
each side, as in the female, there is only one duct which opens
by a round pore without a nipple in the middle line of the body
at a point much further back than in the female. Now by those
two circumstances—the singleness of the duct and its caudal
position—the mamma of the male porpoise is brought within
reach of comparison with the femoral gland of the male duckbill.
This is nothing more than a curious suggestion; but if the
* Journ. Anat. & Phys. Vol. xi. p. 29.
477
BY C. J. MARTIN AND FRANK TIDSWELL.


porpoise be represented with a pair of hind limbs, the single duct
of the male mamma opening in the middle line far back on the
ventral surface would then be represented by a pair of ducts
going with the limbs, and that is exactly the condition in the male
duckbill.”
In 1876 Spicer communicated an account* of injurious effects
following wounds made by a Platypus with its spurs in the hand
of a friend of his. This account corroborates in every particular
those previously mentioned in this paper. Mr. Spicer points out
the difference between the effects in the above-mentioned case and
the usual effects of lacerated wounds, and considers that the small,
non-lacerated wound, the rapidity with which the symptoms
follow, and their intensity indicate more than can be accounted
for by a mere wound. He instances the relationship of Saurians
and Ophidians to Monotremes as indicating the possible family
right of the latter to the possession of a poison apparatus; but
remarks that its existence in the male klone is unusual, since in
cases where such is found in one sex only—as in some insects—
it is usually the female which exhibits it. He refers to the
seasonal variation of snake venom, and states that “ its virulence
depends largely on the circumstances under which it is received.”
He quotes the opinions of Bennett and Owen with regard to the
sexual nature of the gland, and considers it possible that during
the pairing season (the time of the year when the above-mentioned
case occurred) the secretion “ may have some peculiarly acrid or
irritant property, and when injected into the human body may
produce similar symptoms to those of a true poison.” He also
quotes Baden Powell (“ New Homes for the Old Country ”), who
thinks that when no harm results from Platypus wounds, it is
perhaps because the. poison sac is empty at the time, or that the
animal does not use the spur when on land (out of its proper
element). Baden Powell further suggests that the spur and
secretion may be used for toilet purposes, the animal being known
* On the Effects of Wounds inflicted by the Spurs of the Platypus.
Papers and Proc. Roy. Boc. Tasmania, 1876, p. 162.


to clean itself with its hind legs. Mr. Spicer thought such a
usurpation by the male of feminine privileges would be as singular
as the animal’s taste in hair oils.
A Nicols* records having wounded and captured a Platypus
which was lively enough to scratch him with, its sharp olaws, but
made ho attempt to use its spurs when handled. The native who
accompanied him, however, expressed fear of the spur. Nicols
thought that the spur and its gland might be “ a remnant of
conditions of life very different from those under which the
animal now exists.” He considered that although it might possibly
be used in contests with its own kind, “ there is no reason for
attributing a poisonous character to this weapon.”
Darwin (Descent of Man, 2nd ed. p. 502), when discussing the
weapons of offence possessed by the males of various kinds of
animals, mentions the spur and gland apparatus, but states that
Harting has shown that the secretion is not poisonous.
In his recent Presidential Address to the Royal Society of
N.S.W., Prof. Anderson Stuartf refers to the cases recorded by
Jamieson and Spicer, and gives an account of the effects of the
poison on dogs. One of these animals received the wounds whilst
retrieving. Their infliction was rapidly followed by great swelling
of the face, which was very tender. The dog became sleepy, and
refused food. He had no salivation, vomiting, diarrhoea, tremor,
convulsions nor staggering. He ultimately recovered.
Another Platypus hunter stated that he had lost in this way
four valuable dogs of comparatively large size. On one occasion he
“ saw the Platypus strike, heard the dog whine, saw the wound,
and the train of symptoms ending in death.” In these cases the
most marked constitutional effect was intense drowsiness.
lii summing up on the question, Prof. Anderson Stuart says ;
“ We may, I think, conclude that the poison is powerful enough,
at all events at certain seasons, but at what seasons the accounts
* Zoological Notes. London, 1883. Chap iv. p. 116,
t Royal Soc. of N.S. W. Anniversary Address by the President, Prof.
T. P. Anderson Stuart, M.D., 1894.


do not permit me to say, though I think it is the pairing season.
I have set down these new accounts because I believe them worthy
of record, and perhaps this allusion may lead to something more
being done.”
Still more recently, other cases (two men and two dogs), display-
ing severe symptoms following wounds from the spurs of these
animals, have been recorded by Dr. Lalor in a communication to
the Victorian Branch of the British Medical Association.*
We are unacquainted with Dr. Lalor’s paper, but from the
abstract we have seen, the principal symptoms appear to have
been great oedema and rise of temperature. In one case, that of
a man, the temperature rose to 104° F.
From the above historical summary one sees that four views
have been entertained concerning the function of these glands
and their associated spurs, viz.:—
(1) That they are in some way accessory to the organs of
generation (Home, Bennett, «fcc.).
(2) That they are poison glands, and as such constitute
important weapons of offence (Jamieson, Blainville, Hill,
Meckel, Knox, Spicer, &c.).
(3) That the secretion is used for toilet purposes (Baden
Powell).
(4) That they are a remnant of conditions of life very different
from those under which the animal now exists (Nicols).
We will consider the last suggestion first. This, while it is very
difficult to show that it is false, does not appear to us very
reasonable. It would be highly improbable that a complicated
arrangement such as we are considering should be retained in
such a condition of functional perfection if it were of no service
to the individual or the species.
Baden Powell’s notion that it may be used for toilet purposes
is unlikely. Spicer pointed out that it was confined to the male
sex, and Bennett observed that the specimens he had in his
June 16th, 1894, p. 1332 (abstract of paper).


possession never used their spurs for this purpose, but smoothed
their locks by using their claws as a comb. From its position
also it is unsuited for such a purpose.
Home’s suggestion, which had the powerful support of Dr.
Bennett, cannot be absolutely denied, as no one has, as far as we
are aware, ever seen these animals copulating. Home’s main
reason for such an hypothesis was that in the female there are
situated in corresponding situations slight hairless depressions.
It seems to us that for the male to apply its spurs to these
depressions during copulation in the manner suggested by Home
would involve an amount of gymnastic ability of which even an
Ornithorhynchus is incapable.
Moreover, Knox* and Owen* have shown that these depressions
in the female are merely the rudiments of the male spur, and that
the young female, indeed, actually possesses a spur which disappears
prior to the dawn of sexual life.
Bennett did not espouse Home’s theory very strongly, but
having come to the conclusion that the poison hypothesis must be
discarded, put forward, as a possible explanation, the suggestion
that the spurs play the same part in fixing the female as the
appendages of some Crustaceans and other lower animals.
The only remaining theory, that the whole apparatus forms a
powerful weapon of offence (at any rate at certain periods) has a
large number of facts to support it. We have the above-mentioned
well authenticated cases of serious results following a wound by
the spur; not to mention any amount of native tradition. As
has so often been pointed out, the train of symptoms following
such wounds are absolutely unlike those produced by a simple
puncture or by the introduction of septic material. The almost
immediate and lasting depression, the intense pain, and great
<edema and absence of suppuration have led more than one
observer to compare the result with that produced by snake
poison. Moreover, a precisely similar train of symptoms presented
themselves in every case, whether in man or animals.
* Loc. cit.


In the accounts of those naturalists (Bennett, Nicols and others)
who have thought the spur was not used as a weapon of offence,
it is invariably stated that the animals handled by them made no
attempt to use their spurs. They do not instance any cases in
which wounds were made without injurious results.
This negative evidence is of little value compared to the cases
quoted above. Taking all these facts into consideration, it is at
least difficult to avoid the conclusion that the-gland and spur
constitute a weapon of offence.
Quite recently we were fortunate enough to receive, through
the kindness of Dr. G. Elliott Smith, a supply of material in very
faircondition for ordinary anatomical and histological investigation.
At the same time Dr. Smith obtained for us a small amount of
the secretion of the glands. In addition to this, we have had the
use of some preserved specimens kindly placed at our disposal by
Prof. Wilson. We wish here to acknowledge our indebtedness
and express our thanks to these two gentlemen.
The naked eye anatomy and anatomical relations of the femoral
gland and its duct and spur have been so well described bj'
Meckel* and Owenf that we feel we have little further to add.
In view of the fact, however, that these descriptions were written
from the dissection of preserved specimens, we have deemed it
advisable to risk repetition by giving a short account of it here.
Anatomy of the Glands.
The femoral or crural glands (PI. xxvm. i) are two whitish
bodies shaped somewhat like a cocked hat, situated symmetrically
one on each side of the spine over the acetabulum and femur.
They are covered by skin, panniculus carnosus, and deep fascia,
the latter forming a special compartment in which the gland lies.
At the inner side of each, and slightly overlapping part of the
inner border, is the gluteus maximus muscle; at the outer
* Desc. anat. Ornithor. paradox.
+ Todd’s Cyclopaedia, Art. Monotremes.


side are the muscles of the leg. Anteriorly it reaches the border
of the obliquus extemus abdominis muscle and posteriorly touches
the biceps, under which its duct passes. From above downwards
it rests on the rectus, iliacus, gluteus minimus and g. medius
muscles.
A gland of average size measured 3 cm. in length, 2 cm. in
breadth at its widest part, and about 1-5 cm. in thickness. The
outline is somewhat reniform, the inner border being' strongly
convex, and the outer marked by a deep indentation about its
middle, somewhat resembling the hilus of a kidney. The ends
are rounded ; the anterior is larger and thicker and is directed out-
wards ; the posterior is smaller and thinner, and directed backwards.
It is flattened dorso-ventrally, the dorsal surface being slightly
convex and the ventral flatter. The surfaces show the lobular
character of the gland. From the posterior half of the outer
border the duct emerges, and passes downwards, with the nerves
and vessels, on the posterior aspect of the leg. It is about 5 cm.
in average length, and in an undilated state about 2 mm. in
external diameter. After leaving the gland it passes down under
the biceps muscle, internally to the tendons of the tibialis
posticus and flexor longus hallucis muscles, then crossing obliquely
the tendon of the gastrocnemius, reaches the base of the spur.
Here it becomes dilated into a sac which is so deeply embedded
in the ligamentous tissue at the back of the tarsus that its
isolation is a matter of difficulty. From this dilatation a prolonga-
tion extends into the canal in the spur. (PI. xxvm.)
The nature of the spur has already been sufficiently well
indicated. It is attached to a supernumerary tarsal ossicle which
is articulated to the astragalus and tibia. The powerful gluteus
maximus is inserted at the base of the spur, .and is in all pro-
bability the muscle brought into action when the animal “strikes.”
Histology of the Gland and Duct.
The minute structure of the gland and duct was studied in
specimens from three adult individuals shot near Raymond
Terrace, H-SAV., on June 6th, 1894. They had been placed in


92% alcohol two days after the animals were killed. The weather
at the time was cold, so that the tissues were in very moderate
condition notwithstanding this delay. Transverse sections of
these were cut from pieces embedded in paraffin and also in gum.
The sections were stained in h;ematoxylin and borax carmine.
The gland is of the compound racemose type. The duct, traced
into the gland, divides repeatedly into smaller and smaller
branches—the final branches opening into the alveoli. Each
gland is divided into lobules (PI. xxix. figs. 1 and 2), all of which show
numerous alveoli and ducts in a connective tissue stroma. The
alveoli are dilated, and lined by a single layer of epithelial cells
situated on a basement membrane.
The epithelial cells (PI. xxx. fig. 1 a) are large, irregular in
shape, and have flattened nuclei at the deeper part of the cell.
The nucleus and that part of the protoplasm nearest the attached
end of the cell take the stains readily. The rest of the cell is
occupied by coarsely granular material which did not stain with
nuclear stains. This appearance corresponds to the condition
observed in the cells of a mucous salivary gland prior to the
discharge of its secretion. The portions of the ducts seen in the
sections (viz., the portions within the gland), are lined by a
single layer of large columnar cells seated on a basement membrane.
The stroma (PI. xxx. fig. 1 b) presents the usual characters of
white fibrous tissue. It is formed by the septa passing in from
the fibrous layer of the capsule which divides the gland into
lobules.
The capsule consists of two coats ;
(1) The fibrous one just alluded to (PI. xxx. fig. 1 c), consist-
ing like the stroma of white fibrous tissue, and containing
a liberal supply of blood-vessels and nerves.
(2) A layer of unstriped muscular tissue, three or four cells
deep, situated outside the fibrous coat (PI. xxx. fig. 1 cl).
Outside of these is the investment of fibrous tissue derived from
the deep fascia, which is not shown in the drawings, having been
removed in the process of dissecting out the glands. .


The layer of smooth muscle fibres is no doubt brought into
action to help to express the secretion when the animal “strikes.”
The large alveolar spaces as well as the duct serve as store-house
for this fluid. When the animal contracts its powerful gluteus
maximus and the other muscles at the back of the thigh, the gland
would be compressed to some extent. As, however, these
must be constantly so contracted when the animal runs and
swims without causing the discharge of the contents of the gland,
such muscular contraction cannot be considered as the only cause
operating. We think that the contraction of the thick panniculus,
which envelopes the leg in this region, is in all probability the
principal agent concerned, and that the smooth muscle of the
capsule co-operates with it in effecting this end. The fact that
the muscle fibres of the gland itself are of the unstriped variety,
does not necessarily prevent them from being indirectly under the
influence of the will. The pupil of the eye in mammals is provided
with muscle of the same unstriped character, which can be brought
into operation in associated action with certain voluntary muscles.
As regards the duct proper, sections were made from a portion
about midway between the gland and spur. Most of these
(PI. xxix. fig. 3) showed two channels (some, however, three and
others only one) embedded in white fibrous tissue. This duplica-
tion of the lumen of the duct, which was noted by Rudolph!,*
indicates that in the development of these specimens the
branching of the original invagination had occurred lower down than
is usual in such structures. In all cases the duct was single at
the lower end. The duct contains no muscular tissue whatever.
We have made serial sections from every region, including the
dilatation situated at its lowest end, without discovering any trace
of muscle. This seems to us the more remarkable as under
ordinary circumstances it is impossible, either in the living or
recently dead animal, by pressing on the gland to drive the
secretion through the spur. So that the animal must possess
some arrangement for obliterating the channel and so preventing
undue waste of the secretion.
* Abliand. d. Berlin. Akad. 1820-21. Abtheil. i. p. 233-236.


Each of the channels is lined by four layers of epithelial cells
situated on a basement membrane. Those nearest the basement
membrane have large oval nuclei, and are arranged round the
duct with their long axes parallel to the basement membrane on
which they rest. The innermost layer consists of irregularly
pear-shaped cells, with elongated nuclei arranged radially, their
larger ends towards the duct of which they form the immediate
lining. Between these there is a layer one or two cells deep—the
cells being of an irregular rounded form and having rounded
nuclei.
Sections of the saccular dilatation at the base of the spur
showed similar characters to those of the duct just described, but
the enclosed cavity was much larger. No muscular tissue was
noted, and from the manner in which this sac is embedded in
dense ligamentous tissue, muscular fibre would be of little use in
this situation.
When we compared the sections obtained from these specimens
with some previously obtained by one of us (M) from a fresh
specimen killed in April, 1892, at Wellington, N.S.W., we noticed
a very marked difference in the minute structure of the gland
and in the character of the cells lining the alveoli (cf. PI. xxix.
figs. 1-2, and PI. xxx. figs. 1-2).
(1) The proportion of fibrous tissue to gland structure proper
was very much greater in the latter.
(2) The alveoli also were very much smaller, and the duct
leading from each alveolus, instead of being lined by
columnar epithelium, showed four layers of cells as in
the larger duct which delivers the poison to the spur as
above described.
(3) In the latter specimen the glandular epithelial cells were
smaller and more regularly cubical in shape. Their
nuclei were rounded and in the middle of the cell, and
they and the protoplasm stained readily throughout.
The protoplasm was moreover only finely granular.
This appearance forms a marked contrast to the large elongated,
coarsely granular cells, with their nuclei pushed to the attached


end of the cell, which we found in our second specimens killed
June 6th. The variations in structure between these two glands
recall to one’s mind the differences between an actively secreting
mammary gland and one which has undergone retrogressive
metamorphosis.
It is interesting to note that corresponding to these differences'
in minute structure, differences in the physiological action of the
secretion obtained from them were observed.
The secretion from the first described glands in which the cells
were in an “ active ” condition produced a marked poisonous effect
when injected into rabbits, whilst that from the second gave
negative results.
Note oh the Chemical, Composition of the Secretion.
This and the following portion of this paper dealing with the
toxic action of the secretion of these glands, must, in considera-
tion of the small amount of material at our disposal, be looked
upon merely as a preliminary communication. But as we cannot
tell how long it may be before we are fortunate enough to
obtain further supplies, and considering the very definite nature
of our results, it seems quite worth while to publish them at the
present time.
More than two years ago one of us (M.) attacked this subject.
A pair of glands (fresh) which were supplied through the kindness
of Prof. Wilson, were chopped up and extracted with dilute salt
solution, and the nature of the extract examined. This examina-
tion showed that in addition to the albumins, globulins and
nucleo-albumins, which might be extracted by such treatment,
there was present in the extract a small quantity of proteose.
The innoculation experiments, however, both with the first
extract, and with the separated proteose, gave negative results.
As the poisonous constituents of snake venom had been shown*
to be due to proteoses, and in the light of the above results, we
* Weir Mitchell, Smithsonian Contrib. to Knowledge, 1886. Wolfenden,
Jour. Physiol. Vol. vii. ; Kaulback, ibid. Vol. xiii. Martin and Smith,
Proc. Roy. Soc. N.S.W. 1892.


considered it extremely probable that the toxic properties, if any,
of the glands might be due to proteoses (albumoses) also. We
accordingly requested our friend Dr. G. Elliott Smith, who had
heard of the slaughter of some Platypi by a friend of his up
country, to express the contents of the ducts and glands into a
bottle of strong alcohol, whereby all the albuminous constituents
would be precipitated. This Dr. Smith very kindly did for us.
The glands and ducts were carefully dissected out and a ligature
applied to the periperal end of each duct, and the whole removed.
The ducts, which were distended with secretion, were then cut
just above the ligature, and by gentle pressure the larger alveoli
of the glands and the ducts were emptied of their secretion.
Three pairs of glands were treated in this way, the liquid
expressed being limpid and opalescent. The strength of the
alcohol used was 92%. We received the bottle containing the
alcohol and precipitated secretion four days later. The precipitate
was separated from the alcohol by filtration and dried at 40° C.
and powdered. We obtained in this way a little less than - 4
gramme of a pearly white powder, which was in large part soluble
in water and dilute saline solutions, forming a slightly opalescent
liquid.
This solution, which we found to contain the active substance
of the secretion, was neutral in reaction and behaved in the
following manner with reagents :
(1) Warming with nitric acid and subsequent addition of
ammonia - orange colouration (xanthoproteic reaction).
(2) On addition of Millon’s reagent, it gave the usual proteid
reaction.
(3) Heating (after previous acidulation with acetic acid)
produced a turbidity between 75° and 80° C. At about
80° C. a considerable flocculent precipitate came down.
This was filtered off, and the filtrate found to still contain
a small quantity of proteid, as it gave a biuret reaction
(4) With caustic potash and a trace of copper sulphate a
violet biuret reaction was obtained.
reaction.


(5) Nitric acid produced a precipitate which was not appre-
ciably diminished by warming.
(6) Picric acid produced a precipitate which was not appre
ciably diminished by warming.
(7) Acetic acid produced no turbidity.
(8) Saturation with magnesium sulphate did not produce any
precipitate.
(9) Saturation with ammonium sulphate produced a precipi-
tate. This was filtered off and the filtrate contained no
proteid.
From the above it is obvious that there were at least two
proteids present in our original solution—
(1) A proteid coagulated by heat.
(2) A proteid soluble at 100° C.
The former appears from the above reactions to belong to
the albumen class, as the presence of nucleo-albumen (nucleo-
proteid, Hammarsten) was excluded by the absence of any
precipitate of nuclein on submitting the clear solution of the
proteid in 2% HCI to peptic digestion for some hours (12) at 37° C.
The albumen, however, had undergone digestion and had been
converted into deutero-proteose and peptone, for the solution now
reacted in the following manner :
(1) Boiling acidulated solution. No precipitate.
(2) KHO + CuS0 4 . Strong pink biuret reaction.
(3) HN0 3 . No precipitate, but on further addition of NaCl
turbidity which disappeared on heating and returned on
cooling the solution.
(4) Saturation with Am a SO 4 . Slight precipitate. Filtrate
contained peptone.
To determine the nature of the proteid present in the filtrate
after precipitation by heat, we boiled some of the solution which
had been previously acidified with acetic acid, and separated the
heat precipitate by filtration. An equal volume of trichloracetic
489
BY C. J. MARTIN AND FRANK TIDSWELL.


acid was added to the filtrate. This caused a slight turbidity,
which, however, disappeared on heating the solution, but reap-
peared directly it was allowed to cool.
It was filtered boiling through a funnel surrounded by a hot
water jacket. The filtrate became slightly milky on cooling, and
when rendered alkaline with strong caustic potash and a few drops
of copper sulphate added, showed a pink biuret reaction.
By this treatment the presence of a very small quantity of
proteose may be demonstrated when such is present together with
ordinary proteid.*
Our conclusions as to the composition of the secretion drawn
from the above experiments are ;
(1) It is a solution of proteids.
(2) That the greater portion is composed of a proteid belong-
ing to the class of albumins, and that in addition a small
quantity of proteose is present.
(3) Nucleo-albumens are absent.
The minor portion of proteid which is rendered permanently
insoluble by alcohol may contain globulin, but none of this proteid
went into solution subsequently, f
As we shall show in the next section, the secretion of these
glands is capable of exerting a powerful toxic action on rabbits.
Whether the whole of the proteids contained possess this power,
or whether it is confined to the small quantity of proteose present,
we are unable to state. There would, however, be no great diffi-
culty in answering this question had we more material to work
upon.
Experiments on Rabbits with the Secretion.
The small amount of the secretion in our possession necessarily
limited the number of experiments on the nature of its toxic
action. We were, however, able to make four experiments, the
* C. J. Martin, Journ. of Physiol. Yol. xv. p. 375.
t That a body of the albumen class, after four days’ sojourn under 92%
alcohol, should readily dissolve in water and dilute saline solutions is
peculiar: Ordinary albumens, including the serum-albumen of the Platypus
itself, are in this length of time rendered insoluble.


results of which were sufficiently definite. Rabbits were chosen
for the purpose, on account of their suitable size.
The following are the details ;
Experiment I; On June 18th, 1894, a healthy rabbit of average
size and in a very lively condition had -05 gramme of the poison,-
dissolved in 5 cc. of 75% salt solution injected under the skin of
the abdomen at 2 p.m. Its temperature at the time was y ,102° F.
During the injection the animal struggled, and afterwards remained
much quieter. For the rest of the day the animal remained
very quiet in its cage, but no local signs .were observed.
June 19th. A swelling about the size of a duck’s egg has
appeared near the seat of injection. This swelling has a semi-
cystic feel, is not circumscribed, is movable over subjacent tissues,
but adherent to skin. It is tender to the touch. The animal is
sick—it does not struggle nor attempt to escape when handled,
its eye is dull, and it eats only sparingly. Temperature 102-8° F.
A specimen of blood removed from the ear clotted readily in a few
minutes, and was normal in microscopic appearance. At 6 p.m.
the same day the swelling had slightly increased, extending up-
wards over thorax. The animal has been quiet all day, remaining
huddled up in a corner of its cage, and passively submitting to
handling. Temperature 103T° F.
June 20th. The swelling is much smaller and is less tender.
The animal is much livelier, has taken more food. Temperature
102-8° F.
June 21st. The swelling has almost disappeared. The animal
is very lively, taking food well, and struggling when handled.
Temperature 102-6° F.
June 22nd. The swelling has quite disappeared; the eye is
bright and the animal apparently quite recovered. The seat of
injection has a bruised appearance, but is not tender to the touch.
After this no further symptoms appeared; the animal recovered
completely from its illness in five or six days after the injection.
It is at the present time (July 28th) alive and well.


Experiment II: A rabbit about 3 lbs. in weight was etherized
and cannulse inserted into the left jugular vein and carotid artery
and a small sharp pointed cannula was passed through the wall
of the trachea. The cannula in the trachea was connected by a
piece of rubber tube with a small tambour, covered with thin
india-rubber sheeting. The movements of the india-rubber
were transmitted to a lever, the end of which marked by means
of a writing point, on a travelling surface of smoked glazed paper.
As the animal sucked in air with each inspiration, the rubber was
pulled down and the lever marked a downward stroke on the
paper. When air was expelled with each expiration the rubber
membrane rose and the lever described an upward stroke. In
this way a record showing the extent, frequency and general
character of the respiration was obtained. The interior of the
artery was connected with a mercury manometer, the movements
of the mercury in the distal limb of which were recorded on the
paper by means of a light float and stile carrying a writing point.
In this manner a record was obtained of the pressure of the blood
exerted upon the walls of the vessel (aorta), as well as every
variation of this pressure due to the heart’s pumping fresh
quantities of blood into the aorta at each beat, and to the respira-
tory movements of the animal.
In addition to these records, the time was marked by an
electromagnet in connection with a clock, so that at each second
a small vertical line was drawn. The exact movement at which
the injection was commenced and ended was also indicated by
another writing stile, which described a horizontal line on the
travelling surface.
During the injection this stile which was connected with an
electromagnet, was raised by closing the circuit and fell again at
the termination of the injection when the circuit was opened, by
its own weight. In this way the duration of the injection was
indicated by raising this horizontal line. The writing points of
all four records were previously carefully adjusted so as to register
exactly in the same vertical line.


The cannula in the external jugular vein was used to introduce
the solution of the gland-secretion. This was dissolved in a ‘75%
solution of common salt, and was of such strength that 1 ccm.
contained O'Ol gramme of our dried secretion. Having started
our smoked paper travelling, and arranged the respirator}' and
blood pressure records, we first allowed the apparatus to run in-
order to obtain a portion of record previous to the introduction
of the solution. Of the solution 6 ccm. ( = 0-06 gramme) were
then rapidly introduced through the external jugular vein.
Within three seconds from the commencement of the injection,
the blood pressure, which was previously equal to 97 mm. of
mercury, fell almost vertically to 60 mm. (mercury), when the
heart beats were seen to become much less frequent. At the
same time the respiration became hurried and exaggerated, and
speedily terminated in a series of expiratory convulsions. The
appearance was exactly the same as if one had clamped the wind
pipe and so asphyxiated the animal—only much more rapid in its
onset. During this convulsive period the blood pressure rose
again, even higher than before the injection, but speedily fell
again to within 27 mm. of the abscissa. By this time—9o secs,
from the time of injection of the solution—the records of the
heart’s beats disappeared from the tracing and the respiration
had ceased. A post mortem examination was immediately made.
The heart was still beating feebly and continued so to do when
removed from the body. The right chambers of the heart, and
the whole of the venous system were discovered to be full of
clotted blood. The left cavities of the heart and the pulmonary
veins contained fluid blood, and there was an extensive subendo-
cardial haemorrhage in the left ventricle. This result might
perhaps have puzzled us had we not had numerous opportunities
of witnessing precisely the same results after the introduction of
the venom of the Australian black snake or tiger snake* into the
veins of dogs and rabbits.
* C. J. Martin. “On some effects upon the blood produced by the injection
of the Australian black snake.” Journ. of Physiology, Vol. xv. No. 4,
1893.


Almost immediately after the injection of the solution, more or
less extensive clotting of the venous side of the heart and great
vessels had taken place, and the circulation of the blood had very
soon been brought to a standstill. The dyspnoeic convulsions
followed from the consequent deprivation of the nervous system
of oxygen.
As mentioned previously, at death the blood pressure in the
arteries did not fall as is usual to within a few mm. of the zero
line, but remained considerably above this (27 mm.). The
explanation of this is that owing to the extensive solidification of
the blood, the arteries were unable to empty their contents into
the veins.
Experiment III: A rabbit of 3 lbs. weight was etherized and
prepared in exactly the same manner as described in Experiment
ii. In this case 4 ccm. of a 1 % solution ( = 0 - 4 gramme) of the secre-
tion were very slowly injected into the jugular vein. The blood
pressure at the moment of injection was equal to 138 mm. mercury.
It fell in five seconds to 76 mm., and by the end of the injection,
which lasted 40 secs., was only 42 mm., i.e., less than one-third of its
previous height. The heart at the same time became much slower
and feebler in its action.
At the end of half an hour the pressure was only 20 mm., and
the heart was beating very feebly. At this point a further
injection of 4 ccm. of the same solution was introduced. This
was immediately followed by asphyxial convulsions and death.
On opening the body, the whole of the venous system and right
cavities of the heart contained solid blood, so that on cutting
across the large veins not a drop of blood flowed out. The aorta
and other large arteries also contained clots. The examination
was made immediately, the heart continuing to beat feebly for
some minutes after removal from the body. The left ventricle
showed hemorrhages under the endocardium as in Experiment i.
Experiment IV: In this experiment we tried the effect of a much
smaller dose of the secretion. Everything was arranged as in
Experiments ii and iii. The same solution of the secretion was
used (viz., a l°/ a solution in '75% salt solution).


The blood pressure previous to the introduction of the solution
was equal to 108 mm. mercury; the heart beats were 300 per
minute and the respirations 48 per minute. Of the solution 2cc.
were then introduced (-02 gramme secretion).
The blood pressure fell suddenly to 55 mm., the heart beats to
228 per minute (PI. xxxi.). The respirations were not altered in
frequency, but became slightly irregular. For 90 seconds the
blood pressure continued to fall steadily, notwithstandiftg the
heart’s beats soon reached 300 per minute again; they were,
however, much enfeebled. At the end of that time, the pressure
was 46 mm. A further dose of 'O2 gramme was then injected.
There was a very slight further fall of blood pressure (to 42 mm.)
and the heart’s beats became reduced to 228 per minute again,
the respirations also becoming irregular.
From this time the fall in blood pressure was steeper (as marked
by the curve), so that at the end of 2J minutes from the com-
mencement of the experiment it was only equal to 26 mm. of
mercury. The heart’s beats had by this time become practically
obliterated on the tracing, although the heart could still be felt
feebly beating.
During this time the respirations had become irregular both in
frequency and depth, and gradually becoming weaker and weaker,
were finally reduced to occasional inspiratory gasps.
In 26 minutes from the beginning of the experiment the animal
quietly died.
A post mortem examination revealed nothing except haemo-
rrhages under the endocardium of the left ventricle of the heart.
The blood was not clotted in any of the vessels, and on being
drawn off coagulated much more slowly than normally, taking 12
minutes.
These four experiments prove that the secretion of the crural
gland contains some body which is capable of exerting very con-
siderable toxic action when introduced into the body of rabbits.
In the section of this paper devoted to the consideration of the
composition of the secretion, we adduced evidence that it contained


proteids, and we have just seen that the introduction of these
proteids into the animal economy may lead to fatal results.
The possibility that the toxic agent may be of other than proteid
nature, but inseparable from the proteid constituents by the means
employed, must remain open. The small quantity of the secretion
at our disposal (less than - 4 gramme) did not admit of any varied
or extensive methods of purification. We do not, however, think
that such is the case, as we • have knowledge of other proteids
which are capable of producing similar results to those obtained.
The close analogy between some of the symptoms observed by
us and those recorded as occurring in men and dogs when poisoned
by wounds from the spur, lead us to expect that had we used
other animals for' our experiments, the results would have been
parallel.
In Experiment i, in which the poison was introduced sub-
cutaneously, the symptoms were precisely similar to those exhibited
after wounds from the spurs, in which the secretion would almost
certainly be injected under the skin.
In the other experiments in which the secretion was intra
venously injected, the conditions were so different that they are not
comparable to the same extent.
The most striking effect is, perhaps, the almost universal throm-
bosis which occurred in those experiments in which the poison
was rapidly introduced directly into the circulation I Exps. ii and iii).
In Experiment iv, where only - 02 gramme of secretion was
injected intravenously, no intravascular clotting followed, and the
condition of the blood after death was in remarkable contrast to
Experiments ii and iii, for it failed to clot as rapidly as usual,
twelve minutes elapsing before the onset of coagulation. These
results would be almost unintelligible were they not, so far,
absolutely analogous to some effects produced by the introduction
of the venom of our Australian snakes which have been more
fully discussed by one of us* elsewhere.
The next most striking general effect of the poison is the sudden
and great fall in the pressure of the blood, which is so marked a
* C. J. Martin, loc. cit.


feature of the curves shown. This may he due either to weakening
of the heart’s action or to diminished peripheral resistance caused
by a sudden paralysis of the whole vasomotor centres, or to both
causes combined. We are strongly of opinion that the former is
the principal cause, hut as the data at our disposal do not prove
this to be the case, it is useless to discuss it further.
The drowsiness and general depression which formed so
prominent a feature in the recorded cases following wounds from
the spurs, and was also seen in our first experiment, would result
from this fall of blood pressure and the consequent diminution of
blood supply to the nervous system. As in these cases the poison
was injected under the skin, it would only reach the general
circulation slowly, and the onset of the symptoms would be more
gradual.
Our first experiment also shows the local irritant action follow-
ing subcutaneous injection, which is marked by great oedema
and tenderness.
The capillary hemorrhages found in our other cases are another
manifestation of this irritant action.
Altogether there appears to be a remarkable analogy between
the venom of Australian snakes and the poison of the Platypus.
This resemblance is indicated by the following tabular state-
ment :
(1) The poisons both owe their toxic properties to proteid
constituents.
(2) They both markedly retard or prevent the coagulation of
the blood when small doses are slowly introduced.
(3) They both cause intravascular clotting when injected
intravenously in sufficient doses.
(4) They both cause an almost instantaneous drop in the
pressure of the blood.
(,5) They both cause capillary hemorrhages and oedema when
locally applied.
In the production of local (edema platypus poison appears to be
much more powerful. Snake venom, on the other hand, is


Jive thousand times as virulent as our preparation of platypus
poison, and the above comparison only obtains between platypus
poison and snake venom diluted to this extent.
At the conclusion of our survey of the literature of this subject,
we pronounced the opinion that as far as the evidence adduced
went, it presented a very strong case in favour of the contention
that these glands, at any rate at some seasons, produce a poisonous
secretion.
We venture to think that the results of our experiments have
established the fact that the secretion is poisonous at some time
of the year. Whether the animal is capable of discharging a
secretion possessed of poisonous properties at all seasons of the
year is not at present determined. Creighton* states definitely
that the gland is subject to seasonal variations in size just as is
the case with the mammary gland and testes (Bennett). We have
been unable to find on what evidence Creighton makes this
statement; but the differences in minute structure observed by us
lend support to this view.
The idea naturally occurs to one that this apparatus, which is
confined to the male sex, owes its peculiar development to the
operation of sexual selection. That it is a weapon used by the
males on one another when conflicting for the possession of the
females, is an idea which would become extremely probable if it
could be established that the gland is specially developed at or
about the pairing season. This is a point which could be settled
without difficulty provided specimens could be obtained in sufficient
number at suitable periods of the year, say August and February.
Bennett found developing ova in the uterus as early as Septem-
ber, so that in all probability the animals pair during the latter
part of August and earlier part of September.
' That the secretion obtained by us from the glands of an animal
killed in June proved actively poisonous, whilst that from an
animal killed in April was innocuous, is interesting in this respect,
* hoc. cit.


although June would indicate a somewhat early preparation-for
pairing. We cannot, however, place much stress on this isolated
observation, as it is quite possible that the difference in develop-
ment was due to quite other causes. In the meantime the
biological significance of these extraordinary organs must remain
an open question.
In conclusion we wish to express our thanks to our able assistant
Mr. Robert Grant for his help with the experiments.
DESCRIPTION OF PLATES.
Plate XXVIII.
Dissection of left femoral gland and duct (nat. size drawing). The leg is
strongly rotated outwards. The skin, panuiculus carnosus, and deep fascia
have been reflected. The position and anatomical relations of the gland,
duct, and spur arc shown.
a., M. gluteus max. ; 6, M. erector spinse; r., M. latissimus dorsi;
d., M. iliacus ; e., M. gluteus min. ; /., M. gluteus med. ; M. rectus ;
A., M. flex. long, halluo. ; i;, M. tibialis post.; j., femoral gland ; 2, duct
(leaving gland) ; 2', duct (near base of spur) ; 3, spur.
Plate xxix.
Transverse sections of gland ( x 10).
Fig. I. —Section of gland of animal killed June, 1894, showing dilated alveoli.
Fig. 2. —Section of gland of animal killed April, 1892, showing fibrous
condition.
Fig. 3.—Section of duct (showing two channels.
a., Epithelium of duct.
Plate xxx.
Transverse section of marginal portions of gland.
Fig. I.—Section of gland of animal killed June, 1894.
a., Coarsely granular large alveolar cell (flat nuclei); b., fibrous tissue of
stroma ; c., fibrous tissue of capsule ; d. , muscular layer of capsule.


Fig. 2.—Section of gland of animal killed April, 1892.
a.. Small alveolar cell (nuclei round); b., fibrous tissue of stroma ; r.,
fibrous layer of capsule; d,, muscular layer of capsule; ee., bloodvessels.
Plate xxxi.
First portion of tracing obtained in Experiment iv.
Above is the record of respiration in which the dovvnstrokes represent
inspiration and the upstrokes expiration. Underneath this, is the record
of the blood pressure in the carotid artery. At the point * the injection
was given as described in the text. The time occupied by the injection is
represented by the raising of the signal line («).












A PERLITIC PITCITSTONE FROM THE TWEED RIVER,
NEW SOUTH WALES, with REMARKS ON THE SO-CALLED
PERLITIC STRUCTURE IN QUARTZ.
By W. F. SMEETH, M.A., A.R.S.M.
Demonstrator in Geology and Lecturer in Metallurgy, University
of Sydney.
[With Plates XLIY. - XLVI.]
[Read before the Royal Society of N, S. Wales, November 7,1894. ]
The specimens from which this rock is described were brought
to Mr. G. W. Card, a.r.s.m. of the Mines Department, Sydney,
by a prospector under the impression that the phenocrysts of
yellow quartz were tin-stone. Mr. Card drew my attention to
to them, and, as they appeared to be of an interesting character,
we decided to publish conjointly an account of them. I regret
that Mr. Card has been unable to find time to carry out this
arrangement, and so the task of describing the specimens has
devolved upon me.
Macroscopical Characters.
In external appearance the rock presents a black glassy matrix
uniformly studded with numerous phenocrysts of quartz and
felspar averaging two to three mms. in diameter. The ferro-
magnesian constituent is only apparent under magnification. The
glassy matrix is black (colourless in thin sections), with a semi-
vitreous lustre and a conchoidal fracture somewhat interrupted
by the perlites which stand out on a fractured surface. The
perlitic structure is remarkably well developed, and is best seen
on a finely ground surface of the rock, over which a glass slip has
been cemented with Canada balsam. The cracks appear as light
coloured lines on a black ground, the lighter material filling the
cracks being transparent and of about the same refractive index
as the surrounding glass, so that in thin sections the perfection of
the structure is not so distinctly evident.


The Quartz occurs in rounded grains, which however, in many
cases, can be recognized as more or less corroded bi-pyramidal
crystals. In parts they are yellowish in colour owing to numer-
ous cracks which are filled with a ferruginous staining material.
These cracks are generally spheroidal and cause the. crystals to
break up into small grains with curved faces.
The Felspar is chiefly sanidine in glassy tabular crystals show'-
ing the usual transverse cracks and frequently simple twinning.
A certain amount of plagioclase (albite) is present in smaller
grains.
Microscopical Investigation.
Thin sections of the rock appear clear and fresh where not
affected by weathering, and but little secondary alteration is visible
either in the glass or in the phenoorysts ; the latter, however,
have undergone more or less corrosion by the molten magma.
The quartz grains are chiefly remarkable for the numerous
strongly curved cracks which traverse them. In sections these
cracks are sometimes rudely concentric for portions of their length,
but more generally exhibit a number of curves abutting abruptly
against one another. Occasionally these cracks include portions
of the glassy matrix. Cracks quite similar to these have recently
been claimed to be ‘perlitic,’ and if ‘perlitic’ simply implies that a
crack is curved and may reasonably be inferred to be due to contrac-
tion on cooling, then the majority of these cracks are undoubtedly
perlitic. I hope to show later on that typical perlitic cracks
present well marked characteristic features, which give them the
right to be considered as forming a distinct and definite rock-
structure, and which features are markedly different to those
exhibited by the cracks in the quartz.
Inclusions are not numerous, and so far as I have observed are
all glassy. In sections at right angles to the vertical axis these
inclusions are hexagonal in shape with slightly curved sides which
may be due to action by the re-fusion of the contained glass. This
glass contains minute crystallites, occasionally one or two needle-
shaped crystals and invariably a small bubble with a dark border.


The Felspars are clear and fresh, but are in parts much corroded
and contain great numbers of cavities filled with glass. Some of
these take the shape of the host bat the majority are irregular in
shape, generally connected with one another and with the external
glass. These latter doubtless owe, at least their present form to
to secondary action. They frequently contain rounded or ring-
shaped bodies of an isotropic material which varies in colour from
pale green to dark brownish-green, and in places become opaque
from the presence of a dark brown or black powder (probably
magnetite). They are all doubtless secondary secretions of iron-
silicates introduced along cracks and planes of solution in the
felspar. The monoclinic felspar is sanidine, which occurs in large
single grains, generally simply twinned. The triclinic felspar is
much less in amount, in small grains two or three of which are
sometimes aggregated together. The lamellar twinning is well
marked and the extinction angles agree closely with those of an
albite.
The Hypersthene occurs in small distinct grains of prismatic
habit which usually do not exceed 1 mm. in length. No trace of
any other ferro-magnesian mineral is to be observed. The grains
though considerably corroded do not appear to have yielded any
secondary alteration products (save possibly a little magnetite).
In very thin sections they appear to be made up of an aggregation
of minute rods parallel to the vertical axis. In thicker sections
only a somewhat fibrous arrangement is visible in parts, but there
is a strong cleavage in the same direction and a rough cracking
at right angles. The grains are distinctly pleochroic, and the
following scheme shows their relation to the type mineral.
Pleochroism : a reddish-yellow, h yellow, c = green, principal
cleavage 010 which is also the optic-axial plane. a= a and is the
acute bisectrix, the optical sign is therefore negative.
The metallic inclusions so characteristic of some hypersthene
are not present, but there are comparatively large crystals of
magnetite included as well as numerous small zircons and a few
apatite prisms. In addition to these there are a number of


prismatic cavities whose lengths are parallel to the vertical avia,
and which appeared to be filled with glassy material.
Crystals of magnetite similar tothose included in the hypersthene
are scattered through the rock, but are most numerous around the
grains of hypersthene, while some are partially in the hypersthene
and partially in the glass. These facts seem to indicate strongly
that the magnetite was originally contained as inclusions in the
hypersthene and has been set free by partial solution of the latter.
Though the phenocrysts are traversed by numerous cracks no
apparent dislocation of the pieces has taken place, and this, in
conjunction with the fact that many of the cracks pass out into
the surrounding glass affords strong evidence that this cracking
took place subsequently to the cessation of flow.
The glassy matrix is transparent and colourless in thin sections
and thoroughly vitreous, but at the same time filled with innumer-
able microlites and crystallites, which under a one inch objective,
appear as minute twisted black lines. These by their varying
concentration serve to indicate the excellent lines of flow and
vortex motion in the magma. Under high magnifying powers
the minute bodies which are so densely distributed through the
glass may be divided into two classes, the proportion between
which varies in different parts (Plate 45, fig. 2). One of the classes
consists of plagioclase felspar microliths, and is most typically
represented by straight rod-like bodies terminated by crystalline
faces and traversed by one or more cracks which sometimes
appear parallel to one of the end faces (Plate 46, fig. 1). These
minute rods, which average about - 02 mms. in length, are crystal-
line and react on polarized light. Their extinction angles, though
difficult to measure with any approach to accuracy, vary from 0°
to about 25° with the longer axis. They are doubtless lime-soda
felspars rich in lime and the elongation is probably parallel to the
axis ‘ a.’ Less perfect forms occur having forked terminations,
while others resemble a dice box in shape. All the individuals of
this class lie with their longer axes parallel to the lines of flow.


The other class consists of true crystallites, and is mainly repre-
sented by a form which I believe is uncommon. This is built up
of a central axis, generally strongly curved, along which are
ranged rows of globulites. Two rows of globulites are always
visible, and sometimes a third can be detected, and leads one to
surmise that a fourth row is present on the under side. The
globulites are somewhat ovoid in shape and are occasionally
composite. Frequently a portion of the axis projects free at one
end, and it may then be seen to be serrated suggesting the partial
fusion of a single row of globulites {Plate fig. 2).
A form described by Zirkel as consisting of rows of cuneiform
grains placed axially along a central line appears to be akin to
that here described, and I think the designation ‘granular axiolite,’
which he uses may serve very well for the latter.
The individuals are always distinct and average a greater length
■(•05 mms.) than the microliths mentioned above. They are much
contorted and curve about independently of the lines of flow
except in places where there has been considerable differential
motion in the current as in going round some of the larger crystals.
No evidence of transition of the crystallites into the microliths
is observable. Isolated globulites are rare, and margarites
can occasionally be detected. In order to explain the fact that
these crystallites are generally much curved, and in all directions
to the flow I would suggest that in the flowing mass there were
numerous minute whirls or eddies, and that these elementary
bodies had not attained sufficient rigidity to resist their distorting
action up to the cessation of flow. This is supported by the fact
that these bodies are straightened out along the lines of flow where
there was a strong set, and on the other hand become broken up
where the motion appears to have been turbulent.
' Accessory minerals. —A few slender prisms of apatite are present
and some short prismatic grains of zircon. These may have been
derived, along with the magnetite from the hypersthene. A few
grains of a blue doubly-refracting mineral occur associated with
the zircons which may possibly be sapphire.


Chemical and Mineralogical Constitution.
Sp. gr. = 2 - 47. The bulk analysis of the rock gave the follow-
ing results;—
SiO a = 75 - 51 per cent.
ALO s = 14-30 „
Fe 2 0 3 = 1-01 „
CaO = 1-81 „
MgO = -24 „
K 2 O = 2-89 „
Na 2 0 = 1-21 „
H 2 O = 2-84 „
99-81
The alkalis were further determined in some of the glassy
matrix from which the phenocrysts were separated, and gave the
following:
K 2 O -78 per cent.
Na 2 0 .1-14 „
showing that the porphyritic felspars are rich in potash, while the
glass is relatively rich in soda.
The relative volumes of the constituents were approximately
determined by drawing several sections and cutting out and
weighing the the pieces. After multiplying by the specific gravities
of the minerals the mean of six sections gave the following result:
Quartz... ... s'll percent. ,
Sanidine ... 14-94 „
Albite ... ... 2-07 „
Hypersthene ... 1-90 „
Glass 73-14 „
Water. . ... 2-84 ~
100-00’
The water being deducted from the percentage of glass. From
these figures we can deduce that the glass contains 80-27% of SiO a
and that its sp. gr. = 2-44. Assuming that the above figures
are fairly accurate, it follows that there is not enough K a O to
completely satisfy the sanidine, which will therefore contain some


Na 2 0 (1’3%); while similarly, the albite will contain 1'9% of CaO,
the bulk of the CaO being in the glass and in the lime-soda micro-
liths. Figures derived in this way cannot of course be trusted
very far, but they are interesting from their general agreement
with the conclusions of microscopical observation.
A few words may not be out of place here as to the nomenclature
of this rock. The well defined and abundant phenocrysts form a
striking feature, and recall the appearance of vitreous members of
the Dacite group, and this suggestion is somewhat furthered by
the presence of hypersthene as the sole ferro-magnesian constituent.
The high percentage of Si0 2 however, combined with the excess
of potash over soda, and the fact that the majority of the porphy-
ritic felspars are sanidine, necessitates the rock being placed in
the acid group. It therefore becomes a quartz-felspar-pitchstone.
I am not aware that hypersthene has before been observed in
so acid a rock.
In certain rhyolites intergrowths of enstatite and bronzite have
been occasionally noticed in monoclinic pyroxenes. These latter
are seldom conspicuously developed in the more acid lavas, and
may usually be referred to the less ferruginous varieties. The
presence therefore of hypersthene in this rock as a distinct con-
stituent and in well marked grains, is, I think, worthy of special
note.
Peelitic and othee Ceacks.
It would not be necessary to more than allude to the perlitic
structure, so well exhibited in the glass of this rock, were it not
that certain cracks similar to those in the quartz crystals have
been claimed to be perlitic also.* In view of this it may be advis-
able to consider somewhat in detail the nature of the. cracks to
which the term perlitic is applied; and as a starting point I will
first describe the structure which may be easily produced with
great perfection in Canada balsam. This artificial structure is
admitted to resemble very closely the perlitic cracking of lavas
* The Occurrence of Perlitic Cracks in Quartz, W. W. Watts, m.a., f.o.s.
— Q.J.O.S., Aug. Ist, 1894.


and is probably quite analogous if we remember that one is pro-
duced in a thin layer of substance and the other in the interior of
a solid mass. In fact we may consider the artificial structure as
a two-dimensional phase of the natural structure. Certain points
of difference follow from this, to which I will allude later on.
As the method of producing the structure in Canada balsam
does not appear to be very generally known, I may perhaps be
permitted to refer to one or two points in connexion with it. If
a layer of balsam be spread on a polished slip of glass (or a cover
glass) and heated until it becomes distinctly yellow in colour and
then plunged into cold water, the balsam will be found to be
traversed by numerous fine cracks which may be described as
polygonal. In this case perlitic cracks are not developed, or only
to a very slight extent. If however, the surface of the glass slip
be first uniformly ground and the process repeated, the balsam
will be found to exhibit, in addition to the polygonal cracks, very
beautiful perlitic structure—the perlites occupying the interspaces
between the polygonal cracks. If, instead of plunging the slip
into water it be laid on a piece of glass the cracking takes place
more slowly,'and may be watched under the microscope. In this
case the polygonal cracks make their appearance first, and then
each individual perlite springs suddenly into existence, producing
the impression of a tremor in the little mass of balsam. The
higher the balsam is heated and the more quickly it is cooled the
smaller is the interval of time between the two sets of cracks,
until it becomes imperceptible to the eye.
In the structure so produced we may notice the following points
{Plate 45, fig. 4.)
First, that the perlites always occur in the interspaces of a set
of polygonal cracks and are formed subsequently to the latter,
though the interval of time may be very small.
Second, each perlite is formed of segments of one or more
spirals like curves—the radius of curvature tending to diminish
as the curve is followed round. (Allowance must be made for


distortion according to the shape of the polygonal interspaces).
This spiral character can be clearly seen, and as a consequence
the curves are not closed. Occasionally a curve may divide
tangentially into two, or two may join into one, due doubtless to
want of homogeneity or to a local disturbance.
Before applying these observations to the perlitic structure of
a mass of rock, it will be necessary to try and form some con-
ception of what I would call, the ideal perlitic surface. We have
an approach to one section of this surface shown in the layer of
balsam as a spiral curve, and we may take the external shape of
a perlite to be spheroidal and that the outer surface completely
encloses all the inner turns. It is evidently not possible to have
a surface every section of which will be a spiral, and we are forced
to assume that the surface is rolled spirally on an axis, each turn
enclosing the previous ones, and all the turns touching each other
tangentially where the axis intersects them. We have approxi-
mations to such a surface in the foraminifera nummulites and
fusulina, the former being generally compressed and the latter
drawn out along the axis.
A section of such a surface at right angles to the axis will give
a spiral ( Plate 46, fig. 3). A section passing through the axis will
give a figure something like fig. 4, all the curves touching at two
points on the axis. When the section passes through only one of
these points we get fig. 5, and when it does not cut the axis
between these points we get curves like fig. 6.
So far I have assumed this surface to be a continuous one. But
even in the Canada balsam the spirals are only segments, and
therefore represent portions of a surface or surfaces similar to the-
ideal one. Again, in the balsam the curves all represent sections-
of the surface at right angles to the axis consequently the balsam
may be considered as a section through a number of perlites whose
axes are all parallel to each other and at right angles to the section.
To such a group of perlites I may perhaps be permitted to apply
the term ‘ polarized perlites,’ and this arrangement is undoubtedly
due to the mode of production on a plane surface of ground glass.


In a mass of lava on the other hand there is no such directive
influence at work, so that the perlites would lie with their axes in
all directions, and if they are surfaces similar to the ideal one, we
should get the sections exhibited in tigs, 3to 6. As a matter of
fact we do get figures closely resembling some of these in sections
of perlitic rooks, but the majority of the curves in the natural
structure are considerably different, and we are led to inquire
.what modifications of the ideal surface is likely to occur in a
natural glass, and whether such modification will yield curves
similar to those most frequently observed. The most obvious factor
of disturbance will be a want of homogeneousness, which will I
presume, be admitted to be a feature of natural glassy magmas.
The probable effect of this factor will be to produce a less
symmetrical surface, and one in which the different turns—instead
of being all rolled on one axis—are rolled on different axes. (The
axis being the line joining the points of contact of any turn with
the surrounding turn). For instance, if the axes of the turns in
fig. 4, be displaced in the plane of the paper, we get curves of the
type shown in fig. 7. If they are displaced in other directions as
well, curves similar to figs. 8, 9, 10, must result with considerable
variations in detail. To these considerations we must add the fact
that the curves are frequently segmental or intermittent, and that
the different segments may represent portions of more than one
surface. These last set of curves bear a striking resemblance to
those which may be observed in sections of perlitic rocks. Types
approaching the previous more regular curves may also be observed
.but not frequently. In confirmation of these remarks I refer to
the photograph of perlitic cracks ( Plate 45, fig. 3), and to the
drawings of actual perlites (Figs. 11 to 15).
If these suggestions as to the nature of perlitic structure are
admitted to fairly represent its true character, I may be allowed
to define it as follows : —Perlites are cracks of more or less irregu-
larly spiralloid character, occurring in the interspaces between
sets of polygonal cracks; in section these appear as rudely con-
■centric curves which are frequently in contact at various points.


Perhaps the most obvious characteristic is that the curves con-
stituting a perlite never meet otherwise than tangentially, while
another striking feature is the fact that the curves are so frequently
segmental, the crack ending abruptly in the medium, and even
curving round so as to run parallel with an adjacent crack instead
of splitting into it. These are points which may be of use in
determining whether any particular set of cracks are of a perlitic
nature or not.
■Before concluding these remarks I feel tempted to offer a
suggestion as to the origin of this unique structure. It has been
suggested, and I think generally admitted, that it is the result of
contraction of the magma due to cooling. This however does not
carry us very far, for everyone is familiar with countless instances
of materials cooling, contracting, and splitting up under the strain,
without giving rise to a semblance of perlitic structure. Even
amongst volcanic glasses—the natural home of perlites—the range
of the structure is extremely limited in comparison with the extent
of apparently suitable magmas which have been examined.
In experimenting with Canada balsam, the fact that the struc-
ture is easily produced when a ground surface of glass is used,
and is only poorly and with difficulty produced on a polished
surface suggests at once that the friction of the roughened surface
plays an important part. Its effect will be a resistance to the
natural contraction of the balsam, giving rise to a state of tension
among the molecules. On a smooth surface of glass this tension
exists only to a slight extent, and as soon as the polygonal crack-
ing takes place, the strain is relieved and nothing further occurs.
With the ground surface it is different, and two cases present
themselves. First, when the balsam has not been very highly
heated (and is therefore not very brittle) and is cooled slowly. In
this case the polygonal cracks appear first, and the perlites spring
into existence after an appreciable lapse of time. It is evident
here that the balsam in the interspaces of the polygonal cracks
remains under strain owing to friction, that the strain is towards
the centre of each area and increases with the fall of temperature.


At >some instant a rupture occurs and the fissure travels round
with a diminishing radius of curvature as the shock travels towards
the centre. Hence the spiral character of the cracks. In the
second case, when the balsam has been highly heated the two sets
of cracks occur simultaneously as far as the eye can tell, which
may be due to the fact that the balsam is in such a condition of
strain that the shock caused by the formation of the polygonal
cracks, sends a vibration towards the centre of each interspace
sufficient to cause the perlitic cracking of the highly strained
balsam.
In order to apply these remarks to a mass of cooling lava we
must seek for some agency capable of inducing the molecular
tension which is supplied by the friction of the ground glass in
the experiment. If we consider a stream of lava it is evident that
the surface exposed to the air and those in contact with the ground
become comparatively cool and hard, while the interior remains
still viscous. This internal portion continues to part with its
heat and consequently to contract. It will also experience a
resistance to contraction, depending for amount on the ability of
the external portions to withstand deformation. The result will
be molecular separation along certain surfaces which may—as in
the Canada balsam—take the form of polygonal and perlitic cracks.
Doubtless these only occur where there are some particular
relations between the strain and the viscosity, or brittleness, of
the medium. The various conditions necessary to induce a
sufficient strain and to allow of the adjustment of such relations
may well lead to the sparing development of the structure. lam
not aware that up to the present the range of perlitic structure
in rocks in which it occurs has been carefully studied.
To return now to the rock which I have been describing, we
find there a glassy matrix full of undoubted perlites, and a number
of quartz grains exhibiting various curved cracks. These latter
are so similar in character to those figured by Mr. Watts in the
paper above referred to, that I may be allowed to treat them in
common. Apart from a general dissimilarity to the perlitic cracks
317
A PERLITIC PITCHSTONE FROM TWEED RIVER.


it seems to me that they differ also in two important particulars:
First, they do not lie in the meshes of a set of polygonal cracks,
hut on the contrary are often seen to be continuous with some of
the polygonal cracks of the matrix. Second, instead of being
segmental or touching each other tangentially they are almost
invariably closed by abutting abruptly against each other.
These I consider to be important distinctions, and I cannot
imagine anyone, who can view the two sets of cracks side by side,
calling them by the same name, save on an extremely general
basis of classification.
As I have not been able to obtain a photograph exhibiting the
perlitic cracks and those in the quartz side by side, I have
endeavoured to reproduce in Canada balsam a structure similar in
essential points to that of the rock. The result is shown in
(Plate 45, fig. 4) and was obtained as follows:
Small round pieces of polished cover glass were cemented on to
a ground glass, a layer of balsam was spread over this and heated
to a certain point and suddenly cooled. The result, as shown,
was polygonal and perlitic cracks in the balsam overlying the
ground glass and curved and sometimes concentric cracks in that
overlying the polished pieces. It will I think be admitted that
these latter cracks resemble in character those in the quartz grains
and that they are quite distinct from the undoubted perlites.
There are a few other points in connexion with this matter to
which I must allude. If a curved crack which lies mainly in the
quartz encloses also a portion of the glass, one or more concentric
cracks, representing an imperfect perlite cut off by the quartz,
may be present in the enclosed glass. Again, if a perlite is
adjacent to a crystal one or more of the cracks may traverse the
crystal ( Plate 45, fig. 1). Or, if a small crystal occupies the centre
of a perlite, one or more of the cracks may traverse the crystal.
These cases however do not prove that perlitic cracking will
occur in the crystal per se.
There is another case which is probably of frequent occurrence
and of which I have an example beside me at the present moment


in a glassy basalt containing phenocrysts of olivine. Certain
curved cracks surround the grains of olivine, but are elsewhere
absent. They lack the even curvature of perlitic cracks, but,
waiving this point, it is evident that they depend on the olivines
for their existence, and do not prove that the magma would per se
have yielded perlites. It appears to me that this case is on a par
with the lithoidal variety of rook referred to by Mr. Watts (Op. cit.
p. 373). These cracks, said by the author to be perlitic, surround
the quartz grains. But, as in the former case, I should consider
these cracks as doubtfully perlitic, and due to the contraction of
the quartz, I am still unconvinced that an originally lithoidal
groundmass has been found exhibiting of itself perlitic structure.
As Mr. Watts points out, quartz possesses a peculiar advantage
towards yielding perlitic structure in having no cleavage, and, if
such a medium cannot produce anything better than has been
brought forward up to the present, it appears to me extremely
improbable that a crystalline aggregate, consisting of individuals
with various cleavages and different coefficients of contraction,
would be able to develop so delicate a structure.
Reference to Plates.
PLATE XLIV.
General view of the rock x 15 diameters. Showing several grains of
quartz with curved cracks, a large sanidine twin, and some small grains
of magnetite and hypersthene.
PLATE XLY.
Fig. 1 x 30 diameters. A curved crack in the quartz on the right
passes out into the glass through a crystal of felspar and round a grain
of magnetite. This encloses a perlite, the outer curve of which is visible
passing through the felspar.
Fig. 2. x 500 diameters. Showing the straight felspar microliths and
the curved ‘ granular axiolites.’
Fig. 3. xlO diameters. The perlitic structure of the rock photographed
from a polished surface.
Fig. 4. Imitation of the structure of the rock in Canada balsam. The
central patch which represents a piece of quartz shows some incipient
perlitic cracks in addition to the curved cracks, but nothing like them is
present in the quartz of the rock.


PLATE XLYI.
Fig. 1. Drawings of types of microliths.
Fig. 2. ‘ Granular axiolites.’
Figs. 3,4, 5, 6. Sections of ‘ldeal Perlitio Surface.’
Figs. 7,8, 9,10. Conjectural modifications of above.
Figs. 11,12. Perlites from the Meissen Pitchstone, Saxony.
Figs. 13,14,13. Perlites from the present rock.


Journal Royal Society of N.S.W., Vol.XXVIII. 1894. Plate XLIV


Journal Royal Society of N.S.W, Vol.XXVIII 1894. Plate XLV.


Journal Royal Society of N.S.W, Vol.XVIII. 1894, Plate XLVI.




AN ACCOUNT OF SOME RARE NERVE AND MUSCLE
ANOMALIES, WITH REMARKS ON THEIR SIGNI-
FICANCE.
By G. ELLIOT SMITH, M. B., Ch.M. (Syd.),
Demonstrator of Anatomy, University of Sydney, N.S.W.
I. Anomalous Condition of Brachial Plexus.
In a male subject recently dissected in the Practical Anatomy
room of this University, and in which numerous muscle and
nerve anomalies were noticed, the brachial plexus on both sides
presented some marked peculiarities. During the dissection
of the left axilla, a large lateral cutaneous branch was seen
proceeding from the first intercostal space. This immediately
divided into two branches, both of which were distributed along
the inner aspect of the arm almost as far as the elbow. The
upper of these, whilst in the axilla, gave off a small branch which
ascended and joined a twig of about the same size from the internal
anterior thoracic nerve, the conjoined nerve going to supply a
pectoralis quartus slip, about half an inch wide, which formed the
posterior or deeper part of the lower border of the pectoralis major,
but was inclosed in a distinct sheath, and was inserted under
cover of the pectoralis major. The intercosto-humeral nerve
was of the ordinary size and divided into three branches, of
which the uppermost was joined by a twig from the lateral
cutaneous branch of the first dorsal There was no nerve of
Wrisberg.
A careful dissection was subsequently made of the right
brachial plexus, which presented, among other rare anomalies,
some hitherto undescribed. The arrangement is diagrammatically
represented in the appended figure, p. 96. Prom the outer cord of
the plexus the external anterior thoracic nerve ( e.a.t) was given off
in the ordinary manner, but it was connected with the internal
anterior thoracic nerve ( i.a.t ) only by a very fine filament (c),
not so large as the nerve which supplies the posterior belly of
the omo-hyoid muscle. The external anterior thoracic nerve


divided into three branches of about equal size. The upper,'of.
these pierced the costo-coracoid membrane, and supplied the
clavicular and the upper part of the sternal divisions of the
pectoralis major. The second, branch divided into two series of
branches, of which some pierced the* pectoralis minor, supplying
its upper part, others turned round its upper border to reach the
“ gladiolar portion ”of the pectoralis major. The third branch
passed backwards (dorsally) and broke up into a large number
of small branches, which ramified on the coats of the axillary
artery in much the same way as branches of the anterior
division of the obturator nerve—the nerve which supplies the
muscles of the leg, homologous to those supplied by the external
anterior thoracic in the arm—ramify on the femoral artery.
The internal anterior thoracic nerve arose in the ordinary way
from the inner cord of the plexus and divided into two branches,
the upper and larger of which, after giving off a fine twig of
communication (c) to the external anterior thoracic,'divided into,
a branch to the lower part of the pectoralis minor (pj) and a
branch (jp”) to the lower border of the pectoralis minor and
pectoralis quartus. The latter (p") was joined (as on the other
side of this subject) by a small twig (c") which came from a
very large lateral cutaneous branch of the first dorsal nerve
(L.C). The second or smaller division of the internal anterior
thoracic (W), after communicating by means of a small filament
(c T ) with the lateral cutaneous branch of the first dorsal, was
joined by a small twig (c iT ) from the intercosto-humeral, and was
distributed in the region of the posterior axillary fold. This
was the only representative of the nerve of Wrisberg.
The trunk formed by the junction of the anterior primary
divisions of the eighth cervical and first dorsal nerves divided in
the ordinary manner into ventral and dorsal divisions. The
latter (L) divided into two branches—a branch which helped in
the formation of the posterior cord of the plexus, and a second
nerve (I.C') which ran downwards in the axilla, lying just to
the inner side of the internal cutaneous nerve (I.C), and
associating itself with the ulnar nerve, descended as far as the
space between the internal condyle and the olecranon, below
which level it was distributed in the same manner as the
posterior division of the internal cutaneous nerve is usually


distributed. The internal cutaneous nerve arose in the ordinary
way, but its distribution was restricted to the area usually
supplied by its anterior division.
A lateral cutaneous branch (L.C) of the first dorsal was also
present on the right side, but was much bigger than on the left,
being almost as large as the internal cutaneous. In the axilla
it remained practically undivided, only giving off three very fine
twigs. One of these (o') joined the fine loop (c) between the
anterior thoracic nerves (c"), united with the branch (p") of
the internal anterior thoracic to the pectoralis major and
pectoralis quartus, while a third (c m ) formed a loop of com-
munication (f) with the smaller division (W) of the internal
anterior thoracic. The intercosto-humeral nerve (i.c.h) was very
small.
Examining the condition of the first and second dorsal nerves
inside the thorax, the following peculiar condition was found on
the right side. The second nerve (DH) was found to give off
a fairly large branch, which, proceeding upwards over the second
rib, closely associated with the superior intercostal artery,
divided into two branches. The larger of these (a), after joining
a branch of the first dorsal nerve, recrossed the second rib to
supply the muscles in the second intercostal space ( b ). On
account of the previous disturbance of the part by dissection,
I was unable to determine the connections of the second branch
(a'), but it appeared to have joined the intercostal (lateral
cutaneous) branch of the first dorsal. The latter, after giving
off a small muscular branch (d) near the head of the first rib,
was continued with this branch as far as the mid-axillary line,
where it perforated the thoracic wall to enter the axilla.
The intrathoracic arrangement of the nerves on the left side
presented nothing specially noteworthy, except the fact that
there were two well marked communicating branches from the
second dorsal nerve, which joined the first dorsal trunk before it
divided into its brachial and intercostal portions.
From the posterior cord of the right brachial plexus four sub-
scapular nerves sprung. Of these the first two (S 1 S 2) supplied
the upper part of the subscapularis muscle, and represented the
first subscapular nerve. The third (S 3 ) was the long subscapular.
The fourth (S 4 ) arose alongside the circumflex, and, after giving


a few twigs to the subscapularis, supplied the teres major. In
addition to these nerves the circumflex nerve (0), as it turned
round the lower border of the subscapular muscle, gave four
small twigs (O 1 O 2 O 3 O 4 )to that muscle. This arrangement
recalls the distribution of the subscapular nerves in a typical
mammal (the Porcupine) as described by Paterson (1., a).
Turner (11,, p. 104) has recorded several cases in which the
circumflex nerve has given twigs of supply to the subscapularis
and teres major, in the absence of a branch from the subscapular
nerves to the latter muscle. In the case here recorded, however,
the latter branch was present, and the twigs from the circumflex
all went to the subscapularis.
With reference to the interpretation of the conditions
described, several features of the arrangement call for special
remark. It will be noted that on the right side of the body the
two anterior thoracic nerves were connected only by a very
delicate filament. Practically no interchange of fibres can
therefore have occurred in this case, and hence this arrangement
of the nerves shows at a glance the morphological distribution of
the fibres of each nerve. The arrangement agrees well with that
recorded by Herringham as a result of his investigations (IY., p.
423). The external, derived from the fifth, sixth, and seventh
cervical nerves, supplied not only the “ anterior pectoral seg-
ment ” of Windle (III.), but also a considerable portion of the
“ middle pectoral segment,” including both its “ gladiolar ” and
“ costal ” portions. Concerning the distribution of this (anterior
pectoral) nerve, Windle says (111., p. 348) that it is quite definite
and distinct both in its connections and distribution to the
anterior pectoral segment. In the case here recorded, however,
the external anterior thoracic nerve must include some branches
which ordinarily form part of the middle pectoral (internal
anterior thoracic) nerve. Regarding this nerve Windle ( loc. cit.)
says—
“ Sometimes the greater part of this nerve appears to be derived
from the outer trunk [of the plexus], sometimes from the inner, but
the latter is by far the more common condition It cor-
responds to the internal anterior thoracic of human anatomy, which,
arising from the inner trunk, receives also a constant and sometimes
largo branch of communication from the external or upper nerve
coming from the outer trunk.”


The double nerve supply of the dorsal, i.e. deeper, part of the
lower border of the pectoralis major on both sides—from the
internal anterior thoracic and the lateral cutaneous branch of
the first dorsal nerve—helps to establish its identity as a
pectoralis quartus. In a well developed example of pectoralis
quartus in another subject, the insertion was blended with the
insertion of a large achselbogen, which had a double nerve
supply similar to the pectoralis quartus in this subject. The
resemblance between and the frequent union of the insertions
of the pectoralis quartus and achselbogen, together with the
similarity of their nerve supply, seem to indicate that, whatever
their homologies, they both belong to the same muscular sheet.
With regard to the internal cutaneous nerve, the condition
here recorded is very remarkable, because if part of the nerve
belongs (as it certainly does in this case) to the dorsal series of
branches, the nerve, as ordinarily met with, will form another
exception to Paterson’s law “that, in the formation of the
plexuses, the dorsal unite with dorsal and the ventral with
ventral branches only.” Paterson has himself pointed out an
exception to his own law in the case of the small sciatic nerve,
which he now regards as a mixed nerve, formed by the union of
dorsal and ventral branches (V., p. 177). It is of interest to
note in this connection that, like the small sciatic, the internal
cutaneous nerve lies along the post-axial border of the limb.
After meeting with the case here recorded, I examined the
distribution of the internal cutaneous, the lesser internal
cutaneous (Wrisberg), and intercosto-humeral nerves in several
subjects. All of these subjects except one complied with the
classical description, making due allowance for the variability
of cutaneous nerves. In one subject, however, there was no
intercosto-humeral nerve on either side, but a very large nerve
of Wrisberg, which not only replaced the intercosto-humeral, but
also invaded the territory usually supplied by the internal
cutaneous, just below the internal condyle of the humerus. In
the other subjects the size and area of distribution of the nerve
of Wrisberg varied inversely with that of the posterior division
of the internal cutaneous. It is now a well recognised fact, to
which Cunningham (VI., p. 539) drew attention, that the inter-
costo-humeral nerve and the nerve of Wrisberg constitute alter


native paths for the same series of nerve filaments. ' The facts
recorded in this paper seem to point to the fact that additional
paths for the same fibres are to be found in the lateral cutaneous
branch of the first dorsal (when present) and the posterior
division of the internal cutaneous nerves. Now, Paterson says
(1., a, p. 154) —
“ The inferior [anterior primary] division of each nerve entering a
limb plexus is homologous with the whole [anterior primary division]
of the intercostal or anterior lumbar nerve, and that the dorsal and
ventral divisions of the nerve in the plexus correspond respectively
to the lateral and anterior or inferior branches of the intercostal
nerve.”
If this be true, not only does the nerve of Wrisberg, hut also
part of the internal cutaneous nerve—both usually springing
from the ventral portion of the plexus—belong to the same
series of branches as the intercosto-humeral, i.e., to the series of
dorsal branches; and the condition present in this subject,
instead of being a mere abnormality, really reveals the true
morphological arrangement of the plexus.
As regards the presence of a lateral cutaneous branch of the
first dorsal nerve, Paterson’s observations on the mammalian
brachial plexus show that—
“the first thoracic nerve always plays an important part by its
axillary branch [in the formation of the brachial plexus, but] the
remaining small portion, which is intercostal, never becomes cutaneous
in the ventral line of the body, but ends in the muscles of the first
intercostal space ” (1., b, p. 630).
This nerve evidently takes the place (in the case here re-
corded) of the intercosto-humeral and the nerve of Wrisberg
to a large extent. Now, the accumulated evidence, not only
derived from anatomical but also from physiological and clinical
research, localises the origin of both of these nerves largely, if
not mainly, in the second dorsal segment of the spinal cord. If
such be the case, we should expect to find a large bundle of fibres
passing from the second to the first dorsal nerve, to convey the
fibres of the lateral cutaneous branch of the first dorsal nerve.
Such an arrangement exists on the left side, but on the right
side there is a very different condition of affairs. A connecting


link certainly does exist, but of this the greater part (a) has
no communication with the intercostal or brachial parts of the
first dorsal nerve. We shall consider this branch later. The
connections of the other (smaller) part (a') were not made out
with certainty, but even if this joined the lateral cutaneous part
of the first dorsal, as it seemed to do, it would be quite inadequate
to carry all the fibres which passed out as the lateral cutaneous
branch. The only other way of explaining the state of affairs
is to assume that an intracentral passage of fibres takes place
from the nucleus of the second intercostal nerve, some of whose
fibres pass out with the first dorsal nerve. This view receives
a strong support from the very peculiar distribution of the
branch (y) of the first dorsal nerve. This branch is distributed
to the muscles in the second intercostal space, thereby clearly
showing that the branch (y) belongs morphologically to the
second dorsal segment.
11. Musculus pisi-uncinatus.
A very well developed specimen of this rare muscle was found
in the left hand of a very muscular labouring man.
The muscle was first described in 1866 by Calori (VIII., p. 140)
as the “ musculo piso-uncinato.” It was next recorded by W.
Gruber (VIII, p. 202) in 1875 under the name of “ pisi-hamatus.”
The latter observer in 1880 systematically examined 200 subjects
for this muscle and found it in 2 - 5 per cent, of these cases (IX.).
In all he found twelve cases. Apart from these, the only other
case I can find recorded is that of Calori. It is worthy of note
that in all the cases in which the muscle was present on only
one side it was the left, as in this case. In only one of the
recorded cases was the muscle anything like the size of the
muscle here recorded. The origin also is broader and slightly
different from any of Gruber’s cases. It formed a plump
rounded mass on the anterior aspect of the annular ligament,
but completely hidden by a very well developed palmaris brevis,
from which it was separated by a small quantity of fatty tissue
and the hypothenar fascia, as well as by the ulnar artery and
the superficial division of the ulnar nerve, both of which took a


distinct curve outwards (radially) round the prominent fleshy
belly to cross the thin expanded origin.
The muscle arose by an obliquely directed origin 17 mm. wide
from the tendon of origin of a largely developed opponens minimi
digiti, from the hook of the unciform bone, and from the lower
border and anterior surface of the anterior annular ligament.
From this origin a fleshy belly, 6 mm. thick and 3 cm. long,
extended upwards and inwards to he inserted into the whole of
the anterior and part of the internal surface of the pisiform
hone, and into the anterior and inner surfaces of the tendon of
the flexor carpi ulnaris. The deep branches of the ulnar nerve
and artery sprang from the parent trunks fully 2 inches above
the pisiform, and passed under cover of the muscle to enter the
“ canalis hamo-muscularis ” (Gruber). The muscle was supplied
by a twig from the deep branch of the ulnar, which entered
the muscle just near its insertion to the pisiform hone.
111. Double Nerve Supply to the Musculus gemellus superior.
In a subject dissected for demonstration purposes, the nerve to
the quadratus femoris, in addition to giving a twig to the inferior
gemellus, also supplied a twig to the superior gemellus. The
nerve to the obturator internus also gave a branch to the
superior gemellus, so that the muscle had a double nerve supply.
On dissecting the other side of the subject the same condition
was found to be present.
In all English text-books the nerve to the quadratus femoris
is described as supplying the inferior and not the superior
gemellus muscle, but in Schwalbe’s Neurologic (X., p. 963) it
is described as supplying the two gemelli. I subsequently ex-
amined the distribution of this nerve in six other cases, in all of
which it presented the arrangement described in English text-
books.
This anomalous condition of the nerve to the quadratus femoris
invading the territory of the nerve to the obturator internus is
interesting in the light of comparative anatomy, presenting, as
it does, an indication of the primitive arrangement of the nerves
of supply to these muscles.


v Professor Cunningham (XL, a, p. 143; h, p. 270) describes the
“ nerve to the quadratus femoris ” supplying both gemelli as
well as the adductor magnus in Thylacine and Cuscus. Pro-
fessor Wilson has described the “ nerve to the quadratus femoris ”
giving off the “ nerve to the obturator internus ” in Dasyurus
viverrinus. In the same place (XII., p. 355) the same observer
publishes a unique case in which the “ nerve to the quadratus
femoris ” invades the territory of the great sciatic nerve after the
marsupial type. In the present case we have an instance of an
invasion in the other direction, an extension of the nerve to-
wards the upper part of the great ischio-femoral mass revealing
a tendency towards the condition existing in Dasyurus.
IV. Mtisculus peroneus quartus.
Well developed specimens of peronei quarti were found in both
legs of a subject which presented numerous other commoner
anomalies. On the left side the muscle arose by a large fleshy
belly from the posterior aspect of the fibula between the peroneus
brevis and the flexor hallucis muscles, with the former of which it
was blended in its upper part. The strong tendon of insertion split
into two parts, the larger of which was inserted into the floor of
the groove on the outer surface of the os calcis through which the
tendon of the peroneus longus passes. The smaller part was in-
serted partly into the posterior surface of the os calcis and partly
into the deeper layer of the aponeurosis of the leg under cover of
the tendo Achillis. In the right leg there was a peroneus quartus
almost as large as that in the left leg, hut inserted, like the larger
division of the tendon, on the left side.
This muscle has been met with by Gruber in 13 per cent, of
the subjects examined (XIY.). The name peroneus quartus was
given to it by Otto (Neue Seltene Beohachtungen S. 40).
Macalister (XY.) calls it peroneus sextus. Testut (XIII., p. 753)
regards it as a peroneo-calcaneus externus variety of the musculus
peroneus quinti digiti of Huxley. Testut describes how, in the
series of mammals, the attachment of the latter muscle shifts back-
wards, or, as he puts it, gains “ secondary ” attachments, first to


the fifth metatarsal, then to the cuboid, the calcaneum, or even, in
one instance, the external malleolus, constituting a whole series
of muscles, which have been described under various names by
different writers. The additional slip on the right side of this
subject, inserted into the fascia of the leg, constitutes another
stage in this retrogression.
(In this foot was a well marked instance of an extensor primi
internodii hallucis tendon of Macalister, the fourth noticed in the
last two weeks.)
V. Other Uncommon Abnormalities.
In the subject in which the anomalous brachial plexus described
above was met with, the abductor minimi digiti of the right hand,
in addition to its usual origin, had a broad fan-like origin from the
deep fascia of the forearm about 2 inches above the wrist, from
which it extended downwards across the ulnar artery and nerve to
the radial side of the pisiform bone, where it joined the other por-
tion of the muscle. At the site of this high origin the deep fascia of
the forearm was strengthened by a strong accession of fibres from
the tendon of the flexor carpi ulnaris. The muscle was supplied
by a twig from the ulnar nerve. There was no palmaris longus
—a fact which is interesting because Macalister (XV.) regards
this muscle as a palmaris accessorius. A similar case is recorded
by J. W. Smith (XVI.) and three cases by Wood (1868), but in
none of these cases is there any mention of the peculiar connec-
tion of the tendon of the flexor carpi ulnaris with the high origin.
In this connection may be mentioned a case met with in the
class of operative surgery. In cutting down upon the ulnar
nerve a dense thick aponeurotic layer, more than an inch wide,
was found in front of the ulnar side of the carpus. On further
examination, the flexor carpi ulnaris was found to be fleshy right
down to its insertion, a slight aponeurotic band forming its
radial border. About 3 inches above its insertion it gave rise to
a strong fleshy belly, which almost immediately gave place to
the strong fibrous band above mentioned, which expanded to form
the palmar fascia. There was no other representative of a
palmaris longus. The same condition was present to a lesser


degree on the other side, but was sufficiently well marked to
confuse the operator.
In the arm containing the anomalous plexus ( supra ) the
median nerve passed behind the brachial artery, and, as is usual in
such cases (Turner, loc. cit.), the circumflex and profunda vessels
arose by a common trunk. The biceps in the same arm arose
by a broad aponeurotic sheet which extended from the coracoid
process to the floor of the bicipital groove of the humerus. The
representative of the upper part of the long tendon constituted
a ligament attached distally to the upper extremity of the
bicipital groove.
In another arm, the brachialis anticus muscle had a triple
nerve supply—from the musculo-cutaneous, musculo-spiral, and
median nerves. As the latter gave off a large communicating
branch to the musculo-cutaneous nerve, the twig to the
brachialis anticus muscle was in all probability merely part
of the musculo-cutaneous fibres which were conveyed by
the “ median ” path. On both sides of this subject the biceps
had a humeral head, and the palmaris longus was represented
merely by a fibrous band, and the flexor sublimis was connected
with the flexor longus pollicis and flexor profundus digitorum
tendons by means of two well developed muscles, whose nervous
supply corresponded with the deep muscles to which they were
attached. The lumbrical muscles presented a peculiar anomaly
in the right hand. In addition to the usual muscles, all of
which had bicipital origins, and one of them (the third) a
bicipital insertion, there was present an additional muscle, which
appeared in the middle of the forearm as a delicate rounded
tendon to the outer side of the flexor sublimis digitorum, but
which could be traced on the deep surface of the latter muscle
as far as the internal condyle. This tendon at the upper border
of the anterior annular ligament gave rise to a delicate muscular
belly, which was inserted mainly into the index tendon of the
flexor sublimis just opposite the metatarso-phalangeal joint, but
partly also by a delicate slip into the dorsum of the finger, like
an ordinary lumbrical. A slip somewhat similar to this has
been described by Wilson (XYIL). In this case the flexor longus
pollicis was inserted into the anterior annular ligament, a small
part of the tendon giving rise to a muscle inserted like the one


in question. The flexor profundus digitorum gave off the tendon
to the thumb.
In conclusion, I must express my deepest gratitude to
Professor Wilson for the kindly advice which he has at all times
willingly given me, both as regards methods of work and in the
search for references.
[diagram.


Diagram to Illustrate the Anomalous Brachial Plexus described in the text.


REFERENCES TO THE DIAGRAM.
e.a.t, external anterior thoracic.
i.a.t, internal anterior thoracic.
c, their delicate loop of intercom-
munication.
d, the intercostal branch of the
first dorsal.
L.C, its large lateral cutaneous
branch.
jf, branch of i.a.t to the pectoralis
minor.
p", branch of i.a.t to the pectoralis
major and quartus.
w, the smallest branch (cutaneous)
of the i.a.t.
c', a delicate communicating fila-
ment from the first dorsal to
the loop of communication, c.
c", a twig from the lateral cutaneous
division of first dorsal to p",
the branch of i.a.t to the
pectoralis quartus.
c m , a communicating twig between
w and L.C.
i.c.h, intercosto-humeral nerve.
c l ’, aloopof communication between
i.c.h and w.
So, the representatives of the first
subscapular nerve.
s 3, the long subscapular.
s 4, subscapular nerve supplying
teres major.
0, circumflex nerve.
o 1 o' 2 o :t o 4 , twigs from 0, to the lower bor-
der of the subsoapular muscle.
M.C, musculo-cutaneous.
M.S, musculo-spiral.
M, median.
U, ulnar.
I.C, internal cutaneous.
I.O', posterior division of internal
cutaneous, arising in common
with one of the roots of origin
of the posterior cord of the
plexus.
a.a', branches of communication
passing upwards across the
second rib.
h, nerve crossing second rib to
supply the muscles in the
second intercostal space.
REFERENCES TO LITERATURE.
I. Paterson, A.M., (a) “The Limb Plexuses of Mammals,”
Owens College Studies in Anatomy, 1891;. ( h ) also
Journal of Anatomy and Physiology, 1887.
11. Turner, W., “Additional Variations in distribution of Nerves
in the Human Body,” Journal of Anatomy and Physiology,
vol. vi.
111. Windle, B. C. A., “The Pectoral Group of Muscles,” Trans-
actions of the Royal Irish Academy, vol. xxix. pt. xii.
IV. HerringhaMj-W. P., “The Minute Anatomy of the Brachial
Plexus,” Proceedings of the Royal Society of London,
vol. xli.
V. Paterson, A. M., quoted by Ross, “The Segmental Distribu-
tion of Sensory Disorders,” Owens College Studies in
Anatomy, 1891.
VI. Cunningham, D.J., “Connecting Twig between anterior
divisions of first and second Dorsal Nerves,” Journal of
Anatomy and Physiology, vol. xi.
VII. Cai.ori, Mem. del Accad. delle Scienze dell’ Institut. di Bologna,
Ser. ii. Tome vi.
VIII. Gruber, W., Archiv fiir Anat. Phys. und Wissensch. Med.,
Leipzig, 1875.
VOL. XXIX. (N.S. VOL. IX.) G


IX. Gruber, W., “ Ueber den Arcus Tendineus Piso-Hamatus und
dessen Substituten, den Musculus Piso-Hamatus,” Virchoio’s
Arehiv, Bd. 86.
X. lloffman-Schwalde, “Anatomie des Menschen,” Neurologic.
XI. Cunningham, D. J., (a) “Challenger” Report on Marsupialia;
( b ) also Journal of Anatomy and Physiology, vol. xv.
XII. Wilson, J. T., “Abnormal Distribution of the Nerve to the
Quadratus Fern oris in Man, with Remarks on its Signifi-
cance,” Journal of Anatomy and Physiology, vol. xxiii.
XIII. Testut, L., “Les Anomalies Musculaires chez I’homme,”
1884.
XIY. Gruber, W., “ Beobachtungen,” Heft vii.
XV. Macalister, A., Transactions of the Royal Irish Academy,
1871.
XVI. Smith, J. W., “Muscular Anomalies in Human Anatom} r ,”
Owens College Studies in Anatomy, 1891.
XVII. Wilson, J. T., “Series of Varieties in Human Anatomy,”
Trans. Intercolonial Medical Congress, Sydney, 1892.


NOTE ON A PECULIAR ARRANGEMENT OF THE SUPRA-
SCAPULAR VEIN.
By G. ELLIOT SMITH, M.B., Ch.M.
(Syd.). Demonstrator of Anatomy, University of Sydney
N.S.W.
In a subject which presented a large number of anomalies,
the most noteworthy of which have been communicated to this
Journal in the previous paper on “ Some rare Nerve and Muscle
Anomalies,” there was present a very peculiar condition of the
veins in the left axilla.
The suprascapular artery arose from the first part of the
axillary artery, a variety mentioned in Quain’s Anatomy. The
corresponding vein ran downwards parallel to the artery, and at
the inner side of the axillary artery changed its direction and
ran parallel to the cords of the brachial plexus to join the
subscapular vein by two roots, so that with the subscapular
trunk it formed a vascular ring. The subscapular vein received
veins corresponding to the circumflex and profunda arteries,
and was placed very low, —in fact, outside the axilla proper,
The long subscapular nerve was directed downwards in the
axilla parallel to the suprascapular-vein and the inner branches
of the brachial plexus, beyond the lower fold of the axilla,
where it took a bend at right angles, passing through the
vascular loop as through a pulley.
Quain (10th edition, vol. ii. pt. ii. p. 425) says the supra-
scapular artery “ has been found to proceed from the axillary
artery, and from the subscapular branch of that vessel” In this
case the artery belonged to the first variety here mentioned,
while the vein corresponded to an artery belonging to the second
variety.




[From Vol. IX. (Series 2nd) of the “ Proceedings of the Linnean
Society of New South Wales ” (October Slat, 1894J-]
A PRELIMINARY COMMUNICATION UPON THE
CEREBRAL COMMISSURES OF THE MAMMALIA,
WITH
SPECIAL REFERENCE TO THE MONOTREMATA AND
MARSUPIALIA.
By G. ELLIOT SMITH, M.B., ET CH. M. (SYD.).
(Demonstrator of Anatomy, University of Sydney).
(Plate xliv.)
“ The subject requires careful re-investigation, but if the currently received
statements are correct, the appearance of the ‘ corpus collosum ’ in the
placental mammals is the greatest and most sudden modification
exhibited by the brain in the whole series of vertebrated animals—it
is the greatest leap anywhere made by Nature in her brainwork.”—
Huxley, “ Man’s Place in Nature.”
The cerebral commissures of the non-placental mammal present
a simplicity of arrangement, which may be readily understood, so
that a study of their distribution is likely to throw a considerable
amount of light upon the more complicated systems of connecting
fibres in the brain of the placental mammal. The knowledge of
the arrangement of the commissures of the Proto- and Metatherian
cerebrum, moreover, must have an important bearing upon the
proper understanding of the morphology of the brain of all sub-
mammalian Vertebrates, since the Monotremata and Marsupialia
form the connecting links between the latter and the higher
mammals. This tracing of the homologies with the Eutheria is
all the more important because the common descriptive terms
have mostly been originally applied to parts of the higher
mammalian brain, especially that of the Primates.
During the present year, acting upon the suggestion of
Professor Wilson, to whom I am deeply indebted for much


valuable advice, I have examined a considerable number (about
thirty) brains of the Monotreme and Marsupial orders, more
especially those of Ornithorhynchus and Perameles nasuta. A
knowledge of the gross anatomy having been obtained by dissec-
tions of fresh brains, the minute anatomy was worked out in
serial sections of the whole brain cut in coronal, sagittal and
horizontal planes. The Wcigert-Pal and Golgi staining methods
were used for most of the work, supplemented by occasional use
of anil in blue black. In addition to the above, the cerebrum has
been examined in the Phalanger, Macropus, Koala, Kangaroo-rat,
Dasyurus and Echidna, and compared with those of the rabbit,
pig, cat, dog, guinea-pig and mole. From a series of foetal
specimens of Phalangista of various ages, I was enabled to make
out many points in the cerebral development. Through the
kindness of Professor Wilson and Mr. J. P. Hill, I was enabled
to examine some beautifully stained series of sections of foetal
Kangaroos and Bandicoots, as well as a very valuable series of
sections of a f cetal Platypus, whose external appearance is described
in this number of the Society’s Proceedings. For the abundant
supply of material with which this research was conducted, I am
deeply indebted to Dr. C. J. Martin, Mr. J. P. Hill and Dr.
Meredith, of Raymond Terrace. To Mr. Robert Grant I am
under a deep obligation for much valuable assistance in the
histological work.
In the Marsupial and Monotreme brain the greatest interest
centres in the unique arrangement of the cerebral commissures,
the uniformity of whose general plan throughout these orders
indicates the close relationship between the Proto- and Meta-
theria, and separates them as a distinct and well defined group
from all the Eutherian orders.
This paper is merely intended as a synopsis of that part of the
subject which relates to the commissures. The complete results
of the work'on the non-placental cerebrum I hope to present to
the Society in a short time.
At an early stage in the development of the non-placental
mammal, the mesial wall of the prosencephalic vesicle becomes


indented to produce two parallel furrows, in exactly the same way
as occurs among the Eutheria. The lower of these two furrows,
which extends forwards as far as the foramen of Monro and
backwards as far as the posterior extremity of the lateral ventricle,
is the fissura choroidea. The upper corresponds to what has been
called the fissura urcuata (Bogenfurche of Arnold) in the placental
mammal and is coextensive with the lateral ventricle. Included
between these two fissures is a strip of cortex, which is known
as the arcus marginalis ( Eandbogen), which (owing to the
deficiency of the cortex lining the fissura choroidea) becomes the
edge of the cortex cerebri. The fissura arcuata of the Monotreme
and Marsupial brain differs from the corresponding structure in
the placental mammal, in that it persists into adult fife as the
fissura hippocampi in the whole extent of the ventricle, thereby
meriting the name of “Ammonsfurehe” given to the corresponding
structure in the Eutherian brain by Mihalkovics. In the non-
placental mammal, then, the hippocampal fissure forms a projection
—the hippocampus—into the lateral ventricle in its whole extent.
The fissure, and consequently the hippocampus, corresponds in
shape with the contour of the ventricle. So that in Platypus,
where the lateral ventricle has only a small descending horn (so
small that it was quite overlooked by Hill, “ On the Cerebrum of
Ornithorhynchus,” (Philosophical Transactions B. 1893), the
hippocampus and hippocampal fissure present a slight hook-like
bend downwards at their posterior extremity. This is shown in
a somewhat exaggerated manner in fig. 2 hfi In all Marsupials
the fissura hippocampi (fig. 1 hfi ) presents a well marked curve
downwards at the posterior extremity corresponding to the down-
ward curve of the lateral ventricle to form its descending horn.
From the arcus marginalis is formed the fascia dentata and from
the projection into the ventricle the cornu Ammonis, whose
histological structure closely resembles that of the corresponding
regions of the Eutherian brain, as described by Ramon y Cajal.*
* “Neue Darstellung vom histolog. Bau des Central-nervensystems,”
Arohiv fur Anat, p. 377, 1893.


The ventricular aspect of the hippocampus is covered in its whole
extent by the alveus, a layer of fine medullated nerves, which
arise as axis-cylinder processes of the large pyramidal cells of the
hippocampus (especially those near the fimbria) and from the
polymorphous cells, which form the nucleus fasciae dentatse.
“ Collaterals ” derived from the same sources also pass into the
fimbria to become “commissural” fibres. All these fibres converge
towards the thickened lamina terminalis, which is the homologue
of the septum lucidum of higher Mammals. In order to reach
this point, above the foramen of Monro, the fibres coming from
the anterior extremity of the hippocampus are directed backwards
and inwards, and those coming from the posterior part of the
hippocampus are directed forwards and inwards with varying
degrees of obliquity. Since the greater part of the entire
hippocampal formation is placed behind the foramen of Monro,
including the whole of the descending horn, which alone is present
in Eutheria, there is, consequently, a large mass of fibres coursing
forwards and increasing as it goes, from fresh accessions of alveus
fibres. This mass of fibres becomes collected to form a distinct
ridge which constitutes the fimbria, which is mainly derived from
the descending horn. The fimbria, therefore, will vary in size
with the length and degree of development of the hippocampus
behind the foramen of Monro, more especially with the size and
extent of the descending limb of the hippocampus. In Platypus,
and to a less marked degree in Echidna, the descending part of the
the hippocampus is short, and in neither is the layer of alveus fibres
thick in this region. As a consequence neither Monotreme has a
well-formed fimbria. In all Marsupials, however, there is an
extensive part of the hippocampus lying posterior to the foramen
of Monro and a well developed descending limb, so that the cut
fimbria projects as a prominent spur in transverse section. Since
the hippocampus extends forwards beyond the foramen of Monro,
no part of the fimbria ever becomes free from the hippocampus to
form posterior pillars or body of the fornix as in placental
mammals. The fimbria, or its representative, lies in the whole of
its extent along the margin of the cortex, where that is formed


by the fascia dentata. The latter structure in Platypus throughout
forms the upper border of the choroid fissure, but in Perameles and
others, where,the ventricle turns downwards, and the descending
cornu thus formed bends forwards, the fascia dentata and fimbria
come, of course, to occupy a position at the lower margin of the
choroid fissure in its descending limb, and the fimbria lies above
the fascia dentata in this region. The destination of the alveus
fibres, after they have arrived at the region of the foramen of
Monro, varies.
(а) The great majority of the fibres cross the middle line to enter
the hippocampal region of the opposite side, so that they
effect an exchange of fibres between the two hippocampi.
In the alveus of the opposite hippocampus they give off
numerous collaterals which enter the white matter and
come into relationship with the pyramidal cells. These
fibres constitute therefore the hippocampal commissure
proper of Owen and Symington—the corpus callosum of
Flower, Sander, Osborn and almost all recent, writers—the
hippocampal decussation (in Platypus) of Hill. Its origin
from cells of the hippocampus (including the subiculum and
fascia dentata) indicates without the slightest possibility
of doubt its homology with the psalterium of Eutheria.
(б) A large bundle of fibres dips downwards behind the anterior
commissure to enter the optic thalamus. This is the
anterior pillar of the jornix.
(c) A third smaller and more scattered bundle arches forwards
in the mesial wall of the hemisphere in front of the
anterior commissure—the precommissural fibres of Huxley.
(<•/) A considerable number of alveus fibres pass into other
regions of the same hippocampus from which they arise.
These may be called hippocampal association fibres.
The present paper will only deal with the first of these sets of
fibres—the hippocampal commissure—and will only refer to the
others in so far as they are related to the commissural fibres. It


may be remarked, however, in passing, that Hill’s statement*
that “ all such fornix as exists in Ornithorhynchus crosses in the
middle line ” and that the descending fornix fibres come from the
hippocampal commissure is absolutely erroneous, since the great
majority of such fibres come directly from the alveus and never
cross the middle line. His further description of their destination
and of the formation of the taenia thalami is equally inaccurate.
On separating the cerebral hemispheres of any Marsupial or
Monotreme from above, a large white transverse band will be
noticed passing between the two hemispheres and hiding from
view the anterior extremity of the third ventricle and the
foramina of Monro. The question of the homology of this band
has been the subject of much controversy.
A full account of the earlier discussion of this question will be
found in the paper of Flower, f and the more recent bibliography
will be found in the papers of Symington}; and Hill.§ Ever
since Meckel’s monograph|| there have been supporters of his view
that the superior commissure was corpus callosum. Thus Flower
in Echidna and a series of Marsupials,U Pappenheim in Didelphis,**
Sander in Macropus and Didelphis, ft Osborn in foetal Macropus, }}
Zuckerkandl in Platypus, §§ and Herrick in Didelphis, |||| as well
as in numerous papers elsewhere, have, among others, supported
* Loc. cit.
t “ On the Commissures of the Cerebral Hemispheres of the Marsupialia
and Monotremata,” Phil. Trans. 1865, p. 633.
X “ The Cerebral Commissures in the Mammalia and Monotremata,”
Journ. of Anat. VoL xxvii. p. 69.
§ ‘‘Cerebrum of Ornithorhynohus,” Phil. Trans. B. 1893.
|| Desor. Anat. Ornithor. parodoxi, 1827.
II Loc. cit,
** Compt. Rendus, Vol. xxiv. p. 186, 1847.
ft “ Ueber das Quercommissurensystem des Gehirns bei den Beutel-
thieren,” Arch. f. Anat. 1868.
XX “The Origin of the Corpus Callosum,” Morph. Jahrbuch, Vol. xii.
§§ “ Ueber des Eiechcentrum,” 1887.
1111 “ Callosum and Hippocampus in Marsupial and lower brains,” Journ.
of Comp. Neurology, Vol. iii. p. 179.


the view of Meckel that a corpus callosum is present. Haeckel,
as recently as 1893 has made use of the following terms in
describing the essential features of the Marsupial and Monotreme
brains. Among the “ Hereditiv-charactere der Monotremen” he
places “die primitive reptilienahnliche Bildung des Gehirns,
insbesondere der Mangel eines ausgebildeten Corpus Callosum,”
and referring to the Marsupialia, “die geringe quantitative und
qualitative Entwickelung des Gehirns, namentlich des Corpus
Callosum.”* Beevor, who, after an examination of the cerebrum
of Macropus, expressed the opinion that the superior commissure
was corpus callosum (Brain, 1887), elsewhere denies the presence
of any hippocampal commissure in certain Primates, t Apart
from the evidence of the presence of such a commissure which the
non-placental mammal affords, there is the valuable corroborative
evidence of its presence in the placental mammal by Honegger.*
The opinion of Owen that the corpus callosum is absent in the
Non-placentalia is supported by Eydoux and Laurent,f by Robert
Garner in Platypus and several Marsupials, | by Symington in the
clearest and best account of the subject which has yet appeared,§
and Hill;|| and Edinger in the fourth revised editions of his
says that all Marsupials so far examined lack a corpus
callosum.
In spite of this the generally accepted opinion among recent
writers [of which, for instance, the works of Foster and Balfour,
as well as the more recent work of Minot on Embryology and the
* “ Zur Pliylogenie der Australischen Fauna,” Jena.
+ “ On the Course of the Fibres of the Cingulum, &0., in the Marmoset
Monkey,” Phil. Trans. 1891.
* “ Vergleichend-anatomisohe Untersuchungen iiber den Fornix, &e.,’
Recueil de Zoologie Suisse, Tom. v. Nos. 2 and 3. '
t “ Sur 1’ Encephale de I’Eohidna compare k celui de I’Ornithorhyuque,”
Voyage de la “ Favorite.”
X “ Anatomy of the Brain of some small Quadrupeds,” British Assocn.
Reports, 1858, p. 123.
§ Loc. cit.
II Loc. cit.
IT “ Vorlesungen iiber den Bau der Nervosen Centralorgane,” Leipsig, 1893.


comparative papers of Sir William Turner,* may be quoted as
examples] is that all mammals possess a corpus callosum. This
opinion is still actively upheld by Herrick in his numerous papers,
although in a different (but equally mistaken) sense to all other
writers. So that to-day there is still considerable uncertainty
upon this question, in spite of the short but clear and convincing
paper of Symington, f
So far no attempt has been made to explain either the arrange-
ment of the fibres in this commissure or the difference in shape
which it presents in different animals, and which so deceived
Flower. This paper aims at offering an explanation of these
appearances.
If a sagittal section be made through the mesial wall of the
cerebral hemisphere of Perameles, i.e., a short distance from the
mesial plane of the brain, the section stained by Pal’s method
presents an appearance which is represented in a purely schematic
manner in fig. 1. In the middle of the figure is seen the section
of the commissure ( ps .), which has given rise to so much discussion,
and radiating from it the fibres (/.) of the alveus are schematically
represented proceeding to all parts of the hippocampus, whose
contour.is represented by the hippocampal fissure (hf.) From the
concavity of the hook formed by the commissure are to be seen
issuing the fibres of the anterior pillars of the fornix {of.) and the
precommissural fibres of Huxley (s.) separated by the anterior
commissure (ac.).
In fig. 2 the corresponding structures in Ornithorhynchus are
represented in a similarly schematic manner. The psalterium or
superior commissure here presents only a slight hook at its
posterior extremity corresponding to the rudimentary posterior
descending cornu of the hippocampus. Consequently the com-
missure is not folded in bilaminar form as it is in Perameles. In
fig. 3 the condition found in the placental mammal is diagrammati-
cally represented.
* “The Convolutions of the Brain,” Journ. of Anat. Vol. xxv. 1890;
“The Cerebrum of Ornkhorhynchus,” Journ. of Anat. Vol. xxvi.
+ Loc. cit.


In Perameles the sagittal section of the commissure is thin in
front, where it is composed of scattered bundles coming from the
anterior part of the hippocampus. But as it is traced back it
becomes thicker and more compact from the crowding together of
fibres from the middle portion of the hippocampus. Posteriorly
the commissure takes a sudden bend downwards and forwards,
and at the bend a large number of fibres are aggregated to form
a structure which resembles the splenium corporis callosi of
placental mammals, and was actually believed by Flower to be the
splenium. Since it is produced in the same manner as the
splenium, it may not be inappropriate to call it the “splenium of
the hippocampal commissure.” From this splenium the ventral
limb of the commissure extends downwards and forwards like the
psalterium of the placental mammal, and as in the latter it is
formed mainly by the fimbria. In the higher Marsupials the
angle formed at the splenium by the two layers of the commissure
becomes more acute, and in the highest Metatherians like the
Kangaroo the two layers form two parallel bands united behind
at the splenium. After this description of the arrangement in
Perameles, the appearance of the commissure met with in Platypus
will be readily understood. As the descending horn of the
ventricle is rudimentary there is a very small descending limb of
the hippocampus. There is consequently no ventral layer of the
commissure, but only a slight hook-like “ splenium ” at the posterior
extremity of the commissure. In the Eutheria (fig. 3) where that
portion of the hippocampus lying above the velum interpositum
does not develop, there is consequently no dorsal layer of the
hippocampal commissure; but, corresponding to the ventral part
of the hippocampus, which alone persists, the ventral layer of the
hippocampal commissure forms the psalterium, as we usually
understand that term— the place of the dorsal layer of the com-
missure being occupied by the corpus callosum. The corpus
callosum of higher mammals is continuous with the psalterium at
the callosal splenium, and the exact point of union of the two is
not usually evident. Although in the highest mammals the
splenium is formed wholly of callosal fibres, yet in some of the


lowlier Eutheria, e.g.. Mole, (Ganser*) it is formed of psalterial
fibres, and is not therefore strictly a splenium corporis callosi,
but corresponds rather with the “splenium” of the marsupial
commissure. Ganser, from such considerations, and recently Paul
Martinf from a study of the development of the corpus callosum
in the cat, have come to the conclusion that the separation of the
psalterium from the corpus callosum is purely artificial and serves
no useful purpose, since both commissures connect parts of the cortex
cerebri. These writers therefore include both structures under
the term corpus callosum, and divide it into dorsal and ventral
layers. But as I have already pointed out, the superior com-
missure of Proto- and Metatheria is formed solely of fibres derived
from cells lying in the hippocampal region. This in Eutheria is
the only distinguishing feature of the psalterium, that it is formed
of fibres whose “ Ursprungzellen ” lie in the hippocampus, as
distinct from callosal fibres, which consist solely of axis-cylinders
and collaterals of cells lying in the mantle proper. The whole
superior commissure of the non-placental mammal is strictly
homologous then with the ventral layer of the great cerebral
commissure of the placental mammal, while the dorsal layer of
the latter is a pallial commissure superadded to the ventral, and
superseding the dorsal, layer of the hippocampal commissure
present in the Marsupials and Monotremes. If then it be
permissible to consider the ventral layer of the Eutherian com-
missure as truly corpus callosum, we must, of course, admit that
the Proto- and Metatheria have a corresponding structure, consti-
tuting, however, a corpus callosum, none of whose fibres arise in
the mantle proper and which is, therefore, not strictly comparable
to the great white band seen on divaricating the hemispheres of a
higher mammal. This relationship of the superior limb of the
hippocampal commissure in the Metatheria was not appreciated
by Flower, who, from the resemblance of the whole commissure
in sagittal section to the combined corpus callosum and psalterium
♦ “ Vergleichend-anatom. Studien ii. d. Gehirn des Maulwurfs,”
Morph. Jahrb. Bd. vii. 1882.
f “Zur Entwick. dea Gehirnbalkens beider Katze,” Anat. Auzeiger, 1894.


of Eutheria, regarded the dorsal layer of the marsupial hippo-
campal commissure as a true corpus callosum.
In the descriptions given above, I have described the appearance
seen on section through the mesial wall rather than through the
middle line, because in the latter plane the fibres have become
collected into a more compact mass, and the simplicity of the
arrangement is correspondingly obscured. It may be pointed out
in this connection that the marked difference in the appearance
presented on mesial section of, e.y., such brains as those of Echidna
and Macropus, are more apparent than real.
The mass of grey matter, which is situated on the ventral aspect
of the hippocampal commissure in Ornithorhynchus and which fills
up the concavity of the hook formed by the commissure in
Perameles, is the homologue of the septum lucidum of Placentalia,
being formed, like the latter, from the thickened lamina terminalis.
The septum lucidum, therefore, in Marsupials (fig. 1) fills up the
concavity of the “ psalterial ” hook, lying ventral to the dorsal
limb or cornu of the hippocampal commissure, which alone is
present in Platypus (fig. 2), dorsal to the ventral limb or cornu,
which alone is present in Eutheria, while, as already stated, it lies
in the Marsupial between the ventral and dorsal limbs of the
commissures, which are both present. The septum lucidum,
therefore, presents the same topographical relation to the corpus
callosum of placental mammals as it does to the dorsal limb of the
hippocampal commissure of non-placental mammals, so that
Flower’s* main argument for the existence of a corpus callosum—
that it lies dorsal to the septum lucidum—loses all its cogency.
In this connection it is important to emphasize the fact that
the “ septum ” lies entirely upon the ventral aspect of the hippo-
campal formation in Platypus and ventral to its anterior part in
.Marsupials. It lies, therefore, entirely ventral to the Randbogen,
below which it is carried backwards with the superior commissure
as the latter develops. Now the corpus callosum occupies the
same position in relation to the septum pellucidum as the dorsal
* Loc. cit.


limb of the hippocampal commissure does in Marsupials, and
develops in the lamina terminalis just as the corpus callosum does
(Marchand, Paul Martin, Minot). Moreover the latter is con-
tinuous posteriorly with the psalterium. The corpus callosum
from comparative reasons, therefore, as well as from the purely
ontogenetic evidence in human brain by Marchand,* and Paul
Martin in the cat,f lies entirely ventral to the Randbogen. Hill’s
statementj that “the corpus callosum in its backward extension
breaks through a convolution, which lies outside the ring from
which the fascia dentata, fimbria and fornix are developed,” as
well as the opinion of Fish “ that in its dorso-caudal growth the
callosum ploughs its way . . . through the arcuate gyre ”§
are as equally opposed to the facts of comparative anatomy as
they are quite unsupported by the brilliant results of Marchand’s
developmental researches.
Before a corpus callosum (using the term in the restricted sense
in which anatomists generally regard it, t.e., as distinct from the
psalterium) can develop, either the hippocampus must disappear
in the region in which the supraventricular callosal mantle-com-
missure is to develop, or the callosal fibres must traverse the
hippocampal region. Of these alternatives the former is that
which is found to take place. Accordingly in the ontogeny of
the cerebrum of the placental mammal the anterior portion of the
fissura arcuata (the “vordere Bogenfurche” of His), and con-
sequently the hippocampal projection into the anterior horn and
body of the lateral ventricle, disappears preparatory to the
development of the corpus callosum, the “ hintere Bogenfurche ”
alone persisting to become the hippocampal fissure, which forms a
projection limited to the descending horn of the ventricle. This
is quite in accordance with the belief of Professor D. J. Cunning-'
ham, who, as the result of his study of the development of the
* “ Ueber d. Entwick. d. Balkens im Menschlichen Gebirns,” Arch. f.
Mikr. Anatomic, Bd. xxxvii. JB9l.
• t Loc. cit.
X “ The Hippocampus,” Phil. Trans. B. 1893.
§ “ The Indusium of the Callosum,” Journ. of Comp. Neurology, Vol.iii.
1893, p. 61.


human cerebrum, says*:—“l believe that it [vordere Bogenfurche]
is transitory and that it is gradually obliterated during the time
that the corpus callosum assumes shape.” In Proto- and Meta-
theria the anterior commissure is the cerebral commissure par
excellence, being the sole connection between all parts of the
hemispheres, excluding the hippocampi only. It is of interest to
note in this connection that the anterior commissure persists in
Eutheria in just that part of the mantle related to the descending
horn of the ventricle in which the hippocampus remains, while in
the region from which the hippocampus has disappeared the
anterior commissure is supplanted by the fibres of the proper
corpus callosum. In the temporal lobe of Placentalia the alveus
fibres (the root fibres of the hippocampal commissure) present the
same relationship to the terminal fibres of the anterior commissure
as they do to the same commissure in the whole range of the
extensive hippocampal region of Non-placentalia. And, as the
hippocampal region in the latter is co-extensive with the lateral
ventricle, so the anterior commissure is co-extensive with the
lateral ventricle, i.e., supplies, in these forms, the whole of the
cortex, excluding the hippocampus only.
The important question, “What is the significance of the
corpus callosum ?” must now be considered. Is it a new com-
missure to connect cortical areas hitherto unconnected or not
present in lower mammals; or, on the other hand, is it merely a
new path for fibres which possess representatives in the brains of
the Meta- and Prototheria 1 From a consideration of the facts
before us, it seems possible that the corpus callosum appears in
response to the demand for a shorter connecting route between
the rapidly developing dorsal portions of the cortex cerebri. That
such factors are at work, the Marsupials themselves seem to afford
evidence. In Ferameles the anterior commissure passes around
the corpus striatum as an external capsule to reach the various
regions of the mantle. In Phalangista, a bundle of anterior
commissure fibres proceeds to the cortex vid the internal capsule,
* Cunningham Memoirs of Roy. Irish Acad. No. vii. 1892, p. 5.


in addition to the external capsule. In Macropus, in order,
apparently, to meet the demands of the greatly increased mantle,
almost half of the anterior commissure fibres pass through the
internal capsule to reach the dorsal part of the mantle. It seems
as if this principle became extended in the placental mammal,
and to provide for the enormous mantle development of the
higher Mammalia, a shorter supraventricular route was established
in place of the circuitous path, which the fibres of the anterior
commissure would otherwise have had to take to reach such a
region, for instance, as the callosal convolution in man.
Although from these considerations it seems as if the callosal
fibres were serially homologous with the fibres of the anterior
commissure, i.e., fibres separated from the anterior commissure to
meet the exigencies of a huge mantle-development, it must not
be forgotten that the parts of the cerebrum which the corpus
callosum connects, only develop late in the phylogenetic and
ontogenetic history of the individual. Thus Sir Wm. Turner'*'
states that the relative proportion of mantle to rhinencephalon
decreases as we descend the Mammalian series until in the lowest
mammals the pallium is almost as small as the rhinencephalon.
In Perameles this reduction of pallium goes still further, as,
instead of being as large as the rhinencephalon, the pallium forms
merely a small cap placed upon the rhinencephalon. In the
Eutheria a considerable portion of the mantle, viz., the temporal
lobe, is connected by the anterior commissure. If, then, from
the small cap of mantle found in Perameles we_subtraot the portion
corresponding to the temporal mantle of higher forms, there will
be little, if any, mantle left to be connected by a corpus callosum.
In such higher Metatherians as the Wallaby the demand for a
corpus callosum becomes greater, and is met to some extent by
added fibres of the anterior commissure passing through the
internal capsule. If in such a highly developed brain as that of
the Wallaby, where the demand for a true corpus callosum is
evident, such a structure is wanting, it seems a priori highly
* Journ. of Anat. Vol. xxv.


improbable that in the Sauropsida and Amphibia such a com.
missure should exist, as so many writers assert.
Although a priori statements are of little value as scientific
argument, still with such presumptive evidence of the absence of
a corpus callosum in Submammalia, one is naturally chary of
accepting any opinion as to its presence, unless supported by
definite and convincing evidence. Suchevidence moreover is not yet
forthcoming, and the arguments which have hitherto been adduced
in support of the hypothesis, are of the flimsiest kind. Herrick
states* “the callosum is practically absent [in Di</elphys\ .
a rudiment of what may be called corpus callosum [is present],
although we are unwilling to definitely homologise it with that
body . . . it soon loses itself in, the median walls of the
hemisphere, corresponding to the septum pellucidum. Being a
tract of cortex, this band has as great claim to be homologised
with the corpus callosum as the, relatively larger commissure of
the alligator.” The area which Herrick, here calls “septum
pellucidum ” and elsewhere “ intraventricular lobe ” is an area of
the mesial surface of the cortex, which is directly continuous
posteriorly with the tract which has already been described as
the septum lucidum and which develops from the lamina termi-
nalis. The corresponding grey mass in Reptiles has been called
“ septum pellucidum ” and “ Fornix leiste ” by Edingerf and
Meyer, J although the latter would not definitely homologise it
with the “ septum” of Eutheria. Flower§ called it “ septal area.”
All these terms are very misleading, because the area in question
is not homologous with the septum lucidum, which is merely the
thickened lamina terminalis.|| This tract, moreover, develops
from the “posterior olfactory lobule” of His, and can be readily
* “Cerebrum and Olfactories of the Opossum, &0.,” Bull. Sci. Laboratories,
Denison University, Vol. vi. Part ii. p. 75.
+ “ Yergleiohend-entwick. und anat. Studien im Bereiche der Hirn-
anatomie. 3. Riechapparat und Ammonshorn,” Anat. Anzeiger viii. 10, 11.
% “ Ueber das Vorderhirn einiger Reptilien,” Zeit. f. wiss. Zool. Iv.
Bd. Nov. 1892.
§ Loc. cit.
|| Minot “ Human Embyrology.”


traced in the Mammalian series as the gyrus subcallosus of
Zuckerkandl* or the “ peduncle of the corpus callosum.” Neither
of these terms is applicable to the nonplacental mammal since
there is no corpus callosum. The area in question may be
distinguished as ‘* the precommissural area,” a purely descriptive
term equally applicable to all vertebrates possessing a cortex. The
“ precommissural area ” from its connections and ontogeny is part
of the rhinencephalon. Now the only two commissures which are
known to have any connection with the rhinencephalon are the
anterior and hippocampal commissures—the corpus callosum
never. To distinguish some fibres of the hippocampal commissure
by the name of “ corpus callosum ” —as Herrick does—simply
because they go to the precommissural area is therefore entirely
unwarranted, and opposed to all the accepted criteria of a corpus
callosum. Since the corpus callosum of certain reptiles is confined
to the homologous area, it is only natural to conclude that a
corpus callosum is absent in them as it is in Didelphys.
Moreover, Osbornf in Amphibia speaks of a bundle of fibres
as “ a commissure of the dorsal portion of the mantle and homo-
logous, on this ground, with the corpus callosum,” quite oblivious
of the fact that, by his own showing, the dorsal commissure in
Marsupials is anterior commissure. Besides, EdingerJ shows
that the mesial and dorsal portions of the cortex of reptiles is
homologous with the Ammon’s horn, and therefore its connecting
fibres must be hippocampal commissure. When it is upon such
flimsy and unscientific evidence that many writers base their belief
in the presence of a corpus callosum in Submammalia, one is fully
justified in doubting their conclusions, especially when there is so
much discordance as to what actually is the corpus callosum. Thus
many writers {e.g., Osborn, Gage, &c.) describe as corpus callosum
a structure which is undoubtedly hippocampal commissure. Evi-
dence is accumulating, which will go far to prove that the corpus
* Loc. cit.
t Lot. cit.
J Lot. cit.


callosum of most writers on Submammalia, is nothing else than
a hippocampal commissure—a view, which a comparison with the
arrangement of the commissures in Platypus would lead one to
expect. The great source of confusion to investigators not only
upon the Marsupial but also upon the Sauropsidan cerebrum, in
attempting to compare the latter with the placental mammal, is
the altered position of the hippocampal commissure—firstly, by
the bending of the hemisphere accompanied by a corresponding
bend in the commissure, and secondly, the disappearance of just
that part of the hippocampus and its commissure, which clearly
maintains its true morphological position as the upper margin of
the choroidal fissure, dorsal to the septum pellucidum. In the
Platypus we have the key to unlock the whole question.
The following summary presents a hypothetical explanation of
the presence and order of appearance of the three commissural
bands met with in the region under consideration.
In the lowest stage of cerebral development the anterior com-
missure is the great commissural system of the cerebrum.
Included in the anterior commissure are numerous strands of
varied significance, which may in lowly forms be quite distinct
from one another as they lie in the lamina terminalis., e.g., in
Teleostei, where this anterior commissure system is known as the
“commissura interlobidaris” (Gottsche). Early in development
the upper border of the choroidal fissure becomes differentiated as
a hippocampus, which, before the ventricle becomes bent, lies
entirely dorsal to the fissure, as in Platypus and the Sauropsida.
This is the portion of the cortex furthest removed from the
situation of the anterior commissure, and hence this—the hippo-
campus —is the region which first demands a shorter route for its
connecting fibres. Hence the hippocampal commissure appears
as the second distinct commissural band, and we have the Mono-
treme and Marsupial condition.
In the ontogeny of the Eutherian brain this order of develop-
ment of the commissures is also observed, the anterior commissure
being the first to appear, and later the combined calloso-hippo-
campal commissure. Of the latter commissure, the commissural


fibres of the fornix are the first to develop,* so that in the early
Eutherian brain there is a stage which closely resembles the
adult condition in Metatheria with “ anterior ” and hippocampal
commissures and a complete absence of corpus callosum proper.
Combined with this absence of the corpus callosum there is a
persistence of the Bogenfurche, which completes the picture of
the Marsupial brain, constituting a veritable “Metatherian stay?”
in the development of the Eutherian brain. These interesting
facts in the development of the higher mammalian brain, which
the recent work of Marchand and Martin have elucidated, fully
bear out the statement of the late Sir Richard Owen that the
hippocampal commissure in the Marsupials “ represents the first
stage of the corpus callosum as it appears in the development of
the placental mammal ” —a statement which has been repeatedly
misunderstood by Owen’s critics. The work of Owen, which was
performed almost fifty years ago with the crude methods of investi-
gation of that time, will stand the test of the latest methods of
investigation which the last few years have yielded. In the light
of our advanced knowledge of to-day, with all the delicate and
selective staining agents and improved methods of research, the
results of his labours on the brain'of the nonplacental mammal
stand out as a lasting memorial to his close observation and
insight. The opposition which has been brought to bear against
his investigations by so many prominent biologists, some of whom,
from a less clear comprehension of the subject, attempt to
depreciate the value and question the accuracy of his work, can
have no other result than to expose their own ignorance. Even
as late as last year, an English writer well known in neurological
literature, in a disparaging attempt to find fault with Owen’s
work on Platypus, simply laid himself open to the accusations
with which he ineffectually attempted to stamp the work of the
great savant. The result of the present research on the cerebrum
of a large series of Monotremes and Marsupials, with the methods
of Golgi and Weigert, is to completely vindicate Owen from the
* Martin, loc. cit.


charges of inaccuracy which have been ignorantly levelled against
him. lam well aware that the writer of the paper in question
had very bad material with which to work, but that is all the
more reason why he should have been more cautious in his attack
upon others’ work. The hypercritical tone of the paper in question
reaches its acme in the following passages :—“ On what ground,
too, does Owen maintain, that the essential function of the fornix
as a commissure ... is maintained, when, as will be shown
presently, all such fornix as exists in Ornithorhynchus decussates
in the middle line, is not united with the olfactory bulb awl may
be, for all one can tell to the contrary, not a longitudinal commis-
sure at all, but a series of tracts uniting together corresponding
parts of the two sides ? ... “He saw the difficulty, but not
the way out of it.”*
The closing phrase in this quotation accurately describes the
position of its writer, who, by ignoring the close and intimate
connection of the hippocampus with the olfactory lobe (the
internal root, the Riechbundel of Zuckerkandl, and “the olfactory
bundle of the fascia dentata” of the present writer), and having
elsewhere stated that the external olfactory root cannot be traced
to the hippocampus, completely excludes the hippocampus from
any connection with the olfactory region, in spite of the fact that
he correctly located the fascia dentata as the olfactory centre.
But for the statement of Owen that the “association” between the
olfactory and hippocampus is maintained to a greater extent (as
compared with the commissural connection) than in higher animals,
his statements may be taken as strictly accurate, a very close and
intimate association existing between the anterior extremity of
the hippocampus and the olfactory lobe, by means of fibres passing
through the precommissural area, and which are probably homo-
logous with some of the “ precommissural fibres of Huxley ” and
the striae Lancisii of the Eutherian cerebrum. The latter
homology is rendered all the more probable by the statements of
Blumenauf that the striae Lancisii, which are continued pos-
* The italics are mine,
t Loc. cit.


teriorly into the fascia dentata, are connected anteriorly with the
olfactory lobe, in much the same way as I have elsewhere shown
my “olfactory bundle of the fascia dentata ” to be connected in
Platypus.
After the appearance of the hippocampal commissure the
increased development of the mantle next demands a shorter
course for its connecting fibres, which is provided by the corpus
callosum. If these conjectures are right, the three cerebral com-
missures must bft regarded as serially homologous, the anterior
commissure, or at least its pars olfactoria,* appearing first, the
hippocampal commissure next, and the corpus callosum last.
That some" of the fibres, which in Placentalia pass in the latter,
cross the middle line with the anterior commissure in Non-
Placentalia seems certain, so that part of the anterior commissure
is really the homologue of the corpus callosum in the Proto- and
Metatheria, the hippocampal commissure being merely a part of
the anterior commissure, which has become separated off earlier in
phylogeny. The appearance of a corpus callosum can hardly be
considered then, therefore, such a sudden event as would appear at
first sight and such as Professor Huxley’s remark (supra) seems
to imply, but is merely an example of the adaptive element in
development, which recent research has recognised as the important
modifying factor of phylogenetic tendencies in ontogeny.
What becomes of the anterior extremity of the hippocampus
in the placental mammal 1 Comparison with the non-placental
mammal supports the view, which is forced upon one by the
important researches of Marchandt and Blumenau,| that the
gyrus suprocallosus of Zuckerkandlg (the indusium or stria;
Lancisii) is the representative of the anterior part of the
hippocampus.
* The “pallial” part of the anterior commissure probably does not appear
until after the hippocampal commissure.
t Loc. cit.
X “ Zur Entwickl. v.’ feineren Anatomie des Himbalkens,” Archiv f.
Mikr. Anatomie, Bd. xxxyii. 1891.
§ Loc. cit.


In man and microsmatic mammals the temporal part of the
hippocampus retains its primitive contour, the fascia dentata
ending just behind the splenium of the corpus callosum. Hill,*
not recognising the association between the disappearance of part
of the hippocampus and the appearance of the corpus callosum,
attributes this fact to “ accident.” But what happens in the
macrosmatic mammal 1 For, in order to prepare for the advent
of a corpus callosum, the whole of the upper and anterior part of
the hippocampus has disappeared, and only the small temporal
segment is left to carry on the functions of the whole. To
compensate for this restriction, the hippocampus, as it grows,
becomes bent upon itself in an S-shaped manner (fig. 6) and
becomes accommodated under the corpus callosum, in which
situation it may extend forwards almost as far as the foramen of
Monro. This bending can be readily seen in the brain of the
rabbit or foetal pig. Hill, in discussing the question “whether
the fascia dentata is continuous with the nervus Lancisii?” comes
to the conclusion that there is no continuity between the two
structures, and that the fascia dentata is essentially a subcallosal
structure. His principal argument is that in the ox “he fails to
see any indication of the return of the fascia dentata to the under-
surface of the splenium in order that it may round the splenium
and sweep forward in the nervus Lancisii in the manner required
by the theory” [of Honegger and Zuckerkandlf], This view, that
the fascia dentata is essentially subcallosal, is not only directly
opposed to the facts of its development as described and figured
by Mihalkovics, Blumenau and Marchand, but also to the facts
elicited by a comparison with the Marsupial. The corpus callosum
occupies the same relative position to the Randbogen that the
superior limb of the hippocampal commissure does in Metatheria,
and hence the fascia dentata is essentially supracallosal.
If the suggestions concerning the stria; Lancisii advanced in
this paper are correct—and the whole weight of comparative
* “ The Hippocampus,” loc. cit.
t Loc. cit.


and developmental facts, as well. as the histological structure as
described by Ramon y Cajal, seems to favour the view—then the
cleft between the mesial stria and the callosal gyrus would be the
anterior extremity of the Bogenfurche. So that for practical
purposes the opinion of Schwalbe (which is essentially identical
with those of Hertwig, Schmidt and Mihalkovics) that “the
Bogenfurche in its upper part becomes the upper boundary of the
corpus callosum ” is for all practical purposes correct. Strictly
speaking, however, the callosal fissure must be regarded as a new
formation, because with the degenerate condition of the hippo-
campus is associated the practical absence of the “ Ammonsfurche,”
the callosal fissure being formed by the growth of the cortex above
the corpus callosum, causing it to bulge over the latter. So that
Professor Cunningham’s statement* must be regarded as strictly
correct “ that the Bogenfurche is transitory and is gradually
obliterated during the time the corpus callosum assumes shape.”
The facts brought forward in this paper afford a perfectly
rational explanation of the circuitous course taken by the fornix
fibres in the higher mammalia, without resorting to any such
theory of the rotation of the brain as that advanced by Hillf —a
pure speculation utterly opposed to all the, facts of development.
Prom an examination of the brain, of a higher mammal, there is
no apparent reason why the hippocampi should not be connected
like the rest of the temporal, lobe by the anterior commissure
fibres. But just as by a comparison with the condition met with
in the Prototheria, the reason for this is apparent, so also is the
meaning for the course of the anterior pillars of the fornix above
the foramen of Monro to reach the optic thalamus self-evident.
* “The Surface. Anatomy of. the Primate Cerebrum.” Cunningham
Memoirs, Roy. Irish Acad. No. yii. 1892..
t Plan of the Central Nervous System, 1885.


EXPLANATION OP FIGURES.
Fig. I.—Scheme of a sagittal section through the mesial wall of the cerebrum
of Perameles nasnta. The alveus fibres represented in a purely
diagrammatic manner.
Fig. 2. —Ditto. Platypus.
Fig. 3.—Ditto. Placental mammal.
Fig. 4.—Scheme of the hippocampus as seen in transverse section through
the region of its commissures. The cells, axis-cylinders and
collaterals shown as they are stained by Golgi’s method.
Fig. s.—Mesial view of “hippocampal region” in pig (foetal) to show the
S-shaped bend of the hippocampus; only the posterior part of
the corpus callosum represented.
References to figures.
ac., anterior commissure; a/., anterior pillar of fornix; alv., alveus;
c., “collateral” of an alveus fibre, ending in the stratum radiatum; cc.,
corpus callosum; d., molecular layer of the fascia dentata; df. , descending
alveus fibres (to form the anterior pillar of fornix and the precommissural
fibres); ext. olf, external olfactory root; /., fibres of alveus, represented
schematically; FD., Fascia dentata; fi., fimbria; g., pyramidal cells of the
nippocampus; hf., hippocampal fissure; hip., hippocampus; int. caps.,
internal capsule lying in the corpus striatum; 1., bundle of collaterals (so-
called superficial medullary lamina) derived from the pyramidal cells of the
hippocampus, also transverse sections of bundles of longitudinally running
fibres; M., foramen of Monro; p., Purkinje-like cell of the fascia dentata;
pi l ., dorsal limb of the hippocampal commissure; ps"., ventral limb of the
hippocampal commissure (the psalterium of placental mammals); pyr.,
pyramidal cell of the subiculum cornu Ammonis; rfi, rhinal fissure; s., pre-
commissural fibres of the fornix-system; sept., “septum pellucidum ”;
s. hip., subiculum cornu Ammonis; spl., splenium corporis callosi; spl l ,,
“ splenium of the hippocampal commissure.”






Abdruck ans:
Anatomisaher Anzeiger.
Centralblatt ffli die gesamte 'wissenschaftliche Anatomie.
Amtlicbes Organ der Anatomischen Gesellschaft
Herausgeg. von Pro£ K. von Bardeleben in Jena. Verlag von Gustav Fischer in Jena.
XI Band, Nr. 2, 1895.
Nachdruck verboten.
The Morphology of the Smell-Centre.
A Preliminary Note by Dr. G. Elxjot-Smith, University of Sydney,
N. S. W., Australia.
With 3 Figures.
The hippocampus and fornix system retain, in non-placental
Mammals, much of the simplicity of general arrangement, which they
present in the Sauropsida, whilst they exhibit at the same time quite
as high a histological differentiation as is met with in the Placentalia.
It is therefore possible to establish exact comparisons with the more
complicated structures of the latter.
The hippocampus (including the comu Ammonis, subiculum cornu
Ammonis and the fimbria) forms in a typical early Mammal the
dorsal margin of the whole extent of the fissura choroidea (see Fig. 1
in my paper in Anat. Anz. Band X. No. 15). The ventral margin of
the cerebrum in the same region (i. e. the part bordering on the
thalamencephalon) is formed by the pyriform lobe.
The prosencephalic part of the olfactory bulb is continued cau-
dally as a short peduncle, which almost immediately divides into two
parts a ventro - mesial, the tuberculum olfactorium, and a lateral,
the pyriform lobe.
The latter extends backwards along the basal aspect as far as the
posterior extremity of the hemisphere, where it overlaps the posterior
pole of the hippocampus. In front of the optic chiasma it is placed
4


upon the lateral aspect of the tuberculum olfactorium; but posteriorly
it forms the ventro-mesial border of the hemisphere and in this region
its grey matter is continuous (in Ornithorhynchus) with that of
the corpus striatum the bridge being apparently the homologue of
the nucleus amygdalae.
In all Mammals the caudal pole of the hemisphere bends down-
wards to form a descending cornu. This bending has a marked in-
fluence upon the shape of the hippocampus and pyriform lobe, so that
in Platypus, where the bending is very slight, the appearance of the
unbent pyriform and hippocampus is very paradoxical to the student
of the Eutherian brain. In all other Mammals the bending is much
more extensive and a well developed descending cornu, which curves
downwards and forwards exists. As a consequence, the posterior pole
of the hippocampus curves downwards and forwards and its commissure
is correspondingly curved (Fig. 1 ps. d, ps. v ). In Marsupials the
hippocampus forms a regulary arched structure, whose contour is indi-
cated externally by the hippocampal fissure ( h. fiss.). Concentric
with this are the fascia dentata (f. d.) and the fimbria (fi.) in their
whole extent. In the basal part
of the hemisphere the pyriform
lobe becomes bent up and crow-
ded into a smaller space. This
curving is felt all the more
since the posterior part of the
pyriform is larger than the an-
terior. As a consequence the
caudal bent part projects as
a large swelling the “nati-
F ig . I.
Fig. 1. Mesial view f cerebrum of Perameles nauta. X 2.
s lamina terminalis (septum lucidum); f.d fascia dentata; a. c anterior commissure;
ps hippocampal commissure.
form eminence” or “hippocampal lobule”. To this swelling most writers
confine the term “pyriform lobe” including the rest of the lobe in the
olfactory peduncle (Sir W. Turner). The inappropriateness of such a
distinction is clearly shown in Ornithorhynchus where, on ac-
count of the slight degree of bending, the pyriform lobe (as defined
here) consists of a uniform band (with the characteristic histological
features [Koelliker]), which extends right forward to the olfactory
peduncle (in the restricted sense employed here).
The tuberculum olfactorium (Koelliker) (Fig. 1 t. o.) is


a prominent (in lower Mammals) hemispherical grey mass on the mesial
side of the anterior part of the pyriform lobe and (in a surface view
of the base) immediately behind the olfactory bulb, with which it is
connected by the short olfactory peduncle. It is the “Rinde am Streifen-
hugelkopfe” of Gansee, the “espace quadrilatdre” of Beoca, the “post-
rhinal lobe” of Heeeick and the “orbital lobe” ofTuENEE (in Dasy
pus sexcinctus). It also roughly corresponds to Edingee’s “Riech-
feld”, to the “locus perforatus antiCus” of Vicq d’ Azte (in man) and
possibly to the “lobuS post-olfactorius” of Bueckhabdt inProtopterus.
It is covered superficially by a thin layer of medullated nerves
derived from the external olfactory radiation. Posteriorly it is con-
tinuous with the grey floor of the thalamencephalon and mesially with
the “precommissural area” (p. a.). Dorsally it is continuous with the
corpus striatum. Like the pyriform lobe, it varies in size with the
development of the olfactory bulb. Both areas probably reach their
maximum relative sizes for a Mammal in the small marsupial mole
Notoryctes typhlops, whose cerebrum I have described in the
Transactions of the Royal Society of South Australia.
' These three parts of the brain hippocampus, pyriform and
tuberculum olfactorium together with the olfactory bulb, precom-
missural area and “septum lucidum” constitute the smell centre. That
some of these parts subserve other senses than that of smell is prob-
able, but that they are all more intimately connected with the ol-
factory than with any other sense-apparatus is equally certain.
All the rest of the cortex may be distinguished as “pallium”,
following Tuenee’s nomenclature. It is an area of very variable ex-
tent, whose size does not appear to be directly related to that of any
sensory apparatus. Tuenee has shown that its relative size may be-
come greatly reduced in certain Mammals such as Erinaceus and
Talpa. In Perameles nasuta it is still further reduced, so that
it merely forms a small cap resting upon the rhinencephalon. In
Notoryctes it is still smaller. If this process of reduction were
continued any further, the result would be a brain practically with-
out “pallium”. In lowly macrosmatic Mammals e. g. Talpa, Pera-
meles, the pyriform lobe extends round the ventro-lateral border to
constitute a large part of the lateral aspect of the cerebrum. Among
the Marsupials as one examines the brains of Macropus, Dasyurus,
Phalangista, Koala, Perameles in turn, it will be found that
the hippocampus takes a greater share in the constitution of the median
hemisphere wall as the series is descended, until in Notoryctes
there is more hippocampus than median “pallium”.
4*


In Sauropsida (according to Spitzka, Brill and Edinger among
others) the hippocampus even crosses the dorso-mesial edge to form
part of the dorsum of the cerebrum. Thus as the animal scale is
descended the hippocampus and the pyriform approach one another
on the lateral aspect of the cerebrum. Brill even goes so far as to
infer that they meet. In other words the “pallium” virtually dis-
appears in the Sauropsida. According to Meter also no “pallium”
(in the sense used here) exists in Submammalia. Whether this be
true or no, this much is certain that the pyriform lobe is closely
related to the hippocampus in the whole of its extent among certain
lowly Vertebrates. In lower Mammals pallial tracts are “added”
(Edinger) to separate the pyriform from the hippocampus except at
their caudal extremities, where the former overlaps the latter. Now
as the caudal part of the hippocampus is all that is left in Eutheria
of the Metatherian hippocampus, it happens that the pyriform lobe
(hippocampal convolution) is adjacent to the hippocampus. But the
study of the non-placental Mammalian brain shows that this relation-
ship is not essential, but probably only fortuitous.
The tuberculum olfactorium and precommissural area (the portion
of the “septum lucidum”, of most writers, which lies in front of the
thickened lamina terminalis resemble one another in that they con-
tain small scattered polyhedral cells, with none of the typical cortical
arrangement. Into relation with these cells large numbers of medullated
fibres coming from the olfactory bulb terminate, in a similar manner
to which the fibres of the external olfactory radiation terminate in
relation to the cells of the pyriform lobe. The axis-cylinder processes
of these cells form an important share of Zuckerkandl’s Riechbiindel
(the precommissural fibres of Huxley), running upwards in the pre-
commissural area and septum lucidum to the hippocampus. These
fibres are intimately mixed with a number of fibres proceeding by the
same route from the hippocampus to the base of the brain. Arising
in the olfactory bulb, apparently in a similar manner to the other
“radiations”, there is a diffuse fibre tract, which, following the nomen-
clature of Zuckerkandl I have already distinguished as the “olfactory
bundle of the fascia dentata” (Anat. Anz., Bd. X, No. 16).
The olfactory peduncle, tuberculum olfactorium and pyriform lobe
are closely connected with the other hemisphere by means of the
anterior commissure. The precommissural area is connected with the
other side by a part of the hippocampal commissure, which Herrick
calls “corpus callosum”.
By means of a very strong fibre system situated in the substance
of the tuberculum olfactorium and in series with the! internal capsule


olfactory lobe (possibly the bulb?) is intimately .connected
with lower parts of the nervous system. Edinger suggested that
some of them enter the fillet. In Perameles the great majority
of them enter the pes pedunculi and are possibly reflex fibres. A few
however seem to end in the mammillary region of the floor of the
third ventricle.
All the various parts of the smell centre are connected with the
pallium by association bundles, but one is not justified in considering
the regions of the pallium so connected as parts of the olfactory centre.
Thus the tuberculum olfactorium is closely connected with the anterior
part of the pallium by a strong bundle. From its connections it is
apparently homologous with the anterior segment of the cingulum of
Beevor but quite distinct from the cingulum proper.
There seems to be no legitimate reason for including the callosal
gyrus in the limbic lobe, such as Broca, extending the views of Foville
and Gerdt, has done. The brain of the non-placental Mammal shows
that the callosal gyrus is not „limbic“; and there is no reason to
connect it with the olfactory sense, apart from the presence of associat-
ing fibres to the olfactory centre proper. The true limbic lobe (the
Sauropsidan cerebrum is probably purely „limbic“) consists in a typical
early (i. e. unbent) Mammalian cerebrum of a dorsal (hippocampal) arc
and a ventral (pyriform) arc united in front by the precommissural
area and the tuberculum olfactorium. In Eutheria, the anterior part
of the hippocampus becomes atrophied to form the supracallosal gyrus
of Zuckerkandl (induseum griseum and striae Lancisi). The original
ventral limb becomes bent and the bending of the hippocampus brings
its posterior part into a ventral position.
All such fornix as exists in the Metatherian brain, either arises
or ends in the hippocampus. Since the hippocampus is coextensive
with the lateral ventricle, its anterior extremity lies in front of the
lamina terminalis and the anterior fibres of the fornix system
proceed to their destination directly, so that their connections are
readily determined. The fibres which are leaving or about to
enter the hippocampus, cover its ventricular aspect forming the al-
veus. The alveus fibres from the descending limb of the hippo-
campus collect to form the fimbria (Fig. 1 fi) in Ornithorhyn-
chyus as there is practically no descending limb, there is practically
no fimbria which runs forwards to the ventral aspect of the “septum
lucidum” (s). The fibres from the anterior or dorsal part of the hippo-
campus collect at the dorsal margin of the “septum”. From each of
these parts of the fornix commissural fibres pass across in the thickened


lamina terminalis (s) forming a bilaminar (in Marsupials) hippocampal
commissure (Fig. 2 ps. d., ps. v.) l ). From each of these parts of the
fornix fibres proceed forwards in; the “sep-
tum” and precommissural area to constitute
the Eiechbiindel (Fig. 2 E). Other fibres
enter the anterior (dorsal) part of the fornix
and run backwards to all parts of the hippo-
campus. These fibres arise in the cells of
the precommissural area, tuberculum olfac-
torium, olfactory peduncle and bulb (bundle
of fascia dentata).
In -placental Mammals the anterior (dor-
sal) part of the hippocampus and the dor-
Fig. 2. Semischematic representation of the commissures in Fig. 1. X 5.
af columnae fornicis ;R Biechbundel lying in precommissural area (p. a).
sal limb of the fornix commissure (ps. d.) disappear; the corpus
callosum making its appearance in the place occupied by the latter,
the induseum griseum representing the former. A number of fibres
which proceed to the posterior (ventral) part of the hippocampus
in the “dorsal fornix” of Marsupials, maintain in Eutheria their
ancestral course and proceed to their destination (Fig. 3) above
the corpus callosum as the striae mediales Lancisi. Others run obli-
quely backwards and upwards in the septum as the fornix longus


of Foeel, possibly to pass through the corpus callosum (Fig. 3 x).
Their exact termination in Eutheria is a matter of dispute, but a
comparison with the Metatherian condition renders it highly probable
that they all go to the hippocampus. Some say that they join the
cingulum (Koelliker). If it be true that many fibres of the cingulum
end in the hippocampus (Bruce, Beeyor, Vogt among others), the
statement that many fibres of the fornix longus enter the cingulum is
quite comprehensible. In the light of one’s knowledge of the Marsu-
pial brain, it is hard to believe that fibres of the fornix longus enter
the gyrus fornicatus (Ganser, Koelliker), apart from the subiculum
cornu Ammonis. Meyer and Honegger deny that fornix fibres pierce
the corpus callosum.
In this connection the observation of Vogt that some fibres of
the fornix longus join the stria medialis Lancisi is very important
and what one would expect (Fig 3 x), if my hypothesis be accepted.
Sydney N. S. W., April 1895.
Note. Since this paper was written, I find from the Arch. ital.
de Biologie that [at the Rome Congress Professor Debieeee from
other consideration advanced the same view regarding the limbic lobe
which is independently suggested here. May 15.




Abdrnck aus:
Anatomisclier Anzeiger.
Centralblatt fdr die gesamte wissenschaftliche Anatomie.
Amtliches, Organ der Anatomischen Gesellschaft.
Heraosgeg. ron Profl K. von Bardeleben in Jena Verlag von Gustav Fischer in Jena.
XL Band, Nr. 3, 1896.
Nachdruck Teroten.
Notes upon the Morphology of the Cerebrum and its Commissures
in the Vertebrate Series.
By Dr. G. ELLIOT SMITH,
University of Sydney.
So much has been written concerning the cerebral commissures by
anatomists, who have attempted to settle the vexed questions of homo-
logy by introducing arbitrary definitions of a corpus callosum, that
the whole subject is in a very confused state. In discussing the mor-
phology of the commissures in lower Vertebrates, comparisons with
the Eutherian cerebrum must be instituted very cautiously, for the
latter connot be otherwise regarded by the comparative anatomist than
as a monstrosity. In a brood survey of the cerebrum in Vertebrata,
Ornithorhynchus forms at once the most natural and most reli-
able starting point, exhibiting, as it does, the simplicity of general
arrangement, which characterises the Sauropsida, and at the same time,
a degree of histological differentiation found only in Mammals.


That part of the lamina terminalis, which Bueckhardt x ) has
distinguished as the “lamina infraneuroporica”, contains in the Mono-
tremata, Sauropsida and higher Ichthyopsida, two simple commissural
bands, which, considering the widely different arrangement and appear-
ance of the connected parts in this large series of animals, present
remarkably uniform features. The ventral band is the anterior com-
missure the cerebral commissure par excellence and is distin-
guished by the fact that it always passes below the lateral ventricle.
In Ornithorhynchus the dorsal commissure connects the hippo-
campi majores, fasciae dentalae, and precommissural areae 2 ) of the
two hemispheres and may be appropriately distinguished as the fornix-
commissure. In Reptiles the dorsal commissure connects parts of the
cerebrum, which, from their histological features and developmental
history, are readily recognised as the homologues of the structures
connected by the upper commissure in the Monotreme. There is
therefore, every reason for calling the dorsal commissure in Reptiles
the fornix-commissure. The hippocampus in the latter, in addition to
forming (with the precommissural area and fascia dentata) the greater
part of the mesial surface, also extends on to the dorsal aspect of
the cerebrum, as Edinger s ) and Meyer 4 ) among others, have shown.
It is not confined to the posterior part of the hemisphere as Herrick
believes 6 ). The fornix commissure in Reptiles is therefore placed
above the lateral ventricle. In the vertebrate series this commissure
is essentially supraventricular, and its various modifications in
lower Vertebrates has been clearly traced by Osborn 6 ) under the
name of corpus callosum. Among Amphibia, in spite of many apparent
differences, the same essential features are presented by the two com-
missural bands. The dorsal supraventricular commissure connects two
regions, which must be homologised with the hippocampus and pre-
commissural area. The latter —the “intraventricular lobe” of Herrick,
the “callosal eminence” of Gage 7) —is a very extensive area, with a
relatively very large commissural tract. The hippocampus is a large
dorsal grey mass of very simple histological structure, but about
whose homology there can be no question. The varying relation of
1) Anat. Anz., Bd. IX, p. 152.
2) Anat. Anz,, Bd. X, No. 15, p. 470.
3) Anat. Anz., Bd. VIII, No, 10, 11.
4) Zeitschr, f, wiss. Zoologie, Bd. LV.
5) Journal of Comp. Neurology, Yol. 111.
6) Morph. Jahrb., Bd. XII.
7) quoted by Fish, Journal of Morphology, Vol, X, Part 1.


the dorsal commissure to the third ventricle and foramen of Monro
in different Amphibians may appear to differ essentially from the
typical arrangement seen in the Reptiles: but the difference in appear-
ance is merely the result of the varying development of the lamina
infraneuroporica and in no way interferes with the essential question.
In these fishes which lack a cortex, of course there is no dorsal
commissure. The ventral or anterior commissure, moreover, in these
animals becomes separated into a number of strands “the com-
missura interlobularis” —in the lamina terminalis. Since, according
to Edinger, a hippocampus appears on the dorsal aspect of the
Selachian cerebrum, one might expect to find a fornix-commissure
even among fishes. In birds the olfactory bulb becomes considerably
reduced in size and consequently the hippocampus, which forms part
of the olfactory centre, is correspondingly small. This accounts for
the small size of the dorsal (fornix) commissure, which, here as in
all other Vertebrates, connects the mesial surface (hippocampus) and
precommissural area (intraventricular lobe). When the olfactory bulb
is large, the dorsal commissure [the corpus callosum of Parker in
Apteryx 1 ] is correspondingly increased in size.
In Mammals the dorsal commissure elongates horizontally with
the increased length of the hippocampus; and when the posterior
extremity of the hemisphere (including the hippocampus) bends down-
wards the fornix commissure takes a corresponding bend 2 ).
The anterior or ventral commissure connects the olfactory bulbs
(the peduncles and prosencephalic part) and the corpora striata in all
Vertebrates. The tubercula olfactoria and pyriform lobes are also
connected by the same band, in all animals possessing these areas.
The whole of the first appearing “pallium” (in the Monotremata and
Marsupialia) is connected by the anterior commissure; but the extreme
development of this part of the brain in the placental Mammal appears
to demand a shorter connecting path for its dorsal regions than the
infraventricular commissure affords. Fibres, serially homologous with
the latter, therefore take a supraventricular course as a corpus
callosum. These fibres probably belong morphologically to the lamina
infraneuroporica and supersede the anterior part of the fornix com-
missure, whose position they usurp. The corresponding region of the
hippocampus disappears and the supracallosal gyrus of Zuckerkandl
1) Phil. Trans. Roy. Society, 1891.
2) Proceedings Linnean Soo. N. 8. W,, Yol. IX (2. Series), Part 4,
p. 635.


is all that remains of this region in the Eutherian brain. All that
remains of the corresponding part of the fornix is the striae Lancisii.
The fornix commissure forms -therefore, in the brain of the placental
Mammal, the morphological posterior extremity (which from bending
of the hemisphere becomes ventral the psalterium) of the great
supraventricular commissure. The greater part of the olfactory centre
of higher Mammals thus comes, by accident, as it were, to be placed
posteriorly. But it serves no useful purpose morphologically, nor is
it strictly correct, to compare the whole hemisphere of Petromyzon
with the posterior part of the higher brain, asSTUDNiCKA does x ), on
the ground that the former is entirely olfactory.
In discussing the morphology of the cerebral hemisphere there
are two fixed points which may be recognised in all Vertebrates. The
situation of the anterior commissure in the lamina infraneuroporica is
one of these. The relation of the fornix commissure to this point
varies. Thus in many Amphibia, most Sauropsida and the early stages
of the Mammal, commissure in question is immediately dorsal to the
anterior commissure and the two often appear in median sagittal
section to form one band. As development proceeds in the Mammal
the two commissures become separated by a grey mass formed from
the growing lamina infraneuroporica. This is the Anlage of the sep-
tum pellucidum. Since the fornix-commissure [the corpus callosum of
Bdeckhardt 2 ] is situated in the lamina infraneuroporica, it must be
placed at first on the ventral aspect of the recessus neuroporicus.
Thus in the foetal Platypus the fornix fibres descend upon the lateral
aspect of the little diverticulum, to cross below it. But as the lamina
increases it extends upwards and the fornix commissure grows back-
wards above the recessus neuroporicus (lobus olfactorius impar), so
that it is quite conceivable that the latter may come to occupy the
situation of the recessus triangularis of Schwalbe (the “aulic recess”
of Wilder) as Kupfper holds s ), although the fornix commissure and
probably the corpus callosum are both constituents of the lamina infra-
neuroporica, and therefore morphologically ventral to the recessus
neuroporicus. There is certainly no ground for comparing the latter,
recess with the recessus splenialis ventriculi septi pellucidi, as Burck-
hardt has done. Such a comparison is opposed to all the facts of
the development of the corpus callosum. This further statement that
1) Anat. Adz., Bd. X, No. 3. 4,
2) Morphologische Arbeiten, Bd. IY.
3) Studien zur vergleichenden Entwickelungsgeschichte des Kopfes


“der Recessus neuroporicus unmittelbar hinter den Columnae fornicis
liegen mußte, so daC die Fornices dann ebenfalls noch zur Lamina
infraneuroporica gehorten” appears a much more rational explanation
of the state of affairs.
That portion of the prosencephalon to which the olfactory ganglion
js applied to form the bulbus olfactorii is another easily recognisable
landmark in the cerebrum of any Vertebrate. Lying between the mesial
portion of the olfactory bulb and the situation of the anterior com-
missure is a grey mass, equally easy to recognise in the Amphibian,
the Sauropsidan or in certain lowly Mammals. If the mesial wall of
the olfactory bulb be traced backwards in a cerebrum (5 mm long)
of a foetal Platypus, it will be found to be directly continuous with
the mesial hemisphere wall, which shows a clear histological differen-
tiation into two horizontal parts. The larger inferior part is the
“precommissural area”, a large prominent grey mass, very unlike the
corresponding region in the adult, but very like that of certain Rep-
tiles. Posteriorly it is directly continuous with the lamina infraneuro-
porica, which it closely resembles histologically, morphologically and
probably functionally in the adult. Dorsally it is directly continuous
with the second horizontal band, which forms a thinner narrower part
of the mesial hemisphere wall, which passes backwards above the
foramen of Moneo and fissura choroidea. This band is the anterior
extremity of the hippocampus, the part pordering on the precommis-
sural area being the anlage of the fascia dentata. Behind the lamina
terminalis, the fascia dentata forms the dorsal border of the fissura
choroidea. This anterior extremity of the hippocampus, which is
arranged around a shallow Bogenfurche, does not bend down to the
base of the brain, but becomes directly continuous with the
olfactory bulb almost immediately behind the place where the
olfactory ganglion ceases. From this it is evident that the fissura
prima of His (which divides the lobus olfactorii into two lobules)
cannot be strictly considered part of the Bogenfurche. The latter
(the Ammonsfurche of Mihalkovics) has a definite morphological
significance corresponding exactly in the non-placental Mammal to
that area, which is to become the hippocampus. As the pallium in-
creases in extent in the development of the Mammalian brain, it
appears to tend to push the hippocampus downwards. Where the
latter forms the margin of the hemisphere i. e. in the greater part of
its extent, it becomes folded in the complex manner which characterises
this part of the Mammalian brain, to overcome this tendency. The
rapid increase in the fascia dentata, which is the marginal part, has


an important influence in this folding process. In the absence of the
modifying effect of an extending pallium in Sauropsida, the complicated
inrolling of the hippocampus does not take place. In Mammals with
very small pallium e. g. Notor y c t e s the folding is much simpler
than in animals a little higher in the scale. The anterior extremity
of the Monotreme (or Marsupial) hippocampus way before the growing
pallium and bends downwards, encroaching upon the precommissural
area, but remains practically unfolded, after the manner of the Reptile-
brain.
The clear histological differentiation permits one to speak with
certainty upon these relationships in the Monotreme and by comparison
also in the Reptile, the exact interpretation of the anterior part of
whose mesial cerebral wall has proved such a quaestio vexata.
Sydney, June 16.


Abdrnck am:
Anatomisclier Anzeiger.
Centralblatt fiir die gesamte wissenschaftliche Anatomie.
Amtliches Organ der Anatomised) en Gesellschaft
Heransgeg. von Prof. K. von Bardeleben in Jena. Verlag von Gustav Fischer
XL Band, Nr. 6, 1895.
Nachdruck verboten.
JACOBSON'S Organ and the Olfactory Bulb in Ornithorhynchus.
By Dr. G. ELLIOT SMITH,
University of Sydney.
With 6 Figures.
The only observers, who have yet described these parts of the
anatomy of Platypus, evidently had the misfortune to work with
.mutilated material, so that the value of their accounts is somewhat
discounted.
Thus, in his researches upon the organ of Jacobson, Professor
Symington ') was unfortunate enough to get a specimen in which all
the highly specialised neuro-epithelium had become detached. This
is evident both from his description and figures; and he himself re-
marks that such may possibly have occurred. But for this important
1) Proceedings of the Zoological Society of London, 1891, p. 579.


deficiency, his admirable account of the organ agrees exactly with the
condition found in my specimens.
From Dr. A. Hill’s account of the brain one would judge that
his material must have been in anything but a good state of preser-
vation. His whole account is highly inaccurate and misleading. For
instance, speaking of the olfactory bulb, he says: “it is absolutely free
from the cerebral hemisphere, the rounded neck of the crus . . .
being crossed by, the large anterior cerebral artery. . . . The bulb is
cupped on its under surface” 1 ). It is hard to understand how he
has distorted the facts to fit in with this description, as every state-
ment is absolutely erroneous. Neither is the bulb free from the hemi-
sphere, nor is the cupping on the inferior, but on the upper part of
the lateral surface.
[The “anterior cerebral artery” of Hill is a cerebral vein, which
(in the absence of a superior longitudinal sinus) is very large and
constitutes the main efferent channel for the blood of the cranial
cavity.]
Professor Wilson very generously placed at my disposal a com-
plete series of coronal sections of the head of a foetal Platypus 2 ),
the comparison of which with the adult proved very instructive. In
the foetus the organ of Jacobson forms a sac 1,35 mm long. In
general appearance it presents a considerable resemblance to the
adult condition of the organ in Tropidonotus natrix, described
by Dr. J. Beard 3 ). In transverse section it presents a roughly cres-
centic outline (Fig. 1 J), the outer wall (Fig. 2 I), which is composed
of low cubical epithelium, being bulged in by a slight projection of
the cartilage of Jacobson (Fig. 1 t).
This slight projection is the rudiment of the large turbinate fold
(Fig. 3 t) found in the adult and which Symington has accurately de-
scribed. Exactly midway between its anterior and posterior extremities
the sac communicates ( d) with the naso-palatine canal of Stenson (Sd).
The mesial wall (Fig. 2m) of the sac differs markedly from the outer
wall (I). It consists of a dense mass of cells with deeply stained
nuclei. Many of these cells have a distinctly columnar form and
many of them are to be recognised as neuroblasts connected with
nerve fibres in the deeper layer. In the adult this mesial wall
1) Philosophical Transactions, 1893, B p. 374.
2) The external measurements of this foetus have been given in
detail in the Proc. Linn. Society of New South Wales, Yol. IX, 2od Series,
p. 682. The cerebrum measures 5,15 mm in length.
3) Zoologische Jahrbiicher, Bd. 3, Anat. und Ontogenie, p. 769,


Fig. 1. Coronal section showing the organ of JACOVSON ( J ) in foetal Platypus. X 12.
N. nasal cavity; Sd STENSON'S duct.
Fig. 2. The epithelial structures from Jacobson’s organ from the right side of
Fig. 1. Zeiss D. d. duct of JACOBSON'S organ; m. mesial wall; l. lateral wall.
Fig. 3. Transverse section showing shape of JACOBSON'S organ in adult Platypus.
X 12. t. turbinate process; m. mesial wall.
(Fig. 3 m) presents a structure closely resembling that described and
figured by Dr. Klein j ) in the corresponding part of the organ in the
dog. Its epithelium is more than twice as deep as the ciliated epi-
thelium, which covers the turbinate ridge (t), and which Symington
has described and figured. It appears to be destributed over a relati-
vely much wider area than in the dog and the neuro-epithelial cells are
very numerous. This is significant in view of the large mass of nerve
fibres proceeding from this region. As I had no intention of examining
the organ of Jacobson at the time fresh material was available,
no GoLQi-preparations were made; but the researches of von Beunn 2 ),
von Lenhossek 3 ) and Ram6n y Cajal 4 ) leave no doubt as to the
relations of neuro-epithelium and nerve fibres. The latter form a
very thick mass lying between the mesial wall of the organ and the
nasal septum, and separated from the epithelium by a thin layer of
1) Quarterly Journal of Microscopical Science, 1882.
2) Arch. f. mikr. Anat., Bd, 39.
3) Anatomischer Anzeiger, 1892, No. 19 u. 20.
4) Arch. f. Anat. und Physiologie, 1893, Heft 6.
u*


loose areolar tissue. The enormous development of this nerve layer
may be seen from Symington’s Fig. 1 (loc. cit.). Inside the posterior
part of the capsule of the organ a compact rounded bundle is formed
from these nerves. Escaping from under cover of the dorsal lip of
the cartilaginous capsule, the bundle turns upwards and backwards in
the submucosa on the lateral aspect of the septum nasi. Reaching
the roof it bends backwards and, just in front of the cranium, is
joined by the olfactory nerves proper, which run a much shorter
course. Together they form a rounded bundle, in which however the
nerves from Jacobson’s organ are easily distinguished (in the foetus)
as a rounded strand on the dorsal and lateral aspect of the olfactory
nerves proper.
The cephalic pole of each cerebral hemisphere early becomes
distinguished in the foetal Platypus as the olfactory bulb by the
attachment of the olfactory neural ganglion to it. This ganglion con-
Fig. 4. Transverse section of ol-
factory bulb of foetal Platypus. X 30.
G. olf. olfactory ganglion; G. J. “JACOB-
SON'S” ganglion; med, medullary layer;
pros, prosencephalon.
sists of two quite distinct parts, which are represented in transverse
section in Fig. 4. Covering the whole of the mesial side and extend-
ing on to the dorsal and ventral aspect there is a large ganglionic
mass ( G. olf.), which is connected anteriorly with the olfactory nerves
proper. Situated on the lateral aspect of the prosencephalic part of
the organ (pros.) there is a smaller ganglionic mass ( G. J,), which
is associated with the nerves proceeding from Jacobson’s organ. Each
ganglionic mass is separated from the prosencephalon by a clear nerve
layer ( med .), which is the source of the olfactory radiations. Hitherto
doubts have been expressed as to what parts of the adult bulb are
developed from the two elements ganglionic and prosencephalic
of the foetal organ. The examination of the condition in the foetal
Platypus and comparison with that of highly macrosmatic brains, such
as that of Perameles, clearly indicates the medullary layer in the
bulb (which is immediately connected with the internal and external


olfactory radiations) as the superficial medullary layer of the pros-
encephalon and therefore the line of demarcation between the two parts.
It is evident from this that the prosencephalic part forms an altogether
subordinate largely ependymal part of the bulb in the adult, the
whole of the mitral-cells and the glomerular layer being ganglionic. From
the few neuroblasts, which develop in the prosencephalic part, root
fibres of the pars olfactoria of the anterior commissure arise. It is
to be noted however that the endings of the same series of commis-
sural fibres extend into the ganglionic portion of the bulb.
In the adult Platypus the olfactory bulb forms a small oval
mass into whose anterior pole the rounded bundle of olfactory nerves
is inserted. But for its relatively larger size, it is not at all unlike
the corresponding region in the duck. This resemblance however is
merely superficial. In this disposition of the olfactory nerves and
absence of a cribriform plate Ornithorhynchus differs from all
other Mammals and resembles most Submammalia*). Wiedersheim 2 )
wrongly includes Echidna in this generalisation. The bulb of Platy-
pus is completely invaginated from the upper part of its lateral
and anterior aspects, so that it forms a very deep and complete
cup, whose opening is directed upwards and outwards (Olf. c. Figs. 5
and 6). The arrangement of the olfactory ganglion in the foetus
(Fig. 4), in which the cupping has not commenced,- clearly moulds
the prosencephalic part of the bulb, so that the olfactory ventricle
becomes modified into a cupshaped slit; but is not wholly oblitera-
Pig. 5. Transverse section, olfactory bulb, adult Platypus. X 4. men meninges;
Olf. c. olfactory cup; v. ventricle; glom. glomerular layer.
Fig. 6. Sagittal section through bulb. X 3. Adult Platypus. Olf. c. olfactory
cup; v. ventricle; p. pallium; g. v. c. great cerebral vein; o. r. olfactory radiation.
1) According to Owen Apteryx and Dinornis have a cribriform
plate.
2) Grundriss der vergleiohenden Anatomic der Wirbeltiere.


ted, as Hill has inaccurately stated. As a result of this peculiar
modification a deep olfactory cup is formed containing, apparently,
the ganglion of Jacobson’s organ; the ganglionic structures placed
upon the actual surface of the lobe being related to the olfactory
nerves proper. In the natural condition of parts the cup is not very
evident because it is almost completely filled with the mass of enter-
ing nerves and blood vessels and is bridged over by a meningeal fold
(Fig. 5 men.).
Professor C. J. Heeeick describes *) under the name of “mesal
olfactory fossa” a . deep depression upon the mesial aspect of the
olfactory tuber of certain Ophidia (Tropidonotus, Coluber and
Eutaenia) and says that the structure so described is enormously
bigger in Serpents than in the Alligator and Opossum. He says that
“the localised development of pero on the ventral aspect is associated
with the isolated course of the highly developed tract of Jacobson’s
organ”. Professor Rabl-R(Jckhaed describes a similar fossa in
Python molurus 2 ).
The olfactory cup in the Monotreme, although on the dorsal and
lateral aspects of the bulb, is apparently comparable to the “mesal
olfactory fossa” of the Reptile, since it appears to be definitely asso-
ciated with the development of Jacobson’s organ. The cup in Platypus
is much deeper and more marked than in the Black Snake, where
Heekick describes it as enormous. This fact is interesting when one
remembers that the organ of Jacobson reaches its highest develop-
ment in the Monotreme. In spite of the high development of Jacob-
son’s organ in Marsupials, there is no appreciable cupping in many.
In Perameles a faint mesial depression is to be distinguished,
which apparently corresponds to Heekick’s “mesal fossa” in Did e 1 -
phys. In Echidna, although I have not examined fresh material,
it is evident that the olfactory bulb differs markedly from that of the
other Prototherian, although it has a highly developed organ of Jacob-
son. From these considerations, it would seem that the morphology
of the bulb of Platypus is largely determined by phylogenetic factors.
Symington *) has applied Tuenee’s name “microsmatic” 4 ) to
Platypus, and on the strength of this statement Wiedeesheim 5 )
applies the term to both Monotremes, including Echidna, whose
1) Journal of Comparative Neurology, Vol 3, p. 78.
2) Zeitschr. f. wiss. ZooL, Bd, 58, Hft. 4.
3) 100. cit.
4) Journal of Anatomy and Physiology, Y. 25,
5) 100. cit.


bulb Owen 1 ) describes as enormous. Although ornithorhynchus
has, compared with Marsupials, a small olfactory apparatus, still it
would be distinctly misleading to call it microsmatic. Such a use of
the term would be entirely opposed to Sir William Turnee’s idea,
when he introduced the term. It would introduce quite unnecessary
confusion to classify the Monotreme (whose smell organs are so well
developed as to afford a type for the whole vertebrate series) with
those Primata and Cetacea whose olfactory apparatus is distinctly
atrophic and therefore atypical. Quite apart from such considerations,
the relative size and development of the olfactory bulb gives the
Prototheria a claim to the term “macrosmatic”, equal to that of the
Kangaroo or Dog.
A study of the relations of the part of the olfactory bulb asso-
ciated with Jacobson’s organ with the methods of Golgi and Weigert
does not reveal any arrangement different from the rest of the bulb.
Thus from the mitral cells associated by glomeruli with Jacobson’s
olfactory nerves, axis cylinder processes arise which can be readily
traced to the external olfactory radiation to terminate in the pyriform
lobe. Although, from the peculiar conformation of the “cup”, fibres
could not be traced to the internal radiation, appearances seem to
point to the fact that the region is also connected with the hippo-
campus. It would appear therefore that in all its connections with
the brain the organ of Jacobson exactly resembles the olfactory appa-
ratus proper and like the latter has its centres in the pyriform lobe
and probably also in the hippocampus.
Sydney, New South Wales, June 26, 1895.
1) Comparative Anatomy.




ON THE MYOLOGY OF NOTORYCTES TYPHLOPS,
WITH COMPARATIVE NOTES.
By J. T. WILSON, M.B., Edin.,
Professor of Anatomy,
University of Sydney, X.S.W.
Plates 11. to XV.
, Part I.
Out of the very limited number of specimens of this interesting
marsupial which had come into his possession Dr. E. C. Stirling
very kindly placed one at my disposal for the purpose of investi-
gating its myology. The specimen thus obtained measured
115 mm. from the tip of the snout to the tip of the tail, the
measurement being taken along the slight curve of the back. It
was of the female sex. The abdominal viscera had been removed
through an incision in the anterior abdominal wall.
Dr. Stirling was also good enough to afford me an opportunity
of studying the partially disarticulated skeleton (imperfect) of
another specimen, and this along with his own excellent descrip-
tions and figures enabled me to acquire the necessary familiarity
with the osseous system.
More recently I have been greatly indebted to Professor
Baldwin Spencer, of the University of Melbourne, for permission
to examine the greater part of the muscular system of another
(male) specimen, a permission generously granted at the kind
suggestion of my colleague, Professor ~W. A. Has well.
More recently still Professor Spencer has placed another
specimen at my disposal for the purpose of following out' the
peripheral nerves more satisfactorily than has been possible in the
single complete specimen from which the following descriptions
and figures have been chiefly drawn. The results of such a
further examination I hope to embody in a future contribution.
I take this opportunity of thanking Mr. J. J. Pletcher for his
kindness in giving me access to a number of papers and specimens
in his possession, and Dr. J. Lorrain Smith, of Cambridge, for
specimens kindly procured for me in England.
I also wish to express my indebtedness to Mr. G. H. Barrow, .
lately of the Australian Museum, Sydney, for the care and
intelligence with which he has executed the drawings from which
this paper is illustrated. The drawing to an accurately enlarged
scale of dissections, which were often so minute as to require the
constant aid of a lens, was by no means an easy task.
Incidentally, I may mention that I carefully examined the
marsupium of my specimen. Its hinder limit was 8 mm. in front


of the cloacal aperture. Its interior was lined with hair opposite
the vestibule of the pouch, but throughout the anteriorly directed
fundus hairs were very sparsely distributed.
The fundus possessed slight lateral recesses, within which the
sparse hairs were larger. The position and appearance of the
mammae on the dorsal wall of the pouch opposite the entrances to
the lateral recesses corresponded accurately with those recorded
in Dr. Stirling’s later paper in the Transactions of this Society of
date October 6th, 1891.*
In view of the numerous rather anomalous features in the
organisation of Notoryetes, and the doubts which have occasion*
ally been expressed as to its exact systematic position and affini-
ties, I have thought it advisable while recording the arrangements
of its muscles to aim at providing for a morphological comparison
between these muscles and those of other forms. This I have
striven to do largely by citation from the abundant records of
mammalian myology, supplemented in certain cases, more par-
ticularly in Monotremes and some Marsupials, by the results of
my own examinations. Naturally, the records of the compara-
tive myology of the Marsupialia have demanded the most careful
scrutiny. The other orders to whose myology I have devoted
some attention are the Monotremata, Edentata , Inseetivora,
Bodentia, and Carnivora.
I must, however, disclaim any idea of making an attempt at
giving anything like a complete acconnt of the muscular
morphology, either of these orders themselves or of individual
members of them. With this important reservation, the notes
may yet serve a useful purpose in illustrating the comparative
anatomy of the muscles of Notoryetes, especially as I have paid
more particular attention' to those types in the various orders
(a) whose functional organisation is presumably not widely dis-
similar from that of Notoryetes — e.g., Talpa europea — (b) which
offer certain remarkable points of structural resemblance— e.g.,
Chlamydophorus.
I greatly regret that I have had no opportunity of dissecting a
specimen of that interesting insectivore the Cape Golden Mole
( Chrysochloris), which would come under both of the above
categories. My knowledge of the muscular anatomy of this
animal has accordingly been derived from Leche’s notes in
Bronn’s “ Klassen und Ordnungen” (Sechster Band Abt. V.),
which appear to have been derived from Dobson’s “ Monograph
of the Inseetivora,” Pts. I. and 11., to which I have been unable
to refer.
In studying the myology of a specially modified member of a
* lv., page 286.


group, the attempt to ascertain the homologies of its muscles to
those of other forms may be rendered difficult through a con-
fusion between muscular segmentation dependent upon mere
functional modification of the species and that more fundamental
segmentation into muscle-fibre-groups which, while not indepen-
dent of function, is yet the expression of definite morphological
type.
In the section of work now presented I have not found this
difficulty to offer any insuperable obstacle to a quite intelligible
reading of the muscular arrangements in Notoryctes. In spite of
its specialised structure, indeed, the muscular organisation of
this animal bears very evident traces of its affinity to other more
or less allied forms; and although there can be no doubt that the
marsupial type is the prevalent one, there are features, for a
structural parallel to which one must go outside the limits of the
Marmpialia. And I cannot avoid the conclusion that the
structural resemblances in particular to certain members of the
order Edentata are not all to be explained as merely the coinci-
dences of somewhat similar functional modification’s, but are the
enduring evidences of a real if distant morphological kinship.
Neither in Talpa nor, apparently, in Chrysochloris do we find
any such striking similarities to Notoryctes as we do, for example,
in Chlamydophorus ; and this in spite of the fact that the habit
of life of the first-named animals is probably much.more like
that of Notoryctes than is that of Chlamydophorus. So far as I
can judge from my very limited-acquaintance with the myology
of Chrysochloris , the muscles of the anterior limb of that animal
are far less like those of Notoryctes than at least a superficial
comparison of the skeletons would lead one to expect.
M. pannieidus.
The subcutaneous sheet of the pannieidus carnosus on the
ventrolateral aspect of the body consists mainly of three systems
of fibres— (a) a platysma system ventrad of the neck and chest,
(h) a humeral system passing transversely and obliquely outwards
on the ventral aspect of the thorax and abdomen to the region of
the axilla (fig. 1, p. c.), and (c) a system of longitudinal and
oblique fibres crossing backwards from amongst the other abdom-
inal fibres to the region of the marsupium which some surround,
whilst others enter and end in the folds of skin forming the
margin of the opening of the pouch (sphincter marsupii). This
system of longitudinal fibres is lost posteriorly in the region of
the cloacal aperture and root of the tail, whilst its more lateral
portion is continued oyer the front of the inguinal and femoral
regions (abdominis femoralis). On the dorsal aspect of the


head and neck the panniculus is inseparable from or replaced by
the somewhat extensive cervico-auricularis described below.
A well-marked “ ischiotergal ” slip is attached posteriorly to
the outer aspect of the ischium near its tuberosity, and passes
forwards to be inserted into the skin of the back in the lumbar
region. I find no record of such a specialised slip in any other
marsupial, nor is it present as such in the monotremes. It is
absent in Talpa. I have named it “ ischiotergal ” after an appar-
enly similar slip described by Macalister* in Tatusia.
The comparatively meagre development of the panniculus stratum in
Notoryctes is worthy of remark. In its degree of development and
differentiation it is slight, slighter than is usual amongst marsupials,
and far inferior to the corresponding stratum in monotremes and
insectivores, in which an extensive development of the sheet is found,
e.g., in Oniithorliynchus or in Talpa or Chrysochloris —animals which are
just as destitute of special dermal movable structures.
Some of the Edentata, e.g., most Armadilloes, have well-developed
skin muscles,but in others, and especially in Chlamydophorus, the sheet
is only feebly developed, and not well differentiated.
M. cervico-auricularis (figs. 1,4, and 5 r.a.) is a well marked
sheet of muscle, extending from the mesio-dorsal line of the head
and neck outwards to the distal end of the long tubular auditory
meatus, into the dorsal aspect of which it is inserted, its anterior
fibres mingling with those of the special attrahens aurem (figs. 2
and 3q). Its anterior border reaches the parietal and frontal
regions, whence its fibres are directed backwards and outwards,
converging to the meatus. Anteriorly it is closely related to the
integument of the scalp, while its transverse posterior border
behind the occiput is free.
It overlaps the whole of the cleido-trapezius and delto-trapezius
elements of the subjacent sheet. Many of its fibres have an
almost antero-posterior direction, and a decussation of these with
the transverse fibres is observable.
M. attrahens aurem seu mandibulo-auricularis, a narrow, rib-
bon-like muscle (figs. 2 and 'ia.a.), arising from the lateral as-
pect of the ascending ramus of the mandible, just behind the
insertion of the temporal muscle, by a narrow tendinous origin,
which is overlapped by the hinder border of the masseter. Its
fibres are directed outwards and dorsally, parallel with, and close
in front of, the tubular auditory meatus, to the distal extremity
of which some of its fibres are inserted, the remainder decussating
and mingling with the fibres of the cervico-auricularis.
Cervico-auricularis seems to be the representative of conjoint attol-
lens and retrahens aurem muscles, at least, and part of it corresponds
to the auriculo-occipitalis of Ruge.
* xxvii., page 227.


Not unlikely, it also represents other cervical and cephalic portions
of the panniculus, i.e., elements of the “ subcutaneus colli ” layer of
the “superficial brachio-cephalic stratum ” of Humphry*.
In Myrmecohius Lechef describes two layers of auriculo-occipitalis
fibres, of which the deeper were directed forwards from the ligamentum
nuchae towards the anterior basal part of the ear, and partly to the
upper orbital border, while the more superficial fibres passed directly
outwards from the mid-occipital line to unite with the other fibres in
the auricle.
In 'Phascogale the same observer describes an auriculo-occipitalis
consisting of several slips, of which the anterior passed forwards into
the frontal region beneath the auricularis superior, while three slips
passed transversely outwards to the auricle.
It may be that the hinder part of the M. auricularis superior of this
animait is represented by part of the anterior fibres of the cervico-
auricularis ot Notoryctes.
Attrahens fmandibulo - auricularis) present in both the above
animals. §
In Koala|| Macalister found a thin and wide attollens and a strong
bilaminar retrahens, which came from the occipital protuberance. He
also found two attrahens slips, neither of which, however, corresponds
to the mandibulo-auricularis of Notoryctes.
In Ornithorhynchus the ear muscles are not fully differentiated from
the cephalic prolongation of the panniculus.lT
In Ghlamydophorus Macalister** found the ear muscles exceedingly
feeble, the attollens and retrahens being hardly represented, while in
Tatusia the same author found both well developed. The attrahens in
the former animal was'also feebly developed, and arose from the
zygomatic arch.
Humphry found in Orycteropus ft a large retrahens, continuous with
an attollens, all the fibres converging to the ear, and an attrahens
arising by three origins, of which the first exactly corresponds to the
origin from the mandible in Notoryctes.
Auricular muscles in the Insectivora are well developed in accord-
ance with the great specialisation of the subcutaneous muscles
generally. Both in Chrysochloris and the TalpidaeXt they include occi-
pito-cuticularis and cervico-auricularis sheets, both of which are in-
serted into the auricle; and a cervico-cuticularis may also in part
CGymnura) possess a similar attachment.
That muscular system or stratum of fibres which in man is
represented by the trapezius and sterno-cleido-mastoid muscles,
with occasional intermediate slips, consists, according to Macalis-
ter, §§ of the following elements :—“ Trapezius, acromio-trachelien,
cleido-occipital, cleido-mastoid, sterno-mastoid, &c.”
Only the trapezial and sterno-mastoid portions are with cer-
tainty present in Notoryctes, but the trapezial system of fibres
*xx., page 133. txxvi., page 674. Jxxvi., page 678, and Taf. xcviii.,
fig. 2. §xxvi., page 683, and Taf. xcviii., fig. 2. || xxviii., page 128.
*1 xxxvii., Tab. vi. ** xxvii., page 229. ttxxi., page 295. XX xxvi.,
pages 663 and 679. §§xxvii., page 238.


consists of tlie following recognisable elements:— l, M. cleido-
trapezius (figs. 1 and 3 c.t.); 2, M. delto-trapezius (fig. 1 d.t.); 3,
Jf. acromio-trapezius (figs. 1,4, and 5 a.t.); and 4, M. spino-
trapezius (figs. 1,4, and 5 s.t.).
Of these, the first two are semi-conjoint (figs. 4 and 5 c.d.t.),
while the last two are distinct muscles (figs. 1,4, and 5, n.t. and
s.t).
The first, preaxial and ventral, segment or cleido-trapezius, is
separated by a preclavicular, narrow, triangular area from the
sterno-mastoid muscle (tigs. 2,3, and 5 s.m.). It is only separate
from the second, or delto-trapezius, for a short distance in front
of, and ventral to, the shoulder. The conjoint muscle arises from
part of the crista lamhdoidalis or occipitalis, described by Stir-
ling* as “ running forwards and outwards, and then downwards
from the occipital tubercle till it becomes continuous with the
upper edge ■of the zygoma.” This ridge in its outer vertical
part bounds the temporal fossa posteriorly, whilst its horizontal
inner part, forming the “ superior curved line,” or nuchal crest
of the occiput, gives origin to the muscle under notice as far
forwards as the temporal fossa. It also arises from the liga-
mentum nuchas for 3 or 4 mm. backwards from the occipital
tubercle. The fibres are at first directed transversely across the
neck, covered by the cervico-auricularis. Just behind the auricle
the fibres sweep backwards, becoming at the same time segmented
into the two component parts (figs. 2 and 5, c.t. and d.t.).
The ventral, or cleidotrapezial, part now courses beneath the
shoulder backwards to its attachment to the clavicle, not far
from the rneso-scapular extremity of that bone (fig. 3, c.t).
The delto-trapezial, more dorsal moiety (“trapezio-deltoid,”
“cephalo humeral muscle”) covers the ventral aspect of the
acromion and meso-scapular segment (also overlapping the distal
half of the acromion laterally), and is then continued on, between
the scapulo- or spino- and cleido-deltoids, becoming more or less
united with them, towards a common insertion.
J/. acromio-trapezius (figs. 1,4, and 5, a.t.) forms a transverse,
almost rectangular, band of fleshy fibres, whose anterior border
is closely related to the posterior border of the preceding muscle,
arising mesially from the ligamentum nucha} immediately behind
the delto-trapezius, and extending as far back as the first dorsal
spine, where it ends, leaving a free hinder margin. Its fibres
pass laterally, to be inserted into the dorsal surfaces of the meso-
scapular spine and the proximal half of the acromion, partly con-
cealing the attachment to the pre-axial lips of the same parts, of
the extensive subjacent rhomboideus (figs. 1 and 4 rh.).
*liv., 162.


.1/. spino-trapezms (figs. 1,4, and 5, s.t), the caudal sector of
the trapezial system, is separated by a considerable gap from the
preceding, and, in the interval between them, portions of the
Mm. latissimus dorsi and rhomboideus come into view. It arises
from the tips of the spines of the seventh to the eleventh dorsal
vertebra; (inclusive), and from the supra-spinous ligament, and it
forms an elongated ribbon-like band, directed obliquely forwards
and outwards, to be inserted into the post-axial lip of the scapu-
lar spine, chiefly into a prominence of the same, which overhangs
the post-scapular fossa.
This strap-like muscle crosses the latissimus dorsi obliquely,
and is supplied from the brachial plexus via the axilla, and
posterior to the scapula, by a nerve, which also supplies the
latissimus dorsi.
This entire separation of the posterior segment of the trapezius
sheet, both in origin and insertion, from the more anterior fibres,
is quite unusual amongst marsupials ; in fact, T have neither
observed, nor found any record of, such an arrangement in any
other member of the order.
The trapezius indeed in marsupials generally forms, as stated by
Cunningham* for the three forms described by him, “an unbroken
muscular sheet,” at least so far as the origin is concerned. Macalister,f
however, reports, that in Sarcophilus “ the part of the muscle corre-
sponding to the root of the spine of the scapula was weak and tendin-
ous, and nearly divided the fleshy part into an upper and a lower
trapezius; however, a thin muscular margin near the spines of the
vertebrae saved it from this division.”
In the MonntremesJ the posterior part of the muscle is quite
separated from the anterior by a wide gap, the posterior part of the
trapezius arising from the hinder ribs and vertebrae, and running for-
ward to be inserted into the “ anterior ” or spinous border of the
scapula near its basal end. (In Echidna also into the dorsal border.)
A similar isolation of the posterior occurs in some of the Edentata,
notably in Chlamydophorus§ and in the armadillos generally.il It
arises in Chlamydophoms from the anterior dorsal vertebrae, and is
inserted into the scapular spine.
The division is universal in the Insectivorafi the hinder part (spino-
trapezius) being inserted into the posterior end of the scapular spine.
Mivart and Murie** describe the division also in the Agouti, where
it is also figured by Cuvier and Laurillard,tf and it occurs in other
rodents, e.g., the Rabbit.
I find on dissection that the spino-trapezius in Talpa is innervated
via the axilla, as in Notoryctes.
A tripartite division of the trapezius sheet exists in the cat,Jt in
Ur.ms ameriranus,§§ and in Mycena,\\\\ and in the Carnivora generally
the spino-trapezius is differentiated.
' iv., page 2. fxxix., page 154. Jxxxvii., page 23, and vi. PL, 265.
fig. 2, and xxxix., page 379, and Ixii., page 12. §xxvii., page 234. ||lvi„
page 92. ITxxvi., page 720. **xl., page 393. ffvi. PL, 245. ++ IxiiL,
page 212, and lvi., page 93. §§ IvL, page 93, and vi. PL, 81-2. |||| vi. PL,


In the Cat the three sectors correspond to the cleido- acromio- and
spino trapezius of Notoryctes (i.e., the clavo-acromio- and dorso-
cucullaris of Strauss-Durckheim). The fibres I have named “delto-
trapezius” are simply “ cephalo-humeral” fibres belonging to the
claricular system of trapezius fibres.
I am doubtful whether the segment described above as cleido-
trapezius is or is not to be regarded as the equivalent of a cleido-
ocoipital. A muscle corresponding to the latter is otherwise absent, but
a cleido-trapezius very like that in Notoryctes occasionally co-exists
with a true cleido-occipital, e.g., in Koala,* Cuscus,f Phalangista
vulpina,X amongst other marsupials.§ The origin of the trapezius sheet
in this order varies chiefly in the number of dorsal spines which give
it origin, e.g., from all in Dasyums, or only from seven in Thylacinus,
Phascogale and Cuscus, and nine or ten in Sarcophilus. It arises from
the occipital crest, and ligamentum nucha; also in most. Its insertion
is in all marsupials mainly into the spine or spine and acromion, but
the anterior fibres have a variable insertion, and often wholly
fDasynrnsJ or partly (Phalangista) form a cephalo-humeral bundle
passing, to be inserted along with deltoid, like the delto-trapezius
in Notoryctes.
In Wombat this anterior part passes over the clavicle and replaces
the clavicular part of deltoid, while again in Sarcophilus no part of the
muscle reaches the humerus, the anterior fibres being inserted into the
outer fourth of the clavicle.||
Macalister’s view (adopted by MaoCorraick for Dasyurus and
Phalangista) that the humeral fibres of the trapezius in Phascolomys
correspond to those of the “ cephalo humeral ” muscle found in other
orders is opposed by Lechell, but, as it appears to me, on quite insuf-
ficient grounds. His argument that in Dasyurus and Myrmecobius there
is a “ pars clavicularis deltoidei ” independently of the humeral
trapezius is sufficiently answered by reference to the conditions in
Phalangista** and Phascolomys, where a part or the whole respectively
of the clavicular deltoid is replaced by what are plainly fibres corre-
sponding to the humeral fibres of the trapezius in Dasyums. One need
only suppose that the pars clavicularis deltoidei in the latter animal,
which is concealed by the humeral slip of the trapezius, answers only
to the deeper part of the whole clavicular deltoid.
Ko corresponding segmentation of the anterior part of the trapezius
is present in Monotremes.
In Echidna] the muscle is inserted into part of the dorsal
border of the scapula, along the scapular spine; by means .of a fibrous
arch, and to the acromion and outer part of clavicle. In Ornithorhyn-
chus it is inserted into the dorsal scapular margin and the clavicle and
inter-clavicle.
Macalister,!! after describing a cleido-occipital in Chlamydophorus,
and stating that “in no other Edentate does this muscle seem to exist
distinctly,” goes on to say, “ Professor Hyrtl describes a third muscle
external to the cleido-mastoid, but much stronger, which ascends with
it, and is inserted into the lambdoid suture, and into the temporal
* Ixxii., page 222. fiv., page 4. Jxxxvi., page 104. § vi. Plate,
174 a+, and Plate 176, fig. 1., a+. || xxix., page 154. IT xxvi., page 719.
**xxxvi., fig. 7 tr., andvi. PI., 177. ttlxii., page 12. tt xxvii., page23B.


aponeurosis ; this he regards as the separated clavicular trapezius.
This muscle was inseparately joined to the rest of the trapezius in'
mine,” &c. The last described portion of the trapezius would appear
to correspond to the cleido-trapezius of Notoryctes.
The insertion of the anterior trapezius in Chlatnydophorm and
Tatusia is into the. scapular spine and acromion.
M. rhomboideus (figs. 1 and 4, rh.) is a single, very extensive,
and thick muscular sheet. It arises in part from the crista occi-
pitalis under cover of the cleido- and delto trapezius, but it ex-
tends further ventro-laterally than they do. It also takes origin
from the whole of the ligamentum nuchre under cover of delto-
and acromio-trapezius fibres, and from the first two dorsal spines
where it is uncovered by any other muscle. Its posterior border
is parallel and in apposition with the anterior border of the
latissimus dorsi. The fibres of the muscle have a somewhat com-
plicated arrangement.. The posterior ones run directly outwards,
to be inserted into the vertebral or mesial border of the scapula,
The fibres next succeeding (anteriorly) incline slightly backwards,
whilst those from the cephalic end of the ligamentum nuchse,
together with the whole of the occipital fibres, sweep almost
directly backwards. Of the backwardly-directed fibres, those
more dorsally placed are inserted into the vertebral border of the
scapula, but less into its mesial edge than into the outer surface,
or dorso-lateral lip; whilst the more ventrally placed, occipital,
fibres are inserted into the preaxial lip of the scapular spine
under cover of the acromio-trapezius. (See fig. 4.)
The rhomboideus muscular stratum in Notoryctes plainly con-
tains elements of all three portions recognised in certain other
forms, i.e., Mm. rhomboideus capitis, rhomboideus major, and
rhomb, minor.
Tor a list of synonyms for the rhomb, capitis reference may be
made to Leche’s Memoir in Bronn’s Thier-reich*
The rhomboid sheet in Notoryctes differs from that described in other
marsupials, e.g., by Cunningham,* chiefly in the much greater extent
of its insertion, which has usurped the whole length of the preaxial
lip of the mesoscapular spine. This fact, together with the entire
absence of an acromio-trachelien muscle, leads me to suppose that the
latter muscle has been absorbed into the rhomboideus, or, rather, has
not been segmented off from it. But there is no atloid origin of part
of the sheet to indicate such a compound character.
In Cuscus, Phascogale, and Thylacine f,in Koala j, and in Worabat§ the
rhomboid is undivided and extensive, arising from occipital crest as
well as from cervical and dorsal spines, and in all is inserted into the
whole length of the base of the scapula ; and in each of these animals
an acromio-trachelien is present attached, in .Wombat, to “outer half
of scapular spine,” and in Koala, to “ one-half of scapular spine.”
*xxvi., page 725. tiv., page 3. % xxviii., page 129. §xxix., page 154.


In Phascogale* the acromio-trachelien is double, and attached to whole
length of scapular spine, the “superior ” muscle being united with the
margin of the rhomboideus by its upper margin, so that the latter
muscle is inserted “ to a small extent into the root of the scapular
spine.” A similar fusion also occurs in lnCuscusthe
acromio-trachelien is also double, and distinct from the single rhom-
hoideus. In Thylacine it is single and distinct. In Sareophilus% the
rhomboideus is distinct from the acromio-trachelien, and is itself
divided into “a rhomboideus occipitalis fi.e., capitis), and a proper
rhomboid made up of the fused major and minor.”
In Dasyurus viverrinus and in Phalangista md.pina MacOormick§
found the rhomboid extensive and undivided, and inserted into the
whole length of the base of the scapula, and also that it “ has a small
slip inserted into the anterior lip of the spinal crest of the scapula
close to the base of the bone above the acromio-trachelien superior,
and in a line with it.”
Both in Omithorhynchus and Echidna the rhomboid is undivided,
thick, and strong, its origin reaching in the former from the occipital
crest of the dorsal region. In both forms it is inserted into the
greater part of the scapular base. Cuvier and Laurillard|| figure an
acromio-trachelien in Omithorhynchus which consists of two distinct
parts, described by MeckelH under the name of levatores scapuhe.
The dorsal part is inserted into the scapular base, the other into
acromion and clavicle. Mivart notes the same double muscle in
Echidna under the name of levator-clavicuhe** ; also Westling.ft
MacalisterJJ states that in Dasypus the .acromio-trachelien is supra-
occipital in its origin, that in Pholxdotns it is united with the occipital
rhomboid, and that it is absent in Chlamydophorus, Tatusia, Cyclothnrus,
Bradypus, Choloepiis, in the first two of which the occipital rhomboid
extends along the meso-scapular spine.
In reference to the acromio-trachelien muscle,' the latter author
remarks that “the exact relationship of this muscle to the other
shoulder muscles is not very clear; in the largest proportion of mam-
mals it is present, and is atlantic in origin and acromial in insertion,
occupying a position.beneath the front edge of the trapezius, but most
probably, as suggested by many authors, it is a slip of the superficial
muscular sheet intermediate between the trapezial and cleido-occipital
factors of that expansion. The elements of this sheet seem thus to be
trapezius, acromio-trachelien, cleido-occipital, cleido-mastoid, sterno-
mastoid,” &c. In some cases at least I think we must rather associate
the acromio-trachelien with the deeper rhomboid stratum with which
it is sometimes fPholidotus) evidently fused, and with a greater exten-
sion of which its absence is occasionally associated (Notoryctcs, Ohlamy-
dophorusj. This relationship is well expressed by Cuvier’s appellation
of “ dorso-trachelien” for the three rhomboid factors and “acromio-
trachelien” for the usual omo-atlantic muscle. Leche regards it as
akin to the levator-scapulae group.§§
In VhrysochlorisWW the acromio-trachelien is present as a double
* iv., page 3. txxvi., page 726. J xxix., page 154. §xxxvi., page 106.
II vi. PI., 266, fig. 2. IT xxxvii., page 23. *• xxxix., page 383. ttlxii.,
page 13. JJ xxvii., page 238. §§cf. xxvi., 732. |||| xxvi., page 727 and
733.


muscle, inserted into mesoscapular spine and metacromion. Here the-
rhomboid stratum is bilaminar, the superficial lamina extending from
crista occipitalis and ligamentum nuchse to posterior angle of scapula
and the deeper from occipital crest to dorsal part of spine of scapula.
The part corresponding to the minor rhomboid, however, does not
share in this delamination, but is separately segmented off posteriorly,,
and joins with its fellow of the opposite side to form a muscular band
passing between the posterior scapular angles of opposite sides.
In Talpa there is only one rhomboid muscle, “ probably the repre-
sentative of the rhomboideus minor of man.”*
In most other Insectivora the rhomboid consists of two parts—
anterior corresponding to rhomboid cap. and rhomboid major, and
posterior corresponding to rhomboid minor. Acromiotrachelien is
generally single and inserted into acromion or metacromion, in Tenrec
and Hedgehog along with trapezius.f
In Agouti, Mivart and Muriel describe only “ one continuous sheet
of rhomboid muscle arising from the paramastoid process of the occi-
put, the median line of the neck, and the dorsal vertebrae.” So also in
Hystrix.§
In other rodents the three rhomboid elements are usually present
and distinct.
Acromiotrachelien in the Hare|| is inserted with the humeral fibres
of the trapezius, and in AgoutiU in addition partly into the aponeurosis
of the arm.**
Amongst the Carnivora the rhomboid sheet may have the three-
factors represented as a single sheet (Procyon ), or they may be distinct.
In the Dog and others the occipital portion seems to be absent.ft
The acromiotrachelien is often inserted with the trapezius, and fre-
quently passes backwards crossed by the cephalo-humeral muscle, to be
inserted into the acromion close to or beneath the acromial part of the
trapezius.ft It is double in Cercoleptes.§§
M. sternomastoideus (figs 2,3, and 5 s.m .) takes origin from
the anterior projection of the presternal rostrum, and forms a
rounded or prismatic fleshy mass inserted into the mastoid region
of the skull just above the external auditory meatus and under
cover of the parotid gland.
The fibrous continuation of the imperfect clavicle passes in-
wards to the presternal rostrum just dorsad of the origin of the
muscle. The muscles of opposite sides are in partial contact close
to their origins.
No cleido-mastoid element is present, though such is present in
all other marsupials; and, as already mentioned,|||| the cleido-
occipital, common to all other marsupials, is likewise absent
unless the fibres I have named cleido-trapezins are to be regarded
as such.
*xi., page 212. tvi. PI., 75, fig. 1, and PL, 77, fig. 2. JxL, page 393.
§xxvi., page 728. |1 vi., PL, 232. IT vi,, PL, 215. **Cf.,'also vi. PL,
240 and 249. ttix., page 180. ++vi. PL, page 109. §§ 1., page 547..
I! II Supra.


In OmithorhyneHus the sterno-mastoid is double, one portion being
placed beneath the other.* Neither cleido-mastoid nor cleido-occipital
are segmented off from the sferno-mastoid-trapezius system in either
of the monotreme forms.t In Echidna the sterno-mastoid has an ex-
tensive origin from the ventral face of the median bar of the inter-
clavicle, the presternum, and a large part of the meso-stemum. Its
origin covers part of the origin of the pectoralis major. The origin, as
I have found it, is thus more extensive than Mivart describes it; nor
did I find it so narrow as he did.
A cleido-mastoid is present in Cklamydophorua ,+ Tatusia,% Dasypus,§
Orycteropus,\\ and amongst other Edentata, though it is not invariably
present, while the cleido-occipital is frequently absent in this order,
though present in Chlamydophorus and some others.lT
Both sterno- and cleido-mastoids are usually present in Eodentia
Inseetivora and Carnivora, though the segmentation of the cleido-mas-
toid from the sterno-mastoid is frequently incomplete. A cleido-occi-
pital, too, is generally developed, but its relations are often modified
by the partial or complete suppression of the clavicle, when it may
enter, with the clavicular deltoid, into the formation of a cephalo-
humeral muscle. It is very frequently, wholly or partially, fused with
the cleido-mastoid, or in some forms with trapezius.
I cannot find any instance in these orders of entire absence of both
cleido-mastoid and cleido-occipital.
Jf. deltoideus (figs. 1-5, d.t, c.d.t., c.d., and s.d.) consists of two
distinct sectors, in addition to the delto-trapezius already
described (trapezio-deltoid). The latter occupies a position inter-
mediate between the other two in its course distally towards the
humerus, and in its course it crosses and covers the insertion of
the subclavius into the mesial border of the “ meso-scapular seg-
ment.”
The clavicular portion of the deltoid (M. cleido-deltoideus), figs.
3 and 7, c.d.) is comparatively small, and arises from the outer
or lateral third of the clavicle, and thus corresponds to the inser-
tion of the cleido-trapezius. It covers part of the subclavius
muscle.
The scapular portion of the deltoid ( spino- or acromio-deltoid
figs. 1-5, s.d.) takes origin from the outer or lateral borders of
the acromion and meso-scapular segment, and from the entire
length of the post-axial lip of the true scapular spine (meso-
scapula), the posterior fibres lying in the sulcus between the
scapular spine and the broad scapular head of the triceps muscle
(fig. 2, tr.). This part of the muscle is crossed by the ribbon-
like spino-trapezius.
All three sectors of the muscle (including the delto-trapezius)
are inserted into the proximal tubercle and mesial border of the
elongated delto-pectoral tuberosity of the humeral shaft.
*xlv.,pages. fxxxix., ipage 381. JJxxvii., page 232. §xiv., page
.527. II xv., page 571. IT xxvii., page 232.


This arrangement of the fibres of the deltoid series closely resembles
that figured (by Cuvier & Laurillard in Phalangista,* and described in
P. vulpina by MacCormick.f It is thus ot the bipartite variety, the
scapular deltoid not being segmented into acromial and spinous
portions.
The muscle is unsegmented in the Giant Kangaroo (Maoalister and
Cuvier & Laurillard) Macropus minor (C. & L.), Macropus Benmttii,
and Didelphys (Macalister).J: It is bipartite in Cuscus and Thylacinus,§
as well as in the Vulpine Phalanger,as already mentioned; also in the
Wombat,|| and in Koala according to Young,T though according to
Macalister** it consists of “ three parts inseparably united ” in the
latter animal.
It is tripartite in Phascogale,XX and in Dasyurus vivcrrinus.XX I n Sarco-
philus§§ the spinous and acromial portions of the scapular deltoid are
separate, but there is '■ no clavicular deltoid separate from the outer
fibres of the acromial portion.”
In Perameles an accessory slip from the inferior costa of the scapula
is present according to Owen.|j||
The deltoid in Ornithorhynchusl ll is generally regarded as single and
scapular, though',Owen*** follows Meckelfft in regarding as an anterior
part of the deltoid that deep ventral muscle which MivarttU has named
“ epicoracohumeral” in Echidna. Cuvier and Laurillard figure the latter
muscle§§§ as a middle or lesser pectoral.
In Echidna, Mivart|||||| describes and figures a double deltoid; one
portion is scapular, and corresponds to that in Omithorhynchus, while
the other is claviculo-acromial, and corresponds in position and at-
tachments to a muscular sector, which seems to constitute the most
anterior division of the pectoralis major in Omithorhynchus.
Westling,UHH in remarking upon this correspondence, raises the ques-
tion for future decision whether in Omithorhynchus we have a fusion of
originally distinct muscles, or whether the condition in this animal is
primary, the anterior part of the deltoid in Echidna having arisen as
a secondary differentiation from the pectoralis major.
Westling states that the two muscles are certainly homologous, cor-
responding in origin, position, and innervation. Working in this
laboratory, my friend and former pupil, Dr. W. J. McKay, has satisfied
himself of this homology, and is strongly inclined to the belief that
the sector in question in Omithorhynchus in reality belongs to the del-
toid system, and not to the pectoral. He finds that it corresponds
accurately in postion and attachments to the “anterior deltoid” in
Echidna, and as in the latter animal it splits at its insertion to enclose,
or rather it is folded round, the tendinous insertion of the posterior
deltoid. Again, he confirms Westling’s statement in reference to the
innervation of the muscle. As in Echidna, so in Omithorhynchus, it is
supplied exclusively by the “ nervus axillaris,” which also supplies the
posterior deltoid in both animals. The anterior thoracic nerves which
” vi. PI., 177, fig. 2, and PI., 179, fig. 1. txxxvi., page 115. Jxxix.,
page 159. § iv. ||xxix.,page 159. Hlxxii., page 226. ** xxviii., page
130. ttiv.,page9. J+xxxvi.. page 115. §§xxix., 159. |||| xlv., page 11.
HlTxxvi., page 791, and vi. PI., 265, fig. 2. ••• xlv., page 6. ftt xxxvii.,
page 26. Xtt xxxix., page 384. §§§ vi. PL, 266, fig. 2. ||||{| xxxix., page
384, PI. 52, fig. 2. TO Ixii., page 17.


supply the true pectoralis fibres send no filaments to this muscular
mass, and the only other nerve in relation to it is a cutaneous branch
of the N. supra-coracoideus (peculiar to Monotremes) which pierces
the muscle, but, contra Westling, without supplying twigs to it.
In Ghlamydophorus* the deltoid is tripartite, with clavicular, acro-
mial, and spinous sectors, as is the rule amongst the Edentata. The
clavicular deltoid may, however, be absent, as in Bradypus. t or it may
be rather small, as in Ghlamydophorus. In Bradypus the acromial and
spinous portions are fused.
In the PacaJ a clavicular deltoid is separated from an imperfectly
divided acromio-spinous sector by a prolongation of the acromio-
trachelien. A similar clavicular muscle-segment with imperfectly
separated acromial and spinous portions was found by Mivart and
Murie in Agouti and other rodents,§ but they consider the clavicular
fibres to form part of the pectoralis major.
In the Hedgehog!! the deltoid is distinctly tripartite, the acromial
and spinous portions being separated by the insertion of the
acromio-trachelien. Leche,lT however, refers to it as single.
In Talpa the scapular (spinous) portion is absent, according to
Meckel** and Freeman.ft
In OymnuraXX the clavicular portion is absent.
In Chrysochloris the muscle arises from clavicle and metacromion.
In the Cat, and apparently in the Carnivora generally, the clavicular
deltoid is practically continuous with the cleido-trapezius forming the
cephalohumeral muscle. Acromio- and spino-deltoids are also present,
so that the muscle is here generally tripartite.
M. latissimus dorsi (figs. 1,2, 6, and 7) resembles in general
shape the muscle in the human subject. It is crossed by the
spino-trapezius.
Its origin is from the dorsal spines from the 3rd to the 12th
(inclusive). There are no costal origins. Its fibres converge
laterally and anteriorly towards the axilla, where, at the hinder
border of the massive triceps, they ultimately form a thick pris-
matic fleshy mass partly overlapped by the latter muscle. The
latissimus is entirely destitue of a humeral insertion. Lying
just posterior to the triceps, it enters the forearm, halfway down
which the fleshy fibres end abruptly in the aponeurosis of the
forearm, which is thus greatly strengthened, forming a dense
layer on the surface of the flexor carpi ulnaris. The aponeurosis
may be traced down to the manus. The insertion thus corres-
ponds to one form of a dorso-epitrochlearis insertion, which is
not otherwise present, and probably we ought to regard the two
muscles as fused, or rather as unsegmented from one another.
No trace of such a fusion in the form of a tendinous intersection
was present. The muscle is quite unconnected with the teres
major, but opposite the olecranon its fibres run just parallel to
♦xxvii., page 243. t xxxii., page 56. Jvi. PI., 249, fig. 2, and PL, 251,
fig. 1. §xl., page 398. ||vi. PI., 75 and 76. ITxxvi., page 792. **xxxviii.,
page 496. t+ x ‘-> P a S e 213. tt xxvi., page 792.


the scapular head of the triceps, and it seems partially adherent
to the postaxial border of that muscle.
In no other marsupial whose myology is recorded is the humeral
insertion lacking, and in all there is a distinct dorso-epitrochlearis
present.
The extent of the vertebral attachment varies much amongst marsu-
pials, and a costal origin is absent in many e.g., Didelphys,* Dasyums,f
and Koala, X &o.; while in Wombat§ it arises from no less than six of
the lower ribs. In the three forms described by Cunningham|| only
the last rib afforded an attachment to the muscle.
In Echidna MivartlT describes and figures two muscles as representing
the latissimus. The posterior of these is interesting, as its insertion
corresponds with that in Notoryetes. It is “very elongated, and is
triangular from its origin as far as the elbow. It arises, by digitations,
from six ribs (namely from the Bth to the 13th), and, becoming nar-
rower, passes beneath the interior condyle. A little below the middle
of the forearm it becomes intimately united with the surface of the
flexor carpi ulnaris.” The ulnar insertion of the panniculus is figured
as in close dorsal relation to the latter. The anterior muscle from the
first eleven dorsal spines is “ inserted into the inner condyle of the
humerus, in union with what appears to be the dorso-epitrochlear.”
This “dorso-epitrochlear” the author describes as arising from the
posterior extremity of the vertebral border of the scapula and from
the tendon of the teres major, and as inserted into the inner condyle
of the humerus with the second part of the latissimus by a very strong
tendon. The term “ dorso-epitrochlear” as applied to this slip cannot
be retained, as the fibres in question are undoubtedly only a deep
slip of the latissimus. The true dorso-epitrochlear fibres are to be
sought for amongst the fibres of insertion of the posterior part of the
latissimus. Westling indeed reckons the latter muscle as simply a
dorso-epitrochlearis (including “ dorso-antebrachialis ” and “ dorso-
brachialis” portions).**
In Ornithorhynchns, Owen,ft following Meckel, describes the latissimus
as long and broad, arising from all the dorsal and lumbar spines and
the eleven posterior ribs, and inserted by a broad and strong tendon
into the distal half of the ulnar margin of the humerus, and, with part
of the panniculus, into the fascia attached to the olecranon and spread-
ing over the forearm. At its anterior part the muscle may be divided
into a superficial and a deep stratum. Here, as in Echidna, the dorso-
epitrochlear fibres are probably represented by those which descend
into the forearm and spread out in its fascia.
In Cuvier & Laurillard’s plates, JI however, a segmentation is figured
into an anterior or spinal and a posterior or costal portion, answering
to Mivart’s similar segments in Echidna.
In Ohlamydophorws§§ the muscle also consists of two parts, but the
anterior, which arises from hinder dorsal and anterior lumbar vertebrae,
is inserted into the “posterior inferior angle of the post-scapula.”
This is unrepresented in any other Edentata. The second (posterior)
* xxix., page 156. t xxxvi., page 105. J xxviii., page 129. § xxix., page
156. II iv., page 5. Txxxix, page 380. ** Ixii., page 21. ft xlv., page 11.
Jtvi. PI., 266, i. and i. 1. §§ xxvii., page 236.


part of the muscle is costofascial in origin, is closely attached to the
pectoralis quartus, and has the usual humeral insertion close to the
teres major. Other Edentata vary as regards origin of the muscle, but
all possess the usual humeral insertion, while, in addition, they all
possess a dorso-epitrochlearis element associated with the latissimus,
and often closely connected with the panniculus or pectoralis quartus.
The insertion of the dorso-epitrochlear muscle is more variable than
in marsupials, and is frequently prolonged into the fascia of the fore-
arm CCMamydophorm* and Orycteropusf J, or even to the palmar fascia
fCyclothumsX J, and it may be partly united with the scapular triceps,
as in Orycteropus.^
In Talpa Cuvier & Laurillard|| figure the latissimus as giving off a
slip to the fascia of the forearm before becoming inserted into the
humerus. This is not mentioned by Freeman, H but is plainly a true
dorso-epitrochlear slip.
In this animal, as noted by the latter observer, the latissimus is
rather large, and consists of two portions, anterior and posterior,
separated by an interspace. The two parts, however, unite, and are
humeral in their insertion.
A dorso-epitrochlearis is present in all the Insectivora. It is broad
and thin in Gymnura.** In ChrysochlorisXX it consists of fibres, which
pass from the latissimus to the ossified tendon of the flexor profundus
digitorum. The latissimus itself in this animal is inserted into a pro-
cess running out from the internal condyle of the humerus.
The dorso-epitrochlearis is usually present in Bodentia and Carnivora.
In the Rabbit it is continued into the flexor carpi ulnaris according
to Humphry.
M. serratus magnus (figs. 6,7, and 21, s.mg.) consists of two
portions—anterior and posterior.
The anterior, by far the larger, is a fan-shaped muscle, partly
cervical, but chiefly costal in its origin.
The costal fibres arise as a series of fleshy slips from the first
five costal arches, the more posterior origins being partly over-
lapped by the lateral free margin of the M. rectus abdominis.
The origin from the first costal arch is from the vertebral seg-
ment, and partly indeed from its tubercle dorsally. The cervical
fibres form only a small anterior portion of the muscle lying
dorsal to the cords of the brachial plexus, and arising from the
transverse process of the seventh cervical vertebra, and slightly
from the corresponding portion of the fused cervical vertebral
mass.
This anterior portion of the muscle is inserted along the whole
length of the ventral lip of the vertebral border of the scapula
close to the rhomboid insertion.
The posterior sector of the muscle (not shown in drawing) is
separated from the anterior at its origin by a very considerable
* xxvii., page 236. fxv., page 574. t xxvii., page 237. §xv.,page
574. || vi. PI., 80, fig. 5. ITxi., page 212. ** viii., page 395. tfxxv.,
page 807. ++xx., page 151.


interval. It is a slender slip, placed under cover of the latissimus
dorsi, which arises from the eighth, ninth,- and tenth ribs, a short
distance external to the line of their angles (and distinctly from
the dorsal aspect of the chest wall). This runs forwards under
cover of the latissimus to reach the hinder angle of the vertebral
border of the scapula. There it crosses the posterior part of the
insertion of the rhomboid, and is inserted into the dorsal aspect
of this angle of the bone. At its insertion its fibres are close to
and parallel with the scapular attachment of the anterior sector
of the muscle with whose fibres it was evidently in series, consti-
tuting a retractor scapulce muscle. Its nerve supply was from
the nerve to the serratus.
There is no separate levator anguli scapuke muscle present, the
serratus as described representing the entire “ trachelo-costo-
scapular” muscle of Testut.*
Amongst marsupials the levator scapulae is nearly always lacking as
a separate muscle, and the serratus is invariably trachelo-costo-scapu-
lar in its attachments, and is generally a continuous sheet. The
extent both of its costal and its cervico-vertebral attachment is very
variable. It is a single and continuous sheet in Koala,f Thylaevnus,
and Phascogale,t Dasyums and Phalangista,§ Macropus gig. and minor. ||
Macalister found it in Wombat|| divided into a weak upper part from
four cervical vertebra and three upper ribs, and a strong lower part
from the ribs from the fifth to the eleventh, converging to the sub-
scapular aspect of the inferior angle of the scapula, and a small part
of the axillary margin. The condition was the same in one specimen
of Sarcophilus,\\ but in anotherli he found a separable levator anguli
scap. from the second and third cervical transverse processes.
In Didelphys** a levator anguli scapulae is wholly or partly separable.
Cunninghamft found “an indication of a division of the serratus in
Cuscus into a cervical and a costal portion.”
In Dasyums,XX although the muscle is continuous, MacCormick
describes the posterior five costal digitations as converging “in a fan-
like manner, so as to come to a point at the posterior superior angle
of the scapula, where they are inserted tendinously. The posterior
edge of the tendon folds round the posterior part of the insertion of
the rhomboid.” This latter part of the muscle, as well as the de-
tached posterior sector in Wombat, §§ I take to be homologous to the
detached posterior slip in Notoryctes, although the latter is more
dorsally placed, and altogether beneath the latissimus; c.f., also
Cuvier & Laurillard’s plate of Phal. cavifrons. ||||
In Echidna’S'i the serratus magnus and levator anguli scap. are in-
separable, forming a thick layer, extending back as far as the fourth
rib only, or the fifth rib according to Westling.***
Meckelf ff describes the serratus magnus in Omiftwrhynchus as con-
* Ivi., page 66. t xxviii., page 129, and Ixxii. J iv., page 6. § xxxvi.,
page 110. ||xxix., page 155. If xxx., page 18. **xxxviii., page 478, and
vi. PI., 175, fig. 3. ttiv., page 5. xxxvi., page 110. §§xxix., page
155. ill] vi. PI., page 178. HlTxxxix., page 383. ***lxii., page 13.
•fttxxxviii., page 487, and xxxvii.


sisting of two distinct portions—a posterior costal from the first three
ribs, and an anterior part from the six lowest cervical vertebrae. The
fibres of the former converge to the inferior angle of the scapula, and
those of the latter to the vertebral margin. In addition he describes*
two levatores anguli scapulae, one or both of which, however, are more
probably to be looked upon as of the nature of “ acroraio-trachelien ”
muscles.
In CMamydophorusf the serratus magnus is large, single and un-
divided, the levator anguli scapulae being unsegmented from it. In
Talusia and Dasypus, MacalisterJ found it bipartite, the anterior costo-
cervical part including levator anguli.
Humphry§ recognises in the Ai both anterior and posterior serratus
factors and levator anguli, and Macalister|| found the same in Cyclo-
thurus.
In Orycteropus and several other EdentatesV the “ trachelo-costo-
scapular ” system of fibres is either continuous or imperfectly divided.
In Agouti and various other Rodents** (Guinea Pig, Rabbit, and
Hare) conditions obtain similar to those just described, i.e., there is a
“ trachelo costo scapular ” muscle corresponding to the serratus magnus
and levator scapuhe. In Agouti it is indivisible; in the other forms
there is a line of separation in the muscular sheet opposite the third
rib, which Mivart and Murie regard as marking off the levator. In the
Rabbit Lecheff follows Krause in regarding as the true levator anguli
a distinct muscle which others! + regard as a rhomboideus capitis.
In Talpa§§ the serratus and levator scapulae are distinct, and the
former purely costal in origin. So also in Erinaceus and Chrysochloris || 11,
though in the latter the anterior border of serratus is overlapped by
the levator. In Gytnnura, however, according to DobsonlllT, the serratus
magnus is “ very large, consisting of a cervical and a thoracic portion,
the former the united levator anguli scapulae.”
In most Carnivora the trachelo-costo-scapular muscle is a continuous
sheet.
M. tmbclavius (fig. 3, s, and figs. 6 and 7, s.c.) takes origin
from the anterior border and part of the ventral surface of the
first costal arch, being attached to, and around, the prominent
tubercle on the anterior border of the rib. At this point the
costal arch exhibits in some specimens a segmentation into ver-
tebral and sternal portions, in the shape of a synchondrosis whose
plane cuts the tubercle obliquely. The muscle thus arises from
adjacent portions of both sternal and vertebral rib-segments.
This subdivision is not visible in all specimens.
The muscle thus arising is comparatively narrow at its origin,
but spreads out into a broad and slightly tendinous band as it
proceeds forwards and outwards to its insertion, which is into
the mesial border of the “ mesoscapular segment ” of the shoulder-
girdle, partly into the adjacent part of the mesial border of the
* xxxviii., page 478. txxvii., page 242. X xxvii., page 242. §xxii.,
page 32. || xxvii., 242. ITxv., page 570, and xxvii., page 243. **xl., page
393. ttxxvi., page 730. JJlvi. and xl., page 393. §§xi., page 212.
(11l xxvi., page 767. HIT viii., page 394.


acromion, and slightly in front of this into to the fascia over the
supraspinatus muscle. In its course it passes under cover of the
clavicle, and of the cleido- and deltotrapezius. At its origin it
lies immediately mesiad of the insertion, into the ventral face of
the first costal arch, of the M. rectus abdominis, and immediately
dorsal to it the great vessels of the forelimb arch over the first
rib to enter the axilla. They are, however, sunk in the deep
concavity behind the tubercle of origin of the muscle. Under
. cover of the tendon of insertion there stretches a strong liga-
mentous arcuate band between the coracoid and the mesoscapular
end of the clavicle—a coraco-clavicular ligament. As the muscle
passes under cover of the clavicle and cleido-trapezius the post-
axial border of the subclavius is more or less adherent to the
deep surface of these structures, and a deep lamina of the tendon
of insertion is attached or adherent to the coraco-clavicular
ligament.
The origin of this muscle amongst marsupials is a very constant one.
It arises from the first costal cartilage as in man, or from the first rib.
In Notoryctes no fibres from any other source of origin enter the sub-
clavius such as Rolleston has described arising from the sixth costal
cartilage in Wombat.*
The insertion, on the other hand, is very variable in this order. The
fibres are wholly arrested at the clavicle as in man in Cuscus, Phas-
cogale,f Macropus major and minor, Phalangista cavifrons,X and Koala
(usually). §
In Thylacinus\\ it is attached solely to the fascia over the supra-
spinatus muscle, constituting a variety of sterno-scapular muscle.
In Sarcophiltis'S Macalister found it attached to the clavicle only in
one case, and to clavicle and scapular spine in another, and to clavicle
and acromion in Didelphys ;** while in Dasyurus viverrinus and Phal.
uidpinaft it is inserted into clavicle, acromion, and supra-spinatus
fascia, and in Wombat, by means of the latter to the whole length of
the scapular spine (Rolleston).lt
In Echidna and Omithorhynchus, according to Rolleston,§ § the sub-
clavius muscle is represented by the epicoraco-humeral muscle of
Mivart.llH This arises in Echidna from the ventral surface and outer
border of the epicoracoid, and is inserted into the radial tuberosity of
the humerus between the pectoral and supra-spinatus insertions and
into a ridge running distally from this.
The muscle in Omithorhynehus corresponding to Mivart’s epicoraco-
humeral has beeu figured by Meckel, as already noted, HlT under the name
of an anterior deltoid, and by Cuvier and Laurillard*** as a middle or
small pectoral.
Humphry, as against Rolleston, takes the latter view of this muscle
in Monotremes, when he says,f ft “I conceive the pectoralis minor to ■
!*li., page 626. tiv., page 6. fvi. PI., 195, 181, and 179. §lxxix.,
page 226, and xxviii., page 130. ||iv., page 6. *f xxix., page 158, and
xxx., page 130. *♦ xxix., page 158. ffxxxvi., page 111. tfli., Explan,
of fig. 3 and PI. 47. §§ li., page 617. ||||xxxix., page 383. IflT Supra p.
♦♦* vi. PI., 266, fig. 2. fttxx., page 157.


be formed from factors of the pectoralis major which, or some of which,
represent the epicoraco-humeral of Urodelans, Reptiles, and Mono-
tremes.” And Mivart himself regards the subclavius as represented in
Echidna by “ a small and thin muscle which arises from the anterior
border of the first rib for the greater part of its length, and which is
inserted into the coracoid immediately behind (or rather above) the
origin of the coracobrachialis.”*
This “ costo-coracoid” muscle in Echidna is described and figured by
Westling.f
I am indebted to Dr. McKay for most of the following particulars
regarding the corresponding conditions in Omithorhynchus.% Afairly-
strong costo-coracoid muscle is present, with similar attachments to
those in Echidna given above, from Mivart. Its fibres converge to a
tendinous insertion into the posterior tip of the coracoid. This muscle
must, I imagine, correspond to the “pectoralis minor” referred to by
Owen§ as “ inserted into the coracoid,” or less probably to his
“ subclavius,” which he describes as “ also inserted into the coracoid.”
While, then, the costo-coracoid muscle of Omithorhynchus is either
Owen’s lesser pectoral or his subclavius, the other of these must find
its homologue in a muscle called by Westling in Echidna “sterno-
coracoid,|| but which neither in that animal nor in the Omithorhynchus
is attached to the coracoid, though it is in close relation to that bone.’
Thus in Omithorhynchus it arises from the anterior border of the first
costal arch just mesiad of, and close to, the costo-coracoideus ; and
it also arises from the dorsal, or deep, aspects of both the interclavicle
(slightly) and the prestemum. It is inserted into the anterior half of
the dorsal or deep surface of the epicoracoid in close relation to (mesiad
of) the origin of the “ epicoraco-brachialis.” A somewhat more appro-
priate, if more cumbrous, name for this muscle is M. stemo-costo-
epicoracoideus.
Both of these muscles (Mm. costo-coracoideus and stemo-epicoracoi-
deusj I take to represent the ordinary mammalian subclavius, for not
only are the two muscles in such close relation, possessing analogous
attachments, but their innervation is from a common source, viz., a
branch of the brachial plexus (ventral aspect) homologous to the
norms thoracicus inferior of Fiirbinger in Saurians,H and probably
to the “nerve to the subclavius” of mammals.
In Echidna Dr. McKay finds this nerve giving a branch to the
phrenic, as the nerve to the subclavius occasionally does in man.
Their segmentation as distinct muscles is doubtless correlated with
the partially independent mobility of coracoid and epicoracoid.
The marked divergence of type from the ordinary mammalian sub-
clavius is dependent upon the high development of the coracoids,
causing interruption of the fibres, and thus arresting them in their
passage towards clavicle and scapula.
In Chlamydophorus** the subclavius is large, and has a wide origin
from the broad sternal segment of the first costal arch. It passes
beneath clavicle, and is inserted into the coracoid process, the acromion
and the acromial end of the clavicle very slightly or not at all (Hyrtl).ft
*xxxix., page 382. flxii., page 14, and Taf. ii., fig. 6 c.c. t Ixxvii.
§xlv., page 6. || Ixii. 1 , page 15, and Taf. ii., fig. 6 st. c. IT xiii., page 709-11.
** xxvii., page 241. +f xxiv., page 32.


Macalister also describes separately a retro-clayicularis included by
Hyrtl as part of the subclayius, and passing from first rib to acromion
and supraspinous fascia.
In Orycteropus* Galton found the subclavius arising from the manu-
brium stemi and its junction with the first rib, and also by fibres pro-
longed from the terminal aponeurosis of the rectus abdominis.
Humphry! in the same animal found it arising from first and second
costal cartilages and adjacent part of sternum, while both authors
fonnd it inserted into acromial part of clavicle, acromion, and fascia
over the supraspinatus muscle ; while in addition Galton found it in-
serted into a sesamoid bone just below the aoromio-clavicular joint,
embedded in fibres of the deltoid, and which he surmises may possibly
be a “ meso-scapular segment.” He also says that a thin stratum
derived from the lower portion of the muscle finds insertion by
aponeurosis along the inner edge of the strong coraco-acromial
ligament.
According to Humphry! and Macalister the muscle is entirely ab-
sent in Manis and the Anteaters and Armadilloes. In AI it was thin
and weak. In Tatusia§ Macalister found it very large.
In Dasypus sexcinctus, according to Galton|| and Macalister,V the
muscle is strongly developed. And in Cuvier & Laurillard’s plate,
No. 260, the muscle is seen 'closely to resemble that in Notoryctes.
Galton describes it as arising from the “ irregularly oval and roughish
depression seen at the expanded anterior termination of the first rib,
and also from its superior edge for a short distance.” “It is inserted
by a flat tendon along the whole extent of the upper ridge of the long
acromion process of the scapula, and becomes, moreover, continuous
with the strong fascia which covers the head of the humerus and
which is lost over the supra-spinatus. The strong coraco-clavicular
ligament passes across through the substance of the muscle, close to
the insertion of the latter, splitting it into two unequal portions, the
smaller and anterior of which dips under the ligament to join its ten-
don, while the largest portion passes over the ligament.” This inser-
tion (see also Gallon’s fig. 2, pi. 44) much resembles that in Notoryctes.
In Dasyprocta cristata Mivart and Murie** describe a “ sterno-scapu-
lar ” muscle with double origin, the smaller factor of which they sug-
gest (following Meckelff) may be subclavius. (Galton refers to this
observation in connection with the subclavius in Dasypus .) The
whole muscle is long and narrow, and the smaller head arises from the
outer side of the base of the manubrium and from the cartilage of the
first rib. The larger head arises from the sternum between the origins
of the first and second parts of the pectoralis major. The muscle is
inserted slightly into the distal end of the clavicle and into the scapula
and fascia over the supra-spinatus. , ,
In the Rabbit and Guinea Pig, according to the same authors,! § the
two slips are present, but in the Hare there is only one broad origin.
In the Porcupine also, according to Galton,||(| the muscle is a single
strap-like band arising from the costal portion of the first rib, and
* xv., page 571. + xxi., page 297, and xxxv., page, 494. Jxxii., page
26. §xxvii., page 241. || xiv„ page 528. Txxvii., page 241. **xl.,
page 398. tfxxxviii., page 444. XX xiv., page 528. §§xl., page 398.
llllxiv., page 529, and vi. PI., 229, fig. 2.


inserted partly into the scapular end of the clavicle and into the spine
of the scapula and the fascia over the supraspinatus muscle. (C.f.
also Eolleston’s detailed description of the double stemo-scapular
muscle in the Guinea Pig, the smaller of which he also regards as
homologous to the subclavius.*)
Windle just mentions! the subclavius as “ a strong muscle ” in
Erefhizon epixanthus, but the same author! has described in detail the
condition in the Rabbit, and concludes that the deep sterno-scapular
slip there present represents probably part at least of the subclavius.
In Talpa Freeman § refers to the large subclavius arising from pro-
stemum and first rib, and dividing into two parts to be inserted (a) into
the outer third of the dorsal margin of the coraco-clavicle (6) into the
short acromion and the acromio-clavicular ligament.
Cuvier and Laurillard|| figure a subclavius in the Hedgehog whose
origin very closely resembles in its relations that of Notoryctes; its
insertion!! appears to be clavicular and acromial.
lieche** notes a subclavius as present in Condylura, Solenodon and
Gymnura.
A true subclavius seems hardly to be represented amongst the Car-
nivora, though sterno-scapular slips are found, e.g. in Dog and Hysena**,
and in Proeyon cancrivorusf f and others. Probably most of these slips
are of the nature not of subclavius, but of “ pectoralis minimus,” or,
as Windle names them, “ deep manubrial” slips of the pectoral group
(see this author’s discussion on the subject of sterno-scapular slips).!!
M. pectoralis (figs. 3, 6 and 7, p.a., p.b., and/i.c.). The pectoralis
system of fibres consists of a large mass of considerable thickness
and of the ordinary triangular or fan.like shape. It is separable
into three sectors, which we have distinguished as A, B and C,
with which will also be described the humeral portion of the
panniculus carnosus.
In one specimen the sternal rostrum was specially large, and
was perforated by a large oval fenestra (fig. 21, fen.) filled up
with fibrous membrane from either side of which fibres of oppo-
site pectoral muscles took origin.
M. pectoralis A (figs. 3, 6 and 7, p.a.) arises from the rostrum
and body of the presternum and from the sternal end of the
clavicular arch, the latter fibres being overlapped at their origin
by the sternal attachment of the sterno-mastoid muscle. Its
deepest fibres further arise from the broad, flat and expanded
inner end of the first costal arch. From this origin the fibres
extend outwards, chiefly transversely, but the hinder fibres more
obliquely, towards the humerus, and they end in a partly fleshy
insertion which is attached, along with that of the next sector,
into the distal of the two tuberous elevations of the “ deltoid
ridge,” which is thus a deltopectoral tuberosity.
*li., page 611-2. flxv., page 128. Jlxvii., page 354. §xi., page 211.
II vi. PI.. 75, fig. 2A. IT vi. PL, 76, fig. 2. ** xxvi., page 764. ttlxvi.,
page 82. JJlxvii., page 352 , et seq.


M. pecloralis B (figs. 3, 6 and 7, p.b.) —the second sector of
the pectoral mass—is separated from the more anterior, A, by an
almost transverse cleavage line, but its fibres are otherwise simply
in series with the fibres of A. It arises from the whole length
of the mesosternum, and also by deep digitations from the adja-
cent parts of the sternal segments of the second to the sixth
costal arches, inclusive. Its fibred pass obliquely outwards and
forwards, converging to a thin flattened tendon which becomes
continuous at the humeral end with the more fleshy insertion of
pectoralis, A, which it partly overlaps.
M. pectoralis, C (figs. 3, 6 and 7, p.c.), is separated from the
rest of the muscle superficially by a sulcus of radial cleavage, but
its insertion is totally different from that of the two preceding
sectors. It is the most posterior and lateral of the three pectoral
muscles, and on the whole its origin is deeper, and is largely
covered by the muscle last described.
It arises by a series of deep fleshy slips from the sternal seg-
ments of the second to the seventh costal arches (inclusive),
laterad of, and overlapped by, the corresponding slips of pectoralis
B, from which it is completely separate.
Its outer or axillary margin is not covered by B until it enters
the axilla ] it is, however, covered posteriorly (caudad) by the
mesio-ventral portion of the superficial muscular sheet of the
panniculus. The latter is here very thin, and consists of fibres
arising from the anterior abdominal aponeurosis near the mesial
line, and extending forwards and outwards. These fibres do not
form a distinct band, but they probably represent the pectoralis
quartus, which is otherwise absent.
Immediately external to the lateral border of pectoralis C the
pannicular fibres form a denser layer, covering a portion of the
rectus abdominus, which courses forwards beneath them and
parallel with pectoralis C. The fibres of the humeral portion of
the panniculus stratum cover the whole lateral thoracic wall in a
continuous sheet, extending from the surface of pectoralis C
laterally and dorsally as far as the ventral border of the latissi-
mus. Its fibres are directed forwards, converging to enter the
axilla, and are then inserted into the border of a tendinous arch,
which crosses the axillary vessels and nerves. The ventral end
of this tendinous arch is attached to, and inserted along with,
the insertion of pectoralis C into the greater (radial) tuberosity
of the humerus close to the joint-capsule, and just external to,
and also bridging over, the bicipital groove, and thus indirectly
into the lesser tuberosity of the humerus.
It appears to me very evident that the sectors denominated A and
B together represent the “ pectoralis major; ” and that sector 0 repre-
sents the “pectoralis minor.” Further, a pectoralis quartus is not


differentiated from the “ humeral ” or “ abdoraino-humeral ” panni-
culus.
Adopting Windle’s* convenient classification of the pectoral group
of fibres, I may say that pectoralis A is a “ superficial manubrial,” or
rather “ manubrio-clavioular; ” pectoralis B is a “ gladiolar,” fused
with a superficial lamella of a “ costal” segment; that pectoralis C is
a deep “ costal ” segment; and that an “ abdominal ” segment is repre-
sented by the abdomino-humeral panniculus, no special pectoralis
quartus being present distinct from the latter. Upon the question of
the morphological relations of the pectoral muscles to the panniculus,
c./., also paper by Parsons upon the myology of rodents ;f this author
regards the pectoral mass as differentiated from the panniculus.
With regard to the attachment of the humeral panniculus it may be
noted that the dorsal end of the tendinous arch described above pos-
sesses no definite attachment to bone. It is traceable dorsally under
cover of the latissimus, which there overlaps the humeral panniculus as
the latter enters the axilla. It is doubtless the homologue of the
achselbogen so commonly present in mammals, such as, for example,
MacCormickj: notes in Phalangista, which there, as in Notoryctes,
receives fibres of the panniculus, and in Phalangista also fibres of the
pectoralis quartus. If we are to look upon part of the panniculus
fibres in Notoryctes as those of a pectoralis quartus, then the fibres of
the latter muscle are not inserted along with or close to those of the
pectoralis major as in Cuscus, Thylacinus, and Phascogale,§ and in
Phalangista mdpina,\\ but, like the fibres of MacCormick’s “ ventro-
humeral” muscle (true pectoralis quartus 1), are blended with the
tendon of the pectoralis minor.
The question of the homology of the pectoralis quartus has been the
subject of much discussion by many writers, and it is certain that
various pectoral and axillary muscles have indifferently received this
name. Windle concludes his discussion of the subject by remarking
that “ the diverse views held by authors who have been cited, and
by others who might have been mentioned, with regard to pectoralis
quartus and achselbogen, are many of them reduced to an agreement,
by what I believe to be a right comprehension of the so-called panni-
culus of the abdomen, namely, that it is the hindermost portion of
the members of the pectoral group.” I cannot think that this is a
satisfactory mode of statement, and I should incline rather to accept
Prof. Cunningham’sH view in reference to axillary muscles generally,
that in that region “ there is not the same sharp, well-defined subdi-
vision between the panniculus and the deeper stratum that exists
elsewhere.”
For a general survey of the arrangement of the elements of the
pectoral group of muscles in various mammalian orders I would simply
refer to Windle’s comprehensive sketch in the memoir already quoted
from.**
M. subscapularis (figs. 6 and 7, sbs.J. A comparatively broad
and triangular muscle, whose fibres are arranged in a bipenniform
manner. Its fibres arise from the venter or inner aspect of the
♦ Ixvii., page 349. fxlviii., page xet se.q. Jxxxvi., page 112. §xxi.,
page 7. Uxxxvi., page 112. IT v., page 385. ** Ixvii.


scapula in its whole extent, and from the septum between it and
the adjacent teres major, and they are inserted into the lesser
(postaxial) tuberosity of the proximal end of the humerus.
The muscle not only covers the mesial aspect of the compara-
tively narrow scapula, but projects both anteriorly and posteriorly
beyond the limits of the bone so as to lie in contact with the
supra-spinatus preaxially and with the broad scapular head of the
triceps postaxially (the latter muscle being attached to the whole
of the postaxial or “ axillary” border of the scapula).
Neither in Marsupials nor in the Eutherian orders with which com-
parison has been specially made does the subscapularis present features
which call for special remark. It varies for the most part merely in
its size relative to other muscles and to its surface origin, and in its
degree of attachment to or freedom from the teres major on the one
side and the supra-spinatus on the other. In the Dog Humphry* notes
that it is partly blended with the supra-spinatus, and in the Mole with
the teres major. Freeman,! however, describes it as a small indepen-
dent muscle in the last-named form.
In Omithorhynchus Owen); notes it as a very narrow muscle. I find
it relatively rather broad, much exceeding the width of the scapular
plate, occupying indeed portions of both inner and outer surfaces. In
a recent short paper§ Dr. \V. J. S. McKay and the writer have called
attention to the significance of this attachment of the subscapularis in
the identification of the borders and surfaces of the monotreme scapula.
In Echidna, subscapularis, according to Miyart and Westling,|| is
confined to the outer surface of the scapula posterior to the origin of
the long head of the triceps.
Dr. McKay and the writer find that in Echidna the muscle arises
largely as Mivart describes it, but that in addition it arises from the
whole of the actual posterior border of the scapula, and slightly en-
croaches upon the inner aspect of the bbne, when its limit is indicated
by a faint ridge near the margin.
The muscle which LechelT takes for subscapularis in Omithorhynchus
is certainly not the homologue of the true subscapularis, which he
rightly recognises in Echidna, but corresponds to that which Westling
names the subscapularis accessorius in Echidna. The true subscapularis
in Omithorhynchus is erroneously described by Leche as a large second
part of teres major (q.v.).
M. teres major (figs. 6 and 7, t.rn.) arises from the posterior
(post-scapular) angle of the scapula, which forms a backwardly
prolonged horn of the crescentic base or mesial border of the
bone {vide fig. 8), and from a tendinous intersection between it
and the adjacent axillary, border of the M, subscapularis.
Its origin from bone is narrow and tendinous, and from it the
muscle spreads out somewhat in its course towards the proximal
part of the shaft of the humerus, into which it is inserted, under
* xx., page 158, Note. + xi., page 214. % xlv., Vol. iii., page 5. §lxiv.
xxxix., page 384. IT xxvi., page 796.


cover of the biceps muscle, into the inner lip of the bicipital
groove.
The muscle is quite free from the latissimus dorsi. Its origin
is excluded from the axillary border of the scapula by the greatly
extended scapular head of the triceps, which occupies the whole
of that border lying close to the subscapular muscle.
The muscle in Marsupials is usually well developed, and has the
ordinary attachments. It is frequently in connection with the latissi-
mus at its insertion ( e.g ., Thylaeinus*), and with the subscapularis near
its origin. In no case is it excluded from the axillary or posterior
margin, as in Notoryctes.
In Omithorhynchus, Owenf notes a large teres major. LecheJ
describes it as consisting of two quite separate and well-developed
portions, the larger of which, doubtless, corresponds to a muscle which
Meckel§ regards as the separately developed scapular portion of the
latissimus, while the other, deeper, shorter, and thicker, corresponds
to the teres major of the latter author. As already stated, it is the
first part of Leche which is the true teres major. His second part is
subscapularis.
In Echidna, Mivart|| correctly notes it as a small muscle tendinous
at origin and insertion, arising from the recurved posterior angle of
the scapula, and inserted into the prominent ridge running down from
the lesser tuberosity.
In Chlamydophorus'S the muscle is large, and “ occupies an extensive
area of the posterior margin of the post scapula.” It is attached to
the subscapularis, as also in Tatusia and Dasypus ,H while in all these
it is separate from the latissimus.
In some other Edentates, however, it is united with the latter at its
insertion.
In Cyclothums** it is a huge muscle, arising from axillary border, and
also from spine of scapula, and having close relations to the scapular
triceps, as well as to the latissimus. Galtonff notes that Cuvier re-
garded the muscle as part of the triceps, but maintains that at least
the fibres arising from the scapular costa are to be regarded as teres.
Humphry^l speaks of the whole muscle as teres; and in the same
animal he notes a strap-like portion of muscle which passes from the
angle of the scapula, with the latissimus, to be inserted into the inner
side of the olecranon and partly into the inner side of the forearm.
He is doubtful whether this belongs to latissimus or teres.
Macalister§§ notes that mOrycteropus and Tatusia dorso-epitrochlear
fibres arise from the teres major.
In Orycteropus Galton notes the muscle -as at its origin completely
fused with the scapular triceps. ||||
In the MoleliH the teres major is very large, “ perhaps more hyper-
trophied than any of the arm muscles,” arising from upper two-thirds
of axillary border, a broad surface on the vertebral border, by an ad-
ditional slip from the anterior part of vertebral border, and from
*iv., page 8. txlv., page 6. Jxxvi., page 795. §xxxvii., page 26.
)| xxxix., page 384. IT xxvii., page 245. ** xvi., page 248. ttxvi., page
249. ttxxii., page 35. §§ xxvii., page 246. 1111 xv., page 578. lllf xi.,
page 213.


interscapular ligament. Its tendon of insertion ip largely united with
the latissimus.
In Chrysochloris* it arises as a bicipital muscle, but the heads unite
with each other and with the latissimus towards their insertion.
M. teres minor is entirely absent.
Amongst Marsupials it is absent as a rule, according to Meckel, f
It is present, however, in Cuscus, and Thylacine, KoalaJ
Dasyurus viverrinus, and Phalangista vulpina,\\ though in the latter
Macalister could not separate it from the infraspinatus.
Cuvier and Laurillard figure it in Maeropus giganteusM
In Phascolomys and Sarcophilus** Macalister found it represented by
a fibrous band merely.
It is said to be entirely absent in the Momtremata. ft I cannot,
however, think that sufficient consideration has been given to the
claims of the small muscle, which WestlingJJ names “ subscapularis
accessorius ” in Echidna, to represent a teres minor. I have already
pointed out that it is the homologue of this muscle in Ornithorhynchus
which Leche erroneously describes as the subscapularis in that animal.
In point of fact there is no essential difference between Ornithorhynchus
and Echidna in respect of the arrangement of the muscles of this
region For details of this arrangement I must refer to Dr. McKay’s
forthcoming account of the myology of the region in the two forms. But
I have satisfied myself from that gentleman’s dissections that the little
muscle in question does not correspond with any other typical muscle
of the region if we except the teres minor It is mentioned by Mivart
in Echidna§§ as a “ small delicate muscle,” but he attaches no name to
it, and the only view regarding it of which I, am aware is- Westling
and Leche’s, according to which it is, in the Echidna, a subscapularis
accessorius, and in the Ornithorhynchus, the subscapularis itself. It is
indeed possible that it is a “ subscapularis accessorius.” It receives
its nerve supply from the Kervus axillaris like the subscapularis; but
the twig of supply comes off the N. axillaris between the subscapular
branch and that for the scapular deltoid, in fact nearer to the latter,
with which nerve it is connected by a filament of communication ; so-
that the mode of innervation is at least as consistent with the
homology to a teres minor. But further, its position seems to
negative its affinity to subscapularis, for the scapular head of the
triceps passes between the two, so that the small muscle is con-
tiguous on the other hand to the infraspinatus. A muscle thus
arising from the scapula close to the glenoid cavity, intercalated
between infraspinatus on the one hand and long or scapular
head of the triceps on the other, may surely well enough be teres
minor, especially as its innervation is quite conformable to that view
of its homology. It is indeed only with regard to its insertion that
any serious difficulty arises, for in both Echidna and Ornithorhynchus
the muscle in question is inserted close to the subscapularis, though
quite distinct from it, into the dorsal face of the expanded ulnar
*xxvi., page 796. fxxxviii., page 513. Jiv., page 8. §lxxii., page
227, and xxviii., page 130. Ilxxxvi., page 117. IT vi. PI., page 177-8.
**xxix., page 159. tfxxvi., page 795, and xxxix., page 384. XX Ixii.,.
page 15. §§ xxxix., page 385.


tuberosity, and separated by a considerable interval from the attach-
ment of the infraspinatus to the dorsal face of the expanded radial
tuberosity. Nevertheless there is no intervening structure between
the two insertions, and the enormous lateral expansion of the neck of
the humerus by means of the projections of the flattened tuberosities,
in a plane almost at right angles to that of the projection of the
epicondyles, may readily account for the dislocation of the insertion of
a muscle which every other test would serve to indicate as teres minor.
Amongst Edentata the muscle is generally, though not invariably,
present. It is small in Chlamydophorus.* It is absent according to
Macaliater, at least as a muscle distinct from the infraspinatus, in
both Bradypus didactylus and B. tridactylus and in Cyclothuntsf, though
Humphry}: seems to have found it in the last two, taking for it a slip
of the scapular deltoid arising from the scapular spine in Macalister’s
viewf.
Both in Chlamydophorustf and Dasypus sexeinctus§ it arises from the
“lesser” or post-scapular spine of the scapula, the same which is pre-
sent in Notoryctes (fig. 8 ,p.5.5.) ; and in Crycteropuscapensis\\, where the
muscle is present, arising from the axillary costa, outer edge, there
passes from the “ middle of its inferior edge a strong tendon to the
metacromial process of the scapula.” This would seem to represent
the ligament which in Notoryctes extends from the post-scapular spine
to the metacromion (fig. B,p.s.m. Ug.J, bridging over the infraspinous
fossa, but here no teres minor fibres arise from it. There can be little
doubt that the second or post-scapular spine, when present, is to be
regarded as an exaggeration of the dorsal lip of the “axillary” or
posterior border of the scapula, from which in Orycteropus the teres
minor arises. This lip in Chlamydophorus and Dasypus is fully de-
veloped into a post-scapular spine, but still gives origin to the teres
minor. The latter muscle in both cases overlaps the triceps, and I
think it certain that the exaggerated development of the dorsal lip of
the axillary border into a second spine is simply due to a great expan-
sion of the great scapular head of the triceps.
The muscle is absent in the MoleU and in Gymnura,** but present in
the Hedgehog, Cape Golden mole, and others.ft
Amongst Undents it is stated by Mivart and Muriel + to be present in
Agouti, and in Rabbit, Hare, and Guinea Pig, but it is closely adherent
to the infraspinatus, with which these authors believe Meckel§§ con-
founded it when he failed to detect its presence in this order.
Meokel§ § states that it is generally absent as an independent muscle
in Carnivora; it is present, e.g., in Hyaena striata, H. crocuta, and
Viverra, according to Young and Robinson. ||||
M. infraspinatus (fig. 8, i.s.) arises from the deep and narrow
postscapular fossa between the meso-scapular (fig. 8, m.s.s .) and
post-scapular spines ( p.s.s .). It is smaller than the supra-
spinatus, and its fibres course outwards, and pass under cover of
a narrow ligamentous bridge, which connects the post-scapular
spine with the metacromion (fig. 8, p.s.m. lig.). It is then in-
"xxvii., page 244. txxvii., page 245. tfxxii., page 33. §xiv.,page
530. || xv., page 574. IT xi., page 214. ** viii., page 395. ft xxvi., page
795. £fxl., page 399. §§ xxxviii., page 513. Ill] Ixxii., page 190.


serted into the dorsal aspect of the greater or radial tuberosity of
the humerus between the insertion of the supraspinatus and the
origin of the “ outer” humeral head of the triceps (fig. 8, o.tr.).
In the Marsupials generally, according to Meckel,* the supra
spinatus is larger than the infra-spinatus. The only exceptions, I
note, are Macropus bennettni and Koala. J
In the Echidna, Mivart§ describes this muscle as arising from the
surface of the scapula between the long head of the triceps and the
free margin of the spine and acromion (the actual anterior margin of
the scapula); and WestlingH figures and describes the same muscle.
According to Westling, the muscle is innervated chiefly by the Nervus
axillaris.
In Omithorhynchus (McKay) the muscle occupies a much greater
proportion of the inner surface of the scapula, owing to the ridge for
the scapular triceps being much nearer the actual posterior border
than is the case in Echidna. It otherwise corresponds to that in
Echidna. It is innervated partly from the N. axillaris, but chiefly
from the N. supracoracoideus (suprascapular nerve).
M, supraspinatus (figs. 8 and 15, s.s.) arises from the whole
of the prescapular fossa, as well as from the preaxial border of
the scapula and the prominent anterior angle of the vertebral
border. Its fibres form a fleshy mass, which bulges considerably
beyond the prescapular border, being in apposition with the fibres
of the rhomboideus dorsally, and of the subscapularis ventrally.
It passes outwards under cover of the acromion and “meso-
scapular segment ” to be inserted into the proximal facet upon
the greater (radial) tuberosity of the humerus.
Neither among Marsupials nor the Eutherian orders specially
noticed does this muscle present any remarkable features.
Among Monotremes the muscle arises from the actual inner surface
of the scapula, owing to the remarkable modification of the scapula in
this order. (See note by Dr. McKay and the writer in Proc. Linn.
Soc. N.S.W.)V
The muscle is supplied by the N. supracoracoideus, which represents
the suprascapular nerve.
M. coraco-brachialis is entirely unrepresented in Notoryctes.
In no other Marsupial recorded is the coraco-brachialis absent,
though in Wombat Macalister** describes it as “ extremely small and
rudimentary,” while in several others only the coraco-brachialis brevis
element is present, e.g., Thylacinusjj Dasyu/rus,X% and Myrmecobius,
Chironectes,a,nd Halmaturus.§§
In the Echidna the coraco-brachialis system of fibres is extremely
luxuriant, where it consists of the three distinct elements, which
WoodliH regards as constituting the typical muscle. One of the ele-
ments is, however, epicoraco-brachial in its attachments.
* xxxviii., page 499. fiv., page 9. Jlxxii., page 226, and xxviii., page
130. § xxxix., page 384, and PL, page 52., figs. 1 and 2, i.s. || Ixii., Taf. ii.,
fig. 5.f ITlxiv. ** xxix., page 160. ft iv., page 10. JJxxxvi., page 118.
§§xxvi., page 803. Illllxxi., page 45, et seq.


In the Omithorhynchws the epicoraco-brachialis is fused with the
coraco-brachialis brevis, so that only two distinct elements are present.
Amongst the Edentata it is entirely absent in Cyclothuras and Pholi-
dotus.* In Chlamydophorws* Macalister found it represented by a
“ very diminutive ‘ short variety/ ” while Hyrtlf had found it absent
in the specimen he dissected.
Leohe states J that it is absent among the Talpidte, but Wood§ states
that the short variety is present in the Moles. The latter author
found the middle variety alone in the Hedgehog, while Leche mentions
long and short as present in that animal. Dobsonll states that the
muscle is entirely absent in Gymmtra.
In Guinea Pig and Rabbit WoodlT found the middle variety alone, in
the Hare and Capybara the short only, and in Squirrel and Porcupine
the long. In other Rodents two varieties co-existed.
Among Carnivora** the muscle is single in some, e.g., short variety
only in Dog and Cat, or two varieties may consist as in the Ursidce.
M. biceps flexor antebrachii (figs. 6 and 7, f.b.c.) takes origin
by one head only (the “ long”), by means of a fine tendon, from
the “ upper ” extremity of the glenoid margin at the root of the
rudimentary coracoid. The tendon traverses the capsule of the
shoulder joint to enter the bicipital groove between the tuberosi-
ties. Emerging from the capsule, it gives place to a narrow and
somewhat ribbon-like muscle, which broadens somewhat as it
descends to reach the region in front of the elbow. During
nearly the whole of its course in the arm it is covered by the
pectorals, and lies ventral to the teres major and inner part of
the humeral triceps (fig. 6, ih.tr.).
Towards its insertion it is covered by the pronator radii teres
(fig. 10). It is inserted into the tuberosity of the radius in close
proximity to the insertion into the coronoid process of the
brachialis anticus muscle, whose tendon it crosses, and with
which it has a slight fascial connection.
Macalister,! f writing on “ the homologies of the flexor muscles of the
vertebrate limb,” regards the flexors in both arm and leg as typically
four in number.
These are, in the arm, Ist, Coraco-radial, which is “ most frequently
present, and most strikingly retaining its typical position and attach-
ments ”; 2nd, a humeral head of the biceps (only occasionally present
in man); 3rd, the gleno-ulnar (corresponding to the long head of the
biceps together with the aponeurotic tendon of insertion in man, hence
the muscle is here gleno-fascial, not gleno-ulnar, as in other forms) ;
4th, the brachialis anticus portion of the flexor mass.
With regard to the first-named of these flexor elements, Macalister,
however, remarks :—“ In cases where the coracoid process is not de-
veloped, we sometimes find that the first muscle originates from a
tendon which corresponds with the typical origin of this flexor; and
* xxvii., page 247. fxxiv., page 36. Jxxvi., page 804. §lxxi., page
52. || viii., page 395. IT Ixxi., page 52. ** Ixxi., page 51. -ff xxxi.,
page 287.


hence we hare the compound gleno-radial muscle of the ruminants, in
which, however, as Meckel indicates, a trace of a division may be
seen,” &c.
The condition just described is the condition of the biceps in
Notoryctes, i.e., gleno-radial, but there it presents no trace of its com-
posite character.
Amongst Marsupials the same author* describes the condition in
the Giant Kangaroo and Wallaby as follows:—“ The biceps is divided
into two parts for its entire extent. Of these, the coracoid is gener-
ally the larger, and seems to be inserted into the tubercle of the
radius; the glenoid origin is smaller and,as usual, tendinous; crossing
the head of the humerus and crossing the coraco-radial muscle, it is
inserted with the ulna in company with the brachialis anticus, &c.”
. . . “In Didelphys and Phalangista the muscles are similarly
arranged, as they are likewise in all the other Marsupials which I have
examined.”
In Myrmecobiusf the same elements of the biceps are present, but at
their origin they are fused into a tendon, coraco-glenoid in attachment,
which is quite outside the capsule of the shoulder-joint. Somewhat
similar partial union of the coraco-radial and gleno-ulnar elements is
found in Didelphys and in Ohironectes according to Leche,f while in
Thylacinwsl and Dasyurus§ the tendons of origin are separate at their
commencement. The bellies of the muscle in Cuscus and PhaseologaleX
are separate throughout, the tendons of origin being partially fused.
In Perameles\\ there is no coracoidal head, but the insertion is
radio-ulnar.
In Echidna WestlingH describes two incompletely separated portions.
The smaller is epicoraooidal, rising close to the “ epicoraco-humeral ”
muscle; the larger arises from the coracoid and from part of the
tendon of the coraco-brachialis longus. Mivart** describes the muscle
with these origins as a single mass, inserted into both radius and ulna.
According to Westling it is the smaller epicoracoid portion which
passes by a long thin tendon to the ulna.
In OmithorhynchusXi the muscle is bicipital, one head epicoraooidal,
the other coracoidal. Both are inserted into the middle third of the
radius.
In ChlamydophorusXt biceps is “a slender muscle which arises by one
head from the root of the coracoid process on its inner side at the
margin of the glenoid cavity,” It is inserted into a pit in front of the
coronoid process of the ulna. It is similar in Tatusia.XX
In Dasypus it has a radial as well as an ulnar insertion, and it has
sometimes a coracoid head of origin, either independently or from the
coraco-brachialis muscle, in addition to the constant glenoid one.
In CyclothurusX + the muscle is glenoid in origin, and is inserted partly
with the brachialis anticus to the ulna and partly into the tubercle of
the radius.
In Orycteropus§§ it is gleno-radial, but receives the clavicular deltoid
* xxxi., page 284. txxvi., page 798. +iv., page 11. §xxxvi., page
119. Ilxlv., page 12. TTlxii., page 18. **xxxix., page 385. ttxlv.,
page 8, and xxvi., page 798. it xxvii., page 246. §§ xxvii., page 247.


which is inserted with it. Humphry* found it arising from the fore
part of the coracoid.
In Pholidotusf it is a simple gleno-ulnar muscle.
In Bradypus tridactylusX it is radial in insertion, and it has a glenoid
and a humeral head of origin, while Humphry! found a third slip
arising from the coracoid, and Meckel§ found a slip from the deltoid.
Among the Insectivora there is almost always only a glenoid head.
The muscle is ulnar in its insertion in Gymnura,\\ Erinaceus, and
Chrysochlorisfi radial in Talpa,** and radio-ulnar in some others. In
Talpa** it is a very considerable and curiously modified muscle.
In the Rodents usually only a glenoid head is present, usually in-
serted into the ulna. It is, however, gleno-radial in e.g. Erethizon.ff
It is generally gleno-radial in Carnivora.
M. brachialis anticus, s. interims (figs. 6,8, and 10, h.a.), arises
from the concave outer surface of the shaft of the humerus, ex-
tending as far up as the region of the neck. Here an oblique
line separates it from the proximal part of the origin of the
“ outer ” humeral head of the triceps (tig. 8, ot.r.), whose fibres
in this region encroach upon the outer surface of the neck of the
bone, extending dorsally to the base of the radial tuberosity, and
thus separating brachialis anticus from infra-spinatus. Below the
oblique line mentioned the brachialis anticus is separated fi’om
the triceps by a continuation upwards of the supinator crest of
the humerus. Fibres of the muscle also arise from the concave
inferior and outer aspects of the prominent delto-pectoral ridge
(fig. 8, d.p.tub.).
The muscle is inserted into the sharp ridge leading distally
from the corouoid lip of the humero-ulnar articulation, which lies
in close apposition to the head of the radius.
In ThylacinusXX the muscle arises from the postprior aspect of the
shaft of the humerus by a linear origin, covered by the outer head of
the triceps, though separated from it by a well marked external inter-
muscular septum. It merely clothes the outer aspect of the bone.
In Cuscus and Phascogale,XX however, its fibres arise from the outer
side of the shaft.
In Dasyurus§§ its origin is from both “posterior and anterior surfaces
of the humerus,” extending internally as far as the inner border of the
bone, and externally as far as the insertion of the deltoid. Posteriorly
it extends as high as the origin of the outer head of the triceps, which
separates it from the teres minor insertion.
In Wombat|||| the muscle was “as usual, in position and attachments,
winding round the bone below and external to the deltoid crest, lying
in a deeply excavated sulcus in the humerus.” Macalister states that
“ its position is similar in Sarcophilus, the Bandicoot, Opossum,
Phalanger, Bennett’s and Giant Kangaroo.”||||
*xxi., page 300. f xxvii., page 246. t xxii., page 37. § xxxviii.,
page 520. || viii., page 395. ITxxvi., page 799. **xi., page 215. ttxli.,
page 282. ft iv., page 11. §§xxxvi., page 120. 1 xxix., page 161.


In Koala* Young describes the muscle as arising from the whole of
the outer surface of the shaft of the humerus, and inserted in common
with the gleno-ulnar moiety of the biceps
In Echidnaf the muscle is small and delicate, arising from the outer
side of the shaft of the humerus, and closely embraced externally by
supinator longus.
In Ornithohynchus also it is said to be intimately related to the supi-
nator longus (v. infra, p. 42), and here it is innervated both by the
N. medianus and M. radialis.J It is inserted into the radius.
In CMamydophorus§ the muscle is large and, as in Notoryctcs, is
separated from the biceps by the deltoid tuberosity. Below, however,
they are connected and inserted in company.
The insertion is radio-ulnar in Bradypus tridantylus,§ and there is a
radial slip also in Orycteropus, || where also it receives a slip from the
biceps.
In Talpa'l its origin is from the upper part of the outer surface of
the humerus and from the hook-like process on the outer tuberosity.
It is ulnar in insertion.
In Erinaceus** and Cfymnuraf-f it is inserted into the radius.
It is altogether absent in ChrysoMoris%X-
In several Rodents|§ (Dasyprocta,Lepusi, Cunictdus, &c.) the muscle is
divided into two distinct parts, and is ulnar in its insertion.
2L triceps extensor antibrachii (figs. 1,4, 5,6, 7, and 8, tr.,
s.tr., i.h.tr., and o.tr .) forms a relatively large muscular mass
extending dorsad of the region of the axilla. Its origins are
scapular and humeral, and the humeral origin is partially separ-
ated into “outer" and “inner" heads.
The scapular origin (figs. 6-8, s.tr.) is very extensive. It arises
from the whole of the actual posterior border of the scapula from
the glenoid origin to the recurved posterior angle of the vertebral
border. It also arises from the whole length of the secondary or
post-scapular spine of the scapula, and from the whole of the
surface intervening between this and the posterior margin of the
bone.
Part of this origin is crossed dorsally by the fibres of the
spino-deltoid arising from the meso-scapular spine.
The humeral fibres of the muscle arise from the whole of the
morphologically dorsal aspect of the humerus. The “ outer ”
head (fig. 8, o.tr.) arises from the proximal part of this surface of
the shaft, extending outwards as far as the upper end of the
ectocondylar ridge, where, and above which, its outer marginal
fibres are parallel with and closely applied to the outer margin
of the brachialis anticus. Lower down the outer margin is in
superficial apposition (behind the ectocondylar ridge) with the
proximal margin of the anconeus externus. The highest part of
*lxxii., page 227. txxxix., page 386. Jxxvi,, page 804. §xxvii.,
page 247. || xv., page 576. IT xi., page 215. ** xxvi., page 804. tfviii.,
page 395. jjxxvi., page 804. g§ xi., page 399.


the origin of this head extends upon the dorsal or radial aspect
of the radial tuberosity, and there encroaches upon the outer
aspect of the bone distal to the insertion of the infraspinatus
muscle. From the latter it is limited by an oblique line running
spirally round the neck of the humerus for a short distance. In
the distal half of the brachium this head lies superficial to the
lower part of the origin of the “ inner ” head of the muscle, and
its inner margin is thinned out upon the surface of the latter,
though not quite separate from it. About the middle of the
brachium the musculo-spiral nerve winds forwards between the
two layers (outer and inner heads) in order to reach the ventral
aspect of the limb above the prominent part of the ectocondylar
crest.
The “ inner ” head (figs. G and 7, i.h.tr.) is more massive than
the “ outer.” Proximally it reaches up beyond the insertion of
the teres major. In one specimen the tendinous layer on the
ventral aspect of this head was found to extend upwards ventrad
of the insertion of the teres major, while the proper fleshy fibres
of the bend reached up dorsad of the same muscle. The ventral
tendon was certainly of the nature of internal intermuscular
septum, muscular fibres arising from its dorsal aspect, and I may
hazard the conjecture that its prolongation upwards in front of
the teres major represented the faint remnant of a coraco-
brachialis muscle which is otherwise entirely unrepresented in
this animal.
Short fibres of the inner head of the triceps fill up the great
space in the lower part of the brachium between the humerus-
and the olecranon. These fibres are covered by the outer head,
and the outer margin of this part of the muscle is in deep appo-
sition with the proximal border of the anconeus externus muscle,
from which indeed it is not very definitely separable. The
scapular head forms a thick but superficial lamella of the muscle,
which is inserted along the extensive convex edge of the recurved
olecranon. A few of its most postaxial fibres adjacent to the
latissimus dorsi terminate along with the latter in the aponeurosis
of the forearm.
The fibres of the humeral heads of the muscle form a deeper
fleshy stratum also inserted into the olecranon beneath the
scapular fibres. They are only continuous with the latter at
their insertion.
The question of the representation of the dorso-epitrochlearis muscle-
has already been discussed, and a summary of the morphology of this
muscular element in mammals under the name of M. anconeus quintus
will be found in a memoir upon the subject by Wenzel Gruber.*
* Iviii., page 9, et seq.


The triceps seems to be a strongly developed muscle in all Mar-
supials.
In Thylacinus the origin of the scapular head is extensive, according
to Cunningham,* reaching along the whoie length of the posterior
margin of the scapula. In most other cases, however, the scapular
origin does not occupy more than a third or a half of that border, and
there is in no case an extension of the muscle upon the outer surface
of the bone such as is correlated in Notoryctes with the development
of the post-scapular spine.
The outer and inner humeral heads are stated by Macalisterf to be
inseparable from each other in Marsupials, but this is by no means
nor is it so in Notoryctes.
The triceps in Monotremes is an exceedingly extensive and powerful
muscle, especially in Echidna. The scapular part arises in the latter
from a well-marked crest on the outer surface of the scapula, which
extends dorsally from the lower (ventral) end of the scapula to near
the vertebral border. This tricipital crest has been regarded by
Flower and Gadow as the morphological post-scapular border, and
this view has been elsewhere discussed by Dr. W. J. S. McKay and
the writer.§ We cannot confirm Meckel’s description of a segmentation
of the scapular triceps into three parts|| in Ornithoi-hynchus.
The outer humeral head in Echidna is probably represented merely
by a small tendinous slip arising external to the origin of the supinator
longus from the base of the radial tuberosity. It is separated from
the very large inner humeral head by the musculo-spiral nerve. The
inner head occupies the entire posterior surface of the shaft of the
humerus (MivartU).
It is amongst the Edentata that we meet with the closest parallelism
to the condition of the triceps in Notoryctes. This is owing to the
very similar development in many members of the order of a second
or post-scapular spine. A comparison between fig. 8 and Macalister’s
fig. 24,** representing the corresponding region in Chlamydophorus, is
rather striking. But in Notoryctes I have not found that the scapular
triceps is divisible, as in Chlamydophorus, into three portions ; while
in the latter animal again the humeral triceps is one and indivisible,
and evidently proportionately smaller than in Notoryctes. In DasypusX f
there are two scapular origins, the largest being from the whole length
of the post-scapular spine. In Cyclothums,XX where a post-scapular
spine is present near the actual hinder margin of the scapula, there is
no division of the scapular triceps into distinct heads. In Bradypus
also it is undivided. Giebel§§ regards the post-scapular spine (well
developed, e.g., in Myrmecophaga tetradactyla) as the true morpho-
logical posterior border (post-scapular) of the scapula. Its develop-
ment in the form of a second spine seems correlated with a very
considerable development of the scapular triceps. || ||
Certain Rodents exhibit an approach towards a post-scapular ridge,
i.e., a marked exaggeration of the outer or dorsal lip of the “ axillary”
border of the scapula. This is notable in Arctomys,H lf but Ido not
* iv., page 11. t xxix., page 161. +iv., page 11, and xxxvi., page 121.
§ Ixiv. 1| xxxvii., page 27. ITxxxix., page 386. ** xxvii., PI. xv., fig. 24.
ttxiv., page 538. +J xxvii., page 248, and xlvii., PI. 22, fig. 18. §§xviii.,
page 408. U|| Cf., Ixiv. HIT xviii., PI. 71, fig. 11, and xlvii., PI. xxiv., fig. 14.


know whether it is there associated with a special development of the
scapular triceps. Mivart and Murie note that in Dasxjprocta (arid in
Ilabbit, Hare, and Guinea-pig)* the usual three heads are present with
the usual origin and insertions. The scapular head is large and arises
partly from fascia over infraspinatus.
In Talpaf the triceps is large and trioipital. The scapular head
arises from the glenoid end of axillary border or from three-fifths of
the length of the infraspinous fossa. In the Erinaceidae the triceps
is “enormous in comparison witli the size of the animal.”J It arises
by a scapular and two humeral heads.
Among the Carnivora a post-scapular spinous ridge is figured by
Giebel in Vrsus arctos,§ while Windlell in the same genus describes
the scapular triceps as arising from the “whole of the axillary border.”
Cuvier and Laurillard figure such a form of the scapular triceps in Ursus
Americanus ;1i and in Ursus melcs** they likewise figure a double scapular
triceps, the hinder portion being long and slender (noted as a fifth
extensor), and arising close to the vertebral end of the “ axillary
border” (and doubtless from the dorsal portion'of such a tricipital
ridge or post-scapular spine as is present in Ursus arctos.) This origin
overlaps dorsally the origin of the teres major.
In some cases where such a posterior, or rather post-axial, sector of
the scapular triceps is present it appears to be more or less closely
associated with the dorso-epitrochlearis (Cuvier and Laurillard’s
fourth extensor; Wenzel Gruber’s anconeus Y.). Such a condition
of partial union is noted by Galton as present in Orycteropus capensis ft,
and in Dasypus sexcinctus.'lt
On the general morphology of the extensor mass in the arm in
Mammalia c.f. memoir by Wenzel Gruber.§§
M. anconeus externus seu quartus, sen epicondylo-nnconeus
(W. Gruber) (figs. 8,9, and 17 an.e.). This is a comparatively
large muscle, somewhat rhomboidal in form, and arising from
the back of the ectocondylar ridge of the humerus in its promi-
nent lower third. Its fibres are directed backwards and distally
towards the ulna, to be inserted into the base of the olecranon
and the proximal half c»E the postaxial border of -the shaft of the
ulna. ,
Its attachment to the ulna is crossed by the belly of the M.
extensor indicis et medii digiti, which runs along the shaft of
the bone.
The proximal border is parallel with the lateral border of the
humeral triceps, superficially with the outer head, but deeply
it is in apposition with the short fibres of the inner head, from
which indeed it is not absolutely separable by any very marked
segmentation cleft.
Its distal border is parallel and in apposition with the ulnar
border of the extensor carpi ulnaris (fig. 9, e.c.u.).
*xl.j page 400. fxi., page 215. "(£ viii., page 393. §xviii., PL, 72, fig. 5.
Illxvi., page 83. IT vi., PI. 85-6. ** vi., PI. 102. ft xv., page 578. t+ xiv.,
page 539. §§ Iviii., page 8, et seq.


According to Cunningham,* this muscle varies greatly in the dif-
ferent members of the order Marsupialia, in which, however, it is very
generally present.
In Thylacinus he describes it as hardly existent, while in Phascogale,
and especially in Cuscus, it is largely developed.
In Myrmecobius fasciatws Lechef describes it as especially strongly
developed. From his figure it does not appear to be proportionately
so largely developed as it is in Notoryctes.
In Phalangista mdpina\ it extends over the upper two-fifths of the
outer border of the ulna as a very considerable muscle.
In Echidna Westling§ notes the anconeus externus (“quartus”) as
arising from the dorsal aspect of the ectocondyle, and inserted into a
depression on the external face of ulna (olecranon and shaft), extend-
ing distally as far as the extensores digit, com. and carpi ulnaris.
In Omithorhynchus a well-developed anconeus externus is also present.
According to St. John Brooks,|| it arises in common with the extensor
carpi ulnaris from the external condyle, and is inserted into the upper
third of the ulnar shaft. (This authorlT regards the anconeus externus
of the vertebrate forelimb as morphologically related more nearly to
the extensor carpi ulnaris than to the inner head of the triceps, and as
constituting along with the former the ulnar sector of the superficial
layer of the extensor mass in the antibraehium. Its “ tendency to
unite with the triceps” he regards as a secondary, and not as a primary,
characteristic. The condition in Notoi-yctes would agree equally well
with either view of the affinities of the muscle, but the evidence from
mere topographical relationship is of little value.)
In Chlamydophorm** the anconeus externus is comparatively small,
and it is overlapped by the humeral triceps, and in Tatusia the condi-
tion is similar.ff Humphry! f notes that in Cydothurm {Myrmecophaga)
didaetyla it extends down nearly the whole length of the outer surface
of the ulna between the extensor carpi ulnaris on its outer side, and
the flexores digiform and carpi ulnaris internally, these three muscles
(four 1) forming an almost continuous sheet. In Manis, too, the same
author describes the anconeus externus as large.
Amongst the Imectivora Dobson JJ notes the presence of the anconeus
externus only in the Talpidm. In Tcdpa Europea the muscle, according
to Freeman,§§ consists of two parts, a posterior rounded fusiform fasci-
culus arising from tip of the styliform external condyle and inserted
into the outer projection of the olecranon. The anterior portion is
thin and fan-shaped, arises in common with the preceding, and “ be-
coming aponeurotic as it passes over the extensor muscles of the fore-
arm, is inserted into the prominent crest of the ulna.”
Cuvier and Laurillard figure a well-developed anconeus externus in
the Hedgehog as well as in the Mole.||(|
The anconeus externus appears to be but slightly developed (gener-
ally absent ?) amongst Rodents. However, Cuvier and Laurillard figure
the muscle in Sciurus (pi. 204) and in Arctomys (pi. 207), where it is
indeed rather well marked.
♦iv., page 12. txxvi., page 806. X xxxvi., page 122. §lxii., page 20.
|| i., page 9. IT i., pages 1 and 13. ** xxvii., page 248. ft xxi., page 39.
tf Quoted by Leche, xxvi., page 806. §§xi., page 215. ||||vi., PI. 80, fig.
1 u, and PI. 75, fig. 1 u.


The muscle, so far as I know, presents nothing worthy of note
amongst the Carnivora*
M. anconeus internus, seu epitrochleo-anconeus (figs. 6 and 7,
an. i.). This forms a short, moderately thick, and somewhat
rounded muscle, arising dorsad of the internal (ulnar) epicondyle
(epitrochlea), and directed backwards to the concave aspect of
the curved and beak-like olecranon, into which it is inserted not
far from the tip. The fibres of the muscle are in series with
those of the inner head of the triceps proximally. At its distal
border there is a triangular intermuscular interval, bounded
distally by the epitrochlear and olecranon heads of the M. flexor
carpi ulnaris (figs. 6 and 7, f.c.u.), and proximally, of course, by
the anconeus internus itself. [I found no trace of a fibrous arch
uniting the two heads of the flexor carpi ulnaris, to which the
distal border of the anconeus internus is attached in various
other marsupials (Cuscus, Dasyurus). f]
As usual, the ulnar nerve passes down into the forearm under
cover of the muscle.
The anconeus internus has been described in all Marsupials whose
myology is recorded, and its character and relations seem much the
same in all.J
It is figured, as well as described, in Dasyurus viverrinus by Wenzel
Gruber in his monograph upon this muscle§ ; c.f. also MacCormick.||
Figures of the muscle also appear in Cuvier and Laurillard ( Macropus
major), lT and in Gabon’s paper on the muscle ( Phascolomys ),** as well
as in Cunningham’s Memoirf f (Cuscus).
The muscle is also well developed in the Monotremes. It is described
and figured in Echidna by Westling.JJ; Mivart has not recognised it as
a distinct muscular element, but Galton has both described and figured
it on this genus. §§
In Ornithorhyndms the muscle has been described by Wood,||(| though
Meckel does not refer to it, nor do Cuvier & Laurillard figure it. I
find it a well-developed muscle in dissections by Dr. McKay, and
CouesHH also notes it as a muscle of considerable size (his “Antan-
coneus ”).
The nerve supply in Echidna is stated by Westling*** to be from the
N. radialis profundus. In all other cases the nerve has been found to
come from the ulnar nerve; even in Omithorhynchus. Dr. W. J. S.
McKay has informed me that he can corroborate the statement in
reference to Ornithmhynchus, and with regard to Echidna, he finds that
the nerve comes from the “nervus radialis profundus,” as Westling
states, but that in one case it came off from that nerve along with an
ansal branch of communication between the ulnar nerve and the
“ nervus radialis profundus.”
* Cf. vi. tiv., page 12, and xxxvi., page 122. +iv., page 13, gives
various references. § lix., page 17, and PI. ii., fig. 1. || xxxvi., page 122, and
figs. 2,6, and 8. IT vi., PI. 195, fig. lu. **xvii., fig. 3. rfiv., PI. ii.,
fig. 4. ££ Ixii., page 22, and Taf. iv., fig. 12 E.a. §§xvii., fig. 4. |||| Ixix.,
page 497. HIT iii., page 150. *** Ixii., page 22.


In Chlamydophorus Maoalister* notes this muscle as “very large,
and related as usual.” The muscle is stated by Galtonf to be well
developed throughout the whole of the Edentata, and his paper, as well
as Gruber’s,! ma 7 be consulted for further information.
Dobson (quoted by Leche)§ notes the presence of the muscle in the
Talpidc c only amongst Insectivora. Gruber, however,(| describes it in
several others, including Erinaeeus and Sorex.
It is very largely developed in Talpa. lT
In Rodents it is almost invariably present as an independent muscle,
and in the Carnivora also it is usually to be recognised as such.
The morphology of this muscle is treated of at length in Gruber’s
and Galton’s papers already referred to.**
Muscles op the Forearm.
In describing the muscles upon the extensor aspect of the fore-
arm and hand we may conveniently adopt the schematic classi-
fication suggested by Dr. Brooksff on the lines laid down by
Humphry.!!
According to this scheme we have to recognise three longi-
tudinal sectors of the extensor mass in the forearm, each being
further subdivisible into a superficial and a deep stratum. The
three sectors are distinguished as radial, ulnar and intermediate,
and the superficial elements of these may first be described.
Ordinarily among mammals the superficial radial sector consists
of Mm. supinator longus and brevis and extensor carpi radialis,
which may be segmented into “ longior ” and “ brevior ” portions.
(The supinator brevis is regarded by Brooks as delaminated from
the more superficial supinator longus. Its description will, how-
ever, be deferred until the more superficial muscles are noticed.)
M. supinator longus is unrepresented in Notoryctes.
This muscle is generally present in Marsupials, but it is lacking in
Sarcophilus, according to Macalister. § § Cunningham found it in
Thylacinus |||| “very feebly developed,” consisting only of a narrow
fleshy band arising from the upper part of the ectooondylar ridge. In
Cuscus and Phascogale it was relatively a very large muscle.Ulf In
Dasyums*** it is small and narrow, while in Koalaftf it is enormous.
In Petaurista taguanoidis% + % Haswell found it inserted into the
scaphoid. Leche§§§ found it united with the extensor carpi radialis in
Myrmecobius. Macalister|| || l| suspects that the muscle described by
OwenHHir in Perameles as supinator longus is really an extensor carpi
radialis. St. John Brooks**** holds that the muscle is absent in Ornitho-
rhynchus, and Meckelfff f also omits all mention of it. Neither do Cuvier
* xxvii., page 248. t xvii., page 171. J lix., loc, cit. § xxvi., page 808
||lix., page 13. IT lix., page 14. ** lix. and xvii. tfii., p. xv., and i„
pp. 1, et seq. XX xxii., page 46. g§ xxx., page 19. ||||iv., page 13. TTITiv.,
page 14. *** xxxvi., page 123. f+t xxviii., page 130, and Ixxii., page22B.
Jtt xix., page 176. §§§xxvi., page 810. ||||||xxix., page 164. WIT xlv.,
page 13. **** i., page 9. tttf xxxvii.


and Laurillard figure it. But Coues* names as supinator longue the
muscle which Brooks regards as extensor carpi radialis longior.
Cones’ view is certainly erroneous.
Mivart describes a supinator longus in Echidna, f though he inserts
a query to the name ; and the same muscle is also described and
figured by WestlingJ as fused at its origin with the brachialis anticus,
and as supplied by the median nerve along with the latter muscle.
In dissections by Dr. McKay I find no separation of supinator
longus from brachialis anticus (in fact no satisfactory indication of a
supinator longus at all) in Ornithorhynclms, while in Echidna there is
a very well marked segmentation of a supinator longus parallel with
and close to the brachialis anticus.
In Chlamydophorus and Tatusia§ the muscle is absent, as also in
Dasypus\\ ; but in most Edentata it appears to be present.
It is absent in all Inseclivora and liodentia ,lT but generally present in
Carnivora. It is absent, e.g., in PTywna striata and Proteles.**
M. extensor carpi radialis (figs. 6,7, 9,10, 12, and 17 e.c.r.)
arises from the ectocondylar ridge and from the septa between it
and the adjacent muscles.
It is a large fleshy muscle (indivisible into segments), ending in
a stout tendon which descends dorsad of the prominent radial
styloid and passes under cover of the extensor ossis metacarpi
pollicis which crosses it just below the styloid. Still more dis-
tally it is crossed (close to its insertion) by the indicial extensor
tendon. Its insertion is into the dorsal aspect of the base of the
metacarpal of the third digit.
There is no trace of a second radial extensor, and the muscle
present corresponds from its insertion rather to the ext. carpi rad.
brevior. The entire absence of a portion of muscle or tendon
representing the long extensor is doubtless correlated with the
peculiar condition of permanent opposition and partial flexion of
the metacarpals of both pollex and index in the highly modified
manus of this animal.
Cunnigham notes that the fleshy bellies of the radial extensors of
the carpus are completely amalgamated in Phascogale, though the ten-
dons were separate. In Cuscus and one specimen of Thylacinus the same
author found the muscles quite separate, while another specimen of
Thylacinus resembled Phascogale in this respect, ff
MacCormickJl found in all the specimens of Dasyums examined by
him (and of Phalangista ?J that the muscles were fused throughout, the
single tendon being inserted into the metacarpal of the third digit.
But in most marsupials its insertion is into the metacarpals of both
second and third digits. Young found the muscles in Koala§§ fused in
some cases, separate in others. Macalister(| || mentions one muscle only
in Macropus hennettii, Phascolomys sarcophilus, Phalangista, and Macro-
* iii., page 153. + xxxix., page 386. X Ixii., pages 19 and 2:3. § xxvii.,
page 255. || xiv., page 540. II xxvi., page 810. ** Ixxiii., page 191.
ft iv., page 14. XX xxxvi., page 123. g§ Ixxii., page 229. |||| xxix., page
163.


pus major, but as inserted in these forms into both second and third
metacarpal. He also notes a single tendon only in Didelphys, where
Meckel describes a double muscle.* Both radial extensors are present
in Petaurista.f
In Echidna MivartJ describes both long and short extensors, the
former inserted into the scapholunar, and the latter into the third
metacarpal. Westling gives a similar accouut.§
In Ornithorhynclms Brooks|| notes substantially the same arrange-
ment, only the long extensor is inserted into the first metacarpal, and
the ligaments on the dorsum of the carpus.
Cones’ nomenclature!! of the muscles of this region is different, but
I do not think his view of the homologies can be upheld.
In Chlamydophorus there is only one radial extensor, but two tendons
are present, according to Maoalister,** inserted into metacarpals of
index and medius. Hyrtlff only gives the former insertion. Among
other Edentates a like condition obtains to that noted by Macalister,
but often only an insertion into the third metacarpal is found, e.g.,
CydothnmsXX and Orycteropus.§§
Amongst the Insectivora the muscle is inserted into the second and
third metacarpals in Erinaceus Oymnura and the Talpidoe. In Chryso-
chloris it is attached to second metacarpal only.|| [|
Amongst Bodentia it is almost invariably split into long and short
extensors, inserted as usual|||| and similarly in various Carnivora.
The intermediate sector of the superficial extensor stratum is
represented by the M. extensor communis digitorum (figs. 9, 17,
e.c.d. 1, and e.c.d. 2). This muscle is represented by two fleshy
bellies united at their origins from the distal portion of the
ectocondyle. Fibres of each head also arise from the septum
between the two, and from the septa between their common
origin and that of the extensor carpi radialis in front, and of the
extensor carpi ulnaris behind. The two bellies become separate
in the lower part of the forearm. Opposite the radio-carpal
joint their tendons pass together through a strong and well-
defined fibrous sheath to enter the dorsum of the manus. The
more radial of the two tendons (e.c.d. 1) runs distally on the
dorsal aspect of the metacarpal of the third digit, and is inserted
into the ulnar of the two slight tubercles on the prominent dorsal
projection of the base of the ungual phalanx of that digit, side by
side with the tendinous slip from the M. extensor indicis et medii
digiti (vide infra), which is inserted into the radial of the two
tubercles. The second (ulnar) tendon of the extensor communis
(e.c.d. 2) is slightly the stronger, and the transition from broad
fleshy belly of this part of the muscle to narrow rounded tendon
is a very abrupt one. It passes through the same fibrous sheath
as the first-named tendon, and is inserted into the .radial angle of
* xxxviii., page 138. txix., page 176. t xxxix., page 387. § Ixii.,
page 26. || i.., page 9. IT iii., loc. cit. ** xxvii., page 255. ft xxiv.,
page 38. JJxxvii., page 256. §§ xxi., page 306. |||| xxvi., page 812.


the very broad base of the ungual phalanx of the fourth digit,
•which is indeed fused with the base of the claw itself.
In accordance with the peculiarly modified manus in Notonjdes, this
muscle exhibits a marked reduction from the ordinary marsupial type.
In Koala* Young describes an insertion into each of the five digits.
This, Cunningham remarks,! i s exceptional, as “in the great majority
of marsupials its insertion is limited to the four inner digits.”
[I do not think that Young’s interpretation of the extensor group of
muscles in Koala is a correct one. In several points it differs markedly
from Macalister’s brief account. I have dissected a young specimen
in order to decide certain differences. I find that the extensor com-
munis digitorum arises from the ectocondyle, and divides above the
dorsal carpal ligament into three tendons, one for the medius, another
for the medius and annularis, and a third, which is very broad in the
dorsum of the hand, mainly for the minimus, but partly also for the
annularis. The fibres of the last two tendons thus undergo a partial
decussation. The first-named tendon (for the medius) passes through
a separate theca. No tendon goes to either index or pollex, but the
proper medial tendon is connected by a strong and somewhat rounded
transverse vinculum with the indicator tendon.]
In Thylaciws, according to Cunningham, the muscle is trifid in the
forearm, each tendon subsequently splitting, the six tendons being
distributed to the four ulnar digits.
In Echidna MivartJ describes the muscle as bicipital, one head
being ulnar in origin. He only notes tendons of insertion into the
three middle digits, while Westlingl describes a tendon going to the
terminal phalanx of each of the five digits.
In Ornithorhxymhus the muscle is not bicipital, and arises only from
the ectocondyle, its terminal tendon expanding on the back of the
hand, and sending a slip to the distal phalanx of each of the five digits
(Brooks ||).
In VMamydophorus’i the muscle passes unbroken beneath the
annular ligament, and then goes to be inserted into the second, third,
and fourth digits.
The precise insertion varies in Edentates; in several cases it is into
second, third, and fourth digits, as in Uhlamydophorus, but it may be
into second and third, third and fourth, or third only.
In Erinaceus, which is so very slightly specialised, it is inserted into
each of the five digits.
In Chrysochloris** the insertion is into the third and fourth digits
only. In this animal, it will be remembered, the manus is modified in
somewhat similar manner as in Notoryctes.
No M. extensor minimi digiti (extensor secundus digitorum
auct.) is present.
Such a muscle, designated by Macalisterff as “extensor secundus
digitorum,” is constantly present amongst other Marsupials, and is
generally inserted into the fourth and “ fifth ” digits, rarely into the
* Ixxii., page 229. t iv., page 15. % xxxix., page 387. § Ixii., page 26,
and fig. 14. || i., page 8. If xxvii., page 256. ** xxvi., page 813. t+xxix.,
page 164.


fifth only, and sometimes ( Sarcophilus, Bennett’s, and Giant Kangaroo*)'
into the third, fourth, and fifth digits.
In Koala I found the muscle with usual origin passing through a
special theca, its tendon splitting into two, which pass on a deeper
plane than extensor communis. The ulnar of the two tendons goes
to minimus, the more radial is joined by a fibrous expansion from the
tendon of the extensor medii proprius, and then passes to the annularis.
The muscle is present both in Omithorhynchus and Echidna, f
For conflicting opinions regarding the homology of this muscle see
infra (page 47).
The ulnar sector of the superficial stratum of the extensor mass
is represented by the M. extensor carpi ulnaris. (Dr. Brooks,
holds that the M. anconeus quartus is likewise a part of this-
sector, but I have preferred to describe it along with the extensor
mass of the brachiura.)
M. extensor carpi ulnaris (figs. 9, 17. e.c.u.) (“ ulnaris ex-
ternus”) arises by a narrow pointed origin from the lower
part of the ectocondyle between the preceding muscle and the
anconeus externus, with whose distal border it is in close appo-
sition. Fibres of the muscle also arise from the intermuscular
septa between it and adjacent muscles. It broadens out as it
descends in the forearm, narrowing again towards the wrist into-
a moderately strong tendon. This passes beneath a fibrous arch,
which binds it down to the back of the lower end of the ulna
and ulno-carpal ligament, but immediately distal to this it turns
abruptly inwards {vide fig. 17), winding almost under cover of the
base of the great claw of the fourth digit to reach the dorsum of
the diminutive fifth digit, to be inserted into the rudimentary
metacarpal bone of the latter.
Among the Marsupials this muscle is sometimes split into two.
Thus Cunningham found two distinct factors in Phascogale and in a
specimen of Thylaeinus,X while in Dasyunts§ MacConnick found two-
quite distinct tendons of insertion. In Sarcophilus || Macalister also
describes a second element which he identifies as ulnaris quinti, and
which corresponds, according to MacCormick, to one of the tendons he
found in Dasyum s.
The muscle is sometimes' merely ectocondylar and fascial in origin
(Sarcophilus, Didelphys, Phalangista, Dasyurus ), but in others an ulnar
origin is also present (Phascolomys Macropus, Peramelis, Phascolarctos) T.
In Phascolarctos I found it ectocondylar and fascial only, its tendon
passing through a special theca behind lower end of ulna, and then
winding round wrist to palmar aspect of fifth metacarpal, into which
it is inserted close beside tendon of flexor carpi ulnaris, to which it
is in this animal functionally accessory.
The usual insertion in this order is into the base of the fifth metacar-
* xxix., page 164. t i., page 10, and fig. 6; Ixii., page 27. t iv., page
15. §xxxvi., page 126. 11 xxx., page 19. IT xxix., page 164 ; xxxvi., page
126 ; and Ixxii., page 229.


pal, e.<j., in Phascolarctos, Phalangista rnaculata, Thylacine (sometimes),
Phaseolomys, and Myrmecohius.* But where there are two tendons of
insertion one may pass to the os hamatum, while the other goes to the
fifth metacarpal, as in Phascogale and one specimen of Thylacinus
(Cunningham), or as in Dasynrns and Sarcophilus,jf both tendons pass
to the metacarpal bone of the fifth digit.
In Echidna MivartJ notes the muscle as both ectocondylar and ulnar
in origin, i.c., from olecranon. WestlingJ mentions also a fleshy origin
from the ulnar shaft. The latter I have not been able to verify from
dissections. Mivart merely gives as its insertion the outer side of the
dorsum of the fifth digit, but Westling describes it as joining the
extensor tendons of the fifth digit, and being inserted into the lateral
borders of the middle and base of the terminal phalanx. Wenzel
Gruber,j[ on the strength of Mivart’s observations, holds that in
Echidna the “ ulnaris externus” is simply an “ulnaris digiti quinti.”
In Ornithorhynehus Brooks'; found the origin ectocondylar only, and
that the tendon of insertion passed along with that of the extensor
minimi digiti, and divided at the wrist into two. Of these one was
inserted, as Westling found the tendon inserted in Echidna. The
other, deeper, was joined by a slip from the abductor minimi digiti,
and was then inserted into the base of the proximal phalanx of the
little finger. Here also, therefore, as Brooks remarks, the muscle is
converted into an ulnaris quinti digiti.
This description is remarkably different from that given by Coues,**
who specially states that, while all other muscles lying on the forearm
are more or less condylar in origin, this one “arises wholly from the
ulna.” Further, he states that it is inserted into the base of the fifth
metacarpal, “ partaking somewhat of the general tendency to aponeu-
rotic expansion that characterises all the tendons coming down on the
back of the hand.”
Brooks’ view is in agreement with Meckel’s. The latter,ff in men-
tioning the muscles attached to the ectocondyle, and after noting the
extensor communis digitorum, proceeds:—“ Sequitur hunc latus et
crassus, ulnaris externus, phalangi primre digiti quinti insertus.”
Cones has plainly taken for extensor (his “ flexor”) carpi ulnaris
what Meckel and Brooks describe as “ extensor indicis et pollicis,”
while he has taken the true extensor carpi ulnaris for extensor minimi
digiti, apparently entirely overlooking the real extensor minimi, which
lies more deeply. This author’s description of the mode of ending of
the extensor tendons is extremely vague and unsatisfactory. In par-
ticular, I cannot understand his statement that the tendon of his
“ flexor” (“ extensor” of ordinary anatomists) carpi ulnaris is inserted
into the fifth metacarpal. As a matter of fact, the tendon of the muscle in
question does not pass at all near to the fifth metacarpal, but, as Brooks
describes it, passes beneath the posterior annular ligament in the same
compartment with the tendon of the extensor communis digitorum,
and on the back of the hand distributes slips to the dorsal expansions
• * Ixxii., page 229 ; iv., page 15 ; xxix., page 164; and xxvi., page 816.
+ iv., page 15 ; xxxvi., page 126 ; and xxx., page 19. J xxxix., page 387.
§ Ixii., page 27. lllx., page 24. ITi., page 9. ** lit., page 154. +T xxxvii.,
page 27.


upon the pollex, index, and medius; hence Meckel’s name for it of
extensor pollicis et digit! indicis.
I have satisfied myself by dissection that the accounts given by.
Meckel and more fully by Dr. Brooks are correct descriptions, and
there can be little doubt that the muscles are correctly named in their
writings. It may be remarked that the quite superficial fleshy and
aponeurotic origin from the ulna of the extensor pollicis et indicis
reminds one of the origin of the human extensor carpi ulnaris. Here,
however, the resemblance ends. It may also be noted that in Echidrui
the ulnar origin of the former muscle is not superficial, as it is in
Oraithorhynchus, being overlapped by the olecranon fibres of the
extensor carpi ulnaris, which lie close up to the posterior border of the
ulnar shaft. Accordingly, there is a superficial resemblance between
the ext. carpi ulnaris in Echidna and the extensor pollicis et indicis in
Ornithorhynchus, so far as the relations of their fleshy bellies are con-
cerned ; but the homologue of the latter muscle in Echidna will be
found beneath the former.
In Chlamydaphorus* the muscle is very weak, ectocondylar in origin,
and inserted into metacarpal V.
In OrycteropnsJ origin ectocondylar, insertion by two slips into
metacarpals IV. and V.
In Dasypus scxfinctua,* ectocondylo-ulnar in origin, insertion V.
metacarpal.
In Bradypus gularis § two muscles are present; one ectocondylar
inserted into metacarpal IV., the other, ectocondylo-ulnar (mainly
ulnar) in origin, inserted into metacarpal V.
In Cyclothurvs,§ also two muscles; one ectocondylar only, inserted
into metacarpal 111. ; the other, ectocondylo-ulnar (mainly ectocon-
dylar), inserted chiefly into metacarpal V., but sending a delicate slip to
metacarpal IV.
In Hants,§ also two muscles; one, ectocondylo-ulnar in origin, is
the smaller, and is inserted into the palmar surface of metacarpal V.;
the other—more internal—arises from the ectocondyle, “ between the
preceding and the extensor communis, and divides a little above the
wrist into two broad tendons; the outer and smaller of these is in-
serted into the outer side of metacarpal V., and the inner is continued
along the outer side of digit IV. to the terminal phalanx.” Humphry
remarks in reference to this arrangement that the three elements just
described in Manis correspond to the peronei in' the hind limb, and
he proceeds—“ In the forelimb the three muscles are in several ani-
mals blended into one, the extensor carpi ulnaris. In others there are
two—the extensor carpi ulnaris, constituting the homologue of the
peroneus brevis and longus, and the extensor minimi digiti, which may
pass to two-or more digits, constituting the homologue of the peroneus
tertius. All these, together with the extensor digitorum, belong to
what I describe as the ‘superficial layer.’”|| Against this view St.
John Brooks maintains that the extensor minimi digiti appertains not
to the superficial stratum at all, but to the deep or extensor brevis
stratum, such as is found in Hatteria. Upon this question c.f. Brooks’
papers and discussion on his views.ll
* xxvii., page 257. f xv., page 583. Jxiv., page 543. § xxii., page 46.
xxii., page 46. *i i., pp. let seq., and Ixxii., pp. xv. and xix.


M. supinator radii brevis (figs. 16 and 17, s.r.b.). (This muscle
is systematised by Dr. Brooks* as a delaminated portion of the
radial sector of the superficial extensor stratum.)
It takes origin from the lowest part of the ectocondyle by a
narrow origin, and is inserted into the outer surface of the shaft
of the radius as far distally as the insertion of the M. pronator
radii teres, encroaching upon both dorsal and palmar aspects of
the bone. The posterior interosseous nerve (N. radialis prof.)
appears at its dorsal border between it and the extensor ossis
metacarpi pollicis.
The muscle is relatively well developed in Notoryetes, occupying
three-fifths of the shaft of the radius, and it is deeply placed
under cover of the superficial extensor muscles.
Cunningham notes the muscle as feebly developed in the three Mar-
supial forms dissected by him,f but Macalister notes it as well devel-
oped in Koalaf;, occupying two-fifths of the shaft of the radius, in
Wombat as occupying two-thirds of the bone, in the Tasmanian devil,
Wallaby and Giant Kangaroo ona-third, and in the Opossum only the
upper fourth. §
In Dasyurus it is limited to the upper fourth,|| and MacCormick
here notes an origin from the orbicular ligament of the radius. In no
Marsupial has an ulnar region been described.
In Echidna H the muscle is purely condylar in origin, and has an
extensive insertion into four-fifths of the radius.
In Omitiwrhynchus it also possesses a condylar origin only, but its
insertion is much less extensive, viz., into the upper third of the
external border, and slightly into the anterior surface of the radius
(Brooks**).
In Chlamydophorws the supinator brevis is poorly developed, and it
is absent in Tatusia, but in several other Edentata it is large, e.g.,
Cydothums and Pholidotus.XX
It is absent in the Talpidce%X amongst the Insectivora, but present in
the Erinaceidoe.§§ It is present also in Bodentia\\\\ and Carnivora.
The deep stratum of the extensor muscle of the antibrachium
is represented in Notoryetes by two muscles. The first is
M. extensor ossis metacarpi pollicis (figs. 9-12 and 17 e.m.p.). This
is a broad muscle arising from both bones of the forearm between
the supinator brevis on the radial, and the extensor indicis on
the ulnar side, and extending as far proximally as the lower
border of the anconeus externus, or even beneath it. At the
wrist the muscle narrows and gives place to a fine tendon, which
escapes obliquely from under cover of the common extehsor of
the digits, and, crossing the tendon of the extensor carpi radialis,
it winds round the summit of the radial styloid and passes
* i., page 1. f iv., page 16. Jxxviii, page 130. § xxix., page 165,
Hxxxvi., page 128. Vxxxix., page 387. ** i., page 9. ffxxvii., page
255. JJxxvi., page 811. §§ viii., page 395. |||| xl., page *OO.


further obliquely on to the apparent palmar (but still morpho-
logically dorsal) aspect of the carpus to reach the base of the
metacarpal bone of the pollex, into which alone it is inserted.
In Cuscus Cunningham found this muscle partly subdivided, one slip
being inserted into the trapezium. He regards this as corresponding
to the separation in the human subject of an extensor primi internodii
pollicis. In Thylacinns the subdivision was complete, while the condi-
tion in Phascoyale resembled that in Cuscus.* A like condition is noted
both by Youngf in Koala, and by Macalister also in that animal, as
well as in the Wombat and Tasmanian devil and others.}; The charac-
ters of the muscle in Koala are rather striking. It has the usual radio-
ulno-interosseous origin. Halfway along the forearm its radial border
developes a tendon which almost immediately separates from the rest
of the muscle. This tendon is of even width and much slenderer than
the broad flat tendon of the rest of the muscle, which begins just above
the wrist. Both tendons pass through a special fibrous theca at the
wrist, crossing the supinator longus and radial extensors of the carpus.
The long slender tendon is inserted into the radial border of the meta-
carpal of the pollex, and lies close to but unconnected with the abduc-
tor brevis pollicis. The thick, strong tendon of the rest of the muscle
is inserted into the trapezium.
Extensor profundus in I’etaurista tayuanoides§ consists of extensor
secundi internodii pollicis and extensor medii digiti, the latter con-
nected also with the second and fourth digits.
In Dasytirns\l MacCormick found only the pollicial attachment. So
also Sidebotham in ChironectesM In Myrmecobivs it is attached only to
the trapezium.**
According to Carlsson (quoted by Leche),** the insertion in Didelphys
is into the first metacarpal and into the “ prsepollex.”
In Echidnajif Mivart describes it as a delicate muscle, interosseo-
ulnar in origin, pollicial only in insertion. It is closely associated with
the common extensor, according to Westling. J +
Brooks found practically the same condition in Ornithorhynchus.§§
In Chlamydophonis the muscle is very large, ulnar in origin, and
inserted into the metacarpal of the pollex. It is very much the same
in and IJasypus, but in Oydothurus it is “ humeral in origin,
and is inserted into the ossicle, which is the rudiment of the first
metacarpal, or “of trapezium and others,” according to Humphry.
In Orycteropus it is inserted into the trapezium only, and into this
bone and partly into the first metacarpal in Myrmecophagg,.\\\\
Dobson does not mention the muscle in Gymnura,% H and according
to Leche it occurs in all except this Insectivore.
Leche quotes from Carlsson to the effect that in Castor and Bhizomys
besides the usual insertion (into the pollicial metacarpal; there is a
tendinous slip to the praepollex, and in Cercolabes the latter is the only
insertion.***
M. extensor indicis el medii digiti proprius (figs. 9, 11, 12, and
* iv., page 15. f Ixxii., page 229. J xxviii., page 431, and xxix., page
164. §xix., page 176. ||xxxvi., page 126. ITliii., page 10. ’* xxvi., page
817. ft xxxix., page 387. X\ Ixii., page 28. §§ i., page 9. |||| xxvii., page
258, and xxii., page 48. W viii. *** xxvi., page 818.


17, e.i.m.). This second deep extensor arises from the posterior
aspect of the shaft of the ulna by a narrow, pointed, fleshy belly,
which extends upwards on the bone as far as the base of the
olecranon, from which its highest fibres arise. The muscle covers
the attachment to the shaft of the ulna of the anconeus externus,
and in the distal part of the forearm it is directed obliquely to-
wards the radius under cover of the extensor carpi ulnaris, so as
to enter the same fibrous compartment of the dorsal annular
ligament which transmits the tendons of the extensor communis
digitorum. Still running obliquely its tendon passes beneath the
tendons of the latter muscle, and comes to lie by their radial side.
It then divides into two slips, the stronger of which passes to
the dorsum of the index, where it is inserted, partly by lateral
expansions into the base of the proximal phalanx and partly by
a direct prolongation of itself into the base of the ungual phalanx.
The other (weaker) division of the tendon is inserted into the
radial of two slight tubercles on the prominent dorsal projection
of the base of the ungual phalanx of the third digit.
M. extensor secundi internodi pollicis (extensor pollicis longns)
is unrepresented, or rather the above muscle is the sole repre-
sentative of the muscular mass from which the extensor secundi
is typically differentiated.
In Thylacinus and Phascogale , according to Cunningham, there is a
single muscular mass sending tendons to pollex, index and medius,
which he designates as extensor secundi internodii pollicis. It is of
course the equivalent of the muscle now under consideration, with the
addition of a pollicial division.
In Citscus the author just mentioned found the same mass repre-
sented by two distinct muscular factors connected respectively with
pollex and medius.
The origin of the compound muscle in Thylacinus and Phascogale
resembles that in Notorycies. There “it springs from the radial side
of the olecranon and from the upper third of the posterior border of
the ulna.”*
Macalisterf describes an extensor secundi internodii pollicis arranged
“ as usual” in Koala, but Young); could find so such muscle in that
animal, nor did he find any such indicator muscle as Macalister also
describes “ giving a filmy slip to the pollex.” Young expressly says
that “ the thumb has no special extensor of the phalanges beyond the
slip derived from the common extensor.”
Both authors describe an extensor secundus digitorum supplying the
fourth and fifth digits, and the extensor medii digiti was conjoined
with this in Young’s dissections, but separate in Macalister’s. The
slips to the fourth and fifth digits Young holds to represent the
extensor minimi digiti. It arises from the shaft of the ulna along
with the extensor medii digiti (c/. page 44).
I am strongly of opinion Young has described, as part of the ex-
• iv., page 16. t xxviii., page 131. t IxxiL, page 229.


tensor communis, those muscular elements which Macalister has
rightly recorded under the names of extensor sceundi intemodii pollicis
and indicator respectively.
As has already been mentioned (p. 44), Young states that the com-
mon extensor is inserted into all five digits, an arrangement which
Cunningham has pronounted to be unusual amongst marsupials.
Macalister, on the other hand, passes over the common extensor in
Koala as arranged “as usual.” And when we look at Young’s descrip-
tion in detail, we note that he found the two radial tendons of his
common extensor passing beneath the annular ligament in a separate
compartment from the others, and going to the pollex and index. Are
these not in all probability Macalister’s extensor secundi and indicator
together ? This explanation would largely harmonise the discrepancies
between the statements of these two observers.
I have verified by careful dissection the accuracy of Macalister’s
description. I find that an extensor pollicis longus (secundi inter-
nodii) is undoubtedly present. It is separable from the rest of the
deep extensor stratum, except high up at its origin from the olecranon,
where it is only partially separable from the fibres of the indicator
muscle. The latter arises from the proximal part of the ulnar shaft
and the aponeurosis covering it. Distal to this again, and separated
from it by a small bare area of the ulnar shaft, is the origin of the
extensor medii digiti proprius. Extensor pollicis longus passes
through a special theca, and opposite the metacarpal its long and
strong tendon is connected by a broad, flat, tendinous vinculum with
the indicator tendon. It passes to the usual insertion. The tendons
of the indicator and of the proper extensor of the middle finger pass
through a common fibrous compartment beneath the dorsal carpal
ligament.
In his Monograph on the extensor indicis proprius, Ac., Wenzel
■Gruber* states that in a specimen of Pliascolarctos cinerens he found
an extensor pollicis longus (secundi intemodii pollicis), an extensor
indicis proprius, and an extensor digiti medii proprius. The first-
named had a special sheath in the dorsal carpal ligament, while the
other two passed beneath that ligament in a common sheath, with that
tendon of the common extensor of the digits going to the index. The
arrangement here described is very similar to that I have just noted in
Koala. But in my specimen there was no tendon of the common
extensor going to the index at all, hence the indicator and extensor
medii tendons were alone in their theca.
In Dasyurus][ MacCormick found a small and fusiform extensor
secundi intemodii pollicis arising from the radial side of the olecranon
and overlapping the lower part of the insertion of the anconeus
externus, and thus corresponding in part to the origin of the extensor
indicis et medii digiti in Notoryctes. He also found a muscular mass
in series with the extensor secundi, and arising from the posterior
surface of the ulnar shaft. It accompanied the extensor secundi under
cover of the extensor communis, and divided into slips for the second,
third, and fourth digits. It was very variable in size and connections.
Sometimes the slip to the fourth digit was absent, and sometimes the
indicial part Was a distinct muscle.
* Ixi., page 46. f xxxvi., pages 127-8.


In Sarcophilva* Macalister describes an “ extensor indicis ” giving
slips to second, third, and fourth digits, in addition to an extensor
secundi internodii pollicis, as in Dasyurus. The author views this
series of slips as forming a third group of extensors of the digits. His
second group, or extensor secundus digitorum, is constituted by the
homologue of the human extensor minimi digiti, which in Sarcophihis
arises with the extensor communis, and supplies tendons to the third,
fourth and fifth digits, f
In Wombat,* extensor pollicis longus is present, but the extensor
indicis is absent, and the extensor secundus digitorum supplies only the
fourth and fifth digits.
It is at least difficult to reconcile this overlapping of the series of
slips from Macalister’s extensores secundus and tertius respectively,
with Brooks’s view I that the extensor minimi digiti is simply a dis-
placed element of the extensor brevis series of slips which form
originally an extensor profundus in the forearm.
In Chironectes§ an extensor secundi internodii pollicis is present,
giving slips to both pollex and index, and a like condition obtains in
Myrmecohius ||.
In Ornitharhynclws Dr. Brooks, following Meckel,tl has described an
“extensor indicis et pollicis,” giving tendons to pollex, index, and
medius. It is large, ulnar in origin (extending up to and upon olec-
ranon), and it is subcutaneous for a large part of its extent. This
muscle is plainly the one noted by Coues** under the name of “ flexor”
(extensor) carpi ulnaris, though the insertion given by him is inexplic-
able to me. I have already alluded (p. 46) to the confusion introduced
by Coues’ unfortunate statements. I have made dissections which fully
corroborate Dr. Brooks’ description in almost every detail. Coues’
description of this region must, therefore, be put aside as erroneous.
In Echidna neither Mivartft nor WestlingJJ has described any deep
extensor, save the extensor ossis metacarpi pollicis. Indeed, Mivart
expressly states that neither extensor secundi internodii pollicis nor
extensor indicis are present. I have already (p. 47) referred to the
presence of such a muscle in dissections I have made of the forearm of
Echidna. It is quite a large muscle, arising from the proximal half of
the dorsal aspect of the shaft of the ulna and from the base of the
olecranon. Its origin upon the shaft of the ulna is parallel with that
of the extensor ossis metacarpi, which indeed is slightly overlapped by
it. It is largely covered at its origin by the origin of the extensor
carpi ulnaris, and under cover of this the upper pointed end of its
origin touches the insertion of the anconeus externus. Below, the
muscle passes beneath the extensor communis, which position it occu-
pies for the rest of its course, hence in Westling’s figure it does not
come into view. On the dorsum of the hand its tendon flattens out
beneath the expansion of the common tendon which it joins, but fibres
of it may be traced to all the four outer digits.
Thus the condition in Echidtia is essentially the same as that in
Ornithorhynclats. It is probable that the muscle just described is repre-
sented in Westling’s account by the deep head of the extensor communis
* xxix., page 164. t Cf., also iv., page 17. I i., page 14. § liii., page 10.
|| xxvi., page 818. T i., page 10, and fig. 6; Ixii., page 27. '* in., page
154. ffxxxix. JJlxii.


digitorum of that author. I found the tendons separable from those
of the extensor communis as above stated, hence I take it to be a true
deep extensor muscle.
The condition of the corresponding muscle in Chlamydophorus is
thus described by Macalister* :—“ Extensor indicis (‘ quamvis etiara
ad pollicis fasciolam fibrosam ablegaret, quae sola pollicis extensioni
sufficere debet ’) arises high up from the ulna as high as the olecranon;
it is very large, larger than its neighbour the extensor ossis metacarpi
pollicis. I found its main tendon passing as usual to the dorsum of
the index, but a broad slip of fascia stretches along the dorsum of the
thumb to the last phalanx, justifying the words of Prof. Hyrtl before
quoted.”
In Tatusia the same author found it also exceedingly large and
strong, and here it ended in two tendons inserted into the index and
medius. So also in Orycteropus.f
In DasypnsX the tendons are inserted into the index and pollex. In
Bradypus (didact and tridad) § the insertion is into the index alone,
and in Manis (Philodotus, Macalister) Dalrnanni) § into the terminal
phalanges of each of the first three digits.
In Manis multiseutatus Macalisteril found no long extensor indicis,
but the extensor brevis digitorum on the back of the carpus was
indicial in its insertion. He found the muscle ulnar in origin and
pollicio-indicial in insertion in Myrmecopliaga.
In Edentata separate and distinct extensors of the thumbs are rarely
present, if we exclude the extensor ossis metacarpi as an abductor
longus. Macalister notes the extensor pollicis longus (secondi inter-
medii) as a very small muscle in Myrrmcophaya and Manis.'l
Among the Kodcntia the extensor indicis is present in many forms,
amongst others in Hystrix, Arctomys, Castor,** Oavia, Lepws, and Dasy-
procta.f f Of these it sends a tendon also the pollex in Lepusif and
Castor (usually)**, so that the muscle represents the extensor secundi
intemodii pollicis as well. In Dasyproda and others the extensors of
the thumb are absent.
In GapromysXX a special extensor secundi intemodii pollicis is present
along with the extensor indicis.
In Chrysochloris among the Insectivora Dobson found extensor indicis
as a single muscle, so also frequently in Erinacens.§§
For further details of the morphology of this muscle cf. Gruber’s
monograph.ini
Muscles of flexor aspect of forearm are four in number.
M. pronator radii teres (figs. 6,7, 10, 11, 12, and 16, p.r.t.) is
a muscle of considerable size, and forms the preaxial member of
the group of muscles arising from the entocondyle. From its
origin onwards it lies partly under cover of the flexor carpi
radialis, but a strip of it is superficial. Its origin is partly
* xxvii., page 258. f xv., page 581. X x iv., page 542. § xxii., page 49,
and PI. 252, fig. 1. || xxxv., page 50G ; Cf. also, xvi., page2s2. IT xxxv.,
page 506. ** xxxviii., page 551. ft xl., page 405. Jf Dobson quoted by
Leche, xxvi., page 819. §§ Ixi., page 45. ||i| Ixi.


fleshy and partly tendinous from the entocondyle, and its fibres
pass distally to be inserted into the shaft of the radius on the
palmar aspect of its distal fourth. It overlaps the insertion of
the biceps, and the large median nerve passes under cover of it.
The M. pronator quadratus is entirely absent.
I am not aware of any other Marsupial in which the pronator quad-
ratus is absent, and in many it occupies the whole length of the
interosseous space,* e.tj., in Wallaby and Perameles.
The coronoid head of the pronator radii teres is never present in any
Marsupial, and its general characters in the order are very constant,
varying chiefly in size and extent of insertion into radius. In some
cases (Cuscusf) it is inserted into the distal half of the shaft, in others
(Thylacinus and Dasyi'ruaj J into the middle third or so of the radius,
and in MacmpmX into the upper third.
Both in Ornithurhynchns and Echidna the pronator teres is very
strongly developed, is entocondylar in origin, and is inserted into the
radial shaft as low as the wrist.
There is no trace of a pronator quadratus in the Moiwtremata.
Amongst Edentata the condition of the pronator quadratus is very
variable.
In Uhlamydophoins§ Macalister found the pronator quadratus repre-
sented by a fibrous band, whilst Hyrtl found no trace of it.
It is rudimentary in Tatusia, absent in Pholidotus and Dasypm, |j
while in Oryctcropusl Galton found it occupying the whole interosseous
space, though Humphry found it small. Galton found it in Cydo-
thurus** as in Orycteropus.
Macalister notes it as absent in Manis, and as reaching the whole
length of the forearm in Myrmecophaga f f.
The pronator teres in Edentata is always inserted into the distal
part of the radial shaft for an extent varying from one-third fChlamy-
dophormj to two-thirds (Manixj. The coronoid head is invariably
absent.**
Macalister’s paper]; f on the Pronator muscles in Vertebrates may be
further consulted on the morphology of these muscles.
M. flexor carpi idnaris (figs. 6,7, 9, 12, 13, 14, and 15 f.c.u.).
This muscle arises by two very distinct heads—one from the
olecranon, the other from the entocondyle. Just above the wrist
these bellies unite to form a strong tendon, which is first
developed upon the superficial aspect of the muscle, and is united
with the overlying aponeurosis of the tendon of .insertion of the
latissimus dorsi. The tendon is inserted into the elongated pisi-
form bone near to its base (figs. 14 and 15).
At their origin the two heads of the muscle are in relation
with the distal border of the M. anconeus internus, and together
♦ xxxiii., page 337. f iv., page 17, and xxxvi., page 130. J xxix., page
162. §xxvii., page 253, and xxiv., page 39. Hxxvii., page 253, and xiv.,
page 546. IT xv., pagesB6. ** xvi., page2s3. tt xxxv., pageso4. XX xxxiii.,
page 335.


with it they limit a small triangular interval, at the bottom of
which the ulnar nerve may be found.
The muscle is relatively a very powerful one. As has already
been mentioned, it is covered by a strong aponeurosis, which
forms the continuation of the tendon of insertion of the M. latis-
simus dorsi.
The arrangement of this muscle in Notoryctes is practically identical
with that found by Cunningham in Thylacinus and Phascogale,* <£nd is
fairly typical of marsupials generally. In the three forms examined
by the last-named author the insertion was into the pisiform in each
case; so also is the case in Sarcophilusf and Dasyums.* In Phasco-
lomysf it is inserted into the fifth metacarpal, and in Phascolarctosi
into both the above-mentioned bones as well as into the os hamatum.
In Chironectes into pisiform and fifth metacarpal. ||
In Macropus f the condylar origin is lacking.
In Echidna the muscle is “ enormously wide” (MivartU), arising not
only from entocondyle and olecranon, but also from the inner border
of the ulnar shaft as far as the wrist. Mivart states that its tendinous
surface “ receives the tendon of the first part of the latissimus dorsi;
and the two muscles becoming thus ultimately united, are together in-
serted into the pisiform bone.” Westling, however, distinguishes this
“ first part of latissimus” from the rest as a “ dorso-antehrachialis,”** the
latissimus dorsi itself being arrested at the entocondyle. As I have
indicated above (p. 1C), this “ dorso-antebrachialis” is inseparable from
the latissimus in Notoryctes, and indeed forms the only insertion of
the muscle, c/. also Cones’ description in Ornithorhynchus. ft
The flexor carpi ulnaris in Ornithorhynchus resembles that in Echidna.
The fibres of its strong tendon are completely arrested at the pisiform
bone; it is only quite indirectly that it has an attachment to the
bases of the fourth and fifth metacarpals, as Meckel describes it;JJ
hence Leche is mistaken in classifying its insertion with others as
deviating from the typical modo.§§
Amongst the Edentata the muscle varies considerably in different
forms, from a slender separate muscle with two scarcely separate heads,
inserted into pisiform in Chlamydophorus, to an enormous mass of
four segments, condylo-pisiform, posterior ulno-pisiform, anterior
ulna-pisiform, and olecrano-pisiform in Cyclothums.
No special features require note in the other orders reviewed.
AT. flexor carpi radialis (figs. 6,7, 11, 12, 14, 15). This
muscle arises from the entocondyle close to the entocondylar head
of origin of the M. flexor carpi ulnaris.
It forms a broad fleshy belly on the flexor aspect of the fore-
arm, which suddenly narrows a little above the wrist and forms a
rounded tendon, which passes through a canal in the “ scapho-
carpal ” (fig. 10, for.f.c.r.). In this bony canal the tendon divides
* iv., page 18. t xxix., page 163. t xxxvi., page 131. § Ixxii., page 230.
|| liii., page 9. ITxxxix., page 388. ** Ixii., page 23, and Taf. iv., fig. 12.
tt ill., page 147. ++ xxxvii., page 28. §§ xxvi., page 827.


into two. Entering the palm these are inserted one into the
base of the metacarpal of the pollex, and the other into the base
of the metacarpal of the index (fig. 15).
Considerable variety prevails among Marsupials with respect to the
mode of insertion of this ■ muscle. Thus in Thylacinus* it is inserted
partly into the trapezium and partly into the metacarpal of the pollex;
in Phascogale* into the trapezium alone; in Cuscus* the tendon splits,
and the slips are inserted into the palmar aspects of the bases of the
metacarpals of the index and medius respectively. In Dasyurusf its
tendon occupies a special compartment in the outer part of the anterior
annular ligament, and is inserted partly into the palmar aspect of the
trapezium and partly into the bases of the second and third metacarpal
bones. In Chironcctes'l it is inserted into the radial side of the base
of the metacarpal of the medius only, and in Phascolarctos § also the
insertion is so limited. In Phascolomys, Phalangista, Diddphys, and
Perameles the muscle passes from the entocondyle to the third meta-
carpal, || but in Barcophilus\\ a slip in addition is attached to the trape-
zium. In Myrmecobius U it is attached to the carpus only (scaphoid
trapezium and lig. carpi volare). It is inserted into the bases of the
second and third metacarpals in Petaurista.**
In Omithorhynchns the muscle is relatively very large, and is deep
palmo-dorsally; the pronator radii teres lies embedded in its ulno-
palmar aspect. Its origin is from the entocondyle at its tip, but ex-
tending deeply on its distal aspect to the very edge of the humero-
radial articulation. Part of the muscle arises from the neck of the
radius.
Just above the carpus the broad fleshy belly narrows with great
abruptness, and a single rounded tendon results which is wholly in-
serted into the radial sesamoid bone, and has no connection except by
means of carpal ligaments with the metacarpal bones. This radial
sesamoid is situated on the palmar aspect of the radio-carpal joint and
scapho-lunar bone, and is united to the latter by ligament.
In Echidna the muscle is not relatively quite as large as in Omitho-
rhynchm, but it has substantially the same origin and relations in the
forearm (I could not make certain that any of its fibres actually took
origin from the radius in the specimen I examined for this purpose).
In the lower part of the forearm it does not contract in width so
markedly as does the corresponding muscle in Omithorhynchns, but a
stout tendon (derived from the tendinous investment of the muscles)
appears along its palmar border. The deeper part of the muscle is
continued, partly fleshy and partly tendinous, into the carpus. Here
it encounters the radial sesamoid bone into which it is inserted, and
this bone is in turn connected by strong ligamentous fibres with the
large scapho-lunar bone in front of which it is placed. The more super-
ficial tendon of the palmar border of the muscle as it enters the hand
flattens out and passes in front of the sesamoid. Westling says it is
connected with the first and second metacarpals. I find, however, that
such a connection is at most quite indirect through the palmar carpo-
metacarpal ligaments with which the tendinous fibres are connected.
* iv., page 17. + xxxvi., page 130. t Ink, page 9. § Ixxii., page 230.
xxix., page 162. 1i xxvi., page 822. ** xix., page 176.


The chief part of the tendon is really inserted into the trapezium and
the scapho-lunar, distal to the radial sesamoid.
The descriptions just given differ somewhat from those given by
other observers,* though on the whole I can corroborate the account
given by Westling of the arrangement of the muscle in Echidna.
The radial sesamoid in Omithorhynchiis is very firmly attached to the-"'
palmar aspect of the scapho-lunar, but I could find no indication what-
ever of any special continuation of the tendon of the flexor carpi
radialis to the base of the second metacarpal, such as is alleged'to exist
in Meckel’s descriptions.!
In Chlamydophmts, Cyclothvnis, and Tatxma% this muscle is small,
and is inserted into the metacarpal of the pollex only; into third,
second, and first metacarpals in Pholidotus; % into the index meta-
carpal, with the intervention of a radial sesamoid bone, in Orycteropus ,§
and into the carpus only in Dasypus (os multangulum)|| and Choloepus
(scaphoid and os multangulum). \
In Dasyprocta (and in Hare, Rabbit, and Guineapig)l the muscle is
entocondylar in origin, but is inserted into the base of the first phalanx
of the index. But in rodents in general Meckel speaks of it as arranged
as usual,** and Leohe gives the index metacarpal as the insertion in the
Rabbit, ff
Amongst the Insectivora it arises in Chrjsorldoris, not only from the
entocondyle, but from the proximal third of the ossified tendon of the
flexor profundus digitorum. It is then inserted into the index meta-
carpal, as also in Erinaceus.l J
Amongst Carnivora the muscle is inserted usually into the index
metacarpal, but may be also into the first or third, e.g., dog.
As already stated, there is no 21. palmaris longus present in
Notoryctes, and the 21. flexor suhlirnis digitorum being also
absent, there is only one long digital flexor present forming the
representative of the M. flexor profundus digitorum (+ flexor
longus pollicis) of other forms.
21. flexor digitorum (figs. 12-15 J.dig.) consists of a muscular
mass imperfectly segmented into four portions.
Following Windle’s of the constituents of the
deep flexor mass, we may here distinguish representatives of
(a) condylo-idnaris, (b) condylo-radialis, (c) ulnaris proprius, (d)
radialis proprius. I found no trace of a centralis element.
All tbe parts of the muscle are attached to the large palmar
sesamoid bone (figs IS-lSjo.ses.). See also Stirling’s description. ||||
From the distal portion of this bone the tendons of insertion
proceed.
Condylo-ulnaris and condylo-radialis (/.dig. 1 and 2 in figures)
arise side by side from the slight pit-like depression on the distal
* xxxvii., page 27 ; in., page 152 ; xxxix., page 388 ; and Ixii., page 25.
f xxxvii., page 27, and xxxviii., page 543. t xxvii., page 250. § xv., page
584. II xiv., page 544. *1 xl., page 400. ** xxxvii., page 544. ft xxvi.,
page 821. xxvi.. page 822. §§ Ixviii., page 73. |;|{ liv., page 177, and
PI. viii., fig. 5.


aspect of the entocondyle. They are partially distinct as far as
the sesamoid bone, into which they are inserted, partly fleshy,
partly tendinous, rather in front of the other two portions.
Ulnaris proprius (/. dig. 3 in figures) arises from the whole of
the hollow inner surface of the large olecranon and from the
inner surface of the proximal half of the ulnar shaft. It is
partly overlapped by the condylar heads of the muscle, and
largely by that of the flexor carpi ulnaris. It is inserted into
the proximal end of the palmar sesamoid by a stout rounded
tendon, side by side with, and on the ulnar side of, the insertions
of the condylar heads, though slightly on a deeper plane. The
tendon of insertion is continued up in the substance of the
muscle ; and into the superficial aspect of the tendon, in the
upper part of the forearm, are inserted many short fleshy fibres,
which arise from the intermuscular septum between the muscle
and the overlying flexor carpi ulnaris.
The remaining portion —radialis proprius (f dig. 4 in figures)
—is deepest of all. It takes origin by fleshy fibres from the
shaft of the radius, extending up as far as the insertion of the
biceps, and downwards as far as the lower end of the radius. It
is inserted into the deeper aspect of the proximal end of the
palmar sesamoid, close to its radial corner.
The distal extremity of the palmar sesamoid gives origin to
two short, very thick, and rounded tendons; and a third, more
slender, tendon arises from the radial border of the bone, close to
its distal end. The latter passes on to the palmar aspect of the
second digit, and courses distally in front of its proximal phalanx,
to whose palmar surface it is secured by a fibrous ring. It then
passes on to be inserted into the palmar aspect of the base of the
terminal phalanx.
The other two thicker tendons are inserted into the palmar
aspects of the strong ungual phalanges of the third and fourth
digits respectively.
A tendinous vinculum connects the medial with the indicial
tendon (fig. 15, vi.).
Lumbrical slips are entirely absent.
Windle* has shown that where the flexor profundus attains a rela-
tively great development, the flexor sublimis is proportionately re-
duced, and this he states to be the case in many of the Carnivora, and
some of the Marsupialia.
Such a condition is typically illustrated in the case of Dasyunu,
where flexor sublimis was found by MacCormickf to consist of a
slender tendon lying in a shallow groove in front of the great flexor
tendon, and arising from the front of the upper part of the latter.
This author describes the great deep flexor mass in four parts, the first
* Ixviii., page 73. t xxxvi., page 132.


of which he takes to be equivalent to the origin of the flexor sublimis;
but this is independent of the muscle he describes, as above quoted,
and is, in fact, plainly identical with Windle’s condylar portions.
MacCormick’s fourth division of the deep flexor is evidently a typical
centralis element.
Palmaris longus is well developed in Dasyurus. An essentially”
similar condition obtains in Phascolarctos,* Chironectes ,f and Myr-
mecohms.%
In Cuscus§ Cunningham found the flexor sublimis arising by four
minute fleshy slips from the surface of the deep flexor mass, but he
regarded as the real equivalent of the origin of the flexor sublimis
what Windle has since taught us to regard as condylo-ulnaris and
-radialis portions of the deep flexor. Practically the same arrangement
was found in Thylacinus and Phascoyale.§ So also in Phascolomys and
Sarcophilus,\\ according to Macalister, who also accepts the condylar
origin as a sublimis, inseparable from profundus, and explains the
arrangement as practically a digastric condition of the sublimis.
I find no case recorded in the literature of marsupial myology in
which the flexor sublimis or palmaris longus are entirely absent.
Westling!! and LeclieJ; both state (authority not given) that in
Macropns' (as in Echidna) no distinct flexor sublimis is present, but
Macalister states|| that in the Wallaby the sublimis “ arises from the
inner condyle inseparably united to the profundus ; but from the
tendon of the common flexor above the wrist the fleshy fibres of the
sublimis arise and form a lower belly, which sends tendons to all the
fingers but the first.” Hence the condition in certain species of
Macropus, at least, is similar to the ordinary marsupial one.
Flexor digitorum gives tendons to all five digits in marsupials
generally. Flexor sublimis usually goes to the four ulnar digits, but
in MyrmecohiusX and Chironectesf the tendon for the fifth digit is
lacking.
I find no record of the existence in any other marsupial of a palmar
sesamoid, such as is found in Notoryctes. The nearest approach to
such a condition is recorded by MacCormick in Dasyurus. In that
animal there is just above the wrist “an exceedingly strong tendinous
mass, which, on its deep surface, is covered by a pad of fibre-cartilage,
In Echidna there is a single large flexor mass, a small partially
separable superficial portion of which Mivart surmised might represent
the palmaris longus. He also took the condylar part of the mass to
represent the flexor sublimis element.ff Westlingjj: does not refer to
any subdivision of the mass.
At the wrist an exceedingly strong tendon is developed, and in this
.is a sesamoid bone (one or two, Mivart). Below this the tendon splits
into five tendons inserted into the terminal phalanges by each of the
digits.
In Ornithorhynchus, too, there is only one flexor mass in the fore-
arm, with a similar arrangement as regards the digits. Coues found
* Ixxii., page 231. tliil., page 9. t xxvi., page 823. § iv., page 18.
|| xxix., page 163. *' Ixii., page 24. ** xxxvi., page 132. ft xxxix., page
388. Ixii., page 23. .


“ several small irregular gritty specks like imperfect sesamoids” in the
tendon at the wrist* (c/. also Meckelf).
In this animal, however, Coues found a small fusiform belly
embedded in the substance of the muscle, and ending in a fine tendon,
which was traced distinctly to the wrist, and then lost.* This he took
to be palmaris longus. He also found in the palm a small muscle, or
rather four small muscles, arising from the palmar aspect of the tendon
of the deep flexor. The fine tendons of these slips he found partly to
join those of the deep flexor, and partly to be arranged like those of a
flexor sublimis, to which accordingly he homologises it.
Meckel refers to the last, but does not name it; and he states that
the four small tendons are inserted, not into bone, but into the inter-
digital membrane. § I think Coues’ view of the homology is probably
correct, and if so the condition in Ornithorhynchns falls well in line
with that described, e.g., in Cuscus, by Cunningham ( supra p. 172),
where the flexor sublimis was reduced to four small fleshy slips arising
in the forearm from the surface of the deep flexor mass. There is,
however, another possible view of the palmar fleshy slips in Omitho-
rhynchus, viz., that they represent a palmaris longus. The superficial
position of the slips, and the somewhat indefinite ending of their
tendons in sheathing the digital flexor tendons is at least equally ex-
plicable upon such an hypothesis. There is certainly no other repre-
sentative of the palmaris longus present.
I have traced the small fusiform muscle which Coues found embedded
in the flexor mass in Ornithorhipichns. Its fine tendon, surrounded by
the mKsculo-tendinous fibres of the rest of the muscle, is attached to
one of the sesamoid bones in the common tendon. It undoubtedly
corresponds, not to the palmaris longus, as Coues thought, but to the
“ centralis” flexor element of Windle.|| It is indeed a fairly typical
example of this factor of the flexor mass.
Both in Echidna and Ornithorhynchns the great flexor muscle is ulnar
and entocondylar in origin.
In Chlamydophorus there is a palmar sesamoid ossicle, and to it three
muscles are attached, according to Macalister.'i The first he regards
as flexor sublimis, and is the only condylar part of the flexor mass. It
as attached to the ulnar side of the palmar sesamoid. I should think
it highly probable that this in reality is only the condylar portion of
the deep flexor, or at least of an only partially differentiated flexor
mass. There are, at any rate, no insertion slips which correspond to
those of a flexor sublimis. The other sectors of the flexor mass attached
to the palmar ossicle are an ulnaris (Macalister’s flexor profundus) and
a radialis (flexor longus pollicis). The three sectors seem to be quite
separable in the forearm. From the distal end of the ovate ossicle five
tendons proceed, including an exceedingly fine one to the pollex.
But Macalister describes in addition** seven fine fleshy bundles
arising from the sesamoid bone, which are inserted into each side of
the second phalanges of the fingers except the thumb, and the ulnar side
of the minimus, “ forming short flexors.” These slips at once remind
one of the very similar slips in Ornithorhynchns, and, as in that animal,
, * iii., page 154. f xxxvii., page 28. J iii., page 155. § xxxvii., page 28,
and xxxviii., page 559. || Ixviii., page 74. *i xxvii., page 251. *’ xxvii.,
page 252.


are at least highly suggestive of true flexor subliiuis elements, here
again shrunk down into the palm. Such a reduction, complete or
partial, is, in fact, found in other well-known,forms, as in Hatteria ;*
and amongst the Mammalia in Viverra civetta,j where that part of the
flexor sublimis, at least, which is inserted into the fifth digit, arises not
with the rest of the superficial flexor fibres in the forearm, but from-'
the annular ligt. and pisiform. The tendon to the fourth digit, too, in
this animal receives an accessory short slip which joins the proper
flexor perforatus tendon. Finally, in the Jerboa,X according to
Humphry, “ the flexor sublimis passes to the three middle digits only,
the other digits (I. and V.) receiving delicate muscular superficial
flexors from the supernumerary carpal ossicle which is present in that
animal.”
Further, in Chlamydojihorus there is a large, thin superficial palmaris
longus J condylar in origin and fleshy to the wrist nearly. “ Its tendon
expands over the palmar ossicle, and ends in four superficial slips lost
in sheathing the tendons over the digits.” Hyrtl was doubtful whether
the latter insertion was not that of a flexor sublimis. Macalister’s
rejection of this tentative view is doubtless right, but I am inclined
to believe that his “ sublimis ” is only part of the deep flexor mass,
and that the true sublimis is represented by the small fleshy slips re-
ferred to arising from the palmar sesamoid.
In Mjrrneco/ihaija jubata\\ Macalister says that the flexor sublimis is
unrepresented, but that a strong bicipital palmaris longus is present
inserted by two slips, one on each side of the first phalanx of the
powerful middle digit. The flexor profundus is very large, with five
heads, but forming a single fleshy belly ending in three tendons—one
central, enormous, for the third digit; one smaller, to the fourth toe;
one still smaller to the index, and a very fine slip to the pollex
The same author notes the presence in Myrmecophaga of “ a small
superficial flexor of the fifth digit, arising from the annular ligament
on its inner side by a tendon ; this small muscle gives off a slip to the
ulnar side of the lumbricalis for the medius.”U
In the absence of a flexor sublimis this muscle bears an interesting
resemblance to similar slips in the Civet and Jerboa for the fifth digit
(v. supra). No such arrangement was found in any of the other
insectivorous Edentates examined by Macalister.
The arrangements of the flexor mass vary so considerably amongst
Edentates that it is scarcely possible to give a synopsis of them.
There is, however, a general tendency to imperfection in the segmen-
tation of flexor sublimis, from the palmaris longus on the one hand,
and from the flexor profundus stratum on the other; and in several
cases flexor sublimis is entirely absent. The arrangement of the ten-
dons of the deep flexor varies, of course, with the skeletal modifica-
tions of the manus. It is interesting to note the presence or absence
of the palmar sesamoid which in several Edentate forms assumes large
proportions, as in Notoryetes. It is present in Manis, but is absent in
the other ant-eaters, and in Onjcteropus Macalister remarks that “ its
presence in Manis is interesting, as it is characteristic of all the cata-
phraotous edentates.”!!
* xx., page 170. fxxii., page 172. + xx., page 176, Note. § xxvii.,
page 250. || xxxv., page 502. IT xxxv., page 503.


In Talpa* the flexor mass forms one single unsegraented muscle,
from which comes a strong tendon ; but in Erinaceus* all the factors
are present. In Chrysochlorisif the flexor sublimis is very small, and
passes only to the second finger. In the latter form the flexor profun-
dus has a large ossification in it which reaches to the carpus.
The sublimis and profundus are generally well differentiated in this
order.
Among the liodentia Windle+ notes that the flexor sublimis is nearly
always a somewhat deeply placed muscle owing to its being overlapped
by the large palmaris longus and flexor carpi ulnaris. According to
the same author, the sublimis is reduced to a minimum in the Car-
nivora, existing nearly always merely as “ an offshoot from the condylo-
ulnaris near the lower end of the forearm.” In this respect the Car-
nivora would seem to resemble the Marsupialia.
It would appear from Mivart’s and Murie’s account of the anatomy
of Dasyprocta§ that a flexor brevis manus exists as a small superficial
muscular mass superficial to the flexor tendons, and arising from their
surface, in addition to a long flexor sublimis. It had an apparent at-
tachment or insertion into the proximal end of the fifth digit. In the
right limb the long flexor sublimis gave tendons to the second, third,
and fourth digits; on the left side to the fifth as well. .It is probable
that this flexor brevis mantis is simply a short accessory portion of the
flexor sublimis corresponding closely to that found in the Civet (v.
supra, p. Cl). The condition in the Guinea-pig would also seem to be
similar, according to Humphry,|| though Mivart and Murie state that
they failed to detect a corresponding structure in that animal.
Intrinsic Musculature op the Manus.
Three muscles only are present, viz. :
21. abductor pollicis,
21. flexor brevis pollicis, and
21. flexor brevis indicis.
21. abductor pollicis (brevis ) (figs. 6,7, 10, 12, 13, 14, and 15,
ab.p.). This muscle is contained in the prominent fold of naked
skin which corresponds to the ball of the thumb, and which near
its proximal part or base is in close relation to the projection of
the rudimentary fifth digit.lT
It is a small but fairly thick quadrate muscle which arises
from the aponeurosis of the manus near the wrist at a point cor-
responding to the anterior annular ligament (which is not very
specially developed). It is inserted into the (morphologically)
preaxial or radial manubrium** which juts out from the proximal
phalanx of the pollex.
21. flexor brevis pollicis (figs. 13 and 14, f.b.p.) consists of two
small flattened muscular bands arising together from the base of
the metacarpal of the third digit. They are inserted into oppo-
♦ Ixviii,, page 76. t xxvi., page 824. X Ixviii., page 77. § xl., page 402.
|| xx., page 176, Note. IT Figs. 2, 9,12, 13,14, 15, and 17 “V.” ** Fig. 15,
“ p. 1.”


site sides of the proximal phalanx of the pollex, the radial inser-
tion being in close relation to the insertion of the abductor.
Along with this may be described the M. flexor brevis indicis,
represented by one small fleshy belly taking origin from the
palmar aspect of the third metacarpal and inserted into the-
palmar aspect or perhaps the ulnar border of the base of the
proximal phalanx of the index.
I know of no other instance amongst the Marsupials where modifi-
cation by suppression of the intrinsic musculature of the hand has gone
on to such an extent as in Notoryctes. And with regard to Marsupials
generally, Young has remarked* that in no other class of mammals has
the common mammalian “type” of this musculature been so con-
stantly adhered to as in the Marsvpialia. The case of Notoryctes is
therefore the more noteworthy. There can be little doubt that the
extreme degree of structural modification here exhibited is simply the
result of a very marked specialisation from functional requirements.
A study of the skeleton of the hand will amply confirm this conclusion.f
Further, be it noted, that the structural modification of this group of
muscles is wholly in the way of suppression, and that in so far as
intrinsic muscles are present their homologies are quite easily inter-
preted. There is no representative whatever of the palmar layer
of “ adductores ” The only representative of the dorsal layer of
“ ahdnctores” is the abductor-pollicis; while the intermediate layer of
“Jlcxnres ” is represented by three bellies, viz., both bellies of the
flexor brevis pollicis and the ulnar belly of the flexor brevis indicis.
In view of the anomalous reduction in the musculature of the region
under notice, it is unnecessary to institute any systematic comparison
with other forms, and it will suffice to take note of the condition as
regards the muscles of the hand in a few animals in which we might
expect similar, or at least parallel, modifications.
As already stated, the condition in Notoryctes is quite unique
amongst marsupials. And although the Echidna is a powerful digger
and burrower, a glance at its skeleton is sufficient to discourage one
from expecting any very marked myological resemblance to the hand
of Notoryctes. It is, however, the case that in Echidna we have an
instance of considerable reduction from the type. The muscles
present (apart from the lumbricals), with one exception, belong to the
dorsal layer of abductores. These latter are—Abductor pollicis (Flexor
brevis pollicis of FewkesJ), and five interosseous muscles. The re-
maining muscle is reckoned by Mivart§ as a sixth interosseous, but
Westling takes it to bo equivalent both to a flexor brevis and an
opponens pollicis.* It arises from the tendon of the flexor carpi
radialis, and is inserted, according to Westling, into the proximal
phalanx and metacarpal of the pollex on its radial aspect.
In Chlamydophorus\\ Macalister found a slender cylindrical abductor
pollicis, an opponens pollicis, and a muscle which he regarded as con-
joint flexor brevis and abductor pollicis. He further states that these
polliceal muscles are absent in Cyclothurus, Bradypus, and Chokepus,\\
• xxxv., pages 158-9. f liv., PI. viii. J Ixii., page 28. § xxxix., page
389. || xxvii., page 253.


though elsewhere* he describes a superficial polliceal muscle in Cyclo-
thurus inserted into the rudimentary trapezium and preaxial side of
the manus.
In his “ Report on the Insectivorous Edentates,” the same author
states that “ the short muscles of the hand are very well developed.”*
The only indication of the condition in Chrysochloris which I can
find is in the following statement from Leche : —“ Wiihrend bei Myo-
gale noch besagte Flexores br. und Adductor pollicis die Hand-
musculatur bilden, fehlt eine solche bei Chrysochlorido: und Talpina
ganzlich.”f
REFERENCES TO LITERATURE.
I. Brooks, 11. St. John, “On the Morphology of the Extensor
Muscles.” Studies from the Museum of Zoology in
Univ. Coll., Dundee, No. V. (Dundee, 1889).
11. Buooks, H. St. J oiin, “ Morphology of the Muscles on the
Extensor Aspect of the Middle and Distal Segments of
the Limbs.” Proc. Anat. Soc., Gt. Brit, and Irel. 1888,
pp. xv. and xix.
111. Couns, E., “On the Myology of the OrnitJturhynchus.” Com-
munications, Essex Institute, vol. VI., March, 1871.
IV. Cunningham, D. J., “ Marsupialia.” Challenger Reports,
vol. V., part XVI.
V. Ciixxixguam, D. J., (On “Achselbogen,” in the report of the
Committee of Investigation in Anatomy in Trinity
Coll., Dublin.) Trans. Roy. Acad. Med., Irel., vol.
VIL, 1889, p. 383.
VI. Cuvier axd Laurii.lakd, “Anatomic Comparee, Recueil de
Planches de Myologie.” Paris, 1855.
VII. Devis, C. W., “Note on the Myology of Viverra civetta.”
Journ. Anat. and Physiol., vol. 11., p. 207.
VIII. Dobson, G. E., “Anatomy of the Erinaceidae.” Proc.
Zool. Soc., 1881, p. 389.
IX. Ellenberoer and Baum, “Anatomie des Hundes.” Berlin,
1891.
X. Flower, \V. H., and Gadow, H., “ Osteology of the Mam-
malia.” London, 1885.
XL Freeman, R. A., “Anatomy of the Shoulder and Upper Arm
of the Mole.” Journ. Anat. and Physiol., vol. XX., p.
201.
XII. Fuerbringer, M., “Zur vergleich. Anat. der Schulter-
muskeln.” Jenaische Zeitschrift, Bde. VII. and VIII.
♦ xxxv., page 503. f xxvi., page 835.


XIII. Fuerbringer, M., “Zur vergleichenden Anatomie der
Schulter-muskeln.” Morphologisches Jahrbuch, Bd. I.
(Leip., 1876).
XIV. Galton, J. C., “The Muscles of the Pore and Hind Limbs
in Dasypus sexcincius.” Trans. Linn. Soc., vol. XXVI.,
p. 525.
XV. Galton, J. C., “The Myology of the Upper and .Lower
Extremities of Orycteropus capensis.” Trans. Linn.
Soc., XXYL, p. 567.
XVI. Galton, J. 0., “ Myology of Cyclothurus didacfylus.”
Ann. Mag. Nat. Hist., 4th ser., vol. IV., 1869, p. 244,
XVII. Galton, J. 0., “ Note on the Epitrochleo-anconeus,” <fec.
Journ. of Anat. and Physiol., vol. IX., p. 169.
XVIII. Giebel, C. G., On Mammalian Osteology, in Bronn’s
“ Klassen und Ordnungen des Thierreichs.” Bd. VI.,
Abt. V.
XIX. Haswell, W. A., “ Notes on the Myology of the Flying
Phalanger (Petaurista taguanoides).” Proc. Linn. Soc.,
N.S.W., ser. 11., vol. I.
XX. Humphry, G. M., “ Observations in Myology.” Cambridge
and London, 1872.
XXI. Humphry, G. M., “ Myology of Orycteropus capensis,” &c.
Journ. Anat. and Physiol., vol. 11., 295.
XXII. Humphry, G. M., “Myology of the Limbs of the Unau,
the Ai, the Two-toed Ant-eater, and the Pangolin.”
Journ. Anat. and Physiol., vol. IV., p. 17.
XXIII. Humphry, G. M., “On the Disposition and Homologies
of the Extensor and Flexor Muscles of the Leg and
Forearm.” Journ. Anat. and Physiol., vol. 111., p. 320.
XXIV. Hyrtl, Jos., “ Chlamydophori iruncati cum Dasypodi,”
&c. Denkschriften der K. Akad. d. Wiss. Wien
Math.-Naturwiss. Classe, 1855, p. 1.
XXV. Haughton, S., “ Myology of the Crocodile.” Ann. Mag.
Nat. Hist., ser. IV., No. 4, April, 1868..
XXVI. Leche, W., (On Mammalian Myology) in Bronn’s
“ Klassen und Ordnungen des Thierreichs,” VI. Band,
Abt. V., Lief 29-41 (so far as appeared).
XXVII. Macalister, A., “Anatomy of Chlamydophorus
truncatus, with Notes on other Species of Edentata.’
Trans. Roy. Irish Acad., vol. XXV., p. 219.
XXVIII. Macalister, A., “On the Muscular Anatomy of the
Koala,” Annals and Mag. Nat. Hist., vol. X. (1872),
p. 127.
XXIX. Macalister, A., “ Myology of Wombat and Tasmanian
Devil.” Annals and Mag. Nat. Hist., vol. V. (1870),
p. 153.


XXX. Macalistee, A., “ Further Observations on the Myology
of Sarcophilus ursinus.” Ann. & Mag. Nat. Hist.,
vol. X. (1872), p. 17.
XXXI. Macalistee, A., “On the Homologies of the Flexor
Muscles of the Vertebrate Limb.” Journ. Anat. and
Physiol., vol. IT., p. 283.
XXXII. Macalistee, A., “On the Myology of Bradypus tri-
dactylus.” Ann. Mag. Nat. Hist., ser. IV., vol. IV.
(1869).
XXXIII. Macalistee, A., “On the Arrangement of the Pro-
nator Muscles in the Limbs of Vertebrate Animals.”
Jour. Anat. & Phys., vol. 111., p. 335.
XXXIV. Macalistee, A., “ Catalogue of the Principal Muscular
Variations,” Ac. Trans. Hoy. Irish Acad., vol. XXV.,
p. 1.
XXXV. Macalistee, A., “ Report on the Anatomy of the Insec-
tivorous Edentates.” Trans. Roy. Irish Acad., XXV.,
491.
XXXVI. MacCoemick, Alex., “The Myology of the Limbs of
Dasyurus viverrinus.” Journ. Anat. & Physiol., vol.
XXL, p. 103.
XXXVII. Meckel, J. F., “ Ornithorhynchi paradoxi descriptio
anatomica” (Lips., 1826).
XXXVIII. Meckel, J. F., “System der Vergleichenden Anat-
omic,” 3 TER Theil (Halle, 1828).
XXXIX. Mivaet, St. Geoege, “ Anatomy of Echidna hystrix."
Trans. Linnean Soc., vol. XXV., p. 379.
XL. Mivaet & Mueie, “Anatomy of the Crested Agouti.”
Proc. Zool. Soc., 1866, p. 383.
XLI. Mivaet, St. G., “ Anatomy of Erethizon dorsatus.” Proc.
Zool. Soc., 1882, p. 271.
XLII. Mivaet, St. G., “ Myology of Iguana tuberculata.” Proc.
Zool. Soc., 1867, p. 766.
XLITI. Mivaet, St. G., “Myology of Menopoma and Meno-
branchus.” Proc. Zool. Soc., 1869, pp. 254 and 450.
XLV. Owen, R., “Anatomy of Vertebrates.” London, 1868,
vol. 111.
XLVI. Owen, R., article “ Monotremata,” Todd’s Cyclopaedia of
Anat. and Physiol. London, vol. 111.
XLVII. Paekee, W. K., “Monograph on the Structure and
Development of the Shoulder-girdle, and Sternum.”
Ray Soc. Memoir, 1868.
XLVIII. Paesons, F. G., “ Notes on the Myology of Rodents.”
Proc. Anat. Soc. Gt. Brit. & Irel., 1892, p. X.
XLIX. Pateeson, A. M., “The Limb Plexuses of Mammals.”
Journ. Anat. & Physiol., vol. XXL, p. 611. •


L. Perrin, J. 8., “On the Myology of the Limbs of the Kin-
kajou ( Cercoleptes caudivolvulus),” P.Z.S., 1871, p. 547.
LI. Rolleston, G., “On the Homologies of Certain Muscles
connected with the Shoulder Joint.” Trans. Linn. Soc.,
vol. XXYL, p. 609.
LII. Shepherd, F. J., “ Short Notes on the of the
American Black Bear ( Ursus Americanus).” Journ.
Anat. & Physiol., vol. XVIIL, p. 101.
LIII. Sidebotham, E. T., “ Myology of the Water-Opossum
(Chironectes variegatus)." P.Z.S., 1885, pp. 6-22.
LIV. Stirling, E. C., “ Description of New Genus and Species
of Marsupialia 1 Notaryctes typhlops.”’ Trans. Roy.
Soc. S. Australia (1891), p. 154.
LY. Stirling, E. 0., “Further Notes on the Habits and
Anatomy of ‘ Notoryctes typhlops” Trans. Roy. Soc.
S. Australia, 1891, p. 283.
LVI. Testut, L., “ Les Anomalies Musculaires,” &c. Paris
(1884).
LVII. Watson & Young, “ Anatomy of Ilymna, crocuta.” Proc.
Zool. Soc. (1879), p. 79.
LVIII. Wenzel Gruber, “Ueber den Musculus Anconeus V.
des Menschen,” in Memoires de I’Acad. Imp. des
Sciences de St. Petersbourg, T. XVI., No. 1 (1870). ‘
LIX. Wenzel Gruber, “Ueber den M. Epitrochleo-anconeus,
ifcc.” Memoires de I’Acad. Imp. des Sciences de St.
Petersbourg, T. 10, No. 5, 1866.
LX, Wenzel Gruber, “ Monographic iiber den M. ulnaris
digiti V. und, &c.” Beobactungen aus der menschl. u.
vergleich. Anat., V Heft. Berlin, 1884.
LXI. Wenzel Gruber, “ Monographic iiber den Musculus ex-
tensor digiti indicis proprius, &c.” Beobachtungen aus
der menschl. und vergleich. Anat., VI Heft. Berlin,
1886.
LXII. Westling, C., “ Anatomische Untersuchungen iiber
Echidna.” Bihang till Kongl. svenska Vetenskaps
Akademiens Handlingar. Femtonde Bandet Afd. IV.
Stockholm, 1890.
LXIII. Wilder & Gage, “Anatomical Technology.” New
York and-Chicago, 1886.
LXIV. Wilson, J. T., & McKay, W. J. S., “ On Some Points in
the Anatomy of the Monotreme Scapula.” Proc. Linn
Soc. N.S.W., part 3, vol. VIII. 2nd Series.
LXV. Windle, B. C. A., “ Myology of Erethizon epixanthus.”
Journ. Anat. and Physiol., vol. XXII., p. 126.
LXVI. Windle, B. C. A., “ Limb Myology of Procyon cancri-
vorus and of the Ursidoe.” Journ. Anat. and Physiol.,
vol. XXIII., p. 81.


LXVII. Windle, B. C. A., “The Pectoral Group of Muscles.”
Trans. Roy. Irish Acad., vol. XXIX., pt. xii., p. 345
LXYIII. Windle, B. C. A., “The Plexors of the Digits of the
Hand.” Journ. Anat. and Physiol., vol. XXIV., p. 72.
LXIX. Wood, J., “ Variations in Human Myology,” &c. Proc.
Roy. Soc. Bond., vol. XVI. (1868).
LXX. Wood, J., “On Some Varieties in Human Myology.”
Proc. Roy. Soc. Bond., vol. XIII. (1864).
BXXB Wood, J., “On Human Muscular Variations, and their
Relation to Comparative Anatomy.” Journ. of Anat.
and Physiol., vol. 1., p. 44.
BXXIT. Young, A. H., “ Muscular Anatomy of the Koala.”
Journ. Anat. and Physiol., vol. XVI., p. 217.
BXXITI. Young, A. H., and Robinson, A., “ Anatomy of
llycena striata.” Journ. Anat. and Physiol,, vol.
XXIII., p. 187.
BXXIV. Young, A. H., “ Myology of Viverra civetta.” Journ.
Anat. and Physiol., vol. XIV., p. 166.
BXXV. Young, A. H., “The Intrinsic Muscles of the Marsupial
Hand.” Journ. of Anat. and Physiol., vol. XIV., p.
149.
BXXVI. McKay, W. J. S. Forthcoming paper in Proc. Binn.
Soc. N.S.W.
NOTORYCTES TYPHLOPS MYOLOGY.
EXPLANATION OF PLATES.
Plate 11.
Fig. 1. — Dorsal aspect, superficial, x 2.
References.
r. M. cervico-auricularis.
c. “ clcido-trapezius (“ elavo-cucullaris ”).
d. “ delto-trapezius (“ trapczio-dcltoid,” “ ccphalo-humeral ”).
a.t. “ acromio-trapezius.
s. “ spino-trapezius.
rh. “ rhomboideus.
l.d. “ latissimus dorsi.
p.c. “ panniculus carnosus (humeral portion).
tr. “ triceps extensor antebraohii.
te. “ temporalis.
s.d. “ spino-deltoideus.
Au. External auditory meatus.
Pa. Parietal region of skull.
P. Muscles of forearm.


Plate 111.
Fig. 2. — View of right aide of body, panniculus removed, x 2.
s.m. M. sterno-mastoideus.
s.th. “ sterno-thyroideus and sterno-hyoidcus.
m.h. “ mylo-hyoideus.
zy. “ zygomaticus.
ma. “ masseter.
te. “ temporalis.
a.a. “ attrahens aurem.
s.d. “ spino-deltoideus (“ acromio-deltoid,” “ scapular deltoid ”)
P.d. Parotid duct passing forwards to mouth.
S.g. Submaxillary gland and duct.
B.g. “ Buccal ”or “ zygomatic ” salivary gland.
Au. External auditory meatus.
0. Incision through abdominal walls.
01. Olecranon.
V. Nail of fifth digit.
L. Left manus.
(Other references as in Fig. 1.)
Plate IV.
Fig. 3.— Ventral aspect, x 2.
e. M. cleido-trapezius.
s.m. “ sterno-mastoideus.
s.d.t. “ spino-deltoideus, together with the conjoint delto-trapczius,
c. “ cleido-deltoideus (“clavicular deltoid”)
p.a. “ pectoralis a.
p.i. “ “ h.
р. “ “ c.
s.th. “ sterno-thyroideus.
s.h. “ stemo-hyoideus.
m.h, “ mylo-hyoideus.
o.h. “ omo-hyoideus.
~y, “ zygomaticus.
ma. “ masseter.
a.a. “ attrahens aurem.
s. “ subclavius.
f. “ flexor digitorum.
r.th. “ rectus abdominis.
d. “ digastrious.
P.g. Parotid gland.
B.g. “ Buccal,” or “ zygomatic ” salivary gland.
An. External auditory meatus.
S.d. Duct of submaxillary gland.
Plate V.
Fig. 4.— Deeper dorsal muscles of shoulder and neck, x 2.
rh. M. rhomboideus.
r.o. “ cervico-auricularis (with attachment to meatus).
te. “ temporalis (covered by aponeurosis).
zy. “ zygomaticus.
с. Cut edge of cleido- and delto-trapezius.
c.d.t.l. The same muscle turned aside.


a.t. M. acromio-trapezius.
s.t. “ spino-trapezius, reflected.
s.d. “ spino-deltoideus.
Ir. “ triceps extensor antebrachii.
Ac. Acromion process.
Mss. Root of meso-scapular spine.
S.d.l. Part of origin of spino-deltoid.
Fig. s.— Muscles of right side of head, neck, and shoulder, x 2.
zy. M. zygomaticus.
te. “ temporalis.
d.t. “ delto-trapezius.
c.d.t. “ cleido-trapezius, with M. delto-trapezius, conjoint.
c. “ cleido-trapezius.
a.t. “ acromio-trapezius.
s.t. “ spino-trapezius.
Ir. “ triceps extensor antebrachii.
s.d. “ spino-deltoideus.
s.m. “ sterno-mastoideus.
r.a. “ cervico-auricularis.
а. “ mandibulo-auricularis (attrahens aurem).
m.- “ masseter.
m.h. “ mylo-hyoideus.
B.g. Buccal gland.
01. Olecranon process.
Plate VI.
Fig. 6.— Right anterior extremity. Muscles of axillary region and inner
aspects of scapula and arm, and of palmar surface of forearm (clavicle
turned outwards out of sight), x 4.
r. M. rectus abdominis.
s. “ subclavius. Its insertion has been exposed by turning
outwards the clavicle with the clavicular deltoid as
well as the delto-trapezius.
s. “ subscapularis.
t. “ teres major.
s.mg. “ serratus magnus (anterior major portion).
s.tr. Scapular head of triceps.
i.h.tr. Inner humeral head of triceps.
l.d. M. latissimus dorsi.
l.d.t. Its tendon or aponeurosis where it spreads out over flexor
carpi ulnaris.
au.i. M. anconeus interims (cpitrochleo-anconeus).
f.c.u. “ flexor carpi ulnaris (condylar and olecranon heads).
ab.p. “ abductor pollicis. Its origin overlies the palmar sesamoid
bone, but is not attached to it, arising merely from
the palmar fascia.
d. “ delto-trapezius (pulled aside).
h.p. Humeral pannioulus fibres becoming inserted into axillary
tendon of insertion.
p.a, M. pectoralis a I Cut; a and b turned somewhat outwards,
p.b. “ “ b[- and c turned upwards to show tendon
p.c. “ “ c J of pannioulus, biceps, &c.
f.b.c. “ biceps flexor antebrachii.
б. “ brachialis anticus.
e. “ extensor carpi radialis.


р. M. pronator radii teres.
f.c.r. “ flexor carpi radialis
U.t. Ulnar (postaxial) tuberosity.
G.I. First costal arch, giving origin to M. subclavius and inser-
tion to M. rectus abdominis.
sty. Radial styloid.
1., 11., 111., iv. Nails of respective digits.
Plate VII.
Fig. 7.— Right anterior extremity. Muscle* of inner aspects of scapula and
arm and of palmar surface of forearm (clavicle turned outwards), x 4.
s.c. M. subclavius (turned upwards).
rh. “ rhomboideus.
s.mg. “ serratus magnus.
0. “ omo-hyoideus.
shs. “ subscapularis.
1. “ teres major.
с. “ cleido-deltoideus, turned aside with clavicle.
p.a. “ pectoralis a \
p.h. “ “ I) J- Cut, and a and h turned outwards.
p.c. “ “ c J
ach. Section of axillary tendon connected with humeral panniculus.
l. M. latissimus dorsi.
s.tr. Scapular head of triceps.
i.h.lr. Inner humeral head of triceps.
f.h.c. M. biceps flexor antebrachii.
an.i. “ anconeus intemus (epitrochleo-anconeus).
f.r.n. “ flexor carpi ulnaris (two heads).
f.c.r. “ flexor carpi radialis.
p.r.t. “ pronator radii teres.
e.c.r. “ extensor carpi radialis.
ah. “ abductor polliois (freed of its origin).
G.G.I. Coraco-clavicular ligament.
11.1, Radial tuberosity of humerus (preaxial).
U.t. Ulnar tuberosity of humerus (postaxial).
Co. Coracoid process.
int.ep. Ulnar or postaxial epicondyle (euto-condyle).
01. Olecranon.
sty. Radial styloid.
p.ses. Palmar sesamoid bone.
Plate VIII.
Fig. B.— Right anterior extremity. View of deeper dorsal muscles of scapida
and humerus, x 4.
m. Meso-seapular spine.
p.s.s. Post-scapular spine.
m.seg. Meso-scapular segment.
p.s.m.ligt. Postscapulo-metacromial ligament.
cl. Clavicle.
d.p.tnh. Deltopectoral tuberosity.
01. Olecranon process.
s. M. supraspinatus.
s.c. “ subclavius.
i.s. “ infraspinatus.
b.a. “ brachialis anticus.
s.tr. “ triceps (scapular head).


s.tr.l. Surface of origin of scapular triceps.
0. M. triceps (outer humeral head).
an.e. “ anconeus externus (anconeus quartus),
ext. Extensor muscular mass of antebrachium.
Plate IX.
Fig. 9. — Hight anterior extremity. Dorsal aspect of forearm and manns,
viewed slightly from the xdnar side, x 4.
s.tr. Scapular head of triceps.
1. M. latissimus dorsi.
an.e. “ anconeus externus.
e.c.u. “ extensor carpi ulnaris.
e.c.d. 1, 2. “ “ communis digitorum (first and second parts).
e.c.r. “ “ carpi radialis.
e.i.m. “ “ indicia et raedii digiti.
e. “ “ ossis metacarpi pollicis (abductor poll, longus).
f. “ flexor carpi ulnaris.
d. c. Jig. Dorsal carpal (posterior annular) ligament.
rad.sty. Styloid process of radius.
ect. Ectooondyle.
01. Olecranon.
in., iv., v. Claws of 3rd, 4th, and sth digits respectively.
Plate X.
Fig. 10.— Right anterior extremity. Muscles of palmar aspect of forearm.
x 4.
peel. Pectoral muscles.
f.b.c. M. biceps flexor antebrachii.
b. a. “ brachialis anticus.
p.r.t. “ pronator radii teres.
e. “ extensor carpi radialis.
flex. dig. “ flexor digitorum.
abd.poll. “ abductor pollicis (brevis).
e.m.p. “ extensor ossis metacarpi pollicis (abductor pollicis longus).
e.i.m. “ extensor indicia et medii digiti.
p.ses. Palmar sesamoid bone.
rad.sty. Styloid process of radius.
for f.e.r. Foramen in scapholunar for tendon of M. flexor carpi radialis.
1., il, in. Claws of Ist, 2nd, and 3rd digits respectively.
Plate XI.
Fig. 11.— Right anterior extremity. View of radial aspect of forearm and
manus. x 4.
e. M. extensor carpi radialis.
p.r.t. “ pronator radii teres.
f. “ flexor carpi radialis.
e.m.p. “ extensor ossis metacarpi pollicis (abductor poll, longus).
e.i.m. “ extensor indiois et medii digiti.
e.c.d.l. “ extensor communis digitorum (tendon for digit 3).
rad.sty. Styloid process of radius.
p.ann.lig. Dorsal carpal (posterior annular) ligament.
p.l. Proximal phalanx of pollex.
1., ii., in. Claws of Ist, 2nd, and 3rd digits.


Plate XII.
Fig. 12. — Right anterior extremity. View of palmar aspect of wrist , with
morphologically dorsal aspect of pollex and index.. x 4.
p.r.t. M. pronator radii teres.
f.c.r. “ flexor carpi radialis.
/.dig. “ flexor digitorum.
f.c.u. “ flexor carpi ulnaris
e.c.r. “ extensor carpi radialis.
e.m.p. “ extensor ossis metacarpi (abd, longus) pollicis.
ah. “ abductor (brevis) pollicis.
e. “ extensor indicis et medii digiti.
N.med. Nervus medianus.
p.l. Proximal phalanx of pollex.
1., 11., HI. Claws of Ist, 2nd, and 3rd digits respectively,
v. Apex of pisiform where it meets apex of sth digit.
Fig. 13.— Right anterior extremity. View of palmar aspect of manus (pollex
and index forcibly abducted and permanent opposition reduced), x 4.
f. M. flexor carpi ulnaris.
}'* ® exor communis digitorum
ab.ji. “ abductor pollicis.
f.b.p. “ flexor brevis pollicis.
f.c.r. “ flexor carpi radialis.
1.-v. Claws of respective digits.
p.l. Proximal phalanx of pollex.
p>.ses. Palmar sesamoid bone.
pi. Pisiform bone.
Plate XIII.
Fig. 14. —Right anterior extremity. Palmar aspect of manus (attitude as
in Fig. 13). x 6.
rad. sty. Styloid process of radius.
In 't I Tendons of flexor communis digitorum to index, medius, and
Y j annularis respectively.
f.b.p. M. flexor brevis pollicis.
mu } aiK l second metacarpal bones.
s. Scaphocarpal.
tr. Trapezium.
(Other letters as in Fig. 13.)
Plate XIV.
Fig. 15.— Right anterior extremity. Deep dissection oj palmar aspect of
forearm, x 4.
s.s. M. supraspinatus.
f.b.c. “ biceps flexor antebrachii.
h.a. “ brachialis anticus.
an.i, “ anconeus internus.
f.rad. “ flexor digitorum (radialis).
s.r.b. “ supinator radii brevis.
f.c.u. “ flexor carpi ulnaris (olecranon head).
p.r.t. “ pronator radii teres.
e.c.r. “ extensor carpi radialis.


s.tr. Surface of origin of scapular triceps.
d. Delto-peotoral tuberosity.
01. Tip of olecranon.
Eat. Entocondyle.
rad.sty. Styloid process of radius.
int.lii]. Interosseous radio-ulnar ligament (inferior).
u.c.ligt. Very strong, thick, and tendinous-looking ulno-carpal ligament,
proceeding from the palmar aspect of the lower end of the
ulna to a prominent ridge of the scapho-carpal (to which also
the anterior annular ligament is attached).
Plate XV.
Fig. 16. — Right anterior extremity: Deep dissection of dorsal aspect of
forearm.
ext. Origin from ectocondyle of superficial extensor muscles.
an.e. 11. anconeus externus.
s.r.h. “ supinator radii brevis.
e. “ extensor carpi ulnaris (cut) and its tendon of insertion.
e.c.r. “ extensor carpi radialis (cut).
€ (! cL / 1
ecd° f “ ex *' en3or communis digitorum tendons.
e.m.p. “ extensor ossis metaearpi pollicis (abductor pollicis longus).
e.i.m. “ extensor indicia et mcdii digiti.
01. Recurved tip of olecranon process,
in.-v. Claws of respective digits.
Yardon £ Pritchard, Printers, Adelaide.
































[From Vol. IX. (Series 2nd) of the “ Proceedings of the Linnean
Society of New South Wales” (October Slat, 1804)■]
DESCRIPTION (WITH FIGURES) OF A YOUNG SPECI-
MEN OF ORNITHOHIIYNCHUS ANATINUS FROM
THE COLLECTION OF THE AUSTRALIAN MUSEUM,
SYDNEY.
By J. T. WILSON, M.B.,
Professor of Anatomy in the
University op Sydney.
(Plate xlix.)


Opportunities of studying the anatomy of young (“foetal”)
specimens of Ornilhorhynchus have seldom occurred to the scien-
tific investigator, if we may judge from the paucity of published
descriptions of such specimens.
The explanation of this fact is obvious enough if we remember
that the eggs of the animal are laid while the development of the
embryo is yet at a very early stage (according to Caldwell* at a
stage equivalent to that of a 30 hours’ chick), and that the
further development, both within the egg and probably for a
prolonged period after hatching, goes on in the nest situated at the
end of a lengthy burrow which is rather difficult of discovery and
by no means easy of access.
In consequence of the absence both of pouch and of teat in the
platypus, the young animal during the period of development
which answers to that of the “mammary foetus” of the marsupial,
is probably either wholly unattached or only very insecurely and
temporarily attached to the person of the mother. Thus, even if
the latter emerges at all from the burrow during the period of
nurture of her offspring, as is likely enough, it is improbable that
she bears her young about with her. That she should do so
habitually is indeed excluded by the aquatic habits of the species.
The capture of adult females in a state of lactation has been
recorded, but the young naked “mammary foetus” has never been
obtained save in the nest. In this respect the habit of the
•Caldwell : Journ. & Proo. Roy. Soo. K.S.W. xviii. p. 117.


Ornithorhynchus would seem to differ from that of the kindred
genus Echidna, in whose case there is ample evidence that the
mammary foetus is borne about, either occasionally or habitually
by the mother.* (The incubating egg itself seems to be carried
in a temporary pouch in Echidna, f). Here the very imperfect
marsupium or bilateral pouch-like fold of the integument, which is
present during lactation, affords at least a partial support in
default of a nipple, while a similar pouch appears to be lacking
in the Ornithorhynchus.
In view, therefore, of the rarity of examples of what I have
already referred to as the “mammary foetus” of the platypus, the
present description of one that I believe to be slightly younger
than any hitherto described may be not unwelcome to comparative
anatomists.
For this very valuable acquisition I am greatly indebted to the
liberality of the Trustees of the Australian Museum in Sydney,
who were good enough to place it at my disposal along with a
young Echidna to enable me to continue certain investigations
into the anatomy, more particularly of the head, of the Mono-
tremes.
It is to be hoped that ere long we shall have more abundant
light thrown upon the embryology and foetal anatomy of Orni
thorhynchus and Echidna from the researches of European'
anatomists into the developmental material which we are led to
believe has been accumulated at considerable expense by both
English and German naturalists.
It is perhaps permissible in the interests of British science to
express a keen regret that hitherto so little has come to light as
product of Mr. Caldwell’s fully equipped expedition of over ten
years ago. It is indeed somewhat humiliating to English-speaking
zoologists that after the highly auspicious beginning and the
apparently successful conclusion of that important and long-
* Owen : “On the marsupial pouches, mammary glands, &c., of the
Echidna hystrix.” Phil. Trans. 1865, pp. 671-86.
fHaackc, W. : “On the marsupial ovum, the mammary pouch and the
male milk glands of Echidna hystnx." Proc. Bov. Soo. xxxviii. p. 72.


desired undertaking they should be found looking forward rather
to the results of the labours of Professor Semon and his colleagues
now in course of publication in Jena, than to those of Mr. Cald-
well which might have been expected to emanate from Cambridge^
In this short paper I propose merely to give a description of
the external characters of my specimen which I had very care-
fully drawn by Mr. G. H. Barrow prior to any interference with
it in the way of dissection.
I may premise that my examination of the external anatomy
of the young animal reveals nothing really new, and in fact
enables me to add little to Owen’s description of a somewhat
similar specimen published nearly sixty years ago. So far as I
have been able to discover only three young Ornitkorhynchi have
yet been described and figured, the youngest being the specimen
just referred to. This was described and figured, along with a
larger one, by Sir Richard Owen in Trans. Zool. Soc. Vol i. 1835,
p. 221 et seq., (PI. xxxii.-ni.), and also in Todd’s Cyclopaedia of
Anat. and Physiol. Yol. iii. “ Monolreniata,” where an additional
figure is given. The late Dr. George Bennett of Sydney in the
same Volume of the Trans. Zool. Soc. p. 252, refers to his discovery,
in a burrow, of three young Ornithorhynchi having a length of
1| inch, but unfortunately he was unable to preserve them. It
is possible or even probable that they were slightly younger than
the one here dealt with, but as he does not indicate whether or
not the measurement followed the contour of a curved
it is impossible to say. My specimen is only 40 mm. in
length if the distance between the extreme points of the apparently
naturally curved body be taken, while it is exactly double that
length if the dorsal contour line from tip to tip of snout and tail
be measured. In any case Dr. Bennett gave no further description
or drawing of his specimens if we except a reference to them as
“ only thinly covered with hair,” a statement which Owen quotes,*
but which is unintelligible me, for sections recently made
showing the structure of the skin of my specimen prove that the
• Todd’s Cyclop. Yol. iii.


development of the hair follicles is still in the earlier stages, and
that nowhere have hair-shafts as yet approached the surface of
the epidermis, which was perfectly naked.
Besides Owen’s two specimens the only other one known to me
is one which came into the possession of the late Professor W. K.
Parker and whose external characters were partly described and
a figure of it given (p. 25) in his “ Mammalian Descent ” (Bond.
1885). More elaborate drawings (life-size) of this specimen have
quite lately been published by Professor E. B. Poulton in the
Quart. Joum. Microsc. Sci., Vol. xxxvi., in connection with his
paper on the hairs, ifec., of Ornithorhynchus. Mr. Poulton also
gives a list of memoirs dealing with the anatomy of portions of
this specimen.
From the drawings of Parker’s specimen I have estimated the
length of the dorsal contour line from the tip of the snout to the
tip of the tail as about 250 mm. It was thus very considerably
larger than mine, in which the same line is only 80 mm.
One of Owen’s two specimens was also much larger, so that his
smaller specimen is the only one with which one can rightly
compare the subject of the present paper.
The specimen (which had been labelled as from the Patterson
River) has been very satisfactorily preserved in alcohol, as micro-
scopical sections subsequently made bear witness. Cellular struc-
ture and arrangement are well shown and karyokinetic figures
are abundant, at least in the epidermis. It is perfectly’intact
with the exception of a small apparently accidental skin-incision
on the ventral aspect of the neck (shown in figure 3), and two
other very small abrasions on the skin of the back and abdomen.
The general integument is quite naked and marked throughout
by delicate transverse wrinkles, which are probably of post-mortem
production, and are neither so numerous nor so pronounced as
those figured in Owen’s specimen (Trans. Zool. Soc. Vol. i. PI.
xxxii.). The long axis of the animal is markedly curved, the
convexity being dorsal. The contour of the dorsal surface forms
rather more than a semicircle of slightly unequal curvature
throughout. (In Parker’s specimen the contour formed nearly a


complete circle as shown in Poulton’s plate.) The dorsal contour
line from tip to tip as already stated measures 80 mm., while the
distance between the extreme points of the curved body
(vertex to root of tail) in a straight line, is 40 mm. There is no
distinct cervical constriction, a “ neck ” bejng practically absent.
The distance from the tip of the snout to the anterior border of
the forelimb is 15 mm.
The maximum breadth of the head is 11 mm. The snout i s
sharply separated from the rest of the head by the developing
lappet-like fold of integument which forms so prominent a feature
at the base of the adult muzzle. This has here the character of
a collar-like ridge and is continuous all round the root of the
muzzle, though just at or above the elevated angles of the gape
which reach up to it, it is somewhat lower than elsewhere and is
slightly overlapped by the somewhat projecting hinder angle of
the upper lip' or maxillary lobe. The length of the snout is pro-
portionately small both to the rest of the head and to its own
width. It is 4 - 5 mm. Jong from tip to basal groove in front of
lappet, while it measures 6‘5 mm. in width.
The gape has a sinuous outline and is a simple fissure through-
out which is almost closed. No trace of the tongue can be seen
from the outside nor any vestige of the integumentary folds
which, according to Owen, united the upper and lower lips across
the angle of the mouth in his specimen. The upper lip through-
out slightly overhangs the sinuous gape, whose posterior extremities
turn somewhat dorsally where they reach to the collar-like lappet.
The nostrils are situated dorsally and about l - 5 mm. behind
the anterior end of the snout. Between, and just in front of the
interval betwixt these, the dorsal surface of the snout is sharply
elevated into a very prominent “ caruncle,” which also projects
very slightly forward so that it almost reaches the coronal plane
of the anterior margin of the snout. The tip of this caruncle is
whiter than its surroundings and evidently forms the epidermal
covering which was presumed by Owen to exist over the “minute
fleshy eminence lodged in a slight depression ” and “surrounded
by a discontinuous margin of the epidermis ” observed by him.


The position of the eye is not marked by wrinkles but is smooth
and rounded and is indicated by the line of the closed ocular
fissure which extends back for a distance of 2 mm. from a point
T 5 mm. behind the lappet at the base of the muzzle. The pig-
ment of the eye can be seen around this faintly appearing through
the continuous integument of the region.
The position of the ear is indicated by the slight integumentary
depression of the external auditor}' meatus just behind the ocular
fissure and 4 - 5 mm. behind the lappet.
The dorsal and ventral surfaces of the forelimbs are directed
forwards and backwards respectively, the preaxial and postaxial
borders being respectively mesial and lateral. The forelimbs are
separated at their bases by a much wider interval than are the
hind limbs, and they do not incline towards each other as do the
latter whose dorsal and ventral surfaces look outwards and inwards
respectively, the borders being actually as well as morphologically
pre- and postaxial.
The free distal margins from which the digits spring in both
hand and foot are crescentic.
The digits are well-marked and they all already possess claws,
but those of the toes are much smaller than those of the fingers.
The natatory membrane of the manus is present as a free lappet-
like fold of its integument at the palmar aspect of the roots of
the fingers and it already reaches about as far as the nail-tips.
It is this fold which really forms the distal margin of the hand,
ventrad of the digits, seen in fig. 3.
In the corresponding situation in the pes there is merely a
slight integumentary ridge.
■ The length of the free portion of the hind limb is about 7 mm.
and of the forelimb perhaps a trifle less.
A trace of the calcanean spur is present in the hind limb as a
very minute papilla on the ventral (internal) aspect of the limb,
but it is hidden away in the flexure between the limb and the
abdomen in the ordinary position of the limb.
The cloacal aperture is situated ventrally close to the root of
the tail. A small papilla is visible in the aperture. It is impos


sible yet to determine the sex of the specimen, as? the external
characters are insufficient.
The tail is flat ventrally and convex dorsally. It measures
11 mm. in length and 6 mm. in its maximum breadth.
As Professor W. Newton Parker* has so recently instituted a
comparison between the young mammary foetus of Echidna and that
of Ornithorhynchun, it is unnecessary for me again to call attention
to the interesting resemblances and comparatively slight differences
in external characters between them. I cannot, however, agree
with Professor Parker in his remarks concerning the horny
character of the snout in either young or adult Monotremes.
Thus he indicates as a point of similarity between the young of the
two genera that in each case the snout is “ horny and immobile,”
and he states that in the older of his stages of the Echidna the
“ horn ”is thicker than in the younger. Upon this he observes
“ this is the more remarkable as in the adult the skin in this
region can hardly be said to be homy at all.” Most certainly it
cannot. No epithet could well be further from the mark than
“ horny ” as applied to the skin of the snout of the adult Echidna,
which is, on the contrary, a very soft and delicate skin, wrinkly
and freely movable upon the deeper parts.
But I cannot understand why the term “ horny ” should be
applied to the general epidermis of the snout of the foetus in
either genus. The snout of the foetal platypus dealt with in this
paper is at all events no more “ horny and immobile ” than is that
of the young mammary foetus of a marsupial, with this sole
exception that over the very limited area of the caruncle the
corneous epidermis is perhaps a little thicker and denser than
elsewhere. Sections of the snout which have lately been made
show that, except over the above area, there is no yellow reaction
at all to a double stain of picric acid and haematoxylin, and the
stratum corneum is relatively quite a thin layer, even over the
caruncle, where, however, it does show the yellow picric stain
indicating a process of cornification. Further I have in my
• P.Z.S. June, 1894.


possession two young Echidnas in which the spines are Just
beginning to "show and in neither of them is there any “ horny ”
character of the snout.
In a note appended to his memoir, Professor Parker, after
quoting from a paper by Dr. C. J. Martin and the writerf to the
effect that the skin of the snout of the adult Ornithorhynchus is
“no more horny than that of a dog’s nose,” makes the following
comment;—“There is no doubt, however,-that in my specimens
of the young of both genera the horny layer of the epidermis
covering the muzzle is so thick as to Justify one in speaking of a
“ horny ” snout, even though this is of course more flexible than
the beak of a turtle or bird.”
But if mere thickness of the stratum corneuni of the epidermis
will justify one in speaking of such a structure.as composed 6f
horn or “ horny,” one may with equal propriety speak of man as
possessing a “ horny ” foot, seeing that the skin of the human
heel possesses a stratum corneum vastly thicker in proportion
than that of the skin of the snout of Monotremes, young or old,
of either genus.
T am aware indeed that the British working-man is sometimes
described—for rhetorical purposes—as a “ horny-handed son of
toil,” but hitherto I have not taken this epithet as giving a literal
and scientific description of his'palmar epidermis.
On this principle of interpretation, of course, the whole super-
ficial epidermal layer or stratum corneum is a layer of “ horn ”;
but surely something more than this general and far from novel
proposition is implied when it is stated that the Ornithorhynchus
possesses a “ horny beak.” And whatever more is implied is
erroneous.
Surely to justify the description of a structure as “ horny ” we
must have, not merely a thick stratum corneum, but some such
further chemical and physical transformation of it or of the
“ stratum lucidum ” as that which gives rise, e.g., to the nails,
and which is entirely lacking in the general epidermis of the
+ Macleay Memorial Vol. (Sydney, 1892),


muzzle of the Ornithorhynchus. As matter of fact the skin of
the snout of both young and adult Ornithorhynchi possesses a
stratum corneum which is only moderately thick, which is as soft
and flexible as epidermis elsewhere, whose cell-outlines ahd nuclei
remain distinct right to the surface and which is traversed by
innumerable sweat-ducts and the delicate tactile rod-organs. In
view of these characters and in the absence of any special physico-
chemical transformation ■of the tissue, as distinct from what
occurs in the general epidermis, e.g., of a dog’s nose or of the
human hand or foot, I can see no purpose or meaning in retaining
the old and thoroughly misleading idea of the “ horny ” character
of the “ beak ” of the “ duck-billed platypus.”
The special histological characters of the caruncle will be treated
of in a future publication.
EXPLANATION OF PLATE.
Fig. 1. —“Mammary foetus” of Ornithorhynchus analinus. Life size.
Ventral aspect.
Fig. 2.—The same. Life size. Lateral aspect.
Fig. 3.—The same, x 3 diams. Ventro-lateral aspect (right).






[From Tol. IX. (Series 2nd) of the “Proceedings of the Linnenn
Society of New South Wales” (April 25 th, 1894).]
OBSERVATIONS UPON THE ANATOMY AND RELA-
TIONS OF THE “DUMB-BELL-SHAPED” BONE
IN CRNITHOURHYBCHUS, WITH A NEW THEORY
OF ITS HOMOLOGY; AND UPON A HITHERTO
UNDESCRIBED CHARACTER OF THE NASAL
SEPTUM IN THE GENERA ORNITHORHYNCHUS
AND ECHIDNA.
BY J. T.. WILSON, M.B.,
Professor op Anatomy in the
University of Sydney.
(Plates viii.-ix.)
(A preliminary note summarising most of the conclusions
arrived at in this paper was presented at the Meeting of the
Society March 28th, 1894, and published in the Abstract of
Proceedings of that date).
The question of the morphological significance of the dumb-
bell-shaped bone in Ornithorhynchus first attracted the attention
of the writer when investigating, with Dr. C. J. Martin, the
anatomy of the muzzle of this animal. In the paper in the
Macleay Memorial Volume (1) in which we recorded the results
of our work, no new opinion upon the subject of the present paper
was expressed, though even then our series of coronal sections
had gone far to convince me that the usual premaxillary theory of
the nature of the dumb-bell bone was an inadequate one. This
latter view was that entertained by Rudolphi and Meckel (2, p. 20)
’and was adopted by Owen in his article on the Monotremes in
Todd’s Cyclopaedia (3).
But in his later work upon the Anatomy of Vertebrates
(4, p. 322) Owen apparently forsook this theory in favour of an
9


interpretation of the bone as a ‘ prenasal ossicle.’ This view was
adopted by Flower in the earlier editions of the ‘ Osteology of the
Mammalia’ (5, p. 219), where the bone is referred to as placed
in, or in front of, the anterior extremity of the mesethmoid
cartilage, and apparently corresponding to the so-called ‘ pre-
nasal ’of the pig. In 1883 Albrecht (7) again advocated the
older (intermaxillary) view of the bone mainly upon reasons
derived from a study of the normal and pathological development
of the premaxilla in other mammals. The contentions of this
author were in 1885 supported by Sir William Turner, who
devoted a paper in the Journal of Anatomy and Physiology (8) to
a critical examination of the prenasal and intermaxillary theories
respectively. His reasons for adhering to the latter are in part
founded on his own observations upon the region by means of
special dissection. In the edition of the 1 Osteology of the
Mammalia’ published during the same year, 1885, Professor
Flower (with Dr. Gadow) explicitly gave up the prenasal theory
in favour of the intermaxillary as advocated by Albrecht and
Turner. But in the descriptive passage referring to it an
extremely misleading description is given of the bone as “placed
in front of the anterior extremity of the mesethmoid cartilage in
the palatal aspect of the jaw.” This statement is indeed quite
inconsistent with one of Turner’s points of contrast between the
dumb-bell bone and a true prenasal, viz., that the latter is (and the
former is not) “ placed in front of the vomer and mesethmoid
cartilage.” And in point of fact the dumb-bell bone is entirely
ventrad of the cartilaginous septum and far behind the preaxial
end of the latter.
The latest contribution to the literature of this subject that I
am aware of (apart from the paper in the Macleay Memorial
Volume above-mentioned, which only incidentally refers to it) is
a paper by Prof. Symington, published in 1891 (9). This author
also accepts the view which identifies the dumb-bell bone with
an element of the mammalian premaxilla. Both Turner and
Symington have recorded important details of the structure and
relations of this very interesting ossicle, and the results of their


observations we propose first of all briefly to review, as it is
chiefly to these authors that we owe our knowledge of the detailed
anatomy of the bone. Symington’s chief results were obtained by
the study of series of coronal sections.
After referring to its shape, Turner (loc. cit.) states that the
dumb-bell bone “ consists of two symmetrical and lateral halves
united mesially by a suture, the line of which may be seen on the
palatal surface of the bone, though the two halves obviously
become fused at a comparatively early period of life.” He also
states that it is situated “in the hinder part of a fibrous mem-
brane, which is attached behind to the anterior free border of the
palate plate of each superior maxilla, on each side to the inner
border of the intermaxilla, &c.,” and that “ the edge of the dumb-
bell bone is surrounded by the membrane.” He further states
that “the upper surface of the dumb-bell bone lies immediately
subjacent to the anterior somewhat expanded end of the vomer,
which is fused with it along its mesial line.” He then proceeds
to refer to its relation to the naso-palatine or incisive foramina,
which open on each side of and close to the isthmus or intermediate
portion of the dumb-bell bone as seen from the palate, and he
concludes that in its relation to the incisive foramina, the dumb-
bell bone corresponds with “ that portion of the intermaxillary in
other Mammalia which lies between the incisive foramen and the
mesial palatal suture and that “ the more anterior part of the
roof of the mouth does not undergo an ossific change, but remains
as fibrous membrane, except in the limited area where the dumb-
bell-shaped bone is produced.” He then goes on to examine the
argument for the theory that the dumb-bell bone is the homologue
of the prenasal bone of the pig, as this was expressed by Flower,
following Owen’s later view, and he sums up in favour of its
correspondence to the mesial element of the premaxilla rather
than to the prenasal, as follows : —The dumb-bell-shaped bone “ is
inferior to the vomer and fused with its inferior border; it has no
relation to the anterior nares; it enters into the constitution of
the hard palate, and it forms the inner boundary of the entrance
into the naso-palatine canal. In its position and relations it


corresponds with that part of the intermaxilla which lies between
the incisive canal and the mesial palatal suture.*’ It would
appear from the descriptions thus summarised that Sir Wm.
Turner regards the dumb-bell bone as consisting merely of a pala-
tine plate, since he considers it to be fused along its mesial line
dorsally with the anterior end of the vomer. We shall see pre-
sently that the mesial bone rising dorsally, vomer-like, from the
palatine dumb-bell is an integral part of the bone itself, and is
quite distinct from the true vomer, which ends quite posteriorly
to this region. It may also be noted that what Turner has
regarded as fibrous membrane filling up the extensive hiatus in
the hard palate is in reality a thin sheet of hyaline cartilage
forming the floor of the nose, as was shown by Dr. C. J. Martin
and the writer in the paper already referred to (1). It is in this
cartilaginous layer, and not in fibrous membrane, that the dumb-
bell bone is imbedded. Owen and Meckel both refer to this car-
tilage forming the floor of the nose, and Meckel (2, p. 40) gives
its dimensions and attachments as seen from below.
The additional observations of Professor Symington may now
be reviewed. He notes the close relation of the upper surface of
the anterior nodule of the dumb-bell “ to the cartilages of the
nose which contain Jacobson’s organ,” and he further mentions
the fact, to which Martin and I have also drawn attention, that
near the posterior extremity of the dumb-bell it is covered, as seen
from below, by a thin layer of cartilage. As our figure shows,
however (1, PI. xxm. fig. 17), this is due to the hinder end being
more deeply embedded in the cartilaginous nasal floor and not
merely grafted upon its under surface as appears, superficially, to
be the case in front. From his study of coronal sections Syming-
ton has recognised that the bone projecting from the mesial dorsal
surface of the palatine dumb-bell is, as has been said above, an
integral part of that bone, and his description and figure (9, PI.
XLill. 2) of a coronal section through the bone near the middle of
the posterior nodule will suffice to carry conviction upon this
point. In such a section the bone appears “as composed of two
crescents with their convexities directed inwards, and the greater


breadth of the bone [in the posterior segment] is due to the
elongation of the horns of the crescents which reach about half-
way round the organ of Jacobson and are in close contact with
its cartilage.” This author does not mention the vomer, but quite
plainly he does not adopt the view that the vomer is fused with
the dumb-bell dorsally.
He concludes by stating that “ the dumb-bell bone from its
position in relation to the cartilages of the nose is evidently
ossified in the membrane investing them,” and that “ the relation
of the bone to the organ of Jacobson corresponds essentially to
that of the palatine process of the preraaxilla in various mammals ”
(p. 582).
I may now proceed to state my own observations and conclusions
respecting the anatomy of the dumb-bell bone and of the parts
related to it.
In studying series of coronal sections one cannot fail to be
impressed with the intimate relations between the dumb-bell bone,
on the one hand, and Jacobson’s organ and the cartilaginous
septum nasi, on the other. I have already referred to Symington’s
account of the relation to the organ of Jacobson, but he has
passed over without special remark the relation of the dorsal
moiety of the bone to the nasal septum, a relation so marked as
to lead Sir Wm. Turner to take that dorsal portion of the bone
as part of the vomer.
It may, perhaps, be better to give at once a complete account
of the structure and relations of the bone as I have myself
determined these both by fresh dissection and by the examination
of frontal sections.
In a specially large adult male Ornithorhynchus measuring over
50 cm. between the tips of the snout and tail, I find the palatine
plate of the “dumb-bell ” bone to measure 9'5 mm. in total length.
This measurement includes about 2 mm. of the posterior extremity
of that plate which is overlapped by the palatine cartilage of the
nasal floor (see fig. 1, h and d) just in front of the anteriorly
directed median process of the osseous maxillary palate. The


greater portion of the palatine plate of the dumb-bell lying
anterior to this appears as if applied to the ventral surface of the
cartilage of the nasal floor, and peripherally it is so applied (cf.
figs. 1-3 for points referred to in this description). This palatine
plate consists of an anterior ( a ) and a posterior (b) moiety united
by a narrow isthmus (c). The isthmus is rather nearer to the
anterior than to the posterior end of the plate. The naso-palatine
foramen lies on each side opposite and close to the isthmus.
The antero-posterior diameter of the anterior segment, measured
to a point opposite the anterior margin of the naso-palatine
foramen, is 3-5 mm. Its greatest breadth is 4 mm. The antero-
posterior diameter of the posterior segment is 4 - 5 mm. and its
greatest width is 7 mm. Its hinder border forms a nearly semi-
circular line. The width of the isthmus is 1-5 mm. The palatine
plate is comparatively thin, and the term “ dumb-bell-shaped ” is
only applicable to the general contour of the periphery as seen
from below, and indeed it only imperfectly describes that.contour.
On dissection to expose the dorsal aspect of the thin palatine
plate of the bone, there is seen arising from its dorsal median
line a vertical plate' (/) which dorsally sends out diverging alar
laminse (g) on either side. These form the dorsal horns of the
“crescents” which Symington has described in transverse sections.
The spread of the dorsal alar laminse at its maximum is 3 mm.,
and they do not form a horizontal plate, but from their upward
divergence they form dorsally a deep median groove or gutter
which receives the ventral edge of the cartilaginous nasal septum.
The maximum height of this vertical portion of the bone is 2 mm.,
the maximum height of the bone as a whole being 3 mm. The
vertical plate does not extend to the anterior extremity of the
horizontal or palatine portion of the bone, but begins about
1-5 mm. behind the anterior end of the latter in a gradually
ascending crest with an oblique margin. Just opposite the hinder
end of the preaxial segment of the bone the height of the crest is
about l - 5 mm. Here it rather suddenly develops its dorsal alar
laminse, and from this point backwards it slightly increases in
height, though on the whole its height is fairly uniform and not


exceeding 2 mm. The height does not diminish until the hinder
end of the palatine plate of the bone is reached. Here, however,
the vertical portion of the bone is continued backwards dorsally
for a considerable distance behind the plane of the posterior end
of the horizontal palatine plate, in the form of a thick bony
spur (e), still grooved dorsally for the septum, and gradually
undergoing reduction in height at the expense of its ventral border,
which becomes elevated more and more dorsally above the
horizontal plane of the palate. This spur finally terminates in a
posterior bifurcated extremity. The forks (morphologically con-
tinuous with the dorsal alar laminae of the vertical portion of the
bone in front) are in contact with the lips of the ventral border
of the cartilaginous nasal septum, and they are in continuity
posteriorly with the fibres of strong bilateral “ vomerine ”
ligamentous bands of similar sectional area to themselves which
connect them with the corresponding forks of the bifid anterior
extremity of the vomer. In the dissected specimen from which
this description is chiefly taken, the distance between the extreme
tips of the forks of the vomer and those of the spur of the dumb-
bell bone is about 2 mm., and the latter projects backwards beyond
the plane of the posterior extremity of the palatine plate of the
dumb-bell for a distance of 4 mm. Now the posterior extremity
of the latter bony plate is only about o's mm. in front of the
anterior end of the maxillary palate, to which it is usually regarded
as articulated ; and accordingly the postaxially directed spur of
the dumb-bell bone lies in a horizontal plane above (dorsad of) the
maxillary palate, from which indeed it is separated near its hinder
end by a vertical distance of about l - 5-2 mm., as is also the bifid
anterior end of the vomer and the “vomerine ligament” aforesaid.
This interval, spanned by the series of structures just mentioned,
is not filled up by any septal structure whatever, but in the
living or recent specimen forms a low antero-posteriorly elongated
aperture of communication between the two nasal fossae which is
lined by columnar epithelium similar to that lining the adjacent
parts of the nasal fossaj (c/. fig. 4 i). The maximum height of
this internasal aperture is about 1 mm., while its length antero-
BY J. T. WILSON.


posteriorly is about 5 - 5 mm.* The plane of the anterior boundary
of the. internasal passage corresponds pretty accurately with the
tip of the median anterior process of the maxillary palate whose
upper surface, covered by the nasal mucous membrane, forms the
lower boundary of the passage.
When the nasal septum is viewed from the side, the internasal
aperture is seen to be overhung and almost concealed by the
prominent shelf-like ridge running backwards upon the septum,
and forming the posterior continuation of the prominence con-
taining the organ of Jacobson (see figs 4 and 6-8 gl.). The roof
of the internasal passage maybe regaided as considerably widened
by the projection of this shelving ridge on either side of the
septum (fig. 7 gl.).
From what has already been said of the structure of the dumb-
bell-shaped bone, it will have become evident that that bone
presents on each side a wide and antero-posteriorly elongated
sulcus between the lateral portions of its palate plate on the one
hand, and the vertical portion of the bone, with its dorsal aim, on
the other (see fig. 3). In this sulcus is lodged the greater part of
the organ of Jacobson, enclosed in its incomplete cartilaginous
capsule, for which the bone forms a somewhat semi-tubular osseous
investment, the tube being incomplete externally (of. figs. 9-11).
In transverse sections this gives rise to the appearance of the bone
being “ composed of two crescents with their convexities directed
inwards” (Symington). The hollows of these crescents are,
throughout their greater part but not entirely, lined by the
investing cartilaginous capsules of the organs of Jacobson. The
osseous sulcus on each side is of course deepest where both the
width of the palatine plate and the spread of the dorsal aim are
greatest, i.e., in the region of the posterior palatine segment of the
bone. It shallows rapidly in front of the naso-palatine foramen
through sudden reduction of the aim, and the more gradual reduc-
tion of the vertical plate itself (fig. 12). Posteriorly it is continued
* These measurements are given from the very large specimen chosen for
description. In another specimen the length was only about 4"5 mm. It
will be understood that all the measurements given are proportionally large.


backwards beyond the posterior segment of the palate plate of the
bone as a groove upon the side of the posterior spur, where that
lies in the roof of the internasal passage (figs. 7 and 8).
As Symington has shown ( loc. cit. cf. his pi. xliii. fig. 1) the
organ of Jacobson in Ornithorhynchus, with its cartilaginous
capsule, is continued forwards for some little distance in front of
the naso-palatine foramen into which its duct opens, and in fact it
reaches to near the anterior end of the preaxial segment of the
dumb-bell ending immediately in front of the anterior commence-
ment of the vertical crest. Posteriorly the organ ends at the
plane of the anterior margin of the internasal aperture, i.e, that
of the anterior limit of the maxillary palate, and only a very short
distance behind the plane of the hinder end of the dumb-bell-
shaped plate.
The outer wall of its cartilaginous capsule, however, is continued
a little further back, closing in externally the continuation, on
the posterior spur, of the lateral groove of the bone, in which are
lodged the great nerves and the vessels destined for Jacobson’s
organ. These are contained in the base of the shelving ridge
referred to above, but the marginal part of the shelf consists merely
of mucous membrane, including an elongated mass of glandular
tissue. In sections through the middle of the internasal aperture
(fig. 7) the glandular tissue is responsible for about two-thirds of
the entire width of the shelf, but at the anterior margin of the
passage it forms only about a half of the total width. This
definite glandular prominence lies outside the capsule of Jacobson’s
organ, and may be traced forwards as an extra-capsular prominence
on its dorso-lateral wall almost to the anterior end of the organ.
A small amount of glandular tissue is, however, to be found
within the capsule of the organ.
In the light of these observations I propose now to reconsider
the grounds upon which the dumb-bell bone has been so confidently
regarded as simply the inner or mesial palatine portion of the
intsrmaxillie. The criteria which, in Sir Wm. Turner’s opinion,
were sufficient to establish this judgment, have already been
quoted, and we have seen that the first of these depends on an


erroneous view of the relation of the dumb-bell bone to the vomer.
This is an extremely important point, and I am surprised that
Prof. Symington does not explicitly recognise the mistake which
his observations were quite sufficient to correct. It is very plain,
both from Symington’s observations and my own, that the dumb-
bell-shaped bone is not inferior but anterior to the vomer, and
that it is not “ fused with the inferior border ” of the latter.
The criteria that remain,—viz., that it “ has no relation to the
anterior nares,” that “ it enters into the constitution of the hard
palate,” and that “it forms the inner boundary of the entrance
into the naso-palatine canal ” —may be sufficient to disprove the
homology to the prenasal bone of the pig. A powerful additional
argument against the homology to the prenasal bone in the pig is
derived from the observations of Dr. Martin and the writer upon
the anterior extension of the cartilaginous septum in Ornitho-
rhynchus in the form of a flattened ‘prenasal plate’ lying in front
of the dumb-bell bone and continuous behind with the ventral
extensions of the alinasal or aliseptal cartilages which form the
cartilaginous nasal floor (1, pp. 185-8). But the reasons adduced
do not appear to me sufficient to establish the intermaxillary nature
of the dumb-bell bone against the contention that that bone is a
true “ anterior vomer ” formed, of course, by the fusion of two
bilaterally symmetrical halves, and this is the view which it is
one of the objects of this paper to advocate. Whenever it is
recognised that the vertical bony lamella dorsad of the palatine
dumb-bell is not part of the vomer but an integral part of the
so-called dumb-bell bone, certain of the relations and connections of
that bone at once suggest difficulties in the way of its explanation
as premaxillary.
(1) Although the palatine plate of the dumb-bell bone appears
at first sight as if it were situated in the same morphological
plane with the maxillary palate behind it, this is not really the
case, because the hinder end of the palatine dumb-bell is embedded
in and covered ventrally by the cartilage of the nasal floor, in
front of the maxillary palate. (See figs. I& 9 ; and also Macleay
Memorial Vol. [l], PI. xxm. fig. 17.)


(2) That this peculiar relation of the postaxial end of the
dumb-bell to the cartilage of the nasal floor is no trivial or insig-
nificant fact, is confirmed by the prolongation backwards of the
vertical part of the bone some considerable distance dorsad of the
maxillary palate and in relation to the cartilaginous septum. It
appears to me that a bone which is so prolonged backwards on a
higher plane than the maxillary palate cannot be regarded as
developed in the same morphological plane with it, even though
anteriorly it has come down so as to occupy the same actual plane.
(3) But further, we have seen not only that the dumb-bell bone
is prolonged backwards in the form of a bifurcated (vomerine)
splint in relation to the ventral edge of the cartilaginous septum
nasi, altogether above the plane of the maxillary palate, but also
that this vomerine spur is separated from the maxillary palate by
a very peculiar hiatus. In what light are we to/regard the inter-
nasal passage above referred to 1 A very little consideration will,
I believe, suffice to render this somewhat extraordinary feature
of an adult mammalian septum nasi quite intelligible. When
the palatal plates of the embryonic maxillary processes coalesce to
form the floor of the nasal cavity, they very soon unite with the
ventral edge of the internasal septum. This coalescence generally
proceeds backwards towards the posterior nares, and before the
coalescence of the palate with the septum is complete posteriorly
there is a single median choanal passage, i.e., the nasal cavities
freely communicate. It is plain that here in Ornithorhynclms we
have a condition of non-coalescence of the palate with a certain
extent of the ventral border of the septum nasi.* But it is
notable that this non-union does not occur towards the posterior
* Attention may here be called to the instructive similarities in the
general relations of parts between transverse sections through the nasal
region of Platypus in the region of the internasal aperture, and similar
sections through the nasal region of many embryo mammals passing through
the embryonic choanal communication between the two cavities. Cf. in
particular, figures in Parker’s monographs on development of Mammalian
skull, e.g., Edentata and Insectivora, pi. in. figs. 9 and 9a. Note especially
the ventral relations of the cartilaginous septum to the vomer, &o.


nares, but in front of the vomer. The question arises, why should
the failure to unite with the septum have taken place precisely
in this region? This is an important question, and I think it
may easily be answered if we recognise that the anterior end of
the osseous maxillary palate indicates the anterior limit of fusion
of the palatal plates of the secondary or permanent palate. In
other words the secondary palate ceases somewhat abruptly with
the anterior margin of the maxillaries, and in front of this the
floor of the nasal cavities is constituted, not by a secondary palatal
formation at all, but simply by the ventral parts of the cartilagi-
nous walls of the primary nasal capsules which are intimately
bound up with the forward extension of the intertrabecular carti-
lage forming the cartilaginous septum nasi. This, indeed, is
demonstrably the case. The wide area between the diverging
premaxillo-maxillary crura in the macerated skull is largely filled
up in the recent state by a sheet of cartilage whose composition
has been described and figured in the paper already referred to
(1), and which has nothing to do with the secondary palate. In
ordinary adult mammals the area, which is homologous with this
interval, is closed in below the nasal cavities by the premaxillaries,
which send inwards and backwards palatine plates* which join
the maxillary palate, completing the secondary palate in front.
And according to the prevalent theory the dumb-bell bone in
Ornithorhynchus represents these premaxillary palatine plates, at
least in part. lam of opinion, however, that the facts I have
adduced respecting the dorsal and posterior relations of the dumb-
bell bone tend to negative the view that that bone is an ossifica-
tion in the morphological plane of the secondary palate, and point
distinctly to its homology to a bone of the vomerine series. To
sum up this portion of the argument: I regard the secondary
palate as ceasing altogether at the anterior margin of the osseous
maxillary palatine plate. The failure to develop in front, on the
part of the premaxillary moiety of the usual secondary palate,,
results in the exposure from below of the ventral walls of
the cartilaginous nasal capsules, and of the intervening cartila-
* See, however, discussion towards the end of this paper.


ginous nasal septum. The latter, however, is clad for a
certain distance forward on its ventral border by a bilaterally
symmetrical anterior vomerine splint, distinct from, but in series
with, the principal vomer; while in front of this the ventral
aspect of the septum is bare—covered only by the mucous mem-
brane of the mouth—and here it descends, flattens dorso-ventrally,
and spreads out into a “prenasal plate” of cartilage, which is
continuous laterally and behind with the aliseptal cartilages, and
in front with the marginal cartilage of the upper “lip.” [See
paper (1) and figures in Macleay Memorial Volume.]
Further, with regard to the internasal aperture, I regard it as
situated in a position quite definitely determined by the course of
development, viz., above the extreme anterior end of the secondary
palate. It seems less difficult to understand non-coalescence of the
septum with the secondary palate either posteriorly or anteriorly
than it would be to imagine an arbitrary interruption of the
coalescence midway. Posteriorly a persistent median choanal
passage would be the result of premature cessation of the process
of coalescence, while non-union anteriorly such as we have in the
case before us may possibly be explained by supposing that the
porterior boundary of the internasal aperture really represents
the original starting point of palatal coalescence, and that the
extension of the secondary palate in front of that point, at a lower
level than the septum, is the product of a later development. Of
course the point can only be decided by actual embrjmlogical
investigation, for which, unfortunately, the material has hitherto
not been available.
The anterior boundary of the fenestra is in my view due to a
rapid ventral descent of the septum into the roof of the mouth in
front of the anterior border of the permanent palate, and I
conjecture that it is probably formed somewhat late in develop-
ment, as the septum undergoes the great anterior elongation
which it acquires in the snout of this Iqng-nosed animal.
It might detract from the value of the arguments based upon
the posterior relations of the dumb-bell bone to the internasal
aperture if it could be contended that the latter may be merely


aii adaptive character in this peculiar animal, and one which may
not bear all the significance which I attach to it. But this
position can hardly be taken up when I am able to state that the
feature appears to be a general character of the Monotremata since
it is also present in the genus Echidna (see fig. 5). I have not
yet had time fully to investigate the structural relations of the
fenestra in the latter type, though the material is in process of
preparation. I fully expect that a study of the same region in
Echidna along parallel lines will throw a' fuller light on the whole
anatomy of the region, and will, perhaps, enable us to determine
what in that animal is the structural homologue to the dumb-bell
bone in Ornithorhynchus.
After diligent search £■ have been unable anywhere to find a
reference to this very obvious perforation of the wall between the
nasal chambers in Ornithorhynchus and Echidna , or to the
persistence of such an aperture in any other mammalian form. I
do not think that its presence can ever have been recorded, else
its significance would hardly have been overlooked by comparative
anatomists.
The aperture does, however, bear a most interesting resem-
blance to that which in the duck and certain other water birds
(15) perforates the septum opposite the external nostrils. This
also is a low and anteriorly elongated aperture in the septum at
the nasal floor, and the chief superficial difference from the inter-
nasal aperture in the Monotremes lies in the more anterior position
of the aperture in the duck’s nose.
It may yet be contended that the considerations which I have
hitherto brought forward are, after all, insufficient to enable us
finally to dispose of the argument in favour of the homology,—
derived from a comparison between their relations to the organ
of Jacobson and the naso-palatine foramen, —between the dumb-
bell bone in Ornithorhynchus pn the one hand, and the palatine
plate of the ordinary mammalian premaxilla on the other, or
rather that portion of the latter which, in the words of Sir
William Turner, “ lies between the incisive foramen and the
mesial palatal suture.”


■ I fully admit the force of such an objection and recognise that
if the view advocated in this paper is to be regarded as valid and
satisfactory it must be supported by an explanation of the common
relationship just referred to and one in which the admitted facts
of that relationship are not left out of account.
In attempting to afford such an explanation, reference may in
the first place be made to the condition which is common in
reptilian forms. The late Prof. W. K. Parker has shown in his
Monograph on the structure and development of the skull in
Tropidonotus natrix (10) that the vomer occupies a position and
relation alike to the cartilaginous nasal septum, to Jacobson’s
organ, and to the opening of the duct of the latter which corres-
ponds to the site of the naso-palatine foramen, exactly similar to
the position and relation which we find the dumb-bell bone to
occupy in relation to these structures in Ornithorhynchus. And
identical relations of the vomer, may be recognised in others of
those reptilian forms in which the organ of Jacobson reaches so
high a degree of development. It is then the vomerine element
and not the premaxilla which in lower vertebrates possesses those
relations which among the majority of adult mammals seem to
be possessed by an inner or mesial osseous element of the pre-
maxilla.
Professor Howes has drawn attention to the significance in
Caiman nigeroi the very exceptional arrangement due to the inter-
calation of the bullous anterior free extremities of the vomers in
the premaxillo-maxillary region of the palate. He has shown
reason for the belief that this bullous palatine lobe of the vomer
is to be regarded as the representative of the osseous investment
of Jacobson’s organ generally present in other reptiles arid in
mammals. In other crocodilian forms, in which the palatine lobe
of the vomer is absent, he found the anterior truncated extremity
of the vomer buried in a powerful ‘ vomerine ’ ligament which
runs forward to the premaxillary region, where its fibres are
attached to the periosteum of the premaxillary region and to the
palatine process of the premaxilla when such is present. In a
young Alligator mississippiensis he found the fibres of this liga


ment partly in continuity with the walls of two fibro-cartilaginous
sacs lying within the embrace of the prepalatine foramina, and he
considers it justifiable to assume that these sacs, together with the
vomerine ligament, form the vestigial remains of the palatine lobes
of the vomers in Caiman niger with their associated structures.
I have referred to these observations in detail because the descent
of the anterior lobes of the vomers into the prepalatine region in
Caiman niger presents a very fair analogy to the descent of the
dumb-bell ossification into the prepalatine region in Ornithorhyn-
ehus. In the latter case, however, the ‘ palatine lobe ’is not
absolutely continuous with the main body of the vomer, the con-
tinuity being interrupted by the intervention of the bilateral
vomeriiie ligament which has been described above.*
Turning next to the arrangements in the class Mammalia, we
may enquire whether developmental conditions amongst other
mammalian orders bear out the objection, founded upon the
adult condition of the mammalian skull, to our considering the
dumb-bell bone as vomerine rather than premaxillary. And this
question may, I think, be answered in the negative. A study of
Parker’s elaborate monographs, especially those dealing with the
development of the skull in Edentata and Insectivord (12), has
tended strongly to confirm the idea I had previously formed of
the vomerine nature of the bone in question.
Attention may be specially directed to the following amongst
Parker’s figures — Tatusia hyhrida, PI. XI. fig. 6 v.', along with the
transverse sections in PI. in. figs. 7 and 8 v'. A later stage of
the same, showing the palatine anterior vomers, is figured on his
PI. v. fig. 5 lettered, by mistake, o'.
In the ripe embryonic condition represented on his PI. vx., fig. 1
shows the palatine anterior vomers considerably restricted in
extent and forming that part of the palate which intervenes
between the naso-palatine foramen and the “ mesial palatal
suture,” At this stage, however, they appear to be fused with
the palatine plate of the premaxillse.
* This bilateral vomerine ligament is actually figured by Meckel (2, PI. vii.
fig. 11), though his description of the bone and its relations is meagre.


Again, in Erinaceus europaeus, the anterior vomers are shown
in PI. xix. figs. 1,3, 7 and 8 (v'.), where their intimate relation to
the “recurrent cartilages” or cartilaginous capsules of Jacobson’s
organs is most striking. Of. also the transverse sections, figs. 4
and 5 of PI. xvm.
In reference to the anatomy of the region under notice in Tatusia
hyhrida, Parker has made the following observation ( loc. cit.
p. 18): —“The cartilages protecting ‘Jacobson’s organs’ are no
longer tubular, but form half a tube, open externally, the organ
lying in the outer hollow. But the cartilages themselves have an
osseous counterpart protecting them on the inner side and having
their shape and direction; these are the * anterior paired vomers,’
bones well known for their large development in the Ophidia and
Lacertilia; they do not represent a divided ‘ vomer,’ proper,
.which in nearly all Mammalia is well developed also.” This
description could almost stand for one of the actual conditions in
the adult Ornithorhynchus, the paired “anterior vomers” being
of course fused mesially.
Thus, if Parker’s splendid work could be taken as final, there
could be little hesitation in identifying the dumb-bell bone as the
homologue of the “anterior vomers” described and figured by him
in so many edentate and insectivorous types of Mammalia, as well
as in the Ophidia and Lacertilia.
The figures illustrative of Herzfeld’s paper on the organ of
Jacobson (13) are also worthy of study in this relation, but in the
text this author states that he has simply adopted from Balogh (14)
the identification of the bone lying mesially to the incisive foramen
as palatine process of premaxilla. Some of the figures, however,
show a dorsal extension of this osseous region which is at least
highly suggestive of a true vomerine character.
Professor Howes, however, has stated (loc. cit.) the opinion that
Parker’s views respecting the various elements of the vomerine
series in the Mammalia are not entirely devoid of uncertainty, and
in particular he holds that Parker has “shown that he was unable
to draw a sharp distinction between the palatine processes of the
premaxillse and his anterior paired or lateral vomers.” Never


theless, this inability can only be regarded as manifested in certain
cases, and Howes himself accepts from Parker certain conclusions
on this subject which he sums up as follows :—“ (a) That we can
no longer regard those structures ordinarily described among
mammals as ‘palatine’ processes of the premaxillse as throughout
homologous ; and (6) that the latter are, in a number of cases, no
parts of the premaxill® at all, but rather referable to the vomerine
categoryand he adds that “in his discovery of the complex
nature of the (non-pathological) premaxilla of mammals Parker is
at one with Albrecht, who has shown that there is reason for
regarding the premaxillse of the adult Ornithorhynchus as a com-
bination of distinct elements.” The author then proceeds as
follows :—“ All those mammals for which Parker has recorded
the presence of ‘anterior paired vomers’ are long-nosed. Com-
parison of the skulls of adults with those of the young as figured
by him, will show that while the bones in question may in some
cases pass over to the true vomers they more generally remain
exclusively related to Jacobson’s organ, which they ensheath in
the form of the so-called premaxillary palatine processes, and their
products of fusion and metamorphosis lie, for the most part,
within the area of the latter as ordinarily described.” I have
quoted at this length from Professor Howes’ valuable paper
because it appears to me that the condition in Ornithorhynchus
may be easily interpreted in the light of the last few sentences.
Ornithorhynchus is a long-nosed mammal whose ‘ anterior vomers ’
have fused together in development without uniting with any
other osseous element. Posteriorly they preserve an intimate
relation to the ventral edge of the septum nasi, while anteriorly
they constitute exclusively the osseous investment for the carti-
laginous capsules of the organs of Jacobson.
In view of Howes’ statements above quoted, and of his further
dictum that “ the vomers and palatine processes of the premaxil-
laries have been sufficiently shown to be serial elements of a
common category,” it is not strictly accurate to regard the
vomerine view of the dumb-bell bone as really a novel one. But
I am unaware that anyone has ever explicitly applied this inter


pretation to the “os paradoxum” in Ornithorhynchus, and the
definition of it as a true premaxillary element certainly holds the
field. At the same time, when the significance of the statements
of Parker and Howes for the interpretation of the premaxilla of
other mammals is borne in mind, it may be necessary to admit
that the distinction of the dumb-bell bone as vomerine rather
than premaxillary is largely a nominal one. I submit, nevertheless,
that this nominal distinction is an important one, and I am
inclined to hold that a full recognition that here in Ornithorhynchus
the bone lying between the incisive or naso-palatine foramen and
the mesial palatal suture is truly vomerine and has in its origin
nothing to do with the body of the premaxilla, will help us to
clearer views upon the constitution of the corresponding region
in mammals generally.
[See Appendix, p. 150.]
REFERENCES TO LITERATURE.
(1) Wilson and Martin. Macleay Memorial Volume (Linn.
Soc. N.S.W. 1893).
(2) Meckel, J. F. “ Ornithorhynchi paradox! descriptio ana-
tomica” (Lipsiae, 1826).
(3) Owen, R. “ Monotremata,” Todd’s Cyclopaedia of Anatomy
and Physiology.
(4) Owen, R. “Anatomy of Vertebrates,” Vol. ii.
(5) Flower, W. H. “ Osteology of the Mammalia ” (London,
1876).
(6) Flower and Gadow. Id., 3rd edition (London, 1885).
(7) Albrecht, P. “ Sur la Fente maxillaire double sous-
muqueuse et les 4 os intermaxillaires de I’Ornithorhynque
adulte normale” (Bruxelles, 1883).
(8) Turner, W. “The dumb-bell shaped Bone in the Palate of
Ornithorhynchus compared with the prenasal Bone of the
Pig,” Journal of Anat. and Physiol, xix. p. 214.


(9) Symington, J. “On the Nose, the Organ of Jacobson, and
the dumb-bell-shaped Bone in the Omithorhynchua,” P.Z.S.
1891, p. 575.
(10) Parked, W. K. “On the Structure and Development of
the Skull in the Common Snake (Tropidonotus natrixj,”
Phil. Trans. Roy. Soc. Lond. 1878.
(11) Howes, G. B. “On the probable Existence of a Jacobson’s
Organ among the Crocodilia ; with Observations upon the
Skeleton of that Organ in the Mammalia, &c.,” P.Z.S.
1891, p. 148.
(12) Parker, W. K. “On the Structure and Development of
the Skull in the Mammalia,” Part ii., Edentata; Part iii.,
Insectivora, Phil. Trans. Roy. Soc. Lond. 1885.
(13) Herzfeld, P. “ Ueber das Jacobson ’sche Organ des Mens-
chen und der Zoologische Jahrbiicher, Bd. iii.
(Anat. u. Entwickelungsgesch.), p. 551 (1889).
(14) Balogh, C. “Das Jacobson’sche Organ des Sohafes,” Sit-
zungsber. K.K. Akad. Wien, 1862.
(15) Parker, W. K. “The Morphology of the Duck and the
Auk Tribes,” ‘Cunningham’ Memoirs, No. vi. 1890.
For a bibliography relating to Jacobson’s organ and its rela-
tions up to 1 889, Beard’s paper in Zoolog. Jahrbiicher, Bd. iii.
p. 762, may be consulted. Additional papers are cited in Parker’s
memoir above quoted (12), p. 6.
EXPLANATION OF FIGURES.
Plate viii.
Fig. I.—View of dumb-bell-shaped bone of Omithorhynchua from below,
showing palatine plate and vomerine spur, enlarged four dia-
meters.
Fig. 2.—View of dumb-bell-shaped bone from the left side ( x 4).
Fig. 3.—View of dumb-bell-shaped bone from the left and above ( x 4).
Fig. 4.—Sagittal section of anterior part of snout of adult Omithorhynchua,
parallel with and to the right of the mesial plane. The section


passes through the right nostril and exposes the right side of the
septum nasi. The internasal aperture is seen below the level of
the longitudinal ridge running backwards from Jacobson’s organ.
The capsule of the latter has been shaved by the section at its
most bulging part. The arrow points up towards the naso-pala-
tine foramen.
Fig. s.—Sagittal section of snout of Echidna to left of mesial plane, passing
through left nostril, showing nasal septum with its longitudinal
ridge and intemasal aperture.
References to figs. 1-5.
a, anterior segment; b, posterior; c, isthmus ; d, line on posterior seg-
ment indicating anterior limit of plate of cartilage which clothes the inferior
surface posteriorly; e, bifurcated vomerine spur; f, vertical part of bone;
g, dorsal ala ;h, nostril; i, internasal aperture; j, Jacobson’s organ ; Ic,
marginal car ilage of upper lip.
Plate ix.
Figs. 6-12.—Coronal sections through snout of Omithorhynchus. These
figures have been drawn on a reduced scale of one-half from
photomicrographs having a magnification of eleven diameters.
Fig. 6.—T.s. in plane of posterior boundary of internasal aperture. The
hone clothing the cartilaginous septum ventrally is the vomer
(main vomer), and it is seen just meeting the dorsal crest of the
maxillary palate.
Fig. 7. —T.s. through about the middle of the internasal aperture. Vented
of the septum are the forks of the vomerine spur of the dumb-
bell-shaped bone separated By a little fatty tissue.
Fig. B.—T.s. through plane of anterior boundary of internasal aperture.
The vomerine spur of the dumb-bell is becoming more ventrally
placed and is connected with the cartilage just in front of apex
of the median process of the osseous maxillary palate by means
of some fibrous tissue. The posterior extremity of Jacobson’s
organ is cut through on either side.
Fig. 9. —T.s. in plane of hinder end of posterior segment where that is still
covered below by the cartilaginous lamina of the nasal floor.
Fig. 10.—T.s. through snout, cutting postaxial segment of dumb-bell-shaped
bone in front of line d in fig. 1.
Fig. 11.—T.s. through snout in plane of naso-palatine foramina and isthmus
of dumb-bell bone.
Fig. 12.—T.s. snout in plane passing through hinder portion of preaxial
segment and commencement of vertical crest of bone. Here the
organ of Jacobson is about its widest.


Lettering of figs. 6-12.
mx,, maxillary palate; m. mx., median anterior process of maxillary
palate; v., vomer; d. h. v., vomerine spur of dumb-bell bone; d. h. p,,
posterior segment of dumb-bell bone ; d. b. a., anterior segment of dumb-
bell bone ; d. h. i., isthmus of dnmb-bell bone ; J. 0., organ of Jacobson ;
gl., glandular ridge; nn,, nerves; n. p. f., naso-palatiue foramen; n.c.,
nasal cavity ; a. s., ali-septal cartilage; cartilage of nasal floor; n.s.,
nasal septum; i. a., intemasal aperture.
The figures were drawn by Mr. G. H. Barrow, those of the dumb-bell-
shaped bone from nature, those of the coronal sections from photo-micro-
graphs.
Appendix (July 23rd, 1894): — Just on the eve of the final
revision of the proofs of the foregoing pages there came to hand
by the English mail, P.Z.S. 1894, Part 1 (June Ist), containing
Prof. W. Newton Parker’s paper, “On some Points in the Struc-
ture of the Young of Echidna aculeata,” to which the Editor has
kindly called my attention. In this paper the author refers to
the internasal aperture described above and states that “ a com-
munication between the two nasal cavities has been described by
Home in Ornithorhynchus. Zuckerkandl was unable to observe
this; but I have satisfied myself that both Monotremes agree in
this respect, and that the left and right nasal chambers com-
municate by a slit-like passage beneath the septum just behind
Jacobson’s organ.” In view of these observations I can only
regret that it is impossible now to withdraw the words “ hitherto
undescribed ” from the title of my paper. It is curious that
Home’s observation should have been passed over in silence by
well nigh every later writer on Ornithorhynchus.
The present paper was communicated to the Linnean Society of
N.S.W. at its meeting on 25th April, 1894, a preliminary note
having been read at the previous meeting on 28th March. Pro-
fessor Parker’s paper, although published only on Ist June, 1894,
was received by the Zoological Society of London on 7th Nov.,
1893, and read at the Society’s meeting on 16th Jan., 1894.








[From Vol. VIII, (Series 2nd) of the “ Proceedings of the Linnean
Society of New South Wales ” (October 26th, 1893).]
ON THE HOMOLOGIES OF THE BORDERS AND
SURFACES OF THE SCAPULA IN
MONOTREMES.
BY J. T. WILSON, M. B.,
Professor op Anatomy, Univ. of
Sydney, and W. J. Stewart McKay, M. 8., B.Sc.
(Plate xxi.)
There is not yet anything like a complete consensus of opinion
regarding the homologies of the borders and surfaces of the
monotreme scapula ; and indeed some very discrepant views have
been set forth by various anatomists.
We shall not enter upon a description of the bone in detail,
since the accounts given in several of the works dealing with the
subject are satisfactory enough, and several of them are accom-
panied by figures (see list of references). It is with regard to
the interpretation of the parts of the bone that we propose to
offer a few observations.
Our attention was directed to the subject during the course of
an investigation by one of us (M.) into the myology of the shoulder
region in Ornithorhynchus and Echidna, the results of which will
be published shortly.
Ever since Owen (1) the actual anterior margin of the mono-
treme scapula [‘ margo anterior’ of Meckel (2) ; ‘ bord anterieure’
of Cuvier (3)] has been generally recognised as the representative
of the free margin of the mesoscapula, i.e., as the free border of
an anteriorly projecting scapular spine. This interpretation has
at least been adopted by Flower (and Gadow) (4) and by Mivart
(5), and it is in our view undoubtedly correct, being well supported
by a study of the muscular attachments.


Giebel, however, in Bronn’s ‘ Thier-Reich’ (6) simply notices this
border of the bone as a straight ‘ anterior ’ border, while, in his
“Zootomie aller Thierklassen,” Bruhl (7) not only figures it
merely under the latter name, but even designates the ridge
running dorso-ventrally on the outer aspect of the scapula of
Echidna as “ die bei Echidna deutliche Spina ” 1
The true representative of the anterior or coracoid costa of the
typical mammalian scapula was identified by Owen (1) in Omi-
thorhynchus with a ridge running dorso-ventrally on the ‘ inner ’
aspect of the bone. Along the line of this ridge the actual
anterior part of the bladebone is flexed outwards so as to produce
a marked hollowing of the whole outer surface. Dorsally the
ridge begins close to the mesoscapular margin, but it inclines
backwards as it passes ventrally and terminates, at the inferior
or ventral extremity of the bone (glenoid region), near to the
base of the acromion.
Except for this ridge the prescapula is totally suppressed.
That area of the inner surface of the bone extending from the
ridge in question to the free ‘ anterior ’ mesoscapular margin
seems to represent that portion of the prescapular fossa which is
ordinarily formed by the mesoscapula. And the opposite or
* outer’ aspect of this same portion of the blade forms part of
the wall of the postscapular fossa, giving origin to fibres of the
infraspinatus muscle, which extends forwards as far as the meso-
scapular margin. The posterior limit of the postscapular fossa is
indicated by a distinct ridge, to which the scapular triceps is
attached, and of which more anon.
It seems strange that Flower and Gadow (loc. cit.) should
completely ignore the well-marked prescapular ridge on the inner
aspect of the scapula of Platypus; especially as Owen (loc. cit.)
so distinctly drew attention to it as the true ‘anterior costa.’ But
the omission is possibly to be explained by the fact that, in their
remarks on the monotreme scapula, the authors referred to seem
to have had regard more particularly to the structure of the
scapula in Echidna (which alone they figure); and in this it is to


be admitted the prescapular ridge is not represented by any
recognisable mark. According to Owen (loc. cit.) it is “nearly
obsolete” in Echidna. We hope to show, however, that, notwith-
standing the absence of a distinct prescapular ridge, the condition
in 'Echidna (as regards muscular attachments, <tc.) does so essen-
tially resemble that in Ornithorhynchus that it is an exceedingly
simple matter to homologise the parts in the two genera. And
if we interpret the ridge on the inner surface of the scapula of
Ornithorhynchus (after Owen) as the true morphological anterior
border (prescapular), it becomes comparatively easy to exhibit the
real correspondence of the borders and surfaces of the scapula in
monotremes to those in the typical mammalian scapula.
The identification of an area of the ‘outer’ surface of the
scapula!, by reason of its giving origin to the infraspinatus muscle,
as ‘ postscapular fossa,’ has already been alluded to. In Omitho-
rhynchus this postscapular ‘fossa’ extends from the actual anterior
(true mesoscapular) margin of the bone as far back as the ridge
already referred to as giving attachment to the scapular triceps.
The like is true also of the scapula in Echidna, but here the
tricipital ridge does not lie so far back as it does in the Platypus,
but is separated by a considerable interval from the actual hinder
border of the bone. In fact the ‘ outer ’ surface of the scapula in
Echidna is nearly bisected into preaxial and postaxial halves by
the tricipital ridge, which is more strongly marked than in
Ornithorhynchus.
It may now be asked how the mode of attachment of the supra-
spinatus muscle agrees with the view so far expressed respecting
the homologies of the parts of the bone. Naturally we should
expect to find it associated with that part of the bone which
represents the region of the prescapular fossa; and this, it will
be remembered, we regard as that area of the inner surface of the
scapula in Ornithorhynchus which lies between the actual anterior
(mesoscapular) border and Owen’s ‘true anterior costa,’ i.e., the
ridge formerly described. But the supraspinatus in Omitho-
rhynchus is a relatively very minute muscle, and it does not by
any means occupy the whole of the above area. Its origin is
26


restricted to. an exceedingly small portion of the bone close to
the-glenoid region and near to the root of the acromion. The
prescapular ridge, indeed fades away ere it' reaches the origin
of the supraspinatus, but its faint continuation towards the
coracoid passes behind the muscle, which is thus situated to its
acromial or mesoscapular side, as one would naturally expect.
Immediately above (dorsad of) the origin of the small supra-
spinatus is the attachment of another small muscle, the omohyoid,
quite' close to the continued prescapular line. The greater part
of the ‘ prescapular fossa ’ is, however, occupied by portions of the
attachments of the serratus magnus and acrpmiotrachelien muscles,
which have, as it were, encroached upon the domain of the supra-
spinatus.
■' The area of the ‘inner’ surface of the scapula posterior to (i.e n
caudad of) the prescapular line (in• Omithorhynchus) is covered
by part of the subscapularis muscle, fibres of which arise from the
major part of it. The origin of this muscle reaches backwards to
the actual posterior margin of the bone, and, further, extends
around this upon the ‘ outer’ aspect;
In Echidna the condition of the ‘inner’ surface of the scapula
as to muscular attachments is, superficially, a very different one;
and it is this fact which has probably largely helped to render the
interpretation of the monotreme scapula more obscure. As stated
above,, there is in Echidna no recognisable prescapular ridge
corresponding to that in Omithorhynchus. At the same time,
the supraspinatus muscle is relatively a very much larger muscle,
whose origin occupies a very considerable area of the ‘inner’
surface of the bone, viz., nearly the whole of the inferior or
ventral half of the surface above the glenoid region. As in
Omithorhynchus, the narrow attachment of the omohyoid muscle
is placed immediately dorsad of it, in this case crossing the inner
surface antero-posteriorly. The dorsal moiety of the surface,
amounting to fully one-half of the ‘inner’ surface of the bone, is
in large part bare of actual muscular attachment ; but, dorsally,
the insertion of the serratus magnus occupies it and extends far


ventral wards near both the anterior and posterior limits of the
surface. As in ornithorhynchus, the-acromiotrachelien has an r
attachment close to the mesoscapular margin in front (cephalad) .
of the supraspinatus, and just ventral to the serratus magnus. , .
Thus it would almost appear as if nearly, if not quite, the entire
‘inner’ surface of the scapula in Echidna answered to that area in
Ornithorhynchus included between the mesoscapular margin and .
the prescapular ridge, the subscapularis area of the inner surface
in the latter animal being thus unrepresented. But this is not abso-
lutely the case. For even in Echidna there is a narrow strip (as,
much as 3 mm. wide) of this same inner surface close to the actual
posterior margin which is occupied by fibres of the subscapularis,
though the major part of this muscle arises from the opposite-
pouter’) aspect of the bone. Plainly this posterior narrow
subscapular strip of the inner surface corresponds to the broad,
subscapularis area of the ‘inner’ surface of the Platypus scapula-
which lies caudad of the prescapular ridge. We do not hold that
it is necessary to suppose that the mere line of limitation between
subscapularis on the one band and supraspinatus on the other is.
the actual site of the morphological anterior border (prescapular
ridge), but we do hold that either this is the case or, as is perhaps
more likely, the absolute suppression in Echidna of any ridge
marking the anterior costa has allowed of an encroachment by
the supraspinatus upon the adjacent subscapularis area.
Flower (4), indeed, probably following Mivart [(5) p. 384],
seems to imagine that the subscapularis in Echidna arises entirely
from the ‘outer’ aspect of the scapula, and that it is limited behind
I by the posterior margin of the bone. Westling (9) also adopts
this view.
Thus Mivart [(5) p. 398] states that in Echidna “the supra-
spinatus fossa is on the internal costal surface of the bone, and
the infraspinatus is immediately behind its actual anterior margin;
But,” he continues, “ while in Ornithorhynchus the subscapularis
occupies that part of the internal or costal surface of the scapula
which is not occupied by the supraspinatus, in the Echidna, on


the other hand, the subscapularis occupies exclusively the external
surface of the scapula,” And upon the strength of this view of
the anatomy of Echidna Flower and Gadow accept the actual
posterior margin of the scapula in the monotremes as the true
morphological anterior costa or coracoid border.*
This view seems to us to be an erroneous one. The origin of
the subscapularis even in Echidna not only occupies part of the
‘ outer ’ surface and the whole of the posterior border of the bone,
but extends round it so as to occupy the narrow strip of the
‘ inner ’ surface aforesaid. And when we turn to the scapula of
Platypus we find that the subscapularis area of the inner surface
is so great as to include the major part of that surface. These
considerations appear to ns to vitiate a large part of Flower’s
interpretation of the monotreme scapula, which is based upon
a mistaken view of the real condition in Echidna , and which
fails to give due weight to the condition in Ornithorhynchus.
But if we are to deny the homology of the actual posterior
margin of the scapula to the true anterior or coracoid costa as
suggested by Flower, in what light are we to regard the former ?
Owen (1) simply accepts it as the “posterior margin or costa,”
and, so far as we know, all authorities save Mivart and Flower
and Gadow so regard it (cf. Giebel and Briihl, loc. cit.). Here,
however, we agree with Flower and differ from Owen in taking
as the true morphologically posterior, or glenoid, or postscapular
* In a passage on p. 402 of his Memoir (5) Mivart says of Echidna :—
“ In that animal I find no trace of a ridge on the inside of the scapula like
that which, in Ornithorhynchus, separates the supraspinatns from the
subscapularis; but the supraspinatus is, nevertheless, separated from the
subscapularis by a very large lamella, which throws the last-mentioned
muscle entirely to the outer side of the scapula, and is the only one
developed except that separating the supra- from the infraspinatus.”
Thus it would appear as if Mivart also were inclined to regard the actual
posterior margin in Echidna as morphologically the anterior; while in
Ornithorhynchus the homologue to the latter would be Owen’s ‘anterior
costa ’ ridge. But this theory supposes a very wide discrepancy between
the condition of the scapula in the two genera.


margin, that ridge on the ‘ outer ’ surface of the scapula which is
present in both the genera, though most strikingly evident in
the Echidna. This ridge we have already referred to as the
‘tricipital.’ Mivart states [(5) p. 401] that it might be considered
to correspond to the axillary margin of the scapula of an ordinary
mammal.
Owen styles the subscapularis in Omithorhynchus “ a narrow
muscle” and regards it as restricted to the ‘inner’ surface; whilst,
as we have seen, Mivart and Flower regard it in Echidna as equally
restricted to the ‘inner’ surface. We find that in both instances
the description is inaccurate—as already indicated for Echidna—
and, for Omithorhynchus, in the fact that a great part of what
Owen has taken for teres major arising from the hinder part of
the outer surface of the bone is really part of the subscapularis.
In the scapulae in both forms, in short, the subscapularis arises
from both ‘ inner ’ and ‘ outer ’ surfaces (the proportions differing
much in the two cases), and from the whole of the actual posterior
margin itself. The latter we are therefore disposed to look upon
as constituting morphologically a mere exaggerated ridge—perhaps
of the same nature as the prominent and strongly marked sub-
scapular ridge close to the true glenoid border of the human
scapula,*
That the morphologically posterior, glenoid, or postscapular
border of the monotreme scapula is, as Flower believes, repre-
sented by the ridge upon the outer surface is testified to by its
relation in the way of attachment to the scapular triceps as well
as by its forming the true separation between the infraspinatus
* This idea has at least been harboured by Mivart in reference to the
scapula of Platypus, for he holds that we may theoretically consider “ that
there is a plate developed opposite to that separating the supra- from the
infraspinatus muscle, which, as it were, passes into the midst of the sub-
scapularis, throwing the posterior part of it to the outside and on to the
same surface as that occupied by the infraspinatus, while the rest of it is
but very slightly separated from the supraspinatus.” The view of the
writers is simply that this theory of the nature of the posterior margin of
the scapula is good for both forms of monotreme scapula.


and subscaptilaris muscles in the scaphlse of both the genera of
the order 1 .
•But it is'not alone in the Monotremata'that a displacement of
the true postscapular border on to the outer surface of the scapula
seems to occur In his account of the anatomy of the scapula of
Myrmecophaga teiradactyla in Bronn’s “ Klassen und Ordnungen
des Thier-Reiohs,” Giebel [(6)p.'408, pi. lxx. fig. 5] describes the
, second or postscapular spine in the following terms:—“ Ihr fast
parallel [to, the mesoscapular spine] lauft eine zweite Grate, der
eigentliche Hinterrand [the italics are ours], hinter, welchem aber
die Platte des Schulterblattes noch betrachtlich erweitert ist.”
•And the condition here described is common to many edentate
forms [(6) pi. lxx. and (8) pi, xxi.-xxm.] and is also very promi-
nent in the marsupial Notaryctes typhlops (10). .In these cases it
is associated with a very great development of the scapular triceps.
Thus in Ddsypus sexcinctus Galton (11) describes the scapular
triceps as the largest part of the muscle, and as arising from the
“inferior or'lesser spine of the scapula along the whole of its
extent.” He also found a part attached to the actual “ axillary ”
■border of the bone just posterior to the neck of the bone which
lie opined to be the representative of the human long head ; but
in view of all the facts, we cannot admit this to be so to the
exclusion of the rest of the scapular : fibres. Indeed, the fact is
that where the postscapular spine is present the triceps is not
.usually confined to it alone but spreads backwards upon the flat
surface of bone behind it as far as the actual posterior margin of
the bone, from which also fibres generally arise.
This at least is the case in Nqtgrycies, unascertained by one of
us (W.), and apparently it is so also in Ghlamydophorus truncalus
.(12), in which a postscapular spine is well developed and the
scapular triceps is “ enormous.”
‘ In Orycteropus capemis Humphry (13) simply describes a very
extensive origin by three divisions from the “ posterior costa ”;
but, as in this animal the postscapular spine rises from the
external surface pretty close to the actual posterior border, there
can be no doubt that the attachment of the large muscle actually


reaches as far as the ridge and is not confined to the actual
posterior margin, of the blade;- Gallon’s description of the
condition in this animal does not differ from Humphry’s in any
essential feature (14),
Many rodents also exhibit a'similar though, less! notable post-
scapular spinous development, as,may be,well seen in. the .genus
Arctomys [(6) pi. lxxi. fig. 11, and,(B) pi. xxiy.-fig. 14].
If Giebel’s interpretation of the postscapular spine in Edentata
be correct, we can then bring the monotrerae condition in this
respect well into line ■ with the latter, as may be seen from a
comparison of the series of figures 5-B.*
If the views we have expressed are correct, then there can. be
little difficulty in homologising the two forms of monotreme
scapula. In both forms the actual anterior border is mtso-
scapular. In both the prescapular part of the bone is suppressed,
though in Platypus its site is still indicated ■by a ridge on the
inner surface. In both scapula the acthal posterior border is
really secondary, being an exaggerated Subscapular ridge, the
subscapularis muscle taking origin both from the ridge itself and
the bone on both sides of it., Finally, and as a consequence of
the last character, the postscapular border is displaced outwards
and exists as a mere ‘ tricipital ’ ridge upon the outer surface of
the flat bladebone.
Figs. 5-8 diagrammatically illustrate the points just summarised.
* We have already casually referred to the extraordinary view propounded
by Brtthl (7) that the postscapular ridge in question (tricipital) is “ die bei
Echidna deutliche Spina. ” : In OmithorhyricHua he less confidently suggests
a like view of the corresponding ridge.'. This theory not only ignores Owen’s
view (accepted hy Flower) of the true spinous (mesoscapular) character of
the actual anterior margin, but reveals either an entire ignorance of the
muscular attachments of the scapula or a very extraordinary method in
.their interpretation.' Thus in Echidna he suggests,that the surface in
front of this (tricipital or postscapular) ridge is a.prespinous fossa, possibly
homologous to the supraspinous fossa of higher , mammals. But it is this
very area which is occupied by the origin of" the infraspinatus muscle;
while the area' behind' the same ridge, regarded by Bruhl as postspinous
and possibly homologous to. the, infraspinous.region, is occupied by part of
the subscapularis muscle.


REFERENCES TO LITERATURE.
(1) Owen, E. Article “ Monotremata,” Cyclopaedia of Anatomy
and Physiology (Lond. 1847), Yol. iii. p. 376.
(2) Meckel, J. F. “ Omithorhynohi parados! descriptio ana-
tomica” (Lips. 1826), p. 13 and Tab. IV.’
(3) Cuvier, G. (quoted by Owen, loc. cit.).
(4) Flower, W. H., and Gadow, H. “ Osteology of the Mam-
malia,” 3rd edition, London, 1885, p. 262, fig. 84.
(5) Mivart, St. George. “Anatomy of Echidna hyslrix,”
Trans. Linn. Soc. Lond. Vol. xxv. (1866), pp. 384, 397-8,
and 401;
(6) Giebel, C. G. In Bronn’s “ Klassen und Ordnungen des
Thier-Reichs ” (Leipzig u. Heidelberg, 1878), Band vi.
Abt. v. Lief. 18-20, Taf. lxx. and s. 408. Also Taf. lxxi.
(7) Brdehl, C. B. “ZootomieallerThierklassen” (Wien, 1875),
Lief. iv. Taf. p. xv. fig. le, and Taf. p. xvi. fig. le, and
Lief. v. Taf. p. xvn. fig. 7b (and Explan, of Plates).
(8) Parker, W. K. “Monograph on Structure and Development
of Shoulder-Girdle and Sternum,” Ray Society Memoir
(Lond. 1868), pi. xvm. pp. 192-4. Also pi. xxi.-xxiii. for
scapula of Edentata.
(9) Westling, C. “AnatomischeUntersuohungen fiberA’c/iic?na.”
Bihang till Kongl. Svenska vetenskaps-Akademiens Hand-
lingar. Femtonde Bandet, Afd. iv. (Stockholm, 1890),
Taf. 11. fig. 8,
(10) Stirling, E. C. “Description of a new Genus and Species
of Marsupialia, Notoryctes typhlops,” Trans. Roy. Soc.
South Australia, Vol. xiv. (1891), pi. vm. fig. 1.
(11) Galton, J. C. “The Muscles of the Fore and Hind Limbs
in Dasypus sexcinctus,” Trans. Linn. Soc. Lond. Vol. xxvi.
(1870), p. 538.


(12) Macalister, A. “ The Anatomyof Chlamydophorus trun-
catus,” Trans. Roy. Irish Acad. Yol. xxv. (1875), p. 247.
(13) Humphry, G. M, “The Myology of Orycteropus capensis,”
Journ. of Anat. and Physiol. Yol. ii. p. 301.
(14) Galton, J. C. “Myology of the Extremities of Orycteropus
capensis ,” Trans. Linn. Soc. Lond. Yol. xxvi. (1870), p. 579.
(15) Gervais, Paul. “ des Monotrfemes ” (Paris,
1877-8).
EXPLANATION OF FIGURES.
Plate xxi.
Each of the figures 1-4 has a key-sketch la-4a, showing the outlines of
the muscular attachments.
The outlines of muscular attachments were drawn after careful examina-
tion of several specimens.
In figures 3a and 4a the partly broken off suprascapular part of the
specimen, from which figures 3 and 4 were drawn, has been traced in.
Fig. 1. —Scapula (left) of Omithorhynchus, internal aspect (nat. size).
Fig. la. —Tracing from fig. 1, with outlines of muscular attachments filled
in.
Fig. 2. —Scapula (left) of Omithorhynchus, external aspect (nat. size).
Fig. 2a.—Tracing from fig. 2, with outlines of muscular attachments filled
in.
Fig. 3. —Scapula (left) of Echidna (youngish specimen), internal aspect
(nat. size).
Fig. 3a.—Tracing from fig. 3, with outlines of muscular attachments filled
in.
Pig. 4. —Scapula (left) of Echidna, external aspect (nat. size).
Fig. 4a. —Tracing from fig. 4, with outlines of muscular attachments filled
in.
Figs. 5-B.—Diagrammatic outlines of sections across long (dorso-ventral)
axis of several forms of scapula.


■Fig. s.—Typical mammalian.
.Fig. 6.— Omithorhynchus.
Fig. 7. — Echidna.
Fig. B.— Myrmecophaga.
Littering thus in Jigs, 5-8:
A. —Mesoacapular border (spinous).
B. —Prescapular border (anterior or coracoid).
C. —Postscapular border (posterior or glenoid).
D. —Subscapular (?) ridge.
Lettering of figs. la-4a.
Ac, Tr.' —Acromio-trachelien insertion of dorsal part. Ac. Tr." —
Acromio-trachelieninsertion of ventral part. Clav. Dell. —Clavicular part
of deltoid muscle, origin. Inf. Sp. —lnfraspinatus origin. O.H.—Omo-
hyoid. Mb.' —Rhomboid, ant. part. Mb." —Post. part. Sc. Belt. —Origin
of scapular deltoid. Ser. Mag. —lns. of cervical part of serratus magnus.
S. M. Cost. —lns. costal part. Sb. Sc. —Origin of subsoapularis on ‘ inner ’
surface. Sub Sc. —Subsoapular origin on ‘outer’ surface. Sup. Sp. —
Origin of supraspinatus muscle. T. Major. —Teres major, origin. T.
minor. —Teres minor, origin. Triceps L. H. —Scapular triceps, origin.
‘ Trap.' —Ant. part of trapezius. Trap." —Post, part of trapezius.
N.'B.—Figs. 1-4 are from drawings from nature by Mr. G. H. Barrow.






[From Vol. IX. (Series 2nd) of the “Proceedings of the Linnean
Society of New South Wales ” (October 31st, 1894)■]
FURTHER OBSERVATIONS UPON THE ANATOMY
OF THE INTEGUMENTARY STRUCTURES IN THE
MUZZLE OF ORNITHORHYNCHUS.
By J. T. WILSON, M. B.,
Professor op Anatomy, and
C. J.
MARTIN, M.B., B.Sc.,
Demonstrator of Physiology,
in the University of Sydney.
(Plates xlvi.-xlviii.)


In a recent paper in the Quarterly Journal of Microscopical
Science,'*' Professor E. B. Poulton has recurred to the subject of
the tactile and glandular structures in the skin of the snout of
the Ornithurhynchus, and has given in addition an interesting
account of the structure, and in part of the development, of the
hairs in the same animal, with which account he has incorporated
a discussion of the homologies and origin of mammalian hair in
general.
It is with the earlier part of the paper, dealing with the
structures in the skin of the snout, that the present writers
are more particularly concerned. Mr. Poulton has done us
the honour of making frequent reference to our previously
published observations! upon the rod-like tactile organs (push-
rods), of whose existence and general structural characters he was
the first to give a description. J
We are interested to note that part of Mr. Poulton’s later work
on the peculiar structures in question had been carried on con-
temporaneously with our own—viz., in the summer of
1892. The abstract of our long-delayed paper in the Macleay
Memorial Volume appeared in the published “ Abstract of Pro-
ceedings of the Linnean Society of N.5.W.,” August 31st, 1892,
* Vol. xxxvi. p. 143.
t Macleay Memorial Vol. Sydney, 1892, p. 190.
t Proc. Physiol. Soc. pp. xv, and xvi. ; Juurn. of Physiol. 1884.


although the title alone occurred in the “ Proceedings ” of the
Society for that year.
In our paper in the Macleay Memorial Volume we expressed
our regret at having been unable to utilise Ehrlich’s methyl blue
reaction upon the living tissues of the platypus snout, and ever
since we have been anxious to extend our observations by means
of this and also more especially by the use of Golgi’s silver method.
But even in Australia it is not so easy to procure living specimens
of Ornithorhynchus and especially to have them sent on alive to
Sydney, and it is only quite recently that our efforts towards
again obtaining the animaPalive have been rewarded with success.
Professor Poulton incidentally states his regret that we had
omitted any allusion to the sweat-ducts “and their associated hair-
like and nervous structures.” We may state that itwas the peculiar-
ities of these structures which first of all engaged our attention
and upon which in fact we wrote our first draft of a communica-
tion. On putting together our observations, however, it appeared
to us that certain points remained, for the elucidation of which a
further supply of fresh material was eminently desirable. Accord-
ingly we avoided, of set purpose, all reference to the gland-ducts,
and restricted ourselves to the attempt to set forth the structure
of the push-rods, which appeared to be made sufficiently plain by
the aid of the methods which we had up to that time been able
to use.
In the introductory portion of his paper Mr. Poulton has given
utterance to some rather severe strictures upon the character of
the photo-micrographic illustrations which accompanied our paper
in the Macleay Volume. We may at once admit the justice of much
of Mr. Poulton’s criticism in this regard. It is true that, as he
charitably suggests, the negatives and even the proofs were very
much better than the final impressions would lead one to suppose.
The sections were, in point of fact, satisfactory in the highest
degree; the negatives were, as we believe, very good indeed, as
photo-micrographs, ; while the proofs seemed at least tolerable
reproductions. The ultimate results were undoubtedly the reverse
of satisfactory. Nevertheless, while grateful for Mr. Poulton’s


expressed sympathy, we cannot but feel that his critical instincts
have led him to castigate with undue severity our well meant
attempt after perfect fidelity of illustration. We feel that he
has applied to photomicrographic illustrations criteria of clearness
and definition only applicable to the product of the draughtsman’ B
art. He must surely be aware that, at least in a high-power
photograph of a histological subject (as distinct from the test-
object of the professed photomicrographist), it is inevitable that
while a few points may be rendered definite, much is necessarily
out of focus and “ smudgy.” And even in view of his criticism
we must maintain that there are important points brought out
definitely and unmistakably in at least some of the “ smudges ”
which inspire Mr. Poulton with horror. We would instance the
lenticular bodies in fig. 10, the Pacinian-like bodies and their
relations in figs. 8 and 9, the abrupt ending of the medullary
sheaths of the nerve fibres in the base of the rod shown in fig. 11,
the peripheral and axial groups of filaments seen in transverse
section in fig. 13 (to which Mr. Poulton himself appeals further
on for our discomfiture), and very specially the isolated filaments
of the rod-organ shown in fig. 12. The latter figure is “smudgy”
enough in all conscience, and yet the positive evidence, free from
all shadow of doubt or deception, which such a photograph affords
of the independence and even of structural features of the fibrils
in question is perhaps sufficiently valuable to justify the exhibition
of even that highly inartistic and blotchy reproduction.
Certain of the figures we are willing enough to consign to
oblivion, but even did the series stand alone in all the ugliness of
their imperfect reproduction, it would in our opinion be grossly
unfair to pass upon them Mr. Poulton’s sentence of wholesale
condemnation. But it is to be noted that the photomicrographs
do not, and were never meant to, stand alone, but in connection
with drawings, both from nature and semidiagrammatic, which
had the express purpose of elucidating and interpreting the
obscurity of the photographs. With these drawings, we still
believe that to the unbiassed mind the unfortunate photomicro-
graphs may serve to convey an idea of certain of the appearances


we have described, and, so far as they go, to carry conviction of
the realty of the things represented. And after all it may well
enough he doubted whether a blurred uncertainty of pictorial
representation is so very greatly inferior to that fatal illusory
clearness of delineation so often met with, which is due to the
influence of inadequate visual hypothesis upon the draughtsman.
Such clearness may indeed be advantageous where no possible
■doubt exists as to the nature and characters of the structures to
be represented, since these may in this way be made perfectly
clear to the student; but on the other hand it is only too common
to find erroneous hypotheses as to the nature of obscure structural
details backed up by misleading drawings of the “ clearest ”
possible description. And this observation is not made here
simply as of general application. If the reader will refer to Mr.
Poulton’s own figures (especially his fig. 12 of PL xiv.) showing
the structure of the “ ganglion ” in relation to a sweat-duct in the
skin of the platypus snout, he will there see represented a collection
of bodies described as “ ganglion-cells,” each of which is figured
as duly equipped with a definite nucleus. As a matter of fact,
as we shall show later on, these are not ganglion cells at all, but
knob-like endings of medullated nerves, —and they do not possess
nuclei. The appearance in a few of these bodies of a spot (to
be further referred to) more or less suggestive of a nucleus, (and
in some few cases, perhaps, the actual presence of a nucleus
belonging to the sheath of the somewhat cell-like mass) has
evidently been misinterpreted by Mr. Poulton as witnessing to
the existence of nuclei in the bodies themselves. Nuclei have
.accordingly been clearly delineated so as to convey a quite
inaccurate idea of the real nature of the “ganglion” in connection
with the sweat-duct.
We are, it is needless to say, quite disposed to take for granted
that Mr. Poulton’s material was not of the best description, and
did not afford a fair opportunity for correctly interpreting the
details of these nerve structures. But what we complain of is
that he has given to his drawings an utterly misleading character
of clearness and definiteness by representing structural features


which we cannot but regard as almost entirely hypothetical since
they are certainly absent from the (presumably) better preserved
specimens in our possession.
The simplicity and clearness of semidiagrammatic delineation
characterise other of Mr. Poulton’s drawings than those which
are by him entitled “ semidiagrammatic.” This is of little import-
ance so long as the structural features are correctly given. But
in his important figure 1 (really semidiagrammatic) upon which
he largely relies for illustration of the general features of the
push-rod, it is plain, both from his own descriptions and from his
figure 4 (see also our fig. 4*), that he has omitted, in each of
the three rods shown, an entire layer of cells (second layer of
imbricated cells). If, in our attempt by photomicrography to
•avoid as far as possible errors such as these—arising no doubt
from a laudable desire for clearness and definiteness, —we have
incurred the reproach of making public, obscure and comparatively
uninstructive i' otomicrographic illustrations, we may at least
plead that these latter could not easily convey any erroneous
structural hypotheses.
We shall now proceed to state the results of our continued
investigations into the structure both of the push-rods and of the
sweat-ducts.
I. The Push-rods.
With the fresh material recently secured we have in part
devoted ourselves to the obtaining of satisfactory silver impreg-
nations of the nervous elements of the skin of the muzzle by the
use of the rapid Golgi method and to obtaining the methyl-blue
reaction with the same structures by a modification of Ehrlich’s
method. With both methods of procedure we have achieved a
fair measure of success. In order also to compare with our former
highly successful gold preparations by Freud’s method with
bichromate tissue, we have followed Ranvier’s formic-gold method
for fresh tissue and have again procured very good results.
The further investigations we have thus been enabled to make
into the anatomy of the push-rods in view of Poulton’s late
* Macleay Mem. Vol. loc. cit.


criticism of some of our former statements may entitle us again
to be heard in reply.
We have further completed our study of the sweat-glands and
ducts and their associated structures, and we propose by means
of it to supplement Professor Poulton’s account of these interesting
objects.
Upon the whole, as Mr. Poulton points out, our views upon
the structure of the push-rods coincide with his own. The only
really important subject of dispute concerns the essential nature
of the fibrils or filaments which traverse the shaft of the push-rod.
Poulton strongly opposes our view that these filaments are nervous
in character. He appears to have interpreted our remark that
he “ failed to recognise the nervous character and connections of
the filaments ” as reproaching him with imperfect observation.
It was certainly not so intended but merely as a statement of a
fact, and as such, indeed, Mr. Poulton with some emphasis
expresses his entire agreement with it.
We are very well aware that our opportunities for satisfactory
investigation of the tissues of Ornithorhynchus are, in the nature
of the case, vastly superior to those usually possessed by investi-
gators in Europe. In view of this very fact, however, is not Mr.
Poulton’s dogmatic assertion that the “ nervous character ” of the
filaments “does not exist” just a little hasty? In regard to the
question of their nervous connection we unfortunately did not
gather from Mr. Poulton’s brief communication that he had
“inferred” an actual continuity between nerve-fibres and the
filaments in question such as we claimed to demonstrate. In the
note itself there does not appear the slightest suggestion of such
an inference. The title, “On the tactile terfninal organs,” <fec., to
which he appeals as sole evidence of his inference can hardly be
taken as giving explicit information upon this particular point.
It used to be held for example that auditory nerve fibres ended
by continuity with auditory hair-cells. It has been shown pretty
conclusively by Retzius, van Gehuchten and others'* 1 that these
• Of. Retzius in Biolog. Untersuchungen, Neue Folge, iii. & iv.; Verhandl.
d. Anat. Gesellsch. 1892, p. 63; Anatomischer Anzeiger, vi. p. 82; Van
Gehuchten in La Cellule, viii. 1892.


cells are not actually connected by continuity with nerve fibres,
and yet we fancy that no one would deny to the hair-cells the
name of “terminal organs” of the auditory sense-apparatus.
If, however, it be admitted, as seems to be the case, that the
filaments of the push-rod are, as we have described and figured
them, structurally Continuous, without break or interruption,
with the axis-cylinders which terminate in them, then it is
difficult for us to follow Mr. Poulton in his emphatic objection to
regarding the former as nervous in character. He says they
must be looked upon as “a new and interesting form of nerve
terminal organ probably epithelial in character,” but where, we
ask, is there the slightest evidence for their (non-nervous) epithe.
lial character apart from their situation in the epidermis 1 and of
course this alone is no proof whatever that they are non-nervous.
They are utterly unlike any other epithelial structure of which
we are aware, and their nervous continuity is really very strong
evidence against their being modified epithelial cells, for all
recent investigations by Kolliker, Ramon y Cajal, v. Lenhossek
and others* have shown that nowhere do sensory axis-cylinders
end by actual continuity with non-nervous epithelial structures,
but on the contrary by fine fibrillar often varicose end branchings
in close proximity to, and contact with, epithelial cells which may
or may not be specialty modified. Later on we hope to give
convincing proof that the fibrils under dispute are neither more
nor less than just such intra-epidermic end-branchings of axis-
cylinders.
Careful perusal of Mr. Poulton’s statements in this connection
will show that his single argument in support of his very
positive opinion against the nervous character of the fibrils is
the appearance they present in sections, as clear and somewhat
highly refracting elements. He quotes Professor Schafer as
an authority for the view that this appearance is opposed
to the theory that they are terminal nerve-fibrils. To support
this argument from appearance Mr. Poulton has recourse to two
. * Of. Kolliker, in Verhandl. d. Anat. Gescllsch.; Ramon y Cajal, trang.
in Arch. f. Anat. n. Physiol.


of our own photomicrographs. “If,” he says, “they establish
nothing else, they certainly prove that this conclusion as to the
nature of the filaments [that they are nervous in character] is
erroneous; neither naked axis-cylinders nor nerve fibrils could
have caused the .appearances seen in transverse section in PL xxv.
fig. 13, and in longitudinal section in fig. 8.” And why not?
Apparently merely because we have clear and unstained dots and
lines in two (bi-chromate) preparations stained respectively with
anilin blue-black and haematoxylin, reagents which in tissues
hardened with chromic salts are not to be depended upon as axis-
cylinder stains. What, we must ask, are the histological criteria
of nerve-fibrils and axis-cylinders? The absolute test of the
nervous character is of course the histogenetic one. If these
filaments are, morphologically, outgrowths or prolongations of
axis-cylinders (which in turn are simply the processes of nerve-
cells), then we presume that no slight histological modification of
the ultimate ramifications of such a process would prevent us
from assigning to them a distinctly nervous character. This we
premise because we believe that these terminations of axis-
cylinders (as we confidently regard them) have undergone some
very slight histological or chemical modification. But it is of the
utmost importance to note that whatever change may have
occurred has been far too slight to affect those fundamental
micro-chemical reactions to certain stains which, in the absence
of the histogenetic test, constitute our ultimate criterion of their
nervous character.
It was upon the strength of the argument derived from the
reaction to gold salts that in our former paper we confidently
pronounced these filaments to be nervous, nor should we now see
any valid reason for rejecting that conclusion even if no further
facts were before us.
It seems appropriate here to notice a curious little mistake
Professor Poulton appears to make in reference to the gold
reaction upon the fibrils. After admitting the conclusiveness of
our gold-stained preparations as to the continuity of the fibrils
with the axis-cylinders at the base of the rods, he goes on to say:


“ It is noteworthy too that although the filaments are represented
in PI. xxvi. fig. 22 as black varicose threads, the authors accurately
state in the description (p. 200) that ‘the fibrils are not black but
only highly refractory.’ ” Can it have escaped Mr. Poulton that
this figure and description are those of a haematoxylin specimen
and not of a gold-stained one? (Our fig. 12 gives the actual
photomicrograph itself.)
In our gold preparations to which Mr. Poulton had just been
referring before making this quotation, the fibrils are, of course,
stained black, —or at least the darkest violet, —and stand out in
most striking contrast to everything except the nerve-fibres with
which they are directly continuous, as shown in our figs. 19 and 21,
for whose perfect accuracy we can vouch.
It is, however, with some gratification that we are now able to
present a camera lucida drawing of a push-rod (fig. 1) from a
specimen impregnated by Golgi’s silver method, which in the
fullest and most convincing manner corroborates our former
observations. Little in the way of further description seems
requisite as the figure speaks for itself in a quite unmistakable
fashion. Prom the leash of nerve fibres at the base of the rod,
stained axis-cylinders are seen to ascend and to enter the base or
basal part of the shaft of the rod, and then to be continued along
the shaft as members both of the more peripheral circlet and of the
axial group of fibres in the core of the organ. Such perfect
examples as that represented were indeed far from common. We
did not find that the tissue reacted at all freely towards this
highly selective but rather capricious stain. All the more welcome
were the few more favourable patches in which the impregnation
had turned out successfully. But everywhere, almost, one could
get at least partial reductions of silver showing varying lengths
of axis-cylinders and terminal fibrils blackened in a precise and
selective manner.
No one, we imagine, viewing the present figure, and not
absolutely mistrustful of the bona Jides of the observers and the
draughtsman, can now refuse his consent to our previously


expressed dictum as to the “ nervous character ” of the fibrils
traversing the shaft of the push-rod.
One or two minor details suggested by the figure deserve notice.
The fibrils are shown as non-varicose. The apparent varicosity
of the fibrils especially in our gold-stained preparations turns out
to be due partly to minute sinuosities in the course of the fibrils*
and partly to the presence of intercellular cement substance
between the cells of the successive rows through which the fila-
ments pass towards the surface, and which has caused reduction
of the gold salts. One or two minor details suggested by the'"
same figure seem to deserve remark.
The fibrils do not in it, nor in other of our Golgi specimens
appear to be varicose as we formerly represented them in our
semidiagrammatic illustrations and as they actually do appear in
the haematoxylin preparation of the isolated fibrils already
referred to as the subject of one of our photomicrographs! and as
they also appear very distinctly in our gold-stained preparations.
We have little doubt that the Golgi preparations indicate the
true features of the filaments themselves and prove them to be
quite smooth and sinuous, and that the varicosity as shown in
specimens prepared by other methods is due to the adhesion of
extraneous particles probably of intercellular cement. The regu-
larity of the arrangement of these particles upon the filaments is
doubtless due to their corresponding to the intervals between
the successive rows of cells traversed by the fibrils in their
course towards the surface. This view is borne out by the
fact that in some parts of gold-stained preparations where the
reduction was cruder and less precise than in others, the parallel
series of filaments were occasionally seen to be joined by a series
of dark, transverse lines, corresponding doubtless to the intervals
between the successive cell elements of the core, uniting the
apparently varicose points of adjacent fibrils and so giving rise to
•These sinuosities can indeed occasionally be recognised as such when
haematoxylin preparations are carefully examined.
t Macleay Mem. Vol. loc. cit. fig. 12.


a somewhat ladder-like appearance of lines whose blurred outlines
testified to the indefinite and less highly selective character of the
reduction in such patches. This appearance is never to be seen
in silver-impregnated nor indeed in any other kind of specimen,
but it assists us in interpreting the seeming varicosity of the
nerve-fibrils.
We have satisfied ourselves by careful re-examination of our
haematoxylin preparation of the isolated fibrils that the beaded
contour indicated in the photomicrograph is not merely an out-of-
focus representation of the minutely sinuous outline seen in the
Golgi, and we may add also in good haematoxylin sections (vertical)
of the push-rods, and we are therefore convinced that we have
given above the correct interpretation of the somewhat moniliform
contour of the fibrils exhibited in some kinds of preparations.
Another point to which we may here refer is the absence from
the preparation represented in fig. 1 of any evidence of branching
of the axis-cylinders in the base of the rod. But that such
branchings do occur our gold-preparations testify, so that there
are a greater number of fibrils in the rod than there are nerve-
fibres entering it. As we formerly stated the subdivision of the
axis-cylinder occurs in the basal part of the rod just at the point
where the medullated sheath is lost.
The figure further illustrates the connection of axis-cylinders
with the Pacinian-like corpuscles, and shows in addition that
other bundles of fibres extend up into the dermal papilla;. After
giving off some fibres to the rod as shown in the figure these
terminate in the papilla; giving off end branches, of which some
at least enter the neighbouring epidermis.
We were unsuccessful in demonstrating the “ nervous character
and connections ” of the lenticular bodies formerly described by
us as lying in the base of the push-rod.
Gold-preparations, however, give indubitabletestimonyin support
of our former statements in regard to them, and the examination
of fresh preparations impregnated with methyl blue by Apathy’s


modification of Ehrlich’s process* has fully confirmed our con-
clusions. Striking views of the intermediate disc or plate between
the two clear vesicular cells of the body were obtained, its nervous
character being indicated by its colour reaction with the methyl
blue. It bore a distinct resemblance, though on a smaller scale, to
the nerve disc stained with methyl blue figured by Dogielf in the
Grandry’s corpuscles, with which structures we formerly compared
the lenticular bodies.
The methyl blue reaction was also exhibited by the other
nervous structures in connection with the rods, viz., the nerve-
fibres, the cores of the Pacinian-like corpuscles and also by the
fibrils in the rod itself. Thus we have the most ample histological
confirmation of the nervous character of these structures. We
therefore believe that we are entitled to state definitely that
these interesting filaments, in spite of their fairly definite and
regular arrangement, are nothing but the end branchings of axis-
cylinders of sensory nerve fibres, which have acquired a slightly
specialised character from their definite relation to certain specially
differentiated epidermal cells arranged so as to constitute the rod-
organ.
Possibly such an example of differentiated and correlated nervous
and epithelial structures may be regarded as standing midway
between the ordinary intra-epidermic end-branchings of cutaneous
nerves and such specialised epithelial and nervous arrangements
as are found for example in the tastebuds, where also we have
axis-cylinders ending freely by terminal filaments in intimate
relation with far more highly specialised epithelial cells.
ll.— The Sweat-ducts and their Associated Structures.
The general characters and position of these glands were
described by Poulton in 18844 and again in the present year.§
* Zeitsch. f. wisa. Mikr. ix. 1, 1892, p. 15.
t Arch. f. Anat. u. Physiol. 1891, p. 182.
X Journ. of Physiology, Yol. v. pp. 15-16.
§ Quart. Journ. of Micros. Science. June, 1894.


In his recent paper Poulton has entered more fully into their
histological structure, but from the unsatisfactory nature of the
material at his disposal, there remain some points which he was
unable to elucidate, and others which we are convinced he has
erroneously interpreted
As stated by Poulton, the gland consists of :
(1) A terminal coiled secretory portion, which is wider than
the rest of the tube.
(2) A coiled duct leading from this to the base of an epithelial
downgrowth of the general epidermis.
(3) An intra-epidermal portion, pursuing a winding and
irregular course through the core of the epithelial
downgrowth, to open on the surface.
Poulton describes the secretory portion of the tubule as being
“ lined with short columnar cells surrounded by a longitudinal
layer of smooth muscle-cells,” and in his fig. 8, Plate xiv., outlines
these latter with great distinctness. We do not think that the
words “ short columnar cells ” well express the appearances seen
by us in a large number of specimens from different animals. The
cells lining this part of the duct are rather large and granular,
with nuclei which stain well with ordinary nuclear stains, but the
protoplasm very slightly or not at all. These cells surround a
wide lumen and rest upon a basement membrane, between which
and the secretory epithelium small triangular strongly staining
cells are intercalated at intervals. The whole is surrounded by a
sheath of fibrous tissue, but nowhere have we been able to find
any trace of fusiform or muscle cells (fig. 3).
The character and arrangement of the epithelial cells in this
secretory end of the duct somewhat suggest the appearance of a
transverse section of the alveoli of a mucous salivary gland in
mammals.
The duct leading from the secretory portion of the tube to the
epidermal downgrowth consists of two layers of cells. An outer
circle of short columnar cells, which exhibit a faint striation,


and whose nuclei and protoplasm stain well with haematoxylin and
carmine, surrounds a cuticular layer with flattened nuclei, as
described by Poulton. The whole is surrounded by a fibrous-
tissue sheath (fig. 4). The duct is frequently accompanied by
a leash of medullated nerves whose destination is the base of the
epidermic downgrowth, which the duct enters.
The appearance and minute structure of the epidermal down-
growth with the duct traversing it are shown in fig. 2, which
represents a vertical section of the organ. As to the general
structure and probable significance of this downgrowth, we are in
entire agreement with Poulton, who considers that it represents
a modified hair follicle, through which the duct of the gland
courses to the surface. The further structural particulars which
we have been able to make out, tend only to strengthen Poulton’s
ingenious hypothesis.
The upper part of this epidermic cylinder is mostly composed
of plate-like epithelial cells placed vertically to the surface.
Poulton describes them as fusiform, but as they appear fusiform
both in longitudinal and transverse sections of the organ, (vide
our figs. 2, 5 and 6, or Poulton’s figs. 8,9, 10 in Quart. Journ.
Micros. Science) they must in reality be flattened plates. These
layers of flattened imbricated cells are arranged around the duct
as a centre, but are separated from its lumen by a nucleated
cuticular layer, the cells of which are irregular but generally
flattened in the same direction as the plates (figs. 2,5, 6, c). The
individual outlines of the cells of this layer are difficult to make
out, and indeed in some cases (fig. 2, c) the cells appear fused.
Outside the preceding layers of cells which form the core of the
epithelial cylinder, but not separated from them by any sharp
line of demarcation, are the investing layers of cells formed by a
downgrowth from the general epidermis, the layers of which turn
sharply downwards to form the 'peripheral part of the cylinder.
These investing layers in the upper part of the cylinder consist
merely of epithelial plates continuous with the more superficial parts
of the general epidermis, (fig. 2, b) while below this there is super-
added a peripheral layer of more or-less cubical cells formed by


the reflection of the Malpighian layer of the epidermis. It will
be observed, on reference to fig. 2, that the flattened epithelial
squames of which the upper part of the core of the cylinder
(probable hair shaft) is composed project vertically at the surface,
and, the constituent cells becoming more or less separated from
each other, form a brush-like arrangement which usually projects
slightly above the general surface of the epidermis. According to
our observations upon perfectly prepared material (Flemming’s
fluid, alcohol, and Muller’s fluid), this mass of cells never con-
stitutes a solid plug, as Poulton has figured it, but exhibits the
loose and brush-like arrangement represented in fig. 2, the duct
passing through it to reach the surface.
Towards the base of the cylinder, where it enlarges to form a
bulb, the arrangement of cells does indeed, as Poulton points out,
very strikingly suggest the bulb of a hair. This resemblance is
perhaps best seen in transverse sections (fig. 6). In this situation
the squames and cuticular cells surrounding the duct, which in
the upper portion of the cylinder form its core, both become
continuous with a mass of polyhedral cells (figs. 2 and 5, p).
Amongst these polyhedral cells the duct of the gland passes in an
irregular manner (fig. 2, d). The cells lining the lumen are not
differentiated from the others, and their edges are ragged both
here and upwards throughout the course of the duct.
Previous to entering the bulbous base of the cylinder the duct
is composed of two regular layers of cubical cells (fig. 2, d,). At
the point of entry the external layer becomes continuous with the
outermost layer of cells forming the follicle, and the internal
although differentiated from the polyhedral cells for a short
distance, by taking the stain a little more deeply, soon becomes
absolutely continuous with them.
In describing this epithelial cylinder Mr. Poulton says;—“ The
general epidermis is continued over it as a sheath, which strongly
suggests the outer root-sheath of a hair, and between it and the
cylinder itself a line of separation tends to appear.” He also
figures such a separation of the core from its sheath in his fig. 8.
We have also noticed the same tendency of the core to shrink


away from its investing layers of cells in this position in some few
specimens, but the follicle figured by us does not illustrate this.
Poulton then continues—“ Below, this sheath forms the outer
part of the bulb, and is separated from the inner part by a space
containing small branched cells, the nature of which could not be
determined in my material.” These branched cells are figured by
Poulton in his fig. 8 sp. We have never, seen in any of our
specimens an appearance approaching that described by Poulton;
the sheath of the follicle formed from the general epidermis being,
as we have above described, always in contact with the polyhedral
cells (figs. 2 and 6, p).
We now come to a part of Poulton’s paper with which our
observations are entirely at variance, but it is only just to state
that Mr. Poulton is himself of opinion that his material was not
adequate and that “the whole structure of these hair-like epidermic
cylinders, and the nervous tissues evidently associated with them,
is so remarkable and complex that the fresh tissues are required
for their satisfactory elucidation and for the discovery of the
nerve terminations which we must believe to exist in connection
with the apparatus.”
Poulton is quite right in describing the bulb as being invariably
associated with numerous medullated nerve fibres, but we have
never seen any appearances that would justify one in considering
the terminations of these fibres as ganglion cells as he does. They
do indeed terminate in bulbous expansions of the axis-cylinders,
but not in ganglion cells. No doubt, too, Poulton’s specimens did
not enable him to see that large, numbers of these expansions of
the axis-cylinder are situated within the outer sheath of the
cylinder and amongst the epithelial cells forming the outermost
layer of the root sheath (figs. 2,5, 7).
Accompanying the duct on its course to the base of the epithe-
lial cylinder more or less closely a large bundle of medullated
fibres can be seen. As they approach the base of the cylinder
some of the fibres, whilst still in the dermis close to the bulb,
terminate in enlarged extremities which are similar to those we
are about to describe. Others pass on to the cylinder itself and


penetrate the outer fibrous sheath, entering amongst the epithelial
cells forming the follicle, where their axis-cylinders suddenly
expand into vesicle-like swellings, as seen in specimens stained
with logwood and carmine (figs. 2,5). The swelling of the axis-
cylinder, as seen in such specimens, is faintly granular and exhibits
a knotted appearance. This is seen in specimens stained by
Kultschitzki’s method* to be surrounded by a thin expansion of
the medullated sheath, outside which again is a sharply defined
nucleated capsule, continuous with the primitive sheath of the
nerve fibre (figs. 2,5, n).
Fresh tissue impregnated with gold chloride by Ranvier’s
method, or bichromate-hardened tissue stained by Freud’s gold
method give ample demonstration of the connections of these
swellings with the axis-cylinders of the nerves (fig. 7).
We thought it possible that Golgi’s silver impregnation method
might show the existence of further ramifications, such as we had
found to occur among the epithelial cells of the rod organs, but
though by this method the end-swellings stained and their connec-
tion with the axis-cylinders was well shown, no trace of any
further prolongation was to be seen. This negative result seems
fairly conclusive, as the intra-epithelial ramifications of axis-
cylinder branches were well impregnated in neighbouring push-
rods. By no method of staining is there shown the slightest
indication of nucleus in the end-swellings, although the nucleus
of the capsule surrounding it, when viewed from the surface,
might in some instances be mistaken for one.
Poulton’s figs. 8 and 12 showing these bodies as definite
nucleated ganglion cells are, therefore, quite erroneous and mis-
leading. f
In addition to the nerve-terminations described above, Golgi
preparations show leashes of fibres running upwards towards the
t Occasionally the optical transverse section of the axis cylinder before it
swells out into the enlarged knob, gives rise to an appearance somewhat
simulating a nucleus,
* Anat. Anzeiger, 18S9, p. 223, and Zeitschr. f. wiss. Mikroa. vi. 2, 1889,
p. 196.


surface in the intervals between the follicle and the neighbouring
epidermis. These fibres lose their medullated sheaths and termi-
nate in branchings of naked axis-cylinders, which together with
similar branchings from other sides of the follicle form a ring-like
plexus around the neck of the follicle, most of the individual
fibres of which have a vertical direction.
We were unable to satisfy ourselves that the terminations of
these fibres entered the epidermis of the follicle. The appearance
closely resembles that described by Burckhardt* and Bonnetf as
occurring around the neck of the hair follicles of sensitive hairs
in some mammals, and by the latter author also in the base of the
epidermal downgrowths in the snout of the pig.
The further structural details we have been able to ascertain,
together with the whole arrangement and termination of the
nerves to the follicle, support in the strongest manner Boulton’s
suggestion, that the epidermal downgrowth through which the
duct of the gland passes, represents a mollified hair. Moreover
we are of opinion that it not only structurally represents some
form of modified hair, but that it is so far functionally a sensitive
hair. The core of the follicle (fig. 2, a) does not end flush with
the surface of the skin, but projects appreciably beyond. In the
specimen from which fig. 2 was drawn is a fair example of this.
From the relation of the cells of the core to the surrounding
epithelium, one would imagine that as the epithelial cells of the
follicle proliferate, the core must be pushed upwards so as to
project from the surface, just as occurs with a perfectly formed hair.
In this case, however, the projecting end of the core must con-
stantly be worn away, or more probably disintegrated, leaving the
appearance shown in fig. 2. Why the excretory duct of the gland
should possess such a peculiar relation to it, we are at a loss to
understand. The fact that, as far as we can judge, about one
half of the fibres of the enormous fifth nerve in this region are
associated with these supposed hairs, speaks strongly for their
* Bnrckhardt, “ Ueber die Nervendigung in den Tasthaaren der Sauge-
thiere.”
t Bonnet, loe. cit.


possessing present functional importance, and indicates that
they are no mere vestiges of some ancestral whiskers.
The above described mode of termination of the fibres at the
base of the follicle is not peculiar. Dietl* recorded and figured
somewhat similar endings in the root sheath of the sensitive hairs
of the ox, cat, and dog. He described the nerve fibres as pene-
trating the hyaline layer of the dermic sheath and ending amongst
the epithelial cells of the outermost two layers of the outer root
sheath in knobbed (“knopfformig’ 1 ) swellings. Dietl was uncertain
whether they were indeed terminal. Bonnetf confirmed Dietl’s
observations and extended them to the sensitive hairs of a variety
of domestic animals. He described the nerves as ending in the
deeper layers of the epithelium of the outer root sheath in pale,
knobbed, finely granular expansions of the axis-cylinder. These
are situated in a very distinct capsule formed by the primitive
sheath. Bonnet considered these expansions of the axis-cylinder
as identical with the “Tastzellen” described by Merkel| as occur-
ring in the same situation, but, as we think justly, denies their
cellular character.
If anyone will compare figs. 14 and Ifi of Plate xix., and fig. 12
of Plate xviii., in Bonnet’s paper, with those accompanying this
paper, he will find it impossible to doubt that the structures are
identical in character. The first of these three figures of Bonnet
represents a vertical section of the root sheath of a sensitive
hair from the horse stained with osmic acid, the second a similar
preparation from the snout of the pig. The third is also from the
snout of the pig, and represents the base of an epithelial down-
growth stained by Lbwits’ gold chloride process, and might indeed
well enough represent a patch of one of our gold chloride prepara-
tions of the nerve endings in the bulb of the sweat-duct.
* Untersuchungen fiber Tasthaare 11. Sitzimgsberichte der k. Akad. d.
Wisa. Wien. Mat. Naturwiss. Klasse Ixvi. Bd., iii. Abtheil. 1872.
t “ Studien fiber die Innervation der Haarbalge der Hausthicre.”
Morph. Jahrbuch von Gegenbaur, Bd. iv. 1878.


In a recent paper j upon the anatomy of young specimens of
Echidna, Professor W. Newton Parker describes shortly the
developing sweat-glands in the skin of the snout of that animal,
and, pointing out their resemblance to those described by Poulton
in Ornithorhynchus, he expresses his dissent from the hypothesis
advanced by the latter writer to explain their peculiar structure.
Neither his description nor his figures appear to us to afford
sufficient ground for rejecting a theory which, although without
doubt antecedently improbable, is yet borne out by so many
striking correspondences in structure indicated by Prof. Poulton
and in the present paper.
The developmental stages studied by Prof. Parker were probably
much too late to afford conclusive evidence as to the real manner
of development of these structures. So, at least, an inspection of
his special figure of the sweat-gland and duct on Plate n. would
indicate. The only specific reference we note to an earlier con-
dition, is the statement that “ the lumen is not developed in the
young stages.”
EXPLANATION OF PLATES.
Fig. 1. —Vertical section of rod-organ, showing nervous arrangements, from
a preparation impregnated with silver by Golgi’s rapid method
( x 320 diams.). At the base of the rod the axis-cylinders of the
nerve fibres show out strongly. These fibres have two destina-
tions («.) to the base of the rod where some join the small
Pacinian bodies and the remainder penetrate the rod-organ to be
continued up almost to the surface as the axial and peripheral
groups of axis-cylinders. (6) To the sides of the rod-organ,
where some enter the organ to take part in the formation of the
peripheral circular group of axis-cylinder processes, whilst others
pass up to the sides and tip of the papilla, where they enter the
epidermis. The axis-cylinder processes apparently end in the
superficial portion of the rod-organ, and are not demonstrated
X P.Z.S. 1894, Part i. pp. 3-14, Plates i.-ni.


right up to the surface, but from the gradual way in which they
are, by this method, shown to taper off at their extremities, it is
probable that they participate in the corneous change which
obtains in the epithelial cells of this region of the rod-organ,
and do not therefore react in the same manner to the reagents
as in the deeper region. The preparation was drawn with a
Zeiss’ camera lucida.
Fig. 2. —( x 320 diameters). Vertical section of sweat-duct traversing
an epithelial cylinder (modified hair). The preparation from
which this figure was taken was cut from a portion of the
muzzle which showed remarkably little pigmentation. Accord-
ingly the outlines of the epithelial cells were not obliterated by
the perinuclear deposits of pigment and showed out with
distinctness. It was fixed in absolute alcohol and stained
with haematoxylin.
a, epithelial plates forming the core of the cylinder; b, epithelial sheath
continuous with the superficial layers of the epidermis; 5 1 , epith. sheath
continuous with the malpighian layer of the epidermis; c, cuticle of duct
formed of fused epithelial cells; d, intra-epidermal portion of duct; d l , infra-
epidermal portion of duct; e, medullated nerves ending by enlargements of
the axis-cylinder (&,) surrounded by a nucleated expansion of the primitive
sheath n; n', nuclei of nerve sheath; p, polyhedral epithelial cells in the
bulbous portion of the cylinder continuous with a above.
Fig. 3.—( x 320 diameters). Section of the deepest (secretory) portion of
the tube stained with haematoxylin.
a, secretory epithelium cells; b, small deeply stained cells wedged in
between the secretory cells.
Fig. 4.—( x 320 diameters). Transverse section of excretory duct stained
with haematoxylin.
n, outer layer of columnar striated cells; b, inner layer of flattened cells,
the outlines of which are not seen.
Fig. s.—(x 480 diameters). Transverse section through the bulbous portion
of the epidermal cylinder stained with haematoxylin.
d, duct of sweat-gland; c, cuticular cells lining duct; p, polyhedral cells
of bulb; b, plate-like epithelial cells continuous with the superficial layers
of the epidermis (vide fig. 2); 6 1 , epithelial sheath continuous with the
malpighian layer of the epidermis (vide fig. 2); £, terminal enlargements of


the axis-cylinders of medullated nerves supplied to this region; n, nuclei in
expansion of the primitive sheath [forming a capsule for k. Drawn u ith
camera lucida.
Fig. 6. —(x 480 diameters). Transverse section of the neck of an
epidermal cylinder similar to but smaller than the one from
which fig. 5 was taken. Stained with haematoxylin. This
section was taken in a region where the follicle was completely
surrounded by dermis, /.
d, duct of sweat-gland, which is wider in this region; c, cuticular layer
of cells surrounding duct; a, epithelial plates (cf. fig. 2, a); h l , epithelial
cells containing perinuclear pigment continuous with b- at the summit of
the dermal papilla; 6 2 , malpighian layer of epidermis containing perinuclear
pigment; e, epidermis.
Fig. 7. —(x 320 diameters). Vertical section through bulbous base of
epithelial cylinder traversed by sweat duct; showing knob-like
endings of medullated nerve fibres both within and without the
bulb. Stained by Freud’s gold-chloride method. •






