





REPRINT OE A REVIEW
THE REV. MR. MASKELL’S LETTER
ON THE
Dogmatical Cearfrmg of il)t (£l)urrl).
AS XT APPEARS IX
THE CHRISTIAN OBSERVER
JULY, 1850.
LONDON! PUBLISHED BY JOHN HATCHARO I SON, PICCADILLY.
2Uan Uicmm’S Haiti!
P k inted bv Witi.iAM Pratt & Son 67, Elizabeth-stkebt, Hobaht Town.
1851.




These few pages are a reprint of the Review
of the Reverend Mr. Haskell’s Letter on the
Dogmatical Teaching of the Church, as it
appears in the Christian Observer of July 1850,
published by John Hatchard & Son. It contains
valuable information on the subject which has lately
occupied the attention of the Members of the Church
of England, and is not generally, attainable in this
colony.
Mr. Maskell’s letter proves that he considers
the decision of the Judicial Committee of the Privy
Council in the case of the Rev. Mr. Gorham v. the
Bishop of Exeter to be a right decision.
I would especially call the attention of the
reader of these pages to the evidence they contain,
both in Mr. Haskell’s letter, and also in the extract
from the letter of the Rev. Mr. Dodsworth to Dr.
Pusey, that Tractarian, (erroneously called High
Church) principles, lead direct to Romanism.
I have added the letter of the Archbishop of
Canterbury, in reply to the Metropolitan Church
Union, to show the opinion held by the venerable
and excellent Primate of our Church, upon this very
important subject.
My earnest prayer is, “ That all who profess,
and call themselves Christians, may be led into the
way of truth, and hold the faith in unity of spirit, in
the bond of peace, and in righteousness of life.”
WM. BEDFORD, D.D.,
Incumbent of St. David’s Church, Hobart Town, and Sen. Chaplain of V. D. Land
St. David’s Parsonage, Hobart Town, January, 1851.




The Want of Dogmatic Teaching in the English Church :
A Second Letter on the Present Position of the High
Church Party in the Church of England. By the
Rev. W. Maskell, Vicar of ‘ St. Mary’s Church.
London: Pickering, 1850.
“ The want of dogmatic teaching in the English Church
—such, as our readers will see, is a part of the title-page
of a second Letter of the Rev. W. Maskell a distin-
guished person on many accounts in the Tractarian and
Baptismal controversy. His former letter was on the
subject of the Royal Supremacy: and its design was to
shew, that Her Majesty has authority in the decision of
questions of doctrine, which the High Church party
namely, the party to which Mr. Maskell has for many
years belonged —had thought it right to deny.
This, however, was not the sole, nor yet by any means
the greatest, mistake into which that party had fallen.
A still more serious exposure was to take place, and Mr.
Maskell, to the credit of his ingenuousness and honesty,
resolved to discharge the duty, at the risk of losing
many long-cherished friendships, and forfeiting long-re-
ceived honours and plaudits from those whose good
opinion he most naturally wished to cultivate.
For such conduct he deserves in no small degree the
respect, on some grounds, the sympathy, and, on every
ground, the earnest prayers, of those to whom he has
been most strenuously opposed; and who, with all their
respect for his motives, and his boldness in stating his
views, cannot but mourn over him as one entangled it
is to be feared inextricably —in those meshes woven and
cast around too many of the party with which he has
been connected.


Deeply and fervently attached to High Church prin-
ciples and their advocates, he describes, in affecting
terms, the painful sensations with which he approaches
the discussion of an exposure which he knows must be
distasteful to a very large number of old friends, not
yet prepared to follow his steps or to endure the conse-
quences which he has himself determined to brave.
Disregarding all pecuniary considerations, and many
others which, to a noble and independent, or to a devout
and earnest mind —however misled —are of far higher
importance than houses, or lands, or preferment in the
Church, he had offered the resignation of his living, and
consented to protract his decision, only in consequence
of appeals from his Bishop, which he did not deem it
right to disregard. He has, however, persevered in his
original resolve, and has surrendered his living to retain
his honour. Who does not wish that he had made
these sacrifices in a better cause, and for more valid
reasons!
Yet while paying this willing tribute to one whose
religious views we regard as in a high degree erroneous
and dangerous, we hold ourselves at full liberty to
examine his arguments, and to comment upon his facts
and his conclusions with freedom, though, as we hope
also, with perfect candour.
Mr Maskell intimates, in no ambiguous terms, that
his future steps will probably conduct him to Rome —a
result which those who are stigmatized as the Low
Church party long ago announced, amidst bitter re-
proaches and loud reclamations from their opponents,
as the natural tendency of the whole movement. Pre-
dictions which were then scoffed at, as the bitter
expressions of hostile feeling against the only men able
to stand in the breach against Popery, are now sanc-
tioned by the testimony of a band of seceders, —and not
of seceders alone, but of numbers who are standing on
the very verge of apostacy, ready at any moment to


plunge into the unfathomable gulf of Roman superstition
and idolatry. Nay more; what these persons once
rcjelled as a malicious slander, they now begin to glory
in; as their highest honour, —namely, that in all points
of dogmatic teaching they are essentially one with Rome.
Hence many do not hesitate to denounce the Reforma-
tion as a crime, and its authors as Puritans, Heretics,
and Schismatics!
Mr. Masked grants that neither “the acknowledg-
ment of the Royal Supremacy,” nor “the permitted
denial among us, of the Catholic doctrine of baptismal
regeneration,” are the only, or even the chief, difficulties
in which those who hold what are called High Church
opinions must confess themselves to be.
“To pretend,” he adds, “that they are not grievous and weighty,
would be absurd, now especially that the Archbishops of York and
Canterbury—the two Primates of the Church of England—have given
their sanction to both of them ; to the exercise of the supremacy in
finally determining causes of doctrine, by their presence at the delibera-
tions of the Judicial Committee, and by their approval of its Report to
the Queen in Council; and to the permitted denial of the truth of
Baptismal Regeneration, the one by his Charge in the Autumn of last
year, and the other, in a marked, decided, and honest way, in a preface
to a new edition of his book on Apostolical Preaching.” p. 10.
Mr. Maskell disclaims with honest indignation, for
himself, a charge, brought perhaps with great truth,
against many of his friends; that of “seeking a pretext
for quitting the English Church ;” and then adds, re-
ferring to his former publications in a manner which
forbids us to question his sincerity and earnestness, —
“I declare solemnly that I have never spoken or written any word at
all upon chief doctrines of the Faith, and that I have never intended to
do any one thing by way of public ministration, or private duty, which
did not at the time seem to be—the one especial and exclusive word or
thing which alone she authorized and declared right to be said or done. I
have never been drawn to, never inclined to adopt, what people call,
(and rightly call) Roman practices, and books, and forms. Nay, the
time is not long past, when many who will be the first now to accuse
and to condemn me, blamed the cold Anglican view with which I
wrote and argued in behalf of the Church of England. If I seem to
forsake her now, it is because I feel that what I have worked for,
dreamt of, prayed for, will not and may not be.” p. 11.


This passage is adduced as giving an insight into the
position in which Mr. Maskell has stood, first in refer-
ence to Mr. Gorham, and then in reference to his own
party.
As the Examining Chaplain to the Bishop of Exeter,
he had a large share in the controversy into which Mr.
Gorham was, in the first instance, reluctantly drawn by
his Diocesan. And it was perhaps not easily to be per-
ceived, that his conduct on that occasion could be the
result of such convictions as the above solemn attesta-
tion compels us to admit must have swayed his mind.
To speak plainly, the Chaplain seemed rather to be
taking the part of an advocate and special pleader, than
of an ingenuous and frank examiner or adviser. But
the anomaly is at once admitted; and we are quite
willing to allow that, with all the apparent want of
courtesy and fairness on the part of the Chaplain, there
was no intention to say-or to do any one thing which
the Church did not require him to say or do.
On the other hand, as a conspicuous and able leader
among High Churchmen, he now stands in a remark-
able position with respect to his own party. A little
while ago he was regarded with suspicion, and visited
with strong rebuke for his coldness and backwardness
in maintaining High Church principles, because he
would not adopt “Roman practices, and books, and
forms but now he has distanced all his fellow-travellers
in the path to Rome, and has cast them and their re-
proaches to the wind. Now he is called to listen to
their censures of his precipitancy, extravagance, and
folly. But even they can scarcely doubt —and if they
do, none else will —that he has chosen the more consis-
tent and honourable line of conduct.
But it is time to direct the attention of our readers
to the particular subject of his Letter; namely, “the
want of necessary dogmatic teaching in the Church of
England since the Reformation.” It is to be observed


that he complains of no deficiency of such teaching prior
to the Reformation. Every doctrine taught and main-
tained up to that eventful period was, in his view, sound,
correct, and worthy of implicit belief. His entire argu-
ment proceeds on the supposition that the Reformation
was a dislodgment of previously-received truths, to make
way for vague, uncertain, and ill-defined sentiments,
which were destitute of all authority, and calculated to
produce unmingled evil. This is a view in no small
degree startling to present to those who have been
accustomed to revert to that religious change as the
primary blessing to society at large since the great
moral revolution of the Apostolic age. But it is quite
enough to account for all that follows.
Mr. Maskell acknowledges that the greater part of
his pamphlet springs out of, and is connected with, the
cause of Mr. Gorham against the Bishop of Exeter.
Let us then briefly refer to two topics which are involved
in this argument. First, his admissions respecting Mr.
Gorham’s views; and secondly, his statements respecting
those of the High Church party.
1. His admissions respecting Mr. Gorham’s views are
in themselves extraordinary, and in their tone and spirit
unusually candid, considering the circumstances under
which they are made. He admits that,
“ As the case went on, first in the Court of Arches, and afterwards
before the Privy Council, it was impossible not to feel, more and more,
that the reasons and arguments of the Evangelical party had been too
lightly esteemed .”
These italics are not in the original, but are intro-
duced to show, that, from the commencement of this
controversy, more than thirty years ago, to the present
time, the considerations suggested by the Evangelical
section of the Church have been treated with confessedly
improper neglect by their opponents. The truth is,
that neither Daubeny, nor Bishop Mant, nor Archbishop
Lawrence, ever gave themselves the trouble to look the


argument fairly in the face, and to go with candid
minds to the writings of the Reformers for information
on the subject. They looked with contempt on every
one who dared to hint that a close examination of ori-
ginal documents would lead to conclusions the opposite
of those which they themselves had drawn. In this
school Mr. Masked and others have had their training;
and therefore, when the question was again opened
under new auspices, they clung to the old illusion, and
fortified their position by new defences prepared for
them at Rome.
“ Few,” he proceeds to say, “ holding our opinions, would dispute—
at least I would not —the absolute necessity of rejecting Mr. Gorham,
after such answers as he gave in his examination before the Bisho p
yet every month, as it went by, suggested in my own mind graver and
graver doubts as to the final success of such a proceeding, unavoidable
as it was. I mean doubts whether a Bishop is realiy following the
intention of the Reformed Church of England, and speaking in her
spirit, when he condemns as'heresy the denial of the unconditional
efficacy of baptism in the case of all infant recipients. * * * The
real question—and no man who loves the truth will seek to evade it—
is this, namely, Does the Deformed Church of England teach exclusively
the unconditional efficacy of infant baptism ?" (p. 12.)
Mr. Gorham answers this question in the negative ;
Mr. Masked has, at length, also arrived at the same
conviction; and yet, strange to say, notwithstanding his
own change of views, he holds the absolute necessity of
rejecting Mr. Gorham for having given a true answer
to the great turning question of the whole examination.
Surely, on re-consideration, Mr. Masked must be led to
retract this assertion.
But it is interesting to mark the gradual progress of
conviction in his obviously candid mind.
“After the arguments on both sides were ended before the Judicial
Committee, we were all enabled to consider what the result of the whole
had been. For myself, I felt with anxiety and disappointment, that the
growing impressions and doubts of the preceding six or eight months
had been strengthened rather than relieved. And it was impossible
not to own that there could be little hope of further satisfaction to be


gained in any way, if the speech of Mr. Badeley, in behalf of the Bishop
had failed to give it, That speech was one which ever must remain a
record of all that deep research and eloquence could effect on behalf of
the Church of England.” (p. 13.)
This is strong language in praise of the Advocate.
But we are little disposed to dispute its accuracy, if, by
the Church of England, we are to understand the Church
before the Reformation, and not after it. Rut the
stronger this affirmation of the power of Mr. Badeley s
pleading, the better; for there can now be no room left
for either research or eloquence to repair the demolished
argument of Mr. Badeley. Research has exposed the
“nakedness” of the Tractarian “land,” and eloquence
itself has failed to clothe it with verdure.
The manner in which the facts of the case became too
strong for the most ingenious efforts of forensic eloquence
may be well stated in Mr. Maskell’s own words.
“ When Mr. Gorham was refused institution, more than two years
ago, I thought that it was almost impossible for him to raise a rea-
sonable question as to the exact teaching of the English Church upon
baptismal regeneration; a question, that is, such as a Court would
entertain. But time went on, and the real state of things and tone of
doctrine which prevailed for fifty or sixty years after the reign of Henry
the Eighth, during which the first movers of the changes in religion, or
their immediate disciples, still lived, opened, and became clearer from
day to day. * * * Let me not be misunderstood in what lam now
saying. I mean it to apply only to the earlier Reformation : for it has
been said, and in some sense truly said, that the English Reformation
did in fact take place —rather, I suppose, it arrived at its mature and
completed form, so far as we are concerned, in 1662, and not in 1552
or 1562. Therefore, in all that regards baptism, it is to be carefully
remembered on the one hand, that the opinions of the Bishops at the
Savoy Conference are not merely equal with, but of greater weight than
any opinions of the Reformers of Edward s days or Queen Elizabeth s ;
on the other hand, there is the fact that the Thirty-Nine Articles were
framed in 1552 and 1562.'’ (p. 14.)
This extraordinary passage proves how reluctantly
the writer goes against his former friends and associates;
or he never would have set the weight of the opinions
of Bishops, at the Savoy Conference against that of the


Convocation held in Edward’s and Elizabeth’s time.
What was the authority of the Savoy Conference ? Had
it, in fact, any kind of ecclesiastical character ? Was
it possessed of any synodical authority ? What will the
advocates for Convocation say to such a statement ?
But the whole history of the proceedings of 1662 shows
that, however the disciples of Laud might wish to twist
and to alter the Services in conformity with their own
views, they were effectually prevented from so doing by
the united power of Convocation of both Houses of Parlia-
ment. Even Mr. Masked himself is constrained to allow
that the Savoy Conference did his cause, in many par-
ticulars —especially in the Office for Confirmation (p.
43), and the declaration appended to the Communion
Service respecting Christ’s presence in the Eucharist —
more harm than good.
The Letter proceeds with a kind of apology for the
ignorance which prevails respecting the almost forgotten
books of the Reformers, —of Jewell among the rest.
This is surprizing; for the praise of Jewell, as the very
Nestor of the Reformation, has hung for centuries on
High Church lips. But it is now confessed that his
writings were nearly unknown by the party most accus-
tomed to speak reverently of his name, —or rather by a
new party, who have arrogated to themselves a title not
their own. The writer supposes, no doubt truly, that
he knew “as much as people commonly know of the
theological books of the 16th and 17th centuries.”
“ This knowledge, ” he adds, “ must have been loose
and indeterminate enough, for I was not prepared to
learn, as I have learnt, that perhaps, with two excep-
tions, all the divines, bishops and archbishops, doctors
and professors of the Elizabethan age —the age, be it
remembered, of the present Common Prayer Book in its
chief particulars, and of the Book of Homilies, and of
the 39 Articles —held and taught doctrines inconsistent
(I write advisedly) with the true doctrine of baptism.”


(p. 15.) Thus, then, assuming the popish doctrine of
baptism to be true , the writer of this Letter has disco-
vered that the Protestant doctrine of the Reformers on
the subject is false. But how was it that our High
Church Divines fell into the grievous mistake of suppo-
sing that the Reformers had held views in accordance
with their own ? By the easiest possible means ; first,
by reading “ under the impression of long-established
prejudices and secondly, by learning what they did
learn of the writings of that age through the scanty
and distorting medium of “ catenae .” Buch apologies
might be pleaded for ignorant and unlearned men ; but
they do not exonerate the erudite leaders of a great
school in Theology.
On closer investigation —and surely closer investiga-
tion was never more necessary —Mr. Masked finds, in
many of the Elizabethan writers, passages inconsistent
with what he calls “ the Catholic truth” on the doctrine
of baptismal regeneration, while he finds “ none dis-
tinctly asserting that the Reformed Church of England
holds exclusively the sacramental efficacy of baptism in
the case of all infant recipients.” (p. 16.) He can-
didly acknowledges the force of Mr. Turner’s argument
before the Committee, based upon a comparison of the
Articles of 1536 and the Articles of 1552 and 1562. For
whereas the former Articles bound, most stringently, re-
generation to the baptismal rite, the latter entirely omitted
all the terms used for that purpose; and it was justly ar-
gued, that, with the earlier Articles before them, the Re-
formers could not have made these omissions without de-
sign. That design clearly was, to leave open a question
wdiich the former article had precisely determined. Mr.
Dodsworth had previously made a similar concession; and
thus both these modern High Churchmen are con-
strained, by the simple force of evidence, to acknow-
ledge that much for which Mr. Gorham had contended
was well-nigh established by this single fact.


Another fact strongly corroborative of the views
taken by many of the Evangelical party, is, with great
fairness and candour, brought forward by Mr. Masked.
He refers to the Dublin Articles of 1615. The bap-
tismal form and catechism of the Irish Church were
the same as our own. There were the same sentences,
“Seeing now this child is regenerate , &c.; “ Yet the
whole body of the clergy of the Established Church of
Ireland, assembled in Convocation, did not hesitate to
declare as follows : ‘ A true, lively, justifying faith, and
the sanctifying Spirit of God, is not extinguished, nor
vanisheth away in the regenerate , either finally or
totally.’ ” “I do assert,” he proceeds, “ that such a
statement, whether it may or may not seem to be
against the meaning of the words of the Public Offices
of the Church, is utterly and distinctly irreconcilable
with the Catholic truth of the unconditional efficacy of
infant baptism. Nor is it to be answered, that this plan in
the Irish Articles means nothing more than the famous
Lambeth Articles.”.... “ for there is a material altera-
tion ; the Lambeth form says, non evanescit in electis
the Dublin Articles change this into “ the regenerate .”
(p. 22.) There can be no doubt whatever, that the
substitution of the term regenerate for that of elect is
decisive of the view taken by the Irish Church in the
question at issue. For if all infants are regenerated by
baptism, then, according to the Dublin Article, they can
never lose their regeneration, and never finally perish.
In what a position must such a doctrine have placed Dr.
Mant and Dr. Lawrence, —the one a Bishop and the
other an Archbishop in the Irish Church, —with all who
held their notions of the necessary efficacy of baptism !
And it does not appear how it is possible for any cler-
gyman, at this day, to be a Minister in the Irish Church,
who does not accept either the principle of charitable as-
sumption contended for by Mr. Gorham and Mr. Goode,
or else some such distinction between the regeneration


of infants and that of adults, as was maintained by
Bishop Hopkins and others.
Mr. Masked places in a strong light the effect which
the discovery of this fact produced upon his own mind.
“Some months ago,” he tells us, “the language of our ritual seemed
to be an unanswerable evidence of the intention of the reformed Eng-
lish Church to teach exclusively the truth of regeneration in holy
baptism. There were the plain words and terms of the baptismal
office; and although the Articles alone would not prove the doctrine,
yet it scarcely appeared requisite that any reference should be made to
it [them], with a devotional service so remarkably clear and decided.
But in opposition to such a conclusion, the Irish Articles present an
insurmountable obstacle ; and the strongest of all the reasons which
the high church party in our church had produced, began to fade away
and vanish like a dream. Another established church in full commu-
nion with our own, using our ritual, unaltered, unmutilated, had
obliged its clergy to subscribe and to accept articles of faith, ‘ for the
avoiding of diversities of opinions, and the establishing of consent
touching true religion,’ not merely making doubtful the catholic doc-
trine of regeneration in baptism, but possitively and undeniably contra-
dicting it.” (p. 23.)
The writer concludes a long and forcible argument
on this point, which, assuming the truth of his own
premises, must be deemed irrefragable, by the fellowing
demand, which all who maintain his views will have
some difficulty in meeting, or evading; “If the Re-
formed Church of Ireland, be not in heresy, according to
the judgment of the Reformed Church of England , let it
he shown." By many Protestants this would be deemed
an easy task ; but Tractarian Churchmen are in a very
different position.
Having examined, with some degree of minuteness
the concessions which the writer has made respecting
Mr. Gorham’s views, we may now, we presume, assume
that the opinions of the latter are not only more defen-
sible than those of the former, but are really such as
the Reformers intended to allow in the Church. And
this is enough to show that the controversy ought never
to have been entered upon and agitated by the Bishop
of Exeter, in his examination before admission to a
benefice.


But there is another topic to which attention is di-
rected in Mr. Haskell’s Letter, and on which it behoves
the members of the Church of England to be informed,
and therefore we propose to notice, —
2. His statements respecting th e general views of the
High Church party.
He puts them in the mildest form, sometimes as mere
questions, and often with an apologetic air, which shows
that he would not willingly offend; yet there is little or
no difficulty in ascertaining what he means. He wishes
to be understood, and he is very capable of making him-
self intelligible.
“ In former years,” he says, “it never happened to cross my mind
that the foundations of the Reformed Church of England were less
strong or real than the High Church or Anglican party declared them
to be. As a system, or theory, in its position with respect either to
the Church of Rome or to the countless forms and communities of
dissent, the modern Church of England seemed sufficiently to accord
with words of Holy Scripture and the traditions of the ancient Church.
But the last twelve month? has changed this opinion much and
materially. The case of Mr. Gorham, with its immediate, and, if we
may say so, its personal points, as well as the very many collateral
difficulties connected with and springing out of it, forced one to inquire
somewhat more accurately than before, into the exact facts and history
and consequences of the Reformation. It forced one to prove by some
what sterner , and it may be, surer tests, the sufficiency of the claims
advanced by the Church of England.” (p. 33.)
And here it is obvious to remark in what profound
ignorance of the principles of the Reformers and of the
Reformation learned members of the Church of England
have been content to live, notwithstanding the abun-
dant materials for accurate information which were
always within their reach. It was not till a resolute
adherent to those principles, such as Mr. Gorham is, was
accidentally —shall we not say, providentially—brought
into contact with a leader of the High Church party, as
his diocesan, that men of Mr. Maskell’s intelligence
deemed it needful to inquire accurately into the doc-
trinal views of the Church to which they belonged.


Misled by a few sentences, expressed in positive lan-
guage, the Anglican party thought it scarcely necessary
to look at the Articles for explanation, and wholly need-
less to refer to the writings of the men by whom the for-
mularies of the Church were drawn up. If it will not be
deemed presumptuous, we would even now intreat Mr.
Masked not only to look at, but to study, the works of
these Fathers of our Church. In such a case, we should
entertain a strong hope that he might be led to see the
superiority of their system of doctrine to that of the
Romish Church, which at present seems to stand the
highest in his favour. In his attempt to prove the want
of dogmatic teaching in the Reformed Church of Eng-
land, he produces a string of questions based upon the
peculiar points of doctrine which the Tractarian leaders
hold to be essential. Passing over the doctrine of the
Trinity, as well as that of Baptism, for the moment, he
asks concerning the Church of England,—
“ What is her especial doctrine, for example, upon the number of
the sacraments, upon the blessings and spiritual graces which the
sacraments convey, upon the distinctions between one sacrament and
another, upon the necessity or advisableness of some of them, or upon
their virtue, powers, and efficacy ? and do they contain, as as
convey, grace ? Again, take the sacrament of the blessed Eucharist.
what is the doctrine which the Church of England openly, plainly, and
distinctly, teaches about it ? does she tell us that it is a sacrifice .
does she tell us that it is not a sacrifice ? if a sacrifice, what is the
Thing sacrificed ? and, is it or is it not propitiatory for the living, or
for the dead, or for neither? are the elements after the words of con-
secration bread and wine, as they were before, or are they the Body and
the Blood of our Lord? are they both? if only one, which of these are
they ? ought we, or ought we not, to pay outward honour and rever-
ence to our Blessed Lord, present upon His altar, after the consecra-
tion? Again; take Confirmation; is this a sacrament, or is it not ?
if a sacrament, what is meant by saying that it has not the like nature
of a sacrament with baptism and the Lord’s supper ? is it a ceremony
in which the candidates confirm the vows and promises made for them
by others, long before, when they were baptized, or is it an ordinance
in which they recieve also, after a sacramental and mysterious manner,
by the laying on of hands, the gift of the Holy Ghost, never in like
manner to be again given or received ? and is this last the chief, or not


the chief, end and object of confirmation? Take, again, Extreme
Unction: is this, or is it not, lawful to be received and administered in
the Church of England ? if it be, what are its effects ? if it be not, why
is it not ? is extreme unction ‘a corrupt following of the apostles,’ or
not? if it be, in what sense is it, and confirmation or orders not equally
so ? Again, take Matrimony : what is the especial teaching of the
Church of England about this ? Again, Orders :is episcopacy essential
or not essential to the existence of a Church ? can the blessed Eucha-
rist be given in a religious body—for example, in the kirk of Scotland
—where there is no pretence of episcopal ordination, in fact, where
there are no priests ? is there a ‘ character’ given, or not given, in ordi-
nation? does a priest at his ordination receive power to remit and to
retain sins? and if so, in what sense, &c.” (pp. 33—37.)
These are but a portion of a string of questions all
bearing on similar points, among which the necessity of
“ auricular confession—full, detailed, and particular,”
—in order to obtain “ the grace of forgiveness by
means of priestly absolution,” stands prominently for-
ward. Then follow questions respecting prayers for the
dead, purgatory, invocation of saints; the reserving, car-
rying about, lifting up, and worshipping the Sacrament
of the Lord’s Supper, the invocation of the Virgin Mary,
and the doctrine of justification by faith.
These questions, Mr. Maskell contends, are all open
questions in the Church of England; a proposition
which, as Protestants and true friends of the English
Church, we firmly deny. A moment’s glance at them
will show that the view taken of them by the High
Church party —at least by Mr. Maskell’s section of it—
is that which cannot be consistently maintained by
any member of the Protestant Church of England. It
is indeed the view taken by Rome, and that which was
adopted in England while under the spiritual authority
of Rome ; but it was repudiated at the Reformation,
and has ever since been abjured by the faithful mem-
bers of the Church. Surely then the party now referred
to is in a false position where they are ; and they must,
if consistent, either reconsider and amend their creed,
or depart with Mr. Maskell to Rome—if such be his
miserable destination.


It is the fashion, we are told, to be acquainted with
Hooker’s Ecclesiastical Polity. If then Hooker be an
authority in a case like this, we would ask does he leave
these as Open questions ? Let the reader refer to his
discourse of Justification, sections 5 and 6, and he will
find a string of answers which apply to almost every
question put in Mr. Haskell’s letter, adding ; “ This is
the mystery of the man of sin. This maze the Church
of Rome doth cause her followers to tread, when they
ask her the way to Justification. I cannot stand now
to unrip this building, and to sift it piece by piece ; only
I will pass by it in a few words, that that may befall
Babylon in the presence of that which God hath builded
as happened unto Dagon before the Ark.”
Mr. Maskell thinks that “open questions” must be as
distasteful to the Evangelical party as to his own. But
perhaps he and they do not mean the same thing when
they use the term “ open questions certainly they do
not mean that the Church does not speak definitely and
distinctly on many of the subjects to which he refers,
and especially on the one which he particularly specifies,
justification by faith. But with whatever dogmatic
precision she speaks on such an important doctrine, she
does not allow her bishops to compel every candidate
for a holy office to adopt his own peculiar view of the
teaching of the Church. This she leaves to every man’s
conscience in the sight of God. And there the Evange-
lical section of the Church would have it left.
Not so the men of the Tractarian movement: with
them every thing assumes a dogmatic form, and there-
fore they presume to dogmatize most fearfully. “ The
Church holds this, and you must hold it.” If the re-
spondent ventures a doubt whether the Church really
holds such a doctrine, he is a heathen and a publican,
and must be rejected as a heretic ! Was not this the
feeling of Mr. Maskell towards Mr. Gorham, when he
had him under examination ? And has he not since


learned, and indeed confessed, that the Church of Eng-
land gave him no right to entertain such a feeling,
much less to act upon it ? All therefore, that was done
in this case, must be admitted to be sheer usurpation.
Mr. Maskell admits that the evangelical party is much
more nearly unanimous on all the disputed questions
which he has brought forward, than his own party are.
" The fact is not to be lightly regarded,” he observes,
“ that the two great parties by which the Church of
England is divided having been distinguished, the fur-
ther state of conflict by difference of opinion, is to be
found chiefly, if not entirely, among ourselves. It
begins, alas! with the attempt to bring back Catholic
teaching by Catholic faith, into the reformed Church
of England, and into agreement with her Articles and
Prayer Book,” —say rather into agreement with the
Breviary and the Missal.
The writer, in a very candid manner, proceeds to
compare the different modes in which his own party
and the Evangelical, accept and understand the various
doctrines of the Church. He allows that there is none
on which his party would have a primd facie advantage
in the comparison, but that of baptismal regeneration.
Whether the subject be that of Justification, Absolution,
the Eucharist, or the Real Presence in the Eucharist,
the difficulty of reconciling the statements of the Li-
turgy, &c., with the modern High-Church doctrines,is as
great, and in many respects greater, than that of recon-
ciling them with the doctrines of the Evangelical body.
Another consideration which has pressed heavily on
the writer’s mind is, that the Evangelical clergy declare
their opinions fully and openly ; whereas he makes the
following admission for himself and his friends.
“But we do reserve vital and essential truths; we often hesitate and
fear to teach our people many duties.. .. eminently practical, and which
serve to increase the growth of the inner, spiritual life: we differ, in
short, as widely from the Evangelical party in the manner and openness,
as in the matters and details of our doctrine.” (p. 56.)


There are other topics to which we would gladly have
referred, but our want of space forbids.
In conclusion, we may venture to express a hope that
Mr. Masked’s honesty may be contagious, and that
many of his former associates may discern what has
become so plain to himself—that what is called Anglo-
Catholicism, and the faith and practice of the Church
of England, are utterly incompatible. And, having
arrived at this conclusion, may we not venture further
to hope that they will more carefully investigate the
writings of those Fathers of the Church with whom they
have hitherto dealt so injuriously; will compare them
devoutly with the sacred volume; will earnestly seek
the illuminating grace of the Holy Spirit, and endeavour
to ascertain whether they themselves are not, at this
moment, as far from the teaching of the Scriptures,
and from the true Church of God, as from the Church
of their country. —What enormities does Mr. Maskell
propose to embrace if he passes from the pale of Pro-
testantism into that of the idolatrous Church of Rome ?
Is he prepared to worship a woman, —to call bread flesh,
and wine blood, —and to adore these dead elements as
a living and present God ? Suppose him to be told that
arsenic was mixed with that bread and wine, would he
swallow it ? Does he believe that man can forgive sin ?
Will he sanction the impurities of the Romish Confes-
sional ? Will he adopt the dishonesties of Jesuitism ?
Will not he and other honest and holy men consider on
what foundation they should wish to be found standing
when the great hour of account arrives, —upon the fic-
tions of ambitious and crafty men, or upon the promises
of Scripture ? Is there nothing in the simplicity, purity,
sanctity and Scriptural stamp and character of that re-
ligious system which leads the sinner to the cross of a
Saviour, without the intervention of the Virgin, the
saints, extreme unction, and a scheme of absolution
which wrests the sceptre of justice and mercy from the


hands of God, to place it in the hands of a fallible and
sinful man ? We cannot afford lightly to give up such
men as Mr. Masked. We do not indeed want them as
Anglo-Catholics, or spurious Romanists; but we
earnestly crave them as honest, devoted, ardent, Scrip-
tural Protestants. May the Blessed Spirit, Who, we be-
lieve, has opened Mr. Maskell’s eyes to the discovery of
many past delusions, “ guide him into all truth and
lead him into those quiet and holy pastures, and beside
the still waters, where the great Shepherd feeds His
flock.
Extract from the Letter of the Rev. Mr. Dodsworth to Dr. Pusey.
“ You have been one of the foremost to lead us on to a higher appre-
ciation of that ‘Church system,’ of which sacramental grace is the very
life and soul. Both by precept and example you have been amongst
the most earnest to maintain Catholic principles. By your constant
and common practice of administering the sacrament of penance; by
encouraging everywhere, if not enjoining auricular confession, jand giving
special priestly absolution; by teaching the propitiatory sacrifice of the
Holy Eucharist, as applicatory of the one sacrifice on the cross, and by
adoration of Christ Really present on the altar under the form of bread
and wine ; by your introduction of Roman Catholic books ; adapted to
the use of our Church by encouraging the use of rosaries and cruci-
fixes, and special devotions to our Lord, as e. g. to His Five Wounds;
by adopting language most powerfully expressive of our incorporation
into Christ, as e. g. ‘ our being inebriated by the Blood of our Lord
by advocating councils of perfection, and seeking to restore, with more
or less fulness, the conventual or monastic life ; —1 say, by the teaching
and practice, of which this enumeration is a sufficient type and indica-
tion, you have done much to revive amongst us the system which may
be pre-eminently called ‘Sacramental.’ And yet now, when, by
God’s mercy to us, a great opportunity has occurred, of asserting and
enforcing the very keystone of this system, and apart from which the
whole must crumble away,—forgive me for speaking so plainly,—you
seem to shrink from the front rank. You seem ready to hide yourself
under soft assertions of truths ‘which’ it is said ‘not six men in the
Church of England will be found to deny,’ and behind ambiguous state-
ments which can be subscribed in different senses.” (pp. 16, 17.)


Letter of the Archbishop of Canterbury in reply to the Metropolitan
Church Union.
“Gentlemen. —I beg to acknowledge your letter of the 3rd inst., in
which, as the organs of the Metroplitan Church Union, you desire me
to reconsider my reply to your previous communication. You suggest
that I should represent to Her Majesty the view taken by the Metropo-
litan Church Union on many points connected with that judgment,
in the hope that Her Majesty may license the assembling of a convoca-
tion, and that thus the whole question may again be brought under de-
liberation, and, as you expect, differently determined. But surely it
would be an unprecedented and arbitrary measure by any retrospective
decree to annul a right of which an individual is already legally in
possession. And whilst you assume as undeniable a variety of princi-
ples, and make many positive assertions, in order to invalidate the
respect due to the decision of the existing tribunal, 1 must remind
you that your opinions are directly opposed to those of a numerous
body of intelligent and attached members of our church, both clergy-
men and laymen, who, although they have hitherto observed a prudent
and respectful silence, are yet deliberately convinced that no other deter-
mination of the question at issue would have been in accordance with
the articles of our church and the known principles of those
who framed them ; and that a liberty which has been enjoyed by all
Churchmen from the Reformation to the present day, in the exposition
of subjects of such deep mystery, should by all means be continued to them
within the limits permitted by the revealed Word of God. Assuredly
there are occasions, as you remind me, when it becomes a duty to obey
God ratber than man. But I beg to observe that before any one takes
upon himself the responsibility of contravening the law of man, he ought
to bevery certain that in so doing hewould be obeying God. Now, nothing
which I find in the law of God gives me reason to believe I should be
acting in conformity with His will if I refuse Mr. Gorham admission to
the cure of souls, on the ground of his hesitating to affirm the spiritual
regeneration of every baptized child. And the will of God in this matter
had need to be very plainly declared, before I could think myself justi-
fied in accusing Mr. Gorham of heresy ; much more before I could as-
sume the right of individually condemning him, after the decision of
the legitimate tribunal in his favour.
“ I remain, Gentlemen, your faithful servant,
“ J. B. Cantuar.”


lAff
no
& , ■




