

yf 3. '/
Cfj _
Rescue of Neglected and Destitute
Children .
A Defence
OF
MISS SUTHERLAND
AND
REV. ALEXANDER STEWART
IN ANSWER TO
Rev. ALEXANDER MARSHALL
Rev. Dr. JOHN L. RENTOUL
And Others ;
With an Explanation of the Rescue Work , the Right
Methods , and the Actual Situation.
BY
REV. JOHN THOMSON,
FLEMINGTON.
Hon, Secretary of Assembly's Committee for Neglected and
Destitute Children.
UUlbouruc:
Stillwell and Co., Printers, 195A Collins Street.
1894. \
PRICE SIXPENCE.




PREFATORY NOTE.
It may be well to explain, that the General Assembly of
the Presbyterian Church of Victoria, in November 1893,
undertook the work of rescuing neglected and destitute
children by means of a Society, appointed a Committee of the
Assembly’s own members to superintend and control the work
of the Society, empowered this Committee to appoint a
working Committee of ladies to assist, and to engage a lady as
Agent of the Society. The Assembly’s Committee engaged, as
was intended, Miss Sutherland, and found a working Com-
mittee of ladies ready to their hand in her friends who were
already regularly engaged in the work, and had, some of them,
worked with her in the other Society from the first. “ The
Society,” to be spoken of in this paper, is the working Com-
mittee of ladies, for we have got no further as yet. The Com-
mission (or half-yearly meeting) of Assembly, in May 1894,
passed a resolution restricting the work in several respects,
and appointed a second Committee to enquire into all questions
concerning the Society, and report to the Assembly in November
1894. This second Committee is called the Commission’s
Committee. The unfriendly criticism and action of leading
members of this Committee have occasioned the present con-
troversy and, as part of it, this pamphlet.
It is hoped that the Assembly will take care to keep this
important matter in its own hands, by fixing the Order of
Business so as to secure that it shall be discussed on one of the
first days, and, if necessary, early each day till it is settled.
Proceedings of
Assembly 1893,
p. 53.


We, the undersigned members of the Assembly’s Society
for Neglected and Destitute Children, regard Mr. Thomson’s
statement in Chapters 111 and IV, as representing our views
of the right methods and the situation, and respectfully recom-
mend it to the attention of members of Assembly.
Julia Mary McCallum. Elizabeth F. Lawes,
Annie Young. Eleanor Birchall.
Isabella Hudson. Cecilia J. Lorimbr.
Mary L. Hudson. Frances Houston.
Jane Hughes. Marg. Cameron Stewart.
Margaret Sinclair. 0. H. Thomson.
Grace Drew Sinclair. Mabel Stillman.
Margaret Gunn. Annie McKenzie.
Margaret Gunn. Margaret McCallum.
Mary Elizabeth Picken.
We, the undersigned members of the Assembly’s Committee
for Neglected and Destitute Children, agree generally with
Mr. Thomson’s views in Chapters IV, V, VI, and the con-
clusion, and earnestly recommend the whole statement to be
read against the coming meeting of Assembly.
W. Gray Dixon. P. H. Speedie.
Jas. Weir. John McKenzie.
W. M. M. Mackie. D. Macphail.
Edwd. Rout. William Wishart.


CONTENTS.
PAGE.
Aim of this Paper .. .. .. .. .. .. 7
Facts want to he known .. .. .. .. .. 7
I. —The sort of work .. .. .. .. .. 9
ll.—ls the work really needed ? .. .. .. 10
111. —What are the right methods? .. .. .. ..14
1. About legal control .. .. .. .. ..14
The question is not as to the use, hut as to the exclusive use
of it .. .. .. .. .. .. 14
Eeasons against the exclusive and too ready use of it .. 15
Reasons given for the exclusive use .. .. .. 22
2. About Presbyterian children and homes .. .. .. 23
3. About supervision and religious instruction .. .. 25
Summary as to methods .. .. .. .. ..26
IV. —Are Miss Sutherland and the ladies of the Society to continue
to work in connection with the Assembly ? .. .. 27
1. The loyalty of these ladies .. .. .. .. 27
2. Was Miss Sutherland careless about the eighteen children ? .. 28
3. Was she discourteous to the old Society? .. .. 29
4. The bill for 3s. 9d. .. .. .. .. .. 30
5. Charges of interference with Scots’ Church wards .. .. 31
6. “ You can’t work with her ” .. .. .. ..32
7. “ Her insubordination ” .. .. .. .. ..33
8. The Buninyong remark had express reference to “ some state-
ments made at the Commission,” not to the action of
the Commission, still less to the Church generally .. 33
These statements were made by Mr. Marshall and others,
as she believed, under his influence .. .. .. 35
There was no need to understand Miss Sutherland as making
any wider reference .. .. .. .. 36
The exact reference could have been published the day after
the remark was published, if brethren thought the
Church generally discredited .. .. .. 37 -
Her main statement is known to be true, and was not
“ utterly groundless ” .. .. .. ..37
The remark was a hasty one, but was made under provoca-
tion .. .. .. .. .. .. 39
9. Her alleged equivocations and evasions .. .. .. 40
10. The Scots’ Church Session’s Minute .. .. .. 41
The finding of the Presbytery of Melbourne North .. 42
11. How the Final Judge intends to judge .. .. .. 44
To part with Miss Sutherland is to part with the work .. 44


PAOE.
V.—Two Committees or one ? .. .. .. .. 45
How the Assembly’s Committee have been treated .. 48
Vl.—Has Mr. Stewart himself to blame for his troubles ? 49
Conclusion.
A poor specimen of leadership .. .. .. .. 54
“ Thou mayst not hide thyself ” .. .. .. ..54
Extracts from the Act of 1890 .. .. .. .. 55


A DEFENCE
OF
MISS SUTHERLAND & REV. ALEX. STEWART.
As Honorary Secretary of the Assembly’s Committee, I
think it my duty to state the case from my point of view.
I am bound to defend my post under attack, till the Assembly
relieves me. The aim of this paper is to help to move the
Assembly to continue the work, and to retain Miss Sutherland
with her Committee of ladies (for she and they are inseparable);
also to rescind the Commission’s injunction requiring legal
control in every case of permanent settlement, and Presbyterian
homes in every case of the same. Mr. Stewart’s experience
moved him to resign the Convenership of the one Committee,
and moved him to wish to retire, at the proper time, from the
other Convenership as well. Like Jonah, he asks to be
thrown overboard, that “ the sea may cease from her raging,”
though, unlike Jonah, the storm overtook him when engaged
in his duty. His desire is, that no one should vote against the
work and Miss Sutherland as agent on his account, and that
all should distinctly understand that he, or his being Convener,
is no inseparable part of this good cause. These are his own
views, and ought to have their effect in the Assembly. But
others of us think that he did so well the work given him to
do as Convener, that he is so acceptable to the ladies of the
Society, that he has been so molested from without in that
position, and has, on the whole—we don’t justify his every
act —carried himself so patiently and prudently under severe
trial, that we hope an Assembly which heartily maintains the
work, will also be willing that Mr. Stewart shall continue to
be Convener, in spite of those who would ostracize him from
all Convenerships.
I shall do my best to be moderate in my statements. But
the facts of the case want to be known, as great misapprehen-
sion exists probably in many minds. On the evening of one of
the days of the Quarterly Meetings in June, a much respected
brother came out to me fuming with anger against Mr. Stewart
for obstructing the will of the Church, and bringing on it the
reproach of quarrelsomeness in the public mind. I was only
too readily in a heat of resentment as well, but assured my
friend that, though bitterly vexed, it was not with him, but
with those who had misled him, and all the more, because I
Aim of this
paper.
; Facts want to be
known.
Instances.


believed the impression made on him was but an example of
the way in which many brethren were being misled. After-
wards I wrote him, apologising for the heat I had shown, and
had from him this answer :—“ No apology was needed for
anything you said about Miss Sutherland’s case. What you
said shook me a bit that evening, and when I went, on
getting home, to the Blue Books of Assembly and Commission,
my views were changed, and I would have voted on Stewart’s
side, in fact, I cannot think of Stewart’s conduct that evening
but with admiration. Ido hope the Church will not give up
so truly Christ-like a work as that.” Another valued friend
told me he had voted against us in the Commission though he
had come sympathising with us, and the two things that moved
him were the need of legal control in every case which, in his
opinion, had been made out, and Mr. Marshall’s story about
the little bill for 3s. 9d., which he held up in his fingers to an
impressed assembly. I told my friend our version of legal
control, but the great matter of the little bill I was not then
able to explain. When he heard my story, he declared himself
to be enlightened, and he was good enough to offer to help the
expense of printing a statement of the case for Members of
Assembly. I hope that this statement will help to'clear the air,
and enlighten others as well as my two friends. As time passes,
this hope increases. The Commission’s Committee, which gave
Miss Sutherland and Mr. Stewart so much trouble in and after
May have, in the September quarterly meeting, country brethren
being present, rejected a motion of Dr. Dentoul’s which asked
for enquiry, but which seemed to us to look towards practical
measures to join the Scots Church Society, or at any rate, to
get rid of Miss Sutherland. I hope the Assembly will dispose
in like manner of any similar attempt.
Miss Sutherland’s accusers have not spared the Members of
Committee who have defended the Assembly’s Agent. My
publishing this paper will very likely add to the list of our
offences. But the margin will abundantly remind the reader
that the personal topics touched on by me have been already
brought before the public in numerous newspaper articles,
paragraphs, reports of speeches, Committee’s findings, and
letters from the brethren whom I oppose. And if I cast fresh
light on these topics, that is what at this moment is greatly
needed, not only by the public, but very especially by those
who have to vote in the Assembly. The members of the Com-
mission were—l don’t say knowingly —misled by groundless
statements and unjust reproaches; and it is necessary that the
Members of the coming Assembly should know the rights of
various points beforehand. We have done our best all through
to suppress the personalties, and to persuade our opponents not


to push things to extremes. Up to the moment of writing this,
no hope appears of that. Indeed, the findings of the Scots
Church Session and of the Presbytery of Melbourne North,
and these published by the Presbytery Clerk, force us to do
our best to make known our view of the case.
CHAPTER I.—THE SORT OF WORK DONE BY OUR
SOCIETY AND AGENT.
In the note at page 55, you will find what is meant in the
Act of 1890 by a “ neglected ” child. There are children, how-
ever, who are destitute,” and in urgent need of rescue, though
not “ neglected ” in the sense of the Act.
The work of the Society is something like this; —
(1) They settle children in foster-homes in the country.
The foster-parents are not paid anything by the Society, but
clothe and keep the children, send them to school, and after
14 give them wages.
(2) The Society finds situations in the country for lads and
girls out of work, and in imminent danger to their morals,
(3) They also take care of children for a few weeks in case
of one or both parents being under the necessity of parting
with them for a short time. These are called temporary cases.
(4) lHow and then they find on their hands cases of a kind
very difficult, even for the State, to deal with. The lad Edge,
who died after running away lately, was such a case. Half-
witted, incapable of keeping themselves clean, people, even for
payment, can hardly be found to,take care of them. Some
Christian Society, subsidised by the State, should get them
collected in some such place as the Ballarat Industrial Schools
now or recently vacant.
(5) As a preliminary, the children are taken to the Society’s
Receiving Home till they are in a fit state to be sent to the
country. Meanwhile they are washed, cropped, re-clothed, the
old clothes for urgent reasons needing to be burned; they are
fed, taught lessons, and made to say their prayers.
(6) The ladies of the Society meet fortnightly for sewing
and preparing garments for the children. The attendance
averages about 20. During the year 720 articles of clothing
have been made.
(7) They meet on the first Monday of every month, and
spend about three hours in the following business : — (a) They
pass bills for payment, (b) They hear the Agent’s report of
what she has done with the cases received at last meeting, and
left for her to deal with, (c) The Agent brings new cases
before them ; children accompanied by parents or friends. ( d)
■Cases that needed immediate action are reported by the Agent


as having been settled since last meeting ; these are unem-
ployed lads or girls, chiefly street arabs, that had perhaps been
allowed to lie about the kitchen of the Model Lodging House,
or been locked up two or three times by the police, and that
must be sent off at once to the country, or not at all. There
are always applications from the country for such boys waiting
to be answered; the Agent has only—after enquiries about
their circumstances —to rig them out and send them off.
(8) Two or three ladies, who from many years’ experience
know the work intimately, are almost daily in attendance at
the Society’s Home.
(9) Local Committees for superintendence exist in the
districts where the children are settled.
(10) The work, as carried on in the first six months, would
take about £5OO for the whole year, and we should easily have
had that had the funds continued to flow in as they were doing
till checked by the late dissensions. For that expense, more
than 200 children per annum would be rescued. We had
about 100 for the first six months, ending in May ; up to the
end of September, 174 in all.
(11) The State authorities being in full sympathy with this
rescue work, have recognised our Society and its Agent, so that
Miss Sutherland has power to arrest without warrant a child
who, by the definition in the Act of 1890, is a neglected child
—you will find at the end of this paper an abstract of the pro-
visions of the Act so far as they affect us. She can have the
child, if she thinks good, committed by a Police Court, and
handed over to her care as a ward of the State. If there is a
parent, and if he or she is willing to transfer the legal guardian-
ship of the child, there is no difficulty in that being done,
supposing Miss Sutherland and the Society desire it. We have
not yet received, but have reason to expect, a Government grant
in aid of our work, meanwhile our Agent and her children, in
being settled, travel on the railways free of charge.
(12) The other day, October 5, Mr. W. G. Brett, Govern-
ment Inspector of Charitable Institutions, inspected our
Society’s Receiving Home, and after two hours’ minute enquiry
and examination of premises, books and methods, pronounced
the work to be “ the perfection of system,.” This he said not-
withstanding his own theory, to which I shall afterwards refer.
CHAPTER II. — IS THE WORK REALLY NEEDED ?
Among other efforts to discredit the work of our Society, a
speaker in the Commission did not scruple to suggest that the
result of all their labours may only put, the children into worse
conditions, because—here are my pencil notes taken on the


spot—“ Homes up country not so safe as streets of Melbourne.”
Which means, out of the fryingpan into the fire. To this I
answered at the time, and I answer now, that one of our best
eiders, and one of the most faithful servants of the state, who
for twelve years inspected the boarded out children through the
colony, assures me that there are no better homes in the
country than the Presbyterian homes, to which, for the most
part, Miss Sutherland sends her children. You elders and
members of the Church in the country will take note in passing
of the compliments conferred on you by the party who complain
of Miss Sutherland. I may add that Mr. W. G. Brett declares
that “ placing out children in respectable homes is superior to
any other method that could be devised.”
But perhaps it is the fryingpan that is not so black as it is
called 1 Perhaps the children are not in such dire need as we
supposed 1 Perhaps what little needs to be done is done already,
without Miss Sutherland or her Society, and better done than
by her? Well, what said Mr. Brett ? In his last Report but
one to the Chief Secretary, he expressed the hope that the Pres-
byterian Church as a whole would see its way to co-operate in
the work, in view of the ever-growing requirements of neglected
children, and in his last report he urges the Church of England
to take up the work.
Mr. Geo. Martin, town missionary for eight years in the
City, in South Melbourne, Port Melbourne, North Melbourne,
Carlton, and Richmond, tells me that he has seen the children
in nakedness and misery in the slums, and he has seen the same
children in their country homes, delighted with their lot,
unwilling to return to the city, and he thanked God for the
contrast. Left with their parents, they are sent out to beg;
they see something they can lift, they drop it into their sack,
and graduate speedily in theft—girls and boys. You say
“ why don’t you send that boy to school?” The mother replies,
“ I have more sense.” The boy once sent to school, his name
would be on the roll, and she would be pestered with summonses
for his truancy. As it is, she is unmolested, and the boy grows
up without the rudiments of education. Send him to a home
in the country, and he will have to go to school.
Mr. Shepherd, town missionary, informs me that in his ■
opinion this rescue work must be prosecuted if the children of
the streets are not to fill our gaols and Pentridge.
Surely these views of experienced town missionaries deserve
consideration. Is no weight due to the testimony, the life and
death of Mrs. Armour ? Surely whatever is good and true in '
the Scots Church does her homage. Of the more than 1200
children rescued in twelve years by the Scots Church Society,
all but a fraction passed through Mrs. Armour’s house, she paying
Are the children
safer in the
country ?
“Reports” of the
Inspector of
Charitable
Institutions,
1894, p. 12.
Mr. Geo. Martin,
town mission-
ary.
Mr. Shepperd.
The late Mrs.
Armour and
her school.


the incidental expenses, and handling the children. Dying,
she left part of her means to Miss Sutherland to go on with
the work as they two had hitherto done it. Was it love’s
labour lost? Was she a martyr by mistake? Are we to
believe those now who tell us really there was no need to take
up the children on any such scale as Mrs. Armour did ? With
Miss Sutherland in our Society are those ladies who most
imbibed the spirit and ways of Mrs. Armour—some of them
have known and shared the work from the beginning—are
they too martyrs by mistake ?
Miss Sutherland gives every pledge of sincerity in this work,
her petty salary of £lOO per annum does not cover her expenses,
and the Victorian world knows that the zeal of the work con-
sumes her. Her experience of it extends over fourteen years,
and her witness in these circumstances is surely worth more
than the opinion of a hundred people, however clever, who
never took home one widow’s child, or one waif of the streets,
and whose contribution to this cause is—words, chiefly critical
and destructive. There is no work more before the public than
is hers, or more open to scrutiny as to its methods, means, and
results, and there is no work that more enjoys the approbation
of the public, and the confidence of all sorts, conditions, and
creeds. The only discordant notes came from some Presby-
terians, and these Presbyterians are either persons who know
nothing of her in the actual work, or persons whom she aban-
doned because they refused to keep pace with her and her
zealous comrades in the work. Politicians of all parties,
members of all Governments equally and alike honour her,
as one chief force in the colony for the conservation of order,
peace, and life. But when called before her own Committee—
or rather the one which has jumped, in our opinion, her own
Committee’s claim—she is talked to, and frowned on, and
admonished as a culprit. In the Commission, Mr. Marshall
had no better account of her activity when Agent of the Soots
Church Society, than to call it an attempt “to swamp the
Society ” by too great a burden of children.
Professor Harper told the Commission that, “having severed
her connexion with the Scots Church Society, she was naturally
anxious to make a bold display, and he accounted for the num-
ber of cases she had received from a feeling of rivalry. But
it was not advisable to give this indiscriminate relief, and it
was not good for the Church that children should be taken in
this wholesale manner.’’ This note has been taken up by other
learned brethren. But it occurs at once to ask, How did these
brethren get to know that the 91 children of our Report were
taken on “wholesale” and “indiscriminately?” Could they
prove, at the time, that ten of the children ought to have been


let alone 1 Can they show evidence, even now, for the odd one
of the 91 being needlessly taken 1 And was it generous or just,
or mannerly to impute, without urgent cause, mean motives to
(This good woman, their Church’s Agent 1 Was it not for this
very end —of taking more children than she was permitted to
do—that she left the Scots connexion and attached herself to
the Assembly ?
But, it has been argued that there is very little room for
Miss Sutherland and her Society. “ Eight Societies of a simi-
lar kind are already in the field.” This statement is based, and
insecurely based, on Mr. Brett’s Report for last year. Of the
eight Societies there reported on. four are unlike ours—l mean
St. Joseph’s (R.C.) Home, the Gordon Institute, the Toorak
Try, and “ Clifden.” This last in nearly three years has settled
nine children in homes ; the Toorak Try last year settled one,
the Gordon Institute 16, they of St. Joseph’s Home have 70
children in the house but received none, and seem to have
settled none in homes last year. The Societies that are similar
to ours are—the Scots Church, the Australian Church, the
Wesleyan, and the Church of England; this last seems to
have settled only a very few, the report not giving the number;
the Scots Church received 81 ; the Wesleyans settled 17 ; the
Australian Church 34, 10 of whom were returned to parents
as “ unsatisfactory.” It seems plain that there is room for us
and our Agent after all. “I do not know,” says Mr. George
Martin, “ of any work in the city or suburbs that will bear
comparison with hers for results.” But perhaps we, with the
most experienced and honoured Agent for the work in the
Colony, ought to hang back, anxious to do no more than our
share of the work t But, then, what is our share 1 Our share
is all that remains to be done, all the neglected and destitute
children we can lay hold of, all we can do while not running
into debt, and not undertaking more than we can go through
with. Christ’s work is not done at all by those who are very
glad to leave it to others whenever they have an excuse. “Are
then our Church people to be saddled with all the waifs of the
Colony 1” I reply, the receiving of these children is wholly
voluntary. No family gets a child but by desiring and apply-
ing for him.
I admit that people are, in many cases, pauperised by need-
less charity, and parents have no kindness but mischief done
them by being needlessly relieved of the burden and presence
of their children. But the ladies and the Agent of our Society,
who trained themselves to the work under so wise a woman as
the late Mrs. Armour, are likely to know about those dangers
as well as anybody ; and it were our wisdom to be in no hurry
to charge them with making paupers, till facts thrust the conclu-
Is there no room
for us in the
field?
Presbytery of
Mel bourne
South. Pro-
ceedings of
Commission,
1894, App. p.T,
“ Reports, &c.”
1894.
Are we only ma-
king paupers?


sion on us in spite of ourselves. I asked a town missionary on
this point, and his reply was :—“The children are there perish-
ing, and you have to rescue them in any case.” I asked another,
and his reply was ;—“lt is not manufacturing paupers, for this
simple reason, that they are already paupers. It gives the
child a chance. I wish I had had somebody to take me up
that way when I was young, it would have saved me sin and
misery.”
We were told at the Commission in May, that the work
had been rashly undertaken by the previous Assembly in
November. Neither Presbytery nor Assembly knew enough
of the needs of the children in question to warrant the im-
mediate acceptance of Miss Sutherland and her Society of
ladies. It was a fresh-born zeal that was displayed ; “it seemed
it was not the children that were lost, but Miss Sutherland
that was found.” The learned Professor who thus reproved us
gave us, along with the reproof, a curious insight into his own
mind. He seemed to assume that if he did not know a thing,
it was not known. If he had not lived in sympathy with
Miss Sutherland’s work, any large part of the Church had not;
if he did not count it an honour to hold the rope while she
lowered herself into the burning pit, no sane person could.
Spite of his reproof, and with all our respect for him, many of
us think the coming Assembly can do no better thing for the
Church, for Christ’s cause, for their own honest credit in the
world, than to confirm the appointment of Miss Sutherland
and her ladies, as the Church’s Deaconesses for this momentous
task of rescuing the perishing children.
If we are agreed that the work ought to be done by the
Church, the next question is—
Was the work
rashly
undertaken ?
Argus, May 3.
CHAPTER III. —WHAT ARE THE RIGHT METHODS ?
“ Extract
minute” sent
to Argus,
May 26.
Our opponents have declared that they are as anxious as we
can be that the work should go on, and that the only difference
is one as to methods. On our part, we could wish nothing
better than that all other differences should be hushed, and the
question of methods be temperately discussed in the next
Assembly.
AS TO LEGAL CONTROL.
This, says Dr. Rentoul, is the crux of the whole discussion.
What legal control means for us will be seen in my extracts
from the Act of 1890, in Note at the end.
The real dispute between, us lies not as to the use, but as to
the exclusive use of this power. Miss Sutherland and her
ladies, and we of the Assembly’s Committee, believe in using
it when it is indispensable, and avoiding to use it when not
Letter to Herald,
May 8.
The question is,
not as to the
use, but as to
the exclusive
use of legal
control.


necessary. Dr. Rentoul and his party hold it to be good and
necessary in all cases of permanent settlement. They speak
of the principle of voluntary admissions as “ loose and perilous,”
and they induced the Commission in May to “ direct the Society
to receive children only under legal guardianship.” The ladies,
being supposed to have failed to obey perfectly that injunction,
are accused of disloyalty. Dr. Rentoul has told the public that
“ Miss Sutherland scouts the principle of legal guardianship.”
But he adds, “ Why in a good many cases does she herself
accept the principle of legal guardianship 1 ” And I answer,
because you were not accurate when you said that she scouted
the principle, and because she, with her experience, puts a
difference between case and case, while you, making more
haste than speed to set her right, make no distinction. How
should she scout the principle which she has practised through
many years, whenever she found it necessary, and when she,
more perhaps than anyone else, contributed the ideas to the
part of the Act which concerns work like hers. It may be
true that, in private and casual talk she has used expressions,
perhaps in impatience, which gave occasion for Dr. Rentoul’s
idea of her scouting the use of legal control. But a single
friendly question would have elicited the fact, that what she
scouted was the cry about legal control, and the making it
binding in every case.
question then is not about the use, but about the exclusive
use of this power. In cases of danger of relatives drawing back
the child to vice and misery, our Society use it; in other cases,
they dislike it. Dr. Rentoul’s party, on the other hand,
require it in every case of permanent settlement of a child.
I had better first state —
Second letter to
Herald,
May 11, Age,
May 3.
Mr, Deakin’s
speech at
Essendon,
Herald , June
15.
REASONS WHY THE LADIES AND THE AGENT ARE AVERSE
TO THE EXCLUSIVE, OR THE TOO READY, USEOF LEGAL
POWERS.
They dislike it because Mrs. Armour and Miss Sutherland
attempted it some years ago and found it would not work.
They dislike to have legal guardianship even in cases in which
they are shut up to it by their own conviction of its necessity,
because it entails serious legal liabilities. They are against its
exclusive use because it is not needed in most cases, because
parents, however distressed, usually refuse to surrender their
legal rights, because, therefore, to insist on it in every case is
to stop more than half and the better half of the work, because
again in one class of cases it occasions a stigma on the child
that may work against him through life, because it may occasion
the annoyance of foster-parents who have as good as adopted the


child, because again it is apt to stir up rebellion in grown lads
and girls, and because it cannot prevent them running off and
staying away if they are so inclined when they get to the rest-
less age of 16.
i (1) When the Act of 1890 was made law, it was a sort of
pet of Miss Sutherland’s, as she had contributed to the framing
of it. Says Mr. Geo. Martin :—“ Some years ago Miss Suther-
land was inclined to put every child she rescued under legal
control. I opposed it then, and I oppose it now, and lam glad
that Miss Sutherland has the good sense to discriminate between
the children, or rather the parents.” The ladies of the Society
don’t want to return to an impracticable method. Her censors
may ask why didn’t Miss Sutherland tell us at once that she
had herself tried it and found it impossible? I reply, you
never asked her, and I reply further she did not tell even us,
her friends; I learned it first from Mr. Martin. And this may
cast light on her alleged reticence and evasions. These sharp
critics, by want of sympathy, have made it very difficult for
themselves to get at the truth. Meanwhile the situation is
this : —We have Dr. Rentoul and his party, Act in hand, telling
Miss Sutherland and the ladies they hadn’t studied the Act and
imposing, by a majority of votes, on her, as a new and unknown
better way, a method which she had years ago attempted till
she had to give it up.
(2) Legal guardianship has attaching to it grave and possibly
vexatious responsibilities. The Police frequently require, and
you must be ready any day to give an account of where your
ward is and how he is doing. You must be able to produce
him. If anything happens the child, if there is an appearance
of ill-treatment, if he cannot be found, you have to clear your-
self. The boy Edge, who absconded and died after being
made to wash himself in the creek, would have been a case
in point had he been under legal control ; and our friends
in the Commission’s Committee were not slow to make sharp
enquiries of Miss Sutherland, and promise more about that case.
The 18 children of whom we heard so much and so solemnly in
the Commission are 18 cases exactly in point. For though Dr.
Rentoul at first cited them as lost for want of the legal control
which he demanded for every case, he afterwards found that
they had been under legal control , and that they were not lost.
And the new Agent of the Soots Church Society found she had
inherited the legal control and the legal responsibilities, and the
consequent troubles of Miss Sutherland. If you have legal
guardianship, you must keep a sharp look out on the family
with whom your ward is settled, even if the ward is settled
at home with his own parents. They may be rooted in
one spot of the country, or they may change their residence
Miss Sutherland
tried the
exclusive use
some years ago
Legal guardian-
ship involves
legal liabilities
too heavy for
any agent to
willingly
incur.
Argus, May 3.
Age, May 3.
Herald, May 11.


over and over again, they may migrate to New Zealand
or England. All the same, you are legally responsible for
the child, and you must keep up your knowledge of his
whereabouts. You ask the families to report themselves, but
only some of them obey you ; so that though you have legal
control you may not be able to exercise it, and yet your legal
liability remains the same. Now, multiply that one case by
10, and imagine yourself being responsible to the law for ten
children of other people, to tell any day where they are and
how they are, and be able to produce them. Multiply the 10
by 10, and think of yourself being responsible for 100 children.
Multiply by 10 again, and you have the sort of responsibility
which these brethren seem determined to tie about Miss
Sutherland’s neck, if she be to go on with her work at the rate
of the five months, from November to April, and if she be to
continue in connection with the Assembly. Taking 200
children a year, she would always have on her head far more
than a thousand children, for she takes many of them early in
life, and she is responsible to the law for them till they are 18
in the oases in which she has legal guardianship. Then there
are the ladies of the Society. They may not be legally liable,
but they share their Agent’s moral responsibility. Imagine the
waste of time in keeping themselves in conscious touch with
every child. Imagine the habitual sense of responsibility, and
the occasional harassment attending such a case as that of Edge.
What ladies could be got to face the work on such terms 1 It
would be amusing, if it were not something worse, to see Dr.
Rentoul and his party gravely proposing to render “ more
acute ” the sense of responsibility in Miss Sutherland and her
ladies, though the burden is already as much as they are
capable of bearing. “ Acute ” is a well-sounding word in a
speech or paper, but the thing is not so pleasant. They who
have taken no part in such work, have in their heads an ideally
perfect standard, and they see shortcomings. But there is no
sufficient evidence that the Society and the Agent have failed
to exercise due care ; and the fear of government will not do
the work near as well as the fear of God. These ladies are in
the work for love; drive them out by insisting on police
machinery, and you may get paid officials, but you will not get
half as good service as that which is rendered by these ladies
and by Miss Sutherland out of their hearts’ devotion.
(3) Legal guardianship is not needed in most cases ; a vast i
deal of good can he done in this rescue work without it. As
said before, “ neglected ” children, or rather one section of these,
to wit, children belonging to drunkards or prostitutes or
criminals, who would be apt to find them out by and bye for
their own bad ends, these ought not to he taken hut under
It is not needed
in most cases.


legal guardianship. But then these are not the more numerous
nor the more hopeful cases. Children of destitute parents, or
of widows in poverty and ill health, an uncontrollable boy or
girl out of a more or less decent home, parentless waifs, lads or
girls out of employment—these four classes constitute the great
majority of cases that need permanent rescuing or helping;
and in these cases it rarely happens that legal control is
necessary. In other words, the vast majority of cases of
successful settlement in the country have been cases in which
legal control was not used. Mr. Geo. Martin informs me that
he has given to Miss Sutherland, through eight years, consider-
ably over 100 children. For his own satisfaction, some yep,rs
ago, he made enquiries, and was astounded at the success of her
work. The failures were only about 2 per cent., and be it
observed that only about 10 per cent, of his children
had been taken by Miss Sutherland under legal guardianship.
Take the case for instance of lads or girls out of work. For
an expense of, say half a sovereign, a lad has often been sent
away from town, where he was unable to find work, and was
in danger of becoming a loafer, to the country, where he has
grown up a good workman or honest farm hand. Why should
legal control be imposed on such a case 1 Why should such a
benefit be refused but on condition of legal control being
submitted to 1
The Rev. J. Weir, of Rushworth, says, “ the best part of the
work is done with these boys and girls that get employment in
the country.” He adds that about 70 children passed through
his hands in eight years, and he does not think legal guardian-
ship was necessary for ten of them. If Miss Sutherland finds
good homes for these various classes, if she gives them a good
start in life, why should she be overburdened with the
anxieties and waste of time involved in having to answer to the
law for them any day that their whereabouts or their persons
are demanded 1 Even in cases of drunken parents she has
sometimes done without appealing to the law, and done well
both for parents and children. A certain couple, for instance,
were given to drink. “ Now,” she said to them, “ your
salvation depends on your love to your chidren. I will keep
your children from you till the two of you have been a year
sober.” They consented. They kept sober for a year and got
back their children. He however broke out again, and sold his
child’s boots and clothing for drink. Their good angel was
soon at them again. “ Now I will keep your children from
you till you have been sober two years.” They consented.
They kept sober the prescribed term j they got their children
back, and now for a good many years they are sober, well-doing,
and happy. Of course another Agent might not have the
September
Meeting of
Assembly’s
Committee.


ascendant she possesses over minds; and she freely allows that,
where there is real danger, it should be guarded against by
obtaining legal powers. But on the other hand, that is the
sort of Agent God has given us, and waits to see what we shall
do with her. The present point is, that this anxious weight of
legal guardianship is not necessary in most cases. A child,
remembering the wormwood and the gall of Melbourne, is
quieted at once, when most rebellious, by a threat of getting
Miss Sutherland to take him away. A mother may occasion-
ally, a father scarcely ever, finds out his child’s foster home,
when this is hidden from the parents for fear of their drawing
back the child to vice and misery. If at any time the danger
should arise, there is nothing to prevent the Society obtaining
a committal, and so control. But the fact of experience is, that
the children have been kept safe without legal measures.
(4) The exclusive use of legal control would stop half, and the \
more hopeful half, of the work. Parents object to surrender their
legal rights over their children, so that you can’t get the children,
however destitute, if you insist on taking legal guardianship of
them. Even vicious parents sometimes refuse ; and in most l
cases decent self-respecting people, however pressed by poverty,
find it sadly against the grain. “ They ought to be forced.”
But they won’t he forced, and between their obstinacy and our
worse obstinacy we let the children suffer. It is true, and it
did not need to be pointed out to Miss Sutherland, that she can
go with a parent who is willing before a magistrate, and accept
—she can accept, she tells me, without going—a signed transfer
of guardianship. The thing can be done privately, and no
stigma of Police Court about it; but parents, as a rule, are not
willing when they know the real nature of the transaction.
Such a case as this happens : —A boy is ill-used by his step-
mother and half-brothers; after family quarrels he runs away
from home, associates with boys like himself, is afraid after
some days to return home, sleeps in empty houses, and lives by
his wits. Lately, Miss Sutherland got hold of such a case, and
offered to find the boy a good home, but the father would not
have it at the price of a surrender of his rights. Also, within
some weeks of my writing, a widow with three children wanted
our Agent to take one of them, but went into a fit of weeping
when she heard of surrender of her legal powers, and Miss
Sutherland could not press the point. At the only monthly
meeting of ladies which I have attended, I saw lately a widow
woman with two children before them. She thought if they
could be taken for a year or so she might be able by that time
to undertake them again. Her tumour-swollen neck, mean-
while, did not give much promise of renewed health. When
asked if she would give up the legal guardianship of the child-
To insist on it in
every case is to
stop the most
hopeful half
of the work.
Parents won’t
consent.


ren, she wanted to know what that meant, and being told, she
thought she would rather keep them, so the ladies were con-
strained to board them temporarily with the mother. At the
time, some years ago, when Miss Sutherland was strict for legal
control, Mr. Martin tried many mothers in vain, and when he
could not promise for certain that the Society would permit
letters or wages to be sent her by her child, or allow her to see
her child, then his usual experience was, that the mother would
give the Society no such legal power—“ I have kept them so
far, and I’ll struggle on to the end. I’ll die first!”
It is argued, however, that the parents’ surrender of legal
rights need not sunder parent and child any longer than the
parents’ necessity lasts, and parents need not be frightened by
the thought of any longer separation than that requires. But
the case stands thus ;• —The foster-parents acquire rights ; aflfec
tion springs up between them and their adopted children ; the
tastes of the children change ; the natural parents may not be
desirable company for their children; their condition may be
one of misery ; in short, various reasons may move the Society
to refuse the child’s return to, or even communication with, the
pai-ent. Now, if legal control be obtained, the Society has the
legal power to refuse till the child is 18 years of age ; and the
parent, quick-witted enough in such a matter, dreads to give
that legal power to the Society, and refuses you the child. If
you waive the point of transfer of guardianship you may secure
the child, and obtain the desired separation for the child’s
safety by a little management and firmness, or hardness, if you
will, towards the parent as time passes. In short, with or with-
out transfer of guardianship, the separation of parent and child
may he for many years ; but the demand on the parent to
surrender his legal guardianship brings home the possibility so
sharply that few are willing to part with their children on such
terms. They will rather see them starve, or beg, or steal, or
grow up in idleness, ignorance, wildness, or in gaol. Dr. Ben-
toul’s 18 lost children were, as he now confesses, all under the
Scots Church Society’s legal control, and yet they were all
restored to their parents, which shows, he argues, that transfer
of guardianship need not make a long separation. I have ad-
mitted that it need not in every instance, but have shown that
that does not alter the case ; and I have to add, that the 18
were really temporary cases, being, except two boys, all little
children, and that it was a mistake to have taken legal control
for them.
It has also been argued, that the parent need not be so
frightened about transfer of guardianship, for a Society can,
if it will, divest itself of the guardianship when the parent
wishes. “If it will,” is, however, a serious condition, and the
Answers
answered.
See page 28.


power itself is unknown, so far as I hear, to the persons who
have had longest experience in this work. There is, indeed,
one solitary phrase in the Act, in Section 64, “ unless such
child is sooner discharged,” and sure enough, our censors
pounced on it, and told the ladies with Miss Sutherland that
they had evidently not studied the Act. But the answer was,
and is, that the Act does not explain that point, it has it only
as a parenthesis, and it furnishes no machinery for working
that result. It may be that a Society could apply to the
Governor-in-Oouncil to divest it of its legal responsibility in a
case; but it is also plain, that this is not a thing that could be done
on such a scale as to bring many children back to their parents
out of foster-homes, even if this were otherwise just and desirable.
(5) Where there is no parent, there can be no transfer of j
guardianship. The parent may have deserted, may be in
prison, may be dead. A parentless waif must be charged
before a police court with being a neglected child, and be
committed, that is to say, if you want legal control of him.
In this case, the stigma of a police court must be incurred.
The child is remanded for enquiry, goes to gaol or the
industrial schools, or to the Agent’s home. Miss Sutherland
has to attend a second time on the day fixed for trying the
case. This would involve a serious inroad on her time, and
must be repeated every time she takes in hand that kind of
case. Then the fact of committal is sure to be scented out by
the child’s mates, and to make him a sort of gaol-bird to them.
Twenty, thirty years pass, and he is an elder of the Church, or
a candidate for a seat on a town council, and the old story is
revived, with aggravations. It may be true that many in
this country occupy excellent positions in society who were
industrial school or boarded-out children of the State. They
had it in them to rise. But these persons would probably
give a great deal to have that memory wiped out. There is
no need of any such memory in the case of the parentless
waifs we rescue. We don’t need legal control of them, as there
are no bad relatives to dread.
I named some other objections to the exclusive use of legal
control, but I need not now repeat or enlarge on them, except
to say that foster-parents often practically, though not with
legal process or effect, adopt the children, and might keenly
resent the visit of any representative of the law. And the
child, when under legal control, sometimes waits impatiently
till the nineteenth birthday arrives, and at once is off to where
he or she is unknown. Be it remarked, that they do not
usually feel or act like that when there is no grip of law on
them. As Paul says in a parallel case, “ the law is added that
the offence may abound.”
In the case of a
parentless
waif,the police-
court stigma
must beaffixed,
that is, if you
insist 'on legal
control.


THE REASONS GIVEN FOR PRESSING LEGAL CONTROL IN
EVERY INSTANCE ARE THESE:—
(I) “The children’s position in families would be much
more secure.” That has been sufficiently answered. Those
who know the work testify that the children, in the vast
majority of cases, stay in their homes without legal control.
To the remark of Mr. George Martin already quoted : “ I do
not know of any work in the city or suburbs that will bear
comparison with Miss Sutherland’s for results,” I may add the
record from year to year by the Scots Church District Asso-
ciation, of their “ high appreciation of the excellent work
performed by Miss Sutherland.”
[ (2) “ The ladies and the Agent, if they knew the law was
i watching them, would keep a sharper look-out on the children
■in their foster-homes.” That, too, has been answered. The
work has been well done, and it is unjust to insinuate to the
contrary. To bring in the fear of the police as a motive to
quicken the diligence and care of Miss Sutherland and these
ladies, is—the ladies have requested me to strike out the rest
of the sentence.
i (3) “ Dreadful things happen, and it is folly and worse to
dispense with the legal powers you might possess.” But we do
not dispense with legal control in cases where it is needed.
We use it where there is danger from the parents or connexions.
And besides, legal control will not prevent things from hap-
pening at times.
(4) Mr. Brett and Mr. Miller, Government Officials, urged
on Dr. Eentoul in the most earnest way the use in every case
of legal control, and hold that otherwise the settlement of
children in the country is of no use. Now the Officials
of Government naturally think of the criminal and semi-
’ criminal side of the matter, and in reference to the children of
drunkards, prostitutes, and criminals, Miss Sutherland and the
Society agree with them to some extent, but hold that in their
own kind of work, you must deal with every case on its merits.
Years of experience must teach you, no hard and fast line can
be drawn ; certainly not the line Dr. Eentoul would prescribe.
They have always done what he demands, so far as there is
reason in his demands. The Professor, however, made the
mistake of going to the wrong quarter for information. He
confounded a work of motherly and Christian charity with the
necessary severities of the State, and he has caused himself and
us trouble by applying to the one work the methods suitable to
the other.
(5) Dr. Eentoul also argued that the other Societies used
legal control in every case. The Scots Church Society, since
“ Children
settled more
securely.”
“The ladies and
wouhfneed to
keep a sharper
look-out.
“Dreadfulthings
happen."
“Government
officials urge
L V*vaW, May s.
„ , „„
See also “Reports
of inspector of
institutions
1804.” ’
“Other Societies
case.” m BTery


Miss Sutherland left, had improved their methods by adopting .
this exclusive use of legal power. This may be, but Mr. W. G.
Brett himself complains that the Act is too little used by
“Societies and private persons.” His figures for 1893 show
397 voluntary admissions for the year, as against 56 cases in
in which legal powers were obtained. If it be as Dr. Rentoul
says, where have those figures of Mr. Brett come from 1 Mr.
Brett himself infers that the Act has been “ superseded.” But
even if the Scots Church Society and the others adopt that
method, why should ours do so when Mrs. Armour and Miss
Sutherland tried it years ago and found it an undesirable
method, and when there are such solid reasons for their own
view 1
I have placed side by side the reasons for limiting the use of
legal control, and the reasons urged for the exclusive use of it,
and it is for the Assembly to get any further light they can on
the matter, and judge between Miss Sutherland’s method and
its rival. For our part we cannot consent even to the more
moderate proposal of Mr. Yule and Mr. Cairns, that legal
control be the rule, and want of it the exception. We hold
that doing without it should be the rule, and using it the
exception.
Before leaving this point of legal control, I want to say
that common sense and ordinary courtesy ought surely to move
us to expect that these good ladies, self-trained under Mrs.
Armour, and living for the work, would be right in their
methods, and to feel that our business for awhile, till we get
experience in the work, is not to be severe censors and hasty
innovators, but learners and sympathetic observers.
We on our side have tried to learn, and have gone to the
right quarter for instruction. I have picked my information
as to this central matter of legal control out of the mouths of a
number of practical people who knew by experience how to do
the work, but had never articulated their views in a systematic
statement. For anything I know, you have here the first
printed statement of the kind in this colony, or elsewhere.
Herald , May 8.
“ Reports of the
Inspector of
Charitable
Institutions,
1894.”
Who was more
likely toknow?
AS TO PRESBYTERIAN CHILDREN AND HOMES.
The Commission “ direct the Society always to give the :
preference to Presbyterian children.” There is no harm in
that except in the saying of it. As a matter of course our
Society has done what every other society does, give the
preference to children of their own denomination. But that
need not be proclaimed to the world, as we appeal to the general
public and they have responded liberally, and the more especially
Presbyterian
children first.
Proceedings of
Commission,
1894, p. 14.


as in our case choice seldom or never arises between one child
and another, there being always homes ready to receive any
child Miss Sutherland wants to send.
The Commission also enjoin “to send no children to other
than Presbyterian homes.” The fact is that most of the homes
for our Society’s children are Presbyterian, and there was no
real occasion for enacting that. That enactment does not
represent the calm judgment of the Commission, certainly not
the mind of the Church. No Wesleyan, Baptist, Anglican to
get one of the children 1 Our critics, who got that small-minded
injunction passed, have had themselves to widen it out in the
interpretation, to permit of persons of whatever denomination
if they attend our services. The evidence of heat and haste
i appear as elsewhere so here. The Commission were misled to
enjoin contradictory orders: legal control in every case and
Presbyterian homes in every case. But the Act of 1890, which
gives legal control, requires children to be sent only to their
own religion. “ Child not to be committed . . . so as to
be educated in a different religion.” So that, if you send only
to Presbyterian homes, you must send only Presbyterian
children. But none of us, except the Presbytery of Melbourne
South, ever intended that. Miss Sutherland was reported as
saying she was ashamed of the Commission requiring the
children rescued to be Presbyterian. Whether she said so or
not, there was some reason for our all being ashamed, and
much more has arisen since. Mr. Tait says that “neither in
Presbytery nor in Commission was there any proposal to limit
the children rescued to Presbyterians.” But he admits that
his own Presbytery’s recommendation was to that effect “in
the meantime.” Dr, Robinson says, “The Church never took
any steps to limit the children to those of Presbyterian parents.”
Not knowingly, I admit, but in fact the Commission’s resolu-
tion, as we have seen, has the effect of so limiting the children.
Dr. Rentoul argues that the resolution moves exactly along the
lines of Miss Sutherland’s petition, and of my statement
accompanying the reference of the Presbytery of Melbourne
North ; and he thinks it “exceeding strange” we should assail
the things we pled for. Suffice it to say that we did not agree
to rescue only Presbyterian children when we pled that “ a
large and increasing number of children of Presbyterian
parentage ” needed rescuing; and we did not propose only
Presbyterian homes when we stated that most of the slum
children had been sent to Presbyterian homes. That there is
a special duty to our own denomination’s perishing children
does not forbid a duty to other children. That we find
Presbyterian homes good for them, is not to say we will send
them to no others.
Only
Presbyterian
homes. Ib.
The Commission
enjoined
contradictory
orders.
Argue, May 9.
Argus , May 8.
Herald, May 8.


AS TO SUPERVISION AND RELIGIOS INSTRUCTION OF
CHILDREN UNDERTAKEN BY OUR SOCIETY.
The Presbytery of Melbourne North recommended to the
Commission “ that the Rules be so framed that more efficient
oversight should be ensured as regards the children’s moral and
spiritual education.” And a statement has been recently made,
that “ there is no evidence before us to show that provision is
made for their religious training.” Now, we had two printed
Rules with that view. Here they are ; —“ (1) The Agent shall,
as far as possible, visit all children under the care of the
Society, and report to the Ladies’ Committee on each child’s
conduct, and the fulfilment of the conditions on which the
child was placed. (2) The Society shall endeavour to organise
local committees in the several districts in which children are
placed, to supervise the children. The local committee shall
report at least once a year to the Ladies’ Committee regarding
the conduct and condition of each child.” Our Rules for appli-
cants and foster-parents prescribe—(l) That “applicants for
children must produce a satisfactory recommendation from their
clergyman.” (2) That children must be sent to school accord-
ing to the Education Act. (3) That children of a suitable age
must be sent to Sabbath School and place of worship, if reason-
ably near, and have religious training from foster-parents.
Dr. Rentoul told the Commission, in May, that these provisions
of ours were “quite new.” “They have stolen,” he said, “our
thunder.” My reply was not listened to ; perhaps it will he
now. All our Rules, as printed, were approved on December
19th of last year ; had Dr. Rentoul not gone out of our
meeting that day, he would have known that • they were
printed immediately after. What misled him, I suppose, was :
Mr. Stewart’s putting things of that sort into his proposed
deliverance, in order to compete with the amendments. No
doubt he did so, because he saw the Society’s Rules had not
been looked at. For, be it noted, our Rules, though in the
Business-book, which was in every hand, were not read in the
Commission, and suggestions and corrections were proposed
which ought never to have been mooted had onr Rules and
Report been considered.
Rules can do nothing without persons on the spot to put
them in force. Miss Sutherland does the best thing possible
for anyone in the circumstances to secure religious training for
the children. She sends them to some of the best homes in
the country (farmers and well-to-do people chiefly of our own
Church), and she does her best through local friends and her
own personal visits to superintend them. In her own home, at
the Assembly Hall, she and her assistant teach them to say
Proceedings of
Commission.
Appendix
p. xiii.
See our Rules,
Proceedings of
Commission,
Appendix,
pp. xii-xiv.
Proceedings of
Commission,
pp. 8, 12.


their prayers, and grace before and after meat, and hold a little
Bible Class every morning, A lady friend tells me she has
seen half a dozen of them on their knees for their prayers
before going to bed. If sent for some weeks to another home,
the home is always one approved by Miss Sutherland. From
this, you can judge how much truth and religion is in the report
circulated, that Miss Sutherland “makes no prevision for the
religious teaching of the children.”
Dr. Rentoul in
Commission,
Age, May 3.
I MAY BRIEFLY SUM UP THE CORRECTIONS URGED UPON
OUR METGODS, AND THE ANSWERS WE MAKE.
(1) “ Legal control.” Answer—By all means, we have used
it when necessary.
(2) “ Receive children only under legal control.” Answer
This rule would exclude most of the most hopeful and many of
the neediest cases, and would burden the Society and its
manager intolerably with work, waste of time, and legal
liabilities. This rule, imposed by the Commission, will have
to be rescinded if the work is to go on.
(3) “ Legal control the rule, want of it the exception.”
Answer- —This, though more moderate, labours under the same
objection.
(4) “Presbyterian children first.” By all means; we had
that for our practice ; but we thought it best to make no printed
rule to that effect for the reasons stated on page 23.
(5) “In the meantime, only Presbyterian children.” Answer
—An excellent sedative, if the purpose is to give the work its
quietus.
(6) “No children to other than Presbyterian homes.”
Answer —This rule, imposed by the Commission, is too narrow
for the real mind of the Church ; and also inconsistent with
your own requirement of legal guardianship in every case.
(7) “ Rules be framed for efficient over-sight and religious
training.” Answer—We had such rules printed in the second
month of our existence.
(S) “Avoid crushing expenses.” Answer The Agent’s
salary is £lOO ; the children’s and the Agent’s fares are not
charged on the railways; the people are not paid for taking
the children ; our report showed for the six months a balance of
income over expenditure.
After this review, I think I am justified in saying that there
was not one suggestion as to methods of any value made in the
Commission or in the Recommendations of Presbytery, but was
anticipated in our printed rules or our practice. The real
changes proposed were no improvements, and the two adopted
Proceedings of
Commission,
p. 14.
Presbytery of
Melbourne
South.
Presbytery of
Melbourne
North.
Presbytery of
Melbourne
North.
The outcry
against us at
the Commis-
sion ; why was
it?


by the Commission, misled clamour, will have to be rescinded
if the work is to go on.
Now, be it observed, that it was in the name of wrong methods
that we were faulted and bitterly reproached at the Commission.
“ The question was one of methods ” even as late as May 26,
when the combination that dominated for a time the Commis-
sion’s Committee published in The Argus their minutes. My
reader can judge whose were the wrong methods, whose was
the false confidence, and who are to blame for the trouble and
reproach into which the Church has been oast.
Argus, May 26.
CHAPTER IV .— ARE MISS SUTHERLAND THE LADIES
OF THE SOCIETY TO CONTINUE TO WORK UNDER THE
ASSEMBLY ?
I put these two as one question. For the ladies have never
for a moment hesitated as to which of the two to choose, if
they have to choose between working with Miss Sutherland
and working in connection with the Assembly. The Members
of Assembly ought also to take notice that the question of
methods involves this question. For if they at their meeting
in November re-irnpose the two injunctions of the Commission,
they will make it impossible for the Agent and the Society to
work under them. lam authorised to make that statement.
Several of these ladies left the Scots Church Society along with
Miss Sutherland, and some before her, for the same end as she
had in view, a larger and heartier work. Three of them have
been with her in the work from the start, 14 years ago. I
have heard the ladies of the Society called malcontents. Mal-
contents with what, pray 1 Those who belonged to the old
Society were discontented only with what they thought the
coldness of it. Those who belonged to the Scots Church stuck
to it all through the Strong and Dods disturbances, like Miss
Sutherland herself, who would be welcomed and employed, I
believe, by other denominations if she spoke the word. She
and they may, with better reason, be called the school of Mrs.
Armoui’, the Christian soul who used to move the Scots
Church Society, and whose counsel more than anything else in
that congregation obtained peace between it and the Church at
large. But the majority of the ladies of our Society had never
anything to do with the old Society. And, to prevent further
misrepresentation, I may say that I have ascertained, and can
give, the Church connection of every lady of the Society.
Of the three gentlemen elected by the ladies as members,
one attends our Church at East St. Kilda, one is a member of
Mr. Chapman’s congregation, and occasionally attends our ser-
The loyalty of
these ladies.


vices at Camberwell, and the third is a journalist, who, having
assisted to start the work in the Scots Church, and being glad
to have this point of contact with the Church, desired to be
a member of the Society, and promised to aid the work. Be it
understood that these gentlemen have, by their membership,
no power over - the Society, or its work, for the Society in its
present connexion is under the control of the Assembly’s
Committee.
> Mr. Stewart is severely blamed for not preventing friction
with the ladies of the Scots Church Society by getting new
members for our own Society. If necessary, we can explain
about the friction. Meanwhile, I say that the majority of the
ladies are already fresh blood ; and I say further, that Mr.
Stewart is the only man in the Church v)ho proposed the intro-
duction of fresh blood into our Society. He moved in the
Presbytery as early as April 2, “ to request Ministers to invite
ladies interested in the work, and willing to assist, to send in
their names to Miss Lawes, Hon. Secretary of Ladies’
Committee, 167 Collins Street, Melbourne.” The very men
who now blame him for not doing it were the men to throw
out his motion, this clause of it with the rest. “Ho was the
only man,” I say, with this exception, that at the very start,
in my statement accompanying the Reference of the Presbytery
to the Assembly we had first among our “Suggested Details,”
3 “ That each congregation in city and suburbs elect and depute
one lady to represent them ”in the Society. No notice was
taken of that suggestion ; but now, because under discourage-
ment we have done nothing in that direction, our Convener
must be bitterly assailed for the omission.
Mr. Stewart, like
King David,
has many
afflictions.
Here is one of
them.
Proceedings of
General
Assembly 1893,
appendix, page
x.
WAS MISS SUTHERLAND CARELESS ABOUT THOSE EIGHTEEN
CHILDREN ?
Argus, May 3.
The A rgus reporter, who wrote as Dr. Rentoul spoke in the
Commission, has it that he said ; —“The report of Mr. Brett,
the Inspector of Charities, showed that eighteen of the children
rescued by Miss Sutherland while connected with the Scots
Church Society had been utterly lost, and the police could find
them.” \Age —“The police were endeavouring to trace them.”]
“The Commission knew what that meant. It was not to be
supposed that Miss Sutherland’s methods in the new Society
would be different from what they were in the old. She had said,
‘ I don’t care that for your law,’ and eighteen precious children
had been lost through want of oversight,” There are one or two
immaterial slips in that report, but it gives the substance of
what was said at this point, and the Age report bears it out.
Age, May 3.


The matter stands thus—These eighteen cases were by rights l
off Miss Sutherland’s hands, even while she remained Agent of
the Scots Church Society. They had been all restored to their
parents one after another at dates between April 1890 and
September 1893, on due reason shown by the parents to the
Society. Now, it was the custom of that Society to write off
such returned children as “ out of control of Society,” and it
was their habit to make no more enquiries after them, unless
something special emerged calling for enquiry. In these
circumstances, it was not requisite for Miss Sutherland to keep
a sharp look-out on the whereabouts of those eighteen children’s
parents but for one thing, to which I will immediately refer.
They were “ temporary cases,” children taken for brief periods .
while mothers were in hospitals, and so forth, and Miss
Sutherland might well think them off her hands by the custom
of the Society. But the one thing was a bar : the Society had
obtained legal control of those children. It was a mistake, but
it was done, and Miss Sutherland was legally responsible for
those children till she resigned her situation ; then her
successor became by the Act the heir of her responsibilities.
So the new Agent had to know where those children
were, and how they were doing, even though they had
been .restored to their own parents. She sought them out,
but in these eighteen cases residences had been changed, and
the old addresses in the book were of no use. Very well,
their old Agent could have at once told the Scots Church
Society eleven of the new addresses had they asked properly
for them, and she soon after gave fourteen of them, the
remainder requiring more time as the mothers were domestic
servants, and changed about. Even in these cases, which she
had a right to think she was done with, she had been keeping
in touch with the children. She was in no sense careless, and,
as she says, the children were in no sense “ lost.” If she was
not careless
Miss Slither
land’s letter to
Convener of
Assembly’s
Committee,
May 14.
Herald, May 4.
Herald, May 11.
PERHAPS SHE WAS DISCOURTEOUS TO HER OLD SOCIETY
Let us see. Soon after resigning her connection with them,
she said she would be most happy to furnish them with any
information in her possession as to their wards who had been
her former charge. When their new Agent was unable to find
the eighteen children at the old addresses, her course was
surely to apply to Miss Sutherland, to see if she had the new
addresses. Instead of that, she or her Society applied else-
where, and the first word Miss Sutherland hears is from the
Hon. Secretary of the Sub-Committee of the Scots Church
Society : —“ lam directed ... at the suggestion of the
Dr. Reutoul’s
second letter
to Herald,
May 11.


Superintendent of Police, to ask you for any pai-ticulars as to
the whereabouts, &c., respecting children in the enclosed list.”
Miss Sutherland replied that she would supply the Super-
intendent of Police, and also their Committee with particulars
concerning the said children, if they would kindly forward her
the committal papers so as to refresh her memory. In reply,
these papers were denied her, but “all the particulars and
information ” in them were copied for her, in hope they might
be sufficient. Miss Sutherland says that all the particulars
were not copied ; and that she could understand the committal
papers as nobody else could (for they were her own.) She
therefore declined to meddle with the matter ; and while she
thus delayed the Commission came, and Dr. Rentoul, not
knowing the facts, persuaded himself and a too facile majority
that the children were lost, and that Miss Sutherland had
been guilty of systematic carelessness, which reflected both on
her and her methods. 1 have shown she was not careless in
this matter, and also that the discourtesy was on the other
side. She bore the slight conveyed in their going to the police
and telling her so before applying to her, and only broke off
the correspondence when again the slight was put upon her of
denying her the sight of her own old committal papers, in
order to her furnishing the information asked of her. Another
case of alleged discourtesy has been pressed against her ; that,
too, we shall if necessary explain. Now I come to
My notes from
copies and
originals of
the corres-
pondence.
THE BILL FOR 3s. 9d.
Probably others beside my respected friend were moved to
vote against us by Mr. Marshall holding up the small bill in
his fingers in the Commission. It was ocular demonstration
of Miss Sutherland’s character. The charge was that though
she had engaged to co-operate kindly, she had interfered with
one of the Scots wards, and then sent in a bill for 3.5. 9d. of
expenses. I have heard Mr. Marshall since then admit that it
was a kindness in Miss Sutherland to entertain Scots wards
for a night, but, he added, she had put the fool’s cap on it all by
that bill for 3s. 9d. The case was this, as I have learned from
the two persons who had to do with it. A ward of the Scots
Ladies’ Society settled in a country town went off her head,
and the father of the family rushed in terror to my informant.
This lady, not knowing Miss Stewart’s address, telegraphed to
Miss Sutherland, whose assistant went to the Spencer Street
Station and met the girl, and took her, about 8 p.m., to the
Assembly Hall home. (The Agent of the Soots Church Society
leaves her office in Russell Street about 5 p.m. I am told.)
Next morning she sent her across to the Scots Church offices.


The expenses were put down at 3s. 'Jd., not including mv
informant’s telegram, and charged to the Scots Ladies’ Society.
The charge was a just one. Miss Sutherland’s housekeeper is
allowed expenses by our own Society for every child she
entertains. Miss Sutherland’s salary of £lOO a year, plainly
does not provide for such expenses ! What then was so
peculiar and offensive in this case of the bill for 3s. 9d. 1 This
was its peculiar offence—that among scores of children, wards
of the Scots Church, entertained by Miss Sutherland, this was
the only one ever charged for. There scarcely passes a week
without bringing to Miss Sutherland several wards of the
Scots Church, whom she has to entertain for the night ; and
though Mr. Marshall calls that a kindness, he resents Miss
Sutherland’s assistant even once charging. He knows better
than to pay this little bill for 3s. 9d. ; he rather turns it into
votes in the Commission. At length the bill has been with-
drawn by Miss Sutherland’s assistant, for fear apparently of
Mr. Marshall’s genius for finance.
But there has been
A SUCCESSION OF CHARGES AGAINST MISS SUTHERLAND,
BROUGHT BY MR. MARSHALL,
on behalf of the Scots Ladies’ Society. I have been present
when the Commission’s Committee heard some of them. They
were charges of interference with Scots wards. They were
small matters magnified. Miss Sutherland had been apropos
of some such charges made previous to the Commission enjoined
by the Board of Reference not to interfere with her former
wards. And it is certain, that the connection with the
Assembly will be intolerable for Miss Sutherland and the
Society if this injunction be worked as it has been. Either
they are to be trusted and honoured and not molested, or the
connection must cease. I have seen Mr. Marshall introduce
the present Agent of his Society to the Commission’s Committee
to confirm his accusations against “their own Agent;” I saw
her received with smiles and courtesy, though brought on so
ungracious an errand ; I saw Miss Sutherland appear at the
same meeting to answer the charges, and received as if she were
a culprit before a police magistrate and justices, each more
stern than another. The truth is this :—Miss Sutherland has
through many years, been as a mother to these children and
young people in hundreds, and they look to her as to a mother,
and she feels for them as a mother. She has lived for them
immensely more than most mothers live for their own children.
The Colony knows and feels that, if we don’t. She can, at the
bidding of no Committee, strip herself of these relations and


mutual affections. She cannot bring herself not to know them
or do them little turns when they call on her. She lias indeed
driven them from her door to avoid being again accused
before and censured by the Commission’s Committee. The
children cannot understand it, they think she has changed her
nature, and ceased to be the woman she was, they know
nothing of Scots Society or its new Agent, they knew and
know Miss Sutherland. The effort to please her censors has
been to this extent made, and will not be repeated by her—
she will obey nature, her own heart, and Christ, come what
will of her Assembly connection. She is earnestly desirous to
avoid doing anything to injure or molest the Soots Ladies’
Society, their Agent, and their relation to her own old wards;
she has done nothing intentionally to offend them, and she
will do her best; but this injunction of non-interference must
not continue to be used, as it has been, to humble and harass
her.
I consented to second a motion to enjoin more caution on
her in one case, on condition that two of its severe words were
omitted. But I have not ceased to protest that, in my opinion,
the Commission’s Committee have meddled with the adminis-
tration of this work without any authority, and meddled in a
manner not conducive to peace or good feeling.
It is freely urged that
SHE IS SO HEADSTRONG, ABRUPT, AND UNCEREMONIOUS THAT
YOU CAN'T WORK WITH HER,
or at any rate, without losing your freedom and self-respect.
But Mrs. Armour could work with her and have her living in
her house, Mrs. John Simson and the late Miss Bennett of
“The Hurst” worked harmoniously with her for many years,
the ladies of the Assembly’s Society delight to work with her,
some of them have had many years’ experience of her. Yet
these ladies have not lost their self-respect or power to judge
independently; and they would smile to hear ministers agreeing
among themselves that Miss Sutherland believes in a Committee
of one. Mr. Stewart is credited with a will of his own, yet he
gets on well with her. The town missionaries have gladly
worked with her; the police honour her ; the magistrates will
do anything in reason for her; above all, the children’s hearts
are won by her, and the parents (though often she has to
harden herself against them for the children’s sake) bless her.
The curious thing is, all who seriously engage in the real work
along with her praise her. I asked a lady of our Society, who
was also one of the oldest members of the other, “Was there
ever any trouble between the ladies of the Soots Society
Workers can
work with her.


and Miss Sutherland?” The answer was, “Never with the
workers.” The workers were in the majority, so that cavils
and questions caused no trouble, when raised by one or two
who took part in the meetings but not in the real work. Mrs.
Armour, however, falling ill, and the old workers getting
dispersed, Miss Sutherland and her remaining friends found
some friction from those who wanted things done always in
some other way, till the end came. No doubt, like Dr. John
G. Paton, like John M'Neill, who so edified us of late, like his
namesake, our own John Mac Neil, and like all original and
powerful workers, Miss Sutherland has a mind of her own.
But that mind is so beneficent, and so well able to carry out its
purpose, that she deserves to have scope and indulgence, even
though at times she, unintentionally, offends in minor matters.
Her tender handling of those poor creatures who are to
others only “ tag rag and bobtail,” and whose repulsiveness she
ought to know better than almost anybody else, her thoughtful
care of the aged poor, the sick poor, the bereaved, the unem-
ployed, her humane labours, various and incessant, beyond
what anyone can trace, may well be a garment in the hand of
charity to cover greater faults than any she can be justly
charged with. We have heard a great deal about her
insubordination in her former connection, and many a warning
that we shall not be able to keep her in order, but the odd
thing is, that the Soots Society continued to employ her till the
day she, of her own free will, resigned. At the Commission,
she was described as not caring a straw for our Church laws.
I have to say that, at that time, she had given no occasion in
her relation to the Assembly’s Committee of superintendence
for any such account of her. If in private she has used any
expression to that effect, she was probably speaking to those
whose want of sympathy, and, perhaps, overbearing and
meddling, provoked her to say what she did not mean for the
Church but for them. After the Commission, she made
Age, May 3.
Argua May 3
THE BUNINYONG REMARK.
which has been described as a gross act of insubordination,
deserving of dismissal, by persons who, to put it mildly, seem to
have lost all sense of proportion.
“ Miss Sutherland said she wished to put herself right in the
eyes of the audience regarding some of the statements made at
the Presbyterian Assembly. In the'first place, she would say
that the cause of the whole trouble was her denouncing men
holding office in the Church, who were at the same time
receiving rents from houses used for immoral purposes.” This
is the Argus report, which has been made the basis of the angry
Argus , May 8.


criticism, the cross-examinations, and threats which have
assailed our Agent since May 8. These are the “ allegations
at Buninyong against Officers of the Church,” which the
minute of Scots Church Session declare “ were utterly
groundless,” and which the minute of the Presbytery of
Melbourne North describes as a “general and sweeping
charge,” “ reckless and unwarrantable,” “ intemperate and cal-
umnious,” “ her conduct in casting such aspersions upon the good
name of the Church ”... being “ deserving of censure.”
In reply to these reproaches, I assert that her remark at
Buninyong had a definite and express reference, that in that
reference there was some ground for it, and that the main fact
is well known to be true, and not denied by the parties most
interested.
Argus , Aug. 17.
Argus, Aug. 15.
THE REFERENCE WAS TO "SOME STATEMENTS."
(1) The remark had a particular reference expressed in the
Argus report, and expressed by the speaker in words not
reported. Look at the first sentence of the report. She “ wished
to put herself right ” about what ? “ About some of the state-
ments made in the Presbyterian Assembly,” meaning the
Commission. Not about the action of the Commission, not
even about all that was said of her there, still less about the
Church’s treatment of her, but about some of the statement*.
In the next sentence she gives the cause of the trouble, “ of the
whole trouble,” if you will. What trouble was that ? The
thing she referred to in the previous sentence, “ some of the
statements made in the Commission;” it is these statements
she proposed to account for, and these statements she calls
“ the trouble.” We have no right to go back of the Argus
report, unless we know facts independently of it. But here the
report shuts us out from doing so, for it makes her say :
“First of all . . the cause, &c.,” showing she joined on
“ the trouble ’’ immediately to the “ statements ” of the previous
sentence.
There is, however, something which the Argxis report did not
contain, but which she added, to the effect that a year or so
earlier she had spoken at the Town Hall at a meeting of the
Vigilance Society, and asked what was the good of our going
on with work among these unfortunate girls when men holding
office in a fashionable Church, not far from the Town Hall,
and going round with the collecting plate, were owners of
houses used for immoral purposes? One of the managers of
Buninyong witnesses she said she herself had seen one of them
going round with the plate. The reference then was not
general, but particular and express, and so, even on the


showing of the Argus report, which has been used so much
against our Agent. She had been asked privately before
stepping on the platform what was the meaning of the strong
language against her the previous week, and her reply was
repeated by her on beginning her address.
“ Some of the statements made ” in the Commission :
(2) She had in her mind Mr. Marshall’s strong language and
evident strong feeling against her in the Commission. She
thought of earlier manifestations of that feeling. We now know
what Miss Sutherland knew before. In the light of the Scots
Church Session’s minute, and of her answers to the Commission’s
Committee, we now know that if Mr. Marshall had left generali-
ties and said what he had in his mind, he would among other
things have said in the Commission—“ not only has she been
insubordinate and generally objectionable, but she has
aspersed the character of honoured members of our Board of
Management, and imputed foul things to these gentlemen who
are deserving of sympathy and are above all suspicion.” Had
he spoken out, he would have accounted for the vehemence and
determination he displayed at the Commission and previously.
This was the view in which she spoke at Buninyong. “ Some
of the statements in the Commissionthese were Mr.
Marshall’s statements as she meant the remark. She thought
also that he had influenced other speakers. She had heard
Professor Eentoul speak of things which must have come from
the Scots Church Society, presumably through Mr. Marshall.
She had heard him in the Commission proclaim 18 Scots
Church wards as lost, and refer to 60 other Scots wards in the
Kilmore district, of whom the Kilmore minister “ had no
knowledge whatever;” she had heard him declare that the
Scots Church Society were determined to take no children for
the future but under legal guardianship. She had heard
Professor Harper speak in the Commission with, as she believed,
a prejudice against her, and an equally groundless prejudice in
favour of the Scots Church Society. Rightly or wrongly, in
either case naturally, she inferred that Mr. Marshall’s informa-
tion and influence reappeared in these other speakers. She
repudiates, however, having used the words, “ the cause of the
whole trouble.” She knew there were other minds at work
besides Mr. Marshall’s, and this paper shows sufficient evidence
that Dr. Rentoul’s party had views of their own in addition to
Mr. Marshall’s, misleading them, and through them, the
Commission. At the same time, be it remembered that in the
Argus report, not the Commission’s action, but “ some state-
ments made in the Commission ” were the “ trouble ” which she
proposed to account for.
Argus, May 26.
Argus, Aug. 17.
Age , May 3.
Argue, May 3.
Age, May 3.


(3) The remark, therefore, had no need to be understood as
generally applicable to the Commission or the Church. There
is no force, unless it be will force, or the power of imagination,
in the contention that the two things taken together— (a) her
ascribing some of the strong language in the Commission, or
“ the trouble,” to her having denounced certain house-owners,
( b ) her describing these men as “ holding office in the Church ”
amount to a “ general and sweeping charge ” against members
of the Commission, either as being the owners in question, or
as being influenced by them to give her trouble in the Com-
mission. A Carlton newspaper, it is true, twisted her words
that way ; but it is a new thing for “ Asmodeus,” let us hope,
to be an authority with our Church’s Divines in their interpre-
tations. “ Men holding office in the Church receive rents, &c.”
This is true if true of two people; and there was no need to
take more out of it than that two office-bearers were concerned.
Charity to the Church and charity to Miss Sutherland would
not take more out of it. Some of our ministers, lately come to
the Colony, and not knowing Melbourne very well, became
indignant when they saw others angry. But the most of us
have been longer here, and had no need to allow of any indefinite
extension of the words. I don’t believe the Buninyong audience
thought of the Church generally or ministers. The public, too,
knew pretty well what was the reference. In May, when the
talk was greatest it was not, I am told, Miss Sutherland’s
remark, but the hot speeches of her opponents that brought
reproach on the Church in the mouth of “ the man in the street.”
Mr. Marshall or Professor Harper had no need to take the
reference as general, for they had been previously and privately
told of the owners and tenements referred to.
(4) “ Why then were so many of us misled as to the force
of her remark?” There were several causes at work. One
was that the sentence about the cause of the trouble was
severed from its context, from its preface in the previous
sentence, which indicated “ the trouble ” as being “ some state-
ments made in the Commission.” The remark was quoted and
re-quoted without its limiting preface. On the few occasions
on which the preface was also quoted, no use was made of it,
as if it cast no light on the range of the statement in question.
See a picture of the isolation of the remark in the arrangement
of the type in Mr. Tait’s letter.
Another cause was the already existing feeling hostile to
Miss Sutherland. This had been abundantly shown at the
Commission, and, like fire finding suitable material, blazed up
at once. But for the previous feeling, the remark would not
have been misread as it was. A third cause was the immense
fuss made about the remark, the loud and indignant demands
E g., First An-
swers of Miss
Sutherland,
A rgus. May 26.
8.g., Rev. G.
Tait’s letter,
Argu% May 9.


of meetings to examine and contradict Miss Sutherland, till
many of ns felt something dreadful must have been done by
her, By making a fuss, 1 mean making a work in great over-
proportion to the occasion. Had the displeasure and the haste
and the censures been directed against the facts and persons
pointed at by Miss Sutherland’s remark, I should not have
called that a fuss. A fourth cause was the work made of the
matter by one or two newspapers for purposes of sensationalism.
A fifth cause was the serious and persevering way the Com-
mission’s Committee, then led by Dr. Rentoul’s party, went
through with the enquiry.
(5) She gave these brethren the assurance as soon as it was
asked that she meant no Minister or Elder of the Church, and
that she did not connect the action of the Commission in any
way with the receiving of rents from immoral houses. “The
Rev. C. H. Irwin, happening to meet her at Spencer Street on
her return from Buninyong on May 7, was told by her the
name of the Church, the names of the men, and the street and
numbers of the premises. Why did not his friends of
Dr. Rentoul’s party use this information 1 Had they gone
straight to Miss Sutherland herself on May 8, the day on
which the Argus published her remark, and been anxious
simply to know the facts of her statements, to clear the
Church, and also, if possible, clear Miss Sutherland, they could
have published on May 9 that her reference was to two persons
connected with one congregation, and that the case would be
examined by the proper authorities. On the following
Monday, the 14th, Mr. Stewart had the matter on his business
paper at our Committee meeting, and it would have been dealt
with but for Dr. Robinson, Professor Harper, and others :
stopping all business by their disputing the competency and
existence of the Committee then assembled. If then any
scandal arose from Miss Sutherland’s remark, and from delay
in publishing her explanation, the blame must be shared by
these brethren.
I admit that, in naming the Commission (in the Argus report
“ the Assembly ”) in such a connection, her remark was an
unguarded and imprudent one. She has never hesitated to
confess from the first that it was an unwise thing to say, and
she is willing to be censured by the Assembly for that
imprudence.
I have explained the reference contained in the Buninyong
remark to the Commission. Now let us take the
Main Body of the Remark,
I mean the statement that “ men holding office in the Church
were at the same time receiving rents from houses used for
Argus, May 26.
Professor
Harper’s
second letter to
Herald, May 19


immoral purposes.” This is the matter dealt with by the
minute of the Scots Church Session ; it is the gravamen of the
offence charged by the Presbytery’s finding ; it was the main
topic of the questions of the Commission’s Committee j in short,
it was the sting of the Buninyong remark.
The only statements made by her as to these houses were,
that the owners were office-bearers in Church, and that they
were office-bearers in a certain fashionable Church not far from
the Town Hall. These statements she has stood by, and
nobody denies them.
Yet the Scots Session’s minute finds that her “ allegations
at Buninyong against officers of the Church were utterly
groundless.” How do they reach that surprising result i By
raising a question to which she never adverted at Buninyong,
the question as to whether the owners knew the sort of tenants
they had. A great point has been made of this in Committee,
in Session, and in Presbytery, that she does not impute guilty
knowledge.
I am by no means sure I have guessed the way by which
they seem to themselves to have got to the desired conclusion ;
but I can make nothing better of it than what follows :
(а) “ Without a charge of guilty knowledge there is no
charge.”
(б) “ She does not impute guilty knowledge.”
(c) “Therefore she makes no charge. She has not yet
charged these men before the Session. She stated a fact; but
made no charge. She offered evidence, indeed, but it was not
to the point, not to the point of guilty knowledge.”
There seems to me to have been a play upon the double
meaning of the word “ charge.” It may mean a formal accusa-
tion before a court, with a view to a legal process. In this
sense, it is true, Miss Sutherland laid no charge before the
Scots Church Session. She was not there to prefer a charge ;
she was there as accused, rather than accuser ; she was there
in answer to a citation, and to defend herself by re-asserting
and substantiating her Buninyong statement about the owners,
<fec., being office-bearers, <fec. But the word “ charge ” may
mean simply an allegation of a damaging or scandalous fact.
In this sense she made a charge at Buninyong. Will any man
venture to say expressly, that the fact of ownership of such
houses, and in such a locality, is a matter of no moral account,
not even in office-bearers of Churches; is no scandal in a
neighbourhood making missioning in the neighbours’ minds a
profane farce ? If it is of no account, why has there been so
fierce and long anger about Miss Sutherland’s remark, for it
went no farther ? Even if the owners were acquitted of guilty
How have the
to say that her
were utterly
groundless? "
By raising a
she n had hl ne*er
touched on,


knowledge, there is still culpable ignorance attaching conceiv-
ably to them. “ She makes no charge, therefore we find her
statements utterly groundless.” In reply I say, the one
charge she made at Buninyong, she repeated to the Com-
mission’s Committee, she repeated to the Scots Session, she
repeated to the Presbytery of Melbourne North. She had
witnesses to the character of the tenants at the door of the
Scots Session to sustain her charge. She handed the Scots
Session proofs of ownership. Mr. Marshall and his Session
have not denied the charge directly; indirectly they have
confessed it. They knew there was too much ground for her
statement about the houses and owners ; and they know that
the effect of Miss Sutherland’s statement is, that these houses
have been cleared of their unclean tenants about the time of
her appearing in the Scots Session.
As to the argument from her saying that she had “denounced”
the persons in question, I answered it I think sufficiently else-
where. It resembles that which I have just dealt with, and
would run : “ Without a charge of guilty knowledge, there is
no denouncing.” This major premiss, like the other, begging
the question.
Miss Sutherland was for a while talked of as almost certainly
a slanderer about these office-bearers, but she was no slanderer;
the facts are not denied. I admit she had done better not to
have made the statement, but from the other side it ought to
be admitted that
See minutes of
Scots Session,
Argus,A.ng. 17,
and
Mr. Marshall’s
letter, Argus,
Aug. 30.
Argus, Aug. 21.
Herald, July 2.
THE REMARK WAS MADE UNDER SEVERE PROVOCATION.
She was smarting under the dishonour put upon her, her
lady friends, and her work for the children at the Commission
in the previous week. She had been set upon by one speaker
after another, and these men accustomed to lead. She had
been described as mistaken in her methods and careless in her
work, and as having, among other ill deeds that could be
named, lost “ eighteen precious children.” She had been
described as professing to care not a straw for our Church
laws. Her Society had been likened to a swan, and one of
these candid friends reminded us that a swan was always
a useless and often a dirty bird. The motive of her activity
with us was asserted to be a desire to out-rival the Society
which she had formerly served, and her like activity in that
former service was declared to be an effort to swamp the
Society. It had been loudly proclaimed by the Minister
of Scots Church that there could be no question of joining
with their Society but on condition of Miss Sutherland being
first dismissed by the Assembly.
Argus, May 3.


Hearing members advise the Commission nevertheless to
confer with the Minister and managers of the Scots’ Church,
with a view to the absorption of the Assembly’s Society in the
Scots Church Society, she understood that to mean that they
would endeavour to —in Mr. Marshall’s phrase —throw her
overboard. All the while she knew that the soul of the Scots
’ Church Society had gone out of it with Mrs. Armour, and her
followers, and that the managers of the Soots Church had
never taken a hand in the work. Is it wonderful that, with
these thoughts rankling in her mind, she should have uttered
an unguarded sentence at Buninyong on the following
Sabbath ? To me, the astounding thing is that the anger of so
many Ministers should have been directed, not at all upon the
scandalous facts of the case, but upon the woman who was
faithful enough to point out again and again in private to the
proper authorities, and then bold enough to name publicly the
flagrant fact, though her glorious life of devotion and her many
hundreds of rescued children might well have secured for her
indulgence and the utmost stretch of charity.
We have heard a great deal
Miss Suther-
land’s letter to
Argus ,
April 19.
ABOUT OUR AGENT'S EQUIVOCATIONS
in reference to the exact words she used at Buninyong. When
they are pointed out, we shall be prepared to deal with them.
Meanwhile it is fair to say, that if a mind logically untrained
is subjected to a severe cross-examination such as she has
undergone repeatedly in Presbytery and Committee, it is
natural that now and then things said should seem not exactly
to fit into one another, though when applied to the concrete
facts, they may all agree. Were the sort of criticism which has
been used on Miss Sutherland insisted on, I could produce
quite a number of cases in these recent disputes of statements,
of which it is very hard to see the possible truthfulness.
What then ? are we to hunt one another to death in such
cases! Human society, churches, families, could not hold
together on such terms.
The Commission’s Committee published that they found she
“evaded” answering some of their questions. It has been
asked in the newspapers,
WHY SHE DID NOT SPEAK OUT OPENLY AS TO WHOM
SHE MEANT.
The answer is, that she had been warned not to name names by
friends unknown to Mr. Stewart or myself, and against our
advice; she was afraid of Mr. Marshall; she has told the


Presbytery so ; he had threatened her with law in another
Case on occasion of her leaving his Society, and sho dreaded his
being of the same mind in this case. And, as Mr. Stewart has
it, a certain Member in Committee “ said he would have names
out of her and then see what would come in the civil courts.”
It was indeed myself who carried to her the advice of one of
our wisest heads, and prevailed on her to engage to me to speak
out when she obeyed the citation of the Scots Session.
Previously to that she had told the Commission’s Committee,
in reply to their demand for the names of the Churches in
which the alleged owners hold office, that she had told Mr.
Marshall long ago of the answer she could give, and no doubt
he could give the information they sought. At her first
examination by the Committee, she offered to give the street
and the numbers of the tenements to which she had referred.
Mr. Marshall did nothing, and the Committee did nothing, on
the plea that they would be very sorry to let her saddle them
with the responsibility of a process which she had herself
initiated. The fact being she had initiated no process; they ;
had initiated a process against her, and if they were anxious to
get to the truth or falsehood of her Buninyong charge, she gave
them sufficient information for that purpose. I have already
explained why she delayed to name out names.
Argus, May 28.
See also Herald,
July 2.
Argus, May 26.
Letter of Kev.
G. Tait sent
to Argus, May
26.
Dealings of
Committee,
&c., Question
W- n-
THE MINUTE OF THE SCOTS CHURCH SESSION.
It seems to me that the accusers of Miss Sutherland and of
Mr. Stewart, the brethren who have tried to be neutral, and
the brethren who have stayed away from meetings because they
were disagreeable, have combined to bring on a result which
could not be foreseen, but which is the natural outcome of the
course all these brethren have followed. The Scots Church
Session have been emboldened to hear only one side of the
evidence tendered, to leave Miss Sutherland’s witnesses standing
at their door unsummoned, to declare that they had “ heard all
the evidence,” to pronounce Miss Sutherland’s “ allegations at
Buninyong utterly groundless,” to declare the owners of these
houses “morally blameless,” and “deserving of sympathy for
the annoyance and trouble they had experienced in consequence
of a generous undertaking on their part to serve the Church.”
But for the way this case has been dealt with by the
Commission’s Committee and by the Presbytery of Melbourne
North, I don’t see how the Soots Session could have ventured
to arrive at, record, and publish such a finding. If it is true, by
the way, that the owners of these houses purchased the property
“ to serve the Church,” then surely the Scots congregation and
minister are to blame for leaving them in the lurch with that
Argus, August 17
See my answer at
p. 38.


property in such a neighbourhood on their hands. It is certain
that the late Mrs. Armour and some other ladies saw the
property and disapproved of it as unsuitable for mission
purposes owing to the locality, and that if it was bought for
those purposes, the purchase was made after and in spite of the
disapproval of those best entitled to judge. The question of
the owners’ knowledge cannot be discussed here; if necessary,
we shall be ready to deal with it in the Assembly. Meanwhile,
the curious thing is, that Mr. Marshall and others have thrust
that question on ns persistently, and Mr. Marshall, at the same
time, has threatened us repeatedly with the law courts if we
dare to deal with it.
The Scots Session’s minute is endorsed by
THE FINDING OF THE PRESBYTERY OF MELBOURNE NORTH.
“ The Presbytery find that, while it is so far satisfactory tljat
Miss Sutherland has at last qualified the general and sweeping
charge which she made at Buninyong, that men holding office,”
&c., they “blame her for being so dilatory in specifying the
parties.” I have already shown that her charge was not
“general and sweeping;” it referred expressly to “some
statements,” and to “ office-bearers in a certain fashionable
Church.” I have also shown that she was not dilatory in
offering explanations when they appeared called for, and were
demanded.
The Presbytery express satisfaction that at last she explains
that she had no intention of imputing to the owners guilty know-
ledge; but blame her for being “so dilatory” in explaining, and
“ for using language which gave, and which was fitted to give,
the impression that ” there was guilty knowledge. Answer—
(l) Nothing here must be understood in the sense of Miss
Sutherland acquitting these owners of guilty knowledge; she
does not acquit them. (2) She told the Committee and the
Presbytery she had not spoken at Buninyong to that point.
(3) Her language was indeed fitted to give the impression
referred to, to this extent, that owners of house property are
supposed to know and are bound to use every effort to know,
what sort of tenants they have. No sophistry about tenements
owned by banks or limited companies, away from all knowledge
of shareholders, can have place here, for the cases are not
parallel. (4) lam precluded, I believe, from referring to the
point of evidence in this matter just now. (5) There is a most
strange giving and a most strange withholding of sympathy in
this deliverance.
“The Presbytery further find that her statements were
reckless and unwarrantable.” If “ unwarrantable ”is used as
Argus, August 16
See pages 34-37.
Her charge was
grave enough
without any
reference to
“guilty
knowledge.”


it ought to be in the sense of groundless, her statements in this
matter of ownership were not unwarrantable; there is so good
ground for them that they are not denied by those whose
interest it is to deny them, now that they have been in every
mouth. The finding does indeed look from this point towards
the other part of the Buninyong remark, viz., the way in which
the Commission was referred to. In this reference, the remark,
as I have admitted, was unguarded and indiscreet, even with
the qualifying circumstances already indicated. But these
epithets of “ reckless and unwarrantable,” come without
notice immediately after the matter of the ownership, and in
that vicinity may be taken as referring to that. In that
reference I say they are not true, except only to the extent
already admitted of indiscretion. Motions to lead Presbytery
and Assembly in judicial findings should be, at least, unam-
biguously worded. The finding proceeds: “ Her conduct in
casting such aspersions upon the good name of the Church
to which she belongs, before a general and promiscuous
audience, is deserving of censure.” She intended no aspersion
on the Church ; if she was understood by any to cast aspersion
on the Church, she regrets it, and will submit to censure. The
brethren who have acted against her in this matter have
intended no aspersion on the Church ; but, unless reports from
many quarters are utterly deceiving, they have brought on the
Church grievous reproach, and have caused, within the Church,
alarm for the Church’s future.
The Presbytery’s finding adds : “ That it is most disloyal for
a member of the Church to bring accusations against office-
bearers and members of the Church, in any other way than
through the courts of the Church.” It is true Miss Sutherland
never formally in the Scots Session laid a charge against these
members of their Board of Management, but she spoke to the
Minister several times, and in several years, on this very
matter. He explains that he was not spoken to officially, and
therefore took no action. Let the reader, let the Assembly,
judge where the disloyalty has been, if we are to give verdicts
of disloyalty. They “ reprove and admonish her to be more
careful of her neighbour’s good name,” and to watch against
“ intemperate and calumnious speech,” but they “ refrain from
passing sentence,” and refer the case to the coming Assembly.
It is to me matter of comfort that this resolution represents, so
far as yet appears, the mind of only twelve or thirteen persons
out of a Presbytery of 77 members. I hope that no brethren
in the Assembly will move for sentencing this noble Agent of
the Church in any severe sense. In that case nothing could
prevent sentence falling on themselves from the people of
Melbourne and Victoria, and it would be in vain for them to
And that charge
was not
“groundless ”
nor “ unwar-
rantable.”
Th 3 good name
of the Church
is not to be
maintained by
findings like
this.
“ Sentence ” is a
double-edged
weapon.


“ defy the press,” and flout public opinion. For pure Christian
teaching, and pure Christian practice, by all means let us, when
necessary, defy majorities and multitudes, however great; but
in this case the public conscience, and what is best in the
general feeling of the community, would be sternly and in-
appeasably against us. There was never a time when the
Church and the State stood more in need of such witnesses for
Christ among the people, such bonds between the people and
the Church as this woman wdth her ceaseless benefactions.
Shall we so treat her in the Assembly, as to say to the world—
She is not to our taste, we can find no place for her in our
Church’s machinery 1 If so, we shall dishonour the memories
of Norman McLeod, and Jas. Y. Simpson, and Thomas Guthrie,
and Thomas Chalmers ; we shall dishonour the name of Presby-
terian, and a name nobler still.
It will be hard, I think, to prove that the Session of Scots
Church, the Presbytery of Melbourne North, and the Commis-
sion’s Committee have not, by their findings, publications, and
proceedings, actually done what our Agent has been so severely
blamed for imputing to the Commission. The blame is, as I
have shown, groundless, for she did not impute to the Commis-
sion any action to retaliate on her for her having denounced
the owners in question. But this fact of denouncing, or her
own mention of it, has brought on her, from the bodies I have
named, sharp and as I believe unjust censure, and a great deal
of harassment.
The Final Judge will say—“ Come ye blessed of My Father;
I was hungry and ye gave Me meat, I was a stranger and ye
took Me in, naked and ye clothed Me, I was sick and ye visited
Me, I was in prison and ye came unto Me ; inasmuch as ye did
it unto one of these My brethren, even these least, ye did it
unto Me.” Is there a person in Victoria, in Australia, known
to have done so much of this work as Selina Sutherland! Her
life is one continuous work of mercy, tender consideration,
comfort, salvation. Besides succouring uncounted adults, poor,
sick, aged, prisoners, strangers, oppressed, tempted, she has set
in safety 1380 perishing or endangered children. Yet since she
and her lady friends gave their services to the Assembly, she
has had less sympathy, less tenderness, less justice shown her
than any person I have ever known dealt with by Church
courts. Is the Final Judge all wrong in His estimates, or have
some of us been betrayed for the time into ways of judging
unlike our Master, and unworthy of ourselves!
One of our wisest counsellors has warned us, that to part
with Miss Sutherland is to part with the work. If some
brethren are not clear that the work is needed, or that we are
needed for the work, they will be clear that we are not needed
The Final
Sentence.
Are we going to
let down the
work after one
year’s trial of
it, and such a
trial ?


if once Miss Sutherland and her fellow-workers be separated
from us, and then go on—as they certainly will—with their
work along side of us. There may come some faint efforts to
reinforce the Scots Church Society, for a sudden interest in
that Society has been of late displayed. But after a while the
whole thing, so far as the Assembly is concerned, will be
decently interred, or rather will somehow vanish : and the
louder the trumpets are blown at first, the faster will come the
finale. There may be brought to view castles in the air, there
may be good intentions; but good intentions and powerful
imaginations never put two bricks together.
Another way may be suggested for the sake of peace, and
with the best of motives—to let the Society become a govern-
ing as well as a contributing body, and free the Assembly of
the responsibility for it, while still it might remain a Presby-
terian Society. Various friends have made that suggestion.
But I have shown that the responsibilities, so far as money is
concerned, are not serious ; the Society does not extend beyond
the working ladies as yet; the work has gone on grandly, and
has only to be freed from the recent crippling restrictions and
molestations to go on as well as at first. We ought to let well
alone for the present. After their surfeit of speculative and
vexatious interference, it is due to the workers to give them a
free hand within the defined limits. To separate the Society
from the Assembly, at present, would on all hands be taken as
the dismissal of Miss Sutherland, and I hope the Assembly
will take care to avoid even the appearance of that.
CHAPTER V.— ARE THERE TWO COMMITTEES, OR ONE ?
The Assembly in November 1893 appointed a Committee,
of which Mr. Stewart became Convener. The Commission in
May 1894 appointed a Committee, with Mr. Stewart Convener
of it also. This second Committee consisted of “ the members of
the Committee of the Presbyterian Society for Neglected and
Destitute Children,” with certain new members. The decision
to appoint this new Committee reads thus : —“ (1) That the
Commission express their satisfaction with all the good work
done by the Society; the Commission, however, determine to
appoint a Committee to consider all the questions connected
with the Society, and report to the General Assembly • and in
the meantime authorises the Committee to make the proposed
addition to the name of the Society ; (2) direct the Society to
receive children only under legal guardianship; and (3) always
to give the preference to Presbyterian children, and to send no
children to other than Presbyterian homes.” This resolution is
at one point ill expressed, and, so far as the bare wording goes,
Proceedings of
Commission,
page 14.


might mean that it is the new Committee that is to make the
proposed addition, &c. I hold, however, that the old Com-
mittee was intended by the Commission ; that the wording, in
view of the context, means the old Committee ; that this was
not ended by the Commission, and that it could not lawfully be
ended j and that, in short, there are two Committees.
MY REASONS ARE THESE.
(1) A stranger, it is true, looking at the words might infer it
is one and the same Committee that is appointed to enquire,
and authorised to make the proposed addition, &c. But mem-
bers of the Commission knew there was a Committee in charge
of the Society’s work, previous to this appointment of a
Committee to enquire and report; that earlier Committee is
named at the foot of the page, where the members of the new
Committee are first “ the members of the Committee of the
Presbyterian Society for Neglected and Destitute Children,”
and then some other persons. This is the Committee and this
the Society who are distinguished from the newly appointed
Committee, I admit, not clearly, but nevertheless plainly enough
when the whole case is considered.
For (2) the new Committee is appointed for a definite
purpose named—“ to consider all the questions . . . and
report to the Assembly.” The administration is left, as before,
in the hands of the Society and the old Committee.
(3) If the Commission intended to discharge the old Com-
mittee, it would have said so. There was no word of discharge
or thanks. Was ever a Committee dismissed in that style ?
(4) There was no word spoken in the Commission about
discharging the Committee.
(5) Nor yet in any of the returns of Presbyteries reported to
the Commission.
(6) The Assembly’s Act was :—“ Appoint now and annually
hereafter a Committee of Assembly to superintend . . the
work of the Society.” The Committee was appointed for the
year, not the half year, annual appointments being resolved on.
The Commission, therefore, had not the power, even if it had
the wish, to end the Assembly’s Committee.
(7) Nay more, the Assembly itself had not the power by
Mr. MacMillan’s resolution to terminate short of the twelve-
month the life of the Committee which it had just constituted.
An enactment is null and void that rescinds a resolution of the
same Session. The previous resolution being—“ Appoint now
and henceforth annually a Committee,” the Assembly could
Proceedings of
General As-
sembly, 1893,
p. 53.
Standing orders,
section 50.


not go on in the same sederunt to empower the Commission to
do what would be a partial rescinding of this appointment.
(8) The framer of the resolution adopted by the Commission
confesses that he intended a second Committee, and did not
intend to absorb the old Committee in the new. True, he also
declares that his own words, now he sees them in print, fail
to express his intention, and instead succeed in express-
ing what was contrary to his intention—a pleasant confession
for the Convener of the Assembly’s Business Committee to
make. Meanwhile, if the very framer of the resolution
intended our view, we may believe the members of Commission
who carried it intended also our view,
(9) The Assembly’s law adviser understood the Commission’s
Act as we do, and has not changed his mind.
THE REASONS URGED BY DR. RENTOUL'S PARTY
for holding that there is but one Committee, and that the old
Committee has no existence, are these, so far as I hear ;
(1) That the Assembly’s Committee had only interim
authority, and that the interim ended with the Commission.
On the motion of Mr. MacMillan, the Assembly agreed—“ that
the resolutions [constituting the Society and the Committee] be
declared as of interim authority, and that the whole question
be sent down for the consideration of Presbyteries, with
instructions to report to the Commission in May.” I admit
that there was an interim, but I hold it was to extend to the
next Assembly, and that there was no thought of giving power
to the Commission to bring the Committee or the Society
to an end after six months. Indeed, had there been thought of
that, and had the power been actually given, it was null and
void, as shown a minute ago.
(2) The Commission rejected a motion instructing the
Committee “to continue its care, &c.” This motion was Mr.
Stewart’s proposed deliverance, as amended at Mr. MacLaren’s
suggestion. True, Mr. Stewart’s motion was rejected in favour
of Mr. Murdoch’s, but not at all on the question of the Committee
continuing its existence, a point never raised. The “ care ”in
question was not general care of the whole work, but care of a
particular part of the work, viz., the religious welfare of the
children.
(3) The Commission appointed a new Committee, so that the
functions of the old ended. No ! the functions assigned to the
new were definitely prescribed as enquiring and reporting ; the
administrative functions were recognised as still in the hands
of the old Committee.


HOW THE ASSEMBLY'S COMMITTEE HAVE BEEN TREATED.
On these shadowy grounds, and spite of as I think clear
evidence to the contrary, Professor Harper, Dr. Robinson and
their party, held that the new Committee was the one Com-
mittee, called it “ the Committee of the Neglected and Destitute
Children’s Aid Society of the Presbyterian Church of Victoria,”
called Miss Sutherland “ their own paid Agent,” and referred
to the Assembly’s Committee as “ the so-called,” and as an
“ anomalous body.” Had they been as right as I believe they
were wrong in their view of the force of the Commission’s Act,
they ought to have abstained from overbearing us as they have
done. Had we mis-managed the work through the first six
months, had our report been a confession of failure, they might
have had some show of excuse for rudely taking the work out
of our hands. After the Commission, Miss Sutherland’s
Buninyong remark gave them an occasion which they were
not slow to seize for interposing. Professor Harper, apparently
assuming that his own notions of urgency were law for Mr.
Stewart, demanded a meeting that week, and because Mr.
Stewart rested satisfied with the fact that next Monday, the
Assembly’s Committee, the one entitled to deal with the matter,
was to meet, Mr. Harper accused him in the press of
“ persistent obstruction ” of the effort to bring Miss Sutherland
to task. The Monday (the 14th May) came, and with it came
Professor Harper and others uninvited, “to deny that the
Committee had any legitimate existence, and to protest against
its having been summoned.” Mr. Harper explained in a
newspaper that part of the obstruction charged on Mr. Stewart
was the debate raised in the meeting of the 14th, in favour of
the old Committee’s right to exist. Be it observed, however,
that it was Mr. Harper himself who, though not a member,
raised the debate, arguing against the right of the Committee
to sit, and so arrested the business ; and be it remembered,
that we have already seen how much or how little ground he
had for so arguing.
A second meeting was held, this time the Commission’s
Committee, on May 22nd, and at this the majority held that
there was but one Committee, the Rev. S. G. MacLaren, and
Mr. Campbell, the Church’s law adviser, being in the minority.
It seems to me that any such discussion or decision was
incompetent and null and void, even as Mr. Stewart pro-
tested at the time. The then dominant majority have since
then acted accordingly. They held various examinations of
Miss Sutherland in an unfriendly manner, and have published
their findings. They have received repeated complaints
against her in a way to encourage more complaints, and in a
Herald , May 21.
Herald, May 17.
' T erald, May 19,
lb.


way to Harass “ their own Agent.” They have insisted on her
tendering an apology to an outside quarter, and that without
knowing or sufficiently enquiring into the circumstances. In
Connection with these proceedings, the Convener, the Agent, the
ladies of the Society, and the Presbytery have had their peace
greatly disturbed. A Special Meeting of the Assembly was
spoken of as early as June. We could not welcome that, for
we feared that the country brethren would be absent. Since
then, we have been assured that “by the grace of certain persons”
we had been spared that measure. Through all this, though
non-existent, anomalous, and the rest of it, the Assembly’s
Committee has held the funds ; its opponents being apparently
not so sure of their position as to claim that important part of
the work.
CHAPTER VI.— HAD MR. STEWART HIMSELF TO BLAME
FOR HIS TROUBLES ?
That has been often asserted. Things have been whispered
that were said and done by him in the way of bad taste or
temper years ago. Some of these things are distorted and
exaggerated; none of them have anything to do with the
present matter, except as suggesting inferences and expectations,
which I assert are not borne out by the facts of the case.
“ But his sending his resignation and subsequent letter to
the Argus 1 and his answer in the Herald to Mr. Harper?”
These things he has already explained or apologised for. But
these things do not account for the onset on him made by Dr.
Rentoul and his party in the Commission ; for they happened
after that onset. Neither do they account for Mr. Harper’s
accusations in the Herald of May 17, for these also came first.
Before proceeding further, I ask the reader to notice that
these personal questions are to come, before the Assembly ; they
are already before the public, and it is necessary they should be
explained. We of the Committee who worked with Mr.
Stewart found him easy to do with ; we admired his diligence
and effectiveness in printing reports and appeals ; the ladies of
the Society have only praise and thanks for him ; his report to
the Commission was a gratifying account of good work done,
and, considering the irritation he had experienced, his accom-
panying speech was admired by many as an example of patience
and self-restraint. I have been asked, Did he not give
unnecessary offence to Dr. Rentoul at the very beginning? I
answer, even if he had there was no cause for the offence being
aggravated as it has been. But I was present, and the facts
are these—Dr. Rentoul was a member of the Assembly’s
A rgus. May 25
and 28.
Herald, May 21.
Argus , May 31.
How Dr. Rentoul
fell out with
us.


Committee, but attended only one meeting, and did not wait
through that meeting. At the outset of our discussion of Rules
for our Society, he moved that a clause be inserted giving
preference to Presbyterian children. Mr. Stewart declined to
put the amendment, on the ground that it limited the scope of
the Society more than the Assembly had limited it. He,
however, assured Dr. Rentoul that his wish would, as a matter
of course, be realised in case, a rare thing, of any choice between
children occurring ; but that it was not well to put in print a
rule of that sort, seeing we appeal to the public for funds.
Dr. Rentoul told the Commission that the name of Presbyterian
was flouted. But I heard no flouting; and this was the only
occasion on which our accuser sat with us, nor did he sit long.
Getting on his feet to leave us, he was assured by myself, in
name of all present, that we earnestly desired him to remain
and give us his counsel, but he was not to be appeased ; he left
with the look and manner of one who should say, “You’ll meet
me again !”
We met him again in the Presbytery and in the Commission
as our unsparing censor. I have already shown how much or
how little was in his and others’ censures and corrections of our
methods. In the Commission we reported that, in the five
months from November to April, our Society had rescued
91 children and settled them, all but three, in homes, and that,
after all expenses, there was a balance in the Society’s favour
of £4Ol 17s. 3d. Mr. Stewart, on the basis of that report,
appealed to the sympathies of the Church. Dr. Rentoul rose
immediately, and described report and speech as a hrutum fulmen,
a loud noise about nothing, and the speaker as “ a master of
pious claptrap.” Then came the remark about the swan. The
minutes of the Commission bear that “no such statement was
made by Dr. Rentoul ”as appeared in the Argus. That the
insult was, as the Argus report had it, directed byname against
Miss Sutherland, was strongly denied by Dr. Rentoul and his
friends, and firmly maintained by the reporter.
It does not much matter, for if Miss Sutherland was not
named, then the whole of the Society, including Miss Suther-
land, was meant ; for that such a statement was made is known
to all members of Commission present at the time. Neither
that nor any other of the numerous insults put upon the
Agent and the Convener has been, so far as I remember,
withdrawn or apologised for.
At the meeting of the Assembly’s Committee on May 14,
Dr. Rentoul re-appeared after his long absence, and among the
first words spoken, declared that the desirable thing now was
to get a new Convener.
And tlieu fell
foul of us.
Age, May 3.
Proceedings of
Commission,
1894, p. 18.
Argus, May 4.


At the meeting of Commission’s Committee on May 22, Mr.
Stewart, being in the Chair, was grossly insulted and provoked
by Dr. Rentoul’s gestures and words. The meeting, instead of
requiring an apology to the chair, blamed Mr. Stewart, and the
dominant majority have in this, as in everything else, only
made matters worse as time passed. I was not present, but
several who were testify their own observations in terms more
emotional than I care here to repeat. The facts are these, as I
have had them from those witnesses. Speakers were calling
for action to clear the Church and its ministers of the charges
brought against them, as they thought, by Miss Sutherland’s
Buninyong remark. Two newspaper paragraphs were to be
presented to her for her explanations. Dr. Rentoul endorsed this
demand, and added a third newspaper paragraph, which
described himself as influenced by Mr. Marshall, “and he must
clear his character,” looking to Mr. Stewart as he spoke.
“Very well,” said Mr. Stewart from the chair, “I have no
objection; the clearer Dr. Rentoul can make his character and
that of the Church, the better everybody will be pleased.” What
I have given as Mr. Stewart’s words were taken down on the
spot by the gentleman who was taking the minutes, in answer
to a demand from Dr. Robinson that Mr. Stewart’s words should
be taken down, and I have seen them in the writing. They
are more favourable to Mr. Stewart than his own version, which
omitted “ and that of the Church.” The Committee’s then
majority published that this was “a reflection on Dr. Rentoul’s
character.” I reply, it was no more a reflection on Dr.
Rentoul’s character than on the character of the Church.
They go on to say that it was a reflection “ which a man of the
world would have resented in a much more forcible fashion,
and which the Committee unanimously insisted upon Mr.
Stewart absolutely withdrawing, and which he withdrew
accordingly.” Be it noted, that the reflection on Dr. Bentoul’s
character is not detailed by the Committee’s minute, they
have not thought good to say what Mr. Stewart said. The
impeachment on Dr. Rentoul’a character imputed to Miss
Sutherland, was her representing him as having been in-
fluenced by Mr. Marshall in his views and action in the
Commission.
Suppose he had been; is it any reproach to him to be
influenced by Mr. Marshall t Is Mr. Marshall’s influence so
discreditable as all that 1 Mr. Stewart, however, did not
endorse even that “soft impeachment”; he merely took Dr.
Rentoul’s word from him for what it was worth, and gave it
back to him ; “very well, the clearer Dr. Rentoul can make his
character and that of the Church, the better everybody 7 will be
pleased.” The next moment Dr. Rentoul had cleared nearly the
Did Mr. Stewart
provoke Dr.
Rentoul ?
Argus, May 26
and 28.


length of the two tables, and was shaking his fist within a few
inches of thechairman’s face. Being pulled back byacooler friend,
he turned away telling Mr. Stewart “ my character is clearer
than yours.” The Committee’s then majority published their
minutes declaring that “ Mr. Stewart’s description of Professor
Rentoul’s action is a gross caricature.” And they repeat, at a
later date, “ Mr. Stewart’s extended account, like his former
one, is a gross misrepresentation. The provocation came from
Mr. Stewart himself, and the call to withdraw arose spon-
taneously from the whole Committee.” Mr. Stewart has
explained in the papers about the withdrawal. I can only call
attention to the point that here again the Committee’s published
minute avoids saying what constituted the provocation. That
people were angry with Mr. Stewart is certain ; they were angry
with him at the Commission before he had given them the cause
now alleged. Into the matter of his resignation of the Con-
venership of the Commission’s Committee, I need not go. He
has been severely blamed for making known in public what was
done in private; he has apologised for that, and his plea of
forgetfulness may fairly be accepted on the grounds he has
given. But long before this it has become evident that the
privacy of meetings has become an ordinance binding on one
side, but not for the other. He might have taken the advice
of his friends of the Committee before such a step ; but we were
not waiting for his halting, and we would not turn on him when,
knocked about as he had been, he stumbled once or twice.
This and the rest must go to the Assembly. We have done
our best to arrest this “sorry drama,” as it has been called;
we should have been glad to sink all personalities in the deep
sea ; but that has not been granted us. The walls of Essendon
have been placarded with newspaper bills proclaiming The Rev.
Alex. Stewart severely censured, and then again the Rev. Alex.
Stewart suspended, but the papers did not say that his censors
may have censors in the Assembly, and that he was suspended
by 8 persons out of a Presbytery of 77 Members, and suspended
illegally.
The congregation of Essendon will not think less, but more,
of their Minister when the facts get to be known. They will
find that in trying circumstances, he has carried himself with
exemplary patience. Firmness, clear-headedness, courage,
truth, they expected from him, but we who witnessed the
contest admired most his endurance and his victory over him-
self. Knowing something of the weakening of his health, the
darkening of his eyesight, the breaking of his ambitions, and
the touching of his heart experienced of recent years, we have
thought he looked like a man who had vowed to God, and
whom God was permitting to be tried, to see if he would pay
Argus, May 26.
Argus, May 31.
Argus, May 28.
Argus, Aug. 9,
10, 11, and 14.
Herald, Aug. 9.


his vows.. He thinks he ought to try to save the work by
retiring from a leading place in it; that may ,be right in him,
and none of us who have stood by him would desire to make
him a sine qnd non of the work. We are not his partisans ;
there is no partisanship in our feeling or purpose. We are
anxious chiefly for the work, and therefore for Miss Sutherland’s
continuance in the connection, and for the restoration of the
conditions assigned to the work by the Assembly of 1893.
But we also hold, that Mr. Stewart was assailed when he was
inoffensively and very effectively superintending a grand
charity, over which he had been set by the Church, and if the
Assembly neglect to protect and sympathise with him, they
may reckon on it that their liberties are endangered. A
principle, a habit, a spirit, once admitted, will carry you any
length. Crush Mr. Stewart in this position, and you crush
with him Presbyterian parity, Christian brotherhood, common
justice; and like the man buried in Grey friars, near the
Martyrs’ Monument, Mr. Stewart can say to each member,
each Committee, each good work of the Assembly—“ Your
turn next —i
Hodie mihi, cras tibi."
CONCLUSION.
Up to, and in the Commission, the Assembly’s Committee
did faithfully the work entrusted to them in November last.
The Society of Ladies did a great deal of rescue work. There
was no jar among ourselves. Since the Commission, the
Ladies and the Agent have been impeded and harassed by
persistent criticism and injurious restrictions; they
have felt under a cloud. Prom before the Commission, I
dreaded that the connection with the Assembly would be made
so troublesome to them, that they would resign it of them-
selves. In Presbytery, in Commission, in Committee, my
experience was, to my own feeling, that as soon as one matter
of offence served its turn, and was shown to be no just cause
of offence, another was taken up. In vain we begged and
worked for peace. Mr. Cairns, of Ballarat, asked in the
Commission, “ Why all this heat ? ” Others, who were outside
the counsels of either party, when they saw the vehement
gestures and flashing eyes, and heard the tones of passion,
asked themselves, “What is under all this?” Others, who
attended no meetings, asked us on the street, “ Where is the
sense in it all?” Miss Sutherland was provoked to offer at
Buninyong, the Sabbath after, a part explanation. The reader
can judge whether the Scots Session’s minute confirms that
explanation. The parts taken by several brethren have been
described in this paper, and the reader can judge for himself.


But I by no means undertake to trace or guess at all the
motives or feelings at work. I content myself with saying, in
conclusion, that we have had hut
A POOR SPECIMEN OF LEADERSHIP
from these leading brethren. The fathers have been removed
by death, or are retired by reason of old age or ill-health. Our
newer leaders, left to themselves, have not made a very
promising beginning. They have unnecessarily caused divisions,
they have subjected us to a series of private and prolonged
meetings, of injunctions of secrecy, of inquisitorial proceedings
to find which of us —for they assumed that some of us had—
divulged secrets, of threatenings of civil and ecclesiastical suits,
such as are utterly opposed to order, to liberty, and to brother-
hood. The leaders of a Church require tolerance, conservatism,
equal interest in all members, readiness to utilise and honour
all sorts of energy in well-doing, a sense of the proportions in
things, an ability to appreciate great broad merits, spite of
minor faults of manner, power to sink self and personal
susceptibilities for the sake of large Christian interests. Leader-
ship is not content with majorities ; it hates and dreads to have
aggrieved minorities. Christian leadership will do anything to
deserve confidence from everyone, and to maintain brotherhood
and peace. It strives to give no offence to Jew or Gentile or
the Church of God ; it strives to please all men in all things for
their good and edification ; it is careful to have, if possible, a
good report from them who are without. If that is leadership,
we have not had much of it of late. If every strong devoted
Christian worker is to be harassed, ordered about, called to
trial and censure and public rebuke for every rash word or
action, real or imaginary, while worse words and actions of
others are unreproved, are excused, farewell to the prosperity
of our Church. If the sic volo, sic juheo of a few men is to
wreck at any time an Assembly’s Committee and Convener,
Society, and Agent, the sacredness, pathos, and success of even
this rescue work notwithstanding, let the Assembly say so, and
know what it intends. Ido not believe the Assembly intends
that. But we have all need to be careful that we be not led to
do what we do not intend, and what we should deplor e when
too late. A text in Deuteronomy says that when thy brothers
ox or sheep go astray, “Thou mayest not hide thyself from
them.” Disagreeable duties are the duties that try what spirit
we are of. We have leaders besides the brethren in question,
Surely the call of duty may be heard now at last by them to
lead us as in the past. Not one of those with whom I am
acting has had, I believe, in the past, the slightest objection to
8.g., Age, May 4.


being led in every good work by anyone of the brethren whom
we at present oppose. We hope earnestly they will, without
delay, lead in ways in which we shall be glad to follow.
NOTE.
The Neglected Children’s Act of 1890 provides for the
establishing of receiving homes and probationary schools; for
the committal of neglected children to the care of the Depart-
ment ; for the management of wards of the Department, and
so forth. The part of the Act which concerns us, however, is
Part VIII. This provides for “ committal to the care of private
persons.” Section 61 gives “ power to the Governor-in-Council
to approve private persons or institutions to have the care of
neglected children.” Section 63 gives “ power to judge, justices,
&c. to commit children to the care of approved person, instead
of the Department. Which person or institution, by writing
under his hand, or the hand of its manager, as the case may
be, may consent to accept the care of such child.” Section 64
shows what control is obtained in this case—“ Such person, or
the. manager of such institution, shall become the guardian of
the person and estate of such child, to the exclusion of the
father and every other guardian until” 18, or, if the Governor-
iu-Oouncil will, 21 years of age, and shall have the sole right
to the custody of the child. Then Section 67 gives “ power to
father or mother, being guardian, to transfer the guardianship
of any child to approved person or institution.” This is to be
done in writing, signed before a Justice of the Peace, and the
acceptance is to be also in writing ; this transfer gives the
control defined in Section 64.
The Act in Part 111, Section 18, says, “ Every child who
answers to any of the following descriptions shall be deemed a
neglected child within the meaning of the Act. That is to say,
every child apparently under the age of seventeen years”:—
(1) Found begging ... (2) Found wandering about
. . . or sleeping in the open air . . . without home
or visible means of subsistence. (3) Associating with reputed
thief, or drunkard, or vagrant . . . (4) Having committed
an offence punishable by some less punishment than imprison-
ment. (5) Every child apparently under the age of ten years
engaged in casual employment after 7 p.m. in May to
September, or after 9 p.m. in the rest of the year. To these,
Section 21 adds every child under sixteen found residing in a
brothel, or with a prostitute. Section 19.—Any such child
may be apprehended without warrant by a constable, or
authorised person (such as the Manager for an approved
institution), and taken before two or more justices, who shall.
Au Act to
consolidate the
Law relating
to Neglected
Children,
54 Viet,, .
No. 1121.


if they sustain the charge, commit the child to the care of the
Department for Neglected Children. Section 63, as we have
seen, permits of a private person, or the Manager of an
institution, taking the care of a committed child instead of the
Department.
STILLWELL AND CO., PRINTERS-, 195 A COLLINS STREET.
