

RESOLUTIONS AND PETITION
ADOPTED AT THURSDAY’S GREAT
PUBLIC MEETING AGAINST
TRANSPORTATION.
Moved by W. S. Sharland, Esq., M.L.C. ; seconded
by J. Allport, Esq. ; supported by P. Roberts, Esq.,—
1. “ That the statements made by Earl Grey, ‘ that
this colony is less averse to receiving convicts under
the improved system than it was in 1846,'—that many
millions have been spent by the English Government
in fitting Van Diemen’s Land for the reception of
criminals—and that *the free settlers established them-
selves in Van Diemen v s Land with their eyes open to
the present state of things,' are utterly without founda-
tion. That the latter statement is directly contradicted
by his Lordship’s own admissions. That the colonists
are more strenuously opposed to Transportation than
at any former period, and that no change of system can
reconcile them to its continuance.”
Moved by M. Fenton, Esq., M.L.C. ; seconded by
C. B. Brewer, Esq.,—
2. “ That to disregard the promise made to the
colonists in the name of Her Most Gracious Majesty,
that Transportation to Van Diemen’s Land should not
be resumed, would have the effect of destroying all con-
fidence in the good faith of the British Government,
and that the colonists claim as a right the performance
of this promise.”
Moved by F. Haller, Esq. ; seconded by H. F.
Anstey, Esq.,—
3. “ That in the opinion of this meeting the interests
of the Australian Colonies are inseparable; that to
continue Van Diemen’s Land as a vast penal settle-
ment is calculated to produce in the neighbouring
colonies even greater evils than direct Transportation
to those colonies ; that we therefore trust that Australia
will, as one people, oppose the further introduction of
convicts to Van Diemen’s Land; and that for the pur-
pose of making these views known to our fellow subjects
in Great Britain, a letter be addressed to the Members
of Parliament, to Magistrates, and to influential
societies and persons in the United Kingdom, under
the direction of the committee, who shall take charge of
tne Petitions.
Moved by R. W, Nutt, Esq. ; seconded by T. D.
Chapman, Esq.,—
4. “ That the following Petitions to the two Houses
of Parliament, praying that measures may he taken
for carrying Her Majesty's most gracious promise into
effect, be adopted by this meeting.”
To the Honourable the Commons of the
United Kingdom of Great Britain and
Ireland, in Parliament assembled,
The humble Petition of the Colonists of Van
Diemen's Land, in Public Meeting assembled,
Sheweth, —
That we again come before your llonouiable House
to remind you of the pledge given by Her Majesty
Queen Victoria, that Transportation to Van Diemen's
Land should for ever cease.
That in violation of this sacred promise, and in
opposition to the dictates of common reason and
common humanity, the Englisn Government has
continued to pour criminals into this oppressed colony,
without any intermission— without inteimission even
during the period for which Mr. Gladstone had assured
the people of England that transportation to Van
Diemen’s Land had been suspended.
That the expediency of continuing or discontinuing
transportation to this colony is not now a question for
discussion, —that it has been decided by Hie promise of
the Queen, and that we claim the fulfilment of that
promise. (Cheers.)
That we, nevertheless, notice the pretences under
which attempts have been made to persuade the
English Legislature that the Ku)al promise ought to
be disiegarded.
Tirai it has been asserted that ibis colony is now less
adverse to receiving convicts, under what is called an
improved system, than it was in 18-16 ; that, on the
contrary, the colonists arc more tliau ever opposed to
transportation, (cheers.)
That it has been further asserted, that many millions
of money have been spent by the Government of
England in fitting Van Diemen’s Land for the recep-
tion of convicts,—and that this assertion is utterly
unfounded.
That it has been further asserted by the Queen’s
ministers, that “ the free settlers established themselves
“in Van Diemen’s Land witli their e>es open to the
“ present slate of things.” ihat if this were true, it
was the bounden duty of the English Government to
bave protected tiie colonists against their own error
but that the assertion is so utterly untrue, that what is
called the present state of things,—that is to say, the
system of transportation against which the colonists
have for five years implored your interference, had no
existence until the year 1842; that from that period
scarcely a Iree settler has established himself in Van
Diemen’s Land; that thousands have abandoned
the colony solely in consequence of that system ;
and that Earl Grey has himself declared that
“by this system many of the most valuable set-
“ tiers in Van Diemen’s Laud had been forced to
quit the island ;” and that ** to insist upon main-
“ taining transportation to Van Diemen s Land would
*■ be to drive away the free colonists at whatever
“ pecuniary sacrifice to themselves."
That Her Majesty’s ministers have made some
feeble efforts to induce other and stronger colonies to
receive convicts, — thus demonstrating that even in their
own judgment Van Diemens Land ought to be
relieved; but that the spectacle of the insults and the
injuries heaped upon Van Diemen’s Land lias deter-
mined those colonies to resist to the last a similar
infliction upon themselves.
That the colonies nearest to Van Diemen's Land
now perceive that their safety is involved in ours ; they
see that whatever numbers of convicts may be poured
into this colony, it is impossible that they can remain
here, and that they must be spread over the continent;
and that New South Wales has already commenced
measuies to protect herself.
That the misrepresentations made in England by
the Ministry and by the Local Government of Van
Diemen’s Land respecting the state of the colony, the
wishes, feelings, conduct, and character of its inha-
bitants, and the results of the existing system of
transportation, have been again and again exposed
and refuted ; but living at the opposite extremity of
the globe, months must elapse before the colonists
can hear of the fictions invented for their ruin, and
many more must pass away before they can contradict
them. In the meantime the object sought is attained.
Shiploads of convicts are poured in upon us, and the
falsehood is forgotten before the refutation is received.
Your petitioners humbly pray that such measures
may be adopted by your Honourable House as shall
be best calculated to carry into effect Her Majesty's
most gracious promise, by abolishing at once, and for
ever, the transportation of criminals to Van Diemen's
Land. And your petitioners will ever pray. (Hear,
hear.)
Moved by G. W. Walker, Esq. ; seconded by W. P.
Weston, Esq.,—
5. “ That the Chairman of this meeting be requested
to forward to the Secretary of State for the Colonies,
through the Local Government, and to Mr. Jackson,
through the London Agency Committee, a Report of
the proceedings, with copies of the Petitions and Reso-
lutions adopted at this meeting, and that the following
gentlemen be appointed a committee to make arrange-
ments for having the Petitions signed and presented to
Parliament Messrs. Officer, Pitcairn, Chapman,
i 1 aller, Nutt.
Moved by Dr. Crooke; seconded by J. Crookes,
Esq,—
6. “ That an Anti-Transportation League be formed
at Hobart Town, to co-operate with the Launceston
Association. That the following committee be
appointed to carry out this object, and that they ba
instructed to /fame the pledge to be taken by the
members.” Messrs. Pitcairn, Chapman, Halier,
Allport, Williams, Jeffrey.
5 >- - >tr 0
' .. .... /../<--. 4i *»> JlwvvA-MA
- .ß
