

1 68475
22 MG WSI
Desolations passed at a Public Meeting, held at the Market Place, Auckland, on the 2ith December,
1853, on the occasion of Governor Grey’s departure from New Zealand.
Proposed by W. C. Daldy, Esq.—
~ ,"Th at ' tius meeting express their regret that a section of a party, together -with the numerous
officials, should have adopted measures relative to the approaching departure of Sir George Grey
» a. to ,. thc rai ™s of unchristianlike sfrifiTand enmity;-that his Excellency
% suf ! er f f r l toe ( l metl s' and without notice from the Government of the Colony ;-and that
the,settin o forth of a protest, for the purpose of clearing the general community from the imputation of having
participated in these measures, should have been imperatively required,”
Proposed by James Busby, Esq., J. P., M. P. 0.
That this Meeting, without expressing any opinion concerning the various measures of Sir George Grev’s
government do protest against the offering of any parting compliment—whether by public dinner, address, or
otherwise, to a Governor who has compromised the honor of the Crown, and has outraged the moral feeling
of the community by his systematic calumny and untruth—who has been publicly and repeatedly arraigned
upon these charges, and whom no smgle individual has ventured publicly to defend from ”
Proposed by Walter Brodie, Esq.—
• meetm S express their regret that any of those 520 Colonists of the Auckland Province who
signed the following petition, in the year 1849, should have stultified themselves, and have cast a slur upon
the , community in now pledging themselves to Governor Grey’s uprightness by joining in the testimonials
which have been protested against.” J J 5
Ta the Right Hon. Earl Greg, Her Majesty’s Secretary of State for the Colonies.
The Petition of the undersigned, Inhabitants of Auckland and its vicinity, in the Province of New Ulster
New Zealand, ’
Sheweth,
That this Province has, since the arrival of his Excellency Governor Grey, been subjected by him to a
course of policy—or rather to certain experimental schemes—which have been productive of the deepest
injury to the colony, shutting up its resources, preventing the investment of capital, and discouraging all
energy and enterprise m the settlers. 88
That the representations of its flourishing condition daring the last three years, are founded on false and
deceptive bases, calculated only to mislead your Lordship and others at a distance. The apparent prosperity
the increase of revenue and trade, are solely attributable to the large naval and military expenditure which the
liberality of Her Majesty s Government has maintained for so long a period, the withdrawal of which—by leay
mg the colony to its own natural resources—would show that it has most miserably retrograded under the
management of Governor Grey. b
That the crisis; which eventually must have ensued from the restrictive and suicidal policy that has been
pursued, has been hastened by the discovery of California, and the many temptations to re-emigration which
that country holds out: that already many of our settlers have left, but still much greater numbers are pre-
paring to leave,—induced, in many instances, to do so much more by reason of that misgovemment which has
shut up the resources of the country, and destroyed the prosperity of the settlers, than because of the alluring
attractions of California.
T Petitioners have used every legitimate means m their power, by repeatedly memorializing the
Legislative Council, pointing out the present unhappy slate of this colony, and the imperative necessity for
remedial measures being at once adopted, but they have only obtained a reiteration of the same evasive and im-
satisiactory promises ot future relief, which have been given and broken for the last three years
It is not your Petitioners’ intention to enter now into a detailed statement of their numerous grievances—a
document expressing them having recently been forwarded to your Lordship ;-their present object being
to make luiown the important fact that they have now lost all confidence in Governor Grey’s policy and a’l
hope of his making any beneficial change therein. But, further, they have lost respect for his character for offi-
cial veracity, on account of the systematic misrepresentations of his despatches : some being filled -with plow
mg descriptions of the prosperity of the colony-merely fictitious-while at other times they contafocertnn
calumnious sfrictures on the characters of individuals compounded and forwarded with such complete secret
and with such utter disregard of truth, that no one can venture to think himself secure from being assS-l'
grievance which your Petitioners feel the more keenly oy the conviction that they are entirely in the power of
such statements ; being cut off from any official channel of communication with Her Majesty’s Government and
bemg denied the privilege of Representative Institutions through the unfounded representations of his Slmv
That under such circumstances your Petitioners consider that Governor Grey’s continuance in this appofot ‘
ment can tend neither to the advancement of the colony, nor to the interests of the settlers appoint.
May it, therefore, please your Lordship to a'dvise Her Most Gracious Majesty forthwith to remove
Governor Grey from his appointment, and replace him with one who may, at least, exhibit straight
forward honesty of statement m his communication with Her Majesty’s Government : and whose mo
ceedings in the colony, whatever may be their result, may, at least, bear upon the face of them
integrity of purpose, and good will towards the settlers. 1 Ulcm
And your Petitioners, as in duty bound, will ever pray.
Proposed by Mr. Joseph May—
the ofState * **** by ° hailman ' ° n ° f the Meet “*’ «“* Warded to
JOSHUA THORP,
Chairman.
