

PEOPLE’S LIBERAL PARTY.
RESUME
OF THE
SECOND CONFERENCE
WOMEN’S DIVISION,
HELD AT
BALLARAT, 28th and 29th APRIL, 1915.
INCLUDING
“ PROTECTION,”
Director.
By Mrs. Herbert Brookes,
“SOCIAL QUESTIONS,”
By Mrs. L. E. Goedisson,
Secretary.
MELBOURNE:
SANDS & MoDOUOALL PTY. LTD., PRINTERS, 365 COLLINS STREET,
1915




PEOPLE’S LIBERAL PARTY.
RESUME
OF THE
SECOND CONFERENCE,
WOMEN'S DIVISION,
Held at BALLARAT. 28th and 29th April, 1915.
Most of the delegates travelled up cn Tuesday, the 27th inst.,
m order to be present at Miss Crump’s reception of them at
Clarendon College. A short musical programme by Mesdames
Brookes and Wischer and the Misses Crump, with speeches of
welcome and reply, passed the time till supper, after which the
ladies left, looking forward to a good conference.
The Executives of Ballarat and Melbourne met at 10 a.m. to
transact some necessary business.
The standing orders were read and accepted.
Doorkeepers and Timekeepers were appointed—Miss Stewart,
doorkeeper; timekeepers, Mrs. Speed, Mrs. Anderson, Mrs. Whit-
ham, and Mrs. Rogers.
General business commenced at 10.30 a.m.
The Secretary again read the standing orders, and they were
confirmed.
The roll call was then read, most of the sixty delegates reply-
ing to their names.
Mrs. Whitham proposed, and Mrs. Rogers seconded: “That
the Press be present at all sessions.”—Carried.
The voting delegates were then asked to sit on the right side
of the President, and the members on the other side.
Mrs. Brookes proposed, and Mrs. Wischer seconded- “Thai
Miss Crump be President of Conference.”—Carried.
Miss Crump, in returning thanks, gave a short address, speak-
ing of being in England when the w; r broke out, and declared
she was proud of being a Britisher. She said she was glad to see
that the Suffragettes had given up bomb-throwing, and had
thrown themselves heart and soul Into the movement for recruit-
ing and acting as police women.


On the proposal of Miss Coding, seconded by Mrs. Speed, the
minutes were taken as read, they having gone forth to the mem-
bers in pamphlet form after the previous Conference.
Apologies and wishes for a successful Conference were re-
ceived from the following branches:—Yinnar, Coburg, Cockatoo,
Bendigo, Northcote, Cardigan, Richmond Central, Richmond
North, Collingwood, Castlemaine, East Melbourne, Ringwood, Port
Melbourne, Camberwell, Smythesdale, Queenscliff, Blsternwick,
and from Mesdames Sturgess, Fox, Burkitt, Isaac, and Misses
Symons and Price, members of the Women’s Executive.
An apology for non-attendance was received from Mr. Hagel-
thorn, Minister Public Works.
The Secretary read a letter from Captain Baird, member for
the district, wishing the Conference success, and asking'for the
continued support of members of the P.L.P.
The following resolution was tl -n proposed by Mrs. Wischer,
seconded by Mrs. Brookes; "We, the Women’s Division of the
People’s Liberal Parly, desire to carry a resolution here to-day
of entire sympathy with the Empire in the present crisis, and to
express our hope of complete success, and, as a consequence, last-
ing peace to our arms and those of our Allies in the terrible
struggle in which they are now engaged.”—Carried.
Mrs. Herbert Brookes, Director of the Women’s Section, then
read her paper on “Protection and its Justification.”
PROTECTION AND ITS JUSTIFICATION.
Had this Party a little money to spare, I would suggest
that we offer a prize to everyone who can discover at the pre-
sent moment in the Commonwealth real genuine Freetraders
of the Manchester School. It would cost a pittance, but not
much. Unfortunately, we ourselves have not a penny to spare
for such a laudable purpose, since we are not in the position
of our friends, the Labour Party, who can impose levies on the
industrial unions for political purposes. I would suggest it to
them, however, as an interesting experiment, excluding only as
non-eligible for the prizes those fanatical Freetraders of the
absolute school who would cling to their idol and be buried
beneath the facts which have come down in the showers of
recent events. The People’s Liberal Party has from its foundation
stood for a national policy of Protection. It has been as loyal to
this policy during its comparatively brief life of seven years as has
the “Age” newspaper during its long and zealous career. Under
the title of the Commonwealth Liberal Party, a name by which
we were known before we were Induced to change our name
with the hope that a truly united Liberal Party might be formed
out of some very discordant elements, this League was consti-
tuted with the object of absorbing the old Victorian Protec-
tionists Association. This was done, and a party was formed


with a comprehensive and democratic programme. Representa-
tives from our Executive took part in the negotiations with the
political leaders when the united Liberal Party, or so-called
Fusion, was called into being. Whilst loyal to the Party in the
House, circumstances outside have compelled us to maintain our
existence as an independent Liberal Protectionist Party. It is a fact
that we are rightly proud, to be able to affirm our loyalty from
our inception, to the policy of Protection. If ever a cause has
been justified by its results; if ever a cause has been justi-
fied by events that have recently transpired; if ever the oppo-
nents of a cause have been completely silenced; if ever a nation
little or great had to thank a cause for its comparative peace of mind
during a crisis and possibly its preservation—Protection is that
cause, and the Australian Commonwealth is that nation. It can
be asserted without challenge that the secondary industries of
this State of Victoria and of the rest of the Commonwealth, all
for the most part the creation of our protective system, have
been a veritable bulwark during this world crisis, and a source
of Immeasurable service to the Motherland in her hour of trial.
Australia has been in the proud and happy position of being
able to equip with military outfits, second to none in the world,
the battalions she has raised for service abroad. The excellence
of the material and workmanship has been the subject of com-
ment and approval by the military authorities the other side of
the world. When every factory in the Motherland was working
overtime and at feverish speed, and the Prime Minister and > other
statesmen, Lord Kitchener and the military staff were calling
for a greater output, and assuring the people of England that
the successful prosecution of this awful war depended entirely
upon this one factor, it can be easily appreciated how very
important it was that the factories of Great Britain should be
relieved from the necessity of equipping the Australian troops,
and, indeed, receive some assistance to equip their own forces
from the secondary or manufacturing industries established in
Australia. And furthermore, however, more important was it
for Australia to feel and to know during the earlier and more
critical stages of the war that even if the German cruisers had
succeeded in cutting her off from the Motherland and isolating
her from the rest of the world, she was sufficiently self-con-
tained by virtue of her secondary industries to stand alone for
a considerable period, and to render substantial aid in the
equipment of the forces of other dominions. The knowledge of
this fact has shaken the faith of most Freetraders in Australia
in their shibboleth, and converted most of them to our national
policy of Protection. I don’t think I am wrong in asserting
that the great heart of Australia is deeply grateful to the Party
and to the individuals who have been responsible for two
achievements as the result of their policy. One is the construc-
tion and possession of the Australian fleet, and particularly of
the dreadnought “Australia” in the southern seas during the
darkest hours of the war when nothing but its presence saved


our magnificent coastal cities from looting and destruction by
the enemies cruisers, “Gnelsenau” and “Scharnhorst,” which
were ultimately sunk off the Falkland Isles by Rear-Admiral
Sturdee, after having been driven out of the Pacific Ocean by
our “Australia” and the Japanese fleet. The second is the fact,
as already indicated, that our national policy of Protection had
encouraged the establishment of industries on a scale sufficient
to render us self-dependent, and, indeed, assist the Mother
country even in this direction also. I say openly and candidly
that I am very proud of my father, Alfred Deakin, never
prouder in my life, because I believe that no man in this our
native land has been more responsible than he was and is for
these two blessings. You know as well as I do that he has
ever been the protagonist of Protection. And you know as well
as I do that he signed the cable which placed on order the
dreadnought “Australia.” And, ladies, he was the President
of this Party for several years. Now, need I seek further justi-
fication for the policy of Protection than that I have already
instanced. I might use many arguments good, bad, and in-
different, none of whl h can carry such significance as those
already advanced. In fact I am free to admit that in many
ways from the theoretical standpoint the opponents of Protec-
tion seem to have justification, and doubtless would be justified
in a world where human nature had been left out. The Free-
trader reminds me most of the great cosmopolitan-heart of the
world peace society, whose arguments for peace between the
nations cannot be gainsaid, but which never work out in prac-
tice. I had the privilege of listening to an address by one of
these greatest of peace advocates. Professor David Starr Jordan,
and when he had finished I was satisfied that a world war was
a most unreasonable, inhuman, and impossible thing, but in
six months' time from his visit here the awful world tragedy has
proved the fallacy of his arguments in practice, so much so
that 1 was particularly interested to read a message he had
given to the Canadian Press, three months after the war broke
out, to this effect: “There must be no peace until the German
empire, that nest of snakes, is completely crushed.” To my
mind, there is a great affinity, as I have indicated before, be-
tween the members of the Peace Society and the Freetraders.
They both leave out human nature.
To us it is indeed most interesting to observe, from time
to time in the Press news from the Homeland, growing evidence
of a change even in the policy of the British Liberal Govern-
ment. We have frequently heard of late of assistance which
they are prepared to give to various industries in order to en-
courage their greater development in Great Britain at a time
when of course war has imposed absolute prohibition of the
enemies’ goods. Such things are signs of the times, and people
like ourselves may be pardoned some little satisfaction at the
spectacle, since from all such channels hitherto nothing but con-
tempt was entertained for such proposals. Turning to our Home


land, it a fact, that the stalwart champions of Preetrade in
both the Liberal and the Labour parties have accepted the
settled policy of the country, and willingly develop it. This
is equally true of such men as Mr. Joseph Cook and Senator
Millen as it is of Mr. William Hughes and Senator Pearce. Both
of our great political parties in Australia to-day are Protection-
ist. Their programme and their policy both openly profess this
policy. Only a few days ago both the Prime Minister (Mr.
Fisher) and the Minister of Customs (Mr. Tudor) gave Unequi-
vocal evidence of the determination of their Government to
further develop the policy of Protection. Mr. Fisher, in his
reply to a deputation from the Associated Chamber of Manu-
factures of Australia last week (19th April, 1915), stated deli l
berately : “The main policy of the Ministry was to make all
the secondary industries secure as far as possible, and to estab-
lish them against all competition,” and Mr. Tudor, on the fol-
lowing day to another deputation, said: “The tariff would he
fixed against everyone on a sufficient basis that would enable
industries to be carried on in Australia.” I am most naturally
lead from dealing with the justification of Protection as a
national policy for Australia to consider in what way any ex-
tension of it may be urged at the present stage to benefit and
strengthen and sustain the Empire. Already both political
parties in Australia have decided for and embodied in legisla-
tion preference in our tariff for the Mother country. This is
most wise and a just extension of our protectionist policy. And
even apart from this, it would be justified On other grounds,
seeing that it is but fair and just that the Motherland, whose
money markets provide us with all of our loans save those
which are raised amongst ourselves, should have a preference
when the manufactured goods are purchased which we import
with the proceeds of these loans (see “Argus” to-day re loan of
£2,250,000). Notwithstanding the fact that I am a Liberal in
politics, I freely offer my congratulations to the present Labour
Ministry for the additional preference they have extended to
the Mother country in the tariff which they have already intro-
duced, and which is to be shortly considered in Parliament.
Generally speaking, I find that they have increased the preference
to Great Britain from 5. per cent, to 10 per cent, on most of
those goods which the enemy countries have been supplying in
competition with Great Britain. This is distinctly good, and
I trust they will go further in many directions when they are
dealing with further amendments of the tariff. In this con-
nection it is particularly interesting to recall a statement made
by the British Trade Commissioner at Geelong before the
Chamber of Commerce and manufacturers on 15th April, the
week before last. He said, amongst other things, in a very able
address: “German industry had undoubtedly been aided by Pro-
tection and the spirit of co-operation amongst producers, manu-
facturers end distributors that we unfortunately lacked. . . . Talk
of peaceful rivalry in commerce was platitude, and he had no faith
in it; despite the ravages of the German invaders of European


countries and the attacks on English watering places, many
people would be found to buy German goods if the price were
what they call right. Germany would recover from the war, and
in time gather sufficient strength to attack us again. ... It
was irrational that we had buijt up the German industrial
machine by purchasing German goods, and now we are trying
to shatter what we have contributed to. We should so conserve
and utilize our resources that our industry would be in the
Empire, for the Empire, by the Empire. It was not proposed to
build a wall round the Empire, but we should prefer to do busi-
ness with our own Empire than with strangers. But we should
not forget the claims of our Allies to our commercial sym-
pathies.”
Equally significant, and I may be pardoned if I add, welcome
conversion is manifest in the following extract taken from the
address of the President of the N.S.W. Chamber of Commerce,
that sometime sanctuary of the Freetrade cult and gospel accord-
ing to Cobden. Said Mr. F. B. Winchcombe, the said President;
“It is our hope that never again will Germany hold the trading
position which she has held in the recent past. She made evil
use of her opportunities. British territories threw open their
doors to her commerce, and with the profits of that commerce
she made her preparations to crush Britain out of existence. We
don’t want to see the same conditions arise again. Great Britain
and her sister dominions form a mighty source of supply for
goods which we require in Australia. And for the rest it is our
duty to throw all the business we can into the hands of Belgium,
of France, of Russia, and of Japan.”
You would naturally ask at this stage, what of our sister
dominions and what of our noble Allies in this world tragedy?
Again, fortunately, as far as the Empire dominions are con-
cerned, thej present Government is prepared, as was the last
Liberal Government, to negotiate with them for special tariff
concessions, provided similar action is taken by their own Go-
vernment. Mr. Fisher gave evidence of his Government’s inten-
tions in this direction in New Zealand quite recently. This is
as it should be between the great sister dominions of our glo-
rious Empire. Let us bo bound closer and more closely together
with the tangible cords of commerce and of trade as well as with
those intangible cords of human sentiment and common aspira-
tion. But let us not stop with this. Let us have a favoured
nation clause as promised by the present Government, but let
it apply in such a way as they have not yet expressed sym-
pathy with in which I dare to affirm they do not truly reflect
the desires of all -Australia. All Australia, without a doubt,
desires discrimination at the Customs in favour of the Allied
Powers, and after the war against those Powers which are now
the enemies of our Empire. Why should we not discriminate in
favour of heroic Belgium—a people who have risked their all
in defence of their own freedom and the freedom of the world?


Why should we not discriminate in favour of Prance —a brave,
artistic, tree people, paying the biggest penalty in defence of
liberty? Why should we not discriminate in favour of Japan,
our noble and self-controlled ally in the East. Their Consul-
General in Australia gave utterance to this appeal one day
last week: “They were ptoud of their alliance with Great
Britain, and trust it would last for ever. They have no desire to
enter into industrial competition with Australia; they did not
want to send Australia any goods which could be made here.
Japan wanted wool, wheat, minerals, and other primary pro-
ducts, and wished to send in exchange some of those things
which Australia could not produce.”
Let us have a triple tariff that we may be henceforth thrice
armed because our quarrel is just and because our cause is
righteous and in the Interests of humanity; armed to do justice
to ourselves, armed to do justice to our Motherland, armed to
do justice to our allies. Let us then by all means have a triple
tariff on the following lines:
First —Preference to Great Britain.
Second —Favoured nation tariff.
Third —Other nations tariff.
In this way and in this way alone can our Empire penalize
the tyrants of the world and assist materially in the develop-
ment of free democracies. The Executive of this People’s Libe-
ral Party is asking the Minister of Customs to receive a deputa-
tion of its members with a view to urging upon the Government
the necessity of asking to be clothed with these powers when
the tariff discussion is before the Federal Houses. May I express
the hope that our Empire enemies should never again be per-
mitted to find such a free entry and splendid opportunity to
build up a world trade out of the profits of which they might
at some future time again attempt our destruction as well as
impose their united will upon the whole of Europe. Never
again! We have read Aesop’s fables, and know the story of the
country man who took pity upon a frozen serpent, and warmed
it in his bosom. Never again until at least such time as they
are reborn and their fangs drawn.
Very favourable comment was passed by the following ladies:
Miss Crump (President), Mrs. Thomas (Soldier’s Hill, who asked
that it should be printed and sent to the branches). Miss Thom-
son, Toorak; Mrs. Rogers, Middle Brighton.
Mrs. Wischer (Vice-President) said she highly appreciated
Mrs. Brookes’ splendid paper, and considered that we should make
up our own wool and get flannel in return, not stuff mixed with
cotton and made to resemble wool, such as is ofttimes used In
sweaters.
Mrs. Anderson, South Yarra, asked if this would not be more
costly, and considered the present terrible war should teach us
one especial lesson —that of being more enterprising.


Mrs. Witham, Brunswick, said Australians must be Protec-
tionists. Women of Victoria must buy Australian goods, and so
make Protection a fact.
Miss Eva Crump, Ballarat, in reply to a question, said the
demand for shoddy was in England, where it was made.
Mrs. Tovell Brown spoke np for Tasmanian wool, and Miss
Crump (President) for New Zealand cloth, which she said was
excellent. She thought Australian blankets were better, even at
the higher cost. The trouble in New Zealand was the question
of machinery and capital.
Miss Coding said the present time was an excellent oppor-
tunity for developing trade, and drew attention to the British
contracts being placed here.
Mrs. Speed, Ballarat, said Ballarat serge was good, but one
of the greatest factors which prevented our making up our own
wool was the high price of labour. She considered manufacturers;
should be asked to favour our Australian industries and not to
use Japanese goods, such as bottles and other things which could
be made here. She proposed the following resolution, which,
was seconded by Mrs. Anderson, South Yarra, and carried unani-
mously: “That this meeting pledges itself to further Australian
industries in every way possible, especially by purchasing Aus-
tralian-made goods.”
Mrs. Woolf, Ivanhoe, spoke in favour of the resolution.
Mrs. Wisoher (Vice-President), said that she knew a couple
in Melbourne, who had a plant for knitting woollen garments,
who were on their beam ends on account of the selling at half
price of imported articles of teased cotton.
Mrs. Brookes, in reply, agreed with the sentiment re Aus-
tralian goods, and objected to the pushing of American boots by
tradesmen when asked for Australian. She said that when judg-
ing for the late window-dressing competition, she found several
windows which contained goods from other countries, made up by
Australians, and a small shop in an outer suburb, where every-
thing was Australian, gained the prize. Leather goods and
artificial flowers are made in Australia, though this is not gener-
ally known.
At 2.30 p.m. the Conference resumed its sittings, Mrs. Wischer
(Vice-President) in the chair.
After the roll call had been read, Miss Stewart read an excel-
lent paper on organization. She said that under Liberalism co-
operation in all its forms was fostered consistently with the indi-
vidual liberty essential to the manhood and womanhood of a free
people. Liberals had been lulled into a false feeling of security,
and did not realize their heritage needed safeguarding. They
were now faced by a formidable foe, Labour Socialism, which
threatened a greater form of tyranny than that under which their
forefathers had groaned, had faced, and had finally conquered,
Labour Socialism had made such great strides by organization
on its part and want of the same on ours. Our own want of
unity was also responsible in Victoria, but it not the fault
of this party; they had done their best to get it by entering


inlo a covenant, which they had kept loyally, but at the eleventh
hour the other side failed, and it was theirs to answer the why
and the wherefore. Our own organization was greatly hampered
for the want of financial assistance, while Labour organization
expected and received such from every one of its members She
said, too much was expected of the secretaries, and Liberals should
realize their responsibilities, and that Liberals outside the organ-
ization should not pass carping criticism, so frequently heard.
“Let us leave that to our opponents, who do it so well.
Mrs Goodisson, Secretary Women’s Division, spoke on details
of organizing work, and strongly advised the formation of elec-
torate councils and the division of electorates into sections, each
section to be attended to for the year by a member of the com-
mittee. She asked the members present to see that their elec-
torate committees were properly appointed, so as to be repre-
sented on the Council. Mrs. Goodisson also urged immediate
action that we may be ready to fight the Referenda proposals.
Mrs. H. Brookes emphasized the forming of electorate com-
mittees.
Mrs. Gould, Maryborough; Mrs. Rogers, Middle Brighton; Mrs.
Whitham, Brunswick; Miss Deakin, South Yarra; Mrs. Butler,
Footscray; Mrs. Speed, Ballarat; and Mrs. Seehusen, Kew, all
spoke strongly in favour of Miss Stewart’s ideas, and in appre-
ciation of the paper.
Miss Stewart, in reply, spoke of the necessity of a fixed centre
and one fixed day for forming electorate committees throughout
the branches. She also advocated the use of simple literature for
members.
A vote of thanks to Miss Stewart was passed unanimously.
Mrs. Whitham, Secretary of the Brunswick Branch, then read
a paper on “Women in Politics.” Woman’s place in the world
had undergone profound changes in the last fifty years. In the
old days man provided food, shelter, and safety, and out of these
the women made a home, but with the coming of machine-made
goods women’s energy found scope elsewhere. Women, as
mothers of the nation are particularly interested in securing
sound government and fair administration, and should bring for-
ward measures of social reform. They are a decided success in
organizing electors, “working for the candidate they wish to see
returned at the head of the poll, while men often look calmly on.
‘‘The Labour Party consider women’s vote and organization its
greatest strength, yet some of our women are too apathetic even
to record their votes.” Mrs. Whitham concluded by saying she
considered the women of the Commonwealth could claim a large
share in defeating the Referenda proposals, and hoped we would
do it again.
Mrs. Woolf said that Mrs. Whitham and Miss Stewart’s
papers made one point, canvass all the year round, which Miss
Deakin confirmed as necessary, people moving about so much.
Mrs Brookes said the essential duty was to guard the needs
of women and children, and said that female inspectresses took a
humane aspect of things. She also said that women should be
represented on all boards where women and children are
affected.


Mrs. Wischer said the vote for women gives justice to all,
and “makes good” for the community as a whole.
Mrs. Whltham was thanked for her paper.
“Women in the Home,” written by Mrs. Cohen, President
Middle Brighton Branch, was read, in the absence of the writer,
by Mrs. Goodisson. Mrs. Cohen considered that now women were
finding so many outlets for their patriotic feelings, that they
were apt to forget their first duty—the home. Women were not
trained to spend money as men were to earn it. A home does
not grow, like “Topsy,” nor does It mean living in houses or
lodgings; it means the place which a woman only can make
a haven of rest. No woman could make a real home if she was
always gadding about getting blankets and top boots to send to
the Cannibal Islands. One special duty was for the wife always
to go and purchase her own meat, groceries, greenstuffs, etc., and
not to do her marketing by telephone, and then women would
know the value of pounds, shillings, and pence as well as food-
stuffs, and would not be exploited by unscrupulous dealers;
and, above all things, pay cash for everything you ibuy. The
housewife should also study the likes . nd dislikes of her family,
and their digestions. Go to the market as the Frenchwoman
does, and get your money’s worth.
Miss Crump said one great difficulty was in one woman
running all departments in a home. The inefficient maid trouble
was a very serious problem.
Mrs. Goodisson explained that the title of the paper was
too comprehensive; it was really “Our First Duty,” though Mrs.
Cohen had told her on the telephone it was “Women in the
Home,” and when the Secretary knew, it was too late to alter
the programme. She thought servants were not given suitable
rooms and proper places to sit in, were treated as aliens, and
made to feel lonely, which is the most terrible thing for a woman
to bear.
Mrs. Anderson, South Yarra, thought many Homes were want-
ing help because girls thought domestic service degrading.
Mrs. Whitham, Brunswick, asked what women were to do
who could not afford to employ a servant.
Miss Coding, Brunswick, said she could vouch for the fact
that Mrs. Cohen practised what she preached.
Mrs. Wischer (Vice-President), said she knew the deadening
influence of continuous housework, and understood why girls
disliked it, especially when they saw their brothers earning, for
a shorter space of time, considerably -more money. She depre-
cated the extreme polishing performed in some houses, and the
unsuitable dressing of children, and strongly advocated co-
operative creches and kindergarten, co-operative dining-rooms,
kitchens, and gardens, and the lessening of domestic work
wherever possible.
Mrs. Brookes said the status of servants should be improved
by their occupying the same position as trained nurses, and advo-
cated the establishment of Domestic Economy Colleges.
Mrs. Rogers, Middle Brighton, also spoke, and a hearty vote
of thanks to Mrs. Cohen was passed.


At the High Tea, held in the City Hall, on the evening of
the 28th inst., arranged by the ladles of Ballarat, very good non-
party speeches were made by Mr. Stubbs, President Ballarat Men s
Branch and Colonel Merritt, Vice-President of the Central Execu-
tive, who also spoke of his trip home, which had been cut short
by the war.
The toast of “The King’’ was proposed in the usual manner,
and the “National Anthem” opened and closed the proceedings.
Miss Crump proposed the toast of the Central Executive, to
which Mesdames Wischer, Whitham, and Miss Godlng responded.
Mrs. Brookes proposed a vote of thanks to the Central Branch
for their hospitality to delegates.
Votes of thanks were also passed to Colonel Merritt and Mr.
Stubbs.
The second day of Conference. 29th April, commenced with
"the roll call, Mrs. H. Brookes, Director, in the chair.
Mrs. Goodisson, Secretary v. omen’s Division, read her paper
on “Social Questions.”
SOCIAL QUESTIONS.
At the present time, no women’s conference would be com-
plete unless the three great questions of Drink, Gambling, and
Immorality were discussed, and of late public opinion has been
so aroused on two at least of these subjects, that it behoves every
woman and every man, too, to do his or her share, be it little
or great, in doing away with these evils and lessening their
results: —
I fear that some very good and well-meaning people, who
take a vital interest in these triple evils, do more harm than
good in asking for their total prohibition. Such a procedure Is
impossible unless all alcoholic liquor is destroyed, every game
of chance prohibited (including many now considered legitimate
businesses). And, also, I fear that immorality and its conse-
quences cannot, for several generations at any rate, be eliminated
from the lives of our people.
Regulation, therefore, and preventative measures, seem the
only remedies, and in the first, drink, these are difficult, as so
many Interests, both of employer and employee, have to be con-
sidered. Drink, to which the other two evils so often owe their
existence, is not a necessity, though there is no reason why a
man or woman should not have a glass of wine if he or she
desires it, always provided that such an action does not encourage
the abuse of alcohol in others. Spirits should certainly not be
used except medicinally. Fortunately, many, nay, most doctors
now never order it for their patients, only using it in very ex-
treme cases. This Is a good departure, as, unfortunately, the
majority of a medical man’s patients are women, and with very
few exceptions, women who take to drink, very shortly become


hopeless cases. For this reason, I think all grocers and wine-shop
licences should be stopped, and 'no woman served in a hotel.
The law explicitly declares that no publican shall serve a
Inan who is drunk, but it is difficult to decide what constitutes
drunkenness. A man may go from one hotel to another drink-
ing in each, when suddenly the last proves too much for him
and the publican is fined. ’
Our vaunted “liberty of the subject” is always flaunted when
control is mentioned, but I consider that persons making them-
selves public nuisances, and others making little hells of their
own homes, should be put into sanatoria with or without their own
consent. We have to put away insane and imbecile people and
these poor sufferers from the drink evil are for the time, at
any rate, insane. They should be protected from themselves,
and this can only be done in most cases by compulsion. Such
a law was sought to be Introduced into Victoria some years ago
but met with no success, and I don’t think it ever came into
existence. In a sanatorium, a man or woman’s bodily health is
looked after, and by this means they regain their self-control,
if only temporarily. They are thus enabled to fight against the
demon, which- has well nigh destroyed them body and soul.
The street laws against Sunday trading and the delicensing
6f so many hotels during the last ten or more years, have greatly
lessened the evil, and the streets on Sundays are very different
from what they used to be. I hope that very shortly the spectacle
of a woman, a barmaid, helping a man to ruin himself, his wife,
children, and home, will be a thing of the past. A woman’s
mission in life is to elevate and purify, not to degrade and destroy,
besides which such a life demoralises the strongest, bravest, and’
best woman by lowering her self-respect, in doing what she
knows to be wrong. Shouting, another phase, makes many men
drink far more than they would otherwise do. Custom, and a
bad custom, too, decrees that if a man is shouted a drink, he
must return the so-called compliment. Many men have told me
they did not want the second drink, but it would be bad taste
not to accept it, A little determination, and this stupid practice
could be discontinued,
I spent some months in Java, and was much struck, as is
everyone who travels in that small and prosperous isle, by the
wonderful sobriety of its inhabitants. It arises, doubtless,
greatly from the fact that the Dutchman knows he must preserve
his status and keep his authority over the native. That would
be soon lost if he were seen in a state of intoxication. During
my six months’ residence there, I only saw one intoxicated man,
and I am sorry to say he was a Britisher. (Shame.) Shouting
is unknown, and the hotels have no bars. Each man’s drink is
brought to him in a glass to his verandah, and the Dutchman
who has travelled in Australia thinks the idea that no business
can be done without a drink, most extraordinary. Doctors resi-
dent there consider that the sobriety of the colonized Dutch


man is the reason that he can live so much longer in tropical
■climates than Britishers can do in the same latitude.
It is astonishing that in all movements against the drink
■traffic, clubs are rarely, if ever, mentioned, and yet they have
a twenty-four-hour license to make men drink. Club men will
tell you clubs are private, but then why do they sell liquor and
have to he licensed. There is no reason that they should be
exempt from inspection any more than the public house. The
■ labourer's wife gets her husband home when the publican shuts
him out, bad enough in all conscience, hut the wife of higher
■ degree whose husband is a member of a club, never knows when
to expect hers. Disinterested Management is claimed to he a
solution of the difficulty in England, but it is still on trial,
and though like every Liberal I object to State Socialism, yet I
think, a similar venture, State hotels are a move in a right direc-
tion. I know the teetotaller objects to this as a way of legal-
izing the evil of drink, but it also minimises it, for purer.liquor
■would be sold, and the manager would have no Incentive to ply
a man with more drink than is good for him. Travellers who
have stayed at the State hotels in W.A., say they are well con-
ducted, and free from drunkenness. These, also, are still on
trial, and we should watch the results. It is claimed that the
earlier closing hours and more thoroughly carried out legislation
will lead to sly grog-selling, but this should not necessarily occur
if strict supervision is maintained over what comes into a dis-
trict. I arrive at the following conclusion re the drink traffic,
seeing that we cannot abolish it altogether—
1. Get State or disinterested management.
2. Bring clubs into line with hotels.
3. Prohibit shouting.
4. Employ no new barmaids.
5. Establish sanatoria for inebriates.
6. Prohibit gambling in hotels and clubs.
7. Enforce all these laws without respect of persons.
GAMBLING. —Now I come to the second question, gambling.
1 think in some ways this is the most difficult of all to grapple
With, though its direct effects are not so terrible as those of drink
and immorality. For it must be confessed that everyone in his
hr her way likes a “flutter.” From the financier on the Stock
Exchange, the land speculator, the exploiter of foodstuffs in war
time, the card player at the club, the punter at the races, the
women at their bridge parties, down to raffles for church and
Other praiseworthy objects, even Liberal Leagues, and not except-
ihg the small boy in the street, we all gamble in one form or
another. I think somebody has said that life is one big gamble
and marriage is certainly a lottery-daughter)—so it will be hard
ffiofind one without sin to throw the first stone” at this evil. How to


differentiate would puzzle the most acute and learned brain, for
we cannot stop the land speculator, the Stock Exchange, nor many
other businesses. Still, there are some forms of gambling which
should certainly be tabooed. Gambling in public places is, I
understand, a punishable offence, but it is very inconsistent to
allow it to be practised in clubs, public houses, and similar places.
Most games, even cricket, considered the cleanest of all, have
their gambling side, and this should be discontinued, and the
game played, football, etc., for its own sake. Personally, I think
the totallsator, provided the bookmaker is debarred, will rid the
racecourse of its most objectionable feature. It and Tattersall’s
are automatic, and absolutely fair, just as fair and honest as
your church raffle or shooting at a hull’s eye. The danger lies
in using other people’s money or money which should be paid,
perhaps, to a tradesman, but the one who will do this will do it
if there is no totalisator or Tattersall’s. I am always grieved
to think that women play cards for money, for I consider it
most contemptible to pocket your friend’s losings. I dearly love
a game of bridge or solo whist, but am astonished to find how
difficult it is to get women to play without stakes. Men, natur-
ally, look differently on these subjects, for they will bet on
anything and everything, even as to which fly will get up the
wall the soonest. I am afraid I am unable to arrive at any
definite conclusion on this subject, unless we upset all commercial
life and prohibit gambling in any form.
IMMORALITY. —And now I come to the last and most serious
question of all. Most serious because the most debasing, and
one which has the longest and most terrible results. How are
we to stamp it out? Societies are being formed in Melbourne
and all over the world with this object in view. But the onus
lies with each person to govern him or herself, provided he or
she knows the pitfalls which are spread and ready for all when
they reach the age of puberty. I think pre-natal and hereditary
influences are greatly to blame for the violent and uncontrolled
impulses of the present generation. People live such luxurious
and voluptuous lives, that their offspring must naturally inherit
the same desires. And wine, strong meat, richly-cooked foods
are always available to stimulate and keep up those desires.
The American idea, which will probably only remain an idea,
that medical examination before marriage is necessary for both
parties, would, of course, help largely, if practicable, towards
the bringing into the world healthy, normal offspring. But
public thought must largely alter before such interference in
the mating of man and woman comes into existence. Most
women, nowadays, however, know enough of hygienic laws, or
what is now called sex hygiene, to enable her to judge, in some
degree, of her future husband’s moral and physical health. No
sight is more grievous than for a mother to have a child, or
children, whose appearance is a living reproach to both parents.
A woman should, when possible, surround herself, when carrying
her child, with all influences for purity and for the special atmos


phere she wishes it to occupy. As a child grows up in years
and begins to ask questions as to the mystery of life, why tell
them the old-fashioned fairy stories with the idea of keeping them
innocent? Ignorance is not innocence, and what you don’t tell
them they will most surely find out in a coarse and sensual
fashion. Tell them the beautiful truth, delicately and purely,
what life means, showing the beauty of animal and plant life,
and the wonderful methods God has employed to perpetuate the
species, and then, when the time comes to warn them of the
evils which lie before them, they will be prepared and will know
that you have not deceived them. Till the last decade, these
ideas were considered advanced, but we are now getting accus-
tomed to them; we must look facts in the face without any
mock modesty, but with true, pure, and intelligent grasp, help
the rising generation by acknowledging that deception has
proved abortive.
Just lately I read “Freckles, a delightful book, which
charmed me with its teaching of the boy, who in the forest
watched the birds making their nests, bringing forth their young.
How, though he had been told nothing about it, yet he recog-
nized his mate and kept himself pure for her, both in deed and
word. But that was away from towns and their attendant evils.
Picture shows of problem plays and passionate love scenes are
bad, and I think women might well interest themselves in getting
them replaced by scenery and the works of industrial factories.
Books also carry much evil into young minds; they compare
notes, and ferret out things which should only be told them by
those who can properly explain the origin of life. If boys and
girls could be kept free from sex knowledge until they are six-
teen or seventeen, it would be advisable, but one is horrified by
hearing so-called flappers discourse on these sacred subjects; so
we must e’en make up our minds to tell our children ourselves
and so save them from the evil consequences which follow the
breaking of laws, human and divine.
I was just lately told by a medical man of the terrible
number of young people in Melbourne who suffer the results of
their wrong-doing. One wonders if the laxity of relationship
between the boy and girl of the present day is good or bad.
Good because It gives greater freedom and independence, bad
because it leads to sensual excitement. The best way is to im-
press upon boys and girls the wonderful sanctity of their bodies,
that -each should be equally pure, and that the boy should give
every girl the respect he would show to his own mother and
sister. Then, later, father and mother must tell their children
plainly the evil results which ensue on indulgence.
Syphilis is an evil that will probably never disappear, but
we can at any rate warn our young people against contracting
it, with its terrible results, madness, chronic diseases, and early
death. No wonder our sisters in England try to save the girl
population from the white slave traffic, and we must do the same


lylaurice Gregory’s excellent little work on the subject, contains
fin exceptionally good suggestion, “That men should form an
Alliance of Honour,” and promise to advise every young fellow
to abstain from sensuality, and to keep himself as pure as he
would expect his future wife to be. That members of that
alliance should watch the streets where these unfortunate women
live, and persuade the men they see there not to enter the houses.
And here, naturally, one sees early marriages are to be desired,,
even though young people begin their lives in a small way.
I hope I have said nothing to hurt anyone’s sensibilities, hut
I feel strongly on the subject, and shall be quite content if my
words will make even one woman work against this cruel, de-
vastating curse, and help to keep the resolution which will, I
trust, be carried unanimously this afternoon.
Mrs. Horton said she intended devoting part of her life to
educating young people in these subjects, and thoroughly agreed
with the paper.
1 Mrs. Rodgers, Middle Brighton, advocated special Institutions
for syphilitic cases.
Miss Coding said drink and immorality were the questions
of the day, and we should help the young children.
Mrs Wlscher said the overcrowding in small houses was
responsible for much of the trouble, and agreed with remarks re
picture shows.
Mrs. Gould, Maryborough, said there was too much liberty in
the homes,
.Miss Eva Crump agreed that children should be taught the
principles of plant and animal life. She said she was not in
favour of prohibition, which had been a failure in New Zealand.
Mrs. Marchant, Ballarat Central; Mrs. Galloway, Newbridge;
Mrs. Johns, Ballarat; Mrs. Anderson, South Yarra; Mrs. Butler,
Footscray Mrs. Seehusen, Kew; Mrs. Salmon, Bssendon; Mrs.
Bradbury, Hotham Hill: Mrs. Tovell Brown, S. Elsternwick, all
spoke appreciatively of the paper, and it was agreed that it should
he printed for circulation.
Miss Crump said social reformers often blamed mothers, hut
it was not always their fault, they were not so highly educated
as their sons and daughters.
Mrs. Whitham. Brunswick, said she was grateful for the fact
brought out by Miss Crump, but she maintained that the older
person’s advice was better if even that of an uneducated woman.
Sex education must begin in the home.
Miss Deakin, South Yarra, said creches bring mothers to-
gether, and the educational influence is good.
Miss Stewart disagreed with the part of the paper which con-
cerned raffles. She said the churches were not using them now.
- Mrs. Brookes said the best example was in the homeland, the
greatest immorality was in rich, not in poor, houses. She .con-
sidered raffles were - quite justifiable, as the ideal was good., ~..


by straight heart to heart talks. Men view the subject differently,
but all must acknowledge the terrible results which follow licen-
tiousness.
One remark Dr. Rentoul made, during the famous contro-
versy in the dailies, struck me as very pertinent; “A camp of
womankind, which, having been degraded by men, sought now
to degrade other men.” How true, and yet probably with no
such intention in those unfortunate women’s minds; only just
to keep their poor degraded bodies alive, when their souls had
been killed by man’s brutality and passion.
The demand creates the supply, and if men did not demand,
our women would not be demoralized, and sent to early graves.
One false step, in which the man tak s at least his equal share
and the woman is ruined for life, ostracised, kicked further down
the hill by her 'own sex, until she has no refuge but the streets
iand their awful life, while the man goes unpunished, except,
perhaps, by conscience. A man wrote in a West Australian
paper, and gave the fact that there were 110.000 women of ill-
fame within a twelve mile radius of the G.P.0., London, as a
reason for refusing the vote to women. Who created that im-
mense crowd, of unfortunates? Man, without a doubt, for with
few exceptions woman’s first false step is taken for the love of
a man. Such men as were accountable for those 110,000 women.
And who so fitted to vote against the white slave traffic as the
one who, alone, has suffered the punishment. I thank God
there are many good men in the world who protect women, even
from themselves, and many have been saved even by men ■who
sought them for no good purpose.
Much is written against the notification of disease, but one
recognizes that while, we are trying to uplift our men and
women morally, yet we must also use other means to save the
rising generation. “Nameless notification” is a means to save
the rising generation. “Nameless notification” is a means which
pbtains in some countries, and seems one way out of the impasse.
If men and women are encouraged to submit themselves to treat-
ment with no fear of publicity, they will probably do so, to obtain
a good result. We must also remember that this evil is often
the cause of sterility, and with our big, unpopulated land, this
makes another serious aspect to be considered. Our best assets
are our Australian-born children, and we must save our women
for this great and foremost duty.
Dr. Hammond, a writer and student of syphilis, says: “That
not less than one-third of the population of civilized countries
is subject to constitutional syphilitic affections, and others which
have been transmitted to them by hereditary influences.’
Another writer, Dr. Douglas White, says there are 200,000 fresh
cases annually in London, and half a million in the United King-
dom. In such cases, surely every doctor should notify the proper
authorities immediately, and isolation should be enforced.


Mrs. Goodisson in reply, said medical men should speak out
publicly on the evils of the great disease. Dr. Harvey Sutton had
Said we were up against a brick wall, out we must break it down
brick by brick through regulations and the education of our young
people. Now we were practically out of politics, we should take
up social questions. Evidently it was thought the writer dis-
agreed with raffles, but that was not so. They were only men-
tioned to show how universal the spirit of gambling is. We
should all help our erring sisters, and try to put them in the way
of regaining their position, as had often been done by Mrs.
Deakin.
A vote of thanks was passed to Mrs, Goodisson.
Mrs. Brookes advised the following books to be bought by
mothers: “The Story of Life,” by Blice Hopkins; “What a Young
Boy ought to Know,” by Stall; “What a Young Girl ought to
Know,” by Wood-Alien and Stall.
In the absence of Miss Broadbent, Secretary of the Richmond
North Branch, Miss Coding road her paper on the “Totalisator.”
Miss Broadbent wrote that she considered more important
things now lay before Parliament than the Introduction and legis-
lation of the totalisator, to which she was strongly opposed. She
described the operation of the machine, and gave the opinions
and statistics of various writers against it, showing the great
increase of betting since the introduction of the machine, especi-
ally in New Zealand, and also declared that if betting were sanc-
tioned, it would add largely to the amount of money laid on.
The breed of horses was said to deteriorate considerably where
the machine was used, and the chief, Miss Broadbent contends,
the worst argument in favour of the machine, is that by so doing
we would benefit the charities.
Mrs. Goodisson considered the tote the fairest method of bet-
ting, and did not think the breed of horses had anything to do
with it, as people would always bet on horse racing. The
machine had been used in New Zealand before 1892, so that the
increase from that year to 1913 did not prove that it was due to
the totalisator.
Mrs. Woolf, Ivanhoe, and Mrs. Wischer (Vice-President), said
racing was much cleaner In New Zealand, where the tote ob-
tained, and found racecourses conducted much more decently
there than in Sydney.
Discussion arose as to the possibility or otherwise of women
voting with the bookmaker, and it was decided that further in-
formation was desirable.
A hearty vote of thanks was passed to Miss Broadbent.
The next paper was on the “Charities Bill,” by Mrs. Woolf,
Ivanhoe. She advocated a thoroughly representative Charities
Board, composed mainly of hard-headed business men. The board
should appoint its own band of workers, including ladies and
clergymen, with the necessary experience. The board should
have absolute control of the organization, including its finance,
and this system would prevent overlapping.
Afterwards, Mrs. Woolf read an extract from an English
paper re a Bogus Charity Collection in France, and also spoke
about a similar case which had been exposed in Sydney.


Mrs. Horton, Malvern, approved of the box system, and some
method of effectual oversight.
Mrs. Wiseher (Vice-President) said a new form of the Chari-
ties Bill was to come out this year, and thought equal representa-
tion of men and women should obtain on the board.
Mrs. Woolf, you would not wish the Commissioners to be
women?
Mrs. Brookes (Director); If the same old Bill comes out, we
keep to our original idea. If commissioners appointed only to
allocate money, then the women would do the inspection. The
State charities need help, especially the depot. Mrs. Deakin had
tried to get help for them.
Miss Vale, Soldiers’ Hill, said women should be on, as the
small details were ignored by men.
Mrs. Goodisson said that equal representation only should
be accepted by an organization which carried out this ideal, even
to its finance meetings.
The afternoon and last sessions of Conference were carried
out under the chairmanship of Miss Crump (President).
A paper on “Compulsory Voting,” written by Miss Price, Pre-
sident of Brunswick Central Branch, was read by Mrs. Rogers
(Brighton), who had intended writing a paper on the subject,
but withdrew in favour of Miss Price.
Miss Price stated that her branch was unanimous in declar-
ing that compulsory voting should be a plank of the platform,
while there is so much apathy among our people in contrast
with the opposition, who invariably vote their full strength. After
weeks of canvassing, Liberal women would not come out to vote
unless a car is sent for them. Miss Price thought this measure
should be the first one that a Liberal Government should put
into force when they are in power, and thus compel our apa-
thetic women to do their duty and profit by the privilege granted
them, one which is so much desired by the voteless women of
other countries.
Mrs. Thomas, Soldiers’ Hill, said compulsory enrolment was
useless without compulsory voting.
Mrs. Mclntosh, Brunswick; Mrs. Rogers, Middle Brighton;
Miss Crump, President; Mrs. Johns, Ballarat; Mrs. Peterson, Tal-
bot; Mrs. Galloway, Newbridge, all supported the principle of
■ compulsory voting.
Mrs. H. Brookes said the difficulty was how to enforce It.
It was better to educate people to perform a duty than to compel
them.
Miss Goding, Brunswick North, agreed with Mrs. Brookes,
and said compulsory voting would lead to fraud.
Mrs. Speed considered compulsory enrolment helpful, but did
hot agree with the idea of having compulsory voting.


Mrs. Horton, Malvern, and Miss Deakln, South Yarra, though
not agreeing with compulsory voting, found compulsory enroll
ment useful and valuable, inasmuch as the rolls were serviceable
for 'other than parliamentary purposes. ,
Question Box was the next item on the programme, and!
caused considerable amusement.
The first questioner wanted to know if Australia could evef
prosper under the present overgrown system of government, and
could not more direct government be instituted.
Mrs. Brookes said the system of government was as direct
as possible, each body being elected by the people, starting with
the municipal councils, then the State Government, and finally 1
the Federal. The first deals with purely provincial and suburban
matters, and was the rate payers vote. The second with local
matters affecting each State in which man and womanhood suff-
rage is in force, and finally the Federal, with national affairs, and
carried by adult suffrage. All of them necessary for a thoroughly
governed democracy, and will prove even more so when the popu-
lation is larger, which must come to such a vast, rich continent
with its wonderful climate.
In answer to the question whether branches should meet
monthly, Mrs. Goodisson replied that this was best, but should
be left to local people to decide.
One enterprising person wished to know “If it was not mani-
festly false that the Press was the bulwark of liberty and free-
dom.”
Mrs. Goodisson replied that the Press did make for liberty
and freedom, and various members took advantage of the occasion
to express their appreciation of the notices given to the Conference
in the “Age” and in the local papers.
One member wished to know if anyone could give informa-
tion re the condition of babies in the drought-stricken areas, the
Mallee especially, where no milk is available.
Mrs. Galloway, Newbridge, and Mrs. Wischer (Vice-Presi-
dent) spoke on this matter, and a desire was expressed for
Information, and data on this subject, especially in connection
with the exploitation of child labour on farms, which Mrs. Wis-
cher vigorously denounced.
Miss Crump was asked to reply to a question as to whether
Party Government had resolved itself into a sordid struggle for
pay or power, and said that parties were necessary and did not
lead to a sordid struggle for pay and power anymore than any
other system. That party government in England had been
effective, and at present was necessary in Australia, on account
of the solid Caucus of the Labour Party.
There were several resolutions dealing with proposed alter-
ations in the title of the organization.
Mrs. Brookes explained that the original title was the Liberal
Party, and for the sake of union with another organization they
agreed to take the word “People” if the others would take the;
word “Liberal.”


Mrs. Galloway took exception to the title being Liberal League
or Liberal Association, because there were other Liberal bodies.
Miss Crump thought they were entitled to the word “Lib-
eral.” There was another organization which called Itself
Liberal, but which was not always Liberal. She remembereu
being asked on behalf of that organization not to vote for Mr.
Deakin because he was too much inclined to Socialism,
After much discussion, it was recommended that the name
should be “The Liberal Party.”
Other resolutions were:
By the Women’s Executive: “That the Women’s Executive
wish to aid in every way possible the movement for closing
hotels at 10 p.m. during war time.” —Carried.
By the Maryborough Branch: “That the women of the
People’s Liberal Party do all in their power to urge the Vic-
torian Government to hold a Referendum on the early closing
of hotels, on similar lines to that recently held in South Aus-
tralia. ’ ’ —Defeated.
By the Women’s Executive: “We would like to urge re-
cruiting, but there is a consensus of opinion that the conditions
of camp life are retarding enlistment, and we consider it would
be advisable that the Party approach the Defence Department
on the subject; hoping to get Information by the aid of which
the public can assist them.” —Carried.
By the Women’s Executive; “That every woman should re-
solve to do all in her power to do away with the curse of
immorality so rife amongst us, by instilling the necessity for
purity on her own and any children with whom she comes in
contact, and by getting her husband to assist and to influence
other men in minimising the evil.” —Carried.
By the Women’s Executive: “That steps be taken to tax
amusements in aid of relief funds in war time.” —Carried.
By the South Yarra Branch: “That a general relief fund be
inaugurated for Victoria for sufferers from war and drought.”—
Carried.
By the Women’s Executive: “That the State Government be
asked to deal with the Charities Bill immediately”; and South
Yarra Branch: “That the necessity for the passing of the Chari-
ties Bill be urged upon the State Government, with the request
that women be given equal representation on the Board. —Car-
ried.
By the South Yarra Branch: “Urging the extension of the
playground movement.” —Carried.
By the Toorak Branch: “That we should do all possible to
reform the tram service and tea-rooms at the Zoo, in order to
make it more easily accessible to tired mothers with large fami-
lies, and also more attractive to visitors.”—Referred back to
Women’s Executive.


By th© Toorak Branch; “To endeavour to obtain reform at
the Post Office, especially with regard to cleanliness at the par-
cels office, with efficient and courteous service there. Prompt
delivery of letters and telegrams should be asked for.” —Re-
ferred back to Executive.
By the Smythesdale Branch: “That compulsory voting be
a plank of the platform, as without it compulsory enrolment is
useless”; and Brunswick Branch: “That compulsory voting be
a plank of the platform.”—Defeated.
By the Women’s Executive: “That this Conference urge upon
the Federal Government the necessity for securing power from
the present Parliament, whilst the tariff is being decided, to
establish a triple tariff, covering: (1) Preference to Great
Britain; (2) favoured nations; (3) other countries.” —Carried.
By the Central and Ballarat Executives: “This Conference
recommends that the Central and Ballarat Executives enquire
into the matter of child labour in the country.”—Carried.
Moved by Mrs. Anderson, seconded by Mrs. Speed: “That
this Conference protests emphatically against the continuance of
professional football this winter, in view of the continuous
need of recruits.” —Carried.
Moved by Mrs. Brookes, and seconded by Miss E. Crump.
“That we shall use our influence to prevent a sudden change in
fashion which would render much good clothing useless, until
the end of the war, as is being done in England, due to a sug-
gested innovation of wide skirts and crinoline.” —Carried.
After the resolutions had been cleared off the sheet, Mrs.
Goodisson proposed, and Mrs. Brookes seconded, a vote of thanks
to the Press for their attendance and reports of the Conference.
Mrs. Wischer then proposed, and Mrs. Brookes seconded, a
vote of thanks to the Ballarat ladies for the good arrange-
ments they had made and for their hospitality.—Carried.
Miss Crump suitably responded, and the Conference 'dosed
with the’ singing of the “National Anthem.”
In the evening the Hon. Lyttleton Groom, M.H.R., addressed
a public meeting in the Mechanics Hall. Mr. Stubbs took the
chair.
Mr, Groom made a most interesting speech, and in answer
to Mrs. Brookes’ request, explained the Queensland system of
compulsory voting, of which we hope to hear more after the
elections on the 22nd inst.
(Signed) L. B. GOODISSON,
Secretary Women’s Division.
Sands & McDougall Pty. Ltd., Printers, Melbourne.
