

W r t
RETIREMENT
[private.]
MR. PARKES
FROM THE
LEGISLATIVE ASSEMBLY
NEW SOUTH WALES.
Spßnfg:
PRINTED (FOR PRIVATE CIRCULATION) AT THE EMPIRE GENERAL STEAM
PRINTING OFFICE, HUNTER STREET.




Mr. Parkes was elected a member of the Legislative Council for the
City of Sydney, in opposition to Mr. Charles Kemp, on the 2nd of
May, 1854 ; on which occasion the number of votes for each candi-
date, at the close of the poll, stood as follows: —
Parkes 1427
Kemp 779
At the close of the Session of 1855, Mr. Parkes addressed the
following letter to his constituents ;
TO THE ELECTORS OF THE CITY OF SYDNEY.
Gentlemen —ln the course of the ensuing week, the Legislature to which
you did me the honour of electing me by an unprecedented majority of your
votes, will virtually terminate its existence, and its actual dissolution cannot be
very long delayed. It seems to me, therefore, that the time has arrived when I
ought to inform you of my intention not to present myself again among the
candidates for your suffrages.
During the two laborious sessions of my service as your representative I have
felt the conviction gaining strength, in despite, as I freely own, of some feeling
of ambition, that neither my time nor whatever humble ability I might possess
could be sufficiently subjected to my will to enable me to discharge the high
and responsible trust reposed in me, with that uniform devotion to the public
interest which is implied in its acceptance. Though I have generally been in
my place, I have attended the sittings by wrenching myself, as it were, away
from other duties of an equally serious nature, which often left me wholly un-
prepared for the business of the Council; and in the part I have taken there I
have never felt conscious of any success to satisfy my sense of what is due
from the Representative to his Constituents. While feeling all this, I have also
felt that the distinction conferred by your votes is the greatest within the reach
of the servants of the people, and should only be enjoyed in association with the
most efficient performance of public duty. Besides, the obligations ol the trust
are sacred, as covering momentous consequences to society, and neglect, as
well as a wilful violation of those obligations, must be positively sinlul in pro-
portion to the injury thereby inflicted upon our fellow creatures. It is not,
then, that I lightly value the post of your Representative, but because I am
sensible of my inability to occupy it with advantage to the country, that I
desire to give place to another and, as I sincerely hope, a better man.
I am aware that, by taking this course now, I lay myself open to the taunt,
in some quarters, of declining that which might never be offered ; and I freely
admit I have no reason to expect that I should be invited to stand a contest lor
your representation in the New Parliament. But I would rather incur this
risk of ridicule than silently allow any trouble to be taken on my behalf by
those from whom I have received such uniform kindness and so many marks
of confidence.


The great change about to take place in our form of Government will, we,
all hope, be accompanied by vigour and enlightenment in the administration of
affairs, diffusing the blessings of constitutional liberty through all classes and
interests of the country. Outside the walls of the Legislative Assembly, it may
yet be my privilege to assist in bringing about so desirable a consummation.
In making up my mind to stay outside, I have had to conquer a strong feeling
which my better judgment has told me ought not to be gratified; but the self-
denial has been sweetened by the knowledge that I have before me another field,
fairly won by my own efforts, for future usefulness. I leave the Legislature, as
I entered it, from a sense of duty alone. You opened the door for me against
singular obstacles; I cheerfully close it with my own hand.
If I am too poor to make the sacrifices incumbent on a Representative of
the People, I am, at least, too proud to accept the honour and neglect the
duties of that noble office.
I remain, Gentlemen,
Your very faithful servant,
HENRY PARKES.
Sydney, December Bth, 1855.
(Advertisement in the Sydney Papers , January, 1856.)
REPRESENTATION OF SYDNEY.
A PUBLIC MEETING of the Citizens of Sydney will be held in the
Royal Victoria Theatre, on MONDAY, the 7th instant, at one o’clock, p.m.,
to take into consideration the nomination of four gentlemen as fit
and proper persons to represent the City in the New Parliament, whose
political views are known to be in accordance with those which have been
repeatedly declared by the great majority of the electors in direct opposition to
the unconstitutional principles developed and established in the ELECTORAL
ACT of 1851, and the NEW CONSTITUTION ACT of 1853.
Edward Flood John Campbell, J.P.
W. R. Piddington Thomas Walker
John Dunmore Lang E. J. Hawksley
B. Mountcastle
Martin Guest
Edward James
Robert Stewart
John Eldridge
W. M’Curtayne.
At the Meeting convened by the foregoing notice, the subjoined
resolution was moved by Mr. Benjamin James, seconded by Mr.
Eldridge, and adopted :
That, without presuming in any way to dictate to the citizens, the four
following gentlemen are, in the opinion of this meeting, fit and proper persons
to repi'esent the City in the New Parliament, and are hereby recommended to
the citizens for their support in the ensuing general election, viz : —Robert
Campbell, Esq., Henry Parkes, Esq., J. R. Wilshire, Esq., and Charles
Cowper, Esq.


After tlie resolution come to at the Public Meeting on the 7th
of January, Mr. Parkes attended a meeting of the Electors, held on
the 14th of the same month. That meeting is thus spoken of in a
weekly paper of the day, The Anglo-Australian, January 21st: —
We have every prospect of a sharp contest for the representation of the
Metropolis in the New Parliament. Four members are allowed to Sydney by
the Constitution Act. There are already seven candidates in the field. Four
—Messrs. Campbell, Parkes, Wilshire, and Cowper—are brought forward by
the “liberal” interest, which has heretofore been predominant in city politics.
The Attorney-General is the candidate of the moderate or Conservative party,
who so far seem content with contesting a single seat.
The gentlemen comprising the great liberal coalition were introduced to
the notice of the electors at a meeting held on Monday week last, at the
Victoria Theatre. Mr. Plunkett made his debut as a candidate for the suffrages
of a constituency at the Royal Hotel a few nights afterwards. Both meetings
were attended almost entirely by partizans of the candidates in whose interest
they were convened ; but it is a noticeable fact that in every instance a strong
feeling has manifested itself in favour of the return of the Attorney-General.
And, in spite of the presumed unpopularity of many of that gentlemen’s views,
and the disadvantage of his long connection with an obnoxious system of ad-
ministration, his claims threaten, more than those of any other public man that
might have been put forward could have done, to “divide the liberal interest.”
The first public meeting which it is our province as historians of the week
to chronicle, took place at the Royal Hotel on Monday evening. Some four
hundred persons—as far as we could judge —assembled to listen to the addresses
of the three retiring members of Council who are again seeking re-election.
Speeches were delivered on the occasion by Mr. Flood, who occupied the
Chair, by Mr. Benjamin James, Mr. Redman, and others, but these were mostly
spoken amid such a deafening uproar as rendered it impossible for them to be
heard at distance of a few feet from the platform. The clamour originated in
various causes. A large section of the meeting were warm favorers of the
pretensions of Mr. Plunkett, and indisposed to tolerate any of the imputations
on that gentleman, which constituted much of the talk of the evening. Others
—working men—seemed to consider it a degradation to listen to harangues
from the platform from persons belonging to their own order, and called out
lustily for “respectable men.” There was nothing like general silence and
attention until Mr. Henry Parkes rose. And it must be recorded that all the
discordant elements of which the meeting consisted seemed to melt into har-
mony on his rising to speak. He was not only well received, but welcomed
with a perfect wildness of enthusiasm. His pale excited earnestness, would
probably have conquered the prejudices of any audience, and won a respectful
attention. But his manifest conscientiousness and straightforward honesty
were seconded in this case by a strong sympathy with his political principles,
and the demonstration in his favour was genuine and emphatic. Mr. Parkes
placed himself unreservedly in the hands of the electors. His own interests
and his wish to stand by for a season and “search his own heart and conscience
to see how far he had been correct” in his public career would have kept him
aloof from the present conflict. But if the electors forbade him this interval of
comparative seclusion, he would consult their wishes rather than his own
views.
He knew that if he went into the next legislature he should be for ever doomed (o
one tremendous struggle in behalf of this country. But, if it was the wish of the city
which had conferred upon him in former time distinctions, far above any merit he pos-
sessed, that he should go to the poll, he would do so, and if he was again elected as the
representative of the City of Sydney, he w'ould discharge the duties which would devolve


upon him to the utmost extent of his power. One thing at all events he would promise—
that he would never be absent when their liberties were at stake ; he would never be
absent when their money was to be voted away ; he would never be absent when new
laws might need his advocacy for the advancement of the welfare of their common
country. He would promise more—he would never be absent at all so long as he had
health to attend. He knew very well the sacrifice he should make—and he confessed
that he did desire to avoid that for a short time—the discharge of the public duties in-
cumbent upon him would render him comparatively a stranger in his own family. That
would be the extentof his sacrifice, buhthat sacrifice he was prepared to make rather than
forfeit the good opinion of the citizens of Sydney, and shrink from a public duty if he
was called upon to discharge it.
He defended himself from the charge of inconsistency in thus placing his
services at the disposal of the electors, after publicly avowing his intention to
retire.
Some few months back a meeting was called, and a committee formed in Sydney, to
consider the approaching election, and secure proper candidates. He was applied to in
October last to know if he would become a candidate. He then replied that he had no
intention to do so at the next election. This was six weeks before his published letter
appeared to the electors of Sydney. He mentioned this circumstance to show that he
had not acted precipitately, but with a full consideration of what was before him —of what
his own circumstances were and what was the tendency of his own wishes. But when he
took this course he certainly thought that four gentlemen would come forward to repre-
sent the city who entertained the same opinions as those for the advocacy of which he
had received the triumphant support of the citizens of Sydney; and if any four gentle-
men had come forward and identified themselves with those opinions, he could say
honestly that he should have at once joined their ranks and have given them his support.
To show that he was perfectly sincere in this, he would observe that no further back than
last Friday week he wrote to the gentlemen who got up the meeting at the Victoria Theatre,
offering to go to that meeting and propose or second any four names such as they might
agree upon. The meeting would, therefore, see that his conduct had been clear
and consistent. After his address was published to the electors he was waited upon
by numerous persons—parlies of two and three or more, representing influential
sections of the electors, soliciting him again to present himself as a candidate. He used
the same language to those gentlemen as he had used in his published address in the
newspapers : but when the time of the public meeting came reund at the Victoria Theatre,
aud he was there nominated as one of the candidates for the representation of the City of
Sydney ; and again, after receiving the cordial and significant welcome of the present
meeting, it appeared to him that he should be flying in the face of the constituency, if he
were to refuse any longer.
Adverting to the history of the past session and the part he had taken in
the proceedings of the House, he declared his belief that the minority by which
the extravagant policy of the Government had been so firmly though unsuc-
cessfully resisted, deserved the thanks of the country—a sentiment generally
endorsed by the meeting.
When public writers or public speakers, or persons in private life, told them of the
squabbles in the Legislative Council,he would point to the Parliament in the time of Charles
the First, and ask whether the liberties of England were not won amid squabbling? Where
a small minority contended against the combined strength of a powerful majority there
would always be squabbling; how could it be otherwise when on the one side the principles
were truth and justice, and when on the other they were self-interest and corruption ?
Squabbles ! They had taken place in every nation on the face of the earth where free-
dom had been attained for the people. The proceedings of the first architects of the
temple were denounced as worthless, the conduct of ignorant and designing men. This
accusation of squabbling was the old artifice of the arch-enemy of mankind. But let the
electors look back to the votes of the last session—to the proposals for wasting the public
money on all sorts of impracticable schemes—on incipient armed powers to keep them in
subjection hereafter—to the schemes to break through the commercial tariff of the
country, to ruin our commerce, and to tax in the most unstatesmanlike manner all the
necessaries of life —let them look back on all these things and see who opposed them,
consistently with their whole public lives, and consistently with the public policy of the
country, and who uniformly supported them, and let them then decide for whom they
would vote.
Appealing to the meeting for their decision to the line of conduct he
should pursue, he said :
He cared not who the men sent to the New Parliament might be, so that they were
the right men. As far as he had any interest in the matter, he would say that if beaten


Mr. Cowper ...
3075^
Its
Mr. Parkes ...
3057 1
Mr. Campbeel
3041
Mr. Wilshire
2901
Mr. Plunkett
2800
Dr. Duigan ...
89
he should retire without 11 single pang. He should then feel at all events that the gates
of Parliament were constitutionally closed against him, and he could then do as he
pleased with his time, and enjoy the pleasure of association with his children. He had
nothing more to say. His past conduct was before the meeting. If they desired him
really to be a candidate in this election, he should call upon them to testify their wish
before he sat down. (Loud and continued cheering.) If they really wished that he should
throw himself into the contest, let them tell him so by a show of hands.
The appeal was responded to apparently by the whole meeting, amidst
vociferous applause, which Mr. Parkes acknowledged by saying he was at the
service of the city.
The Election for Sydney took place on the 13th of March, and
on the 20th the Sheriff made the following official declaration :
(Extract from the Votes and Proceedings of the Legislative Assembly,
December, 19,1856.)
Electric Telegraph : —Mr. Parkes moved, pursuant to notice, That an Address
be presented to the Governor General, transmitting the Report of the
Select Committee appointed to consider the subject of the Electric Tele-
graph, with a request that His Excellency will take the necessary steps to
carry out, without delay, the recommendations therein contained.
Debate ensued.
Mr. Weekes moved, That this Debate be adjourned until Tuesday, De-
cember 30.
Debate continued.
And the House having continued to sit till after midnight—
SATURDAY, 20 DECEMBER, 1856.
Question, on the motion for adjournment of the Debate until Tuesday,
December 30 —put and passed.
Vacant Seat:—The Speaker having reported that he had received a letter from
Mr. Parkes resigning his seat in the Legislative Assembly, as one of the
Members for the Electoral District of the City of Sydney ;
Mr. Jones moved, That this House now resolves, that the seat of Henry
Parkes, Esquire, as a Member of the Legislative Assembly for the
Electoral District of the City of Sydney, hath become and is now vacant,
by reason of the resignation thereof by the said Henry Parkes, Esquire.
Question put and passed.


On the same morning the following letter appeared in the Sydney
Papers:—
TO THE ELECTORS OF THE CITY OF SYDNEY.
Gentlemen — A year ago, when the business of the late Legislative
Council was about to close, I addressed a letter to you informing you that it
was not my intention to offer myself as a candidate for your representation in
the New Parliament. In taking that step, I was chiefly influenced by the con-
viction that my other engagements would not allow me to attend to the business
of the Legislature so as to satisfy ray sense of public duty, and that you had
a right to expect from your Representative a course of devoted service to the
country unhampered by the pressure of his personal affairs. The strong expres-
sions of feeling in my favour, and considerations urged upon me of a purely
political nature, induced me subsequently to forego my purpose; and on the
day of election I was returned to the Legislative Assembly as one of your
members. Highly as I valued the distinction thus conferred on me, I could
not even in the hour of triumph conceal from myself the difficulties that would
surround a proper discharge of the duties I had undertaken, though I hoped
they would not be greater than my power to overcome them. Since then, how-
ever, the circumstances which presented to my mind the desirability of my
retirement have grown of greater rather than of diminished force ; and, after the
experience of another year, and an anxious re-examination of the reasons for
and against the course I first proposed to pursue, I have come to the conclusion
that it is clearly my duty to return into your hands the trust you have twice
confided to my keeping. Accordingly, I have this day sent in to the Honorable
the Speaker my resignation of the seat I have hitherto filled as one of your
representatives in Parliament.
I was anxious to continue our relations till after the prorogation, so that
my resignation might not possibly be the occasion of injury to your interests ;
but the adjournment over the Christmas holidays, while it will protract the
session to a period that would seriously interfere with my arrangements for the
future, were I a member of the House, will afford time for filling the vacant
seat without any great inconvenience to the public. Though questions of grave
consequence remain to be determined by the Assembly, I am sure you will not
lose the opportunity to select as my successor a person in all respects better
qualified to assist in their determination.
Leaving the Legislature, it may be well that I should say, to save my
conduct hereafter from misconstruction, that it is my purpose also, for some
years to come, to disconnect myself entirely from public life. But while I live
I shall not forget that I have been honoured by receiving your confidence ; and
neither time nor circumstance shall render the links that have united us in
higher relations, of less binding effect on my ability to serve you as a private
citizen. In return for the great distinction I have enjoyed, I have contributed
little to the advancement of your interests ; but at least I have not weakened
the position of your representative by seeking to build up power to myself.
Henceforth, 1 hope it will be my happiness to see others serve you who shall
prove themselves more worthy of the service.
I remain, Gentlemen,
Your very faithful servant,
HENRY PARKES.
Sydney, December 19th, 1856.


{Extract from the Speech of the Hon. John Hubert Plunkett, late Attorney-
General of New South Wales, and now President of the Legislative Coun-
cil, on nominating Mr. Fairfax, as a Candidate for the Seat vacatedby
Mr. Parkes : reported in the “ Sydney Morning Herald December
30, 1856.)
He had come forward on this occasion to propose a candidate to fill the
seat resigned hy Mr. Parkes. Although since the last election for the City he
had not personally been on speaking terms with Mr. Parkes, he was happy to
hear testimony to the services ,he had rendered ; and it would be difficult indeed
for them to find a member so able, useful, and assiduous as he had been; one who
would throw, as Mr. Parkes had done, his whole heart and soul into the busi-
ness of the country, or who would bring with him into the legislature so much
weight and influence of character.
The following notices of the retirement of Me. Parkes from the
Legislative Assembly, appeared in the public Journals of the time.
(From the “ Illawarra Mercury December 22, 1856.)
This gentleman’s resignation of his seat in the Assembly will be heard
with sincere regret by that large section of the community who entertain libera)
opinions. His untiring industry, unceasing watchfulness, and manly indepen-
dence, as a representative, will make his loss deeply felt, and his like hard to
be found. At this stage of our affairs, his retirement must be deplored, but he
may rest assured, that the memory of his past services will be cherished by the
people with reverence and gratitude.
(From the “ Maitland Mercury," December 23,1856.)
There will, we think, be a very general feeling of regret throughout the
colony that Mr. Parkes has resigned his seat in Parliament. Many even of
those who differ with him in politics will join in the regret that so straightfor-
ward and painstaking a member should quit the Legislature. Among those
who, like us, take the same general views of politics as Mr. Parkes, the feeling
of regret will be very strong. Beyond all doubt he has been one of the most
valuable members in the House, and we believe one of the most thoroughly
honest and single-hearted. Few men, indeed, in it give promise of higher use-
fulness and greater eminence than he has done—for to our mind his is one of the
improving spirits, and he will be a better statesman five years hence than he is
now. .
Mr. Parkes states the cause of his resignation to be the impossibility of
properly performing his public duty with the pressing demands on his time from
his personal affairs. To us it has been a matter of surprise how Mr. Parkes
could manage to devote so much time as he has done to his duties as repre-
sentative, when engaged in an occupation which at best is only profitable when
sedulously pursued, but which must necessarily become a source of constant
expense and loss when it ceases to be personally superintended.
(From the “Northern Times,” December 24, 1856.)
Our readers will regret to learn that Mr. Parkes has resigned his seat for
the City of Sydney. Doubtless Mr. Parkes’ reasons for so doing are satis-
factory to himself and ought to be sufficient to the public. It is nevertheless
to be regretted, that circumstances should have arisen to compel him to retire,
for a time, from public life, except in the sphere of the journalist. In an


address to the electors of Sydney, published in the Herald and Empire, he has
fully explained, so far as could be publicly made known, his reasons for re-
tiring for a season from the Parliament of the country.
The country owes more to Mr. Parkes than many will be inclined to
acknowledge. He has the great merit of having been the first to organise here
a consistent political party. Before his entrance into public life, our politi-
cians were remarkable for anything but their consistency, voting merely as their
inclinations or interests led them, without any regard to principles. He is the
only one of our public men who has been before the country for any length of
time, of whom it can be said that he has not changed sides more than once or
twice. Had Mr. Parkes looked to his own interest, instead of those of the
public, he might, doubtless, have been, as far as pecuniary circumstances go,
better off than he is to-day. He possessed too great an amount of influence,
not only in Sydney, but throughout the country, not to have been an acceptable
acquisition to the anti-progress party, had he chosen to barter his principles
for a “mess of pottage.” The flesh-pots of Egypt have offered no temptation
to Mr. Parkes. We dare be bound to say, that he retires from the service of the
country an infinitely poorer man than he entered it.
Mr. Parkes’ resignation will be a great loss to the opposition. We know
of no one in the House whose opinions on all subjects were delivered with
greater earnestness, or commanded more respect and attention from all parties,
Mr. Parkes does not belong to the rabid school of politicians. What he does
say is said with spirit and sincerity, but without bitterness or malice. In spite
of his politics he has personal friends among the members of every party.
One of his greatest recommendations is, that, unlike some of the liberal party,
he is not to be softened down by flattery. We always feel certain of Mr. Parkes
voting on the right side, no matter what praises ministers may bestow on him,
and we see that the Premeir especially is not niggardly in his encomiums. It
is something to have one leading man in whom we can place entire confidence.
That Mr. Parkes has his faults we shall not attempt to deny. That he
should have them is one of the conditions of humanity ; and we leave to others
the ungracious task to point them out. That as a politician he possesses
fewer faults than most public men, we hold to be indisputable. Not a whisper
can be breathed, as far as we are aware, against either his political or moral
character. His industry and perseverance are above all praise. He is an
example of what may be done by a man of talent and energy, relying solely
upon his own exertions. Mr. Parkes, has, perhaps, had less assistance from
others in his career through life, than most men, yet he occupies a position
in this rapidly advancing country, second to none. It is to his honour that he
has attained his position without sacrificing his independence or cringing to
any class or person.
Not the least benefit which Mr. Parkes has conferred on the country has
been the establishment of The Empire Newspaper. That was a work of no
ordinary difficulty, as those who have had anything to do with newspapers can
testify, especially when one had to contend with a long-established and pros-
perous journal. Mr. Parkes has succeeded, at any rate, in making The Empire
the first paper, in point of talent and information, in the Australian colonies,
and in raising the tone of the Colonial press generally by the influence and
(example of that Journal. We have no hesitation in saying, that if by any
unfortunate circumstances, The Empire should cease to exist, it would be a loss
not only to the Liberal party, but to the colony generally.
That Mr. Parkes, in his character of journalist, will still possess many
and favourable opportunities of advancing the best interests of the country, is
the best compensation that we can have for his loss as a legislator. We do not
know but that in the former capacity he may be of even more use than in the
latter. The career open to him in that capacity is unbounded —in influence and
honour it is second to none. Taking into consideration the great labour devolv-
ing on the conductor of a daily paper, we do not doubt that Mr. Parkes has acted


wisely in confining his attention to that alone, instead of dividing and weak-
ening his efforts by attempting to do what would break down the strongest
constitution. A conscientious legislator or a conscientious journalist will find
enough to do in either capacity, without endeavouring to amalgamate the two.
We trust, however, that when circumstances shall be more favourable, we shall
have the pleasure of hailing Mr. Parkes’s re-entrance into the Legislature of
the country. We would hint the propriety of a testimonial, had not the
honour of such things become greatly lessened by having hitherto been given
so indiscriminately. We question, too, whether Mr. Parkes’s extreme sensi-
tiveness would not shrink from anything like pecuniary reward for his services.
We should like, however, to see the public appreciation of those services dis-
played in some suitable manner.
(From the “ Bathurst Free Press,’’ December 24,1856.)
By the last Sydney intelligence, we perceive that Mr. Parkes has resigned
his seat as a Member for Sydney, and in doing so, has stated his reasons in an
address to the electors. In that address he adverts to the circumstances
attending his re-election —his intention to withdraw from public life, because
impressed by a conviction that his other engagements would not permit him to
so attend to his legislative duties as to satisfy his sense of public duty, and his
subsequent acceptance of a seat upon political grounds, when urged upon him
by the electors. In taking his present step, he says, that the circumstances
which suggested the desirability of his retirement in the first instance have
acquired additional force, and he bows to the necessity they dictate.
Short as has been Mr. Parkes’s career in the legislature of the colony, it
has stamped his character as a consistent, honest, straightforward man, and the
observer of passing events and the public men who influence them, must have
noted the strict regard to political principle by which his career in the Legislature
has been marked. This, in our estimation, is the highest virtue which can
regulate the life and conduct of a legislator. But Mr. Parkes is not a merely
honest and consistent man ; he is endowed by nature with a force of character
and general ability which placed him amongst the foremost men in the House.
There was a sincerity of purpose and earnestness of conviction, aided and
assisted by intellectual power of no mean order, which would make themselves
felt and respected in any deliberative assembly in the British Empire. Even
his bitterest political opponents have faith in his integrity, and the attention
with which he was invariably listened to, both in the Legislature and out of it,,
affords the strongest proof of the estimation in which his parts and character
are held by all classes.
Whether in public or private life, sincerity wins its way into the confidence-
of mankind, and downrightness of purpose is a characteristic which is rarely
undervalued by Englishmen. It is always re-assuring to feel that the senti-
ments we listen to are the pure, unadulterated thoughts of the individual, which
well up from the heart, unpolluted by considerations of expediency or the mere
policy of the hour. Give us the man who exercises his reason in the dis-
covery of the right and the truth —who worships them, once arrived at, with the
fervour of a religious sentiment, and invests them with a character of a religious
obligation. From such materials only may we hope to see patriots and
philanthrophists arise amongst us, and the pages of our history and the history of
every country which has grown great in the world are studded with brilliant
examples of this class. Hence it is that we honour the antecedents of contem-
porary politicians, whose career has ever been in strict conformity with their
professions.
There are few members of our Parliament whose withdrawal we should
regret so much as that of the honorable member for Sydney, Mr. Parkes, be-


lieving, as we do, that he is the right man in the right place. His career in
the House has not been more remarkable for honesty of purpose and sterling
independence than for an industrious discharge of his detail duties as repre-
sentative of a particular constituency. We are not in possession of any statistics
bearing upon the matter, but we question whether, in regularity of attendance
and assidious attention to the various questions under discussion, he w r ould be
called upon to yield precedence to any member of the House. Congeniality of
political sentiment, with, perhaps, some slight shades of difference, may in
some degree bias our judgment, but we candidly avow the opinion that men of
Mr. Parkes’s stamp can be ill spared by the country, and whatever the circum-
stances which have rendered his withdrawal from public life inevitable, we hope
that the day is not far distant when he will again be enabled to take his place
amongst the legislators of his adopted country.
{From the “ Goulburn Herald," December 27, 1850.)
It will he seen, by reference to our parliamentary reports, that Mr. Parkes
has resigned his seat in the Assembly. Whoever may be the candidate put
forward to fill the vacancy, we question very much if the loss sustained by his
retirement can be repaired. With an untiring application to his senatorial
duties, Mr. Parkes brought to bear on the chief political questions of the day a
judgment remarkably clear and distinct. Though not a graceful orator, there
was a rugged impressiveness in his manner of speaking which produced a con-
viction of the earnestness as well as the honesty of the speaker. The laborious
task of superintending a daily paper is a sufficiently strong motive for the
withdrawal of Mr. Parkes from the Assembly. We trust that his health, which
has much suffered by the untiring strain on his mind produced by the multi-
fariousness of the duties he- has lately discharged, will be restored by his
retirement from Parliament.
(From the “Freeman's Journal," December 27, 1856.)
Mr. Parkes, as most of our readers are aware, has resigned his seat in the
Legislature. Much as we are opposed to, and hard as we have often hit, Mr.
Parkes, we regret his resignation extremely. He was “ the noblest Roman of
them all” on the opposition benches.
{From the “ Armidale Express,” December 27, 1850.,)
The resignation by Mr. Parkes of his seat in the Assembly will, no doubt,
surprise the colonists generally—as we confess it has done ourselves. We have
no knowledge of the precise reasons which have induced that gentleman to
consider such a step necessary ; but we deeply regret that it has taken place,
and we are confident that even many of Mr. Parkes’s political opponents will
view his resignation as a great public loss, if not an irreparable one.
Although Mr. Parkes’s valuable services in the Assembly will be lost
for a time, we hope that he does not intend to resign his connection with the
Press. The country cannot afford to dispense with a man of such eminent
public worth as Mr. Parkes, and we are certain that no light sacrifices would
be submitted to by the mass of the people, if necessary to avert such an
untoward event.
{From the “Newcastle Telegraph,” December 27, 1856.)
Mr. Parkes’s resignation of his seat for Sydney, and retirement from
public life, took the community by surprise, and his retirement will cause a void
which for a period cannot fail to be felt.


(From the “ Border Post," January 3, 1857.)
Mr. Henry Parkes, of The Empire, has resigned his seat for Sydney,
in consequence of the great demands made upon his time by his private
business. A writ for a new election had been issued, and the polling-day was
fixed for the 30th December. We have heard a very general expression of
regret at the withdrawal of Mr. Parkes from the Legislature, and although
that gentleman’s duties as the representative of a metropolitan constituency are
not of a nature to render him popular in the “unsettled districts,” there are
few amongst us who do not acknowledge his ability, honesty, experience, and
assiduity.
(From the “Era," January 3, 1857.)
Years hence, when the names of those now high in authority shall cease to
be remembered, history will number amongst the early benefactors of his
adopted country Henry Parkes. Its tablets will tell how a man who himself
sprang—-as he proudly avows —from the working classes, spent his life in the
endeavour, not to raise himself at the expense of his fellows, and to conceal his
origin in a maze of aristocratic connections, but who strove throughout his
whole career, with a firm determination and constancy of purpose, to improve
the condition of his compeers by birth. Its pages will relate how the iron will
of the self-educated man made circumstances bow to his unchangeable reso-
lution ; how poverty, malignity, fulsome flattery, and the fawning advances of
subdued yet secret foes were alike unavailing to influence his actions or pervert
his principles ; and we trust that it will also tell that he lived to see the result
of his labours in the happy faces of a free, prosperous, and contented com-
munity. We have it from Mr. Parkes’ own mouth that, for a time at least,
he is about to retire from taking any active part in political affairs ; but we
trust that the secession of this gentleman from the councils of the country will
not be of many years’ duration, but that before Jong he will again occupy a
position he has ever filled with such credit to himself and such advantage to the
public.
(From the “ Maitland Mercury,” January 27, 1857.)
Mr. Parkes’s leaving the Legislature of the country to return to purely
commercial pursuits for a time, affords an excellent opportunity for showing
how the people of this country appreciate his public services. Unlike Mr.'
Mort, Mr. Parkes has not successfully combined public duties and private
enterprise. He devoted so much of his time and his energies to his public
life that he left himself short of the time and personal supervision requisite to
succeed in business —in the sense of making money by business. His must
have been, indeed, true patriotism, for while his talent and enterprise are
obviously amply sufficient to create a fortune for him, if he chose to devote
them solely to business, he persisted, in spite of gathering difficulties, in
discharging the public duties he had undertaken in a manner that held out an
example to his most industious compeers. And in what a noble spirit did he
discharge them! Let us assume for the moment that the charges of his few
ungenerous opponents was just—that he proposed to himself, as his ultimate aim,
the becoming the head of a party in the State. What “party” did he select to
become the head of? Does any one doubt that, had he chosen to join the
“exclusives,” he might have become and be still the petted favourite of cliques
and coteries ? Does any one doubt, that a convert of his commanding ability
would have been joyfully welcomed, and place and power freely offered him ?
But Mr. Parkes—the man whose ambition to be leader, it was urged, was to
prove the ruin of the country—continued to profess, as the popular leader, the
acknowledged able man, exactly the same politics as he did when he was only


one of the many, an obscure man among the people. Always an advocate of
the rights of the many against the few, he made no change in his course. A
thorough liberal, a hater of exclusive rights or oppressive privileges, when a
quiet citizen, he continued a thorough liberal, a dreaded denouncer of oppression
or wrong, when he had become a powerful public speaker, and the owner of a
mighty engine for good or evil. Such a man, who retained his loyalty to the
people under all circumstances, who devoted his time, his talents, his eloquence,
to the making a practical existing fact of that political and social equality his
opponents would willingly still have confined to theory—should have a uni-
versal testimonial, not a dinner merely, at which a few hundreds can join, but
some form of testimonial in which the people can all take part, in which thou-
sands can have a share, and which Mr. Parkes’s children can one day point
to with honorable pride.
(From the “ Australian Banner,” February 12, 1857.)
Amongst our fellow citizens we have few of the energy of character, the
comprehensiveness of mind, and the self-sacrificing spirit of Henry Parkes.
We may differ from him on some questions, but we cannot cease to respect
him in his public capacity. As a journalist he has raised the character of the
public Press, imparted to it a tone of independence and a spirit of liberty and
emancipation from the old dotage of things, which is calculated to work
extensive good ; for the teaching of the Press, in this colony, is the chief
instruction of the people. The establishment of such a paper, as The Empire,
was, in itself, an Herculean task, needing no small amount of energy and
mind.
But this undertaking was not singular. Mr. Parkes united in all the
great and public movements of the times, and stood out prominently as a
leader in those undertakings ; while in his Legislative capacity he was one of
the very few who took a statesman-like view of the questions of the day. He
contested for principle more than for party, and looked to comprehensive
measures more than details. His zeal may at times have made him irritable,
but while he excelled many, we think he had in the Assembly but few his
equal.
He deserves well, therefore, of the colony, as one of the very few who have
sacrificed his ease and his pecuniary prospects to the welfare of the public ;
consequently, we were glad, on his retirement, to see the indication of the
public mind.
We view Mr. Parkes as the type of a remarkable class of men who have
raised themselves and the class to which they belong, to a high and honorable
position amongst their fellows—honorable because their lustre is not bor-
rowed—but their own.
PROPOSED TESTIMONIAL TO HENRY PARKES, ESQ.—PRE-
LIMINARY MEETING.
(From “ The Empire ,” January 20, 1857.)
A preliminary meeting of gentlemen was held at the Royal Hotel,
yesterday afternoon, shortly after 4 o’clock, for the purpose of forming a
committee and concerting other measures preparatory to calling a public
meeting, with a view to the representation of a public testimonial to Henry
Parkes, Esq. A more unfavourable day for holding a meeting could scarcely
have occurred, as the rain poured down in torrents. Between twenty and
thirty gentlemen only were present, amongst whom were Captain Williamson,
Mr. W. G. Pennington, Mr. J. Lucas, Mr. J. M'lntosh, Mr. B. S. Mountcastle,
Mr. William Northwood, Mr. B. James, Mr. Joseph Clayton, Mr. R. M'Guffin,
Mr. J. G. Raphael, Mr. Venteman, Mr. C. G. Reid, and Mr. Peisley.


On the motion of Mr. C. G. Reid, seconded by Mr. Joseph Clayton,
Captain Williamson was called to the chair.
The Chaieman opened the business by reading the advertisement con-
vening the meeting, as follows:—“Testimonial to Henry Parkes, Esq.—A
preliminary meeting will be held at the Royal Hotel, this day, Tuesday, 20th
instant, at 4 p.m., to make the necessary arrangements for a public meeting.”
When he came there that evening he had not the slightest idea that he would
be called upon to take any active part in the proceedings; but has he had been
called to the chair he begged to inform the meeting that he took it on the
express understanding that the testimonial was not to be presented to Mr.
Parkes on political grounds, but as a token of the estimation in which the
colonists held that gentleman’s manly and straightforward conduct on all occa-
sions ; and although he (the Chairman) did not agree altogether with Mr. Parkes
on some subjects, still he could not help but have a very high opinion of him
as an honorable man, as a journalist, and as a member of the Legislative
Assembly. As this was merely a preliminary meeting, he did not think it
necessary to enter at length into the subject, and would therefore conclude by
calling upon the mover of the first resolution to address the meeting.
Mr. W. G. Pennington apprehended that they had all known Mr. Parkes
as a public man ; at all events he had known him during the past six years, not
only as a citizen, but in every other relation of life, and had known him always
to merit the esteem of his fellow citizens; he did not think it was necessary on
that occasion to enter into a discussion as to Mr. Parkes’s political opinions ;
one thing, however, was clear, they admired his conduct, whatever his opinions
were, and he (Mr. Pennington) believed those opinions were representative
opinions. The resolution which he had the pleasure to move was as follows :
That this meeting is of opinion that a testimonial from the colonists of New South
Wales be presented to Henry Parkes, Esq., late Member for Sydney, in token of the
high esteem entertained for him by his fellow colonists, and as an expression of their
earnest appreciation of the valuable public services rendered by him to the city, and the
colony generally, as a member of the Legislature.
That was only a preliminary meeting, and it would therefore be necessary to
test by a public meeting the esteem which the colonists entertained for Mr.
Parkes. They should render the testimonial worthy of Mr. Parkes—worthy of
conveying a suitable expression of their opinion of his character as a public
man. In conclusion, he felt great pleasure in moving the resolution for their
adoption. (Hear, hear.)
Mr. J. Lucas seconded the resolution. He did so with great satisfaction,,
because he believed Mr. Parkes was an honest straightforward man ; whatever
Mr. Parkes had done he had done it in an honest straightforward manner. He
(Mr. Lucas) was one of the first who thought that a testimonial should be got
up to Mr. Parkes as a mark of public approbation and esteem ; and wherever
he saw honesty of purpose, he would always do his best to support it. (Hear,
hear.)
Mr. C. G. Reid would, before the resolution was put to the meeting, say
a few words. He would confirm what had been said by Mr. Lucas ; and he for
one could say that, although he approved of Mr. Parkes’s principles, he would
not have taken any part in that meeting if it had not been got up in such a
manner that men of all shades of political opinion might heartily join in it.
That the meeting had been got up in such a manner he had only to instance
the presence of his worthy friend the chairman, and his other worthy friend the
seconder of the resolution. He believed that the objects of the meeting would
be successfully carried out, and that the testimonial would be general. Indeed,
unless public men were rewarded by the approval of their fellow citizens they
would not have that encouragement and spirit to serve the public which they
ought to have. (Hear, hear.)
The Chaieman then put the resolution formally, and it was carried by
acclamation.


Mr. Joseph Clayton begged to move the next resolution, which ran
thus:—
That this meeting is of opinion that a public meeting should he convened on an
early day, in order that steps may he taken to carry the proposed testimonial into effect,
and that the following gentlemen be appointed a committee, with power to add to their
number, to make arrangements for the same —Captain Williamson, W. G. Pennington,
H. Richardson, J. Lucas, J. Mclntosh, R. Stewart, B. S. Mountcastle, A. Allen, W. North*
wood, George T. Thornton, W. Skinner, B. James, E. James, Joseph Clayton, R. Me
Guffin, J. G. Raphael, D. Venteman, L. Corcoran, C. G. Reid, Honorary Secretary.
He went heart and hand with the object of the meeting ; but as he was not ac-
customed to public speaking he trusted to be excused from doing nore than
simply moving the resolution and expressing his entire concurrence in it.
(Hear, hear.)
Mr. B. S. Mountcastle seconded the resolution, and in doing so ob-
served that he thought Mr. Parkes deserved the highest testimonial which the
colonists could bestow upon him. He would not occupy the time of the
meeting further than by saying he most cordially concurred in the object for
which they had assembled. (Hear, hear.)
Mr. J. G. Raphael felt that it was nothing more than the citizens ought
to do, to present Mr. Parkes with a public testimonial. Few men had served
the citizens as he had done, and had commanded the respect of all men—his
political opponents included. It was not to be supposed that because he had
resigned his seat in the legislature he was not in a position to do them further
service. (Hear, hear.) It would always be his greatest glory to serve them,
but in another way. They were all aware that during much of his time Mr.
Parkes had worked for them, and now to show that the country knew how to
appreciate his services they ought to give him a fitting token of their appro-
bation and esteem. (Hear, hear.)
The Chairman then put the resolution, and it was carried by acclamation.
Mr. W. G. Pennington then moved, and Mr. Joseph Clayton seconded,
a vote of thanks to the Chairman, for his conduct in the chair. It was formally
put, and carried by acclamation.
The Chairman having acknowledged the honour in a neat and becoming
manner, the business was declared at an end.
PUBLIC MEETING.
(From “ The Empire," January 26, 1857.)
A special meeting of the committee appointed at the Royal Hotel on
Tuesday last, was held at the same place on Saturday afternoon. Besides the
committee, others friendly to Mr. Parkes were invited to attend. The object of
this special meeting was to take into consideration a letter received by the
Honorary Secretary, from Mr. Parkes, in reference to the proposed testimonial.
There were about forty persons present, amongst whom were Mr. Lutwyche,
M.L.C. ; Mr. Cowper, M.P. ; Mr. Jones, M.P. ; Mr. Murray, M.P. ; Mr.
Forster, M.P. ; Mr. Flood, M.P. ; Mr. Robertson, M.P. ; Mr. Gordon, M.P. ;
Mr. Weekes, M.P. ; Mr. Scott, M.P. ; Mr. Francis Rusden, M.P. ; Mr. Lee,
M.P. ; Mr. Marks, M.P. ; Mr. Pennington, Mr. H. Richardson, Mr. R.
Stewart, and Captain Williamson. The chair was occupied by Mr. Lutwyche.
The proceedings commenced at half-past two, by the Chairman calling upon
Mr. C. G. Reid, Honorary Secretary, to read certain letters which had
been addressed to him, in reference to the testimonial. He said the first letter
he should read was one received from Professor Woolley. It was to the follow-
ing effect:—
Lindesay, Darlinghurst, January 22,1857.
Sir—l regret very much that my absence from Sydney prevented my attendance at
the meeting held for the purpose of forwarding a subscription for a testimonial to our late
excellent member, Henry Parkes, Esq.


My family has removed to Darlingfaurst; and I received your circular at the very
hour when the meeting was taking place.
I will only add that I most cordially agree with the purpose of the meeting, and shall
be happy in my small way to express my sense of Mr. Parkes' public services and
character.
I hope that a long future of still more important services is in store for him.
I am, Sir, your obedient Servant,
JOHN WOOLLEY,
C. G. Reid, Esq.
The next letter was from R. M. Robey, Esq., as follows:
Newtown, Sydney, 21st January, 1857.
Dear Sib —Your circular of the 19th instant, in reference to the proposed testimo-
nial to Henry-Parkes, Esq., only reached me to-day, probably in consequence of its not
being addressed as above ; I may however state that a previous fixed engagement for
Tuesday afternoon would have prevented my attending this preliminary meeting, had
your circular reached me in time. I embrace the present opportunity to express my
approval of the objects the conveners of said meeting have in view, and shall be very
happy to contribute in any way that may be decided upon by the committee, to assist in
forwarding their views, believing, as I do, that the honest, manly, straightforward, and
liberal conduct of our late member, H. Parkes, Esq., is eminently deserving of public
recognition, and of some substantial mark of the approval of his fellow citizens.
I remain, dear Sir, yours very truly,
E. M. ROBEY.
Mr. C. G. Reid, Honorary Secretary, Sydney.
There was then a letter from the Rev. Mr. Threlkeld, expressing his
approval of the object of the movement, and enclosing a subscription of £l.
He would next read a letter received from G. Thornton, Esq.:—
January 20th, 1857.
Mv Dear Sir —I regret that a prior engagement will prevent my attending the
meeting convened for this afternoon by the friends of Mr. Parkes; but, if the object be
to recognise the great public services of that gentleman, you shall have my hearty co-
operation. lam of opinion that Mr. Parkes has contributed as much as any, and more
than most men, towards our political advancement. I also believe in the sincerity of his
opinions and his efforts. I might enlarge upon this subject, but as this note is merely
intended as an apology for my non-attendance, 1 hope you will accept it as sufficient,
and am yours very truly,
GEORGE THORNTON.
Mr. C. G. Reid,
There were also letters of apology from Robert Campbell, Esq., M.P., and
W. B. Dailey, Esq., M.P., regretting they could not attend, and expressing
their fullest concurrrence in the object of the movement. He would now pro-'
ceed to the object of the present meeting. It was to take into consideration
a letter received from Mr. Parkes, in reference to the proposed testimonial.
The decision which would be arrived at by the meeting would be conclusive as
to whether they should go on with the movement or not. Mr. Parkes, in this
letter, expressed a desire that the matter should not be proceeded with ; and
it would rest with the meeting to determine whether they were bound, in
deference to Mr. Parkes, to give way to him in this matter, or to proceed. The
letter was to the following effect: —
Sydney, January 21st, 1857.
My Dear Sib —Until I saw the report of the meeting held yesterday at the Royal
Hotel, I did not know who were interesting themselves on my behalf in getting up this
proposed testimonial, and I did not see my way to interfere in the business. I think it is
right, however, that I should now communicate to you, in order that you may explain to
the committee that has been appointed, my feelings on the subject.
In the first place, I think the public should be slow to stamp the services of any man
with a special mark of their approval, for honours of this kind can only retain their value
by reason of the just claims of the persons on whom they are bestowed. Entertaining
this opinion, I cannot persuade myself that I have any merits to entitle me to a distinction
so altogether personal. If I have been fortunate enough to effect any amount of good
in the share I have taken in public life, I would rather have it entirely lost sight of than


over-estimated by my fellow citizens. In either case the good could not in reality he
made greater or less ; but it would be more grateful to one’s self-respect to rest upon
something that remained for ever unacknowledged than to feelconscious of having accepted
a distinction undeserved. On the broadest ground that can be assumed, I think my
friends would best consult the public interest and my individual reputation by abandon-
ing their intention in regard to me.
In the second place, even if I could believe that my claims to public consideration
were greater than my warmest friends can possibly make them out to be, I have a kind of
horror of testimonials. My sense of justice, I am bound to say, is against them. Merit,
wherever it exists, will work out its own most fitting reward. If men cannot achieve
something to stand as a memorial of their own lives, it is best that they should pass away,
without any attempt of friendly hands to magnify their littleness. lam quite content to
submit myself to that inexorable trier of men’s actions, Time ; and to take my chance of
being swept away.
Moreover, I desire above all things, just now, to be allowed to work in quiet. The
duties that lie nearest to me require this for their performance. I am gratefully sensible
of the kindness of my friends, which I shall ever remember: but that kindness will
manifest itself in the form most desired by yielding to the wishes expressed in this
letter.
I am, my dear Sir,
Yours very truly,
HENRY PARKES.
Mr. C. G. Reid, Secretary to Committee appointed at the Royal Hotel.
The Chairman said, the meeting having now heard the letter read which
Mr. Parkes had addressed to the Secretary, it was for any gentleman present to
propose any resolution he might desire. He had his own individual opinion of
the letter ; but he would rather reserve the expression of the opinion he enter-
tained till he had heard the opinions of the meeting generally.
Mr. Jones, M.P., said he did not know what the feelings of other
gentlemen present might be, but he must say his own were in favour of de-
ferring to the wish of Mr.' Parkes, as expressed in the letter just read. He
took that view on two grounds. He thought Mr. Parkes had viewed the matter
rightly ; and whether he had viewed the matter rightly or not, he thought his
views were entitled to great consideration on the part of his friends. (Hear,
hear.) No man who had been observant of the public history of the colony,
for the last thirteen years, could be unaware of the influence Mr. Parkes had
exercised ; but it must be remembered that Mr. Parkes was comparatively a
young public man, and did not stand in the position of one who was retiring
from public life or from the colony ; and in the peculiar circumstances in
which he was placed—retiring for a short time from active participation in the
more prominent affairs of colonial life—he thought they would be placing
him in a false position if they gave him a testimonial at the present time. He
quite agreed with Mr. Parkes, that we should hold this kind of honours sacred,
and should not give them on light grounds, but only where the circumstances
calling for them exist in a marked degree. He thought the meeting would act
rightly by acting in accordance with the opinions Mr. Parkes had expressed in
his letter. (Hear, hear.) It was, however, for the majority to decide ; and if
they should decide on persevering in the testimonial proposed to be presented
to Mr. Parkes, no one would join more heartily than he should do in carrying
it out —(cheers) ; but he thought it would be the better feeling to defer to
the opinions which Mr. Parkes had expressed. (Hear, hear.)
Mr. Cowfee, M.P., said a resolution had been put into his hands soon
after he entered the room, with the sentiment of which he very cordially con-
curred ; and it was his intention to have risen and proposed that resolution
immediately after the reading of the letter ; but an honorable friend who sat
near him, on whose judgment he had great reliance, and in whose opinions he
generally concurred, seemed to think they ought, notwithstanding the letter of
Mr. Parkes, to go on with the movement. This expression of opinion had
considerable influence with him, because he believed that a friend of Mr.
Parkes —as he wished to be considered to be—ought not to throw a damp on


any testimonial of this kind. (Cheers.) But, after hearing the expression of
opinion from Mr. Jones, he was inclined to agree that they should take the
course of deferring to Mr. Parkes, and that this meeting ought not to go on
with this testimonial at this particular time. Mr. Parkes’s opinions ought to
be considered. They ought not to consider him as retired from public life.
Though retiring from public life in one sphere, he continued in public life in
another ; and he (Mr. Cowper) was of opinion, that Mr. Parkes’s influence in
the sphere to which he had devoted himself would be increased by his devoting
his great talents and active habits of life to that particular sphere, in which he
would be more eminently useful than any other citizen. Mr. Parkes undertook
the establishment of a daily newspaper when no other citizen would have had
the courage to undertake it. He undertook it under circumstances which
would have appalled any one else. He had undertaken it and carried it out
with eminent success. (Cheers.) He (Mr. Cowper) with Mr. Jones, looked
forward to Mr. Parkes’s resuming the position from which he had retired j but
he had no doubt, at the present moment, that he had acted wisely in withdraw-
ing from the duties of a member of the Legislature, and devoting himself to
that no less national and important sphere of duties to which he laid himself
out in the first instance. (Hear, hear.) He quite agreed with the views
expressed by Mr. Jones ; and unless they were prepared to throw Mr. Parkes
overboard entirely, and carry on the matter with a degree of enthusiasm which,
perhaps, under the circumstances, it was hardly to be expected would be con-
curred in by the colonists throughout New South Wales, he did not think there
was any course open to them but to acquiesce in Mr. Parkes’s suggestion. Mr.
Parkes would, no doubt, add to the public services he had performed, and
increase the reputation he had acquired. (Hear, hear.) He was, as Mr. Jones
said, a comparatively young public man ; and he had no doubt a testimonial
would be given to him at the close of his public life, which would be valuable
to those who came after him, and show that the inhabitants of New South
Wales are not insensible to the services of a public man. (Cheers.) He
would now read the resolution which had been put into his hand;—
That this meeting desires to express its unfeigned sense of admiration of the
motives by which Mr. Parkes has been actuated in the letter just read, and in sensitively
shrinking from the acknowledgment of his public services, which his fellow colonists
were prepared to offer to him ; and, while reluctantly acquiescing in Mr. Parkes's deter,
minatfon to let those public services speak for themselves, desires to put on record an
example so eminently worthy of imitation.
He had for many years past known the struggles Mr. Parkes had had to go
through, which, unless he had been a man of almost iron constitution, would
have carried him to the grave. How he had carried on his various duties up to
the present time, without sinking under them, was to him a matter of surprise ;
because, after sitting side by side with him (Mr. Cowper), and labouring more
arduously than he did in the Legislative Chamber, he had no doubt gone
back to his own office, and laboured far into the night j or indeed, on many
occasions probably, not retired to rest at all. And he asked whether such
services as these ought to pass entirely unrewarded 1 But Mr. Parkes had not
retired from public life ; and although some very warm friends thought that
this was an opportune moment to express their approval, he (Mr. Cowper)
thought they ought to postpone their testimonial till that time when Mr. Parkes
would have added to that reputation which he had acquired; and when, he had
no doubt, those who differed from him, as well as those who agreed with him,
would join in recognising his services. For there was no man who derserved a
more general recognition of his services from the citizens. (Cheers.) If, how-
ever, there was a determination on the part of the meeting to throw overboard
this resolution, he concurred with Mr. Jones in saying that there was no one
who would go more cordially with them than he would in promoting the object
which they had had in view in originating this movement. (Cheers.)


Mr. Pennington seconded the resolution, on this ground. He thought
that the best compliment they could pay to Mr. Parkes was to defer to the very
dignified and noble sentiments expressed in his letter ; and that they would
thus best make the example valuable amongst their fellow colonists, as an
example of public virtue in its highest degree.
Mr. Robertson, M,P., confessed that he could not accede to the reso-
lution now before the meeting. (Cheers.) He was not at all surprised that
Mr. Parkes, like other great men, should underrate his own services to the
public, but he thought it was the duty of that meeting, as it was of the
country, to mark, at the present time, the remarkable services which Mr. Parkes
had given to the country. (Hear, hear.) What had been Mr. Parkes’ career ?
It was perfectly idle to talk about Mr. Parkes being a young public man. He
had for many years, long before the days of The Empire, in The People's
Advocate, and in other channels, been a public writer of great influence, and he
had always written, and always worked upon that side which was for the welfare
of the people. (Cheers.) Then, when, six years ago, the Press of this country
had sunk beneath contempt, he, although not a wealthy man, started The
Empire ; and, without referring to its political views, what had been the con-
sequences of the establishment of that Paper ? Why even those who differed
from Mr. Parkes’s friends in political matters, must acknowledge that the Press
of the country had so advanced since then, that now on either side it must be
respected for its ability. (Hear.) What was the Sydney Morning Herald before
The Empire was established ? He remembered perfectly well, and every mercantile
man who was in the colony at that time must know, that if English news came
in on Friday, it was deferred till Monday. They knew it would be all right. They
knew the weekly papers would not interfere, and therefore they chose to consult
only their own convenience, filling their columns on the Saturday with advertise-
ments and deferring the English news till the Monday. But The Empire was a
competitor ; and he believed in his heart, that not only had the political character
of the people of this country advanced in the opinion of the world, but that even
the property of the country had been very much increased by the advantage derived
from a powerful Press. We had a daily Press in this country now, thanks to Mr.
Parkes, which would be a disgrace to no country. Having viewed Mr. Parkes’s
character before he became connected with the Press, and having passed over his
career as editor of a paper, what had been his conduct in the Legislative Assembly?
Why, at the risk of his fortune—at the risk he might almost say of his health—
had not that gentleman given an immense proportion of his time to the perform-
ance of his legislative duties ? Had he not been absolutely more in the House
of Assembly than most other gentlemen in it, since his election? (Cheers.)
Talk about his services not being sufficiently ripe to claim a reward from the
people of this country ! why, he knew of no man connected with this country,
in or out of it, Mr. Wentworth or any one else, who had more claims than Mr.
Parkes. (Cheers.) He had always stood by the people and the best interests of
the country. (Cheers.) He, at least, had never sought any personal aggran-
disement. He, at least, in devoting his great talents, and his personal health,
and his pecuniary means, to the public welfare, had abstained at all times from
seeking any advancement whatever. (Cheers.) He believed they would be
doing very wrong if they were to allow the services of this great man, who
underrated his own claims upon the country, to pass unrecognised—if they
abandoned this movement. (Hear, hear.) He was quite sure, from his know-
ledge of the district he came from, and of the whole Hunter River District, that
this would not be a matter that would stop the colonists.. He was quite sure
that throughout the length and breadth of the land Mr. Parkes was held in
higher estimation than any gentleman in the community, or who had ever been
in the community (Cheers) ; and he was quite sure that efforts would be made
to make this a national matter, and not simply a matter of the citizens of
Sydney. There were, he might be allowed to state, many of them in that
meeting who were not citizens of Sydney ; and there were enough of the repre-


sentatives of the liberal country districts there to mark their high appreciation
of the claims of Mr. Parkes. (Loud cheers.) He would conclude by moving
the following amendment: —
That while this meeting desires to express its unfeigned sense of admiration of the
noble and patriotic motives by which Mr. Parkes has been actuated in writing the letter
just read, and in sensitively shrinking from any acknowledgment of his public services,
it is of opinion that those services have been such as to demand the public recognition
which it was determined at the previous preliminary meeting of Mr. Parkes's friends
should be given to them.
Mr. Francis Rusden, M.P., seconded the amendment.
Mr. J. L. Nicholes supported the amendment. He considered that when
the services of a public man were of that peculiar nature which had characterised
those of Mr. Parkes for such a number of years, it did not rest with the in-
dividual to decide upon such a question according to his own wishes, hut it
became a public duty to them to set it upon record that they did appreciate
those services which had been rendered gratuitously and so efficiently, for
the benefit of his fellow citizens. (Cheers.) He thought that if they were to
adopt the original resolution, they would to a certain extent be countenancing
the idea that Mr. Parkes was not deserving or worthy of a public recognition
of his services. Mr. Parkes, apparently, was insensible to his own greatness ;
but that was only an additional reason why they should bring out m strong
relief their appreciation of his greatness and of his humility. He had not had
acquaintance with Mr. Parkes, but during the short time he had been in the
colony—some five years past —he had watched with intense interest his public
career; and he said it was one which claimed at their hands a public recog-
nition. (Cheers. ) Although Mr. Parkes, in some recent political affairs, had
not come up to his (Mr. Nicholls’s) standard of political philosophy, yet on the
whole he agreed with him in his public acts, and in the views he had expressed
on public questions; and he believed those views, however they might have been
expressed, had been prompted by the best public feelings and patriotism.
(Hear, hear.) He most cheerfully joined in the movement to express their admi-
ration of Mr. Parkes’s conduct, and should heartily support the amendment.
Mr. Francis Rusden, having seconded the amendment, felt bound to
offer a few observations. As one who had resided in the far interior, and at a
time when it was not likely that he should become a resident in Sydney,
he must say that he had always looked upon The Empire as one of the
first publications in the country. His opinions were more than con-
firmed when he became acquainted with Mr. Parkes, and when he found how
manfully and how consistently he advocated the best interests of the people.
(Hear, hear.) It had been said that testimonials were such common things as
to have become matters of course ; but he thought in this instance they were
bound to carry out their original intention, and to show that in the case of a
man of real public worth and high public conduct, they are not matters of
course, and that when carried out in their true sense they become a matter of
honour to those on whom they are conferred. (Hear, hear.) He was not at
all surprised that Mr. Parkes should have written such a letter. Men of g>eat
mind always retreat from the public, and have the feeling that the best efforts
are of little worth ; hut the public ought to consider them of great wmth ;
and the more Mr. Parkes shrunk from this testimonial, the more they ought to
come forward and make it worthy of his acceptance. He had not always agreed
with the opinions of Mr. Parkes; nor was it to be supposed that he should
have done so ; but generally he had gone heart and hand with him ; and he
must say that in expressing public opinions, instead of being extreme 01 ultta-
liberal and desirous of subverting everything, he had always found Mr. Parkes
desirous strictly to support the rights of the people, and to cany on good
government; and he had never observed anything in his conduct in the Assembly
of the kind that had been attributed to him by some persons. It had been said
that this testimonial ought not be gone on with. But it w’as not to be supposed
but that a substantial mark of approval from his fellow citizens, and the bulk of


the country generally, must encourage a man to go on in the course he had
pursued. (Hear, hear.) Mr. Parkes had chosen another course in life. He
regretted his absence from the Legislature ; but no doubt if he carried out
the duties of the sphere he had chosen with the same consistency and the
same manliness he had hitherto exhibited, he would be as useful, or perhaps
even more so, than he had been in carrying on his double duties. But in
order to enable him to do so effectually, it might be necessary that at this
time he should have some assistance ; and how could it be better done than
in the mode proposed ? There was another reason why they should go on
with the proposed testimonial. The thing having once been mooted, they
ought to show to the public that it had not been withdrawn because it would
not succeed. It should not be said out of doors that this had been an
abortive attempt. (Hear.) Therefore he did most sincerely hope that the
meeting would carry out the amendment of Mr. Robertson, and that not only
the citizens of Sydney, but the country generally, would come forward, as he
had no doubt they would, and join in making the testimonial worthy of the
acceptance of Mr. Parkes, (Cheers.)
Mr. B, James said he had not intended to make any remarks on the
present occasion, but as so many representatives of the country districts had
addressed the meeting, he thought he should do wrong if he did not express
his opinion; and that was, that Mr, Parkes was entitled to a testimonial.
(Hear, hear,) For some years past testimonials bad been given very freely ;
but though he agreed with Mr, Parkes, that they were of little value generally,
still he thought a testimonial given to Mr. Parkes, and proceeding from the
intelligent minds of the people of this country, would be of great value,
( Hear, hear.) Testimonials had been given to Sir Charles Fitz Roy, to Mr,
E. Deas Thomson, and to Mr. Wentworth. There was no cold water thrown
upon those testimonials f and there was no want of money to carry them out.
But these did not proceed from the people. He thought the citizens would
be exceedingly disappointed if this testimonial, proposed to be presented to
Mr. Parkes, should be set aside ; because he believed Mr, Parkes was one of
those men who had taught the middle and working classes of the people to
know their position. (Hear, hear.) From the time when the citizens were
first called upon to exercise their rights as Britons, when Mr. Lowe was
brought forward for Sydney—from that time to the present, Mr. Parkes had
proved himself by his conduct to be one of those men who have taught the
people to know their rights and to maintain them. He (Mr. James), as
one of the middle classes of this city, should consider they would be deprived
of their right if they were prevented from expressing their appreciation of the
conduct of Mr. Parkes. That gentleman, no doubt, believed it a man’s duty
to do as he had done on the present occasion; but he (Mr. James) at the
same time could not but agree with the remark that it must be agreeable to
a man to find that his conduct had been such as was agreeable to his
fellow citizens. He believed Mr. Parkes’ conduct had been such as met the
approval of his fellow colonists. He bad seen him take a much more active part
on behalf of other persons than for himself. He had seen him very active in
securing the return of persons for the representation of Sydney; but,
when a candidate himself, he never went across the street to ask for a vote.
Ihat was conduct which he (Mr. James) approved of. He did not approve
of a man canvassing for himself, (Hear, hear.) He might safely say there
was no man who had done so much to break down that middle wall between
classes as Mr. Parkes. He had taught the people that the aristocracy of
talent and ability was the aristocracy for this country, and not an aristocracy
of sheep or wool. (Laughter.) He taught them to know that the source of
all power is the people, and taught them how to act; and since his advent to
this city, the citizens had justified their position, and sent men fit to repre-
sent them into the legislature. He believed the citizens would be disap-
pointed if they were deprived of the opportunity of subscribing to a testi-
monial to Mr, Parkes, a man who had at all times supported the best men as


representatives, who as a representative himself had served their interests
faithfully, and who had given so remarkable an impetus to the Press of the
country. He begged cordially to support the amendment. (Cheers.)
Mr. E. Stewart had not intended to say anything, but, as Mr. James had
said, it would ill become the citizens to allow the subject to be discussed
without some of them expressing their opinions. He had had an opportunity
of seeing the public career of Mr. Parkes during the last nine years, and he
believed there was no man in this colony who was entitled to an equal amount
of public approval with him, not only from the citizens, but from the great
mass of the community all over the country, and not only in New South Wales
but in Victoria. His services had been of a character they had not yet had
an opportunity fully to appreciate. It might be known to many that three
or four attempts were made to established a daily Press in this city. They
all failed ; and to Mr. Parkes they were under a deep debt for establishing a
second daily Press— The Empire. That in itself was a national advantage,
Mr. Parkes had incurred a vast amount of personal labour on behalf of the
public. He believed he had worked more disinterestedly than any other man
in public life. During the whole nine years he had observed his career, he
could see no instance in which he could have had the most distant view
of being repaid for his services. On the contrary, the course he took was
the one directly opposed to his own advantage. These were reasons
which led him (Mr. Stewart) to think that no more fitting time than
the present could be selected for the public to express their approval of
his past career. He believed the movement would meet with the general
concurrence, not only of the people of New South Wales, but of many
in Victoria, where a number of gentlemen who had cordially co-operated
with Mr. Parkes, now resided, and who would readily and heartily join in
any mark of approval of his public career. What little he (Mr. Stewart)
could do, he would devote himself to with as much warmth as to anything
he ever took in hand, feeling that he was only offering a trifling recog-
nition of very great services done to the country. (Cheers.) He should
support the amendment.
Mr. C. Simmons said he had entered the room with a prejudice against
testimonials—they had become so common; but since he had heard the
observations of several gentlemen who had spoken, he should certainly support
the movement for this testimonial. He believed the people from one end of
the country to the other, would join in a movement to show their appreciation
of what Mr. Parkes had done for the general welfare of the colony ; for the
colonists generally believed that whatever he had done, had been straight-
forward and patriotic. (Hear, hear.) He should support the amendment.
Mr. Forster, M. P., said he felt considerable diffidence in expressing an
opinion adverse to the opinions expressed by many preceding speakers ; but
there was one point on which he could allow none of those to exceed him,
and that was, in his appreciation of the public services of Mr. Parkes to this
colony. The eloquent terms in which the subject had been spoken of by Mr.
Eobertson, however, had so fully expressed his own opinions of Mr. Parkes’s
public services, that he had very little more to say upon that head. He
considered that gentleman’s public career to have been an honour to himself
and a benefit and an honour to the colony. (Cheers.) The short period he
(Mr. Forster) had spent in public life had brought him into contact to some
extent with Mr. Parkes ; and he must say he had considered it one of the
most fortunate circumstances of his public career that he had been so placed
in contact and enabled to sit on the same benches and vote with that gentle-
man before his late retirement. But in thus expressing his appreciation of
his public services he must at the same time express his dissent from many
of the speakers as to the mode in which they desired to honour him. No
man would go further than he would in doing honour to Mr. Parkes in every
way, and in such a way as not only to express their opinion of him to the


world, but, if possible, to add fresh lustre to his reputation, (Cheers.) But
those gentlemen who were desirous of forcing a testimonial upon Mr, Parkes,
were somewhat forgetful of his own opinions. They had had a letter from
him which had added to his reputation by the sentiments it expressed ; and
he had therein intimated a wish that the matter should not be proceeded
with. He was still inclined to honour Mr. Parkes, if possible ; bnt that
gentleman had very strongly expressed his opinions, and were they to persist
in offering him an honour which he would not consider an honour ? He
(Mr, Forster) could not help thinking of those individuals on whom
testimonials had been conferred, within their memory; he could not
help thinking that the very name of testimonals had been made to stink
in this colony by the names of those upon whom they had been conferred.
He asked that meeting to consider on whom testimonials had been con-
ferred ; and he asked them if they would place Mr. Parkes on the same
level with them, by placing him in the same niche with them ? He was
inclined to think Mr, Parkes would not think a testimonial an honour, when
he considered the names of those on whom such honours had been conferred.
It was not necessary to particularize ; but might it not be said that by giving
him a testimonial they did not confer an honour upon Mr. Parkes, but rather
drew those individuals to his higher level, and restored a lustre to testi-
monials which had been taken from them, Bnt he would wish to con-
sider this expression of opinion as not altogether set aside, but deferred. It
appeared to him that it would perhaps be meeting the wishes of Mr. Parkes
himself and the feelings of the people generally, if they delayed the expression
of their opinions till another time. He very much concurrred with the
opinions of Mr. Jones, who in his usual brief and energetic manner, had
explained what he need not further particularize. When he considered the
manner in which testimonials had been given, and the proposed testimonial to
Mr. Parkes, he was reminded of the anecdote of that ancient and illustrious
character, who, when aked why statues of Cato had not been placed in the
market place, replied that he would much rather be asked why they had not
been placed there than why they had. He thought the reputation Mr. Parkes
had made was a far higher monument than any testimonial they could give.
Would a paltry sum of money raise Mr. Parkes in the estimation of the
world ? He asked the meeting to consider this. At the same time he felt
bound to acquiesce in public opinion so far, that if this meeting, or a public
meeting, should decide that a testimonial of any kind whatever should be
conferred on Mr. Parkes, he should be very sorry to withhold his mite from it.
(Cheers.) He should be very happy to co-operate in that case ; because he
should take the expression of public opinion as a proof of the propriety of the
measure ; but if called upon to give his vote, either there or on another
occasion, he should vote againt it, for the reasons he had expressed.
Mr, Gordon, M.P., said he felt some hesitation in offering any remarks
on this subject, particularly as he saw Mr. Parkes had declined the intended
honour which the citizens of Sydney wished to confer upon him ; and his
hesitation was increased on hearing the opinions of several gentlemen who
acquiesced in the view taken by Mr. Parkes, and for whose opinions he had a
very high respect; but he must certainly say he agreed with the amendment
of Mr. Robertson, and would do all he possibly could to support that amend-
ment. (Cheers.) He quite agreed with the remark that fell from the last
speaker, that no testimonial they could get up and present to Mr, Parkes,
could raise him higher in the estimation of the public than he already stood ;
but he did think still that at a time when he was retiring from public life, at
least as a representative for the City of Sydney—which he had faithfully
represented for some years past—(hear, hear) —he did think it a proper time
for the citizens of Sydney to express their opinion of the way in which he had
represented them ; and he was quite sure the feelings of the citizens would
be acquiesced in throughout the length and breadth of the country. He was
quite sure that not only the citizens of Sydney, but the colonists generally.


would do their utmost to do honour to a man who had done more for tho
public welfare of this colony than any other man in it. He quite agreed with
Mr. James, that the people of this colony really did not know their just rights
and their weight in the community uutil Mr. Parke- taught them to know
them-(hear, hear) ; for he believed he was the very first man who did bring
before the middle and working classes of this colony a view of their proper
weight in the country. Previously, public matters were all in the hands cf
a few, and they were managed somehow or other to the advantage of that
few, and those only within a certain circle had honours and emoluments
conferred upon them. It was only of late years that men such as Mr. Parkes,
and many other, —he (Mr. Gordon) for one—could take any part in public
matters whatever. He thought for these reasons that it was a very proper
time for the public to show their estimation of the services which Mr. Parkes
had performed in this colony. It was quite natural for a man of great mind
and enlightened views, such as Mr. Parkes had shown himself to be, to shrink
from having a testimonial or sum of money raised for his personal advantage.
He did not wonder that he should express an opposition to that way of
expressing public opinion ; but he believed that he was not consulted in the
matter, and he believed he had no right to he consulted in the matter.
(Hear, hear.) The public came forward on this occasion to express their
views of his public character and conduct in times past, and he thought it
was for the public to do that without consulting his views upon the subject.
They believed he had done good service to the colony, and they had a right
to express their opinion of it in their own way ; and although Mr. Parkes
had advised that they should not get up a testimonial, he thought it was
their duty to act upon their own views of what was due to him. That was
his view, and that was why he supported the amendment; and if carried, as
he had no doubt it would be, the movement would not be confined to the
city, but committees would be formed throughout the country districts, where
he was sure public opinion would be as favourable to it as in Sydney.
(Hear, hear.)
Mr. C. G. Eeid quite agreed with the amendment, and thought they
ought not, in deference to the opinions expressed by Mr. Parkes, to alter the
resolution they had come to. He conceived they have a right to acknowledge
public services quite independently of the feelings of those to whom the
acknowledgments were to be made. (Hear, hear.)
Mr. A. Allan suggested that, for the sake of unanimity, the better course
would be for the mover of the resolution to withdraw it. He could see no
reason why the colonists should give way to Mr, Parkes’s own feelings. It
was for them to decide whether they would be grateful to one who had done
them good service. It was their duty to make such a recognition of the
services of Mr. Parkes as would show that any one who walked in the inde-
pendent course which he had followed, would receive the support of the
public. He should support the amendment.
Mr. M. Guest said he neither agreed with the resolution nor with the
amendment, and he should propose another amendment. He thought the
testimonial should be given by a public meeting. He was not one wbo
thought patriotism and public worth could be bought by any sum of money.
He thought that by giving a pecuniary testimonial to a man holding the
position of conductor of a public paper, they ran a risk of interfering with the
freedom of the Press. No one could appreciate more than he did the public
conduct of Mr. Parkes ; but there were other men who had done as much as
he had done. There was their old friend Dr. Lang, for instance, and others,
who had long ago laboured for the freedom of the Press and for the rights of
the people; and they had not had testimonials given to them. Testimonials,
too, were beginning to get common. If Mr. Parkes were retiring from public
life, then there might be good reason to give him a testimonial; but, as the
case now stood, he considered they ought to do nothing that would interfere


with his independence. The amendment that he would propose would be,
“ that a public meeting of the citizens of Sydney be held, to express their
opinion upon the conduct of Mr. Parkes.”
The Chairman intimated to Mr. Guest that, as there was already one
amendment to the motion, the second could not be entertained, but he could
bring his proposition forward as a substantive motion. Mr. Guest, however,
did not subsequently press his motion.
Mr. E. James stated that he coincided with the sentiments expressed in
favour of Mr. Parkes. If ever there was a man deserving of a public testi-
monial, he believed it was Mr. Parkes. Having that opinion, he should
support the amendment.
Mr. Cowper : After the expression of opinion which he had heard from
the various speakers, he felt that he was perfectly justified in withdrawing
the resolution. (Loud cheers.) They all agreed in the object they had in
view, and he was glad to find that there were warm friends of Mr. Parkes in
the room, of determination sufficient to carry out their intention, in spite of
that gentleman. He was not quite sure that those friends who determined to
act in opposition to Mr. Parkes were quite right; but he felt it would not be
right for any one to throw a damper on those who wished to express a public
recognition of his eminent services. He would only say he hoped they
would succeed. He thought they undertook a great responsibility—not
that he would doubt their success ; but he thought it incumbent upon them
to throw their whole hearts into the affair, and produce a testimonial which
would be worthy the acceptance of-Mr. Parkes. (Hear, hear.)
The amendment was then put and passed amid cheers.
The Chairman said he would entreat the indulgence of the meeting
while he expressed his opinion on the subject. From the beginning, it had
been with the majority, and he sincerely hoped, as well as believed, that the
testimonial would be worthy alike of Mr. Parkes and of the colony generally.
He believed there was no man in the country at present who had done so
much to deserve the public gratitude, either as a colonist, as a journalist, or
as a representative of the people. In either of these capacities his conduct
had been such as would command the almost unanimous recognition of his
services by the colony at large. (Loud cheers.)
It was then agreed that a public meeting, to carry out the objects of the
mo vement, should be held on Monday, the 2nd February.
Mr. C. G. Eeid was requested to act as Permanent Secretary, to which he
consented.
A discussion arose as to the necessity of appointing a second secretary,
and the names of Mr. J. Lucas, Mr. A. Allan, and Mr. Pennington, were
respectively mentioned. Some difference of opinion, however, existing, it
was eventually decided that the business should be left in the hands of one
gentleman only.
A vote of thanks was then given to Mr. Lutwtche for his able conduct
in the chair. That gentleman acknowledged the compliment, and the pro-
ceedings terminated shortly before five o’clock.
PUBLIC MEETING.
(From “ The Empire,” February 3, 1857.)
A public meeting, convened by the following advertisement, was held
yesterday afternoon in the Lyceum Theatre, York-street:—
Testimonial to Henry Parkes, Esquire. —Pursuant to resolutions unanimously
passed at two public meetings held at the Royal Hotel, a public meeting of the friends
and admirers of Henry Parkes, Esq., will be held at the Lyceum Theatre, York-street,
this day, Monday, the 2nd February, at 2 o'clock p.m. precisely.


The Honourable,Charles Cowper, Esq.,M.P., has kindly consented to take the chair.
The following resolutions will be submitted to the meeting;—■
1. That this meeting is unanimously of opinion that the public services of Henry
Parkes, Esq., in the patriotic efforts which he has made for many years past to advance
civil liberty, social progress, and good government, demand the sincere and grateful
acknowledgment of every Australian colonist.
2. That upon Mr. Parkes's retirement, probably for a long period, from public life,
this meeting desires that a suitable and permanent memorial should be established of the
high estimation of his public virtues by his fellow colonists, and that a subscription be
opened for the purpose of raising funds for the purchase of an estate, to be vested in
trustees for the benefit of Mr. Parkes’s family.
3. That the earnest co-operation of the Australian colonists, in promoting the objects
of this meeting be solicited, and that gentlemen favourable thereto be invited to aid in
forming local committees, and in soliciting subscriptions in aid of the proposed
testimonial.
C. G Reid, Honorary Secretary.
Between two and three hundred persons assembled. Among the gentle-
men on the platform we observed the Honorable Mr. Lutwyche, M.L.C., Mr.
Cowper, M.P., Mr. Robertson, M.P., Mr. .Tones, M.P., Mr, Francis Rusden,
M.P., Mr. Dailey, M.P., Mr. Gordon, M.P., Mr. Egan, M.P., M, John
Campbell, M.P., the Rev. Dr. Woolley, Mr. W. G. Pennington, Mr. P. Hogan,
Mr. W. G. Windeyer, Mr. R. Stewart, Mr. Richardson, Mr. Raphael, &c., &c.
On the motion of Mr. Jones, M.P., seconded by Mr. Lutwyche, M.L.C.,
Mr. Cowper, M.P. was called on to preside.
The Chaieman, on taking the chair, said he was sorry to have to state that
their proceedings would be of a different character to that which most of them
had anticipated. The friends of Mr. Parkes hoped that, after what took place
a few days ago at a preliminary meeting at the Royal Hotel, Mr. Parkes would
have consented to waive his objections to this movement. But it appeared
that that gentleman had not only not done so, but had stated to most of his
friends his objections with greater force than formerly, and in a manner that
almost compelled his friends to defer to his objections, and not at the present
moment to press on the movement for which they had made the necessary
arrangements. The meeting would, therefore, understand that this alteration
of the course of their proceedings was wholly in deference to Mr. Parkes’s
feelings. The friends of Mr. Parkes felt they ought not to press on him what
had become almost a matter of annoyance to him ; and under those circum-
stances be (Mr. Cowper) was deputed by those who had thus far carried on
the movement with that energy which characterised their conduct in every
matter they took in hand, to inform the meeting that for the present moment
they declined proceeding further in the movement; which step, being in
deference to Mr. Parkes’s own and strongly-expressed wishes, it was hoped
would meet with the approval of the meeting. Unless any gentleman desire,
to address the meeting, he would, therefore, in compliance with the wishes of
the gentlemen at whose request he took the chair, declare their, proceedings
for the present adjourned.
Mr. C. G. Reid, Secretary, stated that before the meeting was adjourned
it would be desirable if some gentlemen in the body of the meeting would
give expression to their feelings with respect to the course the friends of Mr,
Parkes had resolved on adopting.
Mr. Dalley, M.P., in answer to loud and repeated calls, came forward
and said he regretted, as he had no doubt they all regretted, that their
proceedings this evening would not be of that distinctively national character
that he was sure they all wished they should be. (Applause.) He regretted
that what he considered would have been a great expression of public feeling
on the retirement from public life of one of the greatest and purest of their
public men—(great applause)—he regretted that such an expression of
opinion had been stifled by the action of the gentleman himself whom they
were prepared to honour. (Applause.) With that delicacy of feeling which
had ever characterized him, whether he appeared in the Legislative Assembly


or elsewhere, Mr. Parkes had declined the great public distinction his friends
were prepared to offer him. Whether in doing so he had done wisely or not
was a question which it did not become them at the present moment to
consider; but that he had done so from a conscientious belief that he was
pursuing a right course they might rest assured. (Applause.) At all events
when the curtain fell between him and the public—that curtain which for a
time concealed him from them as a public man—it was rung down with the
universal applause of the country. (Applause.) From end to end of the
whole colony, from every journal throughout the country, from the lips of
every man in the country whose good opinion was worth having, testimony
to the purity of Mr. Parkes’s public conduct, to the earnestness of his services,
and to the value of the services he rendered, had been on all sides afforded.
So that whether they consummated this act or not—whether they carried out
the public testimonial proposed or not—still on record the approval of his
conduct by his country lived—(applause)—and he therefore did not require
this testimonial, whether it assumed a pecuniary or other shape, to guarantee
to him that his name would survive and be respect d by his country.
(Applause.) As he did not expect to have been called on, and also from the
state of his health, he was not prepared to address the meeting ; but he
must nevertheless say that he regretted the meeting was not attended by a
far larger body of citizens than he saw before him ; and he believed the
reason the theatre was not crammed at the present moment was solely that
Mr. Parkes had spread far and wide his determination not to accept this
testimonial. This he had stated do some of his dearest friends ; and to
almost all his acquaintances with whom he could place himself in com-
munication he had expressed his hostility to the object for which this
meeting was convened. He (Mr. Dailey) believed this was the sole reason
why the meeting was not more numerously and influentially attended. In
conclusion he would observe that the adjournment of the present meeting did
not deprive them of subsequently carrying their purpose into operation, with
the view of recognising large and noble public services by a testimonial of the
kind they proposed. They have had testimonials enough of late to all sorts
of people in the country ; but he believed the majority of the meeting would
admit that, for the first time in this country, would the sense of the people, as
discovered in a testimonial, have been attested in the proposed testimonial to
Mr. Parkes. By the action taking this evening they were not precluded from
subsequently taking any course they might conceive to be right; and if, after
an experience of those men—of other men who take Mr. Parkes’s place in the
Legislative Assembly—they found they had done wrong in acceding to the
wishes of Mr. Parkes on the present occasion, this at least he knew, that
nothing would prevent them from coming forward and rectifying their mis-
take, and doing justice both to Mr. Parkes and to his family. (Applause.)
Mr. Jones, M.P., was then loudly called for by the audience. He came
forward and said, it was perhaps no secret to them that he in a great measure
shared in the feeling which had been expressed by Mr. Parkes in reference
to the present movement. He had, at the last meeting, endeavoured to
dissuade that meeting from persevering in the course they were about to
take. It was certainly no want of appreciation of the services of Mr. Parkes
that had induced him to take that view of the matter. Indeed, he thought
he was more cognizant of the services of that gentleman than any gentleman
present. (Hear, hear.) Some fifteen or sixteen years ago Mr. Parkes and he
were in much the same position. They had both then arrived in this colony
as working men ; and it was their lot—so long ago as that—to meet in com-
mon, and to take share in public movements, in which they cordially
concurred. And since that time, up to the present time, there had been very
few public movements in which Mr. Parkes had been engaged, in which he
(Mr. Jones; had not been a fellow-labourer more or less. (Applau e.)
There was scarcely one of the great questions of the day in which they had


not cordially concurred, and fought side by side. (Continued applause.)
Few, therefore, he thought, could be able to appreciate his services more
than he could ; few who could more dearly appreciate and value those
services. (Applause.) He could recollect when the question of trans-
portation was before the community. He well knew the services of Mr.
Parkes on that occasion. (Loud cheers.) He could say with truth, that no
man in this colony, at the present day, had done more to merit the gratitude
of the entire community, and there was no man to whom future generations
would be so much indebted as they were to Henry Parkes for his services in
that movement. (Enthusiastic applause.) He knew that his services were
not those that came before the public eye in public meetings; he did not go
and “ say his say,” and do nothing more. He laboured in secret, and wrote,
and contributed more to the successful termination of that all-important
question, than every one else who was engaged in it. He knew very well that
Mr. Parkes was the soul and mind of that movement; and he knew that his
fellow citizens valued, and would always value-that worthy man’s great and
successful exertions. (Loud cheers.) He knew, again, that when the Con-
stitution Bill was before the country —that measure upon which the question
of onr just rights was raised —Mr. Parkes was in his right place. (Cheers.)
And that his whole soul, from the first moment, was in the people’s cause in
that movement; and that by his exertions he had contributed greatly towards
laying the foundation of that liberty whicli we now enjoy in this Colony.
And he knew that he would not be at rest until every blot and blemish were
eradicated from it. (Loud applause.) He would, too, continue to take, as he
had always taken, the greatest interest in every leading question that should
arise in the colony. (Applause.) It was not, therefore, that he (Mr. Jones)
was insensible to the services of Henry Parkes that he had persuaded many
of his friends to refrain from joining in the movement. It was in deference
to his own wisli as expressed by himself. Mr Parkes, as an upright public man,
wished to maintain his thorough independance, and he (Mr. Jones) was
exceedingly gratified at the course he had chosen to take. He perfectly
coincided with Mr. Parkes’s feeling on the matter, and he thought he
was acting in the most suitable manner for the maintenance of his
independence. He thought also that it was unwise to praise public
men, particularly when they were in the pursuit of their public career;
he thought that nothing should be done—even by those who admired
them most intensely—to cripple their freedom of action for the time to
come. (Hear, hear.) It was that he might be permitted to enjoy—as he
wished —the utmost self-reliance, the utmost freedom of action for all future
time, that he (Mr. Jones) felt somewhat averse to any public testimonial
being presented to Mr. Parkes at this time. (Hear, hear.) It appeared to
him that it would have a tendency to put him in stilts. It were putting him in
a false position, to interrupt a public man in such a manner, when he had not half
finished his career of usefulness to the country for which he had already done
so much. He was anxious also that this matter should not go forward, because,
Mr. Parkes, as the principal parly concerned in this movement, had a right to
have some respect paid to his private feelings. Had it gone on, however, ha
(Mr. Jones) would have taken as active a part in the movement as anybody,
because none knew better than he the great worth of the man on whose
accnunt it had been originated. (Loud cheers.) It would be difficult indeed
for them to make an adequate return for the many and important services
which he baa rendered to this community. (Prolonged applause.)
Loud calls were then made for,
Dr. Woolley, who on coming forward said, he had come to that assem-
blage without any expectation of being called upon to take any part in the
proceedings that afternoon. Although he yielded to no man in the colony
in bis high admiration and cordial appreciation of Mr. Parkes as a public man,
yet he felt, occupying as he did a sphere which did not bring him into contact
with party contests, that he was standing in a position which did not properly


belong to him. He felt he was occupying the meeting, when it ought to be
addressed, not by those who, like himself, had been simply spectators in the
shade, but by those who had shared in the heat and burden of that contest in
which Mr. Parkes had been engaged. Although he shared to a great extent
the sentiments of Mr. Jones, and although he had received a letter from Mr.
Parkes, requesting him not to take any part in this meeting, and in coming there
he was, in fact acting against his injunction, yet he had hoped that, as the last
meeting had determined to continue this movement.it would have been taken
up with a unanimity and determination which would have silenced even Mr.
Parkes. He did not look upon this as simply a political movement, nor as one
confined even to Mr. Parkes’s friends. It was one of the great privileges and
rights of the Anglo-Saxon race that we can cordially and heartily appreciate
virtue in an enemy. (Cheers.) And he had heard those who stick firmest to
the Government benches express their regret at the temporary los*— (for it
was only temporary— they didn’t mean to let him remain long absent)—of one
who, if he was an unflinching and an unteraporizing opponent, had always
been an earnest and a manly one. If he had been an opponent of Mr. Parkes,
he should have thought himself in his proper sphere there that evening; but
he was happy to say, that was very far from being the case. During the short
time he had had the opportunity of watching him, he had admired him for his
political principles, and for the manly consistency with which he carried them
out. His taste has led him to fix his mind upon the principles professed by
our political men; and he did believe that the political principles professed by
Mr. Parkes were those upon the progress of which depended the progress of
civil liberty, of true humanity, and of true brotherly kindness — (great ap-
plause)—which was the kingdom of God on earth —that millenium which
others were vainly seeking in other ways. Mr. Parkes was no party politician.
As he was no aristocrat —no plutocrat—as he did not think seven-eighths of
the people were made for the service of the remaining few, nor suppose the
poor to be made for the use of the rich—so he was no wild democrat. He
did not seek to rise to a spurious fame or selfish pre-eminence, by pandering to
the passions of the ignorant and the false. (Cheers.) Mr. Parkes, he
believed, considered himself bound before God to promote the development
of real humanity. His motto was the glorious motto, which now, for the first
time was inscribed upon our banners, and which he hoped to see triumphantly
winning its way till it conquered all parties— “ Each man for all, and all for
each.” (Cheers.) He (Mr. Parkes) understood no division of interest.
Whatever institution in our country prevented any man from rising into power,
and from being appreciated virtually according to his power and wish to bene-
fit his country, that Mr. Parkes looked upon as the remains of Anti-Christ,
and that he had sworn to do his best to destroy. He looked to the time when
every man in this country would have equal rights and equal chances of
rising to what God intended him to be, so that he might employ his faculties
for the benefit of the country. But whilst Mr. Parkes was the advocate of
that holy democracy which lovers of their kind wish to promote, he was not
one of those who desired to do things in a hurry. He knew how many ages
had elapsed from the coming of Jesus of Nazareth to the abolition of slavery ;
he knew how long had been the struggle to overthrow the feudal system; he
knew that still hereditary power is, though faintly, struggling to maintain its
existence; and he was perfectly willing to wait for the day of victory, and to
prepare it, not by force and violence, but by persuasion and by reasoning. And
though in his zeal for the public cause he had so neglected his private interests
that they were now obliged to lose him, they were happy to think that
in his own sphere he would be almost equally useful. They would still
have his reasonings—still have his persuasions—addressed not only to those
who agree with him, but to those who, either from ignorance or prejudice,
differ from him. lor Mr. Parkes believed in human nature. He believed
that many of those who are now most earnestly opposed to him would, if they
could be made to see things from the right point of view, join heart and hand


with him. Ant} he (Dr. Woolley) believed that this feeling had grown in
their minds through the influence of The Empire, and would continue to
grow now that he could devote himself more closely and with less anxiety
to that, his most important work. (Cheers.) He believed that the time was
not far distant when Mr. Parkes would again be restored to them. He had
never had greater pleasure than when he recorded his vote for him at the last
election. (Loud cheers.) And he was sure they were looking forward to the
time when they would again have that pleasure—that they would not be satis-
fied unless that pleasure were given them again—unless they had the
satisfaction of seeing that the verdict they had given on Mr. Parkes was
acknowledged, not in Parliament only, but in the highest places, and he had
that place given to him which no man was more capable of filling. (Cheers.)
In the meanwhile, he feared they must defer to his strongly expresed feelings.
He could only say that his expressions were such, that in the face of them,
those to whom he had addressed his letters could hardly proceed. He putitupon
personal grounds and upon public feelings. And he (Dr. Woolley) must admit
that there was very great strength in what Mr. Jones had said. Whatever comes,
Mr. Parkes was determined to be perfectly independent. It was not because
he had sought their good will that he had it. They knew that if they did any-
thing of which he did not approve he would be as severe a censor to those
who were now assembled to honour him as to those whom he had before
opposed. And it was because he was determined to preserve that independ-
ence—because he would not have that testimonial of theirs at what he (Dr.
Woolley) considered was the outset of a glorious career which would one day
unite his name with those of the guardians of liberty in America and elswhere
(Cheers) that Mr. Parkes asked them to control their strong feelings, and to
be satisfied with this public demonstration of their trust, their love, and their
faith. No: they would not be acting as Englishmen, they would not show
their appreciation of that noble feeling of independence, if they did not defer
to his principles. Therefore he hoped they would on this occasion yield to
him. (Cheers).
Loud calls were then made for Mr. Robertson, mingled with cries
“ Where are the Herald reporters ?”
Mr. Robertson, on coming forward, said that next to the gentlemen who
originated the testimonial, he himself was most responsible for it. He thought
the gentlemen who called the meeting at the Royal Hotel were right at that
meeting in acting in contradistinction to his friend Mr. Jones, and he still
thought they ought to go on with the movement. (Hear, hear, and cheers.)
He thought so still, and was quite sure the country thought so. (Cheers.)
When, however, the gentleman they wished to honour wished them to
abstain, when he took such extraordinary efforts to stop the design of his
friends, he thought they would be wrong to persist; but whilst they had that
meeting, they were entitled to enquire why they had taken such a step, and
whether they were justified in taking it. He maintained they were. What
had been the career and what was the course taken by Mr. Parkes ? It had
been said that he was a young man, and that he had not yet earned his
laurels. What had been the position of that gentleman ? During the last
thirteen or fourteen years he had been a public writer of the greatest possible
influence, and had done everything for the welfare of the people of the
colony. When they found this great man, who had spent so many years of
his life advocating the rights of the people, who had risked his fortune in the
opposing of monopoly on that side of the daily Press opposed to the people’s
rights ; he said that man had peculiar and great claims upon the country.
(Loud cheers.) But whilst they bowed to the determination of that great
man, he appealed to them and to the country, was it not their duty to rally
around The Empire ? (Loud cheers.) He appealed to them whether it was
right, or well, or proper, or commonly honest, that this great man should
have his fortune and the interests of his family sacrificed, whose only object


had been to maintain their rights and the rights of their children. (Cheers.)
He had declined to accept the demonstration proposed ; well, then, there was
another course open to them, and that was to support The Empire— (cheers) —
and to stand by it. They could do that without asking Mr. Parkes’s consent.
He was quite sure from his knowledge of the interior, that iri every hamlet,
village, and town, the most popular man was Mr. Parkes. (Loud cheers.)
Not only was he the most popular, but it was a libel on the pastoral and
agricultural interests to say, that Mr. Parkes was only the friend of those
resident in towns; for he was the friend of the whole country—(cheers)—and it
was their duty to stand by him, as he hoped would do every man in the country.
(Loud and continued cheers.)
Mr. —. Richardson had not at first intended to address the meeting, seeing
so many better qualified, but at the same time he not help expressing his
gratitude to Mr. Parkes for what he had done. When they looked at the
daily Press of the city, and asked how it became so efficient, they would find
it was because Mr. Parkes had started The Empire. He would say nothing
against any other portion of the Press, but there no was doubt that where
there was only one daily paper the public were not well served. It was the
same in the literary as in the mercantile world, where there was opposition
there were improved quality and improved material. (Hear.) With their
two daily papers they had great improvement in the quality, and on that
account the country was greatly indebted to Mr, Parkes. (Cheers.) He
was sorry Mr. Parkes would not accept a testimonial, as he was prepared
to subscribe to it as much as he could afford, and was also prepared to
go into the country for a week to agitate the matter. (Loud cheers.) He
did not think they ought to stop there, but should get up a testimonial
expressing their confidence and perfect satisfaction in his career. They
should strive to push on the success of The Empire, and to introduce it
to their houses. How many mechanics went to public houses and spent
sixpence to have a look at the paper, when for threepence a-day they might
have it all the year around. He was confident he was right when he said
that three-fourths of them gained all their information of passing events
from the daily papers. He would advise them to take The Empire, if only
to express their satisfaction at Mr. Parkes’s conduct, and to show him, that
if he would not accept a testimonial they would make him accept what
he could not refuse. (Cheers.) He would propose
That an address be presented to Henry Parkes, Esq., late representative of the city,
on his retirement from Parliament, expressing the feelings of the citizens of Sydney and
the colonists at large in reference to his eminent public services.
Mr. J. G. Raphael said he was convinced that Mr. Parkes had declined
a testimonial from feelings of delicacy, but he hoped those who had been
benefited by his services would not he niggardly in giving their untiring
support to The Empire. (Cheers.)
Mr. John Campbell, M.P., said the country was greatly indebted to
Mr. Parkes, for, no doubt, The Empire had benefited the country, and done
much to elicit discussion. Where there was no free Press a country did
not thrive, and, therefore, it was a great advantage to the country to have
such a man as Mr. Parkes. (Cheers.) The Empire would do credit even
to the old country, but Mr. Parkes, like himself, would accept of no elee-
mosynary aid, because he had hands and could work; on that account, no
doubt, be had refused to take their assistance. (Cheers.)
Mr. W. C. Windeyer on being called lor, said that was the first time he had
ever appeared in public, but he could not help expressing his feelings, and he
thought at such a time, and at such a meeting, there could not have been a
more favourable opportunity for the first appearence of a young man, nor
could he have appeared under better auspices, than when they were met to
honour Mr. Parkes. (Cheers.) When he first saw Mr. Parkes’s address,


resigning his trust to his constituents, he was in hopes that some expression
of esteem for his high public character would have been made. At last he
heard that he was to be presented with a testimonial, and that Mr. Parkes
had refused it; and he must say the course that had been pursued was the
only course worthy of Henry Parkes. (Loud cheers.) Having now met, it
remained with them not to leave till they had done something, in order to
express their high sense of Mr. Parkes’s services. He should be happy to
second the proposition that had been made by Mr. Richardson. If they could
not present Mr. Parkes with a testimonial, at least they could take such steps
as to set in motion the petition, and to have it most numerously signed, so
that it might be a more true and a more honest testimonial than any address
that had ever been signed in the colony. (Loud cheers.) He trusted the
signatures to it would convey the united good will of the people of the colony.
He hoped some gentleman would, as soon as possible, get up the address to be
signed by all, to bear testimony to the love, admiration, and respect which
they felt towards Henry Parkes. (Cheers.) He would conclude by seconding
the resolution.
The resolution was put, and carried unanimously, with acclamation.
Mr. W. G. Pennington proposed a vote of thanks to Mr, Stephens, the
proprietor of the Lyceum, for his kindness in placing the theatre at the service
of the meeting free of charge.
The proposal was responded to with loud applause.
The Chairman, before the meeting separated, claimed their attention for
a few moments. He freely admitted that he sympathised with the objects for
which the meeting was originally called. He had no doubt that they were
disappointed at the course things had unavoidably taken ; but what he had
been compelled to tell them at the commencement he told them with a great
feeling of disappointment to himself. He would only state that he cordially
concurred in every sentiment expressed by Mr. Dailey, Dr. Woolley, Mr.
Robertson, and other gentleman who had addressed them. < Cheers.) Weil
he knew, and well could be appreciate the great labours Mr. Parkes had
undergone in fulfilling his public duties. Mr Parkes, in bis capacity of
legislator, had devoted more valuable time—time more valuable to him than
that perhaps of any person whatever—not only during the day, but also
during the night, than any other member of .the legislature. He had entered
upon his duties of a representative of this city with that feeling of conscienti-
ousness that he never permitted himself to be absent on any occasion what-
ever. (Loud applause.) When other gentlemen were absent at a dinner
party or elsewhere, Mr. Parkes was in his place. It must now be most
satisfactory to him, after having devoted his days and nights to his duties, to
find that he had earned the admiration of his fellow-citizens. (Cheers.) He
had not, however, retired from public life; and he (Mr. Cowper) had no doubt
they would yet send him back with the stamp of their approval, which his
conduct merited. (Prolonged applause.)
On the motion of Mr. Jones, seconded by Mr. Robertson, the chairman
vacated the chair, which was taken by Mr. Pennington, and a vote of thanks
was accorded by acclamation to Mr. Cowper for presiding over the proceedings.
Mr. Cowper briefly acknowledged the compliment.
Three cheers were then given for Mr. Parkes, and the meeting terminated.


Letter from the Hon. Charles Cowper, Esq., M.P., late Colonial Secretary.
Wivenhoe, i'ind December, 1856.
MY DEAR ME. PARKES,
Your sudden disappearance from the House on Friday night certainly took me by
surprise While I was looking round for you, the Speaker commenced reading your
letter of resignation; and before he had concluded, your letter to myself was put into
my hand. I confess I read it with feelings of emotion, and I soon after went home with
u heavy heart. . , ~ ... , „ ,
The step which you have taken will deprive the Assembly of one of its most useful
members, but I have hopes that good may come out of evil. I feel assured that many
who have been the foremost in maligning you hitherto, will deeply regret your absence
from Parliament; they will now give you credit for motives, which under feelings of party
spirit, they have refused to acknowledge were guiding your actions. You have left us at
a critical moment. Much will depend upon your successor, and 1 wait with no little
anxiety the announcement of his name. The malignity with which those are assailed,
who adhere faithfully to the cause of good government, is likely to deter many from
venturing into public life. It often disheartens even me, and I doubt whether, if I were
to begin a new career, I should face all the obloquy and calumny which I have been
subjected to in acting up to my own sense of duty. ,
I trust vour means of influencing the public mind will be increased, rather than
diminished, by your retirement. You wield a powerful engine—and by having more time
to devote to this all but omnipotent instrument, I indulge the expectation that your
usefulness will be felt and acknowledged by the generous support of that public whom you
have served so faithfully.
Believe me to remain,
Very sincerely yours,
CHARLES COWPER.
HENRY PARKES, Esq., Sec., &c., &c.
Extract of a Letter from Gideon S. Lang, Esq., M.P.
I wish you many happv returns of the season, only I hope few will pass before you
are again in your right place, the Assembly. Perhaps it will gratify you to hear that when
your resignation was so unexpectedly announced, there was a very general expression of
regret among your political opponents, even though they looked upon it as an utter
smashing of the Opposition. Politically I regretted your resignation for that very
reason, for I do not think it safe for the necks of Ministries generally, and for this one in
particular (good as I look on it to he), to have too much rope. Even Jones, without you,
is only a liberal member; with you to support him, even if not in power yourself, he, in a
Ministry, would represent the Democracy of the Colony. What does the Opposition
represent now? Nothing. Or if it does represent the more rapid, in opposition to the
more gradual, progression of political improvement, it is in so detached and undisciplined
a way as to have no weight. The weight of your character kept the Bashibasouks in
some sort of order, but I do not believe any one now, not even Jones, though he has
moral weight as well as the influence of great ability, will make them pull together.
Extract of a Letter from the Rev. Dr. Lang, D.D.
Jtsxiraci oj a x,enerjrom me ivev. WI. j.ang, u.u.
In common with all the right-minded portion of our community, I regret exceedingly
your retirement from Parliament —we have so few men of the right stamp, that to lose
even one, and especially one of your weight and influence in the Legislature, is a public
calamity; but I was not surprised at your procedure, from the overwhelming nature of
your private avocations, as the head of so extensive an establishment. I presume also
there was a feeling of disgust mingled with the other reasons that led to your resignation
disgust at the state of public affairs, and hoplessness, under existing circumstances,
. as to the future. The prospect is certainly very discouraging.


Letter from the Rev. Dr. Woolley, Principal of the University of Sydney.
Lindesuy, January 24, 1857.
MY DEAR MR. PARKES,
My temporary change of residence prevented me from being aware of the meeting
in time to attend. I got Mr. Reid’s circular at the hour when our friends were assembling.
This I could not help very much regretting. It is only natural that we should wish to
express our sense of your past public services, and our earnest and cordial anticipations
of a long future, which shall secure you in the hearts of all generations of Australians
“ monumentum sere perennius.”
However, I for one, though I have some reasons for prefering a public demonstration
just now, enjoy too much the sentiments expressed in the letter which you kindly sent
me, to persist in the matter to your annoyance. I shall not he foremost in pressing on
the plan against your wish; but if the majority of your friends persist, you wiU excuse
my joining them. It is one thing to consult your feelings—another to omit a public
recognition of your public character; if such a recognition is made, at all events, no one, I
think, ought to hold hack on the ground of your personal objection.
I cannot help adding, that I am delighted, and not surprised, at the manly and generous
sentiments contained in your letter to Mr. Reid: they come like the fresh breeze from a
free mountain side. It does one good to think that we have some real men amongst us.
God grant, my dear sir, that you may be spared to take that part in the development
of the moral and material interests of this country which I know you desire, and which,
I am confident, will make your name as familiar to our children as that of Hampden
and Cromwell.
Believe me,
*Very truly yours,
JOHN WOOLLEY.
Extract of Letter from Charles Gavan Duffy, Esq., M.P. (Victoria).
Your retirement from Parliament cannot and must not he more temporary.
More than ever I see no one else in New South Wales to hope anything from, for
posterity.
Letter from the Honourable the Speaker of the Legislative Assembly.
Legislative Assembly Chambers,
Sydney, 26 th January, 1867.
HENRY PARKES, Esq.
MY DEAR SIR,
I connot allow you to relinquish your seat in the Legislative Assembly, as one of the
representatives for the City of Sydney, without briefly expressing to you the high opinion
I entertain of your conduct as a member of the House, since I have had the honor to
occupy the Speaker’s Chair.
Your industry, zeal for the public weal, manly independence, fairness, candour, and
temper in debate, and unvarying respect for the Chair and forms of the House, have been
on all occasions most exemplary ; and it affords me additional pleasure to be able to add,
that I have frequently heard members of all shades of political opinion give expression
to a no less flattering estimate of your Parliamentary career.
Assuring you of my great respect and esteem, and thanking you for the courtesy and
attention I have at all times received from you,
I remain,
Yours very faithfully,
DANIEL COOPER,
Speaker.


