

RETROSPECTS AND PROSPECTS
OF THE COLONY.
THE HON. ARCHIBALD MICHIE,
Delivered in the Exhibition Building, William Steeet,
on Monday, 19th November, 1866.
Reprinted from " T,.c Argus ” of the 20th November.
MELBOURNE:
WILSON AND MACKINNON, PRINTERS AND PUBLISHERS,
COLLINS STREET EAST.
1866.
PRICE SIXPENCE.




On Monday the Hon. A. Michie delivered a
lecture, in the old Exhibition building, on
“ Retrospects and Prospects of the Colony.”
There was a crowded attendance. The Mayor
of Melbourne (Mr. Williams) occupied the
chair; and among those on the platform we
observed the Hon. Mr. M'Cnlloch, the Hon.
Mr, Bindon, the Hon. Mr. Yale, the Hon.
O. Gavan Duffy, the Hon. Mr, Francis, the
Hon. T. T. A’Beckett, M.L.C.; the Hon. C. J,
Jenner, ML 0. ; the Hon. Mr. Cole, M.L.0.;
Mr. Henty, M.L A.; Mr. Balfour, ML.A.;
Mr. Bayles, M.L.A.; Mr. Langton, M.L.A.;
Mr. O’Grady, M.L.A.; and Mr. M‘Kean,
M.L.A.
The Chairman briefly introduced
Mr. Michie, who on rising was warmly
cheered. He said—Mr. Mayor, and Ladies
and Gentlemen,—ln appearing before you
in the interests of our St. Kilda volun-
teers, permit me at the outset to express
my acknowledgements to our citizen-soldiers
generally; for it is now to ba put to
their credit that, after upwards of seven years’
submission to the discipline of the sol-
dier’s profession, they can at any time show
us in round numbers some 3,000 efficient
men in the field. An answer has thus been
given to those who, on the first organisation
of this force, insinuated that the movement
would not last, and that those who joined
it were principally attracted by the pros-
pect of wearing a pretty uniform. In
the camp and in the field they have stood the
test of professional criticism ; and for myself
I will say that the value of this force extends
beyond that of its merely military character.
It must be obvious to the most superficial
observer, that in the course of the volunteer’s
duty every class of society is brought into
more intimate communion ard sympathy
with every other class—a result which as-
suredly is in itself a great good. Not until I
first took part as a spectator in one of our
peaceful battles, and saw even our high sheriff
lead on his own company, among whom
might have been not only some of his own
bailiffs, but even some with whom he might
have stood in still more tender relations, did I
adequately appreciate the civil as well as the
military importance of this portion of our
defences. Seeing, then, that the volunteer
does not merge the citizen in the soldier, and
that we are all—as an ancient philosopher
RETROSPECTS ANO PROSPECTS
OF THE COLONY.
calls men—political animals alike, it is not in
the presence of such a body that I need
apologise either for the matter or the manner
of much that lam going to say. It is pretty
certain, that—as on the occasion of my last
appearance in this place—in some points my
hearers will differ from me, as in other points
they will probably agree with me; but just
as in their own force Volunteers would not
inquire into their right or left hand com-
rade’sopinions before acting on an instruction
to fire into an enemy about to laud, so I hope
they will accept me as a comrade to-night,
and fire away at me as hard as they like to-
morrow morning. It cannot, I think, but be
a great comfort to some of us that—Mr.
Francis and the Custom-house notwithstand-
ing—the drapers’ windows make as beautiful
a show as ever. Still throng the carriages be-
tween three and five in a certain part of Gol-
lins-street. Has not our worthy ex-mayor, Mr.
Bayles, ridden the whirlwind, and directed
the soft-goods storm into that vast hall
which has so lately shown us of what great
things drapery is still capable? And
cannot those inexhaustible fountains of
honour, our excellent fellow citizens, Moubray
and Lush, manufacture any number of
princes, and peers, and marchionesses, and
mesdames on the shortest notice, and on the
most reasonable terms? As these questions
can ba only answered in the affirmative, I
feel I may approach with becoming compo-
sure of spirit, and I propose to talk about, I
trust with all possible good humour, such in-
teresting topics as free trade and protection,
the tariff, the land question, the press, the
people, and the mob; about public opinion
and the modes of influencing it, and about
the probable future of the colony. Ido not
think I can select any other equal number of
topics as interesting as these at the present
time, and therefore I cannot but hope a por-
tion of our evening may ba rationally passed
in temperately discussing them. With the
greatest deference to the analysis of our
Legislative Assembly given at a late extra-
parliamentary utterance at Ballarat, and
notwithstanding the alleged formed opinions
of various sections of our representatives, I
do not think it superfluous to start with the
elementary question, “ What is the meaning
of free trade?” These two words represent
for me an idea which I endeavour to express


to myself thus:—lt is an operation by which
all men enjoy the unrestricted power of
exchanging with each other the fruits
of their labours. The above few words
embody with sufficient clearness to my
own mind the meaning I attach to the
words “ free trade,” when I use those
words. What do I mean when I use
the word “protection?” I mean the appli-
cation of a law by the force of which the truit
of the labour of one man, or set of men, is
favoured and made profitable in any parti-
cular market, by saving it from competition
with the labour of any other man, or set of
men, who, in the natural course of human
dealings, would otherwise resort to such
market. For all practical purposes the above
definitions will suffice. Assuming, then, that
I have fairly explained the proper meaning of
the terms free trade and protection, it may
safely be averred that there never can be
free trade where there is a custom house ;
and there never can be protection which
does not drive us to buy of the pro-
tected industry. In other words, there
cannot be perfect free trade where there
is any restriction; and that cannot be
protection which does not protect. Duties,
however light, are, as far as they go, contradic-
tory of and inconsistent with free trade. On
the other hand, duties, however heavy, never
protect any industry while that industry is
still left exposed to the successful competition
of the general industry of the woild. But,
inasmuch as most countries are in the habit
of collecting a revenue through the custom-
house, and yet some countries—England, for
instance—claim to be considered free-traders,
it seems clear that in the contemplation of
many lespectable authorities light duties, not
amounting to prohibition of foreign industries,
are not deemed incompatible with -a reason-
ble compliance with the principle of free trade.
For instance, England is said to have free
trade in com, although a shilling a quarter
duty is imposed on the importation of toreign
breadstuff's into Great Britain. This slight
and insignificant duty, however, does not and
cannot operate to exclude foreign produce, for
it yields about £60,000 a year to the general
revenue. This sum (assuming that England
exports no corn) exactly measures the dif-
ference between the quantity of corn which
England grows and the quantity which
England consumes. The home grower is not
protected ; the foreign grower is not excluded;
and therefore it is that English statesmen
and journalists are justified in saying that
this shilling duty is for revenue, and not
for protection. At the same time, it is
demonstrable that, nee what language you
may. the English grower derives whatever
advantage arises from the imposition on the
foreign article of that shilling a quarter, from
which the home grower is exempt. To this
extent, infinitesimal though it be, England at
the present moment is deprived of free trade
in corn ; and yet, by reason of the deprivation
btdogbut infinitesimal, we admit that substan-
tially free trade in corn exists in the mother
country. In the above cited instance we (
find that a slight duty on a commodity
for purposes of revenue Is not incompati-
ble with two countries exchanging with
all reasonable and required freedom
their products against each other; and
this, itoo, although the fact is indisputable
that the foreign grower of corn cannot find a
market in England unless he can sell as
cheap as England can sell after the payment
by the foreign grower of that shilling a quar-
ter duty which is the necessary passport to
the English market. Now, let us apply the
above observations to the new tariff, which,
we are told, must next session be made a pro-
tectionist one. Notwithstanding the clamour
which was at first got up about this measure,
I find it difficult to believe that any real ap-
prehension ever existed in the mind of any
man that even the so called protectionists
themselves ever desired the enforcement of
prohibitive duties in this colony. Be that as
it may, it is not easy to understand the policy
of that section of our public men who, being
professed free-traders, are for what they call
giving protection all round —to the farmer as
well as to the manufacturer. These politi-
cians apparently inculcate the policy—
“ A little fostering is a dangerous thing :
Drink deep, or taste not the protective spring.”
A policy which seems to imply their be-
lief that a thing bad in itself be-
comes good when you increase the dose.
This curious and self-contradictory policy
affects to proceed on the belief that
the present tariff is protectionist, in the
ordinary sense in which that term is em-
ployed. Mere counter-assertions as to the
character of the tariff will prove nothing, so
we must go to evidence and proofs. For-
tunately the tariff itself will help us to an
answer; and perhaps an occasional im-
porter will be found an important wit-
ness on the same point. For the tariff
being a sort of table of fixed quanti-
ties is, of course, a mere matter of
arithmetic. It shows either the amount, or
the means by which the amount may ba
calculated, chargeable upon the various
articles therein named. These articles, so
named, comprise scarcely a fifth of the
annual imports to this colony, the aggregate
of which, for the period between the be-
ginning of the year and the 10th of this pre-
sent month of November, I find returned at
£11,982,359 as against £10,722,363 for the cor-
responding period of last year. Four fifths
of those imports are not brought under any
tariff at all, and piece goods of every de-
scription also enter our ports free. Keeping
these important facts before our minds,
now let us see what account experience
enables us to give of the new duties. I find
that the new duties down to the 31st October
last have brought in £116,273, falling short
of the estimate by upwards of £7,000, which
deficiency is no matter for surprise, seeing
that for more than twelve months past goods
intended for New South Wales have been
carried up to the Murray Elver in bond, and
have there paid duty to the sister colony.


For the whole year, therefore,
have, on account of the new duties, a sum
under £160,000, which amount, taking the
new articles subject to the new tariff at two
millions in value, would represent only from
seven to eight per cent, on that value. Of
course the per centage is higher on some few
exceptionally cheap articles, such as dried
fruits, &c., but from seven to eight per
cent, seems the average. Now, in Eng-
land ten per cent, is regarded as per-
fectly reasonable for purposes of revenue, and
as not in any way savouring of protective
duties. It is large enough to yield revenue;
it is not large enough to shut out foreign
goods. Moreover, the rate of duties leviable
under this new tariff is less than that of
almost any other British colony, and does
not amount to one-third of the duties levied
under the Canadian tariff. But here it is
also necessary to remark that the £150,000
collectable under the new tariff, is not an
addition to the previously existing burthens
of the country; it is a substitution only
for the reduced duties on sugar, tea, gold,
and opium. The new imposts just about
balance the old abolished imposts. The gross
amount of taxation through the Custom
House remains under the new tariff what it
had been under the old one. The opposition,
therefore, when opposition arose in the first
instance, had nothing to fasten on with
respect to the gross amount of taxation ; that
opposition could only assail the alleged im-
politic substitution. That substitution being
a substitution of duties on various manufac-
tured fabrics, in lieu of the previous higher
duties on tea, sugar, opium, and gold, it is
important to ascertain whether such substitu-
tion is, in the aggregate, a greater burthen to
the consumer than were the displaced duties.
If consumers pay no more in taxation, who is
hurt ? If a man is to pay £5 a year in taxation,
what does it matter to him whether he pays
that £5 on sugar or on shoddy ? How, in tire
main, has it appeared, as yet, that the new
tariff is more oppressive than were the dis-
placed duties on tea, sugar, opium, and gold ?
It has been said that no duties on tea and
sugar can be protective, because we cannot
produce tea and sugar, but that duties on
hats, caps, and widows’ cap fronts, may be
protective, because we can and do produce
these and similar articles. Let us examine
this position, and endeavour to ascertain what
it is worth. As I have said already, and as
the fact is, piece goods come in free. Why was
this distinction observed between piece
goods and goods worked up into slops?
Apparently because we cannot produce
muslins, calicoes, silks, and other fabrics,
any more than we can produce tea,
coffee, or sugar; but we possess in abun-
dance the labour which can work up the un-
taxed fabrics into shapes fit for human use.
This, of course, will not be denied. Bat then,
again, it may bo said that the puichasers and
wearers of slops have a right to buy in the
cheapest market; that if the labour bestowed
in England in converting these piece goods
into slops is cheaper than similar labour tu re,
should the consumers in Victoria have a right to hny
that English labour in preference to the Vic-
torian labour. Not disregarding such a posi-
tion, what is the choice before the colonists ?
On the one hand, we have before us, as pro-
posed objects of taxation, the labour involv.d
in the production of tea and sugar, and, on the
other hand, the labour involved in the produc-
tion of English slops. Assuming—although
I by no means admit the fact—that the tax
necessarily (alls on the consumer, I ask, if I
and other taxpayers choose to say we will pay
our tax on the labour in the slons rather
than on the labour in the tea and sugar,
what is that to any one ? It will not be denied
that it is of the essence of freedom that men
should be entitled to ch' ose how and upon
what particular product of labour they
should tax themselves. “ Oh,” but it may
be said, “by taxing the labour in the
slops, you encourage, or even foster, the
colonial labour!” Well, if you do so,
what of that ? That colonial labour will he
as cheap as the imported labour, or it will
not. If as cheap, nobody has the colour of a
right to complain. If, however, the colonial
labour be not so cheap, why have not tho
colonists a right to say, as tax payers, that
they choose to hand over to the Custom-
house £5, though it may ultimately go into
the pocket* of the colonial labourer, rather
than pay £5 which is ultimately to go into
the pockets of the English or the American
labourer? The £5 so expended will put in
motion a corresponding amount of labour
here ; it draws no capital into channels into
which that capital is not ready almost of itself
to flow ; and it the aggregate of the taxation
be no more than before, what principle,
either of politics or political economy, forbids
us from saji< g in plain terms chat we will,
through the Custom house (as is done in so-
called free-trade England at the present
moment), offer a premium to domestic indus-
try to produce, it it can, the same sort of
articles which are produced elsewhere? But
at this stage of the discussion it is frequently
interpo ed that the two objects of rev. nue and
protection are incompatible; that the one ne-
gatives or excludes the other. I have already
admitted as much in the definition of protec-
tion to which I have given in my adherence at
the outsetof theseobservations. Butdoes it fol-
low, or, having regard to our daily experience,
is it the fact, that the two objects of revenue,
and the more rapid advancement of domestic
manufactures, are inconsist'nt and incom-
patible? Certainly not. To .assert this
would be to deny facts which are daily tak-
ing place uud.r our very eyes. In every
country which has a custom-house we find
foreign articles taxed, and yet coming into
the taxing country concurrently wrtu that
taxing country producing in large quantities
the same description of ar tides as the imported
taxed article. I may give an instance to be
found in evidence presented to one of our owu
Parliamentary committees. In toe select com-
mittee on manufacture, which sat, and look
evidence so ue two yeais hack, Mr, Aitkin, the
brewer, was called in. In question 240, he is


asked, “ With reference to the duty on beer,
will you give the benefit of your experience ?
Answer: The duty on beer is fid. a gallon.
241. How has that acted? Has it encouraged
the brewer ?—lt has. In 1868 to 1861 English
ale averaged from £8 to £lO a hogshead.
Through all these years that was the average.
242, How many brewers were there in and
around Melbourne then ?—Four, M'Cracken’s,
Henderson’s, Murphy’s, and my own. Since
then there are seventeen, in Melbourne and
suburbs. 243. Has the fact of new breweries
starting decreased the price of the English
article ?—The price of English ale from 1862
to the present time has averaged from £4 to
£6. 244. That is good English ale?—Yes.
You can buy good English ale in the market
at present at £6.” Now, here we have certain
facts, which, being facts, must be reconciled
with some theory cr other. In the first
place, we see that this duty is an
encjuragement pro tanto to Victoria brew-
ing. Secondly, it does not exclude Eng-
lish beer, large quantities of which con-
tinue to he imported; and thirdly, the most
important consequence of all is that the con-
sumer can buy English beer much cheaper
since the imposition of the fid. a gallon duty,
than he could do before the imposition of
that duty. Assuming that Mr. Aitkin is not
deceiving us as to the facts, how are they
to be accounted for but on the sup-
position either that competition between
the English and the colonial brewers has
brought down the produce of both, or that
diminished cost of production in England
has lowered the price of the English article
here; and which is the more reasonable sup-
position of the two? Is it likely, or does
anyone suggest, that the cheaper production
of beer in England just occurred coincident-
ally with the imposition of fid. a gallon duty
on that article when entering our port ? The
duty, then, has apparently operated to bring
into existence many new breweries in the
c >lony. It does yield revenue, and the article is
cheaper to consumers, and wo are properly told
that we are never to forget the consumers. That
the English article comes in in large quanti-
ties, simultaneously with the impulse given
to the Victorian trade, need not surprise us,
as there is always a more or less numerous
class, in any community, who cannot be de-
teired by a tax from the purchase of a foreign
article which is, upon any ground of pre-
ference, real or imaginary, an object of desire
to the purchaser. So large a reliance, in-
deed, on this principle of human nature,
have the United States Government mani-
fested, even very recently, that they, during
the late war, imposed a tax of fifty per
cent, on all foreign manufactured goods,
imported into the States. This taxation was
avowedly for revenue, and declared to be
necessary for providing the means of paying
the interest on their then rapidly increasing
national debt. Yet, even this brought in
revenue, nor need the weight of that revenue
(is is so fiequently assumed), necessarily
fail on the consumer. It might fall on
either producer, importer, or consumer,
or among them, just as
mercantile competition or demand and
supply at the time of the particular trans-
action might determine; a position distinctly
admitted by Mr. Mill himself in one of his
essays “ On some unsettled questions of poli-
tical economy,” and also as distinctly
asserted by a Melbourne importer in a letter
to The Argus of date 15th of June of this year,
to the interesting matter of which letter 1 beg
to refer my present audience. But no one here
is advocating, or proposing to advocate, such
taxation as that of America, on which I am
now commenting. I only refer to it as rather
remarkable evidence of the extent to
which taxation at the Custom - house
may both yield revenue, and yet go on
side by side with the home industry. In
short, some people buy the home made article
and others the imported article, and therefore
it is in the face of experience to say that re-
venue aud encouragement of home industry
are incompatible, or that there cannot be
such a thing as incidental encouragement of
such an industry. Now, it has often oc-
curred to me, on thinking over this and
related subjects, that on such topics as
this one we are discussing, new commu-
nities may learn quite as much from
the actual experience of each other as
from the closest speculations of economists.
For economists generally have written of and
from the experience of old countries. But la
old communities, the country for human use
is already made, so to speak. In young com-
munities we are making the country, whilst
we are applying to it, as well as we can, the
abstract truths of economical science. In
old countries which have reached their ut-
most point of development, all new taxa-
tion is simply a burthen and au almost
unmitigated evil. In a new country, on
the other hand, new taxation, if wisely
imposed and judiciously expended, may
be made the most direct and effective means
of cheapening goods to the consumer, and
consequently of extending commerce and
promoting the prospeiity of the merchant,
the tradesman, and the manufacturer. It is
quite possible tbat to many this will sound
like a paradox. And yet, as you will see from
what I am about to read to you, it is
truth as capable of being worked out to de-
monstration as any theorem in Euclid.
To show this I invite your attention to an
extract from Mr. Russell’s recently-published
boob on Canada. The writer reporting Mr.
Galt’s defence of the tariff of Canada—Mr.
Galt being the Finance Minister of tbat colony
—introduces the passage as follows:—‘ Mr.
Galt argues that an increase of customs duties
does not necessarily injuriously affect foreign
trade within certain limits, and that those
limits Lave not been exceeded in Canada.
Formeily, the cost of British goods in
Canada was much enhanced, owing to natural
causes, whilst Canadian producers obtained a
minimum price tor their exports. The duty
was then generally two and a half per cent.,
but the price of goods was enormous; and the
Canadian suffered pro tmio in his means to


purchase them. Suppose the duties Increased flmate protection to the home' i.e., the
five per cent, were to produce a reduction of Canadian—manufacturer is to this extent
ten per cent, on other charges, ‘ the benefit,’
Bays Mr. Galt, ‘would accrue equally
to the British manufacturer and to the
consumer; the consumer would pay five
per cent, more to the Government, but
ten per cent, loss to the merchant and for-
warder.’ ” As Mr, Galt considers the principle
of Canadian finance and Customs to be mis-
apprehended in England as well as in the
United States, it may be as well to give his
own words:—“The Government has in-
creased the duties for the purpose of enabling
them to meet the interest on the public works
necessary to reduce all the various charges
upon the imports and exports of the country.
Lighthouses have been built, and steamships
subsidised to reduce the charges for freight
and insurance; the St. Lawrence has been
deepened, and the canals constructed, to
reduce the cost of inland navigation'to a
minimum ; railways have been assisted to
give speed, safety, and permanency to trade
interrupted by the severity of the winter.
All these improvements have been under-
taken with the twofold object of diminishing
the cost to the consumer of what he imports,
and of increasing the net result of the
labour of the country when realised
in Great Britain. These ©feat improvements
could not be effected without large outlay;
and the burthen necessarily had to be put
either through direct taxation or by customs
duties on the goods imported, or upon the
trade by excessive tolls corresponding with
the rates previously charged. Direct taxa-
tion was the medium employed, through the
local municipalities, for the construction of
all minor local works—roads, court-houses
and gaols, education and the vast variety of
objects required in a newly settled country;
and this source of taxation has thus been
used to the full extent which is believed
practicable without producing serious discon-
tent. No one can for a moment argue that, in
an enlightened age, any Government could
adopt such a clumsy mode of raising money
as to maintain excessive rates of tolls; nor
would it have attained the object, as American
channels of trade were created simultaneously
that would then have defied competition.
The only effect, therefore, of attempting such
a course would have been to give the United
States the complete control of our mar-
kets, and virtually to exclude British
goods. The only other course was there-
fore adopted, and the producer has been
required to pay, through increased customs
duties, for the vastly greater deductions he
secured through the improvements referred
to. What, then, has been the result to the
British manufacturer ? His goods are, it is
true, in many cases subjected to twenty per
cent., instead of two and a half per cent.,
but the cost to the consumer has been
diminished in a very much greater degree ;
and the aggregate of cost, original price,
duty, freight, and charges, are now very much
less than when the duty was two and a
half per cent., aud consequently the legi-
diminisbed. Nor is this all: the interest of
the British manufacturer is not merely that
he shall be able to lay down his goods at
the least cost to the consumer, but equally
is he interested in the ability of the con-
sumer to buy. Now, this latter point is
attained precisely through the same means
which have cheapened the goods. The
produce of Canada is now increased in
value exactly in proportion to the saving on
the cost of delivering it in the market of con-
sumption.” “If the aggregate of cost to the
consumer remained the same now as it was
before the era of canals and railroads in
Canada, what possible difference would it
make to the British manufacturers whether
the excess over the cost in Great Britain
were paid to the Government or to merchants
and forwarders ? It would certainly not_ in
any way affect the question of the protection
to home (*. e , Canadian) manufacturers;
but when it can be clearly shown that by the
action of the Government in raising funds
through increased customs duties, the cost
to the consumer is now very much less,
upon what ground can the British manufac-
turer complain that these duties have been
restrictive on his trade ?” “.The undersigned
might truly point to the rapid increase in the
population and wealth of Canada arising
from its policy of improvement, whereby its
ability of consumption has been so largely
increased. He might also show that these
improvements have, in a great degree, also
tended to the rapid advance of the Western
States, and to their increased ability to
purchase British goods. He might point
to the fact that the grain supplied from
the Western States and Canada keeps down
prices in Great Britain, and therefore enables
the British manufacturer to produce still
cheaper. But he prefers resting his case as to
the propriety of imposing increased customs
duties solely on the one point, that through
that increase the cost of British manufactured
goods, including duty, has been redueed to the
Canadian consumer, and that, consequently,
the increase has, in its results, tended to an
augmentation of the market for British
goods.” Thus far, Mr. Galt; and I venture
to say that there are very few lines of the
above passage which are not strictly applica-
ble to the circumstances, past and present, of
this colony. Have not we incurred a vast
outlay for lighthouses, harbour acoommoda-
tion, railway?, clearing of rivers, &c. ? # Was
there not a time when the cost of carriage of
goods from Melbourne to Mount Alexander
(a distance of only seventy-two miles)
was £l3O a ton ? Is not the cost now
355, a ton ? Does not this redaction
cheapen the cost of imported goods to con-
sumers ail over the co'ony, and give extra
value to our colonial produce in the English
market? Does not this at once greatly benefit
the merchant, the manufacturer, and the
squatter ? Is it too much to say that we should
make all contribute to the cost of what so
greatly benefits all ? Unless we do this, how, as


against colonial manufacturers and artizans maine, or pay ten per cent, at our port and see
are we to justify these great improvements at his'goods whipped toCastlemalne in a few hours
all? Upon our own principles of free trade, and at a cost of a few shillings, where, in the
might not colonial manufacturers and
artisans have said when these improve-
ments were first projected, “ why is our
industry to be taxed for the purpose
of annihilating the natural protection we
possess ? In other words, why are we to
provide the means of bringing all foreign
industries more cheaply into competition
with our own?” We are at present masters
of the situation, and is it consistent with
the “let alone” principle we so frequently
hear advocated, that the state should make
lighthouses and railways and improve
rivers for foreign merchants, and for
our own colonial importers and ex-
porters, and charge nothing for these advan-
tages? Is it free trade that such bounties
in such shapes should be provided for
foreign industries exclusively at our own
expense? It is idle to say that the state is
paid for providing these facilities to com-
merce, for we do not get back in the harbour
dues and railway fares interest on the
outlay, much less any profit on the work.
So also, if it be said that our artisan gets
the benefit of this cheapness in com-
mon with other purchasers, he will tell
you that the thing might as well be dear
if he cannot buy it at all; and that he
cannot buy it at all if cheapened English
labour has cut him out of employment alto-
gether, or has greatly reduced his purchasing
power. It comes to this, then, that, as Mr.
Galt puts the Canadian case, so may we fairly
put ours. We have by these vast works greatly
cheapened the way of foreign importers to our
market. By thus reducing the cost we have
increased the demand. It we charge foreign
importers nothing for this benefit either
in toll or in customs duty, we as effectually
provide them with a bounty on their labour
at the expense of our colonial labour, as if we
had made them a present of the money with
wnich the improvements have been made.
On the other hand, if we take from them, in
the shape of duty, only a fourth or a fifth of
what is saved by reason of these improve-
ments, we charge them only for less than
the value received by them, we, at the same
time, provide ourselves with the means of
carrying out further improvements for our
joint further benefit. We do no violence in
any direction to any principle of political
economy. We do not allow the poor Brighton
or St. Kilda market-gardener to bring his
produce to the Eastern market without paying
the St. Kilda toil. Why do we impose this
toll? Because we have made a good road,
for which we tell him he must pay.
If this be a good answer for him, is
it a bad answer to the foreign manufacturer
or merchant, or his commission agent here ?
Ask the market gardener whether he would
rather be without either road or toll, or en-
joying the one as the condderaiion for the
otner. Ask the city warehouseman in Cheap-
side, whether he would rather have a free port
here, and cost of carriage £l3O a ton to Gas tie -
olden time, he paid many times more than
as many pounds. We know very well what
the answer would be. Thus far, then, it will
be seen that, in the above observations on
Mr. Russell’s statement of the Canadian case,
I have dealt merely with the position that
customs duties, apart from all considera-
tions of free trade or protection, can be
made the most convenient and expeditious
means of advancing the fortunes and pros-
perity of a new country. In such a case,
and in this view, taxation is raised and ex-
pended for the country, as we raise and ex-
pend it for a municipality—namely, that
Governments may do those things which in
new countries, by reason of the scarcity of
capital, can never be undertaken by private
enterprise. There is no absolute rule, and
there can be no absolute rule, as to what
things shall be undertaken by a Govern-
ment. The rule must be flexible to cir-
cumstances. lu England private companies
can make the railroads. In these colonies
we should as yet have had no railroads to
the interior had not Government undertaken
the work ; and I presume that no man now
listening to me would unmake the Ballarat
and Murray River railways, and return the
money they cost, even if he could do so. Now,
related to the subject of taxation, is another
topic which has often been referred toby public
men among us, and about which I observe
much misconcepti m prevails. The topic I
refer to is Mr. Mill’s so called and miscalled
“exceptional instance” to the doctrine of free-
trade. Before I oflvr a single observation on
Mr. Mill’s words, all iw me to read them to
you: —“The only case (writes Mr. Mill) in
which on mere principles of political economy,
protecting duties can be defensible, is when
they are imposed temporarily, especially in a
young and rising naiion, in hopes of natural-
ising a foreign industry, in itself perfectly
suitable to the circumstances of the country.
The superiority of one country over another
in a branch of production often arises only
from having b°gun it sooner. There may be
no inherent advantage on one part, or disad-
vantage on the other, but only a present
superiority of acquired skill and experience.
A country which nas this skill and experience
yet to acquire, may in other respects be better
adapted to the production than those which
were earlier in the field ; and, besides,
it is a just remark that nothing has a greater
tendency to promote improvements in any
branch of production than its trial under a
new set of conditions. But it cannot be ex-
pected that individuals should, at their own
risk, or rather to their certain loss, introduce
a new manufacture, and boar the burden
of canyirg it on until the producers
have been educated up to the level of
those with whom the processes are tra-
ditional. A protecting duty, continued
for a reasonable time, will sometimes be
the least in convenient mode in which the
nation can tax itself for the support of such an


experiment.” Now, in this passage we see that any sound principle, but I should be advanc-
Mr.MilligQoresnoeconomicalprinciple,either ing the ultimate objects of the science of
precedently or subsequently laid down in the
same work. He rests his suggestion—to use
his own language—on “ the mere principles of
political economy.” He is in pursuit of the best
means of securing the cheapest market. With
this object, he is of opinion that, on large and
long views of things, it may sometimes be
wise in a community to tax themselves for
the purpose of establishing manufactures
among them which without such early fos-
tering might never be able to struggle into
existence at all. “ A protecting duty, then,
on the mere principles of political economy,”
can be only, as it were, the present
price wherewith we buy our way into
a cheaper home market than any which
we can command abroad. Mr. Mill
here does no more than submit an ab-
stract proposition, leaving the application
of it to particular societies. Of course, it
is for these societies to consider the whole of
the circumstances of any proposed application
of the proposition; and having balanced the
present cost against the presumed future ad-
vantage, then to determine how far it
will be ultimately advantageous to foster
its own industries. That Mr. Mill’s pro-
position may be unwisely as well as
wisely acted upon of course caunot affect
the intrinsic soundness of the proposi-
tion itself. Why do I dwell on Mr. Mill’s
proposition on the present occasion? For
two reasons—one personal to myself; another
purely in relation to the public interest. I
have been unjustly accused of having, on a
former occasioa, referred “derisively ” to this
passage of Mr. Mill. My words stand, and
they speak for themselves. I said that Mr.
Mill’s equally eminent father—l speak only
from memory, as I have not any report
of my former lecture at hand—had
not submitted or relied on such a propo-
sition as the one under notice. I
certainly should feel pained could I, by in-
advertence, have expressed myself in terms
other than those of deep respect towards a
man whom I regard as not merely one of the
wisest men of this or of any time, but as one
who has ever proved himself the intrepid
champion of moral troth, howsoever his cham-
pionship may have brought him into col-
lision with the strongest and most intrenched
prejudices of his day. Craving pardon for
thus obtruding my own humble personality
into this discussion, I proceed to my second
reason for calling attention to the so-oft-
quoted passage I have read. It must be ap-
parent to any candid mind that, if Mr. Mill’s
proposition can ever be properly applicable
at all, it must be in young countries; in
countries of, it may be, great and peculiar
yet untried and undeveloped natural capa-
bilities I do not say that Victoria is a country
where such experiments as Mr. Mill suggests
should as yet be extensively entered upon ;
but I will unhesitatingly sav that, could clear
cases be made out for such experiments, I
would at once vote for them, and in doing
so, I should not only not be violating
political economy itself. What are the pro-
babilities of such experiments ever becoming
expedient in this country ? To answer such
a question, we must carefully study our
society, its component elements, and the
circumstances by which our people are sur-
rounded. I am here to speak my own
sincere thought, and if I tread on the toes
of colonial self-love I apologise by antici-
pation, and pass on. We so often indulge in
the pleasant exercise of praising ourselves,
that, by way of corrective, we may do no
harm by standing for a moment or two at the
confessional. If it be asserted that our
colony is “the brightest jewel in the British
Crown,” that our golden resources are mar-
vellous, that our progress has been wonder-
fully rapid, and that we are entitled —
especially when taken at our own valua-
tion—to a good many notes of admi-
ration from the world in general, I sup-
pose all this must, as usual, be admitted.
But there are otner things which, I think,
must also he admitted. Our brightest jewel
has some very unpleasant a pots upon it. What
do you think of that tarring and feathering
business, and of the occasion which led to it, at
the Adelaide Lead the other day ? Is it plea-
sant to find Christian miners trying to smoke
each other to death in their respective claims ?
Are “skull bankers” an agreeable section
of our fellow-citizens? Many of you do not
know what a skull banker is. I did not my-
self know the nature and attributes of a
skull-banker until they were explained to me
some time back by the Hon. W. J. T. Clarke.
A skull banker is a species of the genus
loafer—half highwayman, half beggar. He
is a haunter of stations, and lives on
the squatters, amongst whom he makes
his circuit, affecting to seek work and
determining not to find it. A dozen or
so of these skull bankers were some time
back congregated on a run of Mr. Clarke’s,
and when I, in the Supreme Court, asked a
witness (a resident on the station) who those
men were, he justified their presence there
by saying “they were Mr. Clarke’s friends.”
But the peculiarity of this friendship was,
that whenever Mr. Clarke made his appear-
ance at the 'station the whole of these guests
used to acknowledge the arrival of their
patron and benefactor by taking to flight and
hiding themselves in a dry creek. Again, look
at another class of men among us, commonly
called “ Bolters.” The most experienced police
magistrate in this city, many months back,
called upon me to represent (and to consider
the mode of dealing with) the great and con-
stantly growing evil of husbands and fathers
leaving their wives and helpless chil-
dren a burthen on the community at large.
Does not this state of things necessitate the
encouragement of reformatories, of indus-
trial schools, of benevolent asylums, and of
young ladies hunting modestyoung gentlemen
about at hospital bazaars, on a scale which
may be inevitable in an old and population-
burthened country, but which surely ought


not to be necessary in a young com-
munity like ours? Does not this too com-
mon disregard of the ties of blood pro-
duce much crime and demoralisation, the
necessary results of broken up families, and
of their consequent misery and destitution?
These questions will only admit of one an
swer, for the facts which prompt the ques-
tions are so patent that our very familiarity
with them dulls our apprehension of them,
and causes us to overlook their injurious effects
on society at large. Independent of these
terrible evils, however, I do not consider that
he is a colonist whose years are spent in oscil
lating backwards and forwards between Vic-
toria and New Zealand; between summer
diggings in the one colony and winter dig-
gings in the other. But would he do this
were he able to do anything better? Ought
we not, therefore, to be astute to in-
crease the number, and to extend the
variety of trades and employments for our
people, wherever we can do so consistently
with the general interests of the country ?
Mr. Mill’s doctrine becomes worthy of grave
consideration, when we are suffering under
such anti-social phenomena as I have here
pointed out. To eradicate these evils, if we
could, were a work worthy indeed of the
wisest Parliaments and the most paternal
Governments. I fear, however, that such
evils are unavoidable whilst the constituent
elements of our community exist in their
present proportions. We have over 80,000
miners grubbing all the year round
for gold. These not being enough, we oiler
rewards for the discovery of new gold fields,
that we may take security, as well as we can,
against the commonly recurring flights of
miners to other countries, such as Port Curtis,
New Zealand, or Nova Scotia. At the same
time, we have only some 1,100 pastoral tenants
of the Crown. When we contemplate these
1,100 pastoral tenants side by side with
these 80,000 miners, can we fail to be struck
with the amazing disproportion of able-
bodied men devoted to a pursuit at once very
exciting to ordinary imaginations, and nut
very much tending to fix any man’s aflec
tions to any particular spot? A farmer may
and perhaps generally does more or less
love the field he has tilled? Can the
miner love his worked-out claim, still less
the claim which has disappointed his hopes ?
The expression “ new rush ” goes a great way
towards describing this mining section of
our people. The calm, patient, and provident
household virtues have not here a very con-
genial home. Gambling is so large an element
in the miner’s pursuit, that all the social
vices and defects incident to gambling na-
turally become prominent in mch a con-
dition. The intense and morbid craving
for gold which appears to be generated
of constantly alternating success and
failure, seems in many men altogether
to deaden the moral sense. These are
too commonly the men who abandon wives
and children to inevitable starva'ion, but
for the bounty of society at large. Is it
at “Sailor’s Gully,” or “Murderer’s Flat”
that we can expect to find the simple,
pious, reverent life which may exist in the
poorest societies, and of which Burns gives
us so exquisite a picture in his “ Cotter’s
Saturday Night ?” No. The diggers’ and
mining speculators’ Saturday night will, I
am afraid, seldom do for a companion
picture. Come even down to Meloourne, and
inspect the mining speculator; there can you,
without fear and tiembling, contemplate
that special convocation of politic dealers in
scrip who seem to live their aedve lives near
the Chamber of Commerce, and who block-
ade that part of the pavement, as they dis-
cuss the live long day at high pressure the
last telegram from Ballarat, and inces-
santly give and take the correctest inlor-
mation with high relish, and with au
appetite, which is never sated. Have you
ever been to the Polytechnic, in Regent-
street, London, and seen in that instructive
institution the drop of water magnified, 1
forget bow many thousands of times, upon a
large illuminated circular plane, by way of
giving you accurate and philosophical
impressions of what you are in the habit
of swallowing every day of your lite,
without suspecting it? You remember the
myriads of monstrous things, almost all
stomach, and with any number of eyes, and
legs, and tails, and of all imaginable shapes
and modes of motion, and which seem to
exist only for the great purpose of swal-
lowing each other whole all day long in a
distracting no-system of society, in which
everybody swallows who has the power
and he remains unswallowed who can. If
have ever seen all this, take another
glance at the outside of the Chamber
of Commerce when next you pass, and
see what it reminds you of. But, turning
from the moral aspect of this mining pursuit,
is it at all clear that the physical benefit ulti-
mately accruing to Victoria from the business
itself will afford compensation for the evils I
have referred to ? I think that the history
of other auriferous countries will justify
many doubts on this point. Upon reflection,
it seems scarcely possible to understand
how any mere gold country can, for any
long period together, be a rich coun-
try. “ This yellow slave, this ever fresh,
young, and delicate wooer, this visi-
ble god,” as Timon calls it, is after all only a
better sort of guano to the people among
whom it is founo. Every ounce tnat is ex-
ported leaves the country by so much less for
ever, just as if such ouuce had never existed.
It has been exchanged for so much brandy
and slops. The digger has lived his Doubled
and feverish life for the comfort of the Cham-
ber of Commerce, the Euglit-h merchant, and
the English manufacturer. When the gold is
gone theoigger must go too,or turn tosomething
else if he can find anything else to turn to.
For his so called wealth is simply fugitive,
and a gold couutry woiked out is. uuless other
interests have sprung up during the opera-
tion, worse off than a country which never
had gold within its soil. Regaided in this
light, Mi. Carey, au eminent political


economist of America, would argue that
nothing but preliminary protection, pend-
ing the growth of new interests, could
save such a country from eventual
bankruptcy and ruin. For Mr. Carey con-
tends that even egriculture, by itself, in a
new country—and he instances some of the
eastern states of America —cannot in the
long run hold its own against manufactures,
in the open markets of the world ; and he
puts his position in such a way as to elicit
from Mr, John Stuart Mill a very respectful
and well considered answer. Mr. Carey says
this: that inasmuch as all soils, even
the richest, sooner or later, wear out,
the American farmer with each suc-
cessive crop is deprived of a certain
proportion of his capital—viz., the produc-
tive power of his land; that the crop,
therefore, which he exchanges against foreign
manufactures represents not merely the
annual income or revenue from his land* but
comprises also poitionsof the land itself; that,
therefore, sooner or later, the farmer will have
nothing left to exchange against foreign ma-
nufactures, and that, in the case put, foreign
trade must some time or other cease. Mr.
Mill appears to be somewhat pressed by this
case, and he meets it thus. He contends
that the alleged gradual deterioration of
the land can be corrected by art; that
its exhaustive productiveness can be re-
newed ; and that fox the effecting this
renewal the farmer can import manure. In
making this suggestion, Mr. Mill seems
to be affected by a doubt whether it
would pay a farmer to import a bulky article
of freight like manure, and he therefore en-
deavours to vindicate the reasonableness Of
his suggestion by remarking that all which is
most potent and valuable in manures, viz.,
the phosphates, lie in narrow bulk, and may
be inexpensively carried. This suggested im-
portation of manure is doubtless a merely prac-
tical question, and some farmers may give it
for Mr. Mill, some for Mr. Carey. But it must
be observed that the above answer of Mr. Mill
to Mr, Carey’s case is the best answer with
which Mr. Mill seems to be provided. If Mr.
Mill’s mode of meeting Mr. Carey’s position
should, however, fail in actual practice, it
does not follow that Mr, Carey is right. In
such extensive territories as the states, land
worked out, or partially worked, might
be allowed to lie fallow until it had
recovered the fertility of which man
had deprived it, and thus nature would as
it were replace the exhausted capital
of which Mr. Carey speaks. But, whatever
may bo the result of this controversy in rela-
tion to Mr- Carey’s agricultural instance,
there can be no doubt whatsoever that Mr.
Carey’s observation that international trade
cannot be permanent where the actual
capital of one country is exchanged against
the steady and ever recurring industrial
income of another country, has much
more, and even conclusive, force when
applied to gold. For gold is neither a
manufacture, nor is it an annually recurring
product, like the harvest, the wool clip, or
the vintage; and as, therefore, it cannot be
denied that, sooner or later, our gold-fields
must be like a tale that is told, it is a matter
of public concern to offer the utmost facili-
ties for the miner to transfer himself to the
farm, the factory, and the workshop. At
present he is too frequently a wanderer
on the face of the earth. But the
disciples of the “ let alone school ” may
exclaim, as indeed they have often exclaimed,
“ There is no cure for this. Diggers must and
will continue to rush about, and they have
no disposition, nor can you ever induce them
to turn to anything else.” This answer
cannot be accepted as satisfactory, until
it can be shown that we have at any
time since the gold discoveries afforded
the miner any inducements, or even faci-
lities for turning from mining to any other
pursuit, or for dividing his eneigies between
mining and farming, or some otner business
more healthful to mind and body than work-
ing in a drive. Among 80,000 miners, consist-
ing of an infinite variety of men, many of
whom have merely temporarily transferred
themselves from other pursuits to this of
mining, there must be, as among any other
equal number of persons, men of every pos-
sible variety of tastes and capability. Have
we ever sought to fasten these men to the
soil ? Have we offered them facilities for be-
coming freeholders ? As the business of
gold digging must at some time or other come
to an end, or become so unprofitable and pre-
carious as to be followed only in connexion
with some other less uncertain pursuit, are
we wise in constantly regarding this industry
as a permanent one, when we know that in
its very nature it can be only temporary ? For
years past our produce of gold has been falling
off, and therefore should we not at least,
especially on free trade principles, remove all
impediments in the way of the miner using
his present industry as the means of rising
into some other calling which might give
us a settled citizen In exchange for a
very hardworking, and frequently reckless,
wanderer? What, until very lately, has
operated to prevent, not merely _ miners,
but all other classes, from so changing their
occupations ? I answer, our entire land
system has thus steadily operated down to
the time of the passing of the new land act
now under administration, and which even
yet is on its trial. Therefore it was that a
few moments back I glanced at our extra-
ordinary society, composed, among other
elements, of 80,000 miners, alongside, as it
weie, of some 1,100 squatters. 1 have en-
deavoured, in perfectly good faith, to give a
sketch of the too common condition of
the digger; let us, with equal good faith, now
turn our attention to the squatter. It can-
not be denied with truth that for many
years our squatteis have been a somewhat
privileged class. They have had vast tracts
of land at an almost nominal rent; some of
them have grown veiy rich and powerful
(that is, powerful in that Kind of power
which riches confer) in the enjoyment
of these advantages. I believe that with


many of them the beau-ideal of a
great country is a country which begins
by handing over the bulk of its territory
to eleven hundred persons, and ever there-
after respectfully buys its beef and mutton
from these elevated eleven hundred. I am
disposed to think that we have a num-
ber of banks here which devoutly believe
this to be a highly satisfactory arrangement.
They have substantial reasons for so believ-
ing. Much of their business consists of ad-
vancing on squatting properties, and in
renewing, and renewing, or abruptly pulling
up, according to the position of the squatter,
whose position, in its turn, must depend upon
times and seasons, as upon his own industry
and prudence. There are no droughts in a
banker’s ledger. There, interest grows all the
year round, defiant of scab and foot-rot. The
bright consummate dividend of twenty per
cent, is in large measure made what it is out
of our Australian soil. It solaces the benevo
lent hearts of many absentee gentlemen,
living in elegant mansions in the polite
neighbourhoods of Kensington and Ti-
burnia. We are told that all flesh is
grass, and if this be so, I am very certain
that a large quantity of London flesh at this
very moment is Australian grass. In short,
the squatter, in many instances, is the mere
bailiff of the banker,and the banker is squatter
in disguise. The Australian banker is fre-
uently a wolf in sheep’s clothing, without
prejudice to his becoming, whenever neces-
sary, good honest wolf. In so far as his
banking personality does its direful arith-
metic behind the bluff, smiling, pale-ale-con-
suming, and only partially conscious squatter,
the banker is genuine wolf, and his clothing
is the sheepskin of bis pastoral friend. But
when things go wrong, and when drought-
withered station on the one hand, and the
ledger on the other, will not balance, and the
squatter has his credit stopped, and trem-
blingly calls for his account, and has it
smilingly handed to him, and finds E. 0. E
venerated and cautions capitals—that his
account is closed, and himself closed with it,
then the banker at once appears, and the scene
changes. Flocks and stations having gone down
the maw of banker, it is of course time for
squatter and banker to part. Squatter pays
his addresses to Mr. Noel—banker to Kaye
and Butchart. Kaye and Butchart announce
that “ they have the honour to be instructed,
&c.,” and so the game goes on—with a sort
of everlasting fee fa-fo turn, banker always
smelling the blood of all sorts of Englishmen
(without prejudice to other nationalities) who,
be they alive, or be they dead, have their
pastoral bones perennially ground to make the
banker’s bread. In the reference I have thus
made to the relations between bankers and
squatters, let it not be supposed for a moment
that I am for encouraging any narrow
jealousy of capital, or that I think English
money of itself more injurious in this colony
than any other money. But I am certainly
under a strong impression that this squatter
and banker relation involves some of the
evils which existed in Ireland before the
passing of the Encumbered Estates Act. A
largely mortgaged estate has generally a sort of
blight on it. A mortgagor cannot improve if
he would; a mortgagee will not improve if
he can. A mortgagor’s solicitude about
meeting “ interest ” confines his attention to
fat stock, and he has hardly a thought for
bipeds; a banker-mortgagee thinks only of
the account in the ledger. You therefore
see few indications of civilisation on an
Australian squatting station. What you
might see under more favourable circum-
stances you may find sketched by Sir Philip
Sidney in his “Arcadia.” Let me cut out
the delicious little picture, for the sake of the
contrast“ There were bills which garnished
their proud heights with stately trees: humble
valleys whose base estate seemed comforted
with refreshing of silver rivers: meadows,
enamelled with all sorts of eye pleasing
flowers: thickets, which, being lined with
most pleasant shade, were witnessed so too bv
the cheerful deposition of many well-tuned
birds: each pasture stored with sheep feeding
with sober security, while the pretty lambs
with bleating oratory craved the dams’
comfort: here a shepherd’s boy piping as
though he should never be old: there a
young shepherdess knitting, and withal sing-
ing, and it seemed that her voice comforted her
hands to work, and her hands kept time to
her voice’s musick.” Put beside this sheep
station of Sir Philip Sidney one of our
banker-nursed stations, garnished with
“ skull-bankers.” In place of the shepherd’s
boy, piping as though he should never be old,
most of our shepherds look as if they had
never been young. And as for a shepherdess,
how much would a bank manager advance
upon her? Of what use are shepherdesses in
Australia, when you cannot put them into
an inventory, and band them over with the
rest of the stock on the establishment; and
how could shepherdesses knit and sing here
on damper, and beef, and Barrett’s twist, and
under the almost dog-like domicile of a slab
hut ? I am unable, therefore, to feel any sort of
regret that the present state of things pastoral
is likely soon to pass away. Equity, free
trade, common sense, civilisation, the required
variety of human pursuits, nay, even religion
and morality, demand that that state of
things shall cease. Equity demands it on
tolerably clear grounds. The squatter and
banker between them have had the land for
many years on almost their own terms; and
it is my purpose to show that, according to
my apprehension, these terms are not only
inconsistent, with equity, but that they do also
expressly violate that spontaneous develop-
ment of society and those principles of free
trade about which we have lately heard so
much. When the advocates of free trade
assert it to be so very good a thing, they of
course mean that it is a very good thing all
round—not a very good thing merely for
miners and mechanics, and a very bad thing
for bankers and squatters. Assuming that
they are thus far consistent. I assert, and pro-
pose to show, that there has never yet bean
anything like free trade in land in this


colony. If, further, it can be shown
that squatters and bankers have become, and
propose to continue, wealthy by reason of
this violation of the principle of free trade in
their favour, is it quite modest that the
men in this position should be so specially
demonstrative in favour of enforcing free
trade on every other class but themselves?
That there has never been free trade in land
in this colony the short history of our land
system will show. What is that history ? As
there are many new arrivals among us un-
acquainted with the facts, they may be given
in few words. Before the year 1831, free
grants in New South Wales were made to
settlers in consideration of their taking charge
of convicts. This practice is commonly re-
ferred to as “ the assignment system.” The
grant was proportioned to the number of con-
victs assigned. In the year 1831, Lord Ripon’s
regulations for the abolition of free grants
and for the sale by auction of all Crown
lands, were first promulgated. Until the
year 1839 the minimum price was ss. an acre
for country lands, and in that year this
minimum price was raised from ss. to 12s. an
acre, but the change did not extend to lands
previously advertised at the lower price, of
which there was a large quantity at the time
of the change. In the year 1841 the system
of sale at a fixed price of £1 an acre was in-
troduced in the district of Port Phillip, now
Victoria. In 1842 the system of sale by auc-
tion was resumed throughout the colony at a
minimum upset price of 12s. an acre for
country lands, with liberty to select at the
upset price portions not bid for. In the year
1843 the minimum price was raised to £1
an acre by the act of the Imperial
Parliament sth and 6th of Viet, ch. 36,
with liberty to select at the upset price
country portions put up to auction and not
bid for, or on which the deposit had been
forfeited. Chronologically, you have thns in
a nutshell the successive periods of the va-
rious changes, from the beginning of our first
land system down to the year 1843. It would
be beside my present purpose to show by
what influences, and with what objects, the
present upset price was first determined on.
It is sufficient to say that it effectually
achieved the following results: —It at once all
but annihilated the land fund ; it secured to
the squatters their runs for next to nothing—
as nobody gave, or thought of giving, £1 an
acre for bad land in New South Wales, 16.000
miles from England, when at least equally
good land could be bought at the Cape of
Good Hope for 2s. an acre, in Canada
at ss. an acre, and for 6d. an acre in
the territory ceded bv the Indians to the
United States shortly before the adoption of
the £1 an acre price in Australia. What
wonder, then, that in the year 1844 the entire
quantity of country lands and town allot-
ments sold in New South Wales, inclmive of
Port Phillip, was only 4,259 acres, yielding the
insignificant sum of £9,174 15s. 3d., whilst in
1837, when the population was only 85,000
persons (b ing less than half of the popula-
tion in 1844) the amount of town and
country lands sold was 368 695 acres, bringing
into the Treasury £121,962 12s. sd. In the
year 1847 came out the celebrated Orders in
Council of which you have heard so much,
and which proposed (among other curious
arrangements exhibiting remarkable igno-
rance of the circumstances of the colony)
to confer on the pastoral tenants of the Crown
fourteen years’ leases, renewable until the
land should be bought for twenty shillings
an acre. The net result of this ridiculous
system—the invention of the perverse in-
genuity of Earl Grey—was, that the squatters
practically before the gold era had freeholds
in vast tracts of country constituting their
rune. Outsiders never dreamt of giving £1
an acre for unimproved land not worth 5?.
an acre, and of course squatters themselves
were not such fools as to buy that which in
effect they were already enjoying for
next to nothing. Emigration to Aus-
tralia all but ceased, agriculture was
discouraged, class animosities sprang np
at such an outrageous state of things, the
squatters strove to obtain the issuing of the
leasts, the colonists generally opposing, when
in the year 1851 gold was discovered in Aus-
tralia. This great fact, of course, went a
long way towards practically settling a ques-
tion which is perhaps not finally settled yet.
Now, I have thus rapidly taken a retrospect
of our land history for this purpose. I asserted
awhile ago that there had never been free
trade in land in Victoria. We cannot have
onr common sense outraged by the assertion
that driblets of sales by auction constitute
free trade whilst principalities, altogether
free from auction, are occupied by the squat-
ters at a merely nominal rent. Free trade in
land can only obtain where there is one simple
uniform system for all lands, pastoral or
arable, by auction or otherwise, without par-
tiality or special advantage to any class of
society whatsoever. Where do we find
such a system ? I answer in the United
States. There, the embryo of the future
state was to be found in the setth-rs
of a new territory. The backwoodsman
marched into the forest, and cleared himself
a homestead with his axe. Government
followed him, surveyed, and sold him his
land at a few shillings an acre; and as this
kind of population increased, the territory
in the fulness of time became a state, and a
member of the Union. The importer of
goods, ha d or soft, who said to such a settler
as this, “I require you to buy my goods un-
taxed at the custom-house, as I bring them
from London, the cheapest market,” at
least addressed a settler who was allowed to
draw from our common mother earth the
means wherewith to pay for such goods. But
when our Australian importer and our
bankers and squatters address in the same
terms immigrants generally, may the latter not
reasonably, even as honest free-tradeis, retort,
“Free trade, if good as you say it is, must be
good for all oersons, and should prevail in all
things?” When William the Norman distri-
buted broad England among his ci mpanions
in arms, he did much as the British legisla-


ture did when it handed over our territory
to Borne 1,100 squatters. But the tenants in
chief of Norman William at the least sub let
the Bame land, so that human creatures lived
upon it after all; whereas our barons people
their acres only with cattle and sheep. Are
these barons exactly the authorities to preach
the beautiful simplicity of politico-economical
science? What right has a six-hundredth
part of the population first to appropriate
almost the whole of the land of a country,
and then to require the other five hundred and
ninety-nine parts of the community to buy in
any particular market, when they have never
been allowed freely to grow produce where-
with to pay for their purchases ? These con-
siderations are not urged in any hostile spirit
to the squatters, among whom are many very
sensible, just, and reasonable men. I desire
only to call attention to the inconsistency of
the same men, in the same society, calling
out for what they term the natural system as
applied to dealings with merchandise, and as
lustily advocating the artificial system as
respects land. It is certain, however, that
this artificial system has been allowed to
attain such proportions under the law that
no statesman can now deal with the land
question exactly as he might have dealt with
it in the beginning. It is one of the inevit-
able incidents of an artificial system that
it cannot suddenly be abolished without
injustice, not merely to those who have
dealt under the system, but also to many
more than those directly interested in it.
But, without too roughly interfering with
squatters’ runs, we may now hope soon to
see the country more rapidly settled than
has been its experience heretofore, for
the 42nd clause works. I am rejoiced to
find, not merely from official reports, but from
the interesting statements of the Aye and
7he Argus special correspondents, that settle-
ment is rapidly extending in many districts.
New farm buildings are going up; new
fencing everywhere appearing; solitudes are
becoming peopled; civilisation is reclaiming
the wilderness; the sum of human happiness
is increasing in the land. But the year 1870
draws righ, and once again will the squatters
and their backers fight for a still longer day.
Can we be surprised, ought we even to feel
much disgusted, should they do this ? Every-
where, and in all times, we find class interests
striving to gain the ascendancy over the
public weal. There seems to have been
always, at one period or other, with special
modifications, a squatting question every-
where. The history of the Gracchi and of
the Ager Puhlicus of ancient Rome is in
many of its features not unlike our own land
question. Our own forefathers in England,
nearly three centuries back, had their anti-
squatting agitations, Mr. Francis Bacon—
afterwards the great chancellor -brought two
liberal land bills into the House of Com-
mons, and made pregnant speeches against
“ the Lords,” who, as he said, had “ en-
closed great grounds, and pulled down
even whole towns, and converted them to
sheep pastures.” ‘‘For enclosure of grounds,”
continues he, “brings depopulation, which
brings forth, first, idleness”—their squatting,
you see, generated skull-bankers, even as our
squatting does“ secondly, decay of tillage;
thirdly, subversion of houses, and decrease of
charity, and charge to the poor’s mainten-
ance; fourthly, the impoverishing the state
of the realm, A law for the taking away of
which inconveniences is not to be thought ill
or hurtful onto the general state. And I
should be sorry to see within this kingdom
that piece of Ovid’s verse prove true, 'Jam
seges est übi Troja fuit;' so in England, in-
stead of a whole town full of people, none but
green fields—but a shepherd and a dog.” Not
less distinct and emphatic on the same mono-
polising evil is Sir Thomas More, in his
Utopia. I quote from Bishop Burnet’s trans-
lation. Two of the characters in this work
discussing the then distressing prevalence of
wandering thieves in England—“ There is
another cause of it (*.«., stealing), that is more
peculiar to England,” says one of the speakers.
“ What is that ?” said the cardinal, “ The in-
crease of pasture, said I,”—here the author
is apparently speaking in his own person,—
“by which your sheep, that are naturally
mild and easily kept in order, may be said to
devour men, and unpeople not only villages
but towns ; for wherever it is found that the
sheep of any soil yield a softer and a richer
wool than ordinary, there the nobility and
gentry, and even those holy men the abbots,
not contented with the old rents which their
farms yielded, nor thinking it enough that
they, living at their ease, do no good to the
public, resolve to do it hurt instead of good.
They stop the course of agriculture, inclose
grounds, and destioy houses and towns, re"
serving only the churches, that they may
lodge their sheep in them.” This must be a
wrinkle for some of our squatters—and per-
haps Geelong may tremble —“and, as if
forests and parks had swallowed up too little
soil, those worthy countrymen turn the best
inhabited places into solitudes; for when
any unsatiable wretch who is a plague to his
country,”—Sir Thomas More, who was a most
pious and conscientious man, had evidently
never heard of the heinous sin of “ setting
class against class” —“for when any un-
satiable wretch who is a plague to his country
resolves to inclose many thousand acres of
ground, the owners as well as tenants are
turned out by tricks”—were there dummies
in those days ?—“or by main force, or being
wearied out by ill usage, they are forced to
sell them. So those miserable people, both
men and women, married and unmarried,
old and young, with their poor but numerous
families (since country business requires many
hands), are all forced to change their seats,
not knowing whither to go ; and they must
sell for almost nothing their household stuff,
which could not bring them much money,
even though they might stay for a buyer.
When that little money is at an end—for it
will be soon spent—what is left for them to
do but either to steal, and so be hanged -
God knows how justly—or go about and beg?
and if they do this, they a r e put in prison as


idle vagabonds; whereas they would will-
ingly work, but can find none that will hire
them, for there is no more occasion for
country labour, to which they have been
bred, when there is no arable ground left.
One shepherd can look after a flock, which
will stock an extent of ground which would
require many hands if it were to be ploughed
and reaped Since the in-
crease of pasture God has punished the avarice
of the owners by a rot among the sheep,
which has destroyed vast numbers of them,
but had been more justly laid upon the
owners themselves.” And so the writer pro-
ceeds in the same vein on the same theme,
like a mere Wilson Gray ; and notwithstand-
ing the fuss Sir James Macintosh and other
critics have made about the beautiful simpli-
city and the unbending integrity of Sir
Thomas More’s character, and despite the
stories about Henry VIII. walking about
the garden with his arm round Sir Thomas’s
neck, I can hardly help thinking Sir Thomas
More must have been considered rather a
disreputable character in his own day by the
upper ten thousand. Even as it was, he came
at last to have his head chopped off—perhaps
a fitting finale for one who held such singular,
not to say disgustingly radical, views on
the “ laud question.” B it to come down from
the days of Sir Thomas More to those
of the Hon. W. J. T. Clarke. Of course it
will be said, as has been said many thou-
sands of times already, that agriculture will
not pay in Australia; that sheep and cattle
are the best products for such a land as ours ;
that nature is not to be overruled by man,
and that therefore we ought to allow the
squatters to remain in undisturbed possession.
I grant that nature is not to be overruled by
man, and that land lit only for pasture can-
not be profitably worked as arable land.
But the persons who stand up so stoutly
for nature, on behalf of the claims of
the squatters, begin by committing the
very offence they deprecate in others.
They have overruled nature. They com-
mence by dedicating to a 600th part of
the community the common heritage of all,
and then say to the rest of the population
buy in an open market, deprived in largo
measure of the natural means of buying in
any market at all. We may bo told that we
have no right to mix up such considerations
with the application of the principles of the
economists to our society. I answer that we
find them mixed up already in actual prac-
tice, coeval with tbe original constitution of
our society. We have an artificial system to
deal with, and we have no right to say that
an evil which human error has brought
into existence is to be left to nature to
cure if art can assist nature in effect-
ing a cure. It is therefore idle to repeat
that such social disturbances of what but
for such disturbances would have beeu the
natural current of our colonial industry are
not to be heeded by statesmen when called
upon to apply the principles of economical
science. Special circumstances frequently
call for special treatment; and in actual
practice applied political economy rune
into politics, and both into morals: a truth
of which Dr. Arnold, of Rugby, had so clear a
perception that I may be excused for quoting
his own words. In the life and correspond-
ence of this great and excellent man will be
found, in a letter of January 23rd, 1840, the
following passage:—“l agree with Carlyle
in thinking that they (the Liberal party)
greatly over-estimate Bentham, and also
that they overestimate the political
economists generally; not that I doubt
the ability of those writers, or the truth
of their conclusions as far as regards
their own science; but I think that the
summum bonum of their science and of human
life are not identical; and therefore many
questions in which free trade is involved, and
the advantages of large capital, &c.. although
perfectly simple in an economical point of
view, become when considered politically
very complex; and the economical good
is very often, from a neglect of other
points, made in practice a direct evil.”
Now, it may be as well to keep tbe solid
meaning of Dr. Arnold’s words in mind, not
merely on our own political questions, but
even when we come across some of those im-
patient and bitter expressions of disgusted
and self-satisfied superiority which occasion-
ally appear in the colonial press at what is
denounced as the ignorant and retrograde
policy of Canada on the subject of taxation,
and of America, and other young countries,
on the subject of free trade. May it not be
that the Americans know perfectly well what
they are about ? Can they be so ignorant as
not to know that a high duty per se is worse
than a low duty ? Judged by mere politico-
economical lights, a people taking to pro-
tection for its own sake deliberately will the
partial annihilation of their own productive
powers. I cannot easily conceive of such a
case. I think it less unreasonable to suppose
that the Americans, with full knowledge of
the nature and cost of the means they use,
employ them as a mere purchasing power for
attracting as many people from the old
European communities as can be drawn to the
New World. The Americans apparently
imagiuethat itis not inexpedient to pay a high
price for population, frequently the weakness
of an old country, but always the strength of
a new one. If homestead bills and customs
duties draw this population to their shores,
and if the authors of such measures and
those who are affected by them are content,
I am not aware that any other people have
any right to object. We ourselves buy popu-
lation by means which, at least, equally vio-
late the first principles of political economy,
which should leave labour, like capital, to
flow into or out of a country, according to
the ordinary principle of supply and demand.
Let all these points of policy and motives of
national conduct, however, be what they
may, every nation guides its affairs as best it
can; and in all countries fit for freedom even
errors ought to be turned to account, as
the free play of responsible government,
guided by public opinion, must always mom


or less gravitate towards the true guidance
and economising of a nation’s resources.
Have we a public opinion competent to pilot
its way through these intricacies, and among
these depths and shallows of human interests,
shitting as they do, or rather as they appear
to do, from time to time with the gusts of
party prejudice or passion? A momentous
question, this ! “ Public opinion.” What is
it?—where is it? Who can answer these
questions? How many even strive to answer
them to their own understandings? With
difficulty, and only through the aid of sta-
tistics, can we attain to some knowledge even
of the general composition of our society as
respects ranks and callings. But when we
strive to detect that impalpable essence
called “ public opinion,” I susptct we
are all more or less perplexed, more
or less at fault, and more or less
the creatures of prejudice, and of imperfect,
occasional, and seldom altogether reliable
observation. Unless always on our guard
against our own weakness and partial vision,
we are apt to erect our tastes and our dis-
gusts into opinions and principles of action.
Every man is more or less swayed by mere
fragmentary experience, and by isolated
phenomena of character and conduct. For
instance, to explain by an extreme example
what I mean, some months back, walking
home accompanied by a neighbour, we sud-
denly came on a prostrate and motionless
human figure, all in white, coiled up in an
angle formed by the abutments of a railway
bridge. The recumbent figure might be dead,
or in a fit, or merely asleep. I and my
companion drew near him, and I exclaimed,
judging from his loose baggy cotton dress,
Wny, he’s a Chinaman!” The figure with-
out in the least altering its attitude, returned
with an imperfect pronunciation which ex-
plained his case at once, and set our minds
at ease, “No, no, Oim not a Choingman,
Oim an Oirishman.” Radiating alcohol into
the general atmosphere, as was this fellow-
citizen of ours, the indignant remnant of his
consciousness was stung into activity by my
too hasty judgment, and his outraged nation-
ality vindicated itself by his claim of the
Emerald Isle as the country of his birth. We
walked away; and I could not tielp saying to
myself, “ There lies a specimen of manhood
suffrage; there, with its lodging on the cold
ground; and looking uncomfortably like a
houseless and unregistered dog, is portion of
the majesty of the people; there is an en-
lightened discriminator between protection
and free tiade!” This first thought was a
depressing one. The next thought, whether
a wise one or not, was, I think, but a fair and
just one. How much of this man’s character
or powers did or could I know from this
transitory glance? The presumptions were
against him, it is true. But Sheridan was
once roused up by the watchman from
a similar al fresco slumber, and when
interrogated as to who he was, gave
for answer—the delicious humour of which
almost redeemed its falsehood—that he
was Mr. Wilberforce. Was Mr. Sheridan
unfit to exercise the franchise? You will
perhaps hesitate to answer this question in
the affirmative. But you may say that every
man who gets drunk, and soberises himself
sub- Dio, is not a Sheridan. Granted. But,
all I am contending for is this: that mere
casual observations of men afford you next to
no means of ascertaining their general cha-
racter, For aught I or you could know, my
recumbent Irishman might in his soberer
moods be a man who could draw nice dis-
tinctions. He might on this occasion have
been for the first time in his life drinking too
much colonial wine, and it might not have
agreed with him; and in any view of his
case we know that he must got sober some
time or other, and go about his business like
any other man. Such snatches and passages
of observation as this one of mine, could
never justify the conclusion that the class to
which the sleeper belonged was unfit to be
trusted with the power of voting for one or
the other of two Parliamentary candidates.
To come to just conclusions on such
a subject, we must have more extended
observations, and found our final judgments
upon a much wider experience. Where or
how are we to get this experience? Why,
surely, by striving to take in all the parti-
culars of which our society is composed ; by
giving to each of these particulars its due
weight in our ultimate judgment, and no
more. To instance again. If your mind is
depressed, and very naturally and justly de-
pressed, by the sight of a drunkard sleeping
off his debauch, are your feelings not elevated
and cheered in much more than a corres-
ponding degree by the sight of that procession
of healthy, sober, well-dressed, stalwart men,
who in the pardonable pride of success, cele-
brate annually, with banners and high
festival, the eight-hours system ? Looking as
I have looked, long and carefully, at the com-
position of this procession ; and, looking as I
have looked, long and carefully, at the
assemblage on the grand stand at one of our
champion races, I am sure I am unable—and
so I suspect are you-to pronounce which
assemblage contains the greater amount of
political wisdom. At what point in the
social scale, going upwards, are we to begin to
look for this sort of wisdom ? The men of
Collingwood are not supposed to possess it,
because they are so curiously demonstrative
at public meetings But their whole lives
are not spent at public meetings. The labour
of their hands is perhaps the whole estate of
many of them ; and we may feel assured that
they often think seriously enough about that.
They are not always singing of that everlast-
ing march of old John Browns soul. Bat
whatever this general public may be, and
howsoever composed, it is certain that it is
the public which must ultimately be respon-
sible for the efficient working of our repre-
sentative institutions, and for the general
shaping of our laws. This public may be
taught, advised with, guided ; it can never be
bullied or driven. It is fitting that we
should bear this in mind, whilst en-
deavouring to acquire some clear iu-


sight into its nature and composition.
In making this assertion, I must, in passing,
express my regret that The Argus so frequently
refers to some “ numerical majority ” as a
sort of terrible, blind, and unreasoning power,
ever on the alert to oppress and victimise a
wise, rich, and virtuous minority. Surely
such a distinction is a mere figment of the
brain, D >es any one here seriously believe
that in Victoria we have any sufficiently
numerous section of the ignorant, the house-
less, or of the dwellers in garrets or cellars,
such as constitute in many' old countries “ a
dangerous class ?” Are our police cognisant of
such a class strong enough to be a disturbing
quantity in good government or in society ?
I venture to think not. Nor do I believe
that the numerical majority of any particular
class have any interest (although like every
class they have their prejudices) alienor an-
tagonistic to the just and general interests of
society at large. How many little freeholders
are there throughout the length and breadth
of this colony, all of whom it is certain are
extremely conservative of their little freehold.
How many thousands of careful workingmen
are month by month acquiring (despite of
the long locked-up lands) dwellings through
the numerous building and benefit societies
in operation amongst us? Are these people of
the sans calotte stamp? Are they a likely class
to cry out d la lanterne ! or to throw up barri-
cades against their own trustees? I can
understand anyone calling, us all democrats
or all conservatives (excepting, of course, the
thieves), bat the distinction insisted on by
The Argus is not easy to comprehend. The
above observations derive additional force
from the consideration that our representa-
tive institutions now rest on an electoral basis
of 110,000 men, of whom 70,000 are ratepayers;
the residue of 40,000 are men who have a
right to vote under their manhood suffrage ;
and many even of these have interests in
mines or in mining claims. We have thus
two-thirds at least who may be said to vote
under a sort of property qualification, which
we may reasonably take as some indica-
tion of steadiness, industry, and fore-
thought in those who have attained to
such a position. I observe that even in
England a tenant of a house rented at
£8 a year is regarded as a safe man to be
tru-ted with the franchise. There are pro-
bably few ratepayers here who are not rated
in respect of houses the rent of which is at
least double £B. Mr. Archer’s last published
statistics tell us that 535.048 persons are
housed: that four-fifths of them above five
years old can read and write, and that ten-
elevenths of them can read. Both physically
and intellectually, then, this our community,
as a body, is made up of material very dif-
ferent from that which goes to the composi-
tion of what is commonly called “ a mob.”
And yet we are told that there is a mob here,
and that it was a mob which, during the
last election, refused to hear Mr. Graham
Berry in his defence at Collingwood. Now,
I am not going to attempt a defence of mobs,
for, in the first place, I am not very clear as to
what constitutes a mob. It is a word of rather
vague meaning. Johnson derives it, and no
doubt rightly, from mobile , easily to be moved;
and he describes a mob as “ a crowd, a
tumultuous rout.” which the bulk of a people
can hardly be. He also gives an extract from
Dryden, which shows how large an interpre-
tation even that great classic put on the
word, in the expression he uses, “ a mob of
kings.” The essence of a thing called a mob
would appear, then, to .be its movableness,
its excitability ; and therefore we may have
well-dressed mobs and ill-dressed mobs —
movableness, excitability, being essential to
all of them. When William the Fourth once
went down to the House of Lords to dissolve
Parliament, he was received by a tumultuous
assemblage of vociferating angry peers, who
for some moments were a mob. There may
be a mob, then, anywhere, and most variously
composed. There may be a Colling wood mob,
who do the thing cheaply with good strong
lungs, and there may be an Exhibition-
building mob, who sometimes do the thing
more aristocratically and expensively with
pepper and rotten eggs. Neither of them,
however, is the better for the tumultuous
and merely excitable element, and to be im-
partial, we must censure both. But in our
censure let us at any rate discriminate. This
susceptibility to being moved may be very
various in character. An instructed mob
can seldom, if ever, be as mischievous as an
ignorant mob. The gross and savage mob of
the Lord George Gordon riots was, I
take it, very different from any that could
be got together in our own day. Fun, rather
than malice, seems to be the principal cha-
racteristic of our Victorian gatherings. Fun is
certainly the principal characteristic of a Col-
lingwood convocation. Let us glance back at
Mr. Graham Berry’s meeting, held, I think,
during the late general election. The
comic element of that occasion lay in Mr.
Berry’s proclaimed grievance that the meet-
ing were robbing him in not hearing him,
inasmuch as he had paid for the room. I am
inclined to think that he was in a manner
robbed ; and yet I cannot but also think
that the mass of the meeting were actuated
by a mere spirit of downright fun in thus
converting Mr. Berry’s room into so rough a
temple for concerted music as it became that
night. Whenever Mr. Berry’s own soul was
for marching on to its vindication, the per-
petual motion of that old John Brown’s soul
seemed to be always in opposition. I have
been in a few of these breezes myself, and I
think that there are few large bodies of men
in any rank, where not assembled on an
occasion which demands peculiar decorum,
who would be much more grave than a Col-
lingwood gathering, provided only the comic
elements in each case were the same. There
is no malice in these demonstrations, and it
says much for our society that violence to the
person has been almost unknown both in our
Parliamentary and our municipal elections. At
the same time, before quitting this part of my
address, I would remind my hearers of the
words of a great statesman and philosopher-


words which may be qalta as profitably
pondered by onr higher classes as by the
demonstrative men of Collingwood “ Men
are qualified for civil liberty In exact propor-
tion to their disposition to pat moral chains
upon their own appetites .... Society
cannot exist unless a controlling power upon
will and appetite be placed somewhere, and
the less of it there is within, the more there
must be without.” Words full of wisdom,
and worthy of being learned by heart. How
many of us can conscientiously say that we
reach the standard of moderation here sug-
gested ? Can any one of us say so ? Amongst
the various appetites by which we find
ourselves betrayed, are the appetites for
dominion, for detraction, for the subju-
gation of other men’s wills, and actions
to our own. How often do we assail the
spirit of liberty in the very act of defraud-
ing it ? Are we not all more or less tyrants,
frequently without suspecting the fact ? Men
have been burned at the stake, their execu-
tioners believing they were discharging a re-
ligious duty, when they were only feeding the
perverted pride of a crossed will, which, by
one of those tricks men’s vanity and self-love
can always play, gets called zeal, enthusiasm,
devotion to truth; i, e , the truth of the man
who urges it on the acceptance of his fellows.
Our civilisation has outgrown the •fires of
Smithfield; but does none of the spirit which
lighted those fires survive ? Can or do we all
respect in others that liberty of thought we
claim for ourselves? The men of Colling-
wood were rated for boo-booing the speaker
who claimed to address them, and I am not
going to attempt to defend what is plainly
indefeasible ; but are there no symptoms of
a more deliberate and still less defensi-
ble tyranny among those who probably
claim to be the betters of the men
of Collingwood ? Are there not well authen-
ticated accounts (from Geelong and other
places) of tradesmen threatened with loss of
custom if they did not vote according to the
dictation of the threatened ? And still
worse—have we not seen this tyranny assail-
ing the private lives of persons politically ob-
noxious to the assailants ? And is not this
the worst tyranny of all—the attempted
tyranny over thought—that free thought to
which alone is due almost all the moral good
we enjoy in these latter days? I think be-
fore we are so hard on the mote in the
Collingwood eye, that some of us may think
a little on the beam in our own. On what
agencies are we to rely for the holding in
check this spirit of tyranny which is never
dead—which only sleeps until roused up
again by an adequate provocative? We
have the press, the pulpit, the lecture-
room, the infinite talk of men in all
the walks of life, the ever-mutually cor-
recting moral censures and political experi-
ence of an ever-widening world brought home
to us by electricity and by steam. Of all
these agencies one of the most potent is the
press—wow vi sed sccpe cadendo— for it speaks
to us daily, and we hardly want Cowper’s
assurance of the efficacy of iteration in in-
fluencing men’s thoughts and actions. How
desirable, therefore, that in every civilised
country, and more especially in every free
country, we should see mirrored in its press
the collective intelligence, convictions, and
purposes of the entire community. Is the
press of Victoria such a mirror? I think not
quite. It is hardly possible for it to be so, for
at the same time that it is only wanted to
express our immediate local necessities, the
press of Victoria must suffer, because it does
not carry on its functions under the same
conditions which beset and control the Eng-
lish press. Behind and around the English
newspaper prqss is a literature unsur-
passed in power and variety in any age
of the world. And behind this again are
many thousands of men of much literature,
who do not write, but who have nevertheless
a great influence over those who do. The
unwritten thought of a country, with many
learned men in it, must always largely shape,
and qualify, and keep within the bounds of
justice, decorum, and fairplay, the class of
journalists, even if the latter in so large a
community could ever feel any temptation
to abuse their position. The English press,
therefore, will always mirror everything Eng-
lish, very much that is imperial, and even
cosmopolitan; and on the other hand, the
English people, as a nation, know only and
are influenced only by their own English
press. Press and people therefore grow to-
gether, and each is ever being subdued to the
quality of the other. But here in Victoria,
the local press is not our only press; many of
ns could not feel that we were living if the
English press did not come to us byevery mail.
For our sympathies and our cariosity extend
beyond the sphere of our immediate interests;
we would know the central world though on
the outer part of it; and, therefore, it is not
surprising that Victorians, active and ener-
getic, and congregated here from the world at
large, and most of them owing fealty to early
memories originating elsewhere, shoald so fre-
quently utterly ignore the exhortations of our
press, and refuse to recognise its authority.
Touching the general ability of our press, it
is perhaps not too much to say that, upon
the whole, it stands as high as any
provincial press out of England. As to its
independence, its conscientiousness, its regard
for fairplay, I am afraid that no man who
has been much before the public is quite an
impartial or trustworthy judge on these
points, and, therefore, I shall offer no
opinion upon them. But as I read Eng-
lish as well as Victorian newspapers, I
often fancy that I miss from the latter
the nicely balanced thought, the line judicial
spirit, and the courtesy and moderation of
expression, which, even in the height of party
straggles at home, are"generally displayed by
first-class journals-qualities which give
these journals a certain air of authority for
all classes of readers. I will, however, can-
didly admit that The Argus has one contri-
butor, whose originality and uniform courtesy,
together with his slashing and vigorous style
(So like Burke’s in one respact, as ever hover-


ing between prose and poetry), always com-
mand my respect, and enchain my attention
to the end. Is it necessary for me to
say that I can refer to no other person
than our much-respected old friend, Tom
Stubbs? I cannot quit the subject of the
press without adverting to an observation
I have seen more than once made in news-
paper columns. It has been said that most of
the country press, and also the press of the
neighbouring colonies, have been found in
opposition to the present Government. It
must be admitted that, so far as this is
genuine and honest expression of local
opinion, it affords, where the writers have
mastered their subject—and not otherwise—
an additional authority against the Govern-
ment. Bat I take leave to question the
genuineness of much of this so called opinion.
It is matter almost of notoriety, that much
country journalism is Melbourne manufac-
ture—a manufacture of which you may have
as much as you have money to pay for. Ido
not think that all the members of the Vic-
torian press would like to make affidavit that
even some of the articles published in neigh-
bouring colonies have been produced alto-
gether independent of Melbourne authorship.
Opinions, like light, can be reflected back
upon us from distant surfaces, and a small
political party, under manifold disguises, can
apparently multiply themselves, and recruit
their strength as small theatrical armies
sometimes swell their ranks by bringing
across the stage over and over again, in
various garbs, everybody in the establish-
ment, down even to the money-takers, the
carpenters, and the call-boy. If, however, it
be true that a majority of our press is on the
one side, as most undoubtedly a very large
majority of the people are on the other side,
the spectacle is certainly an interesting one,
for the majority of the people are, in the
main, either right or wrong. If right, they
are wiser than the press which assumes to
instruct them; if wrong, there is a noble
opportunity for the press to convert them.
If wrong, and unconverted, our people are
either unteachable, or our press cannot teach,
the dilemma is one which deserves serious
consideration. One thing is certain, that those
who desire to teach must not exhibit from the
judgment-seat of journalism too great an
anxiety to effect the ends of party.
Let them candidly discuss the views of oppo-
nents, for as Aristotle says, “ Among all the
searchers for truth, none completely succeed,
and none completely fail; those from whose
conclusions we dissent do us service, by exer-
cising our intelligence.” Is not this at once
modest and true ? And do you not feel that
could Aristotle come back to us and edit a
newspaper, he would do his work like a gen-
tleman, and like a gentleman, too, not at all
confident that wisdom would die with him.
But as time admonishes me that I am tres-
passing upon your patience greatly beyond
the little hour permitted by custom to the
lecturer, it is fortunate that but one subject
remains on which I desire to offer a few
observations. That subject is our Parlia-
mentary constitution. 1 wish, and so 1 am
sure do you, to see that constitution work
harmoniously and usefully for the public
interests. It may have been an oversight in
the framers of our Constitution to make no
provision for the possibility of a dead-lock
between the two Houses. But the absence of
this provision entails on both Chambers an
additional necessity for mutual forbearance,
and a mutual endeavour to conciliate oppo-
sition. And as Victoria must now depend
entirely on herself for whatever of political
truth or wisdom there may be in her future
policy, I am sure that the honourable gentle-
man of the Council will allow me to as-
sume that they ate not behind any of us
in their desire to advance the interests of
a country which as our great Intercolonial
Exhibition now shows ns, has at immediate
command, and bounded by our own seas, the
profuse and various wealth of tropical and
temperate climes. To make such wealth
available for millions yet unborn, the works
before us seem plain and simple General
and sound education for the rising genera-
tion, and the elevation of their moral cha-
racter ; the facilitating by bold and statesman-
like land legislation the more rapid settle-
ment of the country; the providing that
country with roads, irrigation, and water
supply: the wise promotion and encourage-
ment of new industries; the steady sub-
ordination cf mere sectional interests to
the great general interests of the public
at large, seem to be plain and pe-
remptory duties lying in our path, and
as man does not live by the material
alone, I would add the adorning and making
attractive to surrounding populations this
our capital city of Melbourne; and last,
although far from least, the federation of all
these Australian colonies, and the consequent
economising and consolidation of their re-
sources and strength. On such subjects can
there be irreconcilable differences of opinion
among reasonable men? On such subjects
can there be permanently one body of opinion
for tho Assembly, another for the Council?
I humbly think not. But if there be such
difference of opinion it is all important that
it should be expressed in both Chambers.
As there must be give and take in politics,
an Englishman can al ways beat being denied
a thing if sensible and honest reasons only
be given for the denial. But no deliberative
body in the world—call it by whatsoever
exalted title you may—can command respect
save by the intellectual manifestation of the
power it exercises. We are often told—and
it is a very trite truth after all—that
political power, uncontrolled by con-
science and unguided by knowledge, is a
terrible power for evil. But all history
shows —and our common human nature
approves it—that such power is quite as
dangerous in the hands of the rich as in the
hands of the poor ; in the hands of the pros-
perous few, as in the hands of the struggling
many. Therefore, all political power, aristo-
cratic nr democratic, must justify itself to the
critical intellect of tho governed, or it will


cease to be power. When the Council checks
hasty legislation, it must do so as if really
understanding its work; it must not do so
in still greater haste and in solemn silence,
as we drink to the memory of departed
friends. lam aware that Mr. Fellows, in his
speech at the opening of the Deaf and Dumb
Institution, expressed an opinion that the
Council, as well as the Assembly, might
improve by still further approximating to the
deaf and dumb inmates at Prahran; but I
think he does the Council injustice in in-
sinuating that they have too much to say.
At any rate, one of the most competent,
and one of the best informed among
Mr. Fellows’s own fellow councillors, lately
held an opinion opposed to him on this
very subject; for only some three years
back, the gentleman to whom I refer, read to
his fellow Itgislators the following startling
passage, for tne edification, I suppose, of the
pastoral interest as represented in that House:
—“They are all ignorant; all dumb dogs;
they cannot bark: sleeping, lying down,
loving to slumber Yea, they are greedy dogs,
which can never have enough, and they are
shepherds that cannot understand. They
all look to their own way, every one for his
gain from his quarter.” Aon mens hie sermo.
With my critical, and facetious friend
(whose lively fancy has perhaps a little
exaggerated here), it seems as if ordi-
nary language broke down, under the
strong conviction he did groan withal, and
nothing short of the nervous words and the
strong Colours of Isaiah sufficed for the
portrait. All I can say is, that / should
never have been permitted to go to such a
source for descriptive materials. But I sup-
pose that in a bishop’s registrar is but a
choleric word, which in a poor outsider like
me would be fiat blasphemy. In conclusion,
I hope I need hardly say that I have aimed
only at one purpose—viz, fair and candid
discussion —in the views I have submitted. I
do not affect any particular devotion to “ this,
my adopted country,” as the phrase goes—a
phrase which is a common form in so many
addresses, and which seems to flow me-
chanically from so many lips. But I think
that we are all compelled to take a peculiar
interest in a country which, although
never to be loved as our own until
we can change our nature with our
skies, is yet very tenderly regarded as
the native country of those who are dearest
to us. With his children abont him every
man is a Conservative, unless he proposes to
run away from them. I therefore, by virtue
of the hostages I have given to fortune, claim
to be as good a Conservative as any one here ;
but I meau the wise conservatism which can
Bmjo
Noef^f
WILSON AND MACKINNON, PRINTERS, COLLINS STREET EAST,
only conserve even the good we have by re-
cognising and discharging the duties which
must ever devolve on the first occupants of a
new country, and the first founders of a new
nation. This distinguishes our position from
that of any equal number of people among
any of the old populations of the world. For
I believe that in the order of Providence,
which in its good time raises and depresses
dynasties and peoples, the legitimate office of
a young land like this is to be the refuge for
the weary and the heavy-laden, as well as for
the resolute and the self-reliant, who from
among the crowded and struggling popula-
tions of the Old World may desire to cast
in their fortunes with ours. The interests of
such a land and the spirit of its legislation
are, or ought to be, as large as the interests of
humanity itself; and in dealing with them
we should do so in the reverent spirit of the
old Puritan poet, who, counselling modera-
tion to the antagonist political forces of his
day, pleads for the solemn interests and the
essentia) truth and dignity of a human com-
monwealth as paramount to the mere forms
of its civil life, in the few grandly simple
lines with which, leaving you to apply them,
I bid you good night:—‘ Let not your King
and Parliament in one, much less apart,
mistake themselves for that which is most
worthy to be thought upon, nor think they
are essentially the state. Let them not fancy
that the authority and privileges upon them
bestown, conferred, are to set up a majesty,
a power, or a glory of their own! But let
them know ’twas for a deeper life, which they
but represent—
That there’s on earth a yet auguster thing,
Veil’d though it be, than Parliament and King.”
[The learned lecturer, who had been fre-
quently applauded during the course of his
remarks, which occupied in their delivery
nearly two hours and a half, sat down amidst
loud and long-continued cheering.]
Colonel Andeeson rose to propose a vote of
thanks to the lecturer, for the great intellec-
tual treat which he had given the audience.
This duty had been confided to .him, he pre-
sumed, as being the representative of the
force on behalf of a portion of which—the St.
Kilda Artillery—the lecture bad been deli-
vered. The members of this body, he was
certain, must be highly gratified with what
they bad heard that evening.
Captain Sakgood seconded the motion, and
on behalf of the St. Kilda Artillery, thanked
Mr. Michie for his lecture.
Mr. Michie brit fly returned thanks; and
the proceedings closed with a vote of thanks
to the mayor for presiding.


Highest possible total per
points.
0’S
Brownlow, N.S.W.
53
J. W. Fawcett, Cn.
57
Lieut. Templeton, Cd. ..
54
Lacey, S.K.A
49
Bayner, N.S.W
51
Slade, N.S.W
56
Johnson, E.H.A
48
M'Clure, Cn.
64
Captain Bankine, 8.A. ..
50
M‘Naughten, S.K.A.
60
M‘Ewan, M. & N.M.
46
Hordern, N.S.W
65
Wickham, N.S.W..
53
Ensign Strong, N.S.W. ..
52
Lieutenant Stack, S.A. ..
61
Thrum, N.S.W
44
Linsley, N.S.W
66
Sharp, N.S.W
64
Colonel Bede. Staff
61
Lynch, N.S.W
61
THE ARGUS, TUESDAY, DECEMBER UU 1866.
— r~. of certain mailg to and from St Arnaud has been suggested that the contents of the well. The plan adopted by the Government TELEGRAPHIC DESPATCHES, I VICTORIAN VOLUNTEER ASSO - MR. LANG TON'S REPLY TO MR.
the volunteer who mvesta himself with to oat altogetheri 60 snrveyorB of driviDg * fchese BtroEg pegB , tffo ♦ % , ' CIA TIDE MEETING. MICHIE.
the real suitors pnvileg , y y t nt a fetter nested at Ballarat that the staler fish should be the first to come or three feet high, and near to the public (ibom ocb own coke kspondentsJ ptt a MATCH t • 7T~ f ... *
the impulse of malice m his vicarious J®* te trfv“ eeveral days before being de- under inspection, or at least be placed on highways, is to be very much deprecated. Monday. ™ of rifle . TT* ’ J
litigation..He is not; restrained m the livered at Sfc Arnand . Mr. Turner promised equal terms in this regard with the primest in The second of a course of Penny Readings A heavy flood weaned at Chiltem this match took p°lact yesterday, at the Sandridge «
purauit of his object by the prudence or h the matter B hould be considered, and condition. Yesterday, at the market, five was given last evening, in the Mechanics orning . Great damag e was done to the Butts. Its object was to settle, atthelnter- 0 f thf discourse was Mr MichieWent
of an ordinary litpnt We Btated that the mails would probably be baskets of whiting, seven dozen fish each. Mint* Williamstown. The hall was proper ty of residents in some places. No
cfuite aware that insolvents often ap- f orwarde d, vid Avoca, direct. The deputa- brought from 30s. to 355. per basket; fifteen crowded; Mr. Call, P.M., the president of the Eveg were lost. best of all. For this purpose the Victorian p ro6p€C ta of Victoria.” The body of the room
“ stjss -y r. a . r. r «.ph sfssrzrsris -sww.mo,™. as^antra* ~ —n p T
criminal dock, and we desire to see no LtXU d" ««»•«. ing ; ” nod . gentian nanaed A.h«rth * to* of bn.br.cg,,. attacked .be £££.
kind of relaxation in the mode of dealing very slightly increased expense. Mr. Turner bead, skate, trevaly, barracoota, trou , gave The Barrelled Organ, a humorous ee ern mai on 11 a f* nea * u °‘ .. because, according to established rule, the M . A Macßain MLA *Mr Gillies
SS thbse dishonest applicants. But promised to see the superintendent of tele- mullet bream, silver-fish, rock cod, and production from the pen of James Law. the Crown Lands Commissioner Mr. GrenfeU, competitorsget the lemgestrangewiththe JJJ* “lal- Sir George
.. 1 j 1 • .Yu , . butter-fish, brought from 20s. to 255. !per Lancashire Poet. In the absence of Dr. Figg, was a passenger, and resisted the robbers, smallest, bull s-eye—secure a show of the , mr. uuraay, , oir ueorge
we certainly do object to hand over any F»PH and endeavonr to .rrange thta natter e| ht b , stets of pachatdß IMll3ed „ H E It ,j d TO | uot eered a reading from Several ebote were exchanged, and Mr. Gren- very highestj efficiency . It ™ BcppM«dth,. Stephen ; Mr. Ebden (ex-Tretanrer), to.
man how gudty soever, to be perse- ™e“S?mdefttottaiol torn 12a to 15a. per basket In all, thirty Hood, entitled " Faithless Fanny.” The fell, who was wounded in the thigh, hae since ffiSSShhSbXJta£ The Ceaiemu. said ,t was expected that
cuted at the pleasure of a private ““J” three baskets were sold. The fieh that were entertainment oonclnded with “ A Passage died. vSSS . JteteJt? Sme. It wta, learV he mayo, of Melbonrne woold have taken
enemy, and we have no doubt that the ° f ‘ he “ ‘ toed' noon Tnd farther condemned were of tb, kind popularly known in the Lite of Mr. Watkins Tottlo,” from Mdlle. Durand was bnrled in the Calbolio nmph We have gotonecitoarmontorchtan- the chair. They were.ware that h» worsh.p
i a rlmiyrarlprl wlipn individuals nre- t,OD > was a B am entered upon, ana lartner , , , . „ ~ , „ r! . , , pion, hut the rest of the prizes gotobydney, presided when Mr. Michie delivered his lec-
law is degraded wnen inaiviauats pre lajne(J Mr . Turne r stated that, from the as Australian salmon. the Sketches by Boz which was rendered burial grounds yesterday. and one of them is gained by Ensign Strong, tore - and the committee of the Free-trade
sume, for private spite, to grasp and . - f Rn y.; p _a ho ponlfl not Hp»l Yesterday morning a fatal accident befell with good effect by Mr. Call. The readings Government has received a telegram from the lowest scorer at the Intercolonial Match. * . , ... ...
wield its terrors. at . a child months old. the son of Mr. were interspersed with the performances of Weddin, announcing the discovery of another It was shown again that our opponents always Leaguewere led to expect that hewoulddo
- Duffett, of Kew. A girl who had charge of the Williamstown Musical Society, who sang rich gully, which promises to equal that first dx*ljith theloesiweathe same favour on this occasion. However.
_„ . . . _ p _. _ . the child was holding a horse, and gave him several glees, and were deservedly encored. At discovered. About 5000 diggers were on the w^ er cou id add that our South Australian *! jV! «!!»I nmm!
Soon after e rgus wen 0p . y ‘ The City Council was occupied for upwards the reins to play with, while sitting upon a the conclusion a vote of thanks was passed ground, and the roads were thronged with visitors had distinguished themselves. We are pie p , , p ~, , .. „
day morning, a telegram was received from 0 f an hour last evening with the considera- form . The horse suddenly jerked the reins, to the president, and after a few remarks diggers bound thither. sorry they did not do so ; but it should be a posi ion-of chairman of that meeting. He
Adelaide, stating that the English mail had tion of the terms and conditions of lease of when child fe u upon its head, and died from that gentleman, the B proceedings Alderman Moore has been elected mayor on to ‘ he “ if the best ° nC f i “‘ rodQC ® the lBcturer - who waa
arrived there at three o clock a.m. The fact the sites for market buildings in the Western rinsed w fhe nnaninff vear Slll J 8 u are al l wa y ß den in ‘f 1 ® well known to them. (Applause )-
was published in a portion of our issue. In Market. The conditions ultimately approved An accident occurred yesterday at the At the Theatre Royal last evening Mr. The Assembly hw voted the remainder of “chiSg hi? profidency without one may Mr. Langton rose amid cordial cheering,
less than an hour afterwards, however, a appear in another column, and tenders for CaBtlemaine Eailway station. The head Hoskins (for the first time in Melbourne) the estimates in chief. The Appropriation shoot steadier with yet a man who After some preliminary observations, the hon.
second telegram was received, ntimating leases of sites under the same will be called porter had his arm severely crushed between appeared in the great part of the Cardinal.ia Bill will be introduced this week.
that the first message was a mistake, the for. the buffers of two carriages. Bnlwer Lytton’s popular play of “Richelieu, Heavy rains have prevailed throughout the Bliug. At least, this is the opinion of so many of free trade v. protection, Bald- Our lay
steamer reported as being the mail vessel The annual speeches by the pupils of the The often been deceived by or the Conspiracy.” Mr. Hoskins gave a eo nthern and western diggings., that they are not allowed in the great matches and learned preacher began with the ele-
having turned out to be a coaster Scotch College will be delivered in St. announ P cements of a » monster of fche deep” on careful and creditable reading of the part; the At auction, Scotch whiskey brought 4s. 3d.; can lre de- “cuts, started with a definition of the terms
Last evening Mr. M.L A., de- OjowM. 1 io-d.,, .Uwo p.m. Theprixe. vi .w, but a. these monsters have only been wily, plotting nnd conntert.lotUn g character, Hannetajk brandy, 6». 6d. ; Lnnod’a case, £?Sn?d-whSh“r ?hKi.Wm« hetatkem S
livered an argumentative address to a will be distributed by His Excellency the i arge Bea i s tbey bavo excited little interest, enlivened by sardonic humour, was most sac- 225. 6d. or not—to secure better rifles of an uniform which they refer, and wirii this definition we
numerous assemblage at St. George s-hall. Governor, who has consented to preside. Now , however, there is really something to cessfully developed; but of the declamatory Arrived.-Natiou’s Hope, from San Fran- pattern.. .. . , must commence also Free trade Mr..
in reply to Mr Michie s recent lecture on Admission will be by ticke only. be seen at a shop next the Cafe de Paris, in scenes, the most effective was the latter portion cisco , with 15,000 bushels of wheat. 400 tons Michie ’ 18 &Q f °? e f ration by which all men
nnd ftw* ol Ttetoria. The Bh.'«>«lynta.Ty in connexion Boulke . Btreet Thi, “monster" In onn of the of that at the conclusion of the fourth act, of Sour, and 200 tons of oats. The%njffits are a. foUo-s: - power «^«g.ng
Hon. G. Harker presided. A full report ap- with Collins-street Baptist Church takes place largest Bharka ever seon w«. o Ma Kt which elicited a re-call before the aadiem* TnFl AIDE Monday nv, ■pm »ith e»oh otherthe fruits oftheir labour;
pears in to-day’s issue. this evening, at the usual hour. by Wm M . Farlanei a Me rman, late in the The same compliment was also paid to tin . A^, LA ± f ON ® AT ‘ First Plate worth £2O) protection, he added, means the application
The Champion Match of the Victorian Mr. D. Lee, organist to the Intercolonial employ of Captain Kenny, of the St. Kilda lessee and manager at the fall of the curtain. There are no signs of the English mail. M ‘Ciure. Carlton .’ 158 of a law by the force of which the fruit of
Eifle Association came off yesterday, the best Exhibition, will today, from two p.m. to Bathing . BhiD . and a b ov named Dominick. With the exception of Mr. Lambert, as Father Government have received eleven tenders 163 the labour of one man, or set of men, is
shots in the three colonies competing. Vic- three p.m., perform the following music The shark measures 16ft. in length, and Joseph, and Mr. Harwood, as Huguet. the for the survey of the land of the Northern ” iw favoured and made profitable in any par-
‘ w i ' me BnarK measures idic. in lengin. ana uoseyn, auu utuwuuu, «a ixuguci, - —
toria, in the person of M‘Clare, of the Carlton Overture, “Barber of Seville”; selections from 7ft. 9in. round the body, and is indeed cast of the characters was not familiar Territory. They will probably decide to- Filth prize j.£SnointV 149 ‘fcular market, by saving it from competi-
Eiflee, won the champion plate, while the four “Stahat Mater,” Eossim; National Melo- f r i„ b tful creature to look at out of to Melbourne audiences of two years since, morrow. “ g ' a * p tion with the labour of any other man,
smaller prizes were taken by Blade, Sharp, dIe8; Hallelujah, from “Engedl,” Bee- he mM , ha , e aod proye. that there la just no* a compara- The weather is ».rm and toe, an d very att? W?te ”“•? f %
Linsley, and Strong, of New South Wales, on thoven. Yesterday, the Exhibition was visited am)eared to the fi Bbe rmen in Half- tive dearth of that talent (or of talent of a favourable for the crops. eon, civilian ; Sergeant Mumby, Ist BMlarat; course ox human dealings would other-
wise heels M'Naughten, of the St. Kilda by 38 4 season pass tickets during the day. moon Bav wbe re he was cauaht can onlv be compensating quality) which at that period Business is very dull, and there is a great Lieutenant Secular, S A. ; Captain Paterson, wise resort to such market.” From the first
Artillery Mloned bard. Carmen shot best nnd 227 in the evening. During the d.y Tdered famone the performs It the want of conddence, oninglo thecontennanoe of theta dehni.ione the taf™ wa, dra.n
at the 600 yards ranges, but were beaten 6 98 visitors paid cash, and in the evening d geen thfl doraal . fin of a shark Royal in the walk of the legitimate drama, of failures. for both sides. J. W. Fawcett made a £at there never can be free trade where
at 300 and 900 yards. The South Aus- 332. The total number of visitors was proachiDg them This fellow seems to have This evening the performances will be for the Nine hundred and fifty bags of sugar, ex Bplendid eC ore of fifty-seven points, with there is a custom-house; and from the second,
iralian competitors did not shoot well. IMI , been known to the fishermen for weeks past, benefit of Mr. J. O. Lambert, who will on this Aldinga were sold at an advance on pre- thatthere nevercan beprotectionwhich does
This affair concluding the meeting, those A grand complimentary concert of vocal and has take n dozens and dozens of schnap- occasion appear as Shylock, in “The Me- _ Trans twelve bulls’-eyes. M-Clure notdriveus tobuy of theprotected industry,
who had joined m it parted on the and instrumental music is to be given in St - per off their hooks in a day. Ha was avoided, chant of Venice.” Wheat alld , "°” ate unal “™' Trana : and Lieutenant Templeton made fitty.fonr Now it Is quite impossible to admit these
A pS j*™' ZttSttSZXSfZ
communication from a correspondent signing baB been published, and the programme is £lllos to' £l 2 10s. ’’* ” I plies the absence of customs duties, the phraa^
himself “ Eecruit, who asks that matches interesting. . lnn( x. of abonfc th i r tv other boats audience was less numerous than on moat Arrived.-Jeddo, from British Columbia. th e whole, we did not make such good prac- (free trade) has come to have another and a
may be airanged for those beginners who
have not spent years in practice. He thinks
ihat were the spirit of emulation allowed a
■wider scope the movement would be healthier.
While alluding to this letter, we by no means
refuse to admit that the Victorian Rifle
Association have done a great deal for the
object “ Recruit” has in view, and young mem-
bers of town and suburban corps appear,
by the announcements of matches so often
made in our columns, to have many
opportunities for practice and prize winning.
For the V.R.A. to provide matches for raw
beginners would never do, but it might,
perhaps, he managed by handicapping on
some occasions, to give an extra chance to
those who do not belong to the upper circles
of rifle shooting.
In the Supreme Court yesterday (the last
day of Hilary Term), a multitude of deci-
sions were given—so many that even our
voluminous law report does scanty justice
to many important matters. Reserved judg-
ments were delivered in the cases of the
Tyson's Reef Company and the Colonial Bank v.
the Loch Fyne Oold-mining Company, in each
of which the ability of directors to pledge
shareholders without their consent, ex-
pressed by extraordinary meeting, was the
main point; Jacomb v. Wrigley, involving
a point of tenant law; Hunt v. Hyland, on
the law of agency in sales; the Universal
Insurance Company v. Miller {chairman), on the
lights in legal procedure of reinsurers; The
Queen v. Akehurst ex parte Hodgson, on the
costs incurred by magistrates; and Bergin v.
Cohen, on the legality of the hospital lottery
bazaar. The dismissal by the magistrates of
the police informations was held to be right.
The case of the fighting election of mayors at
Fitzroy was brought under review in the case
of The Queen v. Delbridge, and the election of
Delbridge declared void, a proceeding which
did not raise any question as to the validity of
the election of the other candidate—Rushall,
and the decision in which, therefore, leaves
the validity of Rushall’s claims still to be de-
termined. Among a mass of other business
done was the admission of three new bar-
risters and six new attorneys. A number of
judgments are still held over.
Yesterday, a deputation from St. Arnand,
consisting of Councillor Lewis, Councillor
Powell, and Mr. Golden, town clerk (from the
Borough council), and Mr. Raven, secretary
of the shire council, waited upon Mr. Grant
with reference to the sale of lands on the
Richardson and Avon Rivers. Mr. Love,
M.LA., briefly introduced the subject, and
Mr. Golden proceeded to explain that the
Borough council were disappointed on account
of the lands, especially those directly adjacent
to St. Arnaud, being put up for sale at so
many different offices. It was impossible for
great numbers of persons interested to have a
sufficient notification of the sales, because the
perusal of the Gazette was confined to very
few indeed. It was desired that the hon.
gentleman should be solicited not to
make any difference with regard to the
present sales, but in future to give the people
concerned the chance of having the lands
offered at their own office. Mr. Grant said
that with reference to the lands at present
advertised, as they were aware, he could not
well change the locality; but all the suburban
lands—lands in the immediate vicinity of St.
Arnaud—would of course be sold at St.
Ainaud. The lands they were offering for
eale now were likely to find purchasers only
in Melbourne. A member of the deputation
observed that he did not think that could be
stated as a fact. They had not yet had a
chance of proving the matter. Some con-
versation then took place with reference to
the appropriation of the fencing vote-
Mr. Hodgkinson said the amount was
divided between the two bodies. A
member asked if that was fair. Mr.
Hodgkinson.—lt is a fair distribution as re-
gards the inhabitants. It has come to my
knowledge in some instances that money
granted to public bodies has not been ex-
pended at all, but has been allowed to merge
into their general revenue. A Member.—That
is not the case with ns. Mr. Hodgkinson.—
The money is granted for planting and im-
proving the ground in that way, and not
merely for fencing. Mr. Grant. —The fact is
we must keep a strict supervision over all
these things. Before sums of money are ap-
portioned to these reserves, we.should have
verified returns as to the past expenditure.
A Member.—We are quite willing to render
them. Mr. Grant.—You cannot expect any-
thing this year. Mr. Hodgkinson will take a
note of the matter for next year; but you
must send in a sketch of what you intend to
do with it. No portion shall be granted for
the purpose of fencing in the racecourse. The
deputation then withdrew.
Yesterday, a deputation, consisting of Coun-
cillor Powell, and Mr. Golden, town-clerk, of
St. Arnaud, accompanied by Councillor
Lewis, and Mr. Raven, secretary of the shire
council, were introduced to Mr. Turner, the
deputy postmaster-general, by Mr. Love t
M.L A., with reference to tha re-adjustment
Mr. F. F. Bailliere has forwarded to us a
copy of the South Australian Gazetteer, just
published. The present volume is on the same
plan and resembles in appearance the two
which have preceded it, viz., the Gazetteers of
Victoria and New South Wales. The towns,
counties, rivers, and geographical features of
the sister colony are described with fulness
and with evident care, together with the pas-
toral stations. A mass of valuable statistical
information is also given. The volume be-
fore us is edited by Mr. R. P. Whitworth, and
cannot fail to prove useful to all who are in
search for information as to the localities in
South Australia. An excellent map of the
colony is prefixed.
An article appeared in The Argus some
months ago advocating representation of
minorities, and adverting to the fact that this
system had been in operation in Denmark for
some years. The article in question was
seen by a Danish gentleman, who wrote home
for particulars. In due time the portion of
the act having reference to the point was sent
to him, which he was obliging enough to for-
ward to us. The extracts are from the act as
passed December 2, 1855, on the motion of
Herr Andra, an eminent Danish statesman.
We have been favoured with a translation by
a gentleman residing at Ballarat, and publish
it in another column.
The ordinary monthly meeting of the
Royal Society was held, in the hall of the
society, last night; Mr. it, isaery pre ß iai~ a .
The honorary secretary (Mr. Rawlings) laid
on the table the following works:—A cata-
logue of mammalian fossils discovered in
Ireland, and three pamphlets on the granite
rocks of Donegal, by Mr. R. H. Scott;
Notes on an Undescribed Petrel Found in
Jamaica, and on the Genus Chiasmodon, by Dr.
Aba Carte, F.L.S.; volumes 3,4, 5,6, and 10
of the Transactions of the Geological Society
of Ireland, presented by the society, and
No. 38 of Fragmenta Phytographix Australix,
presented by Dr. Mueller. Dr. Mueller read
notes on a new South African plant, Seuocio
tropEeollfolius, discovered by Mr. P. M'Oran,
M.A., principal of Shaw College, Graham’s
Town, and transmitted to him for final exa-
mination. Mr. Ellery read a paper written
by Mr. Shiress, chemist, Sandhurst, upon a
“ Method of decomposing pyrites towards
the extraction of gold.” The method
suggested by Mr. Shiress consisted in
placing the pyrites in a furnace, and
subjecting them to the action of fire and
a current of air at the same time, by
which sulphide of carbon was produced,
and the sulphur extracted from the pyrites.
Some conversation followed the reading of
this paper, and several questions were put to
Mr. Shiress (who was present) relative to
the process; and in the course of his replies
he stated that three or four times more gold
would be extracted from the pyrites by this
than by the ordinary method. Professor
M'Coy expressed his opinion that the plan
proposed by Mr. Shiress was only the or-
dinary continental process of burning and
roasting, that sulphide of carbon coaid
not be produced as alleged, and that
some of his chemical experiments were
defective. Mr. Newberry, metallurgical che-
mist, concurred with the views of Professor
M'Coy, and could see no difference be-
tween Mr. Shiress’s process and the old one of
burning. Mr. Crooke said the subject was
one of great importance; and though the
weight of authority seemed against the views
of Mr. Shiress, he would suggest that some
experiments should be made, to test the accu-
racy of his theory. Mr. Gillbee did not see
that the society could do anything at pre-
sent. It was for Mr. Shiress to show that this
process would really extract tue amount
gold which he stated; and then it was for the
society to give to the public a scientific ex-
planation of the process. After some fur-
ther discussion, the paper was referred to the
council, with the view of testing the accu-
racy of its statements. Mr. M'Gowan,! super-
intendent of electric telegraphs,! was elected
a member of council, in room of Dr. Bleas-
dale, disqualified by non-attendance. The
meeting then adjourned.
Some of the fish recently offered (to whole-
sale purchasers) in the Melbourne Fish-market
have been objected to and condemned by
the acting-inspector of the .market. Yes-
terday. morning, before nine o’clock, Dr.
Eades.the health officer of the city, was called
upon to visit the market, to inspect some
baskets of fish which had been condemned,
the owners protesting that the fish was fit for
human food. The health officer confirmed
the judgment of the acting-inspector, and the
fish were carted away to be destroyed. There
were twelve baskets of fish positively bad,
and eight more at the turning-point
from wholesome to deleterious food, if
used as fresh fish, and not salted down
install ter. It appears to he a too common
a practice to mix two “ takes ’’ of fish (one of
some hours earlier than the other) in the
baskets, the earlier “ take ’’ of fish, frequently
almost stale, being placed at the bottom of the
baskets, and the later “ taka” at the top. It
help of the men of about thirty other boats
to get him on shore.
At a meeting of members of the civil ser-
vice yesterday, held at the Freemasons’
Tavern, it was agreed to form a civil service
rowing dab. A very large number of gentle-
men placed their names on the subscription
list.
We observe that the appointment of Mr. J.
W. Ploos Van Amstel, the Netherlands consul-
general at Melbourne, to act in a like capacity
in the several colonies on the Australian con-
tinent, and also in New Zealand and Tas-
mania, has received Her Majesty’s signa-
ture.
Since the floating dock at Williamstown
has passed into the hands of the present pro-
prietary it has undergone a thorough over-
haul. Various improvements have also been
effected. Ey a judicious outlay on repairs
and alterations, it has beeu placed in first
rate order, and is better adapted thau ever for
vessels that require to be taken In for in-
spection and repair. The advantages to be
derived from having such a convenience in
the immediate neighbourhood of the ship-
ping are obvious. Since the completion of
the repairs to the dock the schooner Victoria
has been taken in for overhaul, and as soon
as she is finished other vessels will follow.
Our Queenscliff correspondent writes as
follows“ After four months’ work, and
several failures, the first attempt to launch
the s.b. Barwon, which promises to be success-
ful, was commenced on Saturday, and the
vessel before night was moved forty feet
towards the sea. The plan adopted has been
to lift the hull and bnild two cradles, each
about twelve feet long, under the bottom, to
sustain the weight of the vessel. Under these
cradles two sets of ways have been laid
at a slight incline, to allow the cradles
to slip easily when pressure is applied.
Four screws are worked on the ways against
the cradles, whilst two treble purchases are
fastened to chains passed round the hull, and
heavy moorings laid out in deep water. The
ends of the ropes are then brought on board
the ship to two steam winches on the deck.
It is expected, as the weather is fine, that she
will be afloat on Monday afternoon or Tues-
day morning.”
The Bruce Independent (New Zealand), of
the 24tb ult., gives the following account of a
fatal boat accident on the Clutha:—“The
wonted quietude of the Kaitaugata district
was, on Thursday, the 20th lust., disturbed
by a report that a sailing-boat had been
capsized, and one of the party on board
drowned. Mr. Hodgson, accompanied by his
wife and man servant, left their home in
Kaitaugata bush, for the purpose of proceed-
ing to the Kaitangata store. The boat in
which they left was one purchased by Mr.
Hodgson at the late Molynenx regatta,
only a few days previously. Before they
had proceeded half a mile a sharp bend
in the river was reached, and simul-
taneously with the additional force of current
at such places, a sadden squall struck the
boat, which not having any ballast in, heeled
over, became unmanageable, capsized, and
filled. The man, Robert Angus, in addition
to being immersed, found himself much en-
tangled with the ropes; but fortunately
being a good swimmer, he succeeded in free-
ing himself, and reached the hank to witness
one of the most distressing sights imaginable.
Mr. Hodgson had partially succeeded in
getting on to the boat—which was now
floating bottom up—with one hand he
grasped the keel, and with the other held
Mrs. Hodgson. If this position had been
maintained, it is not improbable that her
life would have been saved; but Mrs. Hodg-
son’s appeal to her husband induced him to
endeavour to urt n«r higher out of the water,
the additional weight upon the keel turneu
the boat round upon them, and both
went down. Mr. Hodgson, however, again
came to the surface alongside the boat, which
he grasped and held on to until rescued by
Mr. Marsh, who put off in a boat on hearing
the screams of the lady. Such is a brief narra-
tive of an event which has carried away in
her youth and usefulness a most estimable
lady, whose quiet reserve and unassuming
manners, it may be safely said, kept her
without an enemy, and devotedly endeared
her to those few friends who had the pleasure
of her acquaintance. Every exertion is being
made to recover the body, but the great
quantity of snags in the river bed renders
dragging a work of great difficulty, and the
success of the parties engaged very doubtful.”
A number of sparrows and canaries have
been set loose in the Botanic-gardens at
Geelong.
Mr. Robert Patterson, J.P., of Conargo, and
his son were driving near to that place on
Wednesday, and met with a serious accident
—the buggy came in contact with a high
peg driven in the ground by one of the Go-
vernment surveyors. The shaft of the buggy
was torn to pieces, and the horses bolted.
Young Patterson jumped out, and broke his
leg; but his father, though in imminent
danger, escaped unhurt. The patient is doing
audience was less numerous than on most
previous evenings. Mr. Greville’s Shaun the
Post seems to be liked better the oftener it is
seen, and there is no falling off in Mr. Rogers’s
forcible delineation of the villanons process-
server.
The performance of “ Belphegor the Mounte-
bank,” with the burlesque of “ Endymion ’’
as an afterpiece, was repeated last evening,
at the Princess’s Theatre, and was well
patronised.
The number of visitors to the National
Museums of Natural History, Geology, and
Economic Geology, applied to mining, agri-
culture, and the arts, for the week ending
Bth December was 1,315.
Mr. Nash, the collector of the Melbourne
Ladies’ Benevolent Society, acknowledges the
receipt of the following subscriptions in aid
of the funds of that charity:—Messrs. Wilson
Brothers, £5; Mr. F. G. Docker, £2 25.; Mr.
Richard Brodie, £5; and Mr. John Sherwin,
£2 2s.
The committee of the Melbourne Home re-
port as follows for the month ending 30th
November : Registrations—governesses, 2 ;
servants, 67; engagements—governesses, 2;ser-
vants, 76; inmates—governesses, 3 ; needle-
women, 4 ; servants 29; staff, 3. Number in
the home 30th November, staff inclusive, 18.
BALLARAT.
(PROM ODE OWN CORRESPONDENT.)
Monday, Dec. 10.
There was very little mining business doing
to-day, most people waiting for the decisions
of the Courts. The Guiding Star Company,
Sebastopol, are making good progress! with,
the works. The second rock has been struck
at a depth of seventy feet. The contractor*
are now engaged puddling up the first rock”
which is expected to be finished in a few days,
and the sinking will then be resumed. The
engine and pumps are working very satisfac-
torily, and the present indications are very
favourable for getting deep ground. The
yield of the Buninyong Freehold Company
for the past fortnight was 4680 z,
A large number of shareholders and others
interested attended at the No. 1 shaft of the
Hand and Band Company this afternoon, to
witness the starting of the great new pumping-
engine recently purchased in Adelaide by the
Band of Hope Company. The machinery
worked very smoothly and seems to be quite
equal to the work it has to do. When started,
the engine worked five strokes to the minute,
of eight feet each, but it is expected that
when in full work it will work at the rata of
nine to the minute. The Golden Gate,
Redan, reports that the contract works are
nearing completion. Steam is to be up on
Friday next, and the contractors are pushing
on the work with speed. At a meeting
of the promoters in the Albion and Great
Lai Lai Companies, held this afternoon the
original agreement to amalgamate was con-
firmed, and it was finally arranged that one
company, of 186 acres, to be called the “ treat
Lai Lai United Gold-mining Comptuy,”
should be worked at once; and that as the
ground seemed to be very rich the remaning
portion of the original Great Lai Lai Com-
pany’s ground should be subdivided into
three or fonr claims of abont 200 icres
each. Mr. Davis, one of the pronvters,
showed about twenty ounces of gold the
result of last week’s work for four nen.
At the extraordinary meeting of the aare-
holders in the St. George United Com any,
held this afternoon at Craig’s Royal lotel,
Mr. R, Guthrie in the chair, to confirn the
action of the directors in requesting Mr,Wil-
liam Rodier, one oi their number, to rsign
and to appoint a director in his sted, or
other directors in the room of those wb are
disposed to support Mr. Rodier in cetain
objects that are deemed detrimental aid op-
posed to the welfare of the St. George Com-
pany, there were about fifty sharehilders
present. Before proceeding with the business
of the day, Mr. Rodier desired to ex-
plain bis conduct, and to taki the
sense of the meeting afterwards, snd if
that was opposed to him, he said he shoild re-
sign. Having given his explanation, themeet-
ing without much hesitation, but aftei some
rather strong and most unparliamentary lan-
guage on either side, adopted the following
resolution, by a majority of about flirty to
eight. Moved by Mr. J. Dowring, seconded
by Mr. J. Cotter:—"That this meeting,
having every confidence in their manager,
Mr. Thomas Gray, do hereby uphold hil po-
sition as their representative, and appiove of
made by him against the jumping
policy oi i.li. Kodier. and hereby
remove the said W. B. rwaw irom office
as a diiector of the St. Georg* United
Company, and appoint Mr. Archibald
MTntyre in his stead.” Mr, Archibald
MTntyre having been elected a director iu
the room of Mr, Rodier, and Messrs; J. M.
Dickson and L. Stewart having resigned their
offices as directors, the meeting broke np.
In the Warden’s Court to-day, tint officer
gave his official decision in the c»e of the
Band of Hope v. the Miners' Racecourse Com-
pany, which was the same as I hare already
repoited. The question of costs being all
that was to be decided to day, these »ere fixed
at £27 7s. In the complaint of the same
plaintiffs against the same defendants, for
trespassing on a block claim, the former with-
drew their complaint, and.the costMllowed to
defendants were £l6 ss.
The weather is hot and sultry afain.
LAW NOTICES.—(This ky).
SUPREME COURT.
SITTINGS IN EQUITY.
(Before Mr. Justice Molesworh.)
Curley v. Henry, Yandell v. Hectir, Shaw v.
Gorman (exceptions).
INSOLVENT COURT
(Before the Chief CommissiW.)
First and Only Meetings.—Josepi Kinsman,
Francis Johnson, Samuel S. BenaoS Samuel B.
Walter, John Bryan, Alexander Mlnnes, Peter
Johnson, William Tressider, John Dumu, George S.
Hartrick, John Graham, James W. Laion, Benjamin
Bowman, Margaret M‘Dowell, Willia) Douglas, and
William Gordon, at eleven.
First Meetings.—James Doig, Cyrl Hewitt, Kerr
and Gray, at eleven. [
Adjourned Certificate Meeting,—Aired Benzley, at
half-past eleven.
Additional items, extracted from Messrs.
Greville and Company’s (Keuter’s agents) tele-
grams :
QUEENSCLIFF, Due. 10.
Arrived.—Redcliffe, from a fishing cruise,
PORT ALBERT, Dec. 10.
Arrived.—l2.2o p.m. yesterday: Charles
Edward, s.s., from Melbourne.
Sailed.—3 pm. to-day; Charles Edward,
8.5., for Bairnsdale.
DAYLESFORD, Dec. 10.
At six o’clock this morning a murderous
attack was made by a woman named Sarah
Vance on her husband, Leslie Vance. The
weapon she used was a tomahawk, with
which she inflicted a deep wound on the
temple, and fractured her unfortunate vic-
tim’s skull. The man is not expected to
recover, and his dying depositions have been
taken. The woman has confessed to the
assault. It is presumed that jealousy was
the cause of the deed. The unhappy couple
lived near to the spot where Margaret
Graham’s house used to stand, at the west
end of Albert-street.
DUNOLLY, Deo. 10.
The Goldsbrongh Quartz mining Company,
Bealiba Reef, declared to day its first divi-
dend, of ss. per 2,000 th scrip for a fortnight’s
work.
BEECHWORTH, Dec. 10.
Raili. commenced Uere at midnight OH
Saturday, and continued to fall very
heavily, with thunder and lightning. The
rain lasted until morning. The total rainfall
was 3*61. Chiltern and the township of the
Ovens were inundated. Several mining
claims in the Ovens and Murray districts
were greatly damaged, and some of the crops
were also considerably injured.
SYDNEY, Dec. 10.
The New South Wales and New Zealand
Governments have consented to hold a con-
ference with the other Australian Govern-
ments in Melbourne, in February next, for the
consideration of our future postal contracts,
and the colonial subsidies to the various ser-
vices by way of Galle, Panama, &c. A despatch
has been received from the Earl of Carnarvon,
accompanied by minutes of the Lords of the
Treasury, strongly recommending confederate
action on the part of all the colonies in postal
matters. The despatch also recommends
that the contracts for the various mail ser-
vices should be taken into our own hands,
at the same time promising a continuance of
the present Imperial contributions.
A Cabinet meeting was held this after-
noon, to take into consideration the steps to
be taken in reference to the amendments in-
troduced by the Council into the Educa-
tion Bill. It is rumoured that the Govern-
ment is prepared to accept some amend-
ments, hut is determined to resist any at-
tempt to introduce third-class non-vested
schools, or to allow of any alteration in the
main features of the bill.
The weather is very unsettled, and itis rain-
ing. A heavy gale of wind blew yesterday.
Mr, Gorman, of Messrs. Mort and Co., is
seriously ill, and at one time his life was
despaired of, but he is getting better.
Mr. Lowther reports sales ofmaizeat3s.4d.
to-day.
INTERCOLONIAL EXHIBITION.
The usual general meeting of the Commis-
sioners was held yesterday, at the offices of
the Exhibition. Present—Sir Francis Murphy
(in the chair), Dr. Bleasdale, the Count de
Castelnau, Dr. T. Black, the Hon. C. J. Jenner,
Mr. C. E. Bright, Professor M'Coy, Dr. Mueller,
Mr. R. M'Dougall, Mr. J. T. Smith, the Hon.
S. H. Biudou, the Hon. W. M. K. Vale, the
Hon. J. Macgregor, Mr. E, Cope, Mr. James
Harris.
The weekly abstract of admissions showed
a total of 13,839.
A letter waa xcoclvod frum the Victorian
Manufacturers’ Association, asking when it
would be convenient for a deputation to wait
upon the Commission, as to the desirability
of setting aside a bar in the refreshment de-
partment of the Exhibition for the sale of
colonial liquors; and tbe Commission directed
the secretary to appoint Monday next, at
hall-past four o’clock p,m.
A deputation from the Intercolonial Ex-
hibition chorus, consisting of Messrs. Rutter,
Harvie, Duning, J. F. Kennedy, and O. Rad-
cliff, waited upon the commissioners on the
subject of future musical performances, and
having brought under the notice of the com-
missioners a statement of their views, with-
drew with the assurance that it should receive
full attention.
Mr. Vale brought forward his motion, that
tbe rate of admission on Mondays be six-
pence, on and after the 6th of January next.
The motion was seconded by Professor M'Coy,
and carried.
Dr. T. Black, with reference to the de-
livery of oral explanations, or short lectures,
in the Exhibition-building, now mentioned
that it would be desirable that these lectures
should be deferred until after the awards of
the jurors.
A motion was proposed by the Count de
Castelnau, and carried, that a committee be
appointed to select a list of picked photo-
graphs as memorials for presentation, and
the institutions and persons to whom they
should be presented.
The reports of the Organisation and Fi-
nance Committees having been read and
adopted, the meeting closed.
tice as the New South Wales men. We were
better than them at 600 yards upon the whole,
.though our best men seemed to fail a little.
Linsley and Lieutenant Templeton made each
fifty-four points, with ten bulls’-eyes; and
Hordern, who also made ten-bulla’ eyes,
scored fifty-three points. Against them
M'Clure made fifty-three points with nine
bulls’-eyes, a score equalled by Ensign Strong,
who began to get forward. Colonel Rede also
made nine bulls’-eyes at this range; but did
not keep to that high standard of excellence.
At 900 yards there was a notable falling off
of some good men. J. W. Fawcett only made
thirty-six points; while M'Clure, who got
dead on the centre of the target, scored fifty-
one points; and M'Naughton, all too late,
made fifty points. Upon the whole, our men
did better at 900 yards i than on Saturday,
but that was all. The following averages
may be of service:—
Averages of Scoring.
300 600 900
yards, yards, yards.
Per man *. .. •• *• 61*48 48*52 38*21
New South Wales, per rifle .. 52 36 48*18 39*90
Victoria, per rifle .. .. .. 51*12 49*37 38*86
South Australia, per rifle .. 50*50 47 00 26*50
The shooting over, there was a little
cheering and complimenting. The end was
that the competitors parted on most excel-
lent terms, and the Intercolonial Match
meeting of 1866 will be remembered as one of
the pleasantest of the series.
The following were the scores made :
300 Yabds,
Highest possible individual score, sixty points,
Size of bull’s-eye, one foot square.
£
a>
O
i
a
o
p-4 m
11
Brownlow, N.S.W.
J. W. Fawcett, Cn.
Lieut. Templeton, Cd. ..
Lacey, S.K.A
Bayner, N.S.W. ..
Slade, N.S.W
Johnson, E.H.A
M'Clure, Cn
Captain Raukine, S.A. ..
M'Naughten, S.K.A.
M'Ewan, M. & N.M.
Hordern, N.S.W
Wickham, N.S.W.
Ensign Strong, N.S.W. ..
Lieutenant Stack, S.A. ..
Thrum, N.S.W
Linsley, N.S.W. .. ~
iJiUDICj 1 } Xv.*J. »»• •
Sharp, N.S.W.
Colonel Rede, staff
Lynch, N.S.W.
N.B.—At this range Dickson, N.S.W., made fifty-
one points. He retired from competition at the 900
yards’ range.
600 Yards.
Highest possible individual score, sixty points.
Size of bull’s-eye, two feet square.
o
75
o
j 2 ©
M®
__ O 9
|.S
Brswnlow, N.S.W.
J. W. Fawcett, Cn.
Lieut. Templeton, Cd,
Lacey, S.K.A
Bayner, N.S.W
Slade, N.S.W
Johnson, E.H.A. ..
M'Clure, Cn.
Captain Rankine, S.A.
M'Naughten, S.K.A.
M'Ewan, M. and N.M.
Hordern, N. S W. ..
Wickham, N.S.W.
Ensign Strong, N.S.W.
Lieut. Stack, 5.A...
Thrum, N.S.W. ..
Linsley, N.S.W. ..
Sharp, N.S.W.
Colonel Bede, staff
Lynch, N.S.W. ..
N.B.—At this range Dickson, N.8.W., made forty
points. He subsequently retired from competition,
having to leave by the afternoon steamer.
900 Yards.
Highest possible individual score, forty points.
Size of bull’s-eye, three feet square.
75
o
Brownlow, N.S.W.
J. W. Fawcett, Cn.
*Lieut. Templeton, Cd.
Lacey, S.K.A.
Bayner, N.S.W. ..
Slade, N.S.W.
Johnson, E.H.A. ..
M'Clure, Cn.
Captain Kankine, S.A.
M'Naughten, S.K.A.
M'Ewan, M. & N.M.
Hordern, N.S.W. ..
WicKDam, N.D.W.
Ensign Strong, N.S.W.
fLieutenant Stack, S.A.
Thrum, N.S.W. ..
JLinsley, N.S.W. ..
Sharp, N.S.W.
Colonel Rede, staff
Lynch, N.S.W. ..
f* oo
11
Ln O
** o.
"Lieutenant Templeton did not fire his last shot.
fLieutenant Stack did not fire his last three shots,
t Linsley’a first miss was occasioned by shooting at
the wrong target.
N B. —Those who did not complete their scores are
not included in the averages.
Total Scoees,
nairower meaning, and in this narrower
meaning it has been and is employed by, it
may be safely said, everyone except Mr. Michie.
Nay, that gentleman has always used it in
the narrower sense himself until this last de-
liverance ; and in his famous lecture on “ Vic-
toria Suffering a Recovery,” he spoke of
“ free trade as at present prevailing in the
Australian colonies.” I need hardly say that
when that lecture was delivered, in 1860,
customs duties were collected, although none
of them were, when imposed, of the character
of those for which we are indebted to Mr.
Francis. And as to the definition of protec-
tion ; what does “ saving from competition ”
mean ? May not duties be imposed which
lessen the force of the competition, which do
not amount to prohibition, hut place the
foreign competitor at a disadvantage; and is
not that protection ? Mr. Michie does not now
choose to admit that anything short of shut-
ting out foreign goods altogether is protection.
He insists that if protection does not amount to
prohibition It is not protection at all. And
in this also Mr. Michie is altogether singular.
For if this view be correct, under what a gross
delusion must the people of England have
been when they called the corn duty protec-
tive. That duty did not shut out foreign
corn, and yet both its enemies and defenders
called it protective. If Mr. Michie be right,
how utterly wrong must have been Cobden
and Peel! The protectionists of Britain, from
Colonel Sibthorp to Sir Archibald Alison,
demahueu duties which should not stop im-
portation, but should raise the price of im-
ported goods, and so give the home producer
or manufacturer an advantage. And in this
respect there is no difference between English
and Victorian protectionists. Mr. Jenner, in
this very hall, declared that “ protection
meant encouragement to native industry, and
nothing else,” and this encouragement he
luuseu rox from duties which shoiuld not pro-
hibit but protect. Mr. Jenner, fact, calls
that protection for which Mr. Michie has in-
vented another name. Revenue and protec-
tion, using the latter in the sense of prohibi-
tion are, said Mr. Michie, incompatible, but
revenue and “ the more rapid advancement of
domestic manufactures” are not incompatible.
And here we have the key to the whole
difference between our learned preacher and
other people. What others call prohibition
Mr. Michie calls protection, and what others
call protection Mr. Michie. calls “ the more
rapid advancement of domestic manufac-
tures.” And this leads us to the conclusion
that the economical Gamaliel at whose feet
Mr. Michie has sat, and whose principles he
has adopted, is none other than the Hon.
C. J. Jenner; for on a close comparison of
their views it will be seen that the two are in
perfect accord. They only differ abont words.
Mr. Jenner calls a spade a spade; Mr. Michie,
being a master of the art of tongue-fence, and
having a natural affection for a quibble,, pre-
fers to call it a ferro-ligneous implement
employed in husbandry. As to the identity
of their aims and wishes there can be no
doubt. Mr. Jenner wishes to impose duties
on articles which can be produced iu the
colony, and he calls that protection. Mr.
Michie will not call it protection, but he
advocates a system identically the same.
And again, Mr. Michie may be refuted by
the author of “ Victoria Suffering a Recovery.”
Protection in that lecture was described
as “compelling A to buy something of
B at a higher price than that for which C
can and will sell the same article; ” and lest
we should be iu any doubt as to the lecturer’s
opinion of the morality of such a proceeding,
he went on to say, “ Protection, as it appears
to me, is merely another name for ob-
taining money under false pretences, by
act of Parliament.” These two definitions,
then, of free trade and protection are in the
very teeth of our learned preacher’s previous
utterances on the same subject; indeed, to
refute the doctrines advanced in the “ lay ser-
mon ” it would be only necessary to quote tha
previous opinions of Mr. Michie; and as soma
divine has published a commentary “ wholly
biblical,” I might on the present occasion
content myself with a commentary wholly
Michiecal. But perhaps I ought not to com-
plain of such inconsistency in a preacher. It
would appear that there are people who re-
gard it as perfectly lawful for one who un-
dertakes to preach to change his opinions
with his circumstances. In that marvel-
lous allegory of John Banyan’s, it will
be remembered that Mr. By-ends —who
might have been an ex-Minister of Justice—
propounds to Mr. Money-love the question,
whether a minister may, if the temper of his
people require it, alter some of his principles;
to which the latter replies, that he may, and
yet be a right honest man. For why? “As
lor his complying with the temper of his
people, by deserting to serve them some of his
principles, thus aigueth :—First, that he is of
a self-denying temper; second, of a sweet and
winning department; and, third, so more fit
for tbe ministerial function.” Any one who
reads Mr. Michie’s two last lectures together
will rise from them with a profound conviction
thathis temper is most self-denying, his deport-
ment most sweet and winning, and bis fitness
for the ministerial function unimpeachable.
But let us see what is the commonly accepted
distinction between free trade and protection;
it may be best stated in the words of Mr.
Mill:—" Duties on importation may, then,
be divided into two classes—those which have
the effect of encouraging some particular
branch of domestic industry, and those which
have not. The former are purely mischievous,
both to the country which imposes them and
to those with whom it trades. . . _ • . The
other class of duties are those which do not
encourage one mode of procuring an article at
the expense of another, but allow interchange
to take place just as it the duty did not exist,
and to produce the saving of labour which
constitutes the motive to international, as to
all other, commerce. Of this kind are duties
on the importation of any commodity which
could not by any possibility be produced at
home, and duties not sufficiently high to
counterbalance the difference of expense
between the production of the article at home
and its importation.” Here, then, we have
the matter clearly stated. Free trade is
consistent with duties which do not
encourage native industry, or, as Mr.
Michie puts it, which do not promote
the more rapid advancement of domestic
individual.


manufactures;” while protection consists in
the imposition of duties which do have that
• effect. “ A protecting duty.” adds Mr. Mill,
" can never be a cause of gain, but always,
and necessarily, of loss to the country impos-
ing it, just so far as it is efficacious to its
end.” But Mr. Michie has cleverly en-
deavoured to shelter himself under this
exception of Mr. Mill in favour of low duties ;
it is apparent, however, that the effect of the
duty, and not its amount, determines its
character. The duty now levied on corn in
England, which is not as Mr. Michie stated
Is. a quarter, but 3d. per hundredweight, is
not protective, because it is too small to ba
felt; although it has, unquestionably, the
effect of raising the price of all the corn
grown in the United Kingdom to that
extent. For another reason, the duty on
sugar in this colony is not protective, be-
cause that commodity is not produced here.
Mr. Michie assumes that the low duties which
he advocates are paid by the importer or pro-
ducer ; he speaks of the foreign coin-grower
having to pay the English duty, and quotes
Mr. Mill as an authority for the doctrine that
such duties may fall on the importer, pro-
ducer, or consumer, or distribntively between
them. Of coarse it may, and often does hap-
pen, that the importer finds the market
glutted, and has to sell at a losing price; in
that case he pays the duty. But is this any
more than an exceptional case ? Will
merchants continue to import goods at a
loss ? Will they not insist on getting
a sufficient profit, whether duties are im-
posed or no, or quit the business? The
importer whose letter to The Argus Mr.
Michie referred to spoke only of the effect of
the duty during the present season. Com-
petition being keen—so keen that several
importers of soft goods have been driven out
of the trade —and stocks being heavy, de-
prived some of the importers for this year of
their usual profit. But this is attributable
to the disturbance of trade caused by the
change, and to the uncertainty always
attaching to such fiscal experiments. If the
tariff remain in force, English manufactures,
whose prices are kept down to the lowest by
competition, will still sell as if the tariff did
not exist. The fact that their goods are subject
to duty here will not affect their prices in the
least; but they will insist, as before, on a
price which will pay them a profit on their
capital, or they will not deal. Merchants
also who import the goods will be governed
by the same considerations. They, too, have
no monopoly of the market; they cannot
charge what they please. If the market price,
duty or no duty, will yield them a profit, they
will import as before; if the duty destroys
their profit, they will cease to deal in the
particular articles affected. Thus it may be
safely and broadly stated that, save in some
strange and exceptional case, and for a very
short time, the importer does not pay the
duty. But Mr. Mill is quoted as an authority
for this doctrine. Mr. Mill has admitted that
in certain cases import duties may ha paid
by foreigners; but it would puzzle even
Mr. Michie’s ingenuity to find a passage
in which Mr. Mill admits that importers
and producers may be made to pay
them. The thing is too monstrous and
absurd; and Mr. Michie ought to have
had too much regard for Mr. Mill’s reputa-
tion to attribute such nonsensical notions to
him. In the passage to which Mr. Michie
refers, Mr. Mill says nothing about importers;
hut he makes this remark Those are in
the right who maintain that taxes on imports
are partly paid by foreigners; but they are
mistaken when they say it is by the foreign
producer. It is not on the person from
whom we buy, but on all those who buy from
ns, that a portion of our Customs’ duties
spontaneously falls.” That is to say, the
effects of import duties are—l. To raise prices;
2. To increase the cost of production; and, 3.
To compel the foreign customer to pay pro
portionately higher prices for what he is
compelled to buy of us. Mr. Mill, there-
fore, expressly insists that the foreign
producer cannot he made to pay the
tax, and Mr. Michie quotes him as saying pre-
cisely the reverse. But this gross misrepre-
sentation of Mr. Mill’s view is, I suppose, an
instance of “ the nicely-balanced thought,
the fine judicial spirit, and the courtesy and
moderation of expression,” which Mr. Michie
misses in tbe Victorian press. Now, sup-
posing Mr. Mill’s conclusion to bo sound, that
the foreign buyer cau be made to pay import
duties, could we expect this to apply to Vic-
toria? Is there anybody out of Yarra Bend
who believes that because we tax salt, mole-
skins, American brooms, and widows’ cap-
fionts, foreigners will give us more for our
gold, wool, or tallow ? If we enjoyed a mono-
poly in the production of these commodities
we might insist on a higher price, but as the
price of gold is almost a fixed quantity, and
as many other countries compete with us in
the other articles, such a demand would not
be one whit more successful than Glendo wer’s
invocation of “spirits from the vasty deep.”
Coming to the new tariff, Mr. Michie ex-
presses himself at a loss to understand the
policy of those who, professing to bo free
traders, yet propose to extend thq tariff by
giving protection allround. Parodying Pope’s
couplet, he sims up their policy—
“ A little fostering is a dangerous thing ;
Drink deep, or taste not the protective spring.”
But the trick of this method of putting the
case is too transparent to deceive anyone. It
is not a question of drinking little or
much, the point in dispute is, whether some
people shall drink at all. The shoemakers,
tailors, saddlers, cabinetmakers, and brewers,
■who now have free access to the spring,
are, according to Mr. Michie, to ba allowed to
monopolise it, and to prevent persons of other
trades from getting a drop. If by import
duties you may promote the “ more rapid
advancement ” of manufactures, why may
you not by the same means assist the deve-
lopment of agriculture ? What is good for the
artisan and manufacturer surely can’t ba
bad for the farmer, grazier, and market-
gardener. Besides, who pays the duties on
manufactured goods ? Is not a very large part
of these duties borne by these very classes
whom Mr, Michie would summarily exclude
from the favours of the state ? And if the no-
tion that we should strive to be independent
of foreigners is to direct our legislation, ought
not that independence to he first of all
secured in the staple article of food ? To
persist in protecting manufactures without
protecting other industries is something
worse even than “ obtaining money under
false pretences by Act of Parliament.” So
obviously just is this view of the case, that it
is evident the protectionists who are not
ashamed of the name, and the tariff-mongers
who, like Mr. Michie, are, will soon have to
choose between, protecting the farmers or
abandoning protection altogether. But Mr.
Michie does not admit that the tariff is pro-
tective—it is a table of fixed quantities; is a
a mere matter of arithmetic; the goods
which will come under it this -year may ba
taken at £2,000,000; the duty levied at
£150,000; the duty averages seven or eight
per cent., and therefore it is not pro-
tective. Quod erat demonstrandum. Now,
assuming that the amount of a duty deter-
mines its character —which I don’t admit —
how is this average obtained? By classing
kid gloves, which pay three-quarter per cent.,
and the finest kinds of hosiery, which pay
from four to six per cent., with salt, whicu
pays forty per cent., and the cheaper kinds
of millinery, which pay seventy or eighty per
cent. But this is not the only, nor the most
serious, objection to this singular application
of the doctrine of general average. Separat-
ing the goods which come under this tariff, it
will be found that all the coarser and cheaper
kinds are subject to heavy duties, while all
the finer goods pay the lowest rates. Tims
scarcely a single article of clothing worn by
the digger or farm labourer is subject to a
less duty than tea per cent,; while hia felt
hat pays twenty-one per cent.; and his
wife is still more hardly used, for the various
recondite articles which compose her toilet
are taxed from eight to upwards of 100 ptr
cent., and she has to pay just about £3 for
what formerly she could buy for £2, a hard-
ship which at least the fairer portion of my
audience can fully appreciate. But, whatever
be the average rate of duty, we are told that
the new tariff is no addition to the burthens
of the people—that the new imposts just
about balance those which have been abo-
lished. £150,000 is collected on a couple of
hundred articles, instead of on_ tea, sugar,
opium, and gold, as before; this is the whola
of the difference. And what does it matter if
a man has to pay £5 in taxes whether be
pays it on sugar or on shoddy? Well,
if he has only to pay £6, it dees not
matter at all. But, .unfortunately, it has
been ascertained by costly experience, that
there are some taxes which exact £2 from
the taxpayer for every one they bring to the
Treasury, and that there are other taxes
which bring into the Treasury nearly all they
take from the taxpayer. Duties on tea,
sugar, wines, spirits, and similar articles,
have been found, wherever they have been
imposed, to be the most easily and cheaply
collected of all dnties on commodities, and
they exact very little more from tke consumer
than the Treasury obtains. A customs duty
of 20s, on tea will raise the price to
tbe consumer about 265. fid.; but a duty
of a similar amount on drapery exacts
fully 335. 4d. from him. The explana-
tion of this is very simple;—A duty oa tea
need not be paid until the retailer re-
guiies the tea for sale; the public, therefore
%
pay only the retailer’s profit on the duty;
bnt cases of drapery have to be opened out
before the importer can dispose of them. The
duty, therefore, has to be paid at once. On
it the importer charges his profit—twenty-
five per cent., or 55.; and then the retailer
charges his profit, not only on the original
duty, bnt on the importer’s profit as well.
And thus it makes a very great difference
whether £5 be levied on sugar or on shoddy;
for, in the one case, it will tax the consumer
£6l2s. 6d., and in the other it will exact from
him £8 6s. Bd, The consumer thus pays
£ll4s. 2d., which does not go to the Treasury,
which does not benefit the retailer or the
importer, for it compels both to have a larger
capital, anything but a benefit, and which
is just as much lost to the country as if
it had been thrown into Hobson’s Bay;
and the evil’of this sort of taxation does not
stop here. Whenever the supply of the article
taxed is partly obtained from abroad and
partly from within the country, the effect of
the duty is to raise the price of both to the
same extent. Take Mill’s illustration of grain :
—Say our consumption is 4,000,000 bushels of
wheat, and that of this we grow 3,000,000, and
that on the extra million imported a duty of
Is. a bushel is imposed; that duty will raise
the price not only of the 1,000,000 bushels
imported but also of the 3,000,000 grown in
the country. On the million £50,000 duty
will be paid, which will go to the Treasury ;
on the three millions £150,000 will be paid as
a bounty to the landlords and farmers. Under
such a tax, in fact, the public will pay
£200,000 in order to get one-fourth of
that sum for the Treasury. This I may
be told, is all very trite and stale.
Granted; but when a man of culture and
ability ignores these obvious considerations,
affects to believe that all duties are very much
alike, and thus misleads those whom he
ought to guide and instruct, what is to be
done? There is nothing for it but to revert
to first principles, and to remind the public
that the elaborate fallacies which I have just
been speaking of have been by no one more
completely demolished than by Mrs, Marcet, in
her Conversations on Political Economy, written
for the benefit of young ladies at school.
There is yet another answer to the question,
what does it matter whether taxation is
levied on one article or another? When the
new tariff was first proposed, it was pointed
out that such duties would have a disastrous
effect upon ear intercolonial trade. That
trade amounted in 1864 to £7,680,000 sterling,
and the export part of it to £4,213,000. Well,
the supporters of the tariff denied that the
tariff would have any effect upon this trade.
But at last we have the actual figures, and we
can judge for ourselves. Iu 1864, as I said,
our exports to the neighbouring colonies
amounted to £4,213.152 ; the tariff was im-
posed in January, 1865; in that year the ex-
ports to the other colonies fell to £2,941,985
a decline £1,271,167 in the first year of the
tariff; and in the present year, to the end of
June, the exports were only £1,329,525, show-
ing a further decline, as compared with the
same period of 1864, of £777,051. So that in
the first eighteen months of this experiment
our intercolonial trade hasfallenoff £2,056,218.
Now,taking the proportion of this which would
have been left in the colony, in the
shape of clerks’, storemen’s, and labourers’
wages, insurance, charges, commissions, and
profits at twenty per cent., it is but too evi-
dent that this new tariff has been accom-
panied during the first year and a half of its
operation by a dead loss to the labouring and
trading community of £400,000. Is not this
rather a high price to pay for the £150,000
which tbe new tariff will bring to the Trea-
sury ? Does it not matter whether taxes are
levied on sugar or on shoddy ? For it ia
clear that under the “sugar” system of
taxation wo had this trade, and about
this profit; and it is equally clear
that under the “shoddy” system which
has such charms for Mr. Michie, we have lost
both. It will be interesting to hear what
compensation we have derived for this fright-
ful and wanton loss. Mr. Michie says that
the change has benefited sempstresses and
other makers of wearing apparel. It may
have done so in some instances; in some I
have heard of, the benefit is certainly a ques-
tionable one. Instead of encouraging the
making up of goods here, the tariff has, iu
some cases, put a stop to it. For instance—
and the ladies will appreciate the illustra-
tion—a silk mantle, the duty on which is 9J.,
would, if made up here, pay a duty of 4s. on
the [materials of which it is made. Corah
handkerchiefs, which cost 2ls. in the piece,
pay a duty of 2s. 3|dL, but when they are
hemmed the duty is only 6d. Is not this a
novel method of encouraging native indus-
try ? We now come to the singular inquiry,
“ What principle either of politics or politi-
cal economy forbids us from saying in plain
terms that we will, through the Custom-
house (as is done in free-trade England at
the present moment), offer a premium to
domestic industry to produce if it can the
same sort of articles which are produced
elsewhere ? ” What industry it is which is
thus encouraged in England at the present
mumvut it would bo interesting to hear.
There is but one duty of the kind iu the
English statute hook, and that is the regis-
tration duty of 3d, per cwt., or Ifd. per
bushel, on grain! Mr. Michie has evidently had
recourse to some old almanac; he cannot be
aware of the declaration of Mr. Gladstone in
1862, "that the legislation of the previous
year did not leave one single protective
duty which was more than nominal in
amount,” and he might have added,
there is only one such nominal duty,
and that is the duty on giaiu. But, al-
though England has not such duties, what
principle of politics or political economy
should prevent us having them? To this
the answer is simple. Politics should be
founded on equity, and it is not equitable to
tix all for the benefit of some, to enable one
section of the community to obtain money
from the rest under false pretences by act of
Parliament; and political economy teaches
that imposing such taxes with such a purpose
is an eminently wasteful mode of raising a
revenue, and at the same time inflicts an
industrial loss, by inducing men to make at
home that which they can obtain with
less labour, that is, more cheaply, from abroad.
Everyone will remember a certain famous
utterance at St. Hilda:—“You cannot get re-
venue and protection by the same means;
for if you get revenue you have no protection,
and if you have protection you get no re-
venue.” But the author of this is now quite
clear that revenue and the more rapid ad-
vancement of domestic manufactures may be
secured by the same means ; and, in support
of ibis, he quotes Mr. Altken’s evidence on
the brewing trade. The sum of it is this:—
A duty of 6d. per gallon on beer was imposed
in 1854; from 1853 to 1861 English ale was
from £8 to £lO per hhd.; that in 1862 it fell
to from £4 to £6; that this was caused by the
duty, and that this gave au euormous stimu-
lus to the Victorian brewing trade. Now, I
can’t admit the facts, and, if the facts were
true, the argument is false. If the fall of price—
supposing it took place—was caused by the
duty, why did it not happen until the duty had
been in existence eight years ? But no such
fall actually took place. The ale that was
sold at £4 must have been sour; certainly it
was not the same ale as fetched £8 a few
years before. There was a fall in price in
1862, chiefly arising from a glut, and partly
from a new ale being then introduced to this
market which was sold at little more than £6,
or at a loss of more than £1 per hogshead,
but which was thus pushed into notice, and
being an excellent beer, has since sold steadily
at from £7 10s. to £B. But if the price of
English ale had been reduced by the duty,
how would that have benefited the Victorian
brewer? Had Mr. Michie taken the pains
to look more closely at Mr. Aitken’s evi-
dence, be would have seen that the latter
quoted these low prices of imported beer
as a proof that the trade wanted
more protection, and in this view of it all
the protectioniet brewers concurred. So far,
however, from agreeing with Mr. Aitken and
his confreres, Mr. Michie gives the duty the
credit for reducing the price, and regards that
reduction as a boon to the brewers! lam
afraid that for this sort of protection Mr.
Michie will not get many thanks. But then
he justifies this view of it by reference to the
example of Canada. Young colonies can learn
mote from the experience of one another,
than from that of the parent country from
which they sprang. And besides, Mr. Michie
has made a taxation may be a
burthen in old countries, but in a new it
may achieve all kinds of advantages. By
taking a crown from A and giving it to B
the fortunes of both parties may be made.
This is not an unfair representation of
the new economical gospel according to
Michie. Mr, Galt imposed duties in Canada,
which were spent on lighthouses, steamship-
subsidies, the deepening of tbe St. Lawrence,
the construction of canals and of railways.
The cheapening of carriage which resulted
from these works rendered English goods
cheaper in Canada when the duty was twenty
percent., than they were when subject only
to a duty of two-and-a-half per oeat. It is
easy to understand this, but it is not
easy to understand bow it cau apply
to the new tariff of Victoria. Our
lighthouses were built, and our harbour
improvements were effected, before the new
tariff was conceived. The only effect, there-
fore, of the tariff must, be to neutralise or
destroy the advantages of tbs coast and ,
harbour works: for, since the works were
actually performed, how could the imposition
of a duty which was not to be spent in further
improvements have any other result than that
of making imported goods as dear as before
the works were undertaken? But it is some-
what singular, and not a little contradictory,
in Mr. Michie to advance this argument. At
St. Hilda, but two years since, he was asked
for a defence of the wharfage-rate, which he
gave, accordin g to the reporter, in these words:
—“To him the wharfage-rate represented a
reasonable toll paid for the entry of goods
into a port on which hundreds of thousands
of pounds had been expended, in surveying,
in lighting, and improving. Shippers ought
to regard the rate as a very satisfactory com-
mutation of the vast expense they were
formerly at.” The wharfage-rate then was
a reasonable payment for these privileges;
now Mr. Michie pleads the same excuse for
the tariff. It, too, is a reasonable toll for the
use of the works effected by the state; and
not of fresh works, hut of those for which the
wharfage rate had been previously imposed;
which, to come from the abstract to the
concrete, amounts to this—6s. a ton was a rea-
sonable toll to charge on salt for the harbour
and coast improvements; 255. is also a rea-
sonable toll to charge on the same article
for the same works! And this is not all.
The new duties are not even the second pay-
ment demanded as toll. Before the wharfage-
rates were imposed, a duty of Is. per ton
upon all shipping coming to the port was in
force, and this, too, was regarded as a toll for
the use of the harbour improvements; so
that the importer is in the position of the
unfortunate bishop whom Friar Tuck carried
over the river, and who was compelled to pay
toll before he got ou to the friar’s back,
again when in the middle of the stream, and
yet once more before he regained terra
firma ; the only difference between the two
cases being, that while the bishop him-
self suffered by the friar’s extortion, those
who hound ou the Government to fleece
the importer have to repay him all that is
extorted from him with compound interest.
But again we must ask, is Mr. Michie repre-
senting the feelings and wishes of the pro-
tectionists in insisting on Customs’ duties in
order to cheapen imported goods? The duties
which were levied in Canada, and spent in
the way Mr. Galt shows, did unquestionably
cheapen importations; “ but,” adds Mr. Galt,
“they thus lessened the legitimate protection
to the Canadian manufacturer.” Victorian
protectionists must he less acute than we
suppose them to be if they do not perceive
that Mr. Michie’s protection is something
more terrible even than free trade. But the
most curious ciicumstance in connexion
with this Canadian illustration remains to
he mentioned. Mr, Galt abandoned in June
last the fiscal system which Mr. Michie seeks
to imitate. Canada has had enough of pro-
tection. The works for which the duties
were imposed [having been completed, Mr.
Galt saw clearly that they might just as well
not have been undertaken if the duties were
to be kept on. For although prices had been
greatly reduced, they could still be reduced
to the extent of the duties if those duties
were removed. But this was not the only
consideration which influenced Mr. Galt.
He found that such duties do not furnish a
steady or a sufficient revenue, aud he found
also that they pressed with the greatest
seventy on the farming population. With
a view to get more revenue, and to
relieve the farmers, he swept off a
large part of the duties at once, and greatly
reduced the rest. Nor did he explain this
proceeding as a change from a higher to a
lower rate of protective duties ; bnt he put it
to the Legislature as a definite abandonment
of protection, and as one grand step towards
the fiscal system which had been productive
of such benefits in Europe, and expressed the
hope that at no distant day the commerce of
Canada would be as unfettered as that of
England. These liberal and enlightened views
were adopted by the Legislature, and the billem-
body ing them was passed in the Lo wer House by
sixty-three to twenty-eight. Isit not, therefore,
rather late in the day to quote the example
of Canada in support of a protective tariff?
Mr. Michie being anxious to reproduce a per-
fect budget of protectionist fallacies, did not,
while speaking on this question of toll, hesi-
tate to trot out once more that much-en-
during individual, the Brighton market-
gardener. who has to pay the St. Hilda toll.
Equity, says Mr. Michie, requires that the
bloated importer should pay as well as the
hard-working horticulturist. Granted. But
will Mr. Michie have the goodness to
point out at what period in our history
the importer has not been compelled to pay
toll? If John Smith, from Brighton, has to
pay le. for bringing his cart-load of produce
through the St. Hilda toilgate, do not the
owners of the Great Britain have to pay £lOO
tonnage dues whenever their noble vessel
enters tbe port ? It is inconceivable that Mr.
Michie did not know this when using his
illustration; and one cannot help remarking
that, before lecturing the press ou courtesy
and moderation, he might have shown *na,t
in himself the press has a ceasor who pos-
sesses at least a supreme regard for truth.
Still adhering to my text, and at the risk of
wearying you, I must touch on another argu-
ment in support of the tariff—none other
than what is called, and as Mr. Michie says
"wiiscalled,” Mill’s “exceptional case.” I
need not quote this, partly because the quota-
tion is a long one, and chiefly because it is
so generally known. Mr. Mill admits that iu
a young and rising nation a protecting duty,
imposed in hopes of naturalising a foreign
industry, in itself perfectly suitable to the
circumstances of toe country, " will some-
times be the least inconvenient mode in
which the nation can tax itself for the sup-
port of such an experiment.” At this point
in the extract from Mill our lay preacher
stopped short. Now, it is rather remark-
able that some two years ago, when this
question from Mill was oa the lios of
every protectionist, the Melbourne cor-
respondent of The Times mentioned the
fact in one of his letters, aud pointed out
that the protectionists in employing the
quotation always stopped at a very critical
part of it; and it is most remarkable that the
author of a recent lay sermon adroitly stop-
ped short in the self-same critical place. Let
me therefore supply the missing passage.
Mr. Mill goes on to say“ But the protection
should be confined to cases in which there is
good ground of assurance that the industry
which it fosters will after a time be able to
dispense with it; nor should the domestic
producers ever be allowed to expect that it
will be continued to them beyond the time
necessary for a fair trial of what they are capa
ble of accomplishing.” Now, it is upon recard
that Mr. Michieon a previous occasion referred
in any but approving terms to this exception
of Mr. Mill. Mr. Michie then pointed out
that Mr. Mill “ seems to forget that iu new
countries some protection already exists in
the very nature of things, in the cost of
freight, expenses, &c.;” land further remarked
—“Against Mr. John StuartMillonthispoint
might be quoted his equally-celebrated father,
James Mill, who never admitted such an ex-
ception at all.” Now, however, Mr. Michie
aho seems to forget all about the protection
of freight, insurance, interest, and other ex-
penses, for he omits all reference to them;
and he misquoted his own remark about
James Mill, excusing himself by stating that
he had no report of his former lecture at baud
—a misfortune which might soon have been
iemedied,for I am credibly informed that of
that lecture the Free Trade League printed
20,000 copies, and have some few of them still
on hand. This proposition of Mr. Mill, we
are told, “every candid mind” must perceive
to be applicable to young countries like Vic-
toria. But, inasmuch as Mr. Mill has but
recently explained what he meant by the
passage, would it not have been “ candid”
enthe part of any one employing it to quote
along with it that explanation? “I never
thought,” this explanatory passage runs, “of
recommendiol wuuwuauulug XU a UCW
colony, more than elsewhere, a general pro-
tective policy, or a system of duties ou im-
ported commodities, such as that which has
recently passed the representative Assembly
of your colony.” It may be replied, that Mr.
Michie does not quote the exceptional case
in support of the tariff; but he quotes
it in support of a system which is to
secure the more rapid advancement of
domestic manufactures, and I have shown
that system to be pure and simple protection.
In the remedial effects of this new method of
taxation, which is neither free trade nor pro-
tection, Mr. Michie believes, with all the
simplicity of a new convert. In some unex-
plained way it is to make all men and women
virtuous and modest, and render the use of
tar and feathers unnecessary. It is to restrain
miners from smoking one another to death in
their drives; to abolish “ skullbankers” and
“ bolters,” and eradicate all such anti social
phenomena. There is only one difficulty in
the way of this eradication, and that is, the
mining interest. “We have over 80,000
miners grubbing all the year round for gold.”
“ At the same time we have some 1,100 pas-
toral tenants of the crown.” The dispropor-
tion of these numbers is, says Mr. Michie,
amazing ; in which remark it is possible to
concur, and yet not perceive why Mr.
Michie should wantonly make the dis-
proportion greater than it is. Are the 80,000
miners he speaks of all proprietors of claims ?
Are there no wages men among them? Why,
then, were not the labourers and shepherds
& I6IUO
THE ARGUS, TUESDAY, DECEMBER 11. 1866.
added to the pastoral tenants before the com- words nor figures can express. It the gold
parigon was made? Even then, the dispro- which has been raised in Ballarat has been
portion may be large, but no larger than the exchanged for “ brandy and slops, to the
relative remuneration in the two occupations sole advantage of English merchants and
would lead any reasonable person to expect, manufacturers, I must conclude, either that
But Mr. Michie is an eclectic philosopher, towns can be built and a population can
JUtUj Hiiumc J.O au ifwuDDuyuci. * • vv *“ • i. j j,
He can’t endure mining. It is unfriendly to thrive on these oddly-associated commodities,
the 11 calm, patient, and provident household or else I must believe that Ballarat is owned
virtues,” begets “ a gambling spirit and all and inhabited by English merchants and
the social vices and defects incident to gam- manufacturers. But either of these conclu-
hling.” In fact, Mr. Michie is of opinion that sions is a reductio ad absurdum. Man cannot
when Providence endowed Victoria with live by brandy alone, nor even with the help
untold golden wealth, Providence made a of slops can he manage to subsist; and I find,
very great mistake. Like an historical or as a matter of fact, that while in 1860 we ex-
fabulous Spanish statesman, Mr. Michie is ported gold to the value of £6,175,000, we im-
satisfied that had he been of God’s Privy ported but £644,000 s worth of “ brandy and
Council when the universe was designed, slops.” The “ brandy and slops theory,
he would have hit upon some better endow- therefore, is untenable. As to English J llO1 *
ment for this colony. On two grounds does chants and manufacturers owning and in-
Mr. Michie challenge the wisdom of Provi- habiting Ballarat, the thing is absurd; for,
deuce—gold-mining is immoral, and it is would Mr. Vale demean himself by represent-
calculated to impoverish rather than enrich ing such disreputable people ? But, supposing
the country in which it is carried on. These I could get over this Ballarat difficulty, which
two propositions, which, though not stated I can’t, there is a certain concrete fact on the
by Mr. Michie in so many words, are, never- Eastermhill which cannot possibly be recon-
tireless, as laid down by him, of so extra- ciled with Mr. Michie’s theory. In the In-
ordinary a character as to demand separate dustrial Exhibition you will see, if you take
and careful treatment. And first, as to the the pains to look, a lump of quartz studded
morality. “Is it at * Sailor’s Gully’ or with gold which came from the claim of the
‘ Murderer’s Flat’ that we can expect to find Royal Standard Company, at the Black River,
the simple, pious, reverent life which may I cannot tell you how much gold the fortn-
exiet in the poorest societies, and of which nate shareholders in that company have had
Burns gives us so exquisite a picture in the happiness of dividing, nor is it necessary I
his ‘ Cotter’s Saturday Night ? No. The should do so. It is sufficient for my purpose
diggers’ and mining speculators’ Saturday to say that one shareholder, who has received
night will seldom do for a companion picture.” nearly £20,000 in dividends, has spent £14,000
Now, in putting thU question, and answering of that amount in the erection of fourteen
it as he does, Mr. Michie is hut repeating an houses on that land lately purloined by
old trick. In the famous trial of Bardell v. the Government from the City Cor-
PicJcwicJc, it will be remembered that while poration. Now, the gold from the Royal
Mr. Samuel Weller the Younger was in the Standard Company went to the place where
witness-box, the senior of the same name nil the gold goes—that is to say, it left the
expressed aloud his entire approval of the colony ; and if you doubt my word, you cau
manner in which his son answered the qaes- ask Mr. Curtayne, of the Union Bank. Bat,
tions. The judge sternly ordered the wit- in spite of the gold leaving the colony, the
ness to look round the court, and point out shareholder I refer to has got these fourteen
the author of the disturbance; whereupon houses on the Eastern-hill. He got them
Sam. Weller looked straight up into the without the intervention of brandy or slops,
lantern at the top of the court, and declared English merchants or manufacturers. He
that he could not see his father anywhere, drew his dividends in yellow sovereigns, dirty
Mr.Michie tarns his back upon cotters, and paper, or clean cheques —just as he pleased;
the* says ho can’t find a “ Cotter’s Satur- and h© spout ttom on Hawthorn bricks, im-
day Night,” But if the same method of ported timber, and wages to Victorian work-
looking for one were employed, would it be men; and in proof of all this, there are the
necessary to go very far from Ayrshire to dis- houses for you to see auyday. And lam told
cover that there are plenty of other people’s that when it was known these fourteen houses
Saturday nights which will not do for com- were to be built, such was the demand upon the
panion pictures? Is Glasgow so very simple, Hawthorn brickmakers that bricks went up
pious, and reverent, that one of our mining £1 per 1,000; and that this was so grateful to
towns need be afraid of a comparison ? Are the brickmakers, that they held a meeting,
manufacturing populations so much more and determined to ask the Government to
happy and virtuous than the popnlation of steal some more land and sell it, in order that
our gold-fields that we should ignore the bricks might go up higher still. Here, then,
wealth beneath onr feet, and turn to manu- are a few facts of the most specific and per-
factoring en masse ? And this is the very gist tinent kind. No brandy, no slops, no chamber
of the question which Mr. Michie has so flip- of commerce, no merchants, no manufacturers
pantly skimmed over. The gold-miners are appear throughout the transaction—only
to be taxed for the more rapid advancement Gemmell and M’Caul who sold the land, the
of domestic manufactures, because manufac- contractor who undertook the work, the men
taring is favourable to morals, and gold- whom he employed, and. the Hawthorn
mining is not. This doctrine is not novel; it brickmakers. I am driven, therefore,
has been propounded over and over again by P er force, to the conclusion that, in the
all the lesser protectionist luminaries; and (it case of a portion of the proceeds of the
is only because it has been adopted by Mr. Royal Standard Company, it has been spent
Michie that attention is now directed to it. in the colony, in tbe erection of a row
[Having quoted the testimony given by seve- of very nice houses, of which I should have no
ral authorities in Great Britain as to the in- objection to be the owner. Bat let us apply
temperance and improvidence existing among to Mr. Michie’s statement another test. Sup-
the labouring population, showing that the posing that, instead of exporting gold, we did
picture of the “ Cotter’s Saturday Night ”is as England does, viz., export coal. Would it
not always to he found either amongst manu- not be just as correct to say that every ton of
facturers or agriculturists, the lecturer pro- coal exported “ leaves the country by so
ceeded to observe]: —But lam not content to much less for ever, just as if it had never
rest the defence of the miners against the existed ?”_ And if that would be so, does it
imputation of immorality on the fact that not establish the conclusion that England is
manufacturing populations are not preetni- engaged in a demoralising pursuit, aud a
nently distinguished for virtue and piety. I pursuit which leaves her so much poorer
affirm that Mr. Michie’s comparison is not every year; for has she not exchanged her
merely unfair on one side, but that it is unfair coal for "brandy ” from France and “slops”
on both sides. The “ Cotter’s Saturday from China, and does not the collier live
Night ”is not the type of domestic life Lis begrimed and murky life for the
among the industrial classes of Britain, and comfort of the French vigneron and
the diggers’and mining speculators’Saturday Chinese tea merchant? But why should
night, as insinuated by Mr. Michie, is not I confine myself to_ the case of the
a lair representation of domestic life on our collier? For what, viewed through Mr.
gold fields. I might content myself with Michie’s bilious and distorting spectacles,
pointing to the fact, that as fast as gold-fields does the English ironworker, cotton-
are entered on, schools are established, and spinner, or woollen-weaver, live his grimy
that, pari passu as shafts go down, do churches and pale-faced life? Is there any dif-
goup. Why, at Ballarat alone there are thirty- ference between the case of the gold-miner
five churches and twenty-one schools. And and that of people engaged in those crafts
lest it might be supposed that the buildings which Mr. Michie is so excessively anxious to
outstrip the worshippers, I will read the de- establish in Victoria? If Mr. Michie’s short
liberate statement of a well-known Presby- and easy method of showing the worthlesa-
terian minister, who has been for nine years ness of gold-mining be admissible, may I not
labouring in our principal gold-field—" I have say with equal force and justice of Lancashire
no hesitation in saying, after a tolerably —every yard of calico that is exported leaves
fair experience, that the Sunday is as well the country by so much less for ever, just as
kept here in Ballarat as in any town of if such yards had never existed ;it has
similar size in Britain, or on the Continent of been exchanged for so much brandy and
Europe, with which it has been my lot to slops; the cotton-spinner or weaver has
form an acquaintance. There is, ot course, lived his troubled and feverish life for the corn-
some Sunday drinking, but not so much as fort of the cotton lords, the Indian merchants,
inmost of the large towns at home. The or the Victorian gold-diggers? “ Oh, bat” says
outward respect paid to the day is about as Mr. Michie, “ gold ia neither a manufacture
great ss in Scotland itself. ... I suppose, nor is it an annually accruing product, like
after all, that church attendance is the best the harvest, the wool clip, or the vintage,”
criterion whereby to judge of the way in and therefore, sooner or later, our gold-fields
which the Sunday ia observed. In this re- most be like a tale that is told.” T w»nd«r
C ptct, t do»’t any largo town in nug- whether Mr. Michie has ever been to Clones.
Und or Scotland that can show a larger pro- If he had been over the works of the Port
Portion of church-goers than Ballarat. In Phillip Mining Company there I think he
many of the British cities there are not more would have been less dogmatic in the state-
tban one in ten, or even a smaller propor- ment that gold is not a manufacture. Pray
tion, to be found in the churches on Sun- what is a manufacture? Is it not strictly a
day. I never heard of any of them, of making with the hand, and has it not come
the very best of them, that could produce to mean production by means of machinery?
more than one in five. From inquiries that Now, what is done at dunes? Some 300
I have made, lam convinced that there are men are engaged in breaking out quanz
about one in four of the Ballarat population —just as pitmen break out iron ore
in church almost every Sunday. ... I in Staffordshire. Some hundred more are
have been among diggers for nearly nine engaged in attending to three steam-engines
years now, and I can testify that there is no driving eighty stamps, which are employed
more respectable or virtuous class in the from Monday morning to Saturday night,
whok community than they.” It is pretty with one ceaseless deafening roar, the rever-
certain, from this testimony of the Rev. beration of which sounds in your ears all
William Henderson, that there are “ Cotters’ Sunday, in pounding the quartz to powder.
Satuiday Nights” to be found even at Bal- Then there are numbers of subsidiary ma-
larat But mining speculators ate a gambling chines employed in separating the gold from
uneciupulons set, and therefore mining is the mercury, in washing and grinding pyrites,
demoralising. On the same principle rail- and, lastly, one delicate and beautiful
ways must be destructive of morality, machine, which saves eighty-five per cent, of
for lave we seen anything here approach- the finest gold which otherwise would be
ing in intensity to the railway mania lost. Let anyone visit this factory, aud then
in England ? And if mining is to be abau- let him say whether or no the production of
doned in Victoria because people are pereu- gold is a manufacture. But it is not au an-
nialljcheating and being cheated in front of nually recurring product like the harvest,
the Clamber of Commerce, ought not public Has not Mr. Michie quoted with approval the
compimes of all kinds to be abandoned in opinion of Mr, Corry, to the effect that agri-
Engisad because there are “bulls” and cultural soils wear out, that every succeeding
“ bear” iu Capel-court ? It must be con- crop leaves them so much the poorer,
ceded that speculators are not a desirable or so that, like the gold-miner, the farmer is
loveale set of men; but it seems to me that living his troubled and discontented life for
those who speculate in shares are not the the benefit of some manufacturing ogre some-
most <bjectionable of the class. To my mind where else? And as to manufacturers, is it
he is the most dangerous speculator who possible that Mr. Michie has not heard of
pandes to prejudices which he despises, and Mr. Jevons’s book on the coal supply of Bri-
specultes upon the gullibility of the uu- tain, in which it is urged—and so forcibly as
thinkig and the untaught. Leaving, then, to command the assent of Mr. Mill—that at
moral considerations, let us turn to the uo distant day the depth from which coal
econonical objections which Mr. Michie will have to be raised will so increase the
urges to mining pursuits. “It is scarcely cost that, unless some other motive power
possibe,” he says, "to understand how be discovered, England’s manufacturing su-
any pld country can for any long period premacy will be at an end. This being so,
togetir be a rich country. The gold where is the difference between agriculture,
is afte all only a better sort of guano to the manufactures, and gold-mining? If “ a gold
peopltamong whom it is found. Every ounce country worked out is worse off than a
that itxported leaves the country by so much country which never had gold,” is a
less fa ever, j ust as if such ounce had never coal country worked out, or a farming
existei It has been exchanged for so much country worked out, any better off? But
brand’and slops. The digger has lived his have we any excuse for indulging in maun-
troubkl and feverish life, for the comfort of dering Jeremiads on the probable failure or
the Climber of Commerce, the English mer- termination of our yield of gold ? Let any
chant,ind the English manufacturer.” Now, one who is inclined to take a gloomy view of
this pssage is a flagrant case of what boys the case read Mr. Brough Smyth’s Mining and
at schol call “cribbing.” The idea, and Mineral Statistics, just published by the Exhi-
almosthe expression, has been stolen bodily bition Commissioners, and he will find that
from Ir. Embling; for everyone must re- only one-fiftieth of tbe area'through which
memhe a similar opinion of mining being quartz veins and auriferous alluvions are
Hi lulUilia ObUluli j HU Wu VClj did Alt iij)
it is popilar, and Mr. Michie being just now
intent oi popularity, adopts it. Yet has this
doctrine never been more emphatically con-
demned than by Mr. Michie himself. Listen
to bin. 1 quote from “ vie con a ounenug a
itecove-j■ tt» ~,ust be very blind, very
ignorant; <r very preverse, who would aver
that we lave made no progress, and that
after all feese years we have nothing to show
for our pld. And yet asseitiona like this
we do Qcusionally meet with among plat-
form orates aud newspaper correspondents,”
and, he right have added, lay preachers.
But it will not do to leave the refutation of
this monsious argument to Mr. Michie him-
self. Am first the question suggests itself,
if the »old has been exchanged for
brandy nd slops, and if the English
merchant and manufacturers have alone
been beifited, how am I to account
for certaiisubstantial and indisputable facts
which Ist aiouud me? I go to Ballarat, to
a place wick Mr, William Howitt described
in 1863, a:l with perfect truth, as a sea of
mud—"th most perfect Serboniau bog on
the face c the earth;” and what do I find
there ? Aopnlation of 35,000 persons living
in a hamome town of more than 8,000
houses—a own well laid out, well lit, and
well pavei with 60 miles of footpaths, 35
miles of etslled road, 22 miles of gas
mains, 35 hatches, 21 schools, waterworks
which cosi tbe inhabitants £57,000, and
gaswoiks ffiich cost £56,200, rateable
property tlaed at upwards of one mil-
lion sterlig, and mining plant worth
another quiter of a million; ten banks, ten
foundries, Is finest mechanics’ institute in
the colony,#n hospital, orphan and bene-
volent Bey-ms, and abounding with
other ifidicauns of opulence which neither
mg gold we are exchanging our capital against
the steady ever-recurring industrial income
of other countries, and must sooner or later
come to poverty, will not to** o.«»iiuMiua ;
for tLo oouutry which exhausts its soil by
agriculture and the country which exhausts
its coal and iron by manufactures is in
just the same condition ; and, therefore,
we shall not better ours by effecting
any violent change in our industrial
system. Mr. Langton then remarked, —
Although Mr. Michie despairs of the future of
a gold country, he does not leave us without
any suggestion as to how we may meet our
fate—we should offer “ the utmost facilities
for the miner to transfer himself to the farm,
the factory, and the workshop.” Have there
been no such facilities ? Are there none now ?
Nay, as a matter of fact, have not men been
continually transferring themselves from
mining to employments which suit or pay
them better? Is it not notorious that ou
every gold-field the larger proportion of tbe
artisans, shopkeepers, aud even professional
men, have at one time been diggers? And
if Mr. Michie had not been anxious to show
that there are no such facilities, he would
have looked at the gold-fields statistics,
and discovered that the number of European
miners has been steadily decreasing for years,
that they numbered 62,428 in 1857, 61,955 in
1861, and hut 58,524 in 1865. Whatever then
may be tbe case with the Chinese, the Euro-
pean mining popnlation has been taking to
other pursuits at the rate of 500 per annum
for the past eight years. This should calm
the fears of the alarmists. But Mr. Michie
is especially eloquent on the wrongs of the
digger in being hindered from obtaining free-
holds. Now this to me ia astounding. Has
not Mr. Grant presided in Latrobe-street for
the past two years, saying to one man get
most palpable injustice. I rejoice, with Mr.
Michie, that the large majority of electors are
iliac very many ot in*
hanit their own freeholds. My complaint is
that numbers of these ratepayers and free-
holders are, under present arrangements, as
utterly unrepresented as if they were deprived
of the franchise altogether. But there are
other tyrannies, says Mr. Michie. Tradesmen
threatened with loss of custom for voting as
they pleased; the private lives of persons as-
sailed who are politically obnoxious to the as-
sailants. And I might add others still. Did we
notseea printer put into a dungeonfor publish-
ing the honest truth ? Has not every mem-
ber of the Legislature who differed with the
present Government been excluded from the
Exhibition Commission? To the press Mr.
Michie looks as the chief agency to hold this
spirit of tyranny in check. Bat he doubts
its fitness or capacity for the task: it is not
like the English press; ha misses the dis-
tinguishing features of first-class English
journals. There may be truth in this ; but
then is Mr. Michie an impartial critic, see-
ing that all the papers of influence in
the colony were against the course which
he and his colleagues pursued, and which
he in this lay sermon defends ? Oh!
but these hostile articles were all written
in Melbourne, and even some of those
published in the journals of the neigh-
bouring colonies. If this were true—and no
proof of any kind was offered—how would it
affect thequestion ? The views expressed, by
whomsoever written, suited the subscribers
and readers, or the papers would not be sup-
ported and read. The conclusion, therefore,
is that the majority of the subscribers to and
readers of the country journals were opposed
to Mr. Michie and his colleagues. It could
hardly be expected that our lay preacher
land, and he gets it, and to another, you would conclude without a word about the
shan’t have a scrap, and he has to Council and Assembly, To the Assembly he
go without? Have we not almost been has no message; his exhortation is addressed
driven into Yarra Bend by the pitiless parade solely to the Council, and the sum of it is, that
of the success of the Amending Land Act in iftheCouncilcheckshastylegislationitsbould
every newspaper we take up, which success is give its reason for so doing—a duty which I was
so perfect and astounding that the author of not aware that body was at all backward in
the measure means to repeal it without the discharging. Enumerating a number of the
help of Parliament, and to substitute an most obvious aims of a legislature—objects in
entirely new land act in its place? What can which all men must concur —he asks, can
be the use of raking up the old grievances of there be in regard to such matters any irre- >
the miners, if Mr. Grant and the new Land concileable difference of opinion
Act have redressed them long ago? And the the two Houses? And, with Mr. Michie, L
privileges of the squatters—when shall we think there cannot. The recent difference
have done with them ? Many people were between the Houses was not on any ,of
under the impression that the squatting these subjects, it arose from a totally differ-
question was disposed of until 1870, unless in ent source. In the noble lines with wl'iich
the interim Mr, Grant should dispose of the Mr. Michie ended, he might have fcjund
squatters themselves. But Mr. Michie begins pointed illustration of the cause of* the
at the beginning, and goes through the whole quarrel:—
dreary story, like a sort of agrarian Mantilini, .. Let not your Klng and p arliame nt in one,
doom ed to one everlasting grind. We are Much less apart, mistake themselves for that
supplied with no fresh facts, no fresh Bug- Which is most worthy to be thought upon ;
gestions. We have some fresh opinions, for Nor think they are essentially the state,
in his lecture of 1860 Mr. Michie told his Let them not fancy that the authority
audience that “whilst the squatter is liable And prmlegea upon them wn,
to be turned out at a moment’s notice with- A°power, o? * glory ol their own."
out compensation for improvements he has
of couise no motive to improve, and, conse- Much less apart. Does not this exactly indi-
quently, a great part of Australia is, in a cate the conduct of the majority in the
mitigated form, in much the same situation as Assembly? Did they not strive to legislate
was Ireland before the passing of the En- “apart” from the Council? Did they not
cumbered Estates Act.” Time, however, insist that they were “essentially the state?”
works wonders. Mr. Michie now is “certainly Did they not try to [set up “a majesty”
under a strong impression” that these same which would brook uo check, “a power or
evils which he describes in the same words, a glory of their own?” And did we not hear
Irish allusion and all, are the result not of the their leader declare, when the Queen insisted
uncertainty of tenure but of the rapacity of on having a voice in the matter, tljat the
the banks. The banker is only a squatter in authority of Her Majesty was dangerous to
disguise ; he is intent only on a bright con- the liberties of this colony ? Had the poet’s
summate dividend of twenty per cent. ;he is neble sentiment been acted on by the Assetn-
a wolf in sheep’s clothing, careless of the bly, we should have been spared all the cou-
equatter, careful only for the London fusion, ill-feeling, trouble, lawlessness, and
flesh, which is Australian grass ; engaged in expense to which we have been subjected for
one ceaseless, ogreish process of grinding the the last two years. At this time ot day any
squatters’ bones to make his (the banker’s) discussion on this subject must be very in-
hread. Passing by the utterly irreconcileable complete which omits all reference to the
character cf these two deliverances, one lact that the law officers of two British
cannot help thinking, if this be a correct Administrations have declared the Council
picture of the “ privileges” of the Victorian to have been altogether right, and
squatter, they are privileges which ic must be the Assembly altogether wrong. With
very much better to be without; and, instead this fact before us, speculation on the
of the squatters being a favoured class, they beet method of dealing with dead locks ia
must bo an oppressed and deeply injured altogether beside the mark. All lovers of
race, since, according to Mr. Michie. the goal their country, all friends of truth and right,
whither they are tending is the Insolvent must wish that whenever, in the future, one
Court. Mr. Michie seems to be of opinion, House ia as palpably in the wrong as the
however, that if they would only im- Assembly was in the recent dispute, that
prove their stations they might avoid House may be as completely defeated as was
the acquaintance of Mr. Noel. But they the Assembly. One change certainly is desir-
are a perverse and stiff-necked set; a able, and that is, that in any future dead-
“ mortgagor cannot improve if he would, a lock the authors of it should manfully take
mortgagee will not improve if he can.” But all the unpleasant consequences upon them-
what sort of a mortgagor or mortgagee would selves; and not, having betrayed one of their
he be who would ever think of improving a number to his ruin, escape without any
property on all the best parts of which punishment at all. One other remark ought
some of Mr. Grant’s free selectors may to be made in justice to the Council. That
squat down any day? Would not the body is directly responsible to its constituents,
friends of a squatter who should fence Seven elections to it have recently taken
his run, make waterholes, or lay down place; of these, six have resulted in the re-
grass under such circumstances at once turn of men approving the course which the
apply for a commission de lunatico in- Council took, and only one approving of the
quirendo, and put a stop to his mad action of the Assembly, and this one, it ia
freaks? Not even in Sir Phillip Sydney’s said, will probably ha unseated on petition.
Arcadia would such a hopeless lunatic But one more topic and I have done. Mr.
be suffered to remain at large. But this Michie has unbounded faith in legislation;
sketch of the squatter and his banking those who think trade, industry, morality,
relations is of a piece with the caricature and religion safer in the hands of the people
of the digger to which I have referred, than of the state, he speaks of as belonging
What can be more disingenuous than to to the “ Let alone school.” To this school I
talk as if tbe squatters still held the only am not ashamed to confess that I belong,
land available for settlement. If it be so, Mr. Michie likens the people, to quote hia
whose fault is it but Mr. Grant’s ? Has he own words, to “ a great stupid Cyclops,
not proclaimed areas open for selection all groping and blundering and knocking his poor
over the colony? And is it not a fact that thick head against the walls of his dark
there are upwards of a million of acres now cave,” and therefore he advocates acts of Par-
ready for any earth-hungry man to take liament which shall direct their industry,
up? Why, then, should Mr. Michie indulge in take care of their morality, aud provide for
all these stale, threadbare platitudes about their religion. Now amongst the many ob-
squatting? “Equity and free trade,” he goes jections which may be urged against such a
on, “ demand that the system should be paternal system, there is one which, to my
put an end to. The squatter and banker mind, is sufficient: it is utterly un-English—
have had the land too long on their own altogether foreign to the genius and spirit of
terms, and those terms are not equitable.” British institutions. To regulate industry.
Whose fault is that ? Was not Mr. Michie a dictate occupations, say what trades are de-
member of a Government which obtained siiableand what are not, and do all tbe think-
office by declaring that the squatters’ rents ing for that “ great stupid Cyclops,” the people,
should not be raised ? And “ free trade ” axe not, according to British traditions, the
also demands a change. “If that be a good proper functions of Government. If Go-
thing for miners and mechanics,” asks Mr. vernment undertakes the protection of the
Michie, “ can it be a bad thing for bankers country from foes without and robbers
and squatters ?” I should say not—nor within, if it sees that the laws are
for barristers either; for it ia not a enforced and justice administered, that
little remarkable that this stern advo* the public estate is not wasted, that the
cate of free trade in banking and squat- people are not oppressed nor their livelihoods
ting belongs to the best and most heavily endangered by unnecessary taxation, may
protected profession in the colony. But P have we not safely trust the rest to the energy,
always been under the impression that there virtue, and piety of the British race ? I
was free trade for both bankers and squatters. I think we may ; and although I did not un-
know of no duty either on the import of specie dertake to speak on either the “ Retro-
or stock. I know of no law which prevents spects or Prospects of the Colony,” I may be
any man who has the means from turning permitted to indulge in one or two xetro-
either banker or squatter. Oh! but it is not spects which seem to me to warrant my belief
free trade in stock that Mr. Michie refers to, in this doctrine of laissez faire. Some half-a-
it is free trade in land. Is it free trade in dozen years ago, a bushman’s hut on the
land to offend the Attorney General’s con- south eastern shores of Port Philip Bay took
science, and dispose of the land by public fire. There were three little children ia it—
lottery? Now let us revert for a mement a boy of eight, a baby unable to walk, under hia
to the definition of froo trado with which Mr, charge, and a child asleep in the inner of the
Michie set out:—“ It is an operation by which two rooms into which the wooden dwelling
all men enjoy the unrestricted power of was divided. The boy first carried out th®
exchanging with each other the fruits baby and deposited it on the grass in a place
of their labours.” Is land the fruit of any of safety ;he then returned for his sleeping
mans labour? If it is, is there any legis- brother. Through the blinding smoke and
lative hindrance to free and unlimited scorching flame this heroic boy must have
dealing in it? How, then, with any show of passed, for he reached his brother’s pallet
reason can Mr. Michie say that there ia not and there perished in the flames. Does
free trade in land ? But his meaning is British, or any history, furnish au instance
nevertheless apparent; it is not on econo- of nobler devotion to duty and to love ‘A
mical grounds at all that his objection to the In August, 1864, three little children strayed
land system which has prevailed here rests, from the hut of their parents, near Mount
What he means by free trade in land is “ one Arapiles—the eldest a boy of nine, the next a
simple uniform system for all lands, pastoral girl, the heroine of the story, and the
or arable, by auction or otherwise, without youngest a boy little more than three years
partiality or special advantage to any class old. They had gone to gather wild flowers
of society whatsoever.” Now here, for once, and cut broom for their mother, but in re-
I entirely agree with him, not in his unwar- turning became confused, lost their way, and
rantable use of the term free trade, but in ultimately went in the opposite direction to
the equity and advantage of such a land their home. For nine days, hand-in-hand
system as he thus describes. But why they wandered without food and without
have we not such a system? Because water, save when the rain-drops hung upon
Ministry after Ministry have persisted the leaves as they fell. For nine nights they
in refusing to adopt one simple uni- lay down side by side, once in a keen mid-
form system. But you ask where is winter frost, many times in the pitiless
there such a system ? I reply, it has been in storm. The youngest child nestled between
operation most successfully for many years at the elder two. Once when this little fellow
our very doors. In South Australia one complained that he was “ Cold, cold,” tha
simple uniform system prevails. Anyone girl took off her frock to cover him. You all
who wants land can have it, and at tbe fair know how, by the praiseworthy and unceas-
morket price. There is always more land on ing efforts of, I may say, tha entire neigh-
eale than there is demand for, and the price bourhood, they were rescued, and are now
seldom exceeds a pound an acre. And what alive and well. It is not so much, however,
is more to the purpose, this system has to this noble girl’s conduct in her care for her
secured the settlement of the people and brother that I desire to call attention ;itis to
the extension of agriculture ; and South the little fact that, night by night, as they lay
Australia is the only one of these colo- down on the cold damp ground, so wearied
nies which not only supplies itself with that even then they could not but sleep, she
breadstuffs, but does in agricultural pro- knelt and repeated the simple words—words,
duce a large ( and thriving export trade, too, which were the first on her lips with
Bnt as to the “ numerical majority” of which returning consciousness :
The Argus writes, and in the tyranny of „ _
which Mr. Michie does not believe, how does Sok -mi d ’
the case actually stand ? Taking the voting Pity my simplicity, ’
at the last general election, what do we find ? And sufler me to come to thee.”
That, in round numbers, 24 000 persons voted „ r . ,
for the Opposition and 30,000 for the Ministry; {al } discover something of the
this, of course, is in the constituencies which Cottar s Saturday-night spirit there. And
were contested. Now the difference here is I would ask are these the boys, are these the
not very wide, nor the majority quite over- girls, is this the rising generation about which
whelming. If our Assembly were au exact an inconsiderable but noisy section of our corn-
reflex of its constituents, the Ministry would profess to be so nervously anxious'?
have secured forty-four supporters and tbe , “J they o be difficulty, in this wide, rich
Opposition thirty-four. As it was, the Minis- iu Dd > to know what to qo with them when
try secured fifty-eight and the Opposition only they grow up . We have a country that is
twenty. I ask, Is this equity? Mr.Michie, fair to look upon, and a mild and salubrious
could ho see it as I do, would ask, Is it free climate. Our soil is rich and bounteous,
trade? And to take a particular instance, look Corn and wine and oil can be ours. At the
atCcllingwood.on which Mr. Michiebestowed P roo ent moment the country, through its
his blandishments so liberally, 1,689 electors fDgthand breadth is a living panorama of
memhe a similar opinion of mining being quartz veins and auriferous alluvions are his blandishments so liberally, 1,689 electors mogtaand breadth, is a living panorama of
expresgd by that eminent protectionist, scattered has yet been opened; and that of that returned three members, 1,640 were unable ~ , auty ;) The heavens have
and hiw he reached the climax of his fiftieth the ground has, save in two or to return one. But, it may be said, this dropped their fatness, and the earth "is
argumeit by exclaiming—“ We send all three localities, been little more than shows, not that the majority are tyrannical, yielding its increase. When I add to this,
our god away, and get nothing but scratched. This notion, then, that in export- but that the electoral system admits of the we hav ? under our feet untold
goods inreturn.” Stolen, however, aa it is, ing gold we are exchanging our capital against most palpable injustice. I rejoice, with Mr. riches, surpassing in extent even fabled
conceptions, and at our back an untraveraed
continent, I think it must be admitted that
he who can see in the future no field here for
his or his children’s work, no outlet for his or
their energy, is an unworthy sou of that
great Anglo-Saxon family which sent us forth,
and whose virtues and energy it is our mis -
sion to reproduce. I think my illustrations
warrant the conclusion that heroism and
piety have their home here; if anyone
doubts whether industry has her’s also, let him
go to Ballarat. These three grand qualities
are not hothouse plants, to be fostered and
fettered by legislation. They have thriven
here in spite, or in consequence, of not being
meddled with by acts of Parliament; and it
is comfortable to reflect that it would require
a vast amouut of such mischievous inter-
ference to drive them from the land. Let our
legislators, then, respect and reverence these
virtues, and remember that it was to them,,
and to those who possessed them, the poet re-
ferred when he exclaimed,
“ There’s on earth a yet auguster thing.
Veiled though it be, than Parliament and King.”
(Loud and prolonged cheering.)
On the motion of Mr. Hitchcock, seconded
by Mr. Callaghan, a cordial vote of thanks
was given to Mr. Langton for his able and
exhaustive lecture, and to the chairman for
presiding.
The proceedings terminated about tea
o’clock.
Mr. Langton, during the lecture, was re-
peatedly applauded. Au attempt to create
a counter-demonstration, in the shape of
hisses, was several times made ; but it was
confined to a handful of persons grouped in,
one part of the room.
