

pETV pPm\
\ 11
\L 'X
RETRIBUTIVE
JUSTICE:
ROMANCE FROM THE GOLDEN LAND.
AN AUSTRALIAN.
|Hdbourm[:
C. W. Burford, Printer, 548 Flinders Street.
1891.


? .
'
* .?
; , ' ? ? ?
?
-
?
C


NOTE I.
GEORGE RIDGEWAY, INSPECTOR OF POLICE.
I had just returned to duty after a fortnight?s leave of absence,
and was sitting in the police station reading a report from Ser-
geant Brainson relative to a murder which had been committed a
couple of nights previously in our district. The person mur-
dered was a gold digger who had come from the country, and
was known to have had a large sum of money in his possession,
but which had disappeared. The murder was brutal in the
extreme, but no clue to the perpetrator had yet been discovered.
The victim?s name was John Jenkins, and he was the elder
brother of a young man who keeps a store in our district. I
may mention here that this crime has no connection with the
shocking circumstances dealt with in these pages ; so I will say
no more about it.
I was sitting reading the report of the case, when a messenger
from Mr. Arthur Willdred entered the office and said that that
gentleman would feel much obliged if I would go to his house, as
a very mysterious and horrible crime had been committed there
during the preceding night. lat once prepared to comply with
his request, and, taking two constables with me, I was soon at
? Lilyfield,? Mr. Willdred?s residence. I was met at the hall-
door by Mr. Willdred himself, who at once explained the reason
why he had sent for me. I was astonished?horrified by what he
related, and, having made a careful examination of the premises,
I stationed the constables at two certain places with orders to allow
no person to intrude there, and then accompanied Mr. Willdred
to his library, where, in the presence of Mrs. Willdred, Mr. Leo
Truman, and Emma Wilson, a servant in the house, he made the
following statement: ?
? I had been here in this room all the evening writing letters
for the English mail, which, as you know, leaves to-day, and I
continued at this occupation till the clock on the mantelshelf
struck twelve, when I arose, and, putting on a hat, walked down
the garden as far as the entrance gate. The moon was up, but
she was obscured by a misty haze, and her light seemed to me to
be peculiarly ghastly, giving each object around a weird and
spectral appearance, while the church spire looming up behind


my own house added to the dismalness of the scene, for it
seemed like a huge phantom keeping watch over the surrounding
district. It was an unnatural sort of sight, if I may so express
myself, or at least I fancied it so. The winds, too, blew in
unusually hollow and mournful gusts, driving the dust in great
clouds along the road, and furiously tossing and wrenching the
branches of the trees till they creaked and groaned as if in
mortal agony. In short, it was a wild, depressing, and uncom-
fortable night, and I felt its influence to a painful extent. I
remained at the gate for some minutes, and was about to return
to the house, but on looking down the road I saw some person
approaching, and in a few minutes a female reached the gate,
which she was in the act of passing, but on observing me she
paused and requested to be directed to the city. I observed her
well, that is, as as it was possible by the peculiar light of
the moon, and saw that she was a young woman apparently about
twenty years of age, very prepossessing, indeed, very beautiful,
with a great quantity of fair or yellow hair, which had been very
much disarranged by the wind. She was fashionably dressed in
dark-colored garments, and wore a dark hat with a light-colored
feather in it, but her hands were bare, so I was enabled to per-
ceive that they were small, delicate, and white, and that she wore
a wedding ring, so I concluded that she was married. She was
evidently a respectable person, and when she spoke she confirmed
this opinion. However, she desired to be directed to the city,
and asked how far distant it was. I informed her, and said that
I supposed she was a stranger in our neighborhood. She replied
that she was, and added that she had come from the country and
arrived in town early in the evening \ that she had come out here
to look for a friend but had not been successful, and was then
returning to town with the object of obtaining accommodation
for the night. I asked her had she not already secured lodgings;
but, as she remained silent, I repeated the question, and after a
slight hesitation she answered that she had not, as she had
expected to have found her friend and that she would then have
no necessity to return to town.
?I may mention that I had become interested in her, for there
was something in her manner and speech exceedingly pleasing, if
not absolutely fascinating, so I said that if she had not secured
lodgings in the city it would, perhaps, be difficult for her to do so
at such an unusual hour as it would be when she would have reached
town. She replied that that was true, but what could she do, or where
was she to go 1 Her face had worn an expression of sadness
from the beginning, but, as she spoke, this expression became
intensified, and she looked utterly woe-stricken and wretched. I
felt very much for her, and asked if it was absolutely necessary
for her to go to town then, and she replied that it was, for she


could think of the city only as a place of refuge, and expressed a
wish to reach it as soon as possible.
? I would have at once asked her into my house, but I really felt
a sense of delicacy too strong to be overcome at the moment, and,
moreover, all the members of the household had retired to rest.
The thought occurred to me, too, that perhaps I was mistaken in
the estimate I had formed of her, and that she was not such a
person as I should admit to my house. I therefore refrained
from inviting her in, so we remained silent. After a little, how-
ever, she said : ?? I feel very unwell, and have felt so all day.
My head is aching very violently; my sight, too, seems impaired;
objects that I know are near me appear distant, and I constantly
hear a sound, a solemn sound like that of a death-bell, far away
in the distance !?
? I told her that it was the moaning of the wind, and not to
mind what she heard or fancied that she heard. All the time
that she had been speaking she appeared as if listening to some-
thing or someone some distance from us; then suddenly, as if she
saw something in the road that frightened her, she moved towards
me, and, shuddering, seemed to be gazing at some object invisible
to me. After a little, however, she asked me if the road led
direct to the city, and I said that it did. Then thanking, me she
bade me good-night, and walked on. I gazed after her, and, as I
watched her slight form contending against the blast, I thought
of my own dear daughter, and asked myself if she were in a
similar position what would I say of the father, who, though
stranger he might be, would suffer her to pass his inhospitable
door at such a hour, and on such a night, to seek for a lodging in
a strange and distant city. The consequence of this reflection
was that the parental feelings overcame all others, so I ran after
the stranger, and, touching her on the shoulder, said that I did
not like the idea of her going along the lonesome road at such an
hour by herself. ?lam a husband and father,? said I, ? with a
daughter apparently not much younger than yourself, and can
therefore speak to you as your own father might, so, I beg
in the name of my wife and daughters, to offer you the shelter
protection of my roof. Pray return with me and stop at my
house until the morning. My wife and family, it is true, have
retired to rest, but I am certain that I may assure you, on their
behalf, that they will be only too happy to learn in the morning
that you accepted my invitation. Return with me, then, and I
will call up one of the servants to wait on you.? She looked up
in my face with evident surprise and gratitude, then placing her
hand in mine, in a manner so childlike and confiding, that my
heart at once warmed towards her.


?We then walked back to the gate, but as we were about to
enter she seized my arm, and, stopping me, pointed to the
entrance, at the same time saying, ? Look ! Do you not see some-
thing there, between us and the gate V
? I looked in the direction she had indicated, and I saw the
shadowy, tremulous outlines of a female form, indistinct, but
sufficiently clear to convince me of its unmistakeable presence-
It was white, or rather grey, and vapoury, and appeared to be a
middle-aged woman, white-haired, wan-faced, dim, shadowy, and
wavering with the winds. I gazed at it for some moments,
scarcely knowing what to think or say, when suddenly a gust of
wind of unusual violence swept across the road and enveloped us
in a cloud of dust. The gate, as you are aware, is a double one
of iron, and the half, the left as you enter, had been lying open,
as wide open as possible, but I heard it shut violently,'and then
the sound of what seemed to be a large mass of building falling,
and next a faint cry or sob in a female voice. I really thought
that the house, or a portion of it, had fallen, and that the cry
had been uttered by some member of my family. I was so cer-
tain of this that I was about to rush forward, when the wind
lulled and the dust discontinued. Then I saw the house in its
usual state. ? She is gone !? said my companion, ? did you see
her f ? See whom V I asked, not wishing to add to her terror
by confirmation on my part of what she had evidently seen, and
at the same time desiring to ascertain if she, as well as I, had
beheld the same identical object, so I said, ? See whom ? ? The
elderly lady with the white face and white hair,? she replied.
? Why !? I said, ? did you see such a person T ? Yes,? she
answered, ? I did, and I know that it was my mother whom I
saw.? ? Your mother,? said I, ? does she reside about here V
? She is dead,? replied the girl with a sob. ?She is dead, never-
theless she has been here just now, and has followed me all this
evening. I assure you that what I say is true.?
?I need scarcely tell you,? continued Mr. Willdred, ?that I
was astonished at what I had both seen and heard, but, without
replying, I led the stranger to the gate, when we found it shut
with the latch down on the fastening. It could not have been
the wind that shut it, for it was blowing in, not out, through
the entrance.
? I opened the gate, however, then we proceeded up the avenue
to the house, and as we were about to enter the porch we saw the
same shadowy form on our right, upon the gravel walk. The
girl?s arm was leaning on mine, and I could feel her tremble
excessively, but moving away from me towards the shadowy
object, whatever it was, she extended her hands and was evi-
dently about to address it when it raised its arm, and, pointing


down the avenue, faded away like morning mist before the sun,
and swiftly disappeared.
? Let me digress here to ask, what was it 1 Was it a creature of
mere imagination 1 It may have been only such, but why should
both have imagined the same identical thing 1 She said that it
was her dead mother, and that it had followed her all the night.
Well, if I believed this statement, and the testimony of my own
senses, how could I doubt the reality of the apparition 1 I could
not do so, and I am satisfied that we both beheld some being
belonging to another state of existence than this. I had never
believed in the supernatural, nor thought it possible for the
departed to return to earth. I have, however, changed my
opinion, and am satisfied that upon that occasion I saw a being
who had passed from earthly existence. I may state chat I did
not experience the least alarm, but I regretted that it did not
speak, if, indeed, it could speak, but I am disposed to think that
it did not possess the power.
? What I have related will, doubtless, appear most strange, if
not absolutely absurd, to you; nevertheless it is true, and though
you may attribute it all to imagination, or to deception of some
sort or other, I will still assert and retain my present opinion
respecting the circumstance. But to return to the stranger.
?We entered the house, and, proceeding to this room, I placed
her in a chair by the side of the fire. She was in a pitiable
state, poor thing, and wept bitterly, so I said that I would call
up my wife. This, however, the stranger would not hear of,
imploring me not to disturb the family on her account, saying
that she would much rather depart than cause any trouble to the
household. Yielding, then, to her entreaties, I abandoned my
intention, and, procuring some light refreshment, a glass of wine
and a biscuit, for her, I sat down on the opposite side of the
fireplace. We remained thus for some short time, during which
she frequently repeated, ?My mother, my mother ; yes it was
she, oh !it was she !? I said that, perhaps, after all, it was only
imagination, that it was a significant fact that all those sort of
things occurred at night, when the imagination is strongest, or at
least less liable to be distracted than during the turmoil of the
busy day. ?Yes,? she replied, ?that may be so in the majority
of cases, but I am satisfied that, in this instance, imagination
had nothing whatever to do with what I saw.? She then com-
plained of violent headache, and expressed a wish to retire to
rest if I would kindly show her where she was to sleep. I
accordingly took her to the room which used to be occupied by
my brother before he returned to England, and there I left her,
having first shown her how to secure the door, and told her that
I would send my wife to her first thing in the morning. But as


I was about to leave her she took my hand in hers, and said ;
? I thank you from the depth of my wretched and breaking
heart for your great goodness to me in affording me shelter and
protection for the night. I feel more deeply grateful than lam
able to express, but, if I live, I shall endeavor to make some
return for the disinterested and fatherly kindness which you
render me, a lonely stranger. I would, and perhaps should, tell
you now a little of my history, and say who I am ; but I assure
you that I am not at present equal to the task, for I am weary
beyond measure, and my head is aching to distraction. I will,
however, inform you that I am married, and a mother, and have
been abandoned for sometime by my husband, who, I have reason
for believing, was already a married man when he beguiled me
into an union with him, or that he is about to marry another
lady in this locality. I will, however, tell you my whole history
in the morning, but for the present I can say no more. I am
absolutely exhausted, and worn out by fatigue and anxiety.?
She again took my hand in hers, and as she held it, I noticed a
scar or an old wound on her left wrist; and, seeing me observe it,
she said, ? It was caused by the bite of a horse, and was very
severe. The wrist was fractured, but skilfully set by the doctor,
who, strange to say, was killed by a horse soon after.?
? This conversation occurred at the door of the bedroom, at the
extremity of the right wing of the house, and which is occupied
by the servants. I then bade her good-night, and left her.
When I passed down the hall or passage, in which, by-the-by,
some old bridles belonging to my brother were hanging on a rack
against the wall, I walked out on the verandah, and, shutting
the passage door, I turned to the right to ascertain if her
chamber window was fastened, and then I observed, through the
space between the side of the blind and the window sash, that
she was kneeling, in prayer I presume, by the side of the bed. I
then entered the house, and coming to the library drank a glass
of wine, after which I sat down by the fire, with my face towards
the door, which was half open. The wine which I had drunk
rendered me drowsy I imagine, for I fell into a state which can
be best described as neither waking nor sleeping, that state in
which a person is faintly conscious of his position and surround-
ings. While in this state I fancied that a shadow fell along the
hall outside the door, and that a face then appeared there and
immediately vanished. This was more like a dream than a
reality, and so very faint and dim were the incidents of both the
shadow and the face that they failed to rouse me out of the
drowsy condition in which I was. How long I remained in this
state I cannot exactly say, but suddenly I was recalled to full
consciousness by a noise as if someone were gently closing the


back door, or rather as if they had done so, and that I had heard
the sound in my sleep or half-waking slumber. I listened for a
short space, then rising from my seat I walked down the hall to the
back door, and found it shut but neither locked nor bolted. I then
opened it, and, going out on the verandah, looked around the yard,
but nothing was stirring. All was as usual, except that the wind
had increased and was blowing with greater force than ever. I
then re-entered the house, and, having turned off the gas, took a
candle from the hall table, and went to my bedroom where IVI rs,
Willdred was asleep. I divested myself of my coat and boots,
but it occurred to me that I had left some very important letters
lying on my desk, so I put ray feet into my slippers and coming
here I locked up the letters, and, having arranged some other
papers, I returned to my bedroom. After I had been there for a
short time the circumstances of the shadow in the hall and the
face at the door recurred to my memory with greater force than
when they had occurred. The noise, too, of the back door shut-
ting, or rather its remembrance, came back to my mind with
redoubled power and distinctness, and it was only then that I
realised the true significance of all the incidents, and correctly
comprehended them. The consequence was that I became
thoroughly satisfied that they had really occurred, and I could
not refrain from associating them with the stranger whom I had
admitted to my house. The result of this reflection was that I
drew on my coat and went directly to the door of the passage, off*
which her chamber was located, but, on attempting to turn the
handle of the lock, I found it moist and consequently slippery.
I paid small attention to this at the moment, as I thought the
dew had caused the wet condition of the handle, so wiping my
hand in the skirt of my coat, an old grey frock, I seized the
handle again, but on turning it found that the door was fastened.
I then went to the window, and, on listening, I heard the
stranger muttering, as if talking in her sleep, and thinking that
she was quite safe, and the shadow, the face, and the noise at the
back door, had all been imaginary, I returned to my bedroom and
went to bed.
? I arose somewhat earlier than usual this morning, as so also
did Mrs. Willdred, and, while dressing, I related the incident of
the strange lady, but said nothing about the apparition, not wish-
ing to alarm my wife, who was very much pleased by my having
afforded shelter to the unknown girl, and said that when she had
completed her toilet she would go and see our stranger-guest.
We were then about to leave the room when Mis. Willdred
exclaimed, ? My goodnesss, Arthur, what stain is that which 1
see on your coatl It looks like blood.? lat once examined the
stain to which she pointed, and I saw that it was indeed blood.


I could not for the life of me imagine how it came there, and 1
said so, but thought no more about it at the time and changed
the garment. Mrs. Willdred then left the room, but in a short
time returned in a state of great alarm, and said that there was
blood on the verandah outside the room occupied by the stranger,
and all across the yard as far as the small side gate; that the handle
of the passage door was smeared with blood, and that they had
not been able to open the door ; that she and one of the servants
had repeatedly knocked on the door and tapped on the window,
but received no reply. She then requested me to come out at
once and examine the place.
? The bloodstain on my coat was now accounted for. I recol-
lected the circumstance of the slippery handle and the fact of
my having wiped my hand on my coat, but I could not account
for the presence of the blood on the handle and about the yard.
Mrs. Willdred and I then went into the hall where we found Mr.
Truman, the head manager in our firm, for it is his invariable
custom to come over to breakfast with us every mail morning,
and I related the circumstances of the previous night to him,
except the one relating to the apparition, and I showed him the
bloodstains on my coat. Mrs. Willdred, he, a servant, and I
then went to the door of the passage leading to the stranger?s
room, but we found the door fastened from within, while traces
of blood were abundantly visible in every direction, indicating
that some shocking crime had been committed. Having wiped
the handle of the lock I pushed the door, which, after a little,
yielded a few inches, but we found on examination that it was
held fast below by the bit of a bridle which had, by some means,
become wedged between the door and the flooring. We suc-
ceeded, however, in removing this obstacle, and on entering the
passage we perceived indications similar to the sanguinary evi-
dences which we had just observed outside. The passage, in fact
was deluged with blood. We went down the passage, I leading'
and entered the bedroom, but found it tenantless ; our guest had
disappeared. The bed appeared as if she had merely lain on, not
in, it, for the bed-clothing was undisturbed and tucked in all
round. There are no curtains, nor is there any place for them on
the bedstead. ? She is gone,? I exclaimed, and turning to the
maid I asked if she missed anything from the room, for I had
begun to fear that I had been imposed upon by the stranger.
?No sir,? said the girl, ?I miss nothing out of the room.? She
then passed up between the bed and the wall, but stopping
suddenly she exclaimed with a shudder, ?Merciful powers, pre &
serve us ! what does this mean 1 Look here, sir ?? and she
pointed to the floor. We at once went around to the side on
which she stood, and we saw a female hand, the left, which had


been severed from the wrist, or rather with a portion of the
wrist, and a wedding ring on the finger, lying in a clot of blood
on the floor. I have since identified the hand by the scar on the
wrist as that of the stranger whom I admitted last night.
? We were, of course, horrified by the ghastly spectacle, and
left the room, without disturbing anything in it, and having
locked the door I requested Mr. Truman to go for you. You
have seen and examined the place, and now let me ask, what do
you think of this horrible affair 1 Has the poor lady been mur-
dered or mutilated and carried away by some monster, or
monsters, actuated by some hideous, some devilish motives 1 She
was, I am certain, in the room when I attempted to open the
door, for I heard her mutter, as I thought, in her sleep, while it
may be she was at the moment engaged in a death struggle with
her inhuman assailer or assailers. Would to God that I had
forced in the door then.
?Well, now, Inspector Ridgeway, I have stated every particle of
what occurred to me here last night, so far at least as relates to
the unfortunate stranger, every tittle. No, by my honor, I have
not. I forgot to mention one fact, which is this. I stated that
the apparition which we saw raised its arm and pointed down the
avenue, just-before it disappeared; well, at that moment, some
person, a man in light-colored clothes, passed the gate, but I have
no idea of his identity.?
Such was the statement of Mr. Willdred, Mr. Arthur
Willdred, of the firm of ? Lovegrist and Another,? Mr.
Willdred being the ? Another.? What was Ito think of it 1
Was it not more like the ravings of a lunatic than the truthful
utterances of a sensible, an unusually intelligent man of business
and of the world 1 The incident of the apparition was absurd,
ridiculous, and the whole narrative a fabrication of the flimsiest
character. So the wise people said when they had heard it. As for
myself, however, I believed every word that Mr. Willdred had
uttered, even including what he had said about the apparition.
I myself had, upon more than one occasion, both seen and heard
appearances and sounds for which up to the present I cannot
account on any natural grounds. I may, it is true, have been
deceived by my imagination or senses, and so may he by his; but
it is very strange that both he and the lady should have imagined,
without previous mutual communication, the very identical
object. Still there might have been a coincidence of fancy, and
the affair, after all, a mere hallucination or a fabrication. Still,
though I believed his narrative as far as it went, had he imparted
all that he knew, and was my faith in his statement to prevent
me from suspecting himself as the culprit 1 No, certainly not.
He might have stated all truth, but not all the truth, and there


might be a portion, the most important, untold. Well, then, did
I suspect him ? Did I believe that he had been guilty of one
horrible crime, and, in order to conceal it, had he committed
another 1 Could I harbor such a thought of him whom I had
known for at least a quarter of a century, almost since his boy-
hood, for he was not more than six or seven and forty '( Could I
harbor such a suspicion against such a man, one who was deser-
vedly respected, honored and beloved in the neighborhood, and
against whose fair fame as much as a detracting whisper never
had been heard in the district nor in the city 1 How could I
suspect such a man of being guilty of such a crime or crimes as
those which suggested themselves to my imagination 1 All this
occurred to my mind while he was repeating his narrative, and
when he had concluded I knew not what to think.
Such were my reflections, and now, before I deal with my pro-
ceedings on the morning of the shocking discovery, I will say a
little about the Willdred family.
Mr. Willdred was a tall and an exceedingly well-made man,
strong, indeed, remarkably powerful and active. He was of dark
complexion, with very black curling hair, flowing beard, and
heavy moustache. His eyes were large, dark and lustrous, being
replete with kindliness, while all his other features equally
excellent. His head was a grand and noble one, without the
least, the faintest indication of criminal tendency, and altogether
he was as fine and handsome a man as one could wish to see. As
for Mrs. Willdred, she was in every respect even more than his
equal in personal appearance, for she was a most exquisitely
lovely creature and good and amiable as beautiful, and, so far as
complexion went, she resembled him, being dark-haired and dark-
eyed. They were devotedly attached to each other, and more
frequently together than any other couple in the neigborhood.
Indeed, all his time, except that occupied by his business, was
spent with her and their children. Their family consisted of six,
three boys and three girls. The eldest of these children was a
son, aged about one or two and twenty, and was with his grand-
father in England. The second child was a daughter about
eighteen, a most beautiful and accomplished girl. The third was
also a daughter even more beautiful than her sister. Their
names were respectively Gertrude and Stella, and I do believe
that it would not be possible to find two more marvellously lovely
and fascinating creatures. The next child was a son, also with
his grandfather in England, and the other two children were
attending school here. All the children were indeed very beauti-
ful, but the father and mother being remarkable for. personal
attractions it is not surprising that their offspring should be so
charming.


Mr. Willdred was the second son of a very wealthy Eng
lish merchant long since retired from business, and had come
with his young wife, many years ago, to Australia, for the benefit
of her health, and had settled there permanently. Such were
the Willdred family, but it may be well to say a little
about the servants. There were five females, a cook, three house-
maids, and Mrs. Wildred?s maid, or, it would be more correct to
call her ? companion,? Emma Wilson, a very beautiful and
unusually well educated young girl, who had been with the
family since her childhood, and who was regarded by them more
as a relative than as a servant or dependent. The other
domestics had also been with the family for a number of years.
There had been a coachman, but he had left a few days before
the outrage had been committed at Lilyfield. There was also a
gardener, who, with his wife, resided in a small cottage at the
extremity of Mr. Willdred?s paddock, and there were other men
employed about the grounds, but they lived some distance away.
All these persons, except one, were well-known by the police, and
bore irreproachable characters; but we know nothing about the
coachman who had left except that he had been in Mr. Willdred?s
service for a short time and had voluntarily relinquished his
place.
I will now briefly describe the house. It was a villa, with
a verandah extending along the front and continuing down
both sides to the middle of each, where it terminated at two
walls which extended out across the garden on each side of the
house to a fence enclosing the two sides of the front garden. As
for the rear, as you stood at the back-door and looked out, the
stables at the end of the yard intervened between you and the
garden, and a broad verandah ran along the rear as in the front,
continuing down two wings, which extended at right angles from
the main building to nearly as far as the stables. The bedrooms
of the servants were located in the right wing, and the room
which had been occupied by the strange lady was the last room in
this wing or range. The opposite wing comprised the kitchen,
pantries, etc. A high brick wall continued from the right wing,
and in this wall the large wooden gate was situated. This gate
was only ten feet from the room in which the stranger had been
placed. Opposite this gate, and of course on the other side of
the yard, there was a smaller gate, which admitted to Mr Will-
dred?s paddock, an extensive allotment of land. The whole
premises are situated between two roads, the main or River
Road, and the back or Church Road. The church, as everyone
knows, is situated on the latter, and upon a hill almost directly
behind Mr. Willdred?s residence. The parsonage is lower down
on the side of the hill, and faces the road. About half-a-mile


below the parsonage, and on the same side of the road, Mr.
Truman?s house comfortably nestles among a grove of trees; and
beyond this again is the handsome mansion of a good old gentle-
man residing with a housekeeper and one servant. Mr. Will-
dred?s property extends from a short distance above his own
house down between the two roads as far as this old gentleman?s
residence, opposite to which it terminates.
I have now described the place, or places, to the best of my
ability, and will only add that Mr. Truman?s place is called the
? Grange,? and the old gentleman?s, ? Rosebank.?
When Mr. Willdred made his statement he spoke without the
least hesitation or evidence of confusion, and appeared most
anxious for the detection of the criminal or criminals.
Mrs. Willdred, from the first moment I saw her, seemed to be
utterly stunned with horror, as also did Mr. Truman, while
Emma Wilson evinced the least concern of all.
When Mr. Willdred had concluded I asked him if he had at
any time previous seen the strange lady, but he said he never
had. I asked him if he suspected anyone, and he replied, ?No,
not a human being in the world.? 1 asked Mrs. Willdred if
she had heard any unusual noise through the night, but she had
not. I requested to know Mr. Truman?s opinion of the matter,
but all he could say was that it astonished, horrified him, I then
turned to Emma Wilson, and asked her if she had observed any-
thing unusual about the place during the preceding night or day,
and she replied as follows :
? Well, Mr. Inspector, I was the first up in the house this
morning, as I generally am, and entered the front, or main,
portion of the house as I always do enter it, that is through the
door which leads into the nursery hall, as we call it. 1 then
went down the great hall to the hall-door and found it only
closed, not absolutely shut, but the outer door, that is the door of
the porch, was fastened. I was greatly surprised on finding the
hall-door unsecured, for I do not recollect having ever seen it
unlocked and unbolted in the morning before, I naturally con-
cluded that the master had forgotten to secure it the previous
night, and I thought no more about the matter. I then went
into the porch and out on the steps, where I noticed some yellow
clay and gravel, apparently left there by some person?s feet. I
fancied that some member of the family had been in the paddock
the previous evening and got the yellow clay there on their boots,
and having come up the garden path the gravel adhered to their
feet and that both clay and gravel had been knocked off by
stamping on the verandah steps. The footprints were quite dis-
tinct, but having a sweeping brush in my hand, and, without
giving the matter a moment?s consideration, I swept the soil


down on the path, and so removed all traces of the feet, lam
satisfied that the person who committed the horrible crime came
through the hall-door, and that it was his shadow and face which
the master saw last night. I am certain, too, that it was no
stranger to the house who committed the crime.?
? Did you hear any noise last night of an unusual character
after you had gone to bed ?? I asked.
? Well, I could not have said then that I did,? she replied.
? Now, however, 1 am sure that I did ; I will explain myself
a little, I was awoke by the sound of feet passing down
the verandah, then I heard the master say, ? This way, please,?
but I heard nothing more till the back door closed, and I
thought that it was Mr. Willdred locking up the house as
usual. I then settled myself to sleep, and I think I had fallen
into a light slumber when I heard a loud noise like that pro-
duced by the blow of a hammer on a board, and next, what I am
now satisfied must have been a groan, though which at that
time I thought was one of the horses snorting in the stable, I
also fancied that the sound like the blow of the hammer was
caused by some of the horses kicking. Some nights they are
more restless than on others, and then we hear them distinctly.
The master himself knows this, and has repeatedly said that he
would have the stables taken down and built further back from
the house. At the time that I heard the noises I did not think
them unusual, but now lam certain that they were. This is all
that I know of the horrible affair, but I repeat my belief that
the person who committed the crime is no stranger to the
house,?
?Well,? I said, ?do you suspect any person??
At this moment a servant entered and said that Brooks, the
coachman who had recently left, desired to see the master.
? Let him come in,? said Mr. Willdred, and in a few moment
Brooks appeared.
?You wish to see me?? said his late employer.
? Yes, sir, I do,? replied Brooks, ? I wish to speak to you
privately, if you please.?
?Is it anything about this shocking affair of last night that
has brought you here?? said Mr. Willdred. ?If it is, and
you have anything to say concerning it, say it now, here in the
presence of this police officer.?
? I would much rather speak to you privately, sir,? said
Brooks, in a respectful but firm tone. ?It might be better, per-
haps,?


? No,? said Mr. Willdred, ?it might not be better ; I repeat,
if you have anything to say relating to the crime committed here
last night, say it to this officer and not to me.?
? But, sir,? remonstrated Brooks, ? I am certain that it would
be much better.?
? I tell you no,? exclaimed Mr. Willdred, ? and I desire you to
speak out before this officer. Do you hear me ? Speak, and let
all hear all that you have got to say, if it relates to the crime
committed here last night.?
? Well, sir, it does,? answered Brooks in a quiet and respectful
voice, ?so as you order me to speak here I will do so, and tell
the truth, but nothing more.?
? Last night I met two friends or acquaintances on the Rive r
Road, about a hundred yards above this place, where we re-
mained talking for some time, when one of them said that he
wished we had a glass of something to drink, that he was sorry
the publichouse was too far away to go to it, for by the time we
would reach it the bar would be closed. I remembered then
that I had left a bottle of rum in the loft in your stable, and I
said if they came back with me, and helped me to cross the gate, 1
would get the liquor. They consented, and we went to the gate,
the large, or carriage gate, as it is called, and one of them stooped,
so that I might mount on his back, which I did, and was about
to climb over, but at that instant I saw a man carrying a woman
or a girl across the yard, over to the small gate that leads into
the paddock. Well, sir, he carried her to the gate, which he
opened and lifted her through, then shutting it he disappeared.
That is what I saw last night in the yard, sir, and what I had to
relate to you.?
? Do you know the man whom you saw 1? asked Mr. Willdred,
eyeing Brooks keenly.
? I do sir, yes, I can swear to him,? replied Brooks, ? but I
would rather not mention his name at present, at least not in this
company.?
?You must mention it now,? said Mr. Willdred, somewhat
fiercely. ? You shall not leave this, except in custody, till you
mention it. Who was the man whom you saw last night carry-
ing the girl across the yard ! Speak.? Brooks remaining silent,
looked at Mr. Willdred, at Mrs. Willdred, at Mr. Truman, at me,
at Emma Wilson, and still remained silent.
? Did you hear me 1? exclaimed Mr. Willdred, ?who was the
man, the monster, whom you saw last night, as you have said T
?Well, sir,? replied Brooks, looking calmly at Mr. Willdred,
?if I must tell, I must. You, yourself, sir, are the man.?


If a thunderbolt had fallen in the room it could not have pro-
duced more astonishment among those present, than did these
words of Brooks. Mr. Willdred fairly gasped with apparent
amazement, but became deathly pale. Mrs. Willdred sank into a
chair and remained speechless and motionless for a few minutes,
then recovering herself she arose and said to Brooks?
? This is a mistake, you did not see Mr. Willdred last night as
you have said, you are altogether wrong.?
? No, my love,? said Mr. Willdred ; ? he did not see me as he
has said, for the simple reason that he could not have seen me,
because I carried no person, man, woman, or child, across the
yard last night, or on any other night or day, except one of my
own children occasionally. You may have seen someone do as
you say, Brooks, but most assuredly you did not see me. What
description of clothing did I wear ??
? The old grey frock-coat that you usually wear about the
place, sir, light coloured trousers, and a black wide-awake hat,?
replied Brooks in the same respectful manner, and then he con-
tinued with great firmness?
? I am not mistaken, sir, I am certain as that I am looking at
you now, that I saw you and no other as I have said I saw you;
and if I did not, why then, I do not see you now. But, sir, I
wish you to understand that though I have spoken on this matter
as I have done, I have no feeling whatever against you, or any of
the family, quite the reverse. I always liked and respected you
and them. I didn?t like the servants, though, they were too stand-
off and uppish for me ; they seemed to think themselves my
superiors because they have been so long with the family, I
suppose, and were quite too good for me, or the like of me. This
was the reason why I left your service, sir. I suppose I may go
now.?
? You said you had two friends with you last night; did they
also see Mr. Willdred ?? I asked.
? No,? he replied, ? they did not, they couldn?t, except they
could see through a brick wall, or a strong wooden gate. I told
them though that I saw him carrying a woman across the yard,
and I said at the same time that after what I had seen I would
never trust any man when a woman was in the question.
Mrs. Willdred grew very pale as Brooks spoke, but Mr. Will
dred merely smiled, while Mr. Truman?s countenance was the per-
fect exponent of astonishment, but an expression of incredulity
mingled with one of scorn flushed the beautiful face of Emma
Wilson.
? What do you propose to do, Inspector 1? said Mr. Willdred.
?The time is passing, and every moment may place an obstacle in


the way of discovery. I beg of you to employ all means that
money can command to unveil this most horrible mystery. Spare
no expense, I will gladly defray it all, and I will authorise you
to make it publicly known that I will give a large reward for such
information as will lead to the conviction of the criminal or the
criminals. I will at once intimate as much to the Government.?
? You may rest assured, sir,? I replied, ? that I will do all that
possibly can be done, to bring the guilty party or parties to jus-
tice, and I have no doubt that, in a short time, I will be success-
ful. If the lady is living, she will doubtless communicate with
you, for her gratitude for your kindness to her will force her to
do so; and if she is dead, if she has been murdered, it will be
difficult for her murderer or murderers to dispose of the body
without leaving some trace, so that in either case we shall, I
think, soon come at the bottom of the terrible affair.?
? As to the statement just made by Brooks, here, I believe it
all, except that he has been mistaken in the identity of the man
whom he saw, for I am quite satisfied that you, sir, were not the
individual.?
? I suppose then that I can go now,? said Brooks, addressing
me, ? I have told all that I know.?
? Not yet,? I replied. ? Who were the persons with whom
you were last night 1?
? I don?t care for telling that,? he answered, ? I might get them
into trouble, at least one of them.?
? You will have to tell us,? I said, ? and moreover account for
where you spent the evening, and the night. But who were your
companions 1?
? Please dont ask me to tell you,? said he, ? I would rather
not. They are respectable persons, I assure you.?
? The less reason you have then for withholding their names,?
said 1. ? Who are they 1 Should you not tell now, we shall
soon find a way for making you do so.?
? Well then, Mr. Inspector,? replied he, hesitatingly, ? One of
them was Mr. George Kingston, who, as you know, has a situation
in Mr. Willdred?s office in town.? Then he paused and looked in
my face steadily.
? And the other,? said I, ? was??
?Your own son Alfred, Mr. Inspector,? said he, in a manner
and tone quite indescribable. ? Your own son Alfred,? he
repeated as if he felt particular pleasure in disclosing the fact,
notwithstanding his former apparent reluctance to divulge it. I
was taken aback by this announcement, but recovering my com-
posure, I asked him if he knew where the young men had been.


? Yes,? he answered, ? they told me they had been to a party,
or a hop, as they called it, at old Brown?s, on the hill on the
other side of the River Road. They were a little merry, that s
all, and when they met me they said, ? Hey Brooks, old man, is
this you 1 where can we get a glass of something to drink 1 The
pub is too far away, and, besides, it would be closed by the time
we reached it.? But I have already told you all that passed
between us.?
? Did you cross the gate at all last night 1? I asked him.
?No sir, I did not,? he replied ; ? I told them that Mr. Wilb
dred was about, as I have stated before; then Mr. Kingston said,
? Oh, has he not gone to bed yet, for goodness? sake let us get
away from this, for if the boss catches me here at this hour it
will be a case of ? sack ? with me in the morning.? So we all
went away, and as they had to pass my place they saw me home,
saw me go into my own house, where, of course, I spent the
night.?
?You have told us all that you know about this affair of last
night 1? 1 said.
?Yes, sir,? he replied, ? all, every word, so I suppose I may go
now.?
? Not yet,? I said, ? Come to the stable and show me where
you placed the rum.? We then proceeded to the stable, and
ascending to the loft we found the bottle of liquor where he had
concealed it. ?That will do,? I said, when we had come down.
?You may go now.?
I then returned to the library and told Mr. Willdred that I
would make another search of the premises. I had, of course,
done so on my arrival, and had left a constable in charge of the
room where the outrage had been committed and another officer
in the yard.
We accordingly made a further search, and in the paddock
immediately outside the side wall of the front garden we found a
carpenter?s hatchet greatly stained with blood. We also found a
lady?s pockethandkerchief with drops of blood on it, but no other
marks. Further on, consequently closer to the River Road,
we discovered a lady?s hat, a dark-colored one with a light feather
in it. Mr. Willdred at once identified this as the hat worn by
the strange lady.
? We have struck upon three links of the chain,? said I to Mr.
Willdred, ?and, doubtless, we shall make the chain complete.
First and foremost, however, let us examine the hatchet, as it
was the first link found.? We did so, and saw that it was
randed with a ? J? and a ?T.?


? These letters stand for James Turner,? said Mr. Willdred,
?the carpenter who has been working about the place for the last
week or two. Yes, this is his hatchet, lam sure, for I saw him
use it at the front of the house yesterday. And, stay, he has
not been here to-day, and he is a large man about my own
size, and wears light-colored clothes. Yes, indeed, the coat
which he had on yesterday was one which I had given him some
short time ago. But it is impossible that he could be the culprit,
for he is a man of most excellent character.?
?He is, sir,? said I, ?and one of the last men in the country
whom I would suspect of the crime, or indeed, of any crime.
However, we shall hunt him up presently, and see what he was
about last night, though I have not the least expectation of
finding the culprit in him.?
We then came out on the River Road, and as we proceeded
towards Mr. Willdred?s entrance gate we saw young Kingston
and my son going up the avenue to the house. They had, on
their way to town, met Brooks, who had, they subsequently
informed me, communicated to them all that he had related to us
at Mr. Willdred?s. The consequence was, that they considered it
prudent to go directly to Mr. Willdred and state all that they
knew about the mysterious affair, which certainly was not much
in favor of Mr. Willdred. However, they went to the house
where we overtook them at the hall-door, and we all proceeded t�
the library, where they related further evidence tending to
criminate Mr. Willdred. As the statements of both young men
were precisely similar I will give their narratives as one.
They said they had left the party at Mr. Brown?s to accompany
some young ladies home, who resided in the neighborhood, and
having done so they were proceeding up the River Road when
young Kingston called the attention of his companion to some
person, a man, walking at some distance before them, but the
night being stormy, and the dust rolling down the road in great
clouds, now and then concealed the individual from their view.
At first Kingston thought it was I whom they saw, and stated so
to my son, but he said, ? Ko, that cannot be, for the old man is
up country and will not be back till morning.? I may state that
Mr. Willdred and myself are pretty equal in height and size.
However, as they advanced they came to the conclusion that the
person before them was Mr. Willdred, but if they still enter-
tained any doubt it was dispelled, for when the person reached
Mr. Willdred?s place he entered the gate and went up the avenue
to the house. They then hastened on along the fence till they
reached the entrance gate, through which they cautiously looked,
and saw the person suddenly stoop at the porch-door and lift
something from the ground. They were not, at first, sure what


it was that he had picked up, but when he opened the hall-door
they saw by the light of the hall lamp that it was a hatchet, and
they wondered what he could require it for at such an hour. He
stood, they said, with the hall-door open for a few seconds, then
moving back into the porch he shut its glass door, without turn-
ing about to do so, and then he entered the hall and closed the
door. His movements were stealthy, and appeared to the young
men as very strange and mysterious. Such is the substance of
their statement. They admitted the correctness of Brooks?
account.
When I asked them if it were possible that they had been
mistaken as to the identity of the person whom they had seen,
they answered ? No,? and said they were absolutely positive that
it was Mr. Willdred who was there. I said they were in doubt
at first, and they admitted the fact, but said that when they saw
him standing at the hall-door, in the light from the hall lamp,
their doubt completely ceased, and they were convinced that the
person was Mr. Willdred and no other.
They spoke the truth, they said, and were sorry that they had
to speak it on such an occasion, but they.considered it their duty
to come forward as they had done. Moreover, as Brooks had
mentioned their names in connection with the matter, they
considered it only just to themselves to state all that they knew
about the affair. When they ceased speaking Mr. Willdred
smiled, sadly, I fancied, and, turning away with a sigh, he sat
down beside Mrs. Willdred, and remained silent for some time.
He looked very sorrowful, indeed, and never before appeared to
me so interesting and so handsome, though I had always re-
garded him as about the handsomest man I knew. He remained
silent for a considerable time, evidently sunk in profound thought;
but suddenly turning to Mrs. Willdred, he exclaimed, ? God bless
me ! Gertrude, if this affair should not be cleared up, T shall be a
ruined man, yes, ruined and disgraced.?
?You, Arthur, ruined and disgraced!? cried she, as she took
his hand and pressed it against her bosom, ?You ruined and
disgraced ! and how ??
? All the evidence up to this, ? he replied, ? points to only
one person as the perpetrator of this most atrocious crime, and
that person is myself.?
? Impossible,? cried Mrs. Willdred, ?impossible, I tell you, my
love, that if the whole world swore to it I would not believe it.?
? Banish the idle thought from your mind, Mr. Willdred,?
said Mr. Truman, ? you have no cause for fear. Your character
is beyond even suspicion, no man can suspect you of such a crime
as this, of any crime, however slight. No, sir, you are, indeed,


beyond the scope of suspicion and calumny. Make your mind
easy, then, my dear sir, on that score, for a bright and unclouded
character is your shield.? ? Yes, my dear Truman,? said Mr.
Willdred, ?what you say would be the case if every one knew
me as well as you know me, but they do not; and 0, Gertrude,
Gertrude ! what will the world say of me 1?
? Conscious innocence,? said Mrs. Willdred, ? can set the
world at defiance, and the happiness and consolation which come
of such innocence shall still be yours, and mine, no matter what
the world may say.?
At this moment one of the constables entered the room with a
slip of paper in his hand, and, addressing me, said, ? I beg par-
don, sir, for disturbing you, but I found this bit of paper folded
up at the foot of the bed in the room where the lady?s hand was
cut off,? and he gave me the paper, then withdrew. I took it
from him and read and re-read it, but could scarcely believe my
eyes, for in a bold, firm hand the following words had been
written on the paper :
? Dear Eva,
To-morrow, as usual,
Your loving husband,
A. Willdred.?
There was no date, the ink was faded and the paper old. I read
the words over and over, and as I read I felt my heart sink in
my bosom. ?Can it be possible,? I asked myself, ?that Willdred
is the villain that this scrap of paper would lead me to suppose 1?
?What is that, Inspector?? he asked, reaching forth his hand
for the paper, but I retained possession of it, and, holding it up
before me, said, ? Read it, sir.? He did so, at first to himself,
and then aloud, and then exclaimed ?
?Itis my own hand-writing, but I never wrote it. Great
powers above us, what does all this mean ! Am I dreaming, or
have I gone mad 1 Is there some magical, some Satanic power
at work to cause my destruction 1 Read it, Gertrude, Truman,
Emma, all read it. There it is for you.?
They did so, and the faces of all grew as white as the
dead, for each person was thoroughly acquainted with Mr.
Willdred?s writing. Mrs. Willdred tottered to a seat, and sank
down in a pitiable state, and Emma and Mr. Willdred went to
her assistance, while Mr. Truman, as white as a sheet, gazed
about the room in open-mouthed astonishment. At length Mrs.
Willdred became partially composed, and said?
? Arthur, what does this mean?this paper ??
? I pledge you my sacred word of honor, Gertrude,? he replied,
? I know no more about it than you yourself do. I would swear


that the writing is mine, yet I would and will, if necessary, swear
that it was never written by me. I never addressed any person
as ? Eva,? never had, and never will have any wife but you, my
own Gertrude. But this scrap of paper confounds me, over-
whelms me with astonishment.?
?Oh ! I know it all, Mr. Inspector,? said Emma, who was as
much privileged as any member of the family. ? I know all
about it now, lam sure. This is how it is. There is another
person of the master?s name, the strange lady was, or is, his
wife, he deserted her, she came to look for him here, in this
neighborhood, and he saw her but she did not see him, and, when
she entered this house with the master, he came up the avenue,
as your son and Mr. Kingston said, and finding the hatchet at
the door he picked it up, then entered the hall, and it was his
shadow and face that the master saw j then he got into her
bedroom, and, having done the cruel deed, he carried the poor
thing across the yard, as Brooks said, and so he took her away,
dead, I suppose, and perhaps threw her into the river. That is
the whole truth about the matter, I do believe.?
? Yes, Emma,? said Mr. Willdred, ? but how are we to ac-
count for the precise similarity of the writing ??
?Well, sir,? argued Emma, ?this other Mr. Willdred writes
exactly as you do. That?s the only way to account for it.?
Mr. Willdred merely smiled and said she was a good girl, then
added, addressing me?? Come, Inspector, let us make another
search, we may find some further evidence against myself,
perhaps, and, Truman, do you come too.?
We then re-searched the premises, but, finding nothing addi-
tional, I sent the constables away, and Mr. Truman and I soon
afterwards left together.
C W Burford, Printer, 548 Flinders Street, Melbourne.


? ?
V
:
*i * i)\ ' mh - v .* .. v fcj . -? .
i.
V V
4 ? * * i
f
s
, ? :/? .
.
L j|^
3 1508 00333569 7
