

PPf'rTv
ifjox \
No. CLXXXIV.
JUNE, 1866.
PAPERS
REI.ATIYK TO
THE WESLEYAN MISSIONS,
AND THE
STATE OF HEATHEN COUNTRIES
(published quarterly.)
o o E naTO\(,o W
W I \ v ' j
The Rev. Daniel James Draper was bora at 'Wickham, in
Hampshire, in the year 1810, and converted to God in the same village,
where his youthful piety and zeal are still remembered. He removed
when a very young man to Brecon in South Wales, the birth place of
the celebrated Dr. Coke, whose thirty years’ example of Missionary
toil and success he followed, for thirty years, and at the end of his
course, like him. found a grave in the ocean, there to rest until “ the
sea shall give up her dead.”


Soon after the Conference of 1835 he was called from his ordinary
occupation as a carpenter, and his useful labours as a Local Preacher,
for which he was eminently fitted by his natural ability and increasing
gifts, to enter on a higher and a wider sphere. He was appointed to
the Australian Mission which had been commenced twenty years
previously by Samuel Leigh, among whose coadjutors were the
lamented Walter La wry, whose last visit to England in the Mission
Ship, “John Wesley,” will be in the remembrance of many, George
Erskine, who was one of Dr. Coke’s Missionary companions to India,
Joseph Orton, who had suffered imprisonment in one of the persecutions
in Jamaica, and who was honoured to be the first preacher in Victoria,
John M'Kenny, who had laboured in Africa and Ceylon, with other
names, now, alas! no longer among the living; to which may be added,
Ralph Mansfield, and William Horton, who yet survive, but are no
longer in full and active service, and William Butters, who is recruiting
his health in England. This Mission, small in its commencement, has
so increased with the increase of the colonies, that the Australasian
Conference now numbers one hundred and forty-three Ministers,
including Supernumeraries and Probationers. To God be the praise !
It was Mr. Draper’s happiness to witness the extension of the work
of God in the Australian Colonies, and in the Islands of Polynesia.
In the accomplishment of that object he gave his share of faithful and
persistent labour.
After ten years’ “ pioneer toil ” in Paramatta, and other parts of New
South Wales, he was appointed to the charge of the Adelaide Circuit,
in South Australia. Among others associated with him in this Mission
was the Rev. Thomas T. N. Hull, now of Dublin, who was his colleague
for several years. By the blessing of God on their labours the Mission
prospei'ed beyond former precedent. Those were “ times of refreshing ”
in that colony, which are remembered to the present day with thankful-
ness to the “ Giver of all good.”
When Australasia was formed into a Conference under the superin-
tendence of the Rev. W. B. Boyce, and by the assistance of the late
Rev. Robert Young, as deputation from the Parent Society, Mr. Draper
was appointed to be Superintendent Minister of the Melbourne Circuit,
and Chairman of the Victoria District. Here Dr. Jobson found him
in 1860, surrounded by every indication of prosperity, almost unexam-
pled in the history of Methodism. That District was afterwards divided
into three Districts, which are now reported to contain thirty-three
Circuits, two hundred and forty-seven chapels, seventy-three other
preaching places, fifty-two Ministers, three hundred and ninety Local
Preachers, five hundred and sixty-six Class Leaders, eight thousand
and eighty-eight church members, with one thousand one hundred and
twenty-two on trial for membership, nineteen thousand seven hundred
and forty-one Sunday School scholars, six thousand six hundred and
seventy-seven day scholars, and forty-five thousand five hundred and
ninety-eight attendants on public worship.
From this scene of spiritual prosperity Mr. Draper took his departure
on a visit to England in 1865. The Rev. James S. Waugh, the
President of the Australasian Conference that year, and other promi-
nent Ministers and members of the Methodist Societies in the colonies,
presented addresses to him on the occasion of his departure, expressing
for him their highest respect and affection.
Nor was his presence at home less appreciated than in his adopted
country. The Sunday after his arrival in London he preached in Great
Queen-Street Chapel,—the Rev. Thomas Jackson and Dr. Hoole,
whose appointment it was, and the Rev. William Horton, being
among his audience, —with a measure of holy intelligence and Christian
affection, which seemed to account for all past success, and to give


promise of future usefulness in the discharge of his ministry,—a promise
fulfilled by frequent services in the same chapel and others in London,
as well as in many parts of Ireland and England, especially at the
Conferences in Cork and Birmingham. On the occasion of his last
attendance at the Missionary Committee prior to his departure, he
took part in the conversation which arose on the announcement of the
death of the late Rev. Robert Young, and seconded the resolution
proposed by Dr. Osborn, expressive of the high esteem the Committee
had entertained for that eminent man, both as a Missionary, and as
having held the highest office, and discharged its highest duties, both
at home and abroad. He then took an affectionate leave of the
Treasurers, Secretaries, and other members of the Committee, and was
commended to the Divine care and protection by fervent prayer.
A holy and useful life is often closed by a peaceful death. But this
is not always the case. God chooses the death by which His servants
shall glorify Him. John the Baptist, the faithful forerunner and
kinsman of our Lord, who had been honoured to baptize the Son of
God, and to witness the descent of the Holy Ghost, and to hear the
testimony of the Father, “ This is My beloved Son,” was beheaded in
prison, while his Lord was working miracles of infinite power in the
course of His Divine ministry, and could as easily have delivered him
as He afterwards delivered Peter. Stephen, filled with faith and
with the Holy Ghost, met with a sudden and violent death. Who can
enumerate the “ noble army of Martyrs ” of the Christian Church,
even of modern times P Some of ns can remember the fatal sufferings
of the Missionaries in the “Maria” mail boat in the West Indies; the
death of William Threlpall by the hands of savage men in Africa;
and the untimely end of the lamented John H. Bumby in the waters of
New Zealand. Daniel James Draper’s name may now be added to
the long list of those who have suffered in their Master’s cause, and
have been faithful unto death.
The fullest account of the last ministerial labours of Mr. Draper
among the passengers and crew who went down with the “ London ”
steam ship, when she foundered in the Bay of Biscay, will be found
in Dr. Jobson’s “Memorial Tribute,” entitled, “The Shipwrecked
Minister and his Drowning Charge.”
We last saw Mr. Draper when he came to take leave at the Mission
House on Saturday, December 30th, 1865. When we had commended
each other to the Divine protection and blessing, we congratulated him
that the severe weather had blown over, as it was a fine day after many
stormy ones. He expressed a hope it might be so, but did not appear
confident. The “ London ” steam ship, in which he had taken his
passage, had already left her moorings in the Thames, having nearly all
her passengers on board, but not Mr. Draper, or the Rev. Dr. Woolley,
as has been erroneously stated in some publications.
During their visits to London Mr. and Mrs. Draper had been enter-
tained at the house of the Rev. Dr. Jobson, to whom and Mrs. Jobson
they had shown hospitality in Australia on the occasion of Dr. Jcbson’s
appointment as Representative from the British Conference to the
Conference of Australasia; they were afterwards welcomed as guests
at his house _ by the Rev. W. Horton, one of Mr. Draper’s predecessors
in the Mission work in Australia; and on the eve of their departure
they visited Messrs. William and Alexander M‘Arthur, former associates
in Australia, and Mr. Walter Powell, their oldest Yictoria friend. On
Monday morning, January Ist, they bade their London friends fare-
well, and went by rail to Plymouth, to join the ship, which had experi-
enced tempestuous weather on her voyage down the Channel.
r On the arrival of the “ London ” at Plymouth on Friday, January
sth, our friends went on board; and, the weather being not unfavour-
able, the vessel immediately put to sea.


On Sunday, Divine service was held in the saloon, in which Dr.
Woolley took part with Mr. Draper.
On Monday and Tuesday severe weather was encountered; and on
Wednesday evening, January 10th, “ a mountain of water” fell suddenly
on the waist of the ship, swept away the main hatchway, flooded the
engine-room, extinguished the furnaces, and filled the lower decks.
Then it was the Captain expressed his fears, by saying to his men,
“ Boys, you may say your prayers.” At midnight Mr. Draper held a
prayer meeting in the saloon, thronged with the passengers and crew, —
Captain Martin snatching a few moments, now and then, to join the
worshippers, and then hastening to his place on deck. Many prayed
earnestly to God. Some fetched their Bibles, opened and read them
for Divine direction and comfort. And first one and then another went
up to the Minister in the midst of them, and said, “ Pray with me, Mr.
Draper.” (“ A request,” say the survivors, “ that was always complied
with.”) This faithful servant of the Lord for twenty-four hours was
incessantly engaged in exhorting and praying; he now went to and fro,
seeking to save those who were ready to perish, and crying aloud, “ O
God ! may those that are not converted be converted now,—hundreds
of them! ”
Shortly the awful announcement was made by the Captain, that there
was no hope; and friends with friends, and parents with children,
began to take a last farewell. Amidst all this, Mr. Draper cried, “ The
Captain of this sinking ship says, ‘ There is no hope ; ’ but the Captain
of our salvation says, ‘ There is hope for all that will flee to Him.’ ”
With tears of compassion streaming down his manly face, he sought
the salvation of all around him. He was eminently a man of prayer.
In many remarkable instances his prayers had been answered. Who
can doubt that those who now united with him in his dying intercessions
were heard, and accepted, and saved ? And would it not appear that
it was for the salvation of these hundreds of precious souls that this
man of God was permitted to lose his life along with them? He was
“ the messenger, the interpreter, one among a thousand,” whose labours
and prayers availed “ to save from going into the pit, that their life
might see the light.” (Job xxxiii. 23.)
For the remarkable narrative of which we have given a sketch, we
are indebted to the kind Providence which permitted nineteen persons
—officers, seamen, and passengers —to escape the sinking ship almost at
the last moment, and who, after twenty hours’ exposure, were received
on board a foreign vessel, and brought to England. A fact was stated
by one of these survivors, in which Mrs. Draper’s name occurs in a
connexion which is quite in accordance with her kindness of heart.
Observing that the men in the departing boat had no sufficient covering,
she handed them a rug, one which had been used by herself and her
husband. We are informed that one of the poor fellows retains the
rug, and would not part with it for any consideration. This is the
only mention of Mrs. Draper’s name; but we cannot doubt that by
her prayers and exhortations she assisted her husband in bringing
mauy souls to the saving knowledge of the Lord Jesus Christ, who
will be their “ crown of rejoicing in that day.”
Does not every collector for the Missions, and every contributor,
feel a satisfaction in contemplating the useful career of these servants
of God, and “ zeal for the salvation of souls which many waters
could not quench P ”
“ Give me Thy strength, Thou God of power ;
Then let winds blow, or thunders roar, «
Thy faithful witness will I be :
’Tis fixed, I can do all through Thee! ”
LONDON: PRINTED BY WILLIAM NICHOLS, 46, HOXTON SQUARE.
