

Jp—.
EEVIVALS OF EE1I6I0K:
THEIR PLACE AND POWER
IN THI
CHRISTIAN CHURCH.
BY THI
REV. ARCHIBALD N. MAC KRAY, M.A. ,
St. David’s Church, Ashfield.
SYDNEY :
JOHN L. SHERRIE F, PUBLISHER,
18 Wvjsivard Square.
1870.




EEYIYALS OF RELIGION:
THEIR PLACE AND POWER
IN THE
CHRISTIAN CHURCH.
BY THE
REV. ARCHIBALD N. MACKRAY , M.A. y
St. David’s Church, Ashfield.
S YDNEI :
JOHN L. SHERRIE F, PUBLISHER,
18 Wynyard Square.




PREFATORY NOTE.
The, following Lecture is given to the Press with considerable
reluctamce. Written, several months ago, for an Association
of Prtesbyterian Sunday School Teachers, the Author considered
that it had sufficiently served its purpose. Having, however,
recently given the substance of the Lecture to his own Congre-
gation, they have requested him, in such a way that he cannot
decline, to give it f urther publicity. The historical survey of
Religious Revivals, contained in the folloiving pages, although
embodying the results of considerable research and personal
observation, is necessarily brief and imperfect. Still, the
Author hopes that it may serve to encourage and confirm the
friends of Revival in his own Congregation, and possibly
beyond their circle, in praying and working for a present
‘time of refreshing from the presence of the Lord;' and he
is likewise glad to give, in this way, his humble aid to the
Special Religious Services recently initiated by the Presbytery
of Sydney.
Ash field, May, 1870.


“The Kingdom of Heaven suffereth violence, and the violent take
it hy force.” — Matt, xi., 12.
“ The Kingdom ot God cometh not with observation.’ —Luke,
xvii., 20.
“ God fulfils Himself in many ways,
Lest one good custom should corrupt the world.”
—ldylls of the King.


! I know no word more gladsome and
stimulating. Apply it to external Nature, and
to those, at least, who have not been reared in
this sunny land, there is at once suggested an awakening
from the gloom and torpor of winter, and an outburst of
fresh life and renovated activities. We think of vernal
showers and budding hedge-rows, and man going forth to
sow under smiling skies and the gay carol of birds. Apply
it to History, Literature, Science, and Art; and the Dark
ages give place to brighter and better days. We descry
the dawn of Civil and Eeligious liberty. We hail the
opening up of the long lost treasures of Greek and Eoman
thought —the dramas of Shakespeare and the philosophy
of Bacon. The bare mention of revival in connexion with
any department of human activity commands immediate
attention, and awakens the most powerful sympathies.
But if we venture to enter a higher sphere, and making
what is surely the noblest application of the term, speak
of the Eevival of Eeligion, we meet with no such enthu-
siastic response. Our great historians deem it foreign to
their purpose, and generally identify the phenomena
belonging to it with the superstitious vagaries of the


human mind, from which no age has been altogether
exempt. Our modern penny-a-liner gives it a paragraph
among current news—do follow a fuller notice of a prize-
fight, or the seance of a notorious spiritualist. How the
introduction of such a theme into our social circles arrests
the flow of conversation, and is too often assailed with
malicious criticism and foul abuse ! The world has still
its Areopagus, where men gather to tell or hear some new
thing; but when a Paul speaks to them of the resurrection
of the dead, the awakening and revival of the very life of
God in human souls, some mock, and others say, ‘We
will hear thee again of this matter.’ But God has never
left Himself without witness. And it were not difficult
to show that the ‘increasing purpose,’ which the poet
dcubts not runs through the ages, finds divinest expression
in those great movements wherein the Spirit of God takes
the world anew into His regenerating embrace, convicting
of sin, righteousness, and judgment, affecting communities
and nations with moral and spiritual impulses, and working
such sudden and simultaneous transformations of character
and life that men are driven from their supine indifference,
and are forced to say, ‘ What hath God wrought!’ The
revival of Religion has been aptly called ‘ The work of
God in every age,’* the issue and crown of all His other
works, by which He has preserved the world from that
utter moral abandonment whither its inherent forces are
ever impelling it. Hpon a dark unvarying background of
spiritual declension and death, this work of Revival has
* The title which Mr. Froggatt gives to the latest and one of the
best books on the History of Religious Revivals,’ to which I have been
considerably indebted in preparing this Lecture. Gillie’s “ Historical
Collections ” form, of course, the great repertory to every student.


made slow, fitful, and sadly chequered progress It has
‘won heights that it was not competent to keep.’ The
thoughts of God which it has unfolded have been seen to
be not as man’s thoughts. ‘He has fulfilled Himself in
many ways, lest one good custom should corrupt the
world.’ ‘ But known unto God are all His works from
the beginning.’ And all shall yet be seen to have been
co-operant to the grand end of ‘ filling the earth with the
knowledge of the Lord,’ and ‘ gathering together in one all
things in Christ, both which are in heaven and which are
on earth.’
Although revivals of Eeligion, in their fuller signifi-
cance, belong only to the Dispensation of the Spirit,
consequent upon the completion of the atonement of Christ,
and His session at the right hand of the Father, we yet
meet with them, in a limited degree, at the threshold of
human history, when the Sethites drew off from the race
of Cain, and the World and the Church became dis-
tinguishable. ‘ Then began men to call upon the name
of the Lord.’ And throughout the chequered history of
the Old Testament Church, —at the Exodus, under Joshua,
at the building of the Temple, throughout the ministry of
the Prophets, and on the return from the Captivity, it was
only by periodic seasons of awakening and revival, that the
trie religion was preserved from absorption in the sur-
rounding heathenism, and an apostatizing people were
resored to the Divine favour and fellowship. But when
Oirist was glorified, and the Spirit given fully and per-
itaxently to the Church, as her Paraclete, religious
reuvals attain new character and power. It was not so
nucb by slow and unobserved increment, as by vast and
ra>id accessions, that the Christian Church acquired place
ani power among men. It was so, pre-eminently, in the


Apostolic age ; and before the close of the second century,
Christianity, according to Neander, could number its ad-
herents all along the North of Africa, in the South of
France and in Spain, in Arabia, Persia, Germany, and even
in Britain. But when the Catacombs were left for the
Basilicas, when so much of the life and activity of the
Church expended itself fruitlessly in the Monastic com-
munities of the Nile valley, so that Kingsley in his recent
“ Hermits ” does not exceed the truth when he says, that
‘to be converted meant simply to become a monk,’ —amid
the fierce rage of rival factions, the obscuration of the old
Evangel, and the rapid develoment of the Papacy, the
Spirit of God was quenched, and His work seemed
prematurely at an end. Nevertheless, throughout the Dark
ages, on one and another chosen vessel, the tongue of fire
descended, and over the labours and achievements of
Claude, Bishop of Turin, Columba, of lona, and his Culdee
evangelists, Wycliffe in England, ‘ the morning star of
the Deformation,’ Huss and Jerome in Bohemia, and
Savonarola, the great Florentine preacher and martyr, the
chronicler of Eeligious revivals fondly and sadly lingers.
The moral and spiritual awakening of the Sixteenth cen-
tury, arising independently, and well nigh simultaneously,
throughout Europe, forms the first great Eevival of
Eeligion since the Apostolic age; and the Leaders of tke
Deformation in Germany, France, Switzerland, England,
and Scotland might undoubtedly be regarded as the great
‘ revivalists’ of that century, if the name had not been so
often grossly abused. And I must remark, in passing, than
those who look with such suspicion and contempt on the
Evangelical revival of the present day, would do well to
consider whether they are not glaringly inconsistent in
estimating so very differently the movement which is


identified with Luther, Calvin, and Knox. It was essentially
a Religious awakening. Many of its leaders underwent
those sudden and violent conversions which now excite such
prejudice and suspicion. The grand theme of Reformation-
preaching is the very shibboleth of the modern revivalist.
The Evangelical hymns, which soon overspread the German
Fatherland in such numbers, have their counterpart in that
plethora of sacred song with which recent revivals have
been characterised. And the errors and excesses of the
Anabaptists were immeasureably wilder and more mis-
chievous, than any extravagances or false doctrines that may
have attended recent religious movements.
During the Seventeenth century, many causes tended to
arrest or retard the work of God in Protestant Europe,
such as the Thirty years’ war in Germany, the cruel
oppression of the Hugenots in France, and the Armenian
controversy in Holland. The Pilgrim Fathers had sailed
to New England. The Scotch Covenanters and the English
Puritans were groaning under the iron yoke of that Royal
supremacy, which Evangelicals in the Church of England
were lately glorifying as the palladium of Protestantism.
Still, the historian of Religious revivals finds, in the
records of this bloody century, much that is calculated to
draw forth his deepest interest and sympathy. The es-
tablishment, under Cromwell, of the “ Society for the
propagation of Religion in foreign parts”; Richard Baxter’s
marvellous successes among the weavers of Kidderminster
and the nailers of Dudley; Bunyan, the ‘ Anabaptist
Timer,’ preaching in barns and on the road-side, until
silenced to write his immortal Dream ; the remarkable
revivals in Scotland, under David Dickson, at Stewarton,
witl their physical accompaniments, scoSingly called the
Stevarton sickness, and at Kirk of Shotts, where a single


sermon of young Livingstone’s was blessed to five hundred
souls; and the noble evangelistic labours of Spener and
Erancke, on the continent of Europe, at the close of the
century,—such details as these prove abundantly that God
was still, and in larger measure, vouchsafing to His Church
‘times of refreshing,’ as the great means of extending His
Kingdom among men.
In the Eighteenth century, when a barren orthodoxy was
conniving at open ungodliness, and supplying to the sceptic
his best arguments; when Christianity, according to
Bishop Butler, was thought scarce worthy of a hearing, God
vindicated His despised Evangel in several Religious
awakenings of unprecedented magnitude. Danish mission-
aries were breaking ground in India. The United
Brethren had established themselves in Central Europe
under the noble Zinzendorf, and were working for the
Lord among the snows of Greenland. Showers of blessing*
were descending upon the Churches of America ; and the
remarkable revival which took place at Northampton and
other towns of New England in 1735, has become widely
known through the “Narrative,” which Jonathan Edwards
furnished to Dr. Watts and Dr. Guise. The “ Thoughts on
the present Revival,” which this great theologian published
at the time, and his later treatise on “the Religious Affec-
tions” ought to be carefully studied by every one who is
praying and working for a revival of the Lord’s work in
his own community.*
* “A great and earnest concern about the great things of religion
and the eternal world became universal in all parts of the town, and
among persons of all degrees and all ages. . . There was scarcely a
single person in the town, old or young, left unconcerned about the
great things of the eternal world. . . The town seemed to be
full of the presence of God : it never was so full of love, nor of joy.


Still more remarkable was the great Evangelical awaken-
ing in England under Greorge Whitefield and the
brothers Wesley, with the story of which most of
you are already familiar. One does not know whether
to be more appalled at the inveterate irreligion of the times,
and the avowed hostility of the National Church to all
Evangelical effort, or amazed at the marvellous success of
the itinerant labours of these devoted men, —congregations
numbering from 10, to 40,000, and composed of all ranks
and ages, assembled in public parks and commons, to
hear the true, yet to them the strange gospel of the
grace of Cod, from the impassioned lips of Whitefield,
and the spread of Methodism so rapid, that at John Wes-
ley’s death 80,000 were in connection with that Body. In
Scotland, too, lamentable as was the state of the National
Church under the withering influences of a dominant
Moderatism, the work of Cod was greatly advanced during
tie latter half of this century. The Erskines and the he-
ard yet so full of distress, as it was then. There were remarkable
tocens of God’s presence in almost every house. . . Our public
asemblies were then beautiful: the congregation was alive in God’s
service, every hearer eager to drink in the words of the minister as
they came from his mouth ; the assembly in general were, from time
to time in tears while the word was preached : some weeping with
sorrow and distress, others with joy and love : others with pity and
ccncern for the souls of their neighbours. . . In all companies,
oi other days, on whatever occasions persons met together, Christ was
tc be heard of and seen in the midst of them. . . lam far from
pietending to he able to determine how many have lately been the-
sibjects of such mercy: but if I may he allowed to declare anything
flat appears to me probable in a thing of this nature, I hope that more
tlan 300 souls were savingly brought home to Christ, in this town, in
tie space of half a year, and about the same number ol males as
females.”—“ A faithful Narrative of the surprising Work of God,


spised ‘ Seceders ’ did noble service in the interests of
true religion, and even within the Church of Scotland, as
at Cambuslang, Kilsyth and Irvine, —districts, which have
in later years repeatedly enjoyed similar times of refresh-
ing, there occurred very remarkable awakenings. Here
are Whitefield’s notes of a day’s labours at Cambuslang,
during a Revival communion season: —‘Yesterdaymorning
I preached at Glasgow to a very large congregation. At
noon I came to Cambuslang—the place which God hath so
much honoured. I preached at two to a vast body of
people, again at six in the evening; and afterwards at
nine. Such a commotion was surely never heard of, espe-
cially about eleven o’clock at night. It far outdid all that
I ever saw in America. For about an hour-and-a-half
there was such weeping, so many falling into deep distress,
and manifesting it in various ways, that description is
impossible. They were carried off and brought into the
house, like wounded soldiers taken from the field of battle.
Their agonies and cries were deeply affecting. Mr.
McCulloch preached after I had done, till past one o’clock
in the morning, and even then the people could scarcely
be got to retire. Throughout the whole of the night might
the voice of prayer and praise be still heard in the
fields.’ * Regarding the fruits of this revival at Cam-
buslang, Mr. McCulloch, the minister of the parish, bears
this testimony, that after five months from the beginning
of the work, and excluding those who were mere pre-
tenders, as he calls them, and the multitudes awakened
under 'Whitefield’s preaching, as beyond his means of com-
putation, he believed that upwards of 500 souls had been
* Froggatt’s ‘ Work of God in Every Age p. 116.


brought under deep convictions of sin, and the most of
these also savingly brought home to God.
With the opening of the Nineteenth century, the reviv ed
life of the Christian Church was finding new channels for
its activities. William Carey, the Northampton shoemaker,
the founder of the Baptist Missionary Society, and the first
Sanscrit scholar of his day, breaks ground in India; and other
societies in England and America soon occupy other portions
of the vast world-field. Thomas Chalmers, in Glasgow,
David Nasmyth, in London, and other kindred spirits were
beginning to evangelize our Home heathen ; and by the
efforts of Bible and Tract Societies the good seed of the
Kingdom was being sown broadcast among men.
During this century, also, and up to the present hour, there
have occurred some of the most widely extended Religious
awakenings which have ever been vouchsafed to the
Christian Church. Robert Haldane’s visit to Geneva, in
1817, and the remarkable success which attended his familiar
exposition, through an interpreter, of the Epistle to the
Romans, resulting in the conversion of MM. Monody
D’Aubigne, Gaussen, and Malan, and through them, in
the revival of the Evangelical Churches of Switzerland and
France, is one of the most remarkable instances, on record,
of what an educated Christian layman can accomplish when
girt with the truth of God, and afire with His Holy Spirit.*
*D’Aubigne, when lately pointing out to a French pastor tho
lodgings in Geneva, where Mr. and Mrs. H. resided, made this true
and beautiful remark : “ Voila le berceau de la Seconde Reformation,”—
“ Behold the cradle of the Second Reformation.” And the grand secret
of Haldane’s success in accomplishing such a work in the short space
of four or five months, was, that he and his devoted wife spent an hour
before each meeting in supplicating the divine blessing and in prayer
that the Holy Spirit might carry home the truth to the students’ hearts.


But it is mainly among the Evangelical Churches of Great
Britain and America that widely extended Religious revivals
have obtained. The late Dr. Baton, of Andover, in his
interesting letters on American Revivals, during the earlier
years of the present century, details narratives of awakenings
in 117 congregations, and, ‘ while in some places divine
influence was continued for several years, like the dew that
descended on the mountains of Zion, in others there was an
apparent suspension and renewal of such influence, re-
sembling successive revivals, several times in the same
year.’ A peculiarly interesting feature in this earlier
Religious movement in America, was the large measure in
which many colleges participated in the blessing. One Presi-
dent, in whose college sixty students were within a few weeks
hopefully converted to God, writes thus;—“The work of
the Holy Spirit in a college is immediately perceptible. A
company of young men, now moved only by ambition or
the love of pleasure, and presently by convictions of reli-
gious truth, present aspects wholly different and opposite,
impossible to be overlooked or mistaken. I have mvself
seen them, and have been filled with wonder at the great
power of God. I would that the unbeliever might witness
these different phases: minds ardent, excitable, impatient
of dictation and control, beguiled by maxims of false
honour, and governed only by the force of laws—and the
same minds, the next month or week, subdued, quiet, obe-
dient, benevolent, yielding to the force of moral obligation,
and governed by the simplest intimations of right. Exist-
ence itself, it has seemed to me, is not more unquestionable
than the reality of Divine influence in such cases. "*
Lord, President of Dartmouth College, Hanover N.
Hampshire : quoted by Dr. Sprague.


In Scotland, too, the blighting influence of Moderatism
was giving way before the advancing tide of Evangelical life
and activity. The most remarkable revival in that country,
during the earlier half of this century, took place in Kilsyth,
Dundee, and other places, associated as it now is with the
names of the two most Apostolic men of recent days—Murray
M'Cheyne and William Burns, who but lately passed from
the mission-field in China to his crown on High, breathing
with his dying accents that petition for the coming of the
Kingdom which had been the theme of his noble, much-
enduring life, The recent appearance of the ‘ Memoir ’of
this devoted Evangelist revives our interest in the remark-
able work of God wdiich he was honoured to initiate in his
father’s parish at Kilsyth, and in other parts of Scotland.
His father bore this testimony before his Presbytery to the
reality and extent of the movement; —“ The waiting on of
young and older people at the close of each meeting, and
the anxious asking of so many ‘what to do’—the lively
singing of the praises of Hod which every visitor remarks ;
the complete dissuetude of swearing and of foolish talking
in our streets: the order and solemnity at all hours pre-
vailing ; the voice of prayer and praise almost in every
house; the consignment to the flames of volumes of infi-
delity and impurity; the coming together for Divine
worship of such a multitude of our population, day after
day; the large catalogue of new intending communicants
giving in their names, and conversing in the most interest-
ing manner on the most important of all subjects; not a
few of the old careless sinners and frozen formalists
awakened and made alive to God: the conversion
of several poor colliers, who have come to me and
given the most satisfactory account of their change of
mind and heart, are truly wonderful proofs of a most sur-


prising and delightful revival. The public-houses, the
coalpits, the harvest-reaping fields, the weaving loomsteads,
the recesses of our glens, and the sequestered haughs
around, all may he called to witness that there is a mighty
change in this place for the better.”* But our historical
sketch has been unduly prolonged. We proceed now
to describe, briefly, so far as the resources at our
disposal and personal observation enable us, the wide-
spread Religious revivals which the Churches of Britain
and America have experienced during the last ten years. The
strange and fascinating story of the American Revival in ’57-
’5B, is so generally known through Dr. Prime’s narrative
embodied in his “ Power of Prayer,” that there is no need to
detail it here. Just as the first Religious awakening in the
Christian Church sprang from the ten days’ concert for
prayer in the upper room in Jerusalem, so can we trace
the great Religious movement which overswept the Ameri-
can people to that upper lecture-room of ‘ the Old North
Dutch Church’ in Fulton-street, New York, where six
Christian laymen of various creeds, but with one accord,
gathered at mid-day for united prayer. In the course of a
few months there were 150 meetings of a similar nature
held daily in the city and Brooklyn. “Everywhere men
were crowding to the meetings, and the spirit with which
they are impressed, and which invites them to so general
an attention to the subject of religion, seems to animate
the whole land. The Northern, Middle, Western, and
Southern States were moved, as by one common mighty
influence. The spirit of the Revival spread everywhere,
and seemed to permeate every nook and corner of the
* Memoir of the late Rev. W. C. Burns, p. 100—a book which every
labourer in the Vineyard should read.


great republic. The subjects of the Revival included all
classes—the high and the low, the rich and the poor, the
learned and the ignorant. The most hopeless and forbid-
ding were brought under its almighty power. . . Persons
of the most vicious and abandoned character, supposed to be
beneath and beyond the reach of all religious influence,
by having lost all susceptibility, were brought to humble
themselves like little children at the foot of the Cross.
Christians were themselves astonished and overwhelmed
at those displays of Divine mercy. . Never before in
modern times, certainly, was there such asking in prayer —
such believing in prayer; and never such answers to
prayer. . Nothing was thought of or demanded, but a
place in which to pray. . The number of converted men
and women constituted a new element of power. . . No
confidence was felt in the mere use of means. . . There
was no Revival preaching; no Revival machinery. . .
There was no strained excitement; no exuberant and in-
temperate zeal. . . One of the most deeply interesting
characteristics of this Revival has been its catholicity. .
The “Union Prayer Meeting” is now a type.
Thousands go without ever raising the question whom
they are to meet, or to what church organization do
they belong. . . Another feature of this work is
that it has been conducted by laymen. . . It began
with them. . It continues with them. . . Never
before in these latter days have ministers found such
abundant help in the church. . . Never have they
preached and laboured with such courage and hope.”*
Years have passed since Dr. Prime penned this interesting
and glowirg sketch. Small thought had he that these
* Tower of Prayer, pp. 29 —39.


1 times of refreshing ’ were sent in preparation for that
bloody baptism in which the American people were to be
purged from their national iniquity, and the wrongs of an
enslaved and degraded race avenged. Still, the establish-
ment, during the war, of the ‘ Christian Commission,’ —an
institution never dreamt of by European Horse-Guards or
Secretaries of War, the emancipation of 3,000,000 slaves,
the entire absence of State-executions at the close of the
war, and the marvellous way in which opposing parties
have since coalesced, testify to the reality of the Religious
life of the Churches. I have been credibly informed that
the marked revival of religion, which appeared shortly after
the close of the war, was largely traceable to the disbanding
of the troops, many of whom were eager, on their return to
their homes, to commend that Saviour whom they had
learned to trust and love on the battle-field and in the
hospital. At the present day the Churches of America are
enjoying renewed ‘ times of refreshing.’ And one cannot
fail to recognize a gracious Providence in the frequent and
extensive revivals which so remarkably characterize the
Evangelical Churches of that great country, enabling them
to cope with, and largely absorb the streams of ungodliness
and vice, which are ever pouring in upon them from the
Old World.
The American Revivals of ’SB were succeeded in the
following year by a notable Religious movement in the
North of Ireland. Dr. Edgar traces its origin ‘to one
congregation, and one man —a plain, honest, faithful, and
laborious Presbyterian minister —who uses wisely and
powerfully God’s own means, and no other means, for
effecting reformation.’ The movement was, as has
always been the case, the fruit of prayer. Beginning in
Connor and Ballymena, the Revival soon overspread the


province of Ulster, and powerfully affected the whole
country. I do not think that any Christian reader can
peruse such narratives as are given in Gibson’s “ Year of
Grace,” “The Ulster Revival.” or Reid’s “ Authentic-
Records,” even though they may be somewhat coloured
by the enthusiasm of the hour, without being thoroughly
convinced that the movement was of God and not of man,
and that it is through these sudden and wide-spread moral
upheavals, mere perhaps than by the slow and silent
accretion of individuals that the evangelization of the
world is now to be accomplished.
The Revival in Ireland has, unhappily, been associated
with such strange tales of prostrations, visions, and other
unwonted phenomena, as to prejudice many minds against
the whole movement. It should, however, be remembered
that such mental and bodily manifestations are not peculiar
to the Irish revival, but have, to a greater or less degree,
accompanied every great Religious movement. They are,
I believe, largely explicable on natural grounds, and it
must always be distinctly understood that they do not
enter into the essentials of a genuine revival. I believe
that in the intense excitement of the hour, some of the
leaders of the movemont were induced to lean too much
upon these exceptional phenomena, and to trace them
unwarrantably, to the direct agency of the Spirit. Hence,
many an anxious inquirer was apt to think that bodily
prostration was an essential of conversion, and others, too
frequently, deemed themselves' saved, because they had
been ‘stricken down,’ or had seen the Lord Jesus in a
vision.* At the same time, it cannot be denied that while
* An Irish clergyman, writing in the Family Treasury of 1868,
says, that ‘ the truth now sems to be this: There was not so much


a general revival of Religion is independent of such out-
ward accompaniments, they have often served effectually
to arrest public attention, and have issued in multitudes of
cases in the most blessed results. One cannot repress a
strange and overpowering thrill of emotion when in a
gathering of two, four, or six thousand people, a
solemn hush steals over the vast assembly, and
tears start unbidden to the eye, and the service
proceeds amid stifled sobs, and deep low wails, and
here and there a piercing cry for mercy. The scenes that
were often witnessed at such special services were doubt-
less largely traceable to nervous excitement. But every
one who has taken part in the Revival movement can recall
cases of decided conversion, that, humanly speaking, could
have been brought about in no other way. Dr. Carson,
in describing the movement in Coleraine, observes that
“it struck terror to the heart of the most hardened and
obdurate sinner. The whole town was in a state of
alarm, business was forgotten, and the revival was the
only subject of conversation. A French invasion could
not have produced so great a panic. I have seen much of
the accumulated misery of bodily disease and mental dis-
tress ; but I never saw anything to be compared to the
harrowing scene in the Coleraine Town Hall. It would
be quite impossible to imagine any agency more powerful
for drawing the attention of men to the state of their
souls. I have heard many people mocking and scoffing,
before that night, about the Revival: but when I saw the
same parties examining the cases in the Town Hall, their
mocking was at an end, and they looked like criminals
good done among those stricken as we had hoped; ther e was more
good done among others than we had suspected.’


whose hour was come. No other sort of Revival could
have had the same effects.”*
Still, any Religious movement has always appeared to me
to be most satisfactory, when these outward accompaniments
are almost entirely absent; and altogether apart from them
the Irish Revival can show abundant evidence of its reality
and beneficent results. Let me cite the emphatic testimony
of Dr. H. Bonar, rather than any further expression of my
own views:—“Party spirit has ceased wherever the
Revival has come, and enemies have embraced each other,
so that a Popish judge bears testimony to the wonderful
improvement in this respect, in his own vicinity. The
drunken assemblages at weddings and funerals have not
only ceased, but been transformed into meetings for praise
and prayer; and the brutal scenes of brawling and blood-
shed on such occasions, are no longer heard of. Thousands
of drunkards have become sober, thousands of blasphemers
have turned from their profanity, the whole moral aspect
of families, of villages, of towns, has been altered for the
better. Hundreds of Romanists have turned from their
superstitions: hundreds of Unitarians have owned the
Lord Jesus as God: poor, profligate females have turned
from their evil courses ; public-houses have been shut up ;
and inroads made among those whom we are accustomed
to call “the masses,” such as have not been made by any
efforts heretofore.”
These emphatic statements are prefatory to ‘ Authentic
Records,’ furnished during the Revival movement.
There is a richness of colouring about them which
more mature experience requires considerably to subdue.
* ‘ Authentic Records of Revival,’’ p. 929,


The Revivals of ’59 did not regenerate Ireland; neither
were they the prelude to the Millenium. The truth is, that
we live so much in the present hour, and are, at the best,
so one-sided, that while a revival continues, we are too
credulous, and when the tide has begun to ebb, we become
too sceptical. Every great Religious movement ought to be
viewed as the resultant of opposing forces.
I have before me, a lengthened paper on the results of
the Irish Revival of ’59, by one who actively promoted it
in his own parish, and after a lapse of nine years, set
about estimating its permanent fruits ; and, after making
ample allowance for cases of back-sliding, and much-
existing formality and coldness in the Churches, he says
that he has to write over again what he wrote in 1860,
that any one who knows what his parish was in 1859, and
what it is now in 1868, will have no hesitation in writing
of D , what Luke eighteen hundred years ago wrote of
Antioch:—“And the hand of the Lord was with them
(in 1859), and a great number believed, and turned to the
Lord.”*
The Religious awakening in Ireland was immediately
followed by a movement in England and Scotland, similar
in its character and results, though neither so widely
diffused nor so deeply felt. All the Evangelical Churches
have been sensibly affected by the movement, although
only in scattered localities did it take distinctive shape and
character. The millions gathered in the great metropolis
have felt its beneficent influence. 'St. Paul’s Cathedral,
* We regret that we must omit any notice of the remarkable revivals
which visited the churches of Wales at this time. Interesting informa-
tion is given in the letters published hy Eev. Evan Davies, in his
“ Revivals in Wales.”


Westminster Abbey, Exeter Hall, and St. James’ Hall
were thrown open for special religious services. The marvel-
lously successful ministry of Mr. Spurgeon has been at once a
cause and consequence of revival. The Young Men’s Chris-
tian Association has felt the new life through all its branches.
The 370 agents of the City Mission testified to the
increased interest in religion manifested more or less by
all classes. Several of the city theatres were filled on
Sunday evenings by quiet and interested congregations.
I knew of a few young men, chiefly merchants’ clerks, who
fitted up a railway arch at their own expense, and con-
ducted a religious service in it, every Sunday evening, to
the poor and abandoned ones whom they could gather in
that strange sanctuary to hear the glad tidings of salvation.
A network of prayer-meetings overspread the city; and
the Bible-woman movement, and the midnight meetings
among the fallen sisterhood, which have at last supplied
long-missing links in the chain of our Christian charities,
are all the outcomes of recent revival.*
In Scotland, the movement has been much more generally
and deeply felt than in England. It strangely first took hold
of our Mining and Fishing villages, and only at a later date
affected our large towns. It ran like wildfire along the
North-east Coast, and mainly through the efforts of one
with whom I had much helpful intercourse, and whose
life fell a sacrifice to his excessive labours—a plain,
unlettered Wesleyan, f village after village was revo-
lutionized. Many of the physical phenomena which oc-
curred in Ireland were repeated. There was undoubtedly
* Based on ‘ Notes ’ by Bov. J. Weir, D.D., Islington,
f Mr. James Turner, late of Peterhead, N. B.


much, temporary excitement which soon passed away. I
doubt, if the fishermen at Findochty and PortknocMe still
put to sea, amid the strains of a revival hymn. But
abundant proof remains of the reality and power of the
movement, which is again manifesting itself in the scenes
of its former triumphs. The large open-air gatherings
throughout the country were a most interesting feature of
the work. I have seen six to eight thousand people
assembled under the shadow of old Huntly Castle,
listening with rapt attention to various ministers and
lay-evangelists, whom the late Duchess of Gordon, of
sainted memory, had brought together; while, during the
two days through which the meetings lasted, a large
marquee, erected for the purpose, was more or less filled
with groups of earnest intercessors, and anxious inquirers.
I was pursuing my studies in Edinburgh when the move-
ment was at its height, and though one cannot say that the
city itself was revived, there was an under-current of
religious feeling affecting all classes of the community A
few devoted Sunday School teachers, belonging to various
religious denominations, were the first leaders of the
movement. Renting an old chapel, in one of the closes of
the High-street, which had before been the rendezvous of
a club of Atheists, they formed themselves into an Evan-
gelistic Agency, now so well known as the “Carrubber’s
Close Mission.” Confining their efforts, at first, to the
neglected children in the neighbourhood, they were soon
encouraged to widen their sphere of operation, until, at the
close of the first year of their existence, and entirely
through voluntary labour, they were conducting Sabbath
morning and evening schools, week day classes for young
men and women, a monthly mothers’ meeting for prayer,
a reading club for families, and an “Excelsior Institute, or


Home College” for training young evangelists. And soon
* the increase ’ was given. God abundantly owned the
labours of these devoted men. Their old chapel was
filled every night, for months, with eager audiences. The
evangelical ministers of the city were called in to aid
the movement. I have seen the old Theatre Royal
crowded to the ceiling during special services that were
held there by this Mission. The various congregations in
the city shared more or less in this gracious revival.
Mr. Tasker, of the West Port, for example, stated, ! in
1861, that there were sixty persons holding district prayer-
meetings under his superintendence; and Mr. Wilson, of
Eountain Bridge, reported that on a certain Sabbath
evening there were thirty-three prayer-meetings conducted
in his district by working men, while one Church added
123, and another 203 names to their communion rolls in
the course of the year.* The Sabbath Schools throughout
Scotland shared largely in the blessings of revival. The
awakening very frequently began in the minister’s bible
class, and in the teachers’ prayer-meeting. I could
give various instances of this; but my ‘ sketch ’is already
too bulky, and it may perhaps be more interesting
if I refer to what occurred in the Mission School in the
old town of Edinburgh, with which I was connected for
several years.f Some of the teachers had then, for the
first time, been savingly impressed, and under the
quickening influence of the revival, we conferred with
one another on the state of our school. It was agreed
* Report by F. C. Assembly’s Committee on State of Religion and
Morals' Bl, ’62.
f This Lecture was originally delivered at a meeting of Sunday
School Teachers, Hence the introduction of this simple incident.


that we should meet, for half-an-hour, for united prayer,
both before and after our evening’s work. And truly,
while we were yet speaking, the Lord heard us. On the
second or third evening after our union for prayer , we had our
first anxious inquirers. I shall never forget the scene, for
the first living seal of his ministry is always the most pre-
cious to the servant of Christ. It is his first-lorn. As our
school was dismissing, one Sunday evening, in the winter
of 1860, two boys, of about twelve years of age, requested
me to remain behind with them. I willingly consented,
and led them to an adjoining room, where, throughout the
winter, teachers and scholars met together for prayer. One
of the boys was deeply impressed. It was * his sins ’he
said, with touching simplicity, that so affected him. We
prayed together; and I endeavoured to present the way of
salvation to him as plainly as I could. I believe that then
and there, as a little child, he entered the Kingdom. As
we walked home, that evening, in the quiet moonlight, it
was pleasant to catch sight of the bright and gladsome look
which the boy’s face wore, so lately before suffused with
tears; and I still remember the poor lad’s words, uttered
in his own vernacular, as he clasped my hand with a warm
pressure: —“ Eh, sir! Tm sae licht noo—sae licht noo /”
Nor was this the ephemeral fancy of a boy. He has, for
some years, been an earnest Sunday School teacher ; and I
was glad to hear, lately, from an old fellow-teacher, that
our first convert is now conducting, among his scholars,
meetings for prayer and converse, similar to those at which
he and others, in 1860, were brought to the Saviour.
But I must abruptly close this overgrown narrative.
The story has no end. During the last three years remark-
able Eeligious awakenings have again appeared in Scotland,


quite as wide-spread as in 1859-60, and with the same
hopeful results. Cheering intelligence reaches us of the
progress of the work in England. Spain is now open to
Bibles and Evangelists. The Churches of America are
receiving fresh visitations from on High. Madagascar has
burned her idols, and the people are petitioning for Chris-
tian instruction. Why should not our Colony participate
in these signal times of refreshing ?
While every genuine revival of Religion cometh
only from the Lord of Hosts, in the energy of
His Spirit, there have been three chief agencies em-
ployed in originating and promoting recent awaken-
ings.* First, and of pre-eminent importance is Prayer:
* Objection is sometimes strangely taken, on almost fatalistic
grounds, to the employment of any special means for bringing about
a revival of religion. What shall we make of such passages as
Ezek. xxxvi. 37., Acts i. 13, and ii. 1,2, xii. 5, 12, Luke xiii. 8,
2 Tim. iv. 1,2, &c. ? Means and ends are perfectly proportioned in
the Divine economy. Wherever the Lord’s work is not progressing,
there must be neglect or perfunctory use of the appointed means.
What congregation, or individual Christian, will profess to have
exhausted \every means of grace? Yet power to its utmost limit is
responsibility . We must find room for the following quotation from
Dr. Huntington’s * Times of Special Religious Interest' : —“lt is said a
social religious interest is made dependent on ‘ machinery,’ is
‘ manufactured.’ Distinguish again between two kinds of machinery
In its own place machinery is held very far from being an evil. Kept
to its use nobody objects. If brought in to do what can be done,
at last, only by the free, unforced choice of the spiritual nature, it is
mischievous utterly. If it is thrust out of its sphere, to obstruct or
to dishonour the higher motions of the conscience and the affections,
it is still a mischief. If by machinery you only signify outward
means to achieve an inward result, or visible measures to arrest and
engage voluntary attention to a great truth, you will not willingly


earnest, expectant, importunate, united prayer. A revival
is just the seal of God’s Spirit on the faith and prayers of
His people. Individuals, families, congregations, Sunday
school teachers, Elders, Churches must set apart special
seasons for waiting upon God, if they would enjoy special
times of refreshing from His presence. Before Livingstone
preached his famous sermon at Shotts, he and his brethren
spent the whole night in prayer and converse ; and the re-
vival in New England, which arose under President Edwards,
is to he traced to the meeting for prayer of a few devoted
Christians, maintained through the whole night. Barrenness
and death is the righteous penalty of prayerlessness.
Second: The diffusion of Revival intelligence. It was so with
the revivals of Apostolic days. It has been so, increasingly,
with every succeeding awakening. Recent movements have
given rise to an interesting and valuable periodical literature
—such as the London “ Revival,” * the “ Times of
Refreshing,” issued quartely by the Scottish Evangelistic
Association, “Evangelical Advocate,” “Christian Work,”
discredit it. All moral and spiritual improvements are carried for-
ward by such means It does seem strange that a
wide-spread spirit of religious inquiry and resolve, appearing simul.
taneously in all parts of a vast country, not suggested by a priest -
hood, but often encountering clerical opposition, proceeding almost
wholly by unpremeditated operation, having simple and unlettered
prayers for its chief utterance and aliment —thus as purely spon-
taneous, or rather bearing as many traces of a Divine origin, as any
authenticated reformation—that this should be held up to reprobation
as the article of a crafty ‘ manufacture.’ You might as well say that
the forests of Mount Washington, or the freshlets of the rivers, or
the American revolution, were got up by manufacture.” —“ Christian
Believing and Living pp. 109, 110.
* Now called “ The Christian.”


<< Evangelical Christendom,” “British Mesenger,” and
“ British Herald,” which ought to he circulated and read
in our families, and at prayer meetings, and special services,
that ignorance and prejudice may give place to an intelligent
and sympathetic acquaintance with the work of God
throughout the world, and to an earnest determination, in
faith and prayer, to have the same marvels of grace
vouchsafed to ourselves.
Third: The employment of lay-evangelists. Eecent re-
vivals at home have been identified with the labours
of many Christian laymen, drawn from all classes
of society,—members of the aristocracy, such as Lord
Eadstock, and the Earl of Kintore ; military officers, such
as the late General Anderson and Trotter; men of Science,
like Sir James Simpson; gentlemen, like Eadcliffe, Black-
wood, and Brownlow North ; and rude unlettered sons of
toil, like James Turner andEichard Weaver. I can safely
aver, from personal knowledge, that he labours of these
lay-brethren have been of incalculable benefit to the cause
of Christ. And it does convey a solemn reproof to many
of us, who are apt to be puffed up by the pride of intellect
to attempt a reconstruction of the old Gospel, as otherwise
unsuitable to modern proclivities, when we find the largest
churches and halls unable to contain the crowds that hang
upon the lips of artless laymen, as they rehearse the strange
story of their conversion, or in simple, homely, but most
impressive words, proclaim the old, and as some would
have it, the obsolete doctrines of grace. The judicious
employment of lay agents seems almost indispensable to a
widely-extended revival of Eeligion. And we are only
returning to the primitive practice, when we do so.* Every
* Acts, viii., 1-4, xi., 19.


Christian ought to he a Eevival-centre; and neither
Minister nor Kirk Session can be exonerated, if a single
willing member of the Church is allowed to remain idle in
the Lord’s Vineyard with the old complaint, ‘No man hath
hired usd
I ought not, perhaps, to conclude this Lecture, without
referring to the current objections which are taken to all
such Eeligious movements as I have been describing. These
objections might be easily shown to spring from an ir-
reverent intelleetualism, an extreme religious sensitiveness,
or crass indifference. But revivals of Eeligion need no
lengthened apology. It is simply an impertinence for any
man, at this time of day, to attempt to explain on medico-
psychological grounds, those great periodical Eeligious
movements which form the chief landmarks of history, or
those lesser seasons of awakening which surprise an indi-
vidual, or a community, and to refuse to see in them a
supernatural presence and power. But if a Divine element
be recognized in the phenomena of revivals, their
occasional abnormal accompaniments can no more affect
their beneficent character, than the offensive decomposition
produced in dead matter, by the sunshine and showers of
heaven, proves them to be of noxious influence, or than the
uttering of a few counterfeits renders worthless the genuine
coin of the realm. As there are certain diseases which
follow only in the wake of high civilization, so it would
appear that every great Eeligious awakening, from Apostolic
days to our own, has been attended, more or less, by errors,
extravagances, and forms 5f wickedness, which are not
found in the dreary reaches of spiritual declension and
death. And these cannot be too carefully guarded against.
But the fact remains that revivals of Eeligion are ‘ the


divinest things in human history/ and one of the chief
agencies for the moral and spiritual elevation of men, and
the advancement of the Kingdom of God.
I am well aware that the phenomena of revivals do not
consort with the tendencies of modern Religious thought,
and that their apologists must he prepared to take
rank among pious weaklings or ranting Methodists.
‘ The Kingdom of God/ we are constantly reminded,
‘ cometh not with observation.’ It develops itself on
what we may call a spiritual Newtonian system. Not by
sudden and startling upheavals, but by slow and unseen
accretion, like the coral reefs of the Southern Seas, will its
normal growth be marked. Revivals are at the best only
morbid developments. But such reasoning is as unphilo-
sophical as it is unscriptural. The agency of fire is as
perceptible in the formation of the earth as that of water.
Does not the doctrine of Crisis hold an imperial place in the
philosophy of history ? Why should the religious life be
excluded from the action of that great law which he who,
of all men, carried the world in his heart has made so
common-place—
“ There is a tide in the affairs of men,
Which taken at the flood leads on to fortune ” ?
And are there not, in the history of the individual and of
the nation, ‘ days of visitation ’ —‘ days of the right hand
of the Most High ’ ? Assuredly, we are neither fools nor
fanatics, when we work and pray for a revival of Religion,
that shall, suddenly, as by the finger of God, affect all
classes of society, and result in the simultaneous conversion
of multitudes.
It is not uncharitable to affirm of many current objec-
tions to the Revival movement, that ‘ the wish is father to


the thought.’ They largely spring from a radical
indifference to the progress of Christ’s kingdom, and from
a painful suspicion, on the part of the objectors, by no
means ill-founded, that any deep, Religious awakening
would be exceedingly unpleasant and embarrassing.*
It is preposterous to find objections to revivals, on the
ground of their tendency to religious excitement, raised by
those who live in one unending round of gaiety and dissi-
pation. It is proper and commendable to endeavour to
create general interest, sympathy, and enthusiasm for
almost any public movement, except that which has for its
object the everlasting salvation of men, and the glory of
our redeeming God! I believe, that, though I could tell
many professing Christians that a genuine revival of Reli-
gion had overspread this colony, and that multitudes were
turning to the Lord, it would not give them a tithe of the
satisfaction with which they would hail the tidings, by next
English mail, that wool had risen two-pence per lb., or that
Australian securities had acquired new value. That there are
such Christians in all our Churches, and among the ranks
of our Christian workers, is to my mind the strongest argu-
ment in favour of a Religious revival; for I know no other
* “ There are indiscretions. We have no doubt of it. The question
is, whether the indiscretions are so many, and so glaring, as to over-
balance the palpable and lasting good that comes of engaging many
people heartily in the new conviction that they have a spiritual
immortal capacity, and owe their lives to their Creator. When we
have governments without indiscretion, families without indiscretion,
colleges without indiscretion, manners, trade, navigation over any
sort of sea, without it, we shall have an administration of Christianity
without indiscretion. But, remember, the greatest indiscretion we can
possibly fall into about religion is to let it alone," — Huntington, p. 105.


means by which these sadly erring brethren can be aroused,
quickened, and saved.
The better I become acquainted with the state of the
Churches in this land, I am the more thoroughly convinced
that a season of wide-spread .Religious awakening is their
grand desideratum. Colonial society is composed of such
heterogeneous and ephemeral elements, and is so much
affected by sceptical and materialistic influences, which soon
eat out the heart of its religious life, that here, if anywhere,
the Churches of Christ, in order to hold their ground and
make headway, need frequent times of refreshing—great
waves of Religious feeling to pulsate through the community.
The Christian Ministry needs Revival ; —that personal differ-
ences and sectarian estrangements may be swallowed up in
zeal for Grod’s glory and the love of perishing souls; that,
eschewing the work of the politician or literateur, we may
give ourselves continually to prayer, and to the ministry of
the Word, and may become living epistles of Christ; that
our sermons may burn with celestial fire, and be made to
overlap the daily life of our hearers ; and that the doctrines
of the new birth, justification by faith and the headship of
Christ, may be felt by them to be as indubitable realities
as, or a thousand times more so, than the bank notes and
gold sovereigns with which they trade.
The Office-hearers of our Churches need Revival; that
they may not leave their ministers to work single-handed,
and that, as ensamples to the flock, their hearts may be filled
with the spirit of prayer, and their mouths opened to con-
fess their Lord.
Sunday School Teachers need Revival; —that, being some-
thing more than task-masters, they may really feed their
dear Lord’s lambs, and that none of them, by their pro-


sence in the theatre and the ballroom, may give the
lie direct to their pretended service in the Church of Christ.
And ice need Revival in all our Congregations ; —that conversions
may become the rule, and not the exception; that there
may be a purer, manlier, more self-sacrificing type of
Christianity among us, and that every Christian throughout
the land may be ‘like a torch in a sheaf,’ until the whole
community be afire with God.
The purpose of this Lecture will be fully accomplished, if
I have encouraged any of the Lord’s people to find, in the
chain of Religious revivals, which stretches from the time
of the Apostles to our own day, hopeful pledge and
assurance of similar gracious visitations for themselves and
for this new and needy land. And just as soldiers inscribe
their victories on their colours, and fight with redoubled
ardour when nerved by the memories of former triumphs,
so may we who rally round the old blue banner of the
Covenant, now happily up-borne by an united and pros-
perous Church, remember, with devoutest gratitude, the
past and present Revivals, in the Presbyterian Churches of
Britain and America, and be encouraged to plead with
God to revive us, again, that His people may rejoice in
Him.
“Awake, awake, put cn strength, 0 Arm of the Lord ;
awake, as in the ancient days, in the generations of old.”
John L. Sherriff, 18 Wynyard Square.




