

Memoirs of Mrs. Margaret Cargill, Wife of the Rev. David Cargill, A.M.,
Wesleyan Missionary : including Notices of the Progress of Christianity
in Tonga and Feejee. By her Husband. 12 mo. pp. xix, 390. Mason.
It has been asserted by inspired
authority, that God ? worketh all
things according to the counsel of
his own will.? One branch of that
human instrumentality. No person
can doubt that the Almighty could,
by the mere exercise of his power,
of all efforts that
either men or angels can put forth,
spread the light of evangelical truth
through all nations, and subject
every child of Adam to the sway of
his Christ; but he does not choose
to do it. In the divine mind there
are valid reasons against such a
course. Some of those reasons are
inscrutable to us, nor does it become
us to inquire into them with irre-
verent curiosity. Our duty is, to
ascertain the will of God, and then
submit to it with meekness and
alacrity; recollecting that the obli-
gations under which we lie, with
regard to the world?s conversion,
are not the arbitrary dictates of
mere sovereignty, as some mistaken
speculatists would persuade us, but
the result of a ? counsel,? of which
infinite wisdom, holiness, benevo-
lence, and righteousness are the
essential elements.
In advancing the cause of Chris-
tianity in the world, there is one
class of agents, whom the provi-
dence and grace of God have called
forth and largely employed; whose
services, though of a subordinate
kind, are of the most substantial
value, and merit a more distinct
and prominent record than they
generally obtain. We allude, of
course, to pious females. In the
early ages of the church they pro-
vided the rights of hospitality for
travelling Evangelists ; they in-
structed persons of their own sex
in the truths and duties of Chris-
tianity; as Deaconesses, they served
the several churches to which they
belonged, both in temporal and spi-
ritual things ; and in various ways
? helped ? even the Apostles in the
propagation of the Gospel, and the
building up of believers. They
were not, indeed, employed as pub-
lic teachers, so as to address set
discourses to mixed assemblies ; but
they were not forbidden to assist in
giving correct theological know-
ledge even to a Preacher, when he
was found to entertain defective
views of divine truth. Priscilla
united with her husband in ? teach-
? counsel ? is, that his Gospel shall
be propagated in the world, and the
purposes of his mercy in the salva-
tion of mankind accomplished, by
ing? the eloquent Apollos ?the
way of the Lord more perfectly?
than he had previously known it;
and thus both" the church and the
world enjoyed the benefit of her
wise counsel.
The kind of agency which pre-
vailed in the apostolic churches has
been successfully exerted in the
Wesleyan societies, from their ear-
liest formation. Mrs. Susanna Wes-
ley, who had conducted religious
meetings in the parsonage-house at
Epworth, when her husband was
from home, at a subsequent period
withstood her son John, when he
was intent upon silencing the first
Lay-Preacher that appeared among
his spiritual children ; and declared,
that Thomas Maxfield was as assured-
ly called of God to preach the Gospel,
as the eager advocate of canonical
regularity, on whose head the hands
of the Archbishop of Canterbury
had been laid. After due examina-
tion, he acquiesced in her decision.
Since that period, memorable in the
history of revived piety, some thou-
sands of devout and intelligent Me-
thodist women have rendered essen-
tial service in the support and ad-
vancement of Christian godliness, as
the Leaders of female classes, visit-
ers of the sick, and the teachers of
youth. In seasons of persecution,
many of them have endured even
brutal insults and violence, with a
meekness and fortitude which would
have been no dishonour to the pri-
mitive confessors.
With reference to the cause of
Missions, the holy zeal, fidelity, and
self-denial of Christian women are
still more apparent. They are, be-
yond all comparison, the most dili-
gent in the circulation of Mission-
ary intelligence, by the distribution
of printed documents on that all-
important subject ; and by their
unwearied perseverance, a large pro-
portion of the requisite pecuniary
supplies is raised for prosecuting
that work of mercy, the benefits of
which already extend to some of
the most distant and barbarous na-
tions, and will be lasting as eternity.
We think it justly questionable,
whether any order of persons make
greater sacrifices, for the honour of


the Lord Jesus, and the spiritual
good of mankind, than many of the
wives of modern Missionaries ; es-
pecially those of them who have
enjoyed the advantages of educa-
tion, with the sanctified pleasures of
domestic and social life, in British
homes ; and who, with their devoted
husbands, voluntarily submit to the
untold privations, hardships, and
perils which are necessarily attend-
ant upon a residence among un-
tamed savages ; murderers of fathers,
mothers, and children; whose feet
are swift to shed blood; who gratify
a fiend-like appetite, by voraciously
feeding upon the mangled bodies of
their own species ; and whose war-
cry is scarcely less appalling than
the yell of demons. Yet are there
Christian women who, with a noble
daring, sustained by the love of
Christ, sacrifice the endearments of
kindred and friendship, encounter
the dangers of the great deep, and
cheerfully submit to live and die
among cannibals ; that they may
assist in spreading that Gospel
which is the great healer of human
misery. Such women sustain the
spirits of their honoured husbands,
amid their arduous toil; they teach
the domestic arts to the wife and
daughters of the savage ; and they
communicate evangelical instruction
to those of their own sex, who are
willing to listen to words whereby
they may be saved. Of this num-
ber was Mrs. Cargill, the touching
record of whose life is now before
us;
This intelligent and pious woman
was a native of Aberdeen, and in
early life was made a partaker of
God?s pardoning mercy and regene-
rating grace, by the exercise of faith
in the Lord Jesus. Her acquaint-
ance with Mr. Cargill commenced
when he was a Student in the Uni-
versity of that city ; and when he
received his appointment, in the
year 1832, as a Missionary to
Tonga, she consented to accompany
him, as his wife, to that distant
field of labour.
?On the 6th of September, 1832,
Miss Smith was united in marriage to
the object of her choice. The prospect
of an immediate separation from a mother
whom she tenderly loved, and the possi-
bility of never being favoured with ano-
ther opportunity of seeing her again in
this world, operated powerfully on her
feeling heart. The agitation of her
mind greatly affected her body; and it
was only by mustering all her strength
that she was able to stand whilst the
marriage ceremony was performed. In
a few hours after the celebration of
that event, Mrs. Cargill had to part with
her friends. Such scenes are always
painful. Mrs. Cargill was literally torn
from her mother?s arms. This was
merely the force of natural affection:
the grace of God so supported her mind,
that she never for a moment shrunk from
her undertaking, or wavered in her reso-
lution. The exalted heroism of a will-
ingness to make personal sacrifices for
the welfare and happiness of others, and
the calm resignation of the devoted Chris-
tian, elevated her soul, and tranquillized
her frame. Though tears of filial affec-
tion and gratitude often trickled down
her cheeks when her mother became the
subject of her conversation or her thoughts;
yet she never was heard to express regret
at the sacrifice which she had made.
Her submission to the dispensations of
Providence was entire and cheerful.?
(Pages 22, 23.)
The party arrived in Tonga early
in the year 1834. Here a deep and
extensive work of God had for some
time been in progress ; and the
blessed effects of true religion, as
they were manifested in the devout
spirit and the pure morality of the
converted natives, were refreshing
to the spirits of the strangers, after
their long and perilous voyage.
? The first Sabbath which Mrs. Car-
gill spent in the Tonga Isles, was to her
a day of much gratification and pleasure.
About half-past eight, a. m., the bell
was rung for divine service; and al-
though a smart shower of rain was fall-
ing at the time, yet it did not prevent
the chapel from being comfortably filled.
Mr. Thomas conducted the service.
The people united in the singing with
one voice. The sound seemed the echo
of a vibration on their hearts. Haring
prayer, the silence and reverence becom-
ing that solemn and interesting exercise
were maintained by all. Young and old
bowed their knees, and closed their eyes.
During the sermon, which was delivered
with great freedom of speech, the people


listened with unremitting attention, and
afterwards united in chanting the praises
of the divine Being, with fresh alacrity
and spirit. The poet must have had a
similar scene in contemplation when he
penned the graphic description of an
assembly worshipping God, in the fol-
lowing lines :
? Lord, how delightful ?tis to see
A whole assembly worship thee!
At once they sing, at once they pray,
They hear of heaven, and learn the way.?
? The congregation went out of the
chapel with regularity and decorum;
those in the centre of the house occupy-
ing their places until the rest of the peo-
ple had retired.
? After the native service, one in the
English language was conducted by Mr,
Cargill. In the afternoon, Mr. Cross
addressed an assembly of natives, equally
as large, well-behaved, and attentive as
that in the morning; and in the evening,
Mr. Hobbs preached in the English lan-
guage.? (Pages 38, 39.)
Till the latter end of the year
1835 Mr. Cargill remained in Tonga,
ministering the word of life with
encouraging success, assisted by his
amiable wife, who was an example
of domestic order, and of pious zeal.
She studied the language of the
natives, and both by precept and
example taught them the nature of
vital Christianity, and its attendant
virtues. She then accompanied her
husband to Feejee, where he and
Mr. Cross were appointed to com-
mence a Mission; and spent the
residue of her days in a land where
Satan had his seat, far from civilized
society, with its accommodations
and pleasures. On taking their de-
parture from Vavau, Mr. Cargill
says, ?
cc The deck of the vessel was crowded
with natives, bidding adieu to the Mis-
sionaries and their wives, and expressing
an earnest wish that the blessing of God
might accompany them, and prosper
their enterprise. They shed many a
tear ; and some of them rent the air with
their cries. Their sorrow at parting
with those who had been instruments of
good to their souls and bodies was un-
feigned ; and most of them said, ?We
shall never forget your love to us; nor
shall we cease to love and pray for you :
do not forget to pray for us.? Such a
tribute of affection and gratitude to those
who had laboured among them in the
word and doctrine, was very gratifying
and encouraging ; and the friends whose
removal from them occasioned such ex-
pressions of regard, reciprocated with
them feelings of affection.? (Page 92.)
Soon after her arrival at Feejee,
Mrs. Cargill addressed a letter to
her mother, of which the following
is an extract. It cannot fail to
excite a generous sympathy in be-
half of Missionaries and their wives,
who may be similarly circumstanced.
?After three years? journeying, we
have at last arrived at Feejee, a land of
darkness and superstition, where men
delight in cruelty and bloodshed. We
left Vavau on the Bth of this month,
and, after a voyage of five days, we were
safely landed. We spent the first night
in a canoe-house, where we were tor-
mented with musquitoes, and were glad
in the morning to return to our little
vessel, where Mrs. Cross and I remained
with the children, until the natives
erected two houses, made of the leaves
of the cocoa-nut tree. Here we shall
remain until we can get better. The
Lord has disposed the people to receive
us with all the kindness they are capable
of showing in their present degraded
state. When we look round us, we are
ready to say, ? Who is sufficient for this
great work ? ? But we can say, with the
Apostle of old, ? Our sufficiency is of
God.? We have seen his dealings with
the Heathen, and are assured in his
word, that all shall be brought to know,
love, and serve him. We had service in
the Tonguese language, when the King
was present :he listened with great
attention. He is desirous that the ser-
vice should be conducted in the Feejeean
language, that his people may all under-
stand what is said. This is very encou-
raging, and is perhaps as much as we
could expect. But we find a great dif-
ference between them and the people we
have left. But still we have great cause
for thankfulness. We have now been
here five days, and all the food we have
had brought is one fowl and a few yams.
\ ou will know by this that we do not
live on the fat of the land. Many of
the people are quite naked ; and those
who are clad have only a small piece of
native cloth brought up between their
thighs, and tied round their loins. Many
of them have their faces blackened, and
their hair is dyed two or three different


colours. These things give them an un-
couth and forbidding aspect. But we
trust the time is come when all these
things shall cease.
?In the last letter which I wrote to
you, I informed you of the birth and
death of our dear little John Smith ; and
I am looking forward with hope and
fear to the end of next month, when I
shall be called to give birth to our third
child. Here, my dear mother, I can
have no human help. Your presence,
and that of my dear sister, would make
my situation enviable in many respects,
when compared with what it is. But I
have all I can expect in these ends of the
earth. I have a kind David, who does
all in his power to make me comfortable.
I want nothing which he can procure for
me; and if you were here, we could be
satisfied to endure the privation of many
comforts we enjoyed in our native land.?
(Pages 102?104.)
Concerning this blessed woman
Mr. Cargill adds, ?
? The conversion and salvation of the
Feejeeans were objects which she ardently
desired, and for which she constantly
and earnestly prayed. The ignorance
and depravity of the people in general,
and the humiliating degradation of the
females in particular, excited her com-
miseration, and induced her to become a
cordial abettor of every plan that was
adopted for the amelioration of their cir-
cumstances. Believing that her useful-
ness among the inhabitants of Feejee
would be very limited without a know-
ledge of their language, she prudently
availed herself of those means and oppor-
tunities which she could command, that
she might acquire such an acquaintance
with the Feejeean tongue, as to be able
to converse in it with a tolerable degree
of ease and accuracy.
?One of the methods which she em-
ployed in the execution of this laudable
desire was, conversation with native
females. At first she supplied her lack
of words by signs, and by pointing to
any object the name of which she wished
to ascertain. In this manner, new acces-
sions to her number of words were fre-
quently made, until she was able to con-
verse freely with them, respecting their
customs and notions of religion. With
uncompromising spirit, she then assailed
their errors and vices; and with affection
and assiduity, she urged upon them the
necessity of reformation of manners, and
pardon of sin from God through Jesus
Christ. Her husband never heard that
any native had taken umbrage at her
faithfulness ; but the invariable testi-
mony of persons of all ranks concerning
her was, A marama ?fk.s'o loloma ko
Misisi Kakile, ?Mrs. C?._Jl is a lady
of a loving spirit.?
?Another circumstance which facili-
tated her progress in the Feejeean lan-
guage was, her attention to those persons
who visited the house in order to barter
their commodities, or obtain medicine for
the sick. The Missionaries in Tonga
and Feejee purchase much of their food
from the people among whom they re-
side ; and part of every Mission-house
becomes, at certain times, a dispensary.
The duties of attending to those natives
who frequent every Mission-house for
such purposes, are numerous and one-
rous ; and when health permitted, they
were generally performed by Mrs. Car-
gill. Her principal motive in adopting
this domestic arrangement was, that she
might thereby enable her husband to
redeem his time, and to devote his undi-
vided attention and energies to the more
peculiar and imperative duties which
devolved upon him. Many an hour has
he, in consequence, been enabled to de-
vote to the study of the language, and
the translation of a portion of Scripture ;
which, had Mrs. Cargill been less de-
voted and active, must have been con-
sumed in secular engagements. Such
intercourse with the Feejeeans had a
direct tendency to extend and correct her
knowledge of the language.?
(Pages 108, 109.)
Some copious extracts from Mr.
Cargill?s very interesting volume,
illustrative of the great spiritual and
moral good which has been accom-
plished, by God?s blessing upon
the Mission in Feejee, are given in
the Missionary Notices, which are
appended to the present Number of
this Magazine ; to which the reader
is referred. 'i he following facts
relating to the character and super-
stitions of the people will serve to
show the power of divine truth and
grace, in raising to peace, holiness,
and hope, a race who are so tho-
roughly under the influence of sen-
sual habits and malignant passions,
that they scarcely seem to belong to
the human family. Mr. Cargill
states, that
? When a temple is about to be erected
to any deity, which their superstition


Review of the Memoirs of Mrs. Margaret Cargill.
urges them to recognise and worship, the
Feejeeans butcher human beings, bake
and eat their flesh, that they may thereby
propitiate id javour of the god to whom
they intend the edifice. On
such occasions, the number of persons
who are slaughtered depends upon the
power of the Chief, at whose command
the work is undertaken, the rank of the
deity to whom the building is to be
dedicated, and the success of the assassins
in meeting with victims. At the com-
mencement, and during the progress of
the work, this cruel and diabolical cus-
tom is practised; but at no part of the
process do they seek a greater number of
victims, than when the posts of the tem-
ple are about to be erected. On that
occasion, all the artifice, vigilance, and
strength of the murderers are exerted, in
order to entrap and secure their victims.
They generally endeavour to seize per-
sons who belong to a different tribe, or
who, through misconduct, or the exist-
ence of national feuds, are obnoxious to
the vengeance of the ruling Chief; but
when such individuals cannot be obtain-
ed, they coolly imbrue their hands in
the blood of friends or foes. The vic-
tims of this barbarous dictate of their
religion are despatched with the club;
for although they may have been shot
dead with a musket-ball, yet the Feejee-
ans seldom think the work of destruc-
tion complete or secure, until they have
beaten with their clubs the objects of
their fury. Being thus deprived of life,
they are baked in native ovens; pre-
sented as propitiatory offerings to the
blood-thirsty cannibal gods, which their
mythology teaches them to adore and
fear; and are then distributed among
the men who are employed in the work
connected with the erection of the tem-
ple. The posts are then triumphantly
erected in the pits which had been pre-
viously dug, and the votaries of a demon-
izing superstition rejoice at the success
of their undertaking.?
(Pages 161, 162.)
The following scene, connected
with Feejeean warfare, is of the
same appalling character :
? Whilst sitting at breakfast on the
morning of Thursday, the 31st of Octo-
ber, we were startled by the shouts of
the natives at the opposite side of the
river; and going out to ascertain the
cause of such an unusual noise, witnessed
an appalling spectacle. The dead bodies
of twenty human beings, men, women,
and children, were being landed from* a
Vol. XXI. Third Series. January, 1812.
canoe in the immediate vicinity of the
house of the King of Rewa. These
unfortunate victims of a cruel system of
politics and religion, had been slain in
war, and were sent by Tanoa as a pre-
sent to Tuindrfekeji. Although the
King and Queen of Rewa have ceased
to eat human flesh, and would not allow
any of the bodies to be cooked within
the precincts of the town of Rewa, yet
they were all distributed among the
Chiefs and people of neighbouring towns,
to be cooked and eaten. The carcases
were dragged about in the water of the
river, and on the beach. The scene
appeared to the imagination as if a
legion of demons had been unchained,
and let loose among the people, to revel
in their degradation and misery, and to
lash their passions into a storm of im-
bruted or diabolical barbarity. The
children amused themselves by sporting
with, and mutilating, the dead body of a
little girl. A crowd of men and women,
of different ranks and ages, maltreated
the body of a grey-headed old man,
apparently verging on seventy, and that
of a young woman about eighteen years
of age. Their bodies were stretched
side by side on the beach. The upper
part of the old man?s skull had been
knocked by a club, and one of his arms
had been broken by a bullet which* had
passed through the bone near the shoul-
der. Human entrails were floating down
the river, in front of the Mission pre-
mises. Mutilated limbs, heads, and
trunks of human corpses were seen in
many places on the banks of the river,
between Mbau and Rewa; and scenes of
horror-and disgust were presented to our
view in every direction. How strikingly
correct is the feature of human depravity
which is described by the pen of inspira-
tion in the emphatic statement, ? The
dark places of the earth are full of the
habitations of cruelty ! ?
?These victims were brought from
Verata, and were killed by the Mbau
people. Two hundred and sixty per-
sons, consisting of men, women, and
children, were killed in an attack on a
Verata fortress; and the bodies were
brought away by the victors to be roasted
and eaten. These two hundred and
sixty bodies were distributed among the
allies and friends of Tanoa and his son
Seru. Twenty bodies was the portion
allotted to Tuindrekeji, although he had
taken no part in the war. Many women
and children were captured alive, to be
employed by the conquerors as slaves.
About thirty living children were placed,
in basket s :, and hoisted up to the mast-


head of their canoes as flags of triumph.
The motion of the canoes, whilst sailing,
dashed the helpless creatures against the
masts, and their piercing cries were soon
silenced in death. Other unfortunate
children were conveyed alive to Mbau,
that the boys might acquire skill in the
art of Feejeean warfare, by discharging
their arrows at them, and beating them
with clubs.
?To contemplate such horrifying
spectacles, without suffering much men-
tal pain, was impossible. During the
course of several days, our time and
attention were almost monopolized by
these scenes; and we could only lament
the degradation of human nature in
Feejee, and express astonishment and
dismay at the terrible effects of Satan?s
sceptre on the minds and manners of the
people. But our trust was in the power
of Him who had sent us to preach deli-
verance to these captives ; and we could
then say, with feeling and energy,
? Arm of the Lord, awake, awake.
Thine own immortal strength put on ;
With terror clothed, hell?s kingdom shake,
And cast thy foes with fury down.?
? Mrs. Cargill?s delicate frame of body
suffered much from the laceration of
mind which the shock of such barbarity
and cannibalism produced. Her heart
was tender; and when the string of her
fine feelings was touched, tears of burn-
ing pity flowed from her eyes, when she
witnessed the atrocious crimes of the
degraded Feejeeans, and reflected on
their exposure to everlasting vengeance.
?A person from Mbau, who had been
present at the siege of the settlements,
and who had been commissioned to con-
vey the inanimate bodies to the King of
Rewa, entered our house, to spend a
short time in looking at our persons, our
employment, and household furniture.
We entered into conversation with him
respecting the origin of the war, the
transactions at Verata, and the probable
results of the late victory. He described
some of the events which took place dur-
ing the massacre of the inhabitants of
the settlements, and at the distribution
of the slaughtered victims, with an ex-
pression of countenance which thrilled
through every nerve of the body, and
every faculty of the soul. Whilst the
stranger spoke, the spirit of war and
cannibalism seemed roused within him.
Mrs. Cargill listened to his recital, and
observed his emphatic gesticulations,
until she almost fainted; and, at length,
feebly said, ? Do not ask him any more
questions, David: I cannot bear it.?
Her request was complied with, and the
curtain of ignorance remained over the
rest of his details. We spoke to him of
the God and Gospel of peace and love ;
but his mind was engrossed with other
subjects, and it is feared that the effect
of our instructions at that time Was like
that of a feather on a rock.
? When getting out of bed, a short
time after the dawn of the day after that
on which the dead bodies had been
stretched on the Rewa beach, I heard
the sound of many voices talking loudly,
and making considerable noise. As
Mrs. Cargill had been unwell the pre-
ceding evening, I was afraid that any
disturbance at that early hour would in-
crease her indisposition; and hastened
out, half-dressed, to ascertain the cause
of the noise, and, if possible, prevent its
continuance. It was still twilight, so
that objects could not yet be clearly
seen; but I was able to observe a group
of persons stooping down, and scrutiniz-
ing something in the inside of cur gar-
den fence, not many yards from our
front door. From them the noise pro-
ceeded ; and one and another exclaimed,
whilst they gazed on the object before
them, ?lt is a man?s head.? I hastened
to examine the object of their scrutiny,
and, to my great surprise, found it to be
the head of the old man whose body had
been maltreated on the beach the preced-
ing day. It had been thrown into our
garden during the night, probably by
some malignant hand, and, doubtless,
with an intention of annoying and shock-
ing our feelings. The next day part of
a skull, which had been cooked, was
found near the front door of our house.
We caused these portions of human
beings to be buried, without giving pub-
licity among the natives to such dis-
agreeable and shocking occurrences.
About this time, a man, with a dead
child in his hand, was seen advancing
towards our pig-sty; but discovering
that the eye of one of our domestics was
following him, he turned back, and went
away in another direction, taking with
him the little corpse.?
(Pages 261?267.)
To those who regard Christianity
merely as a system of instruction,
the conversion of a people so dia-
bolically degraded and wicked, must
appear a hopeless task. But the
Missionary who understands the
nature of the evangelical message
with which he is entrusted, know-
ing by whom he is sent, and under


what sanction his labours are prose-
cuted, abandons every fear, and in-
quires, in the spirit of an absolute
trust,
? Is anything too hard for thee.
Almighty Lord of all ? ?
Wherever Missions have been car-
ried on in this spirit, the result has
justified the appeal to God, who has
never failed to give the promised
signs. In Feejee, at this day, are
considerable numbers of people who
? know the Lord,? having practi-
cally received the Gospel of his
grace. They sanctify the Sabbath ;
they read, with reverent and devout
attention, those parts of the sacred
Scriptures which have been trans-
lated, and printed in their language;
they receive, with faith and love,
the hallowed memorials of their
Redeemer?s passion; they discharge,
with diligence and fidelity, the rela-
tive duties of life, as husbands and
wives, parents and children ; they
offer to God, through the mediation
of his Son, a spiritual worship, and
enjoy communion with him in his
ordinances ; they contemplate, with
all the enlightened confidence and
joy of Christian hope, their future
entrance into the presence of their
glorified Saviour, and resurrection
to eternal life. Some of the native
converts already sleep in Jesus.
Mr. Cargill's volume is both in-
teresting and instructive as a record
of female piety; but its chief value
arises from the authentic informa-
tion which it gives concerning the
triumph of Christianity in Tonga
and Feejee. We pass over the
greater part of Mrs. Cargill?s per-
sonal history, comprehending her
very laudable efforts to advance the
interests of the Mission, her exem-
plary conduct as a wife and a mother,
and the affecting particulars of her
peaceful death, because we purpose,
ere long, to insert a distinct article
on these subjects, from the pen of
one of her husband?s colleagues.
In the mean while, we very cordially
recommend the volume, as describ-
ing a wonderful work of God. It is
beautifully printed, and illustrated
by several well-executed engravings
in wood. Mr. Cargill is evidently
possessed of facts and documents,
the result of his own personal obser-
vation, which qualify him to write a
far more extended account of ? Mis-
sionary enterprises,? of profound
interest, among the Tonguese and
Feejeean savages ; and we trust
that he will be persuaded, with as
little delay as convenient, to give
them to the world, for the honour
of God, and as a motive to persever-
ance in the great work of the world?s
conversion to the faith of Christ.
1 his gifted Minister, whose labours
have been very efficient, especially
in the responsible task of biblical
translation, having placed his child-
ren under the care of a pious lady
in the neighbourhood of London, is,
we believe, preparing again to leave
his native land, and to resume his
ministry in the far-distant islands of
the South Seas. He will be followed
by many prayers and blessings ; and
while men of such talents, zeal, and
self-denial are raised up, to proclaim
the truth in heathen lands, it cannot
be that Christians at home will
withhold from them the necessaries
of life, or suffer the work in which
they are engaged to languish for
want of the requisite support.
_ The interment of deceased Mis-
sionaries, and of Missionaries? wives
and children, in heathen lands, may
be regarded as a certain pledge that
those lands shall, ere long, be sub-
jected to God and his Christ. The
very ground seems to acquire a pe-
culiar sanctity by the admixture of
Christian dust, which was once the
living habitation of the Holy Ghost.
At the great rising morn, the-Mis-
sionary and his family, with his nu-
merous spiritual progeny, shall joy-
fully arise together, and be caught
up to meet the Lord in the air.
