

NOTICES OF BOOKS.
The Rise and Progress of Australia, Tasmania, and New Zealand. By an
Englishman. Saunders and Ottley.
This book belongs to a class we are sorry to see much on the increase
among us?that of works, got up for sale by hardy authors or speculative
publishers, and which derive little or no advantage from any previous
fitness of their writers to deal with this more than any other subject
they might have taken up at random, or been hired to illustrate, at
so much per sheet. It is, indeed, a book of little or no value beyond
such as the statistics the author has collected may be deemed to give
to it; and these, indeed, might, for the most part, have been procured
in England by any one well acquainted with the sources of Colonial
history, and have been compressed by any practised compiler into one
third the space the volume now occupies.
But this is by no means the only fault we have to find with this
writer. While a very small part of his work has any pretence to
originality, that small portion is defaced by an amount of bombast we
have seldom read elsewhere, and by a scurrilous abuse of every thing
and every body at the Antipodes, which will, we presume, as little
commend his volume to the men whose hospitality he has abused, as
it does to those who are able to read it at home by their quiet English fire-
sides. We shall give some instances of each of these errors, which will, we
think, satisfy most readers, both as to the ability with which the writer
describes what he saw or heard, and also as to the animus with which
he has devoted himself to his task.
Thus, after exhausting every term of abuse the language could afford
him for the state of things, when he arrived first in the Colony of
Victoria, he adds that there are still a few to be found there, ? who are
indebted for their position to the purity of their own character?who inherit
their wealth, not from their ancestors, but through their own merit?
men, whose unadorned and manly virtues would, by comparison, leave
the gilded titles of our proud aristocracy completely in the shade???
and much more of the same kind.
In another place, our author attributes most of the ills of this
colony to the selfishness of all who had settled there, and suggests
that any calm spectator would be sensibly impressed with ? the universal
and ceaseless struggle to pass each other in their daily race towards
that great and fathomless ocean, Selfish Ambition, to which there aro
countless rivulets, but in which there is no permanent safety?no security
against the fickle elements of fortune?no fixed and solid termination,
save in the emtombraent of those mortal spirits, which for a season
play upon its waters, or in the midnight calm or death-bed quiet, which
alternately succeed its own convulsions (!)?
Again, the writer tells us that ?avarice, arrogance, and dishonesty are the
pernicious weeds of ignorance??that ?selfishness is the great ally of
ignorance??that, ? in spirit as in act, selfishness, above all other features,
may be seen at every age and every stage of human nature?


that, ?from the rude savage to the polished courtier, and from the Hebrew
bagman to the Christian bishop, self is the great globular monster [!} ?the
concealed or visible human spring that impels, guides and regulates the
movements of the world.? Lastly, we are reminded that ?if the human
heart contained less of the stimulating nitre of selfishness, it would possess
more of real happiness.?
Our author pursues this train of reasoning through many pages?which,
with all due respect we submit, have very little to do with the principal
object of his work. We do not deny that many of his remarks are true
enough?indeed we have the best and the highest authority for believing
that the ? heart of man is desperately wicked,? still, for all this, we appre-
hend that a long and somewhat involved lecture, even on colonial morality,
is out of place in such a volume. It is clear that the writer intends his
work to serve as a sort of Colonial Handbook; we ai?e told on its fly-leaf
that its sale has already (alas for its readers!) reached the ?Fifth Thousand;?
and we are threatened annually with new editions of it, if it be adequately
supported by the public.
If this be so, let the author cut out two-thirds at least of his own de-
scriptions, at the same time retaining and enlarging from time to time his
statistical details, and his work will become, if not an entertaining volume,
at all events one from which intending colonists may derive some useful
information.
Again, when he comes to the more particular description of the places he
proposed to have visited, we find Melbourne called ? modern Babel?a little
hell upon earth? ??a city of gamblers, drunkards, &c., whose delusive schemes
are the pickpockets of honesty,? and where ? the penniless and unprincipled
owner of mental stock would generally outstep his monied competitor in the
race.? The colony of Victoria is termed ? nothing short of an uninhabited
desert;? and we are told that ?unless carried with the stream, and prostituted
for the purpose of gain, the mind had nothing whatever to feed on, much less
to bo edified with.? The old colonists and their children have the pleasure
of learning that, in this writer?s opinion, they ?are illiterate and ignorant in
the extreme;? and the Ex-mayor of one of the principal towns is described
?as arrogant, selfish, and mean to the very verge of contempt?and at the
same time capricious, overbearing, envious, and malicious?miserable,
irritable, and unhappy himself.? He is said to have ? neither sympathized
with nor delighted in the ease and happiness of others. As a patron, he
was courted by many, but respected by none. When his hand reluctantly
tendered a gift, it failed to inspire the recipient with gratitude for the favour.
Without one virtue to secure the notoriety to which his vanity aspired?
like the loss of his own blood, was the sacrifice of that gold which alone
could purchase his desires.?
Besides the naturally evil results on the population at large of the long
continued convict immigration, we learn that there are a considerable
number of settlers ?whose minds have been abused or polluted before
leaving their native land. Polluted by what or by whom? By the dregs
of the Press !" and that ?thousands of the youthful branches of their own
countrymen and of the present generation, have had their minds polluted,
their morals corrupted, and their talents- partially, if not wholly perverted,
by the mass of impure matter which, during the last thirty years, has been
vomited from the disorganized bowels of an unhealthy press, as wholesome
food for an enlightened people /? (The italics are the writer?s own.)
Warmed by this fertile topic, our author proceeds to a general denun-
ciation of ? the venal portion of the British Press,? and of ? the Reynolds
and Eugene Sue class of Fables, and of Lloyd?s Sunday newspaper,?
together with a general attack on ? the descendants of the O?Connell and


O?Connor School, ? the ringleaders in any and every unprincipled scheme?
political, social or commercial,? ?the teachers of any theory, however
fallacious, the advocates of any practice, however base??and much more of
the same kind.
Then we have a long lamentation on the ? rapid strides of invention of
the nineteenth century,? and, on the humiliating fact that ?some beardless
youth can readily command for a few sheets of fulsome romance a larger
sum than the immortal Milton obtained for his Paradise Lost, while a host
of romantic young ladies and ? fast? young gentlemen dive with avidity
into the Mysteries of Paris, &c. Finally, we have tirades against the un-
fortunate parents, who train up their children in ways which they should
not go?on the iniquity of betting books?on the hollowness of the modern
system ot trade and the extent to which the puffing of goods is carried in
London?with a dissertation on the dishonesty of London tradesmen, who
assume anything to be good enough for the colonial market?and on the
evils of universal suffrage, equality, fraternity and the like.
Of the Colonial Press he says that that of Victoria is peculiarly venal,
? the editors mistaking impudent assurance for power, and personal abuse
for satire,? and the Melbourne Argus is stated to be ? a newspaper that may
be justly termed the colonial weathercock.? The late governor, Sir Charles
Hotham, is held up to indignation, as one who promised more than he
could perform, and having shewn the colony that ho owed his position there
to the interest of ?at court? rather than to personal merit. We
are told that ?while his every official act has proved him to be totally
unfit to govern a country, it has also proved that the command of a 16-gun
boat would more nearly accord with his limited capacity than that of a
Colonial Ruler. Imperious without being dignified, he is likewise
austere, reserved, and unaffable; add to these failings, selfishness and
miserly parsimony, together with the minor ingredients necessary to in-
dividualize such a compound, and the reader will be furnished with a
figurative type of Sir Charles Hotham.?
We think that the above extracts will satisfy our readers as to the
character and value of this work, and, when we add that in glancing our
eyes through the volume, we notice, in about 350 pages, between 70 and 80
which have been taken either from newspapers or from other works
previously printed, without reckoning the pages of statistics, procured from
blue-books or the contributions of friends, which perhaps amount to as
many more, we consider ourselves fully justified in pronouncing it a
compilation, without the merit even of originality.
We had now done?but we have noticed in the account this writer has
given of Canterbury in New Zealand an attack upon one of the most able
and single-minded men who has ever left this country to settle in a distant
colony?the Superintendent of that province of New Zealand. After la-
menting that he had not ? been furnished with information respecting this
province equal to his desire to obtain it,? and that ?the promised assistance
of volunteers? had not reached him before his departure, our author adds
that on applying to tho all-important Superintendent of the Province for
statistical information, his Honor majestically observed, ? I have not time
to give the required information, nor am I in favour of any book on the
colony by a stranger; but if a work were needed on the Province of which
I am the head, the Superintendent himself is the only person qualified for
its production.? ?
Now, with all deference to the judgment of the writer of this volume, we
cannot imagine a better reason for not giving the requested information,
than that which the superintendent is said to have afforded; at the same
time, it is not improbable that some inkling of tho nature of the work about
to be compiled may have reached ?His Honor?s? ears, and may have


of "Wnuc,
: ca,? must b>.
ould be like
cities, for
t read^^^
are at
tty piece of
intd the
tragic
von _
unent,
ich
inclined him still less to allow his name and authority (o be mixed up with
such a farrago of abuse, statistics, and vague generalities, as this volume
contains. Of one fact we can assure the writer, that the settlers have every
reason to be content with ? one whose persuasive eloquence and refined
blarney induced a majority of voters to repose, for a season, an important
trust to a no less important individualand that there are not ten persons
in the province who will regret that their ruler did refuse to give his
personal sanction to the publication it has been our lot to criticize in the
previous pages.
In conclusion, we may perhaps be permitted to state our belief that this
work is probably as good as we had any reason to anticipate, from the
motives and the circumstances under which it has been put together. The
writer tells us with singular, perhaps with unnecessary, candour, that he
commenced life as a poet; but that having signally failed, and discovered
that poetry was not bis ?mission,? he determined to try his better luck with
prose. Having succeeded beyond his expectations, ? a wider field for
exertion has been selected, and, instead of confining his pen to particular
localities, the writer has attempted to embody entire colonies and com-
munities??such then was the origin of the volume before us. We will not
ask the writer to betake himself in future to discarded verses, but when he
again resolves to inflict his opinions upon the public, to remember that
? prose is not verse,? and to rein up more tightly his too exuberant
imagination. 4 v , n
?Oiseau . Par J. Michelet. Paris ; Hachette et 0- 2 me ed.
Men have a vein of foreign material running through their mental forma-
tions, or rather a sort of geological dyke, as different from the intellectual
strata it permeates as trap from clay slate, or basalt from red sandstone.
Their familiars know of its existence?not the world; and the latter starts?
as James IV. did, when some sudden turn revealed the pressure of his iron
belt ?starts to find that the homo teres et rotundus was an eccentric being,
after all. M. Michelet has revealed to the world that his organization is
traversed by a vein of heterogenous nature; he has worked it, but the
produce is not gold. Whoever may take up L Oiseau, in the expectation of
meeting either the accuracy of White, the shrewdness of Broderip, the
quaintness of ?Acheta Domestica,? must be disappointed; to recommend
it, indeed, to naturalist readers would be like presenting a child?s ? Noah?s
Ark,?? with its stiff wooden monstrosities, for the edification of Owen or St.
Hilaire. Yet the volume has all that readableness which the French lan-
guage is so well fitted to give to the airy trivialities of either conversation or
composition. Its introduction commences in that strain of egotism with
which other authors, besides those of France, are at times wont to salute
their ? indulgent public,??
sentimental
domestic scene, and ex
that will fade are tenc
,nd expected to sympathize accordingly. Naughty flowers
e tenderly kissed?a silky rabbit meets a tragic fate?its
Some young friends of ours did better: they put on mourn-
r favourite with funeral honours?raised a monument, yet
id the ceremony with quite the gravity befitting such an
)t us not pass from this home circle; the rest must be told.
mistress faints.
ing?buried their favo
scarcely performed the
occasion. JBut let us not pass from this home circle; the rest must be told.
Tame hens, guinea-pigs, doves, dogs, domestic cats of unexceptionable
private character, en grande fourrure, are disposed ? dignement sous les
chaises de leurs jeunes maitres.?
