

This book is invariably to be kept locked up when
not in use and is not to be taken outside the ship or
establishment for which it is issued without the
express permission of the Commanding Officer.
O.U. 6337 (40)
REVIEW
OF
GERMAN CRUISER WARFARE
1914-1918
1940


FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY.
This book is the property of H.M. Government. Its contents are not to be
communicated, either directly or indirectly, to the Press, or to any person not
holding an official position in H.M. Service.


FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY.
Attention is called to the penalties attaching to any infraction
of the Official Secrets Acts.
O.U. 6337 (40)
REVIEW
OF
GERMAN CRUISER WARFARE
1914-1918
1940
(399/1658)


CONTENTS.
CHAPTER I.—SUMMARY OF OPERATIONS
PAGE
Tonnage captured by raiders, length of cruise, area of operations, etc ■ 1
Position of raiders on outbreak of war 1
Fuelling ...• 2
Air reconnaissance ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... 2
Wireless communications ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... 2
Measures against raiders 2
Failure to protect shipping 3
Search and patrol 3
Introduction of convoy 3
CHAPTER lI.—GERMAN CRUISER SQUADRON AND LIGHT CRUISERS
Cruiser Squadron, Emden detached from 4
Comments on British strategy prior to Coronel 4
Attack on Falkland Islands ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... 5
Principle of cruiser warfare 5
Possible co-operation with High Sea Fleet 5
Search for Dresden after the Falklands Battle 6
Emden, operations of 7
Captain Von Mueller’s hints on cruiser warfare 7
Search for Emden ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... 8
Failure to protect shipping from 8
Koenigsberg meets the Cape Squadron 8
Operates in Gulf of Aden 8
Fails to obtain coal 9
Hides in Rufiji River 9
Measures against 9
Karlsruhe meets the Kronprinz Wilhelm 9
Chased by Suffolk ... 9
Successful operations off Coast of Brazil 10
Sunk by internal explosion 10
Failure of search and patrol 10
CHAPTER lII.—AUXILIARY CRUISERS
Kaiser Wilhelm der Grosse breaks out from North Sea ' ... 11
Delay in meeting collier 11
Discovery of coaling anchorage 11
Destruction by Highflyer 11
Cap Trafalgar, commissioned at Trinidada Island 11
Difficulty of coaling 11
Action with Carmania 12
Kronprinz Wilhelm commissioned by Karlsruhe 12
Always coaled at sea 12
Successful operations 12
Interned at Newport News 12
Countermeasures, failure of ( ... 12
Cormoran, commissioned at Tsingtao 13
Detached from Cruiser Squadron 13
Failure to obtain coal 13
Interned at Guam 13
Prinz Eitel Friedrich, detached from Cruiser Squadron 13
Rejoins at Mas-a-fuera 13
Attacks trade off South American Coast 13
Interned at Newport News 13
Moevve, first cruise of 13
Lays mines off Orkneys and the Gironde River 14
Attacks shipping in the Atlantic 14
Returns to Germany ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... 14
Moewe, second cruise of 14
The Samland gives the alarm 14
Captures and commissions the Saint Theodore 15
Narrow escape from the Amethyst 15
Importance of jammed wireless signals 15
Damaged in action with the Otaki 16
Failure of measures against Moewe 16
REVIEW OF GERMAN CRUISER WARFARE 1914-18.


PAGE
Greif attempts to break the blockade 16
Sinks Alcantara 16
Sunk by Andes and Comus 16
Wolf, operation orders of 17
Lays mines off Cape Town, Colombo and Bombay 18
Captures and commissions the Turritella as Iltis 18
Anchors at Sunday Island 18
Obtains coal from Wairumo ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... 18
Lays three minefields in New Zealand and Australian Waters ... ... ... ... 19
Mines approaches to Singapore ' ... 19
Attacks shipping in Atlantic 19
Ships sunk by Wolf’s mines 19-20
Scuttling of Iltis 21
Failure of counter-measures 21
Seeadler 21
Examined by Patia 21
Operations in Atlantic 21
Proceeds into the Pacific 22
Wrecked on Mopihaa Island 22
Counter-measures ! 22
Instructions issued by the Admiralty 22
Leopard 22
Deciphering of British signals 22
Attempts to evade the blockade 22
Sunk by Achilles and Dundee 22
CHAPTER IV.—FUELLING AND SUPPLY
Organisation of German supply 23
Auxiliary bases 23
Duties of naval and civilian personnel 23
Arrangements for supplying Cruiser Squadron in the Pacific 23-24
Arrangements for supplying Cruiser Squadron on homeward journey 24
Action by British diplomatic and consular officials 25
Fuelling arrangements of Emden 26
Captain Von Mueller’s suggestions 26
Koenigsberg, breakdown of supply organisation 26
Karlsruhe, details of coal supply 27
Kaiser Wilhelm der Grosse, delay in obtaining coal 27
Kronprinz Wilhelm, details of coaling at sea and dependence on prizes 27-28
CHAPTER V.—INTELLIGENCE AND COMMUNICATIONS
German Intelligence Organisation 29
New York centre ... ... ... ••• ••• ••• ••• 29
Repeating ship at Pernambuco 29
Las Palmas centre 29
Devices to outwit censorship ... ... ... ... ... •• • •• • •• • •• • •■ • 29
Shanghai centre 29
Intelligence organisation off Coast of Chile ... 29
News of Invincible at Abrolhos obtained by deciphering or espionage 30
British wireless signals of great value to German raiders ... ... ... ... ... ... 30
Assists Von Spec in concentration against Cradock 30
Helps Emden, Karlsruhe and Kronprinz Wilhelm to evade pursuers 30
Remarks of Captains of Karlsruhe and Kronprinz Wilhelm ... ... ... ... ... 30
Caution of German raiders in use of wireless 30
Wireless of 10th Cruiser Squadron supplies vital information - 30-31
Possible explanation of excessive wireless signalling by British cruisers 31
Capture of British merchant ships due to same cause 31
False reports and rumours 31
Wireless as a method of spreading misleading information 31
Koenigsberg simulates wireless traffic of ships at sea ... 31
False reports spread by Dresden and Karlsruhe... .... ... ... ... ... ... 31
APPENDIX.—ANCHORAGES USED BY RAIDERS
Pacific Ocean —North 32
Pacific Ocean —South 32
Atlantic Ocean —North ... ... ... ••• ••• ••• ••• 33
Atlantic Ocean —South 33
Tierra del Fuego and Magellan Straits Area 34
Indian Ocean 34


LIST OF PLATES.
Plate.
I. Track of German Cruiser S.M.S. Emden and S.M.S. Koenigsberg.
11. Track of German Cruiser S.M.S. Karlsruhe.
111. Track of German Cruiser S.M.S. Karlsruhe, 30th August to 25th Octo-
ber, 1914.
IV. Track of German,Auxiliary Cruiser Kronprinz Wilhelm.
V. Track of German Auxiliary Cruiser Prinz Eitel Friedrich.
VI. Track of German Auxiliary Cruiser Moewe, Northern Portion, Ist
Voyage.
VII. Track of German Auxiliary Cruiser Moewe, Southern Portion, Ist
Voyage.
VIII. Track of German Auxiliary Cruiser Moewe, Northern Portion, 2nd
Voyage.
IX. Track of German Auxiliary Cruiser Moewe, Southern Portion, 2nd
Voyage.
X. Track of German Auxiliary Cruiser Wolf, Northern Portion, Outward
Bound.
XI. Track of German Auxiliary Cruiser Wolf.
XII. Track of German Auxiliary Cruiser Wolf, Northern Portion, Homeward
Bound.
XIII. Track of German Auxiliary Cruiser Kaiser Wilhelm der Grosse.
XIV. Track of German Auxiliary Cruiser Cap Trafalgar.
XV. Track of German Auxiliary Cruiser Seeadler.


Name.
Tonnage
Captured.
Length of Cruise,
Theatre of Operations.
Remarks.
Cruiser Squadron
1,600
Four months
Destroyed, Battle of Falklands,
(Von Spec)
Dresden
12,927
Six months ; S. Atlantic and
8th December, 1914.
Destroyed, Juan Fernandez, 14th
Leipzig
15,299
S. Pacific
Four months; N. and S.
March, 1915.
Destroyed, Battle of Falklands,
Emden
82,938
Pacific
Nine weeks ; N. Pacific and
8th December, 1914.
Destroyed off Cocos Island, 9th
Koenigsberg
6,600
Indian Ocean
Indian Ocean. Blockaded
November, 1914.
Finally destroyed 11th July, 1915.
Karlsruhe
76,609
in river, end of October,
1914
Three months, N. and S.
Destroyed by internal explosion,
Kaiser Wilhelm der
10,400
Atlantic
Three weeks, N. Atlantic ...
4th November, 1915.
Destroyed at coaling anchorage,
Grosse
Cap Trafalgar
Nil
Six weeks ; S. Atlantic
26th August, 1914.
Destroyed at coaling anchorage,
Kronprinz Wilhelm...
60,522
Over 8 months ; N. and S.
14th September, 1914.
Interned Newport News, 11th
CORMORAN
Nil
Atlantic
Four months; N. and S.
April, 1915.
Interned Guam, 14th December,
Prinz Eitel Fried-
33,423
Atlantic
Over 7 months; N. and S.
1914.
Interned, Newport News, 10th
rich
Pacific and S. Atlantic
March, 1915.
Moewe (1st Cruise) ...
57,776
Two months ; N. and S.
Returned to Germany, 5th March,
Moevve (2nd Cruise) ...
124,713
Atlantic
Four months; N. and S.
1916.
Returned to Germany, 22nd
Greif
Nil
Atlantic
Two days
March, 1917.
Sunk in North Sea, 29th Febru-
Wolf
38,688
Fifteen months ; N. and S.
ary, 1916.
Returned to Germany.
Seeadler
73,988
27,923
Atlantic and Pacific
(Mines)
N. and S. Atlantic and S.
Wrecked, Mopihaa Island, 2nd
Leopard
Nil
Pacific ; 1\ months
Six days
August, 1917.
Sunk in North Sea, 16th March,
Total
623,406
1917.
CHAPTER I.
SUMMARY OF OPERATIONS.
This monograph is a summary of information which may bear on the opera-
tions of German surface raiders. It is mainly based on the German Official
History of Cruiser Warfare 1914-18 (Kreuzerkrieg, 3 Vols., I.D. Translation) which
gives a detailed account of the operations of the Cruiser Squadron, the light cruisers
Emden, Koenigsberg and Karlsruhe and the auxiliary cruisers Kaiser Wilhelm
der Grosse, Cap Trafalgar, Kronprinz Wilhelm, Cormoran, Prinz Eitel
Friedrich, Moewe (two cruises), Greif, Wolf, Seeadler and Leopard. . The
tonnage captured by each vessel, its length of cruise, theatre of operations, etc.,
are tabulated below.
All the above ships except the Kaiser Wilhelm der Grosse, Moewe,
Wolf, Seeadler, Greif and Leopard were already abroad when hostilities
commenced. The first four of these successfully evaded the North Sea—Atlantic
blockade, the Seeadler having been allowed to proceed after examination. The
Moewe (twice) and Wolf also escaped the patrols on their homeward journeys.
The Greif and Leopard were destroyed before reaching the oceanic routes as a
result of special intelligence which may be considered as an exceptional factor
of the last war. Further information bearing on the operations of the Cruiser
Squadron and light cruisers will be found in Chapter 11, and the auxiliary cruisers
in Chapter 111. Track charts of each vessel are included.
(399/1658)t a 3


Fuelling and supply was perhaps the most difficult problem which faced the
German raiders and Chapter IV is devoted to that subject. The activities of
all these different types of ships depended on the supply and embarkation of
coal and the change over to oil should be taken into consideration before drawing
inferences from 1914-18. Oil can be easily transferred on the high seas, but coal
cannot, except under particularly favourable conditions. The Kaiser Wilhelm
der Grosse and Cap Trafalgar were soon brought to action because their
coaling anchorages were discovered whereas the Kronprinz Wilhelm which
always coaled in the open sea successfully evaded her pursuers. Similarly, the
immunity of the Moewe and Wolf may be partly traced to the large coal reserves
carried in their own holds. Fuel supply is likely to remain the Achilles heel of
raiders in distant waters, though possibly not to the same extent as in 1914—18.
Air reconnaissance is another new factor which may influence operations. Few
ships carried aircraft in the last war, but the Wolf’s seaplane proved of great
value. Wireless communications have also developed during the past 20 years,
but they exercised an important influence on the raiding operations of 1914-18,
and Chapter V has, therefore, been devoted to “ Intelligence and Communica-
tions.”
The German raiders captured 623,406 tons of shipping (including 74,000
sunk by the Wolf’s mines). The lion’s share of 454,712 tons went to the Moewe,
Wolf, Emden and Karlsruhe. They inflicted very heavy losses on British
shipping although the heavier submarine sinkings tended to obscure the fact.
In addition, they held up trade and transport for long periods besides immobilising
a very large number of allied cruisers in distant waters. Under the circumstances,
it seems extraordinary that they were not used on a larger scale. The following
remarks in the German Official History bear on this point:—
“ The Moewe and Wolf only appeared in the third year of the war.
The submarine had already achieved considerable success by then and
was more economical of time and personnel in comparison with tonnage
sunk. The auxiliary cruiser did, however, supplement the war on com-
merce by operating in distant waters which were not threatened by
submarines.
A larger number of auxiliary cruisers of the Moewe-Wolf type would
not by themselves have won the war, but in conjunction with submarines,
might in the years 1917-18 have been able to contribute what was wanting
to secure victory, particularly if the North and South Atlantic routes had
been seriously threatened at their terminals. Auxiliary cruisers would,
however, have been particularly valuable at the commencement of the war
had they been employed at once in large numbers. If for instance, the
colliers of the supply bases at Manila and Batavia had each been fitted at
Kiaochow with a single gun and a supplementary active service crew
commanded by efficient young commanders —then, at a time, when no
merchant ships had been armed, the trade in Australian and Indian waters
would have been completely disorganised. The effect of these auxiliary
cruisers might have been greatly strengthened by the Emden, perhaps
also the Nuremberg in the Far East, and by the Dresden and Leipzig
on the West Coast of South America. Owing, however, to everything
being subordinated to the battle fleet and by systematic opposition to the
jeune ecole, cruiser warfare on a grand scale had never been thoroughly
considered. Nevertheless, the weaker naval power possesses a powerful
weapon in the auxiliary cruiser, which has greater effect, if wielded
energetically, at the outbreak of war simultaneously in all oceans.”
The measures adopted against raiders are referred to in greater detail in
Chapters II and HI. Prior to the war, the Admiralty adopted the principle that
the surest way of affording protection to trade was to make a prompt attack on
the enemy’s fighting ships, the destruction of which was stated to be the primary
object in maritime war. The Atlantic Ocean was divided into zones designated
by letters, to each of which a cruiser force wa? allocated. The idea seems to have
been that they should concentrate their efforts in the focal and terminal areas,
but in practice, operations against raiders mainly consisted of searching areas
and anchorages in which they were thought to be working. In some cases,
shipping was diverted from the normal routes and also temporarily held up in


harbour. For example, all sailings from Aden and Bay of Bengal ports were
stopped when the Koenigsberg and Emden appeared in these areas. Similarly,
troop transports were detained in certain harbours following reports of the Moewe
(2nd cruise) and Wolf. The provision of escorts for transports was another
measure. For example, they were enforced in the Indian Ocean on the 4th March,
1917, on account of the Wolf, discontinued on 2nd June and re-introduced in
December, following an out-of-date report from the Maidive Islands. These
were not convoys in the ordinary sense of the word for a single cruiser often
escorted only one or two transports. No attempt was made to include cargo
ships although this might have been arranged.
Viewed through the perspective of the years, it must be admitted that these
counter-measures did not afford much protection to shipping or attain a high
degree of success in destroying the actual raiders. During 1916 and 1917, we
maintained abroad, exclusive of the Mediterranean, an average of 6 old battle-
ships, 35 cruisers, 13 large auxiliary cruisers and 9 destroyers besides a large
number of sloops. In addition, the French had 4 cruisers on the oceanic routes
and the Japanese lent 8 cruisers and 4 destroyers, making a grand total of 6
battleships, 47 cruisers, 13 auxiliary cruisers and 17 destroyers. This large force
performed various useful duties but its main function was to protect trade and
hunt down raiders. Only three of the latter were at work during these two years,
the Moewe for six months, the Wolf for twelve, and the Seeadler for seven- and-a-
half, but there is very little evidence that they were seriously hampered by the
measures taken against them. Exclusive of the ships of the German Cruiser
Squadron, a total of 12 raiders operated on the oceanic routes at different periods
of the war. One was sunk by internal explosion, three were interned, three
returned to Germany and one was wrecked. Four were destroyed in battle, but
of these the Kaiser Wilhelm der Grosse and Koenigsberg cannot be entirely
credited to our strategical dispositions for the breakdown of the German supply
organisation played an important part in their destruction. Again, the Emden’s
fate depended on a lucky chance and the policy of patrolling and searching was
only fully justified in the case of the Cap Trafalgar. It nearly succeeded when
the Suffolk surprised the Karlsruhe in the West Indies, but the actual result
was to drive her into a more remunerative area. Similarly, when things became
too hot fo.r her on the normal South American trade route, she withdrew by chance
on to the diverted track and made several captures.
It appears that our cruisers in distant waters would have been more effectively
employed in convoying trade, especially as the Allies had more than sufficient for
the purpose. This policy would have greatly reduced the sinkings besides cutting
off the raiders’ source of fuel supply from captured vessels. Even if convoy had
been confined to ships carrying coal, the activities of the Emden, Karlsruhe,
Prinz Eitel Friedrich, Kronprinz Wilhelm, Moewe and Wolf would
very soon have been brought to a dead stop. During the last year of the war,
arrangements were made for introducing a world-wide convoy organisation at
short notice but, by that time, raiding operations had ceased. Also early in
1918, plans were worked out for convoying the Atlantic trade with battleships
to guard against possible raids by German battle cruisers and an American battle
squadron was stationed at Berehaven for that purpose.
(399/1658)t
A 4


CHAPTER II.
GERMAN CRUISER SQUADRON AND LIGHT CRUISERS.
German Cruiser Squadron.
It is unnecessary to say much about the movements of this squadron. They
are described in the Naval Staff Monographs, but the German History contains
some additional information. When Admiral Von Spec decided to leave the
China Seas and make for the West Coast of South America, he realised that that
course of action would provide few opportunities of damaging British shipping.
The question of taking the Squadron into the Indian Ocean was considered, but
rejected owing to the difficulty of maintaining coal supplies. On despatching
the Emden into that area he made the following entry in his war diary :
“ A single light cruiser, which consumes far less coal and can, if
necessary, coal from captured steamships, will be able to maintain herself
longer than the whole Squadron in the Indian Ocean, and as there are
great prizes to be won there (Indian, East Asiatic and Australian shipping),
it seems advisable to despatch our fastest light cruiser, the Emden, with
our best collier. She can subsequently proceed to the African coast, or
should Holland remain neutral, to the Netherland East Indies.”
Commenting on the operations which led up to Coronel, the German History
says :
" The operations of the Allies were undoubtedly severely hampered
by the fact that they were not directed from the outset towards seeking
out and engaging our Main Force. Their operations against German
intelligence centres and bases in the Pacific soon developed into expeditions
for territorial conquest, so that some of their naval forces were diverted
from their main objective for a considerable time. They must soon have
become aware, however, that the German ships were not remaining in
close proximity to German bases and colonies. The operations against
the Cruiser Squadron were hampered further by the necessity for pro-
tecting the transport of numerous troops, who were urgently needed owing
to the situation in the European theatre of war. These smaller operations
interfered with the systematic co-operation of the East Asiatic and
Australian forces.
In addition, the British Naval History indicates that the plan con-
ceived in peace time to combine the China, Australian and East Indies
Squadrons to form an Eastern Fleet under the Commander-in-Chief, China
Squadron, was not carried out completely in 1914, but that the Commander-
in-Chief and the Commander-in-Chief, Australia, worked side by side under
direct orders from the Admiralty, and that the Admiralty, here and in
other theatres of war, restricted the Admirals’ freedom by concerning
themselves with details. It is evident also that the Admiralty were
sometimes unable to obtain concurrence with their strategic views and
were repeatedly obliged to give way to the local interests of the Australian
and New Zealand Governments. The Australian Navy Board, in particular,
appears to have been allowed a certain independence as regards strategic
decisions.
At times, one Commander-in-Chief, did not even know what the other
was doing; in the first particularly critical period they did not even
remain in wireless telegraphy communication, although, with energetic
co-operation, they might quite possibly have found the German Squadron
and engaged it. After the entry of Japan into the war, the co-operation
of the Allies still remained faulty, although they received many indications
of Graf Von Spec’s whereabouts and destination ; this want of co-operation
was chiefly due to the pursuit of local objectives and the lack of close
cohesion of the forces under one command. The strategic position which
brought disaster to the British at the Battle of Coronel was the outcome of
these defects.


The plan of keeping two forces, one on the east and one on the west
coast, each strong enough to engage the Cruiser Squadron, was undoubtedly
right, given the possibility of doing so with the ships available. It was
necessary that each force should be considerably superior to the Cruiser
Squadron, the fighting efficiency of which was known ; it was also necessary
to have a number of fast ships available, so that when the enemy had been
found they could keep in touch with him until the Main Body came up.
If the forces available were inadequate for this purpose, it would undoubtedly
have been advisable to concentrate the Main Force at the Falkland Island.-,
detaching a few fast cruisers to watch that part of the coast where the
Cruiser Squadron would probably pass; this was Admiral Jerram’s
original plan and Admiral Cradock no doubt had it in mind when he pro-
posed to assemble his forces at the Falkland Islands.”
After the Battle of Coronel, the Naval Staff advised Von Spee to try to
break through with all his ships and return to Germany, and that was his intention
on leaving Valparaiso. The idea of attacking the Falkland Islands at the very
commencement of the homeward journey brought about the destruction of his
ships at the guns of Sturdee's Squadron. There can be little doubt that that
battle and the destruction of the Emden off Cocos Islands will tend to make
German raiders in foreign waters avoid attacks of a military nature, and confine
themselves strictly to commerce warfare. Even before the event, the officers
of the Squadron were by no means unanimous on this question. The Captains of
the Gneisenau, Leipzig and Dresden thought it strategically unsound to approach
the Falkland Islands. The History, whilst admitting that a successful landing
would have weakened the British position, remarks: —
“ The damage to the enemy would however, be of a temporary nature
only, because the Cruiser Squadron would be unable to hold the base for
any length of time. It was in no way necessary in the interests of future
operations to attack the Falkland Islands, and as the British wireless
telegraph stations would certainly send out warning signals before they
were destroyed, the whereabouts of the Cruiser Squadron would be dis-
closed, thus lessening the chances of breaking through for home. The
chance of surprising the enemy shipping off the La Plata would also be
forfeited, though it was very important both as regards damaging the
enemy and procuring coal for the Squadron. Further, if enemy forces
were encountered, even a successful action would result in exhausting
the German supplies of ammunition long before fresh supplies could be
sent from home and might also result in damage to ships and engines.”
In a discussion on the general principles of cruiser warfare against trade, the
German Historian lays down that a Commander should as far as possible avoid
action with hostile forces and that this rule becomes even more binding when
bases for effecting repairs are not available. It is stated that a cruiser Captain
must in such circumstances avoid all acts likely to assist the enemy in locating
him. Such acts include attacks on shore establishments except when undertaken
for some very special purpose.
The History also criticises the passivity of the High Sea Fleet at the time of
the Falklands Battle and seems to suggest that the action of forces in distant
waters can be synchronised with those at home to the mutual advantage of both.
It says :
“ The early end of the Cruiser Squadron prevented the High Sea Fleet
from co-operating with it, but it would be false to assume that there was
no possibility of such co-operation, especially if the war had been of short
duration. The operations carried out at a great distance from home waters
had affected British strategy ,to an enormous degree and the continuance
in the Atlantic of those operations might well have caused such distribu-
tion and movements of the Grand Fleet as to afford the High Sea Fleet
opportunities for obtaining military successes, and thus exercising a direct
and decisive influence on the war.
- Special emphasis must, however, be laid on the fact that, if the High
Sea Fleet had taken energetic action in the North Sea during the months
October-December, 1914, the British would have found it difficult if not
impossible, to detach ships to operate against the Cruiser Squadron. This
(399/1658)x a 5


Squadron might then have achieved further military successes, which
would not have failed in their effect on the situation in home waters.
Finally, if the Cruiser Squadron had executed the operation of breaking
through into the North Sea in co-operation with the High Sea Fleet, an
action between the British and German Fleets might have ensued and the
results might have been decisive for the whole war.”
The Cruiser Squadron did not meet any merchant shipping in its passage
across the Pacific, but the auxiliary ship Titania captured the Helicon (1,600
tons) and the Leipzig, the Valentine (3,150 tons) and Drummuir (1,844 tons),
all loaded with coal, off the South American Coast. The capture of the Drum-
muir turned out to be an unfortunate incident for the Germans. She was inter-
cepted to the eastward of Cape Horn on the 2nd December and towed to Picton
Island where her cargo was transferred to the supply ships Baden and Saint
Isabel. This delayed the Squadron’s arrival at the Falkland Islands by three
days but as she sank beneath the waves no one knew that her capture had sealed
her captor’s fate.
Very little need be said about the Leipzig’s movements before joining the
Pacific Squadron. She was in Mexican waters on the outbreak of war and after
cruising as far North as San Francisco, proceeded to Easter Island, capturing the
two British ships Elsinore and Bankfield en route. She sank two more ships
in company with Von Spec’s Squadron which brought her total captures up to
15,299 tons.
The Dresden proceeded from the West Indies to the East Coast of South
America with the intention of attacking trade to the southward of the River
Plate, sinking two British ships, the Hyades and Holmwood on the way. But
her engines needed refitting and an anchorage in Orange Bay near Cape Horn
was chosen for that purpose. Whilst carrying out this work, the Dresden was
ordered to the West Coast and after joining the Cruiser Squadron sank two more
ships which brought her total captures up to 12,927 tons.
The Dresden was the only German cruiser to escape from the Battle of the
Falklands. At first two battle-cruisers and ten cruisers were employed in searching
for her, but after about a fortnight this was reduced to four cruisers one
auxiliary cruiser. Nevertheless, she remained at large for over three ihonths.
The numerous bays and inlets of Tierra del Fuego provided excellent hiding places,
but the Dresden frequently communicated with Punta Arenas by motor boat,
etc., and she would probably have been quickly located if the intelligence organisa-
tion, centred in London and Monte Video over 1,200 miles away, had not proved
defective. Despite this handicap, the British Vice-Consul (unpaid) at Punta
Arenas, who had his own business to .attend to, did obtain accurate information
of the Dresden’s hiding places on two occasions. His first telegram does not seem
to have reached the Admiralty which had become convinced that she was hiding
in an almost inaccessible fjord, Last Hope Inlet, an idea which appears to have
been spread by the Germans themselves. Orders were issued from London to
search it, and the Kent was despatched to Valparaiso to obtain the necessary
charts. The Admiralty did not know that the Captain of the Glasgow had
arranged with the English Manager of a local company to report the arrival of
any ship in that district and before his telegram, to that effect, reached London,
further instructions were issued. The Bristol was now ordered down from Monte
Video and she and the Glasgow proceeded to Union Sound en route for Last
Hope to await the return of the Kent. This move left the southern coast clear
for the Dresden and she proceeded into the Pacific on the 14th February. Five
days later, the Vice-Consul learnt that she had been seen at the southern end of
the Barbara Channel but the Glasgow was now in Last Hope Inlet, where the
Bristol had seriously damaged her rudder by striking a rock. After his return,
the Captain of the Glasgow arranged for a search of the southern area, but on
3rd March the Admiralty informed him that the Dresden had now been definitely
located in Last Hope Inlet. He realised that his own ship had probably been
mistaken for the German Cruiser but the Admiralty was not easily convinced and
ordered the Glasgow, Bristol and Orama to proceed once again on a hopeless
quest to the Last Hope labyrinth.
In the meantime, the Kent was following a more reliable clue obtained from
an intercepted signal ordering the German collier Gotha to rendezvous in 37° S.


and 80° W., about 200 miles south of Mas-a-fuera. On 7th March, the Kent
sighted the Dresden in that position, but she had not the necessary speed to
catch her and the only ship that had, was bottled up in Last Hope until slack
water on the following day. The Kent did, however, intercept an important
signal from the Dresden which on being deciphered pointed to a rendezvous at
Juan Fernandez, where the Dresden was brought to action and destroyed on
14th March.
EMDEN. (Plate I.)
The Emden was a comparatively modern light cruiser, displacing 3,650 tons,
mounting ten 4- 1-inch guns with a speed of 24 knots. Her movements, including
names, etc., of ships sunk, are shown on the accompanying track chart (Plate I) ;
the anchorages she used will be found in the Appendix, and some details of her
fuelling arrangements in Chapter IV.
She captured 82,398 tons of British shipping in less than six weeks, besides
seriously dislocating trade in the Indian Ocean. She also destroyed the Russian
light cruiser Zhemchug and the French destroyer Mousquet, fired the Madras
oil tanks and interrupted communications with Australia by cutting the cable at
Cocos Islands. Another important effect of the Emden’s operations was to
delay the transport of British troops from India and Australia. The History
also infers that the Emden’s appearance in the Indian Ocean had considerable
effect on the native population, although insufficient to have any material influence
on the movement for the overthrow of British rule. It is stated that numerous
disaffected Indians returned to their native land from America and Japan on the
outbreak of war. Apparently, they were supplied with arms and money but the
rapidity with which Germany was cut off from overseas countries, prevented
anything but isolated outbreaks which were quite unco-ordinated and without
lasting effect. An attempt to convey a large quantity of arms from North
America to India in the steamship Maverick, failed owing to what is termed “ the
one-sided neutrality of the United States.”
The Captain of the Emden’s report contains various hints on the best methods
of effecting a capture. He recommends that the ensign should not be shown until
the ship to be boarded is only a short distance off and that the signals “ Stop ”
and “Do not use your wireless ” should be hoisted at the same time. Search-
lights should be used as little as possible and the cruiser kept in a position relative
to the prize in which the latter cannot ram her. A considerable increase in the
complement of cruisers engaged in such work is recommended so that armed
guards, or prize crews for colliers, can be formed. The additional ratings should
as far as possible be reservists from the Mercantile Marine and should include
engineers and stokers. Officers of the Reserve are invaluable for the command of
captured colliers or armed guards, particularly those who have experience of the
area in which the cruiser is operating.
Prizes were usually sunk by opening the Kingston valves, removing the doors
of condensers and opening up the ballast pump valve chests. Openings in bulk-
heads were made by explosive charges during the night or by shell fire during day
light. It was found that vessels sunk more rapidly if holed either forward or
aft, but not at both ends.
In view of the necessity for keeping secret the area in which a cruiser is
operating, the disposal of the crews of captured vessels is stated to be important.
In certain cases, their landing must be delayed as long as possible, and if a vessel
with sufficient accommodation and provisions for numerous passengers and crews
is available, the problem can be solved by keeping her in company for the necessary
time. The enemy can then be prevented from receiving early news of the cruiser’s
position, her methods, supply bases, and use of auxiliary vessels, etc. Never-
theless, a neutral merchant ship fitted with wireless will, as a rule, disclose
the cruiser’s position to any enemy warship she may meet and in any case the
disclosure is bound to occur on her arrival in port. The absence of reports from
ships due at certain signal stations and non-arrival at their destinations will also
enable a cruiser’s area of operations to be inferred. Delay in landing crews will,
therefore, only be of real value in keeping a cruiser’s operations secret,
when no neutral vessels have been stopped or when her position is such that signal
stations or ports will only be reached after a lengthy voyage.
(399/1658)t a 6


The German Historian states that the Emden’s operations in the Indian
Ocean will stand as a model of cruiser warfare against commerce and remarks
that;—
“ Captain Von Mueller delivered his blows where they would have the
greatest political and economic effect. His sudden appearance and dis-
appearance at the scene of operations and a correct appreciation of the
enemy’s counter moves enabled him not only to achieve success in each
individual operation, but also to render his capture difficult. It was not
luck, but the capacity for forming an accurate estimate of the situation
from the scanty information obtainable from prizes and intercepted wireless,
that were responsible for his achievements in spite of all the enemy’s
endeavours to catch him. Far from keeping to any fixed scheme, Captain
Von Muller instantly dropped a predetermined course of action when cir-
cumstances rendered a change of plan desirable.”
The naval measures taken to deal with the Emden’s attack on trade consisted
in employing numerous cruisers in searching anchorages and areas in which she
had been reported or was suspected of operating. The number varied but on
the average totalled 1 battlecruiser (Japanese), 4 armoured cruisers, 4 cruisers,
and 2 auxiliary cruisers. In addition there were 2 Russian cruisers in the Indian
Ocean. Some of these cruisers were slower than the Emden so that even if they
had located her, she would probably have escaped like the Karlsruhe did. In
any case, frequent changes in the theatre of operations usually rendered the
intelligence, on which they acted, misleading or out-of-date.
This system did not effectually protect the trade or succeed in bringing the
Emden to action. Her eventual destruction was due to a lucky chance that the
Sydney, escorting troop transports from Australia, happened to be in the vicinity
when she raided the Cocos Islands. If the attack had been timed a few hours
earlier or later she might have escaped. There can be little doubt that convoy
on the principal trade routes in the Indian Ocean would have greatly reduced the
losses and deprived the Emden of coal from captured colliers on which she largely
depended. It is true that convoy would have slowed up the normal flow of
trade but not to the extent that actually happened. Uncertainty as to the
Emden’s movements led to shipping being held up for long periods in Bombay,
Calcutta, Aden and Singapore, so that trade was seriously dislocated throughout
the Middle and Far East.
KOENIGSBERG. (Plate I.)
The Koenigsberg which was slightly smaller and rather slower than the
Emden, arrived on the East African Station in June, 1914. She was ordered to
leave German East Africa in the event of strained relations and be ready to attack
shipping in the gulf of Aden. Her movements are shown on the accompanying
track chart (Plate I), and the anchorages she used are tabulated in the Appendix.
In addition to ten 4-1-inch guns, the Koenigsberg carried a surplus armament
of two 22-pr. L/30 guns which together with some smaller guns from the surveying
ship Moewe were intended for equipping an auxiliary cruiser. Her operations
were brought rapidly to an end from lack of fuel.
When the Koenigsberg left Dar-es-Salaam on the 31st July, 1914, she passed
close to the Hyacinth, Astrea and Pegasus of the Cape Squadron just as it
was getting dusk but they failed to keep touch owing to her superior speed. They
did however, prevent the collier Koenig leaving Dar-es-Salaam and this handi-
capped the subsequent movements of the Koenigsberg, especially as arrangements
for obtaining coal from Portuguese East Africa broke down owing to its purchase
by the British naval authorities and the restrictions placed on cable messages.
The Koenigsberg’s attempts to obtain coal by capture in the Gulf of Aden also
failed because British shipping was held up or diverted on the outbreak of war.
The German History considers that this was due to her excessive use of wireless
in warning German ships of the outbreak of war and trying to get in touch with
colliers. In any case, the Koenigsberg only captured one ship, the City of
Winchester (6,600 tons) and having burnt nearly all her coal made for Ras
Hafun on the African Coast where she had to depend on a small supply in the
old auxiliary vessel Somali. The German History states that: —
" The difficulties of cruiser warfare in the northwestern part of the
Indian Ocean were enormously enhanced by the monsoon, which in this


region blows with gale force from July to September and which not only
makes boarding and examination of vessels, the transfer of stores and other
operations impossible on many occasions, but also increases fuel consump-
tion whilst reducing considerably opportunities for coaling. These con-
ditions should have been taken into consideration when the mobilisation
orders for the East Africa Stations were being worked out.”
Lack of fuel decided the Captain of the Koenigsberg to leave the vicinity
of Aden and make for Madagascar on the 23rd August with the intention of
attacking French shipping. Arrangements were also made to rendezvous with
the Somali on arrival in that area. It was realised that a move in the direction
of South Africa would have provided better prospects but there was not sufficient
coal to get there. Failure to obtain fuel at Madagascar led the cruiser back to the
Rufiji River in German East Africa where small quantities were available.
Although the Koenigsberg achieved only one actual capture, she seriously
disturbed British trade and shipping by her presence in the Gulf of Aden, by the
attack on the Pegasus at Zanzibar and by weeks of uncertainty as to her where-
abouts during September and October, 1914. Her eventual blockade in the
Rufiji Delta also immobilised a considerable number of vessels at a time when
British naval resources were being strained to the utmost.
The measures to deal with the Koenigsberg consisted of searching and
patrolling a very large area off the East Coast of Africa. For example, the light
cruisers Chatham, Dartmouth and Weymouth were exclusively employed on
this duty for over a month, searching as far south as the Angochi Islands about
700 miles from the Rufiji River where the Koenigsberg was hiding. It is character-
istic of such operations that reports of her movements were nearly always false.
The Pegasus had already visited that locality but the creeks were believed to be
too shallow for the Koenigsberg. The search might have continued indefinitely
if papers had not been discovered in the supply ship, Praesident, indicating that
coal had been sent there. The Koenigsberg was eventually blockaded and
destroyed in July, 1915. It was lack of coal that brought her activities to an
end and limited her achievements to the sinking of H.M.S. Pegasus and the
City of Winchester.
It may be noted that the division of the Western Indian Ocean into two
commands tended to complicate the campaign against the Koenigsberg. Co-
operation between the ships of the East Indies and Cape Stations depended on the
issue of orders by the Admiralty, a procedure which was fruitful in delays and
misunderstandings.
KARLSRUHE. (Plates II AND III.)
The Karlsruhe was one of Germany’s most modern light cruisers, being
rather larger and faster than the Emden and Konigsberg. During the period of
strained relations, she awaited events at an out of the way anchorage, Cay Sal
Bank in the Florida Straits. Her subsequent movements, including ships sunk,
are shown in Plates II and 111. The Karlsruhe’s first task was to arrange a
rendezvous for the conversion of the Kronprinz Wilhelm into an auxiliary
cruiser. The two ships met in the open sea to the eastward of the Bahamas and
at once went alongside each other to transfer guns, stores and men. The opera-
tion was hardly completed, when on 6th August Admiral Cradock’s Flagship, the
Suffolk appeared on the scene and the Karlsruhe at once made off to the
northward. She had no difficulty in escaping but her coal was running short and
the chase drove her further from her supply ships. Captain Kohler therefore,
decided to steer for Newport News to coal but the light cruiser Bristol was
sighted in the moonlight at 8.30 p.m. and barred his way to the North. An
ineffective engagement followed at long range but the Karlsruhe by altering
course to the southward, soon left the Bristol behind. The British cruisers
were not fast enough to bring the Karlsruhe to action but they had depleted
her bunkers by steaming at high speed and placed her in an awkward position.
Captain Kohler tried to get in touch with the supply ship Neckar during
the night but failed and then decided to steer for St. Thomas in the Virgin Islands
where the Hamburg-Amerika line maintained a stock of coal. Next day it was
ascertained that there was insufficient coal to reach St. Thomas and course had
to be altered for San Juan de Porto Rico which was rather nearer. It was
(399/1658)t a 7


estimated that she would arrive there with only 4 tons in her bunkers. The
American authorities offered no objection to the Karlsruhe coaling at San Juan,
but only 800 tons were available, and much of it was dust. Fear of being over-
taken by superior forces caused the Karlsruhe to leave San Juan the same evening
before her bunkers were half full with the intention of filling up at the Dutch Island
of Curacoa.
After leaving Curacoa, Captain Kohler decided to make for the North East
Coast of Brazil which promised to be a less dangerous and more profitable area of
operations. After picking up the supply ship Patagonia, the two proceeded in
company, coaling en route at Maraca Island, Saint Joao and Lavadeira Reef on the
North Coast of Brazil.
The Karlsruhe worked with great success off the coast of Brazil from the
30th August to the 26th October [see Plate III). She usually cruised with one or
two supply ships disposed in a wide formation across the trade routes and experi-
enced no difficulty in obtaining coal. In addition to German supplies, the
Strathroy was captured with 5,600 tons on the 31st August, the Indrani with
6,700 tons on the 16th September and the Earn with 4,400 tons on the sth
October, all three being retained as auxiliaries. During this period, the Karls-
ruhe always coaled off Lavadeira Reef (five times) which she considered the only
suitable anchorage in that area.
Captain Kohler realised the danger of overdoing his success and on the 24th
October decided to leave the Coast of Brazil and return to the West Indies. He
feared that his anchorage would be discovered when the Crefeld arrived at
Teneriffe with captured crews on the 22nd October and that the Karlsruhe’s
movements would be reported by neutral ships, several of which had recently been
intercepted.
After leaving the Pernambuco area, the Karlsruhe made what was perhaps
her most valuable capture, namely, the Vandyck of over 10,000 tons, but the
journey to the West Indies was never completed. Her activities ended on the
4th November, when an internal explosion sent her to the bottom. In three
months she had sunk 16 British ships and 1 Dutch, totalling over 76,000 gross
tons, and probably caused the British naval authorities as much anxiety as the
Emden. They did not even have the satisfaction of knowing that she had blown
up and continued their efforts to find her for several months.
The measures taken to deal with the Karlsruhe consisted of searching
suspected anchorages and areas where she was thought to be operating. The
actual forces engaged varied, but a total of more than 26 different cruisers and
auxiliary cruisers were employed in the search for this particular raider at
various times. At the end of August, for example, 12 cruisers and 3 auxiliaries
were scouring the West Indies and South American waters for her. In addition
to the cruisers which the Karlsruhe locked up in the South, an extensive search
was made for her in the vicinity of the Azores and Canary Islands in the middle of
October about 2,000 miles from her actual position. Again, on the 23rd October,
the Karlsruhe was definitely reported to be at anchor in the Bissagos Islands
on the West African Coast although she was about 2,500 miles away. Two British
and two French cruisers steamed hundreds of miles to search the locality. Six
weeks after the Karlsruhe had blown up, the battlecruiser Princess Royal
joined the cruisers in the West Indies in an intensive effort to find the raider
and even as late as February and March reports were coming in concerning her
movements.
The German Official History suggests that the Karlsruhe was responsible
for the failure to reinforce Admiral Cradock prior to Coronel. It points out that
when the powerful armoured cruiser Defence arrived at Pernambuco on the
25th October she was sent to relieve the Cornwall as guardship at Abrolhos
Rock in order that the latter might join other cruisers in a search off the Brazilian
coast by which time the raider had left for the West Indies. But whatever
opinion may be held on this point, the measures taken neither protected shipping
nor succeeded in destroying the raider.


CHAPTER III.
AUXILIARY CRUISERS.
KAISER WILHELM DER GROSSE. (Plate XIII.)
The Kaiser Wilhelm der Grosse, a fast liner of 22,700 tons gross, was
commissioned at Bremerhaven on 2nd August with an armament of six 4 • 1 -inch
and two 1 • 45-inch guns. She sailed on 4th August and her subsequent track is
shown on Plate XIII. The Captain intended to pass between Iceland and the
Faroes but British wireless signals seemed to indicate that that area was being
watched and he decided to break out to the northward of Iceland. He had been
informed that Las Palmas supply base would distribute 15,000 tons of coal in
colliers on position lines off the Azores, Canary Islands and Cape Verde, but no
collier was found on the rendezvous line to the northward of the Azores and it
was decided to make for the Rio de Oro (Durnford Point, West Africa). The
British steamer, Kaipara 7,392 tons gross, and the Nyanga, 3,066 tons gross,
were captured in the vicinity of the Canary Islands. Both were sunk and the
crews taken on board. The British mail steamers, Galician, 6,762 tons
gross, and the Arlanza, 15,044 tons gross, were also stopped and examined, but
allowed to proceed owing to the difficulty of accommodating their crews and
passengers.
The German collier, Duala, was met on the Canary Island rendezvous line
on 15th August and directed to Rio de Oro, but she had only 800 tons of coal on
board. After anchoring in Rio de Oro Roads on 17th August, the Kaiser
Wilhelm der Grosse proceeded to sea again to search the rendezvous line for
another collier as by that time the Duala had only 500 tons left. She failed to
find it and returned to Rio de Oro to coal. But a large liner consumes a lot of
fuel when steam has to be maintained, and by the time the Duala was cleared on
20th August, she only had 1,221 tons on board, whereas 2,500 were required to
reach her prospective operating area off the South American Coast.
The Las Palmas base had made liberal provision for coal, but the Slawent-
zitz with 5,000 tons had been captured and the Walhalla with 2,000 tons was
taken by the Kronprinz Wilhelm. The Magdeburg arrived at Rio de Oro
on the 24th August with 1,400 tons, the Arucas with 1,500 and the Bethania
with 6,000 on the 25th. The Kaiser Wilhelm der Grosse at once commenced
coaling and by noon on the 26th had 2,100 tons on board. Coaling was still
proceeding when the Highflyer appeared on the scene at 12.30 p.m., and after
a short engagement the Kaiser Wilhelm der Grosse was scuttled by her own
crew. She had sunk 10,400 tons of shipping. The destruction of this raider was
brought about by her having to wait for coal supplies at Rio de Oro for over a
week, and, if the German account is correct, the delay was partly due to the
action of the British Consul in preventing the full loading of the Duala. The
Kaiser Wilhelm’s position became known through a passenger from Rio de
Oro, informing the British Consul at Las Palmas on 24th August that she had
anchored there on the morning of 17th August. H.M.S. Highflyer happened
to call at Las Palmas just as the news came in and she proceeded to investigate
with the result stated above.
CAP TRAFALGAR. (Plate XIV.)
The Cap Trafalgar, a fast liner of 23,300 tons gross, was requisitioned by
the German Naval Attache at Buenos Aires on 15th August for service as an
auxiliary cruiser. Her movements are shown on Plate XIV. An attempt to
complete with coal, water and provisions at that port failed owing to the unfriendly
attitude of the Argentine authorities. She then proceeded to Monte Video and
after coaling sailed for Trinidada Island. There she met the Eber which had
arrived from German S.W. Africa and after transferring the gunboat’s two 4- 1-inch
and six 1- 46-inch guns and crew, the Cap Trafalgar was commissioned on 31st
August.
There were two German and one American colliers at Trinidada, but coaling
was difficult owing to the heavy swell, and after taking in 600 tons it was decided
to proceed to Rocas Rock. After completing with coal there, the Captain of the
(399/1658)x A 8


Cap Trafalgar intended to steam South accompanied by colliers and operate
off the River Plate area. He steered towards Rocas from the 4th to 9th
September, and then decided to return to Trinidada Island. It appeared from
intercepted wireless messages that the British cruisers Cornwall, Bristol,
Berwick and Monmouth were in the vicinity, and it was considered inadvisable
to continue the journey any further to the northward. Also a wireless message
from the Karlsruhe indicated that she would require the colliers at Rocas.
The Cap Trafalgar anchored off Trinidada for the second time on 13th
September. The Captain at first intended to leave at once with the colliers.
The anchorage no longer seemed safe to him as the Eber must have already arrived
at Bahia to be interned. However, there was very little swell at the time and he
decided to fill up with coal as rapidly as possible and leave not later than the
following afternoon. It was a fatal decision. During the forenoon of the 14th,
a strange ship was sighted which afterwards proved to be the British auxiliary
cruiser Carmania. The Cap Trafalgar at once stopped coaling, weighed anchor
and raised steam in all boilers. In the subsequent action, the much heavier
armament of the Carmania soon silenced the Cap Trafalgar’s guns and after
receiving several hits near the waterline she commenced to heel over and sink.
The Carmania also suffered a great deal of damage principally from a fire in the
superstructure, and had to be escorted to Gibraltar for repairs. On meeting the
Cap Trafalgar, she was on her way South to patrol the Monte Video area and
had been ordered by Admiral Cradock to inspect Trinidada Island, en route, with
the above fortunate result.
KRONPRINZ WILHELM. (Plate IV.)
The Kronprinz Wilhelm was a fast liner of 22,700 gross tons which arrived at
New York at the end of July, 1914. A few reserve officers joined her on the
afternoon of 3rd August and that evening she sailed, in accordance with
instructions, for a rendezvous to the eastward of the Bahamas. Her conversion
to an auxiliary cruiser took place alongside the Karlsruhe on the high seas when
the latter transferred two 3-46-inch guns, one machine gun, ammunition and
rifles, a number of ratings and her navigating officer, who took over command
of the Kronprinz Wilhelm. The work was scarcely finished when the Suffolk
chased the Karlsruhe off to the northward. The Kronprinz Wilhelm then
proceeded to the vicinity of the Azores where she met the German collier Wal-
halla on the rendezvous line and commenced coaling in the open sea. On this
occasion, the work continued for three days, after which she proceeded to the
southward again.
It is unnecessary to describe the Kronprinz Wilhelm’s subsequent move-
ments for they are shown on Plate IV, which includes a list of captured ships.
Her enormous coal consumption made that type of ship unsuitable for raiding
operations in distant waters. All sorts of difficulties were, however, successfully
overcome and the risk of capture diminished by coaling in the open sea, steaming
slowly ahead, often in a considerable swell. The Kronprinz Wilhelm remained
under way for over eight months or 250 days without anchoring, 72 of these being
spent in coaling or taking in provisions. German supply ships from South
American ports supplied some of her needs but the greater part of the coal came
from eight captured prizes. Of 31 ships met during this time, 19 were stopped
and 15, totalling over 60,000 gross tons, captured as prizes ; 10 steamships and
four sailing ships were sunk and one steamer used for the-evacuation of
captured crews. The cruise ended with her arrival at Hampton Roads on
11th April, 1915, where she was interned. The decision to make for a neutral
port was necessitated by the state of the ship which was leaking like a sieve owing
to damage received whilst coaling; her boilers and engines were also urgently in
need of repair and beri-beri had attacked some of the ship’s company.
The naval measures directed against the Kronprinz Wilhelm consisted of
searching anchorages and areas in which she was thought to be operating. She
was reported time after time by neutral ships and the fact that most of her
captures w T ere made in a comparatively small area of about 500 by 750 miles, in
the vicinity of Fernando Noronha, illustrates the difficulty of locating raiders
in the ocean spaces. As is usual in such cases, there were many false reports.
For example, she was reported to have visited Rio de Oro on the West
African Coast and the Carnarvon and Highflyer were sent to search that area
about the middle of September,


CORMORAN.
On 6th August, 1914, the light cruiser Emden captured the S.S. Rjasan
(5,200 tons) of the Russian Volunteer Fleet and brought her into Tsingtao. She
was renamed Cormoran and commissioned as an auxiliary cruiser by officers and
men of the gunboats Cormoran, Iltis and Vaterland. After mounting eight
4-1-inch guns and two searchlights and embarking 2,000 tons of coal, she sailed
on 10th August to join the Cruiser Squadron. On arrival at Majuro Atoll on
28th August, Admiral Von Spee gave her and the Prinz Eitel Friedrich orders
to attack trade on the West Coast of Australia. They had only one collier between
them, and after she was cleared the Cormoran’s activities were severely limited
by the necessity of finding more coal. The supply bases in Far Eastern Waters
had sent out a larger number of colliers but, by the time the Cormoran had
returned to the Dutch East Indies, many of them had been driven out of Dutch
ports and captured. The idea of attacking trade off Western Australia had to
be abandoned. After cruising about in search of colliers with several narrow
escapes from British and Japanese cruisers, the Cormoran entered the American
port of Guam on 14th December, where she was interned. She was forced to this
course of action by failure to obtain coal which was partly due to the time wasted
in meeting the Cruiser Squadron at Majuro Atoll. The Official German History
commenting on this says
“ The fault lay, not with the auxiliary cruiser, nor with the supply
bases, but was due to the delay of the Cruiser Squadron in recognising the
value and purpose of auxiliary cruisers.”
PRINZ EITEL FRIEDRICH. (Plate V.)
The liner Prinz Eitel Friedrich (16,000 tons gross) arrived at Tsingtao on
2nd August, 1914, where she was converted into an auxiliary cruiser by the officers
and men of the gunboats Luchs and Tiger. Stores, four 4- l-inch and six 3- 46-
inch guns were quickly transferred and after coaling she left to join the Cruiser
Squadron at Pagan Island.
On sailing from Majuro Atoll for South America, Admiral Von Spee detached
the Prinz Eitel and Cormoran to attack trade on the West Coast of Australia,
but lack of coal prevented them getting there. The Prinz Eitel, however, was
luckier than the Cormoran in obtaining 2,000 tons at Malakal Harbour in the
Pelew Islands. She then decided to make for South America and rejoined the
Cruiser Squadron at Mas-a-Fuera on 27th October. Her subsequent movements
and ships captured are shown on Plate V. The Prinz Eitel was left on the West
Coast when Von Spee sailed for the Falkland Islands and she remained there
until the middle of January. During that time, three allied ships of over 9,000
gross tons, including the French sailing ship Jean with 3,000 tons of Welsh coal,
were captured. After coaling from the Jean at Easter Island, it was decided to
make for Germany via Cape Horn, but the East Coast of South America proved a
profitable area and the idea of returning home faded into the background. Between
26th January, 1915, and 20th February, the Prinz Eitel sank eight allied ships
of about 24,000 tons, but none of them were able to supply her with coal which was
urgently required. On 24th February, there were only 1,000 tons remaining
in the bunkers or less than half the amount required to take her home. The
engines and boilers were also in need of repair and it was decided to proceed to
Chesapeake Bay where she was interned on 10th March, 1915. The depredations
of the Prinz Eitel Friedrich were thus brought to an end by lack of fuel. The
lucky capture of the Jean probably saved her from internment on the West Coast,
and cost the Allies 24,000 tons of shipping.
MOEWE —First Cruise. (Plates VI and VII.)
Ocean liners with a large coal consumption were in most respects unsuitable for
raiding operations in distant waters and the fitting out of the Moewe at the end
of December, 1915, marked the recognition of that fact. The idea emanated
from proposals forwarded by Leiutenant Theodor Wolff (reserve), who wrote :
“ As a fast liner converted to an auxiliary cruiser has too large a coal
consumption it would be preferable to fit out a steamer whose coal con-
sumption was so small and stowage so large that she could go privateering
(399/1658)t a 9


for months without outside assistance ... it should not be very difficult
for an auxiliary cruiser of the kind to run the blockade. She would put to
sea, ostensibly as a cargo steamer escorted by a submarine.”
The Moewe (about 5,000 tons gross) was originally a banana carrier with a
maximum speed of 14 knots. Her armament consisted of four 5-9-inch L/45
and one 4-1-inch L/45 guns and two above water 19-7-inch torpedo tubes.
She also carried 500 mines, the laying of which was defined as her first and
principal task. Like most instructions given to German Captains, those issued
to the Moewe allowed full scope to his initiative and independent judgment.
The following five minelaying areas were suggested but the choice was left
entirely to him :
No. 1. —To the westward of the Orkneys, off the western exit to the Pent-
land Firth and Scapa Flow as far as Cape Wrath.
No. 2. —The North Minch.
No. 3. —Off Lough Swilly between 7° and 9° W. and 54° 50' and 56° N.
No. 4.—Off Bantry Bay.
No. 5. —Area off the mouths of the Loire and Gironde inside the 110 fathom
line.
The Moewe left the Elbe on 29th December, 1915, disguised as a Swedish
steamer and with a submarine stationed 40 miles ahead to escort her out of the
North Sea. Her subsequent track and names of ships sunk are shown on Plates
VI and VII. Half her complement of mines was laid to the westward of the
Orkneys on the night of 2nd January, 1916, and it was on this minefield (the
Whiten Bank field) that the battleship King Edward' VII was sunk a few days
later. The remainder were laid on 9th January, 1916, off the Gironde in the Bay
of Biscay.
The choice of area for attack on shipping was left to the Captain, but attention
was directed to the importance of war material from Canada and the U.S.A. and
grain supplies from the Argentine. The desirability of sending back to Germany
prizes with important supplies was strongly emphasised. The second ship cap-
tured by the Moewe was the British, Corbridge with nearly 5,000 tons of coal.
A prize crew was placed on board and she was ordered to make for a rendezvous
near the estuary of the Amazon. The Moewe then continued her cruise and
after capturing several more ships coaled from the Corbridge off the Maraca
Islands (North Coast of Brazil), the name and position of the anchorage being
carefully hidden from the crew and prisoners.
On 15th February, in the vicinity of the Cape Verde Islands, the Captain
decided to make for home. He considered that sufficiency of coal could always
be found but that the engines required a thorough overhaul. The ships captured
during this cruise included four with cargoes of coal but only one was used, the
remainder being sunk. The Moewe passed into the North Sea about 100 miles
South of Iceland and sighted a number of British warships off the southwest
corner of Norway. The Captain stated that they were not stopping neutral
ships and that the discovery of the Moewe would have been inevitable if
they had. She arrived home on sth March, 1916, the cruise having lasted just
over two months during which time she captured 57,776 tons of shipping. The
Moewe changed her appearance four times with paint and sheet iron panelling,
disguising herself as a P. & O. liner, an Argentine transport, one of the Hall
Line and finally as the Swedish steamer Bia.
MOEWE —Second Cruise. (Plates VIII and IX.)
The Moewe left Kiel for the second time on 22nd November, 1916, dis-
guising herself as the Swedish steamer Marie Sverigi before passing through the
Little Belt. Three submarines were to have escorted her out of the North Sea,
but owing to bad weather, the Captain decided to press on without them. The
Moewe passed between Iceland and the Faroes, after inferring from intercepted
wireless messages that two auxiliary cruisers of the Iceland-Faroes patrol
were meeting each other at 8.0 a.m. on 27th November in Lat. 62° to 63° N. and
Long. 12° to 13° W. She crossed that area about midnight.
It is important to note that on this occasion the Allies received early notice
of the Moewe 's activities from the Belgian Relief Ship Samland, which was
stopped and examined on 4th December. Her wireless was destroyed but she


gave the alarm on arrival at Falmouth three days later. Our naval forces in the
North and South Atlantic were therefore warned that a raider had broken out
and every effort was made to intercept her. This cruise may, therefore, be viewed
as a test of the measures adopted against raiders at that stage of the war.
The movements of the Moewe and her list of captured ships are shown on
Plates VIII and IX. The Yarrowdale which was intercepted on 11th December
had a valuable cargo of war material and was sent back to Germany with a prize
crew. The Saint Theodore, captured on 12th December with 7,000 tons of
coal, was utilised as an auxiliary cruiser and armed with two guns taken from
captured ships. She was renamed the Geier and after parting company, did not
meet again until 16th January when the Moewe embarked 1,700 tons of coal
from her in mid-Atlantic. After arranging various rendezvous, the Geier was
sent off to operate on the sailing ship route between Cape Horn and Europe, “ in
so far as this may be possible without interference with your chief duty as collier.”
They met again on 11th February at Trinidada Island where the Moewe coaled
once more. By this time, the Geier’s engines and boilers were in a bad state of
repair and she was sunk with explosive charges on 14th February. She had sunk
two sailing ships of about 1,500 tons.
The Moewe narrowly escaped destruction on 9th January when she captured
the Minieh and as this incident may provide some useful lessons it will be described
in detail. The light cruiser Amethyst when patrolling about 150 miles to the
eastward of Pernambuco had stationed her collier, the Minieh, 20 miles ahead
with orders to report any suspicious vessels by wireless. She increased speed
during the morning and sighted the Minieh about 8 miles distant, three points
on the starboard bow and then dropped back out of sight. Just before dark,
smoke was observed from the direction of the collier’s assumed position but
suspicion was not aroused as no signals were received. It was ascertained afterwards
that a vessel had approached the Minieh from ahead during the late afternoon,
but the Captain did nothing because he " only had orders to report suspicious
vessels.” At 5.0 p.m., when the steamer was only half a mile away, she hoisted
the German ensign, trained out her guns and made a signal to stop using wireless.
The Captain of the Minieh stated he told the wireless operator to disregard that
order and to signal “ What ship is that ” and make the S.O.S. According to the
British Official History, Vol. IV, nothing was heard in the Amethyst’s wireless
room. In any case, the Minieh was sunk almost in sight of the Amethyst after
the crew and confidential documents had been removed.
The evidence of the German History is probably more reliable than that of
the Minieh’s Captain and the Amethyst’s wireless ratings both of whom were
under suspicion of neglect of duty. According to it, the Minieh did commence
to signal but at the first letter the Moewe " jammed with high energy and.fired a
warning shot.” The German History also states that the Minieh’s Captain
was semi-intoxicated which seems possible in view of his failure to report the
Moewe sooner.
One of the questions arising out of this affair is the importance of jammed
W/T signals as indications of attacks on shipping. All the German raiders made a
routine of jamming their victims’ calls for help and sometimes this occurred in
comparatively close proximity to British cruisers. It looks as if the latter’s
wireless operators were only interested in decipherable messages and did not
realise that signs of jamming might be of great practical importance. Certainly
with directional apparatus, they may provide a definite clue to the position of a
hostile raider.
It is also important to note that this was one of the few occasions on which a
German raider narrowly escaped destruction in the ocean spaces as the result of
a prearranged plan. Most of the narrow escapes described in the British Official
History, such as when the Emden passed within 100 miles of the slow battleship
Triumph cannot be accurately described as such. In any case, this incident
raises the question whether the numerous cruisers searching for raiders might not
have had more success by using merchant ships as decoys and following them
through dangerous areas at a prearranged distance. Another point is whether
it would not have been expedient and more in accordance with the principles of
international law to appoint a commissioned officer to a collier used in this manner
as an auxiliary. The German raiders frequently followed that routine with regard
(399/1658)t a 10


to prizes and supply ships, by placing one of their own officers temporarily in
command, assisted by a few ratings. If that procedure had been followed in
the case of the Minieh, it is improbable that the Moewe would have escaped.
Nor would she have been able to obtain valuable information concerning British
dispositions from confidential documents which the Minieh’s Captain neglected
to destroy.
Another interesting case which occurred during this cruise was that of the
Otaki (9,500 tons gross) in ballast from London to New York, armed with one
4 -7-inch gun. The Moewe sighted her on 10th March but owing to the violent
movements of the raider which was steaming head to sea and the difficulty of
gunlaying, she closed to 2,400 yards before making the signal to stop. As the
Otaki refused to do so, a brisk action ensued in which the Moewe fired 35 rounds
of 5-9-inch, 23 of 4- 1-inch and three torpedoes. Although the Otaki was soon
overpowered she scored three hits which did a great deal of damage by flooding a
compartment and starting a fire in the coal bunkers. According to the Moewe’s
report, the situation became very serious more especially as the ammunition was
only separated from the burning coal by a wooden partition. Two days of the
most strenuous exertions were required to extinguish the fire and avert the danger.
Amongst the numerous British armed merchantmen captured by German
raiders, the Otaki is the only one that succeeded in damaging her opponent, and
this was probably due to the exceptionally short range at which the action took
place. At ordinary ranges, it was practically impossible, for merchant ships to
score a hit quickly because they were not supplied with rangefinders which would
have made all the difference in these encounters. The Moewe had already com-
menced the homeward journey before meeting the Otaki, and her second cruise
ended at Kiel on 22nd March. In four months she had sunk 19 steam and five
sailing ships, totalling 119,600 tons gross.
The Naval measures directed against the Moewe are not the least instructive
part of the story. On the Samland’s report reaching the Admiralty, troopships
in various localities were retained in harbour and very strong naval forces directed
to search for her. Approximately 24 British cruisers and auxiliary cruisers and
an unspecified number of French were employed patrolling different routes and
areas in the North and South Atlantic. Despite the expenditure of an enormous
amount of fuel and energy, the Moewe continued to sink ship after ship on the
principal trade routes. One single armed merchantman defied the power of the
combined Navies because of the fundamental difficulty of locating ships on the
wide expanse of the ocean. There can now be little doubt that if the Atlantic
trade had been organised into convoys and escorted by the numerous cruisers
that were scouring the sea, these heavy losses would have been prevented.
GREIF.
After the departure of the Moewe on her first cruise, the German merchant
ship Guben (4,963 gross tons) was fitted out as an auxiliary cruiser. She was
renamed the Greif and armed with four 5-9-inch guns and two broadside torpedo
tubes. Her task was defined as attack on commerce. The choice of the theatre
of operations was left to the Captain’s discretion but particular attention was
directed towards the shipment of war material irom North America and wheat
from the River Plate, the export of which commences in February.
The Greif, disguised as the Norwegian steamer Rena, left the Elbe on the
evening of 27th February, 1916, submarine U. 70 being stationed 40 miles ahead
with orders to turn back in about Lat. 59° 20' N. On 28th February, the Admiralty
received information that a raider had left Germany and special arrangements
were made to intercept her by auxiliary cruisers of the Northern Patrol and five
light cruisers and seven destroyers dispatched from Scapa and Rosyth. About
9.0 a.m. on 29th February, the Alcantara and Andes sighted a steamer about
70 miles to the northeastward of the Shetlands. It was the Greif and as the
Alcantara was lowering a boat to examine her the raider hoisted the German
ensign, dropped her screens and opened fire. A fierce action ensued during which
two torpedoes, fired at the Alcantara missed. With only one serviceable gun
left, the raider fired a third torpedo which sank the Alcantara. But the Andes
and Comus had now arrived on the scene and soon reduced the Greif to a blazing
wreck.


WOLF. (Plates X, XI and XII.)
The German merchant ship Wachtfels of 5,809 gross tons and 10-5 knots,
was requisitioned for conversion into an auxiliary cruiser in March, 1916. She was
renamed Wolf and armed with seven 5-9-inch guns and four torpedo tubes.
The work was completed by the end of May, but her departure was postponed
until November owing to the short summer nights which greatly increased the
chances of interception by the British patrols. The operation orders (Kreuzer
Krieg, Vol. 3, p : 239) issued by the Naval Staff are summarised below
Departure at your own discretion. High Sea Fleet provides submarines
for reconnaissance and screening duties; S.M.S. Wolf is to arrange
independently with the latter. If strong enemy counter-action is experi-
enced or may, from observation, be anticipated, it is left to your discretion
to postpone the enterprise until a more favourable period.
Task. —The approaches to the most important ports of British India
and British South Africa, as well as the inter-connecting trade routes, are
to be contaminated with mines. The chief ports are : Colombo, Bombay,
Karachi, Calcutta, Rangoon, Singapore, Cape Town —the last named port
is to be mined first and, in addition, at least five ports in such sequence as
may seem fit to the Captain. An entirely unexpected appearance in the
area of operations is essential for the success of the task ; everything must,
therefore, be avoided on the outward journey which may lead to the presence
of the auxiliary cruiser Wolf being suspected.
In allocating the mines to the various harbours and trade routes, it
should be borne in mind that it is more advantageous to mine a large
number of places with a few mines, than a few places with a large number
of mines.
The minefields must be laid irregularly so as to render their clearance
more difficult. Their depth-setting must be so regulated—having regard
to tidal current and range of tide —that their presence shall not be pre-
maturely betrayed by medium-sized steamers running on to them.
After execution of the mining tasks, war on commerce is to be pursued
until all resources are exhausted. The choice of operation area is left to
your own judgment. Main objective for attack is the grain trade from
Australia to Europe, which continues throughout the year.
In order to keep the presence of the Wolf secret as long as possible,
it is desirable that only such ships shall be stopped whose destruction is
legitimately permissible.
Resources. —Support from home or from neutral countries abroad
must not be relied on.
It is desirable that a suitable prize vessel shall be utilised to accomo-
date the passengers from other prizes. Neutral countries will not grant
an asylum to German prizes. Prizes that are to be sent to a neutral port
must, therefore, previously (in accordance with paragraph 114 of the Prize
Regulations) be employed as auxiliary ships and must also have been
converted into warships in accordance with the " Agreement concerning
the Conversion of Merchant Ships into Warships.”
The auxiliary war vessel hoists ensign and pendant; the captain,
who must be an officer shown in the Navy List, on the active list or in the
reserves, receives a written appointment; the crew is detailed from the
crew of the auxiliary cruiser, but may be augmented from any native
personnel that may be found on board the prize ; the prize must be armed.
The conversion may not take place in neutral waters.
These prize vessels, converted into auxiliary warships, must not
carry on independent war on commerce.
If prizes converted into auxiliary cruisers, and armed, are to be
employed for cruiser warfare the greatest care is to be observed that
the terms laid down in the VUlth Hague Convention are fulfilled.
When war on commerce offers no more prospects of success and an
attempt to return home seems inexpedient, the ship is to be laid up.
Special care is to be observed to prevent our enemies from learning
that we are able to read their ciphered messages.


The Wolf left Kiel on 30th November after embarking 465 mines, 6,285 tons
of coal and one seaplane. She was escorted through the North Sea by three
submarines disposed about 40 miles ahead. A fourth, U. 66 proceeded in company,
being towed part of the way submerged and connected by telephone. The
subsequent track of the Wolf is shown on Plates X, XI and XII. The ship
steamed through a vast icefield which had made a particularly early appearance
in the Denmark Straits but a full moon enabled the ship to escape damage.
Only one ship was sighted en route to the Cape where the first minefield was
laid on the night of 16th January. The war diary of that day remarks :
“ In order that the best possible results may be achieved, the mines
must be so placed that the full extent of the minefield shall not be revealed
on the first ship striking mines. The location of its position must be
rendered as difficult as possible, as also its clearance or avoidance. Location
and clearance become the easier the more numerous the mines laid at the
harbour entrance and the closer they lie together. Avoidance is rendered
more difficult by a greater extension of the minefields. Further, the
movements of the Wolf when executing this task, if observed at all, must
arouse no suspicion. She must not, therefore, steer too conspicuous
courses. The order enjoins that the mines shall only be effective against
large ships. Accordingly, the line Dassen Island to Slang Kop Point
in about 40 to 50 fathoms of water, will be best for the mined area ; and
the mines must be distributed as indicated in the sketch map by shaded
rectangles.”
Detailed plans of the minefields laid off Cape Town, Cape Agulhas, Colombo,
Cape Comerin, Bombay, Bass Straits, North of New Zealand, Cook Strait, and
Singapore are given in the German Official History (Vol. 3). The laying of these
minefields was usually a slow business. Positions had to be accurately fixed,
careful soundings taken, in some cases illumination by searchlights had to be
avoided and delays also occurred due to passing steamers. The detailed descrip-
tion of work conveys the impression that the Wolf would have been detected if
patrols had been maintained off Cape Town, Colombo and Bombay by harbour
craft or even small motor boats. It had also been intended to lay mines off
Karachi but an intercepted wireless signal, indicating the discovery of the Bombay
minefield, led to a change of plan. Karachi had probably been forewarned and
it was decided to proceed to the southward with the intention of attacking trade
and obtaining coal.
The British ship Turritella was captured on 28th February and com-
missioned as an auxiliary cruiser under the name of Iltis with an armament of
one 2-inch gun and 25 mines. She was instructed to proceed to the Straits of
Perim and mine the main channel between the Red Sea and Gulf of Aden.
The Wolf also obtained from her the route prescribed for British shipping
between Colombo and Aden. Other cases might be mentioned in which
failure to destroy confidential documents provided German raiders with
valuable information. Another British ship, the Jumna, was captured on 2nd
March, and 247 tons of coal from her bunkers were transferred at sea. On Bth
March, the Captain of the Wolf correctly inferred the recapture of the Iltis
from an intercepted wireless message describing the Wolf and her aeroplane.
But part of it was already out of date for the Wolf had been repainted.
During the next three months or so, the Wolf’s movements were mainly
governed by the problem of replenishing her coal supply, but no ships were sighted
on the Colombo-Aden or Cape-Colombo routes and it was decided to make for
New Zealand. Only one ship, the Dee, in ballast, was captured on the sailing
ship route from Australia between 12th March and 2nd June, despite frequent air
reconnaissance. The utmost economy in coal had to be exercised and the
monotony of the voyage began to tell on officers and men.
After being continuously at sea for six months, the Wolf anchored at Sunday
Island in the Kermadecs on 27th May in order to carry out a thorough overhaul
of engines and boilers. A cargo ship was sighted passing the Island on 2nd June,
but the Wolf could not raise steam in time to intercept her. The seaplane was sent
up instead and after dropping a message underlined with a bomb conducted the
prize to the anchorage. She was the Wairumo with a general cargo and 1,150
tons of bunker coal. This lucky capture dispelled the gloom which had settled


1. Minefield, Cape Town ; laid 16th January, 1917.
Date of
Striking
Mine.
Name.
Nationality.
Gross
Tonnage.
Result of Mining.
26.1.17
Matheran
English
7,654
Sunk.
12.2.17
Cilicia
English
3,750
Sunk.
26.5.17
C. de Eizaguirre
Spanish
4,376
Sunk.
10.8.17
City of Athens
English
5,604
Sunk.
2. Minefield, Cape Agulhas; laid IStli January, 1917.
Date of
Striking
Mine.
Name.
Nationality.
Gross
Tonnage.
Result of Mining.
6.2.17
26.8.17
Tyndareus
Bhamo
English
English
11,000
5,244
Damaged, brought in.
Damaged, brought in.
on the raider’s crew and another steamer with 500 tons of coal was seized on 6th
August, thanks to intercepted wireless messages reporting her time of arrival, etc.,
at Rabaul. The coal could not be transferred at sea and this was done at Offak
Harbour (Waigen Island) after the seaplane had examined the anchorage.
Having replenished her coal supply, the Wolf proceeded to lay three mine-
fields, the first off the Northwest corner of New Zealand, the second near Cook
Straits and the third in the Bass Straits. The last of these tasks was completed
on the night of 3rd July, and it was decided to lay the remaining 110 mines near
Singapore. The Wolf’s report states that on the way there, a British cruiser of
the Talbot class was sighted near the Karaminta Straits. It was a bright moon-
light night and the situation seemed so critical that the Wolf nearly altered
course to get within torpedo range but apparently her presence was not detected.
The last batch of mines was laid on the Singapore-Hong Kong and Saigon-
Manila routes on 4th September, and the Wolf then made for the Indian Ocean
to renew the attack on shipping. Nothing was sighted until 26th September,
when the Japanese steamer, Hitachi Maru with a general cargo and 1,150 tons
of bunker coal was captured in the One and Half Degree Channel. The coal
and part of the cargo were transferred to the Wolf at the Suadiva Atoll (Maldives)
and Cargados Carajos (East of Madagascar).
The Captain of the Wolf now intended to make for home via the Cape and to
reach the Denmark Straits before the middle of December, 1917, but the capture
of the Spanish steamer Igotz Mendi on 10th November, with 5,580 tons of coal,
led to a prolongation of the cruise. After transferring 900 tons at Cargados
Carajos, she was commissioned as an auxiliary and the two ships separated, having
first arranged various rendezvous. They met again near Trinidada Island (S.
Atlantic) on the 19th December with the intention of coaling there, but an
intercepted wireless message indicated that the Island was under military control.
The two ships thereupon proceeded some 600 miles to the southward in search of
smooth water, but the Igotz Mendi seemed to roll in even the calmest sea. Only
550 tons were embarked and both ships seriously damaged in the process. On
10th and 11th January, the Wolf again went alongside near the Equator. This
time she embarked 515 tons but frames and bulkheads were buckled and serious
leaks developed. On the way home, the Wolf experienced very bad weather in
the North Atlantic and the leaking vessel nearly foundered. However, she
reached German waters safely on 17th February, 1917, though the Igotz Mendi
ran ashore on the Skaw in a fog and became a total wreck.
The voyage of the Wolf had lasted nearly 15 months. During that time,
she captured 14 ships of 38,688 tons, all of which, except the Igotz Mendi, were
sunk. In addition, 13 ships totalling 73,988 tons were lost on her minefields and
five ships of 34,587 tons damaged and towed into harbour. Thus the total
tonnage captured and sunk by mines amounted to 112,398 tons. Details of the
losses on the different minefields are tabulated below :


3. Minefield, Colombo; laid 15th February, 1917.
Date of
Striking
Mine.
Name.
Nationality.
Gross
Tonnage.
Result of Mining.
17.2.17
21.2.17
Worcestershire
Perseus
English
English
7,175
6,728
Sunk.
Sunk.
4. Minefield, Bombay; laid 19th February, 1917.
Date of
Striking
Mine.
Name.
Nationality.
Gross
Tonnage.
Result of Mining.
11.617.
16.6.17
24.6.17
29.7.17
17.11.17
City of Exeter
Unksu Maru
Mongolia
Okhla
Croxteth Hall
English
Japanese
English
English
English
9,373
2,143
9,505
5,288
5,872
Damaged, brought in.
Sunk.
Sunk.
Sunk.
Sunk.
5. Minefield, Aden; laid by ILTIS, 4th March, 1917.
Date of
Striking
Mine.
Name.
Nationality.
Gross
Tonnage.
Result of Mining.
20.3.17
5.1.18
Danubian
Hong Moh
English
English
5,064
3,910
Damaged, brought in.
Damaged, brought in.
6. Minefield, Cape Maria van Diemen, N.W. comer of New Zealand; laid 25th
June, 1917.
Date of
Striking
Mine.
Name.
Nationality.
Gross
Tonnage.
Result of Mining.
26.6.18
Wimmera
English
3,622
Sunk.
7. Minefield, Bass Strait; laid 3rd July, 1917.
Date of
Striking
Mine.
Name.
Nationality.
Gross
Tonnage.
Result of Mining.
6.7.17
Cumberland •
English
9,471
Sunk.
8. Minefield, Cook Strait; laid 27th June, 1917.
Date of
Striking
Mine.
Name.
Nationality.
Gross
Tonnage.
Result of Mining.
18.9.17
Port Kembla
English
4,700
Sunk.
9. Minefield, Anamba Islands, near Singapore ; laid 4th September, 1917.
No ship ran foul of this barrage. It was laid too deep, in error.


Before ending these comments on the Wolf, it is necessary to refer back to
the Iltis (ca-Turritella). She reports sighting H.M.S. Fox in the Gulf of
Aden but was not stopped. On the night of 4th March, her mines were laid in
the pre-arranged position. All but one had been dropped when she was challenged
by a darkened vessel. A protracted exchange of signals followed but the name
Turritella seemed to arouse suspicion. When it became apparent that the
patrol ship was determined to examine the Iltis, the sea-cocks of the latter were
opened and explosive charges fired. According to the German account, the sloop
Odin, the patrol vessel in question, had an old Lloyd’s register which did not
include the Turritella and except for this, she would have been allowed to
proceed.
With regard to the measures adopted against the Wolf, they were similar
to those employed against other raiders. Although the first definite information
concerning her was not received until sth March, the Cape, East Indies and China
Stations had been warned to prepare for raiders early in January after the Moewe
was known to be out. At that time, there were 16 British cruisers, nine sloops and
six destroyers in these areas, besides three French and four Japanese cruisers
and four destroyers. During the next two or three months, these were reinforced
by three British and five Japanese cruisers and four destroyers, making a total of
31 cruisers, 14 destroyers, and nine sloops, etc.
When news of the Turritella first came in, the Admiralty stopped all
transports in the Indian Ocean, ordered those en route to Colombo to be met and
escorted, and later issued instructions that transports proceeding to the Persian
Gulf and East Africa must be escorted. At the end of March, eight cruisers were
convoying transports in the Indian Ocean though in most cases, escorting only
one or two ships. The remainder were patrolling various areas and searching
localities, without any reliable guide to the Wolf’s position. On 2nd June,
1917, it was decided to cancel escorts in the Indian Ocean because no raider had
been reported for several months. Accordingly, when the Wolf entered the
Indian Ocean again early in September, transports in that area were unprotected.
Similarly, in December, 1917, when the Wolf was thousands of miles away in the
Atlantic, escorts were reintroduced because her visit to the Maidive Islands in
September had just been discovered.
SEEADLER. (Plate XV.)
The idea of using a sailing ship as a raider emanated from Sub. Lieut. Kling,
a reserve officer. At first, the idea was not favourably received by the Naval
Staff, but personal representations carried the day and he was authorised to select
a suitable vessel. The choice fell on a full rigged ship Pass of Balmaha of 1,571
gross tons, which had been captured by U. 36. She was renamed Seeadler,
fitted with a 1,000-H.P. motor and two 4-1-inch guns, the latter being hidden
under a cargo of timber. She sailed from Germany on 21st December, 1916
disguised as the Norwegian ship, Hero. Great pains were taken to conceal her
true character and a search was even made for Norwegian-speaking German
seamen. An armed merchant cruiser, the Patia of the 10th Cruiser Squadron,
stopped the raider between Iceland and the Faroes on Christmas Day, but the
boarding officer found nothing suspicious and she was allowed to proceed. It is
very difficult to examine a vessel thoroughly without unloading her cargo and at
first sight it may seem that such mistakes are unavoidable. It had, however,
been suggested to the Trade Division of the Naval Staff early in 1916 that as
Lloyd’s Register contained the exact dimensions of merchant ships, including such
details as dimensions of cylinders, etc-., the disguise of ships passing under false
names could be penetrated by careful examination.
The subsequent track of the Seeadler and the ships captured by her are
shown on Plate XV. It will be noticed that she operated for over two months in
an area about 360 miles long and 180 miles wide to the northwestward of St. Paul’s
Rock, capturing nine ships and taking 260 prisoners. The latter were transferred
to the French barque Cambronne on 21st March and their arrival at Rio de
Janeiro on 30th March was the first definite information of the Seeadler’s
activities. But she was already well on her way towards Cape Horn with the
intention of filling up with drinking water at one of the sheltered anchorages en
route. On the night of 16th April, an intercepted wireless message from Port
Stanley indicated that the route round Cape Horn was being watched by British
cruisers, and it was decided not to anchor but to attack the sailing ship route in the
Pacific after giving Cape Horn a wide berth.


Towards the end of July, signs of beri-beri appeared amongst the ship’s
company and the Seeadler arrived off the uninhabited Island of Mopihaa (Society
Islands) on the 31st of that month with the intention of obtaining fresh food. As
the channel was too shallow to enter the lagoon, she anchored outside, close to the
reef and sheltered from the prevailing easterly winds. On 2nd August, the wind
suddenly shifted to the westward, whilst some of the ship’s company were on their
way ashore, and the Seeadler, dragging her anchor, was soon crashing on the
coral. Despite every effort to get her off she became a total wreck. The cruise
had lasted 1\ months, during which time she captured 27,923 tons of shipping.
With regard to the measures taken to deal with the Seeadler, the Lancaster
and auxiliary cruisers Orbita and Otranto were ordered from the West Coast of
South America to the vicinity of Cape Horn on Ist April and the Avoca from
Esquimalt to search the Galapagos Islands on 28th April. The disadvantages
of controlling operations in distant waters from the Admiralty were discernible
in these dispositions. Not only did they clash with instructions issued by the
Senior Officer on the spot but the Otranto and Orbita were kept off Cape Horn
against his judgment long after the Seeadler had passed into the Pacific. He
considered that the chances of intercepting her in that area were small, owing to
the long winter nights and that the real danger lay on the important trade route
to the northward of Valparaiso which was left unprotected.
LEOPARD.
After the Wolf, Moewe and Seeadler had successfully evaded the blockade
it was decided in 1917 to fit out one of the Moewe’s prizes, the Yarrowdale
(4,652 tons gross) as a raider. She was renamed Leopard and armed with five
5-9-inch guns, four 3-4-inch and two torpedo tubes.
Her operation orders issued by the Naval Staff contained a great deal of
detailed information concerning the numbers, movements and dispositions of the
Northern Patrol, acquired from intercepted wireless messages. At that stage of
the war, the Germans and ourselves were getting very valuable intelligence from
each other’s signals but neither seems to have fully realised that this two-edged
weapon was being used against themselves. It looks as if Intelligence and
Operations were working in watertight compartments. The former must have
understood the importance of reducing wireless signals to the minimum whilst
the latter was keeping its opponent’s intercepting stations working at high
pressure.
The German deciphering station stated on 7th March that the patrols between
Scotland and Greenland had been strongly reinforced since the beginning of that
month. This was communicated to the Leopard, but her Captain replied that
despite the augmented patrols he accepted responsibility for the success of the
enterprise. Whilst passing through the Little Belt on 10th March, he was informed
by wireless that the English cipher key had been changed and was urgently
recommended to postpone the break through if conditions were considered un-
promising. To this he replied: “ Have received telegram. Long live the
Emperor.” It is rather extraordinary that whilst the Germans were deciphering
our signals and had received so many practical examples of the fact that we were
doing the same to theirs, they should have broadcast a message of this sort by
wireless. As an organisation grows in size, it is easy to create new departments.
The difficulty is to make them co-operate intelligently.
On 16th March, the armoured cruiser Achilles and the boarding vessel
Dundee, whilst patrolling between Scotland and Norway, sighted a ship in Lat.
64° 50' N., Long. 0° 32' E. She was ordered to stop and the Captain of the
Dundee, Commander S. M. Day, R.N.R., lowered a boat to examine her. He
regarded her with suspicion and very wisely kept his ship, which was only armed
with two 4-inch guns, close up on her weather quarter ready to open fire at a
moment’s notice. After the boat had been alongside about an hour, the Leopard
disclosed her identity by lowering the gun screens with a crash. But the Dundee
was much too quick for her and poured in a deadly raking fire at close range. The
Leopard then put her helm over and discharged a torpedo which missed. After
firing over 40 rounds and sustaining no damage, the Dundee cleared the range
for the Achilles. The Leopard sank after a gallant fight against very heavy
odds, and the Dundee’s boat’s crew, who had recognised the dangerous nature of
their task, went down heroically with her. The fact that the Dundee engaged
the much bigger and more heavily armed Leopard, inflicting heavy damage
without suffering herself reflects great credit on the tactical skill of her Captain.


CHAPTER IV.
FUELLING AND SUPPLY.
The organisation for supplying German ships in foreign waters with fuel,
provisions, etc., was built up in peace time but only came into operation on the
outbreak of war. Auxiliary supply bases were established in the Atlantic Ocean,
at New York, Havana, Rio de Janeiro, Buenos Aires, and Las Palmas with smaller
centres at St. Thomas, Para, Bahia, Santos, Pernambuco, Monte Video, Punta
Arenas, Teneriffe, Horta and Lome in Togoland. Captain Boy-Ed, the Naval
Attache at Washington, was in general control of this area. In the Pacific, they
were organised on the West Coast of North and South America, in China and Japan,
and at Batavia, Manila and Tsingtao.
The officer in charge at the main base of each area was responsible for the
quality and quantity of supplies, for the means of transport and for the requsition-
ing and equipment of the auxiliary vessels needed by the warships operating in
his area. He had to maintain colliers at certain rendezvous which were given in
the handbook carried by cruisers so that they knew where to obtain coal without
making signals. Besides these rendezvous, others were given where liners could
be fitted out as auxiliary cruisers. One was near the Bahamas and it was there
that the Kronprinz Wilhelm met the Karlsruhe. Another was near Trinidada
Island and a third, which was never used, somewhere on the Argentine Coast.
Naval and commercial personnel were also distributed at various places on
the Coasts. The latter used their business connections to obtain supply vessels,
fuel, stores, etc., and were responsible for chartering and manning these vessels
clearing them from the ports and appointing super-cargoes. All business trans-
actions undertaken on behalf of the Navy were supervised by them. They
enjoyed a great degree of independence and had to make important decisions on
their own responsibility.
In order that this organisation could begin to function on the outbreak of
war, agreements were made with a number of German shipping companies, banks
and commercial firms, who undertook to put their steamers, stores and credit at
the disposal of German ships in foreign waters as soon as war appeared imminent.
Agreements were also drawn up with shipping companies and business firms
regarding the upkeep of stocks of coal or its delivery, in stated quantities, at
numbers of places on various coasts. The supply of ammunition to cruisers
abroad had also been arranged. As regards the Cruiser Squadron and ships on
the Australian and East African Stations, there was a full war-time supply of
ammunition in Tsingtao which could be transported elsewhere if necessary. Stocks
of charts for auxiliary vessels were kept in a number of commercial centres.
A certain amount of information concerning coaling arrangements has already
been given in Chapters II and 111, and the following additional remarks are confined
to the Cruiser Squadron, the Emden, Koenigsberg, Karlsruhe, Kaiser
Wilhelm der Grosse and Kronprinz Wilhelm.
Cruiser Squadron.
Commander Von Knorr, the Naval Attache at Tokio, was in charge of the
auxiliary base in Japan. News of the political situation in Europe at the end of
Juty led him to take immediate measures for meeting the needs of the Cruiser
Squadron, in spite of the optimistic views held at the German Embassy. His
first step was to interview representatives of business and shipping firms and
arrange for the requisitioning of any available steamers and the purchase of coal
and stores. On the 31st July everything was so far arranged that purchases could
be concluded on the word being given.
After the outbreak of hostilities, communication with the Cruiser Squadron
was difficult owing to the destruction of Yap Wireless Station on 12th August.
Commander Von Knorr did not know whether it was still operating in the same
area, but it had already been provided with four well-equipped steamers and
reliable information on the probable attitude of Japan. He recommended that
in view of Japan’s probable participation in the war, the Squadron should proceed


to West American waters. After Japan declared war he left for San Francisco
to take over the auxiliary bases of North West America and there continued to
provide for the needs of the Squadron.
The auxiliary supply base at Shanghai was under the orders of Commander
Luring of the Jaguar. On Ist August, orders were received from the Emden
to send 5,000 tons of coal to both Pagan and rendezvous A, and also some ship-
ments to rendezvous B ; on 6th August, Tsingtao transmitted orders from the
Commander-in-Chief that all shipments were to be sent to Pagan, and on 7th
August that all were to be sent to rendezvous B.
Lt. Cdr. Von Meeller took command of the auxiliary base at Manila on 6th
August, bringing with him the crew of the gunboat Tsingtao. It had, however
already begun work. On receipt of a telegram from the Cruiser Squadron on Ist
August instructing it to begin sending shipments of coal and to advise Batavia
and Singapore accordingly, the staff bought up all the coal in Manila belonging
to Madrigal & Co., and obtained the first call on supplies expected by that firm.
On being informed of these purchases, the Commander-in-Chief sent the following
orders on the night of lst-2nd August:—
“ Send first 5,000 tons to Pagan, second 5,000 tons to Angaur (collier
to cruise up and down to the eastward of Pelew Islands) ; next 5,000 tons
to Zamboanga to await orders from Squadron. Delay further shipments.”
On 7th August, the S.S. Rio Pasig, sailed under the American flag with
5.000 tons of coal for Pagan. She arrived the day after the Squadron had left,
cruised about in search of it for several weeks and was captured off Zamboanga
on 15th September by a British destroyer. Her cargo was confiscated by the
Prize Court at Hong Kong and she was released.
On the Cruiser Squadron’s arrival at Mas-a-Fuera, information regarding
German vessels lying in harbours in South-West America and coal supplies were
brought by Lt. Riediger in the Amasis from Callao. Graf Von Spec had asked for
5.000 tons of coal to be sent to Juan Fernandez, 10,000 tons to Port Low, 10,000 tons
a fortnight later to Valparaiso, and 10,000 tons of coal, water and stores to Chilean
ports on 20th October. San Francisco was also to report by 25th October whether
20.000 tons of coal and provisions could be sent to South Chile by the end of
December. Lt. Riediger was despatched in the S.S. Yorck to organise these
deliveries. He was informed that the Squadron would be at Juan Fernandez
about 27th October and at Port Low on 3rd November, and was to report this to
Valparaiso. The general orders given by the Dresden regarding equipment and
despatch of colliers, etc., were confirmed and supplemented by the Commander-
in-Chief.
Valparaiso supply base sent the Commander-in-Chief an account of its
activities and co-operated with the supply bases at San Francisco and La Plata
to meet the Cruiser Squadron’s needs. This account showed that, in consequence
of the unfriendly attitude of the American authorities in San Francisco, Cdr. Von
Knorr had failed to send off the first 15,000 tons of coal to Juan Fernandez and
Port Low on the date required, that the San Sacramento was bringing the first
consignment from San Francisco and that further consignments would follow.
The Valparaiso base, also reported that the S.S. Seydlitz, Santa Isabel, Ramses
and Memphis were ready to sail with 12,700 tons of cargo, as already reported by
the Yorck.
Graf Von Spec’s decision to break through to the North Sea was followed by
telegraphic instructions from him via Valparaiso to the supply bases at La Plata
and New York :
“ Send steamers, German if possible, to arrive at port Santa Elena on
sth December with 10,000 tons of coal and provisions for 1,000 men for
three months ; no oil. Intelligence reports particularly desirable. New
York and La Plata are to arrange together for despatch of 20,000 tons of
coal, 5,000 to await orders at Pernambuco from Ist January, 15,000 at
New York from 20th January; from New York also, provisions for 2,000
men for three months, but only half the oil given in general instructions.”
If the Cruiser Squadron had not been destroyed off the Falkland Islands, the
5.000 tons of coal ordered to be in readiness at Pernambuco by Ist January, 1915,
might have been delivered there, but its transport from Pernambuco to the


Squadron would have proved most difficult, because from October onwards, the
British Ambassador had persuaded Brazil not to allow any German steamers to
sail if there were the slightest suspicion that they were working for the Cruiser
Squadron.
The Argentine Government had also issued an order in October, as a result
of British representations, forbidding ships of belligerent countries to embark
more coal than could be stowed in the bunkers. In December, they issued a
further order that ships of belligerent countries were to declare their destination
and their ports of call before leaving Buenos Aires and to give an assurance that
they were engaged only in commercial enterprises. Vessels which deviated from
the declared route or voluntarily supplied warships with coal were to be treated
as auxiliary warships. They, and all vessels belonging to the same company,
were henceforth to be refused coal in Argentine ports.
From December onwards, Uruguay did not allow any vessels to leave Monte
Video without a guarantee from the Consulate in question that she was employed
on commerce only.
According to the German Official History, the alleged “ intrigues ” of the
British Ambassador and Consuls in Chile were overcome at first by the protests of
the German Ambassador; but gradually the Chilean Government was subjected
to so much pressure, that it became exceedingly difficult for any colliers or pro-
vision steamers to sail. After the Luxor and Memphis had left Coronel and Punta
Arenas without being cleared, the anti-German feeling grew stronger, and at'the
same time the Allied Governments protested against the prolonged stay of the
German Cruisers at Mas-a-Fuera. Von Ercker, the German Ambassador, how-
ever, argued that British forces had frequently coaled at bases in Chilean waters,
and he prevailed upon Chile not to impose further restrictions. From Ist January,
however, Chile allowed war vessels of belligerents to embark only enough coal
to take them to the nearest coaling port in another country, and merchant ships
were as a rule allowed only to fill their bunkers.
It may be of interest to note that when instructions were issued advising the
Cruiser Squadron to return home, the following tentative arrangement? for coaling
off Iceland were included in a letter from the Naval Staff dated 10th October :
“ There is a rendezvous line west of Iceland ; it begins in 65° 0' N.,
26° O' W., and extends from there 30 miles west (true) ; a rendezvous has
been fixed in 64° 30' N., 26° 0' W. in the event of ice conditions permitting
ships to remain on this line. It is said that the west coast of Iceland is
free from ice most of the winter and experts report that it is possible to
coal from steamers under the lee of the ice barrier. It might be advisable
to seek shelter in the bays of Iceland though you would risk being sighted
and reported ; you might have time to coal before the enemy could come
up. The S.S. Brandeburg will be sent to the rendezvous line, if she
succeeds in getting out of Drontheim, where she is now lying with 5,000
tons of coal; she is fitted with wireless and carries a Merchant Service
code book. Endeavours will also be made to despatch colliers of neutral
countries to this line, and information regarding them will be communicated
by Nauen, Hanover and Nordeich.”
When war was declared, the light cruiser Leipzig was in Magdalena Bay on
the West Coast of Mexico. Before proceeding to join the Cruiser Squadron, she
had to make sure of coal supplies, but' as German warships seldom visited the
North West of America, arrangements for supply in this area had not been
thoroughly organised. On sth August, Captain Haun telegraphed to the San
Francisco base, ordering the purchase of 8,000 tons of coal and as much lubricating
oil as could be obtained ; 5,000 tons of coal and 2,000 kg. of oil were to be despatched
at once in the S.S. Alexandria, which was due in San Francisco on the 7th
August. A second steamer was to leave eight days later with 3,000 tons of coal
and 500 kg. of oil, and eight days later again a third steamer was to be despatched
to Saipan (Marianne Islands) with a similar cargo. These instructions were
never carried out owing to the lack of suitable ships, lack of coal in San Francisco
and lack of money, and the Leipzig experienced considerable difficulty in getting
sufficient supplies to take her to South American ports.


The light cruiser Dresden which was in the West Indies on the outbreak of
war obtained all the coal she required from German ships which were summoned
from Brazilian ports to meet her at various anchorages on her way south to join
the Cruiser Squadron.
EMDEN.
When the Emden parted from Admiral Von Spec’s Squadron on 14th August,
1914, she was accompanied by the supply ship Markomannia carrying 5,400 tons
of coal, 45 tons of lubricating oil and provisions. Between that date and her
destruction off the Cocos Islands on 9th November, she coaled five times from the
Markomannia and five times from prizes. Eight of these coalings took place in
out of the way harbours such as the Felidu Atoll in the Maidive Islands (vide
Appendix) or at anchor outside Dutch territorial waters, and two alongside colliers
in the open sea.
In the German mobilisation instructions, arrangements had been made for
sending supply ships to await orders at neutral ports, but Captain Von Mueller
soon realised that this was impracticable in the Dutch East Indies owing, it is
stated, to the extremely harsh interpretation of neutrality adopted by the Govern-
ment of the Netherlands. He soon formed the opinion that they would have to
be sent to pre-arranged rendezvous and that coaling at sea from them or from
prizes would be necessary.
Captain Von Mueller suggests that auxiliary vessels accompanying cruisers
should, in addition to coal, carry a considerable stock of lubricating oil as this is
not easy to obtain from captured ships, about 2 tons of firebricks and the same
amount of fireclay, a supply of sheet and angle iron, washing water, live stock,
good fenders and securing hawsers. He also states that it may be necessary to
coal from the bunkers of captured ships and that appliances enabling the deck of
the prize to be cut open should be supplied. When coaling at sea in a slight
swell, he found it best to keep the ship head on to the swell by steaming ahead
dead slow.
In regard to the question whether the collier should be kept in company, or
sent to a pre-arranged rendezvous, Captain Von Mueller remarks :
“ If I had sent my colliers to a rendezvous I should have been free to
use the Emden’s speed to escape from superior forces, without sacrificing
the collier as the latter would almost certainly have been captured if kept
in company. Nevertheless I considered it better to keep colliers in com-
pany for the following reasons :
1. A collier alone was liable to capture by an auxiliary cruiser, against
which the Emden would have afforded effective protection.
2. If the collier failed to arrive at the rendezvous, the Emden might
have been placed in a very dangerous position, through lack
of coal.
3. By keeping the collier in company I was able to change my plans
unhampered by predetermined rendezvous.
4. Every favourable opportunity, particularly fine weather could be
utilised for coaling.
5. The collier in company was frequently useful for accommodating
the crews of prizes. Whenever two colliers were available I
considered it advisable to keep only one in company.”
Although Captain Von Mueller’s reasons for employing these particular methods
are quite clear, it is evident, says the German History, that the procedure will
largely depend on the particular circumstances of each case, such as the geo-
graphical and strategical conditions of the area of operations, the type of collier
available and the personality of their masters.
KOENIGSBERG.
The difficulties which the Koenigsberg experienced in obtaining supplies of
coal limited her activities and were responsible for her return to the Rufiji River
on 20th September, 1914, where she was blockaded and finally destroyed. Even
before the war commenced, the cable service via Zanzibar, which was under


British control, became unreliable. For this reason, attempts by the naval
commanders to communicate with confidential agents at ports in South Eastern
Africa, regarding the despatch of supply ships, were almost entirely unsuccessful.
As the agents themselves did nothing, and as all stocks of coal at ports in South
Africa, Portuguese East Africa, and Zanzibar had been commandeered by the
British at an early date, only the stocks in German East Africa remained available
for supplying the Koenigsberg and auxiliary vessels.
Two ships in Dar-es-Salaam, the Somali of 2,550 tons and Konig of 5,034
tons, were suitable for supply ships, but only the former succeeded in getting to
sea and coaling the Koenigsberg, once off the Arabian coast and once off Aldabra
Island in Madagascar.
KARLSRUHE.
The Karlsruhe was in the vicinity of Havana when relations became strained,
and her Captain issued numerous instructions to the supply base at that port.
The North German-Lloyd steamer Neckar (9,835 tons) was despatched to the
Bahamas on the night of 4th August and the Spreewald (3,899 tons) was also
sent there from St. Thomas. Both these ships, as well as the Thor and Lorenzo,
were ordered to a rendezvous line to the eastward of Trinidad on 26th August to
await the Karlsruhe. The German Consul at Tampico was requested to forward
400 tons of fuel oil to the Hamburg-Amerika Line’s agent at Havana and the
supply base at New York to include supplies of oil in the auxiliary vessels fitted
out at that port, 200 tons being the normal amount required for the Karlsruhe.
It has already been mentioned (vide Chapter II) that the Karlsruhe was
separated from her supply ship by the Suffolk and Bristol and had only just
sufficient fuel to reach San Juan de Porto Rico. After coaling at Curacoa, she
met the Patagonia on the rendezvous line off the Testigos Islands and coaled
from her at Maraca Island, Saint Joao and Lavadeira Reef {vide Appendix). The
supply ships, Asuncion with 1,200 tons of coal and the Crefeld with 1,000, the
former from Santos and the latter from Rio de Janeiro, were met near the Rocas
Rock on 31st August. During the two months she was operating off the north-
east coast of Brazil, the Karlsruhe had no difficulty in obtaining ample coal
from captured ships {vide Chapter II).
KAISER WILHELM DER GROSSE.
The destruction of the Kaiser Wilhelm der Grosse was partly due to the
delay in sending her colliers (vide Chapter III). The cause of this is worth examining
a little more closely in order to draw attention to the very important part which
British diplomatic and consular officials may, and in the last war certainly did,
play in operations against German raiders. According to the German History,
the Las Palmas base was seriously handicapped because large ships could not go
alongside the moles and the only available lighters were those of the Woermann
Line with a total capacity of 1,900 tons. This difficulty was increased, it is stated,
by the British Consul who did his best to hinder loading and unloading. In order
to get ships away quickly it became necessary to load them without completely
discharging their cargoes. The first ship sent out, the Walhalla, embarked
2,000 tons of coal on top of some of her original cargo. Whilst she was loading
provisions, the British Consul stirred up discontent by pointing out that if war
broke out there would be a shortage of food and a rise in prices. His efforts
apparently bore fruit for when the Duala commenced loading, a mob stopped
the embarkation of provisions and instead of her full cargo of coal she sailed with
only 1,100 tons. By the time she met the Kaiser Wilhelm der Grosse on
15th August this had dwindled to 800. But the raider required 2,000 tons to
take her to South America and the delay in getting it led to her destruction.
KRONPRINZ WILHELM.
The Kronprinz Wilhelm always coaled in the open sea. This was usually
a difficult operation but her Captain realised the danger of anchoring off Trinidada
Island even before the Cap Trafalgar was destroyed there. It often continued
for weeks at a time with occasional interruptions. For example, on 12th Septem-
ber, 460 tons were taken from the supply ship Ebernburg, and by dint of incessant
work 1,018 tons on the 13th and 14th. The 526 tons remaining in that collier


were cleared on the 16th and 17th. Another supply ship, the Prussia then came
alongside and 685 tons were taken in on the 18th and 19th. Arrangements were
made to continue coaling from the Pontos on the 21st, but owing to the swell
it had to be deferred until the 25th. On that day, 205 tons were taken in, but
a great deal of damage was done, including boats’ davits broken clean off and
against the 205 embarked on that day, 120 had been consumed. Coaling and
provisioning continued on these lines for three weeks during which 2,084 tons were
embarked from the Ebernburg, 685 tons from the Prussia, and 1,300 from the
Pontos. With 98 tons in the bunkers this made a grand total of 4,165 tons. In
the meantime, the ship had burnt 2,145 tons, leaving her after all this labour,
only half full with 2,020 tons.
At the beginning of the war, coal was easily obtained from South American
ports, but as time passed restrictions on German supply ships were tightened up,
so that during the first four months, the greater part of her coal and provisions
were obtained from prizes. During the second four, she was entirely dependent
on that source of supply. It is apparent that the activities of the Kronprinz
Wilhelm like those of several other raiders, could have been terminated by
convoying ships carrying coal.


CHAPTER V.
INTELLIGENCE AND COMMUNICATIONS.
The German Intelligence Service which collected and transmitted information
to ships in foreign water was closely associated with the supply bases referred to
in the preceding chapter. It had been carefully organised in peace time but the
Naval Staff realised that difficulties would arise in the event of war with Great
Britain owing to her control of cable communications. The oversea wireless
system (Nauen, African Colonies and Far Eastern network) is said to have worked
well until the stations were put out of action.
Communications between Berlin and the supply bases on the Atlantic and
West American Coast were focused on New York which owing to the interruption
of the cable service, was largely dependent on the high power American wireless
stations at Sayville and Tuckerton. These two stations were under strict Govern-
ment control and only took cyphered messages if a copy of the code were deposited.
They also refused telegrams addressed to belligerent warships. In spite of the
alleged one-sided neutrality of the United States, the energy and experience of
Captain Boy-Ed are said to have successfully surmounted these difficulties. In
any case, the organisation seems to have maintained communications with the
Cruiser Squadron, Karlsruhe and Kronprinz Wilhelm during the first few
months of the war. For example, the Karlsruhe received the following message
via S.S. Holger on 2nd of October :
“ From Shanghai. German Cruiser Squadron on the way to Chile.
From the Naval Staff. Dresden South America West Coast. Leipzig
Galapagos Islands. Cap Trafalgar has been sunk. Rendezvous Line
by Rocas Reef, and Trinidada compromised. Punta Arenas reports
Good Hope, Monmouth, Glasgow sailed 30th September for Chile . . .
etc.”
The German supply ship Holger acted as wireless repeating ship at Pernam-
buco. This breach of neutrality led to protests from the British authorities and
when she slipped out on Ist January, 1915, without clearance papers, steps were
taken to prevent merchant ships using wireless in Brazilian harbours.
Las Palmas was another important intelligence centre. After the Emden-
Teneriffe cable was cut, plain language telegrams with hidden meanings were
sent to Germany via the capitals of neutral countries. Communications with
the high power wireless station at Kamina in Togoland was severed by the cutting
of the Monrovia-Lome cable on sth August and the Lome-Duala cable on the
9th. From September onwards, telegrams were usually sent via Madrid. Funchal
and Horta only accepted ciphered messages during the first few days of the war
and plain language messages with hidden meanings did not always reach their
destination. Up to the 7th August, German ships in port were able to transmit
signals to ships in the Atlantic but on that date their wireless was sealed by the
Spanish authorities. Attempts were then made to communicate with German
cruisers by addressing telegrams to imaginary passengers in ships that happened
to be within range or to the Austrian Embassy in Madrid, but these were only
accepted in cipher up to the 22nd August. Plain language messages with hidden
meanings were liable to arouse suspicion and the ship addressed did not always
realise they were intended for her. Nevertheless, communication was established
by this method with the Kronprinz Wilhelm.
Shanghai was the principal intelligence centre in the Far East. Commander
Luring, who was in charge of that base, established a news service with Germany
which supplied Tsingtao and the Chinese press with reports of events in Europe.
He installed a 1-5 kilowatt wireless set in the German ship Sikiang which main-
tained communications with Tsingtao. The Entente Powers protested but it
was pointed out that they were using similar stations on shore in Shanghai. This
means of communication proved of great value when the Wusung-Tsingtao and
Tsingtao-Chifu cables were cut on the 22nd and 2nd August. After the bombard-
ment of the Yap Wireless Station on 12th August, the surveying ship Planet
got it working again by the 22nd August but only with a range of 500 miles which
was insufficient for communicating with the Cruiser Squadron.
The Dresden and Leipzig organised an intelligence service off the coast of
Chile which depended on the reception and transmission of signals by German
ships in Chilian harbours and the use of special call signs and catchwords for


communicating with the Cruiser Squadron. Arrangements were also made for
certain Peruvian wireless stations to report the movements of British ships. It
should be noted that the German intelligence organisation failed to supply Von
Spec with any information concerning the approach of Admiral Sturdee’s battle-
cruisers. This was not, however, entirely due to the secrecy of their movements
for the German Intelligence Centre at Buenos Aires had already inferred the
Invincible’s arrival at Abrolhos Rock on 24th November, 1914. This priceless
information was to have been sent in writing to Port Saint Elena by one of the
German supply ships, but for reasons which are not difficult to guess, no attempt
was made to cable it to Punta Arenas or Valparaiso from where it might possibly
have been transmitted by wireless. As a matter of fact, Admiral Sturdee did not
arrive at Abrolhos until 26th November, two days later. If the date given in the
German History is correct, it looks as if this intelligence was obtained from a secret
Admiralty telegram dated 24th November addressed to Minister, Rio and Intelli-
gence Officer, Monte Video and Pernambuco “ for Admiral Sturdee arriving at
Abrolhos Rock in Invincible on 25th to join squadron.” Incidentally the sense
of the telegram could have been conveyed without any reference to the Invincible,
for Admiral Stoddart at Abrolhos Rock had been informed in a telegram of 22nd
that the battlecruisers were on their way.
It is important to note that wireless signals made by British cruisers were
often of great assistance to the German raiders and the following examples may
be quoted to illustrate the necessity for restraint in that method of signalling.
When the German Cruiser Squadron first approached the South American Coast,
the wireless signals of the Good Hope, Monmouth and Glasgow were identified
from their call signs, and are said to have facilitated bringing them to action at
Coronel. Again, when the Emden intended coaling at Ulithi Island in the Marianne
Group, en route to the Indian Ocean, the increasing strength of wireless signals
from British cruisers warned her to clear out of that region. Similarly, when the
Karlsruhe was awaiting news at the entrance to the Florida Straits on the 3rd
August, 1914, the Berwick’s wireless signals to Nassau indicated tht she was
approaching and the German raider removed herself to more open waters. The
same ship abandoned the rendezvous line off Rocas Reef on 10th September
because the wireless signals of a cruiser using the callsign HG (Bristol) appeared
to be drawing nearer. Similar!}', after capturing the Earn with 4,400 tons of coal
on sth October, the Karlsruhe altered course to the eastward because wireless
signals from the Bristol indicated that she was in the vicinity. Incidentally
this helped the Karlsruhe to capture more ships for it took her on to the route
prescribed by the Admiralty to ships bound for Europe. The following remarks
appear in the Karlsruhe’s war diary;—
“ Although it is difficult to estimate accurately the distance and move-
ments of enemy vessels from observation of their wireless yet at least some
indication of their approximate position can be obtained from their reckless
and constant use of wireless. Thus the enemy systematically helps us to
avoid his ships.”
The Kronprinz Wilhelm also received great assistance from her pursuers’
wireless signals, and the fact that she was able to continue her activities for over
eight months can be partly traced to this factor. She used to classify all inter-
cepted signals into groups according to whether they emanated from shore stations,
enemy warships, enemy merchant ships, neutrals or German auxiliaries. An
attempt was then made to estimate their distance by the strength of their signals
and concurrent circumstances. The results were plotted daily on a graph so as
to give a general picture of the situation. She mentions that the Canopus,
Dartmouth, Minotaur and Highflyer were very busy signalling to each other
for several days round about the 20th December, 1914, in consequence of which
the following entry appears in her war diary :
“ The English cruisers are chattering constantly so that one can
easily tell whether they are drawing, nearer or not. If they kept quieter
or said nothing at all it would be much more disquieting for us.”
With the exception of the Koenigsberg, which the German History criticises
for not maintaining silence in the Gulf of Aden, the other German raiders only
appear to have used their wireless for communicating with their supply ships on
low power at short range and for jamming their victim’s calls for help.
It may also be mentioned that the auxiliary cruisers of the 10th Cruiser
Squadron supplied the German directional stations with sufficient data to plot
their dispositions and movements and that when possible this information was


passed to ships endeavouring to evade the blockade. A Iso the Moewe intercepted
signals from the auxiliary cruisers of the Northern Patrol on both her outward
and homeward journeys which provided valuable information concerning their
strength and dispositions.
It is true, of course, that we obtained reciprocal benefits from our opponents’
wireless signals, but in these particular operations, the balance of advantage lay
with the German raiders. It must not be imagined, however, that the Captains of
British cruisers did not realise the importance of wireless silence in concealing
their movements. The true explanation will probably be found in a system of
command, developed in the years before the war, which centralised the movements
of individual ships in officers commanding squadrons. Wireless silence was only
likely to be attained under a more flexible system which relied on general instruc-
tions and the initiative of Commanding Officers instead of in a succession of
detailed orders. In commenting on the destruction of the Emden at Cocos Islands,
the German History lay stress on the necessity of fitting all warships in foreign
waters with directional and distance finding apparatus, and modern developments
of this kind will enormously increase the importance of wireless silence in operations
against raiders. This precaution also applies to merchant ships for even in the last
war, the unnecessary use of wireless sometimes led to their capture. On sth
February, 1916, a plain language message from the Flamenco (4,540 tons) reporting
her position to Fernando Noronha was responsible for her interception by the
Moewe. Similarly, the capture of the Matunga by the Wolf was due to a plain
language message giving her time of arrival at Rabaul. Nor were shore stations
entirely blameless in this respect for the Wolf intercepted a plain language signal
from the Naval Transport Officer at Cape Town asking the Oxfordshire her
time of arrival and number of troops, etc., on board.
There remains one more “ Intelligence ” question. It was pointed out in
Chapters II and 111 that misleading reports concerning German raiders sometimes
led to the intensive search of areas thousands of miles from their actual position.
Similarly, the unfounded rumour that the Dresden was in Last Hope Inlet was
responsible for much waste of time and energy. It should be realised that the
Germans frequently spread false reports of their movements and used bogus wireless
signals for the same purpose. When the Cruiser Squadron was off the South
American Coast prior to the Battle of Coronel, arrangements were made to give
the impression that all its signals emanated from one ship, the Leipzig, which
had already been reported at Juan Fernand ez. Hence the probability is that
Admiral Cradock did not suspect the close proximity of Von Spec’s Squadron until
he actually sighted it, whereas the latter knew the exact composition of the British
Squadron from their call signs. Again, when the Germans left Mas-a-Fuera for
the second time, the Prinz Eitel Friedrich was left behind with orders to proceed
to the southwestward and simulate, during the following fortnight, wireless signals
from the Cruiser Squadron. Although this attempt to conceal Von Spec’s passage
round Cape Horn does not seem to have deceived anyone, the manoeuvre illustrates
one of the uses to which wireless may be put. The Konigsberg also transmitted
bogus messages to convey the impression that she was at sea accompanied by
several steamers so as to conceal her hiding place in the Rufiji River. Three
wireless sets were utilised for this purpose, one of which had been removed from
the City of Winchester. Using the same call signs on each occasion, she made
the usual course, speed, coal, etc., signals. Names of places on the African coast
and islands in the Indian Ocean were also inserted in dummy messages which,
according to the Captain of the Koenigsberg, were taken in by British ships and
passed to the nearest shore station. The fact that our cruisers wasted a great deal
of time in searching out of the way anchorages without any real evidence that they
had been used by the Koenigsberg seems to confirm his statement.
The German History also quotes cases in which ships spread false reports
concerning their own movements. For example, when the Dresden left the
West Indies for South America at the beginning of the war, she sent an incorrect
report of her position to San Juan de Porto Rico so as to convey the impression that
she was homeward bound. Similarly when she was lying in Hewett Bay her
Captain instructed Punta Arenas to spread the report that she had been sighted
off Cape de Las Virgines on a northerly course. Again, when the Karlsruhe
proceeded to Cay Sal Bank just before the outbreak of war, she made arrangements
for suitable persons in Havana to spread the report that she would arrive at
Tampico on 4th August. Other examples might be quoted but these suffice to
show the necessity for caution in examining reports of enemy movements.


PACIFIC OCEAN-NORTH.
Position.
Anchorages.
Remarks.
Latitude.
Longitude.
Magdalena Bay
3° 56' N.
77° 20' W.
Leipzig, 1 Supply Ship.
S. Francisco Bay Light Vessel,
37° 45' N.
122° 42' W.
Leipzig.
California
Ballenas Bay —rock, California
26° 42' N.
113° 39' W.
Leipzig, 1 Supply Ship.
Concepcion Bay—peak, California
26° 45' N.
111° 46' W.
Leipzig, 1 Supply Ship, coaled
from shore.
Guaymas—Isla Parajos
27° 53' N.
110° 52'W.
Leipzig, 1 Supply Ship.
Yap—Garim Islet
9° 27' N.
138° 05' E.
Planet, Cormoran.
Ponape—peak
6° 52' N.
158° 14' E.
Cruiser Squadron.
Pagan—Apau Bay
18° 08' N.
145° 46' E.
Cruiser Squadron and Supply
Ships.
Eniwetok atoll—Brown Is., Mar-
11° 21' N.
162° 21' E.
Cruiser Squadron and Supply
shall Is.
Ships.
Majuro atoll—Marshall Is.
7° 06' N.
171° 21' E.
Cormoran, Emden, Cruiser
Squadron and 4 Supply Ships.
Christmas Is.
1° 59' N.
157° 28' W.
Cruiser Squadron and 5 Supply
Ships.
Korror Harbour, Angaur, W. Caro-
7° 17' N.
134° 32' E.
Emden, Geier, Prinz Eitel
lines
Friedrich, and 2 Supply
Ships.
Lamotrek, Carolines
7° 28' N.
146° 24' E.
Cormoran, coaled at quay side.
Malakal Harbour—Channel Pt.,
7° 18' N.
134° 28' E.
Prinz Eitel Friedrich.
Pelew Is.
Port Langinni —Simaloer Is., Sum-
2° 39' W.
96° 11' E.
Emden and 1 Supply Ship.
atra
PACIFIC OCEAN—SOUTH.
Anchorages.
Posi
Latitude.
tion.
Longitude.
Remarks.
Galapagos Is., Albermarle Is.
0° 58' S.
91° 02' W.
(approx.)
89° 40' W.
Leipzig and 1 Supply Ship.
Galapagos Is., Hood Is
1° 23' S.
Leipzig.
Galapagos Is., Chatham Is.
0° 50' S.
89° 27' W.
Leipzig and 1 Supply Ship.
Galapagos Is., Wreck Bay
0° 54' S.
89° 36' W.
Leipzig and 1 Supply Ship.
Lobos de Afuera (Lt.)
6° 57' S.
80° 41' W.
Leipzig and 3 Supply Ships.
St. Nicholas Bay (Puerto San
Nicolas)
15° 14' S.
75° 14' W.
Leipzig and 2 Supply Ships.
Valparaiso
Mas a Tierra (Cumberland Bay) ...
33° 02' S.
71° 39' W.
German Cruiser Squadron.
33° 38' S.
78° 50' W.
Dresden.
Mas a Fuera
33° 46' S.
80° 46' W.
Dresden, Prinz Eitel Fried-
rich, 2 Prizes and 3 Supply
Ships.
Penas Gulf
47° 30' S.
75° 00' W.
(approx.)
74° 21' W.
Cruiser Squadron.
St. Qeentin Bay
46° 49' S.
Dresden and 2 Supply Ships.
Kawiung (beacon), New Ireland ...
2° 36' S.
150° 48' E.
Cormoran.
Hermit Is
1° 30' S.
145° 04' E.
CORMORAN.
Mopihaa (Mopelia) Society Is.
16° 48' S.
153° 55' W.
Seeadler.
Pageh (Pagi) Is., Sumatra
2° 34' S.
100° 06' E.
(approx.)
Emden and 1 Supply Ship.
APPENDIX.
ANCHORAGES USED BY RAIDERS.


Anchorages.
Position.
Remarks.
Latitude.
Longitude.
Port Refuge —Cocos Is.
12° 05' S.
96° 52' E.
Emden and 1 Supply Ship.
Alexis Harbour —New Guinea
5° 08' S.
145° 47' E.
Prinz Eitel Friedrich and
Cormoran.
Raoul (Sunday Is.)
29° 15' S.
177° 53' W.
Wolf and 2 Prizes.
Offak (Fofak) Bay, Moluccas
0° 03' S.
130° 43' E.
Wolf and 1 Prize.
Nusero Besar (Nusa Bessi)
1° 48' S.
134° 08' E.
Emden and 2 Supply Ships.
Tana Jampea (Jampea) Is.
7° 01' S.
120° 45' E.
Emden and 2 Supply Ships.
Borabora
16° 30' S.
151° 45' W.
Cruiser Squadron and 1 Supply
Ship.
Nukahiva—Marquesa Is. ...
8° 56' S.
140° 00' W.
Cruiser Squadron and 3 Supply
Ships.
Easter Is. (Cook Bay)
27° 08' S.
109° 25' W.
Prinz Eitel Friedrich, 7
Supply Ships and 1 Prize.
ATLANTIC OCEAN—NORTH.
Anchorages.
Position.
Remarks.
Latitude.
Longitude.
Cay Sal Bank (Lt.), N. Coast of
Cuba
San Juan de Porto Rico
Santa Anna Bay—Curacao
Maraca Is. —Brazilian Coast
Rio de Oro roads, \V. Africa
23° 55' N.
18° 27' N.
12° 05' N.
2° 05' N.
23° 40' N.
80° 27' W.
(approx.)
66° 07' \V.
68° 56' W.
50° 20' W.
15° 55' W.
approx.
Karlsruhe.
Karlsruhe.
Karlsruhe.
Moewe, 1 Prize, Karlsruhe
and 1 Supply Ship.
Kaiser Wilhelm der Grosse
and 4 Supply Ships.
ATLANTIC OCEAN—SOUTH
.
Anchorages.
Pos
Latitude.
ition.
Longitude.
Remarks.
San Joao Is., N. coast Brazil
1° 17' S.
45° 02' W.
Karlsruhe and Supply Ships.
Jericoacoara (Jeriquaquara)
2° 49' S.
40° 30' W.
Dresden and 1 Supply Ship.
Rocas Reefs —off coast of Brazil ...
3° 52' S.
33° 49' W.
Dresden and 2 Supply Ships,
Kr. Prinz Wilhelm and I
Supply Ship.
Lavadeira Reef —off coast of Brazil
5° 02' S.
36° or W.
Karlsruhe (5 times).
Trinidada Is. —off coast of Brazil
20° 30' S.
29° 20' W.
Dresden and 5 Supply Ships,
Cap Trafalgar, Eber,
Moewe, Geier.
Tova Is., Gulf San Jorge—Argen-
tine
45° 05' S.
66° 02' W.
Dresden called with 2 Supply
Ships.
Cayetano Bay (Gill Bay), Argen-
tine
45° 01' S.
65° 51' W.
Dresden called with 2 Supply
Ships.
Port Santa Elena, Argentine
44° 32' S.
65° 22' W.
Dresden.
Pacific Ocean—South— continued.


TIERRA DEL FUEGO AND MAGELLAN STRAITS AREA.
Position.
Anchorages.
Remarks.
Latitude.
Longitude.
Orange Bay (pyramid)
Puntas Arenas (beacon)
Snug Bay
Sholl Bay
Hewett Bay
Christmas Bay, Stokes Bay J
Sylvester Bay, Stokes Bay... J
Fox Bay
Puerto San Antonio
San Jose Bay
55° 31' 24" S.
53° 08' S.
53° 52' S.
54° 15' S.
54° 15' 40" S.
53° 59' S.
S. Coast of San
53° 53' S.
53° 53' 36" S.
52° 21' 20" S.
68° 05' 24" W.
70° 51' W.
71° 26' W.
71° or w.
(approx.)
72° 21' 30" W.
(approx.)
72° 41' W.
approx,
ta Ines Is.
70° 27' 30" W.
(approx.)
70° 54' 05" W.
(approx.)
74° 27' 30" W.
(approx.)
Dresden and 2 Supply Ships.
Dresden.
Dresden and 1 Supply Ship.
Dresden and 1 Supply Ship.
Dresden and 1 Supply Ship.
Dresden and 1 Supply Ship.
Dresden and 1 Supply Ship.
Dresden and 1 Supply Ship.
Dresden and 1 Supply Ship.
Dresden and 1 Supply Ship.
INDIAN OCEAN.
Position.
Anchorages.
Remarks.
Latitude.
Longitude.
Felidu Atoll, Maldives
3° 30' N.
73° 31' E.
Emden and 2 Supply Ships.
(approx.)
Emden and 1 Supply Ship.
Teladum Mate Atoll, Maldives
6° 40' N.
73° 00' E.
*Addu Atoll, Maldives
0° 35' S.
73° 05' E.
Emden.
Suvadiva Atoll, Maldives
0° 18' N.
73° 22' E.
Wolf and 1 Prize.
Nancoury (Channel), Nicobar Is. ...
7° 26' N.
93° 42' E.
Emden and 1 Prize.
*Balasor Roads
21° 28' N.
87° 03' E.
Emden.
Diego Garcia
7° 21' S.
72° 27' E.
Emden and 1 Prize.
Bendar Burum Bay, Gulf of Aden...
14° 30' N.
49° 00' E.
Koenigsberg and 2 Supply
Ships.
Hallanya Is., S.E. Arabia
17° 33' N.
56° 04' E.
Koenigsberg, 1 Supply Ship
and 1 Prize.
Soda Is., Khorya Morya Bay
17° 28' N.
55° 54' E.
Koenigsberg and 1 Supply
Ship.
Ras Hafun
10° 32' N.
51° 10' E.
Koenigsberg and 1 Supply
Ship.
Cargados Cara] os
16° 39' S.
59° 33' E.
Wolf and 2 Prizes.
(approx.)
46° 27' E.
Aldabra Is
9° 22' S.
Koenigsberg and 1 Supply
(approx.)
39° 21' 09" E.
Ship.
Simbauranga —Rufiji River Delta,
7° 46' 10" S.
Koenigsberg.
Custom House ,-r'
* Rendezvous mentioned by Emden, but not used.
(399/1658) Wt. 44612—6380 750 2/40 H* S Ltd. Gp. 399


CONTENTS OF THIS POCKET
Plates
I. Track of German Cruiser S.M.S. Emden and S.M.S. Koenigsberg.
11. Track of German Cruiser S.M.S. Karlsruhe.
111. Track of German Cruiser S.M.S. Karlsruhe, 30th August to 25th Octo-
ber, 1914.
IV. Track of German Auxiliary Cruiser Kronprinz Wilhelm.
V. Track of German Auxiliary Cruiser Prinz Eitel Friedrich,
VI. Track of German Auxiliary Cruiser Moewe, Northern Portion, Ist
Voyage.
VII. Track of German Auxiliary Cruiser Moewe, Southern Portion, Ist
Voyage.
VIII. Track of German Auxiliary Cruiser Moewe, Northern Portion, 2nd
Voyage.
IX. Track of German Auxiliary Cruiser Moewe, Southern Portion, 2nd
Voyage.
X. Track of German Auxiliary Cruiser Wolf, Northern Portion, Outward
Bound.
XI. Track of German Auxiliary Cruiser Wolf.
XII. Track of German Auxiliary Cruiser Wolf, Northern Portion, Homeward
Bound.
XIII. Track of German Auxiliary Cruiser Kaiser Wilhelm der Grosse.
XIV. Track of German Auxiliary Cruiser Cap Trafalgar.
XV. Track of German Auxiliary Cruiser Seeadler.






























