

l/crcy U i
“in*)?
\f CT^
. iv*~\iJl •dXjL^c{ L
JJ-y/iSry




ter of the. scenery of the country, and
which might have remained in the
portfolio of the artist, for any infor-
mation they convey out of it in their
engraved form; whilst ample mar-
gins, large type, contracted pages,
and hot-pressed paper, make cruel
inroads upon the funds of circulat-
ing libraries, almost the only passive
dupes of these literary, or rather
bookselling impositions.
By whom the work is compiled
does not appear ; it is not by the
nobleman under whose command
the voyage was performed. It ap-
pears to have been concocted out
of the papers of the Chaplain, and
those of several officers ; but with
little spirit, and little trace of a pre-
siding genius. Had it appeared
in the more modest form of a thin
octavo, it would have been better re-
ceived, as less pretending ; and in
that form it would have called for the
gratitude of all who eagerly receive
every kind of information in which
man, in the various fprrns of society,
is concerned, when too great a tax is
not laid upon the indulgence.
The object of the Blonde’s Voyage
was, as our readers generally know,
to convey the bodies of the deceased
King and Queen of the Sandwich
Islands, who had visited England for
the laudable purpose of promoting
the benefit of their country, back to
the land of their fathers. The ap-
propriation of a British frigate to this
purpose, was generous, and perhaps
also in good policy on the part of the
Government; a good understand-
ing with these islanders being of
some consequence to us; and as, in
some sort, they are placed under
our protection, we owe something
to a mark of generous and honour-
-1 able confidence, which will here-
after be noticed.
The discovery of these Islands by
Captain Cook, in 177 H, first awaken-
ed the minds of these reflecting
islanders to the superiority which
civilization and the arts confer upon
man, and the elevation of a monarch
ofgenius and enterprise to the throne,
not inferior probably to Peter the
Great, though with a more limited
sphere of action, snapped the chain
which bound this interesting people
to the savage state, and to a gross
idolatry, and lirst opened to them the
career of civil improvement, and then,
hy the blessing of God, the light and
hopes of the true religion. This King
was Tamehameha, the father of the
Prince who died in England, and
whose remains were conveyed by the
Blonde back to Ohwyhee, or as it is
written in this volume, Hawaii. Pro-
fiting by the visits of European ves-
sels, and by the residence of some
persons who had deserted from them,
he began to cultivate the arts; and
finally, though only an inferior Chief,
subdued the whole cluster of islands
to his power. It was by this Chief,
that this rising though limited em-
pire was formally placed under the
auspices and protection of Great
Britain; and from that time, to this
country the natives have looked as to
their protectress and patron. This
curious circumstance is thus men-
tioned in the volume before us :
“ Hut the most singular circumstance
which occurred during Vancouver’s
visit in 1794, was the formal cession
which, in the presence of the assem-
bled chiefs, Tamehameha made of the
Island of Hawaii to England. In the
forenoon of the 25th of February, the
chiefs met on board the Discovery, and
each made a speech on the subject,
setting forth the reasons which in-
duced them to take so extraordinary a
step ;* after which it was proclaimed
to the Islanders that they were no
longer Kanaka no Hawaii, but Kanaka
no Hrittanee, i. e. no longer men of
Hawaii, but men of Britain. Mr. Paget,
accompanied hy some of the officers
from the Discovery and Chatham, then
went on shore and hoisted the British
flag; and a piece of copper, whereon
a memorial of the transaction was en-
graved, was deposited in the royal
dwelling.
“This singular cession of the coun-
try to a power nearly at the Antipodes
was not, of course, followed by any
act of authority, or ally apparent change
in the conduct of the English to Hawaii;
but it was a proof of the anxious desire
of Tamehameha for the advantage of
* These were, ehielly, the unprotected state
of the Islands, where the ships of tour nations,
English, American!,, French, Hessians,louche.i ;
and many of ihem treated the inhabitants most
cruelly; that the English were their oldest
friends ; that Captain Cook had made known to
them the greatness of the world, and they would
trust in the protection of the English against all
other powers.
246
Review of “ Voyage of the Ship Blonde


his kingdom. His intelligent mind
was aware of the incalculable superi-
ority possessed by the Europeans and
others, whose ships visited him, over
his own poor Islanders. The circum-
stances, that the English were the first
to touch there ; that their vessels were
the largest and most powerful; that,
besides theadvantages sought forthem-
selves in procuring provisions of all
kinds, they had endeavoured to improve
the Islands by carrying thither new
and profitable animals and vegetables;
all led him to look on the British as not
only the most powerful but the most
friendly of the new nations they had
learned to know ; and he might reason-
ably hope that we should be as willing
as able to protect them against the
insults and injuries that some of the
traders had offered them.” (pp. 35—37.)5 —37.)
The steps taken by this King, for
the improvement of his subjects, are
remarkable, and show the form and
resources of superior minds, in what-
ever state of society they appear.
The most interesting event, how-
ever, and we may call it one of the
most extraordinary in modern times,
was the renunciation and total aboli-
tion of idolatry, even before Christ-
ian instructors had reached those
shores, and when Christianity had
been only heard of by distant report,
or was seen very imperfectly, and often
no doubt unjustly represented in the
conduct of the crews of the vessels
which traded there. In so extraor-
dinary a way, perhaps, no nation
ever “changed its gods,” or rather
renounced them, in hope of being
taught a better system of worship.
Of this event, which in those distant
Islands cast down Satan from his
seat, and has now established there
the honour and worship of Him to
whom honour and worship only are
due, we select the following account,
from the first division of this vo-
lume, which is by far the most im-
portant. Tamehameha, or the Great,
as he is justly called by his people,
remained an Idolater, but often ex-
pressed his dissatisfaction at the
clumsy and useless form of his own
religion. He had a desire to know
what the religion of his civilized vi-
sitors was; but had none to inform
him but the masters of merchants’
vessels, or the low adventurers settled
on the islands, and could obtain no
satisfaction. But his doubts appear to
have been openly expressed, and led
to what took place in the reign of
his son, shortly after his death, in
1819. This singular transaction is
thus given:—
“During the six months immedi-
ately succeeding the death of his father,
the young King had held frequent con-
ferences with the different chiefs on the
subject of the insufficiency of their re-
ligion, of the impotence of their gods,
and the oppressive nature of the tabu ;
and finding that they generally agreed
in the expediency of a change of system,
it was determined to desecrate the mo-
rals and destroy the idols. It was, how-
ever, necessary to obtain the sanction
of Keopuolani the King’s mother, who
by birth enjoyed a higher rank among
the chie.s than even her son. She
asked what harm the gods had done,
that the chiefs should wish to destroy
them. ‘ Nay,’ said her friends, ‘what
good have they done that we should
keep them ? Is not their worship bur-
densome ; did they not require human
sacrifice; and have we not learned
from other nations that gods of wood
are not able to protect us, and that the
sacrifices are cruel and useless ? ’ * It is
good,’ said the Queen, ‘ do as you will;’
and on that same day the morals and
hevas were destroyed or desecrated, and
nothing remained but the places where
the bones of some of the chiefs were
deposited, and a few of the ancient
priesthood, who were appointed to watch
the relics.
“ This act was accompanied by
another of equal importance, which
has been strangely misrepresented by
at least one English traveller. The
breaking the tabu, by which women
were prohibited from eating with men,
or tasting of certain kinds of food, has
been represented as a mere frolic of the
young King. But the measure had
been concerted with the chiefs, and its
importance well weighed. The women
of the Sandwich Islands, though ac-
knowlegcd as chiefs, and admitted to
council, had still the degrading mark
of inferiority in their separate meals
and prohibited sorts of food. To raise
them to a better state was doubtless a
strong motive with the young King, who
revered his mother, and was passion-
ately attached to his young wife; but
he also desired to get rid, as soon and
as much as possible, of every part of
the system of tabu, which he wisely
considered as highly inimical to the
progress of civilization.
The manner in which it was


carried into effect is characteristic of
the simplicity of a people just emerg-
ing from barbarism. On occasion of a
great feast, the people, totally ignorant
of the intentions of the chiefs, were,
as usual, collected round the eating-
houses of the King and of his Queens,
which, under the old law, were at a
distance from each other. When the
baked meats were brought into the
King’s presence, he caused the choicest
part of them, and especially of those
kinds of food which it was unlawful
for women to taste, to be carried into
the eating-house of his wives, and ac-
companying them himself, he sat down
and ate, and caused the women to eat,
in the sight of the people, of all the
things looked upon as prohibited. The
priests and chiefs were instantly ap-
prised of the fact, which to the multi-
tude appeared prodigious, and calcu-
lated to awaken the vengeance of
heaven ; but they, prepared before-
hand, had already met together, and
the chief priest Hevaheva, preventing
the messenger with the report, ex-
plained to the people, that as the gods
had not revenged the violation of the
tabu it was a sign they had no power,
and therefore ought to be destroyed; on
which Hevaheva himself began by
setting fire to the principal morai. On
that day the idols were overthrown ;
and as soon as the event could be
known in the other islands, the ex-
ample was followed without hesitation.
One chief alone, the crafty Kckuaoka-
lani, armed in defence of his idols.
Though consulted among thfe other
chiefs as to the propriety of relin-
quishing the ancient deities of the
nation, he had never opposed the mea-
sure, and therefore resistance on his
part was unexpected : besides, being
the first cousin of the King, he was
supposed to be particularly engaged to
support the measures of his house.
However, he had only waited for the
destruction of the hevas as a signal for
rebellion, and seizing the war-god
Tarai, which was under his guardian-
ship, and which had anciently been
placed as the royal standard in every
field of battle, he induced a number of
the kanakas to join him; and flying
with them from Oahu, he assembled a
large body of men in Hawaii, being in
hopes of securing that island at least
for himself, and thus dividing the sove-
reignty with the young Tamehameha,
But Karaimoku, the friend and compa-
nion in war of Tamehameha the Great,
pursued him with a better and more
numerous army, and coming up with
him at Eaki Laki, after a desperate
battle, Kekuaokalani was killed, and
the war-god* was taken prisoner ; and
thus terminated the last effort in favour
of idolatry.
Meantime, Karaimoku and his
brother Boki, chiefs who, though not
of the highest birth, possessed the
greatest share of power and influence in
the land, had resolved to take the first
opportunity of solemnly and openly
professing Christianity*—that religion
which they believed to be a mark and a
consequence of superior civilisation, if
notits cause ; and when Captain Frey-
ciuet touched at the Sandwich Islands
in his voyage round the world, these
two chiefs were baptized by the chap-
lain of his ship; and thus Christianity
was planted, as it appeared, by the
spontaneous will of the natives, before
any mission even of persuasion had
reached them.” (pp. 45—49.)
There is an admirable correspond-
ence and harmony in all the opera-
tions of the Almighty, which some-
times break forth, as in this instance,
in the most unexpected and striking
manner. The man to whom that is
the most profound philosophy, which
can best account for things without
God, will see in the disposition of
these Islanders to renounce their su-
perstitions, nothing but an effect
produced upon their minds by asso-
ciating the superior knowledge and
power of their visitors with a supe-
rior form of religion. It would hap-
pen unfortunately for this hypothesis,
that no such effect appears to have
been ever produced upon any other
savages, whose general remark is,
that European religion is best for
Europeans, but their own for them.
There would be also a curious coin-
cidence to be accounted for, —that
whilst this change was going on in
the minds of the natives of those far
distant Islands, there was also a con-
cern for their conversion growing up
in the minds of many American
Christians; and that a Mission was
actually preparing in the United
States, in the entire ignorance of
this change in their attachments
to idolatry, and in the full persua-
sion that their ancient superstitions
were as deeply seated as in all other
Pagan Islands of the Pacific Ocean
they had been found to be. This,
perchance, may be resolved by the
* Brought to Eoglftna by Lord Ityron.
247
Review of 11 Voyage of the Ship Blonde .”


same philosophy into a lucky acci-
dent. But Christian philosophy takes
the higher ground, and is not afraid to
brand it as a pitiful folly, to suppose
events which affect the eternal inte-
rests of men and of nations, to be
left to chance; and to exhibit this
as one of those instances in which
He, under whose power are the times
and the seasons, prepares the way
for the working out of his own coun-
sels among the children of men.
There is a “suffering” of nations
“to walk in their own ways”; and
there is a “now,” when He “com-
manded! all men every where to re-
pent,” by the powerful instrument-
ality of His Gospel.
This coincidence, to which we have
referred, is marked as at least sin-
gular in the work before us :
“ These events took place late in the
autumn of 1819, while a Mission was
preparing in America to visit Oahu.
Its projectors, who had formed their
plan on what they had learned from
the masters of traders, and on the ac-
counts given by some youths, natives
of the Islands, who had been sent for
education to the United States, little
calculated that the work was partly
done to their hand, and that, the old
faith being destroyed, they had only to
begin to build up the temple of a purer
creed. In April, 1820, the ship bearing
the mission, which consisted of six fa-
milies, arrived in the harbour of Oahu.
There were two clergymen, two lay
teachers, a physician, and a farmer,
with their wives, besides two young
natives who had been brought up by
the mission as teachers in the United
States.
“ Their landing was at first opposed.
Many persons of the different nations
trading to Oahu represented, and not
without good grounds, that the mis-
sionaries would probably interfere with
the government of those Islands, that
the influence they would undoubtedly
gain might be dangerous, and advised
the King to refuse them permission to
land.
“ After eight days’ deliberation,
however, Tamehameha 11. determined
to admit them ; his desire of obtaining
teachers in the pule, or worship of Eu-
ropeans, and pain pala, or reading and
Writing, overcame all other considera-
tions ; besides, he said, as they were
so few, it would be easy to dismiss them
in case of misconduct. He assigned to
them a piece of ground for a church
near his own residence, and gave them
houses and gardens sufficient for all
their wants. One of the first objects
of the Missionaries was, to obtain a
knowledge of the language of the
Sandwich Islands, which is soft, har-
monious, and curious iu its inflections.*
It is well adapted to rhyme, of which
the natives are very fond, all their civil
and religious history being contained
in metrical talcs and ballads. Early in
1822 the first Hawaiian book, —it was
only a primer, was printed at the
missionary press at Oahu, and the hi-
therto savage dialect was henceforth to
be counted among the languages of
cultivated nations.
“ The King, his Queen, and the other
chiefs of both sexes, applied themselves
diligently to learn to read and write.
Their progress was rapid; they soon
began to write letters to each other;
and one of them remarked with delight
that now, at whatever distance you
might be from your friend, you might
whisper in his ear ; but that formerly
you could only communicate by mes-
sengers who forgot or divulged what
you trusted them to say for you.
“ The Missionaries of course were
not negligent of the opportunity of in-
stilling the doctrines of Christianity
into the minds of their pupils, afforded
by this very favourable disposition of
the chiefs. One of the first converts
was Keopuolani, the King’s mother,
a woman of strong sense, the highest
birth, and extremely beloved by all
classes of people, and especially by the
Queen, her daughter-in-law; who iu
her last illness scarcely ever left her,
or would allow any body but her hus-
band to share with her in performing
her dutiful attentions to his parent.
This great chief, the most honoured
wife of Tamehameha 1., died early iu
1823. Her loss would have been still
more felt by the mission had not ano-
ther female chief, whose name is so
like hers that they have sometimes been
confounded, already taken up the
cause. This is Kapeolani, wife of
Nahi, the hereditary orator or Se-
naschie of the Sandwich Islands. She
was baptized about the time of the
Queen’s death, and since that period all
her influence and authority have been
exercised in favour of the new faith.
Nothing like force however has been
* See Ellis, Appendix, especially Tor a pecu-
liarity in ttie pronouns. It is to be hoped, that
this gentleman, whose information and abilities
abundantly qualify him for the task, will pre-
serve the ancient mythological and historical
legends of these islands, now likely to be swept
away by the progress of civilization.
248
Review of a Voyage of the Ship Blonde.”


employed, and the religion of the Prince
of Peace has proceeded gently but
steadily to purify the morals and im-
prove the manners of an intelligent,
cheerful, and sweet-natured people.”
(pp. 49—52.)
The ancient superstition of these
islands differed but circumstantially
from those of the other islands in
the Pacific. Besides numerous gro-
tesque and monstrous idols, each
Chief had a family-temple, and a
war-god, which was always carried
with him to the field of battle.
Human sacrifice was practised ; the
victims were strangled without the
doors of the temples, and then brought
in and laid on their faces before the
idols. They had some obscure no-
tions of a supreme, invisible God ;
but deified the operations of nature.
Of the intermediate beings, between
the Supreme and them, some were
benevolent: but mischievous divini-
ties seem, as in most other places, to
have had the deepest hold upon their
homage;—a proof that there, as
throughout the pagan world, fear is
a sentiment more predominant than
hope and love.
'Fhe following is a description of
a morai. The anecdote which closes
it, shows that common sense would
sometimes remonstrate against ido-
latry in the darkest times ; and that
the Jesuit? of Owhyhee are not be-
hind their brethren in other places,
in the promptness of pious so-
phistry ;
“ After rowing along the coast to
the southward for a short time, we
came to a pretty creek called Honau-
nau, where the morai, overshadowed
with cocoa-nut trees, stood. The ex-
terior appearance of the building itself
does not differ from that of the grass
houses of the native chiefs. It is sur-
rounded by a palisade formed of the
trunks of palm trees, and the court
within the palisade is filled with rude
wooden images of all shapes and di-
mensions, whose grotesque forms and
horrible countenances present a most
extraordinary spectacle. Most of these
idols are placed in the same attitude ;
one, however, was distinguished by a
greater degree of skill in the carving ;
it had a child in its arms. There were
also a number of poles with carved
heads in various parts of the court, and,
immediately in front of the morai, and
outside of the palisades, there was a
kind of sentinel deity of a very gro-
tesque shape. On entering the moral
we saw on one hand a line of deities
made of wicker-work, clothed in fine
tapa, now nearly destroyed by time,
and adorned with feathered helmets
and masks, made more hideous by
rows of sharks’ teeth, and tufts of
human hair; each differing a little
from the other, but all preserving a
strong family likeness. Under these
the bones of the ancient kings of the
island are said to be deposited; and
near them the favourite weapons of de-
ceased chiefs and heroes, their orna-
ments, and whatever else might have
been pleasing to them while alive.
“ As the idolatrous worship of these
things is now at an end, Karaimoku
takes every occasion to do away the re-
membrance of it, taking care not to
shock the feelings of the people too
violently. He had given directions,
that as the English officers were de-
sirous of taking some of the ancient
gods, and other articles deposited in the
raorai, to show in Britain what had
been the worship and the customs of
their Hawaiian brethren, the guardians
of the place should permit them to re-
move whatever they pleased. We
could not wonder that the old man,
who had long been the priest of the
temple, and was now the guardian of
its relics, showed some signs of regret
at this final destruction of the gods of
his youth. This man was the son of
the high priest of Captain Cook’s
times. He told us an anecdote of his
youth which may deserve to be re-
peated here.
“ One morning his father had placed
the usual offering of fish and poi be-
fore the Nui Akua, or Great Spirit.
The son having spent a long day in an,
unsuccessful fishing expedition, re-
turned, and, tempted by hunger, de-
voured the food of the gods. But first
he placed his hands on the eyes of the
idol, and found they saw not; and
then his hand into its mouth, but it
did not bite; and then he threw his
mantle over the image and ate : and,
replacing the bowl, removed the mantle,
and went his way. Being reproved by
his father, he said, ‘ Father, I spoke to
him, and he heard not; I put my hand
into his mouth, and he felt not; I
placed tapa over his eyes, and he saw
not: I therefore laughed and ate.’
‘ Son,’ said the old priest, ‘ thou hast
done unwisely; ’tis true the wood nei-
ther sees nor hears, but the Spirit
above observes all our actions.’
Vol, VI. Third Series. April, 1827.
249
Review of u Voyage of the Ship Blonde .”


“ This priest opposed, with propriety,
the offering any indignity to the bones
of the deceased Chiefs, but in every
thing else assisted us with civility,
though with reluctance, to spoil the
morai of its most precious contents;
and the Blonde soon received on board
almost all that remained of the ancient
deities of the islands.”
The whole structure of their su-
perstition is an additional proof to
those which all researches in Ame-
rica, Australia, and Polynesia have
afforded, of the common origin of
all people, from tribes imbued, in
their early ancestry, with the tradi-
tions which, having been preserved
in the Scriptures, are transmitted in
their truth to us; but being per-
verted by superstition, have dis-
seminated the most fatal and de-
grading errors wherever a written
revelation has not been vouchsafed.
They had even some of those parti-
cular customs, which even more than
general mythological resemblances
mark their origin from Asia. As the
Jews had their cities of refuge, and
most pagan nations of antiquity their
sanctuaries, the Owhyheians had their
refuges surrounded with white flags,
the emblems of peace; which, when
the criminal had touched, made it
infamous to injure him. A religious
distinction was also made between
the lower classes and the higher, at
the feasts of their gods ; and the
“ Odi profanum vulgus,” was felt as
strongly by the Sandwich Chief, as
by the initiated Greek or Roman.
The women, too, though allowed the
privilege of giving their opinions in
council, —a point, it should seem,
never conquered from them in this
cluster of the Sandwich Islands, —
were in other respects treated as
greatly inferior.
(To be concluded in our next.)
A Widow's Tale, and Other Poems. By Bernard Barton,
Author of “ Devotional Versesfyc. 12mo. pp. 155. ss. 6d.
Poets are a class of writers on
whom the most serious responsibility
devolves. Addressing themselves
principally to the imagination and
the passions, their verses often ope-
rate as a charm upon the human mind,
and are productive of great good, or
of great evil. The design of their
art, it has been said, is to give plea-
sure to the reader. But if, in their
endeavours to attain that object, they
flatter the vices, and inflame the evil
propensities of mankind, by present-
ing impure and irreligious sentiments
in the attire of elegant and beautiful
verse, the moral mischief done by
their compositions is incalculable ;
and that mischief is increased in pro-
portion to the vigour of the writers’
talents, and the celebrity of their
character. How much, for instance,
of what Dryden has written, is calcu-
lated to inflict the greatest injury
upon the youthful mind ! And who,
that considers this fact, and at the
same time conscientiously believes
the Revelation of God, would envy
that eminent man the honours which
he has otherwise so justly acquired.
by the wonderful fertility and strength
of his genius, and by the improve-
ments which he introduced into our
national literature ? A writer of
slender abilities, who attempts to
undermine the goodly fabric of mo-
rality and religion, can only for a
short season obtain attention, and
exert an injurious influence upon the
public mind, —in a few years he dies
and is forgotten, and his lucubra-
tions sink into that oblivion which
they so justly merited. But the
poetry of such men as Dryden and
Lord Byron will be read, as long as
the language in which it is written
shall be understood ; and, consider-
ing the unhallowed tendency of many
of their most popular compositions,—
mixed up indeed, but not neutralized,
by pieces of a different character, —
fearful is the account which those
distinguished men will have to ren-
der to the Judge of quick and dead,
for the actual wickedness, effected by
their instrumentality, and accumu-
lated through a series of ages.
It is pleasing to turn from such
instances of perverted talent, to those
250
Review of Barton's <l Widow's Tale."


REVIEW.
Voyage of His Majesty's Ship Blonde to the Sandwich Islands, in
the Years 1824-1825. Captain the Right Hon, Lord Byron,
Commander . 4to. pp. 260. 21. 2s.
{Concludedfromp. 250.)
These islands have several vol-
canic craters, —some of them terri-
fically active ; and they gave rise to
a class of volcanic deities, the objects
of terror to the people, and were
consequently regularly propitiated by
offerings. The compiler of this
volume describes these deities, by
mistake, as peculiar to Owhyhee.
Wherever pagan superstition has pre-
vailed, and there have been volcanoes,
we believe that they have been as-
signed to some terrific personification
of evil. In the more refined classical
mythology, Vulcan is the local deity
of volcanoes, from whom indeed they
derive their name; and to him, as
one of the gods of fire, sacrifices were
offered. The merry fictions of the
poets deprived him of much that
was awful in his character; but
with the Sandwich islanders, unmi-
tigated terror and prostrate awe
were produced by the very name of
these fearful deities. Their most
remarkable volcano is that of Peli ;
and to the goddess Peli solemn
and propitiatory respect was paid.
She was served by a peculiar priest-
hood, among which it appears that
women were often enrolled ; and it
was not uncommon for them, and
others of her most zealous votaries,
to cause their bones, after death, to
be thrown into some of the fiery fis-
sures of the mountain where she was
supposed to hold her court. The
fear of this imaginary goddess of the
lava-halls, appears to have been with
difficulty extirpated from the minds
of the poor natives, by the introduc-
tion of Christianity ; and we advert
to this, for the purpose of introducing
an anecdote of a converted native
female, which is given in the work
before us, in terms not too strong for
its deserts. A party from the Blonde
ascended to the crater of the volcano;
and after describing the journey, the
account proceeds
“ At length we reached the edge of
the crater ; but words are totally in-
adequate to describe the effect produced
on us by the first sight of that dark
fiery gulf. From its brink, where we
stood, we looked down for more than
thirteen hundred feet, over rocks of
lava and columns of sulphur, between
whose antique fissures a few green
shrubs and juicy berry-bearing plants
had fixed themselves, to a rugged plain,
where many a cone, raised by the ac-
tion of the fire below, was throwing up
columns of living flame, and whirls of
smoke and vapour, while floods of
liquid fire were slowly winding through
scoriae and ashes, here yellow with sul-
phur, and there black, or grey, or red,
as the materials which the flames had
wrought on varied.
Not less than fifty cones, of various
height, appeared below us as the fun-
nels of the various operations going
on. At least one half of these were in
activity, but it appears that the same
are by no means constantly so ; nay,
that often older cones fall in, and new
ones are formed elsewhere in the bottom
of the pit. Some eject stones and frag-
ments of rock, others throw out ashes
only, while, from their dark or sulphur-
coloured flanks, lava and sometimes
water issues ; many of the cones emit
vapours which, condensed, form beau-
tiful beds of sulphur, others are dis-
tinguished by the wreathed columns
of white and black, that indicate steam
and smoke, curled round each other by
the wind, but never mixing.
“ We remarked that within the
sunken plain, and near the great crater,
which the natives call Kairauea, there
are pools of fresh cool water, doubtless
furnished by the steam from below,
which, condensing here, forms these
pools, where numerous wild birds re-
sort, and which are shadowed by reeds
and bushes.
“ Night increased the magnificence,
perhaps the horror, of the scene. The
volcano caused what Defoe calls “ a
terrible light in the air.” The roar
ocasioued by the escape of the pent-up
elements, and the fearful character of
the surrounding scenery, suited with
that light; and all impressed us with
the sense of the present Deity, such as
when from Sinai he gave, with thun-


derings and with lightnings, the tables
of the law.
“No wonder, then, that the unin-
structed natives had long worshipped,
in this place, the mysterious powers of
nature. Here it was that they sup-
posed the gods of the island had their
favourite abodes, and that, from this
centre of their power, they often shook
the land, when it pleased them to pass
under ground to visit the sea, and take
delight in open places. The first pair
who arrived at the island, with the
animals and fruits necessary for their
subsistence, met the fire-gods, say they,
on their first landing, and propitiated
them by offerings of part of their provi-
sions. These they accepted, and retired
to their dwellings in Kairauea, whence
they have seldom come but as the pu-
nishers of evil men, or in vengeance
of the violation of their sanctuary.
Hence no ohelo berry was eaten on
Peli, till some had been offered to the
goddess of the same name : the sandal-
wood was not cut, nor the fern-roots
dug, without propitiating her by locks
of hair, and often more precious things.
Frequently the hog and the dog were
sacrificed to procure her favour ; and
never was the ground disturbed or any
thing carried away from Kairauea.
This worship is now no more. The
hut in which we passed the night had
witnessed one of the greatest acts of
moral courage, which has perhaps
ever been performed; and the actor
w as a woman, and, as we are pleased to
call her, a savage.
“ Kapiolani, the wife of Nahi, a fe-
male chief of the highest rank, had
recently embraced Christianity; and
desirous of propagating it, and of un-
deceiving the natives as to their false
gods, she resolved to climb the moun-
tain, descend into the crater, and, by
thus braving the volcanic deities in
their very homes, convince the inha-
bitants of the island that God is God
alone, and that the false subordinate
deities existed only in the fancies of
their weak adorers. Thus determined,
and accompanied by a Missionary, she,
with part of her family, and a number
of followers, both of her own vassals
and those of other chiefs, ascended
Peli. At the edge of the first precipice
that bounds the sunken plain, many of
her followers and companions lost cou-
rage and turned back : at the second,
the rest earnestly entreated her to de-
sist from her dangerous enterprise, and
forbear to tempt the powerful gods of
the fires. But she proceeded; and on
the very verge of the crater, caused
the hut we were now sheltered in to be
constructed for herself and people.
Here she was assailed anew by their
entreaties to return home, and their
assurances, that if she persisted in
violating the houses of the goddess, she
would draw on herself, and those with
her, certain destruction. Her answer
was noble : —‘ 1 will descend into the
crater,’ said she ; ‘ and if 1 do not re-
turn safe, then continue to worship
Peli; but if I come back unhurt you
must learn to adore the God who
created Peli.’ She accordingly went
down the steep and difficult side of the
the crater, accompanied by a Mis-
sionary, and by some whom love or duty
induced to follow her. Arrived at the
bottom, she pushed a stick into the li-
quid lava, and stirred the ashes of the
burning lake. The charm of superstition
was at that moment broken. Those who
had expected to see the goddess, armed
with flame and sulphurous smoke,
burst forth and destroy the daring
heroine, who thus braved her in her
very sanctuary, were awe-struck when
they saw the fire remain innocuous and
the flames roll harmless, as though
none were present. They acknowledged
the greatness of the God of Kapiolani:
and from that time few indeed have
been the offerings and little the re-
verence offered to the fires of Peli.”
(pp. 183—188.)
An heroine so consecrated, so to
speak, would, had she made the
voyage, attract more attention in this
country, though among another class
of people, and from another class of
feelings, than did the King and Queen
of these islanders themselves.
The circumstances which led to
Captain Cook’s melancholy fate, have
been of late explained in several
publications. To some of our readers
the statement may however be new.
A popular song, on the death of a ce-
lebrated chief, Orono, which has been
translated by the American Mis-
sionaries, concludes with this pro-
phetic stanza : —“ Ere he departed,
he prophesied, I will return in after-
times, on an island bearing cocoa-
nut trees, and swine, and dogs.”
“ On the first appearance of the Eng-
lish ships off Tauai, the Chiefs and
Priests, taking them for floating islands,
imagined that their long expected
Etuah Orono was arrived. Hence,
even at that island, though it was not
Orono’s country, Captain Cook was
received with honours approaching to
adoration; and Captain King 1 ; not com-
328
Review of 11 Voyage of the Ship Blonde.”


prebending the meaning of the repeti-
tious of his name, supposed it to be
the title of the chief Priest. But it was
at Hawaii that the simple natives paid
the highest honours to him whom they
imagined to be their guardian spirit.
“ The King was absent in Maui, en-
deavouring to settle the succession to
the island in favour of his daughter-in-
law ; but Kaoo, the chief Priest, and
his son Oneeah, who appears to have
been the Priest of Rono, received Cap-
tain Cook, with honours they really
meant for divine, and which he ima-
gined meant nothing more than friendly
respect, and perhaps fear on account
of his large and powerful vessels.
“ Scarcely were the ships anchored
when a Priest entered, and decorating
Cook with red cloth, such as adorned
the deities, offered him a pig in the
manner of sacrifice, and pronounced a
long, though to the English, unintel-
ligible discourse. In it the word Orono
was frequently repeated, and doubtless
the. Captain was hailed as the god re-
turned to bless the island. The same
name occurred frequently in a verse of
a song or hymn chanted before him on
his- landing by Priests bearing wands,
and the inhabitants of Kearake’kua,
the village where he first landed,
either withdrew respectfully from sight,
or prostrated themselves on the ground
as he walked from the beach to the
high morai. The w hole account of his
reception there, his presentation to the
gods, his place assigned between two
of the principal images, the offerings
made to him, and the chant of Orono,
are admirably described by Captain
King, who could have been at no loss
for the meaning of the whole had he
been acquainted with the Legend of
Rono. He seems, however, to have
suspected that the honours rendered to
Cook were divine.
No sooner was Teraiopu able to re-
turn from Maui to Kearake’kua than
he went on board the Discovery, to pay
a private visit to Captain Cook, and
seemed to vie with the Priests them-
selves in showing him honour. Of all
the South Sea Islanders, those of the
Sandwich Isles have displayed the
greatest powers of observation, and
consequently of improvement. r i he
Chiefs wished anxiously to have Cap-
tain King, whom they took for the sou
of Cook, left behind with them, doubt-
less that he might contribute to their ad-
vancement in those arts they discovered
Europeans to possess ; and as they had
confidently expected that the return of
Orono was to confer some immediate
and important benefit, they eagerly
embraced the idea, that the blessed era
was come ; and that all the knowledge
which they believed, on the faith of
tradition, they had lost, should be re-
stored, and new arts and new comforts
taught them by the inhabitants of the
floating islands. The stay of the Eng-
lish, however, only served to consume
the provisions of the country, and the
people soon perceived that they were
there solely to repair their own ships
and refresh the crews. Curiosity was
satisfied; and great disappointment
was felt at the departure of Orono,
taking with him his floating islands,
and all they contained of wonderful and
useful. His unexpected return to re-
pair his vessel did not entirely restore
him to the degree of honour he at first
enjoyed, and the severity with which
he had punished one or two acts of
theft, had perhaps a little indisposed
the native Chiefs against him. His
unfortunate attempt to get the King on
board his ship, there to confine him
until the boat he had lost should be
recovered, was the cause of the tumult
that ended in his lamented death.
There certainly was no malice in the
case, —not the slightest intention of in-
juring him ; and his body was treated
in the same manner as those of their
own Chiefs, the bones being assigned
to different Eries, who, either from
affection or from an idea of good luck
attending them, desired to preserve
them. Long after Captain Cook’s death
they were persuaded he would re-ap-
pear, and perhaps punish them for their
breach of hospitality.” (pp. 24 —28.)
How far Captain Cook was aware
that he was the object of divine ho-
nours, we shall not pretend to deter-
mine. The veil of charity is deli-
cately enough drawn over the trans-
action in this account. What one of
his officers suspected, however, ought
to have been suspected by the still
more acute mind of Cook; and
though, at the worst, it could only
he a sailor’s frolic to submit to these
ceremonies, yet these are subjects
which no enlightened man can jest
with, and be innocent.
The freaks of human pride, when
unchecked, find instances in all na-
tions ; and limited as the history of
Owhyhee is, it yet preserves a curious
instance. Of King Kevaloa it is re-
corded, that, “If any of the lower
order were so unfortunate as to look
upon him, between sun-rise and sun-
set, even by accident, they incurred
329
Review of a Voyage of the Ship Blonde


death.” Whether by candle-light his
Majesty was more tolerant of inspec-
tion, is not stated. The present
Queen Kahumanu seems, whilst a
Pagan, to have been a violent and
Cruel woman; but the change wrought
in her character appears to be so con-
spicuous, as to exercise the best in-
fluence. She sailed in the Blonde
on an excursion from one part of the
country to another at some distance ;
and the author of the Voyage thus
speaks of her “No longer giving
tvay to the violent passions which
disgraced her youth, this Queen is
now distinguished by the Hawaiians
as the ‘ Good Kahumanu.’ She is
one of the most zealous among the
new Christians, and her first act, on
arriving here, was to go to church
and return thanks for her safe voyage;
and on seeing Mr. Ruggles, the Mis-
sionary, she took his hand and said,
‘ When I formerly saw you I disliked
you, I hated you; hut now I love
and respect your character.’ This
change will doubtless have a fa-
vourable effect on the people.”
The persons of the natives are
thus described :
“ They are generally well made, and
the nobles are almost universally taller
and larger than the middle size in Eu-
rope ; they are strong, active, and ca-
pable of enduring great fatigue. The
skin is of a fine brown, inclining to
copper-colour ; their hair is rather
coarse and black; in some it curls na-
turally, in others it is quite straight;
they still discolour the roots with lime,
as in Cook’s and Vancouver’s time,
and cut it in every variety of fashion.
Sometimes it is allowed to flow loosely;
sometimes it is cut and tied so as to
form a sort of aigrette on the crown of
the head ; and again it is shorn on
both sides so that a crest, like the
bear-skin of an old dragoon’s helmet,
remains. Their eyes are quick, lively,
and apparently never at rest ; which
last quality gives an expression of wild-
ness to the countenance. They have
naturally fine teeth, but hitherto few
men have grown up with a full set, it
having been the fashion to extract a
tooth or two to commemorate the death
of a friend or chieftain. Our friend
Boki, himself, had four of his front
teeth sacrificed to the great Tameha-
meba ; and the operation must have
been severe : he was laid on his back,
and his mouth filled with tapa j a
sharp instrument was placed at the
root of the teeth, and at one blow they
were all knocked out at once! Tattooing
is often used as another mark of mourn-
ing, though it is sometimes done for
ornament alone. The ladies tattoo tha
tips of their tongues in memory of their
departed friends. On the death of la-
mehameha all the Chiefs had his name
and the date of his death tattoed on
their arms. The women are in youth
beautifully formed, but become corpu-
lent as they grow old ; they are good-
humoured and affectionate, and walk
and move gracefully. Of this they do
not appear unconscious ; and they are
extremely fond of contemplating them-
selves in a glass, and almost every one
possesses a small mirror. They gene-
rally wear their hair long, and flowing
over their shoulders, and the Chiefs
keep it very clean. Not so the lower
people, who, although they keep their
huts very neat, yet are dirty in their
persons, and have both vermin and a
variety of cutaneous diseases, especi-
ally the itch, for which, however, the
Missionaries have begun to teach them
to use the sulphur that is produced
abundantly in Hawaii.” (pp. 135—137.)
The following is a specimen of the
eloquence of these islanders : it is a
speech of an aged chief, to a number
of others, who were somewhat hesi-
tating as to the part they should take
in one of the intestine broils of for-
mer times. Genius creates by its
own laws ; criticism discriminates
and arranges these creations into
rules. Homer was the father of epic
poetry, and of its rules ; of the latter
without intending it; and we know
not whether all the rules of a perfect
oration for more civilized society,
might not be gathered from the war-
speech of Kaikeoeva, the aged.
He lifted up his withered hands
among the other chiefs, and said, —
“ ‘ Hear me, ye Chiefs ; ye who have
warred under the great Tamehameha ;
Karaimoku and I were born upon the
same mountain in this island ; we were
nourished at the same breast, and our
boyish sports were in common, and
together we breasted yonder foaming
waves. In manhood we fought side by
side. When Karaimoku was wounded,
I slew the Chief whose spear had
pierced him ; and though I am now a
dried and withered leaf, never be it
said that Kaikeoeva deserted his friend
and brother in arms in time of need*
Who is on Karaimoku’s side? Let
330
Review of u Voyage of the Ship Blonde .”


him launch his war canoe and follow
me.' This burst of eloquence, from
so approved a warrior, aroused the
Chief; in an hour all the war canoes in
and near Laheina were launched, and
bore six hundred men to Taui in time
to join Karaimoku as he marched to
attack the fort of Taumuarii.
(pp. 99, ICO.)
The natives, it seems, arc lovers of
poetry; and the Missionaries have
therefore very wisely composed seve-
ral hymns for their use, in the native
language.
Of the American Missionaries,
upon the whole, respectful mention
is made ; although it is evident that
the officers of the Blonde viewed
them with some suspicion, as intend-
ing to exercise political influence on
the island in favour of their own
country, and as disposed to interfere
too much with civil affairs. Both
these were however expressly dis-
claimed by those gentlemen, and no
contrary fact is adduced in the vo-
lume. They have manifestly done a
great work ; and if it is thought right
to encourage Missionaries to go out
from England,—which, considering
the relation of these islands to this
country, may be very proper,—this
ought to be done in the spirit of true
Christian fraternity. The field is yet
sufficiently wide. The following ex-
tracts will show that no inconsider-
able change has been effected by the
pious labours of the Americans: —
“ From Lahaina the Islands of Ra-
nai, Morokoi, and Taoorawa are in
sight at the distance of about fifteen
miles; their appearance is dreary, with
lowering clouds constantly resting on
the summits of their dark hills.
“ On the southern part of the bay,
and close to the shore, are the ruins of
a heiua or morai; and as we trod over
the confused mass of stones, we re-
joiced in the thought that its mon-
strous gods are for ever destroyed,
and its bloody sacrifices for ever ended.
Seven short years have sufficed to put
an end to a most barbarous super-
stition, to detach the whole nation from
idolatry, and to plant among them the
fiure faith and morals of the Christian
aw. A church capable of containing
six hundred persons has lately been
erected here; its walls are of reeds,
lined with the woven leaves of the lau-
hala ; and the roof, covered with the
tMeat) is supported by strong poles, The
whole is exceedingly neat arid even
elegant. The Chiefs are extremely
kind to the Missionary, and have al-
loted him a house and piece of land
sufficient for his wants.” (pp. 107, 108.)
To the same purport are the judi-
cious reflections upon the scene pre-
sented at the public funeral of the
King and Queen :
“ Having reached the church, which
was hung with black on the occasion,
the cars were drawn up before the door,
and the persons of the procession formed
a circle around, while the Chaplain of
the lilonde read the funeral service in
English, and the American Missionary
addressed the assembly in their native
tongue. The procession then in the
same order marched to the same house,
belonging to Karaimoku, where wo
had been received the day after our
arrival; it was now entirely hung with
black, and a raised platform, over which
a low arch was thrown, at one end, was
prepared as the resting-place of the
remains of the two sovereigns, whom
the old man had loved as his children
through life, and whose early death
has been most grievous to him. He re-
ceived their bodies standing by a chair
covered with black velvet, placed for
him close to the platform prepared for
them ; and prepared as he was for the
reception of their remains, he was ex-
tremely agitated, and could not restrain
his tears. As soon as the coffins were
deposited on the platform, the baud ac-
companied some native singers in a
funeral hymn, which the Missionaries
had written and taught them to sing,
to the air of Pleyel’s German Hymn.
We could not help reflecting on the
strange combination of circumstances
here before us ; every thing native-
born and ancient in the isles was pass-
ing away: the dead Chiefs lay there,
hidden in more splendid cerements than
their ancestors had ever dreamed of;
no bloody sacrifice stained their ob-
sequies, nor was one obscene memorial
made to insult the soul as it left its
earthly tenement; but instead, there
was hope held out of a resurrection to
happiness, and the doctrines admitted
that had put an end to sacrifice for
ever, and pronounced the highest bless-
ing on the highest purity ! Where the
naked savage only had been seen, the de-
cent clothing of a cultivated people had
succeeded, and its adoption, though
now occasional, promises permanency
at no distant period. Mingled with
these willing disciples were the warlike
and the noble of the land the most re-
mote on the globe, teaching, by their
331
Review of u Voyage of the Ship Blonde .”


sympathy, the charities that soften
yet dignify human nature. The savage
yells of brutal orgies were now si-
lenced ; and as the solemn sounds
were heard for the first time, uniting
the instruments of Europe and the
composition of a learned musician to
the simple voice of the savage, and
words, not indeed harsh in themselves,
framed into verse by the industry and
piety of the teachers from a remote
nation, came upon the ear, it was im-
possible not to feel a sensation ap-
preaching to awe, as the marvellous
and rapid change a few years have pro-
duced was called up to the mind.”
(pp. 128—130.)
The beautiful incident in the
voyage home, the discovery of the
small Christianized Island of Mauti,
was given in our last Number, p. 239.
The judicious conduct of Lord Byron,
the Commander, is mentioned fre-
quently in the volume with just com-
mendation.
SELECT LIST OF BOOKS RECENTLY PUBLISHED, CHIEFLY
RELIGIOUS.
TVith occasional Characteristic Notices.
[The insertion of any article in this List is not to be considered as pledging us to the approba-
tion of its contents, unless it be accompanied by some express notice of our favourable opinion.
Nor is the omission of any such notice to be regarded as indicating a contrary opinion ; as our
limits, and other reasons, impose on us the necessity of selection and brevity.]
The Substance of an Argument to
prove the Truth of the Bible; drawn
from the Fitness and Harmony of its
Subjects. By David M‘NicoU. B vo.
pp. 154. 5s. —In this age of infidelity
and irreligion, when men of talents
and information attempt, through the
medium of the press, to illustrate either
the truth or the doctrines of the Bible,
they confer an important benefit upon
society, and justly entitle themselves
to the respect of the wise and good.
Aware of the direct tendency of the
sacred writings to promote the spi-
ritual and eternal interests of mankind,
Mr. M'Nicoll, in the very able tract
before us, attacks the unreasonable
prejudices of unbelievers, and invites
those unhappy men to a cordial recep-
tion of revealed truth. His object in
this work,is not to present a comprehen-
sive or even general view of the Evidence
in favour of Divine Revelation ; but to
argue the truth of the Bible from the
harmony of its parts, and its adapta-
tion to the peculiar situation and cir-
cumstances of man. In this, we think,
he has succeeded ; and if some parts of
his work be too abstract and recondite
for ordinary readers, much of what he
has written is distinguished by great
clearness and force of argument, and oc-
casionally by happy and eloquent illus-
tration. In reference to those sections
which are the least striking, the author
justly says,“ Some plain or private Chris-
tians, it is feared, will not think they
meet with much in these remarks, either
to delight their taste, or to increase their
profit. Happily no critical inquiry
into the parts and structure of the
Bible, is requisite in order to promote
their best instruction. Divine truth
comes home to the humble and ob-
servant mind like the light of heaven
to the lifted eye, which questions not
those principles of optics on which the
vision is enjoyed. But nothing should
be left undone to fix the attention of
the Infidel, on a subject so important
as the sacred authority of the Scrip-
tures. And this is our apology for the
nature of these reasonings.” With this
explanation we think every intelligent
reader will be satisfied. Works on this
plan are, however, after all, rather
adapted to establish those whose judg-
ment is previously won, than to con-
vince the sceptic. The grand proof lies
where our Lord and the sacred writers
have placed it, —in “ the works,” —
the attestation of miracles. Appeals to
mere rational conviction are entirely
dependant upon the animus of the reader.
Lux Renata: A Protestant Epistle ,
with Notes. By the Author of Religio
Clerici. B vo. pp. 63, 4s. 6 d. —This
pamphlet contains an able poetical
sketch of the Papacy, and of the
struggle which Protestantism has main-
tained with it since the glorious era of
the Reformation. The sentiments of
the author are truly British and Pro-
testant, his versification generally vi-
gorous and correct, and his satire often
pointed and efficient.
The Apocalypse of St. John, or Pro-
phecy of the Rise, Progress, and Full
of the Church of Rome; the Inquisi-
tion; the Revolution in France; the
Universal JFar; and the final Triumph
of Christianity. Being a New Inter-
pretation, by the Rev. George Croly,
A.M. , H.R. S. L . Bi-o. pp. 470. 12s.—
332
Select List.
