

Revolutionary Socialism
AND THE
WOMAN’S MOVEMENT
By LILY GAIR WILKINSON.
PRICE ONE PENNY.
PRINTED AND PUBLISHED BY THE
SOCIALIST LABOUR PARTY,
28 FORTH STREET, EDINBURGH.


REFORM OR REVOLUTION. A Lecture delivered at
Bostoftf Mass., by Daniel De Leon. Price, One Penny.
Socialists are not reformers. The key-note of this address shows why
the working class can get nothing out of Reforms. Once read by an
intelligent person he is proof against any Reform craze.
THE DEVELOPMENT OF SOCIALISM FROM UTOPIA
TO SCIENCE. By Frederick .Engels. Translated
from the German by Daniel De Leon. Price, One Penny.
The student will likely come across articles in the capitalist press
lauding all kinds of things, from a “ profit sharing ” bakery to the Post
Office, as Socialism. In this book the historic and economic development
of Socialism is traced, and the scientific bedrock upon which the science
is based is set forth in plain language.
DEVELOPMENT OF SOCIALISM IN GREAT
BRITAIN. Authorised by the N.E.C, of the Socialist
Labour Party. Price, One Penny.,
An historic economic sketch of affairs in Great Britain down to the
{(resent time, showing the development of industries and of capitalist and
abour economic organisations.
THE SOCIALIST LABOUR PARTY ; ITS AIMS AND
METHODS. Price, One Penny.
This pamphlet deals with the important problem of Socialist unity. In
it we offer the methods of organisation and the arguments by which they
are supported to the dispassionate study of all who wish for its
accomplishment.
HISTORICAL MATERIALISM, Written by Frederick
Engels as an Introduction of the previous Work from his
pen, entitled, " Socialism, Utopian and Scientific.”
It designates that view of the course of history which seeks the
ultimate cause and the great moving power of all important historic
events in the economic development of Society, in the changes in the
modes of production and exchange, in the consequent of Society
into distinct classes, and in the struggles of these classes against each
other.


Revolutionary Socialism
AND THE
Woman’s Movement.
I.
INTRODUCTORY.
By LILY GAIR WILKINSON.
(l What is freedom ? Ye can tell
That which slavery is too well:
For its very name has grown
To an echo of your own."
Throughout the whole period of civilisation woman has been a
slave. The form of slavery may have varied from age to age,
but in one way or another woman’s written history has been a
record of dependence and subjection, and to-day the wrongs and
degradation which slavery brings weigh more cruelly upon her
than ever before. During the past century all the evils of society
have been intensified by the monster power of capitalism; there is
more poverty, more shame, and more oppression in our midst than
was ever dreamt of in former days. And wherever there is
oppression, it is women who are most oppressed by law and
custom; wherever there is shame, upon women the stain is


deepest; wherever there is poverty, it is women who suffer the
greatest privations.
We hear much from reformers and moralists of the famous
“ Woman Question,” but women themselves are at last awakening
to the fact that all this questioning does nothing to alleviate the
misery of their bondage. This is the healthy and hopeful sign of
modern feminine slavery; women are everywhere beginning to
recognise the inferiority of their social position and to revolt
against it. No matter how heavily nor how lightly the invisible
chains may weigh upon her individually, a woman who has truly
become conscious of her subordinate position must always be a
woman in revolt. To her there comes a burning sense of the
shame and disgrace of subjection ; there is always with her the
living reality of slavery —a weight of chains insufferable, yet
powerful enough to hold her down, strangling and impeding her
efforts to be free.
Everywhere increasing numbers of women are beginning to feel
this yoke —becoming conscious that they are born in bondage—
and everywhere more and more are giving active signs that they
can strive for freedom. It is no longer merely a case of a “ Woman
Question ” bound up in the volumes of learned theorists; there is
to-day an actual Woman's Movement where in the past there was
only a mark of interrogation.
The world in general is at last startled out of its indifference by
these signs, and on all sides there is much talk of woman and her
slavery, of woman and her hopes of freedom. The_ many con-
flicting opinions (all equally assured) of course result in much
conflict of action.
It is necessary that the Socialist Labour Party should make
clear its position towards so prominent and so confused a move-
ment in society. Socialism stands for social freedom for all, and
therefore it must very definitely stand for the emancipation of the
greatest sufferers from social bondage—namely, the women. In the
sense that the feminist movement also professes to be a movement
towards the emancipation of women, it has a very special signifi-
cance for the Socialist Labour Party. And it is all the more
urgent that prominence should be given to the true Socialist
position because the bourgeois feminists have received great
support in their campaign from many reformists calling themselves
Socialists, who, pretending to serve the cause of women, serve that
of the enemy instead.


What then is the position of revolutionary Socialism towards this
modern feminist movement ? How far is Socialism in sympathy
with feminism, and in what are the two movements antagonistic ?
Before stating the difference it is better to show the points of
agreement. Briefly stated, the sympathy between Socialism and
feminism consists in this : both are alike antagonistic to the
reactionary principles of the “anti-feminists.”
These reactionary principles are based upon the theory that
women are naturally subject to men because they are naturally
inferior. This assertion is generally made with a pretty “ half-
concealing, half-revealing ” veil of sentiment, but, plainly stated, it
would appear to mean that social inequality of the sexes is the
necessary result of the physical and mental inferiority of the female
sex. Now, this statement is nothing more than a loose generalisa-
tion made from the consideration of a few particular cases ; to
prove it satisfactorily would entail an enormous amount of labour
in the way of research, experiment, and statistical enquiry, carried
out by persons of proved capacity. As it is, however, the charge
comes from wholly irresponsible, not to say prejudiced, quarters,
and is made without true scientific authority. In our present state
of knowledge we have no proof of either physical or mental inferi-
ority in the female sex. It must always be remembered that right
development in both sexes brings with it great and necessary
differences between male and female. The healthy, well-developed
woman does not become masculine , either physically or mentally,
any more than the healthy man becomes feminine. Woman’s aim
is not to reach to man’s estate, but to her own. This must not on
any account be disregarded in making a comparison between men
and women ;ifit is the comparison will have no value. Bearing
this in mind, it can easily be seen that the usual arguments in no
way prove the inferiority of women.
As regards physique, recent scientific research does not bear
out the theory of female inferiority. We must not judge from mere
outward appearance ; superior physique is not proved by superior
height, nor by superior strength of certain muscles, such as the
biceps in the arm. A better standard to judge by would seem to
be the total vitality of the individual as manifested in the physique.
In this respect what evidence modern lesearch has given goes to
show that women on the average are actually superior to men.
This would appear to be a strange anomaly, considering the
disadvantages imposed upon women in regard to physical develop


meat, did we not remember the greater vitality required by women
in the natural function of motherhood.
In regard to mental inferiority the main argument has been made
from a comparison of the size of the male and female brain.
There have been men who have passed laborious years in trying
to show that the average female brain is smaller than the average
male brain. Professor Bischoff claimed to have proved that on
the average woman’s brain weighs 100 grams less than man’s
brain, and from this he confidently asserted that the mental inferi-
ority of women was demonstrated. On the death of the learned
Professor it was found that his own brain weighed just five grams
less than the average of the despised female sex! The pathetic
irony of this case has no doubt tended to cool that particular
form of anti-feminist zeal.
As a matter of fact these experiments have proved nothing.
Some of the heaviest brains ever weighed have belonged to idiots
and to the insane; and in comparing the proportion of brain-mass
in men and women with the weight of the entire body, it appears
that the females have the advantage by i per cent. This argument
from brain weight is therefore totally inconclusive, even granting
the unscientific supposition that the weight of the brain is the
criterion of mental capacity.
Another favourite contention is that woman’s inferiority is
proved by the absence of transcendent genius in women. This
assertion, like the other, is not proved, nor is it capable of proof.
We are too apt to judge genius merely by prominence and pub-
licity, and these are just the things which most women avoid and
dread as tending to deprive them of a certain vague abstraction
called “ womanliness,” upon which they are taught to depend for
success in life. How far women (in spite of a seclusion partly
enforced and partly induced) have excelled in the past, may never
be known—only here and there in history do we get a glimpse
behind the veil —but it is certain that renown and success have for
the most part been reaped by men. The fame of Socrates was
supreme in his age, and comes down with glory to ours ; but
Socrates acknowledged superior genius in a woman when he sat as
a learner at the feet of Aspasia,
But even if women’s physical and mental inferiority were fully
proved we must remember that the argument cuts both ways.
Bebel, Mill, and others have long ago pointed out that inferiority
of the female sex would be an argument against the subjection of


women, and not for it. As Bebel says : “ The laws of nature hold
good in human life. If a gardener or planter sought to maintain
with regard to a given plant that it could not grow, although he
made no trial, perhaps even hindered its growth by wrong treat-
ment, such a man would be pronounced a fool by his intelligent
neighbours.” Now, if a similar statement originated with a woman
there would not be wanting men to generalise upon the instance as
a proof of the incapacity of the female mind for logical methods of
thought; yet the supposed logical mind of man has not generally
perceived that the alleged inferiority of women is in reality an
argument in favour of instituting equality of the sexes in social
benefits. Before we can judge whether women are naturally defi-
cient as compared with men they must have an equal chance with
men of development. This they certainly have not at present;
opportunities of larger knowledge and experience in social life,
which are given to men, are denied to women. In nearly all
civilised countries women are still refused the right to take part in the
making of the laws which they must obey. All sorts of difficulties,
legal and conventional, are put in the way of women who desire to
take upon themselves their own responsibilities. Women, in fact,
are not given equal social opportunities with men.
The question of natural inferiority or otherwise seems therefore
of minor importance. It matters little to any practical woman
whether her sex as a whole is less capable than the male sex as a
whole. She may very well leave that matter to those who love
to wrangle about non essentials. She may very well turn her
attention to the vastly more important question—that of the unequal
social opportunities of the sexes, of the undoubted social inferiority
of women.
So far, then, the Socialist and feminist movements are in full
agreement. Socialism is in sympathy with the exposure of the
superficial and illogical arguments of the anti-feminists. Socialism
also recognises all the world over that women must have equal
freedom with men if ever social freedom is established at all. And,
furthermore, in regard to the present Suffragist movement, the
S.L.P. does not share the bourgeois horror of the mildly “militant
tactics ”of the “ Neo-Suffragists.” The S.L.P. gives credit to the
Suffragists for their organised efforts to gain publicity for their
cause. Certainly the methods used are frequently of a vulgar
nature. But what of that? As a certain nineteenth century wit
has said, “ the one touch of nature that makes the whole world kin


is— vulgarity .” This, at any rate, would seem to be a means of
proving kinship with the bourgeois politicians of the House of
Commons—and for the Suffragists, whose aim is a mere reform of
bourgeois legislation, that must surely be a desirable end.
In any case the matter is of no concern to Socialism, and the
Socialist Labour Party in no way bases its opposition to the
Suffragist movement upon it. But the real significance of that
opposition must now be considered, the points of agreement
between Socialism and feminism having been mentioned by way
of introduction. The statement of difference is more important
than the statement of agreement, because the whole action of those
who desire the true and complete emancipation of woman depends
upon their understanding of this side of the question.
II.
PRINCIPLES OF SOCIALISM.
In considering the false basis upon which the feminist movement
rests it is necessary first to make clear the basis upon which
Socialism rests. The basic principles of Socialism must therefore
be briefly outlined.
The development of society is conditioned by the invention and
use of those instruments with which the whole wealth of society is
produced. Throughout history the owners of the most important
means of producing wealth have been enabled by the power of
ownership to form separate and dominant classes in society. The
resulting conflict of interests between those who had the power and
privileges of ownership and those who were disinherited caused
perpetual struggles between the classes. In modern times the
struggle is between capitalist class and working class. With the
introduction of machinery into industry and the expropriation of
the peasantry the power of industrial capital was enormously
increased The owners of the new productive machinery formed
the rising capitalist class. The working class, on the other hand,


was largely recruited from the expropriated peasantry, who, being
deprived of their lands, were forced to enter the towns and there to
live by selling themselves to the capitalist owners as workers of the
machines. Thus capitalism acquired an enormous impetus, and
the foundations of modern wage slavery were laid.
The wages paid to such workers represent the price of the
labour-power which they sell to the owners of the machinery of
production. Labour-power being the only thing which a member
of the dispossessed class has for sale, and by the sale of which he
can live, he is forced to bring that labour-power (and he himself
goes along with it of course) into the market, to endeavour to sell
it there for what it will fetch, in just the same way as any other
goods are sold. If the supply of labour-power is large in relation
to the demand for it, the price (wages) will be low. If the supply
of labour-power decreases relatively to the demand, the price will
go up. Thus that price (wages) constantly rises and falls above
and below a central point—that centre being the cost of production
(or, more correctly, the value ) of labour-power. The cost of pro-
duction of labour-power is equal to the amount of labour which is
necessarily expended upon the production of those things which
create, maintain, and reproduce that labour-power. This, in the
long run and on the average, is what a worker will get by the sale
of his power to labour—only this and nothing more.
Now this bargain between capitalist and worker must also be
understood from the capitalist’s point of view. Why the worker
has to make the bargain is obvious; he has no other means of
living. But why does the capitalist make the bargain ? Because
in operating the tools of production, with their wonderful modern
productive powers, the workers will produce more than the equiva-
lent of that amount of wealth which the capitalist must return to
them in the form of wages in order that they may go on living and
come back to work another day. In the capacity of owners the
capitalists appropriate and enjoy this surplus-wealth created by the
labour of the working class; not, be it marked, because they take
any active part in production, but merely because they are owners.
To the owner goes the product.
When the workers themselves will own and control the machinery
of production which they alone operate, they will enjoy the full
product of their labour, but so long as there is a parasitic master-
class standing between them and their instruments they will be
robbed of the greater part of that which they produce.


Of old, the owner of the tool was also its operator ; production
was then an individual affair. To-day, by the highly organised
division of labour, production has become co-operative, or social.
Ownership, however, is still private, or individual. This brings
about a contradiction at the very heart of society. The develop-
ment from private production to social production has yet to be
completed by the development from private ownership to social
ownership. Nothing short of this is Socialism. All reformation
of the present capitalist system is useless to the workers, since by
the system of buying and selling labour-power whic h capitalism
makes necessary to them, they are for ever robbed by a small
minority in society—the owners, or capitalist class. And this
robbery is always increasing in degree ; the result of improved pro
ductive methods is a lessening of the demand for labour, and, con-
sequently, an increase of the “ unemployed army,” i.e., an increased
supply of labour in relation to the demand for it. In this way
wages are lowered and capitalist robbery becomes greater; and
greater also becomes the poverty, degradation, and slavery of the
workers.
Thus the only hope of the workers is Socialism. To build their
hopes and waste their energy and resources on attempts at
reforming capitalism is mere illusion.
Now, in all this, the interests of working women are just the
same as the interests of working men —directly opposed to the
interests of the members of the capitalist class, women and men
alike. The question is one of class, not of sex. Sex antagonism
may have a very practical interest for the women of the bourgeoisie,
but for women of the working class the practical question is the
question of class antagonism.
From a wider outlook it may be shown that the true interests of
all women are in reality bound up with the interests of the majority,
the working women ; because no woman, whatever be her position
in society, can escape altogether from the burden of the age-long
degradation of her sex while that degradation in any way endures.
But, while this is fully recognised, too much is not to be expected
in that direction. It must be remembered that the feminist reform
movement is naturally very attractive to women in the capitalist
camp. And,’moreover, class prejudice is a thing that dies hard.
Therefore, whilst acknowledging that the true interests of all
women lie in Socialism, and that in this sense there is a sex
question distinct from class, we must endeavour to be practical and


not .to forget that the question of Socialism is essentially a working
class question, and for all practical purposes must be regarded
from the working class point of view.
The feminist movement, like other reform movements, is of
direct interest to the bourgeoisie only, and not to the workers.
Feminism, in its larger sense, claims equal political and social
rights for women as for men within the framnvork of the present
social system. Socialism claims that even if this were fully achieved
it would be no true emancipation of women. Only those women
would benefit who belong to the privileged, or propertied, class in
society. The majority of women, like the majority of men, belong
to the wage-earning class, and this class cannot benefit by the
reform of capitalism owing to its condition of social life—the
selling of labour-power—which gives to capitalist masters of both
sexes the means of carrying on industry by an ever-increasing
robbery of the workers.
III.
THE SUBJECTION OF WOMEN.
To those who see effects only and do not trace back to causes
woman’s struggle appears merely as a struggle of sex against sex ;
but a wider issue is really involved. The woman question is but a
part of the wider question of social evolution from the earliest
times.
The basic mistake of the feminists is that they do not recognise
this, and therefore cannot trace the true cause of the inequality
of the sexes. Sometimes they attribute women’s social inferiority
to her physical weakness; sometimes to the moral weakness of
man. But these differences of the sexes, if they exist at all, are
more likely to have arisen as effects of sex-inequality than to be
causes thereof.
Socialism, on the other hand, does not look for an explanation of
social enigmas in any such vague theories. Socialism holds that


human society has an essentially economic basis. To Morgan, and
to Marx is chiefly due the scientific research which shows that the
evolution of human society has progressed in accordance with the
development of the tools of production and the methods of their
ownership. Here we have the secret of the origin of all forms of
social slavery, the subjection of women among the rest. Without
the introduction of economic inequality, sex-inequality could never
have spread throughout the civilised world as it has done. And
this economic inequality was itself a quite natural result of the
primitive division of labour and the primitive development of the
tool.
Women of to day, brought up to believe in their helpless inferi-
ority, would gain somewhat in self-respect if they were taught
instead the scientific facts of their position; because, while it is
true that during all historic periods the position of women has been
one of degrading dependence, this was not the case in pre-historic
ages. But, of course, while Morgan,* Engels, Rebel, and others
have shown that the social position of women was superior in
barbaric times before the growth of private property, we must
clearly understand that it was only relatively so. Privilege in those
days had a much more obvious materialistic basis than in civilised
times, during which the fashion has grown with the growth of
modern social evils of covering up these evils as prettily as may be.
The famous “ Mother-right ” of barbarism was not by any means
of an idyllic or chivalrous description. The first division of labour
was of a purely physiological nature. Man was the fighter ;
woman was the rearer of the race. Man procured the food;
woman prepared it. It was for man to “ fight, hunt, and sit
down; ” for woman to bear, nourish, and bring up the children.
Descent was in the female line simply because the custom of
group-marriage between all the members of certain different clans
( gentes) made possible only the definite recognition of the mother.
This “ Mother-right ” naturally gave power and importance to
women as having control over the children. As Morgan says :
“ The members of her own gens, in all probability, predominated in
the household, which gave full force to the maternal bond, and
made the woman, rather than the man, the centre of the family.”
What the Suffragists of to-day are striving for, and a good deal
more besides, was enjoyed by women in those barbaric days, such
“ women’s rights ” being regarded as merely natural. The women
not only voted ( e.g:. , in the elections of military chiefs), but had a


seat and voice in the councils. Ancient historians, such* as Tacitus,
and modem travellers alike, bear witness to the rights of this
primitive variety of “ Suffragette.”
The development of private property was the cause of the down-
fall of the matriarchal system. Under that system the family
groups were the basis of society, and property was hereditary in the
gens. When a man married he did not become a member of the
gens of his wife, although he lived among her people; he remained
always a member of the gens to which his mother belonged, and
when he died his property accrued to his mother’s gens and
not to the gens to which his wife (or wives) and his children
belonged; thus a child could never inherit from his father, as they
did not belong to the same gens. Such a system was only suited
to societies in which property was undeveloped. A contradiction
arose as the forms of property multiplied and its importance
increased. It was then more and more individually appropriated
for the sake of power and ease, and the words mine and thine began
to have a fuller significance. As a natural result, inheritance
became an important social factor; but so long as children belonged
to the mother’s gens they could not inherit from their father, how-
ever great his importance as a man of property. This contradiction
was the cause of the great change from the matriarchal system to
descent in the male line, and, finally, in advanced societies, to the
introduction of monogamy. Desiring to make their own children
their heirs men took possession of their wives. Instead of living in
the families of their wives, they took their wives to live with them,
and thus the idea gradually grew up of female morality and virtue
as distinct from male morality and virtue—an idea which has de-
scended to our own day veiled in a sickly sentimentality which can
only partially conceal its materialistic basis.
Another result of increasing productive power by development of
the tool was the second great division of labour in society—-that of
freemen and slaves. Instead of eating their prisoners of war, the
conquerors found that, by the use of tools of production, they
could force them to produce a sufficient amount to cover their owm
necessary sustenance and yet leave a surplus for the enjoyment of
their masters. This was the first form of exploitation and the first
division of society into classes with antagonistic interests. The
female slaves not only shared in the degradation of this exploita-
tion, but they suffered further degradation because of their sex.
Their helpless position made it possible for men to allow themselves


a license which they now did everything in their power (frequently
with the utmost brutality) to forbid to their wives. This was the
origin of that special kind of parasitism to which all women of the
privileged class are born, which enables them to maintain their
“respectable” position by the sacrifice and degradation of innumer-
able women of the proletariat. True monogamy has never been
generally established in any society; it is everywhere the exception
and not the rule. The present form of marriage is legal monogamy
supplemented by prostitution—this is the terrible price which is
paid for the reputed honourable position of the wives of civilisation.
Thus the subordination of the whole female sex was first brought
about by the power of property. It is probable that in some parts
of the world, and in some ages, women made a noble resistance,
and fought for their freedom; the legends of the Amazons have in
this a scientific explanation. But gradually men increased their
ascendency, and women being now dependent upon them for sub-
sistence, not merely as men but as owners of property , v/ere more and
more forced into a subordinate and submissive position. The
warlike feudal times gave an impetus to this development. These
were rough days, in which men did not spare each other; but, as
laws and legends testify, they spared women even less.
The development of capitalism was a complete revolution in
society, and, among other things, it revolutionised the social
position of women. The more brutal laws and customs of feudalism
were now out of date, but the new order brought with it a new form
of slavery. With the introduction of machinery into industry—the
Industrial Revolution —the now dominant capitalist class made the
discovery that there was a quite other “sphere ” for working class
women besides that of the home—namely, the factory. They could
be employed to work the machines at lower wages than men, and
the consequence was that women and children were exploited in the
factories with such cruelty that it is obvious the rough brutality of
former days had only given place to a still more revolting form of
brutality.
The old jdea of “ Woman’s Sphere ” being the Home, to which
sentimentalists still cling in spite of facts, was in accordance with
the conditions of life under individual production. The home, how-
ever, meant more for women in those days than the mere rearing of
children. They then took an active part in production within their
homes —not as wage-slaves, but for the family benefit. The home-
tasks of the women before the nineteenth century included spinning,


knitting, baking, the making of clothes, soap, candles, and many
other domestic necessaries. All these tasks are now executed by
capitalist industry, and an ever-increasing number of women are
forced by modern social conditions out of the home into the factories
and workshops, there to take once up more a part in production—■
not now as wives and daughters producing for the family, but as
wage-earners producing for the benefit of capitalist masters.
This entrance into the social productive sphere certainly gives to
the working women of to-day a semblance of independence
unknown before in woman’s history. And it gives, moreover, a
promise of true independence to come. But while capitalist
masters must be served this seeming independence is but a means
of enforcing the most cruel slavery ever known.
If a life of wage-slavery is bad for a man it is very much worse
for a woman Under capitalism women have entered nearly every
line of production (many involving great danger or inevitable
disease), but employment is always given to them as an inferior
sort of goods. An exact comparison between the wages of men
and women has never been made, but as far as the records go
women’s wages compare very unfavourably with those of men. It
has been shown that the average wage of women manual workers
(including the textile workers, whose wages are relatively high) is
very little over 7/ per week. That is to say, women do not receive
a “ living wage.” In very many trades (e.g., French polishing and
the various branches of the printing industry) men’s wages are two
or three times as high as women’s wages. In the tailoring and
other clothing trades employers seem to find a special opportunity
for exploiting female labour. Women employed in these trades
receive only 7/ to 16/ weekly for work for which men get 30/ to 40/.
In one case a girl is reported as receiving 7/ per week and making
seven pairs of trousers in that time, and then being threatened with
dismissal for not having produced enough. A man’s wage for the
same work would be about 25/. Tables may be referred to in
the reports on many other industries showing the inferior wages
earned by women. Among shop-assistants women earn from £lO
to a year; men from to £4O. Taking an average, the
difference is shown to be 33 per cent, in favour of the male shop-
assistants. Where machinery is used women are not paid
nearly so much as men for working the machines A case is
quoted by the authors of “ Women’s Work and Wages ” of a large
cycle works where 80 men were employed in 1902 ; in 1905 only


20 men were employed, women having replaced the rest. When the
men were dismissed they were told that they could go home and
send their wives instead of them. And why ? The wages paid to
the men had been from 30/ to 40/ per week ; the highest wages
given to the women for exactly the same work on the same
machines was 18/ per week; The home is not “sacred” to
capitalists when it is the home of wage-slaves from whom larger
profits can be squeezed.
The reasons for the difference between the wages of men and
women are somewhat complex. The fact that many women are
only part-earners of a family wage, their wages being supplementary
to the wages of their male relations, is a great factor in preventing
any equalisation of the earnings of male and female workers. And
although the growth of “ she-towns ” (in which the men cannot get
work, but have to stay at home while the women go out to earn
their wretched wages) shows that it is false to claim that women work
merely to gain supplementary wages, still it is true that innummerable
widows and single women, who have to support themselves and
others without the help of male relatives, suffer from the competi-
tion of many less helpless wives and daughters whose necessities
only force them to aim at supplementary earnings. But while this
and other factors complicate the question, deep down at the root of
the whole problem of women’s wages is the age-long tradition
arising from woman’s position of social inferiority. Woman as the
inferior being is not credited with the needs of man. Her labour-
power has a cheaper price because her cost of living is cheaper.
How much this is the case appears from the very low estimate
of woman’s needs betrayed by the advocates of a “ minimum
wage ” and other reformers. At a recent meeting in Glasgow the
wage proposed as the women worker’s minimum for a working
week of 51 hours, was only 10/iod, per week. Again, the
organisers of women’s trade unions are never tired of exulting over
the position of the female textile workers as a proof of the worth of
their efforts. But what are the conditions which they find so
gratifying ? In spite of the arduous nature of the work and the
skill required, the average wage of women textile workers is calcu-
lated by G. H. Wood to be no more than 12/4d. per week. Women
are indeed reckoned as cheap goods on the market !
Turning to the “ sweated ” industries (but where are the workers
who are not sweated by capitalism to-day?) we find that the
greatest suffering is endured by the women. It is a ghastly record


which capitalism produces in the columns of statistics relating
to its female slave-driving. If we look down the rows of
figures given in reports of investigations made into the
conditions of the “ sweated ” workers we find over and over
again the same terrible story told in the same chill words.
The earnings of women working as much as 14, 15, and 16 hours
daily are frequently shown to amount to no more than 4/ or 5/ per
week. We even find cases quoted in which the worker toils for as
much as 18 hours a day and earns only 5/ weekly. Cases are given
of women making shirts for 1 /3d. per dozen, and as one woman
doing this work expressed it: —“ It is just putting out our life to
keep it in; but the putting out is the quickest.” Another woman
who was given trousers to finish at id. per pair (the finishing taking
two hours for each pair), found it, as she said, “ easier to starve
without the work 1 ” Suits of “ shoddy ” for children are made by
women working for i£d. per suit, the net result of twelve hours of
very hard work being no more than pd. A woman doing this work
in Scotland had had a family of seventeen, of whom seven survived.
With unconscious irony she expressed the bitterness of her life of
misery ; “ God took most of my bairns,” she said. “He is the best
friend we poor folks have.”
Such cases are by no means exceptional, but are quoted in the
various reports with sickening recurrence; Figures are totally
inadequate to express the meaning of such conditions ; the slaves
who suffer day by day what the cold and lifeless statistics are
incapable of expressing, alone know that meaning in all its horrible
reality.
As has been said, woman’s wage “ is too low to live upon and too
high to die upon.” The fact is that modern capitalism calculates
on, and to a great extent flourishes upon, the most odious of social
evils. Many employers of female labour do not scruple to make
this plain to the women who apply to them for situations. No
wonder that the bourgeoisie recognises prostitution as a “ necessary
evil.” “Necessary ”to capitalism, which grows fat upon it !
Bitter want drives countless wives and daughters to this horrible
resource as the one means of warding off starvation ; and before
all working women, existing in the terrible uncertainty which is
now the condition of working class life, is always the possibility of
having some day to make the ghastly choice between shame and
starvation. On the one hand, the hypocritical bourgeois moralists
are crying, “ Woman’s sphere is the home ! ” —on the other hand,


capitalist conditions are forcing women out of the home into the
misery of modern production, or into the still greater misery of
personal debasement.
These universal evils make the talk of feminist reformers
seem like a bitter mockery. While countless numbers of women
are driven by actual dread of death to sell themselves into some
form of misery, while the very conditions upon which capitalism
exists deprives them of any other means of life than this, how can
mere reforms within the capitalist system bring about the true
emancipation of women ?
IV.
SOCIALISM VERSUS SUFFRAGISM.
Let bourgeois reformists fight as they may among themselves, it
is for Socialism ever to express the interests of the workers, men
and women alike, and to show that reforms cannot bring better
conditions to their class. It is here, then, that the Socialist Labour
Party comes into conflict with Suffragism.
The Suffragist movement makes two false claims upon the
sympathy and support of working class women, (i) It claims that
the present agitation for the extension of the suffrage to women on
the same basis as it is granted to men, would enfranchise working
women in general; (2) It claims that enfranchisement alone would
lead to improved conditions for working women.
The first of these claims is made by limited Suffragists only ; the
second is made by both limited and adult Suffragists. The Socialist
Labour Party combats both positions.
Taking first the question of a limited extension of the franchise
to women, it is easy to see that the various Bills brought forward
have had an undoubted bourgeois origin. It is proposed to extend
the franchise to women upon the same basis as it is given to men.
.But this is a basis of property. This movement is in reality a
movement in the interests of women of property; these women
desire the emancipation of the women of their class—an insignificant


minority—leaving the vast majority, the working class women, in
bondage. They would thus subordinate the interests of their sex
to the interests of their class. From the beginning of the move-
ment it has been so; the famous John Stuart Mill petition and
amendment of 1866 and 1867 demanded the suffrage for women
on the ground of property qualifications. The petition began with
these words :—“That it having been expressly laid down by high
authorities that the possession of property in this country carries
with it the right to vote,” etc.
At the present day these bourgeois reformers are agitating on
the same lines, in spite of their fair words to working women; but
in the face of Socialist criticism the true facts are now disguised by
false pretences. It is claimed that working women would be
enfranchised if a limited Bill were passed. This, in fact, is one of
the main contentions of its supporters. They state that the
majority of women enfranchised under the householder, lodger, and
“ latch-key ” franchises would be women of the working class. This
sounds well in theory, because it is obvious that the majority of
women who might vote under such a franchise woukj be working
women, if they ■could fulfil the necessary conditions. But what are
those conditions ? To vote as an “ occupier ” a woman would
have to be the owner or tenant of a house for which rates have been
paid, and could then only vote after a year’s occupancy. As a
“ resident ” a woman might vote by the “ latch-key ” franchise as
inhabitant of a house, flat, or single room ; but in this case the
“ resident landlord ” must have no control over her habitation.
Legal decisions, such as that of Douglas v. Smith, have made the
actual working of this franchise exceedingly difficult. For a
“lodger’s ” vote a twelve month’s occupation of a separate room,
with an annual rental, unfurnished, of or, furnished, of 5/ per
week, is necessary, The “ service ” vote is given to an occupier
who occupies by virtue of his service, and does not apply to
servants living in the employer’s house.
■ Now, taking all these qualifications into account, the possibility
of a large women worker’s vote dwindles away. Certainly women
of the capitalist class could qualify to use the franchise, even when
they were not independent property-holders. Capitalists already
buy for their sons the necessary qualifications tor voting; with this
kind of woman’s suffrage they could do the same for their
daughters, and so greatly increase the voting power of the propertied
class. But how are the women of the working class to get their


qualifications? The average wage of working women does not
exceed 7/6d. per week; what proportion of these wage-workers
will be able to pay for an unfurnished room, or to prove
occupancy independent of any resident landlord ? Under the law
as it is to-day a great many male workers are unable to use the
franchise ; unmarried working men are very rarely able to live
under the conditions necessary for voting. If this is the case in
regard to men, how will unmarried women of the working class
obtain the vote with their still more wretched wages ? The law has
already decided that married women are not women at all, and
unless they are specially constituted into legal personality, the law
will, in all probability, interpret the Bill in such a sense that
married women, as legal nonentities, will be unable to vote. In
any case, forking class married women are not likely to be able to
show separate property qualifications which it is hard enough for
the husband alone to fulfil.
An attempt has been made by members of the Independent
Labour Party to prove that a limited Bill would enfranchise working
women. A record was taken in regard to the municipal vote in
“ 50 towns or parts or towns,” and the result claimed to show that
82.45 per cent, of the women voting are working women. But this
record being taken by the I.L.P. branches in “towns or parts of
towns,” and these branches having their connection in working
class districts, the conjuring trick of this marvellous 82.45 P er cent,
is revealed. The true marvel would have been had the figures
turned out otherwise. We don’t look for capitalist majorities in
working class “ parts of towns,” which capitalists are, as a rule, at
every pains to avoid as residential quarters. Again, the term
“ working woman ” is so loosely and vaguely defined in the
directions given to the branches as further to deprive the record of
any real value. It would, indeed, hardly be worth mentioning, but
that this 82,45 per cent, has been much used by the Suffragists in
their propaganda in order to gain working class support.
Without very full statistics (which we do not at present possess),
it is impossible to state what proportion of working women would
be enfranchised by the limited measure. But it is certain that the
proportion would in itself be insignificant, and, as compared to the
proportion of enfranchised propertied women, it would amount to
a relative decrease of the working class vote. The present Suffragist
agitation is, in fact, a fraud upon the working women.
While the workers must not be side-tracked by this Suffragist


fraud, they must also be on their guard against the illusive claims
of the Adult Suffragists; not that Adult Suffrage is in itself
undesirable, but because it is not desirable as the aim of working
class effort, or the expenditure of working class energy and
resources.
The Adult Suffragists maintain that their reform would lead to
sex equality. This is to lose sight of the true function of politics,
and so to put the cart before the horse. Women’s subjection did
not arise from political disabilities—these disabilities arose from
women’s subjection; and, as previously shown, this subjection has
its roots deep down in economic inequality. Politics are the result
of economic conditions, and in all its variety political action has
gone upon lines of economic interests. The enfranchisement of
every man and woman could only extend the possibilities of political
action, but could not, of itself, remove the economic conditions of
which political action is but a reflex.
Every Socialist is in a sense an Adult Suffragist, inasmuch as
this is the only democratic method of election. But the suffrage in
itself is neither desirable nor undesirable to the workers—its worth
depends upon the use that is made of it and the economic power
by which it is backed up. The claim of the Adult Suffragists is, of
course, that by the use of the vote the workers could secure what
conditions they please. As a matter of fact this is a fallacy which
the impotence of the present Labour Party is exposing to the
workers in actual practice. The vote is useless to the workers while
it is not backed up by an organised economic power sufficient to
ensure the introduction of Socialism.
The power of the enemy, the capitalist class, does not lie in the
vote, but in the possession of property, and the resulting control of
production. Which possesses true social power, and which is the
social slave—the disfranchised lady-capitalist, or the enfranchised
wage-worker in her employment ?
The real interests of the workers are not bound up in mere
political enfranchisement, but in the complete emancipation of all,
men and women alike, from the power of capital.


V.
SOCIALISM THE ONLY HOPE.
Emancipation from the power of the private owners of the
means of production will be true emancipation for women, because
it will be complete. When all are collectively, or socially, the
owners and operators of the means of production, all will have
equal access thereto, and thus women will at last be placed upon an
equal footing with men.
Through generations of suffering capitalism has forced women
to take a part in production, not merely in domestic life as depend-
ents of men (as in pre-capitalist days), but socially , and as inde-
pendent of men. The foundation of a lasting independence for
women has indeed been laid, since women now take part in the
cooperative productive work of society; but while the conditions
of the workers’ lives remain conditions of wage-labour, their labour
is slave-labour, and they are despoiled of its fruits by their masters.
When all women, with all men, shall be the owners of those things
wherewith they work, and by which production is carried on, then
their labour will be the labour of the free, and they will themselves
reap its fruits.
The enemy of the women workers is not the male sex, but the
capitalist class. That class is made up both of men and women.
Many women are direct employers of labour; many are share-
holders in capitalist industries ; and as employers and shareholders
they have equality with men. Do we find that their influence is
used in favour of their women employees ? By no means. Where
their class interests are concerned women capitalists in general act
no more mercifully than men capitalists. Their interests are to
extract the fattest possible dividends out of the life-blood of the
workers, without considering, or even knowing, whether the labour
that creates these dividends is that of men or women. Would it not
be folly in working women to expect these luxurious capitalist
ladies to recognise common interests with them ?
But the bourgeois feminists make a special appeal to the women
workers under the pretence that their interests can be served along
with the interests of wealthy women —that the privileged section
will fight the male tyrant for the benefit of all women . The different


class interests, different mode of life, different outlook, and different
aims of the women of the bourgeoisie are ignored.
It is true that for these women also the bonds of slavery still
exist, but they are rather silken cords than the iron chains borne
by working women. So soft indeed are these cords that the
majority of women in the capitalist class are quite oblivious to
their own degradation. The affluence in which they live acts as
a narcotic. Wealthy women are surrounded by a sensuous and
hypocritical “ chivalry,” which for the most part they blindly accept
without detecting its falsity. They are content to have as their
aim in life the buying and selling of themselves into that peculiar
ornamental slavery and dependence which is the capitalist ideal of
marriage. Capitalism creates its institutions in its own image, and
it is therefore not surprising that marriage in the capitalist class
should be a mere business contract. The strangely callous com-
petition which characterises this “ marriage market,” gives to
bourgeois marriages the human peculiarity of female rather than
male rivalry. The male bird displays his brilliant plumage glitter-
ing in the sunshine to attract the female; but in bourgeois society
it is the woman who adorns herself. She is brought up to think
that her success in life is conditioned by the making of “ a good
marriage ” (meaning a wealthy one), and this is indeed the road to
success where the ideal in life is dependence and luxury.
Certainly there is a minority, and an increasing minority, which
resents this state of things. While the majority remains lethargic
and indifferent, the more energetic and thoughtful women of the
bourgeoisie are striving to free themselves from this peculiarly
insidious form of slavery. During last century a great advance
was made in this way. Many women (and men also who held
liberal opinions on this subject) agitated for ‘ the emancipation of
women” —by which, however, they only meant the emancipation
of those belonging to their own privileged class. From the
bourgeois point of view this is perfectly logical; the immediate
interests of the women of the capitalist lie in introducing
whatever reforms of capitalist conditions may give them greater
freedom and independence. Their degradation is in reality a
degradation of sex, and it is very possible to lessen it under existing
economic conditions.
But for working women it is a totally different matter. Capitalism
has for them loosened the bonds of sex, only to rivet upon them
the chains of wage-slavery. The attempt to win the adherence of


working women to the bourgeois feminist movement, under the
pretence that with equal political rights with men they could ‘•ecure
better wages, is utterly deceptive. The capitalists, who hold control
of the means of production, and who by better organisation may still
greatly enhance their profits, can utilise their power by introducing
new machinery and by funher combination. Less labour being
then required, the unemployed army will grow ever larger, and, as
a consequence, wages will tend to go down. Far from making it
possible to raise the wages of the worst paid section of the workers
(the women) to an equality with any better paid section, the
progress of capitalist industry tends to lower the wages of the better
paid sections to the level of those that were formerly worse paid. A
mere coolie status for all is the outlook for the workers in the future,
unless they use the power they possess to free themselves altogether
from the wages-system.
What is that power ?
It is the power that belongs to all men and women who are wage-
slaves—the power of the producers. The workers as a class must
unite on the basis of the productive function which they fulfil in society
—as industrial workers , in fact. This is the only sure way to freedom.
Before the introduct'on of Socialism can become a practical and
immediate possibility, the workers must be sufficiently organised to
direct and control industry in their own interests. Without such
organisation they are completely at the mercy of the master class,
whose armed forces are ever ready for use against even sporadic
efforts to resist increasing robbery.
In this unity of the workers on the industrial field lies their
strength. At p esentthey are not united ; they are disunited. The
few who are organised at all in the trade unions are organised on
mere craft lines ; they are helpless against the growing power of
capital, and the different sections are fighting against each other
inMead of against the masters. There is blacklegging and strife
where all depends on union and harmony. Union is strength, but
trade unions are weakness.
Woman’s part in the Industrial Union movement is important.
This is a class movement, and no section of the workers must be
left out of it. Women, who take an active part in production
to-day, will naturally take their place as producers in the industrial
< r. anisation of the workers.
We need only look hack into the history of past revolutionary
struggles to see how well women have played their part therein.


“ Women cannot fight,” say certain bourgeois theorists, “ and there-
fore ought not to take part in government.” Can women not fighi ?
Because they do not belong to the paid forces organised for the
coercion of the oppressed at home and abroad, is that to say they
cannot fight ? Women certainly are not elegible to belong to
troops of hired assassins, but wherever the fight is for freedom,
when the class war breaks out in violence and bloodshed, women
do not shrink away like cowards and hide themselves in the home.
Was it not the women who led the way for the starving people of
France in 1789? Did not the women of the Paris Commune of
1871 know how to shoulder their rifles and defend the barri-
cades along with husbands, fathers, brothers, and sons ? Did they
not know how to die, upright, facing the enemy, with the undaunted
cry of “ Vive la Commune !” as their last utterance ? And only
the other day, when the workers of Belfast were shot down by the
soldiers of the capitalist government, did the women not face these
soldiers again and again just as the men did ?
Women can, and do, fight for freedom. In the struggle of the
future, whether the warfare be mainly industrial, or whether it be
of a more violent nature, as certainly it may, women will take their
full share of the burden. For them the inducement is even greater
than it is for men, because in general their suffering is even
greater.
As the industrial organisation gains in strength it will certainly
express itself politically ; such political expression will be a natural
outcome of unity on the economic field. Civilised men and women
avail themselves of civilised methods, and the ballot will be used
by the revolutionary workers as a means of expressing their
intentions in a civilised manner. But such expression would be a
mere farce were it not backed up by the organised might of the
workers acting as a class. Behind those workers who may have the
vote and use it as a means of revolutionary expression, must be
the solid ranks of workers in factories, mines, mills, railways, and
in all the other manifold branches of productive activity, united as
workers , irrespective of sex or of suffrage privilege, or any other
kind of privilege, united because they are the toilers, the producers,
the sufferers, by whose toil and suffering society exists.
Here women, enfranchised or not, will have their rightful place.
If capitalist governments continue to deny the right of all men and
women to vote, then here in the daily life of the workers—on the
industrial field—lies the power which will overthrow the economic


and political ascendency of capitalism. If, on the other hand, the
master class, in frenzy of fear at this growing power of their slaves,
should throw out Adult Suffrage among other sops, then women, as
well as men, educated by the revolutionary struggle in the industrial
organisation, will know how to use the ballot. They will see clearly
that not in the mending of the wages-system, but in its ending, lies
their only hope. And straight for that end they will cast their
votes.
Should the masters then be blind or mad enough to refuse to
yield, they will merely court disaster. The day of that refusal must
hasten the final action. The workers, united as a class of men and
women long exploited for the benefit of a few, will retain their
places as producers, but will in future utilise the means of produc-
tion, no longer in the interests of that few, but in their own interests.
This will be the General Lock-out of the Master Class and the
introduction of Socialism.
With the establishment of Socialism and the abolition of Capi-
talism and the wages-system dependent thereon, women will at last
be placed upon an equal footing in society with men. Men and
women under Socialism will have equal access to the means of
production. Each individual will be able to produce enough and
to spare for individual needs. Thus one sex will no longer have
power over another. Women, married or unmarried, will always
have access to the means of producing the necessities and comforts
of life, and will thus be able to gain an independent livelihood,
when necessary, merely by taking part in social production.
This is not so under present conditions, and cannot be so, because
access to the means of production is not free. The private owner
stands between the worker and those things wherewith work is
carried on and wealth produced. The wage-earner can only take
part in production by first entering the labour market, there to be
sold for a price. The conditions of the labour market being even
harder for women than for men, working women when thrown upon
their own resources to-day are in the most pitifully helpless state.
The only means of escape from this is some kind of dependence
upon men. The result too often is that a woman who is destitute is
forced by her economic position to debase herself. Capitalism thus
makes prostitution compulsory, and puts women at the mercy of
men. Under Socialism there would be no such compulsion. Women
would therefore, equally with men, have full opportunities of healthy
development and independence.


It is impossible to predict the detailed results of this true freedom
of women. Whatever ideas individuals may hold in regard to this
can only be more or less of guess-work. The course of social
evolution must decide.
But this much can be said : If the home in its true sense is the
ideal of the race, if monogamy in its true sense is also an ideal,
these are ideals which will only be possible of realisation under
Socialism. There is nothing in Socialism incompatible with that
true home life which capitalism destroys. What is only bitter
mockery as preached by capitalist moralists may very well become
a healthy and beautiful reality in the Socialist Republic.
In any case it is to Socialism that women must look for their
freedom; and Socialism can only be achieved by a united working
class. Let the women workers of to-day unite with their brother
wage-slaves to put an end to that suffering and subjection in
which the silent generations of the women of the past have lived
and died.
The women of to-day must realise that theirs are the most
degrading chains that ever slavery knew. So much the greater then
will be their effort. For in proportion as the struggle has been
long, and in proportion to its bitterness, must be the strength of the
effort towards that freedom which will end it
THE ENIX


WHAT MEANS THIS STRIKE? A Lecture delivered at
New Bedford, Mass., by Daniel De Leon. Price, One
Penny.
“ What Means this Strike ? ” is an address delivered before the striking
textile workers of New Bedford, Mass. It is the best thing extant with
which to begin the study of Socialism. The strike is used as an object
lesson to show the nature of capitalist society. The development of the
capitalist is clearly given, showing why it is that the capitalist class is
able to live in idleness and luxury while the working class rots in poverty
and toil.
THE BURNING QUESTION OF TRADES UNIONISM.
A Lecture delivered at Newark, N.J., by Daniel De Leon.
Price, One Penny.
Trades Unionism is one of the methods by which the exploited class of
to-day —the working class—seeks to resist or minimise the power of the
exploiter. The author goes into a searching analysis of trades unionism
and shows how the mistakes incurred by trade unionists lead to the
nullification of their efforts at redress. Correct tactics are set forth. No
student of Socialism but must be familiar with the trade union move-
ment, therefore this book should be read.
THE PREAMBLE OF THE INDUSTRIAL WORKERS
OF THE WORLD. An Address delivered at Minnea-
polis, Minn., by Daniel De Leon. Price, One Penny.
The organisation of the Industrial Workers of the World, at Chicago,
July 10, 1905, marked an epoch in the history of the Labour Movement
in America, for the reason that, as the preamble to the constitution
declares, there can be no peace between the exploited working class and
the exploiting capitalist class ; the I.W.W. organised itself on that basis
—the recognition of the class struggle.
INDUSTRIAL UNIONISM. An Address delivered at Grand
Central Palace, New York, December 10, 1905, by Eugene
V. Debs. Price, One Penny.
The Industrial Workers is organised, not to conciliate, but to fight the
capitalist class. We have no object in concealing any part of our
mission ; we would have it perfectly understood. We deny that there is
anything in common between workingmen and capitalists. We insist
that workingmen must organise to get rid of capitalists and make them-
selves the masters of the tools with which they work, freely employ
themselves, secure to themselves all they produce, and enjoy to the full
the fruit of their labours.


REFORM OH REVOLUTION A Lecture delivered at
Boston, Mass., by Daniel De Leon. Price, One Penny.
Socialists are not reformers. The key-note of this address shows wh v
the working class can get nothing out of Reforms. Once read by an
intelligent person he is proof against any Reform craze.
THE DEVELOPMENT OF SOCIALISM FROM UTOPIA
TO SCIENCE. By Frederick Engels. Translated
from the German by Daniel De Leon, Price, One Penny.
The student will likely come across articles in the capitalist press
lauding all kinds of things, from a “profit sharing ” bakery to the Post
Office, as Socialism. In this book the historic and economic development
of Socialism is traced, and the scientific bedrock upon which the science
is based is set forth in plain language.
DEVELOPMENT OF SOCIALISM IN GREAT
BRITAIN- Authorised by the N.E.C, of the Socialist
Labour Party. Price, One Penny.
An historic economic sketch of affairs in Great Britain down to the
{•resent time, showing the development of industries and of capitalist and
abour economic
THE SOCIALIST LABOUR PARTY: ITS AIMS AND
METHODS. Price, One Penny.
This pamphlet deals with the important problem of Socialist unity. In
it we offer the methods of organisation and the arguments by which they
are supported to the dispassionate study of all who wish for its
accomplishment.
HISTORICAL MATERIALISM, Written by Frederick
Engels as an Introduction of the previous Work from his
pen, entitled, “ Socialism, Utopian and Scientific.”
It designates that view of the course of history which seeks the
ultimate cause and the great moving power of all important historic
events in the economic development of Society, in the changes in the
modes of production and exchange, in the consequent dronci'i of Society
into distinct classes, and in the struggles of these classes against each
other.


THE KAUTSKY SERIES-— THE WORKING CLASS—
THE CAPITALIST CLASS—THE CLASS STRUGGLE
—THE SOCIALIST REPUBLIC. These four pamphlets
are translated from the German of Karl Kautsky by
Daniel De Leon. Price, One Penny each.
The reader who has progressed thus far, will find these four pamphlets
(to be read in the order given) a veritable mine of facts and information
as to the broad lines upon which Socialism is based and upon which the
Socialist Republic will be reared.
SOCIALISM- By William Scholl McClure. A Lecture
delivered before the Albany Press Club. Price, One
Penny.
When it comes to the pessimist, the man who knows what Socialism
demands, believes the Socialist Republic would be justice personified,
and yet blinks his eyes and says it is all very nice to think about, but that
the remoteness of its realisation should place the Socialist Republic out-
side the consideration of reasoning beings—when one meets that kind of
a man, one must have tactics that will suit the occasion. It will not do
much good to argue with him, but if one persuade him to purchase a
book that treats of his particular case, one may be able to set his brain
matter going. That is the object of this work.
MONEY- By Daniel De Leon. Price, One Penny.
A short compendium of what money is.
WAGE LABOUR AND CAPITAL. By Karl Marx.
Price, One Penny.
An essay written by Marx in which the theory of surplus value is
explained in as simple a way as the nature of the subject permits. It
includes an Introduction by F. Engels.
SOCIALISM AND EVOLUTION By H. S. Aley, M.D.
Price, One Penny.
There is nothing in Socialist literature of this country that covers the
same ground as does this little pamphlet: a careful perusal of its contents
will prevent any honest student of Socialist philosophy being wrecked
upon the shoals of sentimentalism, and thereby save them much time
and useless effort in the investigation of social problems.
It will aid them immensely in seeing the social question from a clean-
cut, positive stanpoint.


HISTORICAL BASIS OF SOCIALISM IN IRELAND
By Thomas Brady. Price, One Penny.
MARX OK CHEAPNESS Price, One Penny.
The question of protection or free trade in relation to the real material
interests of the working class are explained in a “ Discourse on Free
Trade,” delivered by Marx at Brussels in 1848. The portions of this
speech which are of vital interest to-day are included in this pamphlet.
TWO PAGES FROM ROMAN HISTORY. Two Lectures
delivered at New York, by Daniel De Leon. Price,
Twopence. Post free, 2^d.
This is a critical examination of the dangers that beset the path of the
Socialist movement. Historic parallels from critical periods in the
history of the Roman Empire are applied to present day conditions, to
enlighten and warn the Working Class that it may steer its movement
aright. Every student of Socialism should read, this pamphlet.
THE COMMUNIST MANIFESTO. By Karl Marx and
Frederick Engels. Price, One Penny. Postage, id.
Written by the two foremost Socialist thinkers, the “ Manifesto” is the
most representative and widespread exposition of the historical basis of
Socialism.
ANTI-PATRIOTISM Address of Gustave Herve at the Close
of his Trial for Anti-Militarist Activity, before the Jury of
La Seine, December 1905. Translated by Solon DeLeon.
Price aid.
VALUE, PRICE AND PROFIT. By Karl Marx. Edited
by his daughter Eleanor Marx Aveling. Price, Threepence.
Postage, id.
“Value, Price and Profit,” which was written by Marx a couple of
years before his “Capital” appeared, is an address delivered to working-
men, and covers in popular form many of the subjects later explained
scientifically in “ Capital.” It is especially helpful as an introduction to.
“ Capital."
HANDBOOK OF INDUSTRIAL UNIONISM. By Wm E
Trautmann Price, 3d. Postage, id.
Contents :—Basis of Capitalist System ; Concentration of Industries;
Operation of Industrial Mechanism ; Real Problem Stated and how
Accomplished; Revolution in Control; Structure of Industrial Union ;
Malysis of the Preamble of I.W.W,


HO COMPROMISE, HO POLITICAL TRADING 8,
Wilhelm Liebkecht. Price, Fourpence Postage,
A most important work for the Socialist Movement It shows the
necessity for keeping clear of all entangling alliances with capitalist
parties
AS TO POLITICS. A Discussion upon the Relative Import-
ance of Political Action and of Class-Conscious Economic
Action and the Urgent Necessity of Both. Price, One
Shilling. Postage, id.
It contains the information whereby to arrive at the correct tactics
wherewith to reach the goal of the Socialist Commonwealth.
THE FIRST NINE CHAPTERS OF “ DAS CAPITAL ”
By Karl Marx. Paper, is. Cloth, is. gd. Postage, 3d.
THE EIGHTEENTH BRUM AIRE OF LOUIS
BONAPARTE. By Karl Marx. Translated from
the German by Daniel De Leon. Price, is. 2d. Postage, i|d.
“ The Eighteenth Brumaire of Louis Bonaparte ” is one of Karl Marx’s
most profound and most brilliant monographs. It may be considered
the best work extant on the philosophy of history, with an eye especially
upon the history of the movement of the proletariat, together with the
bourgeois and other manifestations that accompany the same, and the
tactics that such conditions dictate.
REVOLUTION AND COUNTER-REVOLUTION By
Karl Marx. Price is. 6d. Postage, 3d.
A series of Letters written to the “New York Tribune ” from London
by Karl Marx in ISSI-52 treating of the German Revolution of 1848.
The letters were written while Marx was in exile, and they give a history
of the events which succeeded the Revolution of 1848 and which resulted
in the failure of the insurrection through the counter-revolution which
followed.
THE WORLD’S REVOLUTIONS. By Ernest Untermann.
Price is. 6d. Postage, 3d.
Contents : —The Individual and the Universe; Primitive Revolutions ;
The Roman Empire and its Proletariat ; The Christian Proletariat and
its Mission ; Feudal Ecclesiasticism and its Disintegration ; The American
Revolution and its Reflex in France ; Bourgeois Revolutions in Europe ;
The Proletarian World Movement.


THE ORIGIN OF THE FAMILY. By F. Engels. Price.
is. 6d. Postage, 3d.
This book, which consists of 217 pages, is the best popular summary in
any language of the vital facts discovered by Lewis H. Morgan and
elaborated in “ Ancient Society.” It embodies all the most essential
data for arriving at a new and clearer conception of social development'
SOCIALISM, UTOPIAN AND SCIENTIFIC By
Frederick Engels. Price, is. 6d. Postage, 3d.
This is one of the few books that must be read by any one wishing to
understand modern Socialism. It explains how the meaning of the word
Socialism has changed, so that instead of standing for a vague ideal of
social change to be brought about by kind-hearted capitalists, it stands
for the struggle of the working class to overthrow and do away with the
class of owners, and thus to own the tools of production arid get the full
product of their labour. Engels’ introduction to this book is one of the
best short statements of the Socialist theory of historical materialism.
WOMEN UNDER SOCIALISM. By August Rebel. Trans-
lated from the thirty-third German edition by Daniel De
Leon. 300 pages. Cloth. Price, 4s.
The Woman Question is not a question by itself; it is a part of the
great social problem Proceeding along this correct line, Rebels work is
an exhaustive analysis of the economic position of woman in the past
and present. Despite the boasts of Capitalist Christianity the facts show
that under Capitalism woman, especially of the working class, is degraded
and dwarfed physically and mentally, while the word home is but a
mockery. From such condition of parenthood the child is stunted before
its birth, and the miasmas, bred from woman’s economic slavery, rise so
high that even the gilded houses of the capitalist class are polluted.
Under Socialism, woman, having economic freedom equal with man, will
develop mentally and physically, and the mentally and physically stunted
and dwarfed children of the capitalist system will give way to a new race.
The blow that breaks the chains of economic slavery from the working-
man will free woman also.
CAPITAL* By Karl Marx. Price 4s. Postage, 3d. extra.
This profound work is the great Source Book of economics upon which
Socialist literature and the science of Socialism is founded. It is an
absolutely essential book for any one who wishes to discuss Socialism
intelligently, either as a propagandist or an opponent.
MORGAN’S ANCIENT SOCIETY. A Revolutionary
Work, treating of the Growth and Development of Society
from Savagery through Barbarism to Civilisation. By Lewis
H. Morgan. Price, ss. Postage, 4d.
The price formerly was 16/ per copy, but, owing to the copyright having
expired, the Book can now be had at a price which makes it accessible
to all.


THE SUE NOVELS
Written wilder the Collective Title of “ History of a
Proletarian Family Across the Ages.”
Translated from the French by DANIEL DE LEON.
In order to understand our own time it is absolutely necessary that we
know something of the times that have gone before. The generations
are like links in a chain, all connected. The study, by which we can
understand the philosophy of events and learn what has been done and
thought before us, is history, and this is perhaps the most fascinating of
ail studies. The reading of history, clothed in the garb of fiction, without
historic accuracy being sacrificed, is the most delightful way of gathering
historical knowledge. Many people have a far better idea of Scotch
history from reading the works of Scott than if they had depended solely
on the dry-as-dust text books. Socialism is more concerned with the
history of the people than with the doings of kings and queens ; and with
a knowledge of the history of the people we can better understand how
the great men achieved prominence. Fortunately, the great Eugene Sue
has given us in the form of fiction the best universal history extant. It is
a monumental work entitled “ The Mysteries of the People,” or “History
of a Proletarian Family Across the Ages.” In this work Sue gives the
leading and successive episodes in the history of the race, by tracing
through the ages the varying phases of the fortunes of one family under
the several systems of society, together with the nature of the struggle
betweeh the contending classes.
The following five stories have been translated, and should be
read by those entering upon a study of Socialism.
THE GOLD SICKLE. Price, is. 9 d.
THE INFANTS’ SKULL. „ is. 9 d.
THE BRASS BELL. „ is, 9 d
THE IRON TREVET. „ as. 6d.
THE PILGRIM’S SHELL. „ 2s. 6d.
Others are in course of preparation, and will be issued shortly.
Read the “ Socialist.”
OFFICIAL PARTY-OWNED ORGAN OF THE SOCIALIST
LABOUR PARTY.
A Revolutionary Working Class Paper advocating Revolutionary
Working Class Politics and Industrial Unionism.
ONE PENNY MONTHLY.
Subscription Rate, is. 6d per year.


THE
Communist Manifesto
nr
KARL MARX and FREDERICK ENGELS.
PRICE, ONE PENNY.
Written by the two foremost Socialist thinkers, the “ Manifesto "
is the most representative and widespread exposition
of the historical Basis of Socialism.
Reform or Revolution?
nr
DANIEL D£ LEON.
A study in tactics. A powerful argument for the uncompromis-
ing, revolutionary tactics of die Socialist Labour Party.
PRICE. ONE PENNY.
KARL KAUTSKY—The Working Class.
—The Capitalist Class.
—The Class Struggle.
—The Socialist Republic.
These four pamphlets, taken together, give a comprehensive
view of the various dements of modern society and of the aims
of the Labour movement They are very popular in form, and
can be read separatdy, though they complete each other.
Price of each. ONE PENNY.
ADDRXSS ORDERS TO
SOCIALIST LABOUR PRESS,
at FORTH STREET. EDINBURGH.


NO COMPROMISE, NO POLITICAL TRADING. By
Wilhelm Liebkecht. Price,. Fourpence Postage, id
A most important work for the Socialist Movement It shows the
necessity for keeping clear of all entangling alliances with capitalist
parties
AS TO POLITICS. A Discussion upon the Relative Import-
ance of Political Action and of Class-Conscious Economic
Action and the Urgent Necessity of Both. Price, One
Shilling. Postage, id.
It contains the information whereby to arrive at the correct tactics
wherewith to reach the goal of the Socialist Commonwealth.
THE FIRST NINE CHAPTERS OF “ DAS CAPITAL ”
By Karl Marx. Paper, is. Cloth, is. gd. Postage, 3d.
THE EIGHTEENTH BRUMAIRE OF LOUIS
BONAPARTE. By Karl Marx. Translated from
the German by Daniel De Leon. Price, is, 2d. Postage, i£d.
“ The Eighteenth Brumaire of Louis Bonaparte ” is one of Karl Marx’s
most profound and most brilliant monographs. It may be considered
the best work extant on the philosophy of history, with an eye especially
upon the history of the movement of the proletariat, together with the
bourgeois and other manifestations that accompany the same, and the
tactics that such conditions dictate.
REVOLUTION AND COUNTER-REVOLUTION By
Karl Marx. Price is, 6d. Postage, 3d.
A series of Letters written to the “ New York Tribune ” from London
by Karl Marx in 1851-52 treating of the German Revolution of 1848.
The letters were written while Marx was in exile, and they give a history
of the events which succeeded the Revolution of 1848 and which resulted
in the failure of the insurrection through the counter-revolution which-
followed.
THE WORLD’S REVOLUTIONS- By Ernest Untermann.
Price is. 6d. Postage, 3d.
Contrnts :—The Individual and the Universe; Primitive Revolutions;
The Roman Empire and its Proletariat; The Christian Proletariat and
its Mission ; Feudal Ecclesiasticism and its Disintegration ; The American
Revolution and its Reflex in France f Bourgeois Revolutions in Europe ;
The Proletarian)
OF AUSTRALIA
