

HINTS ON RIFLE SHOOTING (SECOND EDITION)
PRICE 1s. BY POST, 1, 2 d
P. FARTHER.




Rifle Clubs' Sundries
SANDS & McDOUGALL LIMITED, MELBOURNE.
CLUB Record Books, 100 leaves, Is. 6d.
Black, gummed, 2j6 per 1,000; Black and White (900 White,
100 Black), 2/6 per 1,000; White, 2/6 per 1,000.


THE
AUSTRALASIAN
RIFLE ..
REGISTER
and . . ,
Notes on Rifle Shooting,
FOR
MARTINI-HENRY, MARTINI-ENFIELD,
and LEE-ENFIELD RIFLES,
With Wind Tables, &c.
Sands & McDougall Ltd., Melbourne.
By
An Old
Victorian
Rifle Shot
Price,
2/"
By Post, 2/3


GUNS AND CARTRIDGES.
JUmmm W, Mmtw,
IMPORTER OF GUNS, RIFLES, AND REVOLVERS,
And all Accessories pertaining thereunto, b.v the Best Makers and of the most approved
principles in the world. Note Address :
Gunmakei by Appointment to
His Excellency tne Governor,
and to the
Victorian hifie Association.
CLARKE’S BUILDINGS,
Half-way between Kirk's
I Bazaar and Queen Street.
Old No. 63
New No.
432 BOURKE ST.
MELBOURNE.
6ENTLEMEN requiring such goods with faithful service will profit themselves
permanently by dealing at this establishment, where modern useful articles are
always kept, in stock at lowest prices consistent with the highest practical service,
every weapon being carefully tested, and the character and performance given with
the same, thus inspiring confidence in the purchaser and insuring satisfaction.
GUNS by Greener. Purdey, Webley, Scott, and other celebrated makers.
RIFLES by Winchester, Colt, Martini-Henry. Top-lever,Kangaroo, Rook, and Rabbit Rifles.
REVOLVERS by Webley, Colt, Smith & Wesson, &c.
CARTRIDGES for Station, Field, and Match use at lowest prices—the most approved
Smokeless Powders being used at Purchaser’s choice. A special line for Station
use at 6'6 per 100, and smokeless at 10/- per 100.
REPAIRS of all kinds done in London style by efficient workmen, and at lowest prices
consistent with faithful service.
SPECIALITIES— dust landed, a new lot of Rifle Implements, comprising Sight Covers, Pull-
through Cleaners, Brushes, Verniers, Ventometers, Orthoptics, and every requisite
for the new ‘303 Martini-Enfield Rifle ; also the new Webley Match ’303 Rifle.
J W. R. is making a special wash for '303 Rifles, price 1/- per bottle ; also a Special Anti-
Rust Grease that effectually kills all cordite rust, I/O per jar.
LADIES and YOUTHS’ GUNS, also pretty little AIR GUNS for indoor practice.
NOTE.—Notices and Results of Matches posted to J. W. R. will be placed on his V.R.A Board.
Australasian Rifle Register, 2/-; by post, 2/3.
Club Record Books, 16 each.


ATL RTGHTS RESERVED.
RIFLE SHOOTING.
By P. FARGHER,
OP THE
MELBOURNE RIFLE CLUB.
Wiqner of Queen’s prize, Vp.pl. Qold ffledal, ffp.jl. Medal (Victoria),
Queen’s podge, pronze Cross (pisley), Champion
Qold ffedai (JY.S’W), etc., etc.
itidbownte:
SANDS & McDOUGALL LIMITED, PRINTERS, 365 COLLIN STREET.


SHOOTING
GLASSES
For Rifle, Pigeon,
and Sharp Shots.
Orthoptics of the Latest English and Continental Patterns
garter & Werner
Ophthalmic Opticians
86 Elizabeth St., Melbourne.
Lydiard St., Ballarat.
Sight Tested by C. H. F. Werner, Fellow of the Worshipful Company of
Spectacle Makers, London; Dioptric Grade, British Optical Association.
SHOOTING GLASSES are made for clearing the sight and sharply developing the
sights on the rifle or gun, as well as to give perfect definition of the object aimed at, without
in any way enlarging the same ; also, to prevent the eyes from getting tired during aiming.
Extra powerful Telescopes, Binoculars, Field Glasses, for Target
and Rifle Ranges, /rom /£- The new Prismatic Zeiz Binoculars.


INTRODUCTION
NOW that rifle shooting as a pastime is being taken up by thousands of
citizens throughout the land, and as very many of them are quite
unacquainted with even the rudiments of the sport, it seemed to me
that a book of this kind, dealing in detail with the practical and essential
parts of the game, would prove useful and even necessary.
The notes on rifle shooting that appear in the front pages of the various
scoring books do not go sufficiently into detail to be of much service to the
class of men this book is intended for, and I do not know of any other book
available here that gives the kind of instruction which it is the intention of
this little book to supply.
I have had a long experience as a rifle shot, and have experimented care-
fully with everything that is subject to a difference of opinion among
shooting men. The opinions expressed here have been formed after years of
close observation and study.


I have dealt only with those points which I consider essential to the learner,
and avoided the discussion of theoretical principles which have more to do with
the making of rifles than the shooting of them. The matter is so arranged
that each part of the subject is dealt with in the order in which it occurs on
the range. Such parts of the subject as are closely allied by their effects on
each other, I have treated together, as for instance, elevation and light. I
have tried to avoid over elaboration of the various phases of the subject, with a
view to putting each point clearly and concisely; whether I have succeeded or
not I must leave the reader to judge.
If this little book should help to make popular the practice of rifle shooting
as a national pastime, I shall be amply rewarded.
P. FAKGHER.


INĎEX
PAGE.
Introduction - - - - - - - 3
Service Rimes ------- 7
Selecting a Rifle - - - - - - - 10
Sights -------- 14
Position - - - - - - - - 19
Aiming - 25
Windage - - - - - - - - 31
Elevation and Light ------ 40
Mirage - - - - - - - - 46
Orthoptics ------- 48
Sling and Holding - - - - - 52
Score Register ------ 56
Cleaning - - - - - - - - 61
Team Shooting ------ 66
General Remarks - - - - - - - 69
Useful Information - ----- 71




SERVICE RIFLES.
THERE are four patterns of service rifles used in Aus-
tralia at the present time, viz., Lee-Metford, Lee-
Enfield, Martini-Enfield, and Martini-Henry. The
latter has done useful work during the last twenty years,
and some fine shooting has been made with it, but it was
never a satisfactory weapon beyond 600 yards, to say
nothing of its terrible recoil, and its always more or less
inferior ammunition. Most of us are eagerly looking
forward to the time that we may hang it up over the
mantelpiece as a relic of the past, and a reminder of
the days of our youth.
The other three patterns are of the same calibre, and
take the .303 service ammunition, with cordite powder
and a nickel-covered lead bullet.
The calibre of the Martini-Henry is .450, muzzle velocity
1,315 feet per second, initial velocity of rotation 744 revs,
per second. It has seven grooves, which make one full
turn in 22 inches.
The Lee-Metford and Lee-Enfield both have the Lee-
Speed bolt action, and a magazine which holds 10 rounds


of ammunition. The Metford has seven, the Enfield five
grooves, and the following particulars apply to all pat-
terns of the .303:—Length of barrel, 30.197 inches; twist of
rifling, 1 turn in 10 inches; muzzle velocity, about 2,000
feet per second; velocity of rotation at the muzzle, 2,400
revolutions per second. Length over all of the magazine
rifle, inches; of the Martini-Enfield, about 46J inches.
The Metford rifling is semicircular in section, with rounded
lands between the grooves; it has therefore no sharp
corners in any part of the barrel for fouling to set hard in.
The Enfield has five grooves, which are square cut, so
that its rifling consists of sharp corners and right angles.
These corners are liable to hold the fouling in hot weather,
and cause the rifle to lose its elevation. The trajectory of
the .303 is much flatter than the Martini-Henry. At 1,000
yards’ range its highest point is at about 600 yards, when
it is 25 feet above the line of sight, as against the
Martini’s 48 feet. It has, therefore, a shade more than
half the trajectory of the Martini-Henry. The reason of
the M.-E. being 3£ inches shorter over all than the maga-
zine rifle is because the Martini action is that much
shorter than the bolt action, the barrels being the same


length. The result is that, when aiming, the backsight
of the M.-E. comes 3£ inches nearer the eye than with the
other rifles. To middle-aged and elderly men, who are
getting a bit long-sighted, this is a drawback, as the
lines on the backsight are more inclined to blur, but for
men with normal sight it should not affect them much,
and it is a very handy, compact little weapon, whose
shooting qualities are first-class.
As soon as the bullet leaves the rifle it is acted upon
by the force of gravity, which, of course, causes it to fall
towards the earth; and the resistance of the air, which
retards it in its flight towards the target. The bullet is
also diverted a little to one side by what is known as
“drift,” which is caused by the spin of the bullet. In the
M.-H. it is to the right on account of the twist of the
rifling being from left to right: in the .303 the rifling is
from right to left and the drift is therefore towards the
left.
But as all these influences are constant, and accu-
rately known to the maker of the rifle, they are allowed for
in the sighting, and the ordinary rifleman need not worry
about them. For those who would like to study the
B


cause of drift, and the laws which govern the flight of
projectiles, and many other scientific matters of interest
to riflemen, I would recommend them to get “Target
Shooting,” by Capt. Foulkes, M.A.; price 10s. fid. In
the discussion of windage, later on, the effect of drift is
not considered, as it has really nothing to do with
windage.
SELECTING A RIFLE.
Having decided to take up rifle shooting as a pastime,
and having joined a military corps or a rifle club, your
next step is to secure a good rifle, and a very important
step it is.
Military men who have a rifle served to them as part
of their equipment should, if they can afford it, get one
of their own to do their private and match shooting with.
It is a good thing to have a rifle for important shooting
that does not get knocked about by the more or less
rough handling a regimental weapon is subject to in the
course of the year.
There are two ways of getting a rifle, and there is a
great variation in prices. You may buy a rifle from the


Government for two or three pounds, or you may buy
one of private manufacture for anything between seven
and twelve pounds. I would recommend beginners to
get the Government rifle, and, when they have learnt to
use it, if they have the money to spare, they might do
worse than lay out eight or nine pounds in a target rifle
of some well-known make. They will get a nice selected
heart stock and carefully finished sights for that price.
One advantage of paying a good price for a private
rifle is that it tends to make one more careful of his rifle,
and its shooting qualities are likely to last longer on that
account. If you buy a rifle of private make, see that it
is of British manufacture and bears the Government
Viewer’s mark.
The fore end should be a bit of straight grained wood,
and nicely fitted to the barrel. The bands should not be
screwed up tight, but should be just tight enough to pre-
vent them being moved easily with the hand. The fore-
sight should be clean cut, evenly sloped on the sides,
of medium thickness, and should have no burr or file
marks on it. The sides of the ladder of the backsight
should be perfectly parallel, so that the bar will fit it
B 2


evenly all the way up, and the bar should be just tight
enough to ensure its not slipping with the shock of the
discharge.
I spoilt a couple of long range scores at Sydney two
or three years ago, and ruined my position in the Cham-
pion Aggregate, through the ladder of my rifle being loose
at the place the bar comes to at 800 and 900 yards, and
for a time I failed to notice it had slipped down because
it w r as all right at the middle ranges. This unevenness of
the ladder may be caused by screwing up the ventometer
too tight when putting on wind lines. The forecap should
be square on top, not too thick, and the metal should be
well gouged out in front of the V, which should be small,
with bevelled edges. The top edge of the backsight
should also be bevelled to a knife edge, and the bar should
be straight and not capable of being tilted out of the
horizontal line. The trigger pull should be short and
clean, and there should be no suspicion of a move in it
until it goes off. The pull should be as light as is per-
mitted by the rules of rifle shooting, viz., 6 lbs. It should
never be more than 6£ lbs.
In my opinion 6 lbs. is much too heavy, and far better


shooting could be done with a 5 lb. pull, which seems quite
enough for safety. If even the 6 lb. could be easily got,
it would not be so bad, but it is a notorious fact that
almost every rifle isued from the armoury has a pull of
from about 9 to 12 or 14 lbs., and generally a rough drag-
ging pull at that. Accurate shooting appears to be the
last thing armourers, and those who pass their work,
think of, or they would not habitually supply volunteers
with a rifle whose trigger requires a team of bullocks to
pull it. It is marvellous how some of the militia shooting
men ever hit the target when you come to examine the
pull of their triggers.
When you get your new rifle, rub some bees-wax into
the join between the barrel and the woodwork to keep out
the water, and give the woodwork a liberal application of
boiled linseed oil, well rubbed in with the hand, for the
same purpose. Get good protectors for both fore and
back sights; also a suitable cover, and take the utmost
care of your rifle when travelling by rail, etc., to preventits
being knocked about. Never lay the rifle down in damp
grass or even on the ground when it is hot, as a warped
fore end will ruin the shooting qualities of the best rifle


ever made. Use the jointed rifle rest, which is sold for the
purpose.
As the marking on the sights is very rarely correct,
being sometimes as much as 100 yards out, the beginner
should if possible get some experienced shot to try his
rifle over the ranges on a fine day and mark the correct
elevation for each range on the ladder with a deep scratch,
and this must be looked on as the mean elevation for that
rifle and ammunition. The old stager with the aid of his
vernier, will, of course, soon find the “mean” of his rifle
and carefully record it.
SIGHTS.
Before taking your place at the firing point, it is neces-
sary to give some careful attention to the sights.
The foresight should be attended to at home, and care-
fully guarded from dust with a protector which covers
it all round. There is much diversity of opinion among
riflemen as to the best kind of foresight to use, and many
devices are used to make it easy to define. Among many
others are the “Bisley spot” and the “Miller’s line.” To
put on the “spot” you blacken the whole sight, and then


put a very small dot of white paint about half way up, and
in the centre, of the barleycorn; the idea is to see the
portion of the tip down to and including the “spot,” over
the bar when aiming. The “Miller’s line” consists of a
black sight with a white block and a thin white line
running up the centre of the barleycorn nearly to the top.
Another idea is to put a little blob of white on the tip,
which is seen just over the bar in aiming, and a variation
of this sight is to have a white spot at the base of the
barleycorn and see the whole lot over the bar. This is
known among shooting men as the “white tip,” and is used
by some very prominent shots in this colony.
The sight most commonly used by rifle shots all over
the world is just the plain black sight, smoked with a
candle, a wax match, a bit of camphor, or painted with
liquid black. I have tried them all. I used the “Miller’s
line” for a couple of years, then I used the “Bislev spot”
regularly for three or four years. I have used the white
lip occasionally, both in competition and in experiment,
but for the last year or two I have gone back to the plain
black tip, and upon the whole I think it is the best, and
most reliable in varying lights.


In some lights, such as when it is very dull, or when
it is clear bright, with the sun in rear of the sights,
any kind of white foresight shows up well, and very line
shooting is done with it, but in grey lights and all kinds
of changeable lights it is treacherous and unreliable.
When shooting on canvas targets, especially when the
sun is on the back of the targets, a white tip invariably
leads to disaster. That is one of the reasons why no one
uses it at Bisley, and very few at Sydney. I think the
reason why it has been successfully used by some shots
at Williamstown is because, owing to the southern aspect
of the range, and the shooting being done on iron targets,
it has found its most favourable conditions. Still eyes
differ, and what doesn’t suit one man may be the right
thing for another. I would recommend young shots to
try the plain black, and, if they can see it well, stick to
it. If, howmver, they cannot define well with it perhaps
one of the other ideas will suit them. The object is to
get a clear definite aim. I will discuss the amount of
foresight to be taken in conjunction with “aiming”
later on.
The bar of the backsight should be blackened with a


mixture of drop black and methylated spirit applied with
a brush, and wind lines put on with white paint or a soap-
stone pencil. The putting on of these lines should be left
until just before going to fire, then judge the strength
of the wind as near as possible and put one line the full
depth of the bar at the place where, if your judgment is
correct, you can aim straight over it. Then put on a
short line 8 verniers on either side, so that if the wind
varies when you are shooting you can work between the
lines.
Many men use only one line and are continually
obliged to get up between the shots to shift it. This has
some serious drawbacks, as the line has frequently to be
put on in a hurry, and if it is in competition the shooter
is apt to become flustered for fear of being disqualified
for losing time. I have seen many scores spoiled and
some big matches lost over the single line idea. In club
shooting and at practice, when there is plenty of time,
the idea works very well, and sometimes to the advantage
of the man who uses it, but in “big” shooting it is fatal.
You should never use in practice—-except for experi-
mental purposes—anything you should not use in, say,


a Federal team. Care should be taken to use a liquid
black that is free from lumps, so that when it dries it
leaves a smooth surface on the face and a clean cut edge
on the top of the bar.
Recipe fob Making Sight Black
Take a piece of drop black in the lump, grind it with
a knife on a sheet of glass with some methylated spirit
until the mixture is entirely without any lumps, then put
it in a bottle with enough methylated spirit to bring it
to the right consistency. To make it stick well put into
the mixture some gold size. When it becomes too thick
add some more spirit.
The lines should not be drawn quite to the top of the
bar but to within about a 32nd of an inch or so of the
top. On a bright day, with the sun on the sights, the
lines have a tendency to run up and form a star on top;
it is therefore necessary to keep them down a bit. On
a dull day, or in a bad light, it is necessary to draw the
lines thicker and nearer to the top of the bar. The
desirable thing is that the line should just appear to
reach the top of the bar when aiming, the object being


to see the foresight over the line distinctly and without
blur.
Young shots should, if possible, at first get some one
of experience to show them how to fix their sights, but
they should learn to do their own work, as assistance is
not always available. No one is more contemptible than
the man who year after year comes on the range with
his rifle in a state of nature, trusting to others to paint
and line his sights.
POSITION.
Before discussing position, I wish to strongly impress
on young shots that they must never load their rifles
until they are in position at the firing point, and it is
their turn to fire; also that they must on no account leave
the firing point with a loaded rifle. If anything should
occur to delay the shooting, if only for a minute, the
breech should be opened at once. " Military men are
taught this as part of their training, and it soon becomes
second nature to them; this warning is therefore for the
special benefit of civilians, and I want them to allow it


to soak in, and keep always in mind that a rifle must
never be loaded except when actually about to be fired.
There are four military positions, viz., standing, kneel-
ing, sitting, and prone, and all rifle shooting in Australia
which is controlled by the naval and military authorities
or by the various associations is done in one of them.
The positions, as laid down in the infantry drill-book,
are about the best in a general way, and applied to the
average man; but as men vary physically in length of
arm, breadth of shoulder, stoutness, slimness, etc., the
various positions must be modified to suit individuals.
I quote from the 1899 drill-book the instructions for
the various positions, leaving out the detail of drill, which
would have no sense here and does not affect the instruc-
tions. “Standing.—Carry the leftfoot about 10 inches to the
left front; at the same time bring the rifle to a horizontal
position at the right side. Then bring the rifle into the
hollow of the right shoulder, pressing it with the left
hand, backsight to be upright, left elbow well under the
rifle, right a little lower than and well to the front of
the right shoulder; as the rifle touches the shoulder bring


the cheek down on the butt, close the left eye, and align
the sights on the mark. Press the trigger without any
movement of the hand, eye, or arm, until the spring is
released.
Points to be Observed.
“The body should be erect and well balanced. The ride
should be held firmly in the palm of the left hand, the
wrist kept well up, sights perfectly upright—butt well in
the shoulder —left elbow well under the rifle —right elbow
a little lower than and well to the front of the right
shoulder —head slightly inclined forward, not sideways.
“The trigger should be pressed, not snatched at, aim
should be taken quickly; the breathing should be re-
strained whilst aiming and pressing the trigger.” I think
the feet are too close in this position, and that most men
will get a firmer position by keeping them a few inches
further apart. Some men with weak arms and shoulders
find it an advantage to rest the upper part of the left
arm against the chest, grasping the rifle close up to the
trigger guard, throwing forward the stomach and bending
the back inwards to enable them to take aim. This is


not a graceful position, and would set the teeth of any
self-respecting sergt.-major on edge, but I have often seen
good shooting done that way, and that after all is the
object to be desired. Personally I have always used the
military position and think it the best. As the man was
never born who could hold a service rifle steady on the
mark in the standing position, I would recommend that
the rifle be held firmly with both hands. Get the sights
up to the proper elevation, when the muzzle will be found
to sway across the target, then by steady practice and
grim determination the forefinger can be taught to act
quickly when the sights are in the right position. Good
shooting can only be done by snapping quickly at the right
instant. Avoid sticking out your latter end, humping the
back, and sloping the elbows. Bear in mind that you are
using a rifle, not a shot gun.
The kneeling position is laid down thus:—“Advance
the left foot about one pace to the front of the right toe,
sink on the right knee, bring the weight of the body on
the right heel, place the left forearm on or behind the left
knee, head and eyes straight to the front. The left heel
should be slightly in advance of the left knee, the left


foot pointing to the front. The right knee should point
to the right front. ’
“The body should be kept well down on the heel, and as
erect as possible, the elbow in the most comfortable and
convenient place on the knee or over it, if preferred; the
rifle should rest solidly in the palm of the left hand and
be firmly grasped; elevation should be got if necessary by
lowering the right shoulder without shifting the left
elbow.” This cannot be improved on except, perhaps,
that some men may find it an advantage to point the right
knee almost square across instead of to the right front.
The sitting position is very little used except by
mounted men, but this year it is made optional with the
kneeling position at 200 yards in the “Queen’s” both in
Sydney and Melbourne at their annual meetings. This
is what the drill-book says:—
“Turn half right, holding the rifle horizontally with
the left hand at the right side; place the right hand on
the ground, and sit down in a comfortable position, rest-
ing the forearms on the thighs, head and eyes straight to
to the front. Aim as when standing, but with the elbows
supported by the knees.”


Some men cross the legs, the right in front. Find out
which way feels the most comfortable, and adopt it.
The prone is the steadiest and best of all the military
positions, and the great bulk of shooting is done in it.
The instructions are:—“Turn half right, holding the rifle
horizontally with the left hand at the right side; place the
right knee, then the right hand on the ground in advance
of the right knee, and lie down on the stomach, obliquely
to the line of fire; both elbows closed inwards, the legs to
be separated; head and eyes straight to the front.” The
following hints will be useful if carried out:—Lie well
across the line of fire, as by doing so the rifle can be held
further out by the left hand, the recoil is not felt so much,
and the head comes more easily into the best position for
aiming. The actual position of the left hand will depend
on the breadth of the shoulders and the length of the arm;
some men can hold in front of the middle band without
straining, but the average man should hold just behind
the backsight with the Martini-Henry, and just in front of
it with the Martini-Enfield. The object is to get into the
easiest and most comfortable position without any notice-
able strain on any of the muscles. By keeping the elbows


as far apart as possible without slipping, a good low firm
position is secured, which is an advantage in a strong
wind.
I would recommend beginners to practise first at the
400 and 500 yards in the prone position until they can keep
in the neighbourhood of the bull, then, when the natural
tendency to “bob” or flinch on the explosion of the cart-
ridge is overcome by practice and grim determination,
they can “take on” the longer ranges and the difficult
standing and kneeling positions.
AIMING.
Having got into position, the next thing is to put a
cartridge into the chamber and take aim. When bring-
ing the rifle to the shoulder the finger must on no account
be allowed to touch the trigger; keep the whole hand
around the small of the butt until the sights are aligned
on the mark, then the finger should be carefully placed
round the trigger, and not till then. Nearly all accidents
on rifle ranges are caused by premature discharges, and
they are caused by some careless man playing w T ith his
trigger before his rifle is laid on the target,
c


A good clear aim and a steady pull off are by far the
most important things in rifle shooting. More scores
have been spoiled by a bad pull off than by all other
causes put together. Judgment of wind, light, etc., are
of no use unless you can aim well and get your shot off
steadily, and at the right time. First of all get your
rifle upright, which can be done by levelling the top of
the bar with the top of the target. Get the sights in line
at once by bringing the tip of the foresight up to the
bottom of the bull’s-eye, which should appear to be sitting
on the tip of the foresight, care being taken that the fore-
sight is seen exactly over the part of the bar which will
give the desired windage, the breath must be held and a
little pressure put on the trigger until the aim is exactly
right, then the trigger must be pressed quickly and
steadily so that the shot goes off without the least move-
ment of the rifle.
To do this well requires plenty of practice. After a
time the sense of touch in the trigger finger becomes so
finely trained that one can get nearly the full pressure
on and keep it for several seconds until the right instant,
when the brain tells the finger to act, which it does


promptly, and the shot is off almost unconsciously.
This, however, is the very perfection of rifle shooting, and
can only be acquired by long and earnest practice. The
method taught in the British Army is to hold the rifle
firmly with the left, lightly with the right hand; to hold
the aim steadily on the object and press the trigger until
the shot goes off unconsciously. This is a beautiful
theory, and on a calm day or shooting up a sheltered
gully might be used with some chance of success, but as
a general thing it is a ghastly failure, and the very men
who teach it at Hythe do not practise it themselves.
A much better way is to get your aim right and
make the shot go at the exact instant you want it to.
This requires great care to prevent jerking, but it can
be done, and is done by the best shots everywhere.
The rifle should be held firmly with both hands. The
trigger should be pressed with the forefinger, and the
thumb should be round the small of the butt, the pressure
on the trigger being got by squeezing the rifle between
the thumb and forefinger.
When aligning the sights for windage care must be
taken to move the rifle without canting it, as an inclina-
C 2


tion of the sights to one side will throw the shot towards
the side to which the rifle is canted, and if shooting over
a centre line, or allowing wind in the same direction as
the cant, it will put you low as well. If, however, you
are allowing wind in the opposite direction to the cant
it will not have much effect on the elevation. For
instance, if the rifle is canted to the right and you are
allowing, say, 10 verniers left windage, the effect of the
cant will be to raise the point of the bar over which you
are aiming above the centre of the bar, the higher ele-
vation thus got counteracting the low effect of the cant.
The next consideration is the amount of foresight to
be taken. There is much diversity of opinion and con-
tinual controversy among the talent on this point.
While one will have it as fine as he can see it another will
take the full barleycorn and see a bit of the block as well.
One crack in the Permanent Artillery used to claim that
he not only saw the whole block but also a bit of the
upper band. The late Col. Umphelby, than whom there
was no better shot in Australia, used a full sight always.
Some use a half-sight, i.e., half the barleycorn, whilst
others use a three-quarter one. I have carefully tried


them all, and in my opinion the best and the safest in all
lights is the plain black tip, and that just enough of it
should be taken over the bar to enable you to see it com-
fortably without straining the eye. If you strain for too
fine a sight, you are apt to lose it occasionally, and get
a low outer or miss. The eye becomes accustomed to
measure the amount taken and will vary it according to
the light. As a precaution against taking too much, it
is a good plan to paint the lower part of the barleycorn
white, leaving about one-third of the top of it black, so
that if too much sight is taken the white comes into view.
For young keen eyes this may not be necessary, but for
those of us who are getting frosty on top it is a wise
precaution. Eyes differ, and what suits one man is not
necessarily the right thing for another. I would, there-
fore, advise my readers to experiment for themselves, and
eventually adopt the amount and colour of foresight
with which they can do the best shooting.
Be ready to aim as soon as the target is clear, as this
will give you time to get your shot off without being hur-
ried, or, if necessary, to dodge a puff of wind, or change of
light, or for any other reason to take a second aim,


Have your mind made up how much wind you are
going to allow before commencing to aim, then give your
whole attention to the aim and act with decision; the
sooner the shot is off the better. Do not acquire the habit
of taking long aim, as this has many disadvantages—the
eye becomes weak, and the long strain on the muscles
makes you unsteady. It also gives more time for a change
of wind to occur, which you will not notice if you are
giving proper atention to the aim. This is particularly
the case in fishtail winds, when quick shooting is often the
only chance one has of making a score.
If using a white tip, aim should be taken right into the
middle of the bull; you should then just see the top of the
bull in the form of a semicircle over the white tip. With
any kind of black tip you should see the whole bull’s-eye
above it, aim being always taken below the bull at
6 o’clock. When changing from a white to a black tip,
raise the elevation 2 verniers at 600 yards to allow for the
aim being taken on a lower part of the target. Changing
from black to white you, of course, do the reverse.


Remember that it is by dogged determination during
those few seconds you are aiming you bring all your pre-
vious preparation to a successful issue, or by carelessness
or want of grit at that supreme moment, fail dismally.
WINDAGE.
The two greatest enemies a rifleman has to battle with
are wind and light. There are minor troubles in the shape
of bad ammunition, bad marking, disagreeable officials
nerves, liver, etc., not forgetting hard lumpy mounds, but
all these are insignificant compared to the unceasing
struggle to overcome the eternal shiftiness of wind and
light. But, after all, it is these difficulties which give to
rifle shooting that zest and charm which it undoubtedly
has for the enthusiast. The best and most experienced
shots have never quite mastered these enemies, but get
very near it sometimes, a few much nearer than others.
Rifle shooting is like billiards in that respect that it is
never learnt. No matter how proficient one becomes
there is always the consciousness that there is more to


learn, and by the time a man has acquired about all there
is to know, he is old and his sight failing. I will discuss
“light” in conjunction with elevation later on.
For convenience sake, the figures of a clock dial are
generally used by riflemen to indicate the direction of the
wind, and also the position of hits on the target. The
firing point represents the centre of the dial. The target
is at 12 o’clock. A rear wind is therefore a“6 o’clock”
wind. A wind across from the right is said to be blowing
from 3 o’clock, one from the left a 9 o’clock wind, etc. The
same with hits on the target; for instance, a magpie low
left at an angle of 45° from the vertical and horizontal is
called a half-past 7 magpie.
This system is particularly useful in team shooting,
when the spotter can tell a man exactly where his shot
has struck, the shooter being thus saved from the neces-
sity of straining his own eyes.
Windage should always be allowed on the bar and
never on the target, and for that purpose the straight edge
of the-bar must be on top. There must be an exception


made, however, at the short ranges, as it is necessary to
shoot tlirought the V, a straight forecap not being allowed.
But whenever the straight bar is allowed the aim should
be taken at the same spot every time and the necessary
wind allowances made on the bar. Do not be persuaded
to allow windage on the target, for the moment you leave
your aim spot, just under the bull, you have nothing
definite to aim at, and you are sure to lose your elevation.
1 often hear old shots, when instructing young ones, tell
them to aim on the left edge of the target to correct an
outer on the right, etc. Such instruction is worse than
none to the young shot who aspires to become a crack.
If the method of putting on lines mentioned in the
remarks on “sights” be adopted, it will soon become easy
to correct the windage between the lines. If the lines
are put on 8 verniers apart, which is equal to 4 feet at
600 yards, you can divide the spaces thus: —Taking the
foresight over the bar just clear of the centre line to the
left will give 2 verniers = 1 foot. Half way, 4 verniers =
2 feet, the right edge of the left line 6 verniers = 3 feet,


over the left line 8 verniers = 4 feet of left windage. This
is near enough for a beginner, but as your eye becomes
accustomed to judging the distance from the lines you
can easily measure it to 1 vernier. It is not enough to
get the bull, you should try to get your shots into the
very middle of it, as this will give you half the bull’s
diameter as a margin to work on. You will find that the
line looks a little thicker than the foresight, and you can
correct the position of your shots in the black circle by
taking your tip over the right or left edge of the line as
required. These remarks, of course, apply only to those
who possess a ventometer, or a vernier with a suitable
spur on it for marking wind lines, and this is the system
I strongly advise beginners to adopt. But for those who
have not arrived at the dignity of a vernier, and there are
a very large number, I give the following table, which
shows the windage got at the various ranges by using
|ths of the military line. The full military line gives
18 inches of wind for every 100 yards range, for instance,
a full line at 000 yards equals 9 feet of wind.


Windage
IN
Parts
OF
Line.
1
4
1_
3
4
1
1
1
4
1
1
2
Ft.
In.
Ft.
III.
Ft.
In.
Ft. In.
Ft.
In.
Ft.
In.
500 Yards
l
10
3
9
5
7
7 6
9
4
li
3
600 „
o
3
4
6
6
9
9
0
11
3
13
6
700 „
2
7
5
3
7
10
10
G
13
1
15
9
800 „
3
0
6
0
9
0
12
0
15
0
18
0
900 „
3
4
6
9
10
1
13
6
16
10
20
3


It will be seen from the above that an outer right or
left at 400 and 500 yards requires an alteration of of
a line. At 000 and 700 yards about %of a line. At 800
and 900 5 of a line is necessary.
A division on the vernier or ventometer gives one inch
of windage for every 100 yards of range. This applies
to both the M.-H. and the .303 rifles, as their sights are
nearly the same distance apart.
The following table is given more for the purpose
of showing the different wind effects on the M.-H. and
.303 rifles than in the hope that it will be of very great
assistance in finding the bull’s-eye with the first shot.
The drawback to using a table of this kind to indicate
the proper windage to be allowed at any time, lies in the
difficulty of correctly judging between what is a moderate
or fresh breeze, a fresh or strong breeze, etc., but for
the purpose of comparison it will be worth studying, and
the figures may be relied on;—


WINDAGE IN VERNIERS.
Martini.
.803
Martini.
.308.
Strength
Strength
0> jj
2*
— M
S M
of Wind in
Sj i
Verniers.
$
14
-g
u»«
:-4
14
Verniers.
«o
♦ *3
14
*~‘S
i/S.U
:-4
14
_-'©
of‘o
ro e
_*©
«*o
•*> o
—*0
rf©
to ©
— ©
M*©
to o
Light ...
l.ight ...
2
3
4
1
2
3
(0
■o
s
Moderate
Fresh ...
2
3
4
5
5
7
1
2
2
3
3
4
Moderate
3
6
7
3
6
9
>
o
e
©
Strong...
5
8
10
3
4
6
Fresh .
5
9
ii
5
9
14
00
Ci
V. Strong
6
10
12
3
5
8
Strong...
7
12
14
6
12
19
V. Strong
9
16
20
8
16
24
o5
Light ..
Moderate
1
3
!
3
6
1
2
2
4
3
6
Gale
11
20
“
9
20
30
Fresh ...
4! 7
9
3
6
o
©
Strong ...
V. Strong
6
7
10
12
12
15
4
5
8
10
12
15
Light
2
3
4
1
3
5
Gale
9
15
18
6
12
18
Moderate
Fresh ...
4
6
7
10
H
12
3
6
9
9
14
Light ...
1
2
3
1
3
4
Stiong .
8
13
16
6
12
19
>»
(0
3
&
6
3
5
8
o
X3
>i
Fresh ...
5
8
10
4
8
12
V. Strong
10
18
22
8
17
28
o
O)
O
Strong ...
6
11
13
5
10
15
Gale ...
12
21
26
9
22
35
e
<0
V. Strong
8
13
10
6
13
19
Gale
.0
18
22
8
16
25


It will be seen that side winds up to a moderate
strength affect the M.-H. and .303 about equally at the
middle ranges, but with strong side winds the latter
require much greater allowances. Also that as the direc-
tion of the wind approaches the line of fire the effect on
the .303 is much less in proportion.
Take the tip of the foresight more to the right for a
right increase, to the left for a left increase, the reverse,
of course, for a lull. The amount of windage required
depends on the strength and direction of the wind, and
can only be found by personal observation on the range,
bearing in mind that a change near the target has a
greater effect on the bullet than a change at the firing
point, on account of the decreased velocity of the bullet
at the target end.
Watch the wind carefully between shots, both for
strength and direction. You can do this by watching
flags, chimneys, long grass, trees, the smoke from other
rifles, or anything which will serve to indicate a change.
If you think the wind has altered since the last shot, put
on a little more, or take some off, as may be required.
Do not be afraid to alter because the last shot was a bull.


as it is often necessary to do so. Some men always
follow" tlieir shooting, and when they happen to make a
score are loud in their praises of their pet theory, but
the few that do so are very erratic shots, as they must
necessarily he. It is sometimes necessary to alter several
feet in windage between shots.
Under certain conditions the apparent windage is
affected by the light. This occurs when the direction of
the range (as at Williamstown) is north and south, and
the sun rises and sets in the direction of 3 and 0 o’clock.
When the sun is low it lights up one side of the foresight,
and causes the side lit up to become the centre of aim,
although the real centre of the foresight is more towards
the dark side. So long as the sunshine continues this
simply requires correction as for wind, but if the sun
becomes obscured the true sights are seen, and, if other
conditions remain the same, the shot will go anything up
to 4 or 5 verniers to the side that was previously lit un.
This is even more puzzling when shooting through the V
at the short ranges, because when the glare is on the right
of the foresight it is on the left slope of the V, w 7 hieh in-
tensifies the trouble by doubling it. This peculiarity


varies in effect in proportion to the strength of the glare.
ELEVATION.
There are so many things which has each its separate
effect on the elevation that it is perhaps the most com-
plex question to be considered in connection with rifle
shooting. It is impossible to do more than by indicating
some of the principal causes and their effects to assist the
shooter to form a correct opinion of the conditions as he
finds them.
The principal things that affect elevation are light,
strength and direction of the wind, state of the atmo-
sphere, mirage, temperature, and fouling. There is
another disturbing influence which is not nearly so
generally known, even among experienced shots, as it
ought to be, viz., flip and jump. I will deal with this
separately later on in connection with the use of the
sling.
In a bright light you see a small portion of the fore-
sight and unconsciously take it finer than in a dull light;
this tends to make a higher elevation necessary; but on
the other hand you aim nearer the bull than you will do


if the light is dull, that is to say, higher on the target,
and this nearly counteracts the effect of the fine sight, so
the elevation is not materially affected.
The reverse of this happens in a dull light; you take
a bigger foresight, but you aim lower on the target. The
real trouble comes with a changing light, which lights up
the target and the sights alternately. When the target
is bright and the sights in the shade you want a lower
elevation, because you take a big sight and aim higher at
the same time; when the target is dull and the sun on
the sights you want a higher elevation, because both in-
fluences tend to put you low.
The amount of alteration necessary for a change of
light depends on the nature of the change, which is an
ever varying quantity, sometimes requiring no alteration,
at other times necessitating an alteration of 3 or 4
verniers, at all times requiring special care and watchful-
ness.
In dull, damp weather the elevation is always lower
than usual, especially with the Martini-Henrv. This is
due to two causes. The moist atmosphere offers less re-
sistance to the flight of the bullet, and the fouling,
D


instead of setting dry and hard in the barrel, keeps soft
and greasy, acting more as a lubricant than a resistance
to the passage of the bullet. Of course, there are all the
various stages between the extremes of dryness and
moistures, and that is where good judgment comes in.
The effect on any particular day must be determined and
allowed for at the time, but a knowledge of the causes
will assist the young shot to overcome the effects. In
the M.-11. the fouling is very troublesome. In very hot
dry weather it sometimes accumulates for several shots,
making it necessary to raise the elevation about 2
verniers each shot, until a lot of it “lets go” on one shot,
leaving a comparatively clean barrel; the next shot is sure
to be a high outer or a miss. This cannot happen in the
.303. With both rifles it is necessary to raise the ele-
vation after firing the first shot out of a clean barrel.
With the M.-H. the amount varies from scarcely anything
on a moist day to 3or 4 verniers on a dry day. With the
Lee-Metford it is safe to raise 2 verniers after the first
shot with a clean barrel in any weather, the Martini En-
field is about the same.


The effect of wind on elevation varies with its strength
and direction. With the M.-11. the effect of strong head or
rear winds is very great, sometimes as much as 8 verniers
higher than the mean at 600 yards for a head wind, 8 lower
for a rear one. With the .303 it is much less, I have never
found an alteration of more than 2 or 3 verniers neces-
sary.
As the direction of the wind approaches right angles
to the line of fire its effect becomes less on the elevation,
until at 3 and 0 o'clock winds it practically ceases. It will
he seen, then, that while great care is necessary to watch
variations in strength and direction of the wind for the
purpose of varying the windage, it is just as important to
watch it for its effect on the elevation. This is of special
importance with winds from right front, left rear, etc.,
which affect both elevation and direction, bearing in mind
that as the direction of the wind approaches the line of fire
it requires a higher elevation for a front wind, a lower for
a rear one.
The following table gives the necessary alteration in
loOths for high and low shots for the Martini-Henry:—
i>2


Allowance in 150ths for
High or
Low Shots.
Yards
500
600
700
800
000
Centre
2 deg.
2 deg.
1 deg.
2 deg.
2 deg.
Magpie
3 deg.
3 deg.
2 deg.
4 deg.
4 deg.
Outer
4 deg.
4 deg.
3 deg.
When a shot strikes “high left,” “low right,” etc., half
the allowance must be made in elevation and half in
windage. Use your judgment acording to the position of
the hit. For instance, a “high right” magpie, level, say,
with the centre, will necessitate lowering the elevation
2 verniers and altering 2 verniers for the wind.
With the .303 the elevation requires less alteration,
1 vernier for a high or low centre, 2 for a magpie, and 3 or
4 for an outer, according to its position, will put you right.
The following are the average amounts the elevation


has to be raised between ranges in 150ths for the Martini
and .:tO3 respectively:—
M.-H. .303
From 400 yards to 500 yards rise 16 verniers.
„ 500 „ 600 * „ 18 10
„ 600 „ 700 „ 20 11
„ 700 „ 800 „ 22 12
„ 800 „ 900 24 13
„ 900 „ 1,000 „ 26 14
With a front wind the rise will be a little more, with
a rear w ind a little less, according to the strength of the
wind, and the rifle yon are using.
Get a vernier and always use it. The 150tli is the best
and practically the only kind used now. It is the most
convenient, for the following reason. One of its divisions
gives an inch for every 100 yards of range, and is about
equal to 1 minute of angle. Although a division on the
vernier is often called a “degree” by riflemen, it is not 1°
but I'. It is also frequently called a “vernier,” so that
in this connection “degrees” and “verniers” are synony-
mous terms.


Always record the elevation and windage in your
scoring book in “verniers,” always speak and think of
them as “verniers,” and when making an alteration in
either elevation or windage, do it with your vernier. I
cannot too strongly impress upon young shots that to
become “first flighters” they must adopt exact methods.
The man who shoves up his bar with his thumb, or adjusts
it with a cartridge case used like a hammer, is simply a
rule-of-thumb man, and can never get beyond mediocrity.
You can never depend on him. If he starts on the bull
and things keep steady he will probably make a good
score, but if he has to “work” for a score he is simply lost,
lie shifts about with his wind and elevation, but doesn’t
know how much he is shifting, he therefore loses con-
fidence —and sometimes the target. It is for this reason
that capable team captains never include a rule-of-thumb
man in a big team if a scientific man is available.
MIRAGE.
The effects of mirage on rifle shooting are many and
peculiar. Sometimes it puts you high, sometimes low,
sometimes to one side, sometimes to the other. It does


not seem to lmve any definite ideas as to its own move-
ments, and I know of no fixed rule whereby its difficulties
may be overcome. It has a tendency to distort the bull’s-
eye, making it appear sometimes like an oblong vertical
streak, then elongating it horizontally, often making it
lengthen and shorten spasmodically like a concertina.
When such conditions prevail good shooting is quite im-
possible. If you watch it through good glasses you will
sometimes notice it drift across the front of the tarsret
like a river, in which case it carries the image of the
target with it, with the disastrous result that you fire
at a bull’s-eye that is not there. It is very erratic in its
movements —one minute drifting from the left, the next
from the right, and then it ceases to drift at all. It is
always safe to allow for the drift of mirage as for wind,
and it should be closely watched with good glasses just
before aiming. A fresh breeze clears it away, or a cloud
lliat covers the firing point and more than half the range.
There is another trouble known as barrel mirage. It
arises from the heat of the barrel in hot weather and is
most troublesome when shooting through the V at the
short ranges. Our friends the Queenslanders, with their


usual astuteness, have overcome the difficulty by painting
their barrels with dead black. This is a dirty but most
effective remedy. The bands, on account of their raised
position, generally get worn more or less bright, which in-
tensifies the trouble, and are also nearer the line of aim.
I have found that by painting them black on a hot day
you get the desired effect without going the whole hog
of painting the barrel.
ORTHOPTICS.
The orthoptic is au opaque disc with a hole in it to
aim through. It is made in several patterns, the most
common being fitted in a pair of spectacles with a slightly
darkened glass over the other eye, the disc being adjust-
able so that the hole can be twisted round to any position.
Some are made to screw into the peak of the cap, the ad-
justment being got by means of a universal joint, and
are known as “the hat-eye.” Others are attached to a
metal prong which slips up under an elastic band round
the head. Another kind lias the disc placed in a thin
copper shell which is kept in position over the eye by an


elastic band; these are designed to shut out all light ex-
cept that which comes through the aperture in the disc.
This is the origiual form of orthoptic, and, in my opinion,
it is the best kind of all, but as its use is disallowed in all
matches under N.R.A. conditions, as at Sydney, it has
practically gone out of use. It is, however, still allowed
in Victoria.
A kind that is coming into general use at Bisley is
known as the “Canadian,” having been introduced to
Bisley by the Canadian team. It has a little tube in
front of the disc which serves the double purpose of keep-
ing the sun’s glare off the aperture, and making it im-
possible to see the bull’s-eye unless you aim through the
centre of the tube; it is used as a “liat-eye.” Still another
kind is the “Freemantle,” a peculiar contrivance which
has to be seen to be understood. The last I will mention
is the “Iris,” a rather expensive affair, in which the aper-
ture can be varied in diameter by a twist of the finger and
thumb, it also has a bit of yellow glass in front of the
hole which may be used or not at the option of the
shooter. I daresay there are others, but this exhausts
the little list of those I have actually tried.


Every one of these different patterns have their own
little set of barrackers, who each claim special virtues for
their particular pattern, but the object of all patterns is
the same, viz., to get the hole in the proper position for
aiming through when the head is in its natural position.
What has to be avoided is the necessity for twisting the
neck to get the hole in line with the sights, and any
pattern that will achieve this object is a good one.
Opinions differ as to the advantage or otherwise of
its use. I shot well for years without it, then for some
more years I used it occasionally as I thought circum-
stances required it, for the last four or five years I have
used it regularly and mean to continue using it.
The effect of its use is, I believe, to cut off some of the
superfluous rays of light which the eye cannot focus, and
which causes the sights to become blurred.
Not being an optician, I cannot give a learned dis-
quisition on the subject, but I know' this, when the lines
on the backsight blur and spread, and the whole becomes
mixed with the tip of ihe foresight, the orthoptic clears
them up and enables you to clearly define the sights.
For young men whose eyes are keen, who can clearly


define flip lines on tlio backsight in decent light, G or 8
verniers apart, the orthoptic is not necessary and should
be left alone, but for middle-aged men, who are getting a
bit long-sighted, they are a decided advantage, in some
lights especially, and not a disadvantage at any time.
The principal things to be observed in the use of the
orthoptic is to get one with a disc that can be adjusted
laterally as well as in a circular direction, so that the hole
can be easily got into the right position; and to be care-
ful to aim through the centre of the hole every time. If
the orthoptic is a suitable one, the hole will be clear when
looked through. The largest hole that will clear up the
sights should be used, for as you get older it will become
necessary to use a smaller hole, so it is advisable to begin
with the largest that will serve the purpose. As you go
back to the longer ranges the hole should be lowered a
little to prevent straining the neck into an uncomfortable
position.
For elderly men and those who have defective vision,
there is an arrangement made, called the lenticular
orthoptic, which is a combined orthoptic and clearing
glass. There are many of these used at Bisley, and they


seem to keep a number of old shots in the first flight to
an astonishing age.
I would advise those who decide to try the lenticular,
or the ordinary clearing glasses, to consult a good
optician so as to get properly suited.
Carter & Werner, of 8G Elizabeth Street, Melbourne,
make a specialty of this work, and their prices are reason-
able.
With the introduction of canvas targets, a good field
glass or telescope becomes a necessary part of a rifleman’s
equipment. Without one you cannot see the spotting
disc well beyond fiOO yards.
THE SLING, AND HOLDING
Before discussing the use of the sling and its effect on
the shooting, it will be wise to take a glance at the move-
ments of the rifle at the moment of discharge and their
causes.
When the explosion of the cartridge takes place, the
first effect on the rifle is to cause the muzzle to drop below
the line of fire. This is called “flip.” Tt is immediately
followed by a reverse movement which throws the muzzle


up above the line of fire. This is called “jump.” These
movements, in rifles with the Martini action, are vertical,
but in rifles with the Lee-Speed bolt action they are ob-
lique, the flip being to the low right, the jump to the high
left. The oblique movement in the magazine rifle is due
to the centre of gravity in that rifle being to the right of
the axis of the barrel. The foresight is placed .023 inches
to the left to counteract this feature.
These movements would not matter much to the shoot-
ing man but for the fact that under certain conditions of
holding they effect his elevation considerably. If the
rifle is held loosely one shot and firmly the next, it has a
disastrous effect on the elevation. Many an “unaccount-
able” high outer among a string of bulls is due to the
rifle being held a little loosely for that shot, thereby re-
ducing the flip and allowing the jump to have carried the
muzzle above the line of fire before the bullet left the
barrel; or by a tighter hold than usual to increase the flip
sufficiently to get an outer low. To keep the elevation
it is therefore necessary to hold evenly throughout. The
use of the sling is another thing about which great diver-
sity of opinion exists. The majority of crack shots use it,


but the fact remains that many other “top-notchers”
manage to get along without it and shoot just as well as
those who use it. I use it regularly myself, and believe it
is an advantage taking one day with another throughout
the year. There is no doubt it helps to get off steady
shots in a strong wind. On the other hand, unless used
with great care and with equal strain each shot, it inter-
feres with the flip and jump movements and causes a loss
of elevation. It also has a tendency to cant the rifle to
the right, and takes the extra attention that has to be
given to plumbing, from the aim. I would recommend
beginners to shoot without the sling for a while at first,
until they have mastered other and more important parts
of the game. For those who decide to use the sling I
would offer the following suggestions:—Adjust the length
of the sling so that you get a nice even strain on it when
aiming, without having to shift the left hand from its
usual place, and keep it on the same part of the left arm
every shot. Get the same strain on it every shot. Guard
against canting by taking a glance at the “plumb” of the
rifle when you have got your aim. immediately before pull-
ing the trigger. You regulate the tension on the sling


by moving the left hand along the rifle, but if the sling is
the right length, and you keep it on the same part of the
arm, the grip will always be in the same place except when
lying on uneven ground.
In all patterns of the .”<>;{ the sling swivels are placed,
one on the middle band, the other on the toe of the butt.
At Hisley and Darn ley the authorities allow a swivel to
be fixed just in front of the trigger guard so that the
sling may be used from that to the piling swivel, thus
placing it in the same position as on the Martini-Henry.
This is also permitted in Victoria, but in New South Wales
the sling has to be used in the “regulation” manner, and
much growling has resulted. T will refer to the “regula-
tion” style as the “short sling.” It is questionable whether
the disadvantage of using the short sling is so great as is
generally supposed. lam inclined to think that the un-
doubted awkwardness of the position is compensated for
by the diminished effect on the flip and jump. At the
189!) meeting of Ihe New South Wales Rifle Association,
when the .30.‘5 was used for the first time in that province,
some ingenious methods of using the short sling were in
evidence. A few knowing ones from Queensland took a


turn round the right arm, then a turn round the left.
The whole position was complicated and awkward, but
some splendid shooting was done that way. Personally,
T used the sling short, with a turn round the left arm in
the usual way. I did not like it, but it did not have a bad
effect on my shooting, my elevation being unusually well
kept throughout the meeting. lam therefore inclined to
think that with continued use so as to get thoroughly
accustomed to the awkwardness of it, the short sling may
be found a blessing in disguise. I have not, however, had
enough experience with it to be sure, so I give this idea
for what it is worth.
SCORE REGISTER.
Having provided yourself with the means of accu-
rately measuring your elevation and windage, you must
next provide yourself with a suitable means of keeping
a record of your shootinsr. It is essential that a faithful
record be kept of every shot fired, whether in practice or
competition, together with the elevation, windage, direc-
tion of wind, changes of light, etc. To do this properly


you must get a suitable scoring book, which has an ap-
propriate place in each page for each and every note.
Of the scoring books available, the best I have used is the
“Australasian Rifle Register,” published by Sands &
McDougall Limited, Melbourne, its pages being admirably
designed for that purpose.
It is, of course, impracticable to carry about with you
a barometer, thermometer, and anemometer, as the pages
of the average scoring book suggests, but you can jot
down the weather conditions as hot, dry, moist, damp,
etc., for future reference and study in connection with
elevation. One of the best ways of keeping a diagram
of your shooting is to mark on the target in your book the
position of each hit by the figure, which will also show
the order of the shot, the figure being written as small
as possible. Or perhaps more accuracy can be obtained
by marking the exact position of the hit with a small dot
and writing the figure alongside it. By keeping a dia-
gram in this way you will notice after a few shots, if there
is a tendency to bunch your shots too high or too low or
to one side or the other. The necessity for a slight altera-
tion in the elevation or windage is brought more forcibly
E


to your mind in this way than in any other. Upon studying
your scores some time after they are made you will often
notice that a difference of a vernier in the elevation or
windage would have added two or three points to the
score.
It is just as important that practice shooting should
be recorded as shooting in competition, even more so, as
there is more time for thinking out the cause of bad and
unaccountable shots. Practise as often as possible, and
in every kind of weather, the trickier the wind and the
more changeable the light the more profitable the practice,
if the results are carefully recorded and studied. Not
only that, it is only by plenty of intelligent practice that
it is possible to acquire that fine sense of touch on the
trigger referred to elsewhere, as so necessary to a perfect
pull off. But the practice must be done with method and
intelligence, brains are just as essential to success as good
eyesight —one is of little use without the other. Real
success can only be got by combining practice with much
thought and study, and as the best of all data from which
to draw conclusions are your own previous experience, it


is plain that such experience should be recorded in such
a way as to be clearly and readily available for reference.
With the advent of the .303 there is more reason than
ever that every shot fired in practice should be made to
yield its full share of useful experience. The rifle is
more accurate, the ammunition much better, and taken
together they do not have the inherent defects which in
the Martini-Henry make it so difficult sometimes to
know whether a fault is due to weather conditions or the
natural perversity of the rifle and ammunition. Owing
to the use of cordite and a hard nickel bullet the barrel
will not last anything like the time of the M.-H., which is
another—and most important—reason why not a careless
shot should be fired out of it. This aspect of the case
should be grasped hard by those who buy their own rifles.
The introduction of the .303 sounds the death knell of
the rule-of-thumb man, the greater accuracy and the
necessity for finer adjustments with the new rifle makes
scientific methods indispensable to the aspiring crack.
Learners should, if possible, watch the methods and get
advice from men whose own methods are scientific, and
avoid the fussy person who poses as an expert because
b 2


of his military commotions or his having been a member
of a rifle club for a long time, but who has never learnt
to shoot well himself.
A good way to note the direction of wind in the scor-
ing book is by drawing an arrow in the place provided
for recording its direction. The arrow should be drawn
flying with the wind, and at the angle in which it is blow-
ing. The strength of the wind should be recorded in
verniers, and this, with the angle of the arrow, makes a
complete record. Some men also record the strength of
the wind by writing the letters L, M, F, etc., to indicate
that the wind was light, moderate, fresh, etc. It is, how-
ever, very difficult to discriminate between the various
grades of strength, and it can only be a matter of opinion.
The objection will probably be raised by a certain
school of critics that no aids to accuracy should be used
that are not practicable on active service. To these critics
I would say that, while they make rifle shooting more
attractive as a sport, the use of the aids recciumended
here for target shooting will not detract from a man’s
skill when obliged to shoot without them, except the little
loss of accuracy that will place him on the same level as


the best men trained under strictly service conditions.
To realise this, watch a deliberate scientific man shooting
in a rapid-firing match, when he will be found to get his
shots off as quickly and as accurately as the best trained
army men. Why, then, should rifle shooting, as a sport,
be deprived of anything which would help to make it
more attractive and interesting?
CLEANING.
The all important part of a rifle is the inside of the
barrel, and on its condition the shooting qualities of the
weapon depend. Every shot fired through it causes very
severe friction on the surface of the grooves, which from
the nature of the work it is impossible to effectively lubri-
cate, and the result is that every time the rifle is fired a
hard. dry. tight bullet is forced under enormous pressure
to take the grooving and travel the entire length of the
dry unlubricated barrel. Everyone knows that the more
smooth and polished you can get rubbing surfaces the less
the friction will be under a given pressure. It is there-
fore obvious that the best way to reduce the friction to a
minimum, and thus ensure the shooting qualities and


lengthen the life of a rifle, is to keep the inside of the
barrel highly polished. If rust is ever allowed to form, no
matter how carefully it may be removed, that part of the
surface can never again be smooth and true, for not only
does rust roughen the surface, it destroys part of the
metal, and leaves the barrel out of gauge at that spot.
Besides that, the rough surface scrapes some of the metal
off the bullet and sets up metallic fouling, which will soon
make decent shooting impossible.
Cleaning the Martini-Henry is a simple matter, as the
fouling from black powder contains no acid. Get a piece
of strong cord, make a loop at one end and attach a bit of
lead to the other, small enough to drop through the barrel
—a bullet with the sides pared down is as good as any-
thing. Make the loop about 3 inches long, so that rags,
etc., can be easily inserted. Tear a piece of old flannel
or flannelette to the size that when it is doubled through
the loop it will fit the barrel fairly tight. If the fouling
is very hard, use a slightly damped rag a few times to
remove it—not a wet rag, just a damp one—then dry care-
fully with a dry rag, finishing up by pulling through a
couple of times a bit of clean dry rag saturated .with a good


rifle oil or vaseline. Tow is an excellent- cleaning
material, if it is available, but whatever you use see that
it is dry and clean.
Cleaning the .303 is a very serious matter, and must
on no account be neglected. The fouling from cordite
contains acid, which gets thoroughly rubbed into the steel
surface under the great heat and pressure of the exploding
gases. This acid can only be neutralised and got rid of
by using an alkali in the cleaning oil. There are several
preparations in use in England for this purpose, and a
good cordite cleaner can be obtained from J. W. Rosier,
Bourke-street, Melbourne. The following preparation is
as good as anything I have met with, and I have used
it long enough to know:—Put into some methylated
spirit as much caustic soda as it will absorb, then put
a wine glass of this saturated spirit into one pint of
good Rangoon oil, and you have a cleaning mixture that
is really effective. Shake it up before using it, and use
plenty of it.
The best way to clean the .303 is by means of a stiff
bristle brush on a wood or brass rod. You take a piece of
thin flannelette, saturate it with the mixture, and wrap it


round the brush, then pass the brush a few times up and
down the barrel; throw that rap away and use another
saturated one; then use one or two clean dry raps until
you feel satisfied that every trace of the oily foulinp is
removed. The barrel should then shine like a mirror, and
if it does not it is not clean. Then oil the barrel with some
of the mixture on a clean rap, and if you have done your
work well the rifle will be safe until next morninp. The
rifle must be cleaned and examined for “set up” every day
for a week after beinp used, as the cordite acid is
treacherous and liable to break out in the shape of rust
quite unexpectedly.
If you wish to put the rifle away for some time, pive
it a thick coat of vaseline, but you must pive it at least a
week’s treatment with the mixture before it is safe to
do so.
The bristle brush is used for the purpose of keepinp
the rap up to its work and thorouphlv searchinp the
corners of the riflinp, but it should not be used by itself,
for if it is it will soon become full of filth and quite useless.
The brush is particularly necessary to clean the Enfield
groovinp, as a “pull through” does not easily get into the


corners. It may be said that the “pull through” serves all
right for the use of the military forces. But it must be
remembered that in framing the “regulations” the military
authorities have to consider matters of this kind in con-
junction with their adaptability to the conditions of active
service, and it would be quite impracticable to keep every
soldier supplied with necessary rods and bristle brushes.
But thereis onething they might do with great advantage,
viz., put more alkali in the “regulation” oil. These hints
are, however, written for shooting men who wish to pre-
serve the life and accuracy of their rifles as long as
possible. The brush may be attached to a cord and used
as a “pull through.” This is a more convenient way of
carrying it, but it can be more effectively used with the
rod.
Clean the rifle w T hen it is hot; one or two rubs through
with the mixture as soon as you have fired your last shot
are worth more than all the rubbing you can give it when
it gets cold. Get into the habit of doing this regularly,
and it will save you a lot of trouble and lengthen the life
of your rifle.
In the case of rifles which have the Martini action, such


as the Martini-Enfield, it is necessary to be careful to pre-
vent the dirty oil and fouling from getting into the action,
or it will soon become clogged with dirt. This is a bad
feature of the Martini action, it being so difficult to get
at it to clean it; with the bolt action anything in the way
of dirt can be cleaned out in a minute, but it must be
cleaned out.
While every rifleman, who loves his rifle —and who,
that is any good, doesn’t—will not allow the outside of
it to get rusty or remain dirty, I want to impress on the
readers of this book that their chief care should be given
to the inside of the barrel. They should think of it always,
and care for it as tenderly and lovingly as a mother does
her baby.
TEAM SHOOTING.
Team competitions are the very salt of the sport of
rifle shooting. There is nothing which tests the quality of
a man so much as shooting in a team. Team shooting
promotes good feeling among riflemen, and tends to make
them sociable and unselfish. When you have fired along-
side a man in a big struggle to win a match you for ever


afterwards feel friendly disposed towards that man, and
if he proved worthy of his place you love him like a brother
for the rest of your natural life. It has the splendid
feature that everyone is working for the aggregate and
not for the individual score, not only is everyone anxious
to do the best possible himself, he is just as anxious to
assist the others to make a good score also. This has
a good effect on a man’s character, and the man who has
done much team shooting is rarely selfish.
To be selected to represent his country in a big match
is the highest honour to which a rifleman can attain.
Every young shot should aspire to being selected in teams.
First his club or company, then his battalion or district,
then his branch of the service, then his province, and
finally his country, and this should be the very pinnacle of
a rifleman’s ambition.
Rifle clubs, companies, battalions, etc., should arrange
matches with each other as frequently as possible, as
nothing arouses more interest in the sport than friendly
jnatches; it also promotes good feeling among members of
different corps, and shooting on different ranges gives rifle-
men valuable experience.


In selecting a team its members should be chosen more
for their known reliability than for their capacity for
making a brilliant score now and again; erratic men
should be left out. The best way to pick a team from a
series of shoots is to weed them out from the bottom,
beginning with the lowest score of the series, then the
next lowest, etc., until only the required number is left.
Jsy this means the men are eliminated who are most likely
lo break down in the match. Team competitions are won
>r lost, not by the top, but by the bottom scores.
In selecting a “big” team no one should be included
who does not regularly use the vernier both for windage
and elevation. Men should be selected not only for what
they are capable of making themselves, but for their
capacity for receiving assistance or imparting it to others.
A selfish man, or one about whom there is any suspicion
of selfishness, should be rigidly excluded from big teams.
Some men’s selflove is so great that they will not admit
having fired a bad shot, with the result that if the next
shooter accepts their word two bad shots are made instead
of one. Such men—and there are a few of them —are a
curse to a team, and should be left out with tremendous


unanimity. The captain should know every man person-
ally, and his peculiarities, and should so arrange the pair-
ing of his team that the men of each pair will be of the
greatest assistance to each other. The dominant thought
in the mind of each and every man should be that the
match must be won, and that it is not the individual but
the aggregate score that will win it. When weather con-
ditions are in favour of good shooting, no time should be
lost, but the fullest advantage taken of favourable con-
ditions; on the other hand, when the shooting is very diffi-
cult, it is good policy sometimes to hold back a bit in the
hope of an improvement. Matches fired in the morning
will generally gain advantage by no time being lost; those
in the afternoon the reverse, if there be light enough to
finish. Spotting and coaching to be effective must be
f*done systematically; loose coaching is worse than use-
less.
GENERAL REMARKS.
Let me urge young shots not to be discouraged by
early failure. If progress cannot be made with one thing,


try another. Some of the best shots in this colony to-day
were not successful for years at first.
If you get a bad shot do not be discouraged, rather
think out the reason and allow for it next shot.
If you hear a conversation in rear while aiming, and
find yourself following it, you should ask the tattlers to
stop talking, as you cannot follow a conversation and
give proper attention to your aim at the same time.
Have confidence in yourself, and if you make an outer,
be determined to make two bulls so as to average inners.
Never think you are beaten if a possible at the next range
would make you win. If yon are a smoker you should
smoke when you feel inclined. If thirsty, take whisky
and water sparingly, if used to it.
No special training is necessary (as for athletics); what
you want is good general health, and a good sound sleep
the night before a match.
When you have become a good shot, give all the in-
formation and assistance you can to those who are
anxious to learn; you will lose nothing by it, and it will
be for the good of the game.


In conclusion, I would ask every rifleman to do all he
can, in his own way, to help towards establishing the
sport of rifle shooting as the national pastime, bearing
in mind that, in time of national stress, the safety of all
who are near and dear to us will depend on “the man
behind the gun.”
USEFUL INFORMATION.
The following N.R.A. Conditions in reference to rifles,
scoring, etc., apply equally to rifle competitions through-
out Australasia:—
Rifles must be as issued by the Government or of
British manufacture, and of bonit fide Government
pattern, bearing the Government Viewer’s mark.
Martini-Henry.
1. Weight—Not to exceed, without bayonet, 9 lbs.
2. Length—Maximum, measured from the muzzle to the
butt when placed vertically on the ground, 49| inches.
3. Stocks—Must not be checkered.


4. Pull of Trigger —Minimum G lbs. The rifle to be held
vertically.
5. Sights—Strictly in accordance with those on any
pattern of Government Service rifle.
Magazine Rifle.
1. Weight—lncluding cleaning rod, oil bottle, pull
through, and magazine, not to exceed the greatest
weight of the Regulation rifle of the corresponding
pattern and mark. (The weight of the Mark 11. is
9| lbs.)
2. Length—Maximum, measured from the muzzle to the
butt when placed vertically on the ground, 49J inches.
3. Stocks—Must not be checkered. No pad or shoe for
the heel plate of the butt is allowed, nor may the
butt-plate be checkered.
4. Pull of Trigger—Minimum G lbs. The rifle to be held
diagonally.
5. Sights—Strictly in accordance with those on any
pattern of Government Service rifle.


The only colours allowed on the sights are black or
white or black and white, but not mixed so as to produce
grey.
Backsight—
(a) Must not be supported by any means extraneous
to the rifle.
(b) The bar must not be capable of sliding laterally as
a wind-gauge.
(c) The bar may be reversed, and may be used on either
side of the uprights. The “small slide” may be
used in all competitions.
Note. —The hand-guard may be removed at the option
of the firer. The safety catch may not be used for firing
the rifle.
The above rules will also apply to the Martini-Enfield
rifle, except Rule 2in regard to length. The rifle should
be held perpendicular when testing the trigger.
Targets and Scoring.
Where fixed targets are used the conditions of targets
and scoring are as follows: —
F


At 200 and 300 yards: targets 4 feet by 4 feet.
At 500 and 600 yards: targets 6 feet by 6 feet.
At 800 and 900 yards: targets 6 feet by 12 feet.
The divisions on the face of the targets are:—
1— At 200 and 300 yards—
Bull’s-eye, circular ... ... ... 8 in. in diameter
Inner ~ ... ... ... 20 in. „
Magpie ~ ... ... ... 32 in. „
Outer „ ... .. remainder of target
4 ft. square.
2 At 500 and 600 yards—
Bull’s-eye, circular ... ... ... 2 ft. in diameter
Inner ~ ... ... 3 ft. ~
Magpie ~ ... ... ... 4 ft. ~
Outer ~ ... ... ... remainder of target
6 ft. square.


3 —At 800 and 900 yards—
Bull’s-eye, circular ... ... ... 3 ft. in diameter
Inner ~ ... ... ... 4 ft. 6 in. ~
Magpie „ ... 6 ft. square
Outer ~ ... ... ... remainder of target
12 ft. by 6 ft.
The value of hits shall be —
Bull’s-eye, indicated by white disc ... .. 5
Inner „ red disc ... 4
Magpie ~ black and white disc .. 3
Outer „ black disc .. ... 2
The flags used at long ranges shall be—
Bull’s-eye ... ... ... ... red aud white
Inner ... ... ... ... ... blue
Magpie ... ... ... ... blue and white
Outer white


Where the Bisley system of disappearing target is
used, the marking is done by showing a black patch on
a white dummy target as follows: —
OUTER.
(Scoring 2 marks.)
bull’s-eyb.
(Scoring 5 marks.)
MAGPIE.
(Scoring 3 marks.)
INNER.
(Scoring 4 marks.)
RICOCHET.
(Scoring 0 marks.)
EXAMINE.
On the target being lowered, the value of the hit, if
there be one, will be shown as above on the dummy, and
the actual position of the hit will be shown by the spot-
ting-disc when the target is again raised.


With all kinds of targets the divisions and values are,
of course, the same.
Slings.
“The sling may be used as an assistance in shooting
for all prizes. The greatest length of a Government sling
is 54J inches, not including the tongue or the buckle,
Straps must not be used instead of slings.”
Ties.
The following rules for deciding ties are taken from
the programme of The National Rifle Association of New
South Wales for 1900. They are identical with the
N.R.A. and V.R.A. rules, with the addition of a good rule
for handicap competitions:—
A. —ln Individual Competitions—
1. If at more than one distance by the range totals
in order of distances commencing with the longest.
2. By the greatest number of hits.


3. By the fewest outers.
4. By the fewest magpies.
5. By the value of each shot in inverse order.
6. By shooting off.
B.—ln Team Competitions, except Volley Firing—
1. If at more than one distance, by the aggregate
range totals in inverse order.
2. By the greatest number of hits.
3. By the fewest outers.
4. By the fewest magpies.
5. By the total of each round in inverse order.
6. By the highest scorer in each team shooting off.
Foe Guidance op Rifle Clubs in Local Handicap
Competitions.
Where a tie occurs between Scratch v. Handicap, or
Handicap v. Handicap, unequal—in either case with or
without limit—the handicap allowance shall be first
added, then the tie shall be decided by the Regulation


now in force, i.e.—(a) Score at longest range, (b) Greatest
number of hits, (c) Fewest outers, (d) Fewest magpies,
(e) Counting back shot for shot, from the longest range.
Table showing comparison between M.H. and maga-
zine rifles in some principal features: —
PARTICULARS.
M.-H.
Magazine.
Length
4- ft. 1 in.
4 ft. 1 i in.
Weight
9 lbs.
9 lbsv8 07.8.
Bore
.450
.363
Twist of Rifling ...
1 in 22 ins.
1 in 10 ins.
Direction of Twist
Left to right
Right to left
Muzzle Velocity ...
1,315 ft. per sec.
2,000 ft. per sec.
Distance to which sighted
1,450 vds.
2,800 yds.
Highest Trajectory in feet when
fired at 1,000 yds. ...
47.76
25.4
Weight of bullet (in grains)
480
215
Material ...
Hard lead
( Lead, nickel and (
\ copper-covered )
Weight of packet of 10 rounds of
ammunition ...
1 lb. 1-ft ox.
9 oz.
Powder f Description
£ Weight (in grains)
B.F.G. 5 black
85
Cordite
30 to 32


The following, taken from the-Tnfantry Drill-Book of
1899, will be useful information for those who prepare
their own earthworks on club or private ranges:—
Penetration of the .303 Bullet.
Sand ... ... 29,inches. ; Brickwork ... 9 inches.
Earth... ... 28 -,, Iron ... ... T 77 ~
Peat Earth ... 60 ~ Red Gum 30 ~
Clay ... ... 48 ~ Ironbark 12 ~
As this is the actual penetration, it is advisable to add
at least 100 per cent, to the thickness as a margin of
safety.
