

RIFLE EXERCISES
AND
MUSKETRY INSTRUCTION FOR
CADETS
COMPILED BY
LIEUTENANT R. STUPART
FOR
OFFICERS AND NONCOMMISSIONED OFFICERS
IN THE COMMONWEALTH CADET CORPS
SECOND EDITION
REVISED AND ENLARGED
COPYRIGHT
PRICE SIXPENCE
ANGUS & ROBERTSON LTD.
MILITARY PUBLISHERS
89.95 CASTLEREAGH STREET, SYDNEY


MILITARY HANDBOOKS
!!y LIEUT TENANT E, STUPART
IMF AUTRY POCKET BOOK.
A Concise Guide to Regulations, Field Train-
ing, Musketry, Camp Duties, etc., with Duty
Roster, Nominal and Attendance Rolls. With
prefatory note by'Col W. Holmes, D. 5.0., V.D.
2nd edition, revised and enlarged. 1/6; post-
age, Id.
Eerrij TnfatlinymLK- should have it copjj. A emst invaluable guide
for the Field, the Hifie Idanpei Camp, andrferr general referenee
purposes,
OUTPOSTS, AND ADVANCED
FLANK AND REAR GUARDa
Includes tbe Training of a Company in Out-
post Duties, Fallings In Outpost Duties, and
a Special Chapter and Sketch Map, describing
the Telling Oil and Posting of /a Planet on
Night Outpost Duty. Illustrated. By Lieut. R.
Stupart. 1/-; postage, Id.
CADET HANDBOOK AND SECTION
ROLL,.
A Conelse Guide to Appointment and Promo-
tion for Officers and N,C. O.’s. Includes Regu-
lations, Syllabus of Botams for Promotion,
Syllabus of Training, Guards and Sentries,
Duties of Non,-Corns., Infantry Signals, etc.
With an Attendance Roll fop Seetidn Com-
manders,; 2nd edition. Pd.; postage. Id.
GUARD AND SENTRY DUTIES,
What to do and how to do It. A complete
Guide to the Guard Duti es of Field Officer and
Captain of the Day, The Commander, Sergeant,
Corporal, and Private Soldier of the Guard,
htc., with copy of Guard Report. 9d.; postage,
«d.


RIFLE EXERCISES
AND
MUSKETRY INSTRUCTION FOR
CADETS
COMPILED AND EDITED
BY
LIEUTENANT R. STUPART
Author of “ The Cadet Handbook,” “ The Infantry Pocket Book,”
“ Guard a.ns'iSentry Duties,” etc
For Officers and Non-Commissioned Officers
in the Commonwealth Cadet Corps
SECOND EDITION
REVISED AND ENLARGED
COPYRIGHT
ANGUS & ROBERTSON, Ltd.
Military Publishers
89 Castleebagh Street, Sydney
1914


Just Published, Price Is. 3d.
The Art of Instructing
IN
Aiming and Firing
AND IN
Miniature Range
AND
Landscape Target Training
illustrated with numerous diagrams
EY
Lieutenant R. Stupart
CONTENTS
Elementary Instruction in Aiming and Firing and Grouping
Practices, Application Practices, Visual Training, Military
Vocabulary, Fire Orders, Indication and Recognition of
Targets, 'Regulation, Direction and Control of Fire, Fire
Direction Practices, etc., with complete Set of Rules for
Miniature Range Competitions,


CONTENTS.
CHAPTER I.
RIFLE EXERCISES.
PAGE
Plate—-Parts of Rifle .. . . .. .. .. 6
General Rules .. . . . . . . .. . . 7
Falling-in with Arms at the Order .. .. .. 9
The Stand-at-Ease from the Order . . . . . . 9
The Attention from Stand-at-Ease .. .. .. 9
The Slope from the Order . . . . . . . . 9
The Order from the Slope .. . . .. .. 10
The Present from the Slope . . .. .. .. 11
The Slope from the Present . . 12
Inspecting Arms on Parade . . .. . . 12
To Ease Springs and Come to the Order . . . . 18
Instructions for Inspecting Arms .. .. .. 13
To Examine Arms .... . , . . 14
The Trail from the Order . . .... 14
The Order from the Trail . . . . . . . . 14
Short Trail from the Order . , . . . . 15
Use of the Short Trail .. .. .. .. 15
The Change from the Slope . . . . 15
The Secure from the Slope . . , . . . . , 16
The Slop© from the Secure . . . . . . 16
Slinging Arms . . . . . . . . 17
Grounding and Taking up Arms . , , . 17
Paying Compliments with Arms . . . . 17


CHAPTER 11.
CARE AND CLEANING OF ARMS.
PAGE
General Instructions for Cleaning . . . . 18
Use of the Pull-through .. .. .. .. 19
Daily Cleaning .. .. .. .. .. 20
Gleaning before Firing .. . . .. . . 20
Cleaning after Firing Blank Ammunition .. .. 20
Cleaning after Firing Ball Ammunition . . . . 21
Cleaning with Hot Water .. .. .. .. 21
Cleaning the Action and Outside .. .. 23
CHAPTER 111.
AIMING INSTRUCTION.
Stages of Instruction .. .. . . .. 26
Accuracy in Aiming .. .. .. .. 27
Common Faults in Aiming .. .. .. .. 29
Triangle of Error .. .. .. .. .. 30
Aiming at the Ground .... . . ... . . 32
Aiming Off for Wind .... .. .. .. 33
Aiming Up and Down . . . . ~ .. 34
Rapid Adjustment of Sights -. . . . . 35
Aiming Off for Movement .. .. .. ~ 35


CHAPTER IV.
FIRING INSTRUCTION.
Instructors ... . . . . . . . . . . 37
Firing Rests . . . . .. . 38
Trigger Pressing . . . . • • • • 38
Firing Standing . . . . . . . . . . - 41
To Load .. ■. ■ .. . • • • 41
To Unload • • 42
To Adjust the Backsight . . . . .. 42
To Lower the Backsight . . . . . . 42
To Adjust the Windgauge . . ... . • 42
To Turn the Steel Sight Protector . . . . 42
To Aim and Fire . . . . . . ■ . . . . 42
Firing Prone . . . . . . . . . . 44
To Lie Down .. . . .. .. .. 44
To Adjust Sights . . 44
To Aim and Fire .. . . .. . . 44
Firing Sitting . . . . . . ■ . ■ • 45
Firing Kneeling . . . . .... 45
Use of Cover . . . . . . ■ ■ ■ • 40
CHAPTER Y.
Muscle Exercises . . . . . . 47
Tests of Elementary Training . . 48
Senior Cadet Musketry Course . . . . 53
Target Practices . . . . . . . . 55
Dimension of Targets . . . . 56
Instructional Range Practices . . . . . . 56
Grouping Practices . . . . . . .57
Some Groups and what they Indicate . .. 60
Analysis of Faults . . . . • . 60
Application Practices . . 61


The Westley-Richards Rifle
CALIBRE .310 INCH.
Parts of Rifle.
1 ®Tnzzle
2 Pore-sight
3 Back-siglit
4 Bed
5 Leaf
8 Elevating Screw
T Wind Guage
8 Vof Baci-siglit
A.-A. Barrel.
8.-B. Stock
19 Body
20 Trigger
21 Trigger Guard
22 Lever
23 Loop of Lever
24 Lever Catch
25 Indicator
26 The Block
' 9 Tore-end
10 Hosecap
11 Band
12 Band Swivel
13 Bntt
14 Small of Butt
15 Heel of Butt
16 Tee of Butt
17 Butt Plate
JlB Butt Swivel
6


CHAPTER I.
RIFLE EXERCISES.
GENERAL RULES.
1. Cadets, before they commence the rifle exercises,
are to be taught the names of the different parts of the
rifle, and the care of arms, as laid down in Chapter 11.
of this handbook.
2. The instructor should always be provided with a
rifle when at drill in order that he may show the cadet
the required positions and motions. Such practical
instruction should, as far as possible, be substituted
for the minute detail given in the text.
3. Drilling by numbers should be restricted to the
instruction of recruits, and should be curtailed as far
as possible.
4. Instruction in the rifle exercises should be combined
with “ Firing Instruction.” The cadet should be
accustomed to regard his rifle from the first as his
chief means of destroying the enemy, and not merely as
an implement to be carried at drill and manoeuvre.
5. The rifle must be carefully handled, especially when
coming to the order.


0, Arms may, if desired, be sloped from the stand
easy on the command, Squad—Slope arms. When the
squad is at the slope it will be taught to go through
the motions of the cider, stand at ease, and stand
easy en the command. Stand easy.
T. The rifle exercises are of special importance as
being required on parade in close order and for the
ordinary routine of peace. They must he thoroughly
taught, and be carried out with smartness and precision.
8. Squad drill with arms should he practised occasion-
ally in extended order to accustom cadets to handle
their arms steadily and correctly when separated from
their comrades.
9. The cadet haying been thoroughly instructed in
the rifle exercises by numbers, will he taught to perform
them in quick time, the words of command being given
without the numbers, and executed as detailed in the
following sections, with a pause of oue beat of quick
time between each motion.
10. Squads with arms will be practised in the different
marches and variation of steps described in squad
drill. The disengaged arm will be allowed to swing
naturally as described for marching in quick or double
time without arms respectively.


FALLING-IN WITH ARMS AT THE
ORDER.
The cadet will fall-in with the rifle held perpendicu-
larly at his right side, the butt on the ground, its toe
in line with the toe of the right foot. The right arm
to be slightly bent, the hand to hold the rifle lightly,
back of the hand to the right, thumb against the thigh,
Angers slanting towards the ground.
THE STAND-AT-EASE FROM THE
ORDER.
' Incline the muzzle of the rifle
slightly to the front with the right
hand, arm close to the side, at the
same time keeping both legs straight,
carry the left foot about one foot
„ length to the left, the left arm steady.
Stand-at-
Ease
THE ATTENTION FROM STAND-AT-
EASE.
( The left foot will be brought to the
■j right, and the rifle returned to the
v order.
Squad
Atten-tion
THE SLOPE FROM THE ORDER.
( Give the rifle a cant upwards with
the right hand, catching it with the
left hand behind the backsight, and
the right hand at the small of* the
butt, thumb to the left, elbow to the
rear.
Slope Arms
One


Carry the rifle across the body, and
place it flat on the left shoulder,
trigger-guard outwards from the
body. Seize the butt with the left
hand, the first two joints of the
- lingers grasping the outside of the
bntt, the thumb about one inch above
the toe, the upper part of the left arm
close to the side, the lower part hori-
zontal, and the heel of the butt in line
with the centre of the left thigh.
Two
( Cut away the right hand to the
( side.
Three
THE ORDER FROM THE SLOPE.
Bring .the rifle down to a perpen-
dicular position at the left side to
the foil extent of the arm, at the
same time meeting it with the right
hand in line with the left shoulder,
, arm close to the body.
Order Arms
One
| Bring the rifle to the right side,
j seizing it at the same time with the
) left laud just helow the foresight.
I. butt just clear of the ground.
Two
f Place tie In tt quietly on the
j ground, cutting the left hand away
t to the side.
Three


THE PRESENT FROM THE SLOPE.
Present
Aims
One
Two
Three
{Seize the rifle with the right hand
at the small, both arms close to the
body.
Raise the rifle with the right hand
perpendicularly in front of the centra
of the body, trigger-guard to the left;
at the same time place the left hand
smartly on the stock, wrist on the
■ trigger-guard, fingers pointing up-
wards, thumb close to the forefinger,
point of the thumb in line with the
mouth; the left elbow to be close to
the butt, the right elbow and butt
close to the body.
Bring the rifle down perpen-
dicularly close in front of the
centre of the body, guard to the front,
holding it lightly at the full extent
of the right arm, fingers slanting
downwards, and meet it smartly with
■ the left hand immediately behind the
backsight, thumb pointing towards
the muzzle; at the same time place
the hollow of the right foot against
the left heel, both knees straight. The
weight of the rifle to he supported by
the left hand,


THE SLOPE FROM THE PRESENT.
f Bring the right foot in line with
j the left and place the rifle on the left
1 shoulder as described in the second
motion of the slope from the order.
Slope Arms
One
f Cut away the right hand to the
side.
Two
INSPECTING ARMS ON PARADE.
I. The cadets will stand at the order.
Pot
Inspection.
Port Arms
One
Two
Cant the rifle, muzzle leading, with
the right hand smartly across the
body, guard to the left and down-
wards, the barrel crossing opposite
the point of the left shoulder, and
meet it at the same time with the
left hand close behiind the backsight,
thumb and fingers rhund the rifle, the
left wrist to be Opposite the left
breast, both elbows close to the body.
Passing the right hand over, the
outside of the hntt, place the thumb
in the loop of the lever and with a
J smart forward jerk; open the breech
and grasp, the butt ■ midway between
. heel and small, first ! two joints of the
fingers on the, outside and the thumb
* pointing towards tire muzzle.


TO EASE SPRINGS AND COME TO
THE ORDER.
Place the forefinger of the right
hand round the trigger, remaining
fingers under the lever, press the
• trigger without, touching the lever,
press the lever home to. the catch,
then seize the small of the butt with
the right hand.
Ease
Springs
f Holding the rifle firmly with the
■j left hand, seize it with the right hand
h below the band.
Order Arms
One
f As in the second motion of the
order from the slope.
Two
f As in the third motion of the
| order from the slope.
Three
INSTRUCTIONS FOR INSPECTING
ARMS.
2. When arms are inspected at the “ Port ” only, as
in inspecting a company on parade, the officer will see
that the windgauge is properly centred, that the slide
is at its lowest point, that the elevating screw is oiled
and free from dust, and that the breech action works
freely.
Each cadet, when the officer has passed the cadet
next to him, will, without further word of. command,
press the trigger, press the lever home to the catch,
order arms and stand at ease, when the inspection is
completed, the, section will then be closed on the Section


Commander’s command, Close ranks, March, when
the rear rank will take one pace forward.
TO EXAMINE ARMS.
On the command, examine arms, both ranks will
come to the position for loading, with the muzzle of
the rifle so inclined as to enable the officer to look
through the barrel.
The officer will look through each barrel to see that
it is clean and free from rust. The cadet, when the
oflieer has passed the Sle next to him, will press the
trigger, press the lever home to the catch, order arms
(resume his distance if in the rear rank),, stand at
ease, and stand easy.
THE TRAIL FROM THE ORDER.*
By a slight bend of the right arm
give the rifle a cant forward and seize
it at the point of balance, bringing
it at once to a horizontal position at
'' the right side at the MI extent if
the arm, Angers and thumb round th(
rifle and behind the seam •of tin
- trousers.
Trail Arms
THE ORDER FROM THE TRAIL.
f Raising the muzzle, catcli the rifle
1 below the band, and come to the
t order.
Order Arms
* The tr<Ll 3is not to he used at drill in close order. This motion
is onl j intended for skirmishing and for physical training.


SHORT TRAIL FROM THE ORDER
i Raise the rifle about three inches
i from the ground, keeping the barrel
c close to the shoulder.
Short Trail
USE OF THE SHORT TRAIL.
If standing with ordered arms, and directed to form
fours to close to the right or left, to step back, or to
take any named number of paces forward, cadets will
come to the short trail.
THE CHANGE FROM THE SLOPE.
T Seize the butt of the rifle with
I the right hand, back of the hand up,
I at the same time slipping the left
t hand up to the small.
Change Arms
One
Carry the rifle, turning the trigger-,
guard outwards, on to the right
- shoulder, bringing it well to the front
so as to clear the head, which is to
be kept quite steady.
Two
Three | Cut the left hand to the side.
To “ Change Arms ” again, reverse the above motions.


THE SECURE FROM THE SLOPE.
' Bring the rifle down to the full
extent of the left arm and seize it
< with the right hand in line with the
shoulder, as in the first motion of
the order.
Secure Anus
One
C Turn the trigger-guard to the
■j front, seizing the rifle with the left
I hand near the backsight.
Two
Give the butt a sharp cant to the
rear, place the breech under the left
arm pit, muzzle inclined slightly to
the right and downwards, at the
same time cut the right hand to the
side.
Three
THE SLOPE FROM THE SECURE.
Bring the rifle to a perpendicular
posiiton opposite the left shoulder,
< at the same time meeting it at the
small of the butt with the right
hand.
Slope Anns
One
Carry the rifle on to the left
shoulder, turning the -trigger-guard
■ out, seizing the butt with the left
hand as in the first motion of the
“ Slope ” from the “ Present.”
Two
| Cut the light hand to the side.
Tlixee


SLINGING ARMS.
On the command sliug arms, the cadet will pass
the head and right arm between the sling and the rifle,
the sling passing over the left shoulder, and the rifle,
muzzle upwards, hanging diagonally across the back.
GROUNDING AND TAKING UP ARMS.
On the command Ground Arms, the rifle will be
placed gently on the ground, muzzle pointing to the
front, at the right side, trigger-guard to the right.
The right hand will be in line with the toe as it places
the rifle on the ground.
On the command Take up Anns, the cadets will
take up arms and come to the order.
PAYING COMPLIMENTS WITH ARMS.
When a cadet carrying a rifle passes or addresses
an officer lie will do so at the slope, and will salute
by carrying the right hand smartly to the small of
the butt, forearm horizontal, back of the hand to the
front, fingers extended, saluting at the same number
of paces before reaching the officer, and cutting the
hand away, as directed when saluting without arms.
In passing an officer the cadet will always turn his
head towards him in the . same manner as when un-
armed.
A cadet, if halted when an officer passes, will turn
towards him and stand at the order.
Sentries, when saluting, otherwise than by present-
ing arms, will carry the right hand to the small of
the butt as directed above.


CHAPTER II.
CARE AND CLEANING OF ARMS.
GENERAL INSTRUCTIONS FOR
CLEANING.
In order that the “Instructions for Cleaning ” may
be understood, it is essential that the causes of foul-
ing in rifle barrels should be briefly explained. Foul-
ing may be said to be of two kinds;— (a) Internal —
probably caused by the forcing, of gas or harmful
material into the pores of the metal. (I) Superficial
—caused by the deposit in the bore of the solid pro-
ducts of combustion of the charge and of the cap
composition.
Tbe result of neglect in either case is the same, viz.,
the formation of rust in the bore and, as a consequence,
corroded barrels, calling for the use of wire gauze, or
even more drastic treatment, thereby causing unneces-
sary wear.
Internal fouling can be removed satisfactorily by the
use of boiling water. If for any reason this method
of cleaning cannot be used, the barrel will “ sweat,”
and a hard black crust of fouling will appear in the
bore. This will turn to red rust if not removed, and
the rifle will then require repeated cleaning with
flannelette and probably with gauze for a time which
will vary according to climatic conditions and the state
of the bore,


Superficial fouling is readily removed when warm
by the use of a pull-through and flannelette, but if it
is allowed to remain long in the barrel, it will become
hard and will have a corrosive effect equal to that
produced by internal fouling.
USE OF THE PULL-THROUGH.
In order to ensure the gradual compression of the
gauze, if used, and of the flannelette, drop the weight
through the bore from hreech to muzzle. The pull-
through should be drawn through in one motion, other-
wise the spot where the flannelette is allowed to rest,
while a fresh grip of the cord is being taken, will not
he properly cleaned. Very great care must be taken
not to allow the cord to rub against the muzzle, other-
wise a groove, technically' known as “cord wear” will
be cut, which in course of time will destroy the
accuracy of the rifle.
Only regulation flannelette is to be used. When
cleaning or drying the bore after washing out with
water, a piece of dry flannelette large enough to fit
the bore tightly (about 4 inches by 2 inches) should
be placed in the second loop of the pull-through.
For oiling the bore, a slightly smaller piece of oily
flannelette, which will fit the bore loosely, should be
used. Care must be taken not to use too much oil,
as it will be squeezed out of the flannelette at the
entrance to the bore, and will run down into the action
when the rifle is placed in the rack, and may then
cause miss-fires.


The use oi two single pull-throughs attached to one
another so as to make a double one is strictly for-
bidden, because this practice has been found to produce
“ cord-worn ” barrels.
INSTRUCTIONS FOR CLEANING.
Daily Cleaning;. —The outside of tie rifle will be
cleaned ‘ daily, and all parts of the action wiped with
an oily rag. The bore of the rifle will always be left
oily. Once a week this oil will be removed and the
bore re-lubricated.
Cleaning: before Fixing;.- —The action will be
wiped with an oily lag, and all traces of oil will be
removed from the bore and chamber - by the use of. a
pull-through and flannelette.
Cleaning after fixing blanlc ammunition.—The
superficial fouling should be removed as soon as
possible by pulling pieces of dry flannelette through
the bore until it is view clean. Cleaning should be
thorough, because, there being no bullet to scour out
the fouling left by the preceding round, there is a great
accumulation of superficial fouling. When the bore is
clean it should be lubricated with oily flannelette before
being placed in the rack. The following day the bore
should be wiped clean and re-oiled, after which, unless
firing takes place, the oil should only be removed for
inspection.
When blank firing precedes practice with ball, the
rifles will be thoroughly cleaned before ball practice


commences, particular care being taken to see that no
cordite remains in the bore.
After tiring ball ammunition. —The bore should
be wiped out so as to remove superficial fouling.
Whenever possible it will then be washed out with
water and oiled.
If hot water is not available the rifle will be cleaned
as directed after firing blank ammunition. Should
this method prove ineffective the gauze must be used,
but normally in peace time wire gauze will only
be attached to the pull-through:—
(a) For the removal of hard fouling, the result
either of neglect to remove superficial foul-
ing before it has had time to become hard, or
-of “ sweating ” after firing hall ammunition
when it has not been found possible to wash
out the bore with boiling water.
(b) In the ease of a rusty or corroded barrel, for
the removal of free rust which, owing to the
pitted condition of the bore, is likely to
appear.
The bore should he wiped clean and re-lubricated the
day after firing ball ammunition, and again on every
alternate, day for ten days. Subsequently the oil will
be removed only for inspection.
Cleaning with hot water. —Place the rifle to be
cleaned, muzzle downwards, over some vessel which will
catch the water after passing through the barrel in
order that it may be returned to the boiler. Insert
a -funnel in the breech of the rifle, and pour two


quarts of boiling water slowly through the barrel,
taking care not to splash water into the action. Stand
the ride, muzzle downwards, to drain for a few seconds,
then thoroughly dry the barrel by means of the pull-
through and chamber stick nsed with dry flannelette.
Slightly soiled flannelette should be dried and kept for
future use. After the bore and chamber are thoroughly
dry, iusert a piece of oiled flannelette in the second
loop of the pull-through and thoroughly lubricate the
bore and chamber. Rifles with new barrels will be
wiped out with oiled flannelette next day, but rifles
with old barrels that were slightly corroded or rusty
before flriug may require subsequent extra cleaning
with the pull-through and flannelette. The use of
tepid water defeats the object of this system of clean-
ing, the value of which depends on the rifle-barrel
being made very hot. The effect of the hot water
treatment is most satisfactory if applied at once; its
application should not be delayed beyond 24 hours.
It should be used on every occasion on which the rifle
is fired. If firing is to be discontinued for some days
the rifle should be wiped out and lubricated every
alternate day for ten days.
The appearance of metallic fouling or leading should
he watched for. It is caused by a portion of the bullet
being left on the surface of the bore, and appears as a
whitish streak on the lands, or as a slight roughness on
the edge of the grooves. If it is deposited near the
muzzle or the breech it is visible to the eye when the bore
is clean, but in the centre of the bore it can only he
detected by the use of the gauge-plug. It is a cause of in


accuracy, and if a rifle for no apparent reason shoots
badly its presence should be looked for as a possible
explanation. The soldier should make no attempt to
remove it himself but should hand his rifle to the
armourer or other qualified person to be cleaned.
Cleaning the action and outside. —Wipe the
inside of the body,- as far as practicable, the block and
the cartridge chamber with an oiled rag, to prevent
rust and remove dirt; also rub the outside of the barrel.
Close the breech by pressing the trigger.
The inside of the action will be cleaned when
necessary by an armourer.
The backsight should be kept thoroughly clean and
well oiled, particular care being taken that the elevating
screw does not become clogged.
The backsight should always be lowered gently.
The steel sight protector should be removed and
the inside rubbed with an oiled rag to prevent the
formation of rust.
The instructions regarding the use of an oily rag
for cleaning the action and outside of the rifle will
not apply in dusty districts, where all parts of the
action will be kept dry and clean.
INSTRUCTIONS FOR CARE OF ARMS
AND AMMUNITION.
The greatest care must be taken to prevent the
barrel being bent or dented, as either would be detri-
mental to accurate shooting. A rifle must never be


used for currying -weights, or for an y unauthorised pur
pose. Placing rifles forcibly in a rack, or leaving them
carelessly against a wall or a fence so that they fall
down will often cause serious damage to the barrel,
especially at the muzzle.
Care must be taken not to run the muzzle into the
ground; should this he done accidentally, the dirt must
be removed at once, for if the rifle be fired with any
obstruction in the muzzle the barrel will probably
burst.
The foresight must he carefully protected from being
injured; and the rifle should never he carried with the
leaf of the backsight raised.
The mainspring should never be allowed. to remain
compressed, except when the rifle is loaded, as the
spring will thereby be weakened. The position of the.
indicator shows whether the mainspring is compressed
or not.
The amount of pressure required to release the
trigger nose from the bent of the tumbler is called the
“ pull-oil.” When it is too heavy or too light, it is
generally because those two parts are not of the correct
form and hardness, or because the trigger spring is
not of the right strength. These defects are to be
rectified by the sergeant instructor; they must never
be attempted by the cadet.
A r o member of a Cadet Corps is ever to attempt to
take to pieces any portion of the action, nor to loosen
or tighten any of the screws.


Care should be taken to prevent the browning from
being rubbed off the ride.
In dusty districts it may be found necessary to cover
the muzzle arid action with a cover of khaki or other
suitable material, to prevent the dust gaining access
to the interior of the rifle.
On no account should a piece of rag, corjc, wood, or
other substance be kept in the muzele of the rifle.
A missfire arises from—
1. A defective cartridge.
2. A defective rifle.
In case 1 the cartridge will be tried in another rifle,
and, if it still fails to fire, a report will be made to
the sergeant instructor.
Iri case 2 the rifle will be taken to the sergeant
instructor for examination.
The oil will only be removed from the bore of the
rifle —
1. Immediately before firing.
2. For parades and duties as may be ordered by
the commanding officer.
In all cases it will be replaced as soon as possible.
The steel sight-protector will not be removed except
for the purpose of cleaning.
* Ammunition should be kept perfectly dry and clean.
To prevent cartridge eases jamming in extraction, they
must be kept free from oil, dust, or sand.


CHAPTER III.
AIMING INSTRUCTION.
STAGES OF INSTRUCTION.
Aiming will be taught in stages, as follows:
Explanation of the theories of sighting, elevation,
and deflection.
Method of adjusting the sights.
Explanation of aiming with the backsight and
foresight.
Aiming with scrupulous accuracy from a rest.
Demonstration of results of inaccuracy in aiming.
Aiming combined with trigger pressing.^
Declaring point of aim at moment of discharge.
Aiming from a rest at figures and ground.
Aiming at indistinct targets described hy word of
mouth.
Aiming off, making allowance for deflection as
ordered.
Setting of the windgauge.
Judging deflection allowance for wind and aiming
off without orders.
Aiming up and down.
Rapid adjustment of sights in accordance with
orders.
Aiming and snapping without a rest in all positions.
Rapid alignment of sights.
Aiming off for movement.
Fire discipline exercises.


It is immaterial whether the instruction is given in
the above order, .but further training should be deferred
until the eye is shown to be accurate in aiming. Ample
time should be devoted to trigger pressing and de-
claring the point of aim on discharge; this instruction
may conveniently be given indoors.
Aiming instruction should proceed simultaneously
with firing instruction and muscle exercises, short lec-
tures and questions being included in the daily pro-
gramme.
ACCURACY IN AIMING.
Especial care will be taken that the sights of any
rifle used in aiming instruction are in perfect order.
The aiming mark in the earlier stages will be a
special aiming target* placed at a distance not exceed-
ing 100 yards, but when the habit of accuracy has been
acquired, service targets will be used and care will be
taken that there is no falling off in accuracy owing
to the shape and comparative invisibility of these
targets.
The instructor must inspect the sights frequently to
insure that they are correctly adjusted in accordance
with his orders.
He will explain the following rules, and demonstrate
the results to be anticipated from common errors in
aiming
1. The backsight must he kept upright.
* For description ot target see Musketry Regulations, Part 11.


2. The left or light eye, according to tlie shoulder
from which the cadet shoots, must he closed.
5. Aim must be taken by aligning the sights on
the centre of the lowest part of the mark, the
top of the foresight being in the centre of, and
in line with, the shoulders of the Y of the
backsight.
The errors committed are generally attributable to
the non-observance of the rules or principles of aiming.
In correcting them the fault and its result must be
pointed out, and attention must be directed to the
remedy of the error.
When these principles have been mastered, the in-
structor will adjust the sights for any given range and
aim from the rest at the target, taking care that his
eye is immediately , above the butt-plate. It will be
convenient to use a sandbag aiming rest to steady the
head during the aiming. Having aimed, he will call
on each individual to observe the correct method of
aligning the sights on a mark. Each cadet will then
aet similarly, when the instructor will verify, the aim,
point opt the errors, and explain how they would have
affected the accuracy of the shot, and how they are to
be avoided. He should occasionally call on a cadet to
point out any errors which may have been made by his
comrades.
Extreme accuracy of aim must be insisted on even
during the first lesson.


COMMON FAULTS IN AIMING.
The most common faults in aiming are —
1. Taking too much or too little foresight
into the V of the backsight.
It should he explained that a fine or half sight will
cause the bullet to strike about 5 inches and 3 inches
lower respectively, per 100 yards of range, than when
the correct sight is taken.
The following method will be found useful to guide
a cadet in taking the correct amount of foresight; —
Lay the edge of a piece of paper on the upper edge of
the backsight cap, when the sight will appear as shown
in one of the subjoined diagrams. A piece of card-
board laid on the cap and held in place by an elastic
band will answer the same purpose.
Correct.
Too Fine.
Too Full.
2. Inaccurate centering of tlie foresight in
the notch of the backsight.
The cadet should understand that this inaccuracy will
deflect the muzzle of the rifle to the side on which th>-
line of aim is taken, e.g., if aim bo taken over tfle right


edge of the notch the direction of the line of fire will
be to the right of the line of sight.
3. Fixing the eyes on tlie foresight, and not
on the abject.
If the eye is accommodated for the foresight, the firer
will retain only a blurred image of the target. This
may not affect the result of his shooting at stationary
vertical targets, but when firing at service targets which
appear and reappear, or at areas of ground, it will be
necessary for him to watch the target closely.
4. Inclining the backsight to one side.
In this ease the hullet will strike low, and to the side
on which the sights are inclined. The resulting error
will be considerable at long ranges.
TRIANGLE OF ERROR.
To test proficiency in aiming and to demonstrate the
errors which, will arise from inexactitude, the following
method of recording a “triangle of error” will be em-
ployed:—
The rifle will he placed, on an aiming rest, and
directed at a sheet of blank white paper, affixed to any
convenient object at a distance of about 10 yards from
the rife; a second aiming rest should be used to steady
the head in aiming. A marker will stand at one side
of the target with a small rod bearing an aiming disc
of metal or cardboard, painted white, about li inches
in diameter; on this is a black bull’s-eye J-ineh in
diameter, in the centre of which is pierced a bole just
large enough to admit the point of a pencil. The disc


will be held on the paper, the instructor will align the
sights on it as laid down, and its position will be marked
with a'pencil.
Each cadet in succession will be called up and
ordered to look along the sights, but without touching
the rifle, and when he has satisfied himself as to the
correctness of the aim, the disc will be removed. It
will then be replaced on the paper and moved at his
direction until the lower edge of the bull’s-eye is
brought into the line of sight, when its position, will
be marked. The operation will be repeated three
times, and the points thus fixed will be joined in such
a way as to form a triangle. The position of the
points in relation to the instructor’s aim* will ex-
* If the cadet’s aim is "below that of -the instructor, it shows that he
has taken too full a sight; if above, that this sighting has been too
fine; if to the right, that the foresight was on the [left of a perpen-
dicular drawn through the centre of the notch j if to the left, vice versa.


pose any constant error in aiming. Their position in
regard to one another will show inconsistency.
If the triangle is formed so that its greatest side lies
vertically on the paper, it proves that the cadet’s
principal fault is inconsistency in respect of the
amount of foresight taken up into the line of sight; if
horizontally, that his principal error is inaccurate
centering of the foresight.
When any one of the sides of the triangle exceeds
;ne-third of an inch, or if the centre of the triangle
is more than one-third of an inch from the instructor’s
aim, the cadet will he noted for further, instruction.
The aim corrector will also be used to enable the in-
structor to supervise the cadet’s methods and test his
progress, the aim being taken from an aiming or firing
rest.
AIMING AT THE GROUND, AND MARK-
ING DOWN AN ENEMY.
The eyesight must be gradually trained in aiming
at figures or other service targets and at ground which
might conceal an enemy. For this latter purpose a
cadet will be directed to show himself for a few seconds


at different ranges. The squad will aim from rests at
the ground which they believe to be occupied. After
a short interval the cadet will stand up, when errors
will be corrected and criticised.
Further practice will be given in aiming at ill-
defined targets described by word of mouth, which will
lead up to the fire discipline exercises.
AIMING OFF FOR WIND.
The use of the windgauge will be explained, but it is
not to be regarded as the normal means of making
allowance for wind under service conditions. The
instructor, having explained that a variation of one
division on the windgauge scale is equivalent to about
6 inches on the target per 100 yards of range, will
tell the . cadet how many feet of deflection allowance
would be required for the wind which is blowing,*
and then direct him to set his sights for the range,
adjust the windgauge, and aim from an aiming rest.
The cadet should be taught to discriminate between
mild, fresh, and strong winds, by the effect which they
exercise on natural objects, and to note the direction
of the wind as front, rear, right angle, or oblique, by
turning his face full towards the wind.
The approximate allowance in elevation or deflection
for these winds at decisive range will be taught.
Practice will be afforded in aiming off a full-length
* A ready method of ascertaining the required adjustment is to
multiply the number of feet, or fractions of feet, of allowance for wind
by 2, and divide the product by the number of hundreds of yards in the
range. The result will be the number of divisions which the wind-
gauge must b% moved.


figure target according to the range, and the strength
and direction of the wind, actual or supposed.
The cadet should be accustomed to make deflection
allowance with reference to the breadth of the target,
the full-length figure target being rather less than 2
feet wide. Such practices should be limited to 400
yards, but in addition there must be practice in aiming
off at all ranges according to orders, the allowance
being indicated if possible by reference to the breadth
of the target, or intervals in a formation, or by selec-
tion of an auxiliary aiming point. If this is not
possible, it must be expressed in feet or yards.
In such exercises it is necessary to employ a cadet
at the target to indicate the correct point of aim
with a marking disc after each aim taken by the cadet.
The amount of allowance made will be observed by
the instructor with an aim corrector, 'unless an aiming
rest is used.
AIMING UP AND DOWN.
In aiming up and down the aim should be directed
at a point not more than 3 feet above or below the
6 o’clock line, according to the position of the target
beyond or short of the zone for which the sights are
set, but if the difference between the range and the
sighting exceeds 200 yards, it will be best to alter the
sighting.
To practise aiming up and down, cadets or dis-
appearing targets should be brought into view for short
periods of time at various ranges, the sights' being
fixed as may be ordered.


RAPID ADJUSTMENT OF SIGHTS.
Instructors will frequently test their squads in set-
ting their sights rapidly and accurately. They will
give orders for aiming or firing at definite targets, but
Without naming the range, and require their squads
to adjust their sights before they bring the rifle to the
shoulder. The careful adjustment of sights will thus
become instinctive.
Adjustment of sights will also be practised in con-
nection with movement of the firer or the target.
When there is time,- the sights will be adjusted for
every alteration in the range, and aim will be taken
at the lowest part of the mark, but frequent small
changes of sighting lead as a rule to loss of fire effect,
and may be avoided by aiming up or down.
AIMING OFF FOR MOVEMENT.
The instructions for aiming at moving targets in the
following paragraphs will be given during the latter
portion of preliminary training, practice in this form
of shooting being carried out on 30 yards or miniature
ranges, where the pace of movement may be regulated
in strict accordance with that of service targets.
When firing at crossing targets, aim will first be taken
on the object, then following it sideways, the aim will
be carried in advance and kept in front of the object
until the rifle has been fired. The distance to which
the aim should be carried in advance of the target will


vary according to the range, rate of movement, and
direction of the movement.
Up to 500 yards range, aim should be taken —
About 1 foot in front per 100 yards, at a single
man walking.
About 2 feet in front per 100 yards, at a single
man doubling.
About 3 feet in front per 100 yards, at. a single
horseman trotting.
About 4 feet in front per 100 yards, at a single
horseman galloping.
Thus, at 100 yards, a cadet should aim about the
breadth of a man in front of an individual walking,
and at 200 yards about a horse-length in front of a
single horseman trotting. Fire will rarely be effective
at a single man moving across the front at more than
300 yards’ range, or at a single horseman above 500
yards. At “effective and long ranges, aim should be
taken at the head of a body of troops moving to a
flank.
In aiming at an object moving directly or obliquely
towards or away from the flrer, allowance for elevation
must usually be made by aiming lower or higher.


CHAPTER IV.
FIRING INSTRUCTION.
INSTRUCTORS.
Instructors will teach by force > of example ratner
than by word of mouth, and be careful to refrain from
any form of comment which may discourage cadets.
Words of command are seldom required except in
collective firing instruction, all motions of firing being
performed independently, and each cadet being required
to use his own judgment as much as possible. Faults
must not, however, be overlooked or allowed to become
formed habits ; the essential points of the firing
positions are to be insisted upon from the beginning,
as the foundation of fire discipline.
In the early part of training, squads will not, as a
rule, consist of more than seven cadets, who will be
assembled round the instructor in a semi-circle. The
instructor will explain the uses of the different firing
positions and illlustrate them .to the squad. Cadets
will practise the motions separately until able to com-
bine them, and assume each position rapidly and with-
out constraint.
The position of each cadet will be corrected in turn;
the regulation positions may be varied if physical
characteristics render them unsuitable in any ease, but
awkwardness in the first stages of instruction will not


be accepted as an indication that the regulation
position requires modification.
The instructor should stand about five paces from the
cadet and to his right front while correcting his faults.
FIRING REST*
The firing rest will be frequently employed
in early instruction to enable the cadet to support the
rifle and rest his muscles, whilst the instructor modifies
or corrects his position. An incorrect position, how-
ever, usually arises from want of accuracy in the
preliminary actions which lead to it, and it is to
these that attention must be given, for a faulty position
once acquired cannot easily be corrected.
TRIGGER PRESSING.
Before he is permitted to practise snapping, the
cadet will be given several lessons in the correct way
of pressing the trigger. The rifle will be rested on
sandbags or in an aiming rest, and the cadet will be
seated with his elbows rested on a table. The in-
structor will first take steps to insure that the cadet
can move his trigger finger independently of the re-
mainder of the hand and arm.
The instructor will explain—
1. That the direction of the pull-off is diagonally
across the small of the butt;
* For description of rest see Musketry Regulations,Partl.l


2. That the first joint of the forefinger should be
placed round the lower part of the trigger ; and
3. That in order not to disturb the aim, breathing
must be restrained when pressing the trigger.
In order that he may learn from experience the pres-
sure required to release the main spring, the cadet will
also be directed to place his forefinger under that of the
instructor, but without exercising pressure, whilst the
instructor carries out the motion. Then, to enable the
instructor to ascertain whether the method is under-
stood, the cadet will place his finger over that of the
instructor, and exert the pressure. Finally, the cadet
will himself press the trigger, while the instructor uses
the aim corrector. The main object is to release the
main spring without disturbing the aim.
Special care will be taken that the breathing is
restrained while pressing the trigger, and the cadet is
always to say after the spring is released whether the
aim was maintained truly at the moment of snapping.
If not, he must state definitely the direction in which
the rifle was pointed at the moment of discharge.
Prom time to time the instructor will test the aim
and steadiness of each cadet with an aim corrector, and,
if necessary, further lessons in trigger pressing will be
given. Practice with the sub-target machine or with


miniature cartridge may advantageously be given, to
develop steadiness until range practice is begun.
Trigger pressing requires most careful individual in-
struction, during wbicli the necessity for determination
and strong personal effort will be impressed on the mind
of every cadet.
Daily practice in snapping is required by trained
cadets as well as recruit cadets. Progress should be
tested by grouping practice on the 30 yards range or
with the sub-target machine.
The use of the sling for steadying the rifle during
firing is not to be taught.
Particular attention should he given to the
following points:—
1. Hook the first joint of the forefinger round
the lowest part of the trigger.
2. Grip the small with the remaining fingers
and thumb.
3. Squeeze the thumb and forefinger toward
each other.
4. Restrain the breathing while pressing.
5. Note whether the aim is disturbed at the
instant of pressing.


FIRING STANDING.
The standing position will, as a rule, be used on
service to fire from breastworks, high walls, and cover,
such as long grass or standing corn, or to take a snap
shot, when advancing, so that the pace of the advance
is not materially cheeked.
It is a convenient position for elementary instruc-
tion, but when cadets have acquired facility in handling
the rifle, they will be practised for the most part in the
prone position in the open, and occasionally in the
kneeling position, or lying behind cover.
To load. —Turn half right; carry the left foot to
the left and slightly forward so that the body is equally
balanced on both feet. Bring the rifle to the right side
in front of the hip, with the muzzle pointing upwards,
small of the butt just in front of the hip, and grasp
the stock with the left hand immediately in front of
the trigger-guard.
Placing the thumb of the right hand inside the loop
of the lever, open the breech by a smart forward jerlc,
put a cartridge in the chamber, and press it home with
the thumb; then press the lever home to the catch
and remain steady.
Points to note—
1. Body erect and well balanced.
2. Left elbow close to body.
3. Firm grip with left hand in front of
trigger-guard.
4. Muzzle pointing upwards.
5. Butt welf forward.
6. Eyes on the mark.


To unload. —As when loading, but after opening the
breech, press the trigger, press the lever home to the
catch, lower the backsight, turn the steel sight-pro-
tector and order arms.
To adjust the backsight. —Hold the rifle at the
loading position so that the lines of the backsight can
be clearly seen, and raise the leaf by placing the thumb
of the left hand on the milled underportion. Then with
the thumb and forefinger of the right hand rotate the
milled screw until the line ,on the slide is level with the
line on the leaf, giving the elevation for the distance
named. Remove the left thumb.
To lower tke backsight. —Hold the rifle as when
adjusting the backsight, and rotate the milled screw
until the slide is at its lowest point. Remove the left
thumb.
To adjust the windgauge. —Holding the rifle as
when adjusting the backsight, turn the windgauge screw
until the central line is level with the line giving the
required deflection.
To turn the steel sight-protector. —The rifle
will be held as when loading. Then lower the rifle to
a convenient position at the right side, keeping the
muzzle pointed upwards, and turn the steel sight-pro-
tector with the right hand, drawing it back to the nose-
cap. Return the rifle to the loading position.
To aim and fire.— Load, and direct the eyes on the
mark. Then bring the rifle into the hollow of the right
shoulder, press it in with the left hand, grasp the small
firmly with the thumb and three fingers of the right
hand, place the forefinger round the lower part of the


trigger; the backsight to be upright; left elbow well
under the rifle, right elbow a little lower than, and
well to the front of, the right shoulder; as the rifle
touches the shoulder bring the cheek down on the butt,
keeping the face well back from the right hand and
close the left eye, align the sights on the mark, restrain
the breathing, and press the trigger. After a pause
bring the rifle to • the loading position and repeat the
practice.
Great care must be exercised to insure that the fore-
finger is not placed on the trigger before the rifle is in
contact with the shoulder, and that a firm grip is
maintained with both hands while firing.
During this exercise the instructor will explain to
the cadets that uniformly accurate shooting cannot be
obtained unless the butt rests firmly in the hollow of
the shoulder, and that the further the eye is kept from
the backsight the more clearly will the sights be defined,
the less strained the position of the head and neck,
and the less the effect of recoil.
The flrer should always declare the direction of his
aim at the moment of discharge before removing the
rifle from the shoulder.
Points to note—
1. Body well balanced.
2. left elbow well under rifle.
3. Good bed for the butt.
4. Firm grip with both hands.
5. Eye well bach from the right hand.
6. Sights perfectly upright.


FIRING PRONE.
The prone position will generally be adopted by
cadets on open ground, or when firing from continuous
low cover, or from behind small rocks, trees, ant-heaps,
etc. Preliminary instruction in firing, and firing
exercises, will, as a rule, be carried out in the prone
position.
1. To lie down. —Turn half right, bring the rifle to
the right side as when standing. Place the right
hand on the ground, and lie down on the stomach
obliquely to the line of fire, with the legs separated,
left shoulder well forward, left arm extended to the
front, and rifle resting on the ground in a convenient
position, muzzle pointing to the front.
2. To load. —As when standing.
3. To unload.— As when standing.
4. To adjust sights. —Draw the rifle back with the
left hand until the lines on the backsight can be clearly
seen, and proceed as when standing.
5. To aim and fire. —Proceed as when standing,
closing the right elbow towards the left. To obtain
elevation, the body must be raised on the elbows and
slightly retired.
Cadets will be trained to assume the prone position
rapidly, and to perform the loading and aiming motions
with as little movement as possible. The oblique angle
is not to be unnecessarily exaggerated. Behind objects,
affording a restricted amount of cover, the body and


legs will be parallel to the line of fire, if the oblique
position would increase vulnerability.
Points to note—
1. Body oblique to line of fire.
2. Legs separated.
3. Heels on ground.
4. Good bed for tbe butt.
5. Firm grip with both hands.
6. Bye well bach from right hand.
7. Sights perfectly upright.
8. Elbows closed slightly inwards.
FIRING IN OTHER POSITIONS.
The cadet will also be instructed to fire—
1. Sitting, which. is most suitable when on ground
falling at a steep slope. In this position the
right shoulder should be kept well back, and
the left forearm supported by the thigh, the
right elbow resting against the right knee, or
unsupported, as desired.
2. Kneeling, used mainly when firing from con-
tinuous cover, such as a low wall, bank, or
hedge, or in long grass, crops, etc., which
would obstruct the line of sight if the prone
position were adopted.
The cadet may kneel on the right knee or on both
knees. In the former case the body may be supported
on the heel or not as desired; the left knee will be
in advance of the left heel, and the left elbow rest on
or over the left knee ; the left leg, hand, and arm, and


the right shoulder, should be in the same vertical plane
when firing in the open. In the latter, the body may
rest on both heels, or be kept upright to suit the
height of the cover, the elbows in both instances being
unsupported by the body.
Points to note —
1. Body well balanced.
2. Left elbow well under rifle.
3. Good bed for tbe butt.
4. Firm grip witb botb bands.
5. Eye well back from right hand
6. Sights perfectly upright.
7. Left heel slightly behind left hnee,
8. Left knee, forearm, rifle, and right shoulder
in one vertical plane;
USE OF COVER.
Besides teaching the firing positions which are des-
cribed above, the instructor will explain to his squad
the best means of using various forms of cover for fire
effect and protection.
In the intervals of firing in the open the head should
be lowered, but ground in front must still be watched
by selected observers.
The value of cover from view and the means of con-
cealment afforded by small folds in the ground, a few
tufts of grass, etc., will be illustrated, and the ten-
dency to attract attention by exaggerated movements
of the head, arms, or rifle, in loading and aiming, will
be pointed out and checked.


CHAPTER V.
MUSCLE EXERCISES.
To accustom the muscles to the strain of prolonged
firing, the following exercises will be performed daily
during the elementary training of recruits and frequently
by trained cadets. Care must be taken that cadets are
not unduly fatigued.
In each practice a conspicuous object, repre-
senting the target, will be indicated, and the rifle will
invariably be thrown into approximate alignment with
it. In the first and third exercises the correct aim-
ing position will be assumed, including bringing the
cheek on to the butt, and closing the left eye, but with-
out actually aligning the sights. In the second
exercise the head will not be lowered, the left eye
will not be closed, nor will the sights be aligned.
Ist Practice.
Caution.—Muscle Exercise, Ist Practice.
Standing—Load.
(Lying)
One. Bring the rifle to the position for aiming,
return at once to the position for loading,
and continue the practice.
Order Arms. As before.


2nd Practice.
Caution,—Muscle Exercise, 2nd Practice.
Standing—Load.
(Lying)
One. Bring the rifle to the position for aiming.
Two. Quit the rifle with the right hand.
Three. Seize the rifle with the right hand, and at
the same time quit it with the left hand.
NOTE. —The words two and three will be given
at intervals of about 10 seconds. The trigger will not
be pressed when in the third position.
Order Arms. As before.
3rd Practice.
Caution.—Muscle Exercise, 3rd Practice.
Standing—Load.
(Lying)
One. Bring the rifle to the position for aiming.
Order Arms. As before.
NOTE. —The cadets will be trained progressively to
hold the rifle in this position until they can do so with-
out fatigue for two minutes.
TESTS OF ELEMENTARY TRAINING.
Range practices and more advanced training may be
regarded as waste of ammunition and time, unless
cadets have been thoroughly grounded, and trained
cadets are kept efficient, in elementary training. The


following system of tests lias therefore been designee)
in order to —
1. Provide instructors with a means of testing
cadets to ensure that they have reached a
sufficient standard before they begin range
practices.
2. Ensure that trained cadets haye retained their
efficiency.
3. Prevent any detail of elementary training from
being overlooked.
4. Enable non-commissioned officers and cadets
to reach the required standard in their own
time.
These tests are divided into oral, inspection and
standard tests. A record will be kept for each cadet
of the results of the various tests, which will be in-
spected periodically by the commanding officer. Ex-
tracts from these records will furnish useful guides as
to efficiency when cadets are transferred to other com-
panies or battalions. Cadets, particularly recruits,
should themselves keep a record of their performances.
It is important that teaching should not be con-
fused with testing. In the former a cadet is in-
structed by example and explanation; in the latter he
is questioned, or ordered to carry out a certain exercise
without any explanation or assistance, and either passes
the qualifying standard or is relegated for further in-
struction.


METHOD OF CONDUCTING THE
TESTS.
ORAL TESTS.
1. Care of Arms and Ammunition.
A few questions should be put to each cadet.
2. Description of Natural Objects.
Each cadet separately should be called upon to
describe one or two objects in the landscape, and be
questioned as to shape, colours, sizes, units for
measure, etc.
3. General theoretical knowledge.
A few questions should be put to each cadet regard-
ing the objects of, and reasons for, various details that
have been taught him.
INSPECTION TESTS.
1. Firing positions.
Every cadet should be individually inspected in all
firing positions and the existence of any of the follow-
ing serious faults should be noted in a book for pro-
duction at subsequent tests, viz.:—(1) Firing from
left shoulder. (2) Eye near cocking piece or thumb
in aiming position. (3) Want of grip with either
hand. (4.) Excessive constraint. (5) Finger round
trigger in loading position.
2. Fire discipline.
The rapid execution of all orders for fire direction,
adjustment of sights after each advance In attack, and


before every advance of the enemy (represented by
fatiguemen) in decisive phases of engagement, should
be tested.
STANDARD TESTS.
1. Eyesight.
To be carried out in conjunction with Standard Test
3. Four fatiguemen as “ points ” should be placed
under cover, in various directions and at different dis-
tances, not exceeding 800 yards. The cadets to be
tested lie down extended to two paces. Each point is
called up by signal.
The fatigueman stands, kneels, or raises his head,
according to the degree of visibility, and fires four
rounds of blank ammunition in half a minute, then
returns to cover and place. During the half-minute the
observers adjust their sights and place their rifles at
arm’s length to the front. At the end of the half-
minute a whistle is blown, and those cadets who have
failed to discern the point are noted, while non-
commissioned officers record the elevations found on
the sights in connection with Standard Test 3.
In every case, the point should be signalled to rise
a second time in order that his position may be shown
to those cadets who previously failed to see him, and
half a minute should then be allowed to these cadets
to adjust their sights for Standard Test 3.
Failures not to exceed one per cadet, but considera-
tion must be given to the visibility of the points.


2. Recognition of targets and aiming points.
The cadets to be tested should each have an aiming
rest or sandbags. A non-commissioned officer from
behind them will describe some difficult aiming point,
as a point in a hedge, or area of open ground. The
cadets lay their rifles on the point which they recog-
nise from the description. Four points should he
described for every cadet tested.
3. Judging distance.
The distance of four standing fatiguemen should be
judged at distances not exceeding 800 yards.
4. Adjustment of sights.
Several distances will be named and sights examined
after 3 seconds; an extra 5 seconds will be allowed if
deflection is ordered for adjustment of wind gauge.
5. Regulation aim.
To be tested by triangle of error. Standard —No side
over one-third of an inch, or the centre of the triangle
more than one-third of an inch from the instructor’s
point of aim.
6. Trigger pressing.
Trigger pressing will be tested by means of the aim
corrector, or sub-target machine. The Standard, if the
sub-target machine is used, will be: —Marksmen, .2 inch
group, Ist Class, .4 inch group, 2nd Class, .6 inch group.
7. Aiming off for wind or movement.
Tested for wind with the aiming rest. The cadets
will be ordered to lay their rifles on a point at some


number of feet, not exceeding 6, right or left of fatigue-
man. One foot of error only, measured from the regu-
lation point of aim, will be allowed.
Allowance in aiming off for wind or movement will
be tested with the aim corrector, the percentage of
serious errors being recorded.
8. Rapidity of aim.
The time required to bring the rifle from' the load-
ing position to the shoulder, on the command “Fire,’’
and to align the sights on an aiming disc held
to the eye, will be measured with a stop watch.
Position, prone.
The instructor will stop the watch when the trigger
is pressed provided he is satisfied with the aim. Four
seconds will be the standard time. The sub-target rifle
may be used for this test.
9. Grouping with miniature cartridges.
The grouping standards for miniature cartridge
practice at 25 yards will be: —Marksman, 2 inch ring:
Ist Class, 3 inch ring; 2nd' Class, 4 inch ring. These
standards should be attained with rapid as well as slow
fire.
SENIOR CADET MUSKETRY COURSE.
MUSKETRY TRAINING FOR SENIOR
CADETS.
First and Second Years of Service.
Theoretical instruction, in accordance with Musketry
Regulations, Part 1.. 1912, Chapter IV., Sections, 36-60.


Instructional Practices.
05
Number
of
Practice
Description
Class of Target.
&
H
of
Rounds.
Position
Grouping...
2nd Class Elementary Bull’s-eye
100
5
Lying
with
the
rifle
rested.
2
Application
2nd Class Figure Target
200
5
Lying
3
200
10
4
1st Class Figure Target
300
10
,,
5
”
400
10
”
The tests of elementary training laid down in Musketry
Regulations, 1909, Part 1., Section 64, as far as these
are applicable to the .310 rifle, shall be passed by
senior cadets before being allowed to fire full-charge
ammunition on the range.
Miniature Practice —30 rounds on 25 yards’ range
where facilities exist.
Third and Fourth Years of Service.
As above, and —
Glassification.
In the 40 rounds fired, those who obtain—
-120 points and upwards, Marksmen; 90 points and
upwards, Ist Class; 75 points and upwards
2nd Class; less than 75 points, 3rd Class.
NOTE, —1. Not more than 20 rounds are to be fired on
any one day.


2. Every cadet must “group,” vide Musketry
Regulations 1912, Section 89, before pro-
ceeding to other practices.
3. To further encourage shooting, 110 rounds
of ammunition per cadet, in addition to
the above 40 rounds, will be allowed for
field practices and matches, to be issued
at the discretion of the Area Officer.
TARGET PRACTICES.
An Officer (or a Non-commissioned Officer of the In-
structional Staff) must be present at target practice and
exercise the utmost vigilance to prevent accidents,
observing that each senior cadet handles his rifle with
the care necessary to prevent the possibility of danger
to himself and others. The ammunition must be re-
tained in the possession of the Officer (or Non-com-
missioned Officer of the Instructional Staff), only the
requisite number of rounds necessary for the practice
being issued, and at the conclusion of the practice every
precaution must be taken that none remains in the
cadet’s possession. Arms must be examined before
the practice commences, at the conclusion of the firing
at each range, and before leaving the ranges. The
Officer (or Non-commissioned Officer of the Cadet In-
structional Staff) in charge will be held personally re-
sponsible that all target practices are in every respect
regularly carried out at an authorised Rifle Range, and
that the necessary flags, discs, &c., are provided, and in
order for use. No senior cadet is to be permitted
to act as a marker under any circumstances
whatever.


Description.
Aiming
Mark; ,
Scoring
Bull’s Kye
4 points.
Inner
3 points.
Outer
2 points.
Is. Class —6ft. Sq.
2nd „ 4 „
24in.
Sin.
24in.
12in.
48in.
24in.
Remainder
of Target.
Description.
Figure
4 points.
Inner
3 points.
Magpie
2 points.
Outer
1 point.
1st Class —5ft. sq.
2nd ,, 4 ,,
21in. xlSin.
12in. x 12in,
40in.
24in.
56in.
35in.
Remainder
pf Target.
DIMENSIONS OF TARGETS.
ELEMENTARY (Bull’s-eye).
FIGURE TARGETS.
Lower half covered with green or dark brown paper.
Upper half covered with grey or green paper.
Figures of dark brown paper.
INSTRUCTIONAL RANGE PRACTICES.
General.
When recruits have shown clearly that they have
acquired a satisfactory standard of skill in all branches
of preliminary training, it is necessary that they should
verify for themselves by practice the lessons which, up
to that time, have been taught in theory only.
Instructional range practices need not be continuous;
intervals of time between the exercises are often bene-
ficial, especially to nervous cadets, but in any case time


should be found to continue the exercises of preliminary
training on days allotted to range practices, in order
that there may be no separation between theory and
practice.
In preliminary training the cadet has not accustomed
himself to the shock of discharge. In some cases there
is extreme difficulty in overcoming the tendency to
flinch from this shock, and this is one of the commonest
causes of inaccurate shooting. Cadets who flinch should
not proceed with firing practice, the cause of'the flinch-
ing can be detected and sometimes be removed after
one or two rounds only.
It is a common experience that serious faults become
formed habits in cadets before they are discovered by
the instructor; and that they are exposed only after
repeated visits to the range, by which time it will be
difficult to correct them.
In order to compel analysis of faults, to indicate
clearly how defects may be remedied, and to remove
all suspicion as to the accuracy of his rifle, preliminary
and qualifying practices are divided into exercises in
(a) grouping, and (6) applying fire.
GROUPING PRACTICES.
Individual grouping is an exercise in firing a series
of shots (usually five) at a definite aiming point with-
out alteration of aim or sighting during the series. As
it is necessary to exclude atmospheric influences as much
as possible, the range should not exceed one hundred
yards.
The term "group” is used to define the diagram
made on the target by the series of shot marks. The


value of such a group is determined by the relative
closeness of the shot marks. It is measured by means
of rings of various sizes, and points are allotted accord-
ing to the size of the ring which will contain all the
shots, or, when specially prescribed, all the shots but
one, which is called a “wide shot.’’ When the ring
is applied so as to contain all the shots, the point where
the centre of the ring falls on the target is regarded
as the point of mean impact. The position of
the point of mean impact, with reference' to the
mark aimed at, has no influence on the value of the
group. Its position is, boweevr, of great 'importance
for instructional purposes, because it indicates approxi-
mately the error of the rifle, and gives information as
to any constant fault of the firer.
Should a cadet make a bad group, and the rifle is
suspected, it should be at once fired under similar con-
ditions by a reliable marksman. Should the marksman
also make a bad group with the rifle, the rifle should
be tested, and if found “inaccurate,” the cadet to
whom the rifle belong should be allowed to recommence
the course, the necessary ammunition being found from
the present authorised allowances. If the rifle is proved
accurate, the cadet’s aim should next be tested by the
triangular method, and his let-oif should be tested by
means of the aim corrector. His eyesight and nervous
condition should be examined.
Unsteadiness may be traced to lack of determination,
or to illness, or to some habitual excess, such as cigarette
smoking. The position of the shots on the target may
indicate errors in aiming or inclination of the sights;
they may show that the firer moves his shoulder forward


to meet the shock of discharge, which will tend to throw'
shots low left, or that he flinches from the shock direct-
ing them high. If the trigger is jerked by the wrist
instead of being pressed by an independent action of
the finger, shots will usually strike low right.
Instructors should carefully note the positions of good
groups as well as bad ones, for some constant error in
aiming of fault of the rifle may thus be discovered,
which will escape notice in application practice when
every shot is signalled and error is attributed to wind
or other cause for which allowance is easily made in
sighting. Such errors are not uncommon, even among
marksmen, and often affect the shooting unfavourably
in field practices when there is no shot for shot signalling.
The will-power of cadets who have shown nervousness
should be developed by gymnastics or other means. Faults
may sometimes be remedied at once by correcting the
fire positions, by allowing time to elapse between the
shots or by snapping practice. Sometimes cause of
the failure is due to the filer’s effort to succeed; he
dwells too long on his aim, his muscles become tired,
the vision becomes blurred and his will-power is impaired.
It is necessary to take time in such cases.
A complete analysis of the faults of the flrer and his
rifle should be made before leaving the range, and a note
should be made on the register of the steps decided upon
for remedying defects.


SOME GROUPS AND WHAT THEY
INDICATE.
A widely scattered group indicates unsteadiness
generally due to lack of determination or to some
habitual excess such as cigarette smoking.
A Mg3i group usually indicates a tendency to flinch
from the shock of discharge.
A group low right indicates that the trigger is
jerked by the wrist instead of being pressed by an
independent action of the finger, or that the sights are
inclined.
A group low left may show that the firer moves
his shoulder forward to meet the shock of discharge, or
that the sights are inclined.
The instructor should carefully note the positions of
good groups as well as bad ones, for some constant
error in aiming or fault of the rifle may thus be dis-
covered, which will escape notice in application practice
when every shot is signalled and error is attributed to
wind or other cause for which allowance is easily made
in sighting.
ANALYSIS OF FAULTS.
A complete analysis of the faults of the firer and his
rifle should be made before leaving the range, and he
should be tested until it is found, whether the faults
are duo to his aiming, trigger pressing, eyesight, or to
lack of determination.


The analysis should be made in the following
manner:
1. If the rifle is suspected, it should be at onee fired
under similar conditions by a reliable marksman. Should
the marksman also make a bad group, the rifle should
be tested and if found “inaccurate" the cadet to whom
the rifle belongs should be allowed to recommence the
course.
2. If the rifle is proved accurate the cadet’s aim
should be tested by the triangular method.
3. Next test his let-off by means of the aim corrector,
causing him to aim and press the trigger at some good
aiming mark.
4. His eyesight may be tested by causing him to read
printed matter held at a reasonable distance.
5. The most serious fault usually found in this test
is lack of determination (no control of nerves) result-
ing in flinching and gun shyness. This is caused by
some habitual excess, such as excessive cigarette smoking,
and is the most difficult fault to overcome. Muscle
exercises are very useful to increase determination, and
rope-climbing and gymnastics are recommended.
APPLICATION PRACTICES.
When a cadet is shown by the result of his grouping
to have acquired sufficient skill in aiming and trigger
pressing, he will be instructed in applying his shots to
a definite mark. This form of practice, in which aim
or sighting is altered as may be found necessary, is
called ‘ ‘ Application. ’ ’


Instruction is given in making allowance for atmo-
spheric influences, chiefly cross winds; but it is not
desirable that trifling changes of wind should be met
by minute adjustment of the windgauge. The instructor
should call upon the cadet to estimate the wind before
firing, and tell him the correct allowance which he is
to place on his sights. Subsequent alteration should
be unnecessary. Similarly, small errors in elevation
should be met by aiming up and down, and not by fine
adjustment, though the target must always be kept,
in view.
Grouping standards are in some cases attached to
application practices in order to emphasize the import-
ance of care and consistency in shooting.
SPECIAL INSTRUCTIONS.
It is intended that the standards fixed for qualifying
practices shall ensure the allotment of extra ammunition
to inferior shots.
Instruction on the firing point is an indispensable form
of musketry instruction for young cadets, but if it leads
to continual alterations of sighting to meet errors in
shooting, the flrer is confirmed in his errors and his faults
are only obscured. During the firing the instructor
should watch the cadet, not the target, and should in-
sist on being told the probable result of the shot before
it is signalled.
No departure from correct firing positions should on
any account be permitted; the rifle must be gripped,
face kept back from the right hand and there should
be no constraint.


The management of the breathing and the let-off
must be noticed and the cadet reminded of them con-
tinually, so that his mind may be centred on the more
important details of shooting and not on changes of
wind or light, with which he will become familiar later.
Although care and deliberation are necessary in
elementary firing instruction cadets must not be allowed
to fall into the habit of dwelling on their aim nor of
aiming and returning to the loading position repeatedly
before. pressing the trigger. These errors arise chiefly
from taking a fine sight and accommodating the eye so
as to obtain a defined image of the foresight rather than
the target. When such methods are adopted it is a sign
that the object of range practices is misunderstood, and
that the flrer is in need of more practical instruction.
W. C. Fenfold 4" Co,, Printers, 183 Pitt Street, Sydney.




Angus (Si Robertson's
AUSTRALIAN LANDSCAPE TARGETS
Consist of five specially designed Australian
Landscapes in panels, each measuring 60
inches and 36 inches, reproduced in natural
colours.
No. 1. An ordinary Australian Landscape, show-
ing a number of well-defined features, suit-
able for elementary instruction.
No. 2. A continuation of the above, but with
the country becoming more open, and fewer
description points.
No. 3. A typical Australian Landscape showing
a piece of flat country, with very few des-
cription points.
No. 4. An Australian coastal landscape showing
o ordinary coastal features.
No. 5. A continuation of the above, showing
coastal features, railway, etc.
The first three targets form one panel and represent
one continuous piece of country. The advantage of
this is that they can be placed together for the
instruction of a large squad in Collective Firing,
demonstrating the concentration and distribution of
fire, etc.
The price of the Targets is—
Unmounted, 3s. 6d. each, or 17s. 6d. per set of five
(postage Is. Bd.).
Mounted on canvas, 7s. each, or 355. per set
(postage 2s. Bd.).
ANGUS & ROBERTSON Ltd.
MILITARY PUBLISHERS
89-95 Castlereagh Street, Sydney


AUSTRALIAN MILITARY BOOKS.
LIGHT HORSE POCKET BOOK.
A Concise Guide to Regulations, Equitation,
Field Training, Camp Duties, etc. With Duty
Roster, Nominal and Attendance Rolls. By
Lieut, D. C. Howell-Prlce. 1/6; postage. Id,
ALPHA]
JET''MADE
\
SEMAPHORE
EASY.
An easy Method of Learning how th Sema-
phore In a few hours bwineans of a pack of 30
cards, showing Senderte position “ Front view.”
od.; postage, Id. / '
A TACTICAL EXERCISE.
A descrlptlon/of RideV-By Col.
Foster. 78 pages, 6 dldgrams-Vrsmaps, and a
large map o y thekcene of operations. 2/-
postage, id./ \/
SCOUT!
Or PMt
adapted fq
idapted fqrXhd
raluCh TlLjfciW.
lostage,
lOLDIERS’
BOOK.
Incl udes-JBh
nee, Groupiiig PnaCti
lumber <f\lagram\li
nd
Ann
cal Reconnaissance,
Jleld Tramlng of Aus-
Jor Dove. 6d.;
SMALL
tance, Pniitl
_ • fa6ep „
ores /nd Standard
ictfeeEKln Tables
3d. 'Ad.
otlng. Judging Dls-
!s, etc,, with a large
or keeping a record of
d Standard Test
A and B, Compiled by
RIFLfe EXERCISES & MUSKETRY
INSTRUCTION FOR CADETS,
as Care of Arms, Rifle Exercises, Aim-
ing Instruction, Firing Instruction, Muscle
Includ
Exercises, Tests of Elementary Training, etc.
With Sketch* of Rifle showing all parts. 2nd
edition, revised and enlarged. 6d.; postage, Id
ANGUS & ROBERTSON LTD.,
Military Publishers, 89 Castlereagh St., Sydney
