

RIMU
AND
RATA
T. E. L. ROBERTS.


INDEX
Rimu and Rata by Lake Kanieri ... ... 3
New Zealand ... ... ... ... 3
The Hunters ... ... ••• ••• 6
Old New Zealand ... ... 7
The Witchery of the Wild Ways ... ... 9
A Letter ... ... 12
Brighton Waves ... ... ... ••• 14
The Gold and the Green ... ... ••• 15
Christmas Day ... ... ... ... 17
The Song of the Millions ... ... ••• 18
On the Cliffs ... ... ... ... 19
Trickling Water ... ... ... ... 20
Willows and Water ... ... ... ... 21
Reveries ... ... ... ... ... 22
Seaside and Sunset ... ... ... ... 23
The Grey Duck on the Avon ... ... ... 25
The Ebb and Flow ... ... ... 26
Music in the Branches ... ... ... 27
Korea ... ... ••• ••• ••• 29
Sea Spray ... ... ••• 31
Only a Girl ... ... ... ••• 33
Music ... ... ... ... ... 34
Memories ... ... ... ... 36
Daybreak ... ... ••• ••• 37
A Reverie ... ... ••• ... 38
On the Haldons ... ... ••• 40
A Blatent Athiest ... ... 42
Sixty Years Ago ... ... ••• ... 43
Greta ••• ••• 44
The Wairau ... ... ... 47
Autumn in London ... ... ... ... 50
Greta Peak ... ... ... ... 51
On the Hillside ... ... ... ... 52
Moel Llys ... ... ... ... 54
A Ride to Cape Campbell ... ... ... 56
“Thy Kingdom Come” ... ... ... 58
The Sands of Time ... ... ... ... 61
A Sailor's Tale ... ... ... ... 64
And the Great Good News Came Through ... ... 66
The Stalkers ... ... ... ... 68
Bush Yarns ... ... ... ... 70


N submitting this little booklet
to the judgments of the general
reader, I am fully conscious
of my limitations as a singer of sweet
song.
I have written for no other purpose
than the pleasure of a passing mood,
for in the writing alone was my re-
ward.
1 am prevailed upon to bring them
into the light of day, and, in yielding.
should it so happen that here and
there I have struck a note that finds
an echo in the heart of some chance
reader, then a double reward will be
mine.
T. E. L. ROBERTS.


Rimu and Rata by Lake Kanieri.
AWAY in the west, where no sounds are heard
Save the songs of the bush-birds singing ;
Where the breath still breathes that conception
stirred
Far off in the great beginning.
Where a mirror lies that the wond'rous grace
Of the myriad forms of that wond’rous place
May find reflex, and in silver trace
Their charms with a restful clinging.
There came young Rimu, a forest maid,
Of a beauteous form and slender ;
A dreamy girl, as her tresses strayed
To the breeze with a gleaming splendour—
As witchery weaves it of threads of gold,
And over her girlish shoulders rolled.
In the shimmering light that frees to fold,
And a delicate charm to lend her.
Young Rata met her when summer suns
Near the zenith their rounds were keeping ;
And felt the quiver of blood that runs,
When lyove awakes from his sleeping.
Just one brief glance of her drooping eyes,
And he felt the flush to his temple;; rise,
So the earth, the sun and the seas and skies
Were lost at the joyous leaping.
Before he met her, he felt that he
Was as fair as the best about him.
And that his tribe of the bush would be
Much less to the world without him.
But now he trembled where once he stood
As bold as a prince of the forest should.
The meekest mortal in all the wood,
Best this sweet thing should doubt him.
And yet she never had said him nay,
When out from the woods he sought her ;
But gave him welcome and bade him stay,
When gifts of the bush he brought her.


He ventured early and lingered long,
And sang her often a wild-wood song,
Away where sweet sylvan songs belong.
By the side of Kanieri water.
But like the lovers that still draw near
To the shores of Love’s lake to wander,
He knew Love’s hopes and he knew Love’s fears
In that far-off distant yonder.
His words would come to his rembling lips,
And draughts would tempt him where sweetness sips,
To flit yet away to the mountain tips.
When he drew where his heart grew fonder.
Till once a storm of the wildest blew.
And the trees of the forest bended
Before the blast that in fury grew,
Till they thought that their days were ended ;
Brave Rata rushed to young Rimu’s aid,
Whose tender figure was tost and swayed,
And he wrapt her round in a mantle made
Bor his love that he now defended.
He thought no more of the raging blast,
For his Rimu and he together
Could brave the storm till the storm was past,
And wed in the warmer weather.
He wrapt her round with his folding arms,
And the storm was lost in the love that calms.
And they dreamed together the dream that charms.
Of the dream that goes on for ever.
And the bush was glad on their wedding day,
For the bell-bird’s notes were ringing;
Hoheria brought for the bride her spray ;
Manuka confetti was flinging.
And all proclaimed, by the lakeside there.
These two the fairest of all the fair
In all our forests, no matter where,
And the sun went down on their singing.


New Zealand.
TO the land that lies in the great south seas,
Where the widths of the wide world sweep,
I would strike a song from responsive keys
Till it swell in an anthem deep.
To the lone, long land that is far away
From the worlds where old his’tries cling,
I would lift my voice in at least one lay
That her praise might echoing ring.
To the land yet new, in a world grown old,
Where the dreams of our youth belong :
To the breaking dawn and the night has rolled,
I would fashion an anthem strong.
To our mountains lofty that press the skies ;
To our torrents that seethe and roar;
To our forests deep that in grandeur rise
With a beauty that breathes of awe ;
To the glaciers wearing our mountains down,
With a grind that is sure if slow,
To a song that no thunders dread may drown —
To the roll of the frozen snow ;
To the geysers weird as they belch their wrath
In those volumes of hissing steam —
Emissaries dark to the light sent forth
From the depths where such demons dream.
To the lakes that lie with their floods at rest,
In the wrap of a golden ray,
W ith the bush-clad hills in reflection prest,
I would offer my heart’s best lay.
To each beauty soft, to each beauty wild,
And a beauty enwraps the whole,
I would lift my voice like a wondering child.
Of a rapture that moves the soul.
’Tis the sun-kiss’d land that our fathers found
Like a babe of the sea asleep,
In the swaddling wrap of the ages wound,
And they gave her to us to keep.
And we took the gift as a groom his bride,
W hen the heart goes too with the hand,
With a joy in the trust and a will to guide,
And we love her, our native land.


And we hear the call of the futures far,
When the seas and the years have rolled,
And we see her lift, like a shining star,
Where the names of the great are told.
And I press my warmth on these words that come,
Dike a glow on the eastern skies
When the morning breaks, for I sing of home
That away in this south sea lies.
The Hunters.
V\ TJ'E have cast the office shackles,
Mf/ We have stored the pad and pen,
vv And we're moving for the mountains.
Fitted out as mountain men.
We are toasting to the sweetness
That the city never knows—
To the many perfumes wafted
By the breath from off the snows.
Did you ever breathe the freshness
Of those mountains far away,
Where the feathered folds are singing
In the bush the live-long day ?
And the mountain streams go rushing
Through their gorges ever down,
To their plaintive songs, with meaning
Strange to all the songs of town.
Did you ever pitch your canvas
In the shelter of the bush,
On the marges of some torrent
Where wild torrents roar and rush ?
Did you ever take your billy
To the gurgling flood, and stand
Till you felt the very rhythm
That your tongue could not command ?
Did you ever hear the wekas
Calling through the failing light,
With a hundred far-off voices
Dike bush sentinels of night ?


Did you ever leave the camp-fire
At the first faint light of day—
Glancing backward see the smoke-wreaths
Curling through the trees away ?
Did you ever climb the mountain
With your rifle in your hand,
Itching for the stag or wild boar
If you did, you’ll understand
Why we long to cast the shackles
Of the city, and be free.
Turning outward to the mountains.
To the camp and billy tea —
To the tales around the camp-fire
With its crackling, ruddy glow ;
To the scent of burnt manuka
That the older campers know;
To the bunk of scrub and brushwood,
Where the soundest sleep is spread,
Where no midnight trams go clanging,
And no watchman’s weary tread.
To the mountains, and the hunger
That is breathed of mountain air ;
To the timid stag and frightened,
To the wild boar in his lair ;
To the freedom and the freshness
Building hope and strength anew,
We will toast us at the parting:
Till we meet again, Adieu.
Old New Zealand.
OBD New Zealand, Old New Zealand !
Would that I could sing a song
In the notes of sweetest music that I feel,
As I wander through the windings
Of the days that now belong
To shades that only mexn’ry can reveal —
To the tussocks, brown and waving,
On the hill and on the plain ;
To the flax and toi growing by the stream ;


And the weka in the places
That are sought for now in vain,
For the tussock brown has changed to grassy green.
I have seen the order changing,
For I helped to bring the change,
Through the busy years of manhood’s active might;
I have seen the new arranging
Out old Natuer’s wild arrange,
And I look across the changing scenes to-night.
New Zealand, Old New Zealand,
With thy roadless tracts and wild,
When the work of man had scarcely yet begun ;
And the boundless hills and valleys
Were the playground of the child ;
Oh, the boundless hills and valleys where we’ve run.
I have helped the new, and helping
Do not quite forget the old,
Nor the free, unfettered impulses that beat
In those sturdy hearts of freedom,
Where no social favours told ;
But where every heart of honour was complete.
There was something strong and reckless
In the hearts that braved the ills
Of old colonial life; and looking back
There was more of sturdy manhood,
Dess of sickly form that kills
When each street was only marked by beaten track.
New Zealand, Old New Zealand,
Brave indeed were those who faced
The thousand ills of life as then it ran —
The thousand ills that lurked within
The boundless tracts untraced —
Untraced since wildest Nature first began.
Oft nightfall found the weary
With no place to rest his head,
But on the lap of Nature, with the sky
Out-spreading o’er his slumbers,
And the inner man unfed ;
His lullaby the weka’s lonely cry.


Brave heroes of the old time.
Pausing not to dare and do ;
The watchword unexpressed of each and all,
“ To find a task, and do it
Of the manly strength they knew,”
Still stout of heart whatever might befall.
I love those old-time heroes,
living still within the pale
Of life that yet affords tlnm pleasure sweet ;
I breathe a sigh in silence
Over those within the veil.
Beyond the line of labours here complete.
New Zealand, Old New Zealand;
Would that I could sing the song
That trembles yet in many a heart unsung,
Of old colonial longings
Throbbing in those hearts so strong—
The wild notes of their early hopes begun.
But music fails me, falling,
Far from all that needs must be :
My words can only make the music less;
The song were more of silence,
Bike some deep-felt sympathy,
That springs too deep for words to quite confess.
The Witchery of the Wild Ways.
YEARS ago—Do I remember ?
Ah, I hear the distant calling,
As the echoes of the wild wood,
When the early morn was falling
On a world but half awakened
From its slumbers, by the ringing
Of the bell-bird’s note that startled
All the feathered fold to singing.
I remember ! I remember !
Could I live, and once forget it ?
All that I have learned to feel and love,
And in my loving let it
Be more than all, and many more
Than all man made for me.


I can srent the very essence
Of the bush night as I knew it,
In our tent life, when a picture fell
As only nature drew it—
On the canvas, in the stillness,
And we watched the shaping changing.
To the movement of a gentle breeze,
Or Luna’s rearranging,
As we rested on a bed of boughs
That gave refreshing slumber ,
At the closing of an active day —
When days were active numbers —
When men were measured by their worth,
And fashion left them free.
Yes, I knew the flowers that flourished
As I knew the birds that flitted,
Knew the many nests that nestled
Where the long lianas knitted —
In a network to the tall lops,l *
Where the white clematis clinging,
Spread their beauty for the bush bees
As they gathered for the bringing.
And I knew the tempting flavour
Of the sweets that took some taking
From the active little wizards
That had borne the pain of making,
And whose presence was impressive
When they faced us as a foe.
And I knew the gentle rippling
Of the streamlet, softly purling
Down among the mossy marges.
Underneath the fern-fronds curling ;
Where the mountain duck, secluded,
Whistled where the ways were wildest —
Though in truth her nature made her
Of the milder forms the mildest.
Where the weka felt her kingdom
Measured out and undisputed,
Saving by her kind, and only
If she cross the line computed ;
For the wekas mark their landlines
As the wekas only know,


In these wild ways we have wandered
When the wealth of youth was on us,
Not the wealth of years of labour
With its weariness upon us ;
But a wealth that is of laughter,
That is glad for very gladness ;
For the wilder ways of nature
Hold for youth but little sadness.
In those wilder ways we revelled ;
We were born to love the wild-wood ;
So we turn again, and hearken
To the songs we learned in childhood —
To the song of gladsome Nature
That the bush boys early know.
And we hunted in those wild-ways
When the strength of youth was strongest ;
In the early hours of dawning
When the days had passed their longest
When the wild boar would be roaming,
For he moves at early dawning ;
But he rarely leaves his cover
When the day is past the morning.
This we knew, and so we sought him
With a zeal of youth for danger—
That gives double charm to sport,
And were it not so, it were stranger ;
For the heart of youth is idle
If it beat in time too slow.
When the bush king champed and snorted.
How we gripped our guns and waited,
With the breathlessness of knowledge
Hinging on a shot belated;
For the wild boar gives no quarter,
And no time for second thinking.
It is once and all and over
In just half the time of winking,
So your shot must find a billet,
Or your limbs receive a shaking.
When you’re both intent on giving,
He who fails must do the taking ;
And the fury of a wild boar
Is not just a pleasant dream.


Yes, my heart has often fluttered
As some monster toppled over j
To a hasty shot that found him
As he rushed me from his cover.
And his dying groans were eerie,
From the great fangs close beside me,
As I counted on the changes
Had my better aim belied me.
But we somehow took those chances ;
In th£ wild-ways we were wanted.
That was where our faith was fashioned ;
That was where our hopes were planted,
In the fullest flush of freedom
Of the wildwood and the stream.
That was long ago ;
The changes have been multiplied and many.
While our comrades come no longer,
And we scarcely hear of any-
Of the school who loved and laboured,
When we lived to love and labour ;
When each man to man was needful—
When each neighbour was a neighbour
In the sense the present knows not,
And there comes the distant longing—
For the bush bees and the song-birds.
And the youthful fancies thronging,
With their witchery that won us
To the wild-ways long ago.
A Letter.
A BETTER, old chum, and the years are ten
Since you guided a pen for me.
I’ve wandered afar o’er the world since then,
By the land and the great wide sea;
While facing it ever where last we met.
You’ve battled and braved it, and brave it yet,
Through sun and through shade, with a purpose set,
Exceeding years three times three.
And your words re-echo those days of old,
As they muster the forms we knew,
In the shapes that live of the loves we hold
From those days when those fond loves grew.


Sweet voices greet us, and beckon us back,
Till haloes are cast round the old worn track,
Through fields ’neath the skies where no clouds loomed
black,
And the skies of those days were blue.
There’s never a smile that you don’t recall.
Not a tale that you don’t retell;
And the very beat of old footsteps fall
With a sound I remember well.
Old man, you recall me all these that were
When our hearts were younger and stout to bear
The brunt of the battle we lived to share
'Ere my feet on the wide ways fell.
Our arms were stout, if our judgments erred,
And but little we minded then ;
A miss at the most was a joy deferred,
So we laughed, and we tried again.
We learned the lessons that all must learnf;
We feasted and fasted at times in turn.
Nor fretting nor fainting while we might earn
A place in the ranks of men.
You tested your chance where the odds were great
In the ways with a winding new ;
Then laboured early and laboured late
Till the fruits of your labours grew.
You sought no place in the lights that glare;
Just worked, and trusted to win your share
Of the wealth that waits for the souls that dare,
And the winners need not be few.
I think of it all, and the lips that pressed
To my own at that last good-bye,
When the light in those lingering eyes confessed
That a heart to my own drew nigh.
But the years have stretched, and the seas have rolled,
And the grey has followed the burnished gold,
Through a thousand Sittings four times retold
On that far-off western sky.
And graves have settled o’er loved ones lost;
Some dear to us twain were laid
In the boat of that stream that must be crossed,
With Charon to guide and aid.


Will our spirits fail when the great call comes ?
When senses deaden, and death benumbs.
And answers total to life’s long sums,
With the good and the ill portrayed.
I’ve never a fear of the night shades deep,
For the day and the night are one ;
And we’ll waken again beyond that sleep
To further our work begun.
We’ll weave our web till it’s woven arightj;
Till its lustre catches the purer light
Of ethereal shading beyond the night
Where the shades of our worth are won.
Brighton Waves.
WITH never a rock here to dash on :
With never a cliff here to crash on
With echoing roar.
They roll on their even way spreading
Long lengths of white lines for the shedding
Of foam, where fair forms lightly treading
Gaze out from the shore.
There’s rest where the sea waves are calling
Their lullabies, rising and falling
In all their bright glee ;
And health in the breath wafted shoreward—
Soft zephyrs from eastward by nor’ward,
That push those white lines ever forward
From out the great sea.
They make mellow music to measure
The moods of the throngs that find leisure
To seek these soft sands
Year in and year out without ceasing,
Who come with their numbers increasing,
To rest and to know the releasing
Of custom’s tight bands.
I love those blue waves in their brightness,
That comb and then curl for their whiteness
To eddie away,
In a wealth of rich foam that comes sweeping


With swish and with swirl and with leaping,
To pause on the sands that are keeping
The bounds of their play.
How gladly we come to them, bringing
An ear for the songs of their singing
Again and again.
Sweet songs rising softly, and sending
Love's messages clear without ending,
Till sea songs with shore songs are blending
In one happy strain.
Love breathes through those sea songs that nourish
Sweet dreams where the sweetest dreams flourish,
And fancies grow fond ;
For the surge of the surf rising splendid
Makes language where language is ended
Of words, and of sympathy blended,
We feel and respond.
The Gold and the Green.
THE green and the gold are blending :
The gold and the green.
On the tall cliffs steeply ascending
The marge of the stream ;
And the green and the gold are shaded
From the firm and the fast to the faded,
Till the green is of gold, I’m persuaded,
And gold is of green.
But the gold and the green are parted
As green and as gold ;
And the shades where their shading started
Would seem to withhold
The links linking up and depicting
A line where there is no conflicting
Of shade, and no shade contradicting
That green is of gold.
The sea with its song soft to sadness
Breaks sweet on the ear ;
And a calm hath crept over the madness
Short since sweeping here ;


And the force of the tempest hath drifted ;
And the surge of the surf songs hath sifted
The sighs now so softened and lifted
To lull on the ear.
The surge of the surf, as it follows
The soft and the calm;
In its fury the stoutest might swallows—
The strongest unarm ;
Yet the calm and the smooth and the surging.
In their long lengths at last are converging :
Like the green and the gold they are merging.
Till all is made calm.
The light and the dark are divided
By depths of degree.
Yet each is of each, I’m decided.
By binding decree.
And all is complete to completeness ;
The slow and the fleet in their fleetness :
And the bitter and sweet to full sweetness
In sweet harmony.
But gold is not green, nay, and neither
Is darkness called light;
But gold is of green, follow either
And soon they unite.
As this end and that end are linking
Their lengths, be they stretching or shrinking,
It takes little effort of thinking
To link day and night.
And great is the beauty for ever
That spreads over all,
Wi h no jarring note, nay, and never
One link letting fall.
’Tis the hope of all shades to be shaded—
From the firm and the fast to the faded.
In one colour at last, I’m persuaded.
One colour takes all.


Christmas Day.
SO once again comes round the day.
That gives the year a rarer ray,
One better than the rest.
It was and is and still must be
To millions as it is to me
The brightest and the best.
The day of days of all the year.
And forty cycles re-appear ;
In forty shapes they grow*;
As knew the boy, the youth, the man,
As each the forty Yule-tides ran
From out the long ago.
I tingle yet with joys that knew
The break from school as Yule-tide drew
Our circle home again.
When homely taste bedecked the walls
With boughs of green, and love recalls
The merry festive strain.
When youth and beauty shyly met,
First tasting joys which none forget,
How sweet again the day ;
With mistletoe and merriment
Of every form that custom lent
To make the season gay.
And when we’ve dreamed youth’s sweetest dream,
And bathed in love’s entrancing stream,
Till summer’s suns decline,
A halo paints the slanting ray
And gives us still a Christmas Day
To make the year divine.
So may it be to you and yours,
A cup of joy that yearly pours
A draught of heaven on earth.
A draught to give the heart a glow
Of love, that will at least bestow
Full meaning of THE BIRTH.


The Song of the Millions.
FROM a thousand harps of a thousand strings
I would strike me a song that the wide world sings
In its heart till the wide world wondered.
I would catch my notes from the millions’ lips.
From guns untold, from a thousand ships.
From the valleys deep, from the mountain tips,
Where the awful notes are thundered.
No song of the idler lulled to sleep
Is the song I’d sing, but a song too deep
For the day of our dreamy slumbers :
A song of those warriors locked in strife,
Where the roar and rattle of hell is rife.
And death is mingled with glorious life,
And the balance with death in numbers.
F.om the music of millions take my song :
From the music of millions right and wrong,
And the right with the wrong is ringing.
A tempest of fire and those legions go,
Surging as only those legions know —
Waxing and waning in wonder and woe,
To a climax of awful singing.
A climax of song that no ages knew.
With whistling metal a ghastly dew,
To a roar that would silence thunder ;
As though the demons of strife had hurled
The nethermost arts of the nethermost world
With a withering blast, till the millions curled
kike dead leaves scattered asunder.
And yet with a grandeur wildly grand,
Which only those millions can understand
Who live in that awful dinning—
Who hold their lives as the veriest breath
On the trembling balance of life and death.
Where no vanity is—as the preacher saith,
And no thought, save the thought of winning.
And such are the notes of our great sad song.
Where the rhythm of realty must belong,
Till the right from the wrong is wrested.
Then rend the strings with a glorious praise
For the millions lost in that withering maze—
For the lives laid low on the scale that weighs
The truth where the truth is tested.


On the Cliffs.
THE dreamy swell of a sleepy sea
Breaks under me down below.
And tall grey cliffs that rise to be
A line of limit are under me,
And over a fringe of snow —
A fringe that borders a wealth of blue.
And breaks to a dull dark sand,
That stretches away to the southward view,
As far as the eye can reach, and to
One point on the nor’ward hand.
The scent of the native heath is spread
To sweeten the summer’s air ;
And lays of the song-birds overhead,
That flit and pass, by the sunbeams led,
Are joys that I duly share.
A world of music, of gladness sung;
The bush bees gather and go
Erom flower to flower with busying hum,
That spreads in all to a song as one,
And a sea-song down below.
Alone on my spreading of scented heath,
To listen and dream, or He
And watch the waters that roll beneath,
To vent their strength on the rocks and wreath
Them round with a murmuring sigh—
Or flit me away to the backward years.
When pleasure was less than pain,
And futures fashioned to faithless fears,
And hope was drowned in a mist of tears
For dreams that were dreamt in vain.
I lay me here in the years that were
When the seas and the skies were grey,
And the cliffs were bleak and the rocks were bare,
And never a spot was bright or fair.
And the sun shot never a ray.
The song-bird twitted in vain for me—
The scent of the heather passed


Unnoticed then, and the rolling sea •
Breathed only of dull monotony.
Or gloom of a sadness cast.
But roll, ye billows, with fleecy foam,
And scatter your sparkling spray,
For the sun shines bright and the clouds have flown,
And the joy of a whole glad world’s my own
In the gold that follows the grey.
Trickling Water.
THE stream is trickling past my feet,
Is passing on for ever,
With merry lays of turns that treat
Of motion’s music, lively, sweet;
A broken sermon all complete
When pieced and pieced together.
I hear the lisping language rise
Of God, the Great Creator.
I strain my ears, half close my eyes,
And set my wits to analyse
Each word the waters weave so wise
Of Wisdom’s Great Dictator.
A whirl of motion onward on
That sings of no returning;
I catch the language of the song
That lingers not on notes too long.
Nor breaks too soon on futures drawn
Of fretful cold concerning.
Sweet notes for passing moments sung
Is what the water teaches,
And not for futures vainly strung
Of mystic sound from fancy wrung,
But just the present time begun
Along the living reaches.
The power that gives the music to
The water, weaves no evil,
But gives to every day its due —


To every four its two and two.
Nor keeps one human soul in view
To end it with the devil.
The days of doubt are passing by,
And hope is waxing stronger ;
And fairer fields around us lie,
And Heaven is spread beneath the sky
Where love responds with quick reply,
And hate is known no longer.
The Tui sings above my head
In leafy bowers that cover ;
The Fantail flits him lightly led
Where sunbeams to the shades are wed,
His joy complete, his heart is fed
Of love that knows no other.
Green ferns in rich profusion cling
On mossy marges nearing ;
Sweet Clematis their whiteness string ;
Convolvulus are, too, to bring
Their climbing glory that they fling
O’er rugged tree-tops rearing.
The breezes rustle here and there
To sport the leaves at leisure,
Till all the leaves their notes repair
In euphony-Aeolus’ share
Of sylvan song, and all declare
The breath is Cove's own measure.
Willows and Water.
THE sunlight sparkles brightly
On the eddies rippling lightly.
Before a gentle breeze that skims the pond ;
The dragon-fly is steering
To and fro with glad careering,
Or finding rest upon the boughs beyond—
The boughs that fall and tremble
O’er the waters, to assemble
Their slender leafy trailers in a fold,


That sweeps, and swells, and misses,
With coquettish glee, then kisses
Their mirrowed forms beneath and then withhold.
The willows o’er the waters
Half suggest of Naiad daughters,
And falling folds of light locks loosely strewn ;
The breezes toss those tresses
Tightly with their soft caresses,
And bathe them in the meadows’ sweet perfume.
A scene of peace and leisure,
lived of calm, unbroken measure.
That soothes the restless, throbbing heart of man —
The heart that frets in fetters
Of the grim, hard binding letters,
That stultifies so oft the wider plan.
Oh, Nature, calm and peaceful.
Where man’s eager strivings cease, full
Shorn of every dream of discontent ;
I see me here about me.
Peace that knows no strife without me,
And feel that man’s the only discord lent.
Reveries.
ASTAVB of old song, or the wave of a willow,
Or cluster of roses on lattice or wall,
And down —so to speak—goes my head on the pillow
Of soft recollections that call and recall.
A sprig or a spray will retell me a story
I learned in the morning, when life’s early dew
Sweet scented the flowers of my soul, and a glory
Was wrapt in the flowerets that gathered and grew.
I gathered some buds by the wayside, and cherished
Their sweetness that gave to me floods of perfume.
That stay with me still though the flower form has perished,
And now it is sweeter, perhaps, than the bloom.
I strung them in garlands, those flowers, for the keeping,
Instructed by fingers more tender than mine,


That reach to me still through the years that are creeping,
To teach and reteach me to twine and entwine.
And do the blue eyes, through the tear-drops that glisten,
Still turn and return to the eyes that were brown ;
And ears for the sounds of the long ago listen,
To catch the fond words that come echoing down—
Across the wide gulf, till the silence is broken
By lips that speak only across the long years ;
Yet pulses beat fast to the phrases respoken.
And eyes again glisten through love’s dewy tears.
How sweet is the thrill that comes down through the distance,
To bear us away as on wings of the dove,
To live and re-live with a sweetened insistence
The moments that gather us nearer to love.
Seaside and Sunset.
A SOFT glow lifts on an opal swell
That rides on a heaving sea.
The Sun God gathers his rays that fell
All day on its prancing glee ;
He gathers his rays in a parting light
Of deep rich gold on the verge of night,
And hurries away on his westward flight,
And leaves but the night to me.
The moan of the sea in the twilight falls
On a listening lingering ear ;
And the sigh of the surging surf recalls
A dream of the fading year.
The night and the surf and the sea song brings
Each hurrying part of the past that clings
To those rolling waves, and their wildness sings
A song to a glistening tear.
Away o’er the breast of the heaving sea,
Through the twilight hurrying fast,
I flit from my stand on the verging lea—
Away to the season past—


Away to those streaming shores afar,
Where the sands and the surf and the tall cliffs are.
And a lingering form by the whitening bar,
As the night-shades overcast.
I see in the distance a sweet, fair child,
And one to her trusting true,
Away on the shadowy sea-shore wild,
By the verge of the restless blue.
No darkness shadows the shores for them.
And the stretch of the sea had a grandeur then,
That gathered and broke with a glad rush when
Their hearts with a gladness grew.
For white arms clung to a neck low bent
To a first long, sweet embrace.
And soft lips met of a love long pent —
A tear on an upturned face.
A sigh and a sob, and one long, long kiss
That thrilled their hearts with a deep-drawn bliss,
That counted all in the world with this,
As nought in its boundless grace.
The twilight gathers ; the sea rolls on
That stretches so far between
The past and present; the moaning song
Breaks in on my seaside dream.
The Night Queen scatters her silvery folds
With gentle spread over seas and wolds,
To lend a grandeur to all that holds
Me bound by the white surf’s stream.
I love the surge of the seas that tide
To follow their chaste Night Queen.
I love the silvery lights that guide
The wild waves hastening stream.
I love the present that binds a past
And weaves a future where hopes are cast.
I love the dreams of the loves that last
When the dead leaves follow the green.


The Grey Duck on the Avon.
FROM the city streets, where the crowds are thronging
With a 'ceaseless rush and an endless flow,
I have turned my steps to those shades belonging
To the river’s bank where the weepers grow—
To that greensward stretched with a cool inviting,
There to rest and dream from the summer’s sun ;
And to look once more at the strange uniting
Of the grey duck out from the wild ways won.
For I knew her well in the far-off yonder—
In the waterholes of my boyhood’s days ;
Now she gives her trust, and my heart grows fonder
Than when she was shy in her great wild ways.
And she brings her brood that my hand may feed them,
With never a dream of the old-time dread ;
And the children pass, but she does not heed them,
But gathers the crumbs of the proffered bread.
Oh, you gentle bird, though you doubted ever
Away in the past, yet my hand was stayed ;
And the guns that sought for your life would never
Have fired a shot, were my prayers obeyed.
And I loved good sport, but I loved you better,
As I saw you pass from the haunts I knew ;
And I thought at least that one hand might deter
The lot that fell to the Mountain Blue.
She has gone, and now you could scarcely find her
Through all the ways where she whistled then—
It was ruthless sport, that to death consigned her.
Till she’s known no more in the ways of men.
Is there never a power in the world to stay them,
Those fiends that kill till there’s nothing left ?
Will a sense of wrong in the end betray them ?
Or of sense of wrong are they quite bereft ?
And you to the stream of the town were driven,
In search of a place where no gun is raised ;
And a charm of the wilds to the city’s given
That none may touch, and may God be praised !
I could lie and watch till the sun were setting,
Your sweet young brood on the waters’ breast;
In the charm of the stream and your joy forgetting
That part of life that is not the best.


The Ebb and Flow.
AMONG the woods and fields and flowers
I’ve taught my steps to stray,
Through changing moods of passing hours
To know them day by day —
Through summer’s suns and winter showers —
To labour and to play.
I’ve seen the dark grow into light
When morn of night is made ;
I’ve seen the day pass into night—
The light into the shade ;
And so I found the dark and bright
Were of each other weighed.
I've lived to laugh, I've lived to cry
When happiness was done;
The quickening beat, the long-drawn sigh
To measure one by one.
As every day went passing by
Till fifty years are gone.
I’ve found my joy was of my grief,
My grief was of my joy.
Alternating in sweet relief
In Nature’s fixed employ.
And though the moods be long or brief,
No time nor tides destroy.
The seas roll out along the shore,
To pause and then subside,
Responsive to the moving law
That gives to them a tide ;
And in myself I feel it more
Than in all else beside.
I rise and fall like to the seas —
To pleasure and to pain.
The moving force that moveth these
Is not for me in vain.
As I obey these fixed decrees
I feel in all my gain,


The breezes come, the breezes go,
Till every breath is still.
The trees before the blast bend low—
Swift driving as it will.
And gazing on it thus, I know
An end it doth fulfil.
I rise to do, since do I must.
And feel that I am strong ;
But, oh, the strength in which I trust
Soon drives me seeming wrong ;
And so my pride is in the dust,
And failures through me throng—
Till of my failures and my tears
I make this secret mine—
The rise, the fall, the hope, the fears
Is Nature’s wise design,
To give me still throughout the years
The thrill that is divine.
So failure is not now for me,
And yet again I fail;
The ebb is of the flow to be,
The flow that doth avail;
And of my failure now I see
'Tis thus I must prevail.
Were I not more than failure, I
Had not perceived my loss,
But reaching where my limits lie,
I scarcely touch across,
And in my heart is born a cry
As when the storm-waves toss.
Music in the Branches.
TO sweep of willow and water’s sigh,
The sands hrough the glass are sinking,
The moments flit them as bees that fly.
Laden or lost, and the great blue sky
Arches it over with bounds - hat lie
In the maze of infinity linking.


My thoughts are stringing them rhapsodies
To the beat of the branches swinging ;
Upward and backward as swells the breeze,
Rustling and sighing, these grand old trees.
With notes to rhythm sweet me’odies,
To the joy of the old world ringing.
Oh, rhymes in rhythm, oh, reams of rhyme.
That swell to the breezes drifting ;
Oh, songs that soften, oh, chords that chime.
Till music touches this heart of mine,
And notes are trembled to blend with thine,
Through the boughs and the soft leaves sifting.
The bees, the birds, and the boughs are blent
In a chorus of joyful singing ;
Their music is wafted of sweet content
Where the trailers are over the Waters bent ;
But no notes echo of spleen, nor vent
A strain with a dismal bringing.
Oh, songs that soften, oh, songs that ring
With the joy of these hearts delighted ;
Oh, hearts that swell of the mirth they bring.
Of their offerings glad on each fluttering wing,
Till all would seem of their love to sing,
Of their love that they feel requited.
The moments flit them as bees that fly,
And the bees to the flowers are flying—
The moments are laden or lost, and I
Am heir of the ages to smile or sigh,
When the hours are told, or to swell the cry
Of the untoward bitterly crying.
No fates are fashioned in fast decree
Through the hours of the Great Eternal;
Our strength has limits, our deeds may be
Of the better or worse to entirety,
And our joy or sorrow be known as we
Are concerned with our deeds diurnal.
The first or the last in our race may spell
No truth in the Eight regarded,
For he who suffered defeat and fell


To the heavier strain on his strength may well
Be counted a winner when all things tell.
When measured the steps retarded.
The bees, the birds, and the boughs and I
Are parts of the Great Plan, surely.
That measures its sweep in the bounds that he
To the infinite stretch of the deep blue sky—
That lures us and leaves us where depths defy,
And we rest in a faith securely.
Oh, hove unbounded, we sing our song
To the trust of a Mercy Gracious,
That suffers our failings, the right and wrong—
Our weak endeavour when hopes belong
To the plea of the penitent, stumbling long,
With our steps to the way that is spacious.
Korea.
OIvD companion of mine,
In a reverie lost.
In the years that decline,
To the tracts that we’ve crossed,
I go that I find you,
In song to remind you
Of joys that inclined you,
When friendships engrossed.
To the forms that we knew,
To the hands that we pressed.
Now scattered and few,
Where our fai hs were confessed;
But though some forget us.
And days where they met us,
Some few still regret us
With longings repressed.
To the cot ’neath the hills,
And the one by the way
Where the brook ripples still,
I would turn me to-day ;


Where the trees are we tended
In days that are ended,
When buoyancy blended
In Love’s laughing lay.
I hearken and hear me;
You come as you came ;
The old grey draws near me.
His shoes click the same ;
His footfalls with ringing
Come down to me, bringing
Some notes for my stringing
In Melody’s name.
We drive as we’ve driven
The roads we know well;
Some song to enliven.
Or some tale to tell.
The grey moves to measure
The miles at his leisure ;
His pace is our pleasure,
And no hastes compel.
The Taylor’s wild winding
Is left in the rear ;
The plain is reminding
Old Blenheim is near ;
And come the old faces
In these the old places,
As mem’ry retraces
The ways we hold dear.
The Club and the meetings
With chums whom we know ;
And hearty the greetings
Our comrades bestow;
Ere time had decided
New paths, and divided
That group that confided
With us long ago.
But, Peter, our ways are
Not shapened in pain,
Though slanting the rays are
Well down on the plain ;


The glow in the west way
That heralds the rest way.
That endeth the best way.
Glows warm in the main
Our deeds of the many
Fall short of the best;
With no plea for any.
Our faults are confessed ;
Just trusting and taking.
The meeds of our making.
And sleeping or waking,
With All lies the rest.
Though fates may divide us
Through years stretching long,
The memories that guide us
In friendship are strong —
And give the reminding
Of worn ways and winding,
A sweetness that’s binding;
And so visions throng.
Sea Spray.
1 WOULD gather some songs on the verges
Of time, with its ocean-like sweep—
From the waves of strong impulse that surges
Afar from the depths of the deep.
From the waves that come rushing and raging,
Thrust on by the winds of desire —
A tempest that mocks the dull gauging
That knows not the flash and the fire—
The fire of wild thunderbolts rending
Those systems where thunderbolts burst,
With a crash and a throb and an ending.
In dreams that are nourished and nursed—
When the winds and the waves have subsided.
To measure their limits no more;
Where the sea and the spray are divided.
And the mist is rolled up from the shore.


I would feel those fierce waves of emotion
Roll out as in dreams they remain ;
I Would ride those wild steeds of the ocean
In all their proud grandeur again.
Far out where the verges are sweeping,
Far out where the verges are lost
In a mist ’twixt the waking and sleeping—
In a mist from the billows that’s tost.
I would cull me again from those waters.
Would ride on each tempest in glee,
With those nymphs of the sea, with those daughters
Who rode in those ridings with me.
And so they come now to me, bringing
Their forms on the wings of the wind,
With a sweetness of sound they are singing
The songs that of sweetness they find.
I feel the glad thrill that is racing—
The impulse that’s bounding to break,
In the flight where I follow retracing—
In the realm where I make and remake.
And I sing me sweet songs to the measure
Of music that’s meted to me ;
And I make every heartbeat a treasure
As the numberless sands by the sea.
I toss me again those loose tresses —
Gaze into those orbs meeting mine.
To the thrill of Rove’s tender caresses—
To the joy of Rove’s deep draught of wine.
I pause for the moment, and tremble,
In ecstacy born unto fear,
While all those deep longings assemble
And all those wild hopes gather near.
As the waves of the ocean are tossing
Their sprays, so my forms come and go ;
With the fleetness of fancy they’re crossing
The gulf where the falling lights glow.
They come with their stores of old treasures,
In vessels long lost to the light;
O’er the bar that no time nor tide measures.
From the land of the beautiful night.


They speak the fond words that were spoken,
“ In music so soft and so low,”
Ere the links with the shoreland were broken.
In the language of long, long ago.
And back on the shore is repeated
Those echoes again and again;
So death in my dream is defeated,
And all his dull shading is vain.
Only a Girl.
ONLY a girl in her tender teens,
With a trusting light in her soft grey eyes ;
And I but a stranger, who only means
To tarry at most till the sunlight dies ;
Meeting by chance on a summer’s day.
There in that home by the old grey stream,
That measured a mood in its lonely lay.
To a world asleep in a summer’s dream.
Only a girl, and I met her there,
And she in her beauty turned to me ;
Only a girl, and her long brown hair
Scattered away on her shoulders free.
She turned to me with an impulse new.
And her wondering eyes looked into mine ;
Only a girl, but she closer drew,
Till she almost touched me without design.
Only a girl, but she guessed not why
There in her beauty she sweetly stood ;
Lingered awhile, and then passed me by
In the wondrous grace of her young girlhood.
A parting glance as the twilight falls.
And the day is lost in the closing shades ;
A silent ride, and the night recalls
Some memories sweet in those lonely glades.
Into the night and the years alone,
And into the fields that are far away.
Out where the great wide world is known.
Dreaming at times of those orbs of grey.
Out in the world where our deeds are done
In the strength of youth and our rising years ;
Out in the world, where our ways are won
Or lost to the plash of our salted tears.


Out of the years and the silence long—
And out from the great wide world again ;
Back to the swell of the river’s song
That measures a mood in its plaintive strain.
Out of the years, and we meet by chance,
Meet as we met on that day gone by.
When those soft grey eyes with a girlish glance
Had lingered on mine, though they guessed not why.
Out of the years, and no word has passed;
Out of the years, and no word is said ;
Only she comes in her beauty cast,
And her soul in those soft grey eyes is read.
Pressing my hand on her soft brown hair,
She lingers to treasure the fond caress.
And I know of her secret standing there,
Though never a word doth her lips confess.
Music.
THERE’S music in the laughing stream.
There’s music in the breeze,
There’s rhythm where the glinting beam
Of sunlight flicks, with dancing gleam,
Among the trembling leaves.
’Tis summer, and the days are long,
And all around is gay ;
For every moment flits to song—
A nature chorus, blrhe and strong —
A soul-reposing lay.
The lofty hills that press the blue
With stately grandeur rise ;
A hundred monarchs to my view.
And twice a hundred vassals, too,
Set out against the skies.
While fleecy clouds of summer showers
Trace shadows on the green;
And pearly drops that kiss the flowers.
With press of love at early hours,
On every side are seen.


My heart is glad in all I see,
And life were just a dream,
Could warring hordes give back to me
The peace that sets the love-songs free
Till love-songs were supreme.
But love and war go hand in hand;
And laughing at my woe ;
They bid me I must understand
That they are twins, and they command
The music I must know.
That I must up, and onward take
The step that is to time ;
To martial music, that will shake
My mouldy systems till they break
To heart-songs more sublime.
That I must waken from the spell
The lotus weaves on me ;
And feel the wilder surge that swells.
Where very death itself compels
The songs that are to be.
I love the peaceful songs that ring,
Where every charm is spread,
I love those soothing notes that spring
From hearts that only beat to sing,
With ne’er a note of dread.
But, oh! there’s music sweeter far,
To startle many a tear—
In those wild stirring notes that are
The rending chords of awful war
That tremble me to fear.


Memories.
LONG stretching miles between us spread.
Sweet sister, far away.
From scenes of our infancy led.
In distant parts to stray ;
And time wears ever on apace,
And makes me wont to turn,
The backward passages to trace,
In thoughtful, sweet concern.
The Spring is here again, and calls
The singing world to song ;
The vocal music gladsome falls,
And tempts me linger long.
I see one small dark songster poise
Himself against the sky,
And sing as though o’erflowing joys
He poured to God on high.
And yet another there and there
Lift up their joyous strain ;
Unsullied, sweet, spontaneous air—
Unstudied love refrain.
And Nature spins her web of green
In her great loom below,
And spreads it to the morning sheen,
That all abroad may know —
That Spring is here ; and yet, so far
Apart now you and I;
And dost thy mem’ry backward start,
Or dost my dreams belie ?
Dost thou not see the green boughs wave
Around the dear old home,
In all their old-time grandeur save,
That they are now alone ?
Or dost thou see the wattle spread
Its golden yellow spray,
So beautiful above, to wed
The first bright morning ray ?
Or dost thou hear the starling’s call
Or joyful mimicry ?
From out the wierd old gum-trees tall
That sounds so clear to me ?


I hear it all, and wander there
As we were wont to stray ;
Thou art a girl with flowing hair.
Free floating as it may;
Across the years thy laughter runs,
A rippling stream of joy ;
How sweet the echo as it comes
To me, as when a boy.
The shadows fall, the day is dope ;
The strains of music swell—
Familiar echoes one by one
Of all we loved so well
Are floated back, till time and tide
Are buried in the song ;
The gulf of years no more divide
The loves where we belong.
Daybreak.
OH, lights, now that break
From the dulness of night
A rich crimson streak
Far away to the right;
Oh, pride of the morning.
Oh, sweetness adorning ;
I look on thee, scorning
To pause in my flight.
The breath of the Spring
Bears a fulness to life ;
The morning birds sing
Onward, on for the strife ;
I hear the sweet singing
That swells to me, bringing
The breath of beginning,
Beginning of life.
How sweet is the morn,
When the soul it has slept.
In some measure torn
By sad visions that crept.


To wake and beholding
This grandeur unfolding ;
Rude structures remoulding,
To dew-drops that wept.
Oh, fulness of pride !
Pride of strength for the day ;
On, on then to ride
Through this wonder away,
To pause not, or sigh for
The broken, but try for
The goal that is nigh for
My glad soul and gay.
A Reverie.
OSCARGIIyIy, an effort of language I make.
At fault, or in favour, 'tis done for thy sake ;
But words do not fall for
The metre I call for ;
Yet metre’s not all for
The measures I make.
The rhyme is at random, and random the themes
That come to my calling through fanciful dreams ;
In shapes that go flitting,
Unused, or just fitting
The point I am hitting—
The point as it seems.
And, Scargill, I venture this musing for thee ;
The choice may be ill, but my heart opens free ;
And each fond emotion,
Bike pulse of the ocean,
Rolls out in devotion—
Rolls out unto thee.
Away down the length of a long line of years
I gaze, and the dawning of childhood appears ;
The childhood that knew thee
As wild Nature drew thee,
And so I review thee.
And time disappears.


So time is forgotten, and deeds are undone ;
No fences mark fields now, for fields there are none ;
By roadways decided
No longer we’re guided ;
We go now as I did
Ere these things had come.
The wild boar is startled, not more so than we.
And runs from his cover ; he waits not to see
What order of being
Is this that he’s fleeing,
And we are decreeing
That we, too, shall flee.
In fields of our favour the flax-sticks are ouna,
And sweet is the nectar —the draught that is found.
Those fields are invaded,
And lips pollen shaded
Tell tales, quite unaided
By signal or sound.
The wild-flowers are gathered, and carefully strung
In shapes quite fantastic, the fingers are young.
The little red berry
hike miniature cherry
Is plucked, making merry
To childish songs sung.
The hilltops are mastered, no peak is too high ;
We feel in our triumph we are close to the sky,
And rocks are set racing,
What work there is placing
Our choice for the chasing,
And downward they fly.
At rest time, we’re tucked by a fond mother’s hand,
With a prayer on our lips, and a kiss of command
To love one and all, for
The love that we call for
Will certainly fall for
The loves that withstand.
Since then subdivisions and roadways have come ;
The steam rail, and fresh hearts in turn, one by one ;
And each heart that knows thee,


At length must disclose thee
In action, and shows thee
A wider worth won.
For like creatures like, and the fuller life flows
Back where great Nature her favour bestows —
Great is the greater mood,
Where every breath is food —
Food for the thoughts I would
Could I disclose.
On the Haldons.
IN the mellow autumn sunbeams,
’Neath a spotless azure sky,
Where the waters down the Haldons softly purl;
Here I wait, and hear the murmur
As the streamlet trickles by,
And watch the dead leaves round me gently whirl.
No one breaks the sleepy murmur :
Nature sings her song alone,
To a strain that man has neither made nor marred.
And the feathered pets above me
Pipe the lays which are their own,
From the Great Supreme, their one and only bard.
I feel the depths of grandeur
Of this calm and lonely scene,
That the ceaseless strife of man has not undone.
And I hail the feathered chirpers
In their leafy bowers of green :
And hear their songs as nature has them sung.
For their blithesome notes re-echo
With a gladness all unknown
To sorrow ; theirs a happiness complete ;
For in all I see around me
Peace and harmony are shown :
There is neither here deceiver nor deceit.
Truth, with all the calm that follows
Out the working of the true ;
There is food for thought, and time for resting here —


Aye, and join the song of concord
With a soul refreshed and new,
With Nature or with God without a fear.
So I pause, and rest, and linger.
And I while the hours away,
With the ever-trickling water at my feet;
In all the golden beauty
Of a bright New Zealand day,
That makes my every impulse here replete.
For I hearken not to dogmas—
To confusion born of creeds.
Nor the pettiness that stultifies the plan.
But I see in kindly Nature
All my longing nature needs,
And I live the great religion not of man.
For the very breath of beauty
That is breathing through the whole
Is the spirit of the lesson that I feel;
And it rings my trembling heart-strings,
As it filters through my soul,
And leaves no doubt at all that love is real.
'Tis of joy to everlasting—
Of a faith that knows no fear;
With sufficient for the day that dreads no night.
There is faith in every chorus,
Ringing all around me here :
Not a note in all that is not of delight.
But now the sunlight passes,
And the songs have almost ceased,
The dead leaves seem to slumber, since the breeze
Will sport with them no longer ;
And the stillness is increased
As falls the wrap of sweet Good Night on these.


A Blatant Atheist.
FOR the sake of heaven on earth, hold hard !
Have done as a dull deceiver;
If your soul is dead, then have some regard
For the faith of the firm believer.
You have not found what you have not sought;
You’ve sowed of nothing, and reaped of nought.
And your sickening spirit is sinking, caught
In the swirl of the sad receiver.
No God in life and no hope in death,
And no sense of that mystery awful —
That touches the heart, a mysterious breath,
With a law too deep for the lawful;
When strength is stricken, and child-like lies
In the lowliest dust, and feebly cries
hike a child, indeed, with tear wet-eyes,
In the law too deep for the lawful.
A metaphor fine, you say; but, no !
It’s the literal truth, and take it.
I’ve known men stronger than you laid low
In the dust, as the dust you make it;
And arms much stronger than yours to smite
In their muscular strength, unnerved and quite
Resigned to the Spirit that reigns, despite
Of your boast that you do forsake It.
You have not been as the least of these,
And your word is your own accusing.
You know no living save lust’s decrees.
With a will for the base abusing ;
And you would set you to judge the light
Of Eternal hove with corrupted sight,
Through a soul as black as the blackest night,
And a mind as fit for confusing.
Your laws of logic are lamely laid
To the listener lewd to loathing.
Your words are worth what they would be weighed
With the deeds of their dull disposing.
Ah, me! and the listener is left to leam
That his lusts and loathings must yet return
To the depths of the damned, and his heart would yearn
For one touch of Eove’s sweet composing.


Sixty Years Ago.
YOU sent me a letter ;
For want of a better,
A short rhyme at random I pen in reply ;
In mood reminiscent
Of days you and I spent
Along our Welsh coast, under hills that were high.
I ponder the pages
Your favour engages,
And go with you over the long, long ago,
When we were together,
Among the bright heather,
That coloured the hills with its rich purple glow.
With neddies provided,
What parties we guided,
For pleasure away where the bilberries grew ;
Far up from the village
On heights where no tillage
Was needed to nourish the flowers that we knew.
What joys of the riding ;
And, too, we went sliding
At times from the quarries far up on the hill;
You know how we did it
On rock slab, and slid it
With speed that was splendid, and sometimes a spill.
In fancy I wander
Again over yonder,
To picture the heather, the hills, and the sea—
The forms and the faces
In boyhood’s own places
That is but a mem’ry for you and for me.
We left Dad and Mother,
And Ted, our first brother,
Too, Jennie and Clara and Lizzie at home,
And sought for the starlands
Of youth, in these far lands,
With dreams of adventure and riches to come.
We each went our own way,
A long way, and lone way,
To meet but the once, for our ways drifted wide ;


Now, sixty years fleeting
Have passed since the meeting,
With scarcely a hope that we’ll meet on this side.
Our kin have gone down to
The sleep that comes round to
Us all; of the circle we’re only a few ;
Old Dad and Mum slumbered.
And with them are numbered
The rest, save myself, with poor Uizzie and you.
And so have we drifted
As sixty years sifted
The sands of our time since we last wandered there.
How gaily we parted,
High hopes and light-hearted,
Where all the world widened, we knew not a care.
I fain would go back on
The old beaten track on
The hillside that wound along close to the stream ;
But they would not meet me,
Not one would now greet me
Of all the fond faces I see in my dream.
R.M.R.
Greta.
I’M on a hillock of the hills that press the nether skies ;
I hear a shrieking hawk above, one farther off replies ;
i' I hear the bleat of browsing sheep, that call and call again ;
I hear a teamster’s hammer clang away down on the plain.
A little cloud of dust denotes that work is on the go.
To meet the needs of busy life, in fields way down below.
Small tussock fires are dotted here and there, and I can see
The floating smoke that scents the air—a well-known scent
to me.
I faintly smell the flowering flax beside the little creek,
Where tois weave their wealth into a long white downy streak.
A clump of trees, a patch of green, where ruling shade is brown,
Bespeaks the home of country life, that scarcely knows the town
A country store, a little church, and over there a school,
Where children come for miles around to learn the useful
rule;


They come on ponies, and they ride as though they rode from
death ;
With never fear of fit or fall, they breathe the fearless breath.
At close of school, they take the mail or parcel from the store,
And hurry on as they have done a thousand times or more.
With cows to bring, and wood to cut, and homework to be done,
The daily round of country life, as quick the years are spun.
They climb the hills, they roll the rocks, in nature’s baths they
swim,
Till bronzed and tanned and hardened up, they know the
strength of limb ;
That strength of limb that gives the stride that is not of the
street ;
They have not quite the city’s style—they are not quite so neat.
But they have got the easy swing, the quick discerning eye
That measures on the broader plan, where nature’s secrets lie.
They are the boys we know to-day ; they are the men to be,
To hold the reins of country life, in place of such as we.
It seems to me but days at most since I was such a boy,
Among these same old rugged hills my themes do now employ ;
But homesteads were not then as now—but one or two were
seen —
The land was all untouched by plough, and landlines scarce
had been.
We played along these running streams, we wandered at our
will,
My sisters and my brothers then, and here I wander still.
But I have wandered far since then, and seen the other side,
And things that are of older rule beyond the stretching tide.
But from it all I turn me back to climb these hills again,
To dream the hundred dreams that will go flitting through
the brain.
I love these hills, these grand old hills, it seems as though
they call
Me ever here to childhood’s joys, across the world and all.
The child looked up, and magnified these giants of the sky,
Saw heaven itself just up above the towering peaks and high ;
And little feet went climbing then, a long way up it seemed,
With David and Goliath mixed among the dreams he dreamed.


And here at times among the rocks a perfect stone was found,
He wondered if those David used to sling were quite as round.
And Samson was not overlooked that strong, strong man
of old ;
He had a cave wherein he slept, in which his strength was sold.
And Bluebeard, too, he had a place, a secret rocky den ;
A fearsome haunt, and very real to his young fancy then.
Around these hills such visions cling, no wonder that I feel
I want to climb them yet again, where all those fancies steal.
I’ve known the wilder ways of life—the outer paths that were
New shapened to the needs of men who came to build and
bear.
And I am glad, now seeming done, I’ve had the power to do,
With that I found beside my hand, and with it carried through.
I do not wish those days returned, nor would I once forget
The lessons learned along that way, that some are treading yet.
The fires of youth are burning down ; we’re moving with the
flow ;
And yet those days are dear to me, those days that came to go.
And when I see the backblock boys go riding as they do,
I wonder will they have the grit to see the long row through.
Their cheery laugh dispels the doubt, if doubt there need to be ;
There’s strength behind their sunny laugh that makes their
futures free.
Hats off, I say, to these, the boys in whom we put our trust;
To these our boys who’ll battle on through storm and heat
and dust.
Away from all the city lures, in silence out beyond ;
While these are true, our mouths are full, nor need we to
despond.
And I resign my active part to youth that opens strong.
To push the pen, or scan the page where newer thoughts be-
long ;
For I believe the wider fields should open for the young ;
I pack my lute, and snip the lock, and feel my song is sung.
And from the hills of this my theme I’ll quietly take me down,
With all the mem’ries that are mine, to nurse them in the town.
Mayhap, if music fitting stirs, I’ll weave another lay,
To bear a record down the years, as sign-post by the way.


The Wairau.
TO the valley of the Wairau
Came we in the long ago,
When the tangled wild woods flourished,
Just as Nature bade them grow.
When the Maori plied his paddle
O’er the waters where there stirred,
To the breezes sweetest perfumes
Of a world of flowers conferred.
When those wilder ways were ringing
With an endless nature song ;
And a thousand echoes clinging
To the bush the whole day long.
When the parakeet, the tui.
And the mako all were here ;
And a hundred more beside them,
Ringing out their bush-notes clear.
And I look, and long, and listen
For a sight or for a sound
Of but one of all those songsters.
Where now scarcely one is found.
Glancing back across a lifetime
Comes the Wairau that we knew
When we landed from the Old Ivand,
When we were at most a few.
In those laughing days of girlhood.
How we revelled in the change.
Finding as we did enchantment
In the strangeness of the strange.
Not to buzzing whirr of motors.
Nor to homesteads fixed in flowers
Came we, nor to ease and comfort;
Yet a happiness was ours.
Few our needs or wants, and simple ;
None had much, and all relied
On that brotherhood that gave us
Pleasure of the kind divide.


Bullock dray rides, evening parties ;
How we sang and trundled on
To some homestead in the distance.
Rides that were not then too long.
Love was not unlearned, and girlhood.
Like a bud that blushing hung,
Opened to the warmth that wrapt her
In the fervour of the young.
I recall my own sweet dreaming
As blue eyes would lift to mine—
To the story that he told me
Where bush flowers did clustering twine.
I remember, we were plucking
Blossoms from the wild-wood tree ;
Sweets of Eden somehow touched us,
And our joy had come to be.
Oh, those moments, dreams of heaven
Hold no richer draught than this —
Than the thrill that sealed our futures
In one long, long, lingering kiss.
Oh, the days that swiftly glided,
Of a happiness that shed
Rays of sunlight round our footways ;
In that lovelight we were wed.
Out beyond the Awatere,
In the wilds, we reared our cot;
On the marges of a streamlet
Winding past our chosen spot.
There we planted seeds and cuttings.
Dug about their tiny roots,
That in turn they might reward us
With their shelter and their fruits.
Shelter from the west winds rushing
Off Old Tapu, he who stands
With his royal mien that marks him
King of all our northern lands.


That was when the shy merino
Felt her freedom knew no bounds,
Saving as some boundary-keeper
Drew it in his daily rounds.
There we lived our life, and laboured ;
Reared our children, numbering nine ;
Sweet young lives that brought a gladness
Into his fond heart and mine.
And we worked w th ah our willing
As the years went quickly past.
Till it seemed the ease we sought for
Hovered near for us at last.
But, alas, what thin partition
Screens from mortals what may be ;
He was killed when all seemed brightest.
And that grief was laid on me.
Oh, those bitter hours of anguish ;
Oh, that pain that laid me low.
With the lonely, silent longing
That the heart bereft can know.
But I rallied, lest my children
Suffer, and I hold it wrong
That my grief should hurt another,
When my love should make me strong.
So I took the reins, and guided
As I felt he’d have me guide.
Through the years, and now before me
Looms the end, the Great Divide.
And I stand upon the verges
Feeling that I soon must go
To the Great Beyond to find him,
And my loving wills it so.
And as one whose work is over,
I review the work we’ve done,
Read the meaning of the doing
Of life’s lessons, one by one.


And there comes the sense of resting
Where the day and night are met.
Where the crimson fades to follow
On beyond the sun’s last set.
And those grand old trees, that flourish
As the seedlings and the slips
That we planted, they will whisper
Requiems from their trembling lips.
They will breathe a mystic message
To the children of our line,
Listening with a wrapt attention.
Of a love that’s his and mine.
In the valley of the Wairau,
I will rest me, I will sleep
Near him, where his tombstone standing
Guard above us both will keep.
Autumn in London.
THE cool autumn breeze
Waves the sycamore trees,
That shade the rude lounge where I’m dreaming;
Off Guildford Street West,
Where I pause for a rest.
That my travel has made to my seeming.
The first leaves are shed,
Of their lifelessness spread.
To the breath of decay softly sighing ;
I look and behold
What their teachings unfold
Of a life that is fleetly flying.
To-day in the leaf
Of a beauty that’s brief.
And to-morrow cast down for the sweeping ;
To one and to all
Comes the season of call
To the sward for a winter of sleeping.


How brief at the most
Is the day that we boast,
And how vain is the pride that we borrow —
.The pride born of man,
That lifts up for a span
But to leave him at last in his sorrow.
Oh, green leaves above,
Of the workings of love.
That is life without straining or striving ;
How sweet to return
To thy sources, and learn
Of the wealth that is not of contriving.
Of the wealth that is borne
As the breath of the morn
Unto each and to all wi hout measure ;
Where vanity knows
Not a place to disclose
Of the works that are unto displeasure.
August, 1906.
Greta Peak.
I CLIMBED our highest hill to-day,
That fine old Greta peak.
That lifts his lofty crest away
To catch the sun’s first streak.
He is the first of all around
To touch the golden light—
The first where lofty hills abound.
The last to bid good-night.
It gave my heart-beat some increase
To drink the freshened air,
That is in truth of perfect peace,
For perfect peace was there.
The altitude is high above
Such pettiness and pain,
As cramps the heart of half its love
Along the lower plane.
A lizard basking on a stone
Stole softly from my view,
And I could wish that he had shown
A faith that was more true.


I would not hurt his little life.
Nor mar his little joy;
But he suspected me of strife—
With intent to destroy.
My little friend, I’ve come too far
Along life’s grand highway
To know you other than you are—
A spark of love’s own ray.
From out the Great Infin tude
We sprang to play our part—
You on the rocks of solitude —
I in a sterner mart.
You are, nor question where nor why
I ponder on the plan ;
But love of life’s the binding tie—
The lizard and the man.
Eternal love for thine and mine,
And we are of the whole ;
One grand expression, life divine,
Swells through our every soul.
You have no fear of Him who made
The laws that you obey;
And likewise I am not afraid,
But trust Him all the way.
You are alive, and all is well,
It is your joy to be ;
And more than that I cannot tell —
My life is sweet to me.
On the Hillside.
IN a dream, happy dream, calm and silent,
Enwrapt in a sheeting of gold,
That falls from Oppollo a tangent,
I bask in his joys manifold.
With a carpet of green underneath me.
Fresh wrought from the Great Weaver’s hand,
In blossoms of Spring I enwreath me,
The sweetest of sweetened garlands.


In blossoms of peace, I remember
How bright was the garland I wove
One Sabbath day past in November,
A garland of sweet plighted love.
A few paces down on the hillside.
Then fresh with the freshness of Spring,
In ecstacy fresher than Springtime
I felt what affection could bring.
In view of the home that had nursed her.
In view of the graves where we strayed,
To pluck of the flowers that were first there
O’er the kin who were long ago laid—
I lie in the sunlight and dream on
Her actions so manifest now ;
Her face, with its love-lighting beam on—
Her soft lips prest close to my brow.
And all of that new rapture lingers —
That thrill of life’s tenderest pain;
I clasp me those soft slender fingers,
To press them again and again.
And here on the greensward before me,
In white summer robes that she wore,
Her form kneeling yet watches o’er me—
I see her, and ask for no more.
I start, and the phantom glides past me,
I gaze on the beautiful sky;
And feel that my dream will outlast me,
Through all the long years passing by.
I love, and I find of the choosing
A passion that moves deeper still —
A passion that dreads no refusing,
Nor asks for the forfeit of will.
For ever and ever, for ever
It wanes not, but lives on for aye ;
To love is to live, and to sever
From self is to sweeten the ray—
That lights up the path, making duty
A joy that is wrought for an end,
To love is to fathom of beauty
And strike the sweet concords that blend.


The manifold wonders around us
Are seen in a wonder anew,
When that sweet, swelling passion has bound us.
I gaze on the soft azure blue,
And rise through those spectral regions
Illimitless, spacious and still,
And see in the countless legions
Of worlds an Omnipotent Will.
No link is there lost of all wonder,
Transfer or transform yet all is,
Though the sward tuck us tightly down under,
The flesh and the spirit are His.
Of a love unto each, and unending,
To all and through ever it flows
Till the finite of Infinite blending
Breathes rapture where life’s rapture grows.
The sun and the sky—the green carpet
I gaze on, and wander away.
By my heart-song alone will I mark it,
This spot of one bright Sabbath day.
For ever, and ever, for ever,
In dreams to remember it still;
In dreams that will hold and will revere
The scene on that lone silent hill.
Moel Llys.
ON the shady side of Moel Idys, my sire,
'Neath a rock I have settled me down.
For a restful pause that my limbs require,
Just short of the mountain’s crown.
The bilberries blue, and the first I have seen,
Are plucked with inquisitive hand,
And palated, too, as they oft have been
By yourself in this self-same land.
The mountain is tinged with a purple flush
Of the heather that scents the breeze,
And music is lent by the soft, sad rush
Of the North Welsh rippling seas.


The boom of the blasters anon is heard
From the heights of the monarch Pen,
As they quarry the stone that has long been spared,
Now shaped for the works of men.
The sound of the children reach me, too,
As they wander them here and there
With their bilberry cans, and their quest pursue
In the sweets of the mountain air.
The picture is one of a calm content.
And I venture, if you’ll recall
The spots where your boyhood’s days were spent,
They’ve changed but little in all.
In the vale below, on the left-hand side,
Is the same old sheltering home,
Tho’ forty and ten long years divide
It now from the days you’ve known.
Your parents have gone, with a long race run,
To the goal that to all is sure—
To the goal we’re coming to, one by one,
Where the prize is a rest secure.
On the right they’re laid in the old churchyard.
Where the white stones ominous rise,
Like sentinels grave on their memory guard,
'Twixt the earth and the silent sides.
One stout old elm spreads over the grave
Of your sire, and stands at his head;
With a kindly sweep doth its branches wave
To ihe breeze, o’er that marble bed.
No weeds run revel to sadness there
With their tale of neglected love,
But a pure white marble spread with care
Forms a covering quilt above.
I stood me there, and the conjured past
Rose up as such pictures will,
And the dream of your childhood held me fast,
And I dream of your childhood still —
A dream that is dreamt of a time unknown,
Save by light that conjecture throws,
And at most it is only a dream my own
For there’s none with me here who knows.


I would sing of it all in a well-tuned song
To the joy of your listening ear,
But the notes that swell in my heart so strong.
On my lips are no longer clear.
And so at the best I can only sing
In a strain that is somewhat gross.
But it may of the Old Land something bring
To the New of the Southern Cross.
And Moel Elys will stay, and the bilberries, too.
And the children gathering still,
As they do to-day ; as they did with you,
On the heights of this old Welsh hill.
A Ride to Cape Campbell.
THE wheel of Old Time has turned once again, making
A circuit of seasons, and now it is Spring.
The fields don their fresh robes, from Winter sleep wak-
ing.
And merry birds vie each with each as they sing.
The month is October, when Maoriland reaches
Her zenith of beauty which none may excel.
Just pause you and look, if you think this impeaches
The truth, and you’ll own that my words are said well.
I’ve said, the wheel’s turned, and a year is completed
Since two merry girls and myself, making three
Of a light-hearted group, on our ponies were seated,
Who, judged by their paces, seemed buoyant as we.
The hour was just noon as we turned from the homestead,
And pleasure alone was the bent of our ride ;
The last time together, for one was to soon wed —
A week from that day, and a groom claims a bride.
Away o’er the fields at a good swinging canter.
Our steeds pulling hard at their reins for a race.
Soon Lottie and I in the rear did some banter,
While Minnie went first, and was making the pace.
We wended our way till we crossed the Blind River.
Then followed its course till we crossed it again
Below BursilTs swamp, where the rapu reeds quiver
To breezes that whisper a playful refrain.


Then on past the school, and up on to the ridges
That offer a view of the lake down below ;
Nor passed we unnoticed the crude-fashioned bridges
That answer their purpose, with nothing for show.
We gazed on Take Grasmere, that under us slumbered ;
Now broken no more is her tranquillity,
Since Rauparaha here for the once was outnumbered,
And fled from his southern foe out to sea.
We rode down the slope, and we soon gained the greensward
That margins the lake, just the place for a ride ;
A little bit soft as we turned for the seaward,
But hardened again as we neared the seaside.
We crossed the slim bar that divides the two waters,
And gained the beach sand, which for most part was firm ;
But some parts were softer, and almost down brought us,
And pulled us, comparatively, up with a turn.
But, not to be beaten, each pony soon rallied,
And gathered herself to be at it again:
Thus jesting and laughing, we down the beach sallied —
Our ride was for pleasure, nor was it in vain.
We paused at the rocks of the Cape, and dismounted,
The way now too rough, we would linger awhile ;
The girls for my pleasure their stories recounted
Of lang syne, while resting, our moments to while.
We gazed on the waters that stretched out before us,
With plash and with murmur, with heave and with sigh ;
We felt the weird witchery of surf-songs steal o’er us,
As frothed the white foam as each streamer drew nigh.
But time, too, and tide neither hastens nor tarries,
Although there are moments that seem to flit fast,
To the beat of the pulse, and the impulse that carries
Us out where all measure of moments is passed.
Such moments were ours, but the watch ticking steady
Kept true to the beating of time and of tide ;
A glance at her face, a few shells, and we’re ready
To spring to the saddles, and homeward we ride.
Along by the lake-side and over the hilltop,
And down the decline at a pace that’s not slow ;
The nearer to home, the more eager our nags got;
We held now no longer, but just let them go.


We left the last gateway, with Minnie still leading,
With L,ottie behind, and myself in between,
And up the path someone to catch us was speeding ;
He hadn’t a chance, for we flew o’er the green.
Those lithe figures bent, and the blue skirts were waving,
The air whistled past as our steeds shot away ;
Each muscle was strained, not an ounce were they saving—
All raced now to win at the close of the day.
The meadow streaked under, and loud was the rattle
Of hoofs in our racing, we drew towards home —
On up to the stockyard, and past the old wattle,
The distance is shortened, and all hold their own.
And farther, still farther, and now Minnie’s whip drew,
The last that wa left, she was bent on the win ;
Old Dolly responding, around the quick hedge flew.
And landed her home, all aglow from the spin.
A little girl met us, but why should I mention
Her name in this rhyming ? 'twere better to leave
Her just as I saw her, and not draw attention
To pictures that one time caused sweet reveries.
We pulled off the saddles; they went in the storeroom;
A bridle of Min’s, I think, hung in the hall;
Dike Gilpin, I think we were fit for the sore room ;
We dined off the mantlepiece next day—that’s all.
“Thy Kingdom Come.”
OOOD teacher, stay ; I cannot longer brook,
Unchallenged, these thy words so kindly meant.
Of joy complete, that yet to us will come
When we have cast away this earthly shape
Wherein we taste the first sweet thrill of life—
That is for us to mould, and make, and keep.
I say again, take hold of these thy words,
And weigh them on the face of facts, and see
Canst thou not find in every creature God—
In every breath eternal love that is for all
E’en here, and heaven itself spread out
In mystery grand, till all are mystified ?
Sensation is the joy of life when right
Perceptions bring that sweet content that is.
In very truth, a heaven —for heaven’s a state


And not a place, to be possessed by some
Mysterious leap through unknown door,
Through which no care, however small, may creep.
It is not true : To me at least, a heaven
Without a care were life prolonged without
A hope ; for where no doubt no prospect lies,
As each of each are both complete; likewise
Should one depart the other, too, must go,
And every thrill of life itself be gone.
Where prospect lies there must be doubt, and could
We fix all faith in certainty, it were
The end of all the charm that lures us on
To gather, and to grow in fields for ever new ;
Nor would I now exchange my lot for all
The bright conceivings sung in song.
Nor tell me, too, of painless days, for pain
But points the way that I should go ; he is
The guide that I must heed or pass
Into the Great Unknown called death, from which
I hasten yet, that I may not betray my trust
Or cross before the time that’s proper comes.
Pain is my guardian angel; he it is
Who warns me when I reach the line wherein
My joy is set; and he it is of all
I trust to most to teach me what is mine,
As suited best to me; nor do I blame,
For he is truth itself, and does not fail.
He is the thing thou callest hell, and, 10,
He does but work the will of heaven.
He is the force that drives me back, when I
Would fail to do of choice the thing I must;
The choice is mine to stray, but pain leaves not
A doubt of where I am till I return.
I do not relish pain as such, and yet
I must have an alternative to make
My pleasure real : For that I cannot lose
I cannot own, as ownership gives choice.
And freedom is of entity. ’Tis mine
To make or mar, and suffer where I fail.
If there is in me love, the world becomes,
In every sense, a heaven, and I can feel the


Thrill of joy that every action brings
When I decide the right, and make it mine
From day to day. ’Tis in the fact that I
May choose my lot that makes my joy so real.
This world is more than all my needs, nor could
I here contrive to tonch the outer fringe
Of all that is, were I to dwell till time itself
Were spent. Tell me no more of all that is to come
Away beyond, but bid me now
hay hold of heaven on earth, and live.
Took up, and see the glorious sun that spreads
His wrap around the hills with touch so soft
"Twere all a dream, did he not come and come again.
And yet we scarcely pause with grateful glance,
To pay in part the debt we owe, but let
Him pass as though no wondrous work were he.
And when he steals away beneath a wealth
That weaves a thousand shades into the night;
’Tis but a day that goes because it must,
Nor do we see the Great Eternal hand behind
The whole, for ever here ; and we the heirs
Through time to all eternity.
And yet how grand! My very soul would rise
Till I could sing a thousand songs, and feel
The thrill of that eternal love that comes,
A breath of heaven, and earth a paradise.
In truth do I but learn to taste the wealth
That’s mine, and every day becoming more and more.
Tell me no more of futures ; nay, but tell
Me twice ten thousand times that love is mine.
And that I stand in God’s own house,
To taste of what I will, till every wish
Is more than filled ; and still for ever flows
The Great Eternal source that bids me take.
Great God, I bow mine head in shame that I
Should ask for aught, save deeper love, that gives
Me all; for love is all; and I may love,
If love I will, in this the hour that is
Mine own, and is Thine own, because Thou art
In every hour. Give me not more, I pray,
But let it be that I may understand.


I know that change must be, and death must come
To bear fond hearts away, and tears will fall;
But still I know that death gives love yet more
Than life that knew not change ; and, too, I know
That through my grief my steps, ascending, lead
Me where my hopes are shapened unto God.
My very grief hath made my heart more whole ;
And death it is that teaches me to love
As I had never known did change not come.
For when the grave draws near, my heart doth cling
With lingering beat, that not one pulse may pass
That does not give full measure unto me.
The Sands of Time.
OH, sands of time, roll on, roll on ;
Ye tellers of the ages gone!
Since nothing lingering still may stay
Sweep on for ever all away.
The millions come, the millions go,
On, on for ever with thy flow,
That sees the living rise and fall.
And every breath beyond recall.
I would not hasten, and I could.
To set my willing where I would ;
I cannot know, I cannot do
All that is good, with gifts so few ;
But falling short, I learn to lean
On strength that is a st ength unseen ;
In this I come, in this I go,
And all is well, ’tis all I know.
I do not fail because I will,
And yet some wrong is with me still;
But what of such some pains of wrongs
To every living soul belongs.
To every season, eveiywhere,
Not one is good, why then despair ?
Or lose the faith that all is well.
Though others rose, and yet I fell.
I am, and standing, stand alone ;
To all man’s knowing quite unknown.
The measure is the measure mine—
Some little spark through all divine.


Then who dare say wherein I fail ?
Or set my wrongings to detail ?
Not one ; the many all have gone.
Roll on, ye sands of time, roll on.
I love the changing ; all is change :
The seasons new, the new arrange ;
Though in the new as in the old
I know my falterings will unfold.
My faith is fixed, love is for me ;
Love, only love, my trembling plea ;
Love that is greatest of the great.
That gathers all, and knows no hate.
He is of love that loveth all,
With pitying ear to every call.
In this I fail, as but a part
Discriminating in each heart
To find a reflex of each thought
In turn to vex, and this I sought.
I am no more than this I found—
Roll round, ye sands of time, roll round.
I fail as all must fail, and yet
Not one is lost; can love forget ?
And should I say love is the lie.
And eve y future hope deny,
Is love made less or swept away
That Ino longer feel it ? Nay,
But rather love from me is gone—
Roll on, ye sands of time, roll on.
And should I say that good or ill
Is but a trifling with the will ;
That good or ill is but a name,
And in the ending are the same :
Am I made more, or truth made less ?
Or do I of my pain confess
That hope remains when I am gone ?
Roll on, ye sands of time, roll on.
It may be that I never knew
The deeper depths that filter through
The natures more serenely bent
It may be, of my self content,


I never looked beyond the day.
But cramped the soul to fit the clay,
Or holding self as all in all,
I let my godly portion fall.
I am of all that I have found ;
New systems hedge me round and round.
And if I fail to reach the plan
That marks the man a nobler man,
Or touch the depths that deeper lie,
Must I these deeper depths deny ?
Those deeper depths that are to me
A limit, set my brother free.
Not one is good of all the best;
Yet none may Unger, none may rest
Or pause beyond the limit set
To each, or comes the sad regret.
And be the standard high or low.
All to their purpose come and go.
To answer deed for deed as done.
Roll on, ye sands of time, roll on.
A thousand million years have run
Since purpose, by direction spun,
Encompassed space like breaking morn,
As silent as the breaking dawn.
A thousand milUons : who shall say
That mercy moves not all the way ?
Or that no plan is in the whole—
An aimless mass without a soul ?
No link is broken : no, not one.
A thousand million years have gone ;
And purpose moves with purpose still;
Through all I see one boundless will.
And here and there I touch, I feel
The Ufe that makes my living real.
I come and go, still moving on
To take my place with those who’ve gone.


A Sailor’s Tale.
IN the cabin of an eastward-going steamer we were lying;
We were running down he coastway to the Cape, about the
Line.
He was eeling ill and resting ; by the porthole I was trying
To escape the heat of midway where the hottest suns can shine.
He was silent for a little ; then he said, “ Come, listen near me ;
I’ve a story I would tell you that I wish none else to hear ;
It is nothing to my credit, still I'd like that you should hear me.
You will understand a sailor, and I’ll try to make it clear.
Six and sixty years my age is, and the sea has been my calling—
Too, the failings of a sailor; nigh on forty years ago
I had won for me affection, little thinking then of falling,
I had sworn to be a lover, and was proud it should be so.
She was ladylike and gentle ; I was strong, impulsive, wilful;
But together we were happy, building castles in the air;
She was stronger in her meekness, and I hoped her tactics
skilful
Would improve my reckless nature ; she the fairest of the fair.
It so happened that my duty took me from the Old Land
sailing
To the South of Europe somewhere, why or when, it matters
not;
I was full of hopes and futures that had never dreamed of
failing,
Thinking never at my wildest could the Home One be forgot.
Well, it happened somehow ; ask not —’tis in shame that I am
telling—
I did that which sailors often in their merriment will do ;
Took the cup that cheers too freely, acted to the mad com-
pelling—■
Married in a hasty moment, just quite how I never knew.
But it matters not that story ; ’tis suffice I never saw her
Of the Home Land; I departed unto other climes, and stayed,
Leaving her, The One, in silence, with the silent years before
her,
And without a word from any of the part that I had played.


To the sequel! Thirty years had brought about the Boxer
Rising.
I was then in China waters, ’twas on board a man-o’-war
That I met a British Naval, with a voice at once surprising—
’Twas a voice that linked the present to the thirty years before.
I approached him, learned the story, for he proved to be a
brother
Of the sweetheart disappointed, and remaining faithful still;
She had lost the first and only, thinking not of any other,
But to find herself a duty that she laboured to fulfil.
I, a widower, a sailor now in Australasian trading,
With no chick nor child to know me from the man amongst
the crowd.
With a wish to be returning, all the old love still persuading—
I might yet, if in the Old Band, lift the long-concealing shroud.
But in courage I was wanting, though the longing still grew
stronger.
And the years were meanwhile flitting, till it might now be
too late.
I decided I would face it, I would suffer it no longer ;
I at least would see my birthplace, I would visit old Margate.
So I acted : took my passage, often hoping, often fearing—
I might meet her—l might miss her —thus my hope and thus
my fear,
As our vessel to the Home Band, with a few last hours was
steering—
To the spot which in the gone time I had held of all most dear.
Well, I landed; soon discovered she was there, the one I
sought for.
But I feared to go directly, hoping rather we might meet;
So the hours of suspense lasted, with the miseries they brought
for
Me through all those dragging moments, miseries for me
complete.
Though it takes me but a moment to relate the story, broken:
Many months were meanwhile passing, and I felt at last de-
spaired,
When my hostess, in her kindness, unto whom I now had
spoken.
With a woman’s tact decided, and my further fears were
spared.


So we met; I cannot tell you, but you may yourself surmising
Understand enough to spare me, for I never can describe;
I can never tell the feelings that ran then without disguising,
When I held, at life’s near closing, her, my long-gone promised
bride.
We were married, moved together where we long ago were
plighted ;
And our hearts were somehow younger than they were when
we were young;
For in the hearts re-opened somehow every joy invited,
And we felt the flowers of favour round about our footways
flung.
You have listened; I have told you in the short a lengthy
story ;
I have lived it of a life-time, and I cannot now but feel
That the truth is more than fiction as it passes out before me ;
I have ended now, to dream again that dream that is so real.
And the Great Good News
Came Through.
A CLOUD of war spreads o’er the sky,
And distant thunders roll.
We hear the foeman loudly cry
For power without control.
A trembling world is roused to arm.
To hold the fiend in thrall ;
As spreads the cry, the wild alarm,
Lest tyrant bring our lands to harm,
With serfdom unto all.
The beat of drums, the tramp of feet,
And ships that move away ;
When tears have hallowed eyes that meet,
Where loved ones cannot stay ;
White waving kerchiefs from the decks,
And ringing last good-byes,
As pass the ships to tiny specks
That fade among the fleecy flecks,
Betwixt the sea and skies.


They went, we stayed! and through the years
We waited as they wait
Who know the pain, where hopes and fears
For loved ones alternate ;
And day by day there trickled through
A tale of tears for some.
Until it seemed at most a few
Of all the cheery lads we knew
To us would ever come.
The years were drear—the years were long,
As to and fro they swayed ;
At times of favour hopes grew strong,
At moments, too, dismayed ;
Till with an onward rush they came—
The foe, with fearful press,
That swept our legions like a flame,
That put the fires of hell to shame,
With dire and fearful stress.
And then, when all seemed lost, a lull,
And once again a swing
That sent their forces at the full,
With home hopes on the spring.
We watched each day the long retreat,
And wondered was it true ;
Would victory come from out defeat,
Or would the same old swing repeat ?
And then “ the news ” came through.
Did ever bells on earth so ring
With music half so sweet ?
Did ever hearts with gladness sing
That knew no lesser beat ?
Did ever tears of rapture flow
From founts so deeply stirred ?
It may be ! but I only know
That thrill with me to death will go
Quite unexpressed by word.


The Stalkers.
THEY had heard of deer and stalking,
And away, beyond the plain,
They had seen the white Alps stretching
In a long, long mountain-chain.
They had dreamed of camps and camping
Where the streamlets flood and flow.
When the summer suns are melting
From the tips the winter snow.
They had learned to use the rifle
On the city’s shortened range,
And they felt they’d like to venture
In the wild ways for a change.
They had shed their soft complexions
Of the office, and were tanned
To the useful brown of Brighton,
Basking on the sunny sand.
So the stalking days had found them
Fit and firm, and bronzed and brown.
Till the oldest hand would scarcely
Pick them out as lads from town.
And they drew a stretch of country
That was rugged, wild and rough ;
It was somewhere south of Christchurch,
And I think I’ve said enough.
They secured a horse for packing,
They secured a packman, too,
And they started for the ranges
Under skies of bluest blue—
From a little lonely hamlet,
’Hong the old brown tussock hills.
On the outer skirts of systems
That the new regime fulfils.
Right away among the mountains
Where a weird, wild river runs,
With its murmur down the distance
Of a thousand million suns.
Now they camped, and reared their tripod—
Swung their billy on the crook,
Filled with bluest mountain water
prom a little babbling brook.


And they spread their bunk and rested
When their evening meal was done ;
And they slept the sleep that cometh
To the couch where sleep is won ;
Till the camplight showed them stirring
To the skylark’s first appeals—
Tong before the first gold glimmer
To the highest mountain steals.
And their rifle locks were clicking
With that old familiar sound—
Sweetest music to the sportsman
That in all the world is found.
And they started to the stalking
On the hillside rough and high,
With the camp away below them,
And above the dawn-lit sky.
So they moved with eyes about them,
But they hadn’t mounted far
When they spied a stag above them
On a ridge beneath a star.
That was luck beyond supposing,
So they stopped and fixed their sight
To the estimated distance,
In the yet uncertain light.
To a steady aim and certain
Rang a rifle, loud and clear;
And among the scrub and brushwood
Bay a struggling, dying deer.
They were fearful lest he charge them,
For they couldn’t rightly see
From their point, away below him
Just then what his plight might be.
So they fired again a volley
As the daylight softly broke,
And then rushed them up the hillside
Just to find they’d shot their moke.
And the Censor of the war zone
Never kept so firm a hold
Of his secrets as those stalkers,
But the stupid packman told.


Bush Yarns.
OF pigs and bush-hunting, or other camp days.
You ask for a story, and ask it from me ;
Well, this is the latest, and easily conveys
The top-notch of folly on billy black tea.
I’m dozing and yawning, and but for your row
Was long ago sleeping : then lobster and cheese
Might easily have nightmared a story by now ;
I’m good at night visions when dozing on these.
Well, poke up the embers, and charge each black briar
With Gold heaf or Navy, and blow the white cloud.
It takes the white smoke wreath to crown a camp fire,
And somehow it sets me a-thinking aloud.
Just here I remember one chase that we had :
Wild boars were in plenty at that time, you know ;
For that was when Murray was only a lad,
And so you’ll admit ’twas a good while ago.
You know where Old Cranky Tom’s creek rushes down
To its gorge, where the branches are gathered in one ;
To a sound never heard by the folk in the town,
We started our quarry, and opened the fun.
I sighted a black, he was ugly and old,
And was racing at top for the scrub-shelter thick;
I fired, and I fancied my bullet had told.
But aim is uncertain which needs must be quick.
He didn’t go down, so we followed in haste
Away to the patch where the dogs had some bailed.
We loaded our pieces again as we raced,
For all had been emptied, and so far had failed.
We heard the dogs plainly, anon to a groan,
That well might unnerve even sinews of steel;
A sound that says plainly, " Just leave me alone,
For here in the thicket, the dangers are real.”
A fig for the danger! we must have a brush ;
To give or to take it is all in the game ;
A question of speed should he come with a rush ;
The shot must be hasty, and certain the aim.
We moved with due caution, just guided by sound ;
At most we could see but a few feet ahead—
When, 10, right before us, flat down on the ground
Was my friend, the black one, and seemingly dead.


The dogs were still further away, so we stood
To have a good look, for we were not quite clear
About his condition, for what if he should
Be shamming, we might get a little too near.
He lay like a log. “ He’s as dead as a nail,”
Said Murray ; but Jim said, “ I’ll give him a charge
Of shot. It should kill him from here without fail.
’Tis better than risking our health ; he’s too large—
To play with just now.” So he aimed, and let go.
The next thing we knew he was up with a roar;
The others found cover, but I was too slow,
And lifted my weapon to give him one more.
He came like a flash, and got under my gun
Before I could bring it to bear on his head ;
One instant at most, and the whole thing was done :
He tossed me, and turning, as quickly he fled.
I picked myself up, and I seemed to be sound.
Or little the worse for the fall or the fright;
One finger was ripped, and one garment, I found,
Had parted a little, but that was all right.
My hair no doubt tickled the top of my hat,
And my colour crept down out of sight in the shade ;
Such things at times happen, but what about that,
The others by this had returned to my aid.
We sought for our quarry, and found him again,
Squat down as before, just a few yards away ;
We took no more chances, but ended his pain
Before he could rise from the spot where he lay.
Of all the wild monsters I’ve seen, he was first
In size, with his shoulder shield broken and scarred.
Through many wild brake and through bracken he’d burst;
In many pig frays he’d parried and parred.
But now he was down, he was beaten and out;
Full gamely he lived, and as gamely he died ;
I knew by how little we’d turned it about—
The verdict that might have been all on his side.
One tusk had grown round and back into his jaw ;
The other was broken, which spoiled a grand pair.
His tail for a trophy, and just then we saw
More fun in the distance, and soon we were there.


WYATT & WILSON.
Printers.
Christchurch.
