

Sydney International Exhibition
onr IST©.
THE QUEENSLAND COURT.
RISE AND PROGRESS OF QUEENSLAND INDUSTRIES.
PEARL SHELL AND BECHE DE MER.
The fii’st recorded export of pearl shell from this colony was in 1872, when
the Registrar General notes the shipment of the commodity to the value of
£4234. But the fishery had begun before that year. Some enterprising men
had found large banks covered with the valuable pearl oyster in the hot
sheltered waters of the sea, enclosed by the Barrier Reef and the Northern
Island. At the prices then obtainable for shell these banks of oysters were as
valuable as a rich gold reef, a veritable “jeweller’s shop” in digger’s phrase-
ology. But to obtain the shell many risks had to be run. Between Cardwell
and Somerset, as the harbour of refuge near the northern extremity of Cape
York Peninsula was called, there was no white settlement, and to the dangers
of shipwreck among unknown reefs were added the probable horrors of a
fight for life against the ferocious and cannibal natives of the mainland, or of the
islands. The bold men manning the little craft that sailed those then almost un-
known seas, reaped rich rewards for their daring; but from the nature of their
avocation it was conducted out of reach of strict official investigation, and there-
fore it is not a matter for surprise that the statistics of the colony afford no re-
liable record of their work. The discovery of the Palmer, the opening of the
port of Cooktown, and the establishment of the Torres Straits Mail Steamboat
Line gave a considerable impetus to the industry. And the advent of the
hordes of Chinese that poured into Northern Queensland stimulated the fish-
ery of beche de mer, that uninviting dainty so dear to Celestial epicures. The
trepang or sea slug abounds on the reefs that fringe for so many hundred miles
the northern coast of Queensland, and many stations have been established for
curing the different edible species. Of late, the Chinese have themselves gone
lai’gely into this latter fishery, and a regular junk, built at Cooktown and
manned by Mongolian sailors, trades between the fishing stations and collects
the dried slug for export.


The pearl shell fishery is by tar the more important industry. Last year the
Police Magistrate and Collector of Customs at Port Albany estimated the
amount of live shell procured at 425 tons, worth, in spite of a great fall in
price, £112,320. It is carried on by about thirty trading firms, most of them
belonging to other colonies, and they employ from 700 to 800 people. Of these
very few are Europeans. The camp of a pearl shell fisher contains a queer
mixture of Polynesians, Chinese, Malays, and blacks, natives of the islands off
the northern coast, the Europeans being mainly directors. The Polynesians
and Chinese generally get good wages, the latter especially, who are for the most
part cooks, carpenters, &c. The aborigines dive for the shell. These also get
well paid, although the trade they receive does not perhaps possess a large
monetary value. Yet as their native islands are neither large nor fertile, and the
supply of food on which they were compelled to live before the advent of
Europeans was not abundant or of good quality, they are now in a state of
comparative affluence. And the number of fishing parties competing for their
services ensures to them more liberal treatment than natives usually receive at
the hands of Europeans. Judging by the last report of Mr. Jardine, these
simple children of the soil have so far mastered the rudiments of political
economy as to know how to sell their labour in the best market. And the
same cause that ensures them adequate remuneration for their services,
also protects them from ill treatment, as it is evident that the European
directors of the fishery would rather protect than injure those on whose
good will they are so dependent. There was, however, a growing danger
in the formation of camps on outside islands by vagrant Polynesians and
Other semi-civilized barbarians, including some brutalized whites. These men
treated the natives in a violent and tyrannical manner, and laid the founda-
tion of many broils. In order to avoid the difficulties that were likely to be
thus produced, the Imperial Government has formally placed these outside
islands within the jurisdiction of Queensland, and a bill has just passed the
Legislature providing for the due regulation of the fisheries. A schooner has
also been equipped and placed under the orders of the Magistrate at Port
Albany who is charged with the enforcement of the new law.
It is evident that these fisheries are industries of some importance from the
figures already quoted, the shell raised last year being worth £112,000, and
beche de mer about £14,000. They are certainly carried on mostly by out-
siders, but that is due simply to the fact that they display more enterprize than
we do. It is impossible to arrive at a correct estimate of the extent even of known
pearl shell banks because, naturally, each finder keeps his knowledge to himself
and there is no official record kept. Nor must any tales of the exhaustion of
these banks be taken without reservation, for it is naturally the object of all
persons engaged in the fisheries to keep others from coming to compete with
them. There is no regular system pursued in getting the oysters, and no
suggestion even has been made for preserving the banks. It is evident,
however, that the divers in getting the shell would not take those too small
to be marketable, so that the waste which has almost destroyed the beds of
edible oysters in some parts of the colonies is not likely to take place. A
bank therefore, though stripped of marketable shell, would only require a few
years’ rest to be as rich as ever. Besides, the number of banks discovered must
be always increasing. In spite of the fall in price, the annual yield of pearl


shell has been continually increasing, the returns for 1878 showed a consider-
able increase in quantity over those for 1877. Evidently therefore, the area
of shell-yielding banks must be large, and each fresh patch discovered gives
an additional guarantee of permanancy to the trade, for it is a deposit which
though stripped this year will be workable again at a future date. And
the archipelago of reefs, islands, and islets among which pearl shell banks are
found is so extensive that it is not probable that the waters have ever yet
been more than partially explored.
Besides the ascertained wealth of the seas that wash the northern and
north-eastern shores of Queensland, there are many possibilities of future
profit. These warm sheltered waters teem with life. Sponge has been found
of good marketable quality, but as yet no effort have been made to procure it
on any scale. The crew of maritime explorers, who may charter a small
schooner for a year’s cruise among the waters, pick up what they can, and if
they chance to find a patch of something valuable— like sponge—which they
are not able to utilize on the spot, they are reticent concerning the discovery.
If they can get a capitalist to “ back ” them to work the discovery, they set
to work, if not, they keep the knowledge to themselves until the chance of
making use of it offers itself. Bearing this fact in mind, and also remember-
ing that until quite recently this whole coast line, literally thousands of miles in
extent, counting mainland and islands, was quite an unknown land, it may
be fairly concluded that there is much yet to discover in it.. As settlement
progresses, or the discovery of gold on the mainland or some other attraction
draws pioneers to the northward, the prosecution of the fisheries will become
more thorough and systematic, and it may yet be found that sponge will be
as recognized an article of export as pearl shell. But without reckoning
on any such possibilities, there is in the pearl shell and beche de mer fisheries
two industries, from their very nature likely to be permanent, and yielding
between them produce to the value of nearly £130,000 a year. As Queens-
landers we may, however, be permitted to hope that our fellow colonists will
in the future take a more active share in the prosecution of them.
J. H. REYNOLDS, GENERAL MACHINE PRINTER GEORGE STREET, BRISBANE.


'TA'ffi


sv?TZ3'S~j fI0&&
jf /6 f z ~,0
SYDNEY INTERNATIONAL EXHIBITION
OIF 1879.
THE QUEENSLAND COURT.
RISE AND PROGRESS OF QUEENSLAND INDUSTRIES.
SUGAE.
The suitability of the soil in many parts of the colony, and its tropical
and semi-tropical climate, directed the attention of the colonists at an early
period of its history to the growth of sugar cane as a promising industry.
As far back as 1862, an experimental patch of 20 acres is noticed in the
official records, planted in the neighborhood of Brisbane. The experiment
gave good hope of success, and the attention of cultivators was attracted
by it. Regular plantations were formed in the Brisbane district, and near
Maryborough, which in 1865 returned 316 and 112 acres respectively under
cane. Experimental patches were tried elsewhere, some in places where the
industry has not since taken root. But in that year 20 acres were tried near
Mackay, a locality which to-day is ihe main centre of sugar cultivation. The
industry showed signs of vitality, and the Legislature encouraged it by granting
land on easy terms to sugar cultivators. In the year 1866 sugar mills first
appear in the official returns ; two in the Brisbane district, one on the Mary
river. As a consequence there is an actual recorded production in the
statistics of 1867, to the amount of 338 tons of sugar and 13,509 gallons of
rum. The cautious hesitation with which the new industry was at first re-
garded began now to be thrown aside. Planters sought for cheap coloured
labourers, it being considered that the constant petty work which had to be
performed in the sweltering heat that prevails between the tall rows of cane,
would be too trying for the constitution of Europeans. South Sea Islanders
were accordingly brought to the colony, and the trade in kanaka “ recruits” as
they are called became so c msiderable that the Legislature passed an enact-
ment to check the abuses which had sprung up in connection with it.
In the year 1868 the recorded production of the plantations amounted to
619 tons of sugar and 35,599 gallons of rum ; in 1869, 5,165 acres of land
were put under cane. By 1871 the production of sugar had reached 3,762
tons, of rum 112,979 gallons, and the staple was exported to the value of
.£16,262. It was also recorded that 55 sugar mills were in existence. The
progress was rapid. In the next year, 1872, ten more mills were added to the
number, the production of sugar was 6,266 tons, of rum 161,473 gallons, and


the export had reached a value of £36,803. But the industry was about to
receive a check. The hesitation with which its first introduction had been
received had yielded to a headlong rush of cultivators eager to share the
fortune it seemed to promise. Farmers in some districts abandoned every
other kind of cultivation and planted cane right up to the walls of their
cottages. On the Mary particularly, the settlers threw themselves entirely
into the new cultivation. It appeared to them to be exempt from the limita-
tions that bound every other kind of agriculture. The cane was planted in
newly cleared land, by making holes in the unbroken surface and laying the
“ sets” in them to grow. Very little weeding was done, and the cane, left
almost to itself, grew luxuriantly and apparently free from any disease. And
while the small settlers went on in apparent confidence that the ordinary laws
of nature would be suspended in favor of sugar growers, the planters and mill-
owners proceeded in many cases on a, not much wiser plan. Money was
borrowed for the purchase of expensive plant, on a scale and on terms which
no industry however profitable would justify. The money was expended also
with very little knowledge ; almost any man who had lived on a plantation in
the older sugar producing colonies obtained ready employment from the
Queensland sugar growers, and was entrusted with the direction of work that
somtimes involved large expenditure. In reality it was a continuation of the
experiment of sugar growing on a large scale and in a costly manner. The
relations between millowners, who in all cases had plantations of their own,
and the neighboring farmers who looked to them for the disposal of their cane
became also very unsatisfactory. Both parties had rushed into the enterprise
with a vague confidence that it would come out right, and it failed to do so.
Quarrels and misunderstandings arose between the two, and there appeared to
be a strong probability of a reaction. And to add to the difficulties of cane
growers, a new disease made its appearance among the cane. Up to that time
one variety, the Bourbon, had mainly been grown. It was a large, rather soft
cane, that grew freely and yielded great quantities of juice. But, exposed to
the rather violent variations of our subtropical climate, and cultivated in the
rough and ready manner described, it succumbed in many places to the attack
of a kind of rust which entirely puzzled the cane growers and defied any
attempt at cure.
The lesson was a sharp one, but the industry had become too firmly rooted
to be overthrown. A number of speculative men who had overstrained their
means in order to embark in it had to succumb, but cane growers found a way
out of their difficulties. The practical experience gained during the years in
which cane growing had actually been carried on in Queensland served to put
the industry on a sound footing. There were plenty of men by that time who
had learned the business in the actual field, and sugar mill, and on Queensland
soil. The cultivation of the cane was better understood, and although the intro-
duction of new varieties of it did not actually banish rust from the fields, itatleast
served to reduce it from an evil of the first magnitude to the rank of one of
those minor difficulties which all cultivators have to encounter and overcome.
Continual progress was made in the art of manufacturing sugar, till it equalled
in appearance and value the best production of Mauritius and the West Indies.
The progress of the industry has since been very satisfactory. In 1877 the
number of acres actually put under crop was 15,220, and there were 12,243


tons of sugar, and 196,662 gallons of rum manufactured. The production, it
must be remembered, is confined to the higher grades of sugar, so that the
average value of the product is high. In the year mentioned the value of
sugar exported was £180,668. Of that amount the value of raw sugar—
almost entirely of the highest grades—-was £133,297, that of refined sugar
£47,371. This last was the produce of the large establishment of Yengarie,
near Maryborough, where the cane juice is transformed by a, patent process
directly into a pure white refined crystallized sugar. The Yengarie process it
may be mentioned promises to solve the difficulty between millowner and cane
grower in districts in which it is put in operation, as it enables the juice to be
preserved for a long time, after being expressed from the canes, without
deterioration. On the Mary river, therefore, growers find it advantageous to
crush their canes merely, and to pour the juice through pipes into punts fitted
with tanks to receive it. The juice is then conveyed to the refiner and there
bought at a price per gallon, determined by its density, an arrangement which
precludes the possibility of serious disagreement.
The sugar growing industry may now be said to be firmly established
in the colony, and not likely to be affected by any othex than the
inevitable fluctuations caused in all agriculture by the differing seasons. Its
present centres are the districts to the south of Brisbane, the Mary river and
Mackay, the last being the principal one. There are also plantations on the
Herbert river, near Cardwell, and it seems likely that cane growing after some
unsuccessful attempts will be properly established on the Lower Burnett, near
Bundaberg. It must not be understood, however, that only in these places are
there suitable fields for cane cultivation ; on the contrary, sugar land is to be
found in large areas along our whole coast. But the industry is subject to
other limitations than those of soil and climate. Farmers cannot grow sugar
cane in a new settlement until they have either secured the help of some
capitalist to establish the requisite factory, or have the money to build one
themselves. And experience has plainly shown that a sugar factory to be
successful must be on a reasonably large scale. It is further necessary that
there should be means of cheap carriage from the fields of the cultivators to
the mill, for the cane contains a great weight of woody fibre and water
in proportion to the sugar that can be extracted from it. Therefore, cane
growing has been hitherto confined to the banks of navigable streams. But
the Yengarie process points to the possibility of a much wider extension of
the cultivation by affording greater facilities of transport. At times attempts
have been made to introduce cheap horse machinery for the use of small
isolated cultivators who, it is supposed, might use it for the purpose of
producing a low grade sugar which they could profitably sell to the refinery.
An American patent of the kind is now being hopefully tried, and if it proves
a commercial success will undoubtedly add to the number of sugar growers, and
introduce a cane patch among the fields of most farmers in the coast districts.
But whether the expansion takes this shape, or continues in its present direction
only, the proved suitability of soil and climate will ensure the growth and
progress of the Queensland sugar industry.
J. H. REYNOLDS, GENERAL MACHINE PRINTER, GEORGE STREET, BRISBANE.




Sydney International Exhibition
OIF 1879.
THE QUEENSLAND COUHT.
RISE AND PROGRESS OF QUEENSLAND INDUSTRIES.
TIMBEE.
Queensland is particularly rich, in timber, both useful and ornamental, and
the destruction of timber forests, both by the reckless mannner of working
practised by lumberers and the wholesale “ burning off” carried on by agricul-
tural settlers, has as yet done little to diminish the store. Forests in the
neighborhood of large centres of population have been destroyed or worked
out —are denuded of trees large enough for the saw mills, and those on the
banks of navigable rivers have been thinned, especially in the southern
districts of the colony, but there yet remain great tracts both on the coast and
a short distance inland that are quite untouched. In the interior also, the
great scrubs of ornamental hardwood are quite untouched, and there are also
forests of cypress pine, straight, tall and well grown, that show no trace of the
intrusion of the white man’s axe.
From the first year of the existence of Queensland as a separate colony, the
colonists, besides supplying their own needs, exported timber. In 18el, the
statistics of the colony record the export of 90,228 feet of cedar and pine, and
by 1868 this export had reached the respectable value of £16,578. It should
be noted, however, that then as now the official statistics under this head are
not reliable. There is no export duty on timber, and the cutting and export of
log cedar is largely carried on in places very remote from official centres. It
is well known therefore that the returns furnished for statistical purposes fall
short conoiderably of the actual quantities sent away, and an. unknown margin
must be added to the figures here quoted, But even the. official figures show
EDWARD FORD
ai s-js-jt/ f' fO To :■ .
n- ‘to -


that the timber industry has reached considerable dimensions. In 1877 the
value of timber exported reached according to the official figures =£35,629, and
the export of cedar is known to have been carried on since that date on a very
much larger scale. It may fairly be assumed that the above figures are very
much below the mark, because the value of sawn pine is set down at .£23,919,
and of cedar at only about £9300, a value manifestly inadequate to cover the
produce of the large pax-ties of cedar getters at work on the remote northern
rivers. The returns of sawn pine are probably accurate, as this timber is cut
for export in Brisbane, Maryborough, and Bundaberg, where the cargoes are
properly registered. There is unfortunately no proper record kept of the value'
of machinery used in cutting timber, nor of the number of men engaged in
the industry ; it is therefore necessary to speak in less precise terms concerning,
it than would be desirable.
Taking the south of the colony first, the rivers emptying into Moreton
Bay are or were all fringed with timber scrubs, although the progress of agri-
cultural settlement has cleared much of the forest away. This is especially the
case in the southern portion of the district, but there is yet some pine crrt at
Mooloolah and Nerang; and cedar is to be found at the head of the water-
courses, especially at the two points where the semicircular sweep of moun-
tains that enclose the district approaches the sea to the north and south of it,
A good deal of timber remains in the inland scrubs, beyond the reach of water
carriage, and on the table land at the top of the dividing range. Throughout
the district, however, there is yet an abundance of the hardwood that may be
called forest timber to distinguish it from that found in the close growing
scrubs. The coast to the north of this district is a great storehouse of pine.
From the chain of lakes that open into Laguna Bay, known as Noosa, to far
beyond the Burnett, the coast is lined at intervals with great pine scrubs, and
Frazer’s Island, closing in Wide Bay, is also partly covered with timber scrubs.
These forests form the chief source from which some of the Brisbane saw-
mills and those at Maryborough and Bundaberg draw their supplies. These
establishments, some of which have been in existence since the formation of
the colony, employ many hundreds of men directly and indirectly; both in
actual attendance on the machinery, and in parties of lumberers in the scrubs.
They have in some cases short lengths of tramway laid down from the scrubs
to the navigable waters of the Bay or river, and carry on their operations
with all the economy which the intelligent use of abundant capital can ensure.
Owing to these circumstances and the abundant supply of timber trees, they
are able, while paying remunerative prices to the lumberers, to supply sawn
pine not merely for the wooden buildings of the northern towns in the colony,
but to steadily increase their export to New South Wales, till it reached in
1877 the respectable quantity of 3,124,501 feet. The coast scrubs in the
districts named, though subjected to such a continuous strain and worked with
very little regard to economy, are yet far from exhausted, and the enforcement
of a regular system in dealing with them would render the supply inexhaustible
without diminishing for a year the total yield. However, it is difficult to
enforce economical rules where the supply is apparently illimitable. Behind
the accessible scrubs are great timber tracts as yet untouched, which can and
probably will be reached by tramways. Further inland again the flanks of the
mountain ranges are in places covered with huge timber forests, containing yet


a large reserve of cedar, saved from the reckless lumberer’s axe by tbeir present
inaccessibility. The abundant hardwood of the district is cut at one or two
mills, and the Government has reserved one or two tracts for a supply of
timber to be used in the construction of public works.
Following the coast northward there are huge untouched, almost unexplored,
timber forests in the tracts lying between the ranges and the sea. On the
banks of some of the rivers on the eastern side of the Cape York peninsula
cedar is very abundant. This valuable timber has been worked for many years
past, and to a litei’ally unknown extent, by parties of timber getters in the
scrubs bordering the Daintree and Mossman rivers. Although no reliable data
are obtainable, it is certain that the export of cedar from these two rivers
during the last two or three years must be reckoned in millions of feet, and the
parties of lumberers are yet in full activity. Unlike pine, which soon begins
to decay if allowed to lie at the stump, cedar can be felled and permitted to
remain until a freshet in the neighbouring creek allows the lumberers to roll
their logs into the water and float them down to a navigable stream, even if a
year or more should elapse before the opportunity offers itself.
Its commercial value, also, allows of it being profitably worked under ex-
pensive conditions; consequently the northern lumberers are able to go far from
settled towns in search of cedar, and forming camps in the scrubs continue to
fell the trees, waiting till a sufficient quantity of timber has been accumulated
and floated down to the mouth of the river, to load a vessel. But this freedom
of action has one limit in the number of the wild blacks that swarm in the
river jungles, so that lumberers do not care to go too far out unless in sufficient
numbers for mutual protection. As yet, therefore, no cedar scrubs have been
worked on rivers where the timber has not been found in sufficient quantity to
permit of its being worked easily and by considerable parties. And it may be
said that a good many of the rivers in the far north have hardly yet
been “ prospected” for cedar. So that there is a known reserve in the
numerous small patches that have not yet tempted parties of lumberers to
attack them, and in the more inaccessible scrubs on the flanks of the mountain
ranges; besides the stock that may be discovered on the unexplored rivers.
Great scrubs full of kauri and other pine are known to exist on the coast
range of the north and on its eastern flanks, but these are yet only touched to
supply the limited demand of the new townships ; too far inland to benefit by
the abundant and cheap supply of cut timber sent out by the southern saw
mills.
In conclusion, the timber industry of Queensland, although it has already
reached respectable dimensions in proportion to the population, is capable of ex-
pansion only limited by the demand for the product. The timber forests have
been worked with very little regard for the future, and often in an unnecessarily
wasteful manner; yet even of cedar there remains a supply which could easily
be made inexhaustible. The supply of pine, although in places the scrubs
have been worked out, or cleared altogether away by agricultural settlers, may
yet be said, taking the whole colony, to be undiminished, for the gaps are
hardly noticeable when the whole vast area of pine scrubs is taken into account.
And even those scrubs that are continually drawn upon for the supply of this
timber would maintain an undiminished yield if they were worked judiciously.


Of ordinary hardwood the supply is also practicably inexhaustible. Cutting
of these descriptions of timber only has been carried on as a regular industry ;
the numerous ornamental timbers which abound in the colony have been very
much neglected. These are to be found in endless variety, and some of them
in great quantity in the forests and scrubs of the coast. And the close grained,
dark, prettily veined timber of the interior scrubs, which have naturally been
overlooked, being so tar beyond any existing means of transport, will probably
attract the attention of upholsterers now that the extension of inland railways
promises to make them accessible to the exporter.
"Arp
fjtPjUO
f(OSO SA
J. H. REYNOLDS, GENERAL MAC


"V L
vjKD
Sydney International Exhibition
OF 1879.
THE QUEENSLAND COUNT.
RISE AND PROGRESS OF QUEENSLAND INDUSTRIES.
"W O OL.
A superficial glance at the official statistics of the colony would appear to
indicate that the word progress, as applied to the production of wool, was a
misnomer. In 1869 Queensland had 8,604,115 sheep, in 1878 only 5,418,826 ;
and yet, paradoxical as the statement may appear, great and substantial pro-
gress has been made in sheep breeding and the production of wool. The ex-
planation of the paradox will be found in the following sketch of the history
of the industry since the separation of the colony.
In 1860, the first year of its separate existence as a colony, Queensland
possessed a stock of 3,166,802 sheep. Separation was followed by a great
rush for country, an outburst of pioneering enterprise which led to the explo-
ration of a great portion of North-eastern Australia, and its occupation by
adventurous young squatters. Such a rush for country is always marked by
a great deal of speculative trafficking in new leases; and to stop the land
jobbers from monopolising the fertile wilderness ahead of the real pioneers,
the Legislature enacted that a certain proportion of stock to the square mile
should be in actual occupation of a new squattage before a lease was issued to
the applicant for it. In order also to protect the flocks of the colony from the
much dreaded scab, importation of sheep from beyond the borders was absolutely
prohibited. Sheep were the favorite stock with the young pioneers, and the
demand for them, which could only be supplied from the flocks already in the
colony, inflated the price per head enormously. Ewes sold for as much as 15s.
or 205., and even 255. a head, a price only possible in the fever of speculation
and quite beyond any real value that the animals could possess in a country
like Australia. These extraordinary prices for the carcases of sheep stimulated
an excessive and indiscriminating production. They appeared at first to thrive
on the virgin grasses even on the hot moist coast lands, wool maintained a fair
price in the European market, and for some years the game of run speculation


went on merrily; buyers being generally forthcoming for stations hastily
formed, unimproved, and at prices calculated solely on the number of sheep
with little or no regard for their quality. But the inevitable reaction came.
The financial crisis of 1866 fell like a thunderbolt on the colony, and the
game of specixlation collapsed quite suddenly. The speculative values of stock
abruptly vanished, and the sheep owners were compelled to face their actual
position. The sheep stock had reached in 1867 a total of 8,665,757 ; without im-
portation it had nearly trebled in seven years. But that increase had been for
the most part obtained by a reckless neglect of the precautions that prudent
fiockmasters should take. Breeding, if not quite indiscriminate, had been car-
ried on almost with a single eye to numbers, and the rash sheepowners, no
longer able to find buyers for their stations, encumbered with debt, found
themselves with thousands of animals on their hands that had in many cases
positively degenerated as regards the quantity and quality of their wool, and
yet cost as much to keep as the best. Those of their number also who had put
stock on the coast country had by this time discovered that in Queensland it
is not suited for sheep, that the increase in their flocks was falling off and that
diseases of various kinds were making their appearance among them. They
were learning the lesson that the inland table land with its drier climate and
cooler winters, more especially the rolling downs and wide plains of the far
interior, of which the outskirts were then being occupied, offered the proper
field for the sheep breeder ; it was there only he could be certain of maintaining
the highest standard of wool production, and rely on the abundant salt herbage
for a tonic against most of the ailments to which his stock were subject on
the coast.
Most of the pioneer sheep breeders made these discoveries too late to save
them from ruin. The crisis of 1866 was accompanied by a fall in the price of
wool, and followed in 1867-8 by a prolonged drought, so that accumulating
misfortunes fell on their head. The increase in the total sheep stock of the
colony which had been so rapid suddenly ceased. In 1868, when it reached its
highest point 8,921,784, the increase on the previous year had been only 2'93,
as against 19 'O6 in the preceding year. And those figures are generally
collected in the earlier part of the year before the lambing season, which in
1868 gave very poor results in the western and intermediate districts. In
1869 the poor lambing and the losses by drought became evident in the first re-
corded total decrease, and the stations had begun to change owners, falling into
the hands of men who saw the necessity for a radical reform in the system of
management. Accordingly in spite of the good seasons the record for 1870
indicated a further decrease of 482,425, reports showing that 897,756 had
been sent across the border for sale, or slaughtered for meat preserving, or
boiled down for tallow, and it must be remembered that this large number
disposed of consisted to a considerable extent of inferior sheep rigorously
culled out from the breeding flocks. A new regime had set in, breeding for
quality had taken the place of mere multiplication of numbers, and this neces-
sitated in the first instance a great sacrifice of increase even in the western
and true sheep country. To this must be added the involuntary loss due to
disease and decreased breeding among the flocks in the coast and other districts
now known to be unsuited to sheep, and it will be seen that the decrease in
the sheep stock of the colony was quite intelligible. But it was accompanied


by an improvement in the quality of wool produced which is indicated by the
following table of the values exported.
No. Sheep.
1869—8,646,243
1871—7,403,334
1873—7,268,946
1875—7,101,381
1877—5,976,564
Value of Wool exported.
£1,098,149
1,158,833
1,374,526
1,366,030
1,499,682
It will be seen that making every allowance for fluctuation in price, the in-
crease in the value of the clip has been even more marked than the diminution
in the number of the sheep that grew the wool, so that it may be safely said
that the decrease in numbers has been mainly due to the weeding out process
rendered necessary by the recklessness of the pioneer sheep breeders. The
gradual transfer of the sheep stock of the colony to the western plains has been
delayed by two causes—the reluctance of sheep owners to relinquish the ad-
vantage of cheap carriage to port enjoyed in districts near the coast, and the
great increase in cattle breeding which has taken place during the last eight
years. The revival of colonial industry which followed the disastrous period
of 1866-7-8 led to further occupation of new country, and this time with cattle.
The new generation of pioneers fought shy of sheep, and indeed, plunging so
far inland as they did they could not take sheep with them, for the up carriage
of supplies and down carriage of wool would have swallowed all their profit.
Therefore, a demand for store cattle sprung up, as it had done for sheep in the
previous decade, and this, added to the increased consumption of meat both by
the meat preserving companies and the gold miners who flocked to
the northern diggings, led a great deal of the capital and enterprise available
for squatting into the one channel of cattle breeding. Instead of sheep, cattle
became the rage, and the herds which numbered in the aggregate only 940,354
in 1867 had reached an estimated total of 2,299,582 head in 1877. But the
tide is already on the turn. The proved suitability of the western country for
sheep, the quality of the wool produced there, and the inland extension of
railways will no doubt lead to a rapid increase in the number of the flocks, and
the weight of clip. And such an increase taking place now will proceed safely
and from a sure basis. By bitter experience our flockmasters have learned
the capabilities of the colony, how and where to keep their sheep. The lesson
has been a sharp one, but it has been worth learning. The colonists of to-
day know now that much of the country occupied for sheep stations twenty years
ago is useless for the purpose, but they know also that the western table lands,,
of which the mere outskirts were then explored, are all available for pasturage.
The sheep breeder has lost a comparatively narrow strip of country, but he has
gained in its place a territory giving him room for almost indefinite expansion.
And for its utilization, he has a sure guide in the lessons of experience,
which (while pointing out some possible dangers) give solid assurance to the
hopes he entertains of a most prosperous future.
J. 11. REYNOLDS, GENERAL MACHINE PRINTER, GEORGE STREET, BRISBANE.


■ffUfisr


M zy rr/ 6
7- /&
WARD
Sydney International Exhibition
O3T 1879.
THE QUEENSLAND COURT.
RISE AND PROGRESS OF QUEENSLAND INDUSTRIES.
COPPER.
The copper deposits wliicli are so widely distributed over Queensland
attracted attention early in its short history. In the year 1861 some of these
lodes were being tested, and the official record takes note of three mines in the
Gladstone district which produced 49 tons of ore. The trial shaft from which
this ore was raised, did not evidently lead to more permanent work, for in
1862 no copper ore appears on the list of exports; but the Registrar of the
colony in his annual report notes the fact that a promising lode had been dis-
covered in the Kennedy District—being the mines afterwards known as Peak
Downs. Next year, 1863, it is recorded that 1100 tons of copper ore were
exported, work having been fairly commenced in the Peak Downs mine. Once
begun it was prosecuted steadily and for many years it was the only copper
lode opened in Queensland. But although the lode was large and the ores of high
per centage —including great blocks of rich malachites and other carbonates—
it was found that they could not be profitably carted along a rough bush track
for 200 miles to the port. Therefore furnaces were erected on the spot, burning
wood, and the ore smelted ; so that the cost of carriage was diminished by
carting the product only in its most valuable condition. The mine yielded
large quantities of ore but little profit to the shareholders, as the expenses
consumed most of the proceeds. But, while this was going on, copper ore
was discovered in other localities. A remarkable deposit of native copper and
oxide was found in the Cloncurry river, in the north, at a distance of over 200
miles from the Gulf of Carpentaria. The exceeding richness of this deposit
induced the discoverers to make an effort to work it in spite of its inaccessible
situation and the wild country intervening between it and the coast. The
attempt of course failed. The ore was all that could be desired, but it only
sold for enough to pay the fancy rates of carriage demanded by the bullock
drivers, together with the expenses of working and shipment. Copper was also
discovered at Mount Perry on the upper Burnett and at Kilkivan on the
northern watershed of the Mary. The prospectors could not, however, induce


capitalists to assist them; the experience of Peak Downs was not encouraging,
and the indifference lasted till about 1870, when the increasing price of copper
in the European market called attention to the Queensland deposits.
Some Sydney capitalists determined to work the lode at Mount Perry, and
sent up a staff of miners to begin operations. A company had been formed
on a plan afterwards adopted in many subsequent cases, which caused a dis-
astrous check to the progress of the industry. A cash capital of £6500 was
made to do duty for a share list nominally amounting to £60,000. In the case of
Mount Perry the capitalists who had taken up the shares supplied the deficiency
by guaranteeing a bank credit, and the extraordinary richness of the ores, to-
gether with the high price ruling for copper, did the rest. The mine was worked
to a profit, in spite of the long land carriage to port, and in a few years the
bank credit was covered and dividends amounting in the aggregate to nearly
three times the cash capital returned to the shareholders from the produce of
the lode. The commencement of operations at Mount Perry was the signal for
an outburst of mining activity, or to speak more correctly of mining speculation,
which was increased by the discovery of tin near the southern border. The
copper deposits in the Wide Bay and Burnett districts, of which the existence
had been previously known and disregarded, wei’e eagerly sought for. In all
directions land containing mineral lodes was taken up and company after com-
pany floated to work them. In all these cases the same fatal plan was followed
of subscribing a small cash capital and loading it with an enormous mass of paid
up shares. As instances, the Normanby Company may be mentioned, with a cash
capital of £SOOO, and 80,000 nominal shares of £1 each; the Victorian with
£6,500, and 100,000 shares ; and the Mount Clara with £1,200, and 40,000
shares. But these were only single instances. The largest actual capital sub-
scribed in any case was about £15,000, but most of the companies were formed
on a far less substantial basis. And to add to the prevailing frenzy, the original
Peak Downs mine, which had been working on steadily for many years, gave
a dividend in 1872, equal to about 75 per cent, on the whole of the very large
capital invested in it, a dividend produced in a great measure by neglecting
necessary explorations, and taking out all the ore within reach for the fur-
naces. The prices of shares of all descriptions went up to absurd figures.
The £1 share of the Mount Perry mine sold for over 405., representing a value
for a property in which barely £13,000 had been expended of over £120,000.
Normanby shares sold for over 305., Mount Clai’a for 10s., representing values
of £120,000 and £20,000, for properties in which £5,000 and £1,200 had
been expended, and which had neither paid a dividend, nor appeared likely
to pay one. In the year mentioned—lß72 —smelted copper to the value of
£234,540, and ore worth £23,183 was exported, and no less than 2148 min-
eral selections were taken up for antimony, bismuth, cinnabar, copper, coal,
galena, iron, kerosene shale, opals, silver, tin, zinc, and plumbago. The
“ flash times ” of California were reproduced on a small scale, and each
selection as soon as marked of, became a marketable commodity, portions
Selling freely at prices fixed almost entirely by the excited imaginations of
buyers.
Of course there could be only one ending to this outbreak of mad speculation.
Not only was a capital which might have sufficed to put two or three copper
mines into permanent working order spread over twenty different lodes, but


in almost every case work was begun on the most lavish scale, with all the
paraphernalia of high salaried managers, &c. In one case after another the
money originally subscribed, together with whatever advances the company
could secure on these properties, was exhausted, leaving the lode opened up and
partly explored, but with no means of utilizing the mineral. The enormous
mass of nominal shares floated by each company precluded them from raising
funds to go on, and the general reaction from the frenzy of share gambling
forbade the hope of obtaining exceptional assistance from investors. The sin-
gular result followed, that while funds had been freely forthcoming to open
unexplored mineral country, none could be obtained to work proved lodes.
Besides, the exceptional price ruling for copper had begun to fall, so that one
by one the whole crop of new mining enterprises, which had sprung mush-
room-like into existence, withered and faded away. The mines were sold for
nominal prices and shut up, the companies went into liquidation and the share-
holders, deploring their losses, were apt to attribute them not to their own blind
folly, but to the mineral lodes which had been, not the subject of their invest-
ment, but the counters in the big game of speculation which they had been
playing. And this was not the worst result that followed from the general
excitement of that period, for the managers of the established mines, spurred
on to create big dividends, had concentrated their energy in the exhaustion of
ore that had been opened out, neglecting the proper exploration of the lodes to
provide for the future. They were therefore ill prepared for the fall in price
of copper, and the shares having fallen into the hands of buyers who pur-
chased at the ridiculously inflated prices prevalent during the excitement, the
holders would advance no more money* Those mines therefore have never
recovered the shock, and the present position of this branch of our mining
industry is most unsatisfactory—worse a great deal, than it need be in spite
of the low price ruling for the metal.
The present position of copper mining in the colony, though very unsatis
factory, affords no cause for discouragement. The old mines of Peak Downs
are far from worked out, and the same may be said of Mount Perry,
although of course the low price of copper will not bear the heavy carriage
charges and the cost of smelting with wood fuel. Of the mines in the Wide Bay
and Burnett districts, it is not too much to say that at least a dozen are now
lying with abandoned shafts, in which lodes of ore are visible, capable of yielding
a very handsome return on capital invested in working them even at the present
prices for the metal; although certainly not rich enough to create working
capital out of ore alone. They vary greatly in character. Some are compar-
atively narrow veins carrying rich ores; others, like Mount Clara in the Kil-
kivan district, are regular quarries, in which all the mining work has
been done almost without shifting a ton of rock not containing copper. The
approach of railways now being constructed, will no doubt lead to some re-
newed mining activity in these localities, especially as abundant coal has been
found near the coast. But, copper lodes are found almost over the whole colony.
In the Gladstone district and in the neighbourhood of Rockhampton, lodes
have been found and explored, A mine is now being worked a short distance
south of Mackay, and the ore has been found in the country to the back of
Townsville and on the Cape York Peninsula. The great deposit of native
copper and rich ores on the Cloncurry has already been mentioned, and indi-


cations of copper ore has been found—though not explored—at many other'
points on the coast and in the interior. In fact the very abundance of the
mineral has been the chief bar to the success of this branch of our mining
industry, for it caused the dispersion of the capital available at one time for
its prosecution over too wide a field for success. It is to be hoped that when
the reaction has worn itself out, and copper mining is again resumed, it will
be conducted in a more judicious manner. If so, it is probable that Queens-
land will take the lead as a copper-produeing country.
TAF f
BI&LIO
f totivs A.
U OJu
J. H. REYNOLDS, GENE


7- 2~
SYDNEY INTERNATIONAL EXHIBITION
OF 1879.
THE QUEENSLAND COURT,
RISE AND PROGRESS OF QUEENSLAND INDUSTRIES.
TXUNT.
The story of the discovery of tin ore in Queensland belongs to the romance
of mining. There is a heavy black metallic sand found in the beds of many
creeks, well known to diggers and often a great nuisance to the alluvial gold
miner because from its specific gravity it interferes with the operation of wash-
ing. This sand though metallic was known to contain only iron and other
metals which were of little commercial value. But there was a certain creek in
the southern part of the colony near the New South Wales border, where a
peculiar looking black sand was noticeable where the ordinary dray track
crossed its bed. For years the track was used, and of all the wayfarers that
crossed the creek not one thought of taking up a handful of the sand to look
at it more closely, or to see whether it differed in any respect from that which
was to be found in a hundred creek beds in the colony. It was not till 1871
that a man, more observant or more curious than usual, examined the sand,
noticed the peculiarity of its appearance, and enquired wbat it contained. And
then it transpired that another valuable metal had been added to the list of
available Queensland products.
The tin “ rush ” which created the thriving town of Stanthorpe differed from
a gold rush only in the manner in which the workings were held; instead of min-
ing “ claims ” the country was taken up in selections. The extremely liberal
terms on which these selections were granted facilitated speculation. An in-
tending selector marked off the boundaries of the piece he wanted by affixing
notices to trees at the four corners, and making the best of his way to the
nearest office, paid down five shillings per acre. The selection was con-
ditionally accepted, almost at once, and a title was issued which enabled the


holder to claim exclusive possession of the mineral in it. This title became ab-
solute on payment of 15s. more per acre, and proof that mining improvements to
the value of £1 per acre had been made, the boundaries of the selections being of
course subject to revision when definitely surveyed and laid out by the
Government officials. Naturally there was a rush for tin selections. It was
found that a great number of alluvial fiats contained tin ore, and the taking
up of one selection was the signal for speculators to surround it by a chess-
board pattern of holdings selected on the chance that the ore deposit might
extend through them too. The preliminary title, obtainable by the first pay-
ment of ss. was cheap, and held good for at least twelve months; and while the
first excitement lasted, the fact that tin had actually been found in a particular
spot made every selection within miles of it a saleable property, and while this
species of gambling was going on work progressed briskly on the fields. The
ore—stream tin—was found in several places in deposits feet thick mixed with
very little extraneous matter, and was obtained by stripping the surface soil
and washing the “ dirt ”in cradles after the fashion of alluvial mining. Tin
was then selling at more than double its present price, and the ore, washed
clean, contained from 60 per cent, upwards of the pure metal. Consequently
there was no great expense necessary. A miner with his shovel and tin dish
could wash out many pounds’ weight daily of the ore, which was bought on the
spot by traders, bagged and despatched to port. In the year following the first
discovery, ore to the value ot £108,310 was exported, in 1873 the export had
risen to £370,912.
But, as in other mining, it was soon found that these exceptional deposits
were rare. The amount of tin-bearing ground was certainly very large, but
the expenditure of much money and labour was needed to utilise it. Super-
incumbent masses of barren earth had to be removed, and the deposit of wash
dirt was sometimes thin, sometimes very much intermixed with worthless stuff.
The desultory digging out of patches and rough washing was too wasteful a pro-
cess to yield a profit unless in exceptionally rich spots. Labour had to be organised
and the deposit attacked by opening wide excavations giving a large “ face ”
on which gangs of men working in unison could operate. An abundant supply
of water was needed for sluicing, and the natural supply was neither large,
permanent, nor conveniently situated, for many of the workings. Capital was
needed to put up dams, pumping machinery, and many other appliances. As
time went on the fever of speculation died away. Companies with inflated
share lists, such as had been formed at the time of copper speculation, collapsed,
selections changed hands, and tin mining developed from a speculation into an
industry. As organisation and capital were brought to bear upon it, the cost of
raising the ore was continually diminished, so that deposits which at first were
neglected were profitably worked, although the price of the metal steadily sank
until it was less than half of what it had been at first. Naturally, however,
the total output decreased in value. The export of tin, ore and smelted, sank from
£358,550 in 1874 to £187,201 in 1876. And then another misfortune fell on
the tin fields The great drought which more or less afflicted the colonies
during the years of 1877 and 1878 told heavily on the Stanthorpe tin fields.
Water, and plenty of it, is an absolute necessity in working stream tin, and the
rain during these years fell only in showers. The waterholes, natural and ar-
tificial, dried up. Mounds of stacked “ wash dirt ” lay idle and the miners


were unable to do anything. In the year 1877, the last official record, 54 tin
mines are recorded, and they only raised 2,579 tons of ore, showing how
restricted they had been in their operations. And in 1878, the condition of
the industry was even worse.
However, the drought, though a heavy misfortune, has passed away. The
tin deposits at iStanthorpe are being worked again with more vigour, and there
yet remains a very large amount of ore containing ground to be washed, quite
payable with the appliances now used, even at the reduced price of the metal.
Lode tin has also been found in the same district though it has not yet been
mined. But it should be mentioned that although Stanthorpe is the only
place in which stream tin is being minedon an extensive scale, it is by no means
the only locality in the colony where it has been found. It does not appar-
ently exist among the great mineral deposits of the Wide Bay and Burnett
districts, where ores of almost every other known metal have been found, but
it exists in several parts of Northern Queensland. A few years ago some
promising deposits of stream tin were found by prospecting parties who were
searching the country back from Townsville, and a few selections were actually
taken up, but no use was made of the discovery, the low price of the metal
forbidding the hope of any great profit to the prospectors, who were men with-
out much capital and who would have had to contend against costly carriage
rates through the roadless bush. For the same reason, other deposits of
stream tin found in the neighbourhood of Byerstown, about 100 miles inland
from Cooktown, have not been utilized to any considerable extent; a few tons
of the ore were washed, bagged, carted to Cooktown and exported, but there
could not have been a great margin of profit on the transaction. Besides, in
gold producing districts, it is difficult to induce diggers to take much trouble
about the baser metals as they are called. The splendid prizes which occa-
sionally reward the gold miner, and which often fall to the poorest among
them, exercise an overpowering fascination over those who have experienced
that phase of the auri sacra fames. The man who has, in colonial phrase,
“ followed digging ” never takes kindly to a less exciting kind of mining, and
the population of the far north is yet mainly composed of diggers, or of those
who have lived with and by them, and imbibed their views and prejudices.
However, it is probable that tin fields of great magnitude exist among the
granite ranges that form the backbone of the Cape York Peninsula. The
deposit of ore in the Palmer district, already mentioned, is said to be large
and rich, and stream tin is also now being worked to the southward near
Cairns, in the strip of country between the sea and the ranges that rise
abruptly a short distance from the coast. The length of land carriage is not
so great as from the Palmer field, but from the nature of the country it is
still costly. And it is highly improbable that the localities mentioned contain
the only tin deposits in so great a tract of country presenting very much the
same geological features throughout. The country between the range and the
sea, broken, clothed with a thick scrub and traversed by innumerable swift
streams emerging from deep mountain ravines, has not even—for the most part
been explored and only to a very slight extent subjected to the minute
examination known as prospecting. Besides, searchers for minerals in the far
north have looked only for one metal—gold—the discovery of tin has been
accidental, and the conditions under which the two metals exist are different.


We are therefore justified in concluding that when the restlessness caused by
successive gold rushes has quite subsided, when the progress of colonization in-
troduces a more regular and settled population, when roads are made and the
country better known, many more tin fields will be opened in that part of the
colony. But without reckoning on such contingencies there are already
known deposits of ore sufficient to give tin an important place among Queens-
land products for many years yet. The industry will be subject of course
to fluctuations—the fight against the difficulties with which every enterpnze
in a new country is beset, will be waged with varying success—but as a source
of wealth the production of this metal will long afford employment to capital
and labour in the colony.


_ fizisr/ f f £>BO
UW A i v O FO R D
”7- (O, <> z ,
Sydney International Exhibition
O IET 1879.
THE QUEENSLAND COURT.
/f/s'£ /J/V£» PROGRESS OF QUEENSLAND INDUSTRIES.
GOLD.
When Queensland commenced its career as a separate colony, gold did not
figure to an appreciable extent among the products. Before separation a great
rush had taken place to the Port Curtis district, which though it did not
lead to the discovery of any considerable alluvial deposit, threw many
thousands of men into what was then an almost unknown part of the colony
and founded the present town of Rockhampton. In 1860 there were
wandering parties of prospectors who found a few patches here and there, and
who were always animated by the curious digger’s superstition—for the belief
had little rational foundation—that Queensland contained some great
alluvial deposits.
It was not till 1863 that the Registrar of the colony found the pro-
duction of gold sufficiently important to be worth chronicling, and the 8000
oz. which he records seem to have been the produce mainly of some patches in
the Port Curtis district and the Peak Downs. The prospectors, however, continued
their search in likely looking places and met with some moderate reward.
In 1865 the colony exported 25,338 ozs. worth £92,938, the produce of several
scattered little fields of which Peak Downs was the principal. Still there was
no sign of any alluvial deposit rich enough to attract a rush, and in 1866 the
production had retrograded to a total value of £85,521.
The colony was then, however, on the eve of its first important gold
discovery. In 1867 a prospector named Nash camped for the night in a


scrubby gully near the Mary River in what was then a wild country occupied
by only a few cattle stations. He found “ prospects” that induced him to
search further, and soon discovered that he had accidentally come upon the
richest alluvial deposit yet found in Queensland. In a few weeks the dis-
covery was known, and a “ rush” from the neighboring settlements took
place, followed presently by a still greater rush from all parts of Australia as
the fame of Gympie spread far and wide. That year the expoi’t of gold was
worth £189,248, in 1868 it reached £593,516 and gold mining took rank as
one of the leading industries of the colony. But Gympie, though an exceed-
ingly rich alluvial field, was very limited in extent, and so were the other
patches at Kilkivan, Imbil, &c., in its neighborhood. The reefs, however, at
the first named place attracted attention early, and of the gold easily won from
the alluvial in the outset much was invested in the more permanent work of
opening them up. And the roving diggers who came too late to share in the
alluvial lottery of Gympie found plenty of inducement to remain in the
colony. Hardly had the cream of the Gympie gullies been skimmed when it
became known that at Ravenswood and Gilbert River gold was to be found.
The hardy diggers plunged at once into the almost unexplored North, bi’aving
all the dangers of the tropical wilderness and the numerous tribes of fiercely
hostile savages. They speedily found that in Northern Queensland the
precious metal was distributed overalmost the whole country. Like children in
a confectioner’s shop, the diggers wandered from spot to spot, attracted first by
one deposit then by another. Indeed, in those wild solitudes supplies could
not reach them except by a long, difficult and dangerous route, and it was
only exceptionally rich patches that would yield sufficient to recompense the
miners. Many fields then discovered and partly worked were abandoned
again and remain yet almost untouched, not because the reefs containing the
precious metal are too poor, but because their inaccessibility adds so greatly to
the cost of working them, that men will not attempt the task. The very
magnitude of the auriferous areas of the North also, and the fact that even
now fresh discoveries are being made, militates against their success. The
miners refuse to settle down to work unless tempted by exceptional chances
of profit, and for some years no alluvial deposit of sufficient magnitude to
hold a body of diggers together was found in the North.
Mining in Northern Queensland settled down with Ravenswood as a main
centre, and in Gympie the exploration of the reefs steadily progressed. The
total outpilt of gold though fluctuating was increasing, and by 1871 had
reached a total value of £616,807. In that year, also, it is worthy of note
that the value of machinery on the gold fields was estimated at £66,883.
The alluvial had been for the most part worked out, and the miners were
turning to the more regular profits obtainable from the hundreds of reefs that
had been discovered. In 1872 the value of machinery had risen to £118,367,
and the yield of gold almost entirely from reefs was still increasing. And
again the colony was on the eve of another great discovery. An official
exploring party, traversing the unknown interior of the Cape York Pen-
insula, found traces of gold. This hint sufficed for some adventurous
prospectors who were at the time living in the then main centre of Northern
mining, and by the end of 1873, it became known that another great alluvial
field had been found on the Palmer. Again diggers came rushing to Queens-


land from all parts of Australia, and the gold production of the colony,
which had crept up to £717,540 in 1873, reached £1,383,710 in 1875, ex-
ceeding for the first time the value of the export of wool. A great oppor-
tunity was offered for the establishment of permanent gold mining in the far
North, because not only were there numbers of rich reefs in the Palmer field
itself but also in its neighborhood at a place called the Hodgkinson. The
wide shallow alluvial deposits would, in the ordinary course of mining, have
furnished the miners with funds that would have enabled them to open the reefs,
after the first speculative rush had subsided. This was what happened at
Gympie and laid the foundation of the sound permanent mining industry
established there. It would have happened in the Cook District also but for
an unforeseen event. The Chinese came swarming in thousands from Hong
Kong and closing up like a flood round the footsteps of the European pioneers
succeeded in diverting a considerable portion of the golden stream to China.
For, unlike the white digger, the Chinese never care to expose their winnings
in the alluvial lottery to the inevitable risk of regular quartz mining, pre-
ferring to send away to China every ounce they can scrape together. Conse-
quently the reefers of the far North have had added to the difficulties which
nature has placed in their way the fact that they have been compelled to
depend mainly on outside capital for the long and costly “ dead work” which
must be undertaken in opening a new reefing field. These distracts have
therefore been peculiarly sensitive to the general commercial depression which
has visited the colonies. It is difficult at all times to attract capital to a
distant mining field, and especially when from any cause a pressing demand
for it exists in more settled portions of the colony.
In 1877 the total value of gold exported was £1,307,084, and this although
the yield from the alluvial deposits of the Palmer had greatly decreased. In
that year the value of mining plant on the fields was estimated at £240,230,
and the number of distinct reefs proved be auriferous amounted to 1,565.
These reefs were in defined gold fields covering in the aggregate 6,901 square
miles. In 1878 the yield of gold had fallen to £1,052,490, a decrease partly
accounted for by the almost complete exhaustion of the alluvial deposits of
the Palmer, But of the great number of reefs proved to contain gold two-
thirds are in the Palmer, Hodgkinson, Etheridge and G fiber ton field localities
to which carriage is very costly. And for the reasons above stated, capital to
put these mines in working order has to come mainly from outside, that
which is being produced in the localities themselves from successful mines beingat
present chiefly devoted to further extension of the work and improvements of plant.
Improvements in a reefing district which is compelled to be self-supporting-
must necessarily be slow and fluctuating. And the very extent of our
Northern fields militates against their progress, the little capital available
being spread over too great an extent of country. But, if this is a
present disadvantage it affords a certainty of future wealth. The Queensland
miner has been accustomed to an exceptionally high return from quartz, and
has based his calculations and arranged his work in the expectation of
getting it. And that high return is obtained. In 1878, a year of prevailing
drought, when an unusual array of difficulties faced the miners, and when as
sometimes happens the number of rich finds was unusually low, the average
return of gold per ton was 1 oz. 10 dwt. 3 grains for 165,786 tons. And yet


tlie earnings of miners calculated on the number of men employed equalled
an average of .£2Ol 9s. 9d. per man. This was reckoned an unfortunate year.
There is a great extent of auriferous country over which as great a yield of
gold can be obtained, and if quartz were generally mined and crushed with the
aid of the appliances used in older mining colonies, it would be difficult tc? put
a limit on the amount of gold that could be produced and the number of
people that could find profitable employment in producing it. Last year the
total number of steam engines employed in quartz mining was only 104, with
an aggregate horse-power of 1,354, and the approximate value of all the
plant used throughout the colony was only £269,930. Taken in connection
with the known auriferious areas of the colony it is evident from these figures
that quartz reefing here is only in its infancy.


tz Kjl.
('i'Jff & ~0-t—
-
VutTVv -
' . ', J&jt'
A *
[ t~~ /icM^y^c^U^
A. , , W,iL' < —
"4^_ ( s " u '' y '"’
f 'Wj
