



MR. GEORGE BROOKMAN,
OjUGINATOE OF THE COOLGAEDIE COLD MINING AAD PEO&IT.CTJ AG
Company, Limited.






THE ROMANCE OF KALGOORLIE.
[From the S. A. Register, September 2, 1899.]
“The richest square mile in the
world’’ is the character given by an
eminent mining authority to the group
of mines at Kalgoorlie of which the
Great Boulder was the pioneer. That
authority had inspected the best
mineral properties -which other gold-
producing countries could boast; yet
he unhesitatingly gave the palm to
that wonderful patch of Western Aus-
tralian territory which has already
astonished the world with its richness,
and which will doubtless before long
completely eclipse anything it has
hitherto accomplished. A fascinating
and exciting story indeed is that which
is related by our Special Reporte"
under the title of “A Mining Ro-
mance.” Clearly are traced the suc-
cessive steps by which all the difficul-
ties incidental to goldfield pioneering
were overcome, and the properties de-
scribed placed in their present position
of magnificent pre-eminence. If West-
ern Australia is the Cinderella amongst
the Australian Colonies, having been
suddenly dazzled by a waking dream
of wealth and splendour, the Kalgoor-
lie mines may be likened to the glass
slipper which became the means of
changing the vision into a reality. The
mines opened amid many discourage-
ments have already enormously in-
creased the gold yield of the western
colony. The story of the evolution of
that success has aptly been described
as being a “Tale of Two Cities”—Ade-
laide and Kalgoorlie. Melbourne at
first took only a subordinate place in
the movement. It is curious to reflect
that when Mr. George Brookman visit-
ed the eastern colony to float the
Ivanhoe Mine into a Company he was
poorly supported, and was forced to
return to Adelaide disappointed. Here,
however, lie found that sometimes a
prophet verily hath honour in his own
country, and he was able to dispose in
this city of shares reluctantly taken
in the eastern capital. One explanation
of this was that a section of the Vic-
torian Press which, unfortunately,
found an echo in Adelaide—was at the
time intent upon writing down the
mines of Western Australia, principal-
ly with the object of patriotically
booming those of Gippsland. The
strange aberrations of the scientific ex-
perts who visited the field, and wrote
learnedly in condemnation of its pros-
pects, assisted in enabling the journal-
istic pessimists to put people off the
track which led to fortune; but “The
Register” exhorted holders to keep
their shares and to steadily persevere
In a policy of development, and subse-
quent history has proved its forecast


to have been correct. This is not
case of being wise after the event.
The original discoverers of the Great
Boulder worked three months at Dash-
wood’s Gully in South Australia, and
were rewarded by the modest sUm of
£lO. The value of the gold produced
mainly from the mines which these same
prospectors opened up at Kalgoorlie
amounted, in three months of the pre-
sent year, to about three-quarters of
a million sterling! Comment would
spoil such a contrast. A truly romantic
interest attaches to the conversation
which took place at Dashwood’s Gully
between Mr. W. G. Brookman, Mr. De
Rose, and Mr. S. W. Pearce, and which
resulted in the decision to seek for for-
tune’s favours in the West. The finan-
cial part of the undertaking was well
managed by Mr. George Brookman in
Adelaide. No one can read the inter-
esting narrative of the various steps
by -which success was ultimately at-
tained without noting how largely the
result was aided by the unflinching
confidence with which the enterprise
■was supported by South Australians,
who have been the life and soul of
many great enterprises in all the other
colonies. Of the fifteen members of
the original Syndicate who provided
the funds to equip the expedition the
majority belonged to this city. Travel-
lers who visit the western goldfields
now, and are conveyed in comfortable
railway carriages, may find difficul-
ty in conceiving how enormous
were the obstacles to transport
when the track from Southern Cross
was practically waterless and the
sand and dust lay on it, mile after
mile, to a depth of several inches. In
the history of the development of rich
mines it has frequently happened that,
at the critical stage, when machinery
was necessary, the original holders
have lost faith in their ventures; and
have thus allowed rich rewards to
slip through their hands. This crucial
point in the career of the Great Boul-
der was reached when Mr. George
Brookman started for the goldfields to
inspect the leaseholds, and had to gua-
rantee the Syndicate’s overdraft at the
Bank. Had this prompt action been
delayed what a contrast would the re-
sult have presented to that which fol-
lowed in the fortunes of the parties
principally concerned! A man of little
faith would have hesitated and lost.
There is a tide in the affairs of men
Which, taken at the flood, leads on to fortune;
Omitted, all the voyage of their life
Is bound in shallows and in miseries.
In no other occupation do the freshets
and the shallows of fortune present
more noticeable differences than in
mining. In navigating the channels
which lie between these two extremes
a great deal of cool and steady pilot-
age, as well as good luck, is required.
The systematic way in which Mr.
Pearce went to work, testing the vari-
ous lodes and lines of country
around Kalgoorlie, while Mr. G,
Brookman was directing the fi-
nancing, undoubtedly enabled the
Syndicate to avoid many dangers, and
to take a straight course to fortune.
The surprising richness of the field
proved to be in itself almost a snare
to the prospectors, because it induced
them to take up so many leases that
they made their Syndicate responsible
for keeping a little army of 300 men
employed under the labour conditions
when funds were low and hardly any
machinery was available. Systematic
examination and enthusiasm, however,
triumphantly solved the knotty pro-


blem. The two essentials of careful
tests and subsequent confidence are
seldom found together in such a strik-
ing manner as they were in connec-
tion with the development of the Kal-
goorlie mines.
Most men unfortunately do not pos-
sess sufficient individuality to base
their confidence or enterprise on facts
which they have themselves ascertain-
ed, and to disregard the babble of the
streets. They wait until they find that
people are making a fuss about a
mine, and then they venture upon
their investments, only to prove that
there is such a thing as excess in cau-
tion as well as extravagant rashness.
It would be a mistake, therefore, to as-
cribe the marvellous success of the
Adelaide Prospecting Party to nothing
else than sheer luck. There was not
only enterprise, but cool-headed busi-
ness method allied to firm faith in the
venture; and these qualities, with a
plentiful share of good fortune, have
brought wealth to the principal per-
sons concerned. To Western Australia
the development of Kalgoorlie has en-
sured prosperity for many years to
come. To this colony it fias given op-
portunities of trade which have been
energetically accepted, and it has,
moreover, infused into South Austra-
lians a new spirit of hope and determi-
nation, which in the future may lead
to similar discoveries in our own ter-
ritory. We believe that it will, and
we cannot too often impress upon our
readers the improbability of the wes-
tern lodes and reefs being shut off
from us by geographical boundary-
lines. Such an idea would be repug-
nant to commonsense as well as to
common experience. When the time
shall come to write the history of the
Adelaide Prospecting Party fully in the
light of subsequent events people may
realize that the formation of that
business combination represented a
turning-point in the histories of two
colonies. The statistics of trade with
Western Australia, which are summa-
rized in connection with our special
reporter’s narrative, supply only a sug-
gestion of the commercial situation as
affected by the Western demand. In
order to fill in the details it is neces-
sary to remember that when a great
commercial crisis, bad harvests, and
low prices united to cause extreme dul-
ness in local business, the orders for
machinery and supplies produced an
entire revolution. The “Tale of Two
Cities” possesses very special interest
to practically the whole population of
South Australia.


INTRODUCTORY.
The history of Kalgoorlie is substantially
the history of Western Australian progress.
When the future chronicler of Western
events shall set out the record of the mar-
vellous transformation witnessed in consi-
derably less than a decade, Kalgoorlie will
be the pivot on which the romantic narra-
tive will turn. History furnishes many
instances of the rapid development which
countries have undergone when possessed of
that magnetic attractor —gold—but Kal-
goorlie stands pre-eminent as an example
of a single centre furnishing the impetus
for the exploitation of all a colony’s latent
resources. To those unfamiliar with the
facts of this remarkable progress, more of
picturesque romance than of truth appears
in the statement that barely seven years
have elapsed since the news of Bayley’s
wonderful discovery first fired the imagina-
tions of the speculative and intrepid with
which our race abounds. Within a few
months the obscure name of Coolgardie was
world - famous, but the attractions of the
place were to be eclipsed at a later period
by the magic charm with which its o’er-
shadowing rival became invested.
With the birth of the mining industry a
new future dawned on the Western colony.
Formerly that province was sunk in slug-
gish ineptitude. Its people, cradled in old-
fashioned notions, and isolated from the
rest of the world, were circumscribed in
their sphere of action. Ignorant of the vast
mineral resources which slumbered beneath
the sandy waste stretching over an unex-
plored interior, they confined their atten-
tion to the few scattered patches of agri-
cultural land which skirted the seaboard.
Nature in the internal solitudes which these
bucolic natives dared not penetrate wore a
forbidding aspect, and was characterized by
that weird melancholy which Marcus
Clarke has described as “the dominant fea-
ture of the Australian bush.” The land-
A MINING ROMANCE.
THE RISE OF KALGOORLIE.
HOW THE BIG MINES WERE FOUND.
scape presented one vast monotony of
stunted mulga. It was devoid of nearly
all animal life, and minus the lighter
forms of vegetation to be found in the
sister colonies. The lonely pioneer, piercing
with dauntless persistence the waterless
areas where the yellow metal shone, was
surrounded at times by the most impres-
sive sights and sounds with which nature
thrills the ear and awes the mind of man.
Following upon Bayley’s find came the in-
flux of hordes of restless ’tothersiders
thirsting for gold, and the intoxicating ex-
citement of the digger’s life. These vast-
nesses became dotted with primitive settle-
ments, which soon resounded with the hum
of industry. The mining camp of Cool-
gardie had scarcely wakened into activity
when one dark rainy winter’s night intelli-
gence of a new discovery twenty-four miles
east was flashed with that swift telegraphy
which only prospectors understand. The
discomforts of the night hau no terrors for
the ardent souls that had cast civilization
behind them, and when morning broke
Coolgardie was almost deserted. The deni-
zens of that “tented field” were iar on
their way to the greatest alluvial rush
which the mining records of Western Aus-
tralia furnish. With this discovery, but
not actually with its discoverers, really be-
gan the rational development of the West’s
resources. The genesis of reef-mining
which opened with the pegging of the
Great Boulder was the sequel of this allu-
vial find. The narration of the events
which led up to that mammoth discovery
is inextricably interwoven with a history
of enterprise on the part of South Austra-
lian colonists.
A SMALL BEGINNING.
At this particular period South Australia
w-as suffering from a blighting depression.
Naturally the reports of fabulous wealth
from the new Eldorado excited attention
in this colony, Messrs. W. G. Brookman


and C. H. De Rose were engaged at the allu-
vial find in Dashwood’s Gully, South Aus-
tralia, since known as McTaggart’s. Three
months’ labour there was rewarded with
about £lO worth of gold! While thus
employed they met Mr. S. W. Pearce, an
enthusiastic prospector, who possessed a
splendid knowledge of mineralogy. They
had pegged out a claim known as the Boul-
der —so called because its distinguishing
feature consisted of large sandstone boul-
ders, from the crevices of which the small
quantity of gold already referred to was re-
covered. Mr. George Brookman’s frater-
nal interest in their proceedings prompted
him to visit McTaggart’s, and the scanty
yield obtained excited his mirth. It was
then that Mr. Pearce suggested that if the
party were in the West they would pro-
bably show a very much better result.
After conversation, Mr. George Brookman
arranged to send his brother and Mr.
Pearce to the West to seek their fortunes
there, Mr. De Rose electing to go to Bro-
ken Hill. A small Syndicate was quickly
formed, consisting of ten shares of £ls
each, with five free shares to the prospec-
tors. This was the original Syndicate,
known as the Adelaide Prospecting Party,
afterwards to be called the Coolgardie
Goldmining Prospecting Company, Limi-
ted. Never was a finer illustration affor-
ded of the truth of the Scriptural parable
wherein the grain of mustard-seed develops
into a spreading tree. That £l5O gave birth
to those magnificent properties—lvanhoe,
Great Boulder, Lake View Consols, Kal-
goorlie Mint, Associated, Lake View
South, Lake View Extended, Hannan’s
Oroya, Brookman’s Boulder, Golden Horse-
shoe, Bank of England, and Great Boulder
No. 1, which, at prices touched during the
present month, aggregated a value of thirty
millions sterling.
A FAMOUS SYNDICATE.
The Syndicate was composed of the fol-
lowing members:—W. G. Brookman,
George Brookman, John White, John
Dick, S. W. Pearce, W. E. J. Brocksopp,
E. N. Wigg, Oolin Templeton, F. D. Hodge,
W. B, Wilkinson, J. M. Mcßride, Dr. J.
A. G. Hamilton, G. P. Doolette. and R.
McEwin. Messrs. W. G. Brookman and S.
W. Pearce, whose names, in conjunction
with that of Mr. George Brookman, were
destined to be writ large on the scroll of
mining fame, left Adelaide by the P. and
O. steamer Australia on June 7, 1893.
Landing at Albany, they proceeded imme-
diately to Perth, where they armed them-
selves with a copy of the miming laws ope-
rating in the western colony, so as to be
prepared for all emergencies. On their ar-
rival at York they invested in a spring-
dray and two horses, with which to convey
their requisites into the interior. Their pro-
gress to Coolgardie was slow and painful.
They were compelled to walk the whole
distance beside the dray, and often to camp
out at night when the weather rendered
such exposure most uncomfortable. They
completed this arduous journey on June
29, and entered the mining camp of
Coolgardie, strong in the hope and confi-
dence of future success. Here, however,
they were doomed to disappointment; and,
after inspecting a claim which was offered
to the Syndicate and promptly refused,
they decided to push on to the new rush
at Hannan’s. On reaching Cassidy’s
Claim, which was afterwards purchased by
Mr. J. F. Cudmore. they derived fresh cou-
rage from inspecting a magnificent show oi
free gold there. The tale is best told in
Mr. W. G. Brookman’s own words which
were addressed to the Syndicate from the
“Thirty-mile Rush,” north-east of Ooolgar-
die, on July 4 of the same year:—-
We had the pleasure of seeing on Monday some
ox the richest quartz it is possible to imagine,
obtained from a reef here; and, as we lent the
prospectors our dolly and mortar, and the stone
was crushed at our tent, there was no deception
about the result. It was quite 400 oz. to the ton,
and as good if not better than Sylvester Browne’s;
so we stand a good chance of securing something
■rich. We have already pegged out a reef claim,
20 acres, and in the surface stone can plainly
discern the gold in fine colours, and the pro-
prietors of the reef before mentioned say it is
a better indication than they had. We are now
sinking on the reef, and in a day or two hope
to strike it rich. The adjoining reef to ours is
yielding rough gold, and they are only down
7 ft. Of course, we may have to try several before
being satisfied; but no opportunity will be lost of
obtaining something that will yield a handsome
return to all interested. This field is so far
from the centres of civilization that no postal
facilities yet obtain, and it may be many weeks
before this reaches you. Meanwhile, we hope to
have a rich find.
ENTER THE IVANHOE AND GREAT
BOULDER.
During their sojourn in this locality Mr.
Pearce made frequent excursions from their
camp, and his attention was specially at-
tracted to some large ironstone hills. He
immediately set to work prospecting, with re-
sults so satisfactory that the mates de-


cided to shift their quarters four miles
further into the bush, where they got to
work on what is now the celebrated Xvan-
hoe property. While Mr. W. G. Brook-
man was absent in Ooolgardie making the
necessary application for the block, his
partner was fortunate in discovering, a
short distance from their camp, a very rich
leader, which, being sunk upon, opened out
into a large reef. Never in the romantic
visions of Eastern dreamers has fortune
more deliberately flung her treasures into
the lap of enterprising wooers. Added to
their singular luck, these men brought the
reliable guides of sound judgment and ma-
ture knowledge which enabled them to
take full advantage of their opportunities.
Thus, while hundreds of others similarly
circumstanced failed to “take occasion by
the hand,” these astute pioneers became
the founders of an industry at which the
world has marvelled. That rich leader
upon which Mr. Pearce sunk was no other
than the Great Boulder, which heralded
the unexampled prosperity of an immense
mining field. The letter bearing the news
of the discovery has at this time historic in-
terest, Addressed to the Syndicate by Mr.
W. G. Brookman, it reads as follows: —
Coolgardie, July 15, 1893.—1 came in this morn-
ing to secure a protection area 300 yards by 300,
embracing one of the most mineralized hills in
the vicinity of the new rush, and on the same
line of reef from which the rich stone dollied at
our tent, and which 1 previously mentioned, was
obtained. I can more clearly describe it by
comparing the hills to a peeled orange; the top
consisting of an ironstone blow, and the ridges
dividing the quarters representing fissure lodes,
running east and west from the main reef cross-
ing the ridge. In the north-eastern gullies slugs
of gold were picked up on the surface weighing
from 2 to 3 dwts., and in an adjoining gully,
over a low rise from our claim, slugs 3 oz. and
under were found on Tuesday by a digger, and
a regular rush set in; and before the day was
over there must have been 500 men on the ground;
but, of course, as is usual here, only a few were
lucky. But I mention this to show the leaders
in our claim must have shed this gold, and we
have every indication of having something good
in hand. Of course, it means considerable time
and labour to develop and actually ascertain what
the reef and lodes contain; but we have sunk
several feet on the main reef, and all the quartz
shows fine gold so far as we have gone. We
have also sunk on one of the leaders, and the re-
sult so far is very promising. Some stone raised
(picked) would go 100 oz. to the ton. I am pur-
chasing dynamite and drills, and hope to get down
a considerable depth during the coming week,
and will write at once should we come on coarse
gold. I do not wish to raise hopes in any direc-
tion; but independently of our owti opinion, nulny
other prospectors have expressed the same opinion
as we hold, and I sincerely trust that it may turn
out as good as expected; 300 by 300 is just about
20 acres—a nice strip of country.
A fortnight later another communication
was forwarded conveying additional infor-
mation in the following terms: —
Hannan’s Find, via Coolgardie, July 31, 1893. —
Since my last letter we have been working night
and day developing the reef, and I am glad to say
it improves as we go down. It is not a patchy
reef containing rich nooks here and there, but one
with the gold distributed well through the stone,
and will yield first-rate results. We have a nice
collection of specimens, which will be forwarded
by first opportunity. Of course, we may strike it
very rich further down; but, taking the stone all
round, it is good for 10 oz. to the ton. We have
roasted about 5 cwt. of stone, and will start dolly-
ing some time during the week, and try to get as
much gold collected as possible. This will be a
splendid property, and we propose securing another
20 acres adjoining, and containing several gold-
bearing reefs. But I will write more fully regard-
ing this by next mail. I shall shortly have several
good properties under offer; but there is no need
to push after them. It is much cheaper and bet-
ter to find them ourselves, and there are plenty to
be got. If we secure the 10 acres here, the Syndi-
cate will possess the next-best property in W.A.
to Sylvester Browne’s; but I have not a great deal
of money, and taking up leases is rather expensive;
but if we can dolly out a few ounces to keep us
going, I will secure the lot.
N.B. —One great advantage this district possesses
over Coolgardie for reefing is the unlimited supply
of water obtainable from two to three miles from
our reef, which could either be pumped to the
mine, or a light tramway laid to run the stone
down; and, if the battery were erected, all the
crushing could be done for the whole field—many
of the reef proprietors having expressed their de-
sire for a public battery, and they would pay
liberally for having it done. There is a chain of
lakes extending for many miles round here, while
at Coolgardie none can be got, the only water
Brown’s people get being rain water. I will send
a sketch of the country next time.
It has often been asserted by dll-informed
outsiders that the prospectors of these won-
derful properties were not alive to the sig-
nificance of their discoveries, but the fol-
lowing telegram dispatched by Mr. Brook-
man a little later is an abundant refutation
of this theory:—“Have discovered an im-
mense iron hill with very rich reefs running
through, from one of Which assays as high
as 300 ounces to the ton have been taken.
Have dollied 30 ounces of gold. Estimate
the value at a quarter of a million.” This
brings the reader to the commencement of
a new era in Australian goldmining—an era


of unparalleled advancement, and teeming
with startling revelations which were to
shatter all set mining theories, and to con-
found geological judgments.
SURMOUNTING DIFFICULTIES.
The history of great enterprises, like the
biographies of great men, is often to a con-
siderable extent a succession of discourage-
ments and failures. The brilliant Bard c f
Ayr sang—-
If you would win Dame Fortune’s smile,
Assiduous wait upon her
—and even then the attractive lady’s favour
is proverbially fickle. The development of
that group of great mines in which the
career of the western goldfields practically
began did not proceed upon a smooth un-
interrupted course, but was crowded with
difficulties, to surmount which demanded
enormous efforts and courage and invincible
spirit. These magnificent qualities were
shown in an exceptional degree in the hardy
pioneers of the Western Australian Gold-
fields. Many a tragedy was enacted in that
fierce rush for gold, which attracted the
boldest spirits from the eastern colonies.
Messrs. Brookman and Pearce had not sim-
ply to sail to Western Australia, make their
way under difficulties to Hannan’s and dis-
cover the Ivanhoe, Lake View, Boulder, and
other mines in order to win wealth. To indi-
cate these rich deposits was but to begin a
long and fierce battle with Nature and cir-
cumstances in the effort to acquire the
treasures which they were confident the
ground concealed, vv hen tne Adelaide Syn-
dicate received the telegram in which Mr.
W. G. Brookman estimated the value of the
new claim pegged out by Mr. Pearce, and
afterwards to become a household name as
the Great Boulder, a meeting of the share-
holder's was held. Mr. George Brookman,
who was throughout the moving spirit of
the Syndicate, was naturally much im-
pressed with the sanguine expectations
which the communication expressed, and at
his instance it was decided to instruct the
prospectors to continue acquiring claims
wherever the indications justified their ex-
ploitation. This action showed faith in the
advices received, and confidence in the fu-
ture of the new country. That faith and
that confidence were destined to be liberally
rewarded. Intelligence shortly after reach-
ed the Syndicate that their representatives
had pegged out three additional claims, all
of which have since attained world-wide
celebrity, for they were to be known as the
Lake View Consols, the Australia Blocks,
and the Royal Mint. Mr. Pearce had also
taken up the Golden Horseshoe block on
behalf of the Lefroy Syndicate. The judg-
ment of the prospectors was further dis-
played in the pegging of the great group
of mines—the Associated, including an area
of 350 acres, extending in length 3J miles,
and having a breadth of 1J miles. Obser-
vers of events from afar—startled by the
magnificence of the results which have
sprung from these efforts, and the singu-
larity of the circumstances which crowded
a country’s gold wealth almost entirely into
one group of mines, all developed by the
same promoters—have erroneously attribut-
ed these discoveries to “luck.” It Was un-
doubtedly a happy chance whereby these
pioneers elected to settle at Hannan’s, but
when it is considered that the Ivanhoe is
quite a distinct reef from the Boulder, and
of an entirely different character, that there
fs a space of some hundreds of yards be-
tween the Ivanhoe lodes and the Lake View
Consols, and that both are separated by
distance from the Australia Blocks, it be-
comes apparent that “luck” was a microsco-
pic element in the selection of these parti-
cular areas for development. The prospec-
tors proceeded about their business in a
systematic way. Mr. Pearce made careful
tests of every claim before acquiring the
lease, and in referring to the Australia
Blocks his prophetic declaration that “pos-
sibly at some time the whole hill will be
treated, as I have found cold in the bor-
ings from the country,” stamps him as a
practical geologist, whose theories are
founded upon an intelligent interpretation
of experience. A drive taken through wh it
is termed “country,” as distinct from lode
matter, has been opened out recently for a
distance of 400 ft., and the material passed
through carries an average of 8 dwt. of gold
per ton. In Victoria a reef containing such
a percentage of the metal would be consi-
dered a highly payable mine. After they
had secured this immense tract of country
the troubles of the Adelaide Board of Direc-
tors began. The Board consisted of Messrs.
G. P. Doolette, Jas. Marshall, J. F. Cud-
more, and G. Brookman, and Cbas. Angell
Secretary. It was temporarily unfortunate
for them, and eternally unhappy for the
reliability of geological science, that the ex-
perts who visited the locality, unfamiliar
with the formations, universally condemned
the shows. The shows, however, have since
conclusively condemned them.


SCIENCE MISTAKEN.
Had the promoters not possessed a more
intimate knowledge of the character of the
formations than the experts who reportel
upon them they would, in the face of such
evidence, have relinquished their hold upon
the ladder of success. The tenacity which,
on the contrary, they exhibited, was re-
markable. Discouraged as they were by the
honest misrepresentations of scientists, the
Directors, with Mr. George Brookman at
their head, stood manfully to their enter-
prise. Instead of relaxing in their efforts
they increased them, and strengthened
their capacity for achievement by enlarg-
ing the Syndicate from 15 shares to 100.
Fifty of these were offered to the public at
£25 each, and thus fresh blood and new
capital were introduced into the Syndicate.
Subsequently the Company was still
further expanded to 1,000 shares. Owing
to the conflicting reports regarding the
value of the mines the prospectors were
asked to send samples of ore from the vari-
ous claims. About a ton of stone was for-
warded to Mr James Parkinson for assay
and analysis, and the result confirmed the
statements of Messrs. Brookman and
Pearce. Mr. George Brookman and his as-
sociates were inspired with renewed hope
and courage. A considerable amount of dev-
elopment work having been executed upon
the Ivanhoe property by the prospectors, it
was decided to refloat it as a subsidiary
Company; and, as Melbourne was then the
great home of mining, it was resolved to
effect the registration in that centre. With
this object, Mr. George Brookman visited
the southern capital, where he prepared a
prospectus, and arranged for its issue. The
opportunity this afforded to Victorian capi-
talists was not eagerly grasped at first;
speculators there were unable to realize
what a good thing was being offered them.
The prospectus stated that the claim would
yield from two to three ounces per ton,
which they rightly considered quite good
enough On Mr. Brockman's return to
South Australia from a mission which was
only partially successful, he placed the Ade-
laide portion of the shares without diffi-
culty. He then telegraphed to Melbourne
for some of those held there. This intima-
tion had the desired effect, and before the
list closed there was a “rush for the spoil.”
Quite an impetus was imparted to the de-
mand for scrip by the receipt of a telegram
from the prospectors announcing that they
had cut an eastern lode which gave very
high assay results. The capital of the new
Company consisted of 30,000 shares, at 10s.
each, Is. 6d. paid on application, and Is. 6d.
on allotment Messrs. E. N. Wigg, Harvey
Paterson, Colin Templeton, and A. Camp-
bell formed the first directorate, and Mr.
John Brandon was appointed Secretary.
MORE DEVELOPMENTS.
The flotation of these properties had now
fairly commenced. Shortly after the re-
gistration of the Ivanhoe Company the
Lake View and Boulder East, now familiar
as the Lake View Consols, was offered to
the public. The property consisted of
two 24-acre blocks, and it was successfully
placed in Adelaide by Mr. Brookman, with
applications six times in excess of the num-
ber of shares offered. The Company con-
sisted of 80,000 shares of 10s. each, 40,000
of which were submitted to the public
at 3s. on application, and 3s. on allotment,
with a calling power of 4s. per share.
Twenty thousand shares were taken up in
Melbourne. Mr. Sandford, who assumed
charge of the property on the appointment
of the Directors, carried out some excellent
work during a regime terminated at an
early stage by his untimely decease. No
thing gives a more tragic colouring to the
history of the goldfields than the ravages
of disease which ran rampant among the
earlier settlers. Cut off from the antidotes
supplied by civilization and science, the
brave pioneers died in scores by the track-
side, in the comfortless tent, or amidst the
weird surroundings of the lonely bush. Mr.
Sandford contracted peritonitis, and, de-
spite the utmost exertions by Mr. W. G.
Brookman to save him, he succumbed to
the fell malady. His remains were in-
terred amongst those of his brethren in
arms at Coolgardie. He came to Western
Australia from Hillgrove, in New South
Wales, a locality which has wide renown
in mining circles. Born a prospector, he
lived and died in the forefront of civiliza-
tion. Discouraged by unfavourable opi-
nions, confronted with the most difficult
conditions, robbed of managerial talent by
disease and death, and harassed on all
sides, the undaunted Directors continued
and extended the operations which were
eventually to win the wealth which should
reward their enterprise. It was at this
stage that they entered into a contract with
Messrs. Norwood, Downs, & Co. to dispatch
the first battery to the Kalgoorlie fields.
Recognising that there would be great diffi-
culty in getting the plant carted from the


coast to the fields, teams were sent over bj
the vessel which conveyed the battery. Un-
fortunately, however, even this foresight
was defeated for the time by the stern re-
sistance of Nature to intrusion upon her
wilds. When the teams landed they found
the road to the fields closed, owing to the
scarcity of water. The receipt of this in-
telligence came as a severe shock to the Di-
rectors, who, however, displayed a re-
sourcefulness which commands admiration.
They communicated with Mr. C. H. De
Rose, who had previously joined Mr. W. G.
Brookman at Kalgoorlie, instructing him to
proceed to Southern Cross with the object
of arranging to forward the machinery at
any cost. The difficulties in the way of
achieving this desideratum seemed insuper-
able, but ingenuity and enterprise again
scored a triumph. Mr. De Rose succeeded
in carrying out his instructions by esta-
blishing depots for water along the road
a work which involved immense expense
and great difficulty. The machinery was
thus at length delivered upon the mine, and
was erected under the superintendence of
Mr. John Wills, who had to obtain from
the adjacent bush all the timber required.
That “necessity is the mother of invention”
received a striking exemplification on this
occasion, when the resourceful methods of
the prospectors rescued them from a most
aAvkward dilemma. One of the plummer
blocks belonging to the battery was mis-
sing, and a serious delay in the commence-
ment of crushing operations was threa-
tened. The difficulty was, however, over-
come in the replacement of the lost
article by a wooden plummer made on the
mine. In spite of the concentration of op-
posing circumstances which at every step
confronted them, the persistent pioneers
thus achieved their object, and the dusty
scrub-enclosed settlement soon resounded
to the cheery music of the stampers.
THE BEGINNING OF REWARDS.
Towards the end of the year 1894 Mr.
George Brookman set out on a visit to .he
field in consequence of receiving advice
from Mr. Sandford’s successor that the re-
ports previously furnished concerning the
mine were, not to put too fine a point
upon it, inaccurate. After & sery rough
trip across the Bight, he was met at Al-
bany by Mr. Harvey Paterson with the
welcome news of a splendid fall of rain.
On reaching his hotel at Albany he found
numerous telegrams awaiting him with the
gratifying intelligence that Hannan’s Lake
was filled, and that the nattery had been
set in motion. Prior to this acquisition
of “the gentle rain from heaven,” the Com-
pany had been compelled to condense slalt
water upon the mine, or purchase conden-
sed water at 2s. per gallon, in order to sup-
ply the miners. After the educational ex-
perience of a very rough coach trip to Cool-
gardie, Mr George Brookman reached Han-
nans on Christmas Day, 1894. The first
clean up at the battery, as the result of a
week’s run, took place on Mr. Brookman’s
arrival, and the very satisfactory yield of
250 oz. was returned. This early test of
the qualities of the ore had been render-
ed necessary by the dire financial straits
in Which the Company were placed. They
were extremely short of cash, and prior to
his departure from Adelaide Mr. Brook-
man was obliged to guarantee the Bank
overdraft. In these circumstances Mr.
Brookman naturally felt an especial plea-
sure in handing the gold over to Mr. Rich-
ardson, Inspector of the Western Austra-
lian Bank. Mr. Brookman requested the
Manager to keep the yield a secret, since
it could not be considered the final clean-
up. After preparing, with the assistance
of the experts present, an exhaustive re-
port on the properties, Mr. Brookman re-
turned to Adelaide. He met the share-
holders in the Arbitration-room, Pirie-
street, which had been the scene of so many
a noisy conflict, and gave them a startling
piece of information in the shape of an an-
nouncement that the first crushing of Lake
View ore had yielded 640 oz. as a result of
a fortnight’s run. This intelligence had un-
til then been kept strictly private, the tele-
gram announcing it having been opened in
the room. The news came as a thunderclap
to the delighted shareholders, who greeted
it with most enthusiastic cheers. The effect
upon the market operations was indicated
in the immediate departure of a large num-
ber of the “bears” from the room, with the
object of “buying in” as promptly as pos-
sible. Thus, after much hard fighting, fre-
quent defeat, discouragement, loss, and
danger, the first note of victory was sound-
ed. The Earth had commenced to yield her
treasure.
“A FAIRY TALE OF FINANCE.”
To follow the expansion of the original
Coolgardie Prospecting Syndicate into a
cluster of great Mining Companies is to
trace an intricate network of financial ne-
gotiations. The vastness which the product


of so small a germ has assumed startles the
spectator. The engineering of any great
scheme must ever depend upon some mas-
ter-mind with a genius for detail. With-
out the splendid material at his command
Mr. George Brookman, the dominant figure
in this field of finance, would have been
powerless to achieve the magnificent results
■which crowned his efforts, and he is the
first to acknowledge the valuable co-opera-
tion of his brother Directors, the ready as-
sistance of a great speculating public, and
the faithful service of experienced prospec-
tors and Mine Managers. Yet, placed in
situations which taxed the most fertile re-
sources, Mr. Brookman proved himself
equal to the extraordinary exigencies which
arose. He fired those who were associated
with him with some of his own faith and
fine enthusiasm. He was at once the finan-
cier, the organizer, and the engineer of
every promotion in which this band of
speculators so successfully engaged. These
operations are literally world-embracing in
their scope. Adelaide has become the
mining metropolis of Australia under the
influence of these great stores of mine-
ral wealth whose exploitation has been
directed from this centre. The story
of the expansion of the Western Aus-
tralian Companies takes the reader to the
genesis of the market transactions in the
great Kalgoorlie stocks. The value of the
shares when Mr. G. Brookman left Ade-
laide for the fields in 1894 was about 35.,
and stood at the same price on his return.
The result of the sensational intelligence of
the first crushing imparted to the memor-
able meeting of shareholders, held in the
arbitration-room, Pirie-street, was a sudden
jump from 3s. to 125., and gradually the
scrip commanded much higher figures. The
marvellous increment laiter realized will be
best appreciated when it is explained that
on the sale of the Company’s property to a
powerful English Corporation the colonial
shareholders were recipients of £lO,OOO in
cash and two shares for every one they
held, thus making the scrip, which was
then selling at 35.. worth now £56 per
unit. This is irrespective of handsome divi-
dends which have been received from time
to time.
LONDON CAPITAL.
After the same careful deliberation
which had characterized every action of
the Directors, it was finally determined
that the balance of the claims should be
offered to London. A meeting of share-
holders was convened, at which divers views
were expressed regarding the price which
should be asked for properties. The occa-
sion was remarkable. Some of the share-
holders did not appreciate the full signifi-
cance of the finds, and appeared willing
to surrender their rights on terms not com-
mensurate with their real value; but one of
the original few Syndicators who
was present, exhibiting a spark from
the flame of enthusiasm which
fired the prospectors and promoters,
stood up to record a dramatic pro-
test. Bringing his fist, with sledge-hammer
violence, down upon the table, he exclaim-
ed:—
“Sell on these terms! If the Great Boul-
der isn’t worth a million, I’m a Dutch-
man ! ”
As the outcome of the meeting Mr. G. P.
Doolette w r as commissioned to proceed to
London with a view of disposing of the
claims, and he left by the steamer Aus-
tralia with a parting injunction not to re-
turn without having floated them. This
proved no easy task; for when Mr. Doo-
lette landed in London he was confronted
with unexpected obstacles which scotched
but did not kill his efforts ait flotation.
Indeed, at one time Mr. Doolette had to
contemplate the prospect of hanging from
a certain lamp-post in Cheapside!
Difficulties and disappointments followed
each other in rapid succession; but finally,
after almost interminable negotiations, the
Boulder Group, comprising five claims, was
disposed of to an English Company for a
share interest only, the Company consist-
ing of 150,000 shares of £1 each, and the
colonial shareholders receiving, after
payment of all commissions, 52,000
shares, or a trifle more than one-
third. The absence of cash for
the sale administered a great blow to
the Directors, who were at their wits’ ends
ito comply with the labour conditions im-
posed under the Western Australian min-
ing laws, which necessitated the constant
employment of 300 men on the different
claims.
CONQUERING MORE DIFFICULTIES.
At this critical juncture remarkable
foresight was again exhibited. It was seen
that the Company’s only salvation lay in
its reconstruction on the equitable basis
that every shareholder should bear his
own burden. Prior to this, whenever a new


Company was floated a number of Share-
holders declined to take contributing
shares. To meet this difficulty a scheme,
originated by the central figure in these
negotiations, was successfully carried out
to convert the old Corporation into a li-
mited Company of 100,000 shares, at a lia-
bility of ss. per share, of which Is. was to
be paid on application. In this flotation
there were, in consequence, no paid-up.
shares. Unless the holders complied with
the conditions imposed they forfeited their
interest in the concern. Loth to let their
chances pass them by, every shareholder
responded to the call, and the Directors
immediately made the initial levy of Is.,
which yielded another £5,000, and prompt-
ly followed up their action by demanding
still another contribution. This relieved
the financial stress of the Company.
THE “ASSOCIATED” FORMED.
Mr. Doolette, having disposed of the
Boulder claims, was naturally anxious to
sell the balance. Negotiations tardily re-
sulted in the formation of the powerful
Corporation now known as the Associated
Gold Mines Company of West Australia,
Limited, which absorbed the balance of
claims held by the Coolgardie Goldmining
Prospecting Syndicate. In this instance,
after paying all commissions, the colo-
nial promoters received 132,000 fully paid-
up shares. Complications, however, arose
in London, and it was deemed advisable to
send Mr. G. Brookman to the great metro-
polis to assist ip solving them. The Eng-
lish Syndicate which purchased the pro-
perties had acquired an option over the
colonial shares extending over a period of
twelve months, at an average price of 285.,
and there was also some misunder-
standing with regard to the commissions.
To the astonishment of the Australian sec-
tion of the Company Mr. Brookman, after
a six months’ effort, succeeded by a mas-
terly stroke of diplomacy in releasing the
colonial shares from the objectionable op-
tion, and also recovered 10,000 of the com-
mission shares. By this coup he actually
made the Australian shareholders a present
of £170,000, for on his return from England
the marketable value of the stock was £2
10s. per share. His labours terminated in
the establishment of colonial offices in con-
nection with the various Companies, thus
conferring an immense boon not only upon
Adelaide shareholders but upon the gentle-
men who most do congregate upon the local
Rialto. The facilitating of scrip-dealing has
been remarkably enhanced by this innova-
tion, and only recently an astonishing in-
stance was afforded when £200,000 worth
of scrip circulated through the brokers as
the result of a single fillip in the mining
market. Thus briefly traced is a history
of brilliant financing, which certainly had
throughout enormous advantages in its fa-
vour. Nature had already laid the solid
basis when the erection of the structure
was commenced, but architectural skill is
required to build upon the strongest foun-
dation. Aided as the promoters were by
Fortune, they were often discouraged by
opposing circumstances, and however the
magnificence of their work may be sub-
dued in the shadow of favouring chance, it
must be regarded as a great achievement,
worthy of British pluck and endurance,
judgment, and industry, whose best pane-
gyric is written in the records of that
commerce to which it has given an im-
mense and sustained stimidus. The big
mines have built Kalgoorlie, Kalgoorlie
has revolutionized Western Australia, and
Western Australia has lifted the dark cloud
of depression from the commercial horizon
of its sister provinces.
A TRANSFORMATION.
Five years ago the lonely prospector rein-
ing his horse upon a timbered hill twenty-
four miles east of Coolgardie might have
beheld beneath him a litle clearing in the
centre of vast areas of dark untenanted
scrub. Far as the eye could reach a still
sea of stunted mulga stood out in strong con-
trast to the hazy blue of heaven, where the
bright Australian sun reigned in solemn and
solitary splendour. The only break in this
eternal monotony consisted in the little
clearing where the Imsy hum of an awaken-
ing civilization sang a prophetic song of the
gilded future. Down the slope of the hill
the myriad mounds of loamy red told their
tale of hopes realized and lost in the in-
tense excitement of an alluvial rush, and a
streetless city of canvas tents surrounded
a cluster of primitive structures, where iron
in shimmering corrugations struggled for
supremacy with the baggy hessian of an
earlier time. The giant hand of Labour
was rapidly transforming this ragged settle-
ment into a stately town. Such was Kal-
gcorlie when the wealth of its deposits first
gained respectable credence, and its real
life as a mining centre began. It was then
a straggling confused mass of mounds and


Great Boulder
Lake View Consols .. ..
.. .. 2,812,500
Associated Mines
Ivanhoe
Kalgoorlie Mint .. .. ..
Lake View South
Lake View Extended.. ..
.. .. 65,750
Great Boulder No. 1.. ..
Total
tents, “humpies” and camels, and was in-
habited by a brave band of grimy and coat-
less pioneers. But the day of small things
is never to be despised, and from such a
beginning sprang in half a decade a busy
city, adorned by stately structures, replete
with the most luxurious conveniences which
science and invention can supply, and po-
pulated by a thronging mass of well-dressed
citizens, whose enterprise and sagacity are
commensurate with the ever-increasing de-
mands of a new civilization. As hessian re-
placed calico and canvas, so iron was sub-
stituted for hessian, and brick and stone
are now rapidly driving iron out of the
field. As reef prospectors followed alluvial
diggers, so the metallurgist and miner
came upon the heels of the prospector.
Wide streets of macadamized solidity are
now where the camel-pad and the wagon-
track were the only thoroughfares. Where
the blazing camp fires once relieved the
gloom of night the bright reflections of
electricity now' bridge the space between
the sunset and the dawn. Thus this settle-
ment in an incredibly brief period advanc-
ed from rude forms akin to barbarism unto
the highest reaches of civilization.
SOME FACTS AND FIGURES.
On June 1, 1893, the original Syndicate
consisted of fifteen shares. Of these five
were fully paid, whilst the remainder con-
tributed a working capital of £l5O. On
October 13, 1898, when the shareholders
met to go into the most remarkable liquida-
tion on record, the capitalization represent-
ed these figures:—
Added to this are the amount distributed
£3,421,000, and the sum distributed in di-
vidends (cash approximately), £950,000;
among Adelaide shareholders in shares,
making a grand total of £13,646,750. At
that date (October 13, 1898) the Companies
had produced approximately 560,000 oz. of
gold, equal to 17 tons, and worth two and
a quarter millions of money. So that the
production at that stage represented nearly
30 per cent, on the then capitalization.
These figures were compiled by Mr. A.
Bristowe, the clever accountant, who acted
throughout as Secretary to the Coolgardie
G.M. and Prospecting Company. /When to
them are added the Hannan’s Oroya,
Brookman’s Boulder, Golden Horseshoe Es-
tates, and the Bank of England mines,
which sprang from practically the same
source, it is astonishing to find that during
the present month the total capital value
approached £30,000,000. The facts regard-
ing one of the mines alone are sufficiently
picturesque. The Lake View Consols,
which is paying quarterly dividends of 100
per cent., is a mine which—to quote an
English financial organ, “has proved its
almost measureless capacity for improve-
ment.” In 1896 it produced 22,256 oz.. In
1897 55,727 oz., and in 1898 the yield reached
111,276 oz. This marvellous progress in, pro-
duction does not appear likely to come to
an end yet. For the first six months or
this year the output of the great mine
amounted to 130,920 oz., which is an ad-
vance of 20,000 oz. on the yield for the
whole of the previous year. In announcing
this splendid result the “Financial News”
remarks “that it is an amount that would
be respectable for a, little goldfield.” And
that reliable organ goes so far
in assuring its readers as to state that “to
doubt its ability to maintain the recent re-
turns is to distrust the unsurpassed history
of Hannan’s, with its abundant proofs that
the further the workings go the more con-
sistently rich are the rewards.” In 1893,
the year in which Hannan’s was discovered,
the total gold export trom the western pro-
vince amounted to 72,814 oz., valued at
£276,807. For the quarter ended June
30 of this year the Kalgoorlie field alone
has crushed 119,020 tons for a yield of
197,198 oz—nearly three times the amount
produced by the whole colony in twelve
months at the time Hannan’s was found.
These figures prove that at the present
time the Kalgoorlie field yields nine times
the quantity of gold exported by the pro-
vince of Western Australia for the year
ended June 30, 1893. At that period the
goldfield of Southern Cross was nearly as
old as Kalgoorlie is now, Coolgardie had a
life of about a year, and the Kimberley,
Ashburton, and Murchison Goldfields had
Deen dragging on their way for many weary
summers. The Kalgoorlie Chamber of
Mines recently issued a return, which show-
ed that up to June 30, 1899, the total pro-
duction of the Kalgoorlie field amounted to
1,200,579 oz., which at an average price


of a little under £4 an ounce
would exceed £4,000,000 in value.
And it has to be remembered that about
half a dozen great mines are the chief
contributors to this total. Of the thou-
sands of claims taken un and floated in the
vicinity of Kalgoorlie only a few have
turned out gold-producers. The rich gold
belt which has excited the wonder of the
world is Confined after all to a very narrow
circle, and it is indeed strange that Ade-
laide speculators should have pounced im-
mediately upon the repositories of the hid-
den treasure. The Great Boulder heads the
list in its total production, having yielded
up to date 290,786 oz. 14 dwt. 8 grs. from
117,991 tons of ore, or an average of 2 oz.
9 dwt. 6 grs. per ton. The Lake View
Consols comes next with an aggregate pro-
duction of 266,715 oz. 8 dwt. 13 grs. from
148,302 tons of ore. averaging 1 oz. 15 dwt.
23 grs. per ton. It is evident, however, that
the Lake View Consols will soon surpass
the production of the Boulder, as the latter
is a much older mine, having been re-
gistered in 1894, whilst the registration of
its neighbour is dated in 1896. The Ivanhoe
Gold Corporation has crushed altogether
76,863 tons of ore for a return of 140,757
oz. 7 dwt. 15 grs., thus averag-
ing throughout 1 oz. 16 dwt.
15 grs. per ton; whilst the Asso-
ciated Group has 116,686 oz. 3 dwt. 16 grs.
to show for 69,853 tons 3 cwt. crushed, or
an average yield throughout of 1 oz. 13 dwt.
9 grs. per ton. The Hannan’s Brown Hill
has also been a remarkable producer, hav-
ing a total yield of 124,970 oz. 14 dwt. 14
grs. from 50,482 tons of ore. These are the
five greatest producers, and between them
they have yielded 939,916 oz. 8 dwt. 18 grs.
of gold, which leaves only 260,662 oz. 18
dwt. 22 grs. to be accounted for by all the
other claims registered upon that field.
The great Australia Mines, of the Associated
—the largest of this remarkable group—have
just started the first section of their sul-
phide plant. Their able Manager, Mr. W.
A. Irwin, who has been engaged for a
further term, has recently returned from
England. The output of these mines will
shortly be from 20,000 to 30,000 tons per
month, and two smelters will Shortly be
kept going at Fremantle treating the rich
telluride ores from them. The now
historic report of Captain Oats upon
the leases of the Coolgardie Goldmining
and Prospecting Company contained a
prophecy which has been borne out in a
very remarkable way since. The sentence
alluded to reads as follows:
“There are many hundreds of thousands
of tons of gold-bearing stone on the leases,
which can be easily and cheaply wrought
on account of the soft nature of the stone,
and if future development sustains present
appearance the output of gold will rival
the great gold mines of Australia/'
Not only the great gold mines of other
portions of Australia have been rivalled,
but the vast resources of the Rand have
paled in interest to the British investor
since the Hannan’s belt has received the
attention which its auriferous merits de-
mand. In richness the big Kalgoorlie mines
immeasurably exceed the South African
deposits; and, as the production is still in-
creasing, it is impossible to predict the ex-
tent of its future.
SUGGESTIVE TRADE FIGURES.
The following figures, taken from official
records in South Australia of exports of
local manufacture and produce, suggest
their own lessons concerning what the open-
ing of Kalgoorlie meant to our business
men:—
Machinery. Hay
> and
General. Boilers. Wine. Flour. Chaff.
££££££
1894 13,120 22 3,418 29,580 C 35 11,442
1895 33,341 3,508 5,938 03,100 15,397 29,540
1896 80,439 11,409 11,579 110,247 17,165 34,988
1897 74,873 10,679 7,303 98,033 1,128 4,589
1898 73,686 10,793 4,282 73,371 5,531 1,502
1899 23,181 2.432 14,975 1.037 50
* Six months.
Butter. Eggs. Cattle. Sheep. Saddlery. Leather.
££££££
1894 463 3,800 1,755 3,622 6,489 2,689
1895 6,701 14,561 24,638 13,942 2,986
1896 3,160 28,920 26,895 18,765 7,670 6,518
1897 1,387 39,906 4,624 10,229 2,103 3,644
1898 4,615 45,299 11,105 10,808 1,503 5,428
1899 612 23,632 16,008
* Six months.


W. K. Thomas <fe Co., Grenfell Street, Adelaide.




