

SUPREMACY IN THE PACIFIC;
THE INTEREST AND PROSPERITY OF AUSTRALASIA IN DANGER
MAJESTY'S (LATE) SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE COLONIES*
70 PITT STREET, SYDNEY.
Copies may he had of Gordon & Gotch, Sydney, Melbourne, and




RIVALS
SUPREMACY IN THE PACIFIC;
A BOOK FOR EVERY BRITISH SUBJECT.
GENERAL MacIVER.
THE INTEREST AND PROSPERITY OF AUSTRALASIA IN DANGER
HER MAJESTY’S. (LATE) SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE COLONIES,
LORD DERBY,
AND HIS SATELLITES.
Frige Owe Shilling.
PRINTED AND PUBLISHED BY
GIBBS, SHALLARD, & CO., 70 PITT STREET, SYDNEY,
Copies may be had of Gordon & Gotch, Sydney, Melbourne, and
Brisbane, and principal Booksellers,
December, 1885 —Registered.




mention that in compiling
it, I had much difficulty in making a selection from the huge mass
of letters, documents, newspaper articles, and reports in my posses-
sion, but I think that which I have made will suit present
purposes.
My connection with the New Guinea Annexation (of course) forms
the kernel of the main argument of this pamphlet, and I intend, in the
early future, to give the world a plain, complete, and indisputable
history, based on overwhelming official evidence, of the annexation of
the country by the various powers which are now directly interested in
it. The noble and patriotic work of Sir Thomas Mcllwraith, the vile
blundering and cowardice of English Whigs, the selfish short-sightedness
of the Stuart-Dibbs-Dalley Government of New South Wales, the
timorous and selfish opposition (at the time) of the Hon, Samuel
Griffiths, the present Premier of Queensland, to Mcllwraith’s action,
must be put on record in book form for the information of the genera-
tions of British subjects, especially Australasians, yet unborn, who will
realize the relative merits of these politicians, and accord to each his
place in their affections. Britain and Australasia have lost a most
valuable part of New Guinea and adjacent islands through qualities in
some of her public men which should be foreign to a race that has so
grand a past history, viz. : indecision, fear, jealousy, 'parsimony, and,
above all, a dishonourable grasping greed of office.
I owe some little apology to my readers for the use I have
made of certain rather flattering extracts from English journals in
relation to myself. These are not used from any sense of personal


vanity, but because they tend to explain my relations to the London
Expedition of 1883.
With all its imperfections of what literary men call “ style,” I
hand this little production (in advance) to the public, with the
assurance that the sincerity of the opinions expressed in its pages will
meet with the consideration it is entitled to.
HENRY R. MacIYER.


The following letter, from Major-General Beresford, of the British
army, will doubtless tend more to prove the absolute genuineness
of my contemplated intentions with respect to New Guinea
than a whole volume; and with its perusal, I fearlessly leave
myself in the hands of a generous public.
H. R. M.
75, Lower Leeson Street, Dublin,
November ?>Qth , 1883.
My Dkar General Maclver,
With reference to our conversation, on or about the 22nd
October, when we were discussing the New Guinea Exploration Co.’s
prospects, of which I was to be chairman of the board of Directors, I
perfectly remember you expressing anxiety that the board should select
and appoint a financial manager to proceed with the expedition, who,
from his well-known integrity and social position, should be above
reproach, and who would enjoy the entire confidence of the Directors.
You expressed yourself very strongly on this point, and declared that
under no circumstances would you consent to be in any way mixed up
with finance; so that, no matter what the result pf the undertaking
might be, no person could question your integrity and bonaJides.
In all my conversations with you on the subject of the expedition,
you impressed me with the idea that you were thoroughly in earnest,
and believed in the feasibility of the undertaking, and had I not placed
full confidence in you, I should not have consented to support it.
You are very welcome to let my opinion be known to your friends.
lam sorry the scheme is at an end, for I believe that, carried out
as we intended it should be, the expedition would have been a great
success.
From your letter, 1 gather you are going to Australia, and I shall
be glad to hear from you now and then. Wishing you all success,
believe me,
Yours sincerely,
G. 0. BERESFORD,
Major-General, Retired List,
Madras Army.
My address, after June next year, will be—
East India United Service Club,
14, St. James’s Square, London, W.C.


The following letter from the well known historian, journalist, novelist,
and politician, Justin McCarthy, M.P., will show the estimate in
which he held a friendly acquaintance of over twenty years.
House of Commons,
2ith March , 1884.
My Dear General Maclver,
I am glad to hear that you are going to give an account of some
of your wonderful experiences to Australian audiences. I envy the
audiences. No man could have had a more varied career than you—one
who has fought under fourteen flags is well entitled to speak of war
and adventure. I wish you a brilliant success in your new field, and
I anticipate it for you.
Faithfully yours,
justin McCarthy.
Brigadier-General Maclver.


RIVALS
FOE SUPREMACY IN THE PACIFIC.
HEIR Y ROIALD H. DOUGLAS MacIYER,
GENERAL OF BRIGADE.
“Some men are born for great things,
Some are born for small,
Some, it is not recorded
For what they are born at all.”
Were anyone asked to name the civilised Power at present possessing
paramount supremacy in the Pacific, there would be no hesitancy as
to the answer, Great Britain holds in these seas interests and influence
superior to those of any other civilised nation. But the thoughtful
student of international politics, and, more particularly, of European
politics—for Europe is the seed-bed of modern enterprise and civilisation
—reads, in the signs of the times, prophecies of a swiftly-coming
modification of the present situation—sees looming in the haze pf the
future a formidable rival to Great Britain in the Pacific. That rival
is Germany—Germany, the would-be Imperial dictator of Europe—
the unified German States, cemented skilfully and ruthlessly together
with bands of “ blood and iron ” —Germany, abjectly cowed under the heel
of the most complete, the most comprehensive, and the most uncom-
promising military despotism the world has ever known, I hope to
abundantly prove the position I have taken before I finish this disser-
tation. I hope to make clear to every reader the comprehensive, world-
covering scheme of ambitious aggrandisement that is now the defined
policy of Germany. It is a scheme in which colonisation takes a most
prominent part, and in which the Pacific is particularly interested. I
have spoken of the dominance of Great Britain in the Pacific. Let me
rather, as one who may cast in his lot with Australasia, speak of that
dominance as a question of Australasian supremacy, for the future will


see this great continent take its stand among the nations of the world,
and its people in the van of modern progress. Let me then speak of
the rivals for future supremacy in the Pacific as being Australasia
and Germany.
To obtain a clear comprehension of the ambitious aims of Germany,
to unravel the mazy network of its political and diplomatic manoeuvring,
it will be necessary to study the history of German external policy
as exhibited during the last few years. The colonisation projects of
Germany—in so far as they affect Australasia—include the vexed New
Guinea question. The daring act of annexation attempted by Sir
Thomas M’llwraith, the late Premier, and present leader of the
Opposition of Queensland, affords a convenient starting point for
Australasians, from which to study the German aspirations respecting
the acquirement and development of German colonies in the Pacific.
In treating upon this introductory part of the question, I shall be
reluctantly compelled to say a great deal about myself, inasmuch as I
have been intimately connected with the recent agitation for the British
annexation of New Guinea. In thus importing individual experiences
into this article, I trust the generosity and fair-mindedness of my
readers will acquit me of all incidental charges of egotism. I would
much rather leave my personal experiences out, but I believe it to be
my honorable duty to warn Australasia, as I have already several times
done, of the dangers that threaten her, as concomitant results of the
success of cherished projects for German aggrandisement in the Pacific.
Besides, another necessity compels me to mention much that is purely
personal. I claim to speak upon this subject with authority. It is,
therefore, my bounden duty, as one who has been in an exceptionally
good position to judge, to give the public of Australasia some guarantee
that my views are not based upon haphazard conjecture, but are the
results of much serious study of the position. What better guarantee
can I possibly give than to point out that all the prophecies I have
hitherto publicly made, all the revelations of German Statecraft I have
disclosed, have been swiftly verified, to the bitter mortification of those
who decried my deductions, and pooh-poohed me as an alarmist ? By
proving to my readers that hitherto the hypotheses which I assumed
have developed into accomplished facts, I shall, at any rate, show that
I have been proceeding on a correct line of argument; and I assure my
readers that the future plans of Germany, which I shall afterwards
detail, are merely a continuation of the same line of argument. My
personal narrations must therefore be received as necessary to ensure
the public confidence in the prophecies as to the future upon which I
shall venture; they will, in fact, form the credentials under which I
present myself to the Australasian public, and the world, as one fully
justified in delivering an authoritative opinion upon projected colonising
schemes in the Pacific.
Before I plunge into my subject, let me not be misunderstood; I
have no antipathy to the Germans as a people. All over Australasia,
and especially in Queensland, I find them located as peaceful, in-


dustrious settlers—people of whom any country might be proud.
Under liberal institutions their thrift insures their prosperity.
Under the freedom of Government which obtains in British colonies,
under the more democratic institutions of the great Republic of the
United States of America, Germans flourish. They form a solid and
productive element of those productive communities. They are law
abiding and orderly, and they become naturalised citizens of their
adopted country. I wish to be explicit on this point. lam one who
welcomes heartily all German settlers in Australasia. Some politicians
object to Germans who become naturalised British subjects, obtaining,
too easily, voting powers under the law of manhood suffrage. But I
am not a politician. lam only a plain soldier, who has a keen, and
(without boasting) experienced eye for military and strategic schemes.
Anything I may here say of Germany and German designs is, therefore,
to be considered as quite apart from the question of German settlement
in British dominions. German settlers under free British institutions
form a very different community from that of a Germ an colony under the
government of a military despotism, I am favourably disposed to-
wards Germans themselves, but I deem it to be my duty as a Scotchman
to warn Australasia of the designs towards self-aggrandisement now
cherished, and being determinedly pushed forward by the German
Government. With this explanation, I now proceed to discuss my
subject.
The master mind that directs German policy is that of Prince Bis-
marck. It has been said time and again that Bismarck holds the destinies
of European nations in the hollow of his hand. It has been a fact for
nearly the last fifteen years, and is still a fact humiliating to other
nations, that when Bismarck pulls the string, nations see-saw. His is
themotive power which causes nations to dance as so many puppets. His is
the central brain of present European complications. Every art
known to diplomacy, and every influence that a huge and complete
military organisation can give, are at his command, and few are so
skilful as he in their manipulation.
I was first led to closely investigate Prince Bismarck’s policy, and
thence to turn my particular attention to New Guinea, in. the
beginning of the year 1877. I was then travelling through Europe
with his Excellency General Tchernaieff, who had been Commander-
in-Chief of the Servian troops, and later bn was Governor-General of
Turkestan, under whom, in Servia, I held the position of Chief of
Cavalry. Tchernaieff, Major Ohludoff and I were staying for a short
time at the Grande Hotel de Louvre , Paris. One evening we became
engaged in an animated discussion on Servian politics, and the sup-
posed intentions of the Great Powers of Europe were freely can-
vassed. Incidentally, General Tchernaieff mentioned Germany, a
propos to some remark made, the nature of which has slipped my
memory. “Oh!” said Tchernaieff, “Bismarck won’t bother about
that; he wants Holland.” Then followed a ventilation of ideas. The
subject interested me, and I commenced to study it in all its aspects.


I saw at once the colonial advantages that must accrue to Germany
by the absorption of Holland, and the threatening dangers by which
Australasian and British interests would be menaced. As a military
man, the study of this new idea had an especial charm for me.
Thus I was led to concentrate much of my attention upon New
Guinea. For years there had been spasmodic movements in Aus-
tralasia—chiefly in Melbourne, I believe —aiming at the Australasian
colonisation and subsequent annexation of New Guinea. The atten-
tion of Europe was, every year, more and more directed to the
progressive development of the Australasian Colonies, France estab-
lished a line of steamers to call at some Australasian ports. Then came
Sir Thomas M‘II wraith’s magnificent attempt to annex the whole of
New Guinea, in the name of her Majesty Queen Victoria. Australasia
knows too well the humiliating snub it received from Lord Derby,
a contemptibly weak administrator, who refused to endorse the
far-seeing statesmanlike act of Queensland’s then Premier. Sir
Thomas MTlwraith’s annexation of New Guinea impressed itself
upon my mind as being a glorious idea" and a brilliant act, and it
became my ambition to assist in the grand work of founding a new
British colony, by leading an exploring expedition to that island. I
felt that if I could do this, Lord Derby must withdraw his refusal to
endorse Sir Thomas M‘llwraith’s annexation ; and, had New Guinea
become incorporated with the British Empire, it would have been of
inestimable value to the mother country, and to Australasia, not only on
account of its vast resources, but also as preventing its falling into the
hands of any foreign Power, which might, at any time, use it as a base
of operations hostile to the peace and prosperity of the Australasian
colonies. I succeeded in initiating a New Guinea Exploring Company,
and an influential Board of Directors, with General G. De La Poer
Beresford, of the British Army, as chairman, was appointed.
Prospectuses were issued, and, in a very short time, 600 volunteers were
enrolled, comprising all kinds of labourers, miners, and agriculturists.
Arrangements were also made by which the expedition was to be
accompanied by a scientific staff of eminent mining engineers, geologists,
metallurgists, botanists, &c., together with an efficient medical staff,
two chaplains, the Rev. H. de Burgh Sidley, chaplain to Lord Borth-
wick, who was admitted at his own request, and a Roman Catholic
clergyman. A steamer of sufficient capacity to carry 1000 men was
purchased, and the prospects of the expedition were highly favorable.
But “ the best laid plans of mice and men gang aft agley,”
Lord Derby communicated to me his intention of putting his veto
on the project, and the following is an extract from his first despatch,
bearing date, 24th October, 1883 : “If you had communicated with this
department, Lord Derby would have caused the objections to your scheme
to be explained to you, and as his lordship has now otherwise obtained
information respecting your proceedings, he feels himself under the
necessity of intimating to you explicitly, and without delay, that your
contemplated operations in New Guinea cannot be permitted, and that


if an attempt should be made to carry out the project described in your
prospectus, her Majesty’s Government would be under the necessity
of instructing the High Commissioner for the Western Pacific, and the
officer commanding her Majesty’s naval forces on the station, to
interfere for the protection of the Native inhabitants of the island.
I am, ifec., Edward Wingfield.” The effect of this antagonism on the
part of Lord Derby was disastrous to the expedition, which collapsed
under the imaginary fears thus conjured up. Lord Derby had resented
my first attempt to force his hand, and, besides, he was weakly sensitive
to Bismarck’s pressure. But I - was not to be easily discouraged. 1
came to Australia with a similar object in view, and my persistence at
length forced the hand of the vacillating Earl. From the hour of my
arrival I was dogged throughout Australia by both English and
German spies, and my utterances were deemed to be of sufficient
importance to be cablegramed to Lord Derby and to Bismarck, as I
shall mention presently. In the face of the agitation in Australasia,
Lord Derby could not be quiescent. His hand was forced, and he had
to make a show of regard for Australasian aspirations. It was in
assumed deference to Australasian desires that he established his shadowy
protectorate over a shadowy area of New Guinea. Miserable as was
that concession, it is my consolatory and conscientious conviction —
borne out since by the assertion of no less an authority than Sir Peter
Scratchley, High Commissioner for British New Guinea, and many
other eminent gentlemen—that, had it not been for my action, Great
Britain would not have had an inch of the New Guinea soil at the
present day. The whole of the island of New Guinea would ultimately
have fallen into the hands of Germany. It is equally true that, on the
other hand, had Lord Derby’s policy been more consonant with Aus-
tralasian desires, and had the timorous and treacherous Earl possessed
more back-bone, Great Britain might to-day have possessed the whole
island. Holland, in spite of its pretentious claim, would never have
ventured to dispute Great Britain’s right to annex New Guinea. But
Germany, when she has absorbed Holland, will instantly enforce that
pretentious claim, and place the ownership of all that part of the
island known as Dutch New Guinea, beyond all doubt. Subsequently
Lord Derby’s ridiculous Protectorate blossomed into a fully developed
annexation. It was swiftly followed by a much larger German annexa-
tion of New Guinea territory, and of the adjacent islands. But lam
anticipating myself. I wish to refer to some of my since-verified
prophecies, in order to prove to the reader that I am rightly on the
trail of Bismarck’s ambitious designs.
When I arrived in Australia on May 13, 1884, the New Guinea
question was exciting much public interest, but I was amazed to find
that the only European Power from whom Australasian politicians,
writers, and other moulders of public opinion, seemed to fear encroach-
ments, was France, more particularly with respect to the New
Hebrides. I publicly stated, and wrote, as often as I could, that
Australasia had nothing to fear from France, but that the neighbour it


should dread was Germany. The critics laughed. I was held up to
ridicule as a man with a craze. I was food for the short-lived mirth
of newspaper writers, and the querulous spirit of gohe-mouches
annonymous paragraph mongers. Being desirous to organise an
expedition to New Guinea, the critics considered that I probably viewed
the question from a biased and personal standpoint. I veritably
believe that many thought I was troubled with a complaint that might
properly be styled “Bismarck on the brain.” The critics were
fortified in their scoffing by official utterances made by Lord Derby
and Gladstone, who both declared in the British Parliament that
Bismarck had no designs whatever upon any of the islands of the
Pacific. Yet every prophecy I then made has come true ; while the
weighty, official utterances of Lord Derby and Gladstone —who ought
to have been well informed, but were diplomatically deceived—have
been falsified. What I said Bismarck would do, he speedily did.
What Gladstone and Derby said Bismarck would not do, he speedily
did. During my visit to Melbourne, I was staying in the George Hotel,
St. Kilda. Among the guests there was h Mr, Kruge, an ex-German
Consul-General. The conversation one afternoon turned upon political
questions, raised by information received by cablegram, that Germany
mooted the question of subsidising a line of German mail steamers to
Australia, and I remarked to Mr. Kruge, in the presence of several
other gentlemen (this was in the latter end of May, 1884), that in the
course of a few months, Germany would commence her aggrandisement
in the Pacific, that she was the power to be most strictly guarded
against in her designs on New Guinea, and the other islands in the
Pacific, and that it was my intention to expose the designs of Germany
in my lectures to the Australian public. I afterwards heard, on
authority which I am not privileged to give, that the statement was at
once communicated to the German Consul of Victoria, who immediately
communicated with his Government. On June 24th and 25th, 1884, I
was interviewed by representatives of the Sydney Press, respecting the
New Guinea question. The advice I tendered to them may be thus
summed up: —“Look out for Germany. Watch Bismarck. He, and
he alone, is the stumbling-block to Australasian supremacy in the Pacific.
It is Germany, and not France that is causing Lord Derby to vacillate
in his policy.” Again the critics laughed. Again I was ridiculed as a
man with a “fad.” But not for long. Lord Lytton tells us that man
is arrogant in proportion to his ignorance, and our gohe-mouches
paragraphists well illustrate the aphorism. I have already hinted
that my public utterances were thought of sufficient importance to be
cablegramed not only to Lord Derby, but to Prince Bismarck. This 1
know as an absolute fact. Well, it so happened that two days after I
had been interviewed by the representatives of the Sydney press,
the Sydney newspapers published the following cablegram from
London :—“ Prince Bismarck states that the grasping policy of
English colonists is offensive and irritating to Germany.” The man
“of blood and iron ” was becoming petulant. He saw a chance


of his darling projects of colonisation coming to grief, and he was
angered. The critics who had been ridiculing my statements halted.
A confirmatory light was shed upon my prognostications, and
the critics reconsidered their position. Like Lord Derby, Bismarck
disliked his hand being forced. He objected to disclose his plans
with regard to Hew Guinea before he thought it was time to do
so. However, I compelled him to show them. Dr. Krauel, the
German Consul-General was recalled to Germany to personally con-
sult with the German authorities respecting New' Guinea, and a
large German warship, Elizabeth , was secretly despatched to Australia,
arriving at Sydney without warning. When Lord Derby took definite
action respecting the British claims to any portion of New Guinea, this
German warship left Sydney under the ostensible pretence of continuing
a cruise to Samoa and Japan. That was the programme announced as
the vessel cleared Sydney Heads, but it was a subterfuge—a barefaced
blind. The German warship steamed northwards, past the Louisiade
group of Islands, and the neighbouring neck which forms the South-
eastern end of New Guinea, up to New Britain, and annexed that; she
then sailed over to New Ireland and annexed that too; and, finally,
visited various parts of the northern and eastern shores of New Guinea,
and annexed the whole of that island not suppositiously claimed by
Holland. It will take a great deal of argument, and forcible argument,
too, to convince me that there was not a secret understanding as to
these annexations between the weak-kneed Lord Derby and the dicta-
torial Bismark. Lord Derby has denied the existence of any such
understanding, but the occurrences are full of suggestive incidents. At
any rate, there is this indisputable point—Lord Derby and Gladstone
officially declared, if against my individual warning, that Germany had
no designs whatever upon any of the islands in the Pacific ; yet, within
a very short time of such declarations, Bismarck seized upon all the
available part of New Guinea, and two very important adjacent islands.
One official declaration made by Lord Derby places that noble Earl
in a very unpleasant position. As I have stated, I publicly warned
Australasia, through the medium of the Sydney press interviewers, on
June 24th and 25th, 1884, to be on its guard against the aggressions of
the German Government. It is within my absolute knowledge that the
reports published of those interviews, as well as a number of other
verbal statements by me, were cablegramed to Lord Derby and
Bismarck, who were kept well informed of my doings ; for I was closely
watched. Therefore, Lord Derby must, before July, 1884, have had
before him the details of the public warning against Bismarckian designs
which I had deemed it my duty to get published in the Sydney press.
Yet, on July 2, 1884, Lord Derby officially spoke in the British Parlia-
ment as if he were entirely ignorant of the aspect which the New Guinea
agitation was assuming in Australasia. He was asked a question about
New Guinea by some hon. member, and this was his reply: —
“ There were strong reports about the intention of some power—nobody
knew what power—to seize upon some part--nobody knew what part—


of New Guinea.” Lord Derby made that ambiguous reply, with the
full details before him of my exposd of Bismarck’s colonising schemes.
I had deliberately named Germany as the one power which Australasia
had to fear; yet Lord Derby argued as if he knew nothing beyond
floating rumors that had then assumed no distinct shape. In what
position does this official and misleading utterance place Lord Derby ?
Either he deliberately played with Australasian and British confidence,
or he was miserably hoodwinked by German diplomacy. Either
he was guilty of a cowardly and treacherous dissimulation, or he was a
too innocent and a too confiding simpleton. The occasion to which I
have referred was also the time when Lord Derby made the notorious
gasconading announcement that the Gladstone Government would “ not
view it as a friendly act if any other country attempted to make a
settlement” on the New Guinea coast. Bismarck has long ago com-
mitted that “unfriendly act,” and Derby swallowed the rank leek
without a protest.
To show you the deep and watchful interest which Bismarck
took in New Guinea all through the annexation agitation, I
may mention that my doings in Australia, previous to the
German annexations, were closely dogged by German spies, who
spared no expense in cablegrams to keep the Chancellor of Germany
thoroughly posted up in all my utterances and actions. Why
should he have set emissaries to watch my insignificant self; why
should he have deemed me worthy of his exalted notice if he had
no designs on the islands of the South-Western Pacific ? While in
Sydney, where I had in public lectures exposed Bismarck’s policy in
the Pacific, and the beginning of his designs on Holland and its dependen-
cies, and in the beginning of July, 1884, a report was suddenly bruited
about that I was a Russian spy, and that it was because I was interested
in Russianaggrandisementthat I washostileto German interests. Nobody
could say how the falsehood was manufactured, or by what means it was
circulated; yet it was rumoured, seemingly, everywhere. It was
openly stated that I had fought in the Russian military service, and
had been awarded Russian decorations. The whole statement was a
black falsehood. I have never served the Russian Government in a
military or other capacity, and I have no Imperial Russian decorations ;
but if I had, as a soldier, I should be proud to wear them as souvenirs
of military services. It is true that I have Servian decorations, which
were conferred on me by King Milan and his Excellency General
Tchernaieff, the Comrnander-in-Chief of the Servian troops, and late
Governor-General of Turkestan, now President of the Military Com-
mission. I made short work of that false and malicious rumour,
which was got up by official and other cliques in New South Wales,
which cliques were intriguing to secure, by favour of the Imperial
Government, the leading privileges in connection with the colonisation
of New Guinea. I daresay that the Stuart-Dibbs-Dalley clique knew
more about the inception of that slander than I can ever hope to trace.


However, with my public denial, and my challenge to my traducers to
come forward and make the accusation to my face, the mean and
malicious canard died a speedy and violent death.
I have now done with retrospect, and will now, as far as in me
lies, unveil the immediate future that looms upon Australasia. I tell
you Australia is dreaming in a perfect fool’s paradise in relation
to German colonisation in the Pacific. It is not only a part of
New Guinea alone, with the islands of New Britain and
eland, for which Germany has striven. Her aims embrace far higher
game. Her policy is a maze of complexity. The key to that maze
is contained in the terse words of his' Excellency General TchernaieflT—
“ Bismarck wants Holland.” Every move made by the German
Government should be studied with that as the chief sidelight.
Why has Germany established herself in Africa, next door (so to
speak) to the Dutch? Because “Bismarck wants Holland.” Why
has Germany established herself in New Guinea, alongside territory
to which the Dutch Government is supposed to have some claim ?
Because “ Bismarck wants Holland.” Most Australasian politicians
appear to be drowsily content to “ cobble only local questions,
and ask with surprise what business they have to interfere with
international politics, I tell such gentlemen that Australasian politics
are getting mixed up very fast with international politics. The
reason for this is not far to seek. The world is getting filled up.
The desert places of the earth are becoming populated, the dark
corners of the globe are becoming known. Savagedom is vanishing
everywhere before advancing civilisation. Civilised Powers are eagerly
grabbing all the empty places they can find. Australasia shares in all
these changes. No longer are Australia and its islands “ encompassed
by an inviolate sea.” In New Guinea British territory has now
a land neighbour, and that neighbour is a gigantic and frowning
military Power. The statesman who controls its destinies is fired with
ambitious designs, complicated and Machiavellian in their character. It
is to Australasia’s interest—nay it is Australasia s duty—to closely study
the projected programme of its new neighbour. W emay gauge what Prince
Bismarck, the statesman and arch-filibuster of the age, is likely to
do in the Pacific, by noticing what he has already done in the colonising
business in other parts of the world. It is the fashion for a ceitain
set of English politicians to talk glibly about an Anglo-German alliance,
and to declare that no two nations were ever in closer relations of amity ;
but actions testify more loudly than words, and it is more convincing to
judge of German friendliness by German actions, than it can possibly be
to rely upon mere empty statements. What has Bismarck done in
various parts of the world, in matters that clash with British interests ?
He has ousted Australasia with contempt from the greater part of New
Guinea and has annexed New Britain and New Ireland ; he has thrust
himself into Angra Pequena in a manner which England cannot help
resenting \ he has been the accomplice of Russia, and antagonistic to
British interests in connection with Great Britain s Egyptian policy j he


is the avowed patron of, and sympathiser with the Boers in the Trans-
vaal ; and he has forced matters with a high hand on the Congo. It is
a delicious pastime to gabble about the friendship Germany cherishes
for England ; but sensible men want some more tangible security than
a purely sentimental guarantee. It is true that the accidents of the
past history of the two countries have hitherto kept them at peace with
each other. But this has been due to purely fortuitous conditions —
mostly geographical. The two countries have never been land neigh-
bours, having as a boundary line between them a frontier of frowning
military fortresses. Had they been land neighbours in any part of the
world, history would have told a different tale.
Bismarck has been described as having colonies on the brain. It
is certain that he has evolved a colonial policy of startling magnitude,
and it is not difficult to discover the immediate reasons which prompted
him to thus find a profitable outlet —profitable to the Fatherland I mean
for superfluous German enterprise and energy. A wit has described
the Germans as “ colonists without colonies.” The epigram is so pat
that it covers the whole ground, Germans by tens and hundreds of
thousands have swarmed into the United States of America, and have
helped to build up that great Republic. In lesser numbers, they have
assisted to colonise Canada and Australasia, Bismarck, whose ambitions
are central in the aggrandisement of the German Empire, deplores this
diversion of German thews and sinews, of German brains and enterprise,
from the controlling influences of the Fatherland. So he has set
himself the task of founding German colonies. While we watch him
building up these German colonies, never let us for a moment lose sight
of the fact that “Bismarck wants Holland.”
To become a colonial power, it is necessary that Germany should
have facilities for speedy and regular communication with her colonies.
For this purpose Germany must acquire more seaboard. “Bismarck
wants Holland,” for Holland has ample seaboard. Germany is very
badly off in that respect. Her fighting strength at present lies in her
land forces. Her resources are internal. Yet, her navy, even now, is
a great deal too large for the naval requirements of a country which
depends mainly upon its army for aggression or defence ; but, on the
other hand, it is not large or strong enough for a nation that holds
Germany’s exalted position amongst the Great Powers, if that nation
had a seaboard commensurate with the extent of its territory. With a
keen cognisance of these things, Bismarck casts covetous eyes around for
seaboard. Holland lies temptingly to his hand, and recent events in
that country have seemed to fall favourably for his acquisitive inclination.
For years Bismarck and other German statesmen have manoeuvred for
Holland, and he will assuredly annex it some day, as he did Schleswig-
Holstein. The principal power that now prevents him from absorbing
Holland is Great Britain. While Great Britain is at peace, Bismarck must
stay his hand. Could his consummate finesse and diplomatic diablerie succeed
in embroiling Great Britain in a costly and desperate war with any
other nation, Bismarck would leap from his lair of pretended indifference


and would kidnap Holland, either by force or diplomacy, feeling assured
that Great Britain would have too much on her hands to interfere with
his action. Holland is a tempting prize of immeasureable richness.
For, by absorbing Holland, not only would Germany become possessed
of all that country’s magnificent seaboard, but would also become the
owner of all the Dutch colonies, wheresoever situated. And this is
why I say that the key to all Prince Bismarck’s schemes of German
colonisation is to be found in the three words first uttered by Tchernaieff
—“ Bismark wants Holland.”
The possession by Germany of all the Dutch colonies would be a
'portentous menace to Australasia. That is what makes German colonis-
ation in the Pacific of such paramount importance to those colonies.
First of all, Germany would own all the rest of New Guinea. New
Guinea is an island containing 275,000 square miles. Great Britain
has annexed a narrow strip of land in the south, comprising 60,000
square miles. When Germany absorbs Holland, she will, therefore,
possess 215,000 square miles, of New Guinea territory, or over 78 per
cent, of its whole area. But this is not the worst. Germany would
also acquire, by the absorption of Holland, the Dutch possessions of
Java and Sumatra. Take a glance at the map and see what this means.
The military and strategic value of these islands to any Great Power is
incalculable. Germany, as owner of Java and Sumatra, would have the
absolute command of the Straits of Sunda and the Straits of Malacca.
Singapore, Borneo, and the other few islands not yet annexed, would
fall an easy prey to any German invader. The whole of the British and
Australasian trade with China passes through one or other of
the straits named. With New Guinea, Java, Borneo, and Sumatra ui her
possession, a German fleet could sweep British and Australasian commerce
off the China and Japan trade routes. Every British and Australasian
merchantman on those lines would, in case of war with Germany, be
compelled to run a terrible blockade. Trade would be paralysed. Nay,
more—the unprotected ports of Northern Australia —both of North
Queensland and of the Northern Territory of South Australia—would
be completely at the mercy of German war vessels and cruisers, which
could swoop down suddenly upon our shores, and swiftly return to
safety under the shelter of land fortifications in New Guinea, Java, or
Sumatra. This scheme of German aggrandisement is one worthy of
the fertile brain and ambitious soul of Bismarck. There would then be
no question as to which of the two rivals, Australasia or Germany,
would be paramount in the Pacific. Even a Confederated Australasia
would be nowhere, so long as Germany held these strategic points, and
cut off our best and speediest trade communications with China, India,
and Europe.
It may be argued that Germany has no navy fit to cope with the
British navy. That is true at present. But, with the resources and
seaboard of Holland added to her own, Germany could speedily enlarge
her fleet until her navy would be equal to any in the world. Even
now, Germany is continually strengthening her navy, with a view to


her future larger sphere of operations. She is aiming at becoming as
formidable a naval as she is a military power. Recently, a very impor-
tant and necessary change has been made in her naval administration.
A few years ago her navy was under the direction of a Departmental
Head ; now its operations are entirely controlled by the Minister for
War. Germany’s Intelligence Department is so thoroughly and
systematically organised that it is, perhaps, the most efficient, com-
prehensive, and secret in the whole world. Dut, besides aiming to
acquire the seaboard of Holland, Bismarck is straining every nerve and
usin» every art of which he is master to secure possession of Mediter-
ranean ports. He is intriguing for Trieste, now in the possession
of Austria, and situated in the Gulf of Venice or Adriatic Sea.
In order to further this end, he has been supporting, and will continue
to support, Austria in its ambitious aim of absorbing the eastern princi-
palities and Balkan provinces. The establishment—as minor kingdoms,
similar to Bavaria, Saxony, and other countries in the German empire—
of Servia, Roumania, Bulgaria, Roumelia, Eastern Roumelia, Bosnia,
Croatia, Herzegovina, Montenegro, and Albania, under the sceptre of
the Emperor Francis Joseph, would, in addition to other advantages,
provide Austria with a largely increased frontage to the Adriatic and
Black Seas. The German and Austrian empires in alliance, offensive
and defensive, would then form a power of such huge magnitude as to
control the destinies of Europe. An enormous sea-board would mean
the organization of an enormous navy to control the Mediterranean and
also the Suez canal. With this power, and the command of the at
present Dutch possessions—Sumatra, Java, and New Guinea the
Austro-German alliance would, unquestionably, destroy Btitish and
British colonial supremacy in the Pacific, and, indeed, throughout the
world. Some of my readers may think that in making these statements
I go too far ; but let me assure those who may be of this opinion that
my long and active experience of European diplomacy will not allow
me to play the part of a mere alarmist. Look at what has recently
occurred. Before hint had been given by Germany of her intention to
annex territory in the southern seas, I called out to Australasia to beware
of her. How quickly she annexed the greater part of New Guinea, the
New Ireland and New Britain islands, we have seen. Her recent
attempt to obtain possession of the Samoan and Caroline groups may
be taken as further evidences of her resolution to secure a firm control
in Oceania. Then look to what is passing in eastern Europe. Does
anyone for a moment suppose that the present war between Servia and
Bulgaria is only a quarrel for supremacy between the powers actually
engaged in the conflict 1 Let me tell those who may believe that the
dispute is of so simple a character, that Prince Alexander of Bulgaria —
the ambitious German soldier, placed in his present position by the
Treaty of Berlin —is an instrument of Bismarck’s, who expects, should all
(/q we ll with him, to wear a kingly crown —true, a minor crown, but yet
a kingly crown. The struggle now proceeding is but an initial step in
the direction of obtaining a powerful addition of territory to the


Austrian Empire, and, indirectly, also of power to Germany. It is well
to remember at the present juncture the impressive words of Lady
Hamilton : “ German craft is never at a loss for deceptive plans, nor is
German prejudice easily pacified, No machinations are too hideous nor
too infamous when suggested by the one to gratify the other. It was
Britain’s duty to herself and to the world to curb the development
of this greedy power, but thanks to the worthless, aye, criminal states-
manship, of despicable Whigs, the growth of our enemy has been
prodigious, while the influence of our own country among the nations
of the world has been seriously injured by German intrigues and
aggressions. The Whigs have been, and will ever be, the curse of
Britain, both at home and abroad. How nicely they played into the
hands of Germany and Austria over the Schleswig-Holstein affair in
1864 ! Has Denmark yet erected a statue to the high-spirited and
most noble Lord John Russell ? But, to continue our discussion in
regard to German colonial policy. It is absurd to suppose that, in case
of°a war with Great Britain, Germany would operate with her vast
armies in Australasia. The serried and well disciplined batallions of
Germany would attend to the carnage in Europe, while the German
navy would be engaged in harrassing British commerce in all parts of
the world.
Still, it must not be forgotten that Germany is fully alive to the
increased military responsibilities entailed by colonization. It used to
be argued that the establishment of German colonies was contrary to
German military institutions, and interfered with the operation of
the principle of general liability to military service. idea has.
been long since exploded. The necessities of her future Pacific colonies
has set Germany thinking, and the idea has already been mooted in
Germany, and has gained many adherents, that it would be a wise
provision to establish an independent colonial army. All military and
constitutional scruples would be banished by such an organisation, and
there is not likely to be any difficulty in respect of men. At the
present time, one per cent, of the German population is annually
enrolled in the standing army of Germany j but, as the population of
the Fatherland is steadily increasing by half a million a year, the con-
tinuance of this yearly added percentage will soon become impossible,
both from the standpoint of cost and of military non-necessity. The
proposal now mooted is the establishment of a colonial army by
voluntary establishment, at a much higher rate of pay than the soldiers
at home, the recruits being required to serve four or five years. It is
considered that, for the present, a colonial army numbering only 2,000
would be sufficient, as the operations of the colonial forces would be
at first limited to the defence of coast districts or small islands, and
the good government of colonial possessions. The small armies kept
by England and Holland in India are cited as practical illustrations of
the ease with which colonial possessions may be maintained, and teem-
ing millions of subjects ruled by small forces of European soldiers.
Australasians, however, must look well ahead into the future. At pre-
B 2


sent, if Germany possessed the Dutch Colonies, her navy is mostly to
be feared ; but, as these colonies became Germanised and populated, so
would the strength of her colonial army increase.
But it may be urged that a war between Great Britain and Ger-
many is an impossibility. Let that be granted. The danger to Aus-
tralasia of the possession by Germany of the greater part of New Guinea,
of Java, and of Sumatra, is not much mitigated on that account. It
is probable—nay, it is almost inevitable —that Great Britain will be at
war before many years with some Great European Power. The aim
and ambition of German statesmen for years has been the embroilment
of Great Britain in a European war. Many far-seeing politicians
regard a war between Great Britain and Russia as merely a question
of time. Let us suppose these two nations to be at war, with Germany
in possession of all but British New Guinea, of Java, and Sumatra.
What follows 1 Germany is not in alliance with England, and is
known to have Russian leanings. According to international law, all
German ports are neutral places of refuge. Belligerents who may
meet in any neutral port cannot fight there. If two opposing war-
vessels meet in such a haven, and one leaves, the other must give it
twenty-four hours’ grace before setting out in pursuit, Russian
cruisers could harrass British commerce, and, if pursued, could readily
find concealed refuge in any convenient harbour. They would have the
whole of the coasts of Java and Sumatra and German New Guinea to
utilise. Every bay and inlet on these shores would afford a con-
venient lurking place from whence they could pounce out upon British
and Australasian merchantmen. Of course, British cruisers could do
the same with Russian commerce. But Great Britain has about one
hundred times as much merchant shipping to protect in these seas as
has Russia; and it would tax all Great Britain’s vast resources to
efficiently guard her mercantile interests. Further, Northern and
Eastern New Guinea may be said (to use an Australasian phrase) to be
within “ cooey ” of North Queensland ; as also are the islands of New
Britain and New Ireland, both German possessions. Every harbour on
those German coasts would also be available for Russian cruisers, and
sudden descents could be made upon Australasia with frequent impunity.
It must not be forgotten either that Russia has an oceanic outlet from
her Asiatic territory in the Sea of Okotsk, from whence she can reach
Australasia in the short distance of about 5000 miles. It was in view of
the serious military and strategic possibilities involved in the possession
of the Dutch colonies by Germany that I so strenuously strove to
awaken Australasia to the vital necessity of Great Britain annexing the
whole of New Guinea and adjacent islands; my revelation of the
entire position explains, too, why I tried to force Lord Derby’s hand
and secure for Australasia a sister colony in the “ great dark island ” of
Papua.
The subject cannot be dismissed without a brief glance at European
politics and complications. Some sanguine persons talk airily about
effecting a treaty between England and Germany. Such people only


exhibit their dense ignorance of the underground links of European
international relations. It has long been generally known that there is
an existing secret treaty between Germany, Russia, and Austria
commonly talked of as the “Unholy Alliance” of the three Emperors.
Russia is stealthily but surely advancing in the East, and Germany is
blind to her Eastern encroachments. In return Russia winks at
Germany manoeuvring for Holland, and her intriguing for Trieste as a
German port in the Adriatic. Austria’s good-will and underhand
encouragement are secured by the understanding that she may take the
Balkan provinces, and thus secure territorial frontage to the Black Sea.
With all these schemes of aggrandisement afoot, and participated in
by three of the Great Powers of Europe, a terrible cauldron of trouble
is bubbling, and a fearful European war, in which Great Britain—and,
consequently, Australasia —will be gravely involved, is only, in my
opinion, a matter of time. lam pleased to notice that Victoria is alive
to the dangerous possibilities of the immediate future, and that her
Government, regarding war between Great Britain and Russia as
ultimately inevitable, has resolved to continue the Defence schemes so
vigorously commenced recently, when war’s alarm was rung in our ears
with ominous distinctness. I implore all the Australasian colonies and
especially Queensland, as being Northerly situated—to follow the wise
example herein set by Victoria. Now is the time for Australasia to
prepare for emergencies, and to so arrange its armaments as to be able
to defend itself when the impending danger bursts upon it. The
establishment of a Federal Council will be a practical step towards
Federal Defence, and it is a matter for regret that New South Wales
holds aloof from participation in the privileges granted by the Tederal
Enabling Bill that has just been passed in the British Parliament.
Complete defensive measures can only result from united federal action.
It is the opinion of Admiral Tryon, the officer in command of the
Australian Station, that the defence of two such strategic points of
attack as King George’s Sound in Western Australia, and Thursday Island,
in Torres Straits in Queensland, should be a question of federal action,
and that the cost of such defence should be proportionately bore by all
the colonies. v
the colonies.
, I have done no more than my duty in once again warning
Australasia to face dire coming events which cast their shadows before.
I appeal to Australasia to awake from its sweet dream of false security,
to come out of its fool’s paradise, and to honestly face the problem of
what German colonisation in Austral seas really means. But a few
week’s since, the German war steamer Samoa paid a friendly visit to
Townsville. Its officers were hospitably received and treated with the
greatest cordiality. They were banqueted, and piloted around to all
the local places of interest, and were treated generally in accordance
with the genial traditions of Northern Queensland colonists. All this was
very pleasant and temporarily cheering. But a trivial incident struck
my military (and perhaps, suspicious) mind as being suggestive. That
German war-vessel took soundings in Townsville harbour. Perhaps


the British Admiralty chart of the harbour was not deemed by the
German naval authorities to be sufficiently accurate. Perhaps they
wanted to test for themselves the submarine peculiarities of the harbour
of Townsville, a wealthy and comparatively defenceless North Queens-
land port.
Australasia must awake to her responsibilities of self-defence. Inter-
national politics make Germany’s aspired-to supremacy in the Pacific
the most important political question with which Australasia is con-
fronted. All New Guinea and the islands adjacent to our shores are,
geographically, the birthright of Australasia, and the encroachments of
all countries thereon should be stubbornly resisted. It is the birthright
of individual manhood to make one’s peaceful existence secure—to
environ oneself with conditions that will enable one to defend that
which he has developed by his own enterprise and industry. That
which applies to the individual applies equally to a nation. I call
upon Australasians to agitate this question. Australasia is a part of the
British Empire, and has a right to know xsffiat provision that Empire is
going to make to protect it from the incursions and menances of un-
friendly neighbours, with whom Australasia, as a part of the British Empire,
may be drawn into war, by no act of its own, but by Imperial blundering,
or Imperial necessity. In return for her allegiance, Australasia expects
the British Empire to protect it; or else, it is a fair contention that
Australasia should have a voice in the Imperial Parliament, which
sometimes enters upon a foreign policy not greatly conducive to Aus-
tralasian interests. This aspect of the broad question embodies much.
It holds within itself the idea, not only of Federated Australasia, a
glorious and powerful nation of robust vitality, but also that of a
Federated British Empire, in the councils of which the young offshoots
should take an active part, and shall help to shape national policies,
instead of remaining in leading-strings and leaving international ques-
tions to be muddled by weak kneed Imperial Cabinets, the members of
which feel a greater apprehension for their seats over a Parliamentary
division upon (say) a local Dog Act, than they do for the progress and
and prosperity of a growing young nation over whom they have
temporary control.
Australasia was fooled by Lord Derby in respect of the annexation
of New Guinea. Let it not be similarly fooled again. If Australasians
insist on their rights, and show that they are prepared, should ever
stern necessity require it of them, to fight, and even die, for their
rights, they will assuredly obtain that for which they agitate. Let us
welcome the German people amongst us as Australian colonists, but
let us resist with all our might the Bismarckian schemes of German
colonisation in Austral seas, now so fondly cherished by the Germanic
Government. To be forewarned should be to be forearmed. Let
Australia not shirk the coming ordeal. To show the continued and
persistent greed of Bismarck of acquiring colonies and coal depots,
with a view to counteract British, French, and other influences in the
Pacific and other waters, no stronger evidence could be forthcoming


than his recent action in trying to wrest the Caroline Islands from
Spain. The position of those islands, so near to Java, Sumatra, and
China, would not only materially add to his rising strength in the Pacific,
but would also add to his moral and national prestige throughout the
world ; but the spirited and patriotic action of plucky Spain will be
hailed with delight by more than one Continental Power, for her
gallantry in saving herself from national humiliation and the deep-laid
snares of the huge grasping bully. “ Viva Espania.”
In concluding this article, I may be permitted to announce the fact
that I am now engaged in the preparation of a volume for publication in
Europe, America, and throughout the colonies, dealing comprehensively
with this vexed question of annexation in the Pacific. That volume
will contain interesting and instructive information from official and
other sources, not hitherto published, and will prove beyond contra-
diction that the loss to the British Crown of New Guinea and the
adjacent islands is due, not only to the vacillation of Lord Derby, but
also to the self-interested action of contemptible jealous-minded cliques,
with their satellites in England and the colonies—names will be given—
many of whom, assassins of character, who, with persecution and slander,
have used their liar and coward tongues in form of the treacherous and
venomous fangs of the viper to strike at a temporarily unfortunate man.
“ Glad tidings tread upon the heels of grief,
Like hounds that follow fast the flying fawn.
As tears to throbbing heart bring sweet relief,
Dark is the hour before the coming dawn.
The ore through fire must pass to be refined,
In life our souls are oft by sorrows tried ;
Doubt not when destiny proves most unkind,
In misery mankind is purified.
News may be bad, but at its worst ’twill mend.
Glad tidings come with comfort in the end.
So wait with patience for the turning tide.”


ANNEXATION.
THE ANNEXATION QUESTION.
Mr. Service’s Reply to Mr. Stuart.
The following reply was yesterday sent by Mr. Service to the
letter he received from Mr. Stuart, which was given in The Argus on
Monday, in reference to the proposal that the Agents-General should be
instructed to make renewed representations to the British Government
on the annexation question :
Premier’s Department,
Melbourne, September 23, 1884.
My Dear Stuart, —Your letter of 20th reached me only this afternoon at half-
past 5, but I had seen the text of it in our newspapers this morning, and felt much
regret at the view you take of the islands question, and of the course these colonies
should now take in respect thereto.
Let me say, first, that by a clerical error in my circular telegram the word
“ north-west ” was used instead of “ north-east,” which I did not observe when
signing it. My object in referring to the northern side at all was because,
although there is a northern side to the eastward of the Netherlands line, Mr.
Gladstone, in his recent remarks in the House of Commons, appeared to ignore
that portion of the coast altogether, and coufined his remarks to the southern and
eastern coasts alone. Whilst none of us desire to interfere with the Dutch claims,
the Convention was unanimous in desiring “ the incorporation with the British
Empire of so much of New Guinea and the small islands adjacent thereto as is not
claimed by the Government of the Netherlands,” and I think we shall agree that to
leave a part of the coast line on the northern side open to be appropriated by a
third power would be most undesirable. In this opinion I have no doubt you fully
concur.
There are two points in your letter which I was sorry to read—lst. That the
time has not come to further urge on the Imperial Government the necessity of
prompt action with respect to New Guinea ; and 2nd. That you describe the policy
of agitating for a complete protection over all the unappropriated islands as a de-
parture from the resolution of the Convention.
With respect to the first point, of course the exact time to repeat our appeals
to the Home Government must necessarily be a matter of opinion. You admit the
matter, as far as New Guinea is concerned, as an urgent one, and yet you hesitate
at present to say so a second time lest we be charged with “ restlessness and
impatience.” I deem it of far greater importance to show our deep earnestness in
the matter by a frequent importunity than to save ourselves from any small
imputation of the sort you deprecate. It appears to me that nothing but a
continual knocking at the door will arouse the Imperial Government to action.
Patience is but a poor substitute for pressure in cases like the present. You must
not forget that it is now 14 months since Lord Derby invited the colonies to unite
for the express purpose of securing the objects we desire—an invitation emphasised
in his lordship’s despatch of 9th May last in the following terms, viz. :
“ That in order to place Her Majesty’s Government in a position to consider the
proposals for the protection or government of New Guinea, or other places in the
Western Pacific Ocean, it was desirable for the Australasian colonies to combine
together effectively and provide the cost of carrying out any policy which it might
be desirable to adopt.”


The colonies have now combined together to provide the cost, and it remains
for Lord Derby to carry out his part of the contract.
But to my second point. I think all our Convention colleagues will be amazed
at your describing our agitating “ for a complete protection over all the un
appropriated islands” as a “departure from the resolutions of the Convention
In the resolutions of the Convention, as finally passed, the special mode of preventing
“ the further acquisition of dominion in the Pacific south of the equator by any
foreign power ” is not suggested, but no one ever imagined what you now propose,
viz that this could be best accomplished by placing all the islands except New
Guinea (why do you except New Guinea?) under the joint protection of the
European nations ! It takes one’s breath away to read such a proposal I thought
it was an accepted principle with all the colonies that the people of Australasia had
the best right to the Islands of Australasia, and that when the Convention
deprecated the further acquisition of territory by any foreign power they did not
mean that the whole of the islands should be handed over to the protection of all
the European Powers. To my mind it is clear as day that the only method of
preventing foreign powers from acquiring territory is to take it ourselves, and that
this was the view of the Convention, I think, must be admitted. You will
remember that clause 2 of the resolutions (see page 13 of the proceedings), as
origionally proposed by Mr. Whittaker (see pp. 10 and 11), indicated the means of
preventing foreign acquisitions to be “ by accession, annexation, or protectorate,
thus clearly indicating that England was, by some means or other, to secure the
isPnds against all foreign acquisition, and the more colourless clause, as finally
passed, was adopted because we had some difficulty in ascertaining what accession
or a protectorate exactly meant, and we cared not how the islands were made safe
so long as they were made safe. But the proposals of a dual control, or plural
control over these islanda was certainly never mooted at the Convention, and
contains within it, in my opinion, the germs of infinite trouble. I am very sorry
that your views in this matter are so divergent from those held by the Governments
of the other colonies. Queensland, South Australia, New Zealand, and Victoria
are all agreed on the necessity for further action. Tasmania, lam quite sure, will
ioin heartily as soon as our present tedious mode of communication by letter (owing,
to the breaking of the cable) will permit. Western Australia I did not ask to join
in this particular matter because she is a Crown colony. lam sorry New South
Wales will not join. A pull all together would almost certainly have gained our
object and I fear if England delay much longer the problem will be solved in a way
none of us will like. I yield to no man in a desire to preserve our mother country
from “ embarrassment.’"’ and it is because “the further acquisition of dominion m
the Pacific by any foreign power ” would be (to use the language of the Convention
resolution No, 1) “injurious to the interests of the empire,” as well as “highly
detrimental to the safety and well-being of the British possessions in Australasia,’
that I feel it imperative to strain every nerve to prevent a consummation so
devoutly to be deprecated.
I am, yours truly, v
James Service.
(From the Argus, February 4.)
The following despatch has been received by the Premier from the Agent-
General: —
“ London, December 24, 1884,
“ Sir,— Referring to my last despatch of 19th instant, No. 6934, I have the
honour to advise that, immediately on receipt of your message of the 20th, I waited
upon Sir Robert Herbert, to whom I communicated its contents. He at that time
informed me that the Colonial Office, while pursuing inquiries on the subject,
believed that Germany was virtually, if not actually, pledged not to attempt any
annexations in New Guinea, but that he regarded the intelligence, so far as related
to the other islands, as probably true. The daily papers also, as you will perceive,
believed themselves justified in rejecting the story, but before the following


Monday, the 22nd, official confirmation had been furnished by the German
Government to the press. I called at the Colonial Office again on that day, and
received from Sir Eobert Herbert an admission to the same effect. In answer to
my remonstrances, based upon the declarations publicly as well as privately made
by the Colonial Office I elicited little more than an acknowledgment that the act
of Germany was certainly unfriendly, although some hopes were held out that it
might be possible by negotiation to reverse the action of Prince Bismarck, so far as
New Guinea was concerned. I cannot, however, entertain much confidence in
these statements, nor does it appear that the Colonial Office have ever been alive
to the danger arising from foreign activity in the Pacific, or that the Government
will be induced, even by this untoward incident, to strengthen our hold on the
remaining islands, I need scarcely point out how fatal has been the effect of our
want of unanimity, and especially of the opposition of New South Wales, or how
impossible it has been, under these circumstances, to produce any effect on the
Imperial Government. I have, &c,,
“ Kobt. Murray Smith
“ The Hon. the Premier, Melbourne.”
The following is the message of December 20, referred to by the Agent-
General :
Telegram to the Agent-General, London.
“ Melbourne, December 20, 1884.
“ A.t last the end has come. Information received—reliable source—that
Germany has hoisted flag on New Britain, New Ireland, and north coast New
Guinea. The exasperation here is boundless. We protest, in the name of the
present and the future of Australia. If England does not save us from the danger
and disgrace, so far at least as New Guinea is concerned, the bitterness of feeling
towards her will not die out with this generation. We now appeal in terms of Lord
Derby’s despatch, 11th January, 1883, second paragraph.
“James Service.”
Extract from review in S. M. Herald, December 4, 1885.
41 The World of London.” By Count Paul Vasili,
And there is a very ominous ring in the passage which describes present and
prospective relations between England and Germany:—
“ A rupture between England and Germany is inevitable. Prince Bismarck
pursues his obvious intention of absorbing Holland in Germany; this with one
stroke would give him the Dutch colonies, and place a formidable rival to England
at the very doors of India and Australia. This danger England has brought upon
herself, and it is probably now too late to escape it. If she had chosen to do so she
could have prevented Sadowa and Sedan, and united Germany would not now
exist. Austria asked nothing better than to join with England, and prevent the
Schleswig campaign ; but she could not venture to act alone. The Queen opposed
the Austrian alliance, fearing to have to draw the sword against her good friends
the Germans,” »
The above Telegrams speak for themselves.


At the last moment, before going to press.
BRAVO VICTORIA!
New South Welshmen take a lesson from the plucky little colony.
S. M. Herald, December 3, 1885.
THE NEW GUINEA QUESTION.
STATEMENT BY MU. SERVICE.
[By Telegraph,]
(FROM OUR 9WN CORRESPONDENT.)
Melbourne, Wednesday.
Early on Wednesday morning, in the Legislative Assembly, Mr. Service made
a statement on the New Guinea question, in reply to questions put to him by Mr,
Woods and Dr. Quick with reference to the vote of £4,694 for the continuance of the
colony’s contribution towards the expenses of the Government of New Guinea.
Mr. Service said : The fact is that the whole of this business was a bungle
from beginning to end —(cheers) —and Lord Derby will go down in the history of
these colonies as the man who lost New Guinea. (Cheers.) I never can think of
that episode in the history of our colonies, without experiencing a sense of absolute
disgust. (Cheers.) The whole thing was bungled. The object we had at the beginning
in establishing a protectorate over these islands, or in attaching them to us in some
way, was to prevent them from falling into the hands of any foreign nation.
(Cheers.) It was an absolute necessity, and it remains an absolute necessity, for
North Australia—for Queensland —that the southern portion of New Guinea should
be in the hands of Great Britain —(cheers) —and in so far as the southern part of
New Guinea is protected in the way it is, we have to thank God and not Lord Derby,
(Cheers.) With reference to this subsidy, it is simply vexatious in the highest
degree to find that, while we are compelled to pay £15,000 for the government of
this southern portion of New Guinea, the Germans have laid hold of the northern
part of it, and it has not cost them a single farthing. (Cheers.) All these matters
I have not failed to bring before the Colonial Office. Not only that, but when it
became an accomplished fact that Germany had succeeded in getting a permanent
hold of New Guinea, my last despatch stated that, while for the present we must
accept things as they are, our acceptance was not to be regarded in any shape or
form, either for the present or the future as a recognition of German rightsvto
any part of New Guinea. (Loud cheers.) If I were an Australian—l mean by
that if I could have a life which in the nature of things I cannot hope to have—l
would say that I would never recognise Germany’s rights to any portion of New
Guinea—(cheers) —because we took possession of it in the name of the nation.
(Cheers.) We have been assured that no foreign nation had any desire for it; that it
would be regarded as an unfriendly act to England if any other nation took posses-
sion of it. (Cheers.) Germany could take New Britain, New Ireland, and the
other islands, because we had made no special claim to them ; but she knew that
we had taken New Guinea, and that it was ours according to the traditions of the
British Empire. (Cheers.)
Dr. Quick: And by the law of nations.
Mr, Service: Yes, it was ours by the law of nations—(cheers)— and we can
just as well now take the northern coast of New Britain from Germany as she had
any right to take the northern coast of New Guinea from us because we did not
occupy it. (Cheers.) I have taken care that whatever may happen in the future,
nothing will be done by this Government that will recognise Germany’s right to


New Guinea. (Cheers.) 1 look forward to the time when Australia will be able to
assert her rights. Ido not know what may be the result of the despatch that we
have had from England. It is that as soon as a permanent appropriation of this
money shall be passed by the colonies, the Queen’s sovereignty will be proclaimed
over the southern part of New Guinea, and without that there is no law there.
With regard to the vote, Queensland passed a permanent appropriation last year
for its share of the total sum. I am not quite sure whether some of the other
colonies have done so or not; but Sir Peter Scratchley, in laying out his scheme
for the Government of the island, submitted a proposal which was placed on the
table of the House. It extended over a period of five years, and showed what he
intended to do during that period. It committed the colonies to an expenditure for
that period. It would not be unreasonable, at all events, to guarantee the expendi-
ture for that period of time, because we must remember that although this matter
has been bungled we were really led into this expenditure in a way we should not
have been led. (Cheers.) Still we cannot do otherwise than go on with it. But
at the time we were asked to pass the £15,000 it was believed that we would not
only get New Guinea, but New Britain, New Ireland, and the other islands—
(cheers) —and it was under such an impression that I wired home, guaranteeing the
whole of the money on the part of Victoria. (Cheers.) It turned out, however,
that we did not get New Guinea, but only a slice of it, and there is no doubt but it
was a shabby way to secure the vote.


APPENDIX.
The Times (London)/in a leading article which appeared on the Ist
November, 1883, referring to General Maclver’s proposed New Guinea
exploration and colonisation scheme, said ; “ But its promoter declines
to be put down, and announces his intention of going to New Guinea
with such followers as he may succeed in inducing to accompany him.
This affair , unimportant as it is, has lately served to keep the D/ew Guinea
question before the public mind; and-in that way it has done good
service. For the New Guinea question is both important in itself, and
is likely to lead directly to results of the very highest interest. It
seems destined to open a new chapter in the history of the relations
between the mother country and that magnificent group of colonies
which encircles the vast Australian Continent, and which will, in no
long time, be the means of spreading over the multitudinous islands of
the South Pacific the influence of the English races. No one can have
forgotten the feeling of mingled admiration and astonishment with
which we first heard, last spring, of the annexation of New Guinea.
The Queensland Government had willed it.”
The World, London, August 22nd, 1833.
I hear that the adventurous General Maclver is organising an expedition for
the purpose of founding a colony in recently much-written-about New Guinea.
As no attempt has yet been made to deal commercially with the wealthy country,
there would seem to be a considerable chance for a successful opening in this
direction, as, according to travellers’ accounts, the island is almost equal in riches
to that of Monte Christo.
The Weekly Times, London, 2nd September, 1888.
General H. E. Maclver is organising a party to proceed to NewjGuinea to
form a settlement which is intended as the nucleus of a large and important
colony. As the expedition will be well equipped, and under competent leadership,
the undertaking has every prospect of success, and will open up a fine fresh field
for emigration. V
St. Stephen's Review, September 28th, 1883.
NEW GUINEA.
No sooner is a want felt in these days than the minds of mankind go to work
to supply such want. The Daily Telegraph is publishing columns upon the
subject of “ What to do with our boys,” and this, General Maclver now proposes
to show. New Guinea is an immense island, lying close to and to the north of
Queensland, and is inhabited by natives. The land produces gold, silver, tin, and
apparently all other metals, and precious stones are known to exist. The climate
is generally equable, and agricultural pursuits can be carried on to_ an extent
believed almost unapproachable elsewhere ; the soil being of the richest, and
capable of producing all tropical or semi-tropical vegetation. It is thought by
many that it will be the sheep country of the world.


The General has, I understand, associated many noblemen and gentlemen
with himself, and proposes almost immediately to take out a colony of some 100 to
200 settlers. It need scarcely be said the “ list ”of proposing pioneers will be long
“ over-filled,” in a very short time, and I should advise every one who desires
reliable information to call on him at 40 Tavistock Street, W.C. Those first
arriving in this new land of promise may soon rival old Australian settlers in wealth,
if all the tales be true, and those associated with the scheme prophecy a wonderful
future for all. There is room for everybody—gentlemen, farmers, soldiers,
mechanics, or labourers. “ The New Guinea Exploration and Colonization
Company, Limited,” may entice a great deal of an English superabundant popula-
tion, and it seems to me to be “coming out ”at a most auspicious moment. All
the Company requires is that each one joining the first party shall subscribe £lOO
for shares and pay for his outfit, so that £l5O may furnish a grand future for those
who are getting tired of doing nothing. The projectors are already busy negotiating
for agricultural and other machinery, and expect a speedy start.
Dover Courant Oct.
It is now generally understood that if the Government will not sanction the
proceedings, and give effect to the wishes of fhe colonists of Queensland and
Australia generally, with reference to New Guinea, a powerful expedition will be
formed, composed of British and colonial adventurers, under General Maclver, for
the purpose of founding a colony there, so that should any foreign Powers attempt
to meddle with the territory, they will find it virtually annexed under the Union
Jack,
The Bailie (Glasgow), Sept. sth, 1883.
My London correspondent writes:—l had a crack t’other day with that dis-
tinguished soldier of fortune, Brigadier-General Maclver, late of the Confederate
the Greek, the Servian, and a dozen other services. He is at present full of his
latest scheme—the organization, to wit, of an expedition for the colonization of
New Guinea. There is no earthly reason why this should not turn out ‘ a big
thing, ’ and any adventurous young Scot who is unable to find an opening at home
might do worse than put himself in communication with the gallant General
Maclver, I may tell you, is a man worth knowing—a figure that might, fop all the
world, have stepped out of * Quentin Durward.’ Though barely on the wrong side
of forty, he has fought on scores of battle-fields, been wounded over and over again,
and probably known more hair-breadth ’scapes than any living man of his age.
His biography is written by Captain L’Estrange, late of the 12th Lancers, and
bears the suggestive title, “Under Fourteen Flags,” which, as the General justly
observes, beats * Ouida.’ ”
The Court Journal, September Bth, 1883
General Maclver, old in honours, but vigorous and energetic as ever, is
organising an expedition to New Guinea, about which El Dorado so much has
been talked and written, and so little done. The enterprise will be peacefully and
practically conducted, and will not seek to oust the rightful owners of the soil from
the land of their birth, but will deal with them in an inoffensive manner. Annexa-
tion will not be the motto of Maclver’s little band, nor will what a certain clique
call piracy, form one of their precepts ; conducted on purely commercial principles,
the venture should have the approbation of all who wish to see the resources of
that grand island developed.
Note.— The Bailie is the leading Scotch humorous journal, and its high intellectual character
has led to its being called “ The Punch of the North ” in literary circles.


The Editor of England , Bth September, 1883.
General MacTver, whom I have had the pleasure of meeting in sundry places
abroad, is organising an expedition for the further exploration and general opening
up of New Guinea. The gallant gentleman informs me that the objects of the
“ deputation” he intends to introduce to the natives are to assure them “That
instead of restricting their costume to beads and their food principally to the flesh
of the human being, they might, with European aid, not only make themselves
useful and respectable members of society, but develop and grow upon the
resources of the tremendously wealthy country which they inhabit.” Also to
practically and fully explore the island. The General goes on to remind me that
“ New Guinea is half as large again as France, its climate is all that need be
desired ; its scenery, its foliage, its manifold natural products, and the fertility of
its soil would seem to be sufficient to recommend it to enterprising colonisers, and
yet it has hitherto been allowed to lie dormant in the hands of the natives, who
have no soul above feasting upon one another, and executing feats with poisoned
arrows. Referring to the “ foliage ” which the General includes among New
Guinea’s recommendatory points, on,e might sum up them somewhat thus;
General Maclver’s expedition will take French leave to get among the foliage,
which, when once they have established themselves in it, will never become
French leaves. Good-bye, Maclver, I hope you will disagree with the savage who
eats you. I always liked you, but I suspect that he won’t.
The Broad Arrow, 15 th September, 1883,
The Broad Arrow has never omitted an opportunity of deprecating the faimeant
laisser alter policy our colonial officials are pursuing in regard to England’s
interests in the Pacific. Lord Norton, in a recent letter to the limes and the
Broad Arrow, at the same period, pointed out how frequently and legitimately has
increase of colonial territory been effected without direct action on the part of the
home Government. New Zealand, it is well known, would have now been a
French colony had it not been for the prompt action of our colonial authorities,
and the material prosperity of the North Island of this possession would have been
far behind its present state had not Colonel Ridgway and his late father, acting in
the interests of the colonists, put in force the operation of the “ Waste Lands Act,”
in defiance of the Colonial Secretary of the day. When some two months back
this journal suggested the possibility of French attempts upon the New Hebrides,
the idea was scouted by several of our contemporaries, who relied upon the formal
and explicit contradiction of the French official press. Recent advices from New
Caledonia will make it now perfectly clear that if the New Hebrides have not been
formally annexed by France, a “Protectorate of New Caledonia will carry out
the scheme, and cause the French flag to fly in the islands which vainly claimed
England’s protection. While the Government of England, however, remain _ in-
active, private enterprise is not wanting to aid in the cause of British colonisation,
and theopening upof the resourcesof New Guinea—a country described by D’Albertis,
Admiral Moresby, Mr. Wilfrid Powell, and others who have partially explored the
country, as a land of great promise in its agricultural, mineral, and commercial
capabilites. General Maclver, who has had experience of almost every climate,
and every species of soldiering and campaigning, is now organising an expedition
of a partly public and partly private nature, in the view of exploring, and possibly
founding a settlement on the island. In the expedition, which will be composed
of picked men, there will be miners, carpenters, engineers, shepherds, and various
artificers ; there will be several officers, as leaders, who have knowledge of these
regions, and numerous volunteers are daily offering to embark in the scheme
There is every reason to believe that the neighbouring colonial possessions of Great
Britain in the Pacific, will afford material aid in men and money to General
Maclver’s spirited undertaking, which will be of a semi-military character, and
conducted according to the rules of order and discipline.


Note. With regard to the closing sentences of the preceding
article, I should mention that instead of obtaining “ aid in men and
money,” from the Colonial Governments, I have had a cold, cruel “ dead
wall ” set up against my efforts by leading politicians of the Stuart-
Dibbs-Dalley administration in New South Wales, and the present
Government of Queensland particularly, who are anxious to keep in
favour with home politicians of the Derby and Granville stamp for
the accomplishment of their own selfish and greedy expectations.
The discourtesy and inconsiderate treatment meted out to me, I must
overlook in the case of some of the more prominent politicians of the
above stamp, and their minions , on the score of ignorance and stupidity \
others with low cunning, and gifted with coarse, vulgar, “ verbosity,
are frequently kicked into office to their own amazement, and to the
detriment of a grand and generous people, who are being continually
hoodwinked by the above class of political prigs.
“ Tender handed press a nettle,
And it stings you for your pains ;
Grasp it like a man of mettle,
It as soft as silk remains.
Thus it is with vulgar natures—
Treat them kindly they rebel,
Use them like the nutmeg graters
Then the rogues will serve you well
H. R. M.
The Globe, London, October 25th, 1883,
THE NEW GUINEA EXPEDITION.
Although Lord Derby may have good grounds for placing his ban on the
contemplated expedition to New Guinea, his threat to employ her Majesty’s forces
to prevent the realisation of the project, opens out a somewhat important question.
The promoters of the expedition profess to have nothing but peaceful objects in
view This was stated distinctly in the company’s prospectus, and in letters to the
Times on the 19th and 20th inst., General Maclver categorically repeated the
assertion “ Our aim is simply to purchase a big tract of land, and then to build
towns and open up farms ; we do not mean to do anything which may savour of
filibustering ; our expedition is a peaceful one, formed for the purpose of extending
British trade and commerce ” —these are among the definitions of the scope and
purposes of the enterprise which we get from its chief promoter. Are they illegal,
collectively or separately ? Is it against the law of England that her children
should buy land from barbarians, and seek to develop British trade at the risk of
their lives ? If that be so, we have a good many settlements in various parts of
the world, whose beginnings were tainted by illegality. Lord Derby may be right;
on that head we cannot offer any opinion at present, because we are unacquainted
with the evidence on which he based his judgment of the expedition. But his
peremptory communication to General Maclver certainly does not show cause why
the undertaking should be regarded as a filibustering project in disguise. The
Colonial Secretary compares it with the previous expedition, which was initiated in
1875 and he says, quite truly, that the then Government very strongly objected to
it But in that instance, open parade of warlike purpose was made. The
promoters did not attempt to conceal that it was a fighting enterprise in which
they desired to embark, and the Conservative Ministry therefore persuaded them—
no absolute order was given—to desist.


People, London, October 28, 1883.
Lord Derby, writing from the Colonial Office to General Maclver, the pro-
moter of the New Guinea Exploration Company, with his accustomed suavity and
politeness, observes :—“ If you had communicated with this department, Lord
Derby would have caused the objections to your scheme to be explained to you, and
as his lordship has now otherwise obtained information respecting your proceed-
ings, he feels himself under the necessity of intimating to you explicitly and without
delay that your contemplated operations in New Guinea cannot be permitted, and
that if any attempt should be made to carry out the project described in your pro-
spectus her Majesty’s Government would be under the necessity of instructing the
High Commissioner for the Western Pacific and the officer commanding her
Majesty’s naval forces on the station to for the protection of the native
inhabitants of the island.” Of course, as the New Guinea Exploration Company is
an English company ; as its objects are pacific and commercial, and directly calcu-
lated to promote the interests of the Empire, his lordship threatens peremptorily
to employ her Majesty’s forces to prevent any possibility of its success. The pro-
ject, Lord Derby declares, is merely a revival of the project of 1875, which was
abandoned on account of the disapproval of Government. It would be interesting
to learn on what evidence his lordship bases this assertion, which, so far as the
public is aware, is as false as it is gratuitous. The New Guinea Exploration Com-
pany is not composed of members likely to embark in a filibustering expedition
either secret or declared.
The Colonies and India, October 2 6th, 1883.
LORD DERBY AND GENERAL MacIVER.
No doubt Lord Derby was annoyed at the prospect of his hand being forced
in the matter of annexation, but as he had some time ago expressed his intention
not to sanction annexation, and based that refusal partly on the absence of any
trade with and knowledge of the island, his position, in violently opposing a
company projected with the object of opening up relations with the island is
inconsistent. The position may be summed up thus : If General Maclver’s
scheme was for a bona-fide trading concern, Lord Derby had no authority to stop
it. If his intentions were to go on a filibustering expedition, the High Commis-
sioner ought to be able to take measures, in the ordinary course, to prevent it, or
to punish the offenders. If our present organisation is not sufficient to do this,
the only step to be taken is to annex the island.
The Standard, London, October 29th, 1883.
Notwithstanding the warning conveyed in Lord Derby’s recent despatch, Gene-
ral Maclver expresses his determination to proceed with the New Guinea Explora-
tion and Colonisation Expedition. General Maclver and his friends have already
chartered a steamer in order to leave this country before Christmas. The prospectus
of the expedition states, amongst other things, that settlers intending to join the
first party must contribute one hundred pounds towards the company. The sub-
scription will include all expenses for passage money. Twelve months’ provisions
will be provided, together with tents and arms for protection. It is said that the
expedition will land on the north-east coast of the island.
From Judy, London, October 31st, 1883.
For the life of me I cannot see on what ground Lord Derby ventured to
write, without being asked, to General Maclver, in the terms used by him. I shall
be much surprised if his lordship’s cumbrous epistle will prevent the departure of
C


the expedition. All Lord Derby ought to have said was, that in the event of
General Maclver sailing, he must not expect British interference in his behalf,
whatever may happen to the English D’Artagnan and his fellow adventurers.
The Daily News, Tuesday , April 2nd, 1884.
Brigadier-General Maclver, the original promoter of the “New Guinea
Exploration and Colonisation Company,” which the Colonial Office so sternly
suppressed, sails for Australia to-day. His errand is nonbelligerent in any sense,
nOT has he any intention of “ Sarawaking ” a Pacific island. His purpose is
merely to deliver a course of lectures in the Australasian Colonies on his
experiences with the “fourteen flags” under which he has served.
The Queensland Figaro, 6th- August, 1885.
It is a pity that Australia lost such a valuable prize as Northern New Guinea,
merely because an English cabinet minister’s spine was out of joint. Australian
exploring parties to New Guinea will now, probably for a long time, be confined to
the southern and British portion of the island. Thus does officialdom ever limit
bold enterprise. It is said that Scotchmen leap to the lead in every corner of the
earth, and certainly the two most prominent names in connection with the nativity
of New Guinea, in its new existence, will be those of two Scotchmen, both bold
and shrewd men—MTlwraith and Maclver. . . . Brigadier-General Maclver
is peculiarly fitted to lead men where dangers and privation abound. Anyone who
has read “ Under Fourteen Flags ” must marvel at the courage, skill, and endurance
of the soldier there described—often lurking alone in swamps, morasses, and
jungles, as a fugitive from enemies, and ever turning up triumphantly to the
surprise of his friends, who had long since mourned him as dead. His life has
been a marvel, and reads like a romance. The St. Jawes s Gazette, a leading
London paper, likens Maclver to the famous Quentin Durward; while the Scotswan,
the foremost, perhaps, of Scottish journals, compares him to John Hawkshaw, the
leader of those condottieri who, at one time, made it “ hot ” for the old Italian
Republic. Many other papers speak of him in the most flattering terms, and he
was, for a long time, one of the lions of London society.
The Argus and Australasian, Melbourne.
The Argus, and also the Australasian, of 3rd November, 1883, stated in their
editorial columns that Australia “ owes a debt of gratitude to General Maclver for
thus forcing the English Government to declare their views,” in respect to New
Guinea.
The Warrnambool Standard (Victoria), 27 th November, 1884.
The General, it will be remembered, was the first to draw attention to the
designs of Germany in the Pacific; and, although his views were thought at first
not to be entirely warranted, subsequent utterances by Prince Bismarck showed
that the General had not been far out in summing up the situation, and its pro-
babilities with regard to the future of the Pacific. The attention thus directed to
the danger of New Guinea falling into the hands of Germany was a powerful factor
in hastening decisive action on the part of that apparently vacillating statesman,
Lord Derby, and the General is consequently entitled to the thanks of the Austra-
lian public for the part he has played in the affair.


The Tamworth News {N. S. Wales), 2nd January, 1885,
In a leading article in the above paper the following appears :
It was General Maclver who first told the people of these colonies that it was
not so much France that we had to fear as Germany. His views at the time were
ridiculed, and, although he brought forward some strong arguments in support ot
his contention, there can be no doubt he was looked upon as a man with a craze.
He was told, though not, perhaps, in so many words, that he was the victim of a
delusion with respect to the Teutons, that they were really our friends, and that
we had reason to distrust only France.' His reply was Wait and see ,
Bismarck is playing his own game, he can be checkmated now, but it will soon oe
too late.” Scarcely seven months had elapsed since the Generals warning *iad
been given, and time has proved that he had a better idea of German policy than
those had whose duty it was to learn it. ... _ Doubtless the utterances of
General Maclver had something to do with precipitating this action on the part ol
Prince Bismarck, for, very shortly after they were made, Dr. Krauel the German
Consul-General, was recalled from Sydney in haste to Berlin, and a large German
corvette, the Elizabeth, was despatched to these waters. In the meantime, the
protection of Great Britain to the southern shores of New Guinea was granted, an
the news sent out to Australia,


PART ll.—-GERMANY AND NEW GUINEA.
The Melbourne Daily Telegraph, Tuesday, May 20, 1884,
THE COLONISATION OF NEW GUINEA.
Arrival of General Maclver.
The Orient steamer Potosi, which arrived here on Saturday, brought amongst
her passengers General Maclver, whose name came so prominently before the
public some few months ago as the promoter of an expedition for colonisation pur-
poses to New Guinea, from Great Britain. Knowing the deep interest which is
always taken in these colonies in any matter connected with New Guinea, a repre-
sentative of this journal waited on General Madder, and obtained some interesting
particulars from him with regard to his proposed scheme.
His Military Career.
A few words will, doubtless, prove acceptable concerning the General himself.
From boyhood’s years he has been a true soldier of fortune, fighting his way
through the world in a literal sense, until some six years ago, when he retired
from active military service. During that period he fought under the British
(Indian mutiny), Italian, American (Confederate States), Mexican, Brazilian,
Argentine Republic, Cretan, Cuban, French, Egyptian, Spanish (Don Carlos),
Herzgovinian, Servian, and Greek flags, and at the battle of Kevineck, in Servia,
he commanded the Servian cavalry against the Turks, the Servians, after a des-
perate and bloody battle, lasting for two days, losing eighty officers and 3,000 men.
General Tchernaieff decorated General Maclver on the field of battle with the
Servian cross of Takavo and the gold medal for valour, so that it will therefore be
seen that General Maclver is not a “ Gen’r’l” in the ordinary American accepta-
tion of the term, but has carved out a name and position for himself by hard
fighting in many a foreign clime. We would fain have enlarged our notice of his
military career, but as he intends to bring the many stirring episodes connected
with it before the public in a few days, in the shape of a lecture, entitled “ Under
Fourteen Flags,” it would hardly be fair to thus anticipate his subject. It might
also be mentioned that General Maclver has, on more than one occasion, acted as
war correspondent for London journals, so that with his journalistic experience, he
should no difficulty in placing his lectures before the public in a comprehensive and
interesting manner.
His Colonisation Scheme.
Having thus introduced the General to our readers, we will proceed to give
the details of the New Guinea colonisation scheme with which his name is so
closely associated, and how the movement originated. When the news reached
home that Queensland had annexed New Guinea it created a great stir, and then
came Lord Derby’s refusal to sanction that annexation. General Maclver had at
this time been reading up authorities on New Guinea, and we may now quote his
own words on hearing of Lord Derby’s action:—“ The thought at once entered
my brain what a glorious plan it would be to found a colony there, and I
said I would do it. If successful, it will be doing the colonies a great service
by compelling him to take decisive action, and thus show his hand. Then,
if Lord Derby agrees to recognise us, we will found a colony and fight any
other power that dare to interfere with us.” General Maclver at once com-
municated his idea to several friends, and a board of directors was appointed,
with General Beresford as president. Advertisements were then put in the papers
calling for people ready to join in the expedition, and in a very short time 60 were


enrolled, comprising every class of labour, with a large proportion of agriculturists
and miners. A ship was bought with the intention of sending off the first consign-
ment, numbering 500, the gross number, however, being unlimited. The greatest
care was taken to exclude the rowdy element, and the applicants were obliged to
produce references as to character, or show that they had learnt a trade. Some of
them were connected with the best families in England, and gentlemen in the
best positions wrote to try and get their sons taken. The scheme was looked upon
as a genuine and satisfactory one, and partaking in no way of the nature of a
filibustering expedition, and really containing the germs of a grand colony.
General Maclver intended to start it on the basis of a military expedition under
thorough discipline, which was necessary not only for the protection of the mem-
bers of it, but also to establish and preserve amicable relations with the natives;
and the men were distinctly given to understand that any plundering, or act of
violence, would result in the offender being summarily shot. The General in-
tended to lead the expedition, arid here, again, we may quote his own words to
the men:—“You will have terrible hardships to go through in exploring the
country. Strict discipline must be enforced, and the first man who disobeys will
be shot down. I will be the first to set foot on shore, but I will not ask you to go
where I will not go myself. I have never yet done anything to bring discredit on
myself, and therefore I shall not allow it to be said that I led an expedition which
acted cruelly or unjustly to the natives. I wish to show the world that our object
is the advancement of civilisation and the benefit of future generations by opening
up this country to them.” Under no circumstances was it intended to set up any
form of government in the island. General Maclver was requested to do so, but
declined, and announced his intention of working in conjunction with the other
colonial governments and people, as he thought in no other way could the new
venture be successful. On landing this first instalment of the colonists a steamer
was to be despatched to Queensland to communicate the fact to the Australian
colonies, and to state that the new colony would place itself under the British flag.
A despatch was also to be sent to every colony, requesting them to recognise the
members of the expedition as peaceable British subjects, and stating their willing-
ness to offer the fullest information to any person who might be delegated to inspect
their movements. The advantages attached to the colony were twofold. He
says :—“ In the first place we could cultivate wheat, sugar, maize, indigo, cotton,
sago, collect valuable woods, and establish an important trade with the colonies and
Great Britain, while in the second we could relieve Great Britain of some of her
surplus population. There is not the slightest doubt that this would be an
advantage to England, as there are hundreds of men, many of whom are well
connected or have held good positions, walking about London now without know-
ing where to look for a dinner to-morrow. As for the rowdy element, I beliqve if
I had offered to take them I could have enrolled a thousand volunteers in a day.”
From these day dreams of a new world General Maclver was rudely awakened by
Lord Derby putting his veto on the whole proposal, and this was no doubt due to
the fact that it was started and advertised as a colonising expedition. General
Maclver believed that had he issued the prospectus for an exploring expedition
instead, there would have been no objection to it ; but then, on the other hand, it
might have attracted only naturalists, botanists, and geologists, instead of the
class of people requisite for settlement. Lord Derby wrote to General Maclver,
telling him plainly that if the expedition was insisted on, her Majesty’s fleet in the
Western Pacific would be ordered to operate against it, which meant that it would
be treated as a piratical or filibustering expedition, and fired on. The effect of
this threat was that many men of wealth drew back afraid, and the expedition fell
through. The result of this ending to the scheme created a feeling of genuine
regret amongst those who had intended to take part in it, and many of them
stated that if at any time the expedition was reorganised, they would be glad to
join it. General Maclver states that Lord Derby still suspects him of adhering to
the colonisation scheme, and believes that he has come to these colonies for the
purpose of carrying it out. In this suspicion, however, Lord Derby is wrong, as
the general does not intend to go on with his scheme now. When, however, he


has completed his lecturing tour he intends to offer his services to the colonial
Governments as the leader of an exploring expedition to New Guinea on a grand
scale, for the purpose of ascertaining its mineral and agricultural resources. In
making the offer, however, he does not lay it down as a sine qua non that he shall
be the leader, but, on the contrary, is willing, if the colonies believe they can find
a more suitable man, to accept his leadership. General Maolver has come to the
colonies alone. There were many people at home who wished to accompany him
here, but on mature consideration he decided to come out by himself.
General Gordon and the Egyptian Troops.
Referring to other topics, General Maclver mentioned the name of Colonel
Gordon, whom he knew personally, having met him in London. He speaks of
him as a splendid fellow, quiet, charitable, and unassuming, very genuine, a
Christian as well as a soldier. The Egyptian troops with whom he has come in
contact are composed, he says, of shockingly poor material, about the worst, in
fact, that he ever met with.
The World, Melbourne, Thursday, May 29, 1884.
THE NEW GUINEA COLONISING SCHEME.
General Maclver Interviewed.
General Maclver, the original projector of the abortive New Guinea Colonising
Company, who arrived in this colony from England a few days ago, and is staying
at the George Hotel, St, Kilda, was interviewed yesterday by a representative of
the World. The gallant soldier of fortune received his interviewer most cour-
teously, and answered his interrogations with much geniality.
There is no need to retail the stale news concerning the New Guinea Company
and its collapse, which was given in London correspondence months ago. It is still
fresh in public recollection that the ostensible purpose of the proposed expedition
was to justly acquire, peaceably settle, and cultivate land in New Guinea ; that the
Imperial Government regarded it as nothing better than a filibustering scheme ; and
that the company fell to pieces, and the proposed expedition was abandoned in
consequence of the Earl of Derby declaring that H,M. Pacific fleet would prevent
its members from landing on Papuan soil.
The Brigadier-General.
General Maclver is a gentleman verging apparently on forty, of fine physique,
well-proportioned, well-knit figure, regular and handsome features, and military
address. There is nothing about him either of the flashy adventurer or the bluster-
ing braggart, and as little of the lover of carnage for carnage sake. A quiet gentle-
manly man, somewhat foreign in his mannerisms.
Tall—say six feet—and erect in bearing, weather-bronzed face, clean shaven,
except for military moustache and imperial; brown, grey-tinged hair, close
cropped to the well-set head; keen grey eyes with quiet resolution stamped on
every feature —such in appearance is Brigadier-General Maclver, the soldier who
has fought “ under fourteen flags,” who has won his way from cadetship to com-
mand of brigade.
Who He Is.
The reporter opened fire with—General, you have been taking an active part
in a scheme closely affecting the interests of these colonies. The question has
been raised, who are you ?—I claim to be a Scotchman, was the proud reply. My
father was a Highlander, a native of Rosshire, my mother being a Douglas. I was
born on the high seas on Christmas Day, 1841, and am now therefore in my 43rd
year.


His Militaey Rank.
There is an idea abroad that you are an American “ general.” What commis-
sions have you held ?—I entered the Confederate army as lieutenant, and rose to
he major. I was lieutenant-colonel in the Mexican Imperial Army, lieutenant-
colonel and commander of the Foreign Legion in the service of the Argentine
Republic, colonel in Crete, colonel in Cuba, colonel and inspector-general of cavalry
in Egypt, colonel in the French army, colonel and chief of cavalry (which gave
me the rank of general of brigade)Jin Servia, and afterwards received from the
Greek Government by the special direction of M. Comondourous, the prime minister,
the commission of general of brigade. To set curiosity at rest as to my military
title, you can judge for yourself. (General Maclver here produced several dis-
patches from the Earl of Derby, addressed to “Brigadier-General” Maclver and
added:) Thus you see, my rank as Brigadier-General is acknowleged in official
dispatches.
It has been said that you are not merely a soldier of fortune—you do not mind
that designation ?—Certainly not.
Not merely a soldier of fortune, but a filibuster.
Are you a Filibuster?
Emphatically, No ! Such an accusation is a false and cowardly slander, lam
a gentleman, and I intend to prove it before the audiences I shall address in this
colony. That cowardly slander is the result of the contemptible jealousy that
brought about the break-down of the expedition. The Earl of Derby, who gave
that jealousy effect, who is he to cast imputations ? A renegade ! A Conservative
who has deserted his own colours for the sake of office. It is a well-known fact
that lam no filibuster. I came forward with a strong desire and purpose to assist
in opening up a new country, to carry out a scheme of colonisation that would
have been for the benefit of thousands upon thousands who now, straitened in
action in the narrow sphere of over-crowded England, would in a comparatively
unpeopled land have made new homes foy themselves, and would there have
established a new, a prosperous, and a civilised community. To this end I have
been doing everything in my power, at much expenditure of time, much personal
trouble and worry, and no little cost. If I were a filibuster would my plans have
provided, as they do, not only for the safety, as far as possible in a land inhabited
by semi-savages, of the members of the expedition, but also for the protection of
the natives ? Those who volunteered to proceed with me were told plainly that if
they were accused of acts of violence and outrage, particularly offences against
women, they would be tried by drumhead court-martial, and, if found guilty, shot
to death. Military discipline would have been enforced over the members-of the
expedition—for which 600 suitable men promptly enrolled themselves—until the
arrival of Imperial or Colonial officials to administer the affairs of this new colony.
Immediately on our landing in New Guinea a steamer would have been sent off to
the Australian mainland with despatches for the several colonial Governments
requesting their protection and guidance, and if that had been granted, our com-
munity would have been placed under their, or under Imperial administration.
Am I a filibuster ? Were the men who forty years ago sailed up the Yarra, and
landed on the site of Melbourne, and formed the infant settlement that has grown
into this grand and glorious city, were they freebooters ? They did what we pro-
posed to do—took possession of and turned to good account unoccupied territory,
if I am a filibuster, then the people of these colonies are either filibusters or the
children of filibusters. My aim has been to do in New Guinea just what your
fathers did in Australia, who in the doing founded these magnificent communities.
You disclaim the imputation for yourself, as you would deny that the Pilgrim
Fathers and William Penn were filibusters ’—Certainly. Had I been a filibuster
I should not have obtained the support I did in England from such men as General
Beresford.


In Quest of Land.
A filibuster of course, General, is one who is after plunder. Were you in
quest of plunder?—Plunder is not the word. I was in quest of unoccupied land,
or of land which could have been obtained in a fair and amicable manner from the
natives claiming to possess it. When the island had been brought under the
British flag the land there, as originally all the land in these colonies, would have
been vested in the Crown, from whom we should have purchased selections on
reasonable terms. Of course we expected to get the cream. In an honourable
and straightforward manner I wished to open up friendly intercourse with the
natives, and to produce, as rapidly as might be, a civilised state in place of a
savagery. This would have benefited the whole world, added glory and influence
to England, and advantage to the colonies.
His Plans.
On what part of New Guinea did you intend to land ?—Ah, now! ah, now !
You must be content with a generalisation—the South-East coast.
Supposing the natives, who have, it is said, ideas of their own as to fixity of
tenure, had refused to sell the land ; would you have taken it from them ? —We
should have established ourselves in New Guinea, like the early colonists settled
themselves in this colony. Our intention was to land at a suitable spot to take
possession of uninhabited territory.
You would not have allowed the natives to drive you away ? —Certainly not;
our force would have been strong enough to make good its defence.
Undee the Fifteenth Flag,
What are your plans for the future, apart, of course, from your lecturing
our ?—I am entirely at the command of the Governments, and at the service of the
people of these colonies. I am ready and willing on their behalf to act as either
leader of an exploring expedition to New Guinea; or, if they prefer to place some
other gentleman in the post of honour—for I do not presume for a moment to say
that I am the only man available to fill it—l am prepared to act as a second or
third in command, feeling confident that my past experiences would stand me in
good stead. I have, it is generally admitted, forced the hand of the Earl of Derby,
and it rests with the colonists to follow up the advance so far made in the move-
ment for the annexation of New Guinea.
The Sydney Daily Telegraph , Friday, June 27, 1884,
A NEW ENEMY IN THE PACIFIC.
General Maclver has already scored a big point, and we hasten to cover
ourselves with sackcloth and ashes. The General was startling, and our reporter
was incredulous and sarcastic. We apologise. We reprint the following from our
yesterday’s report:
General Maclver claims that the exploration of New Guinea is a matter of
great urgency. In support of this statement he refers to the alliance existing
between Russia and Germany. The Germans, he says, who have never been
England’s friends, are winking at the advance of Russia in the East, as Russia is
winking at the advances of Germany in the Southern waters. The Germans are
aiming for the establishment of Mediterranean seaports, which, once effected, will
give them a material influence in regard to the Suez canal, and enable them to extend
their powers in the Pacific. What guarantee, the General asks, have we that New
Guinea is not one of her hopeful prizes ? He firmly believes that Bismarck has his
emissaries distributed over the Australasian part of the world, and that Russian
and other spies are in our midst, watching our every movement and secretly
communicating with the heads of the nations they represent. Just as Bismarck
had his spies distributed over France before the declaration of the Franco-Prussian


war, tactics which largely contributed to the German victories, so that great
diplomatic statesman is watching his opportunity in Australia for an extension of
the German Empire, and new fields for her commerce. Germany, according to
the General, is in a state of commercial poverty, and she is the greedy grasping
vulture that has her eyes on New Guinea, and the thousands of Germans at present
in Australasia would be ordered to flock over to New Guinea, in order to give
colour to any proposal of annexation which Germany would be prepared to make.
This morning we publish a singular confirmation of General Maclver’s views,
A special cable says that the question pt the future ownership of these Pacific
territories has come up for discussion in the German Reichstag ; that Prince
Bismarck made an important speech, in which he ridiculed the pretensions of the
Australian colonies to a monopoly of the Pacific islands ; and that the Berlin press
deny the right of England to annex New Guinea. So that we are evidently to
have a new competitor and possible enemy in the Pacific. We are drifting with
terrible rapidity into international politics. The great powers of the old world—
Great Britain, France, Germany, and Russia—are to be the great powers of the
new. Our statesmanship will have to show a broader sweep of vision, and develop
a more subtle cunning. Most seriously, this news from Berlin opens up vast
possibilities and dangers. Germany already has very large commercial interests
in the Pacific, and evidently she has her eye and heart, and may, unless prevented
by prompt and decisive British action, lay her hand upon New Guinea. The
Australian governors and premiers should consult and act without delay.
Sydney Daily Telegraph, 28th June, 1884.
AN INTERVIEW WITH GENERAL MacIVER.
The views of General Maclver, in reference to the designs of the German
Empire in the Pacific, having been so curiously borne out by the telegrams pub-
lished in our columns yesterday, we arranged for a representative of the Daily
Telegraph to again meet that gentleman, in order to obtain his views upon the
position of the German Government. The following conversation took place :
We want to know in detail your opinions in reference to Germany and the islands
of the Pacific. —That opens up a big question, and I shall have to speak about
things that do not apparently belong to the subject, but I must say that one of the
grandest diplomatic strokes Bismarck ever made was when by trickery he hood-
winked Beaconsfield into permitting Bosnia and Herzegovina to be handed over to
the protection of Austria. The present German-speaking provinces are bound to
become annexed to the German Empire, while Austria will be content to assume
the sovereign power over the present Sclavonic possessions and Hungary, with the
future prospect of ‘ * gobbling up ” the Danubian principalities. Germany will
naturally support Austria, so as to get hold of the other German provinces. Now,
Austria having that basis of operations to work upon, Germany will swoop down
and take possession of Trieste as a grand seaport and an outlet to the southern
portion of her empire. Germany must have a seaport and outlet into the Medi-
terranean, and having obtained Trieste she will have a natural outlet, by the
Adriatic into the Mediterranean, for her fleet. Now, Germany must have also
certain ports for her commerce, and in the event of England becoming embarrassed
with any continental power, she has nothing more to do but make one bold stroke,
and I have no doubt her ultimate object and ambition will be the seizure of the
Suez Canal, this being winked at and indeed understood by Russia, which would
have the power in her Asiatic provinces by a flank movement on the Euphrates to
baulk any action in that direction. A threatening aspect of affairs in India
caused by Russia would give Germany full power to operate at any moment; and
her great aim would be to possess herself of these great and, as yet, unexplored
islands of the South Pacific, which would act as a support to her wealthy com-
mercial interests. The necessity for her to grasp and form colonial possessions is


caused by her great national army, which she is compelled to support for the
protection of her home frontiers. It does not require any great stress of imagina-
tion or any very great judgment to.see this, because her forward movement in
establishing a- large colonial steamship line is '•a proof of this. Where are
Germany’s interests here to support such a company ? Why does she ask her
Parliament to pass such a law ? Where is her trade ? I ask where is her trade
to support it ? Is it natural that any Government would run the risk of falling
into the bad opinion of the people generally by risking so many thousands per
annum for the purpose of merely establishing a line of steamships to these colonies
without having some object behind: to pay her for it ? Why does Germany go to the
expense of 'gunboats here ? Where is the necessity for it ? She has no
possessions here, 1 cannot go further into this matter now, but I shall give the
reason in my lectures. .This lam perfectly certain of: Germany is trying to
embroil France with England, and if she succeeded, and there was trouble between
them, Germany would at once step in and take advantage of it. The position of
the people of these colonies would then be very much worse than it is now.
Do you mean by Germany the people or Bismarck ? —I mean the German
Government.
But does this feeling exist amongst the Germaji people ?—Decidedly ; they care
for nobody but themselves and their own people. All the nations of the world
might sink and die so far as sympathy on their part is concerned.
Then you think, I presume, that Germany is England’s greatest foe ?—Yes.
When the mutiny broke out in 1857 in India, we were under no obligation to Ger-
many. We were drawn into the war with Napoleon by a German Prince, who
caused Great Britain to incur a national debt to support his own people and his
own country, England never gained any advantage from these great wars ; all
she had to show for them was a large and pressing national debt for the people of
this age, and of generations to come, to bear. When the Indian mutiny broke out
in 1857, when thousands of innocent women and children were butchered, who
was it came forward? Not Germany. Who was it supplied the Russians with
arms and ammunition for the purpose of killing Englishmen and Frenchmen when
they were in the field together, but the Germans ? It is a well-known fact that the
Germans did everything in their power to defeat the allied powers. Who came forward
when the Indian mutiny broke out but the French ? No Englishman can forget the
noble offer which the Emperor made at that time. He offered not only speedy
transit through France but also the use of his battalions to crush out the rebellion.
I fully believe that Germany is the snake in the grass to England, and that she is
using every effort to crush out British interests. That is my firm belief to-day.
Her plans are laid out for conquest, not only of England, but also of her colonies,
and in saying this I speak with authority. I think my previous statement to the
Australasian press is corroborated by what appears this morning as coming from
Bismarck himself ; my words were going forth to the Australian public while they
were discussing the matter in the German Parliament. You cannot get over that.
Do you think any change would be made in this policy in case of the death of
Bismarck and the Emperor ?—I do not think so ; because the people, with their
natural greed, will force any Government that they may have to acquire new
territory for their surplus and increasing population, I have every reason to
believe that the German Government and Bismarck have an understanding about
New Guinea. They intend at the first favourable opportunity to seize New Guinea
and the surrounding islands. I will give my reasons for holding this opinion in
my opening lecture next week, and I think my audience will come to the same
conclusion as I have done.
Do you suppose that your proposed expedition would induce the British
Government to take any steps for the annexation of New Guinea ?—Yes, unques-
tionably so ; and not only that, if a large and extensive exploring expedition were
to go there under the protection of these colonies—although only as explorers—
they could be the first in the field, and they would be there and raise the British
flag so as to hold the country against all comers until the old country could come in.
Of course, being there, we would have the natural right to remain there. We


would be there under our own flag and with the concurrence of the people of the
island, who would recognise us as against all comers—at any rate until we were
beaten out of the field.
What are your ideas about the probability of a general European war within
the next few years ?—lt is certain to come. It has been brewing for years, and
will come as sure as fate, and I would not be surprised to see one within the next
year or two.
And you think Germany will be the disturbing element ?—She will, as she has
always been. She is supporting an immense army, and that army has to be kept
up at a greater expense than her internal revenues can possibly submit to. The
amount of money that she raised—the milliards drawn from France‘have disap-
peared ; they have been expended in the most extravagant manner in defensive
works, frontier fortifications, and so on. And now she cannot afford to reduce her
army, but must have occupation for it. That army can only be supported by her
foreign commerce ; and the people have come to a knowledge of the fact that it is
necessary for them to have possessions in the South Pacific and other parts of the
globe, where they can establish their own commercial interests.
Then why do they not annex Samoa—where they have large interests—at
once ?—Perhaps that would be a bad card to play. If they did that it might arouse
suspicion. Their game is higher than Samoa; they will take the larger islands first
and then go for the smaller ones like Samoa.
From the Sydney Daily Telegraph, Saturday, January 17, 1885.
BEIGADIEE-GENEEAL MacIVEE AND GEEMAN ANNEXATION.
TO THE EDITOB OF THE DAILY TELEGRAPH.
* Sir,—While Victoria and Queensland are vigorously protesting against the
German annexation of New Guinea, and against the British Government’s vacillat-
ing policy, we find the Acting-Colonial Secretary of this colony, the Hon, W. B.
Dailey, Q.C., preaching “ peace and good will” to the foreigner who has planted
his flag on several important islands in the Western Pacific, and worse than all, on
the north-eastern coast of “ the great dark island.” In his speech at West Maitland
on Tuesday evening the hon. gentleman is reported to have said, “All at once we
were invited to a new display of Colonial enterprise—a new form of audacity, that
of unitedly protesting against the action of Germany in doing that which, so long
as she violated no international compact, she had an undoubted right to do, that
is to occupy for purposes of civilisation, an unclaimed and, save so far as it was
the home of tribes of savages, an unoccupied territory.” Surely the speaker had
forgotten that, so far from being unclaimed, the whole of New Guinea, except the
Dutch portion, had been claimed by Queensland on behalf of the British Empire,
and that Germany had formally annexed part of this island in face of Lord Derby’s
announcement that Britain would “ not view it as a friendly act if any other
country attempted to make a settlement on that coast.” In my letter in your
issue of the 3rd instant, I said that this statement of Lord Derby’s, when viewed in
the light of subsequent events, showed one of two things—either the Imperial
Government had been most wilfully deceiving the British people in these colonies,
and thus had been guilty of treachery to those who had made the Australian continent
what it is, or they had been hoodwinked by German diplomacy, which in ordinary
times would be considered a national insult, and one that would be very sharply
resented. I know not which of these views Mr Dailey accepts, but I incline to the
latter. Germany has no right in New Guinea, and all honour to the colonies that
are endeavouring to show this to the world, Mr Dailey goes on to say, we were
to indulge in vague language of protest against this act of a nation in alliance with
our own Empire—a nation that on the weightiest grounds of national policy it
would be a perilous thing for any European Power to provoke, a nation of which it
is said, without drawing upon its last reserves, it can place in the field at any time


two millions and a half of armed men, in the most perfect state of military dis-
cipline.” In the first place, Germany is not in alliance with Britain, but, on the
contrary, she is disposed to be an enemy. No later than Wednesday last a tele-
gram appeared in the morning journals to the effect that Prince Bismarck had
announced that in the event of Britain taking notice of the protest of her subjectsin
Australia against the German annexations in the Western Pacific he would be dis-
posed ,to join the other continental Powers that did not approve of the English
policy in Egypt. This certainly looks like friendship between nations ! And as to
the two millions and a half of armed men which Mr Dailey thinks will intimidate
Britain into snubbing her loyal sons in this new world, for the gratification of the
“ man of blood and iron,” I will only say that when these hordes are turned into
the field, another two millions and a half will soon be found to meet them. I say
again, that Germany is a foe of Britain, and when the inevitable great Continental
war breaks out, it will be found that the nations are not “in alliance.” In
further praise of the Germans, Mr Dailey proceeds to say—“ Gentlemen, of all Con-
tinental nations, I think the last from the people of which we have anything in
these colonies to fear is the great nation which stands at the head alike of the cul-
ture and the power of Europe—the first empire and arms in the world—the
empire of Germany. 1 1 is said that Germany is not a colonising power, that she
has no great colonial establishment to point to. In the sense of the foundation of
exclusively German establishments this is doubtless true. In no other sense does
the assertion contain a single particle of truth. Through two great cities of Ham-
burg and Bremen she has poured into the United States during the past half
century millions of the most industrious and orderly of her citizens; and when
citizenship had in hours of trial and danger to be proved by a preparedness to die
for the great republic, the adopted children of the commonwealth stood the supreme
with a splendid and eternally memorable gallantry. Quarter of a million of them
during late years have passed annually into the United States
There is not one of the Australasian colonies which is not under the greatest
obligation to this German nation for sending them some of their most industrious
law-abiding, and patriotic colonists. We have 9000 of them—624B males, and 2490
females—in this country. They have 8571 of them in Victoria, 6891 in Queens-
land, and more than twice the number in South Australia. We would welcome
tens of thousands of them, and feel grateful to the nation that sent them. And
yet we are asked to protest to their fatherland against the occupation of portions of
a savage island which we have not touched, which we have abstained from touch-
ing, which we would not and could not occupy if we annexed it, which we should
be unable to occupy if we did so. We are asked to protest against the Govern-
ment of this people taking a portion of that land. The coming of such a people
as this into our neighbourhood, engaged, you will remember, in a work which our
Government would not themselves undertake, presented to me not only no subject
for apprehension, but much to afford satisfaction, and to a certain extent to
increase our prosperity in these seas.” While Ido not agree with Mr. Dailey in his
estimate of the courage of the German people—knowing, as I do, from personal
experience, that during the great civil war, the German mercenary hordes, consist-
ing chiefly of men who had been soldiers in their own country, even when
commanded by German generals were thrashed off the field by very inferior forces
of the Confederate army—l will in no way attempt to undervalue their worth
as permanent settlers in these far southern Biitish dominions. But this is
beside the point. Germans living under the British flag are not necessarily the
same people when living under their own eagle. The Teutonic residents of the
United States and of the Australasian colonies are not likely to menace the peace
of the land they live in, but the impending European complications may lead to
the newly formed German settlements in the Western Pacific being utilised for
purposes hostile to the peace and commerce of our colonies. When the Germans
are in a minority in a country they are quiet and industrious, but when they are in
a majority they become haughty and arrogant. By encouraging the formation of
populous German colonies near the shores of Australia and New Zealand, Mr.
Dailey and those who believe with him will be following a course which can only


lead to results at once inimical to the progress and prosperity of the British
colonists. That the territories recently annexed by Germany are to be turned to
account as soon as possible, may be judged from the fact that only the other day
we learned by cablegram that two steamers are being fitted out in Germany for
trading operations in the Pacific, and further that it is intended to start a line of
Government steamers to bring thousands of Germans to our doors, and to take
much of our Pacific trade from us. In time a vast population will accumulate on
the newly acquired lands, and the danger to Australia and New Zealand will then
be palpable enough. A war on the continent of Europe, in which Britain and
Germany are sure to be foes, will be - the time for our colonies to put on their
armour, Mr. Dailey may think that lam inclined to overstate my case, but I
would ask him to carefully weigh the arguments contained in my previous letter
already referred to. In the event of war breaking out between Britain (and her
allies) and Germany, is it likely that the German colonies in the Pacific, if suffi-
ciently strong, would hesitate to attack colonial traders, and even Newcastle and
and other desirable and easily attackable ports? The Hon. James Service, with a
foresight which does him infinite credit, is doing his utmost to compel the with-
drawal of the German pretensions in these seas, and it must be comforting to him
to find that his own colony and Queensland are aiding him in his efforts. If Mr.
Dailey would see how grave are the prospects in front of these colonies which have
been built up by British industry, I am convinced that he would no longer act as
the stumbling block in the way of the united protest of Australia against the
German annexations. It was all very well for the honourable gentleman
to tell his audience at Maitland that the Germans are doing us a great
service in taking up “ portions of a savage island, which we have
not touched, which we have abstained from touching, which we would
not and could not occupy if we annexed it, which we should be unable to
occupy if we did so.” Are we to infer that the Germans can colonise places where
Britons would fail ? Is not the history of colonial settlement a record to the con-
trary ? Taken as a whole I can only view Mr. Dailey’s speech as one of the most
humiliating that ever came from the lips of one professing to be a leader of men,
and above all a true Briton. Its sum and substance may be put in the words,
“ Britain is afraid of two millions and a half of German soldiers, and, therefore,
Bismarck must have his way in the Western Pacific.” This un-British tone ill
becomes the acting-Colonial Secretary. Is the honourable gentleman under the
skilled tuition of anyone who, years ago, made his mark as a diplomatist at the
Courts of Berlin and St. Petersburg, and who is known to have German sympathies ?
“Imperial interests must first be considered, and afterwards the colonies will
receive attention,” may be the advice upon which Mr. Dailey is acting ; but let me
once again urge upon the public of Australia the absolute necessity for forcing the
Colonial Office to immediate action, at whatever cost, to prevent the occurrence of
the troubles I have pointed out. To check the development of an arrogant Ger-
man dominion under the Southern Cross, the people of New South Wales should
at once join the other colonies in their protest against the policy of Bismarck, and
turn a deaf ear to the advice of the gentle, woman-like, but eloquent Dailey. To
young Australia Isay, ‘‘lf you desire to speak on behalf of your country, do so
now, or for ever hol’d your peace. The future general well being of your native
land very much depends upon your present action.”
The designs of Germany in the Pacific have been known to me for a long time.
During an arranged interview at the Colonial Office in London, late in 1883, I
spoke warningly on the subject to Mr. John Bramston, one of the Under-Secretaries
of the department, and very shortly after my arrival in Sydney, in June last, I
made known through your columns my views on the German intentions in this
part of the world. As the Sydney Daily Telegraph was the first morning paper in
the world to thus make known the plans of Bismarck with regard to annexation in
the Western Pacific, I may perhaps be permitted to remind your readers of what I
then stated, and to compare my prophecies with what has occurred since.
Prior to Prince Bismarck having publicly announced his policy I said to a
press interviewer representing your paper, “Germany is the power that |has her


eyes on New Guinea, although her designs in that direction only form part of a
vast plan of colonial aggrandisement which she has planned for herself in the Pacific.”
This opinion was published in your columns, and I was heartily ridiculed and
abused for having dared to utter it. But few days passed before the colonies had
unpleasant proof of the accuracy of my statement. Part of New Guinea, New
Ireland, and New Britain are now under the German flag, and whether or not
Bismarck will continue in his work of annexation remains to be seen.”
In the Melbourne Argus for October 2nd, 1884, I published the following
letter :
GEEMANY AND THE PACIFIC ISLANDS.
TO THE EDITOR OF THE ARGUS.
Sir, —The telegram you published this morning from your London corre-
spondent, to the effect that Prince Bismarck has arranged with the European
Powers to form a league for the protection of the unoccupied territory of the world
against English aggression, is so strongly confirmatory of the views I have always
held in regard to the attitude of Germany in the Pacific question, that I claim to
be allowed to say a few words on the subject. It was my ambition to be allowed to
lead an exploring expedition through the heart of the great island of New Guinea,
and assist in its permanent annexation to the British Crown, but the timorous
policy of Lord Derby defeated my plans, and left me a heavy monetary loser. In
consequence of this want of promptitude, the colonies are now in serious danger
of losing those valuable possessions they have striven so earnestly to gain, I have
never ceased to represent, since I first took an interest in the matter, that the
exploration and annexation of New Guinea are of great urgency, owing to the
alliance existing between Germany and other European Powers. Germany is no
friend of England. The German policy is to favour Eussia’s advance in the East,
while in return Eussia will turn a blind eye on Germany’s encroachments in
southern waters. It has already been seen that the Germans, in aiming for the
establishment of Mediterranean seaports, are seeking to gain a controlling influence
in the Suez Canal, so as to extend their powers in the Pacific. I have always
thought that New Guinea would be their ultimate aim, as it is incomparably the
most valuable new field for enterprise in the Pacific. We heard the other day
that Prince Bismarck, in the Eeichstag, ridiculed the pretensions of the Australian
colonies to a monopoly of the Pacific Islands. Now we are told that a foreign
league has been formed against the aggression of England. It is thus clear that
Germany has an acquisitive eye to the valuable possessions on the north coast of
Australia, Unless she is prevented by prompt action, the people of this vast
island continent—which I believe in a few short years will be a great and united
nation—will have to deplore the loss of territories which geographically belong to
them, and which in ordinary course would be peopled from their shores. As one
who has taken an earnest interest in this matter, I hope I may be permitted to
express the hope that there is enough of national spirit in the Australian colonies
to resist to the last extremity this Bismarckian policy of German aggrandisement
at their expense,—l am, &0., Heney R. Maolver, late General of Brigade.
October 1.”
In the issue of the same journal for the 11th October, I read the following
cablegram:
NEW GUINEA,
A BRITISH PROTECTORATE TO BE PROCLAIMED.
[By Cable.]
(From our Correspondent.)
London, October 9.—The Government have sent instructions to Commodore
Erskine, the commander on the Australian naval station, to proclaim a British
protectorate over the southern shores of New Guinea and the islands immediately
adjacent, in accordance with the terms of the promise given by Mr, Gladstone in
answer to a question by Sir Wm. McArthur in the House of Commons on the Uth
August.


I perused this item of news with feelings of intense disgust, because I saw
at once that Lord Derby had left an open course for Germany to pursue—viz., to
annex the other part of New Guinea. This she has done, and the complications
which I am sure must arise will tell seriously against Australia in the event of
hostilities breaking out between Britain and the German Empire. I deplore the
wretched work of Derby, the timidity of Dailey, the apathy of New South Wales,
in the matter of protesting against the German encroachment, and above all, the
lack of patriotism on the part of the Parliament of this country.
The strategic positions now in the possession of Germany are not yet lost to
Australia, if only New South Wales' will listen to wiser_ counsel than that of
German-loving Mr. Dailey, and join in with the other colonies in a demand for
justice from the motherland. —I am, &c.,
HENRY R. MacIVER,
Late General of Brigade.
GENERAL MacIVER INTERVIEWED.
Sydney Evening News, December 26 1884.
Britain and Germany in New Guinea.
On the arrival of Brigadier-General Maolver in this colony in June last a re-
presentative of the Evening News interviewed him. The opinions of the General
upon the question of a British protectorate over New Guinea, and the designs of
Germany in the Pacific, were published. Assisted by the information which we
obtained, the conductors of other newspapers followed with articles upon the same
subject. The opinions which the General then expressed have, in the meantime,
been confirmed. In order that some further particulars might be obtained, an
Evening News reporter again interviewed the General. At the time our reporter
waited upon the General, the latter was apparently engaged upon some very im-
portant business; but he said that he would only be too happy to supply any
further information in his power.
Well, then, in the first place General, you have for many years closely watched
the action of Germany in her designs for an occupation in the Pacific ?—Yes ;
it was immediately after the Servian war, in the beginning of 1877, when the
question first cropped up. I was travelling in Europe with the Commander-
in-Chief of the Servian army, who is now Governor-General in Turkestan. I refer
to General Tchernaieff. We, together with Major Cloudoff, were in the Grande
Hotel de Louvre, in Paris, when Tchernaieff remarked that the aim of [Germany
was to seize Holland.
What led to the remark ?—Well, we were simply talking over the Servian war,
and the then complicated situation of the European powers, and the prospects of
another war. , . ,
But how came you to take up the question subsequently with such zeal ?
When I came to consider the whole subject, I at once saw that if Germany
seized Holland, all the colonial possessions of Holland, together with all those
parts to which Holland had pretentious claims, would fall into the hands of Ger-
many. .
And should hostilities ever arise between Germany and Britain, the possession
of these positions would very seriously affect the trade between China and the
colonies? —Most undoubtedly. With the possession of Java and the Netherlands,
she would have full control of all the commerce of China, and would very seriously
harrass the trade between the colonies and China.
But have you considered at all this alleged Anglo-German treaty ?—Just as you
infer. The news has not yet been confirmed. It may therefore be premature to
express an opinion on such a subject.
There would be no harm in merely giving an opinion, based upon your know-
ledge and experience.—Very good. I believe Britain could never enter into a great


sfiprpt alliance with Germany. I cannot conceive such an alliance. There is
nothing in Germany to make her interests with Britain identical, or to cause these
two nations upon such a question to act with reciprocity.
According to a cablegram which has just been published by the Evening News,
there annears to have been a violation of the alliance already. -You _ refer, A
presume, P to that from the Victorian Attorney-General, to the effect that he had a
personal interview with Sir Robert Herbert, Permanent Under-Secretary for the
Colonies, when the latter is said to have “ protested vigorously against the action
of Germany in having annexed territory in the Western Pacific asserting that
Germany had pledged herself not to meddle with New Guinea ? -Ho.
Weil then from the scanty particulars we at present possess it does seem
that the action of Germany in having annexed a portion of New Guinea is a gross
violation of the alleged treaty, and consequently a gross insult to the British
Crown, which is not likely to be tolerated.—Very true ; for it is very hard to say
what has taken place. But then, Lord Derby has already acted with so apparent
a disregard of the welfare of the colonies in this matter that his actions must be
viewed with a sceptical eye. If the Imperial Government sanctions usurpation of
the greater portion of New Guinea by the Germans, then it is very dear that Lord
Derby has deceived the colonial Governments. He has asked them for £l5 000 a
year for the maintenance of a British protectorate over New Guinea, while allowing
the Germans to reap all benefit from the possession. , , , ,
But on the other hand, assuming that Germany has violated the treaty, and
has placed herself in a position of defiance .—Why, no Imperial Government
under heaven would submit to such indignity. , ,
As Germany has a very powerful navy, the complications would be somewhat
serious would they not ?—Undoubtedly. But while her navy is very powerful,
taken in connection with her limited seaboard, she could never hold supremacy
would then bo able to
enlarge her fleet, and possess a navy equal to any in the world.
At the present time is not the navy of Germany far in excess of what she
requires for her own protection ?—Yes; and she is continually strengthening it,
particularly during late years ; and there has been one very important and
necessary change made in her naval administration. A few years ago her navy
was under the direction of a Minister of the Cabinet. Now its affairs are entirely
in the hands of a Minister for War; while her intelligence department is
universally recognised as one of the most secret and successful in the world.
Austria would undoubtedly be Germany’s ally in the event of hostilities
arising ? Most decidedly ; and in all probability Italy also.
In that case the trio, collectively, would form rather a formidable opponent to
Britain ?—Yes; but I firmly believe that France would join with Britain, and then
would come the tug of war. , . ... „
It will then be to Britain’s interest to retain her friendship with r ranee ?
Of course : but not as much for her own safety as for the safety of France. _
Were you not the first man to publish a warning note respecting the designs
of Germany on the islands in the Pacific ?—I was the first man in the world.
The facts, as published, created some consternation in Germany, did they not ?
Yes; and the exposure not only forced the hand of Lord Derby, but compelled
Bismarck to divulge his plans. , , ~
You first became aware, you say, of the designs of Germany by the observation
made by General Tchernaieff in the hotel in Paris,. Did nothing else occur to con-
firm your conviction of the truth of the assertion ?—O, yes. Colonisation was
being repeatedly advocated in the German press. Moreover about this time,
Bismarck expressed his intention to subsidize a German and Australasian line
of steamers I might add that it is with no feeling of egotism that I take the
credit upon myself of having exposed the designs of Germany in reference to
her annexation policy in the Pacific. It is because when you first published
my opinions, I was very harshly and unjustly criticised both by the press of the
colonies and the public.


So that now you can turn the laugh upon them, eh ’—Exactly. My senti-
ments were pooh-poohed at first; but you see recent movements have verified
them, and now it is generally acknowledged that my exposure forced the hand not
only of Lord Derby but of Bismarck,
Is there any other fact which points to this conclusion ’—Yes. During my
visit to Melbourne I was staying in the George Hotel, St. Kilda. Among
the guests there was a Mr. Kruge, an ex-German consul. The conversation
one afternoon turned upon political questions, and I remarked to Mr.
Kruge, in the presence of several other gentlemen (this was in May
last), that in the course of a few months Germany would be in the Pacific,
and probably immediately, should the New Guinea question be finally settled by
the Imperial Government. I have since heard—on authority which lam not
privileged to give—that the statement was at once communicated to the German
consul of Victoria. When I left Victoria for Sydney, I was followed by two
German emissaries, employed to watch my movements. The information which
I gave you on my arrival here in regard to the designs of Germany in the
Pacific was wired immediately by German authorities here to their Ministers in
Berlin, To substantiate what I said in the George Hotel, there is a document
which you are at liberty to publish. The document in question reads—“We,
the undersigned, do certify and affirm that about the end of May, 1884, in
the George Hotel, St. Kilda, Melbourne, shortly after his arrival in the colony
Brigadier-General Maclver stated in the presence of several gentlemen (we being
present) that Germany was the power to be watched and most strictly guarded *
against in her designs on New Guinea and the other islands of the Pacific ; and that
it was his (General Maclver’s) intention to expose the designs of Germany in his
lectures to the Australian public. We further certify that those, with ourselves,
who were present and listened to Brigadier-General Maclver’s remarks on the
subject, ridiculed the idea of Germany having any pretentious claims to annexation
in the Pacific, we never having heard on any previous occasion that Germany enter-
tained any idea of colonisation or annexing any of the islands under the Southern
Gross. (Signed) F. Wimpole, proprietor of George Hotel; John F. Thompson,
C.E.; L. Scouller, merchant; and Charles Tynan, inspector of schools.”
Then there was the subsequent recall of Dr Krauell, the German Consul-
General. How do you account for this ’—lt was undoubtedly in anticipation of the
action now taken, in order that he might personally attend and advise the Cabinet
previously to action being taken.
To what purpose, besides naval depots, do you think Germany will put any
territory she may acquire in the Pacific ?—lt is difficult to say. The climate, con-
trary to what is so often conjectured, should not militate against settlement. At
the Boyal Geographical Society’s meeting in London, May, 1883, Mr. Wilfrid
Powell said “ A more beautiful and healthy spot than New Guinea can scarcely be
found in any tropical country in the world. The coast rising in many places sheer
from the sea to the height of 1000 ft., ranging inland to the mountains and forests
and tablelands. The open grass country offers every facility for cattle-raising,
well watered with streams which take their rise in the heights.” Admiral Moresby,
at the same meeting, in indorsing these statements, said “ that New Guinea has a
grand and splendid coast, abounding in beautiful harbours, and the whole country
is apparently very healthy and very fertile, with an enormous stretch of clear land,
which should provide a future for settlers unexcelled in any portion of the globe.”
Well compared with what we have recently learnt of the character of the
country from persons who have gained a practical knowledge by many years’ resi-
dence there it would seem that the experience of Messrs. Powell and Moresby is
very theoretical and superficial.—That may be ; but then, again, what guarantee
have we that the main reason which has prompted Germany to acquire possession
in the Pacific is to assume a direct hostility to this portion of the globe .
Good heavens !—And perhaps to establish penal settlements on these islands ;
for she has none at present.
0, good morning, General,


The General, with a lurking smile under his rigid countenance, returned the
compliment, and again dived into the mass of papers which lay before him, and he
was once more lost in the business which the reporter had interrupted on his
entrance.
At the last moment I hear the sad tidings that Major-General
Sir Peter Scratchley, K.0.M.G., Her Majesty’s High Commissioner for
New Guinea, died on board the Governor Blachall , on the morning of
the Ist December. I was in correspondence with the late General in
respect to the part I had played in connection with the annexation of
the island. I feel grieved by the sad tidings ; and, now that death has
unfortunately closed the career of a gallant soldier and gentleman, I
publish a letter below, which I addressed to the late General
Scratchley, and also his reply thereto.
His Excellency Major-General Sir Peter H. Scratchley, K.C.M.G.,
High Commissioner of New Guinea.
General —I have the honour to acknowledge receipt of your Excellency’s
communication dated 13th inst., also to bring to your Excellency’s recollection
certain facts. Your Excellency may remember my waiting upon you in Sydney, on
more than one occasion. At that time, as your Excellency is aware, I was engaged
organising a New Guinea exploration expedition, and had already promises or
substantial support.
I would respectfully remind your Excellency of an interview I had with you
on the 27th of January last, in Sydney. On that day I made application to your
Excellency for permission to lead an expedition through that part of New Guinea
under British jurisdiction. Your Excellency then intimated to me that you could
not give me such permission for at least two months. I then offered your Excellency
my services in any suitable capacity, expressing my readiness to produce all my
credentials and military commissions. , Your Excellency was good enough to state
at that time that you knew all about me, and that you would much rather that I
should work with you, than with a private party ; also that you would prefer me to
any other person. Your Excellency therefore requested me to communicate my
changes of address to you, a direction which, I need hardly say, I have carefully
carried out.
I would specially bring to your Excellency’s recollection the following words,
which your Excellency was kind enough to apply to me “ You little know,
Maclver, the effects of your action with regard to this New Guinea question. If it
had not been for the action taken by you, matters would not have been as they
are, and England and Australia would not have had any part of New uumea at
the present day.”
Considering that your Excellency made that statement, your Excellency must
have received, previous to your departure from England to assume the administra-
tion of New Guinea, such full official information as led you to form the opinion
therein expressed ; which, indeed, is a fact that cannot hereafter be contested.
Under all the circumstances of my position, as known to your Excellency,
surely lam entitled to some preferential favourable consideration. I would lay
stress upon the fact that I have lost much time, and have incurred very considerable
monetary losses, in connection with the New Guinea question—far greater losses
than my worldly circumstances warrant, I have abandoned more than one promis-
ing enterprise in the confident hope of becoming useful to the colonies and your


Excellency, in some responsible position- -becoming a soldier and a gentleman—
under your Excellency’s administration of New Guinea.
I have now to regret that your Excellency should have misled a temporarily
unfortunate man—a soldier who has held and won by distinguished service a
military rank equal to your own—with promises, and a hope that appears never to
be realized, and which has caused me to pass through a great many unpleasant
difficulties.
My present aim is to organize an exploring and trading expedition to New
Guinea subject, of course, to the conditions imposed by your Excellency for the
due regulation and conducting of the same. If successful (as I hope to be), in
floating the necessary syndicate, I will, in compliance with the directions in your
Excellency’s letter of the 13th instant, forward by your Excellency the fullest in-
formation with respect to the intended movements of the expedition.
At the same time I beg to assure your Excellency that my services are still at
your Excellency’s disposal, should you honour me with any appointment suitable
for a military officer and a gentleman, such as, for instance, that appointment
which has already formed the subject of conversation between us, namely, an officer
to organise a New Guinea Police Force, and a thorough system of coastguard
supervision. I feel sure, should your Excellency honour me with any suitable
appointment, that such appointment would meet with the approval of a large
majority of the intelligent English-speaking people of these colonies, who are under
deep obligation to me in respect of the New Guinea annexation, as has been
publicly admitted by several of the leading Australian newspapers. [Copies of
newspaper extracts are herewith enclosed ]
I may mention that his Honor, Mr. Justice Mein, has personally inspected my
military commissions and credentials, and has expressed himself as completely
satisfied with them ; indeed, as quite surprised at their importance and excellence.
His Honor, Mr. Justice Mein, reported upon the same to Mr, Griffiths, the
Premier.
Further, it is a fact which cannot b e disputed, that, on April 13th last, when
war with Russia and other nations seemed to be inevitable, and of hourly immi-
nence (the people of this and other colonies being in a state of great anxiety), I
offered my services to the Queensland Government unconditionally— seeking only
to help the mother country and her colonies in the dark hour of trouble and
danger. This offer was made to the Premier, Mr. Griffiths, in the presence of
Lieutenant-Colonel Mein. Further, knowing from personal observation that
Colonel French, the present military commandant of Queensland, was sadly in
want of experienced officers, having a previous practical knowledge of military
strategy, I offered him my temporary services in case of an attack upon
Brisbane,
In conclusion, permit me reiterate the statement that, although I am at present
endeavouring to launch a private expedition to New Guinea, I am entirely at your
Excellency’s service, should your Excellency see fit to avail yourself of me.
In the event of your Excellency honoring me with any suitable appointment,
I will immediately relinquish all private schemes I have in hand or in view, and
hold myself ready to obey your Excellency’s command.
Respectfully requesting an immediate reply, I have the honor to be,
Your most obedient servant,
HENRY R. MacIYER,
Late General of Brigade.
Chancery Chambers,
George Street, Brisbane, Queensland.
June 23rd, 1885.


[Ct>PY —Reply.]
New Guinea Protectorate.
H.M. Special Commissioner’s Office,
July \6th, 1885.
Sir —I am directed by Major-General Scratchley to acknowledge the receipt
of yonr’letter, dated 23rd June, on the subject of New Guinea which has reached
him on his return from New Zealand, and to state, m reply, that it will receive
early attention.
I am, Sir,
Your obedient servant,
G. SEYMOUR FORT,
Private Secretary.
H. Maclver, Esq.,
Late General of Brigade,
Brisbane.
In reference to the above correspondence I may state, that I
submitted for the inspection of his Honor, Sir Charles Lilley, Chief
Justice of Queensland, and his Honor, Mr, Justice Mein, a copy of the
above letter, together with the late General Scratchley’s reply. The
General returned to Brisbane from Melbourne the following month,
August, and on two occasions received me with soldierly courtesy,
expressing readiness to assist me as far as he could. G eneral Scratchley
would, no doubt, have carried out his previous promises made to me
had his actions not been hampered and restricted by bureaucratic in-
fluence. I reluctantly insert my letter to the late General Scratchley,
and his reply thereto, but I consider it a duty to the general public, and
to myself, to publish this evidence of my honafides in the matter which
forms the subject of my pamphlet; and this, together with other-
evidence herein contained, will, I trust, prove conclusively, that I am
entitled to some favourable consideration, and I therefore leave myself
to the kind and favourable verdict of the people.
Extract from the Brisbane Courier’s report of an interview held by its
Special Representative with Major-General Sir Peter H. Scratchley,
High Commissioner for British New Guinea.
See Brisbane Courier, August 20th, and Sydney Morning Herald, of the 25th, 1885.
« t qq ie High Commissioner is anxious to establish and develop with the
islanders legitimate trading enterprise. In this respect he regards with favour the
expedition which Brigadier-General Maclver is engaged in organising for a pre-
lected excursion to the New Guinea coast, and he appears to be very highly
impressed with the Brigadier. His good qualities, he is convinced, have been
either ignored or misunderstood, and his bad ones—for no man is perfect—have
been grossly exaggerated. People have rashly jumped at the conclusion led to an
extent, no doubt, by the persecution of the late Secretary of State for the Colonies
that Maclver was endeavouring to raise a force for the wholesale slaughter of
Polynesians, and the spoliation of the country, whereas in General Scratchley s
opinion, his motives are honest, high-minded, and unselfish.
Gibbs, Shallard, & Co., Printers, Pitt Street, Sydney.




