

f/0773


WHO lias not had pointed out to him, times without number
some local potentate with a style and magnificence
worthy of Solomon in all his glory, and listened to a discourse
somewhat as follows “Ah! my dear boy, do you see that swell
driving those spanking greys?” You acquiesce. “Well, seven
years ago he landed hero with only half-a-crown in his pocket.”
(We notice men who make big piles, according to popular version,
generally commence operations with half-a-crown.) Perhaps, in
a facetious way, you reply “I landed here with several half-
crowns, but still dread to meet my tailor.” “Ah! but,”
your informant whispers, “Mr. Rothschild Croesus got a billet,
saved money, and bought land in favorable localities.” You
inwardly wish you had done likewise, instead of planking your
spare cash on “morals” that generally acted as “ whippers-in” to
the other high flyers, instead of getting first past the post, as
assured they would, upon information “straight from the stable.”
And now, gentle reader, “lend us your ear” whilst we give you
some information straight from those celebrated stables Obser-
vation and Experience, which, if acted upoh, will most assuredly
prove the tide Mr. Shakspeare refers to, as leading on to
fortune.
Has it ever struck you, the amount of money that
annually leaves this Colony, in payment of fruit and vegetables ?
Last year it reached the enormous total of £300,000!!! truly
enough to stagger a thinking man. Fruit fron\ Tasmania,
vegetables and produce from Victoria and Yew Zealand, and yet
our men doing little or nothing, and our acres comparatively idle
and unproductive.
Well, as to capital, what is required ? We shall
that the most suitable soil, within easy distance of Sydney, is4o be
had in large or small blocks for a few shillings a week. Tools,
seeds, etc ? There is not a working man, be he single or married,
that at the present rate of wages could not save enough in six
months to fix himself up in this respect and have sufficient to live
upon, for the short time that would intervene between putting
the crops in and getting his cash returns. With such a climate as
we enjoy, providing that great requisite—water, is near etcher
in the shape of a close handy river, or from underground supplies,
no man with determination and the ability to take tte spade in
♦


h'^
's P^k'^Si,
I£jy3
"i
*
?
SUCu &-■*/'■'**s
M, V.




hand, but can do infinitely better for himself than he may
ever hope to in working for daily wages. The fact is, such
people scarcely realise the opportunities offered them. Has the
ordinary working man the faintest idea of what a mint of money
a small patch of strawberries, for example, properly attended to
means ? Is he for one moment aware that an acre of early
cucumbers at ss. or 6s. per dozen, an acre of celery, a patch of
asparagus—luxuries scarcely to be obtained at famine prices in
the local market-mean, in a few years, a downright competency,
always provided he selects such soil as is found in the second
subdivision of the George’s River Estate. Tomatoes again, will
grow on this sub-division without any trouble, and produce the
most bounteous and remunerative crops. Fruit trees and vines
we will not enlarge upon, the marvellous results obtained in this
district being too well known. Just imagine the absurdity
of New South Wales exporting . tin to California and then
then after the said tin has been duly manufactured into preserving
tins, re-importing the same filled with vegetables and fruits, which,
with very little trouble, might have been grown on such spots
as the George’s River Estate, at a much less cost and a saving
of freight and intermediate profits. These are self-evident facts,
that must forcibly strike anyone who takes the trouble to think
for a moment.
Above we have only touched on the profits to be realised
by a little careful kitchen gardening and fruit growing, but a
few fowls, aided by a couple of incubators, would prove as profit-
able an investment as “ Paddy’s pig.” With the Loop line a cer-
tainty, the George’s River Estate is brought within as easy a radius
of Sydney as Parramatta (with its lightning-express train service of
fourteen miles to the hour), and considering the prices suburban
property has reached and the low price asked for this land, it will
not be long ere this tempting Estate is snapped up, either for
holding, or as a bona fide speculation, or as the most charming
retreat it were possible to discover. For, merely as an invest-
ment, as we said before, what does the whole course of experience
in New South Wales show, but that the safest and surest avenue
to wealth is to buy in such judiciously selected spots as the
George’s River Estate. The “good old days,” when a block of
land in George Street, now assessed at hundreds of thousands,
could be had for a few kegs of rum, are not to be repeated any-
where in the Colony, yet grand chances remain for anyone
prudent enough to seize opportunities, which in a small way will
afford equally happy returns. It is not given to everyone to
recognise a “good thing.” Those smart folks that, six years ago,
scornfully rejected poor Gordon’s Mount Morgan selection of 640
acres for as many pounds, never now cease to regret (whilst the
same property is valued by experts at from seven to ten millions
sterling) that their shortsightedness should have so led them astray.


We are not vain enough or foolish enough to imagine that
the George’s River Estate is going to turn out a Mount Morgan,
but this we do assert, without fear of contradiction, that from
its unique position, with its valued advantages of soil, water and
climate, it is to-day one of those opportunities that it would be
the height of folly to neglect. It is now about three years
since word came out from England to dispose of these broad
acres at Ingleburn, till then locked up from actual settlement.
Of a sudden, bona fide settlers wanted to secure holdings, and
the place shot ahead as if by magic. Two sawmills and brickworks
sprang into existence, and also a number of private residences, to
such an extent that the Government were shortly compelled to vote
£1,500 for road making, while the longplatform--amongst the longest
in the Colony—is now to be replaced by a Station, with station-
master’s residence, telegraph office, and usual adjuncts. A School
also has been erected within a stonesthrow of this Estate—a great
boon to parents. The immense advantages of the Loop line now
determined upon, is no doubt another great reason why land at
Ingleburn is rising so rapidly in value. Those who bought a
couple of years ago have realised big profits, land at the station,
only 120 feet deep, having changed hands at £2 10s. a foot, and,
in fact, higher prices have been refused for other picked sites.
Those who secure blocks in the George’s River Estate at the
present low prices per acre , will ere long, when buying by the
acre is out of the question, realise corresponding advantages.
So dry and bracing is the climate—unlike the heavy moist
atmosphere of Sydney—that already invalids are finding out its
health-restoring properties, and sick people, who have experienced
its beneficial results, liken the climate more to that of Madeira
than any known place. A special charm too lies in the George’s
River itself, which flows in ‘sight of the Estate. The romantic
walks along its banks, the cool cosy retreats, are the pleasantest
of changes after the stifling air of the City, not to mention the
sportsman’s opportunities, which are found all around. To the
market gardener, with his patches of strawberries, tomatoes, &c., this
River is invaluable. Anywhere back from the River’s banks the
purest of water to an unlimited extent can be obtained at a very
shallow depth. At Ingleburn, too, the River is not, as lower
down, tainted by any factories’ noxious outpourings, but is pure
and sweet as spring water. One of the greatest curses of many
subdivisions in the suburbs is that, heedless of the future, and in
defiance of all sanitary laws, many of the fairest spots have been
transformed into very hotbeds of disease, through the land being
cut up into what have been aptly termed “microscopical” or
“'chess-board allotments”; here the reverse is the case—at
Ingleburn nothing under quarter or half-acre blocks have been
countenanced.


With the prospect of an unusual season of activity this
year, with money in large amounts seeking investment from the
Old Country, with the local bank rates already reduced, and gold
imported in large quantities by the banks from England, with
the break-up of the drought, and the return of prosperity again
to both squatters and farmers, and with the rise in woo], it is
more than certain that 1887 will witness a fresh boom in land.
There are signs everywhere that with the removal of last year’s
depression, land will be one of the first things to feel the in-
vigorating influence, and in the opinion of many shrewd, far-
seeing men, prices will yet be forced beyond what was experienced
in the rosiest times, especially when we consider the consequence
of the big influx of home visitors attracted by our Centenary
celebrations and the Exhibitions of the sister colonies.
To delay, therefore, when such a grand opportunity of
investment, on such easy terms as we offer, presents itself, were folly
indeed. Be wise, therefore; a few shillings a month placed in
this tempting subdivision will assuredly prove a stepping-stone to
fortune.
lIDnT ZMIIOSTID-
Buyers of 6 lots will receive 5 per cent, discount.
8 71
!> v ' )! >» * 2 ») J)
„ 10 „ „ 10
RAILWAY FARES RETURNED TO PURCHASERS.


SURVEYOR’S REPORT
GEORGE’S RIVER ESTATE.
This Estate is hut a very short distance from
the Ingleburn Railway Station, and is situated on a
gentle eminence sloping gradually down towards the
George’s River, affording a perfect system of drainage.
The soil is of a rich character , eminently suitable
for vegetable gardening , fruit or vine growing, and
is mostly well timbered. As a site for poultry farms
it is specially adapted.
The locality being recognised as a Sanatorium,
these quarter and half-acre blocks are most suitable
as villa sites for Sydney business men, whose health
requires the bracing of a clear dry atmosphere.
These allotments are all carefully pegged and
numbered, fronting streets ranging from -66 to gg ft.
The water of the George s River is here wonderfully
pure ana clear, with very little trouble a plentiful
supply for domestic and agricultural purposes might
be secured'
The Public School is erected close to the Estate.
The Relief Line will bring this Estate from 6 to f
miles nearer Sydney.
THOMAS C. FOWLER, L.S.,
Of Tayt & Fowler,
Jjg Pitt Street,
16th December , 1886, Sydney.










I OR PRIWE 'saS!b INCLEBIIRN
by D. Incus & C? t!^ SuMy7Sim^ o
28 JAMIESON ST ft Qfwwid. ‘skajOoo-&
NvrRE . svdney. i '*~ y Halt" CWc 'Blocks
WEWuM*
tl. lIUU'VUTVJU
Rich Soil, Coocl Timber.
Quarter Acre Blocks r —I
ORLY <£Q LACK
6j) t »4.
iS a Half Acre Blocks slgpL .*
*ONLY dT/d EACH pHM^.
11 <£! lOf-moMy^
IL- „rslA.tt /f -
r /&
Poultry Farm Ifne/areC
\ i/r SefJ'V*
| PoaltJjf'ane
Licensed. Surveyors.
LicefoseUs owre^orcy.
,S9P/rr
SYDNEY.
THO>'K rHtVAjrt n S'CPHAW L'TH




RECIPES.
The following Recipes have been culled for the benefit of settlers
on the George's River Estate. They will be found an in-
fallible guide upon a variety of subjects ; if you want to shift
ants or raise moustaches , cure gapes in chickens or bottle hop
bitters , this pamphlet will prove a comfort in the hour of igno-
rance.
Animals' Skins, To preserve.
Skin them carefully, and leave skull, horns, tail, and hoofs
entire; then, with a mixture of salt, pepper, and alum, rub the
inside of the skin thoroughly, and hang it up to dry.
Ants, To destroy.
Drop some quicklime on the mouth of their nests, and wash
it in with boiling water. Camphor, creosote, and all strong scents
are useful remedies. A ring of tar, or a piece of rag dipped
into creosote and wound round the trunks of trees, will prevent
them climbing.
Asphalt for Walks, &c.
When you intend covering a walk or a shed floor with
asphalt, first make it level, then give it a thin coat of tar, sift
some ashes or road sand over it, let it harden, and repeat the
process six or eight times.
Beetles, To destroy Black.
Mix up some flour of malt with a little butter, adding to it
a few drops of oil of aniseed, and then mix one ounce of corrosive
sublimate to every four ounces. To be made up into small balls,
and placed where the beetles frequent.
Birdlime, To prepare.
Put one pint (or less) of linseed oil into an old 'saucepan ;
boil it very gently, stirring it occasionally. As soon as it
thickens, dip a stick into it, then put it into cold water, and feel
with your fingers if it is thickened to the proper consistency.
Then pour the whole into cold water; take it out when cold, and
add Archangel tar to thicken as required.
Bird-skins, To preserve.
Mix one part of pepper and saltpetre with four parts of
ground alum. The bills, orbit, feet, etc., should be touched with
corrosive sublimate.


Blacking for Harness.
Take half-a-pound of treacle, one ounce of lampblack, one
spoonful of yeast, and one ounce each of sugar candy, isinglass,
olive oil, gum tragacanth, and a cow’s gall, the whole to be mixed
together w ith one quart of stale beer; let it stand on the stove or
before the fire for an hour, it is then ready for use.
Blacking requiring no Polishing.
Beet together the white of two eggs, a lump of sugar, one
tablespoonful of spirits of wine, and a little finely-powdered ivory-
black to thicken. Mix it well, apply with a bit of sponge, and
allow it to dry out of the dust.
Books, To remove stains from.
Apply with a feather or camel hair brush a little of either
a solution of oxalic acid, citric acid, or tartaric acid. These take
out writing or other ink marks.
Bottles, To clean.
Put some fine coals into them, with warm or cold water, and
well shake it about. If there are any disagreeable smells in
bottles or jars, put a piece of charcoal at the bottom for a day or
two.
Cast Iron, To soften.
Heat it to red heat; allow it to blacken, and then throw it
into soapsuds.
Cement for Broken China, &c.
Dissolve one ounce of gum acacia in one quartern of boiling
water, and add sufficient plaster of Paris to form a thick paste.
Apply it to the articles broken with a camel hair brush.
Chickens, Gapes in.
Give them small pills of dough, thoroughly impregnated
with soft soap. This will quickly cure the complaint.
Charts and Maps, To keep and preserve.
Brush them over lightly with a solution of gutta percha.
It is perfectly transparent, and they may be coated both sides.
Cloth, How to extract Paint from.
If the spots are small, dip a pen or any pointed bit of steel
into spirits of turpentine, and apply sufficient to discharge the oil
and gluten. If they are large or numerous, apply with a sponge.
Let it stand a few hours, and then rub it.


Glothes, To keep Moths from.
Put a lump of camphor in a linen bag ; then place it between
the clothes in a chest of drawers or box.
Eggs, To keep.
Dip them into boiling water for one minute, and then put
them in a cool place.
Another.
Lay them in jars in dry common salt.
Another.
Put them into strong lime water.
Another.
Place the small end of the eggs downwards. Make holes in
a board, and as soon as the eggs are laid place them in the holes,
with the small end downwards. This is a very easy and good
method for preserving eggs.
Fishing-lines, To waterproof.
Apply with a piece cf flannel a mixture of two parts of
boiled nil and one part of gold size. Keep it in a bottle. Apply
it two or three times, and let the lines dry between each coating.
Flannel Shirts, &c., To prevent shrinking of.
Put them into a pailful of boiling water on the occasion of
their first washing, and allow them to remain in till cold.
Flies, To prevent them settling on Picture Frames, &c.
Get a large bundle of leeks and soak them for five or six
days in a pail of water, then wash pictures, picture-frames,
furniture, &c., with it.
Flowers, To revive, when withered.
Plunge the steins into boiling water, and keep them there till
the water becomes cold ; then cut the stems, and put the flowers
to stand in cold water.
Furniture Polish.
Colour six parts of lisneed oil with one part of alkan t root.
When sufficiently coloured, pour off the oil on to one part of resin
and sixteen parts of beeswax; melt the whole, and then stir in
six parts of turpentine. Warm it before using; smear the furni-
ture all over with the polish, and finish off with linen rags.


Harness-makers’ Jet.
Take a quarter of a pound of glue, one drachm of indigo,
quarter of an ounce of isinglass, half an ounce of soft soap, one
pennyworth of logwood raspings, and one quart of vinegar.
Boil the whole over a slow fire till reduced to one piut. Clean
the harness, boots, or any other article, and apply it on a piece of
clean sponge.
Hop Bitters, To make Infusion of.
Mix six drachms of hops with one piut of boiling distilled
water ; macerate for four hours in a covered, vessel press, strain,
add half-a-pint of brandy or whiskey, and bottle for use when
cold.
Horses, To make a Condition Powder for.
Give them the following mixture once a day : Four pounds
of bruised oats, two ounces of bruised juniper berries, and one
ounce of common salt.
Horses, Tonic Balls for.
Mix one ounce of camomile, one ounce of Peruvian bark,
quarter of an ounce of gentian, and two drachms of sulphate of
copper. Divide into two parts ; add five drops of aniseed to each
part, and mix into a ball with honey. Cure ball a week may be
given for four successive weeks.
Horses’ Feet, To cure Cracks in
Mix and apply frequently a quarter of an ounce each of
zinc and sugar of lead and four ounces of lard or palm oil.
Ink Spots, To remove from Linen.
Pour hot wafer upon the spots immediately.
Iron, To prevent it from Rusting.
First make the iron moderately hot, and then rub it
thoroughly with clean white wax. Finish by rubbing it with a
piece of coarse cloth or rag.
Leather, To make it Waterproof.
Put into ajar and melt one pound of tallow, two ounces of
resin, four ounces of Burgundy pitch, two ounces of beeswax,
and one quart of linseed oil. Mix it thoroughly, and while warm
apply it with a soft brush to the leather. Give the articles
requiring to be made waterproof two or three coats,






Manuscripts.
When almost illegible, they may be renovated by washing
them carefully with a very weak solution of Ferrocyanide of
Potash in clean water.
Onions.
In peeling onions, put a needle or small piece of steel
between the teeth. This will save the eyes by attracting the
acrid juice of the onions.
Faint, To remove old.
Wet the paint with naphtha until it is soft, and then rub
the surface clean.
Paint, To remove the smell of.
Plunge a handful of hay into a pailful of water, and allow it
to stand in the newly-painted room.
Poultry, To cure wet and dry Roup in.
Mix one grain of Antimonial powder with sopped bread,
and give it twice a day for wet roup. Fordry roup, give every
day two pills of garlic.
Rats, To destroy.
Mix, with half a pound of oatmeal, half an ounce of ISlux
Vomica in powder, and add a few drops of oil of aniseed and
musk.
Seidlitz Powder.
Mix of tartaric acid half a drachm, carbonate of soda two
scruples, Rochelle salts one drachm, and powdered ginger tive
grains. Put the whole into a tumbler, pour as much cold water
as will nearly till the glass, stir it, and drink immediately.
Wasp Sting.
To extract the venom, bind a thick plaster of salt, slightly
moistened with water, over the sting.
Whiskers and Moustache, To promote the growth of.
Mix four ounces of Eau de Cologne, four ounces of tincture
of cantharides, and twenty drops each of oil of lavender and
rosemary. Rub it well into the roots three or four times a week
at night time.


Wines, To promote the ripening of.
Remove the corks or bungs and substitute bladders tied air-
tight over the openings ; or, add a little diluted sulphuric acid to
the coarser wines. Four or five drops of tartaric or acetic acid
dropped into a bottle of wine gives it the flavor of four years old.
Wines, To restore.
Put a small quantity of freshly-burnt charcoal into the cask
when the wine is sour.
Worms in Horses, To destroy.
One quart of new milk, half-a-pound of honey ; mix, and
administer to the horse in the morning; give no food for one
hour and a half afterwards. At the end of that time, give one
pint of salt and water, succeeded by another fast for one hour.
All worms will be destroyed if this treatment be followed for
three or four successive mornings.
Wood, To destroy Worms in.
Saturate the wood with a strong solution of corrosive
sublimate. :''
