

Riverview Training Farm
Riverview, Queensland
The management of The Austral-
asian has permitted the Salvation
Army Immigration Department to
reprint the following article, which
appeared in the issue of September
3, 1927. We gratefully acknow-
ledge this kindness.
The article shows the useful work
now being carried on at the River-
view Farm in preparing new-
comers for country life in Queens-
land, which is acknowledged to be
very necessary to successful settle-
ment.
The article refers to Mr. D. S.
Alexander. This is Staff-Captain
Alexander, an Officer of outstanding
ability in the training of lads for
farm work.


SALVATION ARMY FIRM, QUEENSLAND
TRAINING IMMIGRANTS
By F.W.L.
THE Riverview Boys' Training Farm at
Riverview, eighteen miles from Bris-
bane, on the Brisbane-Ipswich rail
way line, which is owned by the Salva-
tion Army, is engaged in work of national
importance. It was established as a
Girls’ Home twenty-nine years ago, and
subsequently it became a Boys’ Reforma-
tory Home. For the last twelve months it
have been devoted to training immigrants,
and giving the lads an insight into farm-
ing under Australian conditions. After a
course of practical and theoretical in-
struction positions are found for them on
farms, where the experience gained at
Riverview stands them in good stead.
Those controlling the training farm do
not profess to turn them out as finished
farmers in the three or four months they
remain there, but they do claim and
justly so too —that on their departure the
boys are better equipped as farm hands
than on their arrival. The environment
of Riverview cannot fail to have a bene-
ficial moral, social, and physical influence
on those fortunate enough to make it
their first home in the land of their adop-
tion. The superintendent (Mr. D. S.
Alexander), who opened the institution
when it was inaugurated, and after a long
period of service in other States returned
to it two years ago, is keenly interested
in the welfare of the lads and in the
various activities of the farm. He is held
in the greatest affection by the trainees
and the staff, and it is obvious that he
is the right man in the right place. The
farm, which has a frontage to the Bris-
bane and Bremner Rivers, embraces 363


acres. About 150 acres is cropped an-
nually, and the balance of the land is
under indigenous pastures. The crops
usually grown are maize, sorghum, oats,
barley, peas, pumpkins, and mangels, and
the bulk of the produce is consumed by
the animals on the farm, which include
a herd of dairy cows, a number of pigs,
and the necessary horses to do the cul-
tural work. There is forty acres under
lucerne, which is cut for green fodder the
whole year round. Hay-making starts in
October or November, and extends over
six months. The stands yield a large
quantity of green feed and hay. “If we
only had irrigation,” remarked Mr. Alex-
ander, “there would be practically no
limit to what could be produced.” The
soil is sandy loam, fertile, and easy tilled.
THE CURRICULUM.
The lads arrive in batches of about
thirty-five, and go straight from the ship
to Riverview. The training period is from
three to four months, and includes gene-
ral farming, dairying, pig-raising, vege-
table culture, carpentry, blacksmithlng,
and household duties. “The object of the
lastnamed is to enable a boy to cook his
own meals and do his washing,” said Mr.
Alexander, “a knowledge of how to per-
form these tasks being often essential in
the bush.” The different departments of
the farm are under the supervision of
assistant officers, of whom there are eight,
all practical men, who instruct the lads
in bushcraft, agriculture, and live stock
management. Talks on agricultural sub-
jects take place once a week, and a course
of lectures on pigs is delivered by Mr. F.
Bostock, assistant instructor in pig-rais-
ing, at the conclusion of which an exam-
ination is held, and each paper is marked.
During their term at Riverview the boys


are taken to a bacon factory, accompanied
by one of the instructors in pig-raising
and one of the farm officers. The various
types of pigs are inspected, and the good
and bad points demonstrated, after which
the process of bacon manufacture is wit-
nessed and fully explained by experts at-
tached to the factory. On the principle
that “all work and no play makes Jack
a dull boy,'’ healthy recreations, such as
football, cricket, swimming, etc., are pro-
vided, and the trainees occupy some of
their spare time in these amusements.
The living conditions are all that could
be desired, clean sleeping accommodation,
wholesome food, and pleasant surround-
ings providing an atmosphere that makes
for enjoyment and contentment. The ap-
preciation of the boys at the treatment
meted out to them is proved by a number
of letters that have reached Mr. Alex-
ander from different districts in which
his former charges are now located. In
every instance they refer to the happy
time spent at Riverview, and emphasise
the value of the training they received.
Farmers are eager to secure their ser-
vices, and no difficulty is experienced in
finding employment for them when their
apprenticeship has been served. The
farm buildings and plant are adequate
for present requirements, but the question
of finance compels strict economy, which
has to some extent retarded the progress
of pedigree stock breeding.
DAIRYING.
Dairying is the principal industry at
Riverview. There is between sixty and
seventy head of dairy cattle of different
ages, consisting in the main of pure and
grade Ayrshires and pure and grade ll-
lawarra Milking Shorthorns, the majority
of which were bred on the farm. A pure


bull of the lastnamed breed has been
kept for two years, and before him a pure
Ayrshire sire headed the herd, and he
sired most of the stock. The milking shed
is built to accommodate forty cows at
the one time, and that is the number
generally in commission. The cattle are
running on pastures all the year round,
and those in profit are fed in the bails
for three months (June, July, and
August), when the grass is of little value
for milk production. It is nutritious even
when dry, as evidenced by the excellent
condition of the dry and young stock that
have w'intered on it without having 're-
ceived any supplementary feeding. The
grazing areas are burnt off every season
about this time, and if rain falls the new
growth comes away with almost incred-
ible rapidity. There is a twin concrete
silo of the tub type, with a capacity of
approximately 160 tons, which is filled
with maize. Silage is the only feed sup-
plied to the milking herd in the bails
during the winter months, when the suc-
culence which the pastures lack is thus
provided. Whole milk is forwarded twice
on week days and once on Sundays to the
Salvation Army People's Palace, a large
boarding establishment in the city, and
to the Salvation Army Home for Boys
in Indooroopilly, one of the suburbs of
Brisbane, Any surplus is separated, and
the cream forwarded to the butter factory
at Kingston, on the South Coast railway
line. The milking shed is well lit and
airy, and it and the dairy are kept scru-
pulously clean. A commodious shed is
close by, and it is used for storing lu-
cerne and oaten hay. Dairying is being
carried on at a disadvantage at present
owing to the excessive number of old and
unprofitable cows in the herd. Steps are
now being taken to reconstitute it, and


there are some promising heifers coming
on that will gradually replace the vete-
rans. It is probable that when the process
of elimination is completed, and the herd
is placed on a better footing, a much
greater quantity of milk will be produced
by a lesser number of animals. If the
strength of the herd is maintained at its
present level the output of both milk and
butter-fat will be on a largely increased
scale.
PEDIGREE JERSEYS.
Although Mr. Alexander Is a native of
Ayrshire, he is not prejudiced in favour
of the great Scottish breed of dairy cat-
tle that originated in the land of his
birth. While admitting its many excellent
qualities, he prefers the Jersey, and he
is now getting together a herd of pedi-
gree Jerseys, and hopes to eventually
have no other cattle at Riverview. In
March he acquired a registered bull and
five registered heifers with which to
make a start. The bull, Trinity Dragon,
born September, 1925, was bred by Mr.
J. Sinnamon, Goodna, one of the foremost
breeders in the State. He is by Lord Et-
trey of Banyule, a son of Audrey’s Lord
Twylish and Ettie sth of Banyule, born
in the Banyule stud of Mr. C. Gordon
Lyon, Heidelberg, which has had a high-
ly successful career in the show ring in
Queensland, in addition to siring much
high-class stock. His dam is Dunmore Ox-
ford Crocus, by You’ll Do Oxford (imp.).
This young sire is full of breed type and
quality, and he should make good at
Riverview. The heifers were purchased
from their breeders, Messrs. Burton and
Co., Yandina. They are Yimmin Golden
Buttercup, born September, 1925, by Yim-
min Milk Lad, ex Yimmin Countess, by
Montrose Jock; Yimmin Bright Light,


born October, 1925, by Yimmin Milk Lad
ex YYmmin Gloria 2nd, by Trinity Inves-
tigator ; Yimmin Elsie, born November,
1925, by Yimmin Milk Lad ex Yimmin
Joyous, by Montrose Jock; Yimmin Poppy
Flower, born November, 1925, by Yim-
min Milk Lad ex Yimmin May Flower
2nd, by Trinity Investigator; and Yimmin
Mermaid, born September, 1925, by Yim-
min Milk Lad ex Yimmin Magnet 2nd,
by King Lear 4th. In the pedigrees of
these heifers figure the names of some of
the leading sires imported to Queensland,
including Alfriston Duke, Clair Val Hero,
King Lear, Prince Palatine, and Soci-
able’s Noble, as well as those of a num-
ber of cows equally famous in the his-
tory of Jersey breeding in the northern
State. All the heifers are in calf to Trin-
ity Dragon, and, if pedigree counts, the
resulting progeny ought to turn up
trumps. Since these cattle came to River-
view six high-grade Jersey heifers have
been brought on to the farm, and they
will doubtless perform their part in raising
the standard of production. The breeding
of pedigree Jerseys has been initiated on
sound lines, and it should not be very
long before the Riverview herd ranks
with the best in the State. The environ-
ment is eminently suitable for this breed
of cattle, which is highly esteemed by
dairymen in Queensland. The display of
Jerseys at the Brisbane Royal Show is
always one of the most attractive and
pleasing features, and the type and qual-
ity of the exhibits is unexcelled at any
show in the Commonwealth.
PIG BREEDING.
One of the leading activities at the
farm is pig-breeding and fattening, which
is receiving greater attention than hither-
to, and which will be extended. Mr.


Alexander is keenly interested in pigs,
and he is endeavouring not only to in-
crease the number of breeding stock, but
also to improve the quality. There are
twenty-one Berkshire and Middle York-
shire brood sows, all of which are pure,
but not registered. A registered Berkshire
boar, bred at the Gatton Agricultural Col-
lege, has been used for some time. He is
by Gatton Master Jack ex Brentwood
Purity, by Bungaree Stanley. His dam is
Gatton Beauty, by Conargo Outlaw, by
Conargo Dick ex Claremont Freda, by
Danesfleld Sultan Ist (imp.) A young
boar, Goodna Sunrise, bred by the Hos-
pital for the Insane, Goodna, was recent-
ly purchased. He is by Northgate Pres-
ton, by Preston Starlight ex Goodna Beu-
lah 3rd, by Goodna Star, by Brentwood
Star. The Middle Yorkshire boar, Kya-
bram Aviator, was bred in Victoria by
Mr. Ralph Joyce. His sire is Kyabram
Star Rover, and his dam Kyabram June,
which runs back to the successful sire
Drayton Chief. A young registered Tam-
worth boar and sow were recently ac-
quired, and other sows of that breed will
be added, as it is Mr. Alexander’s inten-
tion to specialise in the production of
pedigree Berkshires, Middle Yorkshires,
and Tamworths, as well as to continue
breeding and fattening first crosses. The
cross favoured is the Berkshire boar and
the Tamworth sow, which breed a pig
suitable alike for bacon and pork. The
female progeny resulting from this mat-
ing is much sought after by Queensland
pig-raisers, who join them with a pure
Berkshire boar or a pure boar of which-
ever breed they favour. The Berkshire
gives early maturity, and the Tamworth
imparts length of side, which is import-
ant in a bacon pig. The adult and young
stock at Riverview shows abundance of


quality, and is of well-bred appearance.
Pig-breeding will be made a ‘‘leading
line.” and, when the farm is fully sup-
plied with breeding stock, it should be-
come one of the leading studs in the
State. The natural conditions are all that
could be desired for pig-raising, and
when the organisation of this branch of
the farm is completed the profits should
appreciably increase. The pig industry is
making substantial progress in Queens-
land, and there is certain to be an an-
nually growing demand for pedigree
stock. There is room and opportunity for
breeders who turn out the right class of
animals.
METHODS OF MANAGEMENT.
When a sow is served she is turned
into a fenced enclosure fronting the
Bremner River or put in one of the runs
attached to the piggery. She is fed once
daily on slop and lucerne, or some other
green stuff. During the time sows are
outside they have ample opportunity to
forage, and as there is abundance of
grass they would be able to gain their
own living, but the supplementary feed-
ing assists in keeping them in good con-
dition. They are exceedingly partial to
nut grass, which grows in profusion on
the river bank. In their search after the
"nuts” they root up the ground, and this
provides them with mineral substances
and exercise, both of which are essential
to their well-being. There is ample shade
and shelter along the river, and the runs
are equipped with sheds, into which the
animals can go when so inclined. There
is always a plentiful supply of fresh,
clean water for the sows to drink, which
is greatly appreciated, more particularly
during the hot weather. A month before
a sow is due to farrow she is penned and


Ced twice a day on a similar ration as
when she is running out. While she is
rearing her brood the quantity is still
further increased, if it is seen that such
a course is necessary. Care is taken that
the sows are not allowed to get too low
in condition, but it is regarded as equal-
ly important that they do not become
over-fat. The aim is to maintain the
happy medium, and thus assure large,
strong, thrifty litters. The suckers are
weaned when from seven to eight weeks
old; some are sold for breeding pur-
poses and the remainder fattened for
pork. Those intended for the butcher are
yarded and fed liberally twice a day on
slop, maize, and green stuff. They are
disposed of as porkers when five or six
months old, by which time they weigh
from sixty to eighty pounds (dressed).
Some of them go to the People’s Palace,
and some to the local butcher. “Of the
pure breeds I prefer the Middle York-
shire for pork, in fact for all purposes,”
remarked Mr. Alexander, “they are good
doers, and mature quickly and evenly.”
It is generally considered that white pigs
are liable to sunscald in Queensland, but
no trouble has been experienced at River-
view in this connection. The stock is well
looked after, consequently the animals
are healthy and vigorous.
