

RoadS and Ra ila gs
IN
NEW SOUTH WALES AND INDIA.
WITH REMARKS
EXPLANATORY OF THE ADVANTAGES
LIKELY TO RESULT PROM THE EMPLOYMENT,
UNDER CERTAIN CIRCUMSTANCES,
OF
ANIMAL POWEIR,
INSTEAD OF
STEAM POWER.
BY
SIR WILLIAM DENISON, K.C.B.,
COLCNEL, ROYAL ENGINEERS.
MADRAS:
J. HIGGINBOTHAM,
MOUNT ROAD.
1864.




Roads and Railwags
IN
NEW SOUTH WALES AND INDIA,
WITH REMARKS
EXPLANATORY OF THE ADVANTAGES
LIKELY TO RESULT FROM THE EMPLOYMENT.
UNDER CERTAIN CIRCUMSTANCES,
OF
ANIMAL POWER,
INSTEAD OF
STEAM POWER.
BY
SIR WILLIAM DENISON, K. C. B.,
COLONEL, ROYAL ENGINEERS.
MADRAS:
J. HIGGINBOTHAM,
MOUNT ROAD.
1864.


PRINTED AT THE ASYLUM PRESS, BY WILLIAM THOMAS.


INTRODUCTION.
The two first Sections of the present paper comprise
the substance of two papers read to the Philosophi-
cal Society of New South Wales in 1856 and 1857.
The object was to bring clearly before the com-
munity the nature and extent of the advantages
afforded by Railways of different kinds for the trans-
port of passengers and goods ; and, while pressing
these on the notice of the public, to clear away a
misconception, which appears to prevail pretty gene-
rally, that there arc no limits to the beneficial or
profitable action of the Locomotive Engine as a
moving power.
For this purpose it was necessary to investigate
carefully the comparative cost of transport upon the
different kinds of Roads, and by the use of different
descriptions of power.
The result of this investigation, so far as regards
the Colony of New South Wales, is shown in the
second section, where it is proved that, under condi-
tions analogous to those therein specified, Horse
power would be cheaper than Steam power.
On my arrival at Madras, 1 found the Govern-
ment engaged in pressing forward the works upon
several lines of Railway ; and although the conclu-
sions which I had drawn from my investigations in


Australia led me to doubt whether the ordinary
interest upon the capital expended would be realized
by the traffic upon these lines ; yet, as the indirect
benefit to the population at large might be great, and
as the political advantage accruing from the rapidity
and certainty of the transport of Troops and Military
Stores was indubitable, I did not think it necessary
to enter upon any enquiry as to the character of the
lines in progress.
Of late, however, various schemes have been
brought forward for the extension of the Railway
system. Some of these contemplate the construc-
tion of branches, or extensions of the main lines,
upon the same gauge, and with the same rolling
stock; others propose to have lighter rails, with a
narrower gauge, but the motive power is still to be
the Locomotive Engine ; others again, propose to lay
down rails upon the existing roads, and to use animal
power instead of steam. Under these circumstances
1 have thought it advisable tore-print the papers read
by me in New South Wales, and to add a third sec-
tion, descriptive of all those peculiarities of the
Indian climate, and of the habits and customs of the
people, which may have any influence upon the pro-
fitable working of the Indian Railways.


SECTION I.
RAILROADS.
A BRIEF OUTLINE OF THE DEVELOPMENT OF THE RAILWAY
SYSTEM IN ENGLAND, WITH SUGGESTIONS AS TO ITS APPLI-
CATION TO THE COLONY OF NEW SOUTH WALES.
A history of the last thirty years would he very incom-
plete which excluded from consideration the vast changes
which have been wrought in the state of society by the intro-
duction of railroads. Socially, politically, and morally, these
changes have been very great; and it would be a curious and
an interesting study to trace the effects which have resulted
from the introduction of this easy and rapid system of loco-
motion ; some of which have originated directly from the
forces put into action for the completion of the railways
themselves, and for maintaining them in effective operation ;
but more of which must be traced to feelings and motives
lying deep in man’s nature, but which have been stimulated
into activity by circumstances connected more or less inti-
mately with the physical changes of which the railway system
has been productive. We are as yet in the infancy, or, at all
events, in the youth of this system; and if the past presents
much of importance to the historian and moralist, the future
offers as wide, or a wider, opening to the speculative philoso-
pher. With questions such as these, however, it would be
premature to deal. If railways are in their youth elsewhere,
here they are in their infancy; and it will be more immedi-
ately interesting and useful to investigate the steps by which
other countries have arrived at a position so far in advance of
ourselves, than to speculate upon the possible changes which
may take place here, when we have availed ourselves of the
experience of others, and, by the exercise of skill, energy,


and perseverance, have brought these causes into action,
which ha\e produced so marvellous an effect elsewhere, but
which, for the present, are with us dormant.
In the short compass of a paper like this, it would be
impossible to give anything like a history of the various steps
by which the common cast-iron tram of the coal districts, on
which horse traction only was used, has developed itself into
the wi ou o ht iron railway, traversed by steam engines of great
weight and power. A sketch is all that can be attempted, and
is, indeed, all that is required ; for our object in this Colony
should be rather to avail ourselves of the principles which
havc been established during the course of a long series of
experiments, than to follow blindly in a track which would
lead to w aste of both time and money, and very much check
the development of the resources of the Colony.
In tracing the extension of the railway system in
England, it may be as well to look back some hundred and
fifty years, and to enquire what was the state of the roads
about the end of the seventeenth century. From all the
accounts which have been handed down to us, it would seem
that roads in England at that time were very similar to those
tracks which are in this Colony dignified by the name ; badly-
laid out with lefoionce to the country through which they
passed, and worse constructed. In the year 1700, however,
the demand for increased facilities for transport forced the
Legislature to consider the means by which an improvement
could be made in the condition of the main lines of commu-
nication ; and the system of turnpike trusts commenced, which,
in the course of little more than a century, covered England
with a network of roads, the aggregate length of which was
not less than 24,000 miles.
Under the turnpike system, however, the improvement
in the state of the roads was very slow; the introduction of a
better scheme of management produced, of course, some
beneficial effects, but this could not compensate for the want


of experience in the construction and management of the
roads, or of a knowledge of the general principles which have
been the result of many experiments, some of which have
proved successful, others, most unsuccessful. We must not
be surprised, therefore, to learn that in the year 1800, after
the labour of a century had been bestowed upon the roads,
they were in an indifferent state ; that the rate of travelling
upon them was slow, and the cost of transport great.
In the middle of the last century, attention was drawn to
the advantages afforded by water transport, and a very large
capital was expended upon canals leading from the great
manufacturing towns to the metropolis, and to the sea-ports.
The effect of the cheapness of this means of communication
was very visible in the increase and development of manu-
facturing industry, and in the enhanced value of land in the
vicinity of these great channels of trade.
The necessity of adopting some means by which the
traction on ordinary roads could be lessened, was first felt in
the Northern Colliery District; and wooden trararoads were
first laid in the neighbourhood of Newcastle, at the end of the
seventeenth century. These, after a time, were exchanged for
cast-iron, which was found, from its durability, to be cheaper
than wood. Wrought iron rails were subsequently adopted,
when the demand for increased supplies of coal made it neces-
sary to substitute steam for horse power.
In 1826, the commencement of the railway era, the
condition of England, so far as regards the means of internal
communication, may be summed up as follows. The country
was traversed by about 25,000 miles of turnpike roads, upon
which coaches travelled at a speed of from eight to twelve
miles per hour, and on which goods were convoyed by wag-
gons, at an average cost of about JHtZ. per ton per mile. In
addition to these, there was a network of canals, the aggre-
gate length ot which exceeded 3000 miles, upon which goods
were conveyed at the cost of about \d. per ton per mile.


There were, in the coal, and some of the other mineral dis-
tricts, several hundred miles of iron tramways and railways
for the conveyance of minerals to the port of shipment, or to
the principal markets.
At that time, however, the demand for increased facilities
for communication between Manchester, the centre of the
cotton manufacture, and Liverpool, the port of entry of the
raw material, was so urgent as to induce the formation of a
Company for the purpose of constructing a railway between
the two towns, upon which passengers and goods should be
conveyed in carriages propelled by steam power; and after
some delay, on account of the new and expensive character of
the work, the Liverpool and Manchester railway was opened
in 1830.
The length of this line is 32 miles, the original cost about
£840,000, or on an average, £26,250 per mile. The returns
during the year 1831 were sufficient to give a dividend of
about 10 per cent, upon the above capital, a return which is
sufficient of itself to show the enormous development of the
traffic between the two towns; but which, when analyzed,
exhibits the peculiar feature of a much greater extension of
the passenger than of the goods traffic.
This successful experiment on the part of the Manchester
and Liverpool Company had the effect of stimulating others
to follow their example ; numerous Companies were formed,
which, availing themselves of the experience which had been
gained during the progress of the works at Liverpool, and of
the daily improvements made in the machinery of the loco-
motives, and in all the other details of railway engineering,
commenced the construction of lines from the metropolis
towards every part of the country, and in 1855 the length com-
pleted amounted to 8,240 miles, at a cost of 291 millions. All
this has been executed in about twenty-five years, so that about
300 miles of railway have been constructed annually, at a cost
of about nine millions, or at the rate of about £30,000 per mile.


It would be useless to go at any length into the details
of the modifications and improvements which have been made
in the construction of the locomotive engine, and in the
arrangements for accommodating the different descriptions
of traffic. It will be easily understood that the stimulus
given to the mechanics of the whole world by the intro-
duction of locomotive power upon railways was not with-
out its fruits. Alterations and improvements have been
made, and are daily making, not only in the construction
of the engines, but in all the minor details of the railway.
Most of these have for their object the development and
extension of the peculiar advantages of steam traction;
namely, the increase of speed, and of power, for the purpose
of meeting the enormously increased amount of traffic. A
few examples will suffice to convey an idea of the nature of
these alterations.
The locomotive which gained the prize of £5OO, offered
by the Directors of the Liverpool and Manchester Railway,
weighed 4 tons, 5 cwt., and the tender with water and coke,
weighed 3 tons, 4 cwt. The conditions of the experiment
were, that the engine should not weigh more than 6 tons ;
that if it weighed more than 4£ tons, it should rest
upon six wheels; that it should draw three times its own
weight at a rate of ten miles per hour, and should not cost
more than £550. In the experiment the Rocket, built by
Mr. Robert Stephenson, drew a gross load of 17 tons, includ-
ing its own weight, at the average rate of 14 miles per hour.
When, however, engine power was practically applied to
railway purposes, it was soon found that the wheels of the
engine were apt to slip on the rail in wet weather with even
on ordinary load, and in all weathers, when the load was
increased beyond a certain proportion to the weight of the
engine. To remedy this the engines were made heavier, so as
to augment the friction upon the rail, and this addition to the
weight was accompanied by a corresponding increase of power
and speed.
B


These additions to weight and velocity involved alterations
in the construction of the railway. The light rails used upon
the Liverpool and Manchester line, which weighed 351bs. per
yard, were not, of course, strong enough to support the increas-
ed load brought upon them; and rails weighing 45, 60, 75,
and 90 lbs. per yard have gradually been introduced. The
increased power of the engine, and the hold on the rail
obtained by throwing additional weight on the driving wheels,
enable the train to ascend gradients, which before were
worked by stationary or auxiliary engines; but, on the other
hand, the increased velocity has made it advisable to pay
greater attention to the plan of the road, the curves of which
are now described with a larger radius than heretofore, for,
when great speed is required, some sacrifices must be made
in order to secure a line as straight as possible.
This is a brief sketch of what has taken place in
England. The different stages in the scale of progression
may be summed up as follows :
Ist. —Muddy tracks.
2nd.—Turnpike roads.
3rd. —Tramroads of wood.
4th. Do. of iron.
sth. —Railroads with light rails, worked by locomotive
engines at low speed.
6th.—Railroads with heavy rails, traversed by engines
of great weight and power, drawing loads of 150 tons, at a
rate of from 25 to 50 miles per hour.
It must not, however, be assumed that these changes
were either general or simultaneous; that the muddy lane
ceased to exist when the turnpike road was put in operation; or
that these latter have been altogether banished by the railroad;
on the contrary, every change had to undergo the most deter-
mined opposition. At the first introduction of railways, the
owners of property, who are now eagerly striving to get the


lines as near them as possible, exerted all their influence to
keep them at a distance. It is only within the last fifteen
years that more enlightened ideas have prevailed, and that
people have been made aware that every additional facility
given to locomotion confers a most important benefit upon
the country. It is true that in many instances the works of
the railways have been executed at a cost which the returns
have not justified, and the capital expended has yielded but
a scanty return of interest; but this has been principally due
to an unwholesome system of competition, which has induced
an outlay upon works where the amount of traffic, though
sufficient to pay the expense of working the line, and main-
taining the road, is not adequate to the payment of interest
upon the capital laid out.
The experiments which have been carried on for the last
thirty years in various parts of the world, have been uniform in
certain results, which may, therefore, be safely laid down as
general principles for our guidance in discussing the policy of
adopting railroads as our principal means of internal commu-
nication. It has been shown that increased facilities of com-
munication have an immediate tendency to augment traffic;
the augmentation, however, takes place to a much greater
extent in passengers than in goods. Increased facility of com-
munication is also in all cases productive of economy ; this,
however, is shown more in the transit of goods than of passengers.
In the case of the latter, though there is often an actual reduc-
tion in the cost of conveyance, yet the principal saving is in
time. With regard to goods, the actual reduction in the cost
of transport is enormous, while the benefit is still further
enhanced by the certainty and rapidity with which they are
conveyed. A reference to the traffic returns of English
railways will establish these facts beyond a doubt; and there
is no question that were we in possession of similar returns
from other countries the result would be the same. This
brief sketch of the introduction of the railway system in
England, and of its extraordinary and rapid development,


will not, 1 trust, be uninteresting ; and it will be most useful
if it should have the effect of introducing a more close inves-
tigation of all the causes which have had an influence in
producing such a state of things, with a view to the applica-
tion of the results of such an investigation to the circum-
stances of the Colony.
In carrying out an investigation of this kind, however,
care must be taken to keep constantly in view the very
marked differences between the state of things in the Colony
and the mother country.
In England the population is densely packed together,
and the manufacturing and agricultural interests are enor-
mously developed. In this Colony, on the contrary, the popu-
lation is thinly scattered, and the agricultural and manufactur-
ing interests are yet in their infancy.
O *
There is thus, instead of an analogy between the state of
things in the two countries, a marked and striking difference.
We cannot, therefore, assume without proof, that because it
has been found advisable in England to expend some three
hundred millions in improving means of communication
already comparatively excellent, it will be to our benefit to
expend in New South Wales a tithe of that sum for the same
purpose; but that such an expenditure will be most benefi-
cial I firmly believe. The very marked differences which
exist between the mother country and this Colony appear to
me to strengthen rather than to weaken the groundwork
upon which this belief is based ; and I trust, before I conclude,
to be able to make you partakers of my convictions. In
order to this, it will be necessary, in the first place, that a
clear and definite idea should be formed of the nature of the
benefit which the country is supposed to derive from improved
means of communication, more especially from railroads;
and it would be desirable, if possible, to make some approxi-
mation to the amount of this benefit, as measured according
to some pecuniary standard. Now, the benefit which the


proprietor of a railway derives from it is measuicd by the
clear annual return of profit resulting from the payment made
for the conveyance of passengers and goods, after all the cost
of transport, and that of the maintenance and repairs of the
road have been defrayed; but Avhile this is a correct representa-
tion of the benefit which an individual or a private Com-
pany can derive from the ownership of a railway, the case
becomes very different when the Government, acting for the
community at large, undertakes the construction of such
works-
In this case, the direct benefits, which are measured by
the profits of the railway as a speculative investment of capi-
tal, and the indirect benefits, which are those resulting to
society at large from the use of the railway, are merged
together, the community being both proprietor and employer
of the railway; and the amount of these latter, taking their
monetary value only into consideration, is very far in excess
of the former, as I shall be able to prove.
Take, for instance, the English railroads. The direct
return to the shareholders is estimated to be on an average
from 50 to 55 per cent, of the gross receipts ; that is, the
cost of transport and management, together with that of
keeping the road in repair, absorbs about from 45 to 50 per
cent, of these receipts, leaving the above balance as piofit.
It is now found, however, that while the traffic is contin-
ually increasing, as is shown by the annual returns, the
shareholders are receiving but a very small interest on their
capital; that is, the direct benefit, as before defined, is
small. With regard to the indirect benefit, we have, luckily,
the means of arriving at the amount of the saving in the cost
of conveyance of goods, in the fact, that the average cost of
cartage upon a good turnpike road was per ton per mile,
■while on the railway it varies from 2 d. to 3 d. ; that is, there is
a saving of upwards of 70 per cent, in the cost of transport of
goods; while in the conveyance of passengers, if the actual


money saving be not so great, the saving of time is fully 70
per cent. Now, the actual returns on the English railways,
in 1855, amounted to upwards of twenty-one millions ; and
the saving, on the above assumption, would amount to forty-
nine millions; while the direct return of interest did not
exceed eleven millions. It may be said, however, that these
returns can only be expected in a country thickly peopled,
with an enormous trade already developed ; and that, in this
Colony, we must pass through all the various modes of road-
making before we can hope to arrive at similar results. This,
however, I conceive to be a mistake. The advantage to a
community of any improvement in the means of communica-
tion must be measured, partly by the difference between the
cost of transport upon the old roads and upon the new, and,
partly, by the increase given to the value of property. Now,
from the returns furnished by the different benches of Magis-
trates in various parts of the Colony, the present cost of
transport throughout the Colony is shown to vary from about
one shilling to eleven shillings per ton per mile. The average,
however, may be taken at from two to three shillings per ton
per mile.
Were the cost of conveyance per ton per mile upon a
railroad the same as in England, the saving would be at least
90 per cent. It will be safer, however, to take the actual
charge upon the Paramatta railroad, which is six pence per
ton per mile, as a measure of the probable future charge
throughout the Colony, and in this case the saving will
be 75 per cent. As an instance of the actual amount
of benefit conferred upon a particular locality, the returns
from Campbell-town may be taken. Campbcll-town is
about 33 miles from Sydney, upon a road to which a
good deal of attention has been paid. The return states
the actual amount of traffic backwards and forwards to be
about 8,700 tons per annum, and the average cost to be
two shillings per ton per mile, or £28,710 per annum as the


whole charge for transport. Now, by railway, at six pence
per ton per mile, the whole charge would amount to £7,177 ;
and the difference between this and the former amount of
£28,710, or £21,533 per annum, is but a portion of the
indirect benefit conferred upon this district by the substitution
of a railway, for a turnpike road. I say, hut a ‘portion ; for,
in the first place, I have made no allowance for the saving of
money and time to the passengers on the road ; I have not
calculated on the increased amount of traffic, which will most
assuredly be the result of the introduction of railway commu-
nication ; neither have I taken the increased value given to
property into consideration ; I have merely taken the present
amount of goods traffic ; and have shown that the saving in
the cost of transporting it for a distance of 33 miles amounts
to upwards of £21,000 per annum ; a sum which, at 6 per
cent., represents a capital of £350,000. As, then, the present
cost of transport in this Colony far exceeds that by turnpike
roads in England, the saving to the inhabitants by the intro-
duction of railways will be larger in proportion than in Eng-
land. lam not in possession of any data which could enable
me to form an opinion as to the number of passengers, or the
probable charge for their conveyance; but it is evident that
the same reasoning will apply to these as to passengers in
England, and that the saving of time, owing to the rapidity
and certainty of conveyance by railway, will be relatively as
great.
The next question for consideration in forming an esti-
mate of the indirect benefit resulting from railway communi-
cation is the increase in the value of property.
In many parts of the Colony, the land, of which the
Government is in the possession of thirty-nine-fortieths, is
unsaleable. The distance from a market, and the enormous
cost of transport, would render land at a distance of 100 miles
from Sydney almost valueless, even were it of the richest
description. Take, for instance, a farm of 100 acres, at 100


miles from a market, and assume the produce available for
sale to be 800 bushels of grain of some sort. This, which
would weigh about 20 tons, would, at the rate of 2s. per ton
per mile, cost, for transport only, £2OO, or ss. per bushel;
and the farmer would, of course, be utterly unable to compete
with the foreign producer. Even the farmer in Michigan,
who has to bring his grain, or the flour produced from it, a
distance of nearly 2000 miles to New York, and from thence
12,000 or 14,000 miles by sea to New South Wales, would
be able to undersell a farmer living not more than 100 miles
from Sydney, whose only communication is by the ordinary
roads of the Colony. Place, however, the farmer within a few
miles of a railway, and every thing is reversed ; his produce
is conveyed to Sydney for £SO instead of £2OO or for Is. 3d.
per bushel instead of ss. He is, therefore, in a position to
undersell the foreign producer; and, a market being insured
for the produce of his farm, the land in the neighbourhood
assumes a value proportionate to its quality; and a rise in the
price of land of from 300 to 400 per cent, may fairly be
expected.
With regard, however, to these calculations as to the
amount of indirect benefit, it will be seen that they are based
upon the assumption that the cost of transport upon the rail-
road will be 6d. per ton per mile. It is true that this is the
charge at present on the Paramatta Railway, but it is to be
observed, that out of this sum of 6d. the Government receives
upwards of 2 \d. as interest of capital. If, then, the charge for
transport were reduced by this amount, the benefit to the
community would be enhanced to an equal, if not to a greater
extent, by the stimulus given to production, and the increase
in the value of property.
The inference which I am disposed to draw from what
I have here stated is, that in undertaking the construction of
railways by the Government upon a large scale, it would,
perhaps, be wise to relinquish altogether the idea of obtaining


any direct benefit from them in the shape of interest of
capital, and to be content with the indirect returns accruing
from the saving in the cost of transport, and the increase in
the value of property. With regard to the former, it would
give evidence of its existence in the general development of
business of every kind; but the latter would assume a
tangible shape, and would pour more money into the Treasury
than would compensate for the capital sunk in constructing
the railway. If, for instance, the Government, being the
owner of 200 millions of acres of land, were to sink the value
of one-fourth of this in the construction of railways, by which
the value of the remaining three-fourths would be doubled,
the actual money profit to the Colony by the transaction
would be equivalent to the present value of 150 millions
of acres of land, irrespective of all other advantages.
In advocating a large outlay upon the railways as the
only mode by which this Colony can ever be made capable
of supporting a dense population, and, therefore, as the only
means by which it can be made prosperous and powerful,
I must not be understood as pledging myself to the adoption
of any particular scheme. It is a matter of comparative un-
importance whether we adopt the wide or the narrow gauge.
I do not think it is necessary, under our present circumstances,
to insist upon uniformity of gauge as a matter of necessity,
although it would, I admit, be desirable to establish some
uniform system. What we do require is the railway or
tramway, (for in principle they are identical) that is, the
hard, uniform, and comparatively level surface upon which
carriages can run without much friction or resistance. The
nature of the road is altogether independent of the power
which is to be used to transport goods and passengers upon
it. This may either be steam or animal power, the character
being determined by the nature and amount of the traffic on
the road, or by peculiar considerations which may make it
more economical to use one kind of power than another. It
c


is true that in the consideration of any particular scheme, the
description of power to be employed must have much influ-
ence upon the details ; but a railway is still a railway, though
the carriages are drawn by horses, and the benefit to the
country through which it passes may be quite as great in
such a case as if locomotive power were employed. It may be
asked, what power will it be desirable to employ in this
Colony ? To this the simple answer would seem to be, that
which is the cheapest, provided it be sufficient. In England
the amount of traffic upon the different lines, and the demand
for speed on the part of the passengers, has made the univer-
sal adoption of steam power a matter of necessity ; but before
we assume this to be the case in New South Wales, a proper
calculation must be made as to the relative cost and efficiency
of the different kinds of motive power. Ido not, of course,
mean to infer that cheapness is to be the only consideration ;
but I do mean to say that, in the present condition of the
Colony, it would be unwise to incur any great additional
expense for the purpose of increasing the speed of transit
beyond ten or twelve miles per hour for passengers. If, then,
horse power can be shown to be cheaper than steam, and,
though slower, competent to the conveyance of the traffic
which is likely to come upon the line for some years to
come, I should certainly recommend that it should be em-
ployed.
In discussing the question of the relative expense of the
two systems of locomotion, the actual cost of working the
line in each case is not the only matter to be considered.
The cost of constructing the road in either case must enter
into the comparison. For instance, for steam power the line
must be straighter in plan; less steep and abrupt, and less
undulating in section ; the rails must be heavier, and all the
work upon the road more massive and substantial; while even
upon the more solid road, the wear and tear of the heavy
locomotives going at speed, will be far greater than that


caused by horse traffic. Taking all things into consideration,
I should be disposed to believe that the line prepared for
locomotive power would cost at least double of that laid down
for horse power; and the wear and tear will probably be
larger in the same proportion. This, however, as I said
before, must be determined by calculation and experiments;
and I hope on some future occasion to be able to lay before
you the results of some which are now in progress.
I have in the present paper confined myself as much as
possible to the general question, on the satisfactory elucida-
tion of which the adoption of railroads as the ordinary means
of communication must depend. Hereafter, I trust full ac-
counts will be laid before the Society of the practical working
of the different systems which may be tried, and the members
will then be in a position to render valuable service to the
Government, by classifying and analyzing these returns,
from which only we can hope to deduce results applicable to
the peculiar circumstances of the Colony.


SECTION II.
In a paper which I read to the Society last year, I gave
a sketch of the development of the railway system in England,
together with some general remarks upon the advantages
which might be anticipated from the application of a similar,
or, perhaps, I should say analogous, system to New South
Wales.
These advantages I was in a position to assert would be
very great; but, as my object at the time was to bring the
question in its broadest features under the consideration of
the Society and the public, I abstained from any attempt
to discuss it in detail. I expressed no opinion as to the par-
ticular character of road, or as to the power which it might
be advisable to employ upon it.
These, as I said at the time, were matters which ought to
be determined by observation and experiment; and it is
with a view to bring under the notice of the Society such facts
and observations as have been elicited in various ways during
the last twelve months, that I now lay before the members
this, which may be looked upon as a supplement to my
former paper.
I may remind the members, in the first place, that the
subject of railways has been under the consideration of a
Committee of the Legislative assembly, and that facts and
opinions have been elicited during the examination of several
witnesses, all of which, having been printed, are now in the
possession of the public. In addition to this published
matter, I have been placed in possession of a mass of infor-
mation having reference to the employment of horse power,
both on common roads, or wooden trams, and on iron rail-
roads ; all of which has an important bearing upon the ques-
tions which will have to be determined, namely, the character


of the road which it would be advisable to construct, and the
nature of the tractive power to be employed upon such road.
I have also been furnished with a report on the railroads
of the United States, addressed to the Committee of the
Privy Council by Captain Douglas Galton, R. E., which
contains much valuable information.
Having then, such a mass of information at my disposal,
I feel that I am now in a position to discuss those questions
upon which, in my former paper, I declined to express an
opinion ; and as the subject is daily assuming more and more
importance, whether it be regarded as a mere question of
economy, or as one, upon the proper solution of which the
future advancement of the Colony must mainly depend, I do
not think that the Society can be called upon to consider one
of greater interest. Before I proceed to enquire into the
character of the roads which it would be desirable to sub-
stitute for those at present in existence, I may as well attempt
to give a more detailed sketch of the latter than I attempted
to do in my former paper. The following general description,
from personal observation, will apply to both the Western
and Southern roads.
From the terminus of the railroad at Paramatta, or
Liverpool, these roads pass, for a certain distances (some
twenty or thirty miles) through enclosed property. They
are, as a general rule, badly laid out; that is, but little
attention has been paid to the form and inclination of the
ground; the culverts and bridges have in very many instances
been constructed of perishable materials, and with little refer-
ence to the quantity of water which would have to pass
through them ; little or no attention has been paid to drainage;
the soil being generally a strong tenacious clay or loam,
and the road having but in few instances been metalled, these
portions of the line are in wet weather almost impassable.
In dry weather the clay gets baked and hard, and the
power expended in moving a load upon these roads is then a


minimum ; but the surface is at that time covered with a soft
impalpable dust, which is not only most unpleasant to travel-
lers, but also causes a great resistance to traction. From the
point where these roads enter the bush, that is, when they
cease to be fenced in, they do not improve. The difficulties
which are opposed to locomotion do not diminish, though they
vary in character according to the nature of the country
through which the roads pass. The observations which were
made as to the faulty direction of the road, the absence of
drainage, the bad construction of culverts, &c., apply with as
great force to the roads through the bush as to those through
enclosed land.
Where the bush is not too dense, it may occasionally be
possible, where the usual track is very much cut up by traffic,
to diverge, for the purpose of escaping some particular obsta-
cles ; yet, when the weather is wet, the ground in the bush is
as saturated with moisture as the road itself, and where the
crust of vegetable mould, consolidated with roots and vegeta-
ble fibres, is once broken through, the sub-soil is incapable of
resisting the action of the wheels, and constant accidents take
place.
When the road passes through a sandy soil, the draft,
which is very heavy in dry weather, is less so in wet; but the
drains are speedily choked by the sand brought down by the
rain.
In rocky soil the inequality of surface is a constant im-
pediment to traction, both in wet weather and dry ;in the
former the hollows are filled with mud, and the road consists
of alternations of mud holes and hillocks, the effect of which is
most injurious upon both cattle and carriages, and in the latter,
though the holes are full of dust or sand instead of mud, the
rocky obstacles remain as prominent as ever.
This description, which from personal observation I can
testify applies to the Southern and Western roads, is, I believe,
equally applicable to the Northern line from Maitland, with


the additional obstacles arising from the more numerous water-
courses, in that line, which, not being bridged, become impas-
sable in wet weather, and which, besides the delay and hin-
drance to communication they occasion, entail annually the
loss of several lives. The correctness of this account of the
state of the main lines of communication throughout the
Colony will, I think, be vouched for by many of the members
now present; and it will not, therefore, be a matter of sur-
prise that the cost of conveyance upon these roads should vary
from a minimum of Is. to a maximum of 2s. per ton per
mile ; or that the average rate upon the Northern roads should
be Is. 10 \d. per ton per mile, on the Western roads Is. 11 \d.
per ton per mile, and on the Southern Is. 11 \d. per ton per
per mile.
The loss and inconvenience which such a state of things
occasions cannot of course be measured by the difference of
cost between the transport on these roads, and that upon either
a good turnpike road, or a railroad; allowance must be made
for the delays which constantly take place. It is not an
uncommon occurrence for a drag to be upwards of a month in
going from Sydney to Goulburn, a distance of 125 miles ; or
six weeks between Sydney and Braidwood, a distance of 185
miles. The farmer is often prevented from sending down his
wheat at the time when the market would suit him, the roads
being too bad to permit him to venture his teams upon them ;
or the price of transport so high as to swallow up all the profit
on his crop.
As, however, the difference of cost of conveyance upon
these roads and upon a good turnpike or railroad is the mea-
sure of the minimum amount of injury done to the Colony, it
may be as well that I should give an approximate estimate of
its money value.
Along the Northern road 25,800 tons of goods are moved
for various distances which, when reduced, give 1,183,770
tons moved one mile for £110,653, or, at the average rate of


Is. 10£<i per mile. Now the cost of moving goods upon a
good turnpike road should not exceed per ton per mile,
which would be a saving of Is. fc?. per ton per mile, or in
round numbers of £62,887 ; while, on a railroad, this quan-
tity of goods might be moved for §d. per ton per mile, or less,
and the saving in this case would be £81,059.
Along the Western road the traffic is equivalent to
1,615,725 tons moved one mile for a sum of £156,737, or at
a rate of Is. 11 \d. The saving then, in this case, at the rates
stated above, would be £92,800 in the case of a turnpike
road, and £116,344 in the case of a railroad.
On the Southern road the traffic is equivalent to 1,916,022
tons moved one mile for £188,672, or at the rate of Is.
per ton per mile. The saving in this case would amount to
£112,830 in the case of a turnpike road, and to £139,709 in
the case of a railroad.
Along these three lines, which may be termed the main
arteries of communication, the loss to the inhabitants of the
different districts, occasioned by the badness of the roads,
amounts, on the transport of goods alone, to £268,517 per
annum ; and, were a railroad the means of communication,
the saving, by the use of it, would amount to £338,175 per
annum. This, I have said, is the minimum amount. I have
allowed nothing for the increased expense to passengers, I
have said nothing of the diminished value of land, I have
merely taken the returns of existing traffic, and have shown
that the saving in the expense of conveying it would justify
an outlay of Capital on these three lines, the length of which
amounts altogether to 843 miles, of £5,370,340, in making
turnpike roads, or of £6,763,500, in the construction of rail-
ways; that is, of £6,370 per mile upon the one, or £B,OOO
per mile upon the other. I have assumed 9 \d. per ton
per mile as the fair charge upon a good turnpike road ; this
was the average charge in England previous to the construc-
tion of railways, and it covered, not only the cost of transport,


but also the tolls, which produced a sum adequate to maintain
the road in repair, and, in many instances, to the payment of
some interest upon the capital expended upon the formation of
the road. In this Colony, however, the sum taken as the
average cost of transport is chargeable with but a very small
amount of the repair of the road, the tolls received upon the
different roads do not amount on an average to more than
£5,600 or to £l3 per mile on the whole length of the road
charged with toll, while the Legislature has appropriated,
during the present year, a sum of £29,000 towards the main-
tenance and repair of these roads, which sum ought properly
to be added to the amount of saving which would accrue were
the roads placed in a proper state, and which would represent
an additional capital of £580,000.
The state of the roads, then, is such as not only to occa-
sion a heavy annual loss to the community, but to saddle it
with a heavy amount of taxation in addition. By what means
can so unsatisfactory a state of things be remedied ?
There are three modes of doing this which naturally pre-
sent themselves.
1 st. By the construction of turnpike roads ; that is, of
roads properly laid out, drained, and macadamized, and main-
tained out of the proceeds of tolls.
2nd. By the construction of railroads on which horse
power will be used.
3rd. By the construction of railroads on which the
traction will be performed by steam power. The preference
to be given to any one of these schemes over the others must
be determined by a comparison of the advantages and disad-
vantages attendant upon each, and by a correct estimate of
the charge which it will be necessary to impose upon goods
and passengers, in order to cover the cost of traction, that of
keeping the road in repair, and the interest of the capital
I)


expended in making the road. To an analysis of these matters
1 will now proceed to draw your attention.
Ist. As to turnpike roads.
These, when in their best condition, are tracks broad
enough for different vehicles to pass each other, laid out at as
gradual a slope as the nature of the country will permit, pro-
perly drained, and covered with a stratum of hard broken
stone of sufficient thickness to resist the action of the traffic,
and to protect the foundation of the road from the rain falling
on its surface. Upon such a road, when properly constructed
and kept in repair, a horse will draw from 15 to 20 cwt. net
weight, and the cost of conveyance will be from to 12 d.
per ton per mile, including of course in this the sum paid for
tolls, out of which the cost of maintaining the road in repair
must be defrayed, as well as the interest on the capital expended
in its construction. The amount of the capital required will,
of course, depend upon a variety of circumstances ; the cha-
racter of the country, the nature of the soil, the quality of the
materials, and especially the price of labour. Taking, how-
ever, all these matters into consideration, the cost of con-
structing properly one mile of road may be estimated roughly
at £3,000 per mile.
The cost of a railroad which is intended to be worked by
horse power, will not differ much from that of a turnpike road.
The heavy expense of cuttings and embankments for the pur-
pose of diminishing gradients, which, when locomotive power
is employed, are works of absolute necessity, is, in this case,
not required. lam aware that, in making this statement, I
am placing my opinion in opposition to that of Engineers of
some experience; but the difference between us is more in
appearance than reality, and is due to the fact that we look at
the subject from different points of view; my object being to
show how a given amount of goods and passengers can be con-
veyed from one point to another at the least possible cost, and
their’s being to explain how the greatest result can be derived


from a given amount of power. It is, of course, unquestion-
able that the advantage gained by the substitution of the hard
and smooth iron rail for the soft and rough material of the
road, is a maximum when the road is absolutely level. In this
case, we learn by experience that a horse can draw on a rail-
road, about eight times the load which he can move along a
turnpike road. On an ascent the power which the horse has
to exert is compounded of that which is necessary to overcome
the force of gravity, and of that which balances the friction of
the road, &c. The force of gravity is, of course, the same on
both road and railroad, and varies in proportion to the steep-
ness of the slope of the road; while the friction is a constant
quantity, or nearly so ; that of the turnpike road being eight
times as great as that of the railroad. While, therefore, the
ratio between the effective power of a horse on a railroad and
on a macadamized road, when both are on a level, is as eight
to one, this ratio is reduced to three to two when the road is
on an ascent of one in twenty, and to seventeen to thirteen
when the ascent is one in ten. It is, therefore, evident that,
to get the full benefit of the power employed upon a railroad,
the gradients should be as easy as possible. If, however, the
cost of reducing the road to this state, that is, of making the
extra cuttings and embankments, be great, the interest of this
extra charge may exceed the saving in the cost of the motive
power; in this case it would evidently be unwise to expend
money for such a purpose, the interest of which must be met
either by an increased charge upon the conveyance of goods
and passengers, or by a general tax upon the whole community.
Taking this view of the subject, it is evident that the solution
of the question must depend upon the quantity of goods and
passengers conveyed. If the traffic is heavy, a small saving
in the cost of traction per ton or per passenger may be suffi-
cient to cover a large amount of interest; but when the traffic
is small, and when the cost of locomotive power bears but a
mall proportion to the sum chargeable as interest, or to the


cost of maintaining the road, it is evidently desirable to reduce
these items to a minimum.
In comparing the cost of constructing a macadamized
road with that of making a railroad, when the gradients are the
same, all that is required is to determine the relative cost of
covering the former with metal, and of laying down the rails
on the latter; the items for fencing drainage, including bridges,
culverts, &c., will be the same, or nearly the same, in each, the
advantages being a little in favour of the railroad, as, from its
narrowness, the width of bridges, culverts, &c., would not be
so great as upon the turnpike road. Now the cost of broken
stone depends on a variety of circumstances. Mr. Brady, in
his evidence before the Committee of the Legislative Assembly,
says that it is worth 10 shillings per square yard, or for a
road 18 feet wide, £3 per running yard, or £5,280 per mile.
This statement, however, must have reference to the vicinity
of Sydney, and cannot be admitted as an element in deter-
mining the cost of such work elsewhere. On the Southern
road, the Surveyor estimates the cost of macadamizing at
from £2,500 to £3,500 per mile. It will, however, be safer
to calculate the actual amount of labour which would be
expended in preparing and spreading metal of good quality,
and this may be roughly stated as follows:
Ist. Quarrying. —A man should quarry cube yards
per day, and this quantity will not vary much, whether it be
necessary to use powder or not. The cost of quarrying a
yard of metal will, therefore, be about two-fifths of the daily
wages of a labourer.
2nd. Breaking. —A man will break half a yard good
metal per day, or perhaps more, say three-fifths of a yard.
The cost then of breaking will be If of the daily wages of a
labourer.
3rd. Cost of Carting. —This would depend upon a
variety of circumstances; but, -taking an average lead of two


miles, the cost per yard might be put at 4s. 6d., while that of
spreading might amount to Is. 6d.
Summing up these various items, it would seem that the
cost of quarrying and breaking would amount about 12s. 6d.
per cube yard. Labour being valued at 6s. 6d. per day;
add to this 4s. 6d. for cartage, Is. 6cZ. for spreading, and the
cost per cube yard, would be 18s. 4d. If the average thick-
ness of metal be taken at six inches, and the width of the
road at six yards, one cube yard will cover a running yard of
road, and the cost of metalling will be about £1,613 per mile.
What then will be the cost of a single line of railway,
including, of course, a sufficient number of sidings, &c., to
accommodate the traffic in both directions ? These latter may be
assumed, on an average, to increase the length of the single
way, from 1,760 yards to 2,000 yards per mile, and the cost of
the work will resolve itself into that of the following items
First. — Rails and Chairs.
Second. — Stone Blocks, or Wooden Sleepers, as bear-
ers for the Chairs.
Third.— Fixing Chairs and laying the Road.
Fourth.— Making good the ballasting and roadway
between the Rails.
Ist.—Rails and Chairs.
As a 35 lb. rail was considered to be sufficient for the
Liverpool and Manchester Railway when worked by locomo-
tive engines, the same weight of rail will be amply sufficient
for a mere horse track; then 2 x 35 x 2,000 = 140,000 lbs.,
or say 63 tons will be the weight of rails required for each
mile of road ; and this, at £l2 per ton, will amount to £756.
The chairs, if placed at five feet apart, will weigh about 20
tons, and, allowing for breakages, may be charged at £lO per
ton; making a total for chairs and rails, of £956, or say
£l,OOO per mile.


2nd.—Stone Blocks, or Wooden Sleepers.
In many parts of the country it would be advisable to use
stone blocks to carry the chairs; these were formerly used
very generally on railroads in England, but it was found that
the jar of the heavy engine upon them caused displacements
and breakages; this, however, would not be the case in a
mere horse road, and the cost for repairs would be very much
lessened by the employment of stone instead of wood; but if
stone blocks cannot be procured, then cross sleepers at every
five feet, carrying a longitudinal bearer Bx 6, would answer
every purpose. When such bearers are used, the rails might
be made very much lighter; but without making any allow-
ance for this, the cost of sleepers and w r ooden rails would not
exceed £5OO per mile.
1,200 Sleepers at 1«. 6 d £ 90
4,000 Cubic feet of squared timber, BX6 at 2s. £ 400
£490
Say £5OO by proper arrangements, by making use of
steam power, and by applying a variety of mechanical expe-
dients to the preparation of the timber, this cost might be
very much reduced. The cost, then, of the materials of the road
would not exceed £1,500.
3rd. —Fixing Chairs and laying Rails.
The cost of the labor of doing this may be put at £3OO
per mile. I believe that the charge for this, on the locomo-
tive railroad, is about £500; but, looking to the extra care
and attention which is required on such a road, I do not
think that I have under-estimated the cost.
4th. —Making good the ballasting and roadway between
the Rails.
A very heavy item in fixing the rails of a locomotive
railway, is the “ Ballast” as it is called, or the bed upon
which the sleepers rest. This should, if possible, be composed


of gravel, or some material which, while it admits of being
moved so as to be forced under the sleepers, forming thus a
solid bed for them, is porous, so as not to retain moisture,
and not susceptible of being acted on by the weather. Gravel
is, in fact, the best kind of ballast, and of this material it is
usual to place a thickness of 1 feet 6 inches to 2 feet
under the sleepers. This, however, which is almost a matter
of necessity when locomotives are used, would be a needless
expenditure when the road is intended for horse power. In
the former case the road has not only to withstand the action
of the load, that is of the goods, and the trucks in which they
are conveyed, and this at a speed at least double of that w r hich
could ever be attained on a horse road, but it has to withstand
the action of the power itself, in the shape of the locomotive
engine, which may be represented as equal to a load of from
four to six tons upon each wheel, moving with a velocity of
from 25 to 30 miles per hour. No precaution can be too
great to take, which may enable the road to withstand the
action of such a force, whether we look to the premanency of
the road itself, or to the fatal effects which must necessarily
ensure from any failure which might cause the train to leave
the rails. But in a horse road the action of the disturbing
forces is so slight, that when the road is laid upon cross sleep-
ers, with longitudinal bearers, these might be placed at once
on the surface of the ground, and when stone blocks are
employed, they might be bedded in the soil, no particular
precautions being taken to insure their stability.
I find that in the American lines, when it has been diffi-
cult to procure ballast, a ditch has been dug at each side of
the road, the soil from which has been banked up so as to
cover the centre of the sleeper, but sloped off on each side,
leaving the ends of the sleepers exposed in order to allow the
rain to draw off rapidly.
Looking, therefore, at the difference above stated be-
tween the railroad for locomotive, and that for horse power,


£
s.
d.
Bails and Chairs
0
0
Sleepers or Blocks.,,.
500
0
0
Labour, fixing
0
0
Ballast or road
340
0
0
Would give £2,140
0
0
the cost of the ballast may be merged into that of the horse
track, the material required for which will on a length of
2,000 yards, allowing a depth of 12 inches and a width of 6
feet, amount to 1,280 cubic yards, and taking this at an
average of ss. per yard, the cost will be £337 per mile.
Summing up these various items, viz :
as the cost of forming the track for a railway, while that of
macadamizing the turnpike road would amount to £1,613.
The difference, or about £527, would be the excess of the
cost of the railway above that of the macadamized road, and
if the cost of the latter be put at £3,000 per mile, that of the
railroad may be taken at £3,500.
Having thus arrived at an approximation to the cost of
the turnpike road, and the horse railroad, it only remains to
determine the cost of a railway for locomotive: for this we
have a variety of date.
We have the average cost of English and American
railways; and we have the actual cost of railways already
executed in this Colony; and if the comparatively easy line
between Liverpool and Paramatta has cost upwards of
£II,OOO per mile, we may feel sure that in the more difficult
country, where the cuttings must be deeper, the embankments
higher, the bridges more numerous, £12,000 will be a very
moderate estimate.
The comparison, then, between the different modes alluded
to in the former part of this paper, of remedying the evil
arising from the miserable condition of our present lines of


First cost p£r
mile.
Annual charge
for Interest
per mile.
£
£
Turnpike Hoad
3,000
3,500
150
Horse railroad
175
Locomotive railroad
125000
600
communication, so far as the first cost of each is concerned,
will stand as follows :
The next matter for consideration will be the annual
cost of maintenance of way, as it is termed, namely, that of
keeping the road in a proper state of repair, by applying
labour w r hen it is needed, and by renewing the materials as
they decay.
In all cases, the outlay for these purposes must depend,
to a certain extent, on the amount of traffic; but, if we assume
this to be such as to require the renewal of the metal upon a
macadamized road every ten years, and that of the iron rails
of the railway every twenty years, while the wooden sleepers
may be taken to last eight years, the relative outlay may be
roughly estimated as follows :
On the turnpike road a single station man will, on an
average, with light traffic, take charge of four miles of road ;
and his wages will amount to £lOO per annum, or £25 per
mile. The total cost of metal has been put at £1,613;
one-tenth of this, or £l6l-6s. will be the annual cost of the
metal, so that the total annual charge per mile for maintenance
will, on the turnpike road, be £lB6-6s.
On the horse rail the labour would be trifling in com-
parison, as the station man would only be called upon to
look after the general drainage, and would never have to
fill in ruts, &c., however, to make ample provision, two men
E


£
s.
d.
Renewal of rails
50
0
0
Do. sleepers
62
10
0
Labour
66
13
4
179
3
4
may be allowed to every three miles of road, which, at the
ordinary rate of labour, would give £66-10s.-6(7. per mile.
The charge for rails and chairs has been taken at £l,OOO per
mrle; and as these are supposed to last twenty years, the
the annual renewals will cost £5O.
The charge for sleepers was put at £5OO per mile, and
if these last eight years, the annual charge for renewals will
be £62-10$. Should stone blocks be used, this charge Avould
almost vanish.
I have not made any allowance for the maintenance of
the horse track between the rails, as I consider the amount of
labour allotted is amply sufficient to make good the very
slight damage which would be done by the feet of the horses.
The total charge for maintenance of way on the horse rail-
way will be as follows :
On the locomotive railroad the charge for renewals,
assuming the rails and sleepers to last as long as on the horse
road, will be 2000 -f- 20 = £lOO per annum per mile for
rails, and say 150 -j- 8 = £lB-105. for sleepers. For the cost
of labour we must be dependent upon the data afforded by the
returns from the English railroads, and the experience which
the Paramatta railway will afford.
From the returns which have been furnished, 1 find that
the contract price for labour only was £l6 per mile per fort-
night, or £416 per mile per annum, or Is. 10c?. per train mile.
In America the cost is about half of this, amounting to
per train mile, while in England the cost varies from 13*92 d.
to 3*072(7., and the average may be put at 7‘66(7. per train mile.


The greater the amount of traffic upon the road, the
greater, of course, will be the absolute cost of maintenance
of way, but the less will be the rate per train mile, as there
are several items which are almost constant, or which, at all
events, do not vary with the amount of traffic.
Under these circumstances, if the charge per mile of road
is put at £250 annually, that is at £166 less than is now
actually paid on the Paramatta line; and if to this be added
the cost of re-placing rails and sleepers, before estimated at
£HB-10s. per mile, the total charge for maintenance of way
will be £368-105. The proportionate cost, therefore, of the
maintenance of way on these three descriptions of road will
be as follows :
£ s. d.
Turnpike road 186 6 0
Horse railroad 179 3 4
Locomotive road 368 10 0
Having thus established an approximation, at all events,
to the two great items of permanent charge on the different
kinds of roads, the only question which remains to be investi-
gated is the actual cost of transport. I mean, the cost of the
power employed in haulage ; including in such cost all inci-
dental and contingent expenses, such as the repair and renewal
of rolling stock, coaching, traffic and station charges, &c.
In entering upon the investigation, I will commence with
the locomotive railway; for, with regard to this, we have not
only the experience of the English and American railways to
guide us, but we are also in possession of the returns of the
cost of working the line of railway from Sydney to Paramatta
and Liverpool.
The actual cost of locomotive power may be classified
under the following heads :
Ist. Interest of purchase money of rolling stock.
2d. Repair and renewal of do.


3d. Cost of working, including wages of Engineers,
Drivers, Firemen, &c. and charge for fuel, oil, &c.
4th. Station expenses, that is, the wages of persons
employed in various capacities, but not actually engaged in
working the locomotives.
The whole of these charges are (with the exception per-
haps of No. 4) directly proportional to the amount of the
traffic upon the road. In order, therefore, to estimate their
amount, some specific number of passengers, and of tons of
goods, must be assumed as likely to pass over the railway.
The total tonnage passing up and down the Southern road
between Goulburn and Sydney is shown by the annexed
return to amount to 30,543 tons. Of this, however, 10,000
tons pass down the railway from Liverpool, and an additional
10,000 tons is assumed as the amount of the Campbell-town
traffic, 10,000 may therefore be assumed as the existing
amount of the traffic along the line of road from Campbell-
town to Goulburn, a distance of about 90 miles.
It is difficult to form any probable estimate of the
number of passengers. The replies to queries sent to the
mail contractor show that the maximum capacity of the
vehicles employed by him is adequate to the conveyance of
twenty passengers per day, or between six and seven thousand
per annum over the whole distance.
If then, we assume 30,000 tons per annum, or there-
abouts to be the probable amount of goods traffic from
Campbell-town to Goulburn, that is about 100 tons per day
up and down, and that the present number of passengers is
also trebled, or that 60 per day are conveyed by the different
trains, we shall have some definite data upon which to esti-
mate the relative cost of conveying them by locomotives, or
by horse power on railroads, or by horse power upon common
roads.
Basing the estimate of rolling stock required upon the
data supplied by Mr. Brady in his report on the comparative


£
s.
d.
4 Engines at £3,000
12,000
0
0
4 Second Class Carriages
at £350.
1,400
0
0
4 Third Do.
at £250.
1,000
0
0
4 Brake vans at £250....
1,000
0
0
30 Waggons at £150
4,500
0
0
19,900
0
0
Say £20,000.
cost of haulage by steam and horse power, the cost of rolling
stock ■would stand thus ;
The charge then under the first head of interest of cost
of rolling stock will be, interest at 5 per cent, on £20,000 =
£I,OOO or £ll-2s. per mile of road.
The second and third heads are, in the accounts of
English railways, combined together, though data are given
by which the actual charges for locomotive power can be
separated from those for repairs and renewals.
On reference to these returns, it would appear that the
cost of locomotive power, inclusive of repairs, amounts, on
the English lines, to about one shilling per train mile, while
the repairs may be averaged at 5d. ; so that the actual cost of
locomotive power is in England about Id. per train mile.
On the Paramatta line, the returns show that the charge
for locomotive power, including repairs, was 23’518 per train
mile, and if we assume, what was, I believe, the case, that
the charge for repairs was unduly enhanced in the particular
period to which the return had reference, yet it is very
evident, that the charge for both working and repairs must
be much heavier here than in England. From the returns of
English railroads, it would appear that the charge of Id, per
mile for locomotive power would be divided between wages,
materials and superintendence, in the proportion of 2*27 to
the first, 4*37 to the second, and *36 to the third ; while on
the Paramatta line the charge for materials was 12*36 per
mile, or about three times the amount of the English charge,


£
s.
d.
Interest per mile
. 11
2
0
Locomotive power
. 95
0
0
Coaching charges and station expenses..
. 46
19
0
153
1
0
the item superintendence amounted to I*Bs, or six times that
in England, while the labour, including the charge for repairs,
was 19*308, or nine times the amount of the English charge.
Looking to the relative cost of labour here and in England,
we may assume, without much risk of error, that the charges
in this country will be about three times as heavy as those in
England, and, therefore, that the charge for locomotive
power would be 3s. per train mile, and if the train miles be
assumed to be equivalent to the number of miles actually
traversed by goods and passenger trains, running twice a
day, the charge will, for two trains per day, be 6s. per mile,
or for the year of 313 days £93-18$. or say £95. The fourth
item of station expenses averages, in England, about 11*85
pei train mile; on the Paramatta line the charge was 20*11,
and if we take 18*00, as the fair amount, the total charge
would be £46-19$. per mile. The cost, therefore, of working
the locomotive line will be—
The cost of traction upon a horse railway, may be infer-
red, so far as the goods traffic is concerned, from a return
which has been furnished to me by the Engineer of the
Australian Agricultural Company, Mr. Whyte ; as well as by
information obtained by me, relative to the working of a
contract system, previous to that now adopted.
I rom Mr. Whyte’s paper, it appears that the actual cost
of moving 18,565 tons of coal an average distance of P 963
miles, and of hauling back the empty waggons amounted to
2*83 per ton per mile one way, or 1*415 for each mile
travelled by the power ; in this charge, is included an item for
the repair of harness, and also an allowance, though appa-
rently too small, for the depreciation of horse stock.


£
5.
d.
6 Carriages for passengers,
at
£250 each
... 150
0
0
60 Horses at £35
... 2,100
0
0
18 Sets of Harness at £15
... 270
0
0
150 Goods Trucks at £100
.. 15,000
0
0
210 Horses at £25
0
0
180 Sets of Harness at £3-10s,.
.. 630
0
0
Say £25,000.
£24,750
0
0
By the returns formerly procured by me, it appears that
the contractor who supplied the whole power delivered 516
tons daily, which were equivalent to 1,418 tons drawn one
mile by 36 horses ; each horse, therefore, drew 39 tons net
weight, one mile daily, besides taking back the empty wag-
gon to the pits. Starting, however, from the data afforded
by these returns, we may infer that one horse will move from
50 to 60 tons daily over one mile of road, and as, according
to the supposition upon which the former calculation was
based, 100 tons have to be conveyed daily over each mile,
two horses per mile will be required for the goods traffic,
and, allowing for losses, accidents, &c •, horses per mile of
road would be a sufficient stock. The carriages or trucks for
goods would contain about three tons each, and about 150 of
these would be required for the conveyance of 100 tons daily,
over a distance of 90 miles.
For the passenger traffic of sixty persons, backwards and
forwards daily, four carriages would be required in constant
work, and two additional, to provide against contingencies.
These carriages would be drawn by two horses, and the
number of these required to secure the regular working of
the passenger traffic, would be, allowing for contingencies,
about 60; eighteen sets of harness would be wanted.
The capital expended in what may be termed the rolling
stock, would be —


Passengers’ Carriages
£
... 1,500
Goods trucks
.. 16,000
Harness
/ 270
I 630
10 per cent, on
£17,400
..£17,400
= 1,740
Horse, passengers
. 2,100
Horses,
Do. Goods
| 5,250
20 per cent. on.....
£7,350
. 7,350
1,470
Total repairs and renewals
Equal to £35-135.-4d. per mile of road.
£
s.
d.
4 Coachmen at £180
720
0
0
12 Grooms at £108
1,296
0
0
48 Horses keep at £50
2,400
0
0
£4,626
0
0
or £51-8s. per mile.
The interest of £25,000 at 5 per cent, would be £1,250,
£l3-185. per mile of road. Repairs and renewals of the
carriages may be put at 10 per cent, on the cost, as may also
that of the harness ; while the horse stock must be put at 20
per cent. The charge for repairs and renewals therefore
will be—
The cost of working the traffic so far as the goods are
concerned, has been shown to be rather less than 1*415 for
labour, maintenance of horses, shoeing, &c. Let it be put,
however, at 1 \d. per ton per mile, then, as 30,000 tons have
to be conveyed in the course of the year, the cost per mile
will be £lB7-105.
The cost of working the passenger traffic may be roughly
estimated as follows :


£
s.
d.
Interest per mile
13
18
0
Repairs and renewals
35
13
4
187
10 0\
238 18
0
Working 51
8 0 j
Total
288
9
4
Interest
Maintenance ...
Cost of working.
£
Turnpike
Road.
Railroad.
Horse.
Locomotive.
£. s. d
150 0 0
186 6 0
1,077 10 0
£ s. d.
175 0 0
179 3 0
300 0 0
£. s. d.
600 0 0
368 10 0
153 1 0
1,413 16 0
654 3 0
1,121 11 0
The charge thus for working will be as follows
The charge for station expenses will be trifling in com-
parison to that on a locomotive line, as all the arrangements
would be more analogous to those on the turnpike road. If,
therefore, the cost of working be put at £3OO per mile, this
will leave an ample margin for all charges.
The cost of the conveyance of goods on a turnpike road
has been put at 9£d. per ton per mile ; this, however, includes
the charge for tolls, which is supposed to be sufficient to pay
the cost of keeping the road in repair, and also the annual
interest of the money borrowed to construct it.
The charge for locomotive power would thus be reduced
to l\d. per ton per mile, which, for 30,000 tons, would give
£637- 10s. per mile for the goods traffic only. The cost for
passenger traffic would be about double that on the horse rail,
or £l4O per mile, giving a total of £l,o/7-10s. per mile foi
working expenses.
The general comparison between the cost of conveying
the given quantity of goods and passengers, by either of the
three kinds of conveyance, will stand as follows
r


An analysis of the above table will show, that, while on
the turnpike road, and on the horse railroad, the interest of
the first cost of the road will be paid by a charge on the traffic,
amounting to one penny per ton per mile on goods, and \d.
per mile on passengers, the charge on the locomotive railway,
to cover the interest of capital, will be 3 \d. per ton per mile
on goods, and 2d. per passenger per mile.
Taking, however, the last item, namely, the cost of
working, the charge on the turnpike road will be 7±d. per ton
per mile for goods, and per passenger per mile; (this
latter charge is too low, but I have been anxious not to exag-
gerate), on the horse railroad, the charge for working would
be per ton per mile for goods, and f d. per passenger per
mile; while on the locomotive line, the charge for working
would be less than one penny per ton per mile for goods, and
id . per mile for passengers. As the traffic increases upon the
road, the advantage which the horse road possesses over the
locomotive road, will diminish rapidly.
As the interest of capital expended is a constant quantity,
any increase in the traffic will diminish the charge, per ton or
per passenger, which will be required to pay this interest. It
is evident, however, that a large amount of business must be
done upon a railroad, in order to cover the fixed and perma-
nent charges upon it.
The fixed charges must, in this country, be heavier than
they are either in England or America, for labour is much
dearer here than in either of these two countries, and the inter-
est of capital is certainly higher than in England; though not,
probably, than it is in America. It becomes, then, a matter
of the utmost importance to us, in deciding upon the adoption
of some improved system of internal communication, to weigh
carefully the various circumstances which may operate in
developing such an interchange of products and people from
one part of the country to another, as will defray all the
charges upon such improved communication. The example of


England, of the United States of America, and of the North
American Colonies, are all held out to us as justifying the
assumption, that, where improved means of communication
are provided, traffic is sure to be created ; and to this, as a
general rule, lam quite prepared to assent; but the question
we have to consider is, what will be the probable amount of
such increase.
Now we may at once set aside the example of England
and the United States. The circumstances of those two coun-
tries are so diametrically opposed to those in which we find
ourselves placed, that to reason from that which has happened
in either of them from the construction of railroads, to what
will follow from the construction of similar works here, would
lead us into error. The position, however, of the British North
American Colonies is so far different from that of the mother
country, or the United States, as might induce a belief that a
system which has been applied with success in Canada, may
possibly answer here.
Is there, then, any such an analogy between the present
state and future prospects of New South Wales, and those of
Canada, as to justify us in expending upon our internal commu-
nications, a sum larger than our present necessities require, in
the confident expectation that, in a few years, the traffic upon
such lines of communication will increase to an extent sufficient
to enable us to reduce the charge for transport to a level with
those which would be sufficient to pay the whole charge upon
a cheaper system, but one fully adequate to our present wants.
The North American Colonies, extending, as they do,
from the Atlantic to Lake Superior, cover an area of 455,000
square miles, and support a population of millions. These
Colonies border for a length of about 1,800 miles upon the
United States of America, with which they carry on an
increasing trade, and the population of which amounts to
upwards of 30 millions. The communication of the North
American Colonies with England and Europe can be made in
ten days by steam, and in twenty-five or thirty by sailing


vessels. The land, especially that in the vicinity of lakes Erie
and Ontario, is of good quality, well calculated for the growth
of wheat, and other cereal crops, for which there is a ready
demand, either in the Colonies themselves, or in the United
States, or in England and Europe.
Land, therefore, especially that in the vicinity of rail-
roads, is eagerly bought up, and brought under cultivation, as
there is a certainty that, although the price of wheat may be
influenced to a certain extent by the quality of the harvest in
England, or on the continent of Europe, the value of the crop
n ill be sufficient, at all times, to remunerate a farmer who
pays ordinary attention to his land.
The construction of a railway, by lessening the cost of
conveying produce to market, encourages, both in Canada and
the United States, the settlement of the land in its vicinity;
thousands flock to avail themselves of the advantages thus held
out to them, and the result is an amount of traffic which is not
only sufficient to defray the cost of working the railway, but
also to pay the interest on its construction. If, however, the
settler in Canada had to depend upon the consumption of
Montreal and Quebec, that is, if he had not the certainty of a
better, or at all events, a larger market for his produce, the
amount of land disposed of would be much less, and the pas-
senger and goods traffic upon the railways would not be suf-
ficient to justify the cost of constructing them.
In New South Wales, the population, by the last Census,
nas 289,000, and the annual increase may be taken to be 8
per cent. This population is spread over an area of about
230,000 square miles. There is a large quantity of good land
in various parts of the Colony, well adapted for the production
of cereal and other crops; but the distance is too great to allow
the settler to look to the English and European market for the
disposal of his surplus produce. He has the markets of India
and China at no great distance, but these countries will not
take his wheat in exchange for the rice and tea which he pur


chases from them. He must, then, so far as the sale of cereal
produce is concerned, depend upon the home market; and
this, though the population is increasing rapidly, affords but
a limited demand. He may, it is true, if the cost of convey-
ing his produce to the coast be much lessened, compete with
the farmers of the adjoining Colonies in the market of Mel-
bourne, but the demand there is not large, nor is it perma-
nent, as the Government of Victoria is already taking steps
to construct railroads, and facilitate the means of communi-
cation throughout a country, much of which is admirably fitted
for the production of cereals.
In estimating, therefore, the increase which is likely to
take place in the existing traffic upon any given line of road,
we must not merely be able to say that it opens up a tract of
country admirably suited for farming operations, but we must
be prepared to show that there will be adequate inducements
to settlers to purchase and occupy such lands, productively, in
numbers sufficient to create a traffic for the railway.
In some parts of the country, as, for instance, in the
neighbourhood of Newcastle, there will be an increasing trade
in coal, which will be brought by the railroad to Newcastle,
as the port of shipment. In other parts of the country there
may be, and indeed there are, local sources of traffic, which
only require cheap means of conveyance to admit of a large
development; but the principal receipts of the railroads in
New South Wales, must, for many years to come, be derived
from the movement of pastoral and agricultural produce from
the interior, to the port of shipment, or place of consumption,
and supplies of different kinds, and of imported articles of
comfort or luxury, from the capital to the settler.
The pastoral products do not admit of any rapid develop-
ment ; though thoir extension is certain, and may be eventually
very great; and I have already shown that as the agricultural
products can only command a limited market, their increase
cannot be dependent upon to an extent sufficient to create a


traffic for any great length of railway. I am, therefore, of
opinion that the analogy between Canada and New South
Wales is not close enough to justify the inference that railways
will succeed here, because they have done so there.
The conclusion which I consider myself justified in draw-
ing from the facts and calculations exhibited in this paper are
as follows;
Ist. The cost of transport by a turnpike road is in
excess of that by a railroad, whether such road be worked
by horse power or steam.
2nd. The cost of steam power is much less than that
of horse power upon railroads, but this cheapness is, with a
limited amount of traffic, more than compensated for by the
increased cost of construction and maintenance, if such roads
be compared with those on which horse power may be used.
3rd. That the circumstances of the Colony are not
such as to lead us to expect so large a development of internal
traffic as would compensate, by the saving on the cost of
motive power caused by the employment of steam, for the
increased charge for the interest of capital, and maintenance
of road,
4th. That the railway on which horse power is used
would, under the present, and probable future circumstances
of the Colony for several years to come, be the cheapest means
of conveyance both for passengers and goods; and that it
would be, theiefoie, advisable to adopt it on all the main lines
of communication.


£
s.
d.
86 Horses at say £l per week
0
0
7 Drivers at £3
0
0
0
Grease for waggons
10
Boy for greasing
0
0
£62
10
0
APPENDIX.
RAILROADS.
RESULTS OF EXPERIMENTS AT NEWCASTLE.
Cost of 1$ miles near Newcastle including land, laying, original-
ly with wood, and relaying with iron rails, 35 lbs. to the yard, £9,500
or £6,332 per mile. The next mile cost .£l,BOO.
The contract price for the carriage of the coal from the pits to
Newcastle, and delivery on boardship, is at the rate of Ij. 3 d. per
ton, or, on an average, about 5j per ton per mile.
The lengths of the branches are 3, 2\ and 2 miles, but the same
price is paid for all. For this, the Contractor finds horses, harness,
drivers, grease, and men and boys attending the Staiths, but he does
not keep the waggons or the permanent way in repair. The Con-
tractor delivers about 516 tons daily, of which 260 tons come 2£
miles, and 256 come 3 miles, equal to 1,418 tons, drawn one mile.
To do this work the Contractor has 40 horses, four of which are kept
at Newcastle, to haul the coal up to the Staiths.
He employs seven drivers, five men at the Staiths, to assist in
shipping the coal, and four boys. In order to find the actual charge
for locomotive power, the four horses kept to work the Staith, and
the five men and four boys unemployed for the same purpose, should
be deducted from the establishment, the estimate for which will then
stand as follows :
for this sum 3,096 tons can be drawn from the pits to Newcastle, or
8,508 tons can be drawn one mile, the actual coat being I|, or a little
more, per ton per mile. To this, however, must be added—


£
s.
d.
36 Horses at £40
0
0
Harness for do, at £5
0
0
£1,620
0
0
£
Locomotive power
TutorARt
Sinking Fund
Supervision
Interest of Rolling Stock..
Repairs and replacement.,,
£5,133
Ist. Interest upon the capital of the Contractors, which may
be calculated as follows :
and this at 10 per cent, will amount to £162 per annum.
2d. Sinking Fund for re-placing stock, at 30 per cent, per
annum £486.
3d, Supervision or payment for Contractor’s labour, say
£5OO per annum.
4th. Interest of cost of rolling stock ; this stock for the con-
veyance of 120 tons of coal at each trip, would amount to 70 car-
riages, and if each carriage is put at £5O, this will give £3,500
interest upon this at 6 per cent. £2lO.
sth. Repairs and sinking fund, say 15 per cent, upon above
amount £520.
If all these items were added together, the amount will be as
follows
or say £IOO per week, for which, as has been shown before, 8,508 tons
can be drawn one mile. The cost, therefore, of conveying goods upon
a railway by horse power, may be put at 2’82, or rather more than 2f
per ton per mile, this includes taking the carriages back.
The experience gained by the working of the Newcastle coal
mines is sufficient to show the relative advantages of the different
kinds of roads. It appears that the coal was formerly brought into
Newcastle by carts along ordinary bush road, and three horses
brought in twenty tons per week. When a wooden tramway was
laid down four horses brought in 30 tons per day, or 180 tons
per week. When iron rails are substituted for the wooden tram,
five horses can bring in 100 tons per day, or 600 tons per week.


Steam,
Horse.
Interest
200
Traction
1 166
Maintenance of way
100
1,516
1,466
Thus, on a bush road, a horse will draw 7 tons per week. On a
wooden tram, a horse will draw 45 tons, and on an iron Railway 120
tons per week.
This is conclusive against the employment of wood, at all events,
as a tramway. The friction would possibly be less upon an edge rail
of wood, but still the difference between wood and iron would pro-
bably double the cost of traction, and altogether neutralize any bene-
fit which might be derived from the comparative cheapness of wood.
In Mr. Bell’s paper there is an estimate of the comparative cost
of horse and steam traction ; and there is no question but that, with
such an amount of traffic, steam power would be much .cheaper than
horse power. According to his calculation, the engine would have
to travel 288 miles per week. Now, the cost in England per train
mile, including repairs, &c., is Is. 3 d. per mile. The experience of the
Paramatta rail road gives, I believe, 4s. 6 d. per train mile. If we
assume 2s. 6d. as a fair price, looking to the great expense of every
thing in the Colony, 288 X 2'6 20 = £36, the cost per week of
locomotive power, &c,, and as 3,096 tons have been brought down,
the cost per ton will be 2'79 pence, or the cost per ton per mile
will be, as near as possible, 1 penny. This, however, does not include
interest upon rolling stock, including engines and carriages ;
neither does it provide for repairs and re-placements, or for super-
vision.* In fact, the cost of conveying about 160,000 tons per
annum would be so far as mere traction is concerned, by steam,
£666-135.-4d. per mile, and by horse power, £1,166-135.-4d. Against
this, however, must be placed the interest of the outlay on the con-
struction of the road; which, if put at 12,000 for the steam road,
and 4,000 for the horse road, would be £6OO and £2OO, and the
increased cost of maintenance of way, which for the steam road,
may be put at £250 per mile, and for the horse road at £IOO. The
comparison will therefore stand as follows ;
«
* In fact, it is the mere cost of locomotive power, and it must therefore be
compared with the horse power, which has been shown to cost rather more than
|d per mile.


Tons.
M.
Q.
F. Y.
LI. Yds.
From D Pitt
.. ..8,164
Length of
Railway.
2
0
0 42*
29,084,260
From E Pitt..,
Do.
2
i
1 21*
27,431,096
From F Pitt...
Do.
0
3
0 184
5,820,480
18,565
62,335,836
Average mileage per ton 1 ‘908.
Average
£ s. d.
Summary of Cost. Cost.
Haulage on 18,565 £ s. d.
m
tons at 3d. 232 1 3 1-53
390 bushels of maize at 5s.97 10 0
Cost of 4 0 1'21
12| tons of hay at £5 62 10 0
Added | of original
Run in paddock 9 15 0
stock for deprecia-
Horse shoeing bill ,...10 2 6
tion per annum... 13 7 3 -09
Saddling bill 4 6 6
429 12 6 2'83
184 4 0 or say in round numbers nearly 3d.
per ton.
Original cost of Stock and Plant.
£ s. d.
16 horses at £25 each
15 sets of harness and gears £70 52 10 0
427 10 0
With a smaller amount of traffic, such as is likely for many years
to pass over the Southern and Western roads, the comparison will be
much more in favour of horse power.
Particulars of the actual cost for traction of coals on the Aus-
tralian Agricultural Company’s Railway, near Newcastle, New South
Wales, from the Ist January to the 31st March inclusive, 1857.
The above quantity is delivered at the coal Staiths by contract,
including grease and oil, at the uniform rate of 3 d. per ton all
through, which also includes the haulage of the empty waggons back
to the pits ; making the cost for manual labour and lubrication alone,
to average 1'53 pence per ton each mile for the loaded waggons one
way.
The Company furnish horses, harness, and provender. Cost of
maintenance during three months.
(Signed) ROBERT WHYTTLE,
27th April 1857. Manager A, A, Co.'s Collieries.


05
to
03
to
Ot
- g
Distance.
05
o
o
O
03 S
s
3
Q-
w
p
et-
5
5d
05
o
*~i
p
3
CP
S
O
o H
3 . O
w
o
O
*-t
r-
£3
<D
o
? s’^sp
O
; 3 &
p
p-
£-
: g
: *<«
Or
ox
4^
H
CO
Ox
05
to
Ot
to
4“
o
3
Sundries.
Or
O
03
o
M
Ox
CO
-
r
H
00
CO
:
:
o
3
Grain.
Ox
Ox
OQ
M
•<r
*.
o
o
to
05
to
Ot
to
4-
00
4^
Total Tonnage.
Ox
03
o
M
Or
H
Rate
o
03
ier ton for
co
4“
O*
00
the whole distance.
Or
J35
to
4^
_co
Cost of Convey-
03
o
05
O
to
CO
8
ance.
o
Ox
O
o
o
o
o
O
O Jb
CO
-
_
to , 9s
Rate per ton per
00
1-
—
mile.
**,Co
00
M
to
Co
Cjt
00
to
CO
B
Distance.
o
CO
O
Or
o
p
t*
Q
h3
w
o
«o
f>
<
o
3
o
o
g
►<
o
£-
s
o
c?
3
H
f
T3
O
o
&
2-
p
5
p
c
g
p
3
cr
rr>
vs
§
*■*
a Sydr
from
Road
3
p
3
05
p
pt
00
H
o
o
o
o
b
o
00
o
00
o»
05
o
3
Sundries.
o
o
o
o
oo
o
4^
00
p
Or
JLTt
H.
CO
o
b
o
05
00
:
:
o
3
Grain.
Or
GO
o
o
p
CO
O
o
oo
*Co
o
o
o
go
00
b
05
Total Tonage.
C*
00
o
05
00
o
00
H
g.
Rate per ton for
"
CO
M
co
CO
Ot
the whole distance.
5
00
p
co
c>
_co
o>
£
vj
,00
Cost of Convey-
o>
b
o
bo
to
4*
b
ance.
u>
§
5
56
05
o
to
o
o
o
o
o
o
o
o
O J+5
to
to
_
1— 1 '
to
—
to
GO
Rate per ton per
-
00
mile
iHw
iHoo
*w»- •
Abstract showing the total tonnage, the rate per ton the distance conveyed,
and the cost of carriage for goods on the Western roads annually.
Average rate per ton per mile Is, 10c?.
(Signed) GOTHER K. MANN.
Abstract showing the total tonnage, the rate per ton, the distance conveyed,
and the cost of carriage for goods on the Southern roads annually.
Average rate per ton per mile Is. lit/.
October 1856, (Signed) GO THER K. MANN.


—
s
CO
O
co
co cr.
Distance.
Of
°
o
o
Of
O
o
O as
O
2
3*
CR
g
c
QQ
2
c
O
p
g
CD
f H
O
B
a;
o
aT
O
p
o
o'
s
3
EL
3*
CT5
*-*
E.3.2
pg£.
O
P
E-
6
o
w-
&
CD
i 2 5*
: EL
to
to
Jjl
JO
H
CO
o
GO
o
OS
4^
as
co
-I
0C
4*
4^
to
as
O
3
Sundries.
o
00
4-
o
4^
O
o
CO
jo
H
4^
O
I
0
s
Grain.
o
t»
JO
to
JJ1
to
to
-^1
o
00
o
as
4-
as
CO
4^
4w
to
as
Total Tonnage.
o
GO
4^
o
4^
O
o
4^
h>
to
H
o
CO
as
vl
CD
Of
00
!» fc.
Rate for the whole
o
p
•“
O
o
o
O
o
o
0 ?>
distance per ton.
Oi
o
as
4-
4^
as
CO
oo
Cost of Convey-
o
OS
Of
CD
to
bo
o»
O
00
o
OD t*>
ance.
°
O
as
o
o
to
o
O
o
O
O
o
o
O tr>
-
o
to
►— *
to
• 5°
Rate per ton per
■
, ■
mile
°
o
O
*4-
as
Of
*4*-*
o
to
*4-
O Q*
»0tv- •
Abstract showing the total tonnage, the rate per ton, the distance conveyed,
and the cost of carriage for goods on the Northern roads annually.
Average rate per ton per mile Is. B d.
Note.— The traffic from Warialda and Wellingrove does not pass through
Nunab and Cassilis, but comes upon the Northern road near Murrurundi.
The Wollombi traffic passes along about five miles of the Maitland road onlv.
(Signed) GOTIIER K. MANN.


SECTION III.
Tlie principles which regulate the comparison which has
been drawn, in the former sections of this paper, between the
cost of transport on different kinds of roads in Australia, are
of general application; and, looking to the fact that the
Government of India, although it has expended large sums upon
roads and railways, as well as upon canals, when opportuni-
ties of constructing these were afforded, has yet many thou-
sand miles of road to make, and fresh lines of communication
to open, I cannot but think that an enquiry into- the circum-
stances which influence the cost of transport in India, and a
comparison of the advantages presented by different modes of
communication, would be useful, not merely to the Govern-
ment, but to the capitalists who may be disposed to invest
money in works of this kind, and who, of course, would wish
to derive from such investment the largest returns.
Such an enquiry, and such an investigation will make a
very useful corollary to the conclusions deduced, in the former
sections, from English and Australian experience, and will, I
think, tend to prove that the local features of the country, the
character of its climate, the peculiarities of the people, and
the nature of their industrial system, influence, far more
largely than many are apt to think, the discussion of questions
which would seem, to most, to be simple matters of engineer-
ing experience.
Before, however, I enter upon this enquiry and compari-
son, I must premise that the facts which I propose to classify
and arrange, as the basis of any inferences I may draw, have
reference to the Presidency of Madras, which occupies by far
the largest portion of the southern extremity of the Penin-
sula of India. There is, however, a marked similarity be-
tween the state of things in the different Presidencies; and,
with some trifling allowances for local peculiarities, I think
that what I have to say about railroads in Madras, will be
found applicable to the whole of India.


GENERAL ASPECT OF THE COUNTRY.
Hie Peninsula of India extends from Cape Comorin in
latitude 8 N. to latitude 20° or 21° W., at which point its
width is about 14° of longitude or 800 miles or thereabouts.
A range of mountains from 6 to 8000 feet high runs
parallel to the Western Coast at a distance of about 50 or 60
miles from the sea. This range is broken through at one point
where there is a gap of about 40 miles in width, the height of
which is not more than 1,200 feet above the sea. The fall of
the ground to the westward is therefore rapid, while, speak-
ing generally, there is a gradual and much more gentle
slope to the eastward, which is interrupted, occasionally, by
abrupt secondary ridges rising to a height of 2 or 3000 feet-
Nearer the East Coast the land slopes gradually towards the
sea, at the rate of about 4 feet per mile, in great plains, where
there is but little to catch the eye, or to relieve the monotony
of the landscape. It follows, from what has been said above*
that the rivers flowing to the West Coast have short and
rapid courses ; though, as they flow through a narrow belt of
alluvial soil near the sea, they are often navigable for small
craft for some miles from the mouth. Those that flow to the
eastward have a much longer course, and, as they drain a
much larger area of country, they bring down, during the
rainy season, a very heavy body of water; as, however, the
supply is but temporary, as will be seen when I speak of the
climate, these rivers do not afford any facilities for water
communication in their unimproved state,
CLIMATE.
The position of the Peninsula, within the northern tropic,
exposes it to the action of the periodical rains. These are
modified in their action by the relation of the Peninsula to
the great mass of the continent from which it projects, and as-
sume the form of two distinct monsoons. The south-west-
ern, which is by far the most extensive in its action, commen-
ces about the middle of May, and, so far as the Peninsula of
India is concerned, expends its force principally upon the


West Coast, and the range of mountains parallel to it, where,
daring the months of Juno, July, August, and part of Sep-
tember, there is a steady down-pour with an occasional break ;
the average rainfall may be put at 180 inches.
Of course a large proportion of this water returns rapidly
to the sea on the West Coast; the effect being to lessen the salt-
ness of the sea to such an extent as to kill the fish, and all the
plants which are naturalized in salt water, for several miles from
the coast, and to cause thereby a most disagreeable putrescent
effluvium along the coast, and for three or four miles out to sea.
A portion of the rain of the south-west monsoon is dis-
charged upon the eastern slopes of the mountain rano-e, and
drains into the water-courses which form the heads of the
large rivers, such as the Godavery, Kistnah, and Cauvery,
which discharge themselves into the Bay of Bengal; causing
heavy floods in the lower portions of these rivers. In Octo-
ber the wind veers to the northward of east, and is called the
north-east monsoon. It brings with it the rain which it has
sucked up in the Bay of Bengal, and discharges it upon the
eastern slopes of the Peninsula. The amount, however, of
this discharge, which continues at irregular intervals through
November and December, is not nearly so great as that of the
south-west monsoon. The average of twenty years gives
thirty-one inches as the amount of rain at Madras during the
north-east monsoon, and further inland the average is much
less, not exceeding thirteen inches.
Rain may be said to fall from May to December in some
part or other of the Peninsula; but the or 5 months from
January towards the end of May, may be termed emphatically
the dry season.
No vegetation takes place, except in situations where
water can be found to irrigate the soil; the sky is cloudless,
there is nothing to impede the action of the sun upon the
ground, which is baked to the hardness of a brick where
the aluminous element prevails, and is reduced to a dust where
its consistency is less compact.


CULTIVATION.
From the foregoing description of the climate, it may be
inferred that the productiveness of the country depends alto-
gether upon the periodical rains. Should nature pause in her
action for a single season, the result of this short cessation
would be such a wide-spread famine as would destroy mil-
lions upon millions of people, and reduce the country to a
desert. Complaints are commonly made of the insufficiency
of the monsoon, and comparisons are drawn between the
existing state of things, and that of which history or tradi-
tion hands down the records, where the rain fell more
regularly and in larger quantities. lam disposed to give some
credit to these statements, and to trace the diminution in
the quantity of rain to the mode in which the country has
been denuded of timber.
To return, however, to the character of the cultivation as
influenced by the climate. On the West Coast the rain falls
with such regularity, and the atmosphere generally is so
moist, that few or no attempts are made to retain the water
discharged upon the range of mountains bordering the coast.
On the east side of these mountains, however, the case is vexy
different. Here the rain is scanty and irregular, and care is
taken to secure as much as possible of the drainage of the
country. In every water-course, or line of drainage, dams
will be seen following each other in x’egular succession, till
all, or nearly all of the drainage Avater is caught, and x’etained
for agricultural purposes; the surplus, which finds its way
into the rivers, is again stopped by anicuts or dams con-
structed aci’oss them, from distance to distance, and channels
are taken from above these dams by which the water of the
river is distributed as extensively as possible. When all this
has been done, there is but a small proportion of the cultivated
land which is susceptible of irrigation ; the remainder is de-
pendent upon the ordinary action of the rains, and is sown
with what are termed u dry cropsnamely, various kinds of
millet, and raghi, and also Avith oil seeds, gram, and other


leguminous plants. This dry cultivation imposes upon the
farmer the obligation of completing his agricultural operations
rapidly : he cannot plough before the first rains have softened
the ground; he cannot sow till he is pretty certain of conti-
nual showers of rain. The result is that he is compelled to
maintain, or at all events to employ, a pair of bullocks for
every five, or at the least, for every eight acres of land which he
cultivates, as he would not be able, with less animal power, to
carry through the various ploughings and hoeings which the
land demands. The crop springs up rapidly under the in-
fluence of rain, and of a sun nearly vertical, and 4s ready for
reaping in four or five months. It is then reaped, trodden
out by bullocks, as was done in the time of Moses, and win-
nowed by the wind in a manner as old-fashioned as the thresh-
ing. When all this has been done, the farmer, unless he has
land which he can irrigate, and from which he can get a
second crop, has no work for his bullocks during the five or six
months of the dry season; they are, consequently, employed
in conveying produce to market, and the farmer or cultivator,
leaving his land to take care of itself (which it does by pro-
ducing a plentiful crop of coarse grass and weeds) attaches
his bullocks to a light cart or bandy, and becomes a common
carrier, being satisfied, of course, with very small profits, as
every penny which he receives, in addition to the amount
required to maintain his bullocks, is clear gain.
POPULATION.
The population of the Madras Presidency may be put at
24,500,000, of which about 16,800,000 are employed in agri-
culture. About 450,000 are congregated in Madras and its
suburbs. There are, however, few large towns, though in each
district there are three or four towns, about which the popu-
lation congregates more densely than in the rural districts.
As a general rule, the population is more generally dif-
fused over the face of the country than is the case in England,
H


where the agricultural portion of the community forms a
much smaller portion of the whole than is the case in India.
WAGES.
A necessary result of this dissemination of the people,
and of their employment in the rude processes of agriculture,
is that wages are low every where. The capital expended by
the different Companies upon Railways and irrigation works,
has, by increasing the demand for labor, raised, locally , the
rate of wages; but, even now, in parts of the country a little
distant from the lines of Railway from 2£ Rupees to 4 Rupees
per month or from 2 \d. to 3c?. per day, may be considered as
the ordinary and average rate of wages; while, generally
speaking, the whole of the agricultural labour is paid for in
kind. The hire of a pair of bullocks and a man to drive them,
and to plough at the same time, is 5 annas or 7%d. per day.
ROADS.
Though men and cattle may be hired at a very low rate, as
shown above, yet the cost of transporting commodities must
depend very much upon the character of the road over which
the traffic is to pass. The main lines of road throughout the
Presidency are, generally speaking, in a fair state of repair,
much money having been spent upon them. The principal
obstacles to ready communications are the nullahs and water-
courses, many of which are not bridged; during the rainy
season these are torrents altogether impassable ; while in the
dry season, the river beds are filled with a loose drifting sand,
across which the ordinary carts or bandies, carrying about
half a ton, require to be assisted by many men. The cross
roads are in pretty good order, for the character of the traffic
which passes along them, indeed, during the dry season, roads
though deep in dust, do not oppose any great obstacle to the
movement of goods or produce. A great proportion of the
work of transport is accordingly done in that season; the cost
of conveyance being about 24 annas or 3 \d. per ton per mile.


Daring the rainy season the cost of conveyance is much
enhanced : in the first place, the roads are soft and damaged
by the rain; the bridges are carried away by floods, cul-
verts blown up, &c. The actual labour and risk of conveyance
is therefore much greater. In the second place, the rainy
season being the working period of the agriculturists the
whole of the animal power of the ryot is expended upon his
cultivation, and he cannot spare any to be employed upon
road traffic, and there is, therefore, less competition. To set
against this, however, there is less traffic at that time of
year, and I am disposed to consider the figures aijove given
as the cost of conveyance, and which were taken from a return
furnished by the Commissary General, of the contract price
for Government transport, to be a fair average for the whole
year.
RAILROADS.
Of these, the Madras, or South Western line is completed
from coast to coast, a distance of 406 miles. The North
Western, which is eventually to communicate with Bombay,
is open for a distance of 41 miles from its junction with the
Madras line. The Great Southern of India line is finished from
Negapatam to Trichinopoly, a distance of about 80 miles, but
it has yet to bo connected with the Madras line by an exten-
sion of about 80 miles, which will meet the South West line
at a point about 250 miles from Madras. A branch from the
Madras line, about 80 miles in length: leads to the Military
station of Bangalore : this is just completed. When the whole
of these lines are finished there will be a complete chain of
Railway communication connecting the principal Military
stations in this Presidency, with the great depot at Madras ;
and this latter will communicate directly with Bombay.
CANALS.
Of these there are but few. The Irrigation channels in
the deltas of the Kistnah and Godavery are used with great
advantage for local traffic; and there is a coast canal, con-


necting the backwaters of some of the rivers to the north and
south of Madras ; while the Irrigation Company has on hand
a project for completing a line of water communication between
Kurnool, on the Toombuddra, and the sea on the East Coast.
As a general rule, however, the country is altogether un-
fitted for this kind of communication, owing to the difficulty of
securing, either at or below the summit levels, a sufficient sup-
ply of water to furnish the lockage, and to meet the very large
demand on account of evaporation.
I have given this short sketch of the Madras Presidency,
and of the existing means of communication, in order to facili-
tate the comparison which it will be necessary to make between
the result of the Railway system here and elsewhere.
In the earlier sections of this paper, I have laid great
stress upon the indirect benefits arising out of the Railway
system ; which, both * n England and Australia, afford a full
compensation to the country at large for the capital sunk in
the Railway. The holders of Railway shares are losers, of
course, to the extent of the difference between the dividend
paid, and the ordinary interest upon the capital invested ; but
every man who travels by rail, and every man who has goods
to send to market, saves a very large percentage of the amount
he would have had to pay, had his means of communication
been limited to turnpike roads.
In India, however, so far as the conveyance of goods is
concerned, the indirect benefit is by no means so great as that
which is enjoyed by English or Australian merchants. Here
the cost of moving goods is about 2|d. per ton per mile on
the road, while on the rail it may be put at 1 \d; that is, the
cost per rail is to that per road as 2 to 5, while in Hew South
Wales it is as 1 to 4, and in England 1 to 5.
The benefit to travellers in India is very great; the facili-
ties afforded by the Railway have made thousands travel, who
in former times never dreamed of moving from their homes.


Still, however, the poverty of the people, the very low wages
which they receive, taken in connection with the fact that a
very large proportion of such wages is paid in kind, would
seem to point to the conclusion that years must elapse before
any very great extension of passenger traffic will take place,
except in the vicinity of large towns. At the present low fare
of | of a penny per mile for 3rd class passengers, the Madras
cooly Avould only be able to travel miles for his daily
wages; while an English labourer would earn enough in one
day to carry him 30 miles. A reduction in the Madras rates
would, I have no doubt, increase the number of passengers; but
it is very questionable whether it would increase the net
receipts. If, indeed, the cost of working the Railway in India
bore the same ratio to the cost of working in England, as the
rate of wages in India does to that in England, the lowness of
the Madras rate would not have much influence on its net
receipts; but in India the cost of freight has to be added to
that of the Coal or Coke used ; the wages of skilled labour, as
Engine Drivers, &c., are higher than in England; and though
the ordinary labour employed about the stations, and on the
maintenance of way, is cheaper than in England, it is not
cheaper in proportion to the difference of wages, for one
Englishman will probably do the work of at least three Natives.
On the whole, it will, I think, hardly admit of a doubt that
the amount of traffic required to pay the interest of the capital
expended upon the construction of the Railway, as well as to
defray the costs and charges of maintenance of way, and of
locomotive power, must be far greater in India than in Eng-
land and elsewhere.
Now the interest of capital is one of the heaviest charges
against the proceeds of Railway traffic, as has been shown in
the earlier sections of this paper; and when the traffic is com-
paratively light, and not likely to increase to any great extent,
it may be more to the advantage of the Government, and of
the country generally, that a description of road should be


constructed which, involving a smaller outlay of capital, but
requiring a somewhat more costly description of locomotive
powei, would, at a charge little, if at all, in excess of that of
the Railway, furnish a return sufficient to keep the road in
thorough repair, pay the interest of the capital expended upon
its construction, and provide an amount of tractive power fully
adequate to the wants of the people, though the time expended
would, of course, be very much in excess of that required by
the locomotive line.
I piopose, then, in the remainder of this section, to
investigate carefully the relation between the outlay and
the returns upon various kinds of roads in the Presidency of
Madras ; namely, the Railway, worked by locomotive engines;
the Railway worked by animal power; and the macadamized
road. The first step towards this comparison must be the
determination of the amount of passenger and goods traffic
which is to be taken as a standard quantity, and in order to
simplify the calculations, and, indeed, to substitute matter of
fact, for matter of inference, I propose to take the amount of
traffic upon some given line, or portion of a line of existing
Railway, as this standard.
The Madras or South West line of Railway, extending
from Madras to Beypore, a distance of 406 miles, partakes too
much of the character of a great Trunk line to justify the
adoption of the whole, or of any portion of it, as a standard
of comparison, whether as to outlay, or as to the amount of
traffic ; but the North West line, or the portion of it already
completed, viz., 41 miles, may be fairly looked upon, at pre-
sent, in the light of a branch ; and an enquiry into the cost of
moving the passengers and goods, stated to have passed over
this line, by some more simple system of conveyance, will
afford satisfactory data as to the relative advantages of Rail-
ways or other roads.
I may observe that the Madras Railway, though it only
paid, during the first half of 1863, interest to the amount of


*66 per cent, or 13s. Id. per hundred pounds of capital expended
upon the whole line , did, I have no doubt, pay the full interest
of five per cent, upon the cost of the 40 or 50 miles nearest to
Madras ; but it would be difficult, if not impossible, to attempt
to deal with the line in sections, and to attribute to each its
fair share of expenditure and receipts. It is only necessary to
say that, with an amount of traffic equal to 595,000 passen-
gers, and 96,000 tons of goods in the half year, the amount of
interest was only, as stated above, '66 per cent, for the half
year, so that 1,200,000 passengers and about 200,000 tons of
goods would only pay the cost of traction, of maintenance of
way, and per cent, upon the outlay of capital.
The following is an abstract of the nature and amount of
the traffic on the North West line, for the half year ending
30th June 1863; and the numbers given will, when doubled,
from the standard amount of traffic upon which the calcula-
tion of the cost of conveyance on the different kinds of roads
will be based ; the actual cost of the working of the Railway
being taken.
Passengers.
Ist Class 194 x 2= 388
2d Do 1,411 = 2,822
3d Do 75,999 =--151,998
Goods.
Tons 15,711 x2= 31,422
The first and second class of passengers will be merged
into one of say 3,220. The 2nd class of passengers will con-
sist of 152,000, and the goods will be taken as 32,000 tons.
I will now proceed to enter upon a detailed examination of the
cost of construction, of maintenance of way, and of locomotive
power upon the macadamized road, upon the Railway for
animal power, and upon the Railway for locomotive power,
with reference to the above amount of traffic.


Ist. MACADAMIZED ROAD.
CONSTRUCTION.
The data as to the cost of constructing such a road as this
have been furnished by the Public Works Department, and
the amount given below may be considered a fair average of
the cost of such roads throughout the principal parts of the
Presidency.
Width of road 30 feet.
Width of metalling 24 ~
£ s. d.
Cost of earthwork 166 14 0
Do. of metalling 163 16 0
Bridges and Culverts 302 14 0
Sundries 40 0 0
£673 4 0
If an addition be made to this sum for the cost of superin-
tendence, &c., bringing it up to £750 per mile run, this will
be an ample allowance for any contingency.
2nd, RAILWAY FOR HORSE POWER.
CONSTRUCTION.
The cost of the earthwork, and of the bridges and cul-
verts, would be rather less on the railroad than on the maca-
damized road; for, while it is not intended to modify the
gradients in any way, or to add to the cuttings and embank-
ments, except on very special occasions, the width of the road
may be less. Ido not, however, propose to make any deduc-
tions on this account, but shall assume the cost of the earth-
work and bridges and ballasting, at the same sum as given
for the macadamized road, viz., £750 per mile; setting the
metalling against the ballast of the Railway. The cost, there-
fore, of the railroad will be found by adding to the cost of
the macadamized road, that of the purchase of rails, chairs,
and sleepers, and that of the labour of fixing them.


lii the second section of this paper, I have assumed that a
rail of 35 to the yard would be required ; this was the weight
of the rail used at first on the Manchester and Liverpool line ;
but it seems to me that, for horse traction, a rail of 28 lbs. to
the yard would be amply strong enough ; and as 2000 yards,
or an addition of 240 yards to the mile, will be sufficient to
cover all sidings, &c., 2x28x2,000=112,000 lbs., or 50 tons
per mile, will be the weight of the rails. These can be deliv-
ered at Madras at £B-10-0 per ton, and an additional 30 shillings
per ton, making a total of £lO per ton, will cover the charge for
conveyance, so that £5OO will be the cost per mile of the rails
delivered upon the road. Timber sleepers have been found to
decay rapidly in this climate; I should therefore lay much
Greater stress than I have done in the description of Austra-
lian Railways, and upon the employment of stone blocks as
supports for the rail: in many parts of this Presidency, when
the gneiss crops out on the surface, the stone block would be
far cheaper in first cost, and far more durable than any
other description of sleeper; but, as these may not be attain-
able generally, I propose to allow for the use of the iron pot
sleepers, which have been employed on the Railway. For the
horse traction line these may be made lighter than for the
locomotive line, but I propose to allow for the same weight
and price, that is £1 per pair of sleepers with the connecting
tie rod. I shall allow, however, for a bearing of five, instead
of four feet: the cost, under these conditions, of chairs and
sleepers will be £1,200 per mile.
The cost of laying the railway may be put as on the
locomotive line, at 4 \d per yard run, the cost for 2,000 yards
would therefore be £37-10-0.
In order to make the action of this railroad "perfect, it
should be provided with a line of Telegraph; and the cost of
this, judging from the amount expended upon that on the
Madras line of railroad will be £9O per mile.
I


£
s.
d.
Earthwork including Ballast or
metal. 830
10
0
Bridges, Culverts, &c
302
10
0
Rails
500
0
0
Chairs and Sleepers
1,200
0
0
Fixing Rails
37
10
0
Telegraph
90
0
0
Stables and rest Houses
50
0
0
Sundries
40
0
0
Superintendence, &c.„
76
0
0
£2,627
0
0
1
!
.
Cost per mile.
Interest.
£ s. d.
£ s. d.
Macadamized road
750 0 0
37 10 0
Railroad for animal power
2,627 0 0
131 7 0
Railroad for steam power
o
o
o
o
tH
600 0 0
The whole cost of this railroad for animal power per
mile will bo as follows :
LOCOMOTIVE RAILWAY.
The cost of this may fairly be put at the same rate as
that charged for Railways in New South Wales, namely,
£12,000 per mile : this has been the cost of the South West
line, and it will in this case, include the cost of the rolling
stock required to work the amount of traffic taken as the
standard. The comparison, therefore, between the capital
expended per mile upon the different kinds of roads, and the
annual charge on account of interest will be as follows :


The next matter for consideration will be the cost of
maintenance of way, that is, the annual outlay required to
maintain the road in a state of thorough repair.
This must, of course, so far as the macadamized road
is concerned, depend upon the amount of traffic, while the
quality of the materials employed will have some action upon
the annual charge. A fair approximation, however, may be
arrived at by a reference to the amount commonly allowed
for maintenance upon the great trunk lines of road in this
Presidency, and 300 Rupees, or £3O per mile, would be con-
sidered sufficient for a road upon which the standard amount
of traffic is conveyed. The cost of repairs upon a road over
which 1,872 vehicles pass per day, has, in an average of five
year, amounted to £ll9-14-9.
In order to be on the safe side, therefore, I propose to
allow £55 per mile for the maintenance of the macadamized
line of road in thorough repair.
On the road for animal power, an allowance must be
made for the wear and tear of rails and sleepers. The actual
wear of the road itself will be very much less of course than
that of the macadamized road: for the iron rail takes the action
of the wheel; if, then, the rails and sleepers are renewed in
twenty years, one-twentieth of the whole cost may be pro-
vided as an annual charge; and as this cost is £1,700, one-
twentieth of that sum will he £BS. One-half of the ordinary
sura of £3O will be sufficient to cover the cost of other repairs;
so that 85 + ls=£loo will cover the cost of the maintenance
of the Railway for animal power.
The maintenance of way upon the Railway for steam
power must necessarily include an allowance for,the renewal
of rails, chairs, &c., and by taking the duration of these at
twenty years, as in the Railway for animal power, an advantage
will be given to the locomotive line ; as the action of the
heavy engine, going at the rate of from 20 to 30 miles per
hour, must wear away the rail much more rapidly than the


£
s.
d
Renewal of Rails and Sleepers
150
0
0
Labour, Ballast, &c..
100
0
0
Superintendence
5
0
0
£225
0
0
Macadamized
Road.
Railroad,
animal power.
Railroad,
steam power.
£
s. d.
£
s. d.
£ s. d.
Interest
37
10 0
131
7 0
600 0 0
Maintenance
55
0 0
100
0 0
255 0 0
Total
•
92
10 0
231
7 0
855 0 0
light and slow action of the animal power. Assuming, then,
5 per cent, to be the annual deterioration of the rail and
sleepers, and the cost, as on the Madras line, to be £3OOO per
mile, the annual charge for renewal of rails and chairs will be
£l5O.
The other items under the head of maintenance are
grouped together in the returns, and the cost may be put
on an average at about £IOO per annum per mile, while the
charge for superintendence may be put at £5. The cost of
maintenance of way on the steam power line will therefore
be as follows :
The annual charge upon the three descriptions of road
under the head of interest of capital, and maintenance of
way, will be as shown in the accompanying table.
Having thus arrived at the cost of constructing the differ-
ent lines of road, as well as at that of maintaining them in a
good state of repair; all that remains to be done is to deter-
mine the actual cost of traction upon each. To do this,


however, would involve the solution of a variety of very com-
plicated questions. It will be far more simple, therefore, to
show, for the ordinary roads and for the existing railroad,
the actual charge for the conveyance of passengers and goods.
In the case of the Railway, the returns show the actual charge
for locomotive power under several different heads; while
on the macadamized road, the contract price per passenger
or per ton of goods includes not only the charge for power,
but a variety of other items to which I shall allude here-
after.
With reference to the Railway for animal power, I pro-
pose to submit a detailed estimate, on a liberal scale, of the
cost of working it, as, in this country, I cannot obtain any
direct information to guide me.
The cost of conveying goods upon the ordinary roads has
been shown to be 3| per ton per mile. This sum includes the
interest upon the first cost of the vehicle and the cattle ; the
maintenance in repair of the vehicle; the maintenance of the
cattle, and the hire of the persons employed to drive them ;
it will also include a premium of insurance and upon the car-
riages and cattle, so that they may be replaced in case of
destruction or death by accident or disease. It also includes
or should include, some premium of assurance against the risk
incurred as a carrier, and who is responsible for the goods
under his charge. In addition to all these, it must include such
a fair amount of profit as the Contractor has a right to expect,
besides the simple interest on his capital.
The charge for conveying Ist class passengers may be put
at 6d. per mile. This is arrived at by taking the cost of con-
veyance, by the Transit Company, from Tripatore to Bangalore,
a distance of 80 miles ; the transit is capable of accommodat-
ing two persons inside, and a servant on the box by the driver.
Each person may take 40 lbs. of baggage, and the total charge
by the Company is 40 Rupees, or 80 Shillings, that is one
Shilling per mile, or sixpence for each passenger.


£
5.
d.
3,220 at 6c?.=
80
10
0
152,000 at 1 =
633
6
0
32,000 at 3| =
600
0
0
Total...£1,313
16
0
£
s.
d.
Locomotive Department.
1,906
5
H
Fuel
12
0
Coaching
1
Oi
Tickets
2
Repair of vehicles
116
2
5|
Electric Telegraph
11
9
0
General charges,
6
6
Total...6,476
18
6|
A class of passengers analogous to the third class on
the Railway is conveyed to and from places in the vicinity
of Madras, at a reasonably rapid rate, in vehicles drawn
by bullocks or ponies; each of these vehicles is capable of
containing four people, and the rate of charge varies from
2 id. to 3d. per mile for the whole vehicle ; taking the largest
sum, the cost per mile for each passenger would be \d. ; but
it w*ould be safer to estimate the average cost at Id. per mile
per passenger, and this may be taken as a fair charge for such
work in any part of the Presidency ; as the Madras prices are
probably in excess of those of the country districts. The cost
then of conveying 3,220 first class and 152,000 second class
passengers and 32,000 tons of goods will be as follows :
The returns for the North West Railway, for the same
amount of traffic, exhibit the expenditure under the various
heads of classification, as shown in the following table:—
This sum, divided by 41*25, the length of the line will
give 157-0-3| as the cost of conveying the whole of this traffic
over one mile of Railway. No attempt is made to distinguish
the actual cost of conveying the different classes of passengers


£ £
s.
d.
3 Carriages
...at 250= 750
0
0
12 Horses
...at 45— 540
0
0
10 Sets Harness..
... at 10= 100
0
0
Total...£1,390
0
0
or of goods ; in fact any attempt of the kind would merely be
a matter of guess work. The above may be taken as facts ,
which do not involve any calculation.
I have now, however, to form an estimate of the cost of
conveying the same quantity of goods, and the same number
of passengers, along a Railway by means of animal power.
The number of first class passengers has been put at
3,220, or, roughly, 10 per day, or 5 each way. To convey
these, one first class carriage would be required, which would
travel at the rate of 10 miles per hour. It would be drawn
by two horses,, and would be capable of accommodating 16
passengers. The distance of 41’25 miles would be divided into
five stages, each pair of horses going a stage out and a stage
back, or about 16 miles per day, a spare carriage would be
required and a spare pair of horses.
The capital expended would be—
152,000 second class passengers divided by 365, will give 416
as the daily number conveyed both ways. It will, however,
be necessary to reckon upon some extra pressure occasionally ;
and carriage accommodation must be provided for, say, 240
each way, or 480 altogether. Each carriage will contain 30
passengers, and will be drawn by two horses at the rate of
about 6 miles per hour; travelling the same distance as the
horses drawing the first class carriages.
The total number of carriages and horses required for the
actual work will, therefore, be 16 carriages, and 80 horses;
but it maybe as well to estimate for 20 carriages and 100
horses.


£
£
5.
d.
20 Carriages
250
=5,000
0
0
100 Horses
40=
=4,000
0
0
16 Sets Harness...
10
= 160
0
0
Total...
£9,160
0
0
£
s.
d.
£
s.
d.
40 Carriages at
100
0
0 =
4,000
0
0
500 Bullocks at
7
10
0 =
3,250
0
0
Total..
.7,250
0
0
£
s.
d.
1st class passengers
1,390
0
0
2d class ,,
9,160
0
0
Goods
0
0
Say £18,000.
Total...£17,800
0
0
The capital expended, then, upon rolling stock and
animal power will be—
32,000 tons of goods may be put at 100 tons per day, or 50
tons each way.
Three tons may be allowed for each truck, and 34, there-
fore, would be required ; each would be drawn by three bul-
locks, 6 extra trucks might be allowed to meet casualties ; and
a few extra bullocks should be purchased. As the daily
journey of a bullock may be put at ten miles, the distance of
41-25 would be divided into four stages ; so that 12 bullocks
would be required for each truck, 40x12=480 would be in
daily use, or say 500 to cover contingencies.
The trucks ought not to cost more than £lOO each, and
the bullocks £l5 the pair.
The capital, therefore, expended upon the rolling stock
and animal power for the goods traffic will be—
The total amount of dead and live stock required for the
conveyance of passengers and goods along a Railway worked
by animal power would be as follows :


£ £
s.
d.
Interestupon£ 18,000at5 per cent.
= 900
0
0
Wear and tear of carriages and re-
pairs, 15 per cent, on
9,750 = 1,462
10
0
Cost of re-placing horses and bul-
locks, 15 per cent, on
7,790 = 1,168
19
0
Repairs and re-placing harness, 20
per cent, on
260 = 52
0
0
Keep of 112 horses, at £24 each....
= 2,6-88
0
0
Keep of 500 bullocks, at £8 each...
= 4,000
0
0
Hire of 20 coachmen, at £50 each.,.
= 1,000
0
0
Hire of 166 bullock drivers, at
£10 each
= 1,660
0
0
Repairs of stables, at 5 per cent, on
2,000 = 100
0
0
Telegraph, &c., charges as on loco-
motive line
= 11
9
0
General charges, including Clerks,
&c.,
= 442
11
0
Total 13,485
9
0
Interest
Macadamized
Hoad.
Railroad for
animal power.
Railroad for j
steam power, j
£ 5. d.
37 10 0
55 0 0
1,313 16 0
£ s. d.
131 7 6
100 0 0
302 12 10
£ s. d.
600 0 0
255 0 0
157 0 3f
Maintenance
Cost of working....
1,406 6 0
534 0 4
1,012 0 3|
The annual charge may be estimated as follows :
This sum, divided by the total distance 41'25 miles, will
give the charge per mile for locomotive power £302-12-10,
and the general comparison between the cost of conveying the
standard number of passengers and tons of goods per mile of
the three kinds of road will be as follows :
K


The above relation between the total charge upon each
description of road approximates closely to that which was
shown to exist in Australia under circumstances widely differ-
ing from those which obtain in India, though there is a
marked difference in the items which make up this total.
I have, in calculating the cost of working the animal power
Railway, made allowances for a variety of extra expenses;
and I feel confident that the sum shown in the above table will
be ample to cover the whole cost of working the line, and of
paying an interest of 5 per cent, upon the capital expended.
Under these circumstances, it is evident that, until upon any
given line of road the amount of traffic very far exceeds that
which passed over the North West line of railroad in the first
half of 1863, it will be far cheaper to employ animal power
than steam in the movement of passengers and goods.
It remains to be seen what charge it will be necessary
to impose upon the traffic, in order to cover the whole of the
charges upon the road; namely, interest of capital, mainte-
nance of way, and cost of transport. An analysis of the cost
of conveying the different descriptions of traffic will show that
the following is pretty nearly the ratio of the outlay upon each
First class passenger -066
Second class do -430
Goods *504
and if the whole charge of £534 per mile be divided in these
proportions between the different heads of traffic, the charge
upon the first class passenger must be such as would return
£35-4-10£, that upon the second class, such as would yield
£229-12-4|, and that upon goods such as would give £269-2-B|.
Now the charge of £35-4-10£ divided by the number of
first class passengers, viz., 3,220, would give 2*6 pence as the
charge per head per mile. In the same way, divid-
ed by 152,000, the number of second class passengers, would
give 1-38 farthings, as the exact charge per head per mile;
while £269-2-8| divided by 32,000 would give 2*olß pence as


£
s.
d.
1st class passengers
.. 137
10
0
2nd Do.
.. 395
16
8
Goods
.. 275
0
0
Total...
...£808
6
8
the charge per ton per mile. A first class passenger, however,
might very fairly be charged at the rate of 3 pence per mile,
and a second class at a half-penny, while the charge for goods
might be put at per ton per mile; at these rates, with
the standard amount of traffic, the gross returns would be
£556 A 8-4, or £22-18 in excess of the amount shown above
to be sufficient to cover the interest of capital, maintenance of
way, and cost of conveyance. Provision, however, has been
made for the conveyance of upwards of 11,000 first class pas-
sengers, 190,000 second class, and 44,000 tons with-
out any extra charge; and should the traffic increase to this
extent, the returns at the rates mentioned above would be,
And the profit upon the capital expended, which, at the rate of
£2,627 per mile of road for construction, and £lß,ooo-r41*25
or £436 for live and dead stock, would amount to £3,063,
would not be less than 13 percent.
The fair conclusion to be drawn from what has been
stated is, that with an amount of traffic larger than that which
is likely to pass over most of the feeders of the Hallways now
in progress, a Railway worked by animal power would be a
much cheaper mode of communication than either a macada-
mized road, or a Railway worked by steam power.
If, however, this would be the case when the traffic is
already heavy upon the line of road, the advantages of animal
power over steam would be still more marked when the traffic
is comparatively light, and requires to be developed gradually.
A Railway worked by steam must be provided with engines
of power sufficient to drag the largest train over the steepest
gradient on the line : and though the consumption of fuel is,


to a certain extent, proportioned to the load the engine has
to convey, yet, as this load is in very great measure composed
of the dead or unprofitable weight of engines and carriages, the
saving of fuel is not very great; while the other items which
make up the working expenses, are in great measure indepen-
dent of the load, and form a mileage charge.
With a Railway worked by animal power the case is
different; here the power required is strictly in proportion to
the load; no more horses or bullocks are kept than will be
sufficient to meet the demands of the public for conveyance ;
and if these demands are casual or intermittent, arrangements
can easily be made to meet the casual portion of the demand
without the expenditure of capital, or the imposition of a
permanent charge upon the promoters of the line of Railway.
Again, the power of a locomotive engine must be proportioned
to the maximum effort it has to make; that is, it must be
competent to overcome the steepest gradient in the line with
a full train behind it ; it must, therefore, have an amount of
power more than sufficient to do the work of the more level
portions of the line; in fact, it is necessary to have an engine
of 100 horse power, which it might have to exert for a mile
or two; while an engine of 50 horse power would be amply
sufficient to do the remainder of the work.
This is not the case with a Railway worked by animal
power; if there be a hill too steep to be surmounted by a
carriage drawn by the ordinary team of horses or bullocks, the
simple plan is to have a spare pair at the bottom to help the
carriages over the hill. This, however, will seldom be
necessary with horse teams ; for a horse has a reserve of
muscular energy, which enables him to exercise, for a short
time, a much greater amount of power than is wanted for his
ordinary work.
It is not, of course, probable, that the ratio between the
passengers and goods traffic, which I have assumed as the
standard for calculation, will obtain upon ordinary branch


lines. The passengers traffic will be less than the standard,
while the goods traffic will exceed it; looking, however, to
this fact that I have estimated the cost of the rolling stock
and the animal power, at a high figure, and have been very
easy in my demands upon the animal power, it is more than
probable that, when worked by a Company or an individual,
the charge of 1 \d. per ton per mile will be found sufficient
to cover all expenses, and to give an interest upon the capital
expended of at least 5 per cent.
I think, then, that I am justified in applying to by far
the larger number of branches from the main lines of Railway
in India; the following conclusions which are very nearly
identical with those which are expressed, in the second section
of this paper, with reference to Australian Railways.
Ist. That the cost of transport upon a macadamized
road is largely in excess of that upon a railroad, whether such
railroad be worked by animal or steam power.
2nd. That the actual cost of steam power is much less
than that of animal power upon railroads, but that this cheap-
ness is, with a limited amount of traffic, more than compen-
sated for by the increased cost of construction and maintenance
of the railroad worked by steam.
3rd. That the circumstances of the country are not
such as to admit of so large a development of traffic upon the
branch lines of railroad as would compensate, by the saving
in the cost of motive power, for the increased charge under
the heads of interest of capital, and maintenance of way, con-
sequent upon the adaptation of the road for steam power.
4th. That, as a general rule, it would be far'cheaper,
and, therefore, more advantageous in every respect, to con-
struct the branch lines of Railway with a view to their being
worked by animal power.
W. T. DENISON.


RECENTLY PURL IS HE [)/
Abhe Dubois, * * . -yu
On the Character, Manners, Customs of the People in India omd of their
institutions, Religious and Civil, Second Edition. Price 18 Rupees.
... , Norton’s law of Evidence. , ’
(fourth edition.) ; ;
The whole been very carefully revised, the Index enlarged, recent
Cases added, the Stamp Act noticed, and the work brought fully up to the
state of the Law at the present day. Price 15 Rupees, stiff cover ;
half bound 17 Rupees.
Ward’s v r iew of the History, Literature and Religion of the
Hindoos.
Complete in one large volume, illustrated with 6 richly coloVcd lithographs of
the principal Indian Deities with Index. Price 14 Rupees.
Herklofrs Quanoon-e-Islam.
By Jaffitr Shnrrecf, a Native of the Deccan, composed under the direction of,
and translated by G. H. Herklots, M. d., Surgeon on the Madras Establish-
ment, with a few new illustrations. Price 12 Rupees.
The Institutes of Menu,
By Professor Houghton, third edition, with copious Index, in small Bvo.
volume. Price 10 Rupees, by Book post Ks. 10-8.
BOOKS IN THE PRESS.
I.
Moor’s Hindu Pantheon, / ;
Condensed and Annotated in one volume. Price to Subscribers 18 Rs., Non-
Subscribers 21 Rs. ; will be ready in October,
IT. - C
Colehrooke’s Digest of Hindu Law,
To be completed in two volumes with Index. Price to Subscribers 25 Rg„
Non-Subscribers 28 Rs. ; Volume I ready, the 2nd volume nearly readv
111.
Macnaghten’s Hindu Law.
Principles and Precedents of Hindu Law, one volume. Price to
t ’Subscribers 12 Rs, ; approaching completion.
iv. V
Mayne’s Criminal Law.
Principle and Practice, 2nd Edition.
J. HIGGINBOTHAM,
<> / Publisher,
