

Robert Browning:
His Mind & Art.
The Hon. H. B. HIGGINS, K.C., M.P




LITERATURE SOCIETY OF MELBOURNE.
Occasional Papers.
ROBERT BROWNING:
His Mind and Art.
No. 5.




Robert Browning;
His Mind and Art.
Presidential Address delivered to the Literature Society
of Melbourne, at the Athenaeum Hall, Collins
Street, on Thursday Evening, the
10th of May, 1906.
BY
The Hon. H. B. HIGGINS, K.C, M.P.
Melbourne:
The Atlas Phess (E. Newlands),
Block Place.




ROBERT BROWNING:
HIS MIND AND ART.
The value of a poet lies in what he sees in life. The
value of a discourse about a poet must lie, I suppose, in
what the speaker sees in the poet. For my part, I cannot
claim any qualification for the task of lecturing on Brown-
ing except this —that for some quarter of a century I have
found unfailing refreshment and stimulus in his works
in such hours of relaxation as have been afforded by a
busy life. The warmth and colour, the passion and
human sympathy, of Browning’s poems, afford, perhaps,
a much-needed corrective to the sober, cold severity of
the law. To reason out what a testator intended in cir-
cumstances which he never contemplated, or to deter-
mine the precise meaning of the word “ bung ” in a licens-
ing Act, is useful, no doubt, for purposes of social order,
and is often a highly intellectual exercise. But the
complex nature of man needs also other sustenance.
Browning gives you, even if nothing else, all the human
interest that could be given by a library of novels ;
and he never leaves you with a bad taste in your
mouth, or with the feeling that you have been
wasting your time.
The life of Browning covered 77 years—lßl2 to 1889 —
an epoch of unprecedented development in mechanical
arts, in science, in the settlement of new lands. When


he was born, the echoes of the French revolution were
still rolling along the world ; and during his life the
principles of that revolution, and especially the proposal
to enfranchise the masses, were taking root in practical
politics. Browning witnessed the Tractarian movement,
the Essays and Reviews debate, the liberation of Greece
and of Italy, the downfall of two Napoleons, the unification
of Germany, the gold rush to California and to Australia,
the publication of the works of Strauss, of Renan, of
Charles Darwin. His book reflects the unrest and
the keen speculative ardour of the nineteenth century.
Probably, in the course of years, when the controversies
of that century have passed away, a considerable portion
of Browning’s writings will lose their interest, except to
the very few. But his great theme is the human heart;
and that theme is not likely ever to become flat or un-
profitable.
A poem, like every work of art, must have charm ;
but the charm may lie in the ideas as well as in the literary
form. There is a tendency sometimes to refuse the name
of poetry to words which do not soothe the ear, and flatter
the senses, andTo claim the name in particular for smooth,
liquid, lyrical effusions, needing little thought; just
as there is a tendency, in some quarters, to treat paintings
as mere decorations for the walls of houses. These
theories go too far. But the decorative function of pic-
tures is very apt to be forgotten by a public which has
nearly lost the sense of harmony in colours ; and the
limitations of lucid expression have been too often over-
looked by Browning. I frankly make this concession at
once, that he is often jerky, crabbed, and elliptical in his
language, and often obscure. He is strong rather than
sweet or musical; although when he does lay himself out
to be sweet, it is as if we had


“ All the breath and the bloom of the year in the bag of one
bee. ”
He could be as tintinnabulating as any guitarstrummer
of them all. As Izaak Walton said of Dr. Donne, —
“he could make soft and smooth verses when he
thought smoothness worth his labour.” For instance,
there is that song at the beginning of In a Gondola.
It was written for a picture called The Serenade, exhibited
in the Academy by Maclise :
‘ I send my heart up to thee, all my heart
“ In this my singing :
‘ For the stars help me, and the sea bears part ;
“ The very night is clinging
‘ Closer to Venice’ streets to leave one space
“ Above me, whence thy face
' May light my joyous heart to thee its dwelling-place.’
Not only do the words produce to the mind a picture
simple, exquisite, and absolutely clear, but you almost
fancy that you hear the tingling of the mandoline with
every line. But this is not Browning’s usual way. If,
however, he is often hard to understand, he is well
worth the effort to understand. As they say in mining,
the stone is very stiff, but when crushed it shows plenty
of gold. What makes the obscurity ? It seems to me
to be due, in many cases, to the difficult nature of his
favourite subject-matter—the workings of the human
mind ; in other cases, to his use of soliloquy—for a man
does not take the same pains to explain himself to himself,
as to explain himself to other people ; in others, to his
abuse of parentheses—so long and so frequent that you
forget whether you are in the main stream or in the
backwater ; in others, to his extreme rapidity in seizing,
and in dropping, analogies and metaphors ; in others,
to the intensity of his emotions, and the subtle and
rapid nature of his mental movements ; in others, to his


desire for brevity, and his intolerance of padding ; and,
in nearly every case, to his habit of saturation. What
I mean by saturation is that, before writing, Browning
used to absorb all the surroundings of his incident—the
whole environment of place and time, all the physical
and historical facts which encompassed his man —even
the then current modes of thinking; and then he started
off to speak as from the mind of the man, vouchsafing
no introduction, no explanation. He assumes that his
readers have the same things before their eyes—that they
are saturated as well as himself. Read what he calls
St. Martin’s Summer. Most people do not know in these
days that Martin's Summer is a part of October and
November—in which fairly fine weather is expected in
England, but still not the true summer. You cannot
understand the connection of the short, jerky stanzas until
the inspiration came to you, that a husband and wife
are conversing, that both have had first loves, and that
the ghosts, or memories, of the first loves sometimes
escape. When you get the point of view, and the little
bit of history, it becomes easy ; but not before. Browning
is also saturated with knowledge of a very unusual kind.
Every reader must have been struck with the vast
knowledge of natural history displayed (say) in Caliban
upon Seiebos, and in Saul; of ancient botany and
medicine in Karshish; of mediaeval customs in the Flight
of the Duchess ; of the art of painting, in Old Pictures in
Florence ; of music, in Abt Vogler, Master Hugues of
Saxe-Gotha, and A Toccata, of Galuppi’s] of the occultists
and cabbalists and mystics in numerous poems. It is
interesting to learn, by the way—and the fact may explain
a good deal—that the father of Browning was well versed
in the works of Paracelsus, Faustus, and the Talmudic
writers, and also in mediaeval legend and occult literature ;


and it appears from the poem called “ Development ”
that the father took an active interest in his son’s intellect-
ual training.
I suppose it is hardly necessary for me to admit also the
offences against poetic art involved in Browning’s rhym-
ing tricks. They are very clever—but they are tricks.
Take, for instance, his surprising feats in the Flight of
the Duchess. Who can defend there the coining of a word
“ grudgment ” to rhyme with “ judgment ” ? —the dis-
covery of “ quince-tinct ” to rhyme with “ instinct ” ?
the rhyming of “ music ” and “ you sick ” ? Then, as for
his translations of Greek dramas, I do not like them.
I do not know how they appear to other and better
authorities than I am ; but I cannot regard them as a
success. They were meant to be literal to an impossible
degree ; and yet they are not even accurate. Balan-
stion’s Adventure is a delightful romance ; but, as for the
Alcestis translation therein, it seems to have been clearly
shown that Browning misconceived the Greek view of
Admetus, the husband. All these faults, and many
more, may be freely admitted; and all the more freely
because, in spite of them, Browning remains so pre-
eminently great and fascinating.
Browning’s main subject is the human mind, or soul,
working at white heat ; under the influence of love,
or hatred, or artistic emotion, or driven to choose between
two critical courses of action. He loves to dwell upon
the point of intense excitement. Under a prism, a ray
of light is divided into its component rays—the red, the
orange, the yellow, and so on into the violet. The
vibrations of the violet are the most rapid and most in-
tense ; and the poet acts as the prism, separating these
violet rays from the humdrum red, and attracting for
them undivided attention. Browning deliberately chose


this as his subject in youth, and adhered to it till hiis
death. In his belated dedication of Sordello, he sajys
as to that poem ; “ My stress lay on the incidents in tlhe
development of a soul : little else is worth study. I, tat
least, have always thought so —you, with many known
and unknown to me, think so —others may one day thimk
so.” Many years after, in the epilogue to his Paechiair-
otto book, he still speaks of this as his theme —“ Mine the
Man’s thoughts, loves, hates ” ! Even when he seees
three bodies lying in the morgue of Paris, his thoughts
turn at once to the state of mind in which each threw
himself into the Seine. One must be a young fellow <of
ambition, broken hearted by failure ; another a revolu-
tionary, maddened against society ; another a gambler,
who lost and cannot pay. This treatment of his subjects,
by watching and interpreting their souls, is not dramatic
—unless, indeed, we extend the meaning of the words to
actions of the mind as well as to actions of the body —to
what is thought as well as to what is done. Browning
at all events, would seem to concur with the view that
nothing happens but in the soul.
At an early stage of his career, although apparently
after a bitter internal struggle, Browning came to certain
conclusions about life to which years seem to have but
added strength and tenacity. These form the main
burden of his song. If any witling here should catch at
this word “burden,” and say ; “True, Browning’s song is
a burden; it is too grave and philosophical,” I can pitch
Aristotle at his profane head, and go on. For in this respect
Browning fulfils precisely the conditions prescribed for
poetry by Aristotle. Ido not know that I can express
these conclusions adequately. I shall try some of them,
although it would probably be more discreet for me not to
make the attempt, but to talk generalities. I shall be


told that I have misunderstood some things, and omitted
others. But I want to be candid with my audience, and
give what I see in the poet, or so much of it as I can give
in my forty minutes. Man is great ; is unique by virtue
of his consciousness, hopes, fears, aspirations. His life is
of immense value, and its joys, pains, and experiences are
a discipline for his soul. The trial of faith is one means
of discipline, and without uncertainty there could be no
faith. Man’s very imperfections are a proof of his great-
ness ; for they mean that he is stretching outwards and
upwards to a higher ideal. He who sinks all motives of
self-interest in favour of his ideal, does well; and the
man of great aims who does not succeed is greater than
the man of small aims who does. Evil is essential to the
existence of good—is even a form of good. The best things
in life are love (with all its annihilation of self), and
human service—the service of humanity. When these
thoughts are put in such a condensed and abstract form,
they do not affect us much. They reach only the outer
chambers of the understanding. But when they are
expressed with the emotion and imagination of Browning,
with all his force, all his wealth of illustration and incident,
they become of absorbing interest, like some new revela-
tion. There is all the difference that is found between a
dry moral homily and a trumpet that calls to battle.
Where did Browning’s mind get its early bent towards
these ideas ? I do not think that the question is one of
idle curiosity. I cannot help the fancy that he was pro-
foundly influenced by writers of occult philosophical
literature, such as his father loved. That doctrine so
beautifully expressed as to evil, in Abi Vogler, —“ Evil is
null, is nought, is silence implying sound ” may be traced
through Proclus, and the Neoplatonists, Augustine,
Maimonides, Aquinas, the Kabbalists, Hegel, down to


Emerson. Eliphas Levi, one of these occult writers, wnote
much about the human will. He said, for instance :
“ The more numerous the obstacles which are surmounted
by the will, the stronger the will becomes. It is for this
reason that Christ has exalted poverty and suffering."
This sentiment reminds one at once of Rabbi Ben Ezra,
who welcomes “ each rebuff, that turns earth’s smooth-
ness rough, each sting that bids nor sit nor stand, but go.”
Levi also says : “To do nothing is as fatal as to commit
evil, and it is more cowardly. Sloth is the most repre-
hensible of the deadly sins.” Here we have, I think,
the difficult lesson taught by The Statue and the Bust —-
where the Duke of Florence puts off, day after day, and
year after year, the enterprise of carrying off his lady-love
—the imprisoned wife of the Riccardi :
‘ Let a man contend to the uttermost
For his life’s set prize, be it what it will !
‘ The counter our lovers staked was lost
‘ As surely as if it were lawful coin :
‘ And the sin I impute to each frustrate ghost
‘ Is the unlit lamp and the ungirt loin,
‘ Tho’ the end in sight was a vice, I say.
‘ You of the virtue (we issue join)
‘ How strive you ? De te, fabula.”
This same abhorrence of sloth and weakness of will ap-
pears in what might be fairly called Browning’s last liter-
ary words—the striking epilogue to Asolando, published
on the day of his death :
What had I on earth to do
With the slothful, with the mawkish, the unmanly ?
Like the aimless, helpless, hopeless, did I drivel—
“ Being—who ?
“ One who never turned his back but marched breast forward,
“Never doubted clouds would break,’’and so forth.
The earlier poems of Browning are, of course, of ex-


ceptional interest in the study of his work. With all
their outward contrasts, there is a fundamental resem-
blance between Paracelsus and Sordello. It is curious
that in each case we find a soul conscious of great powers,
determined to achieve something great and striking,
struggling between the promptings of selfish ambition
and the drawings of higher ideals, and learning at last—
after great pain—that the highest function of life is to be
found in love and human service. This resemblance
can hardly have been accidental: it must have had its
root in some deep personal experience. As for Paracel-
sus, I do not know how it appeals to others ; but to me
it is a marvel, when I consider that it was published by a
youth of 23, and in the year 1835. Ido not refer merely
to the acquaintance shown with medicine as the science
stood, in its mystic stage, in the 16th century ; but I refer
to the insight which enabled Browning to rehabilitate the
character of Paracelsus, as one of the martyrs of science,
before men of science looked on him as anything but a
vicious and ridiculous quack. I understood that some
claim for Paracelsus —or Bombast, as his true name
was —the title of the father of modern chemistry. He
introduced the use of mercury and laudanum ; and
discovered the metals zinc and bismuth, and (it is alleged)
the circulation of the blood. I refer also to Browning’s
extraordinary forecast of certain modern theories as to
the ascent of nature to man ; and he added the ascent of
man to God. Moreover, from a literary point of view,
there are surely wonderful realism, mastery, and finish—
such as mark maturity of powers and not raw youth —in
that song in which Paracelsus, in his despair, describes
the embalming of his dead youthful aims—especially
the second verse :


" And strew faint sweetness from some old
“ Egyptian’s fine worm-eaten shroud,
Which breaks to dust when once unrolled ;
‘ Or shredded perfume, like a cloud
‘ From closet long to quiet vowed.
‘ With mothed and dropping arras hung,
" Mouldering her lute and books among,
“ As when a queen, long dead, was young.”
It is notable, too, that even at this early age Brown-
ing was intent on the problems of life and destiny, and
the relations of Power and Love. Paracelsus, dying, says
what he learnt of Aprile:—
“ Love’s undoing
" Taught me the worth of love in man’s estate.
“ And what proportion love should hold with power
‘ln his right constitution : love preceding
“ Power, and with much power, always much more love.”
In his Reverie, published on the day of his death, 54
years after, Power and Love still afford him inexhaustible
interest :
‘ I have faith such end shall be ;
“ From the first. Power was—l knew.
Life has made clear to me
“ That, strive but for closer view,
Love were as plain to see.”
As for Sordello, he finds out at last that he has been
thinking only of himself and his glory all along, and that
there is a world of men requiring his help. So he begins
to dream of a new Rome, with new life, and a just order
of things for mankind. But the world has to be built
up spiritually, if at all; and therefore he will take the
Guelf side and work through the Church, not with the
Emperor. He plucks from his neck the badge of the
Ghibilins, though it meant for him high office, and his
fair Palma ; and then dies. Browning marked his true


function in Sordello —the study of the development of a
soul— ; and he followed this study all through his
literary life.
That quaint drama called Pippa passes, once ap-
prehended, becomes a never-failing friend. Published
in 1881, before Browning was 30 years of age,
it soon gained readers—long before his other poems.
The little factory girl of Asolo, on her yearly holiday,
passes through the town, fancying herself as now one,
now another, of those who seem happiest; and she
sings. It so happens that each of the supposed happiest
is at a crisis of life—a time of choice between duty and
self-interest, or a time of extreme spiritual tension ; and
Pippa’s song comes on their ears. She influences these
people to good, unconsciously, by awakening with her
simple words certain subtle associations, by touching,
as with a wand, the hidden springs of the heart. By her
innocent service of loving song she brings to righteous
action Ottima, Sebald, Jules, Luigi, and the Bishop ;
and she ends the day, as she began it, with the thought
which Browning evidently wants to impress :
“ All service ranks the same with God ”
the grand levelling principle of the spiritual world.
But this poem, so graceful and so sweet, contains one of
the most powerful scenes in all dramatic literature. I
refer to the scene of Sebald and Ottima, in the shrub-
house, which ends in the repentance of Sebald, and the
self-renunciation of Ottima, the “ magnificent in sin.”
And there is great power in that description of the
storm in the woods, —Ottima speaks of the lightning
thus :
‘ As if God’s messenger thro’ the close wood screen
‘ Plunged and replunged his weapon at a venture
‘ Feeling for guilty me and thee.”


It is a significant feature of Browning’s thought that
he derives immense satisfaction from man’s imperfection
and discontent. The brute is soon appeased—the
man, never. This is to Browning an indication that man
has higher uses to serve—that life, with all its joys and
pains and experiences, is a means for perfecting the
human soul. The stanzas of Rabbi Ben Ezra are
devoted to this subject. The Rabbi is a genuine historical
character—a Jewish scholar of the 12th century. He
sought riches in commerce ; but, unlike most of his race,
he was unsuccessful. “If I sold shrouds,” he com-
plained, “ none would die. If candles were my ware,
the sun would not set till the day of my death.” Failing
to establish a ‘‘corner” in any earthly commodity, he very
nearly forestalled the market in grain of heavenly wisdom.
It is satisfactory to find that the Rabbi ended by teaching
that what the world calls “ success ” is a small matter.
The chief blessedness of man is in his soul : the function
of life, and especially of pain and trouble, is to develop
the soul.
Then welcome each rebuff
That turns earth’s smoothness rough,
‘ Each sting that bids nor sit nor stand but go !
" Be our joy three parts pain,
‘ Strive, and hold cheap the strain,
Learn, nor account the pang : dare, never grudge the throe
Moreover, according to the Rabbi, effort to attain high
object ending in failure, is greater and grander than
success in attaining a low object. Each one is to be
judged by his ideals—-that is, ideals actively pursued —
“ All instincts immature,
“ All purposes unsure,
That weighed not as his work, yet swelled the man’s amount


“ All I could never be
“ All men ignored in me,
“ This I was worth to God, whose wheel the pitcher shaped.”
The same idea is finely expanded in the well-known
Grammarian s Funeral. Under the enthusiasm of
the revival of learning, a man spends his life in mastering
the mechanism of the classical languages, as a first step
towards his goal of knowing all that is to be known
from books. He believed that God would find use for his
learning, and he never swerved from his purpose ; and
now his pupils carry him to burial on a mountain top —
“ Loftily lying,
"Leave him—still loftier than the world suspects,
" Living and dying.”
Nor does Browning forsake this theory, in his last
Reverie, written when the shades of death were closing on
himself—
“ Then life is—to wake not sleep,
" Rise and not rest, but press
“ From earth’s level, where blindly creep
“ Things perfected, more or less
to the land of the Ideal, where Power and Love are one.
The lower and unconscious forms of life are things “ per-
fected more or less,” incapable of feeling imperfection,
incapable of progress : as the jelly fish :
' ‘ Let the mere star-fish in his vault
Crawl in a wash of weed, indeed,
“ Rose-jacynth to the finger-tips,
“ He, whole in body and soul, outstrips
" Man, found with either in default.
“ But what’s whole, can increase no more,
“ Is dwarfed and dies, since here’s its sphere.”
So with the old masters of Italian art, whom Browning
loved for their high ideals, and efforts after the unattain-
able. They had to face the perfection of Greek art—


perfect within its narrow limits. But, as Browning s.ys
to them :
‘ Growth came when looking your last on them all,
‘ You turned your eyes inwardly one fine day,
‘ And cried with a start— ‘ what if so small
‘ Be greater and grander the while than they.” ’
‘ They are perfect—how else ? they shall never change
We are faulty—why not ? we have time in store.”
But this was not the way of Andrea del Sarto, caed
“the faultless painter.” His faultlessness never reachedhe
higher planes of art. Whether owing to infirmity of metal
power, or of character, or to the pressure of an exacting
wife, who wanted money and insisted on pot-boilrs,
Andrea never rose to such a level as Raphael, and otlers
who had not Andrea’s technical skill; and he felt it ho :
‘ Their works drop groundward, but themselves, I know,
‘ Reach many a time a heaven that’s shut to me.
‘ Ah, but a man’s reach should exceed his grasp,
‘ Or what’s a heaven for ? ”
This noble poem of Andrea del Sarto was published in
1855, at a time when Tennyson was famous, and when
Browning had as yet found few readers. The thought
has occurred to me—l hope it will not be regarded as pro-
fane—that there is some likeness to the faultless painter
in the faultless poet, Tennyson—that master of chaste and
exquisite English, but low, relatively, in pulse, in emotion,
in imagination. In his last volume, Browning brings
out again this theory of his in a remarkably emphatic
form. I refer to the poem of Rephan —a work, as I think,
of great genius, but which has not attracted so much
notice as it deserves. A being from the star Rephan
comes to earth, and tells to suffering men how he lived in
the star. There was perfection—absolute bliss—nowhere


deficiency or excess—no want —no growth. There was
no better, no worse—no preference, no distaste —no
springs, no winters—no hope, no fear —all happy, all
serene—each life like a full-orbed rose. But a seed of
change worked in him till the perfection became irksome.
Out of apathy grew strife —
‘ And I yearned for no sameness but difference
‘ In thing and thing, that should shock my sense
‘ With a want of worth in them all, and therein
" Start me up, by an Infinite
‘ Discovered above and below me—height
' And depth alike to attract my flight,
‘ Repel my descent : by hate taught love.
‘ Oh, gain were indeed to see above
‘ Supremacy ever—to move, remove,
‘ Not reach—aspire, yet never attain
‘ To the object aimed at !
‘ When the trouble grew in my pregnant breast,
‘ A voice said : ‘ So wouldst thou strive, not rest ?
‘ Burn and not smoulder, win by worth,
‘ ‘ Not rest content with a wealth that’s dearth ?
‘ ‘ Thou art past Rephan, thy place be Earth.’ ”
I come now to that very marked feature of Browning’s
ethics—his exalting of indiscretion over discretion ; or, if
that is too summary a way of putting it, his love for the
man who renounces wealth, or position, or worldly gain,
at the call of justice, or of art, or of affection, or of anything
else that is high in motive. How he cherishes the poor,
despised followers of the ideal! Take, for an instance,
Pictor Ignotus —one of the early Italian school—filled
with the ascetic view of Christianity, and painting in the
cloisters and aisles of churches an unending series of
Virgins and babes and saints—all having “ the same
cold, calm, beautiful regard ” ! He sees a youth coming
into fashion, one of the renaissance, who has the Greek


outlook on life and beauty and enjoyment. He feels
that he could do work like that youth. But he will
not. He shrinks from working for the praise or money
of men—in fact, abhors the thought of his paintings
becoming house decorations :
‘ These buy and sell our pictures, take and give,
‘ Count them for garniture and household stuff,
‘ And where they live needs must our pictures live,
‘ And see their faces, listen to their prate,
‘ Partaking of their daily pettiness,
Discussed of— ‘ This I love or this I hate,
‘ ‘ This likes me more, and this affects me less
So the poor, gentle, devout soul keeps to his virgins,
and babes and' saints, in the gloom of the church, in a
silence broken only by prayer ; although his pictures
blacken in the smoke, and moulder on the damp walls ;
“ So, die my pictures ! slowly, gently die ” !
On the other hand, when Browning wants to describe
A soul’s tragedy, he shows a man who allows self-
interest to prevail over his principles. For the sake of
the admiration of the crowd, Chiappino encourages a
false belief, and at the expense of his friend. For the
sake of office and honours, he abandons his republican
principles. Colombe s Birthday turns on the same
internal struggle. Valence, who has come to advocate
the cause of the poor of Cleves, adheres to his mission at
all costs —even at the cost of losing the woman whom
he loved :
“ Cleves, help me ! Teach me, every haggard face,
“ To sorrow and endure ! I will do right
“ Whatever be the issue—Help me, Cleves ! ”
And Colombe herself refuses Berthold, who has the
lawful right to the duchy, and takes Valence for mere
love :
“ I take him —give up Juliers and the world.”


In this case, Valence had not to make the self-sacrifice
which he was willing to make. But he was moved by the
enthusiasm of human service which Browning seems
to exalt above all enthusiasms, and which is inspired by
the thought so feelingly expressed by Prince Hohenstiel —
Schwangau —
‘ Such eyes I saw that craved the light above,
‘ Such mouths that wanted bread and nothing else,
‘ Such hands that supplicated handiwork ;
‘ Men with the wives, and women with the babes,
‘ Yet all these pleading, just to live, not die.”
But I must not omit that marvellous glorification of
imprudence, the story of Caponsacchi and Pompilia, in
“ The Ring and the Book.” The fashionable young
priest finds himself urged by a young wife to assist her in
running away from her husband. Prudence—regard for
his good name and brilliant prospects —said, “ Do not
interfere. Your action will be misunderstood. Your
name will be tarnished, and hers ; and your promising
career will be spoilt.” But Caponsacchi had formed a
new life by the revelation of Pompilia ; and
“ With a grand grave sweep
“ O’ the arm as tho’ his soul warned baseness off,”
he resolved to help her, and did help her ; and thereby
lost his world. For he had—as the good old Pope said—
“The chivalry
“ That dares the right, and disregards alike
“ The yea and nay of the world.”
As for little Pompilia, she too was imprudent in asking
the young Caponsacchi to escort her to Rome. But
she acted under an instinctive impulse to save a human
life that was coming ; and Browning excels himself in
powerful word-painting in her honour :
“ Little Pompilia, with the patient brow.
“ And lamentable smile on those poor lips ”


He tells how, in her helplessness and agony, she
“ stood and stared
“ With her wan face to see where God might wait.”
Even her miserable husband, who murdered her,
becomes eloquent about her, recalling her face —
“ I see the same stone strength of white despair ; ”
And again, as she lay dying—
“ The one ghost-thing half on earth,
“ Half out of it, —as if she held God’s hand,
“ While she leant back and looked her last at me.”
This is how others saw her :
“ Music seemed
“ Always to hover just above her lips,
“ Not settle, —break a silence music too.”
And again, take this little bit of face-study :
“ The lips, compressed a little, came forward too,
“ Careful for a whole world of sin and pain.”
And there is much more about Pompilia which I must
omit, for want of time. I want now to touch briefly,
and I hope warily, on the attitude of this poet to the
creeds of Christendom. He makes so many references
to difficulties of belief—in fact, he makes such difficulties
a main part of man’s discipline on earth —that I cannot
honestly give a fair presentation of the general scope of
his works if I quite overlook the subject. But I shall be
careful to avoid any matter of active controversy. The
scope of poetry, as indeed of all art, is the whole area of
nature and of life, especially where life attains the point
of highest thought or emotion ; and it is not surprising,
therefore, that the position of man in relation to the
eternity and the infinities and the mysteries around him
should attract Browning. Some are very anxious to
ascertain what Mr. Browning really believed ; and they,


not unnaturally, seek curiously to find what confirmation
they can get for their own belief in the opinions of a
man so gifted. But it ought to be always remembered,
that Browning was a poet, not a doctor of theology. So
far as I can find, he never dogmatises : he dramatises,
impersonates, speculates. He has treated of belief from
all points of view—of Caliban, the monster ; of Cleon, the
Greek ; of David, the Hebrew minstrel; of St. John the
beloved apostle; of Johannes Agricola, the extreme
Calvinist; of Bishop Blougram, the Roman Catholic
bishop in partibus ; of the English protestant in
Christmas Eve, and the other English protestant in Easter
Day. He has given the mind of Renan ; and, in La
Saisiaz, —he has — perhaps —given the speculations of
Browning himself unassisted by revelation. But the
truth is, it is not fair —it is even dangerous —to treat
such a poet as Browning as uncovering his mere personal
beliefs, as wearing his heart upon his sleeve, when he is
writing. When a painter makes a picture of Heracles
struggling with Death for the body of Alcestis, no one
says that the painter believes that there was such a
struggle ; and when a poet gives the utterances of
J ochanan Hakkadosh to his disciples, he ought not to be
regarded as necessarily adopting all the views of Hak-
kadosh. This would be a mistake, worthy of the pert
and inquisitive Mr. Gigadibs, whom Bishop Blougram
overthrows with his own kind of weapon, and who is
curiously consigned by Browning as a failure to this
land of Australia. Browning, above all others, had an
inveterate habit of entering into the minds of others, of
translating himself into other personalities, and identify-
ing himself with them for the time. In his poem called
House, he has indignantly disclaimed the idea that he
opens his own soul to the public gaze ; and, on behalf of


Shakespeare, he spurns the idea favoured by Wordsworth,
that Shakspeare “unlocked his heart” in his sonnets.
Shakspeare is made to speak on the subject At the
Mermaid :
Which of you did I enable
Once to step inside my breast,
There to catalogue and label
What I like least, what love best ?
So too, in the Epilogue to Pacchiarotto, Browning
distinctly refuses to pluck the cowslips from his private
meadows in order to flavour the wine of his poetry.
This should be enough for us. Let us judge the man by
his works, not by the views which he held on religion, or
on politics, or on anything else.
But all this exaltation of man, all this delight in man’s
life, and in man’s place in Nature, which are found in
Browning, are very remarkable as coming from a poet of
the nineteenth century—from a man whose eyes and
ears were open to all the intellectual movements of his time.
In an age when every increase of knowledge tended to
lessen man’s importance, to shatter his ideals, to break
up his creeds, to take away the foundations on which
his life seemed to rest; in an age when temptations to
doubt, to pessimism, to despair, have been greater than
in any preceding age, Browning has contributed largely
to the rebuilding of confidence, to the winning back to
earth of the Angel of Hope, to the revivifying of healthy
human energy.
" How good is man’s life, the mere living ! how fit to employ
‘ All the heart and the soul and the senses for ever in joy !
1 Didst thou see the thin hands of thy mother, held up as men
The low song of the nearly-departed, and hear her faint tongue
Joining in while it could to the witness, ‘ Let one more attest


‘ I have lived, seen God’s hand thro’ a lifetime, and all was
for best ’ ” ?
These are the words of David in the magnificent rhap-
sody of Saul; the gloom which oppressed Saul is, I venture
to think, the gloom of the nineteenth century spirit; and
it is met and scattered by the poet lad who also over-
threw the Philistine.
In conclusion, you will have noticed that I have dealt
with the thoughts rather than with the literary form
of Browning. It is in the former, rather than in the
latter, that his charm is found ; and the charm is wonder-
ful—when you have climbed the hill of difficulty.
Art in poetry, as in everything else, ought to give pleasure,
no doubt; but not necessarily to the indolent or the
unthinking. Browning appears to my mind as the
greatest spiritual force in English poetry in all the
centuries ; and when I say English poetry, I may as well
say the literature of the modern world. For poetry is
the queen of literature ; and there is no modern poetry
which, for volume and for quality, is comparable with
that which is in our own familiar English tongue.
27


,'. ~ ■ . 3-s
: v ; 7'. v ,■ y->;'
'
.
'
■
■
■
.
••
.
.
.
■ :;'■'■■■• : , ■■■': ■' ; ' ■ ■: , . ■
'
'
’
