





“ROBERT ELSMERE,’ 1
A REPLY
TO THE
IRZETV. GEORGE CLARKE’S
LICT.QSS.
PBICE .SIXPENCE.
T. L. HOOD,
BOOKSELLER,
LIVERPOOL AND ELIZABETH STREETS,
HOBART.




“ROBERT ELSMERE,”
A REPLY TO THE
REV. GEORGE CLARKE’S LECTURE.
There can be no doubt that the Rev. George Clarke’s lecture
on “Robert Elsmere,” recently published, is one of the most
vigorous and telling critiques that have yet appeared on
this remarkable book. The discourse is marked by all Mr.
Clarke’s best qualities as a cogent reasoner and an eloquent
writer, and it is also pervaded by an intensity of conviction
and an earnestness of purpose which must challenge the
attention of every serious mind. It may seem, therefore, an
act of great presumption on the part of the present writer,
who can lay no claim to any intellectual power or literary
skill, to attempt a criticism of a production which displays
both these characteristics in a pre-eminent degree. At the
same time it may be urged as an excuse for the writer’s
temerity that Mr. Clarke’s lecture is an appeal ad populum
and that he does not profess to do any otherwise than put
his case before ££ an intelligent jury ” comprising persons of
not more than average ability and culture. This being so,
there can be no great presumption in one of the jurymen
stating his reasons for dissent.
Mr. Clarke’s discourse is an argument for “the super-
natural element in Christianity.” By the term supernatural
as thus used is evidently to be understood the miraculous ;
and of the miraculous it is clear the lecturer accepts the
definition given by Squire Wendover, namely, t£ any deviation
from the common norm of experience.” At the very outset,
then, we take objection to this definition of the miraculous as
unsatisfactory, and to this identification of the supernatural
with the miraculous as misleading. Were we to insist that
such a definition would compel us to regard the steam-engine
or the electric telegraph as miraculous, we should no doubt
be met with the objection that, long before the invention of
these wonderful machines, the materials and forces used to
produce them had already existed in the field of observable


nature, although the laws of their action bad not been ascer-
tained, and they had never yet been yoked to the service of
man. The expansive power of steam (it might he urged)
had been shown in raising or rending the solid rocks, and
the force of electricity had been revealed in the summer
storm. Be it so, then ; but it is still open to question
whether the inventive skill which for the first time made use
of these natural agencies would not come strictly under the
category of “ a deviation from the common norm of experi-
ence,” and so have a claim to be regarded as miraculous and
therefore supernatural. Waiving this point, however, we
may confine our quest for the miraculous within the field of
nature outside of man’s action, and before he appeared on
the scene. The conclusions of modern Geology, based on in-
ductions of the highest order of certainty, disclose the fact
that the rocks composing the crust of our earth have been
very gradually formed, and that the earth’s inhabitants, past
and present, vegetable and animal, have been slowly produced
in an ever-ascending succession of types, each displaying
greater novelty of structure and richer variety of endowment.
We need not accept the doctrine of evolution as an explanation
of the production of vegetable and animal forms, but the evi-
dence for evolution, as the history of a process, cannot well be
resisted. Now, suppose some intelligence with perceptive
and reasoning faculties like our own to have watched the
whole process from some “ coign of vantage ” outside the
earth. As he saw one new rock after another, one new plant
after another ; as he saw one animal after another “ differen-
tiated ” from its predecessors, would he see a miracle in every
novelty of rock, or flower, or beast ? Why, if so, miracles
would become the very “ norm of experience ” to him; his
long life wouldbe a constant contemplation of miracles. Yet we
know that what our supposed super-terrestrial observer would
have seen has actually taken place. If you are going to see
miracle in what is new or uncommon you will have so many
miracles on hand that the difficulty will be to know where to
look for the The whole history of humanity,
again, abounds with phenomenal “ deviations from the
common norm of experience.” Are we to say that every man
who reached a higher level of character or attainment than
had been reached by any one before him must have been a
miracle ? Then, if so, Moses and Socrates, and especially the
Buddha, were most certainly miracles and therefore “ super-


natural ” persons. We object to this definition of miracle,
because it gives us no proper criterion by which to distinguish
the miraculous from the unmiraculous, and because it does
not enable us to see at all wherein lies the evidential value of
miracles. Do you say that a miracle is due to the direct
action of God ? We reply that, to the theist who believes in
God as a living causal Will, all the phenomena of the uni-
verse—except of course those which depend on created wills
—are produced by divine power, and we have no valid grounds
for making any distinction whatever between the direct and
the indirect action of God.
The definition of miracle accepted by the lecturer reduces
it, then, merely to the rank of the new or uncommon. How,
to identify the supernatural with the uncommon is simply to
empty the word of all its meaning. To look for the super-
natural amongst natural occurrences, and to try to see it in
merely uncommon events interpolated between the common
is a foolish “ seeking for the living among the dead.” As the
word itself implies, the supernatural is something transcend-
ing the natural—something which belongs to a higher and
altogether different sphere. The Duke of Argyle’s definition
■of the supernatural, as the production of effects without the
use of means is unsatisfactory, because it would bring the
familiar, though mysterious, action of man’s will in moving
his limbs under the category of the supernatural. We
neither know, nor can imagine, by what means, or whether by
any means, the human will acts upon the nerves so as to
produce voluntary motion. Indeed, so inexplicable did it
■seem to one philosopher (Geulinx) that man should possess
any such power, that he actually postulated the action of
God every time the limbs are moved in obedience to man’s
will. In our humble opinion the true distinction between
the natural and the supernatural has been stated once for all
with most admirable clearness and convincing force by Dr.
Martineau in his ££ Hours of Thought,” in the sermon on
■“ Human and Divine Perfection,” and again to the same
effect, though with a different application, in the sermon on
The Prayer of Faith.” According to this keen thinker, the
natural is all that realm of divine causation in which God
has bound himself to fixed ways of acting—uniformities
which, therefore, assume the appearance of necessity, and have
probably given rise to the idea of Fate. In this sphere the
action of God is pledged, out of all possible forms, to take


certain forms rather than others. For were it otherwise—-
were onr bodily and mental organisms and their environments
the subjects of capricious and variable divine action—did
water boil sometimes at one temperature, sometimes at
another —did pure air vitalise the blood to-day and vitiate it
to-morrow —did one man’s mental faculties act in one way,
and other men’s in various other ways—then would such a
world as that be more fittingly termed a chaos than a kosmos,
and life therein could afford no discipline, and would
school no character. In this sphere of God’s settled ways it
is that Science finds its proper field of work; it patiently
and laboriously discovers these habitudes of divine causality,
names them Laios of Nature, trusts them implicitly, and finds
its justification and triumph in the power of perfect prevision.
Here, then, we have the natural—what and where is the
supernatural F The supernatural is to be sought in that
realm of spiritual experience whereof pnophets and saints in
all ages have testified that their highest life has been lived
—wherein God’s free spirit is pledged by no rules of mechani-
cal causation, but acts only according to the infinite nature
of holiness and love —
“ Speak to him, for he hears thee, and spirit with spirit may
meet;
“ Closer is he than breathing, and nearer than hands and
feet.”
By the pathway of righteousness and self-sacrifice the soul
of man has ascended into “this overarching scene,” there to
enjoy the beatific vision, and hold communion with God.
“In this silent ocean of God’s being,—this transcending
spiritual sphere of his life, dwells the remaining element of
the perfection which we seek. It is an all-embracing love,
an inexhaustible holiness, an eternal pity, an immeasurable
freedom of affection, whence all the regularities of bis will
spring forth, and which leaves enough behind to visit the
private wants of every soul, to linger with tenderness near every
sorrow, to be present with rescue in every temptation. This
it is that is the real ground of our trust and love: God is not
merely the power of nature, but the father of spirits : his
resources are not spent and used up in the legislation of the
physical universe, but are large enough to overflow freely
and copiously into the spirits that are in the likeness of him-
self. Hence, without violated rule, without breach of pledge,
he can individualise his regards, enter with his gentle help


into every mind, and while keeping faith with the universe,
knock at the gate of every lonely heart.” Of the supernatural
understood in this sense Jesus of Nazareth may well have
been the greatest prophet, and his religion a supernatural
religion, though he never walked on the sea, stilled the storm,
or raised the dead.
If the conception of the natural presented above be just
and true, it is easy to see what is the real a priori argument
against miracles, and to estimate its force. Its true ground
is not metaphysical, it is not scientific—it is religious. The
protest against miracle conies, not from the scepticism of the
understanding, or from the arrogance of scientific assurance,
but from the deep heart of religious faith itself —from trust
in a God “ with whom there is no variableness, neither any
shadow of turning.” No doubt some thinkers have persuaded
themselves that there are metaphysical considerations
which lead of themselves to the rejection of the miraculous.
In “ Robert Elsmere,” Grey says: “ I am old-fashioned
enough to stick to the a priori impossibility of miracles, but
then lam a philosopher ! ” (page 353). We do not profess,
to know what are the “ philosophic ” grounds, here hinted at,
for holding the a priori impossibility of miracles, and we
gravely doubt whether any such exist. At all events we
humbly hold with those philosophers who deny that the
belief in an inviolable order of nature is in any respect like
the belief we have in infinite space and time, or in the exist-
ence of an external world, or in the axiom of causality—that
it is in any sense a datum of the understanding. Again, the
scientific conviction of a changeless natural order is simply
empirical and inductive ; it rests upon the observed order of
co-existence and sequence among natural phenomena, and can
furnish only the most shadowy presumption against the
occurrence of miracles. On the other hand, what may be
called the religious conviction as to the invariability of
natural laws is nothing else than simple trust in the veracity
of God —the belief that the Creator will keep faith with his
creatures in the expectations which the works of his own
hands have raised. “What Science calls the uniformity of
nature, Faith accepts as the fidelity of God.”
Cogent as this a priori argument is, it is probable that very
few people have been led on this ground alone to reject the
miracles of the New Testatment, Mr. Clarke, however,
declares that “ Mrs, Ward, like Strauss, Bauer (Baur?),


Uenan, and her uncle Matthew Arnold, demands that we shall
come to the criticism of the life of Jesus with the foregone
conclusion that miracles are impossible.” Now, is this true F
Granting even that it is true of all the writers mentioned
along with her, it is most certainly not true of Mrs. Ward
herself, if her hero’s opinions may be taken as representing
her own. For it will be remembered that, when Elsmere
detailed to Grey the steps by which he had been led to reject
the miraculous element in traditional Christianity, his friend
thus summed up the process which had been described to
him :—“ Well, the process in you has been the typical process
of the present day. Abstract thought has had little or
nothing to say to it. It has been all a question of literary and
historical evidence You have come to see how
miracle is manufactured, to recognise in it merely a natural
inevitable outgrowth of human testimony in its pre-scientific
stages. It has been all experimental, inductive.” (Page
353). But whatever Mrs. Ward’s procedure may or may not
be, it is certain that many of the most distinguished
representatives of “the critical method” do not subscribe to
the opinion that miracles are a priori incredible. In proof of
this it will surely be enough to quote the following emphatic
declaration of Professor Kuenen:— <£ Without for a moment
concealing my own conviction that there is not one single
miracle on record which we can accept as a fact, I would,
nevertheless, place in the forefront of historical criticism the
principle that miracles are possible. To this principle I have
never been consciously untrue while pursuing the very path
which has led me to the conviction I have just avowed. I
shall not, therefore, reject miracles a priori without discussion
and without distinction, but shall enter in perfect good faith,
and not simply as a matter of form upon the investigation of
the credibility of even a miraculous story.” (Modern Review,
July, 1880). Now, it is clear that Mr. Clarke also feels the
force of the historical argument against the credibility of
miracles, and that he himself sees with Elsmere how miracle
is manufactured—at least, outside the New Testament canon.
On what grounds, then, does he conclude in favour of the
New Testament miracles, while refusing to believe in any
others P It cannot be on the ground of better external
evidence; for the miracles reported by St. Augustine and
many other fathers are supported by a weight of detailed
evidence far in excess of any that can be adduced for the


Gospel miracles. St. Ambrose, for example, relates that at
Milan one Severus, a butcher by occupation, who had been
compelled to relinquish business through the loss of his
eyesight, miraculously recovered the use of his eyes by coming
into contact with the dead bodies of two martyrs which were
being removed to the Basilica. St. Augustine in his
Retractationes confirms the story in the most solemn manner.
The evidence for this miracle is set forth at length in an
article in the Modern Review for January, 1880, by the Eev.
P. H. Wicksteed, who concludes with the following
summary:— 1 “ Here, then, we have a miracle, vouched for by
an eye-witness of the highest authority (Ambrose), supported
by two other witnesses (Augustine and Paulinus), who were
specially well qualified to speak, and treated as a matter of
notoriety during many years of the lifetime of its subject
(Severus).” What better attested case of miracle is there in
the Hew Testament ?
The only test, it appears, by which Mr. Clarke professes to
be able to distinguish genuine miracles from spurious ones, is
a purely subjective test. It is the character of the miracle,
and especially its harmony with the character of Christ, that
appeal to his judgment, and compel his belief. The miracles
of the Talmud, he says, are “ puerilitiesthose of the
apocryphal gospels are “ grotesque and absurdand, as far
as anything appears to the contrary, all the miracle stories
outside the Hew Testament are “ a rubbish heap of follies,”
The Gospel miracles, on the contrary, “ are sober miracles -
“ they do not shock our moral sense.” Well now, it may be
readily conceded that most of the miracles ascribed to Jesus,
being works of beneficence and mercy, do bear the character
claimed for them. But Mr. Clarke’s statements, both in
favour of the Gospel miracles, and in disparagement of the
others, are far too sweeping. On the one hand, no reader
with an unfettered moral judgment, and duly impressed with
the greatness and dignity of Christ’s character, can fail to
feel the most serious difficulties about such stories as those
of the demons in the swine, the cursing of the fig
tree, the coin in the fish’s mouth, the multiplication of
an artificial product like loaves of bread, and the turning of
water into wine. On the other hand, even the apocryphal
gospels contain stories of miracle which, if they cannot be
called artistically beautiful, still at least are in no way morally
objectionable. The story, for example, of the child Mary


having been daily fed in the Temple by the hands of angels,
is not intrinsically more “ absurd” than the story in the
Gospels that angels came and ministered to Jesus at the close
of his temptation. The same may be said of angelic
epiphanies and annunciations. The story of the angel’s visit
to Joachim to announce the coming birth of Mary is not
more “ grotesque ” than the story of the angel’s visit to
Zechariah to announce the coining birth of John. Let us
revert to the ease of the blind butcher, Severus. Everything
that can be claimed for the Gospel miracles of healing can
also be claimed for this alleged miracle. The miracle is
one of mercy, and it has the advantage of being powerfully
“ evidential.” Again, if we take the portents recorded in the
Gospels it is difficult to see what preference as to intrinsic
credibility can be accorded to them over the portents
claimed to have been witnessed by some of the fathers.
Tertullian, for example, “assures us that for forty days a fine
city was seen suspended over Judaea, and the miracle was
acknowledged by a multitude of Gentile witnesses.” How is
this story less “sober” than that of the star which guided
the Magi to the manger-cradle of Bethlehem F Possibly Mr.
Clarke might object that his contention is for a miracle-
working person, and that the portents recorded in the Gospels
have no necessary connection with the personality of Jesus.
Very well, then; but if the pious imagination of the early
Christians was capable of producing the stories of the portents
and prodigies, why may it not have been equal to producing
the stories of the miracles which are ascribed to the personal
agency of Jesus? How, the answer which Mr. Clarke gives
to_ this last question contains the real gist of his case for the
miraculous element in the Gospels. For his attempt to
establish a presupposition in favour of physical miracle as
part of the ministry of Jesus, by proving that he was himself
a spiritual miracle, and the permanent source of spiritual
miracles in others cannot possibly convince any one who
distrusts the actual documentary evidence for the alleged
miracles. Spite of the eloquent generalities which take up so
much space in the lecture, people will examine the Gospels in
detail, and they will enquire what is the exact amount and
value of the historical testimony which authenticates these
stories of wonder-working “ in the realm of physics.”
notwithstanding some appearance of contradiction in his
utterances on this point> Mr« Clarke may be fairly considered


as holding that the bare historic testimony is cogent enough
to invalidate any application of the mythical theory, and to
justify the acceptance of the Gospel narratives as they stand.
He says : “I am perfectly willing to test the historic
credibility of the Gospel testimony exactly as I would test the
stories of Herodotus,” etc. He asks, “If the early disciples
were capable of remembering Christ’s words, why should they
be so prodigiously incapable of remembering his works ?” And
he strenuously maintains that the shortness of the time which
elapsed between the ministry of Jesus and the publication of
the Gospels absolutely precludes the idea that the miracle
stories could have been the product of mythical fancy. Now,
it is just here that an emphatic protest must be entered
against Mr. Clarke’s perrennial assumption that in the
Gospels we have either formally or substantially the
testimony of men who were the actual contemporaries of
Jesus. Putting aside, for the present, the testimony of St.
Paul, it may be boldly said that there is not a tittle of
evidence to support this assumption. Except the Fourth
Gospel—which on account of its doubtful genuineness and
disputed character cannot be allowed to enter into the ques-
tion —not one of the Gospels professes to be the work of an
eye-witness, and there is no internal evidence to justify the
assertion that their compilers were contemporaries of Jesus,
or of his Apostles. What, then, is the external testimony as
to the age of these documents ? There is not a trace of their
existence before the beginning of the second century: further
back than a.d. 100 they can with no certainty be placed.
Nevertheless the lecturer in one of his strikingly alliterative
sentences says : “ Strain the evidence and stretch the time as
we will, the Synoptic Gospels were still within the generation
that had seen and heard the Prophet of Galilee.” How this
statement, if it carries its own meaning with it, could have
been penned by a man of Mr. Clarke’s learning, is to us as
great a puzzle as the origin of these Gospels themselves.
Why, one would think the lecturer had triumphantly solved
a question that is about the most baffling crux in the whole
range of literary criticism. If the question admits of such
easy solution—if the date of these documents is a matter of
such certainty —how is it that so many competent scholars
have erred so egregiously as to assign these writings to the
second century ? Dr. Davidson, for instance, who is a very
moderate representative of the critical school, suggests the


following approximate dates—Matthew 100, Luke 115, Mark
120. Amongst the most eminent critics, Keim alone favours
a comparatively early date for any of the Synoptics. He places
Matthew’s Gospel at about 66 a.d., but this reckoning applies
only to the original nucleus of the document, and not to the
Gospel in its present form. Keim’s arguments for this early
date, however, are not very convincing, since he relies mainly
upon the eschatological discourses ascribed to Jesus, and this is
a subject, as everybody knows, which is surrounded with the
gravest historical difficulties. But if the usual thirty years
be taken to represent a generation, even a.d. 66 would not
bring the oldest Gospel “ within the generation that saw and
heard the Prophet of Galilee.” Nor must it be forgotten
that, although Keim holds the belief that Jesus really wrought
miracles, yet he fully recognises the presence of mythical and
legendary elements in the Gospels. It would be interesting
to know whether Mr, Clarke also admits the existence of such
elements, or whether he would have us accept all or reject
all. It only remains to be said that if evidence, rather more
satisfactory than bare assertion, can be adduced to show
that the Synoptic Gospels were published within the lifetime
of Christ’s disciples, the disclosure will greatly surprise and
interest many a student of primitive Christian literature.
We come now to the lecturer’s chief stroke of argument.
Mr. Clarke attempts to nonsuit all rational criticism of the
Gospel records by an appeal to the testimony of St. Paul. If
words carry any meaning at all, his contention is that the
historical Jesus reflected in the apostle’s great epistles—
Romans, First and Second Corinthians, and Galatians —is
substantially the Jesus of the evangelical records. Well
now, the appeal to St. Paul is good and pertinent, and ought
to be fruitful of decisive results ; and it may be frankly con-
ceded that if the lecturer’s contention can be sustained, then
the mythical theory is at once and for ever out of court.
By what evidence, then, does Mr. Clarke support his position ?
Does he quote in detail declarations from St. Paul as to the
historical Jesus having been a worker of miracles P Hot at
all. He contents himself with the bare assertion—and an
astounding assertion it is—that St. Paul’s acknowledged
epistles “ are full of miracle in all their references to Christ’s
life.” Let there be no mistake as to what the issue really is.
The question is not whether the Jesus of St. Paul is an
exalted, and, if you like, a superhuman personage—the Son


of God, tlie Lord of humanity, the Judge of quick and dead :
neither is it as to what may be the rank and dignity of this
personage in the hierarchy of being, as Mr. Clarke would
phrase it. In the present connection we have no concern at
all with any such questions as these. It does not matter
what St. Paul thought of Jesus as the pre-existent Son of
God, or what he thought of him as the risen and glorified
Messiah. The point at issue is not theological—it is simply
historical. The question is: Does St. Paul know of an
historical Jesus who, in the days of his flesh —as he walked
the thoroughfares of the city, or visited the people in their
homes, or paced the shores of the lake, or taught on the
green slopes of the mountain—was a wonder-worker “ in the
realm of physics ? ” This is the only question that can have
any pertinency as regards an enquiry into the historic credi-
bility of the Gospels; and it is plainly the only question
which, without the absurdest irrelevancy, can receive any sort
of answer in the sentence, “These epistles are full of
miracle in all their references to Christ's life.” On this asser-
tion, that St. Paul knew of a Jesus who had wrought
miracles, we most distinctly join issue with the lecturer. We
have taken the trouble to read carefully through the four
great epistles of St. Paul two or three times, honestly pre-
pared, with a sheet of paper before us, to note every passage
that could by any possibility be taken to bear out Mr,
Clarke’s assertion. At the end of our examination the paper
was blank. Unless our eyes have been mysteriously
“ holden,” and our understanding wofully deceived, we are
confident that this will be the experience of every one who
will investigate these epistles for himself. There is not a
ghost of evidence for the lecturer’s confident statement; and
he is challenged to produce a single passage which either
explicitly asserts or tacitly implies that the historical Jesus of
St. Paul was a thaumaturgist “ in the realm of physics.”
But we can advance a step further. Our argument is not
merely e silentio. The evidence against Mr. Clarke’s asser-
tion is not only negative. We have St. Paul’s positive
statement that Christianity had no miracles to offer in support
of its claims. In First Corinthians i. 22 the apostle solemnly
declares —Jews ask signs, and Greeks seek wisdom, but we
preach Christ crucified, to Jews a stumbling bloch, and to
Gentiles foolishness.” How, could St. Paul have written this
if he had known the Jesus of our Gospels ? Would he not,


must he not, on such a supposition, have written in substance
something like this ? “ Jews ask signs. Well, there the
signs are, in abundance, in the ‘ tradition ’ of Christ’s life
which has been delivered unto us. Let Jews take their fill of
signs and wonders, but let them beware of building their
faith in the Gospel on any such foundation. For other
foundation can no man lay than that which is laid in Christ
Jesus, the suffering, crucified Messiah.” The apostle even
declares that he can, in some sort, meet the demand of
“ Greeks ” for “ wisdom,” although with “ a wisdom not of
this world; ” <£ we speak wisdom,” he says, “ among
the perfect.” But he never gives the slightest hint that
Christianity can answer the demand for “ signs ” which was
made by miracle-loving Jews, Is it credible that St. Paul
could have called Christ a “ stumbling-block ” to those who
asked for miracle, if he had known and accepted a “ tradition”
of Christ’s life which was “ full of the miraculous ? ” The
Prophetof Nazareth was, indeed, a stumbling-block to the Jews.
That fact is attested, if by nothing else, at least by the
diabolical crime of Calvary with its awful warning to all
makers of “ sacred, perfect creeds.” But could Jesus have
been a stumbling-block to these sign-seekers, if he had really
wrought the signs and wonders ascribed to him in our
Gospels, or if he had come upon the earthly scene, and
departed from it, amidst portents of the most startling des-
cription ? The whole attitude of the Jewish leaders towards
Jesus is utterly inexplicable, if he was the wonder-worker that
the Gospels make him to have been. Could these men have
dared to lay hands on a mysterious being who, as they them-
selves would have known, had called forth the dead out of the
very tomb ?
The tetnnony of St. Paul against a miracle-working Jesus,
however, does not stand alone. The Apostle’s words are but
the echo of words ascribed to the Master in the very Gospels
themselves. The Synoptics all agree in reporting that Jesus
was urged by the Pharisees to prove his authority and
authenticate his mission, by showing some “ sign from
heaven.” They vary in the details of the answer ascribed to
Jesus, but they are unanimous that he indignantly denounced
sign-seeking as a spiritual whoredom, that he absolutely
refused to accede to the demand, and declared that no sign
would be forthcoming at any time except “ the sign of Jonah.”
It does not matter whether the reference of the sign of Jonah


to Christ’s resurrection, as made by St. Matthew, be authentic
or not. Whether Jesus foretold his resurrection is not the
point at issue. The question which alone concerns us here is,
Did Jesus during his lifetime work miracles “ in the realm of
physics ? ” If words have any meaning, if Jesus in his most
solemn declarations was not paltering in a double sense, then
these passages show beyond doubt] that he had no miracles
to offer. Do you make the miracles of healing an exception
to the Prophet’s flaming denunciation? The exception is
quite arbitrary and gratuitous; but if it were made, still
there would remain the portents: if these were not “ signs ”
what, in the name of common sense, would constitute a
“ sign ? ” Turn to another part of the common Synoptic
record—the story of the Temptation. If the narrative is in
any degree authentic, it obviously must have come originally
from Jesus himself. Now, it lies on the very surface of the
story that the Temptation had some relation to the exercise
of miraculous powers. What is that relation ? Since the
publication of “ Ecce Homo ” the view has widely prevailed
that the Temptation was the result of “ the nascent con-
sciousness” in the mind of Jesus that he was the possessor of
miraculous power, and that the struggle was occasioned by
the problem of how he was to make use of this extraordinary
endowment. If we are compelled on good grounds to believe
in the miracle-working powers of Jesus, this view is quite
tenable. But it is not the only view that may be taken, nor
is it the most natural one. Suppose that, along with the first
consciousness that arose in Christ’s mind of the Divine call
to the Messiahship, there was also the embarrassment arising
from the consciousness of the want of miraculous power, then
nothing could be more natural than that an intense struggle
should take place as to whether, without such power, he
could adequately fulfil the mission to which he was called.
What the Messiah among the Jews was expected to be and
to do, Jesus must have known quite well. It is certain that
the Anointed of God was expected to be a miracle-worker.
Was this spirit of sign-seeking, then, the demon with which
the Lord Jesus had to wrestle in the wilderness, before
publicly announcing his mission ? If it was, then how com-
pletely does this meaning of the story harmonise with the
after-history! With a crushing apage Satanas! the Prophet
could drive out all trust in miracle from his own soul, but
the devil of sign-seeking he was never able to exorcise from


“ a wicked and adulterous generation,” “ Jews ask signs and
G-reeks seek wisdom.” “ There shall be no sign given.”
What a comment on these passages is the history of Christian
belief—what an irony of fate! Yes, the “Jews” got their
signs—four Gospels full of miracle and portent. And the
“ Greeks ” —well, they had to wait a little longer; but at last
they got the wisdom they desiderated, in “ that unexampled
congeries of luminous phrases,” the Athanasian Creed.
We have not yet done with the testimony of St. Paul to
the historical Jesus, and the bearing of this testimony upon
the trustworthiness of the evangelical records. Let us take
two points for comparison; first the birth of Jesus, and
secondly his resurrection, Matthew and Luke narrate that
Jesus was conceived in a miraculous manner, without the
agency of a human father. Does St. Paul know anything of
such an occurrence ? He never mentions it. If he had known
and accepted such a stupendous fact, could he have failed
to give some hint of it in the course of his writings ? But
more than this; he is not merely ignorant of any such
miracle, he expressly contradicts it. In Galatians iv. 4, he
describes Jesus as one who was “born of a woman.” Of course,
if we come to the study of St. Paul with minds saturated with
the Gospel stories, we may easily read into the Apostle’s words
a meaning which they cannot bear. The phrase “ born of a
woman,” it may be said, points distinctly to the virgin birth.
But would any such meaning as this suggest itself if we had
nothing but St. Paul’s writings before us ? Most certainly it
would not. “Born of a woman” is a common Biblical
expression denoting purely mortal nature and simply human
birth. In Job it is used to denote mankind generally, and
Jesus himself applied it to John the Baptist. Was the birth
of John, then, a virgin-birth? But putting aside these
arguments, the decisive consideration is that in the passage
quoted above St. Paul is speaking of the human limitations of
Jesus, At the very same time that he declares Jesus to have
been “ born of a woman,” he also speaks of him as “ born
under law;” and if the latter phrase is to be taken in its
natural sense, why not the former?” If St. Paul had had
present to his mind the thought of a superhuman birth—a
birth transcending the known conditions of human genera-
tion —how could he have regarded this fact as a limitation
and a weakness in the subject of the miracle? Ho, for St.
Paul the attestation of Christ’s Divine Sonship was not a


miraculous difference “in the realm of physics,” between the
birth of Jesus and that of other men, not the descent of the
Holy Spirit in the material form of a dove at his baptism, not
an audible voice from heaven —it was his resurrection.
“ Declared Son of God, with power according to the spirit of
holiness, by the resurrection of the dead.” Let us now see
what the Apostle knows of the resurrection of Jesus, and how
his statements compare with those of our Evangelists.
We shall refer, of course, to the classical 15th chapter of
First Corinthians, and it will be best to quote this important
testimony in full: “ For I delivered unto you first of all that
which I also received, that Christ died for our sins according
to the Scriptures, and that he was buried, and that he has
been raised the third day, according to the Scriptures ; after that
he appeared to above five hundred brethren at once, of whom
the greater part abide unto this present, but some are fallen
asleep. After that he appeared to James, then to all the
Apostles. And last of all, he appeared to me also
Whether, then, it were I or they, so we preach, and so ye
believed But now has Christ been raised from
the dead, the first-fruits of them who have fallen asleep.
. . . . It is sown an unspiritual body, it is raised a
spiritual body And this I say, brethren, that
flesh and blood cannot inherit the Kingdom of God; neither
does corruption inherit incorruption.” Here we have the
oldest testimony to the resurrection of Jesus. On this recital
we make the following observations, and from it we draw the
following inferences : —(1) St. Paul here gives the tradition
which he had received from the first disciples of Jesus, and
he gives it in full. It is the evidence he has collected from
others, and it is all the evidence. He is not professing to
give a specimen or excerpt of the testimonies, otherwise he
would hardly have taken such trouble to give the appearances
in the exact order of their sequence. Comparing this
account with those of the Gospels, we see that Paul knows
nothing of any appearances to Mary Magdalene. (2) The
resurrection on the third day is a dogma and not an attested
fact—at least St. Paul does not adduce any historic testimony
for it. The belief, like that in the atonement, is derived
“ from the Scriptures,” that is, of the Old Testament. (8)
St. Paul knows nothing of any resurrection from the tomb.
He speaks of the resurrection from the dead, that is, from the
region of the dead, from Hades, the dim underworld to


which it was supposed the spirit of Jesus had gone. He is
also silent about the circumstances said to have occurred at
the sepulchre —the setting of the watch, the earthquake, the
rolling away of the stone, or the appearances of angels. (4)
Most important point of all. With St. Paul the resurrection
of Jesus is the type of the resurrection of all Christians, and
he knows nothing of a material resurrection body. He denies
that there is any resurrection of the flesh. For him the
resurrection body is a spiritual organism ; very emphatically
he declares it is not flesh and blood. The Gospels, on the
contrary, tell of a material resurrection of Jesus; they tell of
something that occurred “in the realm of physics.” Granted
that only a dematerialised body could do some of the things
that are said in the Gospels to have been done by the resur-
rected Jesus, yet at the same time these Gospels also tell of a
body that was not spiritual, but material and tangible. They
say that after his resurrection Jesus walked from Emmaus to
Jerusalem, and that he ate bread and fish. If a body that
eats and drinks is not material, what is a material body ?
We have nothing to do with the suggestion of occult possi-
bilities in the world of matter. We are concerned here simply
with St. Paul’s statement, on the one hand, that a resurrec-
tion body is not flesh and blood, and with the statement of the
Gospels, on the other hand, that the resurrection body of Jesus
was composed of flesh and bones. “ Handle me and see; for
a spirit has not flesh and bones, as ye see me having.” The
Gospel accounts of the resurrection are thoroughly materialistic,
and their spirit is utterly inconsistent with the refined
spirituality of St Paul. They are dominated by the idea that
nothing is real unless it be palpable to bodily sense, and it is
simply inconceivable that these Gospel stories, or anything
like them, could have had a place in the mind of the man
who wrote the 15th chapter of First Corinthians. (5) What-
ever the appearance of Jesus w-as to St. Paul, it was of exactly
the same kind in all the other cases enumerated. The apostle
never hints at any difference between what he saw, and wdiat
the others saw. He places all the six appearances on the
same level, and throughout he employs the same Greek verb
(dxpdii) to describe them. How we know from St. Paul’s own
statements that he was the subject of visions and revelations
in “abundance;” that he frequently got into an ecstatic
trance-state, whether in the body or out of it, he knows not;
and that on one notable occasion he was “ caught up» into the


third Heaven,” and heard things unutterable to mortal ears..
The appearance of Jesus to St. Paul then was a “ vision,” and
a “vision” likewise it was to all the rest. For if the
occurrence here attested took place on the plane of sensuous
experience—-if it was a palpable material phenomenon which
the disciples “saw”—how is it that Jesus was not seen by
others beside the disciples ? The accounts all agree in repre-
senting that the risen Jesus “appeared” only to disciples,and
it is inconceivable that this slrould have been the case if
anything really took place “in the realm of physics.” The
fact is, that shining clearly through the mass of materialistic-
legend there is really the original ground-tradition of a
spiritual vision experienced only by the circle of disciples.
For, we read, “ some doubted - ,” while others “ saw.” How
could there have been any doubt, if those actually present
with the doubters really saw a physical, tangible body —a body
of “ flesh and bones ?” Let it only be added that the word
“ vision” need not necessarily be used as synonymous with
“ delusion.” (6) Observe now that St. Paul calls Jesus “ the
first-fruits of them who have fallen asleep.” Could he have
used this language if he had been aware that Jesus during
his earthly life had raised the dead? (7) Lastly, it must be
noted that St. Paul everywhere ascribes the resurrection of
Jesus to “ the power of God.” In this he flatly contradicts
the Fourth Gospel, which makes Jesus say, “ I have power to
lay down my life, and to take it again” “ Destroy this temple
and in three days I will raise it up. . . . He spake of
the temple of his body.”
We conclude, then, that the non-suit of the mythical theory
attempted to be made out from the great Epistles of St.
Paul cannot be accepted by any candid inquirer. Those who
seek to authenticate the Gospel narratives by an appeal to St.
Paul had better let the subject alone, for the apostle has no
help to give them. “ The ugly little Jew” of Tarsus does
not “ stand in the way of the whole theory.” On the contrary
he lends the theory its strongest support. Search carefully
the writings of the apostle, and you will find that, while he
shows the fullest acquaintance with the sayings of the Master,
he knows nothing of his alleged miracles, although he is
brought face to face with the “Jewish” demand for signs.
Is it conceivable that no hint should have escaped him about
these miracles if there had been any such along with the
sayings in the tradition which had been delivered to him ?


We are now in a position to dispose of the difficulty
with which we are confronted in the following sentence :
“If they (the early disciples) were capable of remembering
Christ’s words, why should they be so prodigiously incapable of
remembering his works?” Suppose there were no miracle-works
to remember, then what becomes of Mr. Clarke’s difficulty ?
Suppose that the earliest “ tradition” contained nothing but
the sayings of the Lord. Nor is this supposition without
warrant; it is strongly supported by the earliest witness to
the Gospels. In a well-known passage of Eusebius, Papias,
Bishop of Hierapolis (about a.d. 160) makes the first explicit
reference to the Gospels of Matthew and Mark. He plainly
intimates that the oldest Gospel, that of St. Matthew, as he
knew it, was a collection of the discourses ( logia ) of the Lord.
No difficulty need be raised by the fact that the First Gospel,
as ive know it, contains the record of miracles said to have
been worked by Jesus ; for competent critics allow that the
Matthew of Papias cannot be identified with our canonical
Matthew in its present shape. This fact is admitted in his
own candid way, by such an orthodox writer as Dr. Sanday,
in his scholarly and interesting work, “ The Gospels in the
Second Century.”
What the primitive Christians were capable of in the way
of distorting history and marring the portraiture of character
may be gathered from a comparison of the Acts of the
Apostles with the undoubtedly genuine writings of St. Paul.
Orthodox critics may try to laugh down the great central
hypothesis of the Tubingen school, or, like Dr. Sanday (in
Bishop Ellicott’s Commentary), they may describe it as “ a
house of cards;” but, as is well remarked by the translator of
Zeller’s work on the Acts, although the theory may be long
resisted, yet it will hold its own, and must win its way to
general acceptance. For, by no torturing of the documents
can the portrait of St. Paul, as limned by his own strong
hand in his epistles, be brought into harmony with the fusing
and reconciling picture drawn for us in the Acts of the
Apostles. If, then, the early Christians were capable of thus
misrepresenting St. Paul, why should it be deemed incredible
that they could do the same for St. Paul’s Master, whom they
understood less than they understood the Apostle ?
We have no concern here with Mr. Clarke’s attempt to
prove that the personality, the thought, the word, and the
work of Christ are miracles in the sense of “ deviations from


the common norm of exj)erience,” or in any other sense. If
these are miracles, they are miracles in the region of the true
Supernatural—the realm of spirit: they are certainly not
miracles “in tire realm of physics.” If the Father of Spirits
lias given us a revelation of spiritual truth, and has intro-
duced a new spiritual power into the drama of human history,
these facts can raise no presupposition in favour of interfer-
ences with the order of physical nature. Those who are not
satisfied with the present order of nature had better try their
hands at drawing up a programme of suggested improvements.
Meanwhile the religious mind will trust in the wisdom of
Him “ who doeth all things well.” We have no fault to find
with Mr. Clarke’s eloquent account of Christianity as a work-
ing power in human history. It is of course quite open ‘to
any one to say that the entrancing picture has been got by
fixing attention on the lights alone and ignoring the shadows.
The lecturer might be reminded that—
“ Beneath the angel-strain have rolled
Two thousand years of wrong.”
However, we are fully prepared to admit that Christianity
has been the greatest uplifting force the world has ever
known. Only observe, Mr. Clarke calls Christianity the
tk dynamic of Christ; ” he says that Jesus “ generated the
forces which have made Christianity what it is to-day.” St.
Paul, on the other hand, calls it the dynamic of God. “ I
am not ashamed of the Gospel of Christ for it is a power of
God.” Do you say that Christ is the “ very and eternal
God?” Very well; say it then, and think it, if you can.
Only remember that the dogma of Christ’s proper deity is
contradicted on every page of the New Testament. The few
passages that were supposed to explicitly teach the dogma
have long since been set in their true light by purer text-
readings, or by more accurate renderings, or by more rational
interpretations. One passage, Homans ix. 5, is a matter of
punctuation. Those who feel any interest in seeing how
completely the arguments of the great Anglican classic,
Liddon, have been torn to tatters, will do well to read a
volume published by Trubner and Co.—“ An examination of
Liddon’s Bampton Lectures, by a Clergyman of the Church
of England.”
We do not attempt here to answer the question “ What
think ye of Christ ? ” If our answers are to be worth any-
thing, every man must find an answer for himself. For our


part, we cannot acknowledge that Mr. Clarke gives much
help towards fairly answering the question. He shows him-
self too much hampered by theological prepossessions, and he
makes the largest and wildest assertions about the teaching
and practice of Jesus, in the very worst style of Canon Lid-
don. Here is a specimen—“He (Christ) demanded that all
men should trust him to the uttermost for all their interests,
temporal and eternal.” How this statement is to be recon-
ciled with the teaching of the Sermon on the Mount, which
inculcates an utter trust in the Heavenly Father alone for
all our interests temporal and spiritual, is a puzzle that can
be solved by the theological mind alone. But whatever we
may think of the authority of Christ as Lord of Humanity,
let us not forget that St. Paul describes it as delegated in its
origin, and temporary in its duration. “Then also will the
Son himself be made subject unto him that subjected the all
things unto him, that God may be the all in all.” Even such
an ecclesiastically-minded personage as Mr. Gladstone has
been understood to express his readiness, on the strength of
this passage, to admit that after all Christianity may be only
“ the scaffolding to a higher theism.” “ For we know in part
and we prophesy in part. But when that which is perfect is
come, that which is in part shall be brought to nought,”
Mr. Clarke is in the habit of trying to stagger all dissen-
tients from his Christology with the painful alternative,
Either Christ is more than man, or he is less than great;
•either he is a superhuman personage, or else he must rank
far below all the other great religious teachers of our race. But
before any such dilemma can be regarded as exhaust!re, there
must take place, under the guidance of historical and moral
probability, a thorough sifting of the records, so that we may
know bow much in them really belongs to Jesus himself, and how
much belon gs to the later theological consciousness of the Church.
We must knock at the door of History with the old request,
“ Sirs, we would see Jesus.” Until some common ground of
appeal is agreed upon, all discussion of the character and
claims of Christ is profitless. Bid Jesus commission his
apostles to evangelise all nations ? and if so, how is this to be
reconciled with the prediction that the apostles would not
have gone over the cities of Israel before the second advent
should take place ? Bid Jesus enjoin his apostles to baptise
“ Into the name of the Father, the Son, and the Holy Ghost ? ”
and, if so, why did the Ap>ostles disobey the injunction, and


baptise only “ Into tlie name of Jesus ? ” Did Jesus take up
the contradictory attitudes shown in the conversations with
the Samaritan and with the Syro-Phoenician woman respec-
tively ? Until these and a host of similar questions are
answered all argument can be nothing better than a mere
beating of the air. The crying need of the time, therefore,
is that our orthodox teachers should come to some good
understanding with regard to the labours of the great critical
schools of Europe in the field of New Testament criticism.
It has generally been the custom to twit these schools with
their want of agreement; but notwithstanding all differences
of opinion among them, there are certain broad general con-
clusions on the subject of the New Testament literature
which are pretty generally accepted by all the great masters
of the critical method. That the Fourth Gospel, with its
Alexandrine gnosis and its long speeches, is utterly unhis-
torical; belongs to a late date ; and is in no sense the work
of St. John —That the Synoptics, though largely historical,
contain more or less of legendary and mythical matter;
that in their present form they were composed long after
the death of the apostles ; that their reports are often con-
tradictory, and that only an “ electic use ” can be safely made
of them —That the Acts of the Apostles (with the exception
of the “we” portions) was composed in the second century,
is largely unhistorical and legendary, and gives a distorted
view of the history of the Apostolic Church—these conclusions
are generally looked upon as certain in all the free critical
schools of Germany and Holland. What shall we say to
it all? Shall we treat the labours of all these patient
investigators as an elaborate monument of learned folly and
insane perversity ? If there is nothing whatever in the results
reached by these critics, then, to us at least, such an instance
of perverted ingenuity and wasted labour would be the
most melancholy and depressing fact in the history
of human thought. These men are not actuated by
any malignant hatred to religion in general or to
Christianity in particular. They are not generally atheists,
and they do not write in the interests of secularism. Many
of them, two notably, Baur and Pfleiderer —par nobile
fratrum —like the Cairds of Glasgow, are votaries of the
most spiritual philosophy the world has known since the days
of Plato—that of Hegel. What depth of kinship there is
between the conceptions of Hegelianism and the conceptions


of Christianity, may be learned from Principal Caird’s noble
book, “An Introduction to the Philosophy of Religion.” In
the writings of Baur and Pfleiderer especially, the conception
of Christianity as a Divine “ dynamic ” is everywhere present;
and notwithstanding Mr. Clarke’s dictum that St. Paul “is
no favourite with the advocates of the mythical theory,” we
owe it to the sympathetic genius of these two men that we
can see something of the Great Apostle as he really was, and
can get a faint apprehension of the thoughts that were
struggling for expression in his fiery soul. The process
of historical investigation which has led the adherents of the
critical method to the results stated above in regard to the
New Testament writings is exactly the same which has given
us a reconstructed history of the Religion of Israel as we have
it in the luminous work of Kuenen. That the conclusions of
modern criticism in regard to the Old Testament are being
quietly accepted, even in Conservative England, is plain from
the report of the recent Church Congress, at which the only
question raised was whether these conclusions should be dis-
closed at present by the clergy in the ordinary course of their
preaching. These teachings of Biblical science on the subject
of the Old Testament have long been most obstinately resisted,
and no doubt there will be an equally strong opposition
to the results of New Testament criticism for many years
to come. But there are plenty of signs that the more
liberal minds within the Church are already feeling their
way to the re-adjustment of thought rendered necessary
by the labours of the critical school. Nothing could be more
significant than the following extract from the report of a
paper read at the Church Congress by the Rev. Sir G. VV.
Cox, of York.—“ He was of opinion that the eschatological
matter in the Epistles of SS. Jude and Peter (II), the imagery
of the Apocalypse on the subjecb of last things, and the
matter of the discourses in St. Matthew xxiv. and xxv., were
derived from the Book of Enoch—(Hear, hear, and dissent)
—and therefore that these discourses were not uttered as
given, and not uttered at all; that no distinction could be
drawn between one set of discourses in the Gospels and any
other; that as some discourses in the first Gospel were not
uttered as they had come down to us, and were perhaps not
uttered at all, discourses in the other Gospels might be in the
same case; and that such questions must be settled according
to the evidence at command, and not by appeals to the


authority of the hook in -which they were found. Such
appeals involved a tyranny which had become intolerable, and
which must be fought against until it was utterly put down.
(Cheers and hisses.”)
We cannot conclude without a reference to the melancholy
words in which Mr. Clarke characterises the religious
basis of the Elgood-street Brotherhood. He says—“ Ho
fellowship huilt on such a drift of sand can hold together
for more than the passing hour.” We call these words
melancholy, because they show how completely the minds
of good men may be blinded by theological preposses-
sions to the most vital teachings of Jesus Christ. What was
the religious basis of the Elgood-street Brotherhood ? It
was none other than the very basis which Jesus himself laid
down for the Kingdom of Heaven. The keeping of the
commandments; loving service to man, humble trust in G-od,
with tender reverence for the memory of Jesus —do you call
this foundation “a drift of sand,” or “a quaking bog?”
Jesus calls it a “ rock ” ! “ Every one, therefore, that hears
these sayings of mine and does them, shall be likened
unto a wise man who built his house upon the rock.
And the rain descended, and the rivers came, and
the winds blew, and fell upon that house ; and it
fell not, for it had been founded upon the rock.” We do not
mean to assert that Christianity is merely a code of morals.
It is more ; it is a religion. But duty comes before doctrine,
character before creed, ethics before religion. Ethics are the
basis, and the only basis, on which any true religion must be
built; and to put theological belief before moral practice is
nothing but a foolish attempt to set the pyramid on its apex.
“ He that doeth the will of my Father shall know of my doc-
trine that it is true.”
Note.— Our quotations from the New Testament are taken,
for the most part, from Dr. S. Davidson’s translation.
Printed at “ The Mercury ” Office, Hobart.






