

I
i
T
1




a B)o F P


ROBERT LOUIS STEVENSON.


Robert Louis Stevenson
as I Found Him
in His Island Home.
CAPTAIN HIRAM G. MORSE.


Copyright, 1902,
HIRAM G. MORSE.


RESPECTFULLY DEDICATED
TO THE FRIENDS AND ADMIRERS
ROBERT LOUIS STEVENSON.




Robert Louis Stevenson as I Found Him
in His Island Home.
Capt. H. G. Morse,
Ex. S. S. “Alameda.”
Many have asked why this author should
have settled in such an out-of-the-way place.
My reply was that, as Mr. Stevenson had
been an invalid for years and searched for a
climate most suitable for himself, he finally
fixed on “Apia” in the Samoan group.
Although an invalid, he was capable of
greater exertion than many who were appar-


ently his superiors physically. His wonder-
ful will-power to accomplish whatever he
undertook was noticeable when some self-
imposed task would be done that an ordinary
person, in good health, would shrink from.
He would plunge headlong into the work,
whatever it might be, at the desk or climb-
ing over some untrodden part of the island,
straining every nerve and muscle to keep
pace with his thoughts. With his active brain
he could give a dozen orders to as many
different persons without even changing the
tone of his voice, or he could sit quietly in
his boat, apparently as unconscious as a
native, waiting for the mail steamer to
anchor and the side steps (gangway) to be
lowered. At the first glance one would have
thought him a tourist coming on board to
look around or to see what was going on.


Once upon his feet he was all action, mov-
ing with an air becoming his name, and bow-
ing gracefully to those who recognized him.
On his gaining my room, and seated on the
floor like the natives, he would commence to
prepare a cigarette, asking such questions as
were to him the most important. His counte-
nance was no index to his thoughts, further
than that he appeared eager for a few head-
lines of what the outside world was doing
and which evidently he would grasp before I
had finished. His penetrating eye was suffi-
cient to keep one from ever attempting to
exaggerate whatever he wanted to know. I
was always impressed with the idea that he
invariably anticipated what you were about
to say and had commenced to think of some-
thing else. At no time nor under any condi-
tion was his mind at rest. I remember his


talking on one subject and at the same time
he was, mentally, in Honolulu with the
Queen. The Hawaiian Islands were then in
a disturbed state politically and Stevenson
had a great desire to see the Queen back on
the throne.
His mind was his motive power; what-
ever he considered he should be doing the
body was compelled to yield in obedience to
the brain. When from overwork the body
and brain refused to do duty together, then
one was obliged to give way to the other.
Knowing that the human system has its
limits and to prevent any unhappy thoughts
from controlling his mind, it was his custom
to invite the “band boys” from whatever
English warship might be in port to come up
to his house and play. Seated on a veranda
with his wife and stepdaughter, “ Belle


Strong,” one on each side, and the native
servants comprising his household, and with
a small clanship of native servants gave to
the observer a strange appearance. Naked
men and half clad women, European band
boys and natives all mixed up, while the
clear notes of such airs as the author might
select vibrated among the hills, giving the
impression that nature was assisting to make
the gathering a pleasant one. It was such
surroundings, which Nature alone can offer,
that gave to his mind a freedom of thought
and which enabled him to grapple with the
universe itself. If Nature has furnished
gifts to those who are selected to enlighten
their fellowmen, it is to Nature appeal
and look for assistance. The mind should be
nursed and surrounded by Nature’s luxuries;
it is only from this world that man can


speak. To define the grandest phases in
Nature one must have dwelt in her midst,
and where is she more liberal with gifts than
in those islands placed as far as possible from
harm and mutilation ? Yet man will be the
assassin of all in the end.
Long before his death, Stevenson asked
me how I could express to people in San
Francisco his life in Samoa so they would
understand and realize the situation. I now
sadly repeat my version. His home in
Vailima was situated about half-way up the
mountain side, accessible at an angle of 15
degrees, on a plateau formerly occupied by
native chiefs, many of the trees (cocoanut)
yet standing as landmarks. Here, in the
early morning, from five to half-past five,
after having his coffee, he would sit in one
of the upper rooms, the balmy atmosphere of


the gentle trade winds sifting through the
tropical foliage, the mountain extending
some 900 feet above his home and thickly
clad with trees indigenous to the soil, in-
habited by birds singing their national airs.
From this altitude he could look down into
the harbor of Apia where the ships were
lying. Far out on the horizon, distant twenty
miles, he could discern the ships and mail
steamers approaching the Island bringing
with them letters from his far distant home.
Here in his new home, in the virgin soil of a
tropical island, he experienced the pleaures
of an invalid beginning, after many years,
to resume an outdoor life and exercise.
In one of his letters to his friend, Calvin,
he says: “Nothing is so interesting as
weeding, clearing and path-making. The
oversight of laborers becomes a disease. It


is quite an effort not to drop into the farmer
and it does make you feel so well. * * *
I scarce pull up a weed but I invent a
sentence on the matter to yourself.” It was
here, with these surroundings, that Mr.
Stevenson’s best and most prominent works
were produced.
Mr. Stevenson’s mode of attire was notice-
able to strangers. Light colored, tight fit-
ting pants, top boots, velvet jacket and a shirt
with a turn down collar and loose tie; in fact,
his dress was slightly Byronic, but more
Stevenson.
When at his desk Mr. Stevenson wrote
from six A.M. to eleven A.M, and from
noon until late in the afternoon, omitting
the siesta, so dear to Europeans in the
tropics.
The sad news of Stevenson’s death, which


was flashed over the wires as soon as it came
within reach of telegraphic communication,
was a blow not only to the world of letters,
but to all the civilized world. He had a
mind laden with noble sentiments, lived a
life punctuated by silent beneficence, was
brave as a lion when surrounded by danger,
pleasant, affable and genial in domestic life,
feared by his enemies and beloved by his
friends.
His grave is on the very apex of Viamea
Mountain, where a monument will mark the
last resting-place of one of the greatest
authors of the present century. Nature has
been more kind for she has given him the
Island itself, anchored in its ocean bed, there
to remain forever and forever. Stevenson
has given to Samoa a place in history such
as Napoleon gave to St. Helena, one from


choice, the other from force; one wielded the
pen, the other the sword.
Whatever Mr. Stevenson’s political aspira-
tions may have been I cannot say. His
apparent leaning towards the cause of King
Malietoa was the outcome of his intense
sympathy for the weak rather than for
the political troubles of that unfortunate
monarch. Proud of his ancestry of clansmen
in his own beloved Scotland, he entered into
and partook of the joy, hopes and fears of the
native chiefs in and around his district. His
home, Vailima, was built on the site of their
ancient stronghold. He loved to hear them
recount the valorous deeds of their fore-
fathers and his interest in them never
flagged. His sympathetic nature won these
poor natives to him. They loved him and
looked up to him for advice, and the advice


that he gave them was ever on the side of
peace.
The growing power of Stevenson with
these primitive, unlettered people caused
grave alarm among the German residents in
the Samoan Islands, whose sympathies and
interests lay with the opposite party. At
one time it was rumored that he was acting
in the interests of Great Britain, but it was
only rumor. His power with the islanders
was certainly very great, but the idea of
accepting office in their behalf never once
entered his mind.
His manner of life was frugal and abste-
mious. He arose early, breakfasted at six,
worked at his desk from seven until lunch
and from two until five P. M.; bed at eight-
thirty and usually his lamp was out by ten.
It is needless to say he was an extraordi-


narily productive writer. At times when his
literal work became monotonous he would
join his native workers in the bush, chopping
down the woods and tropical undergrowth.
This, in addition to his pony and flageolet,
constituted his everyday life in “Apia.”
The constant care and watchfulness of his
wife, the “Fanny” of whom he speaks so
frequently and so tenderly in his letters,
did much to prolong his life.
It has seldom fallen to the lot of an author
to be surrounded by such a literary house-
hold.
During the disturbed condition of the
country Matafa retired to his stronghold on
the small island of Monono. Acting on
advice, he gave himself up to the British
war-ship on that station in consideration of
his being treated as became his rank. From


some unknown cause he was handed to a
German man-of-war, who, in turn, deported
him to the Marshall Islands and there
limited him to a coral reef. The twenty Tour
lesser chiefs who surrendered with Matafa
were imprisoned at Apia, and but for the
private funds supplied by Mr. Stevenson
of them would have died of starvation
and the want of medical attention. Steven-
son, with the Roman Catholic priest, used all
the influence possible in effecting their re-
lease, which was accomplished after one
year's imprisonment.
To show their appreciation of his care and
interest during their incarceration these
twenty-four lesser chiefs built with their
own hands a graded road through the
tangled, tropical forest, where heretofore
was only a mountain trail, and termed it the


“Road of Gratitude,” or, more properly
translated, “Road of the Loving Heart.”
This road extended from Apia to his house,
Vailima.
H. G. Morse.




