

ITVF p
I ' : :
ROBERT RAIRES
Reformer and Roadfindev
THIRD JUBILEE
1180-1930
tp|
Published by the
BOARD OF RELIGIOUS EDUCATION
Presbyterian Church of Australia


•* -
Mm' 11 I mi ' ‘ 9£
$:-V■■■; —. z ;>: ■ ■


ROBERT RAIKES
Reformer and Roadfinder
By
WILLIAM GOYEN
Director, Presbytorian Board of
Religious Education
Uo>
PUBLISHED BY THE
PRESBYTERIAN BOARD OF RELIGIOUS EDUCATION
MELBOURNE, 1930


No man goeth about a more godly business than he who
is concerned with the right upbringing of his own and other
people’s children.
Aristotle
Know you what it is to be a child? It is to be
something- very different to the man of to-day. It is
to have a spirit yet streaming- from the waters of bap-
tism. It is to believe in love, to believe in loveliness,
to believe in belief; it is to be so little that the elves
can reach to whisper in your ear; it is to turn pumpkins
into coaches and mice into horses, lowness into lofti-
ness and nothing into everything, for each child has
its fairy god-mother in its own soul; it is to live in
a nutshell and to count yourself the King of infinite
space; it is—
To see the world in a grain of sand,
And a heaven in a wild flower;
Hold infinity in the palm of your hand,
And eternity in an hour.
—Francis Thompson.




ROBERT RAIKES


CONTENTS
Chapter I.—His Times
.. Page 5
Chapter 2.—His Manner „ 10
Chapter 3. —His Plan 14
Chapter 4. —His Discouragements „ 21
Chapter s. —His Achievement „ 26
Chapter 6. —His Legacy „ 33
Chapter 7. —His Challenge „ 39


Registered by the Postmaster*General for
transmission through the Post as a Book


ROBERT RAIKES
REFORMER AND ROADFINDER
CHAPTER ONE
HIS TIMES
One hundred and fifty years is but a brief span
in the life of a nation, yet it may be so fertile in im-
provement that the later generations are heirs of tradi-
tions distinctly different, and inheritors of a spirit
wholly superior.
In the days of Robert Raikes there were no aero-
planes, no wireless, no telephones, no motor cars, no
railways, no popular franchise nor popular education.
Life was remarkably unlike the life of our day, and
unlike, not only in outward movement but in ruling
spirit. Macaulay held that the chief cause which made
the fusion of the different elements of society so im-
perfect in the 18th Century, was the extreme difficulty
which our ancestors found in passing from place to
P la ce. “Of all inventions,” he goes on to say, “the
alphabet and the printing press alone excepted, those
inventions which abridge distance have done most for
the civilisation of our species. Every improvement of
the means of locomotion, benefits mankind morally and
intellectually as well as materially, and not only facili-
tates the interchange of the various productions of
nature and art, but tends to remove national and pro-
vincial antipathies, and to bind together all the bran-
ches of the great human family.” Obviously the
absence of our facilities for travel and communication
gieatly divided people in spirit as well as in practical


co-operation in earlier days, and contributed to theii
misunderstanding, harshness, severity and cruelty to
each other almost beyond belief.
In the world of employment, e.g., masters unmer-
cifully exploited their workmen, forcing their wages
down below starvation level and stretching their hours
to a length that must have exhausted the toiler—-12,
14 and 15 hours a day being common. Women, too,
were engaged in labour for which their physique was
totally unfitted, and worse still “children of any age,
from four or five upward were put into the mills and
the mines and strained and tortured that they grew
up mere caricatures of humanity.” Overworked,
ill-fed, scantily clothed and oppressed, it is not sur-
prising that immorality, vulgarity and obscenity ran
riot. Ideals were gross, sports brutal, public life cor-
rupt, vice unashamed. Nor is it surprising that the
attempts to check vice and secure order, were of the
drastic kind. Capital punishment was levied for com-
paratively trifling offences such as stealing a sheep or
a handkerchief. For begging or quarrelling or offen-
sive conduct, men and women were tied to a cart’s
tail and whipped through the city, a crowd of people
following after and edging the punishment on. De-
faulting debtors were cast into prison and herded with
criminals of the worst type and left without bed or
board. Desperate in condition they suffered in self-
respect and expressed themselves in shocking language.
Severity had bred degenerates and made them worse
by its blundering treatment. “Heavy assize” wrote
Raikes in his Journal. “Twenty-one condemned to
death. How deplorable that society cannot be secured
without so great a sacrifice.”
The leaders of society, however, seem to have
been strangely blind. Burke (1795) with the stringent
facts of life before him, contended that since the poor
were the tools of the rich, the rich could be trusted
to see that they would not allow their tools to fall into
bad repair. Malthus (1798) proved to his own satis-
faction that the poor must always remain on the
border-line of starvation since population tended to
outstrip the means of subsistence and increase of
population involved famine, and Ricardo (1817) laid


down the iron law of wages which necessitated a pit-
tance for the worker. The social experts of the time
saw no hope of amelioration. Their theories hardened
their hearts.
Much the same spirit of laissez-faire possessed
the Church. With the New Testament in its hands
and the teaching of Jesus on the tender Fatherhood
of God, in its creed and prayer, one would have thought
that the situation would have roused the indignation
and practical sympathy of the whole of God’s people,
yet it failed to do so. They too, were doped by miscon-
ception. Somerville quotes two instances that are
illuminating. Wilberforce could work like a Trojan
for the freedom of the negro, yet when he came to
deal with the degradation of the people in England he
explains that the “more lowly path (of the poor) has
been allotted them by the hand of God, that it is their
part to discharge its duties and contentedly to bear
its inconveniences, that the present state of things is
very short, that the objects about which worldly men
conflict so eagerly are not worth the contest, and that
the peace of mind which Religion offers indiscrimin-
ately to all ranks, affords more true satisfaction than
all the expensive pleasures that are beyond the poor
man’s reach,” etc., etc. Such writing raises one’s
indignation in our day, yet Wilberforce was not insin-
cere. He was a victim of the stupid notion that
Christianity was apart from the common life, that soul
and body were not related, and that the true counsel
was to be content in the circumstances one was placed,
be they good or bad. The other instance quoted points
to the same falsity. Pious Hannah More taught in
a Sunday School in a Mendip mining village where the
wages were a shilling a day and two hundred people
were crammed into nineteen cottages, yet it does not
seem to have occurred to her that such conditions of
life were a crying iniquity in the sight of God and a
cruel crime against the dwellers. Her heart was sad-
dened by the immorality that prevailed, but she did
not appear to make any attempt to better the con-
ditions. She comforted herself with the thought that
the children “understood tolerably well the first twenty
chapters of Genesis,”


With the political leaders callous and the Christian
Church resigned, the situation appeared to be hope-
less. Humanly it was, but God was disquieting the
hearts of men, and great souls like John Howard and
Robert Raikes were responding to His guidance. It
was the tragedy of prison life that raised the protest
of the spirit of God within both of them, and with
one or two concrete cases before us, we may picture
the background of our hero’s great service. In Glou-
cester, his own city, there were two prisons, the Castle
and the Bridewell. They were both notorious. In the
first the disorderly were confined. In the second
persons arrested for debt or crime were imprisoned.
Both were shunned as pest-houses by the respectable
citizen, for filth and disease were rife and the general
condition of the inmates appalling. Here are two
appeals made on their behalf. “There are now in oiu
castle fourteen or fifteen persons confined for small
debts of £lO or £ll. These poor men are in such
distress that they are near perishing for want of sus-
tenance. About a fortnight ago, one unfortunate man,
they say, was starved to death there. Who in the
possession of the good things of this world can refuse
to alleviate such a state of wretchedness?” Here is
another. “From private benefactions placed in his
hand, last winter for alleviating extreme distress in
the county gaol, the printer has been enabled to give
an allowance of two pennyworth of bread per day to
debtors who, not able to pay for a bed, are obliged to
lie upon straw and without such assistance must have
perished for want. This charitable fund is almost
exhausted.” What a lamentable picture these quota-
tions indicate. Raikes, however, was not content to
make appeals for these He visited the
prisons regularly, contributed of his means to the
prisoners’ welfare, read to them and tried in every
way to alleviate their suffering. Intelligent man as
he was, his personal knowledge of their character and
experience led him to feel that valuable lives were
suffering wreck and ruin by the desperate circum-
stances in which their lives were cast and the absence
of instruction and uplift. Gradually a social gospel
grew up in his mind. “Vice,” he held, “is preventable.”


Idleness is the parent of vice and ignorance is the
cause of idleness among the masses.” We should de-
sire m all likelihood to phrase this differently, but it
loughly expresses a working hypothesis that engaged
the unqualified devotion of a great way maker and
led to greater achievements than he could have
imagined.
Inevitably these sordid, sinful disorders reflected
themselves in the rising generation and made a power-
ed appeal. The children of Gloucester were ill-fed
and ill-clothed. They fought each other like tigers,
lied and stole and used language of a revolting char-
acter. Property was insecure because of their dis-
honesty, the streets were noisy with their clamour
and hideous with their curses. They were the young
Ishmaehtes of the land, with hands against every
man and every man’s hand against them. It was not
that they were forgotten of God, but that they were
born under disabling conditions, badly fed, badly
housed badly trained. Many of them were in the
bfrttf” Ul W ° rdS ° f Kingsley ’ “damned from their
childhood, youth and maturity were in a
pitiful condition, and the work of Raikes must be set
JLf ii P TP C u was surely no attractive task
that called for his interest and labour. It cost Raikes
heavily in cash, heartache and weariness. It exposed
him to ridicule and misrepresentation. But he ffave
diliffpripp U^ mi urn W i th unfla^in g’ heartiness and
diligence, and it led him to a movement that has made
his name famous. Not a man to speak freely of his
i e igious experience nor to write heroically, his com-
ment strikes the mind with peculiar power. “It is that
part of our Saviour’s character I aim at imitating. He
went about doing good.” “If the glory of God be
promoted m any way, even the smallest degree, society
must reap some benefit.” ’ y


CHAPTER TWO
HIS MANNER
Robert Raikes came of a Yorkshire family. His
grandfather, Timothy, was an Anglican clergyman
his father Robert Raikes a printer in Gloucester, and
his mother the daughter of the Rev. Richard Drew.
Beyond a reputation for business ability, independent
thinking, sympathetic relations to the poor and strong
temperance convictions, little is known of Robert
Raikes the elder. What traces are left of him indicate
a good, strong sensible citizen who did well tor his
family and took a sympathetic interest in his neig
bours.
Little also is known of our hero in his childhood
and youthful days. He appears to have received his
education at the St. Mary de Crypt Grammar School
close by his home. George Whitefield, the famous
evangelist and John Moore, Archbishop of Canterbury
in 1783, were scholars of the same school. Raikes
probably left the school when about 14 years cu age
to enter an apprenticeship with his father, in the
trade of printing. Apparently he continued his studies
after leaving St. Mary’s, for the business of printing-
required some knowledge of the classics, and he was
said to “write French fluently and be _ a first-rate
geographer.” It would be a mistake to think of him as
a scholar but there is good evidence that he was a
well educated man, far better informed than the aver-
age tradesman and so deeply interested in the welfare
of his age that he continued to increase his knowledge
and discipline his intellect, by study and writing, to
the end of his days. At the death of his father, he
took over the business and effected some improve-
ments. He was then 21 years of age, and became the
mainstay of his mother and her family. Ten years
later he married a lady of good family who shared


his sympathy at the sight of suffering and distress.
Their home was the birthplace of nine children, the
centre of much society, and a connecting link with
many other reputable homes, for Raikes’ six daughters
married six distinguished young officers who fought
under Nelson.
A peculiarity with Raikes was his fastidiousness
in dress. In Gloucester he had the reputation of being
one of the best clothed men in the city, and stories
are current that he paid a man to sweep the footpath
clean between his office and his house, lest he should
splash his stockings or smirch his shoes. Also that
at night a manservant walked ahead with a lantern
in order that his sprucely dressed master might not
step into puddles or come to grief in the open drains
that beset the traveller in those old ill-constructed
streets. The poorer of his fellow citizens scoffed at
the “dandy” and called him “Buck” Raikes, but there
may be something said for the opinion that his fasti-
diousness was part of his spiritual calibre. “What-
soever things are pure and lovely” may have a wider
application than some people think. Henry Drum-
mond held “that we esteem too little the mission of
beautiful things in haunting the mind with higher
thoughts and begetting the mood which leads to God.
... A mere touch of loveliness in a room, in a street,
even in a doorknocker, is a spiritual force. Ask the
working man’s wife and she will tell you, there is a
moral effect even in a clean tablecloth.” Of this we
may be sure, the interest and care Raikes took in his
dress, did not spring from vanity. No vain man would
have visited prisons such as those in Gloucester or
taken such personal care of gutter snipes such as
swarmed in the same city. The labour of Raikes for
half a century acquits him of pride. His neatness
and cleanliness and taste were connected with his self-
respect and his love of the beautiful.
Robert Raikes had a keen strong sense of the
value of human life. “How deplorable, that society
cannot be secured without so great a sacrifice.” This
was his comment when the sentence of capital punish-
ment was passed on 21 persons at an Assize he at-
tended. One would like to have heard his comment


when a famous legislation in after days objected to
the lessened hours for children, on the grounds that
it would interfere with the output of the factories!
On one occasion he is said to have asked some children
what they understood by the phrase “the Kingdom
of God is within you.” After some moments of silence,
the boy who was reading said: “I believe it means
when the Spirit of God is in our hearts.” Raikes was
delighted. He turned to a friend and said: “Don’t
you think that this is encouragement to cultivate the
lower orders of the people?” I could reveal to you
numberless incidents of this nature that occur to me
to render my scheme of “botanising” in human nature
pleasant and agreeable. I cannot express to you the
pleasure I often receive in discovering genius and in-
nate good disposition among this little multitude. In
the age when human life was “cheap” in the eyes of
men, when men, women and children were mine and
mill and cannon fodder, Robert Raikes showed his
Master’s sense of value. The least, the last and the
lost are unspeakably precious in spiritual value and
worth the utmost labour.
Another feature of this man’s life was faith. He
was strong in the substance of things hoped for.
With the apathy of the Church about him and the
callous indifference of the State, none but a high
souled man would have laboured for 30 years in the
prisons and then in the streets of his city. Natural
sympathy, however strong, is too weak for that task.
Raikes fed his gracious efforts from a higher source.
Nearly 30 years after the establishment of his first
school a young Quaker came to visit him in his retire-
ment and gather what information he could regarding
the movement. Touching on the origin, Raikes led
his visitor through the streets of Gloucester to the
place where his first school was held. “Pause here,”
the old man is reported to have said, “this is the spot
on which I stood when I saw the destitution of the
children and the desecration of the Sabbath by the
inhabitants of the city. As I asked myself can noth-
ing be done, a voice answered, TRY. I did try, and
see what God hath wrought. I can never pass by the
spot where the word “try” came so powerfully into


my mind without lifting up my hands and heart to
heaven, in gratitude to God for having put such a
thought into my heart.” As we proceed in our narrative
of his work, we shall be at a loss to account for his
whole-heartedness, wisdom and persistence, without
this sense of God’s direction and support. Raikes be-
lieved and therefore spoke and acted. The hand of
the Lord was upon him. And the Way-maker knew it.
“You’re a queer fellow Robert,” exclaimed a
fellow-worshipper at the Lady Chapel of the Cathedral.
“Why you give pennies to strange boys and waste your
time at the prisons baffles me completely. What do
you get out of it ?” “It behoves us all,” was the modest
reply, “to take some part in helping our unfortunate
beings in distress or disgrace.” Raikes might have
replied: I get the confirmation of my faith. For dis-
appointed and tricked as he often was, there was an-
other side to the picture. Men and women and boys
and girls with the finer instincts apparently battered
out of them, responded to his firm and kindly ways,
broke free from their coarse and passionate habits and
made good in the ways of kindness, honesty and help.
He had tried the gospel treatment and his patients had
recovered. His faith was confirmed by experience.
Other commendable characteristics clustered about
the character of Raikes we may well believe. Judged
by the extraordinary work be accomplished, it is ex-
tremely unfortunate that so little is known of his
personal life, and a positive loss that his correspon-
dence was allowed to perish.
We may think of him, however, as the son of a
good home, privileged with a good education, under-
taking a useful calling, moving in good society, taking
pardonable pride in his appearance, looking behind the
outward appearance of his fellow-citizens and recognis-
ing their spiritual value, possessed of a soul attentive
to the voice of God, and heeding that voice, finding re-
ward m rescued and regenerated lives. Raikes was
one of God’s good men and his steps were ordered by
the most High.


CHAPTER THREE
HIS PLAN
Robert Raikes was deeply indebted to his father
for many good traditions, dispositions and habits, and
amongst them, strong practical sympathies with the
oppressed and wayward. Old copies of the “Gloucester
Journal” have revealed regular paragraphs drawing
attention to the lamentable condition of the common
people, protesting against their inhuman treatment
and appealing for more humane and sensible methods
in dealing with the refractory. On two occasions
Robert Raikes senior was called before the Bar of
the House of Commons for daring paragraphs in his
journal. When his son inherited the newspaper, the
downtrodden, neglected and despised found themselves
with a similar-spirited friend. In addition to the use
of his pen on their behalf, he did everything in his
power to improve their circumstances, remove their
ignorance and inspire them to better life. For nearly
thirty years he carried on this work, visiting them in
the prisons, reading to them, finding them employ-
ment and striving to make them better and their lots
brighter. We have no reason to think that he slack-
ened in his task as his horizon enlarged. The measure
of success that helped to sustain his labours, suggested
ministries more promising and held him captive to his
initial tasks.
Outside his editor’s sanctum, a narrow lane ran
through the city wherein children gathered to play,
quarrel, fight and disport themselves. Raikes could
not escape their clamor, the language they used forced
itself into his room and the conduct he witnessed as
he looked through his window shocked his sense of
decency. Here surely was another sphere for Chris-
tian action. What hope was there in his attempt to
rescue the life of the imprisoned, if these little de-


generates were allowed to proceed on their downward
way.
The question arrested him beyond.release, on the
occasion of a journey to a distant part of the city
where a huge pin factory carried on operations and
employed a crowd of children from seven years up-
Whilst attending to the business of his visit,
the noise and evil language of a company of ill-clad
children near by, led him to remark: “It’s a pity that
something can’t be done with these children. Do they
belong to this part of the town? “Yes!” was the re-
ply, “they do and if you could see this part of the
town on a Sunday, you would be shocked indeed. The
street is then filled with multitudes of little wretches,
released on that day from the work in the factories.
They spend their time in noise and riot, playing at
chuck and cursing and swearing in such a horrid man-
ner as to make the place like hell on earth.” Raikes
was more deeply impressed than ever. He heard the
Spirit of God bidding him try to do something and
he obeyed. Meeting the clergyman of a neighboring
parish a little later, he confided his thoughts to him
and the Rev. Thos. Stock encouraged him to proceed.
Raikes was confirmed in his purpose and set out to
take action.
sou £ht a teacher, and in the person of a
Mrs. Meredith, he appeared to have found one. For
a small remuneration she lent her kitchen as the
school-room and endeavoured to instruct the children
assembled. One of the scholars who attended this
school has left this information. “The place was
called Sooty Alley because the chimney sweeps lived
there. This, I believe, was the first Sunday School
open in Gloucester. A woman named Meredith kept
the school. There were twelve or fourteen boys when
I went there. The schoM didn’t last. The teacher
ound hei pupils too fractious. And the pupils found
the confinement too irksome. The school closed.
Raikes, however, soon found another teacher and
opened another school. This time it was a Mrs. Mary
Critchley, landlady of the Trumpet Inn. She must
have been a personality of rare type. The inns of
those days were reputed to be clean, hospitable, well


conducted centres of social intercourse. Likely enough
Mrs. Critchley was a model landlady. At all events
Raikes selected her for teacher of his next school and
she worked at her post for several years, right on
indeed until she died. At her death she was succeeded
by her daughter (Mrs. Sarah Packer) and this lady
was also succeeded by her daughter (Mrs. Caroline
Watkins). For 83 years—down to 1863 —these good
women held on to their task. But more than teachers
were required. Scholars were to be gained. And this
called for as much tact and perseverance as the enlist-
ment of teachers. By what means could the gutter-
snipes of Gloucester be led to enter a room for the
purpose of praise, prayer and instruction? Well!
Raikes found the means. Buckets of hot steaming
potatoes, occasional gifts of clothes and pennies, kindly
words and treatment, home visitation and parental
help, incessant “mustering” from the streets, these
methods were freely used and with marked success.
Raikes had “a way with him” folks said, and his way
certainly appealed to children. Mrs. Critchley’s kit-
chen became so overcrowded that the school moved to
the Church near by and then to the Grammar School
next door to the Church. It has been calculated that
the school rose to an enrolment of from 100 to 120,
some inevitable fluctuation occurring from time to time.
To keep his staff up to the required numbers, and
we may believe, to deepen the interest of his elder
scholars, Raikes engaged the more competent as
helpers. From a letter written in 1787 we get a pic-
ture of the school at work. “The hour of assembly
on Sunday morning, prescribed in our rules, is 8
o’clock, but it is usually half-past eight before our flock
is collected. Twenty is the number allotted to each
teacher; the sexes kept separate. The twenty are
divided into four classes; the children who show any
superiority in attainments are placed as leaders of
these small classes and are employed in teaching the
others their letters, or in hearing them read in a low
whisper which may be done without interrupting the
master or mistress in their business. The stipend
to the teachers here is a shilling each Sunday, but we


provide the firing and bestow gratuities as rewards
of diligence which may make it worth sixpence more.”
Raikes did not fail to give what time he could to
teaching, but we can well believe his time was taxed
in rounding up scholars, encouraging teachers and tak-
ing general oversight.
“Boys will be boys” in every age, and community,
and we are not surprised that the boys in those schools,
with their hard upbringing were difficult to manage.
After a while girls were admitted to the schools and
testimonies are not wanting that these were not easier
to manage than the boys. Raikes was essentially a
man of wide sympathy, but his sympathy was not of
the sentimental order. He would stand no nonsense.
If a gentle remonstrance failed, he unhesitatingly took
stern measures. Robert Raikes was too much a man
of his age and we think, too wise in the knowledge
both of moral law and the human heart, to eschew
discipline. For one thing he insisted on clean hands,
clean faces and combed hair, and would take no ex-
cuses. “He sometimes ‘birched’ them with his own
hand,” we are told, “and sometimes marched them
home and insisted on their parents ‘leathering’ them,
stopping to see it done and then marching them back
to school again.” As time went on and the children
got to know their benefactor and so developed a desire
to stand well in his esteem, a hint from their teacher
that Mr. Raikes would be informed, powerfully re-
strained their conduct, and parents were known to
thrash a pupil up to the school doors to ensure atten-
dance. The times were rough and the material recalci-
trant. Raikes knew the value of discipline.
One can well believe that when he thrashed a boy,
he would feel like thrashing his parents for he saw
full well that the physical and moral condition of his
pupil was largely due to the home in which he was
reared. Not for a moment did he give wajf to the
current notion that the “poor in a lump is bad,” and
that the child was inevitably cursed with the degen-
eracy of his birth and surroundings.
His “botanising” and his Bible protected him from
that vicious mistake but he knew by experience the
powerful influence of the home and part of his plan


was home recovery. “I frequently go round to their
habitation/' he wrote, “to inquire into their behaviour
at home, and into the conduct of the parents, to whom
I give some little hints now and then as well as to the
children.' 5 “I was taking a woman to task one day,
before her husband, because the house was not so clean
as it ought. ‘Truth, sir/ said the man, T wish you
would come a little oftener; we should be all the
better/ ” Raikes must have been on terms of close
intimacy with his pupils’ homes, or he must have been
very rude to have spoken like that. He was not rude.
The man’s work was so sacred and important in his
sight that he convinced the rough parents of his
pupils that he held their children’s well-being as sup-
reme in value and obligation. Their homes were his
concern, because the children he befriended were their
responsibility to the last degree. The children’s in-
terests gave him the right to do some mission work in
the home, and link the parents with the teachers in
the child’s education.
, * s . delightful, too, to observe how this man
studied his young charges and adjusted his methods
and material to their welfare. Popular education was
unknown in those days. The children of the poor were
allowed to grow up ignorant and licentious and their
possibilities were rated by the thoughtless, reckless
creatuies they became. But Raikes had a different
conviction, and that conviction grew stronger by ex-
perience. “I cannot express to you,” he wrote, “the
pleasure I often receive in discovering genius and in-
nate good dispositions among this little multitude. It
is botanising in human nature.” This term, “botanis-
ing, was a favourite word with him. It expressed
his habit of studying the child’s nature and possibili-
ties, taking knowledge of his needs and attainments
and discovering methods of cultivating the soul within.
“If good seed,” he writes, “be sown in the mind at aii
early period of human life, though it shows not itself
for many years, it may please God at some future
period to cause it to spring up and to bring forth a
plenteous harvest.” “A reformation in society,” he
also writes, “seems to me to be only practicable by
establishing notions of duty and practical habits of


order and decorum at an early age.” One of his notes
said to be written early in his work, expressed the
conviction “that the child’s mind could be best worked
at a profit between the ages of six and twelve.”
By reason of the prevailing ignorance Raikes had
to begin by teaching the children the art of reading
and instructing them in the meaning of words. As
quickly as possible he led them on to the study of
simple passages of Scripture, set them to learn the
Catechism and specified rules of conduct. His calling
as a printer afforded him special opportunities for pro-
viding helpful literature. A.B.C. books and simple
Readers issued from his press. One publication that
had a great vogue was entitled a “Sunday Scholars’
Companion,” and the scope of its pages may be learned
from its lengthy sub-title: “consisting of Scripture
sentences disposed in such order as will quickly ground
young learners in the fundamental doctrines of our
most Holy Religion and at the same time lead them
pleasantly on from simple and easy, to compound and
difficult words.” Raikes took care to understand his
pupils, to adapt his lessons to their state of mind and
heart, and held firmly, to use his own words “that
religion must wait on improved education among the
masses before we shall be able to make much advance.
Religion and education may go together.” He was
no victim either, to the illusion that a good Sunday
School scholar was the full aim and end of early in-
struction. Though the Church of that day gave little
thought for the children, he knew that the children
needed the Church, and had a right to their place in
its life. Greatly daring, therefore, he gathered his
“ragged regiment” about him and well dressed man
though he was, marched boldly with them into Church.
The experience of being in Church was, of course, en-
tirely strange to the children, and their behaviour was
not always becoming. The beadles were said to be
highly indignant, for they and the youngsters were
often at cross purposes in the streets and to see these
ragamuffins in God’s house, shocked their sense of
fitness. Other “respectable” people in the pews were
offended also, and thought Raikes to be “mad.” Yet
the good man persevered and his little followers soon


entered into the spirit of worship and formed the
Church going habit. He was wise enough to see that
if his plan were to be permanently successful he must
enlist the sympathies and win the co-operation of good
men and women further afield, hence he used the pages
of his journal, wrote numerous letters and invited in-
spection on behalf of his Christlike endeavour. Not
only must Gloucester feed God’s lambs, but every city
and town and village undertake the task. How thank-
ful the way-maker must have felt when Fox informed
him by letter on the 7th September, 1785, that a
society for the support and encouragement of Sunday
Schools had been formed in London, and added “the
fire which you have had the honour to light up in
Gloucester, having now reached the Metropolis, will
I trust never be extinguished.


CHAPTER FOUR
HIS DISCOURAGEMENTS
The Gloucester printer began his work of reform
with one aim in view, the alleviation of human dis-
tress and the recovery of those out of the way. His
work for childhood and youth sprang up beside this
earlier undertaking and eventually eclipsed it in pro-
minence and emphasis. “A reformation in Society,”
he urged, “seems to be only practicable by establish-
ing notions of duty and practical habits of order and
decorum at an early age.” With such kindly and in-
telligent aims to his credit, one would have thought
a reformer would have had a fair field and many
favours, but the times were out of joint and woe to
the man who essayed to replace them. Suspicions and
criticisms lurked around his way. John Howard, for
example, began his work in 1773, seven years before
Robert Raikes determined to begin with the child.
Carlyle heard of him and in his Latter Day Pamphlets
wrote this comment: “Howard is a beautiful philan-
thropist, eulogised by Burke and in most men’s minds,
a most beautiful individual. How glorious having
finished off one’s affairs in Bedfordshire to set out on
a cruise over the jails, first in Britain, then over the
jails of the globe! A voyage of discovery, a circum-
navigation of charity to collate distresses, to gauge
to take the dimensions of human misery
—really it is very fine.” And then he goes on to say
(as Blackie paraphrases him) “through such men, the
devil’s children are getting themselves sprinkled with
rosewater as if that would cleanse them, the eternal
Iciw is supGi seded thcit irißkss th.o wRy of ti*ciiisgTossoi*s
hard, a paradise is provided for scoundrels and sound
beneficence is outdone by canting philanthropic twad-
• u TAW an effusion such as this from Carlyle, it
is hardly likely that a movement such as that of Robert


Raikes would escape. Cynicism and snobbery and vul-
garity throve apace, and the sight of a man uplifting
the downtrodden, teaching guttersnipes and actually
accompanying them to Church could not be suffered
with impunity. He must be told what his neighbours
think of his conduct and the mischief he was perpet-
rating.
The poor, ignorant and oppressed may perhaps be
forgiven their attitude. For so long had they been
degraded and despoiled that their “inferiority complex”
was pronounced and over-ruling. They were born to
subservience. Their surroundings held them to in-
digence and sin. What folly to encourage to
cleaner, purer, better life! This was the prevailing
mood; hence at the sight of the printer wending his
way to Church or school with a group of poor children
about him, the frequent cry was heard: “There goes
Bobby Wild Goose and his ragged regiment.” Raikes
in the minds of the common people, was on a wild goose
chase. He was attempting the impossible. His intelli-
gence was blamed. The nick-name, Bobby Wild Goose,
reflected their self-scorn. Few facts could have dis-
couraged Raikes more than that. What hope was there
to recover people who had no faith in their own re-
covery! The printer might easily smile at the nick-
name, but its implications were not conducive to smil-
ing. It intimated a condition of “wallowing in the
mire.”
The disparaging attitude of the “quality” is far
less excusable. They assumed superiority in the social
world and resented any attempt to benefit the masses.
The poor they frankly regarded as a lower order of
the human race, bound to be satisfied with “that
station in life, to which God had been pleased to call
them.” What hope, reasoned the employer, of sub-
missive and contented workmen if these notions of
high personal value get into their heads. Look, said
others, across the seas. Note what is happening in
France under the cry of Liberty, Equality and Frater-
nity. The masses cannot be kept in their place and
remain content with their lot, if you enlighten and
educate them, “An old and respectable correspondent”
attacked Raikes in the “Gentleman’s Magazine” be-


cause his effort would unfit the poor for menial service,
raise discontent and foment rebellion. We may there-
fore, conclude that the Sunday School is so far from
being the wise, useful or prudential institution it is
said to be. On the contrary it is subversive of that
order, industry, peace and tranquillity which constitute
the happiness of society and so far from deserving
encouragement and applause, it merits our contempt
and ought to be exploded as J;he vain chimerical in-
stitution of a visionary projector.” Such was the
attitude of many who prided themselves on belonging
to the “better classes.” Least of all can extenuation
be made for the attitude of the Church. As a citizen
of Gloucester, Raikes was intimately associated with
the local Church. Not only did he attend its worship
on the Lord’s Day, but he was accustomed to associate
himself with those who observed early morning prayer,
yet he has to complain: “Within this month the minis-
ter of my parish has at last condescended to give me
assistance in this labourious work which I have car-
lied on for six years with little or no support in his
own parish.” “Calvinists and Socinians abound here,”
he also writes, “but those abound more who consider
the world as the only abiding place and therefore give
themselves no concern about the preparation for an-
other.” “Respecting the clergy,” he adds, “I fear they
are past feeling . . . their minds are seared with the
hot iron spoken of in the Scriptures.” The good man
must have been unduly depressed when he wrote like
that, or perhaps was especially irritated by some cal-
lous act, for did not the Rev. Thos. Stock give him
encouragement at the outset and did he not speedily
find his work powerfully vindicated by the Rev. Row-
land Hill, a little later ? Yet Raikes had good reason
to complain. Churchmen and Ministers had lost re-
gard for our Lord’s appraisement of childhood, for His
strong words of warning against their neglect and for
His insistence on their nurture. The Church could
take an infant in its arms, baptise him in the Triune
Name and promise to teach him whatsoever things
Christ had commanded, and then turn a cold shoulder
on efforts to protect and redeem! The sacrilege of it,
is outrageous, and its callousness cut Raikes to the
quick.


It is not surprising, that antagonisms of such
nature gave rise to monstrous rumours and stupid
objections.
When Mrs. Hannah More endeavoured to form a
Sunday School in the Cheddar district, the parents
would not allow their children to attend, for the simple
reason that Sunday Schools sought to get hold of the
children and sell them as slaves to the West Indies!
Others showed jealousy of their parental rights,
and objected to their attention and obedience to
strangers. The cry of deprivation was also raised and
opposition amounting to violence was shown on the
grounds that the rollicking amusements of Sundays
that they enjoyed were being interfered with. Poor
people were being robbed of their liberty and pastimes!
Sunday Schools were also said to be guilty of a
breach of the Fourth Commandment. Raikes and his
co-adjutors were working on Sundays. The charge
is so frivolous that one has difficulty in taking it
seriously, but it appears to have been emphatic enough
to call forth a reply. Raikes wrote: “The minds of
men have taken great hold of the prejudice that we
are to do nothing on the Sabbath day which may be
deemed labour, and therefore we are to be excused
from all application of mind as well as body. The
rooting out of the prejudice is the point I aim at as
my favourite object. Our Saviour takes particular
pains to manifest that whatever tended to promote
the health and happiness of our fellow-creatures were
sacrifices peculiarly acceptable on that day.” The
answer bespeaks a wise mind and should have exposed
the stupidity of the charge.
The strength of the disparagements may be in-
ferred from the fact that they found attention in the
political circle of the nation. William Pitt is said to
have seriously considered the introduction of a Bill
to the House of Commons for the suppression of Sun-
day Schools. In all probability this was mainly due
to the connection of open air preaching and Sunday
Schools, but the ridiculous rumours afloat may have
been contributory causes. And it is to be feared the
way-maker’s reputation came in for some evil asper-
sions as well.


Raikes was not by any means a weak man, but
his rough handling and the rough handling of his
cherished work had its effect on his spirits. Writing
of himself to friends, he says: “I can prevail on no
one to second me in my little efforts to civilise the
long despised and neglected children of indigence.”
“I walk alone. It seems as if I had discovered a new
country where no other adventurer chooses to follow.”
“It is some recompense .for the scorn and con-
tempt of my neighbours that I am frequently honoured
with visits from strangers.” “I wonder not that you
are vilified. I am equally so. Our Master was, far
more than we.”
For all these confessions, the good man held on
his way. He had been led to a great conviction. He
had been made conscious of a command from the
Spirit of God to TRY. He had succeeded in gathering
a number of children about him, in inducing teachers
to take up the task, in enlisting some aid from parents
and above all in getting an inside knowledge of youth-
ful hearts and perceiving their promise and responsive-
ness. Why then, should he be disheartened ? True, he
had to contend against spiritual hopelessness, entren-
ched wickedness, religious inertia and stupid misinter-
pretation and misconception. But what mattered these
difficulties with God and God’s friends and God’s child-
ren at his side. “Let us not despond,” he wrote. “Let
us call on Him to whom all things are possible.” lam
never in so proper a frame of mind as when I am
reading or repeating passages from that heavenly com-
position (the Book of Psalms). They are my chief
comfort and consolation when any distress approaches;
they furnish the language of thanksgiving when the
heart rejoices.”


Chapter five
HIS ACHIEVEMENT
As a business man, Mr. Robert Raikes had con-
stant practice in the art of administration. He knew
right well that many good ideas had been spoiled in
their clumsy application, and he knew too, that the
value of an idea was tested in practice.
He felt sure in himself that he had rightly appre-
ciated the solution of the problem of social well-being.
The degradation of the child meant the degradation
of society. The redemption of the child meant the
redemption of society. But would the child respond
to treatment? Could he get helpers who would really
help in the execution of the task? Was it possible
for him to furnish practical proofs that his plan was
effective? As an intelligent, reflective practical man,
these questions must have challenged his mind, and
his answer was: “I will try. I will try in Gloucester,
and after a reasonable time announce the result of my
experiment to the world.”
For three years, therefore, the way-maker gave
himself heartily to his “seminary” under the care of
Mrs. Critchley, and perhaps three other schools that
also appear to have been started. And then at the
end of the three years he announced that he was ready
to show to the world what could be done towards the
creation of a new race, even out of social waste.
It was by means of his own newspaper the “Glou-
cester Journal” that he made public his scheme and
the London papers republishing his account, wide-
spread attention was awakened. Inquiries began
forthwith to pour into Raikes, and one correspondent,
Colonel Townsley, of Sheffield, reprinted the reply sent
by Raikes, in the Gentleman’s Magazine. In these
ways considerable publicity was given to the movement
and profound interest aroused. John Wesley and


George Whitefield had been and still were, preaching
the Gospel with gratifying success throughout the
land. A new spirit was steadily leavening English
society and here in the plan of Raikes men saw the
very method by which the children of the race could
be reclaimed and nourished in the right and happy
way. John Wesley so highly appreciated the enter-
prise indeed, that he expressed the conviction that
Sunday Schools would prove nurseries for Christians
and prove fresh means of reviving religion throughout
the Kingdoms. In 1788 he wrote: ‘‘l verily think these
schools are one of the noblest specimens of charity
which have been set afoot since the time of William
the Conqueror.” Cowper the poet also declared “that
he could think of no nobler means than the Sunday
School by which a reformation of the lower classes
could be effected,” and Adam Smith, author of the
“Wealth of Nations,” expressed the opinion that “no
plan so simple and promising for the improvement of
manners had been devised since the days of the
Apostles.”
Royalty, too, became interested, for in 1788, Queen
Charlotte sent for Raikes that she might hear from
his own lips “by what accident a thought which pro-
mised so much benefit to the lower orders of the people
as the institution of Sunday Schools, was suggested
to his mind, and what effects were observed in con-
sequence on the manners of the poor.” Raikes appears
to have enjoyed himself thoroughly in this privileged
visit, and was further gratified when King George
paid a personal call to one of the schools and uttered
the hope that “every poor child in my Kingdom should
be taught to read the Bible.” The Duke of Gloucester
is also said to have been entertained by Raikes and
one of his biographers “discovered from an oblique
reference in one of the pioneer’s private letters, that
the Empress of Russia, hearing of his plan, invited
him to visit that country in connection with it.”
This remarkable publicity stamped Raikes as
Pioneer of Sunday Schools. Others had preceded him
in gathering young folk together and instructing them
in the Holy Scriptures, but Raikes conceived that prac-
tice on a world canvas. He advocated his “plan” for


all places or as one of his biographers neatly put it,
“from cottager to King all learned of the new institu-
tion through Robert Raikes. He raised Sunday School
teaching from a fortuitous rarity into a universal
system. He found the practice local, he made it
national.” It was by virtue of his achievement in
organisation that Raikes gained the credit of being
Founder of the Modern Sunday School.
We should not give a moment’s hostage, however,
to the idea that the distinction accorded Raikes and
his plan, was mainly due to printer’s ink. Something
much more than advertisement was needed to arrest
the attention and win the encomium of the hosts who
wrote in praise of the movement. Raikes and his
fellow-workers could show the fruits. As early as
1784, he could say “the good effects of Sunday Schools
established in this city are instanced in the account
given by the principal persons in the pin and sack
manufacturers, wherein great reformation has taken
place among the multitudes whom they employ. From
being idle, ungovernable, profligate and filthy, the boys
and girls are become not only cleanly and decent in
their appearance but are greatly humanised in their
manners.” Mr. Church, a manufacturer of hemp and
flax, with many children in his employ, was also asked
tor his opinion, and he replied: “The change could not
have been more extraordinary in my opinion had they
been transformed from the shape of wolves and tigers
to that of men. In temper disposition and manners
they could hardly be said to differ from the brute
creation, but since the establishment of the Sunday
Schools they have seemed anxious to show that they
are not the ignorant illiterate creatures they were.
They aie more tractable, and obedient and less Quarrel-
some and revengeful. In short, I never conceived that
a reformation so singular could have been effected
amongst the set of untutored beings I employ.” The
schools attracted attention and won appreciation
through the marked improvement in conduct and bear-
ing of the children attending them. Instead of noise
and riot in the streets on Sundays there were peace
and order. Instead of quarrelling and swearing where
they foregathered, there were concord and friendship.


A sense of respect and courtesy took the place of pro-
fanity and self-assertiveness.
The rate at which Sunday Schools multiplied was
really amazing. In London ancß the large towns of
England, children were assembled and teachers en-
gaged with ease and enthusiasm. In Scotland for some
years the institution was regarded as superfluous and
the progress sporadic, but in 1796 the Edinburgh Sab-
bath School Society was formed and the activity
gradually spread. In Ireland schools were speedily
planted, and in 1810 an Irish Society formed.
In Wales under the Rev. Charles, of Bala schools,
were opened in 1785 with this distinction that adults
as well as children were enrolled as scholars. In four
years time, Raikes was able to report schools had ex-
tended so rapidly as to include two hundred and fifty
thousand children.
That the growth was of no mushroom variety is
seen from the fact that at Raikes’ First Jubilee (1831),
it was announced that there were one million two hun-
dred and fifty thousand scholars in Great Britain; at
his second Jubilee (1880), there were 12 million in
the Sunday Schools of the world, and in this year
(1980), his third Jubilee there are S 3 millions meeting
Sunday by Sunday in the Schools of Christendom.
The Sunday School has made good as a vigorous
member of the Body of Christ.
During these early years of expansion, great
freedom was permitted regarding the hours and order
of worship, as also of the material of teaching used.
Each school appears to have possessed the right to
work out its plans according to the circumstances in
which it was placed, and the resources at its control.
In the nature of the case, the methods were primitive
and the curriculum scrappy. Schools were finding
their way.
One change became conspicuous. Whereas in the
beginning the children were perhaps exclusively from
the lower classes, as time wore on, the boys and girls
from the middle classes began to attend, and eventu-
ally, the Church saw in the Sunday Schools a mag-
nificent opportunity to give all the young people under


its care a good grounding in the Scriptures, a brief
compendium of its faith and a training in Christian
service. A rule from one of the schools (1809) de-
“This school shall consist of children of any
denomination, from five years old and upwards, not
excluding grown persons desirous of instruction.”
Raikes has left us a description of his visit to a school
on the occasion of an Anniversary that is suggestive.
“The children,” he wrote, “though many of them in
apparel very ragged, were extremely clean. They
walked in order to the Church where they were placed
in a gallery exposed to the view of the whole congre-
gation, and their behaviour during the service was
perfectly silent and becoming. In the repetition of
the Lord’s Prayer, they all joined and formed a charm
that made every heart dilate with joy. . . . After
Church an examination took place. I was highly
pleased to see the proficiency some of them had made.
Several could read in the New Testament, and two or
three have learned to repeat several chapters. . . .
Nearly fifty of them were perfect in their Catechism
and all could repeat some of Dr. Watts’ hymns.”
In 1802 Raikes decided to relinquish the printing
business and in retirement, attend more closely to his
“botanising” and leadership of Sunday Schools. Nat-
urally enough people eager to plant new schools wrote
for his counsel and when possible sought an interview
with the Founder, that they might get more detail
than was possible by correspondence. Nothing pleased
Raikes more than inquiries of this nature. They would
appear to have been voluminous, and it is little less
than a calamity that letters written by him were so
little valued that they became destroyed.
By reason of his interest in his district, the free-
dom of the city was conferred on him and the London
Sunday School Society conferred honourary member-
ship in consideration of his “Zeal and Merits.” In
1811 the good man died. He had lived a strenuous
life, suffered no little misunderstanding and carried
some heavy responsibilities. The years of his retire-
ment were rich in the happiness that comes to one
who has _ won some success in business, reared his
family wisely and served his day and generation by


the will of God. But he was conscious of growing
frailty and impending death. The children of the city
frequented his house, sang to him, recited their cate-
chism and listened to his counsel. He confided to them
that he would soon be leaving them. He was called
away home on the sth April, 1811. Sitting at his
desk and reading quietly he collapsed, and in less than
an hour “was not, for God took him.” Strangely
enough his death and funeral appear to have attracted
little attention in the city he had served so long and
well. No concourse of public men followed him to his
grave and no memorial service was held in his honour.
He had worked hard and wisely for the immature and
obscure members of society and the eyes of men held
in thrall by the obvious, failed to assess his worth.
His young beneficiaries, however, were there. They
walked solemnly before the coffin as it was carried
through Crypt Alley to the Church where he had been
wont to worship, sang hymns appropriate to the oc-
casion and retired each with a token of his love pio-
vided by their warm-hearted friend. The plain tablet
near his grave contains this inscription: “Sacred to
the Memory of Robert Raikes Esq. (late of this City),
Founder of Sunday Schools who departed this life,
April 5, 1811, aged 75 years.” “When the ear heard
me, then it blessed me and when the eye saw me it
gave witness to me because I delivered the poor that
cried and the fatherless and him that had none to
help him. The blessing of him that was ready to
perish came upon me; and I caused the widows heart
to sing for joy.”—Job. 29: 11, 12, 13.
As years passed the discovery of Raikes impressed
itself on the public mind and increased the esteem
felt for his life and labours. In the grounds of the
house in Bell Lane where he died, a Memorial tower
was erected in 1864 bearing a tablet with a Latin in-
scription stating that the Founder of the Sunday
Schools had lived and died there. In 1880 a hall was
erected in Gloucester for the purpose of Sunday School
work and called the Raikes Memorial Hall. A medal-
lion of him was placed over its entrance. At the Sun-
day School Centenary of 1880, a statue of the good
man was unveiled by Lord Shaftesbury in the Em-


bankment Gardens in London, the cost of which had
been raised by the teachers and scholars affiliated to
the Sunday School Union. In this year of our Lord,
1930, it is proposed to add substantially to the concrete
testimony expressive of profound esteem. Already
medals have been struck, poems written and portraits
multiplied. A fine statue is also to be erected in his
natiye city of Gloucester and a fund raised to provide
playing fields about the same city in his memory. Such
memorials are right and fitting. We should praise
great and famous men and venerate our fathers that
begat us. Raikes Memorial, however, is built of more
lasting material than those of stone or metal. It is
composed of assemblies of boys and girls, young men
and women and older folk as well who foregather
throughout the whole Christian world and seek to
know the mind of God as expressed in Christ and the
Holy Scriptures and practice the fulfilment of His will.
There is no activity of the life of the Christian Church
which numbers so great a multitude of members and
woikers as the Sunday School, and its cradle was in
Gloucester and its Founder Robert Raikes.


CHAPTER SIX
HIS LEGACY
Robert Raikes, senior, had won considerable pros-
perity in his publishing business and bequeathed a
considerable amount of capital to his son as well as
a thriving business. Robert Raikes, junior, made
good use of his fortune, adding to the good will of the
office and increasing his capital. When he retired in
his sixty-sixth year he received a life annuity from
the “Gloucester Journal” of £3OO, and at his death
six years later left a considerable sum of money to
his widow and family. As an employer he had a good
reputation, he was a generous supporter not only of
the Sunday School, but also of many other good causes,
and yet Raikes was able to leave a substantial legacy
to his wife and children.
That bequest was small, however, in comparison
with the legacy Raikes left the world in the Sunday
School. For to him belongs the honour of conceiving
a form of Christian activity that goes to the very
root of progress and has outdistanced most other
agencies in its contribution to the Kingdom of God.
In addition he gave indubitable proof of its practical
efficiency. Neither Raikes nor any other intelligent
Sunday School enthusiast would think of matching
the influence of a Sunday School with that of a good
home. Both he and those who share his preference,
know full well that whilst home life is without equal
in its power to mould the life of the young, a good
Sunday School is the best of foster parents. Its in-
fluence is not confined to the afternoon session of one
day in the week. Its literature occupies a real place
on the child’s bookshelf and in his heart, its festivals
bulk largely in his esteem and pleasure, its friendships
are intimate and lasting; bonds are created between
devout teachers and their classes that are the nearest


approach to the filial and its corollary that this world
affords. The very genius of the school is Christian
affection. It was this spirit that led Raikes to become
its founder and it is this that lies at its heart and
has made it the power it has proven. He gave to the
world an institution that approximates to the true
home in disinterested affection, in mutual considera-
tion and character ministry. His legacy consists,
therefore, of a world-wide organisation which kindles
and nourishes the spiritual instincts, the tender affec-
tions, unspoken yearnings and spiritual needs of the
young. It is a school and more than a school. It is
a Christian nursery and training ground, in which
young hearts are nourished in love and from which
the Church gains the largest percentage of her mem-
bers and workers. As Professor Adeney writes: “Ex-
perienced pastors are unanimous in their testimony
that their strongest, most enduring and most satisfy-
ing Church workers—the men and women they rely
upon for the work of the Church—are the fruits of the
Sunday School.”
If an endeavour be made to evaluate more par-
ticularly the legacy left by Raikes there are several
elements of outstanding worth.
To begin with, Raikes left behind him convincing
witness of the spiritual responsiveness of the child;
of the spiritual responsiveness even of children grossly
depraved by their upbringing. At the outset so un-
promising were his pupils that he appears to have had
some misgiving as to the possibility of their redemp-
tion. He was so doubtful indeed, that he kept quiet
about his work for the first three years. But ex-
perience confirmed him in his best hopes. The slum
children of Gloucester were accessible to Christian
endeavour and sensitive to the higher appeal. “Come
and see,” he cried to the people of England, and many
came and saw and went their way to repeat the
miracle. For all time Raikes has proved the fact; the
young can be gathered into the circle of the school
and can be won into the fold of Christ.
Moreover, Raikes vindicated afresh the great truth
so forcibly spoken by our Lord, that the child is akin


to the Kingdom of God, that even the child stamped
by the sin and neglect of his forbears, is still related to
the Divine.
The heart of the good man was shocked beyond
words by what he saw and heard of the children of
his town. Original sin leered at him from childish
faces, but in his “botanising” he learned that original
sin is not the most original element in human nature.
Children are not the offspring of Satan —imps though
they were commonly called. Nor were they merely
secular and sensuous creatures. There is something
of God in the worst as well as the best of them, and
it is the paramount duty of parents, Christians and
citizens to recognise this precious element and give it
fitting nourishment. We sin against the child and
against humanity and against God by its neglect, so
Raikes teaches us. No system that ignores this basic
element deserves the name of education. “To train
a child’s mind and body and neglect his soul is to
produce a monster.” The central element in the great
legacy of Raikes is the spiritual value of childhood.
Once again Raikes gave prominence to the inter-
dependence of religion and education. “Religion,” he
wrote, “must wait on improved education among the
masses before we shall be able to make much advance;
religion and education may go together.” He suited
action to word and even in that early day encouraged
private day schools. The Church, too, eventually set
to work and in 1811 formed the “National Society for
Promoting the Education of the Poor.” This was
twenty-two years earlier than the first Parliamentary
grant in aid of public education. “We may fairly
claim,” says the recent report of the Archbishop’s
Commission (1929) “for the Church that she was first
in the field in recognising and trying to provide for
the needs of public education.” The Church preceded
the State and Robert Raikes preceded the Church.
“The Sunday Schools,” wrote John Richard Green in
his Short History of the English People (pp. 721)
established by Mr. Raikes at the close of the century,
were the beginning of popular education.” Sunday
Schools and Day Schools therefore are of common


parentage. They are twin factors in the rearing of
a godly race. They act and re-act on each other and
should aid and abet each other. This is part of the
Raikes legacy.
It is perfectly clear, too, that Raikes placed the
Bible in the forefront of his work and as opportunity
permitted instructed his pupils in the Holy Scriptures.
They were so illiterate at first that much time and
energy had to be given to teach them to read, but
the goal was Christian education and to that end ap-
preciation of the substance of the Holy Scriptures as
the essential factor. He pinned his faith indeed, as
his publications witness, to the quickening power of
God’s word, and took heart of grace we may be sure,
when King George expressed the hope that all the
children of his nation might be taught the word of
God. It is more than likely that Raikes identified more
closely the letter and the Spirit of the word than we
do to-day. It was more than likely also, that he put
more value on the definitions of religion as contained
in the Catechism than we do in our time. Conse-
quently he was not tempted to make light of inter-
pretations of religious expressions as we are. Neither
was he tempted to anticipate a modern educationalist
who “dissents entirely and emphatically (from the
statement) that the chief business of the Sunday
School is to teach the Bible.” Surely the religion
even of a child requires some expression and surely
the stories of the Bible and the great passages of the
Holy Scripture are instinct with Spirit and with life.
What other writings find men, move men, guide men,
rebuke men and fascinate men, as the books of the
Bible? In its unity is found the most convincing
evidence of its authority and in its sublime teachings
is found the Bread by which we live. “It is the truth
behind and in the story that is religion.” True! But
how can we get the truth apart from the story? It
is the glory of our Sunday Schools that they teach
the story and Raikes planted that practice at their
heart.
We have had some indications of the Churchman-
ship of this great pioneer, and have seen how he


sought to knit his pupils to the Church of the living
God. His difficulties were immense in this endeavour
but he persevered and induced his colleagues to follow
his example. Raikes had no intention of founding an
institution distinct from the Church. The sacrament
of baptism would have rebuked him if he ffad. Unfor-
tunately, developments in later years introduced gaps
between congregations and their schools, to the detri-
ment of both, but those days are drawing to a close.
Schools are making it the conscious and accepted aim
of their efforts to identify their scholars with Christ
and His Church and the Church is devoting more of
her thought and energy and resource to make her
schools effective instruments in their spiritual task.
In Australia all the larger denominations have their
Welfare of Youth and Young People’s Departments
staffed by trained Ministers and well equipped laymen
and women, v/ith lessons carrying the Church’s ap-
proval, and literature published under the oversight
of official Committees. Young People’s Leagues of
Worship are also in vogue and encouraging the young
in the habit and practice of regular worship. In this
again the legacy of Raikes finds appreciation. Finally
the benefit of this good man’s work is seen in Sunday
School Associations. The title of Pioneer as we have
seen is based on his achievement in organisation. His
aims were more than local. They were national and
in this role he created a sense of unity amongst the
schools which took shape in Societies and Unions which
arose in every land, and which continue to this day.
By conference, counsel and encouragement great bene-
fits accrued, only discounted by a species of dual con-
trol. With this defect eliminated increased efficiency
is in evidence, for economies are made possible, ex-
tension work effected and teacher training efforts
strengthened to an extent beyond the hopes of in-
dividual or even denominational endeavour. The com-
bined experience, initiative, enthusiasm and purpose
add incalculably to the movement. The legacy of
Raikes in this form is of great value.
It is well then that this Reformer and Roadmaker
shall be honoured and his memory kept green. In
his heart he was conscious of the leading of the Spirit


of God as he undertook his task and formulated his
plan. Its rapid development must have confirmed him
in his conviction and given him the purest joy. It is
too much perhaps, to credit him with a vision of the
beautiful buildings, illuminating literature, carefully
organised departments, and well-planned courses of
lessons that are common to-day, but had he been told
that a century after his death, the lack of a Sunday
School would have been a reproach to a congregation,
it is not too much to say that Raikes would have shown
no surprise. His attempts at reform convinced him
that there was only one road to it, and that was by
way of the child. And if this way by the child was
lo be pursued, the Church must pursue it. Character
forming is no mechanical operation. It can’t be done,
merely by doing. Motive and inspiration and life are
essential and these only as Christ can impart them.
1 his is wnat Raikes discovered, and were he to speak
to _ us and say wherein we could best celebrate his
third Jubilee, his answer could easily be anticipated.
It surely would be “Carry on the work I began. Use
the veiy best methods you can devise in gathering
in the children and teaching them the Gospel of Jesus
the children’s Friend. Never despond. The Kingdom
of God waits on the heart of childhood.”
On Holy Mountains, out of the
Lap of the Dawn;
The dew of Thy young soldiery,
Offers itself to Thee.


CHAPTER SEVEN
HIS CHALLENGE
We are now in a position to ask what bearing’
the life and work of this great pioneer has upon our
own day and land.
Robert Raikes was firmly convinced that his plan
had come to stay. His scheme was not a hard and
fast system with which he expected conformity. He
was wise enough to leave scope for initiation and adap-
tation and development. Yet there were great vital
truths underpinning his methods and with them he
challenged his day and challenges ours.
To begin with he built on the spirituality of child-
hood His pupils were from the lower strata of society
yet their moral and spiritual possibilities were past all
doubt. Raikes _ himself was often surprised by the
spiritual conceptions and responses he witnessed. Ex-
perience fified his heart with hope. The child is akin
to the Kingdom of God and therefore cannot be neg-
lected with impunity. We sin against their heritage
when we do not claim them for Christ.
Again, Raikes insisted on the availability of child-
ren. they can be approached, assembled and attached.
He proved the fact among the most difficult. Resource-
fulness is requisite, but devotion creates resourceful-
ness. The story of declining attendances is therefore
an impeachment It can be altered. It is not inevit-
able. Raikes called us to action.
Once more, he urged the claims of both mind and
t fi n af th ft Servi -\? f i Childhood - He tau^ht them t 0
read that they might learn to pray with intelligence
and serve with advantage. What would he have said
to an educational system that excluded religion from
™ S cU Cll nu ? m ’ or a Sun day School that tried to
Christians, with little or no Scripture knowledge
?lfc nd e q W -°l d ’ ° r t 0 another school that taught
the facts of Scripture and failed to make clear the
vision and purpose behind them? Raikes appreciated
the emphasis of Jesus: “Thou shalt love the Lord Thy
God with all thy mind.” He was under no miscon-
ception, either, as to the means of regeneration. He


had no blithe confidence in personal influence as ade-
quate for teaching religion. He knew that it is the
Scriptures illumined by the Holy Spirit that make wise
unto salvation, and keen as he was for good teachers#
he was more keen to impart the saving' truths of the
Gospel. Extra Biblical lessons may have their place;
but “Faith cometh by hearing, and hearing by the word
of God.”
Moreover, Raikes deprecated the handicaps of
childhood. These he found in godless homes, untidy
streets, brutal sport and squalid poverty. Apart from
the school, the young mind receives instruction and im-
pression, and childhood’s friends must get busy en-
listing the co-operation of the home, counteracting the
influence of vulgar picture show and banal sport and
recovering the sanctity of the Lord’s day. The child
must be protected as well as instructed, and schools
are slack in their duty as set out by Robert Raikes
when they tolerate vicious and vulgar surroundings.
The social claims of childhood were also an inte-
gral element of his plan. The child was a charge on
the Church. “Feed My lambs,” said Christ to Peter.
Belonging to the Kingdom, the child belonged to the
Church which exists for the Kingdom. The Sunday
School fails lamentably in its duty when it fails to link
Church and child. Without the Church, the child is
spiritually homeless and comparatively helpless.
Church and child belong to each other and must be
identified. Raikes insists on this duty.
Finally, Raikes by pen and press called schools
into a great unity. He would have them confer, ex-
periment, co-operate and extend. Sunday School work
is a Catholic enterprise and transcends the limits of
individual congregations and denominations. How can
we in Australia and New Zealand gather in the children
of remote districts and neglected centres, save by sin-
cere and whole-hearted co-operation ? How can we
succeed in securing the trained staffs we need, but by
linking our energies together? How can we protect
the young from their despoilers, if we do not labour
together? Raikes indicates the way. He blazed the
trail for us to follow. Are we willing to follow his
lead and make the road a highway of holiness ?
FINIS


, :-■ V. • t*v.V '•■* : .
•>; • . , ,. , -‘4., -.
1 > \ • £
■
' -
v , ■ ■. - *rti,. ■ ■
■
P
1
:• , V- ; ., lift, ft
-■
‘jv. •;'
Pv5 ’: ! '-
% ***£. UK :
.
r ’ ' ?:«
■
! -V-i^
j;| |v ;S
\,i ; , r J&
■ 'iip-* <
:
■:a 7 ' - ■ ;
,rt •.
* -j‘ /){'.('•■■ ' ' '; ';■
■
■
'
;p ■ ’ ' i'‘C
’.y ', •'; il
'ft ••' P'. -:v .'■{ i /‘ \ .•':•■■• '’p,
.
,-■ ■v ■■ ‘‘ :-X . •
• : '• ~-*uj ..
■ \ / '%’*■„ ,;> ■
a&C t ■s V'd*
■
• ■■
(m '■sty. 1 ’/'
'■maMRU . .. . • . <l»«
,. . ' Aj •■ :■
& W/M
Iff;- • . ;,. v^v-:
■y '5^V' t
*!
«.v?4tfo- .i: -
ft ft -#" ' : ■
_ N , 'r 'Sft ; ;' ;
SlpiP
•
j/iv*:
ft ft ;S
ftjr,:
' V?' H'Pfe
M^ifC' "'M Mf'
■
■ T
m
w
/< -(i'J* v9Et fti'
■■■
w& . Wit .
1 pi; iM
■
•‘ '■■'.■ '•■' 'j® . ■ ■■ ■
■, .ft ''%k '.;
Ipill
.ft, JP ' ■ -ft, i-fSS
,
i$t 1
§
■
? y\ 'W' 1 v ■ -fi't]
■
Kgf. i«nKi? :
M' V4.--.-r1
life
■. -.: ■“ :.ft .'■■ r., n,
'"'ft • ■• • ■
, .-. ■’
ft ft -' Oft#.' •/'
’.#'v
* * - •
.; ; m-,-. :;- W .-ft
.
W^$m.
4i»a P ■. ; i ;
i ; ■ ,;,'J - ■; jfjjS;.:
%0$0M
■'.' y. 'iK
5$^,.
r Pp .•
•
:■ ■' ■ 'ft ftft
■
ZffQQfCW,.,:- . :<
II;
,4 if ■ p,
; .™ ;; : ;., ■■; ! |^■ ft? 1 ■ ft,/- T:
*
&&
&M r
■
&k'* [ .
,4f,.Vft '
I p3|| ft P5^i
1 \ s.
; ■ i
;
'■X-P : ’ i [•%-.,
;;
e -pi
*
• ’ nit ■
S&jKgJC / "v-'V21
%V. ■
,‘-vjil
■ ■ ■. ■ P : ‘r ■. " M
-M . ■&■
XJb
•>• : ' "■ j-kv- '.
.
~
■
.
i \ % : % \ o * % v
/ / 'I; ' ■ . ': ' • ■ ' : .


