

(Reprinted from Journal and Proceedings of the Royal Society of
N. S. Wales , Vol. xxxv.)
ROCK-HOLES USED BY THE ABORIGINES FOR
WARMING WATER.
By R. H. Mathews, 1.5., Corres. Memb. Anthrop. Soc.,
Washington, U.S.A.
[Read lefore'the Royal Society of N. S. Wales, December 4, 1 W)/.]




ROCK-HOLES USED BY ABORIGINES FOR WARMING WATER. 213
ROCK-HOLES USED BY THE ABORIGINES FOR
WARMING WATER.
By R. H. Mathews, 1.5., Corres. Memb. Anthrop. Soc.,
Washington, U.S.A.
[Read before ihe Royal Society of N. S. Wales, December 4,1901.~\
In a communication to the Anthropological Institute of Great
Britain on this subject in 1896, 1 I described a number of holes
in rocks which had apparently been used by the aborigines in
cooking their food. The mass of sandstone‘containing the holes
therein described is situated within Portion No. 1139, of 24J acres
in the parish of Manly Cove, county of Cumberland.
About thirty miles southerly from the ovens above referred to,
I discovered two similar “pot holes” in the surface of a large table
of Hawkesbury Sandstone on the side of a gully or watercourse,
at the head of Dead man’s Creek, within Portion No. 19, of 960
acres, in the parish of Eckersley, county of Cumberland, and about
two miles northerly from the Woronora River.
During wet seasons a small stream of water runs over the large
rock on which these pot-holes are found, but in a dry time the
water merely trickles along the lowest parts of it. The black
lines shown on the diagram, represent grooves cut into the rock
surface, apparently for the purpose of conducting this trickling
stream of water past the holes or ovens marked No. 1 and No. 2,
the water flowing in the direction of the arrows. (See diagram.)
Unless the natives had intended to use the pot-holes for some
purpose, it is unlikely that they would have cut these grooves,
which must have been a work of much labour, considering their
rude stone tools.
The pot-hole marked “No. 1,” is a little over two feet in
diamSter, and about a foot deep. “No. 2” is one foot nine inches


in diameter, and its depth
eighteen inches. A few
yards down the bed of this
gully is a small waterhole,
which appears to contain a
permanent supply of water,
being fed by a small spring
oozing out of the bank.
About one hundred and
fifty yards westerly from
these ovens is a piece of
level ground, surrounded
by ridges which shelter it
from storms, and which
would have been a very
eligible site for a camping
ground for the aborigines
in olden times. The soil in
this locality is sandy, and
therefore not so suitable for making holes in it for cooking game
as if it were clayey, which latter would hold the heat better. This
would be an additional inducement for the natives to select holes
in rocks for this purpose.
Close to the pot-holes, or ovens, are several figures carved upon
the surface of the same large rock, one of which represents the
forepart of a kangaroo or wallaby, the remainder of the animal’s
outline having weathered away beyond restoration. The other
figures consist of grotesque forms more or less human in shape,
one of which appears to have been intended for some mythologic
creature, the type of which does not exist in nature. The carvings
are shown as Figs. 19, 20, 21, and 30 of Plate ii, in a paper con-
tributed by me to the Anthropological Society at Washington in
1895. 1
1 American Anthropologist, vm., pp. 268 - 278.


Scattered here and there over the rock surface are a number of
hollows worn by the aborigines in sharpening their stone toma-
hawks. I counted one hundred and thirteen of these grinding
places within a radius of about thirty yards from where the ovens
and carvings above described are situated. The length of these
hollows or grinding places vary from about a foot to eighteen
inches. For descriptions and drawings of similar native grinding
places see my paper on “Some Stone Implements used by the
Aborigines of N. S Wales.” 1
Some of the old blackfellows belonging to the Shoalhaven River
and other parts of the south-east coast of New South Wales, have
told me that in the winter time, when the water was very cold,
they used to warm it by means of hot stones. Water was brought
in a native vessel made of bark or wood, and one or more stones
were heated in the fire and lifted into the Water with a forked
stick, to take the chill off it, in order that the natives could drink
it with comfort. My informants also stated that wild honey was
sometimes added to the water to make a palatable and nutritious
drink.
These statements show that the natives were acquainted with
warm water, and the theory may be advanced with some reason,
that instead of carrying water in a vessel, as stated, if a suitable
pot-hole could be found in the rock contiguous to the water, into
which the latter could be drained, heated stones could be thrown
into it to warm the liquid for the purpose of drinking. This
method of warming water was the one in use before the white
people settled in the country; since the advent of the latter the
natives have used European vessels for this purpose.
The following is the copy of a letter on t his subject received by me
in 1897 from the veteran explorer, the Hon. A. C. Gregory, c.M.G.r
“In reply to your enquiry relative to the custom among the natives
in north Australia of boiling fish by immersing heated stones in
1 Journ. Roy. Soc., N. S. Wales, xxvm., 301 - 305, Plate 43.


K. H. MATHEWS.
water, I beg to state that Mr. Baines, 1 the artist of the expedition
under my command in 1856, told me that he had seen the abori-
gines boiling fish by putting heated stones into water collected in
small holes in the clay, on the banks of the Victoria River, in the
Northern Territory. Mr. Baines was a very careful observer of
aboriginal customs, and had been some years in South Africa,
where he had visited the ancient gold mines of the Transvaal, and
noted the evidence of their antiquity.”
I shall be pleased if any of the readers of this article can supply
some reliable information on this part of the subject, because it is
of considerable importance, the general belief being that the
aborigines of Australia were unacquainted with the use of hot
water in preparing their food.
It has been reported by a number of observers, including myself,
that the aborigines over an extensive geographic area, when cook-
ing game in holes in the ground, poured small quantities of water
upon the hot clay and stones forming the floor of the oven, for
the purpose of creating steam to assist the cooking process. This
may be regarded as a step in the direction of acquiring a know-
ledge of the use of hot water in cooking game and vegetable
products.
1 Mr. Baines also communicated this information to others, in a less
definite form. See “Aborigines of Victoria,” by R. B. Smyth, Vol. 1.,
p. 37. Knowing that Mr. Baines had been out with Mr. Gregory, I
wrote to the latter gentleman to obtain fuller particulars, with the above
result.




