

Rokewood
Presbyterian Charge
Centenary Celebration
1847-1949
SUNDAY, NOVEMBER 6th,
1949
AND
HISTORY OF THE CHARGE




Rokewood
Presbyterian Charge
Centenary Celebration
1847-1949
SUNDAY, NOVEMBER 6th,
1949
AND
HISTORY OF THE CHARGE


ROKEWOOD PRESBYTERIAN CHURCH.
OPENED 1866.


Foreword.
In lihdertaking a task such as this, one is impressed by the fact
that he is endeavouring to picture, firstly, the outline of the rise,
growth and development of a witness to the guidance and the grace
of God, which is marked by visible symbols; and, secondly, that he
is trying to depict a cavalcade of men and women whose faith and
fortitude, sacrifice and self-dedication arc engraven where the eye
cannot see upon the innermost tablets of the heart. When in the
fire of 14th January, 1944, irreplaceable loss, was suffered by the
destruction of The Manse, by no means the least loss was the records
of the ctiarge, particularly those of Rokewood itself. In consequence,
it is quite impossible to give anything but the barest outline of
history or of personalities who should find mention in such a record.
Gaps, which cannot be bridged, make it impossible to give a com-
plete record. Minds have been probed, and the best that can be
achieved, it is believed, is here set forth. Should names worthy of
commemoration have been omitted, will our readers be lenient and
believe that in no case has it been deliberately so.
The Minister and present officers like to record here their
appreciation to all who have helped in the search for information,
particularly the Rev. Wallace Archer, M.A., 8.D.; the Rev. Malcolm
McQueen, M.A.;,Miss M. J. Steele, for notes supplied to her father
when Minister of Rokewood; the late G. Thomas Russell, Esq.;
and to Hamilton's and Mcßae Stewart's Jubilee Histdrks.
P. W. TURNER,
Minister.


History of the Rokew oo d Presbyterian Charge.
The Ministry of the Gospel began at Rokewood, when the Rev. John
Gow, a licenciate of the established Church of Scotland, under the jurisdic-
tion of Presbytery of Glasgow, was ordained and inducted to the pastoral
Charge of Colac and Woady Yallock, by the Presbytery of Melbourne and
the Synod of Australia, Church of Scotland, on 3rd November, 1847.
For the next seven years the Charge was thus constituted, when, Colac
separating, called the Rev. Hugh Blair to be its minister. Previous to his
itinerating ministry, Mr; Gow had owned a sheep station (he was still
known as “Mr." Gow), and for some unknown reason had now sought a
call to a Pastorate. The brothers G. and D. Aitcheson, of Kuruc-a-ruc
Station, learning of his preparation for the Ministry, persuaded him to take
up the - work of shepherding souls. At this time there were no public
buildings in this vicinity, and Divine services were held in private homes,
woolsheds or shepherds' huts. The exact site of Mr. Gow’s residence is
doubtful. Mr. Thomas Russell states it was near the only good wooden
bridge over the Woady Yallock River, but just where is uncertain. Another
report, states that he lived at Pitfield, but wherever his home was situated
little time could have been spent within its walls, since he traversed and
ministered over such a vast territory. He did not appear to have much
REV. JOHN GOW
regard for rules of procedure, for there is no record whereby he relinquished
the pastorate of Rokewood to take up that of Scarsdale and Smythesdale,
known then as the “Devil’s Kitchen,” in the Presbytery of Ballarat, where
he d»ed in the year 1866, Between the years 1854-57, the Rev. Archibald


Simpson, of the Leigh, conducted monthly services at Rokewood, first in
private homes, such as “Kuruc-a-ruc” and “The Ponds.” then in McLarty's
Hotel, and afterwards in the school.
This school was probably the first semi'public building erected at
Rokewood, and, according to Mr. Russell, built mainly through the instiga-
tion of Mr. J. Elder (senr.), supported by the local Presbyterians. "Hie
board consisted of Messrs. N. G. and J. Elder, Thomas Russell and W.
White, and the first teacher was Mr. Savage, who later had charge of the
Corindhap school. The John Elder here mentioned had recently moved
from Mindi to Kuruc-a-ruc, which station he had purchased from the
Aitcheson Bros. He was the founder of the Australian branch *of this
widely known family. This school was later sold, and became the residence
of Mr. Magor Carr. It was destroyed in the 1944 fire..
On the sth October, 1857, a memorial from the residents of the
Rokewood Charge was presented to the Presbytery of Geelong, seeking
guidance in procuring a minister. At the same time a stipend of approxi-
mately £3OO per annum was promised, including £4O per annum donated by
Mr. Joseph Gardiner Mack. The terms of settlement were acceptable, and
Presbytery promised to do all within its power to obtain a minister. The
result was that on 13th December, 1859, the Rev. John Cooper was
inducted to the Pastoral Charge of Rokewood and Cressy. The occasional
sermon was preached by the Rev. Hugh Blair, from Revelations, Chapter 7,
v. 15: “Therefore are they before the throne of God, and serve Him day
and night in His temple.” The change of name from Woady Yallock to
Rokewood had now transpired. Although Cressy, as part of the Charge,
s not officially mentioned until 1861, the part played in the Call of Mr.
Cooper by Mr. J. G. Mack is a fair indication that it was part of the Charge.
The question of Parish and Presbytery boundaries had now to be
decided. Smythesdale and Scarsdalc, under Mr. Gow, belonged to the
Presbytery of Ballarat; Rokewood to Geelong; and Pitfield, a disputed
territory, was added to Rokewood by mutual consent.
The recent discovery of gold and the rapidly developing mining fields
had now a very important influence upon the district, and an imperative
demand upon the Church.
Pitfield, where to-day only seven families are to be found, had a
population of between 7,000 and 9,000. Bulldog and Staffordshire Reef,
both within 12 miles of Rokewood, were clamouring for a minister of the
Gospel, and the Methodist Church came to the aid of these people. Roke-
wood and Break-o’-Day (Corindhap) likewise shared in the influx of an
.ncreasing population, while at the same time a new and growing community
rppeared in Rokewood Forest. Under these conditions, and with the
building of two Churches and a Manse, Mr. Cooper must have had a very
full ministry. Cressy, having obtained a Crown grant of land, appointed
Trustees, namely, Messrs. Joseph Gardiner Mack, Hugh Mcßean, John
ujder, of “Yarimax,” Abel Jones and John Nelson. Shortly afterwards a
due-stone Church sufficiently large for the Congregation was built.
• To relieve Mr. Cooper, the Presbytery of Ballarat in 1864, accepted
responsibility for Pitfield, and the Cressy services were increased from fort-
nightly to weekly. A School house was built at Grassy Gully in 1869
to serve Rokewood Forest, and the schoolmaster had also to conduct


Services. The first of these schoolmasters was Mr. McDonald, succeeded by
Mr. Miller and Mr. Milne.
At Rokewood, services continued to be held in private homes until, as
we have already seen, the School house was built and opened on 25th
July, 1851, but the increasing population over-taxed its accommodation.
Once again, Mr. John Elder'came to the fore in a movement to obtain both
a Church and Manse. The Manse project took priority, and by 1860
sufficient funds were available to build, though Mr. Russell says this movement
lacked the ready response which characterised the appeal for the Church.
The successful tenderer for the Manse was Mr. Stock. In August, 1864, the
Church project was launched and, by December Mr. Thos. Russell reported
£1,200 raised, but he suggested £1,400 as the approximate cost. The site
was purchased for £8 on the 11th March, 1865, and the building, designed
by Mr. Alex Davidson, and built by Messrs. Brown and McFarlane, was
commenced. The building committee was composed of Messrs. Thos. Russell,
N. G. and W. Elder (The Meadows), W. White and W. McAndrew;
and the architect was a nephew of the Rev. J. Cooper. The Secretary of the
Church was Mr. Elliot.
The ceremony of laying the foundation stone was to have been carried
out by Mrs. Elder, of “The Meadows,” but she was prevented by illness. In
her absence, her daughter acted in her place, and was presented with an
engraved Silver Trowel and a silver-mounted Setting Maul to mark the
occasion. In the cavity beneath the stone various coins of the realm,
papers and wheat were placed.
' Without the vestry and spire, the Church was completed the following
year, and opened on 23rd August, 1866. A framed memento of this
important event still hangs in the vestry, and it reads “The New Pres-
byterian Church will be opened on Thursday, August 23 rd, 1866, by the
Rev.' J. O. Dykes, M.A., at 12 o’clock noon. The following Sunday, the
Rev. T. McK. Fraser, M.A., will conduct the services at half-past 11 o'clock
and half-past 6 o’clock.”
Few indeed are the townships the size,of Rokewood that can claim a
more beautiful place of worship. Constructed of blue-stone quarried in the
nearby paddock on “Kuruc-a-ruc" estate, of Gothic design, and furnished
in keeping, it presents a noble landmark. The peculiar feature of the
trussing is almost unique in the Southern Hemisphere, and continues to
arouse the interest of architects to this day.
The impact of the “Diggings” was now being felt in various ways;
beneficially by increasing population, royalties received by property owners
from mining rights, and a general enrichment of the whole district; adversely,
by station owners losing their shepherds to the lure of the gold. Mr.
Russell tells us in his notes that the whole countryside was practically
unfenced, necessitating no small army of shepherds. For the most part, he
says, these were Malays, Chinese and “Old Hands” released from Tasmania.
To make good their loss, station owners persuaded a number of Highland
Scots to emigrate, and take the place of those who had left their flocks.
These Highlanders, says Mr. Russell, were for the most part godly men
who were most faithful to their Church, an example which had an uplifting
effect upon some of their employers.


On the 29th May, 1866, it was reported to the Board that Mr. Cooper
had received a Call to Pentridge (Coburg), which included Chaplaincy of
the Jail, and Mr. Cooper, having signified his acceptance. Presbytery dis>
solved the pastoral tie. Apart from his parish duties, Mr. Cooper had been
Moderator of Presbytery for six months, and when his ministry at Rokewood
closed, he must have felt that it had been sufficiently full of incident and
activity to satisfy any pioneering minister of the Gospel.
The next minister was the Rev. John Steele, M.A., who had recently
arrived from the Church of Scotland. Leaving Liverpool by the Aberdeen
clipper “Kosiosco" on 24th March, 1867, accompanied by his bride of
three weeks, Mr. and Mrs. Steele landed in Melbourne three months later.
Mr. Steele was immediately offered several Melbourne Churches, but, pre'
ferring country work, he accepted a Call to Rokewood, and was ordained
and inducted on the 23rd January, 1868, by the Presbytery of Geelong.
There followed 12 years of happy and fruitful ministry.
Apart from his conscientious work as a Minister of the Gospel, Mr.
Steele was also concerned ; with advanced education, and conducted a
private school, first in the Manse, and later in the Church Vestry. One
at least, of his scholars is still with us Mr. Tom Scott. Presently the
sadness of separation invaded the Manse, by the death of the oldest boy
of the six children born to Mr. and Mrs. Steele. A small grave in the
Rokewood Cemetery still reminds us of this sorrow. For his own con-
venience, Mr. Steele purchased a block of land for a glebe, and, on resigning
the Charge, sold the same to the Board of Management for £2O.
In the year 1868, only a week before Mr. Steele’s induction, a new
bell was presented to the Church by Mr. James Grant. In May, 1870,
Messrs. 1. and W. Elder endowed the Church to the amount of £l,OOO, and
a little later Mr. Thos. Russell added a like amount. In return a pew was
set aside for the use of the owners of Kuruc-a-ruc Estate. In September,
1871, it was agreed to dispose of the School building and devote the
proceeds to building a vestry.
On the 7th June, 1878, or thereabouts, Rokewood Charge was dis-
solved from the Presbytery of Geelong, and attached to that of Ballarat.
Two years later Mr. Steele accepted a Call to the pastorate at Kilmore, which
Charge he held until his death in 1904. While at Kilmore he was
unanimously elected to the office of State Moderator, 1897-1898. It is
anticipated that his daughter, Miss M. J. Steele, will be joining in the
celebration for which this is written.
The Rev. George Hay was called to succeed Mr. Steele, and was
inducted on the 3rd March, IffSP, by the Presbytery of Ballarat. There
followed a faithful and conscientious ministry of 34 years. During this
period, gold-mining operations were carried on adjacent to the Manse by
the Hanlon Mining Company. Indications pointed to a lead which would
run beneath the Manse site (afterwards found to bear in a northerly
direction and pass the Manse boundary), and negotiations commenced for
permission to (inspect the “property. An offer of £7OO to purchase the
Manse and site was rejected-by the Board of Management, which fixed the
purchase price at £l,OOO. This, in turn, was refused by the Hanlon
Company, and negotiations for this property dropped.


Other Church properties, however, yielded better financial returns.
The half-acre reserve, on which the School had been built, was let to this
Company for a cost of j£lo for the right to occupy, and 5 per cent, of the
gross value of the gold obtained. The Ij-acre block, known as the
Wesleyan Paddock (previously purchased from the Methodist Church), was
let on the same terms -for the gold won, but in this case the surface damage
was to be assessed': by an independent valuator, and compensation paid
accordingly.
By this time the population was large, and the three main preaching
centres Rokewood, Cressy and Corindhap flourishing, and the Church
was strengthened by including within its bounds several large sheep stations,
namely “Wurrook,” “KuruC-a-ruc,” “The Meadows" and “Commeralghip,” at
Rokewood; “Weering,” "Yarima," and “Strathvean," at Cressy.
In the year 1884, we find the first reference to Illabarook, but it
probably formed part of the Charge prior to this date. Regular services
were then held, but it was not until 1897 that a Church was built; a
very good Weatherboard building, which was erected at a cost of well
below j£soo. The energetic mover in this enterprise was Mr. Robert
McKay, who passed to his rest as recently as May of this year. Before the
regular services were held at Illabarook, Mr. McKay, accompanied by his
wife, would frequently walk eight miles into Rokewood to attend public
worshp Illabarook has suffered, with like districts, by the cessation of
mining, so that to-day only a skeleton congregation remains where once
the Church was filled.
Important changes were now about to transpire. While Rokewood
and Corindhap had developed by the aid of’ mining, the rich pastoral
district of Cressy had advanced by closer settlement, and agriculture. Cressy
was now strong enough to become the centre of a separate Charge, and at
the beginning of this century, the Presbytery of Ballarat sanctioned the
disjunction and a new Charge was formed. .
Before leaving Cressy from further reference, it would be well to
record some past members. The first Trustees have already been noted.
The Communion Roll of May, 1866, included the names of William Neilson,
Peter and Mrs. Mowat, J. G. and Mrs. Mack, Catherine and Jane Mack.
In 1903, Messrs. P. Mowat and McKenzie were ordained. Etderp, and in
1906 Messrs. Peter Nelson and Alex McLennan. • p,
Another landmark (in more than one sense) of this peH6d was the
completion of the Rokewood Church by the addition of a tender and spire;
the munificent gift of Thos. Russell, Esq., of Wurrook. “The Memorial
Stone at the base of the tower was laid on 23rd March, 1907, by Mrs. W.
G. Elder. The architect, Mr. D. Davidson, was the same whose plans had
been accepted for the Church 40 years earlier.
A Committee of the Assembly on 17th June, 1913, granted permission
for the formation of a new Presbytery, to be known as the Presbyttfy of
Western Plains. Rokewood, on the eastern boundary, was one of the seven
Charges which comprised this new Presbytery, and ’its minister, the Rev.
George Hay, was chosen as its first Moderator. This proved to be a
fitting termination to a long and faithful ministry in this pastorate, for nine
months later Mr. Hay retired from the active ministry, and the pastoral tie
was dissolved on the 31st March, 1914,


On July 24th, 1914, a Call from Rokewood to Mr. M. McQueen, M.A
(licentiate), was sustained by Presbytery, and the Rev. Malcolm McQueen
was ordained and inducted on the 10th August of that year. To him fell
the task of ministering during the trying years of World War I, and, after
a period of nearly three years, during which his ministry had made a deep
and lasting impression, he felt the call to volunteer as a Chaplain to the
A.1.F., and, on being accepted, relinquished the Charge. It was during this
ministry that the Golden Jubilee of the Church was commemorated, and the
historical notes prepared for that occasion by Mr. McQueen have been
thankfully incorporated herewith.
The next minister was the Rev. T. V. Charlton, who was inducted in
March, 1918. He retained the Charge for four years, and resigned to
accept a Call to Campbellfield in 1922. Next in order came the Rev. J. B.
Taylor, who gave a devoted ministry of ten years. He was followed by
the Rev. A. W. Cooper, inducted 24th October, 1933, who relinquished
the Charge to accept that of Cobden on 30th July, 1936. For the next
2J years, Rokewood was under the pastoral charge of the Rev. Andrew
Dunn, who was translated to Connewarre in October, 1939, which proved
to be the closing scene of his ministry.
On 23rd April, 1940, the Rev. H. L. Taylor was inducted. Mr.
Taylor, with some years’ experience of Aboriginal Mission work, proved
to be a minister of many parts, including an extensive knowledge of first
aid, dentistry, and some medical training. Rokewood had recently lost its
resident doctor, and could not obtain medical aid nearer than Ballarat.
In consequence, many calls were made upon Mr. Taylor in cases of
sickness, and his help and advice are most gratefully remembered throughout
the district.
On the 14th January, 1944, a disastrous grass fire, starting 30 miles
away, swept a great portion of the Western District, resulting in untold
destruction. Greatest of all was the loss of life to nine people who
perished either in the fire or died as the direct result. Many homes, several
Churches and public halls were reduced to ashes, and thousands of stock
perished. Rokewood, on the South-eastern extremity of the burnt-out area,
suffered heavily, and the Manse, with practically all Mr. Taylor's possessions,
was completely destroyed, together with most of the historical records of the
Charge. The Manse was replaced by the purchase of what had been
the doctor's residence in the past, and, with some alteration, and renovation,
provided a most convenient and commodious residence. Later, a bequest
from the Estate of the late Miss Robertson financed the installation of an
electric light plant. The present Manse was opened and dedicated by the
Rev. Malcolm McQueen on 22nd September, 1944.
Mr. Taylor was translated to Merino on 20th January, 1947. His
outstanding contribution to the Charge was the formation of a Congregation
in the disused Methodist Church at Werneth. This Church was among
those destroyed in the fire abovementioned, a factor which was but the
fore-runner of another disaster. The block of land was purchased from
the Methodist authorities, and another Church secured from the Military
Camp at Ballarat. On the 24th August, 1947, the renovated building was
opened am) dedicated by the then State Moderator the Rev. W, W,


Ingram. Thirteen months later, this Congregation was again bereft of its
place of worship, this time by storm, against which the insurance was
ineffective. With courage and fortitude, this small but loyal Congregation
set to work once again to repair its loss. A building suitable for conversion
to this purpose was purchased by Mr. T. Boyle, while generous contributions
from far and near covered the cost of removal from Ballarat, alterations
and renovation. To complete the work, Mr. Boyle, at a later meeting,
transferred his ownership to that of the Congregation, free of all liability
a most generous gift.
The present minister, the Rev. P. W. Turner, was inducted on 24th
April, 1947.
CORINDHAP.
Originally known as Break-o-Day, because it was in the first grey
streaks of dawn that the gold rush began, Corindhap, having been part
of the Charge from its inception and remaining so, deserves a separate
paragraph. With regard to the origin of services we can only surmise that
the same practice as that at Rokewood was followed. Very early in the
piece a School was erected, which would doubtless serve as the meeting
place for education, religious worship, and social intercourse. This soon
proved inadequate, a second and larger School being built by Mr. W.
Elder. When, in 1872, compulsory education became the law, this School
in turn had not sufficient accommodation, and the Church of England was
used for the overflow of children. A more commodious and permanent
School was built and opened on June 27th, 1877, by Mr. J. B. Patterson,
Minister for Public Works, and the teacher was Mr. Wm. Savage. The
School built by Mr. Elder was then used as a Presbyterian Church exclusively.
At a congregational meeting held in this Church on 2nd July, 1886, the
Rev. G. Hay (chairman) stated that Mr. W. Elder had signified his
intention of handing over the building and site to the Presbyterian Church
of Victoria, and that it would be necessary to appoint Trustees. The
following were duly appointed: Messrs. John W. Elder, Robert Turner,
Wm. Savage, Peter McKay, and D. Ross. On April 7th, 1888, it was
reported that the title deeds of the block measuring 188 ft. west by
174 ft. south, and fronting the main road, had been lodged with the Church
Office, Melbourne. One of the outstanding features of this Congregation
was the Annual Flower Show, which was continued with great success for
over 40 years. Among the families of those who rendered yeoman service
to this Congregation, we find W. Elder, R. Turner, Wm. Laidler, Wm.
McPherson, Wm. Carr, J. N. Elder, Wm. Savage, and W. H. F. Carr.
TRUSTEES.
The first trustees for Cressy have already been named. On 17th
August, 1878, we find those gazetted for Rokewood were Messrs. Thomas
Russell, W. H. White, John Cullen, John Elder and Wp, Savage. Only
two of these, however, were active, namely, Messrs. White and Savage. John
Elder was deceased, Thomas Russell abroad, John Cullen had resigned, and
Wm. Elder had permanently left the Colony. It is presumed that the last-
named had been elected, although his name does not appear on the first list.


At the meeting from the minutes of which the foregoing was obtained, Mr.
N. G. Elder and Mr. Robert Turner were appointed. No further trace of
Trustees can be found, but at a later date all Title Deeds were lodged
with the Trust Corporation of the Presbyterian Church, and the necessity
for local Trustees ceased.
KIRK SESSIONS.
With regard to Sessions, it has proved impossible to obtain a sequence
of ordinations of Elders. A memo from the minutes of the Presbytery
of Geelong states that assessors were appointed on the request of the Rev.
John Cooper, to assist him in forming a Kirk Session, but the earliest
list of Elders we can find is in the year 1875. However, there is a
Communicants’ Roll, signed by the Rev. A. Simpson, in 1859, where the
membership reads; John Elder (senr.), and Mrs. Elder (Kuruc-a-ruc);
Wm. Elder, Norriss Elder, Mary Elder, Margaret Elder, John Smith and
Mrs. Smith (Rokewood); Ewen McDonald (Kuruc-a-ruc); Mrs. Maclachlan,
Donald Maclarty, Mrs. Walker, Mrs. Smith, Miss Savage, William Savage,
Mrs. May, Donald Campbell (The Ponds); Alexander Bethune. One year
later these additional names appear; Mr. and Mrs. Scott, Geo. Kirkland,
Charles Kennedy, Wm. Neilson, John and Mrs. McTaggart, Thos. and Mrs.
Emond, Mr. Lambie, Mr. and Mrs. Lauchlin, Thos. Russell, John Elder,
Mrs. McDonald, Mary Whitson, Peter and Mrs. Mowat, J. G. and Mrs.
Mack, Catherine Mack, Jane Mack, John Buchanan, Mrs. Wilson.
The Annual Report for the year 1875 gives the Session as Messrs.
Thos. Russell, N. G. Elder, Robert Turner, Richard Ward and James
Gay. Doubtless, Mr. John Elder (now deceased) had also been a membei
of the Session. Other Elders whose names appear at intervals through the
course of the years, with the year of ordination where possible are; 1889
Messrs. J. N. Elder, Wm. Laurison, Ernest Jacka, Everett Jacka; 1903
Messrs. Mowat, and McKenzie (Cressy); 1908 Peter Nelson and Alex.
McLennan (Cressy), W. H. F. Carr (Corindhap), Dr. McDougall (Roke-
wood); and later, Ernest Dunstan, R. B. Leggo and W. L. Carr. The
last-named is at present our sole Elder.
BOARDS OF MANAGEMENT.
For Rokewood the only record to escape destruction was the Board of
Management minute book, dating from 1875- 1901. Consequently, it is impos-
sible to give a detailed list of those who have served the Church in this
capacity throughout the years. It is fairly certain that Mr. J. Elder (senr.)
was the first Secretary, and recently it was discovered that Mr. Elliott was
Secretary when the Church was built. From the 1875 report the personnel
of the Board reads: Messrs. Allen, White, McTaggart, Murray, Renolds,
Cameron and McLaren.
For Corindhap, the list is more complete: 1878-9 Messrs. R. Turner,
Wm. Laidlaw, Wm. McPherson, P. McKay, D. Ross, Wm. Carr, I. Bouchier,
R. Menzies, Wm. Laurison (Secretary). 1898 —S. McDonald, Wm.
Laidler, W. H. F. Carr, W. Carr. 1914 —J. Boyle, W. Carr, W. H. F.
Carr, Geo, Laidler, £. Dunstan, J. M. Carr,


The numerical strength of the present Boards, with the name of the
Secretary is: Rokewood, 10 (W. L. Carr); Corindhap, 9 (D. Quarrell);
Illabarook, 8 (W. Rizzolli); Werneth, 8 (F. F. Eason). Two of these
members have rather long service to their credit; namely, Mr. T. Wallace,
first elected 1901 (with not quite unbroken service), and Mr. Jas. Carr,
elected 1914 (continuous). The oldest known member of the Congregation
still alive is Mrs. J. N. Elder, and adherents, Messrs. T. and G. Scott.
SUNDAY SCHOOL TEACHERS.
Only for Corindhap have we anything approaching a complete list,
and even here it is quite possible there are omissions. From 1885, the order
is practically as follows: Wm. McPherson (Superintendent), Miss Dickson,
Miss Savage, Miss Hazaldine, S. H. McDonald, Miss McKay. Miss Smith.
ADDENDUM.
Received too late for inclusion in the foregoing History of the Charge, the
following list of Officials is appended :
CORINDHAP—SUNDAY SCHOOL TEACHERS, 1889.
J. N. Elder, Superintendent; Mrs Elder, W. H. F. Carr, Miss McKean’
Mrs E. J. Carr, Mrs A. Boyle, Miss M. Boyle. Miss N. Eider, Mrs Clark. Mr G -
Evans, Mrs Bacon, W. L. and Mrs Carr, Miss Evans, Misses E. and L.
Dunstan, Rev. A. Dunn and Miss L. Carr.
ROKEWOOD-
Mrs G. Hay, Miss Bessie Hay. Misses F. and M. Hall, C. G. Opie. Miss C.
Elder, Miss L. Palmer, Miss C. Beilis, Mrs T. W. Turner, Miss D. Palmer,
Mrs. H. L. Taylor, Mrs W. L. Carr, Mrs C. Parker, Miss M. Elder.
ORGANISTS,
ROKEWOOD—
Mrs D. Cameron, Mrs McCraw, nee Miss J. Jacka, Mrs J. N. Elder, M.
Stanbrook' Miss M. Hay,Miss B Hay, Miss D. Jacka, Miss T. Evans, Mips M.
Hay, Mrs McKenna, Miss Walter, Mrs K. L. Carr, Mrs M. Elder
CORINDHAP—
Miss N. Mercer, Mrs E. J. Carr. MissM. Laidler, Mrs N. Donaldson, Miss
E. Hope, Mrs W. L. Carr, Mrs. J. Donaldson.


ORGANISTS.
Rokewood Mrs. J. N. Elder, Misses Maimi, Marjory, and Bettie Hay;
Miss M. Stanbrook, Miss D. Jacka, Miss P. Evans, Misses Marian and Con-
stance Elder; Mrs. Walters, Mrs. W. L. Cart, and Mrs. N. G. Elder.
Corindhap Mrs. E. J. Carr, Mrs. M. Laidler, Mrs. W. H. F. Carr,
Mrs. D. Donaldson and Mrs. J. Donaldson.
Illabarook Mrs. Rizzolli, Mrs. Hadler, Miss Bentick. M*S ft
Werneth Mrs. Clark. MAS P£af Off.
So closes a record believed to be as complete and true to fact as is
humanly possible with the material available. By it, may we be reminded
of the debt to-day owes to yesterday, be re-inspired to carry on the work
begun in the name of the Lord Jesus Christ and His Church, and in our
turn pass on the torch and our faith, still burning with undimmed flame, to
the generations which must follow.
