

ROMANCE OF ANDREW THOMPSON
No fined stamp of earlier Australian man-
hood is to be found in the historical records
of New South Wales than that exemplified
by the hard-headed shrewd young Scotch-
man, Andrew Thompson, who died at Wind-
sor, New South Wales, in the year 1810, at
the early age of 37 years, full of honors
and mourned by the leading men • of the
young colony, which included Governor
Lachlan Macquarie.
At the period of his death, Thompson was
a thriving colonist, engaged in various en-
terprises, in all of which he was successful,
principally owing to his sound sense and
abnormal capacity for work.
In 1789, Thompson started the first chap-
ter of his romance in Scotland, as a way-
ward boy, who, for some injury, real or fan-
cied, set fire to a haystack and was prompt-
ly banished from his native heath to the
young- colony. He was still in his nonage
when he arrived at Pdrt Jackson, and it is
here that his romance accumulates. He
came in the ship Pitt, which may have sup-
plied the derivative for early Pitt Row and
the grand and imposing Pitt-street' of to-
day. Be this as it may, Thompson was
promptly put to work as a stone dresser in
various parts of the young settlement. He
quickly became overseer, and his astonish-
ing mastery of work, and common sense and
economies, came under the favorable notice
of Governor King, whose generous patron-
age he got, with the gift-grants of 120 acres
of land near Windsor and 270 acres near
Pitt Town. He acted as bailiff to the mar-
tinet, Governor Bligh (in itself a wonder-
ful achievement of Scotch sense and tact),
and his great friend, Governor Lachlan
Macquarie, appointed him chief magistrate
of the Hawkesbury districts, and entertain-
ed him at Government House.
Thompson became shipowner and builder,
salt maker, farmer, bridge builder, brewer
and publican, in all of which .he was suc-
cessful.
At his death Thompson left half of his
wealthy estate to Governor Macquarie and
Simeon Lord (a fellow colonist) the execu-
tors to his will being S. Lord, John Howe,
and Captain H. Antill, of the military. His
remains were interred, in St. Matthew’s
churchyard, Windsor, and rest in a hand-
some vault, the personal gift of Governor
Lachlan Macquarie.
