

, ' . M'V I --i,.
A."
(second session.)
\: ~ H. S ; V'
Legislative Assembly,
NEW SOUTH WALES.
ROMAN CATHOLIC ORPHANAGE, MANLY,
(REPORT RESPECTING MANAGEMENT—RETURN TO AN ORDER.)
RETURN to an Order made by the Honorable the Legislative Assembly of New
South Wales, dated 11th October, 1904,—That there be laid upon the Table of
this House, —
“ The papers and report in connection with the inquiry into the manage-
“ meut of the Roman Catholic Orphanage at Manly.”
{Mr. JBriner,)
The Acting Secretary of the Australian Protestant Defence Association to The.
Honorable the Premier and Chief Secretary.
The Australian Protestant Defence Association,
Sir, ], Victoria Chambers, 63 Elizabeth-street, Sydney, 4 August, 1903.
1 am directed by the Council of the Australian Protestant Defence Association to bring
under your notice the enclosed extracts from The Watchman newspaper of Juno 20 and 27, and July 4
and 11, re the Roman Catholic Industrial School at Manly.
Seeing that the published statements are made upon a sworn declaration, my Council desires
respectfully to urge upon the Government the necessity of bringing in a Bill for the Government
inspection of all industrial establishments, I have, &c,,
S. ERASER
(Per G. Robertson Gait),
Acting Secretary.
, [Enclosure i]
THIS WATCHMAN, 20/6/03.
•THE NUNS’ INDUSTRIAL SCHOOL AT MANLY.
Sworn Testimony ot an Ei-inmate.
The following is a copy of the sworn testimony of an ex-inmate of the above school. Her testimony will
run through several issues of The Watchman :
STARTLING DECLARATION.
I. E.F., of C. Street, R., in the State of New South Wales, Commonwealth of Australia, do solemnly and sincerely
declare that I was an inmate of the Industrial School for Girls conducted by the nuns at Manly, and that the annexed
document, consisting of 46 folios, and consecutively numbered from one to forty-six, contains a true and faithful account
of my experiences and treatment during the time I was in such institution, and I make this solemn declaration,
conscientiously believing the same to be true, and by virtues of the provisions of the Oaths Act, 1900.
Subscribed and declared, at Sydney, this eleventh day of June, one thousand nine hundred and three, before me
(here follows signature of the Justice of the Peace). , J,P.
I give permission for the above declaration to be printed with this article, provided the initials of my name only
appear.—E.E.
The Reminiscences of an TSx-inmate. —Sitting in the parlour of my little suburban home, with my,
chubby little three-year-old boy playing near me, the remembrance of the terrible years I spent with the'
Manly nuns often comes over me like a horrible nightmare, and I wonder hpry gumy poor girls are at the
47462 196 —A present


present moment suffering hardships at the hands of those “ Sisters of Charity” similar to those that my
sister and I not so long ago endured. That pitiful tale, “ Oliver Twist,” though but a creation or Charles
Dickens’ brain, was founded on cruel, concrete facts, and I am told it had the effect of raising such a storm
of public indignation against the Bumbledom of Jiia day as to bring about a reform of the abuses ox the
parochial system, and an improved condition of the “ work-house brat.” So, perhaps, a true narrative
of the way in which poor girls are treated iby the Manly nuns, by one who can apeak from bitter personal
experience, will direct the attention not only of readers of Tho Watchman, but of all lovers ox
humanity in Sydney to the matter, so that a reform may be brought about by our legislators passing an
enactment to place all Eoman Catholic institutions under compulsory government inspection. If such a
course were taken the abuses I am about to expose would soon cease to exist.
M.y first Introduction to the Nuns. —I was always a delicate child, but lam certain that had i
received proper nourishing food during my growing years, and not been given laborious work—fit only
for a grown woman—and continued often'from early morn till firid'night, I might have, with care,
developed as robust a constitution as has my little round-limbed child; blit, alas, when my sister, who is
three years my junior, and I were still very young, my mother married agaim It was not a happy/nnion,
Second marriages where there are children seldom are happy. So after a while my step-father decided to
send us two girls away from home. Ho and my mother both belonged to the Holy Homan Catholic
Church, and we had both been baptised in it, and from our babyhood had been taught to reverence the
priests and nuns as superior beings, pure, sinless creatures, whose words were law, and who were the
embodiment and quintessence of all that was holy. So it did not seem so very dreadful after all
when we were one morning told by our stop-father that we were to go with him to Manly to stay with
the “ good nuns.” ,We made ourselves look as nice as put on our best clothes, and such little
articles of finery aS young children love, tidied our hair, which was long and wavy, said ‘‘ Good-bye” to
our mother and our little step-sister, and started olf to Manly. "We walked to the convent, our stop-father
talking to us cheerfully all the time, but when the gates of the big galvanised barricade round tho Manly
Convent Industrial School closed on us, a sort of presentiment of coming evil chilled our hearts, and a
suspicion that we might be exchanging a home for a prison. The Eoverond Mother, Mary Cecilia,
received us graciously, and was particularly pleasant to our stop-father, who had been introduced by the
Eev. Father , one of tho French priests of St. .Patrick’s, Church Hill, because (as wo afterwards
ho had promised to pay £23 a year for each of us.
Marly Mxperiences. —lt, however, mattered not at all whether tho parents or guardians paid or not
for the children they placed in the school so far as their treatment wits concerned. Most of the children
and including us two new-comers, we numbered 99—wore orphans or the daughters of wives whoso
husbands had deserted them. Our mother had sent with us nice warm flannel underclothing, hut alter
the first night'these were exchanged for cotton chemises, A s we had always been accustomed to wear
the former, we felt the want of them very keenly, and caught cold in consequence. Bat wo did not yet
know the life that was ahead of us. Barracked together like a lot of young criminals, subjected-to tasks
far beyond our years, fed on the scantiest of diet, we dared, no more than dared Oliver Twist’s companions,
“askfor more,” and were little better off than the poor black slaves described in “Uncle Tom’s Cabin,”
-'•aifiqthftrdiook ‘bhaXj-tvppeft'lfl"— t».o—as** “-a follow-feeling .makes ,u.s v\ondi'ous kind. The
Industrial School,‘of which we were now enrolled as “ pupils, we round to be arranged into different
departments, each under the manageinoni.of a. mm. It is said that no man is a hero to his valet, and wo
soon found out that our preconceived notions as to the sanctity and gentleness of the nuns wore equally as
faulty. They had the same tempers as ordinary women. They could box one’s ears just ns hard, and use
acanean an expert manner. But I must give them credit for not being lazy-, each worked in her special
department along with her girls. In fact tho nuns were in their degree slaves only a few grades higher
than us poor girls, and we were in one respect more fortunate than they, as their servitude was for tho
term of their natural lives. We could hope some day to go out again into the world ; they never !
Sow the System was worked. —" While my sister and I wore at the school the departments were
arranged as follow:
Dormitories.—ln charge of Sister Mary Ignatius.
Eefeetory (alternate weeks) —Sister Mary Isidore, Sister Mary Ignatius.
School. —In charge of Sister Mary Ignatius.
Laundry. —In charge of Sister Mary Matilda.
Ironing Eoom. —In charge of Sister Mary Matilda.
Needle Eoom.—-In charge of Sister Mary Isidore,
Knitting Eoom. —In charge of Sister Mary Patrick,
Bath Eoom. ; —ln charge of Sister Mary Ignatius,
Pantry,—ln charge of Sister Mary Ignatius.
Kitchen.—ln charge of old woman named Bridget.
Cows, &c, —In charge of Michael and Dick (who lived in separate quarters).
The Dormitories. —I will first describe the dormitories. There were three. Two small rooms,
each containing six beds, and one large one, with thirty beds. In the latter Sister Mary Ignatius had
her cell. So there were forty-two beds to accommodate ninety-nine girls. A. few of the biggest girls
Only had a bed apiece. X never enjoyed that luxury, and often I was glad I did hot, When late at night,
coming sopping from the laundry, fagged out and my teeth aching, I stripped off my dripping clothes
and hung them on the four-poster to dry as best they might for mo to put on again in about six hours
time, and crept in between the two little girls, who shared my bed, and tried to dry. and warm my
shivering frame against their bodies. They often woke up when my cold, damp limbs touched theirs, but
they dared not utter a sound, else the sharp ears of the Sister would hear them, and all three of us would
be condemned to take our next morning’s meal on our knees instead of sitting on the forms with the
other girls. This was the usual punishment for speaking in the dormitory, where silence must reign
supreme. This dormitory was a large, painfully plain room. Its whitewashed walls chilled you. There
was no furniture in it, except the nun’s cell and the girls’ thirty iron bedsteads of different shapes and
sizes. We had no sofkabeds, no wire mattresses, but hard, straw-filled palliasses, which we girls were
forced in Our “ spare time” (Heaven save the mark 1) to carry up and down the steep stairs to hunt for
bugs concealed in the binding and folds. There was no toilet glass, no dressing-table, no pictures, no
on the wall, no washstand, no matting on the floor, not oven a chair. As a matter .of fact, no girl


over sat on a chair from the clay she entered tlio school till the day she left, and our poor little hacks
often ached and ached. "We used to wonder whether the consciences of the Reverend Mother and her
nuns ached when they saw our backs bent into hows for want of support. Most of the girls from this
cause became terribly round shouldered, and there was no “ physical drill” to counteract it,
[To ho continued under the following heads:—“Eilthy Laundry Arrangements,” “Contagious
Diseases,” “ Our Daily Hound of Work and Braver,” “Our Pood,” “Confession to the Priests” “The
laundry Work,” “The Needle Work,” “The Scrubbing and Cleaning,” “Emptying Night-pans,’’
“Cleaning out the Well,” “A Night Adventure with a Burglar,” “When Visitors came” “Our
Education” (?), “Girls that Ban Away,” “Recreation,” “Lost Souls,” “If I were a Rich Lady,”
Conclusion,]
WATOHMAN, 27 July, 1903.
THE NUNS’ INDUSTRIAL SCHOOL AT MANLY.
Swoen Testimony op an Ex-inmate,
(Continued from last week’s issue.)
Filthy Sanitary Arrangc.menls.~-A.ltBV getting up —the hell rang at 6 a,m, for the “ Angelas,V
which we had to repeat—wo had to go downstairs to perform our ablutions. Oh, the horror of it! ‘ Even
now I shudder when I think of the utter beastliness of the arrangements. There was no such things as
separate basins or towels; only a few tin basins for ninety-nine girls and.a few roller towels. As water
was none too plentiful, trash water could not ho spared lor each girl, so .dozens washed in the same dish
without it being emptied, wiped on the same towel, and tooth-combed their hair with the same fine tooth-
comb. Such a thing as a tooth-brush was never dreamed of. I forgot to say that directly after our
arrival our heads were cropped close, and always kept so. We cried when our l wavy locks wore clipped
off. Halting or frizzing the hair (oven if possible) was a sin, for which “pride and vanity ”(a favourite
expression of the nuns to us, as if we, with our surroundings, were in danger of falling into suoh sins!)
wo would have to do some terrible penance.
Contagious Diseases.—Among ninety-nine children placed in one establishment—wherever they
may_be drawn from—some are certain to be.suffering from complaints of some kind or another, more or
leas infectious—and so it proved at Manly. One girl hud a saudy-blight, and twelve of her companions,
wlio wiped on tlie shuig towel, contracted. it. ■A.'bout ten were Jmd. up &t tlie sumo time with chicken-pox.
One girl poor unhappy child! had a congenital disease in the mouth. She was eventually taken to
the Quarantine ground whore she died. But two others had caught the disease from her. These, however,
were treated in time and cured. Many girls had sores on their heads. Sister Mary Ignatius used to
clip tenderly round the scabs and cried as she did so. Dear Sister Mary Ignatius I If all the nuns had
been like you our lot would not have been so unhappy. Some of the 'nuns beat us over the heads, hut
they were not all cruel. Sister Mary Justinia (who looked after the Church) used—unknown to tho
Reverend Mother to steal down to us with a dozen or so lollies hidden under her scapula, and sometimes
Sister Mary Evangelist would bring us a biscuit or two left over from the Reverend Mother’s table,
Sister Mary Barbara would also occasionally get one or two of us girls up to her cell to mend her
mosquito curtains, and was not it a treat, a break in the terrible monotony of work and prayers, prayers
And work. "
Our daily round of Worje and Prayer,— l should now give our daily .round of toil copiously
interlarded with religious services.
6 a.m.—Bell rings, Angelas (10 minutes), ablutions, work till Mass.
7 a.m.—Attend Mass, work till breakfast (two hours on an empty stomach).,
8 a.m.—Breakfast, work till noon.
Noon.—Angelus (10 minutes), work till dinner.
1 p.m.—Dinner, work till tea-time.
6 p.m.—Tea, work till prayers.
9 p.m.—Prayers, bed (but sometimes we had to start working again, and keep it up till 11 or 12 or
later).
The “ little girls ” attended school and did sewing and knitting instead of “ work,” and went to
bed at 8 instead of at 9 p.m., which was supposed to he the hour for the big girls to retire. When an
extra rush of work kept us up at laundry work very late, say, till midnight, we were given a cup of
coffee. When the concession eight hours work, eight hours sleep, and eight hours play has been granted
to big strong men, it seems that common humanity would have given at least such a division -of the
twenty-four hours to poor weak girls. But we were “ out of the world.”
Our Pood. —Now_ to describe our meals. Breakfast consisted of 1| slices of broad and treacle
apiece (the girk called it “ Black Jack and pull it ”), and one pannikin of weak tea. The biggest girls
had two slices of bread aiul a scrape of butter or dripping instead of treacle. Dinner was composed of
“stew" (very little meat with perhaps some turnip tops or chopped carrots and plenty ..of “gravy”),:
one potato each, half slice of bread, and one pannikin of tea. Whe-hetide the girl who, sick or stubborn,
refused, to swallow those dainties. Her mouth would be opened, and the food forced down her throat.
On Eridays there was no “ stew,” hut pea soup took its place, and sometimes, as a special indulgence,
boiled eggs (boiled hard), one each for the big girls, and half an egg each for the little ones. ■ Tea was
the same as breakfast, only, if possible, the tea was weaker and the bread drier. During meals absolute
silence was enforced by a nun, who walked,up and down all the time repeating her prayers, with ninety--
nine pairs of hungry eyes riveted on her. As I previously stated, it was a common punishment for a gurl
to have to kneel at her meals. A little less kneeling and a little more feeding would have been more
acceptable to us.
Confession to the Priests.— While the manual labour we girls had to perform was enough to crush
the spirit out of us, it still was nothing as compared with the agony of mind with which we dreaded
the monthly compulsory confession. When attaining 7 years of age we had to be confirmed. We
were too young to understand the true import of confirmation—one of the Church’s sacraments, penance
was another—but from infancy we had been accustomed to “ hear Mass,” and confirmation qualified us
t'o make our “ first communion.” The period before confirmation was the best time we experienced,-as-
then the priests were in and out of the school, and as they sometimes came in during meals, the table
bas net then quite as hare as at ordinary' times. After the' Sacrament of Confirmation had been conferred'
upon


upon us by Ills Lord ship the Bishop, we were obliged to attend Holy Communion on the first Sunday in
every month, and on the preceding Saturday were called from whatever work we might be engaged on to
go to confession, and when we had finished and been absolved, wo were hurried back to resume our tasks,
Ori these Saturday afternoons, could be seen a string of some forty girls, kneeling one in front of the
other on the cold stones of the porch of the chapel, each with tears in her eyes, not tears of penitence, but
of shame at the ordeal awaiting her. What sins could little girls shut up within high walls have to confess ?
So the confession we made, was stereotyped, merely a parrot-like repetition of words, and was almost
invariably as follows : —Kneeling down at iho jirie-dieu opposite to the father confessor, the childlike lips
uttered ;—“ Bless me, Bather, for I have sinned. It is a month since my last confession. I confess to
Almighty God, to Blessed Mary ever Virgin, to Blessed Michael the Archangel, to Blessed John Baptist,
to the Holy Apostles, Saint Peter and Saint Paul, and to you, Bather, that I have_ sinned in thought,
word, and deed, through my fault, through my most grievous thought. I sometimes forget to say
morning and night prayers, and my religious duties. I tell untruths. I quarrel with the girls. I
disobey the nuns. 1 mumble to myself when the nuns punish me. I sometimes back answer tha nuns.
I made faces at the nuns behind their backs.” And not having any more sins to confess the poor little
child comes to a stop. Then commences the indignation of the thing. The priest asks questions
suggesting possible sins that the little girl might have committed. “Ho you ever play with boys?” he
asks. Seeing that we are confined within high walls, and that on the rare occasions wo are permitted
outside, two nuns (nuns never go out alone, always in couples) accompany us, what opportunity had we
for playing with boys, and would it, we wondered, have been wrong had we done so ? But following
questions show that the priest did not mean playing at innocent games 1 And then come other questions
which make me, a mother, blush at the very remembrance of them; “Did you ever ?” “ Havo
■you r r” “ Are you in the habit of ?" “Do you sometimes feel ——p” I cannot repeat
them. What knew we, little children, of carnal lusts or the relation of the sexes? What had we to do
with the horrible things the reverend father suggested? But we were, happily, too young to fully
understand one-tenth of the questions he put to us. We felt, though, that we should not have heard such
things, and our pale cheeks used to become suffused with shameful blushes, and our eyes filled with tears,
why we knew not. W T e had done none of these things. The thought of them had never entered our
heads until put there by the priest, and we felt that some one was wicked. It could not, of course, he
the reverend father, 1 so it must be us. Had we dared we would havo stayed away, slaving at the wash-
tub rather than kneel at the feet of the father confessor listening to his terrible questioning. Need I
say, that since leaving the Manly nuns I have never been to confession, nor have 1 but rarely entered a
church.. If a priest would ask mo when a little child the kind of questions ho did month by month,
what would he not dare to ask a grown woman and a mother ? So, if I am wrong in not now frequenting
church, it is the fault of the priests who disgusted mo with what they called religion. After the
questioning was over the penitent had to express her sorrow and contrition, and then absolution would
he granted by the reverend father confessor. Sometimes, hut not often, two priests attended to hear
these confessions, and then one of them would remain in the parlour whither half of the girls had to go
Protestant children would he brought to the school. The priests—who, like the Pharisees of old, would
“move Heaven and earth to make one proselyte”—immediately baptised them, and so received them into
the Church. In one or two instances, however, the parents or guardians of such children objected to
them being made Catholics. In such cases they were not baptised, but were obliged to go to church to
learn the Catholic payers, say “ Hail Marys,” genuflect, hear Mass, and do just like the other girls did,
except that they did not go to confession, nor were they confirmed.
The Laundry Work.—The nuns took in washing and ironing. Their cart used to ho sent the
rounds collecting soiled linen, and the customers thought they were doing a good work by patronising
the nuns’ laundry. They did not know, and probably it never occurred to them, that little children had
to do the work and slave till night time at it, barefooted, wet, and often dropping from fatigue. Wo
girls had to draw the water for washing, rinsing, and blueing the clothes from a well. There was no
windlass to the well. A girl had to hoistthe bucket with a ropo hand over hand. There were only a few
fixed tubs, and it strained our poor little frames lifting about the large round galvanised tubs.full of
water and clothes to be rinsed and blued. Even now lam suffering from the effects of strains I received
over this heavy work._ Our hands became blistered, and the wet made the blisters hurst and bleed. Yet
we had to wash and rinse the clothes with our tom hands and knuckles. But if the washing were too
heavy work for young girls, what must the ironing have been ? Ton can imagine when I tell you that
one girl was accustomed to iron forty shirts a day. At 3d. each, this represented earnings of 10s. for
one day’s work, but none of it went to the little wage-earner. No, “Black Jack and pull it,” “stew,”
and bare feet were good enough for the puny youngsters that helped to produce the income that kept
going this well-boomed “charitable institution” of the Holy Roman Catholic Church. It was not an
exceptional thing for one girl to iron six petticoats, six dresses, and six blouses in a dav, besides numerous
smaller articles, the schedule prices for which work would amount to 12s. When the laundry cart forgot
to call for any washing, two girls were sent with a large clothes-basket to, perhaps, the Manly College^ to
get the priests and students* soiled linen, or to ct Latimer’s Hotel,” or to some other customer. This we
thought a treat, getting a sight for once of the outside world, but, as wo carried our load “home,” we used
to think, as the basket weighed our arms down, that all this extra washing meant working late into the
night, going to bed soaking wet, too tired to say or prayers, and so rendering us liable to a penance after
our next confession imposed, probably, by the very priest over washing whose dirty shirts we would havo
to tire our small bodies and afterwards fall asleep dead-heat directly wo laid ourselves on our beds.
(To he continued !.)
WATCHMAN, 4 July, 1903.
THE NUNS’ INDUSTRIAL SCHOOL AT MANLY.
Swoen Testisiont op au Ex-inmate.
(Continued from last week’s issue.)
d \ BW ° rh “ nuns ” also catered for all sorts of fancy work, dressmaking, and
knitting. Sometimes wedding trousseaux had to he got ready or shrouds made (it was uncanny work for
ns girls making ugly brown shrouds). So often we had to “stitch, stitch, stitch,” till our finders and


eycja ached. My sister’s eyes are still affected (she has lo wear glasses) from the constant application to
fancy work, for which she was awarded several prizes at different Catholic bazaars, but which prizes she
never saw. Wo silly children thought it a great honor to bo given the priests’ socks to darn, and when
one girl was set to knit a pair of red silk hose tor his Eminence the Cardinal she was the envy of her
mates, iho knitting was done in the “summer house,” a nun, of coui’so, being in charge, and the bleak
wind from the ocean often made us poorly-clad children shiver, so wo tucked up our bare feet underneath
us, and squatted on them while wo knitted or darned as fast as our little fingers could travel. Borne of
the girls wore, from constant practice, expert knitters, and articles made by them always commanded
high prices at fairs and bazaars. It was all a matter of £ s. d, whether our work consisted of washing,
ironing, dressmaking, or knitting. It all brought grist to the Eeverend Mother’s mill. There was no
Miss Belle Golding, no Mr. Walter Taylor, nor other inspector ever entered within our gates to inquire
how many.hours a day we worked, whether we were given any wages or pocket-money, or what ‘'over-
time” we did. No, wo poor children had to moil and toil without any outside person knowing tlmt the
polished shirt he wore was ironed by a child, that the scarlet silk hose, so bravely displayed by his
Eminence the Cardinal Archbishop of Sydney'at State and religious functions, were knitted by their little
fingers inside the galvanised iron frame of the Manly Industrial School. Bid the happy bride, 1 wonder,
guess that her wedding dress was the result of Infantile labour? Certainly the corpse sleeping its long
sleep in the Catholic corner of the cemetery know not that the shroud in which it was onvelopedTiad been
made by girls of immature age, working for their hard task-mistresses, the nuns of Manly. “ The
labourer” (if only a girl) “is worthy of her hire” is a text that apparently never entered the economic
arrangements of the Eeverend Mother of a convent industrial school.
The Scrubbing and Cleaning.- —The dormitories and refectory, of course, had to bo kept clean, and
no one can take exception to the elder girls having to do work of that character. The latter had to bo
stoned daily (no soap being used). Eeur girls were selected each day for this work. No brooms were
provided iov sweeping. We had to make our own brooms, gathering material in the scrub to make them
of, but girls in the bush, I am told, often have to do the same, and if we never had had any worse work
than trifles such as these, this article would never have been written.
Emptying Night-pans —But while scrubbing and cleaning and such like work are fitting employ-
ment for girls, the same cannot be said in regard to emptying night-pans and burying the night-soil. Yet
it seems incredible, we girls had to do this. Would anyone believe that only one closet was provided for
the use of tho ninety-nine girls? But such was actually a fact. Two girls (but not the same two girls)
were allotted tho filthy task of each night emptying the pan, tho contents of which they had to bury in a
hole, which they had to dig in the pea garden. Oh, tho filthiness of it! Our stomachs revolted, and wo
went to bed with a nauseous sick headache. No wonder if in the morning, while hearing Mass, one of
the girls, who had the night before performed this beastly work, went into a faint, and had to he carried
out of church, Just fancy praying on an empty stomach with the smell of the night-pan still in her
nostrils! But it was part of tho system to train us to eschew all “pomps and vanities,” “the pride of
life," and “tho lusts of tho flesh.” But surely they might have thought out some other plan for making
us as ’umhle as Uriah Hoep besides turning us poor defenceless girls into “night-men” !
Cleaning out the Wall.- This was another job that recurred about once a month. The well often
used to run nearly dry. Two of us girls were lot down to the bottom, and a third stood on' top and
lowered a bucket to us. It will he remembered there was no windlass. We were, as usual, barefoot,
and our task was to fill tho bucket from the dregs at the bottom. When the well was nearly emptied wo
had to sop up the remaining water with rags and rinse them into the bucket till tho bottom of the well
was quite dry. And anyone can imagine how wet this made us, dripping to the skin as dirty water
dropped on to us as the bucket was being hauled up. Once we found a dead bandicoot at the bottom.
We had been drinking for some days tho water in which the semi-putrid carcase of that animal had been
decaying. It is a wonder we were not all down with typhoid. One would have imagined that in order
to keep their little workers in good fettle the nuns would have at all events paid some attention to
sanitation.
A Night Adventure with a Burglar. —Speaking of this dead bandicoot reminds me of a real night
adventure with a live “ burglar.” One night we girls were aroused from our sleep about 3 a.m. by “ bang,
hang,” at the dormitory door. Sister Mary Iguatius then woke up those sound sleepers whom the banging
had .not disturbed. We were soon marshalled (that is, the bigger girls were ; the little ones were left in
their beds in a terrible state of fear). The rule of “silence” was for once broken. We were armed
with clothes-props, hammers, sticks, and the iron bars from the kitchen to eject a burglar, who was said
to be inside the chapel. The Eeverend Mother headed the little army, fingering the cross she always wore
in front of her, doubtless intending to use it for anathematising the sacrilegious intruder. It was as
comical as the Cardinal Archbishop of Eheims and the poor little jackdaw ! I can afford to laugh at it
now, hut at the time all of us, Eeverend Mother, nuns, and girls, were really terribly frightened. We
heard a scraping, scratching noise inside the sacred edifice, it sounded very ghostly ! “Those behind
called forward, and those in front cried back,” At last one nun more bold than the rest opened the door,
and then we saw in the “ dim, religious light” the thief actually on the tabernacle trying to get at the
host. He was dragged out, killed, and laid on the lid of the well. Summary jurisdiction ! The little
girls, who had been left in their beds, were taken in the morning to see the corpse of the burglar—a poor
little dead bandicoot! We had another fright one night caused by an iguana being in our dormitory.
He was likewise hastily “ despatched.”
When Visitors came. —When, as not unfrequently happened, ladies came out of goodheartedness or
curiosity to see the convent, and to drop a coin in the charity box to “ help along the good work,” those
of us within sight were told to put our hoots on (usually reserved for church), and whenever parents of
any of the girls came to see them the Eeverend Mother was present at the interview, so we dared not make
any complaints for fear of receiving a beating later on. If any of our relations, when writing to us,
enclosed postage stamps as lolly money (poor deluded parents), we never received them. As all our
letters were perused by the Eeverened Mother before posting, it was more than our skins were worth to
write and ask them not to send any more. 1 suppose the stamps found their way into the “ charity box ”
to “ help along the good work” ! Once some of the holder girls broke open the letter-box to get their
parents’ letters in tact. Wasn’t there a hullaballoo! The punishment inflicted on the culprits was
severe enough to frighten even the most daring from repeating the experiment. Twice to my knowledge
tins of lollies were sent to special girls, on one occasion by some ladies to mark their appreciation of some
exceptionally


exceptionally excellent knitting work ordered by them, but all wo saw of these lollies were two apiece put on
each girl’s enamelled iron plate after dinner one day. It was the only occasion, I believe, when wo got a
dinner consisting of two courses.
Our Utilisation (?). —The little girls went to “ school ” while wo elder ones worked, but what they
learnt there was harmless, principally singing hymns and litanies most of the time, and a “Hail Mary’*
every time the clock struck. One of the “ babies” used to address her “ E nil Mary" to the clock, which she,
doubtless, thought was the “Mary” she was invoking! Less than one-third of the girls went to “school."
Sister Mary Ignatius—the hardest worked nun of the lot —'conducted it, assisted by two girls, each about
12 years of age. These girls wanted teaching badly themselves, but they were competent enough to teach
the“ babies” hymns and prayers. Before I was taken to this place by my step-father I was considered by my
teachers a clever advanced scholar for my age. I was in the upper fourth class at a public school, hut during
my career with the nuns at Manly I learnt nothing of an educational character. I was always too tired out.
I have said I was delicate and was often under the doctor’s hands, in return for whose services we did his
laundry work, and so I did not care to go to “night school,” which was held some evenings when,we
were not working late. There were no books to read, only prayer-books, no picture hooks to look at, not
even a text to catch one’s eyes and remove the monotony of the whitewash. I almost forgot how to read
or spell. It is only since my Manly days that I have by study made up for “ the years the canker worm
had oaten.” No thanks to the nuns for this though! They made me a drudge, a hard-worked slave, old
before I was young, and starved my mind as well as my body. “ Ob, for the rarity of Christian charity ”
in the heart of a nun. We girls seldom met with it. 'But 1 must be fair and give credit whore credit is
due. The nuns wore not all unkind, as I have already given instances of how some of them were sorry
for us, hut they could do little to alleviate our lot, however well disposed they; might i'eol towards us.
Girls that Ban Away, —Would you, reader, blame any girl for trying to escape from such a
hopeless, thankless life, from such a daily round of toil, unbrightoned with the slightest gleam of that
sunshine which radiates the lives of most girls outside of similar ago? During my time six girls tried to
escape, J. If. and B. If., E. W., and L. W., E. A., and L. A. The four first wore brought back. Their
hair was cropped closer than ever. They were locked in cells, and next day the Tempo laundry cart took them
away, and they passed out of our lives for over. What became of thorn God knows ! The other two had laid
their plans better. They had arranged for outside help from a relative and her friend, and wore safely
got away on to one of the Manly ferry heals before the alarm was raised. When their mother heard
their story she determined to retain them with her at all hazards, and defied the Reverend Mother and all
her works, But these two girls were held up by the nuns as awful examples of the depravity of juvenile
human nature to the poor unfortunates in the Manly Catholic Industrial School, ' who secrotely wished
that a similar fate awaited them.
(To he continued.)
THE NUNS’ INDUSTEIAL SCHOOL AT MANLT
Recreation.- —But did the girls never got any recreation ? some of my readers may ask. Did they
ever have games or amusements of any kind ? Well, the “ little ones”—the “ babies” —played ball with the
nuns. The next youngest, the “ little girls” each had a patch of flower garden to look after; but the
“big girls” had no games, no recreation, except on Sundays, when they were allowed in the afternoon the
recreation they desired most, to lie down on their hard beds in the dormitories and sleep. To sleep, and
rest their weary limbs, worn out with a week’s hard work, Sleep, from which we often prayed wo might
never awaken 1 Baton Sundays some of the girls were taken for a walk to the lagoon in the grounds, and
there—like the prodigal son of the Scriptural illustration —we tried to fill our hungry bellies with yams
which we unearthed with sticks, with “ bugberries" and sour grass. Once a year we wore taken to “ Shelly
Beach. 1 ’ Oh, what a, treat it was to see and play with the dear little shells, to pick up seaweed, to look
at the little crabs hurrying sideways from us, to watch the breakers rolling up one after another, to see the
vast expanse of ocean, perchance to spy a tiny steamer far out on the horizon going we know not whither,
to see other children—boys and girls—bright and happy, with sunburnt faces and no nuns to watch their
every movement, to have children laugh. We had almost forgotten what laughter was like 1 To watch
happy holiday-makers laden with flannel-flowers and ferns, to see them with baskets of fruit and dainties
such as we never even dreamed of, Oh, this one clay a year was like Paradise after Purgatory; but,
alas, one day soon passes, but our Purgatory lasted for 304 days in each year. Once eight of tlie best
girls, and 1 was one, were taken to St, Mary’s Cathedral Pete, and 2s. Od. was divided between us tb
spend. We were like a poor little canary I once saw that had got out of its cage and was frightened at
its strange surroundings. We felt dazed, and under the guidance of the nuns who kept us close to them,
we spent the whole of our half-crown buying chances in different raffles, One poor girl was lucky
enough to win a valuable prize, a statue of St. Joseph, but it made no difference to her. She won the
saint, but never saw him afterwards. Probably ho now adorns some altar or occupies a niche in a Reverend
Mother’s parlour or a priest’s oratory. Perhaps he was raffled over again. But the Cathedral people got
the whole of our half-crown, and they stole the poor girl’s Saint Joseph. She won him, but they cheated
her out of her rights. If a Church organises raffles surely it should act “on the square,” and not like the
“ cronk tote shops" I have heard about. The occasion referred to was the only time during my sojourn
with the Manly nuns that I handled money, except once when I was never told the. reason for this
exceptional generosity, nor could we ever discover what occasioned it, 'Wo were puzzled. It was
so strange to actually have pennies, real pennies, in our hands to go to the shop and buy lollies, like wo
remembered we used to do when we were at homo with our mother. But when the nuns took ns to a
shop on the Corse, and sent us inside, we felt stupid, it was such an unaccustomed sensation. Our eyes
Wandered all over the pretty sweets and confectionery, hat we did nut know what to ask for. Bo the nuns
followed us in and told the girl behind the counter to give us some chocolates. When wo got outside
we offered the nuns some, forgetting that they must not eat lollies in the street; but when we got inside
the fence of our “home’’ they accepted some of the few we- then had left. Once or twice a year two nuns
would take two, sometimes four, girls down to the Manly boat and across to Sydney and’bnck. , Thesb
girls had to take their knitting and knit all the time they were on’the boat, so could not see ranch of the
scenery. It occurs tome, now that I can better gauge the motives thafcprompt people’s actions,, that
these


these rare trips wore taken not for the benefit of the girls, but to advertise their knitting, as the best
knitters only were selected for these outings, and had to bring their best and showiest work, which was
often admired by lady passengers who would say, “ Flow clever these little girls are, and how beautifully
they knit. I must call and see the Reverend Mother and give her an order for some knitting. It is
bettor than you can get in the Sydney shops!”
i Lost Souls. —Some of the biggest girls, who wore orphans or friendless, wore sometimes sent away
to service as “ generals" to Roman Catholic mistresses, wlvo bad to pay their wages over to the Reverend
Mother. So their lot was no very different one to that of the “ assigned servant” of early colonial days that
; I have Tend about. Is it any wonder that some of those poor girls “ went wrong” ? The writer has seen
not once nor twice only, on the streets of Sydney, bedecked with tawdry finery, with their calling indelibly
imprinted on their features, girls whom she recognised as having boon in the Manly Industrial School.
Whose fault is it that these poor unfortunates are what they are now P Who made them what they have
become ? After years of drudgery, kept in ignorance and subjection, to bo suddenly confronted with the
temptations that besot young girls who have no mother or adviser, what would seem to their inexperienced
minds more fascinating than the tinselled falseness of a “gay life”? Ah, my “good mm«,” when the
rights and wrongs of tilings are being balanced, it appears to mo that you will not bo held blameless for
the downfall of these poor girls, the care of whoso souls should have been your first consideration. The
mere vain repetition of “ Hail Mary” at each strike of the clock, attending Mass, and repeating prayers in
season and out of season, without the teaching of morality, kindliness, and loving example, were not
sufficient to form the character of those poor girls or to safeguard their future purity. You should, my
dear nuns, also remember that in these days of universal education girls want to ho made something more
than mere washing machines or patent knitters. Technical education in one or other of its branches is a
necessity of to-day. The ordinary “ slavey” is left behindhand in life’s race. You may call mo “ worldly”
if'you like; but can you tell me that the “ training” (T) I have described is calculated to fit girls for
anything bettor than general drudge" nr a “ hand” at a mammoth factory or laundry, earning a mere
iwcekly pittance, and exposed to daily temptations of the worst kind P How many girls so brought up will
develop into suitable wives for the class of husband they are likely to meet? Lot girls by all means bo
taught sowing, dressmaking, and laundry work:, hut don’t, if you value their future, keep them, month in and
month out, at such work in order to cam money to support tho convent. Rathor teach them the principles
of domestic economy, how to grill a chop, boil a potatoe, cook a pudding, or bake a scone. Give them
lessons in “ first-aid” and nursing Lot them practise ealoathonies, so as to develop their bodies, above
all, cultivate their minds and teach, them something more than the mere formulas of religion. Tho writer
does not wish to pose as a political economist, nor as a. deop thinker, who is only a simple self-taught young
woman, who has kept her eyes and ears open, and profited by what she saw and heard ; has read what older
and wiser people have written on different matters, hut she hopes that perhaps her attempts at penning
her own thoughts mid aspirations may not bo deemed, altogether foolish or valueless. Sho may he a
day-dreamer, but this is the very first thing she would do if she were wealthy.
If hoove a rich lady, —l would establish a homo for motherless and poor girls, which should bo
exactly the opposite to what 1 have described as existing at Manly. The dormitories would be cheerful,
tho walla coloured pretty tints, muslin curtains at t.lu>. windows lied up with ribbons, each girl would have
a bed to herself, draped and provided with mosquito curtains, texts would .adorn the walla. There would
bo shelves containing illustrated hooks, games of all kinds—indoor and outdoor—a piano for,the girls to
play on, dumb-bell and club exorcises would bo given separately. The girls would wear pretty neat
drosses and warm flannel undergarments. They would bo taught to have a proper pride in their personal
appearance. Looking-glasses would be provided, so that they could dross their hair, which would not
be prison-cropped. Innocent mirth would be encouraged. There would be plenty of chairs with backs.
Punishment would never consist of “ kneeling at meals ”or repeating extra prayers. There would be no
confession to a priest. Food (which would be cooked by the girls themselves, turn and turn about)
would bo plain, wholesome, and sufficient. Work and lessons would divide the time with recreation.
It would not be a luxurious establishment, hut girls trained in a homo like tho ono I dream of, would,
I think, look back to tlioir youthful days with pleasurable feelings, and not like those who spent their
childhood in tho Roman Catholic Industrial School, Manly, as having undergone purgatory, which, in
tlioir case, by some mistake or other, occurred out of its time, happening to thorn before instead of, as
they were taught to believe, after death.
Conclusion. —ln her descriptions the writer has endeavoured to “ sot down naught in malice,” but
to be fair and truthful. She hates the system, hut on that account docs not condemn all tho individuals
who have been brought up under it. Some of the nuns, she feels certain, would have had things other-
wise, hut the system of the Holy Roman Church crushes out individualism. Sins are made to seem to
exist, and to he confessed which are nob sins. God knows, perhaps the Sisters who secretly brought ns
lollies or biscuits had to do penance for those “sins.” I know some of the nuns wept for ns, Perhaps
that was counted unto them a sin by their father confessor, but lot us hope they may receive their
reward in the hereafter, where sin, is not and where father confessors aro not needed.
[While placing the facts herein narrated before the readers of the Watchman , the winter does
not wish her present friends to know that she spent her childhood’s days within the walla of the place
,sh,o has endeavoured to describe, nor would she like hoi’ bright-eyed baby boy to learn it when he grows
up.' 1 So, without disclosing her identity to a curious public, she has placed in tho hands of the Editor a
statutory declaration, made by her before a Justice of tho Peace of the State of New South Wales (not
for publication), that every statement contained in this her account of tho Manly Roman Catholic
industrial School is true and correct in every particular. May her writings have tho effect she earnestly
prays for them.! May the search-light of public opinion he focussed on tho inside of the institution!
May Government inspectors periodically visit it, and should occasion arise, may they have the courage
to summon the Reverend Mother before ono of the stipendiary magistrates for any breach of tho Factories
Act and regulations, the Public Instruction Act, or tho Health Act! Then, perhaps, tho girls, whoso
misfortune it is to become inmates of the institution,, may have a better chance than was given to the
writer, for whose present reasonably prosperous position she owes the nuns no thanks.]
(The Em)
Extract


Extract from Votes and Proceedings—lBth November, 1903.
Question.
(14.) Illtreatment of Girls in Industrial Home at Manly:—Mr. Law asked the Colonial Secretary,—■
(1.) Has his attention been called to certain damaging statements made in a weekly paper, published
in Sydney, containing sworn declarations in reference to the illtreatment of girls in the Homan
Catholic Industrial Home at Manly ?
(2.) Will he cause an inquiry to be made into the serious statements therein made ?
(3.) Will the Government take into consideration the question of placing all Industrial Institutions
where young people are employed under proper Governmental Inspection ?
Answer.
Sir John See answered, —■
(1 and 3.) Yes,
(3.) All Institutions of this character are open for inspection at any time.
Submitted.—J.M.G., 19/11/1903. The Inspector-General of Police for report. —J.S., 20/11/1903.
The Inspector-General of Police.—J.M.G., 8.C., 20/11/1903.
Memorandum from The Inspector-General of Police.
Police Department, Inspector-General’s Office,
Sydney, 21 November, 1903.
Alleged Illtreatment of Girls at Industrial Home, Manly.
I iiiYE carefully read the statements published in the Watchman newspaper, which may be epitomised
as complaints of (1) insufficient food; (2) insufficient accommodation, sanitary and otherwise; and (3)
harshness of control and treatment.
No doubt the Homan Catholic authorities would readily afford facilities for inspection and
investigation, but I imagine that demur would he made to an officer of Police conducting any inquiry,
though plain-clothes officer Sub-Inspector Tindall would bo well qualified to be entrusted with such an
investigation.
I venture, therefore, to suggest that a letter should be written by the Hnder Secretary to the
Archbishop, suggesting that an investigation should be made into the statements, to he conducted by the
Chief Officer under the Children’s Protection Act (Mr. A. W. Green), but as inquiries may possibly
have to be made outside from the parents of the children, from the medical attendant, and also from the
complainant herself, I suggest that Mr. Tindall might he associated with Mr. Green in the matter.
EDMUND EOSBEHY,
Inspector-General of Police.
. _ ■ ■ - i...... 1. 11..— t.1**v I-.1111-,
Submitted for approval, 24/11/1903. Approved.—J.S.,“ 5/12/1903. Cardinal Moran informed,
11/12/1903. 1
His Eminence the Cardinal to The Honorable the Premier and Chief Secretary.
S' r ! St. Mary’s Cathedra], Sydney, 12 December, 1903.
I beg to thank you for the proposed official investigation regarding tho Industrial Homo at
Manly, and it will be my endeavour to co-operate in every way with Mr. Green, Chief Officer under the
Children’s Protection Act, and Sub-Inspector Tindall, that they may have the fullest information that
they may require.
I would request you to order the proposed investigation as soon as possible, so that it may bo
expedited before Christmas. Tours, &c.,
PATRICK E. CARDINAL MOHAN,
Archbishop of Sydney.
Submitted for approval of appointment of Messrs. Green and Tindall, 17/12/1903. Approved.—
J.S., 17/12/1903, Mr. Green informed, 24/12/1903. Cardinal Moran and 1.-G. Police notified,
28/12/1903.
/Report.
Chaextable Institutions or New South Wales.
Offices of the State Children Relief Board, and Children’s Protection Act,
Sir, _ Hichmond-terrace, Domain, Sydney, 11 Eehruary, 1904.
We have the honor, in obedience to the instruction of the Hon. The Premier and Chief
Secretary, to furnish the following report ou the allegations of illtreatment of the girls in the Homan
Catholic Industrial School, Manly.
The allegations'were published in. The Watchman newspaper on June 20 and 27, and July 4 and
11, 1903; and are in respect of (1) insufficient food; (2) insufficient accommodation, sanitary and
otherwise; and (3) harshness of control and treatment. A detailed list of the specific charges is
appended. They refer to conditions prevailing six (0) years ago, and not to the present time.
We have perused the articles referred to; have paid several visits of inspection to the Home j
and have examined the following witnesses ;
Several girls who were inmates of the Home, and have now been discharged.
All the gilds who are now inmates, and whoso testimony was considered of value.
The officers of the Institution, who have not been changed during the past six years.
Dr. Harvey, the present Visiting Medical Officer.
Dr. Watkins, the late Visiting Medical Officer.
Mrs. E. Tennant Donaldson.


The closest investigation has failed to elicit any evidence in corroboration of the statements of
illtreatment or neglect of the children in any particular, either at the date (six years ago) when the
cruelties were alleged to have been inflicted, or at the present time. Dr. Watkins was Yisiting Medical
Officer six years ago, and his evidence is typical of the unanimous testimony in support of the good care
and kindly treatment bestowed on the children by the officers of the Institution. He states:—
“I had frequent opportunities of observing the way in which the children were treated and
cared for. On no occasion did I see any evidence of neglect or illtreatment. ... I never
received any complaint from an inmate, either direct or indirect. At one time, owing to the
Sisters’ desire not to refuse cases, the dormitory became somewhat crowded; and immediately I
called attention to this fact, funds were raised and the accommodation increased.”
No essential alteration has been made in the past six years in the management of the Institution
or the care of the inmates, and the arrangements in these regards now existing are eminently satisfactory.
The health of .the children is good; their food and clothing are good and sufficient; the sleeping accom-
modation and sanitary appointments are adequate, and due care is paid to the cleanliness of the
Institution; the industrial training is appropriate, and ample opportunities for recreation are afforded.
The children are not overworked, or required to perform tasks beyond their strength, as two men and a
hoy are permanently engaged to do the heavy work.
In the course of our .inquiries we have learned that the allegations of illtreatment were made by a
former inmate of the Home named B. Appleroth, now Mrs. PI. Tennent Donaldson. Requested to grant
us an interview, she failed to keep no less than six appointments she made ; and, when finally seen, could
not afford any corroborative evidence, or indicate any means whatever by which her statements might he
verified. Mrs. Donaldson states that she was formerly Mrs, Porbea; and the articles of The Watchman
newspaper, which purpose to he a statutory declaration, hear the initials “E. P.”
Mrs. Donaldson left the Institution six years ago, and has not since visited it.
We have, &c ,
A. W. GREEN,
Chief Officer, Children’s Protection Act.
AVM. J. TINDALL,
Sub-Inspector of Police.
Industrial School nor Girls, Manly.
Allegations of Illtreatment, published in The Watchman newspaper, 20 and 27 June, and 4 and 11 July,
1003.
1. Removal of flannel underclothing, and substitution of cotton chemises.
2. Porty-tvvo beds to accommodate ninety-nine girls. Writer shared the bed with two girls.
3. No soft hods; hard straw-filled palliasses. No chairs; no girl ever sat on a chair after entering
tire school. >—.... .... . .... , ,
«•* 4- 4. No separate hasmsi “for washing. Only a fewflm basins for mhfcty-mneS girls •, and dozen's
washed in the same water, wiped on the same towel, and used the same fine-tooth comb.
5. Twelve girls contracted sandy blight, through using the same towel; ten were laid up with
chicken-pox; two "girls contracted a congenital disease from a girl who subsequently died at the
.Quarantine Station. „ , . . . ,
G. Many girls had sores on their heads ; some qt the nuns heat them on the heads,
, . , Work.
G a.m, till Mass at 7.
Pro in breakfast at 8 till noon.
Prom noon till 1. p.m.
Prom dinner-time till tea-time, at 6 p.m
Prom tea-time till prayers, 9 p.m.
And often till 11 or 12, or later.
Scan ty Food.
If the girl refused to eat the food, it was forced down her throat. A common punishment .was for
girls to have to kneel at their meals. . . , i - , 1
The Priest proselytised Protestant children brought there ; and in the case were parents objected
they wore obliged to attend the Roman Catholic services. . , , nil , , A
■ Y The oirls had to hoist the water from the well, and this work strained them. Their hands were
blistered, yel; they had to continue to rinse the clothes with their torn hands. „ (( „
One girl was accustomed to iron forty shirts a day, and black jack and pull it, Stew, and
“•hare feet ” were good enough, &c.
Emptying the night-pans.
Cleaning out the well.
Less than one-third of the girls went to school.
■/ '■■■' '■ ' ' ——- 1
' Industrial School ror Girls, Manly.
Allegations of Illtreatment, published in The Watchman newspaper, 20th and 27th June, and 4th and
0 11th July, 1903,
1 Alienation —Removal of flannel underclothing, and substitution of cotton chemises.
1. AUeg*'t on- of any ldnfl to verify'the truth of this. Several inmates and ex-inmates were
P questioned on the Matter, as well as the Mother Superior and Sisters. It was customary to
, , hath all children on admission ; .and if any were found wearing flannels, the practice was
continued. Numbers of the children at the present time wear flannels.
2. Allegation. —Porty-two (42) beds to accommodate ninety-nine girls, "Writer shared the bed with two
7?eo/v—-There was at one period slight overcrowding, which is referred to in -Dr Watkins’ (the
Aepty. mre P . £ , hich ia attached, but not to the extent stated m the
Article At the period referred to there, were seventy-three beds for eighty girls. Two
"Ms (sisters) sometimes slept in a double bed, or a very young girl and an elder one, for
the protection of the younger child, slept together.
100—B ■ ’


3. Allegation, No soft; beds ; hard, straw-filled palliasses. No chairs ; no girl ever sat on a chair after
entering the school.
Reply. The beds were composed of fibre, flock, or kapok, and, in some cases, straw, the latter
necessary for children of dirty habits. Chairs were not considered necessary in a
dormitory, whilst in the school-room, dining-room, and in the grounds forms were provided.
4. Allegation. —No separate basins for washing; only a few tin basins for ninety-nine girls. And dozens
washed in the same water, wiped on the same towel, and used the same fine-tooth comb.
Repig. —The lavatory accommodation is the same now as at the time referred to, and is satisfactory.
It consists of twenty-six enamel basins erected on stands, and four (4) roller towels ; and
twenty single towels were provided for the younger children, while the elder working girls
have a towel each to themselves.
5, Allegation. —Twelve girls contracted sandy blight through using the same towel; ten were laid up with
chicken-pox. Two girls contracted a congenital disease from a girl who subsequently died at
the Quarantine Station.
Reply- —Nothing whatever was known of these complaints, although the late and the present Medical
Officers were requested to report as to the truth or otherwise of the statements.
6. Allegation. —Many girls had sores on their heads; some of the nuns beat them on the heads.
Reply. —There was no evidence whatever in support of these statements ; in fact, it all tended in a
contrary direction. ( Vide Dr. Watkins’ Eoport.)
Wcrh.
Allegation. —6 a.m. till Mass at 7.
Thom breakfast at 8 till noon.’
Prom noon till 1 p m.
From dinner-time till tea-time at 6 p.m. "
From dinner-time till prayers at 9 p.m.
And often till 11 and 12, or later. /
Reply. —The work was arranged as follows /'J^/
Hose, 0 o’clock. f «£{ H 1 )C I
Prayers (short), 6'30. VVjSw SL’• t ,--Vo ?J/
Dormitories tidied then Mass, 7*15. \ % , ’**•—'/
Breakfast, then work for big girls, ‘ JjSl
School, younger children, 9'30. '*****»£*>' ‘
Work ceased, 12'30.
Dinner, 12;40.
Work for big girls begins, VSO to P 45.
School for younger children, 2 - 0.
Work censed, 5 - 30. . .i
- -v \ ~ ~, .• ■
„ big girls, 8 80.
Scanty Rood.
Allegation. —lf the girl refused to eat the food, it was forced down bet throat. A common punishment
was for girls to have to kneel at their meals. ■
Reply. —These statements were denied by and present inmates and the officials. The daily foods
supply was as follows : :
Breakfast—Porridge with milk and sugar, bread and butter,-bread'and treacle, bread
'and dripping, tea ( working girls frequently got meat.
Dinner,—Stew and roast meats, vegetables (in season), pudding, Friday and Sunday.
Tea; —Bread and blitter, bread and treacle, tea.
Allegation.-— The priest proselytised Protestant children brought there, and in the case where parents
objected they were obliged to attend Soman Catholic services.
Reply.— Not a specific case could he cited in support of these statements, and we were unable to find
any foundation for the statements.
Allegation.— The girls had-to hoist the,water from the well, and this work strained them; their hands
were blistered, yet they had to continue to rinse the clothes with their torn hands.
Reply. —This statement is incorrect, as there has always been a man employed for this and similar,
■ heavy work.
Allegation. —One girl was accustomed to ironifpity shirts a day, and “ blafik jack arid pull it,” “ stew,”
and “ bare feet ” were good enough, &c.
Reply,— There is no evidence of overwork amongst the inmates at the present time, and this statement
. - is denied by officials.
Allegation, —Emptying the niglfttpanS; ■ - \
Reply. —This was a 'question really of emptying slops, &c,, from the dormitories. The girls carried
the pans to a certain building in the grounds, and the man disposed of the contents by
, ■* burying it. .
Allegation. —Cleaning out the well.
Reply. —The girls were never set to do this work.
Allegation.—Ajsss than one-third of the girls went to school. :
Reply. —This is untrue. Every child under 14 attends school daily, and the elder girls are given
lessons in the evening. .. 1
* ' , Sydney : Willimffilspplosate Gulllok, Printer.—l,9ol.
9c?.J /
