

<fc»
ONE PENNY
Patriotic Pamphlets.
ROME RULE
IN
AUSTRALIA.
Address hy the
Rev. T. E. RUTH.
at the
Melbourne Auditorium, Sunday, May 27, 1917.
CRITCHLEY PARKER,
Australian Statesman and Mining Standard,
Melbourne and Sydney,


THE ARCHBISHOP’S BID FOR POLITICAL
LEADERSHIP AND THE POPE’S
TEMPORAL SOVEREIGNTY.
Since our last Auditorium service, certain things have hap-
pened to support my opinion that “on the political side of
things, Dr, Mannix is the finest Protestant asset in Austra-
lia.”
His unpatriotic utterances have been of the utmost patriotic
value. Citizens of ah parties and churchmen of all sects —
many enlightened members of his own Church, availing them-
selves of the secrecy of the ballot box—have resisted and re-
pudiated his bid for political leadership, and have risen out of
their lesser loyalties and secondary rights to their larger
duties and their supreme responsibilities.
I am not a party politician; I never speak from political
platforms; I repudiate party politics in these days of Im-
perial struggle, but I cannot help being sincerely sympathetic
toward those loyalists of the Labour Party who have demon-
strated their loyalty by making great sacrifices for their coun-
try, but who have been driven by their party allegiance to
suffer the reflected shame of the irresponsible people who
have trampled upon the Union Jack and of him who has
used his great ecclesiastical position to “defame the Empire.”
And I appeal to all loyal Labourites—with some of whose
ideals I claim fellowship—to postpone their legitimate party


contentions and throw themselves heart and soul into the
one great task before all Britishers, and all lovers of inter-
national righteousness, peace, and brotherhood the one
great task of winning the war. After the war, we may
or may not resume our political sectarianism, but this is no
time for party politics.
Australia has spoken. And two men, two bitter oppo-
nents of Australia’s national policy, have greatly contributed
to the result—a notorious disloyalist and Dr. Mannix.
I have sometimes thought, and generally regretted, that
Dr. Mannix was not a humorist—a fatal lack in any Hiber-
nian. Reading the “Tribune” reports of his speeches from
Easter, 1913, I have come to the conclusion that he is a
pastmaster of that peculiar type of humour that does service
in any political opportunism, the somewhat slim and soulless
humour of public bluff and blarney.
Speaking at Bendigo shortly after his arrival (April, 1913),
he said —
“He hoped to be a good Australian. If ever he had
to say anything that would hurt an Australian it would
be with the object of doing good for Australia.”
Shortly after war was declared, and Australia responded to
the call of Empire, the call of humanity and of God, he dis-
loyally insinuated that—
“Unless he gave up his name and his creed an
Irishman and a Catholic has no chance of due promotion
in-the Australian Forces.”


After the Dublin Rebellion he declared that the men who paid
the inevitable penalty of their crime,
“gave their lives for their faith and their father-
land,”
and he besmirched the British soldiery and fostered Irish
Australian disloyalty by declaring that the suppression of the
rebellion
“was characterised by barbarism and horrors never
surpassed in any theatre of the present war.”
And, as though that were not sufficiently powerful to prevent
his fellow Roman Irish Australians from offering their ser-
vices to the Empire that provides them protection, he said
quite plainly—
“Australia has done her full share —I am inclined to
say even more than her full share —in this war.”
An opinion quoted with enthusiastic editorial approval in the
“Tribune,” October 5, 1916. All these things he has said
quite openly, as well as
“In spite of all we hear about the war, it is simply
a sordid trade war,”
and then, with characteristic bluff and blarney, he says—
“I do not parade my loyalty.”
He doesn’t.
At one moment Dr. Mannix warns us that there is a Roman
Catholic vote —then he suggests that each voter is free. Now,
in the midst of a bitter political attack upon, the British Em-
pire, to which he owes his life, his liberty, his learning* and


his living, he assures us that he is not speaking as a Roman
Catholic Archbishop, but simply as an Australian citizen, but
presently you hear thunderous applause when loyal and en-
lightened Roman Catholics are referred to as “unworthy sons
of the Church”—their sole unworthiness consisting in taking
Dr. Mannix at his word when he says he is speaking as a
citizen, not as a churchman. Is it as a churchman or as a
citizen he defames the Empire for which other men suffer im-
prisonment? Is it as a citizen or as a churchman he excels
in bluff and blarney?
He claims liberty of speech. He would not be guilty of
the sacrilege of preaching sedition at the altar —let such a
thought perish, with all the enemies of Ireland 1 And why
should Protestants deny him the right of private judgment at
a social function? But let Mr. Benjamin Hoare, the emi-
nent Roman Catholic layman, disagree with him, and be
loyal enough to the British Empire to say so, and Dr. Man-
nix, not as a citizen but as Archbishop, declines to meet him
on the executive of the Catholic Truth Society, and a dying
man’s signature is used to deprive him of his seat. The Catho-
lic Truth Society is Mannixed. Mannixism takes the place
of Truth.
The Mayor of Brunswick holds the view that as a citizen at
social functions, Dr. Mannix has hindered recruiting, and he
and the Mayoress are therefore precluded from taking part
in an Empire Day Celebration at St, Matthew’s Roman
Catholic School.
The distinction Dr. Mannix makes between his churchman-
ship and his citizenship is too poor a piece of bluff and blarney
even for political opportunism, and his wit is too weak and
unworthy to pass as typical Hibernian humour.


And yet it has its victims. At his instigation the editors
.of the secular press are circularised by the Defence Authorities
and requested not to publish anything likely to stir up sec-
tarian strife, while he remains free “to defame the Empire,”
and while the press he controls continues its campaign of
calumny.
He actually created conditions that made the resurrection
of certain historic cartoons politically appropriate, cartoons
described as “sectarian,” but which had no sectarian signifi-
cance other than Dr. Mannix gave them, and no market other
than Dr. Mannix made for them. And though these cartoons
are now being described by the Roman press as “obscene”
and “filthy”—though that is not true but simply an absurd
and typical Mannixism—he gave their circulation in Bendigo
his benediction, whether as a citizen or a churchman it doth
not appear. But these cartoons, which exactly hit off the situa-
tion he created, must needs be condemned, while his cruel
and bitter caricatures of British justice and the British Army
are permitted unhindered circulation throughout the Common-
wealth.
But we must not be deceived by this “social function” bluff
and this “citizen freedom of speech” blarney. Whatever his
speech affirms, his deeds declare that his deliberate disloyalty,
his defaming of the Empire, is part of the policy of his politi-
cal priesthood ; that it belongs, not to his citizenship, but to
his churchmanship. His bid for political leadership is allied
to the Pope’s claim of temporal sovereignty.
Dr. Mannix has lost this particular election, but the papal
plea of temporal power survives, and the price of our political


liberty is eternal vigilance. The fact remains, and it must be
faced, that the temporal power of the Pope is gaining ground
in the Commonwealth—in the press, in the schools, in the
homes of the people, and in public services.
Pope Innocent 111. had the audacity to declare that
“Christ has committed the whole world to the gov-
ernment of the Popes.”
And in his Bull, “Unam Sanctam,” he asserted —
“It is altogether necessary to salvation that every
human creature should be subject to the Roman Pontiff.”
You and I are prepared to receive spiritual revelation and
inspiration from any man who has'been taught of Christ. We
sing hymns written by Roman Catholic poets, our devotional
life is enriched by Roman Catholic saints, we rejoice in the
spiritual power and ministry of a really religious priesthood,
but no less as citizens than as Christians we resent and repu-
diate the pagan plea of temporal sovereignty that turned the
Church into a court, its bishop into a monarch, the mitre into
a tiara, and apostolic simplicity into regal magnificence and
expenditure, that employs even spiritual power to temporal
ends, the unspiritual arrogance of the ritual which addresses
the Pope on the day of his “coronation” thus:—
“Receive the Tiara adorned with three crowns, and
know that thou art the Father of princes and kings,
Ruler of the World, Vicar of our Lord Jesus Christ.”
I know we sometimes say that the temporal sovereignty of
Rome was extinguished in 1870, when Victor Emmanuel
became King of Italy and made Rome the capital. It was
brought to an end by the unrighteousness of its government,


the indignation of its Roman subjects, and by the instrumen-
tality of the Roman Catholic kingdoms of Italy and France.
Protestants took no part in its overthrow; it was the work
of Rome’s own children. But Rome does not change. In a
little book, entitled “The Victories of Rome,” and in a
chapter headed “Necessity of the Temporal Power,” a priest
of the Oratory writes —
“She refuses to be deprived of her regal rank, her
sovereign independence, without which the Vicar of
Christ might be expected by Englishmen to sink down
into the likeness of an English Archbishop, to accept the
situation of an ecclesiastical hireling of the State, to
dwindle into the insignificance of the president of some
Wesleyan Conference
“There can be no independence for the Pontificate
but in sovereignty itself
“It is certain that the Church will not give up the
Temporal Power, will remain a kingdom to the end.
The unction of her Pontiffs will be ever regal, as well as
sacred. The Vicars of Christ will be kings, though
nothing be left to prove it but the title on their Cross.”
That is the sort of claim we have to face. It is the claim
with which the Archbishop’s bid for political leadership is
closely allied. The Pope claims temporal power, and in his
preface to “The Victories of Rome,” Kenelm Digby Best
wrote in 1901 —
“Protestant England has already forced Catholic
countries to behave properly to the Popes.”
There cannot be the slightest doubt that Dr. Mannix repre-
sents a political priesthood that labours to supersede the


British Throne by Papal sovereignty. He follows Cardinal
Manning, who said after the Papal defeat of 1870 —
“It is yours, right reverend fathers, to subjugate and
subdue, to bend and to break the will of an imperial race.
England is the head of Protestantism and the stronghold
of its power. Weakened in England, it is paralysed
everywhere. Conquered in England, it is conquered
throughout the world. Once overthrown here, all is but
a war of detail
“There is only one solution of the difficulty
the terrible scourge of a Continental war, a war which
will exceed the horrors of any of the wars of the
First Empire. And it is my firm conviction that in spite
of all obstacles, the Vicar of Jesus Christ will be put again
in his rightful place. But that day will not be until
his adversaries will have crushed each other with mutual
destruction.”
Now, do you see the connection between the bid for poli-
tical leadership that Dr. Mannix makes and the Pope’s claim
of Temporal Sovereignty?
It is his political priesthood, not his devotion to democracy,
that is the source of his disloyalty. Read the eighty mon-
strous propositions of the Syllabus issued by the last Pope but
one, called
“The only anchor of safety for the coming time,”
and-you will see that it is the creed of Dr. Mannix that he
should be free to use his ecclesiastical authority in this
Imperial crisis to defy civil law and to “defame the Empire.”
Proposition 30 reads —


“Let him be anathema who says that the civil
immunity of the Church and its ministers depends upon
civil right.”
Proposition 4 2 —
“Let him be anathema who says that in the conflict
of civil and ecclesiastical laws the Civil law should pre-
vail.”
Proposition 77
“Let him be anathema who says that in this age it
is no longer necessary that the Catholic religion be
retained as the only religion of the State to the exclu*
sion of all others.”
The syllabus precludes freedom of the press, freedom of
speech, freedom of worship. Dr. Mannix is perfectly consis-
tent with the whole genius of his political priesthood in his
attitude to Mr. Hoare and to other Roman Catholics who dare
remain loyal to their King and their country what time their
ecclesiastical chief spreads sedition.
But Mr. Hoare does not stand alone. The keenest oppo-
nents of the Temporal Sovereignty of the Pope are and always
have been the really religious Roman Catholics. Every quo-
tation in this address—and I haven’t finished yet —is a Roman
Catholic quotation. The Protestants’ first line of defence
against the political invasion of the Papacy is enlightened
Roman Catholic opinion. And for argument against the
political domination of Roman Catholicism in Australia I am
not utilising any Protestant opinion, I am using Roman
Catholic protest.


“The concentrated energies of this
old power are
persistently directed to the achievement
of four main
objects:—i. Its own aggrandisement . .
. . apart from
the body politic in which it flourishes. . .
. (2) Mould-
ing the ductile minds of our youth . . .
. to swell the
tide of the priests’ prosperity. (3) Perplexing and inter-
fering with our adult populations in every sphere of
secular affairs, .... imbuing them with disloyalty to
A Roman Catholic barrister, Mr. Michael McCarthy, writes
his “Priest and People in Ireland’’ to show, as he says, that
the commonwealth of which they are members. (4) Terri-
fying the enfeebled minds of the credulous, the invalid,
and the aged, with the result that the savings of penuri-
ous thrift, the inheritance of parental industry, the com-
petence of respectability, are all alike captured in their
turn from expectant next-of-kin and garnered into the
sacerdotal treasury.”
That is not a colour-blind emanation from some Orange
Lodge. Neither does it come from Critchley Parker. It is
not even what the “Tribune” calls “Renloulistic.” It is the
testimony, supported by over 600 pages of sifted evidence, of
“the policy to which our priests have committed them-
selves in the plenitude of their power in Ireland . . . .
in the undermining of individual and corporate morality,
in the emasculation of our people’s character, and in the
raucous wasting of national decline,”
the testimony of a layman trained in the law of evidence, and
who can write —
“I am a Catholic; I am an Irishman! I have a right to
speak.”


And he does speak, though the Syllabus says, “Let him be
.anathema.” And he does not stand alone.
Here is another Roman Catholic layman, Mr. Frank Hugh
O’Donnell, author of the well-known book, “The Ruin of
Education in Ireland,” writing another book, suggestively
entitled “Political Priests and Irish Ruin,” and he writes as
a Roman Catholic, and says—
“I believe in that Church in every point, and accept
her teaching from Nicoea to Trent, and from Trent to the
Vatican. I revere the religious priests of Catholicism:" I
write exclusively against the domination of a political
Sacerdotalism, that perpetual curse of Christendom, no-
where more a curse than in Ireland, and never more a
curse than now.”
Over against the Archbishop’s lying gibe that this is “a
sordid trade war” put this Roman Catholic layman’s charge
of—
“A bloated Church establishment and universality of
clerical grab,”
and the statement that the Roman Church is engaged in
“the development of a sordid and short-sighted selfish-
ness,”
and remember the words of Mr. Michael Davitt, another
Roman Catholic layman,
“A conscientious regard for religion, indeed! No,
it is not that. It is the eternal hungering after secular
influence and temporal power, the assumption of author-
ity to dictate to laymen what they shall think and do in
the affairs of the nation.”


But this is in what the “Advocate” calls “Holy Ireland,”
and you may argue that it does not apply in Australia. But it
begins to apply in the schools, in the homes and in the press
of the Commonwealth. Dr. Mannix is not subject to the law
of loyalty. He is not prevented from “defaming the Em-
pire.” Your State-School teaching is caricatured as godless
by priests who oppose Bible teaching. Australian marriage
laws are declared “null and void,” and in some departments
of your public services it might as well be written up, “No
Protestant need apply.” Over against the plea that State
School teaching is godless, and the only Christian education
is Roman Catholic education, and the zeal with which Roman
Catholic schools are supported by all kinds of gambling
devices, the fact, as estabished by Mr. McCarthy—
- (
“It is sacerdotal interference and domination in
Catholic Ireland, beginning in the infant school and end-
ing in the legacy for masses after death, that will be
found the true and universal cause of that universal de-
generacy upon which we so commiserate ourselves.”
And this opinion of Mr. O’Donnell—
“A Catholic laity, that is run in blinkers, cannot
command respect either for the driver or the driven.”
And read the frank exposure of Roman schools in America
in a book by Father Crowley, a Roman Priest, entitled—
“The Parochial School: A Curse to the Church, a
Menace to the Nation,”
and you will see the stupidity of the charge that our State
Schools are godless, and you will resent in this land of the
Southern Cross what Mr. O’Donnell terms —


“The expensive megalomania of a political sacer>
dotalism.”
Unless you are very careful and extremely vigilant, the tem-
poral power of the Pope in the Commonwealth will be securely
established in schools which an eminent local Jesuit has
euphemistically described as “centres of loyalty.”
Temporal power is already established in this land in
respect to matrimony. Dr. Mannix and his political priests
can and do laugh at your marriage laws. What you call mar-
riage the Church calls “concubinage.” Your Australian law
is declared “null and void.” According to your law, as a
minister of religion, I can marry in my Church Patrick
Murphy to Mary Smith, but Patrick Murphy is an enlightened
Roman Catholic while Mary Smith is a benighted Baptist.
The blessing of Almighty God is invoked upon the bond of
holy matrimony, but Roman law supersedes Australian law,
and it is openly declared that
“the marriage is null and void; the marriage life is only
concubinage; the children are illegitimate.”
That is the sort of thing you tolerate in this free country.
It would not be tolerated in Germany. And mark this well,
“Ne temere” does not apply to Germany. The Pope makes
a concession to Germany. What is legitimate on one side
of the Franco-German frontier is illegitimate on the other.
What is immoral in Australia is moral in Germany. Godli-
ness is an affair of geography.
Australian citizens, it is high time to awake out of sleep.
The temporal power of Rome is gaining ground in the Com-
monwealth. Take this fact as the final example to-night.


About this time last year the “Age” prominently reported
some Protestant opinions of Dr. Leeper, and on June i,
1916, the “Tribune” warned the “Age”in its editorial thus:
“There are 300,000 Catholics in Victoria. There is
a Catholic Federation thoroughly organised. There is an
episcopate and a priesthood whose word and joint action
on a single Sunday can turn the “Age” forever out of
the Catholic household. Here is our chief weapon of
defence It is not the first time that the ‘Age,’
the chief daily organ of the Catholic people, has repaid
our patronage with the vilest disregard of our feelings,
and forgetfulness for our power and our organisation. A
circular from the revered head of the Church in Victoria
and an appropriate discourse from every pulpit, and this
cure can be effectually administered on a single Sunday.”
That was no idle threat, though the “Age” rises superior
to it. It indicates the need in this country of a new Reforma-
tion, of something more than a Protestant Federation—Pro-
testantism may so easily become uncatholic. We need
a Commonwealth League of Citizens, for our civil rights
are threatened, and we may soon have to decide between
Pope and King, between Church and State, between the
liberty wherewith Christ has made us free and the fetters
which a political sacerdotalism is seeking to fasten on the
citizens of the Southern Cross.


"S i f C/
Send Fourpence in stamps for Nos. 17, 18, and 19.
No. 17.
POPE AND KAISER.
Is Rome Pro-German?
A LECTURE BY DIGBY BERRY, M.A.
(Late Canon of St. Paul’s, Melbourne, and Examining Chap
lain to the Bishop of Melbourne).
No. 18
DR. MANNIX
as Political Commander-in-Chief of a
“ Sordid Trade War.”
ADDRESS BY REV. T. E. RUTH.
Melbourne Auditorium, Sunday, March 25, 1917.
No. 19.
“ MANNIXISMS.”
ADDRESS BY REV. T. E. RUTH.
Melbourne Auditorium, Sunday, April 29, 1917.
(America’s Reply to Dr. Mannix and Australia’s
Opportunity.)
