

CONTAINING ALSO
and JLni V
- flNDTHE
IrffiaSe* $? cDP-Qwn Owl#
1: TALE IV.
STEAD'S
Books for the Bairns
Hpniue and theß^O^oo
A oi tke
Australian Bush.
2"
3N, W.C.2.
No. IV.|
BANK BUILDINGS, KINGS WAY,
New Series. February 90
LONDON, W.C.2
February 20, 1923.


Popular Plays for Little Folks
Simple and easily arranged Scenery, Hin'.s for
Staging, Production and Dressing ; illustrations
to help in Designing Costumes.
THE ENCHANTED FOREST
A Fairy Play by Ivy Cholerton,
This is a jolly little Play, embodying several of the
familiar fairy stories. Written in rhyme, it is easy
to memorise, and can be played by children of
several ages, in numbers from eighteen to thirty.
Price 4d. ; by post sd.
Full pianoforte score for the above play can be
supplied for 1/6 ; by post 1/8.
A full list of Musical Plays for Child Performers
is given in Steed's Catalogue of Books for Children.
A copy will be sent post free on application.
Stead’s Publishing House,
Bank Buildings, Kingsway, London, W.C.2.


BOOKS FOR THE BAIRNS
Edited by Estelle W. Stead.
RONNIE AND THE
KANGAROO
An Exciting Tale of the Australian Bush
JESSIE PHILLIPS.
ILLUSTRATED BY BRINSLEY LE FANU.
LONDON: STEAD'S PUBLISHING HOUSE,
Bank Buildings, Kingsway, W.C.2,
[copyright]


vf'-r w ' «s
el- MS) -
/K -VWV.J
\
The joke of the laughing jackass


RONNIE AND THE KANGAROO,
CHAPTER I.—THE PICNIC.
Once upon a time there lived a little kangaroo,
whose name was Wango. His home was in the great
lone Australian bush. His father’s name was Rangoo,
and he was king of ah the kangaroos of his tribe,
because he was the largest and strongest of them all,
and could leap farthest.
His mother’s name was Karoo, and she was very
beautiful. She had large soft eyes, and a fine coat,
and a long thick tail, and, most wonderful of all, she
had a pocket in her coat into which she could pop
Wango and carry him wherever she went.
Wango was very proud of his father’s bravery and
strength, so proud, indeed, that it seemed sometimes
as if he took all the credit to himself.
“ I shall be King of the Kangaroos when I am an
old man,” he said proudly.
“You will have to be hunted by the dogs first;
how will you like that ? ’ ’ asked the platypus, who was
lazily listening to Wango’s account of all he meant
to do when he became an old man kangaroo.
“ Huh,” said Wango scornfully, “ I am not afraid
of the dogs ; I am not afraid of anything, old duckbill,
though many things are afraid of me.”
Ping, ping, something struck him on his head.
It was only a wild cherry that the laughing jackass
slily dropped upon him, but if it had been a white
man’s bullets, Wango could not have been more fright-
ened, and, with a funny little sound of terror, he
scuttled off with all the speed he could make until he
reached Karoo. And before anyone could say “ Jack
Robinson,” he was safe inside her pocket.
“ Ha, ha, ha, ha ! ” laughed the jackass.
” Foolish little Wango,” said Karoo. “ Know thou
that this is the best place for thee if ever the white
man chases us with his dogs and his guns.”
Suddenly Rangoo came leaping into the midst of
them. “ The white man’s cubs !” he cried. “ Hasten


away ! ” In another moment all the animals were
scattered far and wide. Only the jackass remained
pouring forth peals of laughter at his timid friends.
In the squatter’s garden there was a clump of trees
called she-oaks, and here the jackass often loved to
perch. No one ever tried to harm Mr. Jackass; he
remained now on a branch of the tall gum tree watching
the little party advancing. It consisted of the squatter’s
wife and three children.
There was Tom, a boy with a face as brown as old
duckbill’s coat. Then there was Elsie, whose eyes
were the same colour as the sky. Between them
toddled a rosy, chubby little fellow whom they called
Ronnie. The mother stopped under the great gum
tree.
“ This will do nicely for our picnic,” she said. “It
is not safe to venture farther into the bush.”
“ Oh, do let us go on ! ” pleaded Ronnie ; “I want
to see the kangaroos.” ,
Tom made a fire and placed the “ billy,” as they
called the tin which held the water, on to boil.
“ Everything is just perfect to-day,” said Tom,
“ except that father is not home for my birthday.”
“ Never mind,” said his mother, “ he will be back
to-morrow from Melbourne, and will be sure to bring
you a present.”
“ If it were your birthday, what would you like best,
Ronnie ? ”
With his mouth full of cake, Ronnie was just heard
to murmur the one word, “ Pony.”
“ A pony ! ” cried Elsie. “ You greedy boy, you’ve
got one already.”
’Nother one,” said Ronnie. “ I would like a new
pony every birthday, then when I’m grown up they’d
all be there, lots and lots.” “ Paddocks full,” he said.
Everybody laughed, and the jackass loudest of all.
So the merry meal went on until at last it was time
to go home.
Elsie and Tom helped their mother to pack the tea
basket, and while they were busy, Ronnie looked
eagerly round him. “ I’m sure there dbe a kangaroo


|
—^———j
—
Ronnie disappears in search of kangaroos.


if I went in a lickle way,” he said. He looked at his
mother ; her back was turned, and Elsie and Tom
were bending over the baskets. Naughty Ronnie
slipped quickly away behind a tree, and ran and ran
as fast as his little legs could carry him.
When the mother looked up from the packing there
was no Ronnie to be seen. For the moment she was
not very frightened, but called to the child. Ronnie
heard her calling, but only ran all the faster. When,
after calling several times, Ronnie did not answer, the
others started to look for him, expecting every moment
to see his chubby face peep round a tree trunk at them.
But no Ronnie appeared. He toddled on chuckling
with glee at his own naughtiness.
By and by Ronnie stopped out of breath ; he was
alone in the great forest, and suddenly felt very, very
small among the tall gum trees. He began to run
back again, but the trees here were so much alike
that while he thought he was running home, he was
going farther and farther away. His mother and poor
Elsie again had gone in just the opposite direction,
and their calling voices failed to reach him.
They searched until darkness began to fall, then
with white, tear-stained faces, they went back to the
homestead. Alas ! the squatter was away from home
buying new stock that day, but his wife quickly roused
up all the men on the place, and they set out to hunt
for the lost child ; but there was no trace of him to
be found.
CHAPTER lI.—WHAT BECAME OF RONNIE.
Ronnie did not know which way he ought to go,
but, too frightened now to stop where he was until
someone came to look for him, he ran on and on until
he dropped down by the side of a road, half dead with
fright and weariness, and fell asleep.
Presently a man came along, riding a brown horse
and leading a coal black pony. He stopped when he
saw the little boy fast asleep by the roadside.


w j ill
bWi A; ■' fete "j : 4o ylfA[ f
rnii- |\l;
Found by a stranger,


He lifted Ronnie gently and placed him on the saddle
in front of him, and continued his journey to Warra-
town. When Ronnie awoke, he found himself l}ing
on a pile of rugs in a large tent. Two men, one of them
being the rider of the brown horse, sat near him,
looking at him and talking in low tones.
Ronnie broke in upon their talk by sitting up and
asking where he was.
He was a plucky little fellow really, and although
he was puzzled at finding himself in such strange
surroundings, now that he was with people again he
no longer felt frightened. He answered all the men’s
questions, and told them about the picnic and how
he had ran away and lost himself.
When Ronnie had finished the supper the men gave
him he began to look around him, and found he w'as in
the most wonderful place he had ever seen. Ronnie
had never been away from the homestead in his life,
so he had seen very little, and this was nothing less
than a travelling circus. The circus w T as only a small
one, but it seemed w'onderful to Romfie. There w’ere
many cages containing different animals.
But what interested Ronnie most the horses.
Black, wdiite, and browm horses he had often seen,
but there w r ere a couple of piebald ponies with long
tails W'hich were unlike any he had seen before.
The men w r ere amused at his delight, and told him
that the next day he should see Bill, the man who had
found him, riding standing on one of the team of nine
ponies all going at the same time.
Ronnie sprang up, his eyes sparkling.
“ Let me do it too,” he cried. The men laughed.
“ Can you ride, sonny ? ” asked Bill.
“ Course I can,” said Ronnie, with great scorn.
“ I can ride wivout any saggle. Let me ride that
pwetty black pony, and I’ll show you.”
“ No one has ever ridden him yet,” said Bill. “You
couldn’t stick on him for five seconds, sonny.”
“ I can,” said Ronnie, tears of vexation in his eyes
at not being believed. ” Let me twy ; I will stick on.”
“ Let the youngster have a try since he w r ants to ;


he can’t hurt himself much here.” So they put Ronnie
upon the black pony and waited to catch him as he fell.
But Ronnie did not fall off. The pony pranced and
kicked in its efforts to get rid of its light burden, but
Ronnie held on, and, to the men’s astonishment, he
even jumped the pony over a log of wood that lay
in his path.
“ Bravo ! ” cried the men.
“ He and that pony were just born for each other,”
The men exchanged a look which Ronnie did not
see. Both men were thinking wistfully what a fine
attraction he would be in the circus.
“ If we take him back,” said Bill, “ we shall get a
reward, and perhaps they will let us train him for the
horses too, seeing that he seems made for the life.”
“ Not they,” replied his partner. “ I guess his folk
have a stock farm, and he will be brought up to manage
the stock ; * he’ll have as much to do with horses that
way as he wants. No, the only plan is for us to nab
him, and to clear off now before daylight.”
“ And be clapped into jail,” said Bill sulkily.
“ Nonsense ! ” said the other. “ Not a soul has seen
the boy with us, and our going will not be noticed,
as we have given our last performance here, and are
timed to leave to-morrow morning in any case. Be-
sides, he was lost in the bush, and the bush, as you
know, extends hundreds of miles from where you
found him. His folk will search the bush for days
and weeks, perhaps months, and then they will give
him up for dead.”
At last Bill was talked over, and as quickly and
quietly as possible, they packed up their belongings,
and before daybreak came they had vanished from
Warratown, taking Ronnie with them.
CHAPTER HI.—A KANGAROO HUNT.
The next day the squatter came back to a home of
grief and desolation. All work was given up, and he
and his men scoured the bush for days and days.


j
<
Ronnie distinguishes himself.


Weeks passed by, and the squatter had given up
hope.
Ronnie’s mother grew thinner and greyer every day.
Only Tom and Elsie, after the first shock was over,
became like their old selves once more. They could
not believe that Ronnie *was really lost, and often
talked about him to each other. Some day, they felt
sure, travellers would arrive with Ronnie safe and
well, and then everybody would be happy again.
Meanwhile bad times were upon the bush, and most
of the animals went further and further away to seek
water. Rangoo and Karoo, more daring than the rest
went nearer the edge of the bush, and every night t ey
paid a stealthy visit to the squatter’s water-holes.
The field, or as the Australians say, the paddock,
nearest the house was called the stable paddock,
next to that came the home paddock, and then came
stretching away in wild rugged tussocks the sea pad-
dock, ending in the great cliffs that looked towards
No-man’s land. It was in the last paddock that the
great water-holes were.
“ There is little danger,” said Rangoo, when Karoo
showed fear. “We are far enough from the house, and
are not likely to be seen if we choose our times well.”
Tom’s pony, Brenda, was kept in the home paddock,
and one morning very early, just after sunrise, Tom
went to find her.
If she were in a good temper she would whinny
prettily, and trot up to him directly she saw him.
But sometimes she would be in a playful mood, and
would toss up her heels, and it would be a long time
before Tom could catch her.
This morning Brenda had made up her mind that
she was not going to be caught if she could help it,
and she led him a fine chase, till she suddenl} T stopped
right down by the water-holes.
“ Now is my chance,” thought Tom, and he went
softly up to her, when he saw why she had stopped
so suddenly.
Two fine kangaroos, surprised by the pony, were
leaping off as fast as they could.


The kangaroos in search of water.


They were Rangoo and Karoo. He could not see
Wango because he was hid in his mother’s pocket.
In an instant Tom was on Brenda’s back, and was
riding home as fast as he could go. He burst into
the house with the news.
“ Father ! father ! two large kangaroos down by the
water-holes.”
The squatter himself had not much interest in any-
thing now, but there happened to be a sheep-dealer
staying for a day or two at the house. He was as
excited as Tom when he heard the news, and to please
him the squatter decided to have a kangaroo hunt.
“ Oh, father,” cried Tom, “ may I come too ? It
was I who found the kangaroos.”
So his father said that as they had been the first
to see them, he and Brenda might come too.
And Rangoo said to Karoo :
“ Mother Karoo, the white men are out with their
guns and their dogs. We must not stay here any longer.
So Karoo picked up little Wango and popped him
into her pocket, and said : “Lie still now, and we will
soon be safely away.”
But Wango cried : “ Oh, let me see the guns and
the dogs.”
“ Lie still! lie still ! ” said Karoo.
But Wango would not He still ; he wriggled and
wriggled, longing to get a ghmpse of the white men
and their wonderful guns and dogs.
“ I will have a peep, I will see them,” he said to
himself. And at last he stretched so far out of the
pocket, that when Karoo was in the act of leaping, he
fell out. She was leaping so swiftly that she did not
notice that he had fallen out, and she and Rangoo
went on for many hours until they were safe in the
depths of the bush.
Then Rangoo looked at Karoo, and Karoo looked at
Rangoo. Alas ! poor Httle Wango was left far behind
to the mercy of the white men with their guns and
their dogs.
Rangoo railed bitterly at Karoo, saying: “Oh
careless mother to let him fall out of thy pouch.”


Poor Karoo cried greatly, and told him how she
had bidden Wango lie still, and how he had said he
wanted to see the hunters.
Rangoo stopped scolding, for he knew what a
disobedient, boastful little kangaroo Wango was.
Then they began to think of how to get him back.
“ For,” said Rangoo, “ the white men do not make
war upon cubs ; they wall not kill a youngling.”
“ The dogs will,” sobbed Karoo.
CHAPTER IV.—THE CAPTURE OF WANGO.
But the dogs had not killed Wango, as Karoo
feared. The way men hunt the kangaroo is to try
to enclose the animals in a circle, each hunter standing
behind a tree. Rangoo and Karoo had broken through
the circle with the dogs after them, and there in the
middle of the circle was naughty Wango !
It was Tom who saw him first.
“ Look ! look ”he cried. “ A baby kangaroo ! ”
He rushed forward, and to his surprise and delight,
Wango leaped almost straight into his arms.
Tom was allowed to carry Wango home, and the
sheep-dealer was evidently quite envious, for he too
was delighted with their strange find.
So Wango saw the white men and their guns and
dogs, and laughed to himself at the simplicity of his
father and mother at being afraid of them.
“ I knew they would not hurt me,” he said to himself
boastfully.
But as he listened to their talk he began to under-
stand that it was only because he was so little that
he had been saved, and he began to feel afraid.
And that night, instead of sleeping out under the
open sky, tucked cosily into Karoo's pocket from
which he could peep out and see the bright stars, he
was put into a little dark wooden house that smelt
of D O G .
As Tom was putting him into the little house,


■i?
,v ' v ' f . "**
Wango is caught.


Wango heard a sudden “ Ha, ha, ha. ha, ha ! " and,
looking up, caught a glimpse of the laughing jackass
watching him from the shelter of a big she-oak.
“ Oh, dear jackass ! " called Wango, “ tell Old
Man Dog-Killer to come and rescue me." But the
bird only laughed and laughed.
Poor little Wango ! He got so homesick for Rangoo
and Karoo that he cried a great deal, and wished he
had never been so inquisitive and disobedient.
The jackass flew into the bush to find Rangoo, and
tell him what had become of Wango.
If Wango could have heard the talk about him
after he had been safely put into the dog's kennel he
would have been more frightened still. The sheep-
dealer was leaving at daybreak ; one of the squatter’s
men was going to drive him in the buggy into Warra-
town, when he would catch the one train that left
every day for Melbourne. And he wanted to take
Wango with him to the Zoo there.
Wango’s spirits rose when he was taken out of the
dog’s kennel and given a basin of sweet bread and milk.
But no sooner was breakfast over than Wango found
himself put into a box, and although there were holes
through w r hich the air came, it seemed unbearably
stuffy to Wango. The box was bumped about a great
deal, and presently Wango found that there were
several bars in the side of the box through which he
he could see what was going on. He saw that the
box had been hoisted on the top of a buggy, and then
with a crack of the whip, and shouts of “ Good-bye",
and waving of hands, the buggy started. On and on
the buggy bumped and jerked, until they reached
Warratown, and there Wango’s senses almost failed
him. Peering through the bars he saw a terrific animal,
ten times larger than any animal he had ever seen in
the bush. It rent the air with its shriek of rage as it
came thundering on, spitting out fire and smoke.
His box was thrust into the tail of the dragon, that is
to say, in the guard’s van, for the great roaring monster
that nearly killed Wango with fright was nothing more
nor less than a railway train.


The little house that smelt of D O G.


Just at the moment when the monster, as it seemed
to Wango, swallowed him up, Rangoo and Karoo,
tired and thirsty and footsore, reached the squatter’s
house, and Karoo boldly entered the house-yard,
while Rangoo watched and waited outside.
Karoo leapt straight to the kennel in which Wango
had slept the night before, and, as she sniffed at it in
her eagerness she overturned it with her great claws.
Poor Karoo ! The kennel was empty ! Yet only a
few hours before the jackass had seen Wango put
into it. What had these cruel men folk done with her
Wango ? She gave a sharp bark of misery and rage.
It was Elsie who saw Karoo first.
“ Oh, look, mother ! ” she cried, as Karoo entered
the yard, “ there’s the mother kangaroo come to look
for the little one ! ”
The squatter’s wife went to the doorway and watched
the little scene with a strange look in her eyes.
When Karoo uttered that strange cry it seemed to
Ronnie’s mother as if the poor animal was saying to
her ; “ Why have you done this ? Surely you of all
people know what it is to lose a little son.”
She turned sharply away from the door and almost
ran against her husband. He had his gun in his hand,
but before he could lift it she caught hold of it.
“ No, dear, no,” she cried ; “ you must not shoot
it. I beg of you do not harm the poor creature ! ”
and then, to the squatter’s surprise, his wife burst into
tears.
“My dear,” he said, ” what is it ? ” At first the
only word he could hear was “ Ronnie.” Then she
sobbed : “ How could we have been so cruel ? We
have taken away that poor little baby animal and sent
it to a life of captivity ! ”
The squatter was quite taken aback. “My dear,”
he said, “ you don’t mean to say you are crying over a
kangaroo ? ”
“ The poor mother —look at her ! Don’t you know
what it feels like ? ”
The squatter looked at Karoo —she w r as still standing


by the kennel, and again she gave that sharp bark of
anguish.
“ Poor thing,” he said, “ she looks quite human.”
“ Oh, John ! ” cried his wife, “ do get the Httle
creature back ; I cannot bear it.”
“It can’t be helped now,” said the squatter ; “ try
not to think about it.”
But his wife was not to be comforted. She begged
and prayed him to fetch Wango back.
Now that her calmness had at last given way it
seemed as if her strength was quite broken down.
For several days she lay white and still upon her bed,
and every day Karoo came at the same hour and
roamed about the house-yard, looking wistfully for
Wango.
The squatter at last became so anxious about his
wife that he drove into Warratown, and brought back
the doctor with him. And after he had seen her the
doctor said to the squatter :
“ There is only one thing to be done : you must get
that little creature back from the Zoo. And if you
save your wife, you will lose no time, but do
as I have advised as soon as possible.”
The squatter turned pale. Was it as bad as that ?
Was he to lose his wife as well as Ronnie ?
Rather than that he would fetch Wango back,
even if he had to go half round the w'orld in order
to do it.
CHAPTER V.—THE CIRCUS.
The next morning saw r the squatter speeding to
Melbourne to see the sheep-dealer.
” I want you to come with me to the Zoo,” he said,
“ and ask if I can buy back the httle kangaroo.”
“ Oh,” said the sheep-dealer wiien the matter was
explained to him, “ the\ r would not have him at the
Zoo ; said they had enough native animals. I was
rather taken aback, for I didn’t know what to do with


———————I —I— ■— I - — m —
Outside the circus.


the little nipper. But I fell in with a showman and
his circus close to the Zoo and I sold it to him.”
The squatter’s heart sank.
“ Where is the circus ? ” he asked.
“It was only passing through Melbourne. I fancy
it only performs at bush townships, where folk are
only too delighted to pay for anything in the nature
of an entertainment. But as it prided itself on being
the only travelling circus in Australia, it ought not
to be difficult to find.”
They made enquiries and found that the circus was
performing for a week at a miners’ camp a day’s
journey from Melbourne.
“ It seems a wild sort of chase to spend all this
money and time running after a little kangaroo,”
thought the squatter, as he sat with bent head in the
train. “ But it is to save the wife.”
At last Mineville was reached, and the squatter sprang
out of the train, and made his way up the long straggling
street, in which groups of men were laughing and talk-
ing. There, in a paddock a little distance off, he could
see a large tent and the lights flaring outside it. Many
of the miners were going in that direction, and scraps
of their talk came to him now and then.
“ Worth going to see ? ” said one in answer to
some question. “ I tell you it’s worth going to see if
only for the sake of the little nipper ! ”
“ Can’t he ride just! ” said another. “ But it’s a
shame, I think, to let such a little fellow do them
dangerous tricks ! ”
“ Nonsense —he likes it! ” replied the first.
By this time he had reached the circus. On each
side of the entrance the squatter noticed two roughly
drawn posters representing a little boy in bright red
tights riding a black pony. “ Australia’s most wonder-
ful rider,” he read. So this was the little nipper who
had so won the miner’s admiration.
The performance had already begun. So he entered
the big tent with the miners and sat down, little
knowing what awaited him.
Behind the tent, in a space curtained off from the


Preparing for the show.


show, a little boy sat on the floor putting on his shoes,
that matched the red tights he wore.
“ Look alive, sonny,” said Bill ; “ your turn will
come in a few seconds.”
The little boy looked up. “ I'm ready now,” he
said ; “ and so is he.” As he spoke, he put his arm
round a dark bundle that crouched close at his side.
It was none other than our friend Wango.
Poor Wango. He looked a forlorn and draggled
little kangaroo, with all the spirit gone from him.
Since he had come to this strange place he had been
made to work. Yes, he, Karoo’s petted baby, had been
set to learn tricks until he was tired out.
He hated those big men, and would do nothing
they told him. The omy one who could make him
do his tricks was this little bo}’, for Wango knew all
about this little boy.
He remembered every word of the jackass’s story,
and he knew that this was Ronnie. He was a thinner,
whiter Ronnie than the laughing, chubby faced boy who
had run away at the picnic. The circus men were kind
to him in their rough way, and Ronnie did not even
now quite understand that they had stolen him.
When, instead of taking him home, they had gone
through strange places, they told him they were trying
to find his home, and at first he had been quite happy
in the delight of being allowed to ride the pretty
ponies ; but now he began to fear he would never see
his dear father and mother again, and every night he
cried himself to sleep in his home-sickness. He was
more home-sick than ever to-night, and the touch of
the little kangaroo and the look in its soft, liquid eyes
somehow seemed to comfort him.
It was Ronnie’s turn now, and the clapping in the
tent swelled to a roar as the gallant little figure in
red and silver, standing upright on the black pony,
came into view.
Ronnie was to personify “ Young Australia.” With
one hand he unfurled the Australian colours as he
galloped round the tent, while on his left shoulder
Wango sat. Shivering and trembling, not daring to


The miners went crazy with delight.


move, Wango’s eyes were fixed on the people. The
miners went nearly crazy with delight at the sight of
him.
As they went round the tent for the third time,
Wango suddenly nearly slipped off Ronnie’s shoulder,
for there in one of the front rows stood a tall brown -
faced man, whom he knew at once as the squatter.
“It is your father,” barked Wango, but of course
Ronnie did not understand. But what he did feel was
the sudden dig which Wango’s claws made at his
shoulder.
He swerved round and the next moment had seen
the brown-faced man. With one glad cry, “ Father ! ”
he leaped off the pony’s back and landed, Whngo and
all, right in his father’s arms.
The squatter clasped his boy tight, unable to speak
in his joy, and the miners pressed round eager to
know the meaning of the strange scene. When the} 7
understood the story, a crowd of them burst through
the back of the tent to capture the two men.
But Bill had seen what had happened as he stood
watching the black pony and its rider.
With white faces he and his partner had rushed
to the fleetest horses they possessed, and galloped
for their lives into the bush.
When the miners found the birds had flown, they
returned to the tent, and insisted on driving the
squatter and his boy to the next township, where a
train left for Melbourne that night.
They offered him huge sums for Wango, for they
were one and all anxious to have him.
But of course the squatter would not part with him.
Was not for Wango that his journey had been made ?
He had come all this way to find Wango, and in finding
him had found his own little son as well. Certainly
not the biggest fortune would tempt him, and he put
aside the big nuggets of real gold that some of the
miners held out to him.
So Wango and Ronnie went home together. What
a home-coming that was !
The squatter had wired to the doctor to break the


Home again.


news to Ronnie’s mother, and she was up, pale and
thin, but radiant with happiness, to meet him. She
held Ronnie as if she could never let go again.
Tom and Elsie poured out questions about the
circus, until at last the squatter said they had talked
enough for that night, and must all go to bed.
The only one who was not happy was Wango, for
he was put into the little house that smelt of dog.
He was very tired after all that had happened, and
soon whimpered himself off to sleep. It seemed to
him but a short time when he heard a familiar Ha,
ha ! ” ringing outside. The next moment the door of
the little house was opened, and, peering out, Wango
saw that the morning had dawned.
At the door all the household had assembled in a
great state of excitement; but Wango had barely
time to notice them, for, leaping up the yard, was
Karoo.
Like a flash of lightning W- 7 ango was out of the
kennel and the next moment was safe inside his
mother’s pocket.
For a moment Karoo stood as if unable to believe it
was true. It seemed to the squatter’s wife as if Karoo s
large eyes met hers with a look of gratitude in them.
Then with great swinging leaps Karoo was off
through the yard down through the paddocks to the
water-holes, where Rangoo had so often waited in vain.
They did not stop now to hear Wango’s story, but
leaped on and on far into the bush. Overhead flew
the jackass, and his loud, rollicking voice called all
the animals together to hear the news.
So long as he lived Wango never forgot his experience
at the circus, nor the hours he spent in the little house
that smelt of dog.
WTien he became an old man kangaroo, his wonder-
ing grandchildren would gather round him and listen
to the tale of what happened to the little kangaroo who
wanted to see much of the world.
THE END.


ANpENIP
0 W I^
cJimmyand^nip
TAEE IV.
E NI to feel that it was time they came out
from the hollow tree, and went back indoors. “ Mother
will be wondering what has happened to us,” she said
to Jimmy.
The brown owl flicked his beak with his wing.
Don't think of going back yet, my dear,” he said,
pleasantly. " The longer you stay here, the less time
you'll have been away.”
It sounded wrong, somehow, and yet his way of
saying it made her feel that it was quite all right to
stay. She was just going to ask him how the time
would grow shorter if they stayed longer, when he
gave a little squeak of caution. “ Don't stop the
beans from growing,” he said.
So they looked, and kept quiet. Where the Sleeping
Beauty’s palace doorway had been, they saw there
was now a cottage doorway. It all looked very nice
and sunshiny and pleasant, but inside the cottage
they could hear a woman talking—it sounded as if
she were scolding somebody.
“ And what use are beans, I should like to know,”
she asked. “ Beans like these, too. You’re always
getting taken in by somebody, Jack. Beans, indeed !
Take your old beans away.”?
The door of the cottage opened, and a boy came
out, looking rather puzzled. He had some beans in
his hand, they saw, wrinkled, peculiar looking beans.
He stood outside the door for a little while and thought
about it, and then he stooped down, and in the middle
of a little flower bed he made a hole with his finger.
Then he chose out one of his beans very carefully,
dropped it in the hole, and covered it up.


They could hear the woman inside the cottage
muttering to herself about those useless beans, and
the brown owl, beside them, said —“ Look at the
ground—see what happens.” So they looked, and the
ground moved as if there was a rabbit burrowing in it,
till presently two green leaves shot out as if somebody
had pushed them up, and then a big, fat stalk, with
a lot more leaves, came pushing up, like a big green
telegraph pole being driven out of the earth, except
that it had branches which grew so quickly that Enid
rubbed her eyes and thought of conjuring tricks.
And the boy who had planted the bean stood looking
while the beanstalk went up and up, growing so fast
that very soon he had to stretch his neck to look up
to the top of it.
“ Jack —Jack ? ” called the woman inside the cottage
“ I’ll be back in a few minutes, mother,” he called
to her.
Jack went up and up.
BOOKS FOR THE BAIRNS COMPETITION.
See page 32 for full particulars


“ Mind you don’t get into mischief,” she called back.
Then the} 7 saw the boy make a jump at the lowest
branch of the great beanstalk. From that he climbed
to another branch, and as the beanstalk was still
growing as fast as ever it helped to carry him up as he
climbed. He went up and up, and the beanstalk kept
on growing, till presently he was out of sight.
“ Where has he gone ? ” Jimmy asked.
“ After those giants up there,” the brown owl
answered. “ He’ll come back to his mother, later, but
there’s lots more things to show you first.”
(Another Tale next week).
“BOOKS FOR THE BAIRNS.”
Titles already issued in this New Series :
No. 1. The Wonderful Adventures of Old Brer Rabbit,
No. 2. Cinderella and other Fairy Tales.
No. 3. Robin-the-Fiddle and other Fairy Tales.
Each number contains a Special Tale about
“Jimmy and Enid and the Brown Owl.”
Also a Prize Painting Competition, which can be entered at
any time.
If you have not had these numbers order them now from your
Jfewsagent.
A NEW BOOK IS PUBLISHED EVERY TUESDAY.
LOOK OUT FOR No. 5. Ready February 27th.
“ More Adventures of Old Brer Rabbit”
Tale V. “Jimmy and Enid and the Brown Owl.”
Prize Painting Competition.


Special Notice to Readers.
Stead’s “ Books for the Bairns ” are now issued weekly, on (Tuesdays, and
on that day readers will be able to purchase copies from Booksellers, News-
agents, or Bookstalls. It will greatly assist if every reader places a definite
order with the Newsagent or Bookseller ; this will also prevent disappoint-
ment.
It often happens that some reader*—especially those living in remote dis-
tricts or abroad —are unable to order from Newsagents or Booksellers.
So that these shall not be disappointed, an Order Form has been prepared
and is printed below. By filling this up and forwarding the necessary P. 0.,
readers may rely upon securing their copies regularly by post week by week.
The Manager of Stead’s Publishing House hopes that, through this re-
issue, Stead’s “ Books for the Bairns ” will soon become, as they used to be,
the popular and favourite reading books for Bairns all over the world.
Those who would like to say how the book pleases them, are kindly asked
to write to Miss Estelle W. Stead, Books for the Bairns Office, Bank Build-
ings, Kingsway, W.C.2.
The next number of Stead’s " Books for the Bairns ” will be “ More
Adventures Of Old Brer Rabbit” and will be ready on Tuesday, Feb. 27th.
Be sure and order it.
STEAD’S BOOKS FOR THE BAIRNS
PUBIISHED WEEKLY—EVERY TUESDAY.
By using the Order Form below, and making sure of obtaining a
copy regularly, readers will soon be in the happy possession of a
wonderful Little Library of splendid reading.
Subscription Terms :
One Year -
Six Months -
- - 13/- Post Free.
- - 6/6 „ „
©rfigr ffortn. Please send the weekly edition of the
Books for the Bairns for year months to
Name
Address
For which I enclose P.O. for
Address: MANAGER, Stead’s Publishing House,
Bank Buildings, Kingsway, W.C. 2.


32
STEAD’S “BOOKS FOR THE BAIRNS” COMPETITION.
Open to aw, Readers.
First Prize, 10/- ; Second Prize, 5/- ; Third Prize, 3/-.
And Twenty Prizes of 1/-
This Competition is open to every reader of Stead’s “ Books for the
Bairns,” and it is so very easy that every one who tries has a good chance
to win a prize. These are the
RULES. —Colour the picture at the top of the page either with
paints or crayons.
Send it to “ The Brown Owl,” c/o Stead’s Publishing House,
Bank Buildings, Kingsway, London, W.C.2.
Name Age
Address
Signature op Parent or Teacher
SPECIAL NOTICE.
Competitions close every Saturday, and each picture will be included
in the Competition of the week it is received. So you can send
in your picture at any time and still have a chance of winning a prize
As soon as possible prize-winners’ names will be printed in Stead’s
“ Books for the Bairns.” Watch each week’s issue, and you will sooa
discover if you are among the winners


P-tbl TO
STEAD'S MASTERPIECE LIBRARY.
PROFUSELY ILLUSTRATED.
A charming series of Fascinating Stories for Boys and
Girls. As an introduction to English Literature these
little volumes are invaluable ; they are suitable for
reading aloud and for silent study.
Stout Coloured Covers. 4d. each ; by post, sd.
The Story of a Donkey. Re-told
and adapted from the French
of Mme. La Comtesse de
S6gur. Forty-nine pictures.
The Animals at the Zoo, or The
Children’s Holiday at the Zoo-
logical Gardens. By permis-
sion of the Zoological Society
of London, this book contains
a plan of the Gardens. Forty-
two pictures.
The Marvellous Adventures of
Sindbad the Sailor. Re-told
from “ The Arabian Nights.”
Fifty-nine pictures.
The Story of Aladdin and the
Wonderful Lamp. Re-told
from “ The Arabian Nights.”
Fifty-nine pictures.
Some Fairy Tales of the Ancient
Greeks. Most useful as an
introduction to a deeper study
of Greek liter ature. Twenty-
seven pictures.
Fairy Tales from China. Adap-
ted by Marion L. Adams.
Fifty-four pictures.
The King of the Golden River,
or The Black Brothers. By
John Ruskin. Twenty pic-
tures.
The Enchanted islands. A fairy
tale of stirring adventures in
the Golden West. Ten pic-
tures.
The Magic Rose. A fairy tale.
Twenty-eight pictures.
Saint George of Merrie England.
Stories of the Seven Cham-
pions of Christendom. Thirty-
seven pictures.
Robin Hood and His Merry Men.
The stirring adventures of the
band of bold English archers
in Sherwood Forest 700 years
ago. Twenty-six pictures.
The House in the Wood and
Nine other Fairy Tales from
Grimm. Thirty-five pictures.
Little Snow-White and Five
other Fairy Tales from Grimm.
Thirty-two pictures.
The Pied Piper of Hamelin and
The Jackdaw of Rheims.
Thirty-one pictures.
What Katy Did. A charming
story. Thirty-five pictures.
Stories from Chaucer. The
Canterbury Tales. Thirty-six
pictures.
The Talisman. Re-told from
Sir Walter Scott’s famous
novel. Twenty-six pictures.
Wonder Tales. By Nathaniel
Hawthorne. Twenty-five pic-
tures.
Stories from “ Sandford and
Merton.” Thirty-three pictures.
The Story of Hiawatha. Re-told
in Prose and Longfellow’s
Poem. Thirty-five pictures.
Order from Bookstalls. Booksellers and Newsagents ; or if by post from
E. W. STEAD, Manager, STEADS PUBLISHING HOUSE, Bank
Buildings, Kingsway, London, W.C. 2.


Six Fascinating Story - Books
WITH
Hundreds of Beautiful Pictures
Bd. each, by post lOd.
The Enchanted Village
Amy Eodison
A dainty story of real village happenings.
The Water Babies
Charles Kingsley
Hereward-the-Wake.
By Charles Kingsley. Re-told by X. E. Bailey
Alice’s Adventures in Wonderland.
Lewis Carroli
Gulliver’s Travels.
Slightly Abridged
Fairy Tales.
Mark Lemon
SPECIAL OFFER -
These Six Books will be sent to any reader of Stead’s “ Books
for the Bairns for 3/6 post free (ordinary pr.ce would
be 5/-) ' y
Address Spe ial Offer Department,’ - Books for the Bairns Office,
BANK BUILDINGS, KINGSWAY, LONDON W.C.2.
For other books in this series send for Stead's Catalogue of Books
for Children.
W. Mate & Sods (1919), Ltd., Bournemouth.
