

Rosebery
ISSUED
::1913::


The Town Planning Company
of Australia Ltd.
CAPITAL: £100,000 in 100,000 Stares of £1 each
' ' ' “
MANAGING DIRECTOR.
Richard Stanton,
Of Stanton &
129 Pitt Street,
DIRECTORS v
v. arles Alfred Jaques (Chairman)
Solicitor.
12 O'Connell Street,
Robert Josbua King,
Gentleman.
Strathfield.
Harley U. Mackenzie,
Solicitor,
279 George Street.
W. H. Nicholls,
Manager Metropolitan Brick Co . Ltd..
12 Castlereagh Street,
SOLICITORS..
Messrs. Stephen, Jaques & Stephen,
12 O Connell Street.
AUDITORS. > ,
Frederick J. Smith Johnson,
Moore Street.
BANKERS .
The Australian Bank of Commerce Ltd.
SURVEYORS.
Messrs. Howard & Clarke,
Pitt Street.
SECRETARY.
Gordon T. Wood.
REGISTERED OFFICE OF THE COMPANY .
• Stanton SonQ^tE§<
129 Pitt Street,- Sydney.


Rosebery
Sydney's
Model & Indusfrial
Suburb
The Ideal of the
Manufacturer and
Mechanic aliKe
Model Factories
and
Model Homes
“ Life without industry is guilt; industry without
art is brutality.”
ELBERT HUBBARD


Rosebery is the Answer
to the Greatest Question of the People:
WHERE AND HOW TO LIVE?
THE Town Planning Co. of Australia, Ltd., owns 300 acres of
magnificent building land subdivided into fourteen miles of
road frontages, capable of accommodating 1500 residences, besides
numerous factories, shops and other business places; also public
reserves and public buildings.
Artistic and Modern Villas,
with every known comfort and convenience, including electric light,
are now being erected by the Company on plans similar to those made
famous at Haberfield. These cottages arc charming, both externally
and internally; they are built with four, five and six rooms and
kitchen, according to the requirements of the owner. The bathrooms,
kitchen and laundry equipments and other offices are of the very best.
Never before have workmen’s homes been built on such elaborate
designs.
Each cottage stands on its own ground, with frontages of not
less than forty feet, and average depths of 150 feet.
No two adjoining cottages are alike, and each building is a
component part of a general scheme of beautification.
The home sites are carefully sectioned off from the factory sites
and the shopping area.
Terms to Purchasers
Prices range from £675 to £9(10, and are payable as follows:
From £25 to £5O deposit, the balance by instalments of from £1
to £1 ss. per week, with interest at£ per cent. No more liberal terms
were ever offered. The Company will also give home-seekers the
services of their own architect, who will design villas according to any
model desired, and to meet any requirements.


This lovely Cottage home, one of
the first erected at Rosebery,
is a type of cottage being built
by the Company on easy terms


A Dream of Comfort Realised
is a cottage home at Rosebery. Here the thrifty working-man can
be a king in his own domain. To be his own landlord is to-day the
ideal of every Australian worthy of the name.
Sitting in His Own Parlor
in his pretty home, the worker who lives at Rosebery elevates himself
to a higher plane than has ever been attained by the labouring class
in the history of the world.
It is a Picture
of ease, luxury and contentment that must appeal to every man who
respects himself, loves his family, and possesses the laudable desire to
improve his position in life. Those who sow the seeds of love, thrift
and ambition in their own homes reap a harvest of peace, happiness
and fortune in the future.
A Rosebery Cottage Home
possesses character and individuality that cannot he attained elsewhere.
Every building is erected by the Company’s highly trained staff
of experts, and all the Joinery is hand-made on the premises, the entire
work being open to the inspection of intending buyers.
Art in the Home,
which more than anything else marks the advance of civilisation, is
introduced into Rosebery cottages in the pretty effects secured in
tiles, grates, mantles, electric fittings, stencils, fibrous ceilings, and
other materials. The intending purchaser will he enabled to make a
selection from the Company's own offices on the estate, of these and
other materials desired for beautifying his future home.


This interior is the type of treatment
that we would suggest —artistic, and
at the same time, inexpensive


The Model Factory
is a new idea. There is no reason why the hives of manufacturing
should not he cast in artistic and inspiring surroundings. Why should
not a working place be made beautiful in the eye of the worker?
With this in view the Town Planning Company of Australia are
prepared to build factories on the same artistic principles that they
are building homes.
The Rosebery Factory
will not only appeal to the artistic side of human nature, but it will
also be modelled so as to meet in every way the convenience of manu-
facturers, and also provide healthful conditions to those whose daily
toil is centred therein.
Co-operation Means Economy,
and therefore, by having a number of factories together, the Company
are enabled to furnish power and other benefits much cheaper than
they could otherwise be obtained. There is nothing so important to
the development of a great city than
The Segregation of the Factory Area.
Rosebery, though in the Municipality of Waterloo, stands by itself,
and has been planned with such care and foresight that the factories
of the future will not only he isolated from the city, but will form one
of its chief attractions.
The Terms are Unique.
The Company will erect a factory up to a total cost of say €5OOO,
placing at the disposal of the purchaser the services of his own
architect, who will prepare plans and furnish estimates free of charge.
The purchaser may select his own site on any portion of the factory
area.
The terms of payment are only 10 per cent, of the total cost, and
10 per cent per annum, with (S per cent interest. Thus, upon a
building costing €5OOO the purchaser would only be asked to pay €5OO
down and €5OO per annum; and iirspite of the recent increase in rates
of interest the Company asks onlySper cent, return upon their money.
This means that anyone starting a business, instead of having
to put a large portion of his capital into premises, can retain the bulk
of the money which would otherwise be so required for the develop-
ment and expansion of his business.
Many people are enabled by this arrangement to embark upon
manufacturing who have hitherto been prevented from doing so by
lack of sufficient capital.


A factory erected under conditions
as shown here must commend
itself to all up-to-date business
men


Rosebery—a Garden Suburb.
“The Sun” was recently good enough to describe Tlaberfield as
“a perfect masterpiece of garden suburb planning.”
Rosebery will follow in lines similar to Haberfield so far as its
borne life is concerned.
The roads will be 60 feet wide. It is proposed to make public
playgrounds, parks, and no doubt in due time, churches, schools, a
school of aits, theatres, and picture palaces will follow. In brief,
eveiything that is known of that can tend to make life pleasant will
he found at Rosebery.
The Magnificent Situation
of Rosebery, with its undulating, grassy lands, commanding a
panorama of Botany Bay. greatly assists this scheme. In the course
of a very few years there will be no prettier'suburb than Rosebery.
Moreover, its location —elevated as it is, and gaining the gentle
breezes that sweep across it from the great bay beyond —makes it a
pre-eminently healthy suburb. Children will find life there much
more invigorating than in the crowded streets of the immediate
precincts of the city. One may enjoy the sight of his litt'c ones at
play in the public parks devoted to that purpose, thereby gaining
health and cheeriness from Sydney's glorious sunshine.
Health and Wealth at Rosebery
Thus may the one’s interests become centred in a place worth
while —a place that provides him with opportunity to better his lot.
and at the same time enable him to bring up his children as they
should be brought up —with plenty of air and sunshine, and in
pleasing surroundings.
Nothing affects character more than envioronment. and the Rose
bery child will become a citizen of whom Australia may he proud.


Due regard to the health of the
children has been made a
feature and it is hoped that
with the co-operation of the
Waterloo Municipality these
reserves which are set apart
for recreation purposes will be
made attractive for the enter-
tainment of the little ones


The Convenience of Rosebery
is one of its chief advantages. It is not in any sense a distant suburb,
and can be more fairly described as a continuation of the city area, as
it begins practically at the end of Elizabeth-street, which is close to the
site where the new South Sydney Hospital is being erected, opposite the
Victoria Park Racecourse. Thence the estate takes a southerly direction
to Gardiner's-road, facing the Rosebery Racecourse. The eastern
boundary is the Kensington Golf Links and a portion of the
Kensington Estate. The western boundary is the main Botany-road.
By the Existing Tram on Botany Road
which traverses the whole of the western boundary of the estate,
Rosebery is only about fifteen minutes from the Central Railway
Station. This line will shortly be continued along Gardiner’s-road
on the boundary of the estate. Additional facilities will be provided
in the near future, as the present Zetland tram must inevitably be
continued right through the estate to Gardiner’s-road. and thence along
to Moloney-street, thus linking up the Zetland line with the Daccyvillc
line. Rosebery will, therefore, be served by two distinct lines, bring-
ing every part of the new suburb into easy access of the city. Again,
in the early future it is certain that (he
Eastern Suburbs Railway
will skirt this estate, thus enormously enhancing land values and
increasing its importance generally. Another factor in the progress
of Rosebery will bo the assured development, as an important seaport,
of Botany Bay. whose turquoise-like waters, about two miles distant,
may be seen glistening in the sun from almost any part of the estate.




A Summary of Rosebery’s Advantages
1. It is ideally situated, and is expansive and admirably adapted in
every other way for the making of a great garden suburb.
2. It is self-contained, and will therefore possess its own individuality
and atmosphere, without any possibility of being affected by
the adverse influences of any neighbouring suburb.
3. The land is grassy and undulating, with fine elevations commanding
splendid views. The soil is perfect for gardening of any kind.
4. It has been planned so as to avoid the possibility of a single jarring
note in the whole scheme. The factory and shopping sections
will be entirely distinct from the residential.
5. It contains all that is best and most approved in the world's
experience of garden-subuib planning.
6. Every structure, whether cottage, factoiv, shop, church or public
building will be an ornament to the suburb, each being an
integral part of one great scheme of beautification.
7. The roads will he wide, well made and prettily ornamented. There
is generous provision for public reserves, playgrounds and
edifices for pleasurable and educational purposes.
8. It is most handy to the city, being already well served by the
existing Botany tram, while an additional line right through
the estate is certain to he completed in the near future.
!). 'Flic terms upon which homes oi factories may be secured are the
easiest ever offered to the public for buildings of this character.
lit. The land is ridiculously cheap considering its great prospective
value, an all-round price of
Onfy A £3/ per foot
being asked, with three or five years terms, with interest atS per cent.
Stanton &, Son,umia
129 PITT STREET,
Managing' Agents,


To make Avenues suck as this is the ambition of the Company


If You Want a Home to be Proud of
you cannot do better than settle at Rosebery where, as indicated by
the sketches on the opposite page, all houses will be built according to
the latest and most artistic models, and each will be different trom its
neighbours. Thus you are offered at once.
An Artistic Home,
A Distinctive Home,
and a Home built
exactly to suit your
Own Requirements
Nowhere else in Sydney can you possibly secure a pretty and com-
fortable home so cheaply.
Just ThinK of It
We allow you to select your own site.
We give you the services of our own architect and staff.
We build for you according to your own needs.
We finance you at only® per cent., though the prevailing rate
is C per cent, and may go higher.
We ask only £25 to £5O deposit, and the balance as rent.
We sell you land at foot that everyone admits must
soon be worth at least twice as much.


Tupes of
Model Homes
Roseber


Success from the Start
has been the experience of the Town Planning Co. of Australia—-
success so remarkable as to eloquently proclaim the fact that
Rosebery just meets
the People’s Needs
Business was commenced in March, 1913, when the building depot
was opened, and in the twelve working months the land and building
sales have totalled, in round figures, £96 000. A truly wonderful
record when it is considered that the suburb was, during that period,
only in its earliest stage of development.
Such a record could not have been made if the public did not
quickly realise the assured benefits that must accrue from investment
at Rosebery.
L* a l l
Land to-day is omy;£o, per foot; in a
very few years it must inevitably, as it
did at Haberfield, double itself in value


The Rosebery Model and Industria Suburb as foreshadowed by the Management of the Town Planring Company of Australia Limited.


Compiled by Albert Goldie
Illustration by Welter Jardine


Witk Compliments of Stanton & Son, iLii
129 Pitt Street,
SYDNEY.
J
1 SYD. DAY,
• n.
Friator, Ltd.
M4CmwS»
SYDNEY.
