

' ■ m&mmMk'-’mtM >8 m$m ■-■"
f J •<& V *- 'A ■ > •; ■** i : ; ■ £: *. W•’’■'sCvW. ■■■** *
Rosemary
In
. r • " - -♦*. • • ' . ** <£ V * 4f:- ( - ** , * x- .-1 ’ i Jf ■# W*!.™
Rhymeland
.
—Bfr BaUfftt
’■ • ' '/* 4 1 -’ V "f _• iv. ; '_^ ; ’r v ' -,i .-** ■' - , ■ 8 > .: • '■•
■ . -1 ' S'’
. " ,'■ ; { V-.. ' ‘ A ' .- •
■A'’-‘ c A ' ■' ’ “"j - - vftr " ■. . . Ajfc* -. . * 1 i 1 » -BEKf : • V. .’ 1 •/> t * ' v ,-. ,v - •-* - ■**■- - " . s, •. ;i %*%,
t- > ? ‘ . . • T,'-' V', ', •''■■ -v?. • ' ■ ■■*' ■ -■ :* f '/. 'a: S : 'i^^
■■■■; I ..‘A y5?'~ ffe **’ B
|H«B| '1% ✓ NUii, IStssmLzir 4. *Ay-£*'A£
AiA-A S-' ;v' ! I r'C?' -i,.' ?••»* '*• £<rvf*'>i<;/
, Vk 1 '• ' -v.




Rosemary in Rhymeland


ROSEMARY IN
RHYMELAND
Written and Illustrated by
EVELYN BARTLETT
Coloured Frontispiece by
EDITH FLAHERTY
Printed and Published by
PATERSONS PRINTING PRESS LTD.
882 Hay Street, Perth
Western Australia
Price :
THREE SHILLINGS AND NINEPENCE


r i ( ) i o i
* *jJ. O x
uAN


"North by south and east by west,
Out of space and out of time.
Lies the land old dames know best.
The foolish land of nursery rhyme."
J. L.


Jke Ckajitcts a\e:
Rhymeland
A Talk with an Ow
Rosemary Meets the Miff-Riff
Mistress Mary Quite Contrary
Simple Simon
At the Fair
At Old King Cole’s Feast
Lost in the Dusky Wood
The Grab-Grab Tree
nto the Wallawop Country
Letting the Lost Folk Free
At Old King Cole’s Feast


Hi
Rhymeland
lOSEMARY had the mumps. It really wasn't
fair that a little girl should catch the mumps
at all, so that everyone could tease her and
call her Mumpy, but it was even worse that
I she should not be allowed to go with Michael
and John to cousin Bill’s birthday party when she was
so nearly better.
That morning she had pleaded with her father,
because father was usually easily persuaded, but he had
shaken his head and said: “Afraid not, Merry, but we'll
ask Mother.”
When mother came Rosemary asked her, but mother
shook her head and said: “No dear, it would not do to
let you go amongst all the other children yet.” Then
she said: “Anyway, we will ask Doctor, and make
sure.” But Doctor had shaken his head. “No little girl,
I am afraid there will be no party for you this after-
noon,” he said.
Now it was afternoon. Rosemary was wrapped in
a warm rug on a wicker lounge at the sunny end of the
garden. It was an hour since Michael and John had
left for the party, and, although they were not allowed
to go anywhere near her part of the house or garden,
they had called back over the gate: “Goodbye, Mumpy;
we'll bring you some cake.”
Rosemary blew her nose very hard and turned to
the books that mother had brought out of the house for
her. There was “The Magic Pudding,” a delightful


story she had read over and over about a koala bear
named Bunyip Bluegum. Then there was “The Meeting
Pool,” about the animals who met in the jungle, and
“The Wanderings of Mumfie.” Mumfie was a quaint
little elephant who set off in search of adventure. That
morning someone had sent Rosemary a big parcel in the
post, and when she had opened it there was the most
wonderful book of nursery rhymes. Rosemary had
never seen such beautiful pictures before. She lay and
turned the pages over and over, and looked longingly at
the wood where “the old woman who lived in the shoe”
lived.
She began to pretend that the people were real.
“Steady there Humpty or you will fall off that wall,” she
said, addressing Humpty Dumpty as he grinned stupidly
up at her from the book. Humpty was brilliantly col-
oured in green and blue and red. His funny slippers
with great gold buckles especially took Rosemary’s
fancy. He grinned broadly all the while.
“1 wish you would get up and turn round so that I
could see how far your mouth really does go,” said
Rosemary.
She turned the page over. There was Old King Cole
jesting and making merry with his courtiers. Lots of
people in brightly coloured clothes were round him and
“the fiddlers three” were playing on their violins. Rose-
mary closed her eyes and lay back. It was easy to imag-
ine the stirring of the leaves overhead was the murmur
of voices and the rustling of silk skirts. The distant
sound of the radio coming from the house, she pretended
was the music of the fiddlers.
Suddenly Rosemary was startled by something mov-
ing beside her. She sat up and was surprised to see a
large black kitten. It was not walking on all fours as
kittens generally do but standing upright, and using its
two paws as though they were hands, pushing the leaves
aside. It seemed to be searching for something, and as
Rosemary watched it wonderingly she distinctly heard it
say:
“Oh! Mammy dear, oh! Mammy dear.”
“How very queer,” thought Rosemary. “Our kittens
do not walk like that, and lam sure they cannot talk. I
wonder where it belongs?”


Rosemary watched the kitten for some time without
speaking, as she did not want to frighten it away, but
at last she said:
“Excuse me, have you lost something ?”
The kitten started and turned around.
‘‘Of course I have lost something,” it said crossly.
“Do you think 1 would be searching like this if I had not?
We have all lost them.” It began muttering again:
“Oh! Mammy dear, oh! Mammy dear,” and two large
tears splashed down its cheeks.
Rosemary thought it very ill-bred to be so snappy,
but said gently:
“What have you lost?”
The kitten turned and stared at her. It opened its
mouth and was just about to speak when two more kit-
tens came searching among the leaves and Rosemary
found herself thinking of the old rhyme: “Three little
kittens they lost their mittens and they all began to cry.”
“Are you looking for your mittens?” she asked, hop-
ing that the other kittens would be better tempered,
but they did not answer her.
“Oh! Mammy dear,
We sadly fear
Our mittens we have lost!” they sang together.
Suddenly they stopped searching and sat down on
the grass:
“And we shall have no pie,” they sang as they dab-
bed their eyes with their little black paws.
Rosemary wondered what sort of pie.
“I did not know that you were real,” she said af-
ter watching them for some time, and wishing that they
would start a conversation.
The kittens stopped crying and looked at her with
large green eyes.
“Of course we are real,” said the first one huffily.
“Oh yes, 1 know' you are real,” Rosemary corrected
herself hurriedly. “But I mean 1 thought that you were
only in Nursery Rhymeland.”
“So we are,” said the second kitten, who sounded
just as cross as the first one.
“But you are not,” Rosemary argued. “You are in
our garden.”
“No such thing,” the third kitten snapped. “This
is our land—the land of Nursery Rhyme.”


“Silly kitten,” Rosemary laughed. “You are
She stopped suddenly, noticing for the first time how dif-
ferent everything had become. The sky seemed so much
bluer, the leaves much greener, and the trees were twisted
into funny humanlike shapes. They had faces and their
boughs had become long gnarled arms. Some of them
were leaning together whispering. Nearby a little
stream rippled over a stony bed. Rosemary distinctly
heard it laugh as it tumbled along, and somewhere a
voice a long way off began to sing:
“North by south and east by west,
Out of space and out of time
Lies the land old dames know best,
The foolish land of Nursery Rhyme.”
“The Land of Nursery Rhyme!” Rosemary gasped.
“However did I get here?”
“Mother Goose must have brought you on her gan-
der,” said the first kitten.
“Why Mother Goose?” asked Rosemary in astonish-
ment.
“Because she is the only person who can bring any-
one to Rhymeland,” the second kitten retorted.
Rosemary felt bewildered.
“But Mother Goose did not bring me here,” she in-
sisted. “1 have not seen anybody. I have not even
moved. I have been sitting here all the while.”
The kittens jumped up and began searching again,
and there was silence for some seconds until Rosemary
spoke to the one nearest her.
“Mother Goose did not bring me here,” she re-
peated.
The kitten shrugged its shoulders, and waved its
paw impatiently.
“I have not time to argue,” it said. “Arguing is
such a frightful waste of time.”
It ran off after the other two who were already
some distance away.
“Oh! Mammy dear
We sadly fear
Our mittens we have lost!” they sang again.
“Rosemary watched them moving about among the
trees, wondering to herself how she had come to the
land of Nursery Rhyme, until suddenly she realised that
they had quite disappeared.


“When 1 get home,” she decided, “I must see
whether Tibby and Tobby can walk like the three little
kittens. Why! Perhaps they can even talk, and are
only waiting for someone to help them to begin.” She
laughed aloud. “I am sure they would be a great deal
more polite than the Rhymeland kittens,” she thought.
She looked about her curiously, and wished the kit-
tens had not gone so far away before she had asked them
more questions, but she did not like to call them as she
would have done her own kittens. “Besides,” she
thought, “I do not even know their names.”
It was all very strange and bewildering. “The land
of Nursery Rhyme,” she mused. “I did not even know it
was a real place, and that the three little kittens were
really alive, walking about looking for their mittens. I
do wish they had been better tempered, and perhaps I
could have helped them look for their mittens. What if
I had found them.” She laughed again. “What would
I say? ‘Kitten here is your mitten/ or ‘Here’s your mit-
ten kitten.’ ”
She was startled by a gurgling laugh. There did
not seem to be anyone about, only the trees and the little
stream.
For the first time she noticed a path winding in and
out among the trees. She began to follow it, wondering
as she went what was in the kitten’s pie.
“I do hope they will find their mittens,” she said
aloud.
“Of course they will find them!” a hoarse voice
croaked.
Rosemary stopped and looked around her. At first
she saw nobody, and was going on again when she
noticed a tree smiling down at her. She smiled back.
“Did you say they will find them?” she asked
anxiously.
“Of course child,” croaked the tree, “They are
sure to find them. It says so in the rhyme.”
Rosemary nodded.
“Don’t you remember the next verse: ‘Three little
kittens they found their mittens’?” went on the tree.
“Yes I remember,” said Rosemary. “They found
them, and washed them, and then they had some pie.”
“Very good child, very good,” said the tree and it
bent stiffly down and jerkily patted her on the back.


The rough wood of its gnarled finger dug sharply into
her back.
Rosemary was growing used to kittens and trees
talking, and everything behaving so strangely, so that
she did not realise there was anything extraordinary
about a tree patting her.
“But if they are sure to find them because it says
so m the rhyme, why are they so cross, and why are they
crying and bothering?” said Rosemary.
“The world over, the world over,” sighed the old
tree. “People are always fretting and worrying about
things that really do not matter. Things that would
come right if they were allowed to take their own course.
You understand?” it said looking intently at Rosemary,
Rosemary nodded. She did not understand really
but thought the old tree seemed so wise and kind that it
ought to know.
“Someone is coming,” she said as the sound of foot-
steps hurrying down the path could be heard. Looking
around she saw a creature so comical that she nearly
laughed aloud. It was a large frog, dressed in a tight-
fitting suit of green satin and an opera hat. He carried
a posy of flowers, and his collar was so stiff and high
that it seemed to be almost cutting his throat.
“He is in a great hurry,” said Rosemary as the
frog swaggered by without appearing to notice them.
“That is the frog who would a-wooing go
Whether his mother would let him or no,” whis-
pered the tree as the frog disappeared down the path
with his coat tails swinging behind him.
“He certainly does not look very comfortable in that
high collar,” Rosemary could not help remarking, though
she realised it was not quite polite to pass personal re-
marks. “He held his head as though his collar hurt
him.”
“Pride feels no pain,” murmured the tree. “He is
quite the proudest and the most stupid fellow in the
whole of the Rhymeland Wood.”
“Are there many people in the wood?” asked Rose-
mary hoping to turn the conversation to something less
personal.
“Hundreds; some of us are more in the wood than
others.” The tree paused, and Rosemary looked up in-


quiringly. “That is a joke, you know,” it added some-
what testily.”
“1 don't see it . . ~” Rosemary began, but the old
tree went on: “We are both in the wood. You are in
the wood and 1 am in the wood, but I am in the wood in
the wood. See?”
Rosemary did not see anything very funny in that
but she did not like to hint the tree's feelings so she
said nothing for a minute, then she asked:
“Why is Mother Goose the only person who can
bring anyone to Rhymeland ? The kitten said that she
must have brought me here on her gander but 1 do not
remember anything about it.”
The old tree did not answer for some seconds. It
seemed a little offended because Rosemary did not laugh
at its joke. She waited some time, but it took no notice
and seemed to be thinking deeply. It did not speak until
she turned to go. “Eh! What was that ?” it said.
“Why is Mother Goose the only person who can bring
anyone to Rhymeland?” Rosemary repeated.
“Mother Goose!” The tree shivered and looked
cautiously about. “1 would not talk about her if I were
you. She is ahvays flying around somewhere on her
gander to see that everything is all right. None of the
Rhymeland folk dare to offend Mother Goose.”
“Why not?” asked Rosemary.
“Because she would take them to the court of Old
King Cole,” whispered the tree, moving its leaves uneas-
ily. “She takes them on her gander, you know,” it added.
“Old King Cole,” laughed Rosemary, remembering
the brightly coloured picture in her book. “He is a
merry old soul; 1 would not be afraid of him.”
“Merry enough,” agreed the tree, “ but it is always
wise to keep on the good side of a king you know.” It
gave a knowing wink and a nod and Rosemary felt that
perhaps it was right.
“Oh dear! what drowsy weather we are having,”
said the tree, yawning and stretching its limbs so that
all the leaves quivered.
“Where does this path lead?” asked Rosemary,
but there was no answer. She looked up. The old tree
had fallen fast asleep. Rosemary wondered what she
had better do next. She hesitated a minute then turned
and ran along the path in the direction the frog had
taken.


rn
A
A Talk
with an Owl
OSEMARY ran along the path for some min-
utes. When she stopped to look around her
again, she found that the wood had become
full of scuttlings and scurryings. Queer little
creatures appeared from everywhere and they
one and all scampered away in the same direction.
“These must be the three blind mice,” she said to
herself as three mice came pattering through the under-
growth. They ran into trees mixed, themselves up in
the brambles and one little fellow upset himself com-
pletely. He lay squeaking loudly with his feet in the air
until Rosemary carefully turned him over and set him on
the path again. The little animal sat gasping and blink-
ing stupidly, either dazed by his fall or surprised at
being picked up so suddenly.
“Run along silly,” said Rosemary, pushing it gently
with the toe of her shoe, but it sat quite still and blinked
up at her.
“Oh dear, oh dear, oh dear!” it whimpered.
Suddenly the other two mice came hurrying back,
chattering excitedly as they ran.
“I can’t think that he has taken the wrong path af-
ter coming this way so often,” one of them was saying.
They nosed their way to where the little mouse sat
shivering.
“Well, I declare,” squeaked the other, “by the tip
of my elegant tail, why are you sitting there?”


“Oh dear/’ gasped the little mouse with a gulp of
relief at hearing its companions’ voices again. “I have
had
“You won’t have a tail if you don’t come along at
once,’’ said the others together. “listen! Here she
comes.”
Thud-thud, thud-thud, thud-thud, sounded foot-
steps, and in an instant all three mice had scampered
away. They had scarcely disappeared when a funny
little old woman, with a large carving knife in her hand,
came panting along. She stopped when she saw Rose-
mary and eyed the little girl curiously for a few
seconds.
“You are new here?” she said at last. “To what
rhyme do you belong?”
“I do not belong to any rhyme,” said Rosemary,
looking anxiously at the large carving knife, and won-
dering if it were as sharp as it looked.
“Tut, tut, child, what nonsense. You must belong
to some rhyme or other. You would not be in Rhyme-
land otherwise.”
“Really . . ~” Rosemary began, but the farmer’s
wife interrupted her.
“I suppose you belong to the old woman who lives
in the shoe, who has so many children she doesn’t know
what to do. There are always some of them running
wild in the wood.”
“No such thing,” said Rosemary indignantly. “There
are only three of us at home.”
“And how many when you are not at home?” asked
the old lady.
“Three of course.” Rosemary was losing her
patience. “There’s Michael and John, and I come in the
middle.”
“In the middle of what?”
“I am in the middle of the family,” Rosemary ex-
plained.
“I don’t see it,” said the farmer’s wife, gazing
around her. “I always thought it was a wood.”
“Please will you tell me why everyone is in such a
hurry, and where this path will take me,” said Rosemary
changing the subject.
“The path won’t take you anywhere,” snapped the
old lady. “You will have to walk or ride if you want to
get about.”


“What 1 really mean is what shall I see if I walk
along this pathway?” said Rosemary, who was growing
tired of the farmer’s wife.
“Now you are talking like a sensible child,” said
the old lady in a kinder tone. “You will never come to
the end of the path because it hasn’t one. If you keep on
walking for precisely one year, six months, three weeks
and one and a half days you will come to the exact spot
where you are standing now.”
“Oh!” exclaimed Rosemary. “I do not want to walk
for as long as that. I must be home in time for tea.”
“Where is your home?” asked the farmer’s wife.
“I do not quite know,” Rosemary confessed. “Per-
haps you can tell me how I came to Rhymeland, and how
I shall get home again.”
“Ah!” said the old lady, screwing up her eyes and
nodding wisely. “Now I know who you are. You are
one of the babes in the wood.”
“Indeed lam not,” said Rosemary, frowning. “I do
not belong to any rhyme.”
“Well you had better take care that Old King Cole
does not get to hear about you, that is all. Keep your
temper, and don’t boast, neither of them pay in the long
run.”
The old lady turned and started up the path then
came hurrying back and put her mouth very close to
Rosemary’s ear. “He will have you arrested and thrown
into prison,” she whispered.
“I don’t believe I would be the least bit afraid of
Old King Cole,” said Rosemary, feeling very brave, and
thinking to herself: “After all he is only a nursery
rhyme.”
“Ho! ho!” shouted the old lady. “You are not afraid
of Old King Cole, aren’t you ? Ho! ho!”
“No I am not,” said Rosemary defiantly. “Any-
way you have not told me who lives along this path-
way.”
“Everyone lives along here,” said the old lady, with
a wave of her hand. “Jack Spratt, Old Mother Hubbard,
Little Miss Muffett, Little Johnny Horner, 80-Peep, Boy
Blue, Old King Cole, and you will probably see Humpty
Dumpty sitting on the wall. That is if he hasn’t done it
again.”
“Done what again?” asked Rosemary.


“Fallen off of course. He is always doing it, and
then the king has to send all his horses, and all his men
to try to put Humpty together again.”
“Perhaps he has fallen off now, and that is why there
is such a bustle,” suggested Rosemary as several more
little animals ran past squeaking and grunting.
“Oh no, they are all off to the Fair. Aren’t you
going? Everybody does. I would be going myself only
I must catch those mice.”
The farmer’s wife gathered up her skirts, and ran
off so quickly that Rosemary had not even time to say
goodbye.
“I’ll cut off their tails with a carving knife,” the old
lady sang as she ran.
“Poor little mice. I do hope she will not catch
them,” thought Rosemary, as she walked on along the
path. “It seems a pretty crazy sort of place,” she
mused. “I wonder if I can find my way to the Fair.
Anyway I will ask the next person I meet.”
Rosemary was suddenly startled by a small voice
close to her ear. “Fiddle, faddle, feedle,” it whispered.
“I beg your pardon,” she said, looking up at a large
owl, perched on an over-hanging branch. “Were you
speaking to me ?”
“What are you pray?” murmured the owl, blink-
ing sleepily, and ruffling its feathers till it looked an
enormous size.
“Can’t you see?” said Rosemary in as important a
voice as she could “I am a little girl.”
“No, I cannot see,” said the owl drowsily. “I cannot
see anything. I only sit and think in the daytime.”
“What do you think about?” asked Rosemary
politely.
“Rhymes.” The owl nodded its head and closed its
eyes. “Rhymes mostly. I invent rhymes for people who
haven’t any.”
“Oh!” exclaimed Rosemary, remembering what the
farmer’s wife had said about Old King Cole throwing
people into prison if they had no rhyme. “Will you in-
vent a rhyme for me?”
“Always say please,” corrected the owl.
“Please,” repeated Rosemary.
“A rhyme for you,” said the owl thoughtfully, open-
ing its eyes, and changing from one foot to the other. “It


would be better if it were night and I could have a good
look at you. Have you fur or feathers, my dear?”
“I haven’t either,” said Rosemary. “I . . .”
“It hasn’t fur, and it hasn’t feather,” the owl began.
“I am not an ‘it,’ ” Rosemary interrupted.
“And it is not an ‘it’,” droned the owl. “It must
have either scales or leather or - or - or - or - or - and
it kept repeating ‘or’ until Rosemary lost her patience
altogether.
“Oh dear!” she said. “If you can’t make a better
rhyme than that you need not bother.”
“It is no bother 1 assure you.” The owl’s voice was
growing thicker and thicker with every word. “I enjoy
doing it. It gives me great pleasure, great pleasure,
great ple-a-s-u-r-e,” it kept repeating and Rosemary was
startled by loud clapping and cheering. To her surprise
she found a large number of animals had collected.
“Great pleasure,” went on the owl.
“Hear, hear,” shouted all the animals.
“It is neither here nor there,” the owl insisted
dreamily. “As I was rhyming .. .
It hasn’t fur and it hasn’t feather,
And it is not an it,”
“O please,” said Rosemary, “that is a foolish rhyme
There is neither rhyme nor reason in it.”
“Hear, hear,” shouted all the animals in a deafen-
ing chorus.
“One thing, they all seem to agree with me,” thought
Rosemary cheerfully. “I do hope that will make the owl
realise what nonsense it is talking.”
“Of course there is rhyme and reason in it.” The
owl blinked and ruffled its feathers crossly. “At least
there is going to be. The rhyme will come later, and
the reason is already there. She said herself she hadn’t
fur and she hadn’t feathers.”
“Hear, hear,” screamed all the animals even louder
than before.
“I don’t want a stupid rhyme like that,” said Rose-
mary. “1 would like something like—
‘Curly locks, curly locks
Wilt thou be mine?’ or
‘Mary had a little lamb
Its fleece was white as snow r . . / ”
“Have you a little lamb?” interrupted the owl.


“No,” said Rosemary, “but . .
“Well if you haven’t a lamb how can I put one in
the rhyme?” complained the owl, “And it is no use using
the word 'butt.’ If you had a lamb it might, but you have
said yourself that you haven’t.”
“A lamb might what?” said Rosemary looking puz-
zled.
“Butt of course,” wheezed the owl. “B-u-t-t,
Butt,”
Rosemary was silent, and all the animals chattered
amongst themselves. They seemed, as far as she could
make out, to be saying pieces of poetry over and over.
“As I walked by myself
And talked to myself,” began a large guinea-pig.
“Don’t interrupt,” said the owl.
“Myself said unto me,” went on the guinea-pig.
“Stifle it,” snapped the owl impatiently.
“Stifle it,” cried all the animals in chorus, and sev-
eral of them pounced on the little animal and sat upon
it.
“Look to thyself,
Take care of thyself,” it went on, the voice coming
feebly from somewhere near the ground, as the animals
fought and pushed and leapt around. “For nobody
cares - - for - - thee,” it finished weakly.
“As I was saying,” began the owl.
“Oh! do be careful, and mind what you are doing,”
said Rosemary, running to rescue the guinea-pig.
“There,” she said, as she pushed and lifted the animals
aside so that they went tumbling in heaps, and left the
small creature panting feebly on the ground. “That is
better isn’t it?”
“For nobody cares for thee,” it repeated breath-
lessly.
“What were you saying?” asked Rosemary, turn-
ing to the owl. “I did not quite hear.”
“You did not listen,” said the bird indignantly.
“Someone else had better try the rhyme.”
“I am terribly sorry,” said Rosemary meekly.
“You are terribly rude,” the owl retorted, making
clicking noises with its beak between each word.
“Please do not be offended,” coaxed Rosemary, “I
did not mean to be rude, only you see the guinea-pig—,
Won’t you try again?”


“No/' said the owl stubbornly, and it settled back in
the leaves as though it had finished with the whole affair.
“Let the Miff-Piff try,” it murmured drowsily.
“Let the Miff-Piff try,” shouted all the animals in
chorus.
“The Miff-Piff?” said Rosemary wonderingly, but
no one took the slightest notice of her. “Whatever sort
of a creature can that be?” she thought.


Rosemary
Meets the Miff-Piff
ET the Miff-Piff try,” the animals continued
shouting, until a queer little creature was
pushed to the front of the crowd. It looked
very like a pig, Rosemary thought, only that
it had a funny flat little nose, that was not in
the least like a pig’s, and large dreamy eyes. It wore
a tight little suit of red check.
“Let the Miff-Piff try,” shouted everyone again.
Rosemary felt quite sorry for the little animal. It
was extremely embarrassed by so much attention, and
tried to cover its face with one of its paws.
“Will you think of a rhyme for me please?” asked
Rosemary, as she went up close to the little creature.
The Miff-Piff shook its head.
“I can’t,” it sobbed pitifully. “I have forgotten
my own rhyme.”
“It has forgotten its own rhyme,” shouted everyone.
“Wait until Old King Cole hears.”
“Oh!” wailed the Miff-Piff.
“What if Old King Cole does hear? 1 don’t suppose
he will mind,” said Rosemary.
“Yes he will,” sobbed the Miff-Piff. “His soldiers
will arrest me, and throw me into prison.”
“Will throw it into prison,” the animals shouted.


“Well, perhaps it would not be very dreadful, and
besides they might not keep you there long/’ said Rose-
mary encouragingly.
The Miff-Piff sobbed bitterly. “For ever and ever
and ever, and I will be fed on frozen radishes and ink/’
it sobbed.
“Fed on frozen radishes and ink,” yelled the chorus.
“Come, come,” said Rosemary going closer to the
little creature, and patting it gently. “Don't let them
frighten you like this.”
The Miff-Piff sobbed louder. “It's, it’s—” it wailed,
“something about —
Tra, la la,
Tee, dee, dee ... no that is wrong,” and it
sniffed loudly.
“That is wrong,” shouted all the animals.
“I do wish you would all leave off shouting and give
the little creature time to think,” Rosemary said. She
was surprised at her own courage, because, as she
thought to herself, “There must be quite two hundred
animals here.”
“Give it time to think,” cried the chorus, but this
time a great deal quieter.
“Now,” said Rosemary. “How does it go? - - Tra,
la, la, Tee, dee, dee . . .”
“A cat and a cannibal went to sea,” cried the Miff-
Piff excitedly. It thought for a moment and then began
to sob again.
“If I could only remember as far back as the day
before yesterday’s tea time,” it whimpered.
“What difference would that make?” asked Rose-
mary, as she gently stroked the little creature’s ear.
“All the difference,” it sighed. “You see I lost my
memoranda book then.”
“You lost what,” laughed Rosemary.
“My memoranda book. My memory is so bad that
I have to keep memorandas of everything,” explained
the Miff-Piff.
“Memorandas of everything,” repeated the chorus
softly.
“One thing,” thought Rosemary, “I have frightened
them, and they will not bully it while I am here.”
“And,” went on the Miff-Piff, sobbing afresh, “I
had my rhyme so beautifully written in red ink.”


“In red ink,” echoed the chorus, almost in a whisper.
“Surely coaxed Rosemary, “it must be somewhere
about. Try to remember where you lost it.”
“1 lost it in the wood,” wailed the Miff-Piff, “I was
running home to tea and I lost them all—my memoranda
book, my temper, my breath and a great deal of time.”
“Well . . ~” began Rosemary, but the Miff-Piff hur-
ried on. “I found my temper and my breath hanging
on a nettle bush—”
“On a nettle bush,” repeated the chorus faintly.
“Perhaps . . ~” Rosemary began again, but the
Miff-Piff was not listening.
“1 have not found my memoranda book or the time
yet. It does not matter about the time I have plenty
more, but I cannot remember my rhyme, and it was so
beautifully written in red ink.” The Miff-Piff shook its
head sadly.
“Why is it written in red ink,” asked Rosemary.
“Because it had to be re(a)d so often,” sighed the
Miff-Piff. “Red ink to remind me it had to be read.”
“It had to be read,” murmured the chorus.
“That is a very good idea,” thought Rosemary to
herself. “Use red ink to remind one that a thing must
be read.”
“If 1 could only remember the day before yester-
day’s tea-time,” the Miff-Piff began again.
“What did you have for tea,” asked Rosemary,
hoping to cheer it up a little by changing the subject.
“The same as usual,” it answered, staring wistfully
at her with its large dreamy eyes.
“Same as usual,” the chorus repeated, now so faint
that it could scarcely be heard at all.
“But what do you usually have?” asked Rosemary.
“Porridge and potash mostly,” said the Miff-Piff.
“Porridge and potash,” came the echo.
“What a funny meal,” said Rosemary. “I have
never heard of porridge and potash.”
“It is a very nice meal,” the Miff-Piff retorted in a
surprised tone, “Haven’t you ever tried it?”
“No,” said Rosemary. “I know what porridge is
like. Michael and John and I have a bowlfull every
morning, but we do not have potash.”
“Some do and some don’t,” sighed the Miff-Piff. “I
always have both because I can never prevent the ash


falling off the pot when I pour the porridge onto my
plate.”
‘‘When I pour the porridge onto my plate,” came
the echo of the chorus.
‘‘Oh! now 1 understand,” laughed Rosemary. “I
thought you meant something quite different.”
“I meant just what I said,” the Miff-Piff replied in
an offended tone. “I said porridge and pot-ash. It is a
very excellent meal 1 assure you.”
‘‘A very excellent meal I assure you,” sighed the
chorus.
‘‘What do you have when you do not have porridge
and potash?” Rosemary asked.
The Miff-Piff looked thoughtful. “Green soup
sometimes,” it said, “or perhaps a dish of mock mush-
room.”
“A dish of mock mushroom,” breathed the chorus.
“What is mock mushroom?” asked Rosemary.
“Anything,” the Miff-Piff replied, “Just anything
that is not real mushroom.”
“But why do you call it mock mushroom?” Rosemary
could not help asking. The Miff-Piff looked at her in
surprise.
“Don’t you see,” it said earnestly, “you can only
have mushrooms sometimes, but you can have mock
mushroom any time.”
“Mock mushroom any time,” whispered the chorus.
“I see,” said Rosemary, smiling at the earnest ex-
pression on the little animal’s face.
“If I could only remember my rhyme,” it began
again, “Tra, la, la, tee, dee, dee.”
“I know,” said Rosemary, suddenly thinking of a
good idea. “Let us ask the owl. It could make a new
verse for you, and you could write it in a new memor-
anda book.”
The Miff-Piff looked disappointed. “No, it wouldn’t
write me a new verse because I have already had one
you see. The owl only invents rhymes for people who
have never had one.”
“For people who have never had one,” sighed the
chorus.
“Well, perhaps some of the other animals can help
you,” suggested Rosemary, “Ask them if they can re-
member your rhyme.”


“You ask them,” said the MifF-PifF, solemnly.
Rosemary turned to the other animals, but they had
all begun chattering amongst themselves. A large rat
and another queer little animal seemed to be the centre
of attraction, while all the animals gathered around
them chattering excitedly.
“You shan’t,” the rat was saying.
“I shall,” retorted the other animal.
“You shan’t.”
“1 shall.”
“Shan’t.”
“Shall.”
“I challenge you to light,” shouted the rat angrily,
leaping in the air.
“I accept,” screamed the other animal. “Take your
choice, swords or pistols.”
“Oh, please, please,” Rosemary tried to push her
way in amongst the crowd of excited animals, but it was
impossible to make herself heard. The noise was deaf-
ening and everyone seemed to be enjoying the prospect
of a battle immensely.
“Does anyone know the Milf-Piff’s rhyme ?” shouted
Rosemary, but her voice was lost in the commotion, and
none of the animals took the slightest heed of her.
“I prefer bare fists,” shouted the rat, “but make
it swords or pistols, or what you will. It is all the same
to me.”
“Oh dear,” said Rosemary, running back to the Miff-
Piff. “I do wish the owl would wake up. Perhaps it
could make them stop.” The Milf-Piff shook its head
doubtfully.
“Bare fists it shall be,” called the rat’s opponent
fiercely, and instantly the two animals leapt at one an-
other and began to struggle furiously. Round and round
they went, and over and over, while all the animals
cheered loudly and pushed each other excitedly.
“It looks as if they will all be in the fight in a
minute,” said Rosemary, and she was right, for the next
instant all the animals were fighting. There did not
seem to be any sides, they just fought and bit and
scratched the one nearest to them. Closer and closer
they pushed until they were a gigantic ball of fur and
feathers rolling over and over.
“Whatever shall we do?” cried Rosemary, pulling
the MifF-PifF out of harm’s way, behind a tree as the


whirling bundle of animals came rolling towards them.
“We must try to stop them somehow or they will all be
killed.”
“Here comes Mother Goose,” shouted someone in
the midst of the uproar.
“Here comes Mother Goose,” shouted everyone, and
in an instant the animals had scattered in all directions
and disappeared from sight. Even the Miff-Piff, and the
rat and its opponent had vanished, and Rosemary found
herself all alone. Overhead she saw the shadowy shape
of a large gander with an old lady perched upon it, go
hurtling through the air. Everything was quiet again
and Rosemary felt lonely and disappointed because the
animals, and the little Miff-Piff had gone.
“Poor little chap,” she thought. “I do hope he will
find his memoranda book or remember his rhyme some-
how. He seems so dreadfully unhappy about having
lost it.”
Rosemary looked up at the owl who was still sitting
huddled in the leaves fast asleep as though nothing had
happened.
“There is no use trying to talk with you,” thought
Rosemary. “I am sure you could not make me a rhyme
if I did wait until night-time for you to see me—
It hasn’t fur and it hasn’t feather,
And it is not an it.
It must have either scales or leather
Or . . ~” she repeated the owd’s rhyme softly
to herself.
“Perhaps it is a pity that I offended it before it had
time to finish. It might have thought of something bet-
ter later. Still it is no use wasting any more time here,”
she thought.
“Goodbye,” she called to the sleeping owl as she
started off down the path, but the bird took no notice. It
had forgotten all about Rosemary and the rhyme.


Mistress
Mary
Quite
Contrary
WISH someone would come along/’ said
Rosemary aloud, and as she spoke she saw a
tiny cottage with a small garden. It had a
quaint gabled roof of shaded green tiles, and
a tiny green picket fence around the garden.
“How pretty!” cried Rosemary. “But dear me, how
very queer, all the flowers seem to be growing upside
down.” And so they were, with their blooms close to
the ground and their roots waving in the air. “However
do they grow?” said Rosemary aloud, going closer and
looking over the little green fence.
“Oh, we grow all right,” said a large chrysanthe-
mum. “It is quite easy when one is used to it. Any-
thing can be done with sufficient practice you know.”
“Yes,” Rosemary began doubtfully, “But surely . .
“We are not sure of anything,” murmured the
chrysanthemum. “Sometimes we are expected to grow
up this way, and sometimes we have to change and grow
up the other way.”
“It must be a very tiring life,” said Rosemary sym-
pathetically. “Do you have to change often?”
“It is no more tiring than anything else,” the
chrysanthemum retorted in a haughty voice. “Every-
one’s life is full of ups and clowns, even in the best regu-
lated families.
“But why do you have to change?” Rosemary asked.
“Most flowers grow the same way all the time.”
“This cottage belongs to Mistress Mary Quite Con-
trary?” the chrysanthemum explained. “She is never


satisfied witli anything for long, and is always changing
her mind about this and that, or how we should or
should not grow.”
“How dreadfully silly,” said Rosemary.
“I should think it is,” spoke up a tall hollyhock. “1
think we should send a protest to Mother Goose.”
“Be quiet,” snapped the chrysanthemum. “You talk
a great deal too much of things you know nothing about.”
“Nobody is allowed to say anything here only you,”
replied the hollyhock sulkily. “Anyway the snapdra-
gons agree with me don't you?” It turned to a bed of
tall plants behind it, but the chrysanthemum ignored the
remark. “For instance,” it went on, “we are all mauve
to-day because she demanded yesterday that we should
be mauve, but she will be along at any minute and order
us to turn blue or yellow or some other colour. You see
if she doesn't.”
“How stupid,” said Rosemary. “Fancy not liking
flowers the same colour two days running.”
“Two days what?” asked the chrysanthemum.
“Two days running,” repeated Rosemary.
“Did you hear that? Two days running,” echoed the
chrysanthemum, bending over and tapping another
plant, and all the flowers laughed shrilly. “Whoever
heard such nonsense. Days running indeed!” it finished
scornfully.
“Well they go by at any rate,” argued Rosemary,
quite annoyed at the flower’s sarcastic tone.
“Of course they do not,” the chrysanthemum argued
back. “Today stands quite still until tomorrow, and then
it is put aside with all the other yesterdays, and to-
morrow tries its hand at being to-day. But to-morrrow
never does any better than yesterday did, so it is not al-
lowed to stay either.”
“That is just what is wrong with all the world,”
piped up a rose bush. “Everyone is always hurrying
through to-day because they think tomorrow will hold
something better for them.”
“And it never does,” agreed the chrysanthemum.
“If only people would be content with the present they
would be a great deal happier.”
“There is no such thing as the present,” a daisy bush
began, but just at that minute Mistress Mary herself
came tripping out of the cottage.


“Dear, dear!” she said crossly with a frown. “How
ugly all the flowers look to-day, and what a dreadful
colour.”
“I told you so,” whispered the chrysanthemum.
“Why, who are you?” Mistress Mary asked, noticing
Rosemary. “Won’t you come in?”
“Thank you,” said Rosemary. She tried to lift the
latch of the gate but it seemed very stiff and heavy. As
she tugged it suddenly opened with a loud snap and the
gate flew open so quickly that it nearly knocked her
over.
“Everything is contrary here,” whispered the chrys-
anthemum. “So you had better take care.”
“What are you whispering about?” snapped Mis-
tress Mary. “Isn’t it shameful enough to be such a hide-
ous colour without whispering in that ill-bred manner.”
The flowers were silent. “Hold your heads up properly
and see whether that will give you better complexions,”
Mistress Mary scolded.
The flowers began to bend and jerk in a most
peculiar way, and in an instant the whole garden was
growing the right way up.
“Why are you mauve when pink is a much prettier
colour? 1 have never seen such a stupid lot of flowers,”
she went on.
“I told you so,” whispered the chrysanthemum, as
its colour slowly changed to pink.
“All of you,” demanded Mistress Mary turning
sharply on the hollyhock and the bed of snapdragons who
still remained mauve.
“We are tired . . ~” began the hollyhock.
“I said all of you,” said Mistress Mary angrily,
taking a step towards the disobedient flowers. “If you
don’t I shall pull you up and throw you over the fence.”
“Oh,” sighed the flowers, and gradually they too
changed to a deep shade of pink.
“That is better,” said Mistress Mary, and turning
her back on the flowers she spoke to Rosemary. “What
do you think of my garden?” she asked.
“1 think it is very pretty,” said Rosemary, “but it
is a wonder to me that anything grows at all.”
“Oh indeed !” snapped Mistress Mary.
“When the plants are first up one way and then up
the other, and always having to change their colour . ”


Rosemary stopped as she saw Mistress Mary frowning at
her.
“Well?” said the cross little girl.
“At home,” Rosemary went on. “If we pulled a
flower up by the roots it would die, but of course our
plants are different from yours; they do not move or
talk,”
“They must be already dead then,” said Mistress
Mary.
“Oh, no. They are not dead until they are taken
out of the ground,” Rosemary said with a sigh, thinking,
“Dear me, how all these people and flowers do argue.”
“They must be dead,” persisted Mistress Mary.
“Things that cannot move or talk cannot possibly be
alive.”
“I do not know . . ~” Rosemary began.
“Of course you do not know,” interrupted Mistress
Mary. “So why are you arguing?”
Rosemary felt hurt, but thought she would try some-
thing else.
“How are your columbines?” she asked timidly.
“How did you know that I had any Columbines?”
asked Mistress Mary suspiciously, “have you been look-
ing over my back fence?”
“Certainly not?” cried Rosemary indignantly. It
tells about them in my nursery rhyme book. That is how
I know.”
Mistress Mary looked doubtful. “What does it
say?” she asked.
“Mistress Mary quite contrary,
How does your garden grow?
With cockle shells and silver bells,
And columbines all in a row?” Rosemary re-
peated slowly.
“If you would like to see them, you had better come
this way,” said Mistress Mary, and without waiting for
Rosemary to answer she turned and hurried down the
path, then disappeared in at the little front door.
“Thank you,” said Rosemary, rather startled at the
sudden way the little girl had disappeared. She walked
to where the door was, but on going to open it, found to
her surprise, that she was facing a blank wall.
“How stupid of me,” she said, seeing the door a
little further along, “I was sure it was here.”


She walked up to the door again, but the same
thing happened, and she found herself staring at a blank
wall. The door was now back where she had tried the
first time. Rosemary stood and looked at the house for
some seconds before trying again.
“If you don’t at first succeed . . began the chrys-
anthemum.
“Try, try, try, again!” sang all the flowers in
chorus.
“Thank you for your advice,” said Rosemary, and
thought how silly it would be to lose her temper in front
of a lot of flowers. Keeping her eyes fixed on the door
she walked slowly towards it. Nearer and nearer until
she was able to put her foot on the little door mat.
“Inside,” she cried, jumping quickly over the door-
step, but to her surprise she found that she was not in-
side at all. The house and the garden had vanished, and
she was under the tree in the wood again. The owl was
still fast asleep.
“Excuse me, but do you happen to have found it?”
Rosemary was startled by a voice at her elbow. She
turned quickly and there was the Miff-Piff.
“Found what?” she asked.
“My memoranda book,” it said solemnly.
“Why no. lam afraid I have not been looking for
it,” said Rosemary. “I have been talking with the flow-
ers in Mistress Mary’s garden.”
“They wouldn’t know poor things. They are much
too busy trying to please Mistress Mary to know any-
thing about anybody else’s troubles,” sighed the Miff-
Piff.
“Perhaps now that the animals have gone and every-
thing is quiet you may be able to remember your rhyme.
How did it begin?
Tra, la, la,
Tee, dee, dee,
A cat and a cannibal went to sea.”
“No,” said the Miff-Piff sorrowfully, “I have been
thinking it over and that is mostly wrong. The cat and
the cannibal bit is anyway, and so is the ‘tee‘ and one of
the ‘dees’.”
“Well that certainly does not leave very much ” said
Rosemary thoughtfully. “That is only Tra, la la and
one dee left.” ’ ’


“1 am afraid so,” said the Miff-Piff shaking its head
gloomily. “If only 1 had my memoranda book,” it
groaned.
“A rhyme in the head is worth two that are read,”
said the owl, who had wakened up and was peering down
through the leaves at them.
“Could you help the Miff-Piff with its rhyme?” ask-
ed Rosemary, looking up at the large bird.
“Do you mean could I or would 1?” retorted the
owl.
“I mean would - - er - - well perhaps - -” Poor Rose-
mary was beginning to feel quite embarrassed with
everyone being so rude.
“No I neither could nor would at present,” said the
owl. “And I wish you would both go away and stop
chattering when I am trying to sleep.”
“I am very sorry,” said Rosemary. “I did not know
that we were disturbing you. Are you going this way?”
she asked the Miff-Piff, and pointed along the path.
“I will come a little way,” it said as it slipped its
little paw in her hand and skipped along at her side.
“I suppose the owl is right, a rhyme in the head is worth
two that are read,” it said plaintively. “If only I could
remember.”
“Perhaps if you come back later I may be able to
help you then,” called the owl. Its voice sounded
apologetic although very dreamy. “Rhymes mostly,
rhymes you know, I invent rhymes for people who have-
n’t one,” its voice droned.
“Thank you,” called Rosemary as she and the little
animal walked slowly down the path.
“How funny to be walking hand-in-hand with a
Miff-Piff,” she thought. “Michael and John will never
believe me when I tell them, because I am sure they have
never even heard of one.” She looked down but to her
surprise the little animal had disappeared. Rosemary felt
very puzzled.
“What a strange way things have of disappearing
here, first the cottage, and now the Miff-Piff,” she said
aloud.
“That is because you are in the Magic Circle,” said
a tree, disappearing as it spoke.
“Well I do not want to disappear into thin air,” said
Rosemary, and she began to run as fast as she could, hop-


MISTRESS MARY QUITE CONTRARY
ing to get out of the Magic Circle, but to her surprise she
stayed in exactly the same place.
“Oh dear,” she said, stopping suddenly. “What-
ever had I better do? It certainly does not seem any
use to run, perhaps if I tried walking backwards.”
“It would be much better if you did nothing at all,”
said a voice that seemed to come from nowhere. “Close
your eyes and count one, two, three.”
“One, two, three,” repeated Rosemary, hurriedly
closing her eyes. When she opened them again she
found that she was in a different part of the wood.
“Thank goodness,” she exclaimed aloud, feeling very
much relieved. “At any minute 1 might have disap-
peared altogether like the Miff-Piff, the tree and the cot-
tage. I wonder what has become of them all?”


Simple Simon
HAT a long way I have come to-day,” thought
Rosemary, “And what a lot of strange people
and animals I have met. 1 wonder what the
rat and that other stupid animal were quarrel-
ling about so angrily. Swords or pistols in-
deed/' She laughed aloud. “Who would have thought
that a rat could fight with a sword, even if it had one.
and I don’t suppose it had.”
She was so deep in thought about the incidents of
the day, that she did not notice a man and a boy, who
were talking together on the path until she was almost
upon them. The man was carrying a large tray of pies,
which were piping hot and smelt delicious. Rosemary
guessed that it was Simple Simon and the Pieman even
before she heard the man say, “Show me first your
penny.”
Simple Simon looked gloomily at the ground and
choked back a sob of disappointment. “Indeed I have
not any,” he said.
“Poor Simon,” thought Rosemary, and without
thinking felt in her pocket for a penny. To her surprise
she found one. Things were happening so strangely that
she did not stop to wonder how it had come there, but
ran up just as the man had turned to go.
“Mr. Pieman, please,” she called. He turned back
again.


“1 have a penny,” she said and, remembering it was
Rhymeland, she handed him the coin and said with a
smile, “Let me taste your ware.”
The Pieman pocketed the penny, and picking out
the largest pie from his tray, handed it to her and turned
and trudged away.
“There,” said Rosemary, offering the pie to Simple
Simon, who was a tall awkward boy with long yellow
hair, that hung nearly down to his shoulders. His clothes
were a great deal too large for him and very shabby and
uncared for, while his socks (one blue and one yellow)
wrinkled over his boot tops. He stared opened-mouthed
at Rosemary, then shook his head stupidly.
“1 have no penny,” he said.
“1 have paid for it,” said Rosemary.
Simon stared blankly. “Then it is yours,” he said
at last.
“But 1 bought it for you,” Rosemary coaxed going
nearer. “1 am not hungry, and besides, Mother does not
like me to eat between meals.”
“Why not?” asked Simple Simon.
“Because it is not good for me,” said Rosemary.
“Why isn’t it good for you?” Simon persisted
“Oh, Ido not know,” Rosemary said. “Here please
do take this pie, it is burning my fingers.”
She thrust the pie into Simple Simon’s hand. He
looked as though unable to realise his good fortune. “I
have never had a penny before,” he said, as he lifted the
top piece of pastry and peered into the pie.
“Are you going to the Fair?” Rosemary asked.
“Yes. How did you know that?” said Simon, taking
such a large bite of pie that the gravy trickled down his
shabby coat, and he had to push the pieces of crust into
his mouth with his thumb.
“It says so in my nursery rhyme book. You were
going to the Fail* when you met the pieman.”
Simon looked surprised, but he could not answer
because his mouth was full of pio.
“1 should like to go to the Fair too,” Rosemary said.
“Will you let me walk along with you?”
Simple Simon nodded and pointed along the path.
“This way,” he mumbled in a voice thick with gravy.
“Have we very far to go?” asked Rosemary present-
ly.


“Not so far, but far enough,” said Simon vaguely,
and then, as though calculating the distance, he mur-
mured to himself:
“Not very far and not very near.
When you’re there, you can’t be here
When you’re here, you can’t be there.
You can’t be here and at the Fair.”
“How long will it take to get there?” asked Rose
mary.
Simon emptied his mouth with a gulp. “Just the
same length of time as between when we are here and
when we get to the Fair,” he explained.
“Oh, I know that,” replied Rosemary, trying hard
not to lose her patience. “But how long will that be ?”
“You will have to wait and see,” said Simon, look-
ing very worried. “I could not work it out. I never was
good at working things out. That is why they call me
Simple Simon.”
“Well don’t cry about it,” said Rosemary hastily,
as she saw a large tear trickle down his cheek on to his
coat where it mixed with the gravy he had spilt. “It
does not really matter. I like walking and I am not in
any hurry.”
They walked along in silence until Simon finished
the pie. Rosemary was glad when at last it was all
eaten, and the boy had finished licking each of his
fingers in turn, and had picked all the pieces of crust
and dried gravy from his coat. At times he made her
feel ashamed because he ate so badly, and sometimes
he bit into the pie so vigorously that the gravy flew out
at both ends. Once some of it splashed into her hair.
Rosemary knew the trees were whispering about them
because she had caught the words: “Ordinary, a very
ordinary boy.”
“Dear me,” she thought. “Mother says that people
are always judged by their friends.” Simon, however,
did not seem the least affected by the comments around
him, and did not even seem to notice them.
“In your nursery rhyme book . . ~” he began, but
was interrupted by footsteps hurrying close behind them.
“Who can this be coming?” Rosemary asked as a
fat little man, muttering and mopping his face as he ran,
came charging up. “Cats’ whiskers and puppy dogs'
tails, I know I have caught my death of cold,” he
wheezed.


“1 do hope not,” said Rosemary sympathetically,
wondering who the little man could be. He looked al-
most fat enough for Humpty Dumpty.
“Eh! What was that my dear?” he asked, gazing at
Rosemary over his spectacles as though she were some
kind of creature quite new to him. “Did I hear you men-
tion smallpox?”
“No, no . . ~” Rosemary began, but the little man
went on muttering, “Smallpox. Goodness gracious. Wait
one minute and I will take your pulse my dear.”
He set down the small bag he was carrying and
began to rummage round in it feverishly.
“Cats' whiskers and puppy dogs' tails,” he grum-
bled. “I have lost it. Everything was lost and all jum-
bled up when I fell in that beastly puddle.”
I know who he is,” whispered Rosemary to
Simple Simon. “It goes like this in the rhyme book:
Dr. Foster went to Gloster
In a shower of rain.
He stepped in a puddle up to his middle.
And never went there again.”
“I have it, I have it,” shouted the little man, as he
produced a large gold watch from his bag, and waved it
excitedly in the air. “Now come, your pulse my dear.”
“That is not my pulse . You are feeling my elbow,”
said Rosemary indignantly. “Besides, 1 haven't smallpox
or anything else. lam quite well.”
“It does not matter. Pulses and elbows they are all
the same,” snorted the little man, shaking his watch
vigorously and putting it carefully back into his bag.
“But 1 am quite well,” persisted Rosemary. “I do
not need my pulse taken.”
“Oh you are sure to have a symptom of something
somewhere,” said Dr. Foster. “I do not expect to find it,
but whether or no it will cost you 10/6.”
“I am afraid 1 have not 10/6 to give you,” said
Rosemary, thinking to herself that she had never met
such a stupid little man.
“You may have it or you may not. However we will
operate the day after to-morrow,” said Dr. Foster.
“Indeed you will do no such thing,” Rosemary re-
torted.
“All right my dear, all right, don't get huffy about
it,” said the little man, and he began to sneeze violently.


“Cats' whiskers and puppy dogs’ tails,” he continued.
“I know 1 have caught my death of cold, falling into that
beastly puddle.”
“You seem to be quite dry again now,” said Rose-
mary encouragingly. “But perhaps you had better take
something for a cold. Have you anything in that bag of
yours?”
“Ah yes. It is very good of you to remind me,”
said the little Doctor. “Now let me see what it is that I
have to take:
It begins with pills at one,
At two o’clock some more.
Pills at three if they aren’t all done,
And pills again at four.
That makes it pills now, doesn’t it?” he said.
Opening his bag he took out a large bottle of purple
pills. He put six pills slowly into his mouth, one after
the other, and then, seeing Simon’s mouth wide open,
he popped one in.
“It won’t do you any good, but it can’t do you any
harm,”’ he muttered. Simon was so surprised that the
pill had slipped down before he realised. He gulped
and looked woodenly at the little doctor.
“Here, I don’t want any of your purple pills,” he
said.
“It is all right my boy. It won’t cost you anything,”
the little man retorted. “And where was I going next?”
“Simon is showing me the way to the Fair,” said
Rosemary. “Perhaps you are going there too.”
“Ah! yes, of course,” exclaimed the doctor. “It is
good of you to remind me. The Fair. Yes, yes, that is
just where lam going. I will go along with you if you
will allow me, but don’t forget to remind me:
Pills at three if they aren’t all done,
And pills again at four.”
Rosemary walked along with her new found com-
panions. The fat little doctor trotted along on one side,
while Simple Simon lounged clumsily on the other. She
began to wonder again about the Miff-Piff, and what had
become of the little animal.
“Have you ever seen a Miff-Piff?” she asked.
“A Miff-Piff,” repeated the doctor. “Now that you
come to mention it ...”


Just at that moment a rabbit came scurrying along.
The path was very narrow and without even saying ‘ex-
cuse me’ it darted between the little man’s legs, upset-
ting him so that he sat down heavily.
“Cats’ whiskers and puppy dogs’ tails,” he gasped.
“What is the world coming to? There was never any-
thing forward or pushing in my young days.”
“Oh dear!” said Rosemary picking up his spectacles,
relieved to find they were not broken. “I hope you are
not hurt.”
The doctor did not answer. He tried to scramble to
his feet, but was so fat he could hardly sit up.
“Come,” said Rosemary, “let me help you to the
bank here and you can rest for a minute or two. Per-
haps a pill might make you feel better.”
Simon seized the little man under the arms, but he
only crumpled up in the middle.
“Tut, tut, give me time, you stupid boy,” spluttered
the doctor, as he tried to put his spectacles on upside
down.
“This way,” said Rosemary, re-adjusting them for
him. “Now then, one, two, three,” she counted, pulling
at the little doctor’s hands while Simon pushed from be-
hind.
“I wonder how ever he managed to get out of the
puddle, without anyone to help him,” thought Rosemary.
“It must have been very slippery. No wonder he is so
short tempered now.”
“There,” she said when they were safely sitting on
the grassy bank . “After a rest you will be all right
again.”
Doctor Foster took out his bottle of purple pills, and
after studying the directions on the outside of the bottle
for some seconds in silence, he took six pills. Simon was
sitting staring vacantly in front of him, with his mouth
wide open as usual.
“It won’t do you any good, but it can’t do you any
harm,” muttered the little doctor, popping a pill into
the boy’s large mouth.
“I wonder how much further it is to the Fair,” said
Rosemary quickly, as Simon began to splutter angrily,
and wave his clenched fist at the doctor.
“Not very far and not very near,” he drawled, in-
stantly becoming good tempered again.


“Well come along,” said Rosemary. “I think per-
haps we had better go now if Doctor Foster is feeling
quite well again.”
“Quite, never better, never better,” said the little
man jumping quickly to his feet, and they set off once
more.
“Not very far, and not very near . . .’’Simon began
again presently, but he did not have time to finish his
rhyme. The path took a sudden twist to the right, and
turned so sharply that, going straight on, Simon bumped
his head with a terrific whack, against a tree, before
he had time to stop. The small trees tittered, and the
rivulet rollicking beside them, began to sing :
“When 1 was a little boy
I had but little wit.
It is sometime ago
And I’ve no more of it.
Nor ever ever shall
Until that I die,
For the longer I live
The more fool am I.”
“Don’t be personal,” said the little doctor, turning
round sharply.
“Well if he had looked where he was going . . .” be-
gan the tree, rubbing itself.
“If ‘ifs’ and ‘ans’
Were pots and pans,
There’d be no work for tinkers,” said the doctor,
who was growing angry.
“Come, come,” said Rosemary, as she looked from
one to the other, and put her arm around Simon, who was
rubbing the tears from his eyes with large dirty
knuckles. “What is the use of quarrelling about it?
Simon could not help bumping into the tree. It was the
path’s fault for twisting so quickly.”
“1 beg your pardon,” drawled an earthy voice from
beneath their feet. “Surely I can twist occasionally if I
wish. It gets most monotonous going straight on for-
ever.”
“Dear, dear,” thought Rosemary. “Now 1 have
offended the pathway. How careful one has to be in
Rhymeland. Everything seems to have ears, and every-
body is so short-tempered.”


*‘l beg* your pardon,” she said humbly. “I did not
mean to be rude, and we are very grateful to you, for
showing us the way to the fair.”
“Oh! indeed,” snapped the path, shrugging so that
the little doctor nearly lost his balance again. “For
two pins I would not show you the way now.”
“Of course you will,” retorted the little man, hold-
ing tightly to Rosemary’s shoulder to steady himself.
“Come along at once.”
“I will do, ,no such thing.” The path sounded very
uppish.
“Look here, are you going to be reasonable, or must
I report you to Mother Goose?” The little doctor was
very red and angry.
At the mention of Mother Goose the path changed
altogether. “Come along, I will show you,” it whis-
pered nervously.
“And mind that you look where you are going,
called the tree after Simon.
“Or go where he is looking,” chuckled the rivulet,
and all the small trees tittered again.
Fortunately doctor Foster did not hear these re-
marks, and the quarrel ended.


| PtfftH j
I HWt. ■ |
r\o
At The Fair
OODBYE,” the stream called suddenly, taking
a sharp twist and disappearing among the
trees. “I will see you at the fair.”
“Are you sure you are taking us in the right
direction, Path?” asked Dr. Foster suspicious-
ly- “We don’t want any more of your practical jokes.”
“Hush!” whispered Rosemary. “Please do not of-
fend it again or we will never get there.”
“Tut, tut,” muttered the little man, putting his feet
down heavily, as though he expected the path to shrug
again. “One simply must be firm these days. There is
so much bluff, and absolutely no respect for age or
education.”
“Listen,” said Rosemary. “I can hear music.”
“Yes,” said Simple Simon, “that is the Fair.”
“The Fair!” gasped Rosemary. “Are we really there
at last? Oh do let us hurry!”
They had come to a very steep hill with a sign post
at the bottom which read: “PIPPIN HILL.” A voice
somewhere quite close began to sing:
“As 1 went up Pippin Hill,
Pippin Hill was dirty.
There I met a pretty miss,
And she dropt me a curtsey.”
“The Fair! Come along,” shouted Simon excitedly,
and he took Dr. Foster’s arm and hurried him along al-
most at a run.


“You stupid boy! you stupid boy!” gasped the little
man as he ran, but Simon took no notice, and hurried
him on until they came to the gate, where a weary look-
ing man was sitting with a large pair of ticket clippers in
his hand.
Rosemary was surprised to see that he was not clip-
ping tickets. In fact there did not seem to be any
tickets, but he clipped each person’s sleeve or collar as
they went through the gateway.
“Cats’ whiskers and puppy dogs’ tails, I will not
have my second best suit cut into holes,” said the little
doctor indignantly, but the ticket man took no notice, and
quickly clipped his sleeve as Simon hurried him through
the entrance.
Inside the Fair there was a confusion of noise; rat-
tling, thumping, bumping and everywhere singing and
strange music. A crowd of children raced past shout-
ing and laughing:
“How many miles to Babylon?
Three score miles and ten.
Can 1 get there by candlelight?
Yes and back again.”
One little girl was a great deal slower than the
others, and was left far behind, but she did not seem to
mind and called happily to a little lamb, as white as
snow, that was frolicing beside her.
“See-saw, Margery Daw,” sang a little girl and boy
as they flew up and down on a large see-saw:
“Little Jacky shall have a new master.
Little Jacky shall have but a penny a day,
Because he can’t work any faster.”
Some people strolled about amongst the trees and
others sat in groups on the grass. There were stalls
everywhere., and people shouting their wares.
“Giddy girls and noisy boys
Come and buy my painted toys.
Medals made of gingerbread
And penny horses white and red,” a voice
shouted so loudly in Rosemary’s ear that she jumped.
“Dear me,” she said, putting her fingers over her
ears, and looking round at a man whose mouth was open
so wide that it looked as though it would never close


again. “Do you think you should shout like that. You
will be hoarse to-morrow.”
The man closed his mouth with a loud snap. “Now
you are being impudent,” he said, looking hard at Rose-
mary. “1 shouted like this yesterday, and 1 shouted like
this the day before. In fact 1 have shouted like this ever
since I can remember, and I am not a horse yet.”
“1 did not say you would be a horse,” corrected
Rosemary. “I said that your voice would be a little
hoarse.”
“Well, how can my voice be a little horse? What
rot you are talking.”
“No, no,” Rosemary began, but the man was shout-
ing again:
“Medals made of gingerbread
And penny horses white and red.”
“What good are medals made of gingerbread ?”
asked Rosemary. “They would not last.”
“Who wants them to,” snapped the man. “What is
the use of selling anything that lasts? No one would
want more than one.”
“There is something in that,” said Rosemary. “Take
shoes for instance. If they never wore out . . .”
“Well! demanded the man.
“But even if they did not wear out we should grow
out of them,” said Rosemary.
“Of course you would grow out of them,” said the
man. “You wouldn’t expect to grow into them would
you? Who ever heard of anyone growing into their
shoes? It would be most uncomfortable.”
“Yes it would,” Rosemary agreed. “But I meant
that people’s feet would grow too large,” Rosemary ex-
plained.
“That would be their own fault,” said the man cross-
ly.
“No it would not,” Rosemary could not help contra-
dicting. “People cannot help their feet growing.”
“There is absolutely no excuse for anyone getting
too big for their boots,” retorted the man, and he began
shouting again:
“Medals made of gingerbread,
And penny horses white and red.” His mouth
opened wider than ever.


“Come along and see the battle,” said Simon. He was
staring at a large notice board outside a huge striped
tent.
THE LION WILL FIGHT THE UNICORN
AT 3 O’CLOCK.
“Oh! no. Please let us go away from here,” said
Rosemary with a shudder.. “Where is Dr. Foster?”
She looked about for the little man. A band of
children, dancing in a circle were whirling him around,
first one way and then the other, singing as they did so:
“Bring the hoop and bring the ball.
Come with happy faces all.
Let us make a merry ring,
Talk and laugh and dance and sing.”
The little man did not look at all happy as they
twisted him round and when he saw Rosemary he strug-
gled free, and came panting to her side.
“Cats’ whiskers and puppy dogs’ tails,” he gasped,
taking out his bottle of purple pills. He took six and
popped one into Simon’s open mouth. “It won’t do you
any good, but it can’t do you any harm,” he muttered.
“Let us get away from here,” he added, catching sight
of the notice. “The farther away from lions the better,
and unicorns are not the sort of creatures to be trifled
with.”
Simon looked disappointed.
“Come along, my dear,” said the doctor, taking
Rosemary by the arm and leading her away. Simon
turned grudgingly after them. “Well let us find the
house that Jack built,” he suggested.
“Oh! yes,” cried Rosemary. “1 would love to see it.”
Presently they came to an old lady who was shout-
ing:
“Hot-cross buns!
Hot-cross buns!
One a penny, two a penny,
Hot-cross buns!”
“What beautiful buns,” remarked Rosemary by way
of conversation.
“Beautiful!” shrieked the old lady. “Beautiful!
Just look at them. Did you ever see anything hotter or
crosser than my buns? They fought in the oven, and
they have fought ever since, because each one says that
the others have more currants than it has.”


“Really/’ said Rosemary sympathetically. “The)
look calm enough now.”
“Never go by appearances,” sighed the old lady,
“They are busy counting their currants at present.”
“Yes, indeed,” spoke up a doughy voice from the
end of the stall. “All I can find is five. Five indeed!”
It laughed crossly. “Can you imagine anything more
degrading than only five currants. Why my ancestor
Alexander Bun, prepared for his Majesty King Louis XIV.
of France, boasted of no less than thirty-nine and two-
third currants, and my great aunt Angelina Bun is re-
puted to have had ninety-four. Five currants indeed!”
it ended with an exclamation of disgust.
“Excuse me. Have you seen my sheep anywhere
about?” interrupted a little girl. She was dressed in a
blue and white muslin frock, and bonnet. In her hand
she carried a large crook.
“Why it is 80-Peep,” said Rosemary.
80-Peep curtsied prettily. “Yes,” she said, “And I
have lost my sheep. I do wish I could find them, they
will be so cold and hungry if they wander about all
night.”
“I would not worry about them if I were you,” said
the hot-cross bun woman, “A sheep is not as stupid as it
is made out to be.”
“Quite so,” agreed the little doctor. “They always
say two heads are better than one, even if they are only
sheep’s heads.”
“Boy Blue promised to help me find them,” said
80-Peep. “But he is under the hay-rick fast asleep.”
“Why don’t you wake him up?” Rosemary sug-
gested.
“No,” said 80-Peep wistfully. He is such a cry baby.
He always cries when I wake him.”
“Listen,” said Rosemary. “I can hear a horn blow-
ing now; perhaps it is Boy Blue.”
80-Peep listened. “Yes,” she said, as the horn
sounded again in the distance. “Boy Blue is awake, and
he will help me find my sheep. Goodbye,” she called as
she ran off.
“Why, here is the frog who would a-wooing go,”
said Rosemary. The frog, who had passed when she was


talking to the tree, came and leaned on the bun woman’s
stall. He was still dressed in a suit of green satin and
wearing an opera hat.
“Hot-cross buns,” he said with a sniff. “I never did
like them.”
“Nobody wants you to like them,” said the stall
woman tartly. “That leaves all the more for those who
do.”
“Do you like them?” asked the frog, turning sud-
denly to Rosemary.
“Yes,” she answered, rather surprised at the sudden-
ness of the question. “I like them very much.”
The frog stared at her in astonishment. “There is
no accounting for tastes,” it said. “Dear, dear,” it went
on as it looked at a large watch it had taken from its
pocket. “I shall be late at Mousey Hall.”
Rosemary did not make any reply. She felt that
the frog would only answer rudely again if she did.
“They have asked me to sing them a song you
know,” it said politely when it found no one was taking
any notice of its remark or the watch it looked at proud-
ly.
“Oh,” said Rosemary, who felt she must answer this
time as the frog put its watch away and looked straight
at her. “Do you like singing?”
“Yes,” it said, shrugging its shoulders off-handedly,
“but they have asked me to sing something that is not
very long and I do not like short songs.”
“They are much better to listen to,” said Dr. Foster
who had been silently inspecting the hot-cross buns.
“Oh well there is no accounting for tastes as I
said before,” sneered the frog, “With a rowley, powley,
gammon and spinach. Heigh-ho!” and away it went.
“Look,” said Rosemary, “What is that large place
over there amongst the trees? Is it the house that Jack
built?”
“Why no,” said Dr. Forster, “That is the palace.”
“A real palace!” exclaimed Rosemary. “Whose
palace?”
“Old King Cole’s palace,” said Simon. “Come along.
Let us go and see the king.”


“Will we really be able to go inside the palace and
see the king?” asked Rosemary, jumping about and
clapping her hands.
“Come along,” said the little doctor, and the next
minute, without quite knowing how it happened, Rose-
mary found they were all standing at the palace en-
trance.


I
*»! I * 45
Cole’s
Feast
ING COLE'S palace was very large. Crowds of
people and animals jostled and pushed their
way past the page boy who shouted: “No ad-
mittance. Strictly no admittance without
special written invitations."
“Cats' whiskers and puppy dogs' tails, we must be
allowed in," said the little doctor. “I have to take the
king’s pulse the day after tomorrow or the next day."
The page boy took no notice of Dr. Foster. “No ad-
mittance. No admittance. Strictly no admittance with-
out special written invitations," he shouted.
“Who writes the invitations?" asked Rosemary
when most of the people and animals had pushed past,
and disappeared through the entrance.
“Anybody can." The page boy suddenly brought his
voice from a shout to a hoarse whisper. “It does not
matter to me who writes them as long as it is an invita-
tion," he said.
Rosemary was afraid that they were not going to be
allowed into the palace. “How silly," she said. “I sup-
pose most of the people have written their own invita-
tions."


“Of course they have. Who else do you think wrote
them?” said the page looking surprised.
“Well at any rate, we may write our own too,” said
Rosemary.
“Most certainly,” retorted the page. “You are only
wasting time, my time as well as your own, standing
there arguing.”
The little doctor had taken a visiting card from his
pocket, and was busily scribbling on it with a pen, which
Rosemary noticed, was not leaving any mark. “Invita-
tion for three,” he said, handing it to the page, who took
it, bowed ceremoniously three times, and then allowed
them to pass through the entrance.
Rosemary found that they were in a very large
room, and the long table right up the centre was crowd-
ed with people and animals. The noise was terrible,
and there was such a crowd that Rosemary quite lost
the little doctor and Simple Simon. She found herself
pushed into a seat, and squeezed in so tightly that she
had scarcely room to move her elbows, with a dog on
one side, and to her surprise, the Miff-Piff on the other.
She was very pleased to meet the little creature again.
“Have you found it?” she asked excitedly, meaning
of course, the memoranda book.
The Miff-Piff looked at her in melancholy silence.
There were knives and forks all round its plate, and as
the little creature began to eat Rosemary was greatly
surprised to see that it used a fresh knife and fork for
each mouthful, and then threw the used ones behind it,
where they made an untidy heap on the floor. When at
last all the knives and forks had been used the Miff-Piff
looked at the food which still remained on the plate,
glanced up to see if Rosemary was watching, and hastily
crammed the rest into its mouth with its tiny fingers,
licking them afterwards in a shamefaced way.
“No,” it said with a sigh, “I haven’t found it, and I
cannot remember my rhyme.”
Rosemary turned quickly on hearing a sharp voice
say to the dog: “Make a good meal, there is nothing in
the cupboard at home.”
“Why, it is Old Mother Hubbard and her dog,”
thought Rosemary.
The dog coughed nervously behind its paw. “Hush,
I have already three bones in my pocket,” it whispered,


and then, turning to Rosemary, asked politely: “May I
pass you something ?”
Rosemary glanced around, but as far as she could
make out there did not seem very much to eat. She felt
quite nervous among so many people, even though she
seemed to recognise a lot of them from the illustrations
in her nursery rhyme book, and the clatter made her
head whirl. She smiled at the dog and said: “I do wish
they would not make such a noise.”
“Oh! it will be worse later on,” the dog said . “The
longer the feast goes on the louder the noise will get.”
“But it is a wonder the king allows it,” said Rose-
mary .
“He enjoys it,” said Old Mother Hubbard’s dog.
“Look at him.”
The animal waved its paw towards the king and
Rosemary looked along the table. “He certainly seems
to be enjoying himself,” she thought, as she saw the old
king laughing, and talking and thumping the table. Be-
hind him stood the fiddlers three scraping on their
violins, beating time with their feet (as fiddlers do) and
singing loudly at the same time. In spite of their efforts
no one took the least notice of their music.
“Make room, make room,” suddenly shouted a voice,
and everyone instantly began to squeeze closer.
“Surely they will not let anyone else in,” said Rose-
mary, as the dog’s elbow dug uncomfortably into her
side.
“Oh! yes they will,” it said cheerfully. “You had
better begin to eat, or you will be pushed out altogether
before you have even started.”
“But why will 1 be pushed out?” asked Rosemary
in surprise.
“That is always done here,” said the dog, rubbing
its nose with its paw. “Every time anyone is squeezed
in someone has to drop off the end. We are nearly at
the end now.”
“But 1 have only just come?” Rosemary insisted.
“Wuff, wuff, wuff, wuff.” Rosemary looked
anxiously at the dog. She didn’t quite know whether the
animal was barking or laughing, but as it was showing
all its teeth, and looking very amused, she decided that
it was laughing. “It makes no difference when you
come, or when you go here,” it chuckled.


Rosemary looked around her. Simple Simon seemed
to have disappeared altogether, but the little doctor was
on the other side of the table looking very cross and un-
comfortable. He was just taking more purple pills when
she caught sight of him, and she could not help laugh-
ing as he popped one into the mouth of a large mouse
beside him. His voice was drowned by the dreadful
noise, but Rosemary guessed that he said: “It won't
do you any good, but it can't do you any harm."
Next to the mouse sat the fattest woman Rosemary
had ever seen squeezing against a tiny man, who was so
very thin that if it had not been for his long nose popping
out from time to time she would not have been sure that
there was someone there. They were both eating from
the same plate.
“Jack Spratt and his wife," confided the dog behind
its paw, following Rosemary's glance. “Thank goodness
they have left their cat at home. I hate that creature!"
“But surely they would not bring their cat to the
feast?" said Rosemary, quite forgetting that she was
talking to a dog. “Wouldn't the king object?"
“Oh no. Why should he? Even a cat may look at
a king," said the dog wisely.
“Make room, make room," shouted the voice and
everyone squeezed again.
The fiddlers stopped playing so abruptly that every-
one left off talking, and the sudden silence bewildered
Rosemary nearly as much as the noise had done. Old
King Cole looked along the table and rapped loudly
with a large spoon which he used in place of his sceptre.
The page had mislaid the royal one that morning.
“Rhymes," he roared. “First rhyme."
“First rhyme?" shouted everyone, and they all
pointed at the mouse seated next to Dr. Foster.
The mouse scrambled to its feet and began:
“As I went over the water . . ." but it was seized
with a fit of nervous coughing. It mopped its face with
a large green handkerchief and then started again.
“The water, the water
As I went over the water,
As I went over the water,
The water went over me.
The water . . ."


“Too much water,” roared Old King Cole, thumping
the table so that all the dishes rattled and jumped in
the air.
“Too much water,” shouted everyone.
“Next rhyme,” Old King Cole demanded, and a
chorus began:
“Hoddley, poddley, puddle and fogs,
Cats are to marry the poodle dogs;
Cats in blue jackets, and dogs in red hats;
What will become of the mice and the rats?”
“Make room, make room,” shouted the voice again,
as the chorus gradually died away.
“Do be careful what you are doing,” Rosemary said,
addressing a funny-looking creature with a head like a
fish, which squeezed along and put its elbow right in the
middle of the Miff-PifTs plate, and sent the contents fly-
ing in all directions, all over the table and into Rose-
mary’s lap.
“Do be careful,” echoed the Miff-Piff’s voice.
To Rosemary it was a wonder that her little friend
could speak at all, when it was wedged in so tightly. The
fish only looked at them with great curiosity, and seemed
as though thinking of some suitable remark, but the
king had begun thumping again on the table. “Next
rhyme,” he shouted.
“Next rhyme,” echoed the chorus of voices, and
everyone pointed to the fish. It rose up on the end of
its tail, bowed low to the king, and then began in a self-
assured manner:
“Fine feathers make line birds,
But oh! how birds must wish,
They were dressed in shining scales
As elegant as fish.”
It bowedllorw r again and sat down again amidst loud
clapping and cheering.
“Conceited cod,” snapped the dog. “One would not
mind if it forgot a line or two occasionally, but it never
does.”
“Hush ! it will hear you,” whispered Rosemary.
“Bah!” retorted the dog angrily.
The Miff-Piff was sitting with closed eyes murmur-
ing over and over to itself:
“Tra, la la.”


“Make room! make room!”, shouted the voice and
everyone pushed more than ever.
“Goodbye/’ called the dog as he and Old Mother
Hubbard went flying off the end of the seat. “It will be
your turn next so take care/’ Rosemary heard its voice
saying as they disappeared through a large door near-
by.
The noise was gradually growing louder again, and
the Miff-Piff began to cry. “They will ask me to say my
rhyme in a minute,’’ it sobbed.
“Cheer up,” Rosemary coaxed. “There is nothing
to cry about. No one else seems to be worrying about
anything or anybody.”
“I have to worry,” it wailed. “I can only remem-
ber Tra, la la, and one dee and one simply dare not re-
fuse when the king requests.”
“Good gracious!” said Rosemary. “They will not
ask me to say a rhyme, will they?”
“Of course they will,” sobbed the Miff-Piff.
“But that is silly,” said Rosemary. “I haven’t a
rhyme, and even if I had I wouldn’t be able to remember
it with all this noise going on.”
“You will be put into prison, and fed on frozen
radishes and ink,” said the Miff-Piff.
“Next rhyme,” the king cried again.
“Next rhyme,” shouted everyone, pointing to the
Miff-Piff.
The little animal began to sob more bitterly than
ever. “It was the day before yesterday’s tea-time,” it
whimpered.
“Try to remember,” whispered Rosemary, squeezing
its little paw, and helping it to stand up on the seat.
“Tra la, la,
“Tra, la la, . . began the Miff-Piff, but loud sobs
choked its voice. “I have lost my memoranda book, and
my rhyme so beautifully written in red ink,” it whis-
pered.
“What is that?” shouted the king. “What is that
about losing something? Have you lost your rhyme?”
“Yes - - s-s-s-s-.” The Miff-Piff began to tremble
violently. “And it is something about Tra, la, la and
one . . .”
“It doesn’t know its rhyme,” screamed the king
“Throw it into prison.”


“Doesn't know its rhyme. Throw it into prison,”
shouted everybody.
A trumpet sounded loudly at the end of the table,
and the king looked fiercely at the Miff-Piff, and pointed
his finger at the quivering little animal. “There it is,
there it is. Lost its rhyme indeed. Throw it into prison.”
“If you please your Majesty,” said the page boy who
stepped forward as soon as the trumpet stopped blow-
ing. “We cannot make any arrest, because Humpty-
Dumpty has fallen off the wall and all the king's horses
and all the king's men are trying to put Humpty to-
gether again.”
“No arrest,” shouted the king.
“No arrest. Next rhyme,” cried everyone pointing
to Rosemary. Rosemary was very bewildered. “If you
please your Majesty,” she began as she tried to move
the Miff-Piff, who had squeezed down into the seat
again, and was leaning against her. “I haven't a . . .”
“Stand up, speak up, look up!” roared the king.
Rosemary managed to lean the Miff-Piff against the
fish, and stood up. “If you please your Majesty . . ~”
J.J. ,r vv 1,1 JVIVU.OV/ J VUI XTXCVJ . . ~
she began, “1 do not belong to Rhymeland and I have
no rhyme.”
“Nonsense,” shouted the king. “Everyone has a
rhyme. You have forgotten yours.”
“But . . . ~” began Rosemary.
“She doesn't know her rhyme,” shouted the king.
“She doesn't know anything. Throw her in prison.”
“She doesn’t know anything. Dunce, dunce, double
dee, dunce, dunce, double dee,” shouted everyone.
The noise was deafening and Rosemary put her
hands over her ears. “At any rate,” she thought, “they
won’t be able to arrest me until the soldiers come back,
and then as the voice began again, “Make room, make
room,” she took the Miff-Piff by the paw and they ran
out through the door together.


fas ej'qTL
ost
in the
Dusky
Wood
OSEMARY found that they were in a large
hall. There did not seem to be any door, only
a staircase at the other end. The Miff-Piff
clutched her hand tightly and they stood for a
moment, uncertain what to do.
“I wonder how we will get out of here?” Rosemary
whispered.
“I wonder,” the Miff-Piff whispered back
They tip-toed along the hall a few steps, and sud-
denly a large cat appeared in front of them. It sat
washing its face.
“Can you tell me the way out of here?” Rosemary
asked politely, going nearer to where the cat was sitting.
The Miff-Piff followed cautiously.
The cat continued to wash its face in silence for
some seconds, until Rosemary began to think that it
could not talk like the rest of the Rhymeland animals.
Suddenly it discontinued washing its face and sat star-
ing at them with unblinking eyes. At last, just as Rose-
mary and the Miff-Piff were going on again, it spoke in
a deep voice.
“Have you never heard it said that you should not
speak until you are spoken to?” it retorted.


Rosemary felt very hurt at the cat’s rude manner.
“Oh dear,” she thought despairingly. “It is just as bad
as all the other Rhymeland creatures. I shall have to
speak crossly to it.”
“Don’t be impertinent,” she said. (It was a long
word for a little girl to use, and she said it as severely
as she could.) “I asked you a question.”
“I know,” replied the cat, “and little girls should
not ask questions.”
“Why not?” demanded Rosemary somewhat cross-
ly.
“Because,” said the cat, in a patronising voice, “Lit-
tle girls should be seen and not heard.”
This was too much for Rosemary and she did not
even bother to reply, but took the Miff-Piff by the paw
and they started off again down the hall. Several times
she turned and looked back, hoping the cat would
change its mind and call after them, but it had started to
wash its face again, and did not even look in their direc-
tion.
“Do you hear that strange noise,” asked Rosemary
presently, as a queer gurgling sound echoed through the
hall.
“It sounds like someone snoring,” replied the Miff-
Piff, standing still, and listening, with a very grave face.
“Whatever it is it is coming from behind the stair-
case,” whispered Rosemary. “Let us go and find out.”
They crept along and peeped around the banisters.
The Miff-Piff gave a little giggle of delight as they saw,
huddled up in a doorway, through which they could
see the green trees, one of the king’s soldiers. He was
fast asleep and snoring lustily. He wore a uniform of
very old and rusty black, and a pair of top boots, which
looked a great deal too large for him. On his head,
slipped so low that it rested on his chest, was a helmet
which looked very like a battered tin bucket.
The Miff-Piff giggled again, this time quite loudly.
“Hus-s-h!” whispered Rosemary, but it was too
late. The soldier wakened suddenly, and jumping to
his feet pushed the bucket off his forehead.
“Halt! Who goes there?” he shouted in a loud
voice that echoed through the hall.
“Only us,” whispered Rosemary timidly.
“Who is us?” thundered the soldier.


‘'Please do not shout so/' said Rosemary, who was
afraid of attracting the king’s attention. “We are sorry
that we have awakened you.”
“Hum,” grunted the soldier, yawning and pushing
up his helmet, which was so large that it kept slipping
over his eyebrows. “There is not much use being sorry
after a thing is done. Prevention is better than cure
you know.”
Rosemary nodded. “I know he is going to talk a lot
of rubbish,” she thought, smiling to herself, “But I do
wish he w r ould let us go out into the w T ood before the
king’s soldiers come back from Humpty Dumpty’s wall.”
“Of course, what w r e cannot prevent we have to
cure,” went on the soldier, as he took a large paper bag
from his pocket and peered into it. “For instance I can-
not cure myself of going to sleep here, because I could
not prevent them sending me here in the first place.”
“Have you been here long?” asked Rosemary.
“Twenty-two years, six months, three two
days, eight hours, and thirty minutes,” he said staring at
Rosemary from under his helmet, that had slipped down
again.
“No,” continued the soldier with a sigh. “I am get-
ting very tired of the scenery through this door. Trees
come and go but there is very little variety really.”
Rosemary felt quite sorry for the fellow. “Why do
you stay?” she asked.
The soldier was gazing into his paper bag again as
though he was not quite sure himself. “Well,” he said
at last. “It is like this: I was put here to guard this
doorway, and the king has forgotten about me, and no-
body has the courage to remind him that I should be
relieved, so here I stay.”
“That doesn’t sound at all fair,” said Rosemary.
“Doesn’t the king ever see you here?”
“No,” replied the soldier. “He never comes this
way. In fact he seems to have forgotten that there is a
door here at all.”
“But what do you have to eat?” asked Rosemary
anxiously.
“Everyone seems to have forgotten,” went on the
soldier. “Everyone but the kitchen maid who brings me
food. The only thing is I can’t get enough of these.” He
peered into the paper bag again as he spoke.
“What are they?” asked Rosemary.


“Acid Drops,” said the soldier. “Do you like acid
drops?”
“Very much, thank you,” said Rosemary, expecting
him to offer them some.
“So do I,” he said, and rolling up the bag again he
put it back in his pocket “As I was saying,” he went
on, “curing what we cannot prevent . . .”
“Please, are we allow r ed to go out into the wood ?”
asked Rosemary, interrupting him.
“You are,” said the soldier. “But I must search all
your pockets first,” and he put a great deal of emphasis
on the all.
“I have only one,” said Rosemary, “and there is
nothing in that. At least only my pocket handkerchief.”
“If you have only one, all the better,” said the sol-
dier, yawning and taking out his bag of acid drops again.
“Do you like acid drops?” he asked.
“You have already asked me that question,” said
Rosemary indignantly. “I said that I liked them very
much.”
“Did you?” said the soldier. “So do I,” and he
crammed another handful into his mouth, and pushed
the bag back into his pocket. “As 1 was saying, curing
what we cannot prevent . . .”
“You were going to search our pockets, and let us
go out into the wood.”
“Was 1?” queried the soldier, looking doubtfully at
the Miff-Piff for the first time. “I had better do it then.”
“There, that is all I have in mine,” said Rosemary,
taking out her pocket handkerchief and handing it to
him.
The soldier took it, examined it carefully, wiped his
nose upon it, and handed it back again. “That pocket
was not worth searching,” he said crossly. “What is the
use of pockets if you have nothing in them. Now a bag
of acid drops for instance . . .” He was interrupted by
his helmet slipping right down over his eyes, and it was
some time before he could raise it at all, but at last he
managed to push it high onto his forehead. He turned
to the Miff-Piff. “What have you in there?” he asked
gruffly, as he prodded the tiny pocket in the little ani-
mal's coat.
“Nothing,” said the Miff-Piff, wriggling sideways.
“Nonsense,” snapped the soldier, poking the pocket
again.


“Oh, oh, oh,” gasped the Miff-Piff, as it jumped
about. “Oh, oh, you are tickling me, and I never could
bear to be tickled.”
The soldier took the little animal firmly by the
shoulder. “Come,” he said, poking the pocket again
and again, “there is something in there.”
“No, no,” shrieked the Miff-Piff. “There isn't any-
thing, really there isn't.”
“There is,” roared the soldier, as he took a tiny
black book from the pocket. “Where did you steal
this?”
“My memoranda-book,” gasped the Milf-Piff. “And
I have looked for it everywhere, and all the while it was
in my own pocket. Please give it to me.”
“Is that your memoranda-book?” asked Rosemary
excitedly. “Oh, how lovely that you have found it at
last, and now you will be able to learn your rhyme
again.”
“Yes, my rhyme so beautifully written in red ink,”
cried the little creature.
“No such thing,” snapped the soldier. “You have
stolen this from somewhere, and the king shall hear
about it. It will perhaps make him remember how long
I have been here.”
“Please Mr. Soldier,” said Rosemary, not knowing
how else to address the man. “It is his really. He did
not steal it, he . . .”
Rat-a-tat-tat, rat-a-tat-tat, rat-a-tat-tat. Drums and
marching feet sounded through the palace.
“The soldiers!” shouted voices in the distance. “The
soldiers are back from Humpty Dumpty’s wall.”
“Oh! the soldiers, run,” gasped the Miff-Piff. “Never
mind the memoranda book,” and he wrenched himself
free from the sentry's grasp and darted out through the
door. Rosemary followed him and they sped away into
the wood. Tramping feet and clashing swords sounded
very close behind them, and Rosemary was sure that
they would be caught at any minute.
“In here,” panted the Miff-Piff, darting into a hol-
low of a fallen tree.
Rosemary stopped and looked despairingly at the
small hole into which the Miff-Piff had disappeared. She
dropped on her hands and knees and peered into the
darkness. “I will never be able to squeeze in there,” she
called.


“Easily,” whispered the Miff-Piff, from somewhere
quite close. “You try.”
Rosemary put her head in and to her surprise her
shoulders went through without any trouble, and the
next instant she was right inside.
“My, wasn’t that a close shave?” panted the Miff-
Piff. “And just as 1 had nearly found my rhyme again.”
“Why,” said Rosemary, as her eyes grew accus-
tomed to the dim light. “There is plenty of room in
here. But how queer everything feels. Look what funny
trees are growing. They look just as if they were made
of paper.”
“Oh my! oh my! we are in the Dusky Wood,” said
the Miff-Piff, beginning to tremble.
“In where?” asked Rosemary nervously.
“The Dusky Wood,” said the Miff-Piff with a shud-
der. “Haven’t you ever heard of the Dusky Wood?”
“No,” whispered Rosemary. “1 am afraid I haven’t,
but why are you trembling so ? Is there anything so ter-
ribly the matter with the place?”
“It isn’t nice at all,” said the Miff-Piff. “People
lose themselves, and never come back, and all sorts of
queer animals are supposed to live here.”
“Oh dear!” exclaimed Rosemary. “Do let us get
out again at once. I would much rather be caught by
the soldiers, because 1 don’t suppose Old King Cole would
really have us put into prison.”
“Yes, let us go,” agreed the Miff-Piff.
As they looked about them everything suddenly
changed, and there seemed no way out at all. The trees
around looked alike with their queer gnarled and
stunted trunks, and the ragged strips of bark which hung
from them in shreds.
“Oh my! Oh my! We are lost in the Dusky Wood,
and we will never find our way out again,” whispered
the Miff-Piff.
“Yes, we will,” said Rosemary encouragingly. “Look
here is a path.” She pointed to a small winding path
which straggled in and out among the frees, and lost
itself in the darkness.
“No,” said the Miff-Piff. “I don’t like the look of it.
I think 1 will stay here, it is much safer.”
But we won’t be able to stay here for ever,” said
Rosemary. “Come along, let us see if we can find our
way out again.”


The
Grab-Grab
Tree
LOW mocking laugh sounded, but they could
not see anyone. “Ha, ha, ha,” it echoed as
though a long way off, and then, “He, he,
he,” this time quite close.
“How strange,” said Rosemary, as the
laugh kept coming and going in a most aggravating man-
ner. “Whatever can it be?”
“I don't suppose it is anyone,” whispered the Miff-
Piff. “Things just happen in the Dusky Wood they
say.”
“But there must be someone,” persisted Rosemary.
“There could not be a laugh all by itself. It must belong
to someone.”


“Ha, ha, ha,
He, he, he.
Follow, follow, follow me,” mocked a voice.
“It is very difficult to follow when we cannot see
you,” said Rosemary nervously.
“Very few people do see me,” echoed the voice.
At first Rosemary thought that it was one of the
trees speaking, but as she looked she saw that it was a
very tall thin man, who was leaning against a tree trunk
just beside where they were standing. He looked as
though he were made of smoke or mist, and swayed to
and fro in the breeze, that blew softly through the wood.
His face was not pleasant. It was long and thin with hol-
low cheeks and grinning mouth. His eyes shone like a
cat's in the dark, and on his head flickered a queerly
shaped lantern.
“How do you do?" said Rosemary. She did not like
the look of him at all as he grinned hideously at her.
“How do I do what?" he asked in a rasping voice.
Rosemary did not know what to say, and the Miff-
Piff came very close to her.
“How do I do what?" repeated the shadowy man
and then, without waiting for a reply he threw back his
head :
“Ha, ha, ha,
He, he, he." His laugh echoed and re-echoed,
one moment faint and far away, and the next close by.
“Why do you laugh like that?" asked Rosemary.
“You sound as though you were everywhere at once."
“I am everywhere at once," he replied, when he
stopped laughing. “Haven’t you ever heard of me?"
Rosemary shook her head. “At least Ido not think
so," she said quickly. “Who are you?"
“Not heard of me? Not heard of Will-o-the-Wisp?"
he exclaimed in amazement.
“Will-o-the-Wisp," gasped Rosemary. “Why yes, I
have heard of you. You dance in front of people in the
darkness so that they lose their way."
“Ha, ha, ha,
He, he, he,
Follow, follow, follow me," mocked the figure
swaying to and fro.
“It is nothing to be proud of," said Rosemary severe-
ly. “You should be ashamed of yourself. Someone will
catch you one day."


“Ha, ha, ha,” laughed Will-o-the-wisp. “Old King
Cole has been trying to catch me for many years. He
has even offered a reward to any one who can capture
me and take me to his court.”
“Well someone will if you go on being bad,” scolded
Rosemary.
“Never,” boasted Will-o-the-Wisp. “And they will
never find my castle and all the lost folk.”
“Lost folk,” said Rosemary wonderingly.
“Yes,” chuckled Will-o-the-wisp, tapping the lan-
tern on his head. “They mistake my light for their
home and they follow, follow, follow me,” he mocked.
“Where is your castle?” asked Rosemary.
“Nobody has ever reached it, and nobody ever will
unless they follow my light, and then they can never get
out again, because my imps guard it.” Will-o-the-wisp’s
voice rasped boastingly, and he grinned in a most pro-
voking manner.
“You are a very wicked man,” said Rosemary.
Somehow she had lost all her fear, and she looked up
angrily. “1 wish Michael and John were here. They
would find the way to your castle, and fight your hor-
rible imps and you too.”
“fla, ha, ha,
He, he, he,” Will-o-the-wisp’s laugh was grow-
ing more aggravating each minute. “Follow, follow,
follow me,” he sang.
“Follow, follow, follow me,
Past the lair of the Grab-grab tree,
Into the Wallawop country,
Follow, follow, follow me” The mocking voice
grew fainter and fainter, and to Rosemary’s surprise she
found that Will-o-the-wisp had disappeared. Only a
shimmering light danced through the trees, and the
echo “Follow, follow, follow me,~ showed where he had
gone.
“Come along,” said Rosemary quickly. “We must
go.”
“Go where?” asked the Miff-Piff in a quavering
voice.
“After the light. Quickly, quickly,” she answered
excitedly. Why they had to go she did not quite know,
but she had a queer feeling that they must follow the
dancing light.


“No, no,” cried the Miff-Piff, trying to pull her back.
“Think of my memoranda book. Think of a rhyme.
Think of a radish. Think of anything, but do not fol-
low the light.”
“Oh come along, you are wasting time,” said Rose-
mary impatiently.
“But . . ~” pleaded the Miff-Piff, gesticulating de-
sperately with its tiny paws. “But, but Oh please.”
Words failed the little creature, and its voice died away.
“You stay here,” said Rosemary, “if you do not
want to come.”
“Oh my, oh my,” it murmured. “Why ever did we
come into the Dusky Wood. We will never be able to
get out again, and I will never find my rhyme so beauti-
fully written in red ink.”
“You are being a coward,” said Rosemary. “I am
not the least bit afraid, and I am going to find the castle
and let all the lost folk free.”
“You will never reach it,” wailed the Miff-Piff.
“Didn’t you hear what Will-o-the-wisp said about the
grab-grab tree, and the Wallawop, and there will be lots
of wicked imps and animals. Oh my,” it finished miser-
ably.
The light had nearly disappeared and hovered
dimly through the trees. “Follow, follow, follow me,”
the echo came faintly.
“Goodbye I must go,” said Rosemary. “I do hope
you will find your way back all right.”.
She ran off quickly between the trees in the direc-
tion that Will-o-the-wisp had taken.
“Wait, wait,” called the Miff-Piff, bounding after
her. “Wait, wait. I will come too.”
The little creature had suddenly lost all its fear, and
was as excited as she was. “Oh my, oh my! what an ad-
venture,” it chuckled, running along the path close be-
hind her.
“If it were only a little lighter,” gasped Rosemary
as she ran. “It would be much easier to find our way.”
“It is never any lighter than this in the Dusky
Wood,” panted the Miff-Piff, fighting its way through a
thick tuft of rushes that grew over the path.
“I suppose that is why Will-o-the-wisp lives here ”
said “I do hope we will be able to catch
him.” She picked up a stick as she spoke, and beat
aside long strips of bark, which hung from the trees


across their way. Some of them were rotten as tinder
and fell to the ground, and others swayed aside with a
weird sighing sound. The ground was spongy under
their feet, and the path, overgrown with reeds and
rushes, was hard to follow.
Sometimes Wiil-o-the-wisp’s light disappeared al-
together, and sometimes it was quite close. Every few
minutes they heard the same mocking laugh:
“Ha, ha, ha,
He, he, he,
Follow, follow, follow me.”
Rosemary was suddenly startled by the Miff-Piff
exclaiming loudly, and she looked around in time to see
the little animal swing high into the air, calling “Oh, oh,
oh,” as it tried to free itself. Rosemary had only just
time to run for safety as a large gnarled hand came
clutching after her. When she looked at the tree she
saw that each cluster of leaves was really a hand, and
hundreds of these groped and snatched at the air. The
Miff-Piff was held very tightly round the middle, and as
the branch swayed up and down it carried the little
animal with it.
“Ha, ha, ha,
He, he, he,
Past the lair of the grab-grab tree,” mocked
Will-o-the-wisp.
“The grab-grab tree,” cried Rosemary . “Whatever
will become of the poor little Miff-Piff?”
“Oh my, oh my,” came its tiny voice as it swung
quite close to her.
“It is all my fault for wanting to come,” called
Rosemary. “1 am very sorry, really I am.”
“That is all right,” it shouted as it swung down
again. “I . . ~” but there was no time to finish the sen-
tence for the hand that held it had darted up, and dis-
appeared among the branches.
Rosemary took out her pocket handkerchief. She
felt very much as though she were going to cry. There
did not seem anything she could do, and she began to
feel terribly afraid all alone in the half light.
“He, he, he,
Past the lair of the grab-grab tree,” called
W il 1-o-the-wisp.
“Oh dear,” gulped the Miff-Piff, who had plunged
down again. “I do wish the tree would keep still for a


lew minutes, 1 am getting quite giddy/’ The poor little
fellow was looking very limp and sad. 44 You had better
go on without me,” it gasped. 44 Mind you keep an eye
out for the Wallawop. It has four heads, and nine tails
they say. Goodbye.” Its voice finished with a funny
little as the hand shot up again.
44 1 will not move a step from here until you are free,”
said Rosemary emphatically. 44 Can’t you think of some-
thing?”
“Nothing,” groaned the Miff-Piff. 44 0n1y that lam
going to be very sick in a minute.”
“Look!” called Rosemary as the hand came down
again. She had caught sight of something in one of the
hands. “Whatever can that be ?”
W'hen the arm came down again she ran as close
as she dared, and saw a little blue coat. “I wonder who
has lost their coat here,” she called, but the Miff-Piff did
not seem to hear. It had closed its eyes and was making
queer sobbing noises as the tree carried it up and down.
“Think of a rhyme, think of a radish, think of any-
thing,” it murmured weakly.
“Poor little Miff-Piff,” said Rosemary, beginning to
cry. “This is dreadful, and it is all my fault for wanting
to come.”
“Ha, ha, ha,
He, he, he,” laughed Will-o-the-wisp.
“Be quiet,” cried Rosemary, brushing her tears away
angrily. “You are a wicked man. I wish Michael and
John were here, they would catch you, and cut down
this wretched old grab-grab tree.” '
“Ha, ha, ha,
He, he, he,” he mocked again.
Rosemary felt so indignant at the mocking laugh
that all her tears disappeared. “I will set the Miff-Piff
free?” she said determinedly. At that moment she
thought of a plan. She darted about picking up pieces of
wood, stones, clods of earth, and sticks and when she had
as many in her handkerchief as she could hold she ran
back to the tree.
“Piffy, Piffy,” she called.
“Oh my, oh my,” murmured the little creature open-
ing its eyes slowly.
“I have a wonderful idea?” she called.
“My rhyme so beautifully written in red ink,”
came a tiny voice from high up in the air.


Rosemary watched the branch coming down, and
when it was nearly to the ground she threw all the
stones and pieces of earth and sticks into the air. Im-
mediately all the hands began to snatch and fight each
other.
“Run quickly/' cried Rosemary as the hand let go
the Miff-PifF. “Quickly, quickly," she gasped, seiz-
ing the little animal's paw and hurrying it out of harm's
way.
Rosemary propped the Miff-Piff up beside a tuft of
rushes, where it sat for some minutes with closed eyes
while she fanned its face with her handkerchief.
“If only I had some water," she thought.
At last it opened its eyes, and stared around in a
puzzled sort of way. Two large tears trickled down its
cheeks.
“Are you better?" asked Rosemary anxiously,
thrusting her handkerchief into its little paw.
“Much, thank you," said the Miff-Piff, struggling to
its feet. “Let us go on again."
“Perhaps we had better go back," said Rosemary.
“We should never have come."
The Miff-Piff shook its head. “We will have to go
on," it said. “We are in the Dusky Wood where there is
no turning back.
“Follow, follow, follow me," echoed Will-o-the-
wisp's voice in the distance, and the light twinkled
through the trees.
“Come along," said the Miff-Piff, and the next in-
stant they were fighting their way along the path again.


Into the
Wallawop
Country
OSEMARY had not
Miff-Piff stopped
gone very far when the
and listened anxiously.
“Listen,” it said. “I can hear someone whist
ling.”
Sure enough a soft sound of whistling could
be heard.
“Do be careful,” whispered Rosemary as they tip-
toed from the path and peered around a huge tuft of
rushes. “It might be the Wallawop, or some other
dreadful creature.”
“Oh!” exclaimed Rosemary and the Miff-Piff to-
gether, when they saw to their relief, nothing more
dreadful than a small boy sitting on an old log. He was
looking just as worried as they were, and was whistling
to keep his spirits up.
“Hullo!” he said cheerfully. “What are you doing
here?”
“We are lost in the wood,” explained Rosemary.
“The Miff-Piff and I. My name is Rosemary.”
“Mine is Jack,” said the boy. “I am trying to find
the Castle of Lost Folk. Will-o-the-wisp has Jill locked
up there.” He looked very sad as he said this. “We
were going up the hill to fetch a pail of water, and Jill
saw a big hole in a funny-looking log and we slipped
inside for fun, and then there did not seem any way out


again. 1 would like to kill Will-o-the-wisp,” lie muttered
angrily.
“We are trying to find the castle too/' said Rose-
mary. “We want to let all the people free.”
Jack sighed gloomily. “I am afraid it is not any
good,” he said. “We will all be lost in the Dusky Wood
for ever, and ever.”
“Surely we will be able to find our way back some-
how,” said Rosemary anxiously. “There must be some
way out.”
“No,” answered Jack. “Not unless we conquer
Will-o-the-wisp, and make him show us the way.”
“Well let us try to catch him,” exclaimed Rosemary
eagerly. “We will go together/'
“Come along,” cried the Miff-Piff, jumping about
excitedly.
“I was nearly caught by the grab-grab tree,” said
Jack as they scrambled back onto the path again. “1
just managed to wriggle out of my coat before it caught
me properly.”
“It did catch me.” panted the Miff-Piff, “And oh my,
the swinging about made me quite dizzy.”
“Do you think we can possibly capture Will-o-the-
wisp?” said Rosemary. “I mean, make him promise to
let everyone free, and show us the way back again.”
“We will try,” said Jack stoutly. “I must help Jill
somehow. She can't stay in his old castle for ever.”
Ahead of them Will-o-the-wisp ? s light danced
through the trees, and the voice echoed. “Follow, fol-
low, follow me.”
“Where does the Wallawop live?” asked Rosemary.
“1 wouldn't be surprised if it is near here some-
where,” said Jack. “I wish we had something to fight
it with. It is a dreadful monster they say.”
“Think of a rhyme, think of a radish . . ~” began
the Miff-Piff.
“Perhaps if we had a stick each,” suggested Rose-
mary, picking up a stick as she spoke. Jack agreed it
was quite a good idea, and soon found one each for him-
self and the Miff-Piff. The Miff-Piff was highly delight-
ed, and danced about, hitting at everything that came in
his way, until he tripped himself up, and went somer-
saulting over and over.


“You must be more careful,” said Rosemary, laugh-
ing as she helped him to his feet again, and brushed a
large piece of mud from his nose.
“Careful,” panted the Miff-Piff. “Talking of being
careful, reminds me of my memoranda book, and my
rhyme so beautifully written in red ink.” He began to
sniff.
“Oh come along,” said Rosemary. “You must not
stop to think about that now.”
A loud noise, very like a great sob, echoed through
the Dusky Wood, followed by a long drawn sigh and
more sobs.
“Whatever can that be,” exclaimed Rosemary .
Jack looked startled. “I don't know,” he said ner-
vously.
There were more sighs and more sobs, and then a
long moan.
“Do let us go back quickly,” said Rosemary.
“Something very terrible must be happening.”
“O-o-o-o-o-o! scared,” said Jack with an exclama-
tion of disgust. “I am going nearer to find out what it
is.”
“I am not scared,” retorted Rosemary indignantly,
and holding her stick tightly, she followed closely on
Jack’s heels.
They came to a large open space. At the other side
of it there was a large gloomy looking opening which
seemed to be the entrance to an enormous cave. In
front of it sat the most dreadful looking creature Rose-
mary had ever imagined.
“Into the Wallawop country,
Follow, follow, follow me,” came the echo of Will-
o-the-wisp's voice.
“The Wallawop,” whispered Jack.
“Oh my, oh my,” gurgled the Miff-Piff.
The Wallawop was so large and had so many tails
and heads and wings, that at first it was hard to make
head or tail of it. The monster was squirming and
wriggling like a nest of serpents, groaning and sobbing
as it did so.
“There must be something the matter with it,”
whispered Jack.
“Poor thing, whatever can it be,” said Rosemary
in an undertone. She could not help feeling sorry for


the creature. “Perhaps it has toothache,” she added
sympathetically.
At that moment the monster caught sight of them
and bounded up. It lashed its great scaly tails and
scorching flames of fire spurted from one dreadful
mouth, followed by dense clouds of smoke. The ground
about them shook violently as the creature writhed and
pawed.
The children and the Miff-Piff were too frightened
even to run away. They stood where they were gazing
at the Wallawop, but the next instant it collapsed to the
ground again, and great sobs shook its body.
“Don’t stand there staring,” it said in a sorrowful
voice.
The children neither moved nor spoke they were so
amazed at the monster’s strange behaviour.
“Haven’t you ever been told that it is rude to
stare?” asked the Wallawop.
Rosemary wondered whether the creature was as
docile as it sounded, or whether it was only trying to
coax them nearer. It was so large and terrible looking
that she did not like to trust it.
“If you have anything to say, say it,” began the
monster.
“Are you the Wallawop?” asked Jack awkwardly.
The monster nodded all its heads at once. “Yes,”
it said with a deep sigh.
“Oh,” said Jack, taking a firmer grip of his stick.
“Yes,” went on the monster in a deep rumbling
voice. “I am the Wallawop, but you may put down
your sticks, this is not one of my fighting days.”
The Miff-Piff who had been holding very tightly to
Rosemary’s hand, let go its hold and gave a little giggle.
“Hush,” whispered Rosemary, but the Wallawop
was speaking again.
“I am too unhappy to fight,” it said dismally, be-
ginning to sob again. “I never did like it very much any-
way, but other people will always come attacking me,
and then I get the blame.”
“Poor creature,” thought Rosemary. “It must feel
ill.”
“The joy of living has all gone,” moaned the Walla-
wop. “Gone, gone, gone.”
Rosemary was no longer afraid of the animal, and
she went quite close. “Perhaps if you told us your


troubles we could help you,” she said looking earnestly
from one head to the other.
“The difficulty is which head one is really supposed
to address,” she thought. “It is most bewildering trying
to talk to so many at once.”
The Wallawop sobbed loudly for some seconds be-
fore speaking then it demanded suddenly in a booming
voice :
“Have you any aunts?”
“Any what?” asked Rosemary.
“Any aunts,” repeated the Wallawop.
“Oh aunts. Why yes,” said Rosemary in surprise.
“I have four.”
“I have one,” said the Wallawop sadly.
Rosemary thought of her aunt Amelia who was
very stern, and made her feel a trifle afraid when she
went to her place to tea. “But surely,” she said with
a smile, “a Wallawop would not be afraid of an aunt.”
The large creature shook all its heads at once and
sneezed twice, so violently that it blew the Miff-Piff right
off its feet. The Wallawop did not seem to notice the
disturbance it had caused, and began again in a deep
voice.
“Talking of aunts,” it said. “I have one. Aunt
Arradeanbombomba. I have also a great aunt, but her
name is rather too long to remember at present, and it
is my Aunt Arradeanbombomba with whom my great
sorrow is concerned.”
Here it broke off into loud sobs again, and wept so
long and bitterly that Rosemary began to fear that it was
never going to leave off.
“Is your Aunt Arradeanbombomba ill?” she asked
at last when it had recovered a little.
The Wallawop shook all its heads at once. “No,”
it groaned. “Worse, much worse, guess again.”
“Dead,” suggested Rosemary sympathetically.
The Wallawop shook all its heads again. “No,” it
said, “She sent me a parcel.”
“A parcel,” echoed Rosemary and Jack together
in amazement.
“Yes a parcel,” repeated the Wallawop sadly.
“Whatever was in it that it makes you so miser-
able?” asked Rosemary curiously.
“A present,” sobbed the Wallawop.


“But why should a present make you weep so?”
asked Rosemary. “I love getting presents in parcels. It
is great fun untying all the knots and guessing what will
be inside.”
“Great fun,” murmured the Wallawop. “Not if it
is a present like my Aunt Arradeanbombomba sent to
me.”
“Come on,” said Jack impatiently. “You might as
well tell us what it was.”
“Boots,” wailed the Wallawop. “Black leather but-
ton-up boots.” It sobbed again. “I have got them on.”
It pointed to a large foot on which was a gigantic boot
made of black leather.
Rosemary and Jack gazed in bewilderment.
“Oh my! What a boot,” whispered the Miff-Piff.
“But why are you so unhappy?” asked Rosemary
in astonishment. “There does not seem anything to be
so miserable about.”
The Wallawop looked sadly at its huge foot and
sobbed again.
“It cuts and it pinches,” it said. “In fact it is mak-
ing me quite dizzy with pain, and the other one will not
go on at all.”
It threw T the other boot at Rosemary’s feet. A misfit
boot seemed a small thing for a monster to make such a
fuss about. Rosemary was afraid that she would laugh
and offend it. She looked intently at the boot and then
at the Walla wop’s large feet.
“Can you suggest something?” it demanded eagerly.
“Can you help me?”
“I think I can,” said Rosemary.
“How,” demanded the Wallawop.
“I think you have put the boot on the wrong foot.
Try it on the other one,” suggested Rosemary.
The Wallawop looked thoughtful. “If it will not
fit one foot it most certainly will not fit the other,” the
monster said impatiently.
“Of course it will,” said Jack, thinking how clever
Rosemary was to have noticed the mistake.
“Rubbish,” snapped the Wallawop.
Rosemary was afraid it was going to lose its temper
and she thought, “It will never do to annoy the
creature.”
“You try,” she persuaded gently.


The Wallawop still seemed doubtful, but after star-
ing at its foot for some seconds it pulled off the offending
boot and the next minute had slipped it easily on the
other foot. It moved its great leg to and fro, and pawed
the ground, and a look of satisfaction beamed all over its
faces. It began to shout with laughter.
“Well, well, well,” it cried, “It fits beautifully now.”
“Here,” said Rosemary helping it on with the other
boot when it had quietened down a bit. “Now let me
button them up for you.”
The Wallawop handed Rosemary a large shining
button-hook, and laughed heartily. “Well, well, well,”
it chuckled.
There were so many buttons that Rosemary thought
they would never be all hooked, but Jack fastened one
boot, while she managed the other, and at last the task
was done.
“Well, well, well,” shouted the Wallawop bound-
ing up and leaping about. “Aunt Arradeanbombomba’s
button boots are beautiful.”
“Beautiful, beautiful,” echoed the Miff-Piff capering
about and waving its little paws wildly in the air.
Rosemary thought that she had never seen any-
thing so funny as the two creatures, one so very large
and the other so small, leaping madly about, but the
next minute she found herself and Jack dancing just as
excitedly as the others. Round and round they went.
The Miff-Piff jumping and skipping and the Wallawop
lashing its great tails, shaking the ground and the trees
about them. At last it was quite exhausted and threw
itself down onto the ground.
“Well, well, well,” it laughed, mopping its four
brows one after the other. “What a dance, what a
dance.”
The Miff-Piff was still skipping about, but Rose-
mary and Jack were glad to rest.
“I am just the happiest creature alive,” said the
Wallawop. “How can I thank you?”
“That is all right,” said Rosemary shyly. “We are
glad to help you.”
“One good turn deserves another,” observed the
Wallawop. “How can I help you?”
“Perhaps you will tell us the way to the Castle of
Lost Folk,” said Rosemary. “Jack is trying to find


Jill who is locked up there, and we want to let all the
people free/'
“Let me see/' said the Wallawop. “It would be a
very long way if you followed the light, but if you go
this way . . ~" and it pointed to a path leading among
the trees, “You will be there in a few minutes."
“Thank you," said Jack, jumping up, “Thank you
very much."
“But you must be careful of the imps," went on the
Wallawop quickly. “They are very nasty things, and
the trouble is that one is not able to see them."
“Are there very many?" asked Rosemary.
“Hundreds of them," confided the Wallawop. “But
I will tell you a secret. They will pinch you, stick pins
into you, pull your hair . . ~"
“Oh," gasped the Miff-Piff.
“Pull your hair," repeated the Wallawop, “and do
many other unpleasant things, but there is one way to
keep them away."
“Yes," said Rosemary eagerly.
“Cross your fingers and they will not be able to
hurt you," whispered the Wallawop.
“That sounds easy," said Jack. “Let us go quickly."
“Thank you ever so much," said Rosemary, smiling
from one great head to another. “I hope that your
boots will wear well,"
“Goodbye," called Jack, as he ran off.
“Goodbye," called Rosemary as she and the
Miff-Piff ran after Jack, but the Wallawop was not lis-
tening. It was up and dancing madly about again.
“Aunt Arradeanbombomba’s button boots are beau-
tiful," Rosemary heard it singing as they followed the
path through the trees.


Ht A
Letting
the Lost
Folk Free
FTER they left the Wallawop the wood grew
even darker. Sometimes the wind whistled
through the trees and sent large strips of
bark crashing to the ground, sometimes there
was not a sound, and in the silence it seemed
that the wood was waiting like some huge creature to
pounce upon them.
“Oh,” cried Rosemary as something began to pull
viciously at her hair. Suddenly remembering what the
Wallawop had said, she crossed her fingers quickly.
The pulling stopped immediately, and a little moan
sounded in the air close to her, but there was nobody to
be seen. “It must have been an imp,” thought Rose-
mary.
“Somebody is sticking pins in me,” shrieked the
Miff-Piff. “Oh, oh, oh.”
“Cross your fingers . . . quickly,” called Rosemary.
“Nasty creatures,” wailed the Miff-Piff, crossing its
fingers, and hitting wildly at the air with a stick it had
picked up.
“Look,” called Jack suddenly. “Look at those high
walls and lights. “It must be the castle.”
“To whit, to woo ... To whit, to woo,” hooted an
owl in the distance. “To whit, to woo-o-o-o-o-o.”
“Oh my! the Castle of Lost Folk,” said the Miff-
Piff. “Think of a rhyme, think of a radish, think of
anything, but don't let us get locked up in that dreadful


castle, or we will never get out again, and 1 will never
find my rhyme so beautifully written in red ink/'
“Follow, follow, follow me,” came Will-o-the-wisp’s
echo.
“Have you your sticks ready?” demanded Jack,
quite ignoring the Miff-Piff. “We will probably need
them at any minute. Isn’t it a big castle, and oh I say
just look at these gates,” he went on as they walked to
the huge entrance.
In the gloom it was difficult to see exactly what the
castle was like, but Rosemary could see high walls loom-
ing above them, and hundreds of flickering lights. The
gates were very large, and made of a dark shining metal,
and studded with great knobs of polished brass. Jack
tried the latch and to their surprise it lifted easily, and
the gate swung open.
“To whit, to woo, to whit to woo-o-o-o-o-o-,” called
the owl as they crept nervously inside. Whew o-o-o-o-o-,
whistled the wind, and with a noisy clang the great gate
slammed behind them.
“We are locked in,” said Jack in a startled voice, as
the noise echoed through the castle and died away. “Let
us try the latch from this side.”
They ran to the gate, and while Rosemary strug-
gled with the latch Jack pulled with all his might at the
great handle which was really too high for him to reach
properly, but it would not move an inch.
“We must get it open somehow,” said Rosemary
desperately. “Oh why were we so silly as to let it slam
like that?”
“Ha, ha, ha,” came the echo from far away, and
then “He, he, he,” just beside them, and Rosemary look-
ed up to see Will-o-the-Wisp standing near them. He
grinned at her. “The Castle of Lost Folk,” he said in his
rasping voice. “I hope that you will like it, because you
will have to stay a long time.”
“I do not like it at all, and I do not like you either,”
said Rosemary, looking up at the leering face, and won-
dering why they had been so silly as to come inside the
gate at all.
“Ah well, perhaps you will like it better when you
are more used to it,” said Will-o-the-Wisp provokingly.
“People always stay quite a long while,” he ended with a
laugh.


“Well we are not going to stay/' shouted Jack an-
grily. “We are going to smash your silly old castle to
pieces, and we will teach you not to lock people up like
this.”
“Ha, ha, ha,” laughed Will-o-the-wisp.
“You need not laugh like that,” cried Jack, who
was growing more furious every minute. “I am going to
fight you,” and with that he rushed at Will-o-the-wisp,
and hit madly at the wispy figure with his stick.
Will-o-the-wisp was standing with his back to the
wall, and could not get away, but he did not seem to
mind, and struck back at Jack with a long weapon that
the children had not noticed he was carrying.
Crash, crash, crash went Jack's stick, but Will-o-the-
wisp danced about and turned the blows aside as though
he thought it quite good fun. “Ha, ha, ha,” he laughed,
but his laugh only made Jack more angry, and the boy hit
harder and quicker than ever.
“So you think you can conquer me do you?” laughed
Will-o-the-wisp. “Well I will show you,” and he rapped
Jack sharply across the legs so that the boy gave a howl
of pain.
“Help me, help me Rosemary,” he called in a fright-
ened voice.
Rosemary seized her stick very tightly and ran to
help him. Whack, whack, whack, she struck at the tall
shadowy figure, but Will-o-the-wisp enjoyed the battle
even more than before, and laughed again and again.
“Ha ha, ha, He, he, he.”
How long they fought Rosemary did not know, but
it seemed a very long time, and although she and Jack
struck viciously at the wispy man they were never able
to hit him. He knocked their sticks aside and danced
about, occasionally rapping them smartly with his
weapon. As last when Rosemary felt too tired to fight
much longer Jack stumbled and fell to the ground and
lay quite still.
“No, no, please do not hurt him,” cried Rosemary as
Will-o-the-wisp stood over the boy with his weapon
raised, “Please, please.”
Suddenly there was a loud crash and the sound of
shattering glass. Will-o-the-wisp’s light went out and
a shudder shook his wispy body as he wavered slowly
to the ground.


“My light, somebody has broken my light,” he whis-
pered feebly.
Rosemary could scarcely believe her eyes, and she
was so startled that at first she could not understand
what had happened, as she gazed at him sitting crump-
led on the ground, sighing and moaning. “Ha, ha, . .
he began, but his laugh trailed away. “My light,” he
whispered hoarsely. “Someone has broken my light.”
“Oh my, that has done it,” Rosemary heard the
Miff-Piff’s voice from somewhere high above her head,
and looking up she saw the little creature jigging along
the top of the wall. It gave a shrill laugh when it saw
her looking, and hit madly about with its stick.
“Oh do be careful, or you will fall,” called Rose-
mary as it capered about, leaping and jumping and even
turning somersaults.
“Think of a rhyme, think of a radish, think of any-
thing,” sang the little animal excitedly.
“Did you break Will-o-the-wisp’s light?” called
Rosemary.
“Yes,” chuckled the Miff-Piff as it came scrambling
down the wall, “I did it because I thought he was going
to kill you and Jack.”
“Brave little Miff-Piff,” said Jack, who had re-
covered his breath enough to sit up again. “You see
Will-o-the-wisp you are not so clever as you thought,
even a little Miff-Piff can conquer you after all.”
“Ha, ha, . . ~” began the crumpled form beside the
wall, but the voice ended in a sigh, and it hung its head
dejectedly.
“Tell me,” said Jack, jumping up and taking Will-o-
the-wisp by the collar. “Where are all the lost folk?”
“The lost folk,” said Will-o-the-wisp wonderingly,
and looking vaguely up at Jack. “Who are the lost
folk?”
“Oh come on now. Don't pretend that you do not
know,” said Jack, shaking the limp creature. “You know
all the people you are keeping prisoners. Where is
Jill?”
“Yes, I remember,” said Will-o-the-wisp with a deep
sigh. “They are my prisoners. They followed my light
and could not find their way home again. Ha, ha, . .
Again his voice faded away.
“Where are they all?” demanded Jack. “Tell me
at once.”


“In there,” said Will-o-the-wisp waving his hand
feebly towards a large wooden door. “They are all in
there.”
“Well let them out at once, and then show us the
way out of this horrible wood,” said Jack and he shook
the man again.
The limp creature moaned pitifully and struggled to
his feet. Rosemary began to feel quite sorry for him, but
when she remembered his horrible grinning face and his
mocking laugh, and she said angrily:
“Yes, let all the lost folk out at once.”
“You can unlock the door,” said Will-o-the-wisp in
a tired voice as he leant against the wall. “Here take
this key.”
“Why it is made of cardboard! exclaimed Rosemary,
as she looked at the large key Will-o-the-wisp handed to
her.
“So it is,” said Jack.
“In there,” sighed Will-o-the-wisp, waving his
shadowy arm in the direction of the door. “They are all
in there.”
The children ran to the door, and in a minute had
thrown it wide open . “Jill! Jill!” called Jack excitedly.
“Where are you? lam here. It is Jack, and we have
come to set you all free again.”
In an instant out flocked all the lost folk: Peter
Piper, Georgie Porgie, Solomon Grundy, Little Polly
Flinders and crowds more. The last one was a little girl
carrying a large wooden pail.
“Here I am, Jill,” called Jack excitedly, as she ran
towards them. She caught Jack by the hand and they
began to chatter so quickly that neither knew what the
other was talking about.
“Here comes Mother Goose,” shouted somebody as
a whirring, and flapping of wings sounded above them,
and Mother Goose came flying over the castle wall on
her gander. The bird had scarcely touched the ground
before she jumped off and came bustling among the
children.
“There,” she said, pointing a finger scornfully at
Will-o-the-wisp. “Someone has conquered you at last,
and put an end to your wicked ways.”
Will-o-the-wisp only sighed faintly and hung his
head.


Mother Goose was a funny looking little lady. She
wore a tall black hat on her head, and her skirts were
large and billowy.
“She must be very, very old,” thought Rosemary as
she looked at the old lady’s wrinkled face. “And what a
big nose she has.”
Mother Goose looked around her through her large
glasses, and then back at Will-o-the-wisp. “Have you
anything to say for yourself?” she asked severely.
Will-o-the-wisp only shook his head dolefully, and
would not raise his eyes from the ground.
To Rosemary’s surprise Mother Goose seemed to
know exactly what had happened without being told.
“Brave little Miff-Piff,” she said, turning to the tiny
creature, who had come very close to Rosemary and
slipped its paw into her hand. “Old King Cole must
certainly hear what you have done, and how you have
conquered this wicked fellow who has caused so much
trouble among the Rhymeland people.”
The Miff-Piff was too nervous to answer. “Think of
a rhyme, think of a radish,” it whispered to itself.
“Come along,” went on Mother Goose, “I will take
you all on my gander to Old King Cole’s court.”
So many strange things had happened that Rose-
mary was not in the least surprised to find herself, with
all the other children, seated on the gander’s wide back.
Even Will-o-the-wisp was crowded on. Jack seemed to
have forgotten about everything but Jill, and Rosemary
laughed to herself as she watched them chattering to-
gether over their large wooden pail.
“Away we go,” cried Mother Goose, as the gander
spread its huge wings and gradually began to rise into
the air.
“Why it is just like being on a swing,” thought
Rosemary, as up, up they went higher and higher over
the castle wall and a voice in the distance sang faintly:
“Old Mother Goose when she wanted to wander,
Would ride through the air on a very fine gander.
Mother Goose had a house, ’Twas built in a wood,
Where an owl at the door for sentinel stood.”


As the voice gradually faded away the lights of the
Castle of Lost Folk became fainter and fainter, and then
disappeared altogether.
“Where an owl at the door for sentinel stood,” came
an echo, and the next minute the gander had flown right
into Old King Cole's court-room.


Old King
Cole s Court
LD KING COLE'S court-room was very large,
but there were so many people packed in that
there was scarcely room to move. Old King
Cole sat at one end on a large throne, and
behind him were the fiddlers three, still scrap-
ing on their violins. Suddenly they gave a loud
shout and threw their fiddles into the air, and the
minute the instruments touched the floor they turnec
into three large white mice and ran squeaking around
the room.
“I do hope the farmer’s wife is not here,” thought
Rosemary, “And I wonder what has become of the three
blind mice.”
“Silence,” suddenly roared Old King Cole.
“Silence,” shouted everyone.
“Bring in the prisoners,” went on the king in a
loud voice: “Ding dong dell, Pussy’s in the well, who
put her in?”
“Little Tommy Green,” cried everyone in chorus.
“Throw Tommy Green in prison,” screamed the
king. “Who pulled her out?”
“Little Tommy Trout,” the chorus shouted.
“Tommy Trout may keep the cat,” said the king.
Rosemary thought that she had never heard such a
noise, and Old King Cole’s face grew very red with
shouting.
“Next prisoner,” he called loudly.


'Taffy was a Welshman,
Taffy was a thief.
Taffy came to my place and stole a piece of
beef,” sang everyone.
"Bring in Taffy” screamed the king.
In came two soldiers, clattering heavily on the floor
with their large boots. They led a small boy, while a
large roast of beef walked solemnly behind them, bow-
ing to everyone as it came, as though it were a person of
great importance.
"If you please your Majesty,” pleaded Taffy. "I did
not steal the piece of beef. I asked it if it would care to
take a walk with me, and the beef replied it would.”
"Is that so?” asked the king, turning to the large
roast.
The beef bowed very low. "Your Majesty,” it be-
gan. "There seems to be some mistake .. .”
"Mistake,” interrupted the king, "Who is talking
of mistakes?”
"Well . . ~” the roast meekly began again, but the
king was not listening.
"Take them away. Throw them into prison,” he
shouted above the noise, but no one seemed to take the
least notice of the sentence because the soldiers had dis-
appeared, and the roast of beef had picked up one of
the mice, which instantly turned into a fiddle, and began
playing scales.
"Next prisoner,” shouted Old King Cole.
"Next prisoner,” the chorus repeated.
To Rosemary’s surprise Mistress Mary was led into
the court-room. Behind her walked the chrysanthemum,
and the tall hollyhock, and several other flowers from
the cottage garden. Mistress Mary looked very cross, and
did not seem the least little bit nervous of Old King Cole.
"I wish you would not jostle me so,” she said sulkily to
one of the soldiers.
"I told you I thought we should protest,” said the
hollyhock, catching sight of Rosemary as the party passed
quite close to her. "We couldn’t go on like that any
longer. It was too ridiculous.”
"What is the charge against the prisoner?” asked
the king.
"That she ill-treated the flowers in her garden,
Your Majesty,” said Mother Goose. "And that she is
always quite contrary.”


“Quite contrary/' echoed the chorus.
“I am no such thing/' contradicted Mistress Mary
sulkily.
“Don't answer back/' roared Old King Cole. “Throw
her in prison."
“But they won't do anything of the sort/' thought
Rosemary to herself with a smile, and sure enough the
soldiers had disappeared again, and Mistress Mary went
off arm-in-arm with the hollyhock and the chrysanthe-
mum.
“Where is Will-o-the-wisp ?" demanded the king.
“Here Your Majesty," said Will-o-the-wisp, as he
limped forward between two soldiers.
“Have you anything to say for yourself?" asked the
king. “Have you any reason why you should not be
thrown into prison, and fed on frozen radishes and ink
for the rest of your miserable life ?"
“Please your most excellent Majesty," said Will-o-
the-wisp. “If you will only let me have a new light I
will promise never to lead people astray again."
“Rubbish," yelled the king.
“I will light the way so that it will be easy for
them to find their way home," went on Will-o-the-wisp.
“We can't take your word for that," snapped Old
King Cole, and then catching sight of Rosemary for the
first time he forgot all about the prisoner.
“My dear," he said. “You are very welcome here.
I have just had news from the Wallawop of how you
helped him with his Aunt Arradeanbombomba's button
boots. He is so pleased that he has promised never to
fight or bother anyone again, and says that all he wishes
to do is to die honoured and respected in his boots."
“Hear, hear, bravo," shouted everyone. “Three
cheers for the Wallawop," and they all danced and
shouted, while the small animals squeaked and squealed
and ran under the king's throne for safety.
“Because of what you have done," went on Old
King Cole, “You may have one wish, which I, as the
king of Rhymeland, will grant."
Rosemary was so bewildered that she could not
think of anything to wish. She gazed around her, and
the little Miff-Piff began to jump about excitedly, and
clap its tiny paws. “Dear me/' thought Rosemary.
“Whatever shall 1 wish," and then catching sight of
Will-o-the-wisp looking so terribly sad and weak she


could not help feeling sorry for him. Everyone else
seemed so excited and happy so she said, “I would like
to wish for Will-o-the-wisp."
Old King Cole looked doubtfully at the forlorn
creature, “Well," he said, “What is it?"
“I wish that Will-o-the-wisp be given a new light,
so that he will be able to help people," Rosemary
shouted.
“Granted," roared the king.
“Granted," shouted everyone.
Will-o-the-wisp smiled gratefully at Rosemary.
“Thank you very much," he said, when he managed to
reach her side. “It is very kind of you. Can I show
you the way to anywhere?"
“Well not just at present," Rosemary began. She
noticed that he had a lantern on his head again, and it
was burning very dimly, but as she watched it gradually
grew brighter.
“Silence," cried the king, “Where is the Miff-Piff?"
“Oh my, I will be thrown into prison and fed on
frozen radishes and ink," whispered the little creature
nervously as Rosemary pushed it forward. “No you
won't," she said.
“I congratulate you on your most excellent piece of
bravery," said the king. “You shall be rewarded."
“Rewarded, rewarded," shouted everyone.
The Miff-Piff was very embarrassed and bowed awk-
wardly. “It was nothing," it said modestly.
“And," went on the king, producing a large scroll of
paper, “I present you with a pardon for your past forget-
fulness, and a new rhyme, beautifully printed in red ink,
and suitably inscribed."
“A new rhyme," gasped the Miff-Piff, hardly able
to believe its ears. “I am to have a new rhyme?"
“It is an easy one," continued the king. “One that
you will be able to remember. Read it."
“Read it, read it," shouted everyone as the king
handed the paper to the Miff-Piff.
“Think of a rhyme, think of a radish," whispered
the little animal softly, as it struggled to unroll the stiff
parchment.
Will-o-the-wisp's light grew brighter and brighter
and shone dazzlingly in Rosemary’s eyes so that she
could hardly see, and the noise was so deafening that she


could not hear one word of the Miff-Piff’s rhyme, as it
read in its nervous little voice.
Everyone shouted and sang together, and even the
walls of the room began to spin round and round, until
suddenly there was a loud crash. Old King Cole had
fallen off his throne and lay among the little squeaking
animals.
“Oh dear,” cried Rosemary, as she recognised the
little guinea pig that she had seen in the wood. “They
will all be killed.”
“For nobody cares for thee,” she heard its voice
weakly repeating as she managed to get near enough to
help it out from under one of Old King Cole’s hands.
Gradually Will-o-the-wisp’s light began to grow
fainter and fainter and the singing and noise grew softer.
Rosemary looked around her and to her surprise every-
thing seemed to be fading.
“Why . . . ?” she began, as she looked at Old King
Cole, who was slowly melting away. “What ever is hap-
pening?” But nobody answered. Old King Cole,
the Miff-Piff, Will-o-the-wisp, and all the other people
and animals had disappeared, and the singing sounded
faintly in the distance.
“To bed, to bed,
“Sleepy head,” it echoed.
Rosemary found somebody bending over her. “Why
it is Mother! Where am I!” she exclaimed, sitting up.
“Yes dear, we must take you back to bed now.”
“Why I have been to the land of Nursery Rhyme,
Mother,” said Rosemary excitedly.
“Where dear?”
“To the land of Nursery Rhyme,” Rosemary’s eyes
shone as she spoke ,“And I have met Simple Simon, the
Miff-Piff, Old King Cole, and-and-and-all of them,” she
finished breathlessly.
“How ever did you get there?” asked her mother
with a smile.
“I don’t know,” said Rosemary jumping up. “The
kitten said that Mother Goose must have taken me there
on her gander.”
“Perhaps she did,” said Rosemary’s mother.
“She took us to Old King Cole’s court,” Rosemary
went on excitedly .


“Yes, I think it must have been Old Mother Goose,”
said the lady smiling.
“Why?” asked Rosemary.
“Because,” said her mother, picking up a large
feather which was lying on the grass, “Here is one of
the gander’s feathers.”
The End


I
111 lilllillil
3 1508 01755366 5


•
.
’• f v/ • • - : ■ • V* V X •. ;*£>• •>' ' $4*! *$S <v7 * ’kj ’ ' c * iSfe *' 'Vi* ‘ /*- ' '
* . •• r: '• ■. ■•'■ . i ■•• >' ■ ' • & * • % *l> jki-- £ %S • -dk : /v..•(■'»'' 'fe •.^ /SSS&J& ' JRwffiira' ' H* -•*
■'•:-.'■ v-vt! •'/• a*® : ■>.*■ v *-^ilk: »v* ■:^“Skw/ ‘
- ; - ufh-m . $ Vm: i* V^ml:
. « • f1 ■ ■ ,• ■ • ‘\mak ■$& rm>w&iA
■■•■.. :■■!< /^^ '’ ' ' '■£•>•.*>.• a ■■■v- : j*" ,
* V- - : ' • I ,v“ '
< *.'* •• V:;“
■ , ' ■ . , -. , J ■ ■ l' , - . • . ' , • , ‘ ■ ' .V W .. L '.V - j- \... * ■ > . ?»*
:>rr ■ . . f 11- ■’ • X'f®
■• „ 1 ,,.... vl* .-v-''
).. „*.v *. m. a
', • A$&' )ff,' '.. ■£ ’.'wj & .f,*/^, 1 , jf 1 &%$*** - "t ■'“ ' '■“* •' *«*$ '" ' , '' ■■'■“•''‘ >• ' g '' V JLmI^^8y**T
■ , ■-■' ■■- .-**• . ’■•• :, J ■,. -• v- r \ t '*J'. •■ . # A'‘ *■''s
’ • .■
.
"t i&m Imm
f . f* ’ n \ > tJP 58 p **? ?* t 't Hi
■„;, ; #»,€. % ■-■■:;“ v MsS^v^‘MtmsAm& ■■ &!B
-. ■ k---• ■ ■; *wm&J^n3&i
. , ,
j
=:■; w4w|
- v • ;?■•-'■-,■>■. ,►* jr«”4,44«»^K4^yfv?:',• 'W’>%;^sii?.
