

ROUGH NOTES
OF TRAVELS FROM
LIVERPOOL TO SOUTHAMPTON, •
BY WAY OF
AUSTRALIA, NEW ZEALAND
AND
SOUTH AMERICA.
(By R. S.)
PUBLISHED, JANUARY, 1860
LEICESTER:
PRINTED BY J. SIDDONS, POCKLINGTON’S WALK




ROUGH NOTES
OF TRAVELS FROM
LIVERPOOL TO SOUTHAMPTON,
BY WAY OF
AUSTRALIA, NEW ZEALAND AND
SOUTH AMERICA.
(Bt R. S.)
PUBLISHED, JANUARY, 1860.
LEICESTER:
PRINTED BT J. SI DOOMS, POCKLINGTON’S WALK.




CHAPTER I.
From Liverpool to Melbourne.
On the 20th of February, 1858, I left Liverpool for
Melbourne in a sailing vessel, the Wine/red, above 1,000
tons burden. A steam tug towed us out to sea. In the
night a stiff breeze sprang up which caused our towing
line to break, when, being tossed about nicely, 140 out of
180 on board became sea-sick. On the 23rd we picked up
two boats' crews who had abandoned their vessel, and soon
after found a pilot near Cork, who took the whole—eight
seamen —onshore. On the 26th we encountered a severe
squall; which broke and carried away our jib-boom. The
ship, which was iron, 210 feet long and 37 feet broad, was
continually wrapped in one entire sheet of water (tons of
water sweeped the deck drenching all upon it) ; neverthe-
less, for the novelty of the feeling, I continued alone upon
the poop for two hours, and really enjoyed the knocking
about very much. Some of the sailors tumbled about sadly,
receiving broken heads, while the old Doctor Nugent was
afraid to stir out of his cabin to dress their wounds.
Most of the emigrants were below and had the hatchway
fastened down upon them. In the evening our lights were
blown out; the water was a considerable depth on our cabin
floor, and sleep was impossible, arising from the sensation
produced by the expanding and contracting of our “dens.”
The ship shook terribly ; and the unearthly noises and
horrid din, arising from the wild winds whistling through
the rigging, the billows dashing against the sides and on
the deck of the vessel, the shouts of the officers, the re-
sponces of the men, and the groans of the passengers, were
such as to excite suspicion that w T e could scarcely survive
the thunder storm that raged so terrifically. Next morn-
ing only four sat down to breakfast. Upon the deck ropes,


planks, and all sorts of ship material were swimming about
and the seamen wading after them.
“Ye gentlemen of England,
Who live at home at ease ;
Oh ! little do ye know
The dangers of the seas.”
The following day a new jib-boom was put up, and the
windows opened to dry the cabin.
On March Bth the cocks were taken from their coop, and
to evince their courage, which the storm had not quelled,
they exhibited what some might call a respectable fight.
At night, when near the Madiera Isles, a strong breeze broke
our new jib-boom. A fortnight after we had a storm which
lasted thirty-three hours, which besides carrying away the
top main-yard, broke the upper part of the main-mast.
The pig-shed was also shattered into fragments, and all the
pigs squealing, ran about like wildfire. Two of them died.
Every available seaman was up the whole night.
On St. Patrick’s day the Irish drank too freely, and
the end, as might have have been expected, was a fight
at night, but happily without any very serious consequences.
When under the Equator, which we had now reached, one
feels like melted butter, or as if soaked in gravy, or like
being stewed in an iron pan. We had no nonsense in
crossing the line, no collecting of money or brutal attempt
to annoy passengers ; yet we managed to get up a little ex-
cellent fun, and a drink for the seamen. The old Doctor
was very drunk and disorderly at midnight on the 3rd of
April. Next day we caught a shark eight feet long, and
cut it up, though the flesh is entirely useless. Two days
after this the pigs were found in the cabin.
On the 13th we had a strong breeze. Mrs. EL, who for
her outrageous conduct was favoured with the appellation
of the she-devil, threw her coffee in the face of a gentleman,
and indulged in filthy and disgusting language. The Cap-
tain threatened to put her in irons to protect the other
passengers from her violence, if she offered to show her
pranks any more. On the 15th very few passengers were
about, the weather being much worse. A tremendous swell
set in and totally broke our sleep, on the 16th, at 2 am. All


of a sudden, with horrible noises, something like a complete
upset happened. When I opened my berth door I found
all the lights washed out, and the sea-water rolling in the
cabin over and over from one side to the other. The most
disastrous but ridiculous scene presented itself—men being
pitched over the centre table; the steward on the floor on
all fours with one leg in a bucket, one hand holding out a
broken jug handle, and a bit of broken plate in the other,
with his back flat upon the cabin floor, scotching others
that were tumbling up and down, with the water running
over them. Though a partaker in the peril I certainly
enjoyed the struggle, and heartily laughed as I lay all warm
and comfortable in my “ bunk.” Chamber utensils, wash
basins, jugs, and all sorts of articles were dashed about back-
wards and forwards. One young man seated upon a bulky
box went sailing past my cabin mixing with the wreck of
other materials. The sea forced its way down the main-
hatch, broke into the hospital, and upset the only patient
we had; the poor fellow being compelled to assist in lading
out the water. The main hatch, which usually took eight
to ten men to move, was washed from one side of the vessel
to the other with Mr. H. and the purser inside ; but they
caught hold of the brass railing belonging to the poop steps
just as the hatch was dashed into fragments. We had
nearly three days and nights of this weather. Intense
were the distress and sufferings of the overcrowded pas-
sengers who were deluged with water and kept below
shivering in the bitter cold. The polluted air was rendered
intolerable by the numbers who were sick. Many of the
people below, some despairing, screaming, groaning, others
giving vent to yells of laughter, had to sit huddled together
upon their hard boxes which were sliding about. Oh ! the
pitiable looks of those who seemed most afraid, thinking
they should die, as the ship gave roll after roll, bathing her
stunsails in the ocean, with her jib-boom sail streaming
away in tattered strips. We had biscuit, wet with sea-
water, and cheese for breakfast. The officers on duty while
visiting the cabin to render all the assistance they were
able, were set upon by our she-devil, who poured forth,


without stint, her abusive language, backed by her hus-
band ; and a thundering row ensued, equal almost to the
furious storm outside ; —the sight of the irons, however,
restored peace and quiet, and in a short time all calmed
down. So ended this dreadful double storm.
The following games and amusements were resorted to
during fine weather —quoits, pitching dumps, twirling soda
water bottles, chess, draughts, cards, dominos, earwig, hunt
the slipper, Jack lost his supper, turn the trencher, instru-
mental music, flutes, violins, accordians, pianoforte, singing
and dancing.
At length we passed the Islands of St. Paul and Amster-
dam on the South of the Cape of Good Hope, and our
delicate she-devil never ventured out of her den again until
we landed at Melbourne. The 19th April all the passeng-
ers were engaged drying their stock-in-trade; every article
from a slipper to a nightcap was floating in the breeze upon
lines attached to the rigging from fore to aft; on deck,
every rope and available space was covered. We were
now tolerably happy ; the ducks were quacking, the cocks
crowing, the hens cackling, the pigs grunting, the sun
shining, and the ship sailing 10 miles an hour—in the right
direction.
I will give you an Irishman’s description of the gale last
night. Terry said that the boy Mick came tumbling down
the hatchway and telling us “that the houses on deck were
blown right away sure enough, and the big trae (the main
mast) in the middle of the ship was surely down, and all
along for that fellow damning and swearing so. Hid not
I tell him that the judgement of God was upon him and
us, brought on by his wickedness. I bid my poor wife col-
lect all our valuables in her handkerchief and let us be away
on the deck, for they will surely take to the boats. As she
was a following me she said, the letters, jewel, the letters, we
have forgot the letters. But I said d—n the letters ; follow
me up the steps. On the top we saw the ship all full of
sparks from hell fire (phosphorescent water). Och! says I,
come out of that, for the water came over both sides and
met in the middle of the deck, when it fell with a crash.


As all chance was gone of our getting to the boats, she
said, come back, oh, Terry dear, and let us all die together.
So we went back to pray, for we were thinking of our
poor sowls. And we prayed for the safety of our captain,
officers, and crew, and that the boy Mick would kill that
fellow for wishing our ship to sink, and bringing this
judgment upon all of us poor innocent cratures. I prayed
that if I was saved I would never more come back on the
sae any more, but be content with the land, and never
go seeking arter riches far away over the sae sure. I
prayed again that the fellow, Dick Currey, might be pun-
ished for swearing so, and put in irons for 10 days,
chained to the big trae near where the captain and officers
live. Now strike a light, Mick boy, said I ; and let us look
if others are collecting their poor sowls together to the
honour of the great God, while we are sinking down into
the deep.”
The 20th was desperately cold. The purser’s store was
robbed. Two days after the thief was discovered, and punish-
ed. The sails, containing 13,000 yards of canvass, were set
to-day. May Ist, the cold was worse and worse. My
“den” was, I believe, the coldest in the vessel. Sunday, the
30th, 101 days out, land was sighted, and all was com-
motion and joy. We next day passed Cape Otway.
When 103 days out we took a pilot up. The first person I
had the pleasure of seeing was Mr. G. W. in a sailing
boat with Captain C. the Port Warden. They waited till
the Custom house officers reported us in good health; or
as they nautically termed it, had passed us. Following my
instinct and habits, I was the first of the passengers to
leave the Winefred, and set my feet upon the soil of
Australia. I arrived in the city of Melbourne on the 2nd
June, 1858, having spent 104 nights on sea.


CHAPTER 11.
Melho urn e, A ustralia.
1 called upon Mr. T., then took a loivhack car to Lynd-
hurst, four miles distant, where I had breakfast. I then
returned to look after my luggage.
Perhaps the geography of no distant place is better
known to the English than that of Australia. The Conti-
nent of Australasia, formerly called New Holland, is,
regarded as an island, the largest in the world. The
southern half is the part at present settled upon, and
it is divided into three immense provinces—each larger
than England, called respectively South Australia, Vic-
toria, and New South Wales.
Melbourne, the capital of Victoria, cannot easily bo
described. It is finely situated upon undulating ground.
North Melbourne and Collingwood, suburbs of the city, are
large flats, twice as large as Leicester Abbey Meadow. At
the back, and on each side, a good distance beyond the
suburbs, there are lofty hill ranges. The streets of the city
and neighbourhood, from 4 to 5 miles every way, are well
paved. Telegraph wires run along the principal roads. The
land in the vicinity is partly planted with vines, which look
like raspberry bushes.
The trees in the country are the most striking, yet dull,
ragged looking things imaginable, with weeping-willow-like
leaves. They forcibly suggest the idea of dejection and misery.
The surface of the country near Melbourne looks dry and
barren, with stones, bones, and huts strewn all over. The
price of land 41 miles from the city, near to the Sydney
road, is from £7O to £IOO an acre. Some land within the
city, which was bought 6 or 7 years ago for £7 a quarter
of an acre, was afterwards sold for £4O to the Methodists,
who built a chapel upon it; but this week it was sold for
£40,000 clear of materials. Compared with the rates in
England, provisions are dear. At this time cabbages were






selling at 2s. 6d. each ; eggs 6d. ; turkeys 205.; and butter
4s. 6a. lb. •
The habits and intercourse of the people are of a very
free-and-easy description. The Mayor of Melbourne, Mr,
J. T. S. opened a ball the other day with our milkwoman
at a public house in Lyndhurst ; his next partner in the
dance was a washerwoman. Amongst themselves'the people
are continually borrowing and lending money.
The streets of Melbourne are 90 feet wide, the lanes 48,
and the roads from 100 to 200. The Park upon the Syd-
ney road contains 800 acres, and lets for £5OO yearly. The
Richmond Park is small; but attached to it are the Bot-
anical and Zoological Gardens, and the cricket and football
grounds. There is an abundant supply of good water,
which is brought a distance of 25 miles. Fountains are
being erected in the principal streets. Gas is generally
used in every quarter of the city. The piers, for the ac-
commodation of the shipping, and the local steamers, are
most substantial. Of the three railway stations one is very
fine, surpassing that in Leicester. There are banks, shops,
and public buildings of considerable splendour and
great architectural beauty. The Post Office, now in pro-
gress, will not be surpassed by any in the world. The build-
ings for the two houses of Parliament will cost upwards of
.£1,000,000. The decorations are splendid. (But the ladies,
whom I saw in the Upper House when Sir Henry Berkley
prorogued the Assembly in June, 1858, seemed to me neither
handsome nor elegant. Perhaps, however, my eyes were
blinded by the ornamental grandeur which everywhere met
the gaze in this noble edifice.) The river Yarra at Mel-
bourne is half as wide again as the English canal. There
are three bridges over it, each of one span. Victoria
bridge is very substantial, built of stone, and leads from
the city towards Western Port. The second, which is for
foot-passengers only, is a beautiful light iron construction,
leading from Richmond Park to the Botanical Gardens.
The third is also iron and constructed on the tubular prin-
ciple, with external balconies for foot-passengers ; and con-
nects Richmond with Prahran. Windsor, St. Kilda, dc.


The Parliament of Victoria has, at different times, voted
to the public library £lO,OOO for books, and £40,000 to-
wards the building fund : I believe they have upwards
of 10,000 volumes, elegantly bound, for the use of all per-
sons from 10 a.m. till 9 p.ra.
The province of Victoria contains 90,000 square miles,
and a population near to 600,000 ; but there are no large
rivers. The capital is in 374 latitude south, and 145 long-
itude east In June 1858 a Bill was signed by the govern-
ment granting £7,000,000 for the opening up of railway
communication. The Keilor plains which are ten miles
north-west from Melbourne, have a rich soil several yards
deep, extending 17 miles towards Melton. This land must
in a very short time become exceedingly valuable. In the
city of Melbourne the causeway on each side the principal
streets are broad and flagged—and the carriage roads
macadamized
There are four great thoroughfares out of Melbourne ;
one leads towards Sydney ; one to Bendigo and to the river
Murray ; one through Balaarat and the Pyrenees; and
one to Western Port and Gipp’s Land.
Conversing with"a gentleman one day, he told me he had
sold his practice and was about to remove 1,000 miles, near
to Moreton Bay, where he intended to purchase 3,000 sheep
for £l,OOO, and to rent part of a sheep run from a large land-
holder, for which he would give the half of his increase,
instead of money; and he expected to be able in a few
years to realize an annual income of £3,000.
Decided preference is given to colonial-made goods ;
they sell for double the price of English. Imported goods
sold at auction scarcely ever bring above the fourth of their
value.
Messrs. S. & Co., Glasgow, Scotland, make excellent
quartz-crushing machinery. It is capable of either cracking
stones, flattening iron, crushing bones. These machines
are in use at the gold fields at Castlemain and other parts.


to
W
fH
O
Q
W
O
<1
w
w
H
tt
g
W
HH
o
W
K
o
SZS
u




CHAPTER 111.
From Melbourne to Sidney.
On June 16th I took my passage by steamer for Sydney.
One of the passengers informed me that he left a village
between Nottingham and Belvoir, because the Corn Laws
had been repealed. In the old country he had been fond
of a smart horse, and delighted in hunting and racing—
in moderation. When he emigrated he settled near Gee-
long ; and erected substantial steam flour-mills. But
having failed, he was now seeking a home for his family in
New South Wales. —Another passenger was Mr. MacW.,
once the hosiery buyer for Messrs. P. B. & Co, of Dublin, who
had saved £l,OOO while at Sydney. To better his fortune
he had crossed over to the “ diggings'" at Balaarat in Vic-
toria, where he lost all his money. He was now returning
to Sydney ; where, as I afterwards learnt, he engaged with
Mr. David C. to conduct a store at Maitland.—Another
passenger, who was a cattle-dealer, had not succeeded in
bringing together a large mob of cattle, and accordingly
his journey proved a loss.—Another, a young man, was
upon a visit to his sisters who resided upon the Liverpool
plains. He afterward met me at Sydney, and his gener-
osity was overwhelming.—One old man with a young wife,
who were in the steerage, was going to a situation in the
country : their wages were to be —husband £6O, wife £2O,
besides board and lodgings. It was pleasant to observe
that whatever was the business of those on board, all looked
cheerful and conversed right merrily.
Sydney and Paramatta.
Among a number of Leicester residents in Sydney I
found a Mr. B, He had about 200 acres of land, and was
partner with a Mr. P. in an established trade. Mr. C. had
removed to Woollengong, which caused me to select some


waratah plants, at 2s. 6d. each, near Woolloomoolo. Pelts
were selling at 6d lb ; hides 7s each ; hay £9 a ton ; oats
from 5s to 15s a bushel.
Staying at the same Hotel with me were two successful
diggers from Adalone, who were returning to Ireland.
They showed me a quantity of quartz in which the gold
veins were quite apparent. The manner in which the gold
is extracted from the quartz is as follows. The quartz is
burnt, then crushed ; after which quicksilver is thrown in,
and to it the gold adheres.
If you require a boy for five minutes, it is “ half-a-crown
sir ; a man would charge ss; while a horse and cart would
be only 7s 6d.
I attended a sale of horses at Woollers, in Pitt street,
and found the prices marvellously low. The first sold for
21s ; the second for 40s. A number sold as follows : A
horse £lO ; a horse £l2 ; a three-year-old, with saddle and
bridle £ll 10s; a horse £5 ; a colt £3 2s 6d ; a horse
£5 10s. At the same sale a quantity of sole leather sold
at Is lb, and of top at Is Id., to Is. Gd, lb.
Sidney is a large, handsome, quiet place, beautifully situ-
ated ; but some of the roads are very steep, and dirty.
The Botanical Gardens are partly surrounded by clear deep
sea-water. The bays, which number about a hundred, are
all formed in the sand stone up to Paramatta, a distance of
eighteen miles. How pleasant in winter is steam-boat
travelling up those clear waters that are ever rolling through
those lovely bays 1 On each side may be observed patches
of forty acres planted with orange or lemon trees. Forty
acres properly managed will produce £‘soo worth annually.
I plucked my first orange at Paramatta in the garden, and
by the favour, of Mr. G. S., formerly of Leicester; who
informed me that last year the tree yielded, 1,500 oranges,
about £6 worth. From Paramatta I returned by rail to
Sydney, where they have spacious and beautiful Botanical
Gardens,museums, colleges, mechanic's institute,free library,
news-rooms, hall of commerce, government domains, cold and
hot public baths, covered markets, slaughter-houses, theatres,
police courts, hospitals, parliament houses, telegraph sta-






tions, railroads, cathedrals, churches, and chapels; with
splendid additions (the gift of Lady Macquirie) to form
recreation grounds. The country round the town seems
for miles one entire block of sandstone. I have climbed
over rock after rock, and looked upon mountains covered
with, or composed of, pure white sand, which was more
dazzling to the eye than snow. There are also mountains
of drab, buff, and red colour. The vallies are covered with
the everlasting dirty-green bush and queer poverty-stricken
trees, with here and there a few beautiful wattles, Norfolk
pines, and fern trees. I have often been puzzled to under-
stand how those trees can shoot up so beautifully in such
soil! But those clear, ocean bays, wattles, gums, Norfolk
pines, and various coloured sandstone rocks, which when
combined presented such novel and attractive scenery, with
that soft air, wore all to be left.


CHAPTER IV.
From Sydney to Nelson.
On the morning of the 10th of July I was awoke by one
shouting—“ It is past six o’clock/’ By the time I was
dressed the morning had dawned. To make assurance of
being in time doubly sure, I w r as compelled to leave my
linen with a washerwoman at Sidney. I do not expect
ever to see it again. With the assistance of the Boots I
was standing on the Victoria wharf at the appointed time,
and heard the clock strike seven. We rowed to the
bark Burnett, 137 tons burthen, lying in the middle of one
of the bays. The sails were unfurled, and we soon passed
the flag-staff battery. By twelve o'clock we had passed
the “ Heads.” I looked upon the spot, just outside these
heads, where, in 1857, every soul, except one, perished,
when within three hours of their journey, in the ill-fated
Dunbar. Near this the Anne and other vessels had lately
gone to pieces.. By two o’clock we were fairly out at sea,
bound for Nelson, New Zealand, by way of Wellington.
The sea at this time was delightfully calm and beautiful;
the breeze scarcely strong enough to carry us away from
the rocky shore before we were wrapped in darkness.
Lightening and squally, dirty weather came on with the
night. The winds rose, and the vessel pitched awfully.
She was an Australian-built bark, of “ gum-wood, that
sinks like iron when thrown upon the waters.” She soon
lay on one side, and ducked, and dipped, and rolled heavily.
The stormy weather continuing, Captain S. was uneasy ;
and frequently declared that “ someday this vessel will be
found like the ill-fated Prince of Wales with its keel up-
wards.” All hands on board, saving the mate and myself,
were somewhat helpless through sickness. At 10 p.m,, I
returned to my “ bunk,” where I lay rolling about till my
flesh was quite bruised and painful. Had I been tossed in
a blanket all night, I could not have been much more
O J


annoyed. At dawn the squally weather abated, and the
rolling was a trifle less disagreeable. The three subsequent
days the weather was fine, with a good breeze. In the
afternoon of the 19 th—land ho ! We now saw the bold
snow-capped mountains of New Zealand. On the 20th,
while on the poop, we saw astern Terawiti Cape in a glow
of sunshine ; and on the opposite side Tory Channel. Right
ahead, Port Underwood stood out, with a background of
the most dismal, dark-purple storm-cloud I ever beheld.
The storm advanced, blowing, roaring, tearing and raining
furiously. We lay to, “ jammed’' between two lines of
mountain-rocks in Cook’s Straits. Oh ! such bitter, cold
winds ; they soon drove us below for shelter as well as
breakfast. An hour after we visited the poop again, when
the weather was perfectly calm ; the angry clouds that so
lately threatened us bearing away in our stern. With
delight we saw the mountain ranges of Cape Campbell, its
glittering snow-cap soaring high into the sky in the far
east. At one o’clock we ran into an infernal windy bay—
the Port of Wellington; and as usual, I was the first to
land.
My companions in the cabin had been Mr. B. and Mr. H.
They had been to England to see their friends near Chel-
tenham, but became so dull and tired that they were glad
to hasten back to the South seas for ever. They had been to
the diggings near Goulbourne in New South Wales, where
they had roughed it in common with others, till at last they
became disgusted with their abortive attempts. They had
been nearly starved several times, and had lost their dogs and
horses through want of water and food. Now they were
in search of a wilderness, away from mankind ; their friends
in England having promised to join them ere long. But
it may be safely predicted that Wellington will not be their
place of rest. No horse can with pleasure be ridden over
those hills and mountains. An earthquake sometime back
so deranged the springs and deteriorated the water that
most of the inhabitants were placed in the hands of doctors.
In the valley of Hutt the floods are rapid and disastrous.
On the 18 th January, 1858, houses and bridges, cattle and


sheep, two men, four women and seven children were swept
away and lost. In September, another flood happened,
with destruction to property only.
I accompanied Captain S. to the valley of the Hutt, he
mounted upon a beautiful bay horse, I upon a “ buck-
jumping' iron-gray one. The narrow road from Wellington
for nine miles is along the base of a mountain range, and
full of ins and outs, which prevented us seeing more than
400 yards ahead. At the Hutt the hawthorn, originally
transferred from England, grows remarkably well. The
dwellings are of first-rate character. Commodious wooden
bridges stretch over the stream. In passing over one of
these long bridges, after we left the valley, we met two
bullock drays. The wheels of one rubbed against my horse,
which made him run backwards a few paces, when placing
his head between his forelegs he began kicking, and sud-
denly laid me on the bottom of the bridge, and then jumped
over me. But with the assistance of four ladies, two
gentlemen and the captain, we soon recovered him. I
mounted him again in haste (for we had to escape the tide,
and darkness was coming on), but every time we came
near to a dray he plunged with me down to the sea, and
would remain there till it had passed. But when near
Wellington, I forced him close to the mountain side, and
finding no means of escape he rushed up the side, there
hang hy his Jeet, and then dropped as soon as the dray was
gone by!
Wellington is a small, miserable-looking town. The
streets look like dirty lanes. Here and there are lumps of
earth in round heaps to a considerable altitude. There
are small barracks ; and a population of about 6,000. There
are eight piers or landing stages. There is no available
land nearer than the little bit in the valley of the Hutt.
There are almost continually dreadfully heavy winds; or
as the inhabitants remark, —“ all wind or no wind at all.”
At the time of my visit the bay contained two steamers,
two ships, three brigs, five schooners, and a few little boats.
I believe it was near this place that \a converted Maori
(the Marois are the aborigines of New Zealand) applied to


bo married; but the missionary replied that it was not
lawful for him to have two wives, and that he must not
marry while his present wife was living. He returned dis-
appointed. A short time after he came again to be married ;
and on inquiry it was found that he had killed his first
wife and eaten her, that there might be no obstacle in the
way of a second marriage.
On the 25th I was glad to see the anchor weighed, and
to get away from this cold harbour into the open sea. On
the 26th we were again in Cook’s Straits. The sailors
characterize the passage through these straits as being
jammed ; *but it would be more appropriate to describe
them as the mariner’s pawn-shop ; for once in, there is two
to one against getting out. After sailing about for twelve
hours we neared Cape Terawitti. The weather was tanta-
lizing ; sometimes favourable winds, then a dead calm,
then a head-wind and fitful squalls. For thirty-six hours
we were in “ calm and strife,” and made only three miles
direct headway. With the island of Mana at the top and
Cape Terawitti at the bottom ; with almighty, upright
rocks in the middle and what are termed the two brothers
and Wellington Heads with their ugly rocks along th»
opposite side, with a sea only eight miles wine, we were
buffetted about from one side to the other every hour ; and
during three days and nights had made only eighteen miles.
At last we reached the top of Queen Charlotte’s Sound,
leaving other ships in the straits behind us. Here we sailed
to and fro for twenty-four hours between Koamaru and
Cape Jackson, in continual fear of a dangerous sunken
wash-rock (Cooks rock) which lies two miles off the brothers.
Ultimately we had to lie to near the island of Motuara.
Early on the 29 th I found we had passed Cape Stephen
and Nelson’s monument near port Hardy, and were sailing
down Blind Bay. The wind changed, and the tide being
against us, we had to beat about. On the 30th we took
up Mr. Cross, the Nelson pilot, rounded the boulder bank,
and by a narrow channel, like a gutter, glided smoothly
into the natural boson of deep calm water.
Near this bay is the river Wimea, or “ water of many


springs.” The entrance to it which lies south-west about
one mile from the bay is over the Nelson flats, and navigable
only for small craft for two miles.
At Nelson the landing-place and pier, a small luggage
shed and custom house built with wood is three quarters of
a mile distant from the town. I went dashing slip, slop
through the mud, and put up at the Trafalgar Hotel, Mr.
L., the landlord hired a light cart to fetch my Luggage.
I paid two shillings to be put on shore ; two shillings to
pass the customs ; and now five shillings for the cart-hire.


CHAPTER V.
Nelson.
Nelson is a decent -little town. Though it is level,
damp and deep in mud, I like it much better than Wel-
lington. The shops are first-rate Christs church, which
I have been in during worship, is erected upon the choicest
piece of ground, and built of wood, with a shingled roof.
The front overlooks the bay and boulderbank ; and the
other side opens into a wide avenue leading to the moun-
tain range and cemetery. There are several good chapels
and schools ; and the Freemasons have built themselves a
hall 50 feet by 24 feet. All articles of dress are dear. It
is a slow, easy place. No one can inform you within a day
or a month when a ship will sail. Adjacent to the town
is a bog, which, if not drained, must be productive of fever.
Some time ago a person leaving Nelson for England
gave to a friend several town allotments, considering them
of such trifling value as to be unworthy of being retained
in possession during his absence ; but on his return he
found they could be sold for £4,000. Town acres that
were purchased seven years ago for £5 are now valued at
from £IOO to <£2,000 each. This is one of the ways that
money is made or picked up here. Whether a reaction
equally extreme may be expected, I cannot say.
While I was in Nelson the Freemasons’ hall was opened
by a ball, which I attended ; and a delightful and fashion-
able entertainment it was. Among the guests was a Maori
chief. I will now relate how I attended this ball. As all
my luggage was gone direct from Melbourne to Auckland,
the articles of dress I now had on had been picked up on
the road hither. All had gone to the ball and left me
alone; but Mrs. L., the landlady, brought my “ nobbier"
of whiskey, and remarked, —“Now, Mr. S., you had better
say you will go.” 1 replied,—lf I had cLthes I certainly
would go. She left, but returned in five minutes with


two black dress-coats, three white and two buff waistcoats,
one neck tie, one white lawn handkerchief, perfumed, and
two sizes of white kid gloves to choose from ; these being
the articles of which she had heard me remark I was defici-
ent. The only chance of staying away now was a misfit.
I tried on one coat; but no. I tried on the next ; could
not be a better fit. All being correct, the landlord, who
was a freemason, furnished me with a half-guinea ticket;
because it rained a “ whitechapel” -was called to convey
me across the street Being introduced, a considerable
number appeared delighted to see me ; and all the more, I
think, because of my not being expected. It was a stylish
affair. The dresses of the ladies were rich and rare. The
Maori chief whose name was Amano Ari’k, and who -was a
sort of King of the tribe Wakapewaka, was dressed in the
handsomest English ball costume. lat first thought him
an Indian merchant, I left at half-past two a. m., return-
ed to my Hotel, and retired quietly to rest.
At the end of my stay at Nelson I found the “merry
men’' smiling over the victims of “the Dun mountain cop-
per mining association” which had been formed there. The
money which was professedly to carry on the operations of
this association, was nearly all raised in England. An
agent or manager, who also came from England, received a
liberal salary for several years. In June crome had been
found at the Dun mountain, worth about £l2 a ton in
England; but the idea of finding copper was all hosh. It is
a notorious fact that there never was a grain of copper in or
near the Dun mountain, but the specimens were obtained
elsewhere. This information I received from Mr. D., one
of their paid officers, who resided upon the mountain. The
company have rails enough lying about for a line twelve
miles long.
One day I gave the Boots, who by the bye is called
“ Punch,” an extra sixpence to get a glass of ale. He
ordered his master to bring him a glass, I expressed a
doubt as to his orders being obeved. But Punch said, —
“I’ll bet thee halfa-crown that Mr. Luck will bring it into


me.” Well, sure enough, the master brought it in, and
Punch drank it up deliberately, like an honoured guest.
For amusement I one day accompanied the captain of
the Burnett out to sea, and returned with the pilot in his
open boat.
I was now getting tired of Nelson, but did not see the
least chance of leaving for four w r eeks. But happening to
go on board to see a clipper schooner, the Active, that was
leaving for Melbourne by way of New Plymouth, the
weather roughened ; and it becoming dangerous for me to
return with the pilot, I was taken out to sea. One of the
passengers, Mr, P, Irnley of Mount Imley, Twofold bay,
Australia, used to go to bed during the day ; and through-
out the night would have me for his partner at whist
against the captains. The party proving pleasant, I com-
plied with his whims. We sighted Mount Egmont, the
sugar loaves, and New Plymouth in the province of Tara-
naki, on the 6th August.
We cast anchor two-and-a-half miles from the beach,
just as it w 7 as getting dark. We entered the coast boat
and rowed to a buoy, to which one end of a rope w r as
attached, the other end being made fast to a post on shore.
While the boat was being hauled by this rope over the
“ surf walls,” our sensations were akin to those experienced
in the swinging boats that frequent our fairs. The boat
having grounded, w T e were carried ashore upon the backs
of sailors and natives. There is no harbour here, I took
up my quarters in the small, but good Taranaki Hotel.
By this accidental voyage I arrived nearly half-way
towards Auckland; and was at first gratified with the
thought of being so much nearer my port. But the sequel
will show that it might have been more expiditious to have
returned all the way to Sydney, and taken ship thence to
Auckland, though by so doing I should have had to travel
nearly 3,000 miles extra ; for I was detained full three
months wearying and waiting for an opportunity of com-
pleting the other half of the distance. However, the long’
stay gave me an opportunity of acquiring acquaintance with
the territory, people and customs of Taranaki.


CHAPTER YI.
Taranaki.
The Maori own and hold the principal part of the ter-
ritory of Taranaki, and their “ Pa’s” or villages are very
numerous. They also own three-fourths of the drays that
travel about; yet they pay no taxes either for land, roads,
bridges, or to government. The Maori is an untaxed com-
petitor to the “Pakeha” or white men who have to pur-
chase their land and pay local and other expences. They
raise much produce, such as honey, potatoes, onions, turnips,
grain and flax. They used to sell a pig for as much calico
as measured from the pig’s snout to the extreme end of its
tail; they now know better the relative value of calico and
pigs. They wear very few articles of dress imported from
Europe. Yet some of them come to town dressed in a
ragged, coloured calico jacket, and a fine woollen shawl
round their waist reaching to their knees. Others have
on a white calico sheet, or a wool blanket with red or blue
border, or printed drugget, or a soldiers iron-grey overcoat.
Most frequently, however, their raiment is a rough flax
cloth of their own manufacture. The females have gener-
ally a short, dirty pipe in their mouth, smoking in a very
pert, independent way. One lass had a print dress, a black
scarlet and white long shawl, a black beaver hat with
feathers, one of which was white and the other red, and a
long black veil over her face, with a pipe in her mouth
smoking. One woman I saw wearing a white shirt outside
over her dress. When on horseback they carry a pretty
light handwhip, and are clad in a bottle-green riding-habit,
with gloves, hat, etc; but none of them at any time wear
shoes or stockings. Some of them wearing white merino
shawls with fancy borders may be seen driving a pig with
a flax string tied to its leg, or carrying young trees from
the bush to sell ; or driving a team of bullocks in a dray.
Some have their picaninnies on their backs. Old men go a


tzs
W
►d
f
Kj
K
o
Cl
H
W
o
g
H
W
W
td
O
W




shopping with their handsome young wives, whose beautiful,
glossy, black, undulating hair is delicately arranged. Some
few are ugly ; but the most of them, male and female,
have graceful, well-rounded, and finely formed figures, car-
ried cavalierly. When they meet, they cross noses for a
much longer time than we should shake hands.
On the 16th I rode out in company with a young man
to to the Waiatra, about 10 miles hence. Tbe land we
passed over is undulating and exceedingly rich, covered
mostly with firn, and as far as the white man is allowed to
purchase, the land is in beautiful condition and fenced with
gorse.
The Heur village which we pass through upon the Bell
Block with its church, chapel, public house, and brewery,
looks well. No one is allowed to sell, let, or give to the
Maori the least drop of intoxicating drink, under heavy
penalties. Thus the laws of New Zealand compel the
Maori to keep sober by inflicting penalties, and permits the
Pakeha to get drunk by licence. A few miles from this
village commences the Maori land, on account of which
William King and Isaiah were fighting eight months ago.
When these fellows meet and kill two or three men,
they report a large battle. Isaiah wanted to sell this land
to the Government —William King did not, so they quar-
relled. King was the victor and therefore burnt all his
enemies Pa's and drove Isaiah and his tribe out of the land.
We stayed a short time on the Karaka Island. The Isle
belongs to a settler near New Plymouth who did not forego
his claim to this small Island at the time the Emigrants
had to remove from the Waiatra district, which was at first
the New Plymouth settlement. The land was purchased
from the Maori's and divided and settled upon, but some
dispute arose in consequence of two Maori claimants.
Governor Fitzroy restored the land and removed the settlers
to the river Huatoki, the present site of New Plymouth.
But one settler a Scotchman would not remove, the Maori’s
consequently levelled his Wairie, fastened him on to a por-
tion and carried him over the Wivikiho, and there left him
with a caution not to return on pain of death. Then they


erected upon the North shore a very high pole or standard,
which is still standing, and swore they would destroy any
and every white man that took up his abode beyond it.
The Scotchman, nothing daunted, returned to his allot-
ment of land. A second time the Maori removed him back
over the Wivikiho and left him fastened to the boards he
was carried upon. He was found by some one and un-
loosed. Again he repaired to his allotment from which he
had been ejected, determined rather to die than lose his
land. At this juncture a quarrel arose between the two
Maori chiefs, during their struggle the Scotchman was
overlooked and forgotten. And now he is in quiet possession.
To the native evergreens are being added English and
other foreign trees; such as oak, ash, elm, apple, peach,
cherry, walnut, orange, lemon, banana, fig, vine and hop.
A good apple orchard has brought £2OO in a season. Un-
fortunately, however, the worm and fungi destroy the apple
tree after a few seasons.
There is a good variety of indigenous trees. The rata
neuie is a noble tree, with a rich crimson blossom, standing
out like feathers upon a peacock’s head. But it is a para-
site formed of numerous stems interlaced and has no
solid trunk. This tree runs up and embraces the trunk
of some large tree which it afterwards supplants and be-
comes in its stead a considerable tree. The largest mea-
sured 68 feet in circumference. The interior is often used
by the natives for a dwelling-place. The fuschia is nearly
as large as an oak. There is a sort of palm from 50 feet to
60 feet high. It is a very striking object. The red, white
and blue “ maori” trees (maori, as already intimated, is the
name of the aborigines of New Zealand; but the word is
also conventionally used to describe anything that is good,
beautiful or superior) look handsome because of their varied
tints, The pureeree — iron wood — is very useful for the
foundations of buildings. The stem of the Kai Kai is
suitable for human food, after the enormous leaves which
adhere to the trunk in layers, have been taken away ; and
the leaves by being interlaced are employed for lining and
thatching warries. (Warries is the name given to dwelling-


places either for man or beast.) The karaka is like our
laurel in appearance, and in winter is cut down to feed
cattle. Wattles are used for fences ; and supple-jacks are
climbers. The Kauri is the King of the forest, but this tree
grows only in the Province of Auckland.
The people of New Plymouth hear from Asia and Africa
once a year ; from foreign parts of Europe twice ; from
America four times; Tasmania and Adelaide eight; England,
Melbourne, Sydney, Otago and Canterbury ten; Nelson
and Napier once a month ; Auckland, Wellington and
Wanganui twice a month.
The situation of the land postman, who is a maori, is no
sinecure. The route he has to take exposes him in some
places to great danger. He leaves New Plymouth and
goes by way of the Waiatra and Monganui Bluff for 30
miles. Then past Pariokariwa point, the rocks from being
900 feet high projecting into the sea, rise inland 2,000
to 3,000 feet. This postman with the letters fastened on
his back has to ascend a cliff 300 feet high, then by means
of a rope with a succession of knots upon it, to ascend 30
feet higher to a ledge only about 3 feet in width, with the
sea raging 300 feet below on one side, and the cliff like a
stone wall rising as it were to the sky on the other. When
he leaves this ledge of the precipice he has to descend a
vast ravine, whose rugged sides of rock tower high in
awful grandeur. In this ravine there is a chasm to be
crossed ; but he will sometimes have to wait hours and
even days for a favourable opportunity of passing without
being engulphed by the sea, which with short intermissions,
furiously rushes up and overflows the chasm. Directly on
one wave breaking he has to leap to the opposite side ; and
if this daring feat were not accomplished without one slip,
one wrong grasp, or one mistake, he would be dashed to
atoms by the next wave. But even having passed this
perilous spot, he has to swim rivers, cross bogs, and climb
mountains and hills before he reaches the termination of
his journey, which is 160 miles from New Plymouth.
When will there be some other opportunity of passing di-
rect overland to it 1


Guides in this passage have been known to exact the last
penny from the traveller, and afterwards strip him of his
clothing ; leaving him with this advice:—“ Now go to
your Mother Victoria, she can give you plenty more.”
The day after my arrival in New Plymouth I took a walk
wilh two gentlemen who were staying at the same Hotel
with me, when I witnessed hundreds of the most beautiful
spots in this delightful climate, that would make admirable
settlements. The soil and herbage were luxuriant, and the
rivulets of rippling clear water plentiful. There were
capital wood homesteads, and fin® gorse fences. The foot-
paths were good, but the horse roads bad.
On the 12th I accompanied two friends into the bush.
My horse at one time sank in the mud till my feet were
more than covered. We stuck fast for awhile, but at last
managed to riggle out.
On the 14th I walked to Omata, a village four miles
distant. The scenery was delightful, and resembles Siuith-
land, Leicestershire. The land is as rich as butter. I re-
turned with a friend by Cape Egmont. We first crossed
a gully, then an iron-sand mountain of 50 feet slope ; but
in crossing the mountain I slipped and was speedily brought
to the bottom, and almost smothered in hot sand. Having
met a stream, we were enabled to cross it by means of an
accummulation of decayed trees; after which we had to
crawl up an iron sand bank, as hot as the last, when we
were high above the level of the sea. I carelessly slipped
upon some “cutting” grass, and in stretching forth my arms
to break my fall, I was surprised to find all my fingers cut
across, bleeding and smarting severely. This land is thickly
covered with tine clover ; and the people pay one shilling
a head w r eekly for the cattle they turn upon it.
On the 28th we rode over to the Waiwakaiho, or “canoe
river,” where I purchased 75 acres of bush-land, six miles
from New Plymouth, on the Egmont road. Mount Eg-
mont, which is 10 miles distant from New Plymouth, and
8,300 feet high, is a prominent land-mark. Its summit is
covered with snow throughout the winter months. The
winds from it are very boisterous ; and those from Cape


g
M •
CO
CO
M •
o
p
4
CO
P
c+-
H* •
O
P
g
p
° o
co
o nj
gr w
o
CO g
o
- tzS
Or H
U 1
a
c§
9




Egmont blacken early and tender vegetation. Yet few
parts of the world are so pleasant to reside in as near this
romantic snow-capped mountain. When the musquitoes
and sandflies disappear, the vicinity of New Plymouth will
indeed be a physical paradise.
On the 31st I visited the Maori Mission, near to Cape
Egmont. The land belonging to it is splendid. The mis-
sionary—Rev. J. Whiteley—went from Mansfield, near
Nottingham, 30 years ago. He is universally beloved both
by natives and immigrant; and deservedly so. I was
privileged to have frequent intercourse with him, and I
certainly consider him one of the most gentlemanly and
best men in the province.
The next day I stayed in my Hotel, listening to the
conversation of a number of axe-men ; a jolly, intelligent
class, who earn money easily and spend it freely. In a
debate one party maintained that it was most profitable to
purchase bush-land, for when cleared even by hired labour it
would at prime cost be <£lo an acre, whereas fern-land
would be £l2 an acre; the others maintained that one-
half the above sums would be sufficient.
On the 6th September a waterspout, accompanied by
lightening and thunder, came from Cape Egmont, and
passed over the barracks, tearing and carrying up into
the air fences, posts, and sheds.
At one o’clock of the same day the steamer for Auckland
hove in sight. It was to me a happy spectacle. A gun
announced her arrival. I was quickly down upon the
beach, hoping that I was now to be transported to my
destination.
At 4 o’clock p.m„ I seated myself along with others in
the conveyance boat 30 tons burthen. The boatmen
pulled on and over the infernal surf for a long time pretty
well. One of the ladies asked me to hold a jug containing
food for her baby. Shortly after I received slap upon my back
the bulk of a cross wave, which filled the boat ancle-deep.
In a minute or two another, and another broke upon us.
I sat steadily looking at a coming wave, which appeared
from twenty to thirty feet straight up, high above our


already half-filled boat. All were calm, not a murmur was
heard ; the surf fell, sank our boat, and swept clean away
the passengers and crew —in all seventeen persons. When
I arose from beneath the dark waters I distinctly saw in
the distance all my companions spread far apart, On my
left were men upon hurdles and the boat’s oars, and some
clinging to the floating luggage. Straight ahead I paw a
lady by herself, and a man and another lady with an infant
each floating. I then lei go the rope and swam towards
the shore, which I did easily enough, when the surf was not
upon me. All this time I was holding in my right hand
the jug with the baby’s food ; but thinking I could over-
take and render some assistance to a lady three or four
hundred yards on my right who was drifting towards the
rocks, I dropped the jug and tried to approach her. But
as I drew near, too exhausted I am afraid to render much
help, I perceived two people from the shore approaching-
one towards her, the other towards me, to render us assis-
tance. I waved my hand for them to leave me to myself,
and both to go to her. Having reached the beach, I rested
upon a boat for a little while to take breath and get rid of
some sea-water. I then, with assistance, proceeded to my
Hotel, where I was rubbed thoroughly dry, wrapped in a
blanket, turned into bed, and after drinking seventeen
glasses of brandy with a little hot water without either
immediately or afterwards experiencing any injurious effects,
slept soundly. This is one of the many cases m which
people even unused to spirits may, not only with impunity,
but with much benefit partake of them when suffering
from any great shock to their physical frame. In the
morning I dressed my wounded limbs and body, and to all
appearance was quite right. One of the passengers
was for six days in a most precarious state. All, however,
were ultimately saved and restored to strength. Even
when in imminent peril, the scene upon the shore appeared
to me quite ludicrous. As was to be expected tlm utmost
confusion prevailed. Some were running in one direction,
others in another ; some were shouting this, others that.
Maori, officers, soldiers, townspeople and ladies might be


seen a short way in the sea, some with their clothes on,
others with them partly off, and others nearly naked. Such
were the circumstances connected with my first attempt to
leave New Plymouth for Auckland.
I subjoin an extract from one of the New Plymouth
newspapers relating to this untoward incident.
The arrival on Wednesday of the White Swan from Nelson
was nearly attended with the saddest result to a consider-
able number of persons. The weather was squally from
the westward with a rough sea, and it was notified through
the Harbour boat, which had communicated with the steam-
er, that the latter would not wait beyond the return of the
boat from the shore. Accordingly the remaining passen-
gers hence for Auckland had no alternative but to leave at
once. The boat had nearly passed through the surf, which
was breaking some distance out, when she shipped
one or two seas, and in hauling back to regain the shore, the
hawser parted. The boat then breached to, shipped more
water, and sunk. The crew and passengers, including two
ladies and two children, in all 17 persons, were now
struggling for life amidst drifting luggage, oars, and other
floating materials, in an angry and broken sea. The crowd
collected on the beach included the families and friends of
the unfortunate persons in the water, and the excitement
was extreme. A considerable number of military, civilians,
and natives at once rushed into to the sea and breakers in
the, apparently, forlorn attempt to render aid. And it is
to the providential circumstance of the wind and drift of
the sea setting towards the shore and counteracting the
effect of an unfavourable tide that their united efforts re-
sulted in every person being saved, one or two being in the
last stage of exhaustion. The amplest medical aid was
afforded, and the attention and sympathy shewn by every
one present did much to deprive the catastrophe of its full
severity.”
“ The undersigned take this opportunity of expressing
their sense of the strenuous exeitions of the Boatmen to
save the passengers on the occasion of the alarming accident
of Wednesday last. They also present their sincere
39


thanks to those gentlemen in particular who plunged into
the surf and rendered such essential aid ; and in general
to the numerous frinds, medical and others, who by every
imaginable form of kindness, expressed their sympathy and
rendered their aid. And especially they record their gra-
titude to the God of Providence for so remarkable a pre-
servation.
John Whiteley,
Joseph H. Fletcher,
Jas. Eitchie,
Egbert Scott,
H. Eenshaw,
S. Ford.
I will now present a few illustrative cases gathered dur-
ing my three months residence in Taranaki.
Mr. B belongs to Dorsetshire. When a boy he was
placed as a parish apprentice with a farmer. After serving
his time he stayed on at £4 a year. Next year he had £6.
The next he changed his master and got £7. He then re-
turned to his apprentice master and got £B. Two years
after he was married he was asked, and consented, to go to
New Zealand. They arrived with only four-pence half-
penny. They soon got work, but did not, like too many,
drink their wages. He received 10s. a day, and gradually
saved money. He bought a town section, built a shed for
a residence, and thus lived rent-free. He some time after
rented a 50 acre farm upon a purchasing lease, and even-
tually bought it. It is now valued at <£2,000. As he was
prospering he purchased an 80 guinea piano for his wife ;
who takes lessons in music. (The New Plymouth people
have spent £5,000 in pianos.) On one occasion he
remarked, —“Me and my Misses ne’er seed a think like that
till we bote it. And do you knew her plees sarkrad tunes,
and God safe the King quoite well on one finger! and she
ar’nt larnt more than a month !” No sooner was this ex-
planation given than “Missis” B, sat down with her baby
in her lap, and went through her performance.
Mrs. B. cultivates carraway seeds, and sells them at 2s.
a pound The family do all the work on the farm. It is
40






Well stocked, and in better condition than three-fourths of
the farms in England. Mr. B. is now pushing his way into
the bush, near the Egmont road, and making clearings for
his children. One remark he made deserves record, — “ I
tell you Mr. S. we never went past our means.”
20th. I hired a pair of bullocks, and a cart plentifully
lined with straw. Mrs. K. added a parcel of provender,
with something to keep up the spirits while wandering in
the bush. I passed the Wivikiho, and ere long was set
fast in a mud hole near a Maori pa. Oh! the flogging
that had to be performed to get clear again. What jolting
over stumps of trees, and splashing in mud and dirty water!
But it was a roaming life, and excellent fun!
21st. The bites I received from sandflies the other day
in the bush are almost so painful as to make me tear off
my flesh.
26th. I dined on the banks of the Wivikiho, One of
our party had taken 800 lbs, and another 600 lbs of “ Koran ’
honey last season. I called upon Mr. P. E., a gentleman
belonging to the provincial council who farms 141 acres of
his own land, worth £35 an acre. When he landed 17
years ago he had only sevenpence half-penny.
October 6th. I went in the conveyance boat to the
steamer White Swan, which lay off between two and three
miles. She professes to go round to all the provinces once
a month. She charges 400 per cent more than our English
steamers, though she has a subsidy from Goverment. We
were five hours on a rough sea, and completely wet through
with spray, “their only conveyance for Cattle to Auckland
is by vessels from this open and exposed roadstead the
bullocks have to be lashed to the side of the conveyance
boats and swim about two miles, and then drawn up by
their head into the ship. Nine bullocks out of 21 lost their
lives in this way.” After returning and rigging out in dry-
clothes, I went to the Henui and dined at Mr. Ms. I found
they boil and pickle watercresses.
18th. Mr. K. accompanied me to the steam saw mills
six miles in the bush, over hills and along bad roads. They
are wrought by an engine 24 horse power. On our return


we visited Ridge-lane, and set fire to the fern. It was
burning gloriously at 10 p. ra. when we were going to bed,
and could be seen at sea 20 miles off. Next day 1 went to
a ball. There were 60 elegant dressed couples / intermixed
with a sprinkling of red coats from the garrison. A few
days after I attended a subscription ball.
The annexed-is my friend J. K’s. account of himself.
When a boy he was a watch and clock maker, at Stafford ;
then clerk in a bank at Huddersfield ; then went to Lon-
don, where an’ uncle left him some money, not enough to
keep him a gentleman, but enough to prevent him follow-
ing his clerkship or trade. After this he was appointed
manager of a Joint Stock Bank in Berkshire, in which his
own and his wife's property were invested. But the bank
ere long failed. He and his family then emigrated, land-
ing in New Plymouth in 1854. He has since followed his
trade, and let out his spare cash at 15 per cent. Of the
27 families who landed with him, only three remain in Tar-
anaki ; the others are scattered; some to Auckland, Wan-
gani, Nelson and Wellington; others to Sydney and
Melbourne.
Mrs. K. declared “that these colonies are a place of
refuge for the destitute and decayed families of England.
One third have been a burden on their parishes. One third
having failed bring out here what they can in cash of their
ill-gotten gains, and let it out from 121 to 30 percent.
Another third consists of polished English who are too proud
to work, and ashamed to beg at home. These are the ele-
ments of our society. As for Mr. Butler Heaps’ description
of these colonies, it is all nonsense. Equally delusive are
Mr. Hursthouse’s 2 volumes with illustrations.” I visited
one of the places represented in one of his illustrations, and
found it to be only a ropo hut, which at home I would not
have confined a pig in.
Mr. H. was not satisfied. He was working 150 acres of
partly cleared land, the half of which was freehold, and
the other on lease ; but he would willingly have sold out
for £BOO. His young wife, like every other English female
out there, was pining after Old England and the society


d
Ch
w
a
t—H
o
E
H
CQ
w
o
w
d
H
5Z|
E
tr 1
k 1
K
O
d
H
d




Governor’s Salary,
4,500
„ Private Secretary ..
300
Chief Justice
1,400
First Puisine Judge
1,000
Second „ „
1,000
Establishment of Gen. Gov.
4,000
Native Schools
7,000
Executive
Legislative
Judicial
Customs
Postal
Military
Miscellaneous
left behind. It would seem that all do not succeed ; but
generally, the reason is to be found in the peculiarity of
their disposition and habits, or because they attempt too
much.
Lieutenant K. lost <£3,000 in three years in farming.
He failed, and paid his creditors ss. in the pound. As he
and his family were leaving for the East Indies he came to
inform me that New Zealand was a d—d country, only fit
to grow Scotch thistles. On going to the country he "would
not take any advice, but bought bad bush-land, employed
men to build an excellent house, and others to manufacture
charcoal, while he himself was trying to set the old settlers
right. The people thought he was “ too wise and clever ”
for the place.
One day I dined with the members of the Provincial
council at my Hotel. This district, like others, is eaten up
by the local and general expenses, every individual connec-
ted with the government being extravagantly paid, and no
virtue anywhere. The council now eat and drink the money
which should make roads to the interior.
The Rev. Dr. Samuels, a member of the Jewish persua-
sion, stated his views to me as follows. “ The Government
of New Zealand is too costly for the 60,000 Europeans now
resident in it, as the following table will show :
Total £9l
, 816.
The Public Debt is £500,000,
The local taxes in each
province are also considerable
However, the government, their servants, and Her
Majesty’s forces are the chief customers for the produce of
the Colonies.” He asserted also that most of the cleared
lands were heavily mortgaged to him and his craft. Al-
though he is accused of charging from 20 to 30 per cent


interest, he maintained that it was not too much. He en-
deavoured to prove and convince me that 20 per cent was
not paying him more than he could realize in England.
He also stated that the lands and labour of the emigrants
are continually falling into their hands ; and that if her
majesties ministers were to withdraw the soldiers from the
colonies, the land would very soon be in their hands, and
worthless.
The beach at New Plymouth is iron-sand. There are
mountains of it, and it makes excellent steel, A few ad-
venturers applied some time ago for a lease of the beach
The application caused a public meeting to be held in the
masonic hall; after which a lease was granted conditionally
to a person calling himself Captain M. and others. They
issued a prospectus ; but I believe they were unable to
catch in New Zealand flats sufficient for their purpose.
Whether they will, like all other speculators, have recourse
to English capitalists remains to be seen.
It is a well knowm fact that tons of this iron-sand have
during the last 12 years been forwarded to England ; and
though the reports have been more or less favourable, yet they
have not been sufficiently so to induce the thrifty English
to embark in undertakings placed upon much easier terms
than those granted to Captain M. & Co.
About the same time as the iron-sand company was
originated, a flax company was also in course of formation.
But both I believe to be bubbles, and destined to burst
before long. It is an ascertained fact that the New Zea-
land flax is brittle and breaks easily.
The flax plant grows from six to ten feet high. It is
steamed to'get the gum away, and then passed through
fluted rollers to break the bark. Pipe clay is used as a
mordant for cleansing it. The gum is used for envelopes,
the root as a substitute for Sarsaparilla, and the honey from
the bloom is delicious.
Farmers deliver potatoes on the beach at New Plymouth
for 50s. a ton. The frieght to Sydney, with expenses, would
be 30s. extra. At Sydney the price of potatoes is from £5
to £lO a ton ; oranges 9d a dozen ; oats 5s to 15s a bushel.


At New Plymouth the price of oranges is 2s a dozen ; oats
3s to 5s a bushel.
At a sale I attended, heifers sold at from £5 to £8 ; bul-
locks (the finest in the country) at from £8 to £l2. Two
years ago similar bullocks were selling as high as £3O each.
Bricks sell at from £lO to £l4 a thousand.
Italian rye-grfiss, and white and red clover seeds are fre-
quently inquired for.
Merchants, factors and store-keepers do exceedingly well;
but those who buy for cash do decidedly the best. Publi-
cans and auctioneers always thrive; but the latter are
dangerous characters with whom to transact business. For
when goods are placed in their hands, there is often a diffi-
culty for years in effecting a settlement with them. Saw-
yers, axe-men, wheelwrights, carpenters, brickmakers,
masons, smiths, bakers, butchers and brewers earn from 10s.
to 15s. a day.
The women generally do everything in buying and sell-
ing, and are the great guns of the province. The trade
lies between them and the Jews. They have no servants,
and feel no shame in doing their work. The men, how-
ever, frequently stay at home on Sunday, and cook ; and
the merchant-ladies, with their white parasols and satin
dresses, attend divine service.
Land when first taken up has yielded 60 bushels of
wheat, 52 tons of turnips and 70 tons of mangold wurtzel
an acre Carrots, turnips, mangold wurtzel, d‘C., grow sur-
prisingly and to perfection in the soil of this district.
I would advise emigrants to Taranaki not to be in a hurry
purchasing ; but to labour twelve months at least for other
people. The young men assisting in the surveyors office
frequently pick up some good bits of land, which they are
often willing to sell at a small profit; and in four cases
out of five it is safe to act upon their advice. Excellent
land with wood on it may be had for 10s. an acre, only six
miles from the principle town. Cleared land may be had
on lease from 10s. to 30s. an acre Those with large capital
have here an excellent opportunity of investing it. And if
a man even with small capital be steady, plucky and per-
severing, he has a good chance of success.


Being a comparatively young colony there no doubt are
some drawbacks which occasionally mingle disappointment
with the immigrants expectations. It will really cost £5
an acre to turn the land to good account. Frequently also
wild pigs will root up the seed potatoes, and the wandering
cattle eat up the maize and other crops. And in the bush
the roads are so bad as to be almost impassable in winter;
in some parts they are entirely so for cattle and drays.
The streams and rivers inland are still unbridged. But
these are difficulties and drawbacks which will gradually
become fewer, till at last they are all overcome.
A gentleman who lately visited Taranaki thus expresses
himself. “ Suffice it to say I rode through ‘ Bell Block,
carefully observing the country from every eminence afford-
ing a view, and I unhesitatingly pronounce it a lovely place.
But it is really painful to be reminded that all the natural
advantages which New Plymouth possesses are counterbal-
anced by the presence of an overwhelming native popula-
tion, The little town is full of soldiers; not a building is
in progress ; not a sign of animated business is visible.
The settlement possesses the dimensions of about two Eng-
lish parishes, and throughout its small extent is cultivated
into smiling farms. But outside the boundary a wide-
spreading district of equal capability still “ frowns ” in its
native uselessness, for the Maori refuse to sell. The time
will come when they will remove this obstacle ; colonization
will then be unrestricted, and the country under the sha-
dow of Mount Egmont will be a perfect garden.”
This is all very well for a Canterbury settler ; but I can
assure him that the Maori are useful creatures, and that
where they are most numerous the produce of the soil is
richest. And I unhesitatingly say that the signs of ani-
mated business are as visible at New Plymouth as Canter-
bury,' Wellington or Nelson. And were a young active
and persevering English farmer to go out to that district,
I am certain that he would within 10 or 12 years be in
easier circumstances than the owner of the farm his father
rents at home.


Melbourne is the place for commerce, Sydney for delight-
ful quietude, Wellington for bold scenery and cold blasting
winds, Nelson for easy, spicy people, but New Plymouth
makes the heart bound with gladness.
I was much surprised that there was no Banking Estab-
lishment in Taranaki.


CHAPTER VII.
Auckland.
October 29 th. While I was dressing a gun was fired
intimating the arrival of the White Swan steamer. I
hastened and got early on board, all safe this time. Before
I sailed a number of the New Plymouth people came on
board and bade me farewell with smiling faces. During
the three months I had resided among them I had formed
several agreeable fiiendships. But my anxiety to get to
Auckland prevented me feeling much sorrow at leaving
them.
In the evening we put on steam and moved forward. I
was invited to take a hand at whist with the Honourable
M. T., Judge J., and the Honourable D. 8.. for a few hours.
Early on the following morning we crossed the dangerous
sand bar and entered the Manakow harbour. By 12 o’clock
we were lying at anchor. The passengers are conveyed in
small boats from the steamer into shallow water, and then
upon men’s backs to the beach at Onehunga, for which they
pay 2s 6d. They are conveyed from Onehungo to Auck-
land over a good macadamized road in an omnibus for the
same amount. As we drove along I had a little “codoro”
while admiring the hawthorn hedgerows intermixed with
roses.
The latitude of Auckland is 361 south ; the longitude
174 east; mean temperature 59. It contains 13,000,000
acres. The bay is splendid, having the best entrance for
shipping in New Zealand. All the captains report that its
trade is equal to that of all the other trading ports put to-
gether. The accommodation now in progress is perfectly
wonderful for so young a colony. The city stands upon
the south shore oftheWaitemata. It contains about 15,000
inhabitants, and is enlarging every way. There are four
English and one Maori newspapers published in the
province ; the New Zealander twice a week. So salubrious






is the climate, and so abundant and easy of access in the
city is everything in the way of comfort and enjoyment,
that several of the wealthy Australian families spend their
summer months in the locality.
I soon removed from the city to the valley of Papatoetoe,
near to the village of Papakura, 20 miles south. Their
great south road continues to the banks of the noble Wai-
kato which flows for 250 miles from Lake Taupo past the
township of Havelock, and liaglan harbour into the west
sea. For 25 miles this road is equal to any English
turnpike.
December 14th. We were attacked in the bush by two
wild boars. One of them was shot by Mr. Manfred, and
the other, whether wounded or not I cannot say, but it
turned and ran away. They were fine young fellows. We
dragged out the one we had killed, and carried him home
by the light of a bright moon. With boiling water we
scalded and dressed him, and having hung him up, retired
to rest.
The next day we engaged a small mob of Maori to fell
bush. They brought all their picaninies, dogs, pigs, horses,
carts, and kai kai. They then built themselves a warrie,
and borrowed all they were able from the “ Pakeha,” as
they call the English. If you are too generous they will
laugh at you for being soft. Their horses are worth from
£SO to £6O each. But for their best they refused £BO,
which I offered; their price being £IOO.
Oh! what awful plagues the musquitoes and sandflies
are. All my exposed skin was swelled and itching dread-
fully from their bites. Felling and burning timber in the
bush with sandflies, musquitoes, spiders, centipedes, black
stinking wood-bugs biting voraciously, are decidedly un-
pleasant to new “ chums.” The bush-wood after it is cut
down is generally disposed of by burning.
There was a farmer not far from Mr. Manfred’s, if farmer
he could be called, who rented his land, rented his stock,
and rented his money, for which he paid 20 per cent in-
terest. He was a fine-looking man in figure, well educated,


and belonged to a superior English family ; but he was a
miserable creature, and kept a filthy enough farm.
Messrs. V. and M. while I was in Auckland took 600
acres of land; 200 acres were bush, 200 acres swamp,
growing ropo rush and one-one, and 200 acres clay hill,
which will not grow the commonest herbage ; but they
have an excellent wood house, and outbuildings. They are
to pay £25 a year for five years. The buildings were worth
the rent. But there were insurmountable drawbacks.
They were bound to improve by laying down 27 acres each
year in grass; and at the expiration of their term were
to have the option of purchasing the entire lot at £5 an
acre, But neither they nor any other set of men (unless
as rich as Jews) can fulfil these conditions. It is too bad
of the old hands to practice such delusions upon new-
comers, who ruin themselves by clearing other people’s
grounds, instead of purchasing at first-hand.
17th. Mr. B. invited Mr. Manfred and myself to go
wild cattle hunting, 30 miles down south, but as my eye
had been injured by a supplejack, I had to decline, My
hands were double their usual size with the bites of the
sandflies. '
One of Manfred’s steers ate three window-curtains, a
cotton dress, and a pair of cotton stockings; and a calico
sheet was half down its throat when we caught it in
the act, and pulled the sheet back.
18th. A number of hawks were about to-day ; and at
night we heard a bird like an owl singing out continually
“ morepork.”
A farmer near Papakura who followed the trade of a
brick maker while in England,rnade all his cheese of the size,
and in the shape, of bricks. Tie sold those readily which
he had made from new milk, but his skim-milk ones were
so bored full of holes by tasters that they resembled per-
forated bricks, and became altogether unsaleable. He
therefore, as he was an ingenious and economical person,
built a house with his unsaleable skim-milk cheese, and
placed beer barrels one upon the other for a chimney. He
contrives to reach his sleeping apartments by means of a


farm, which Mr. S. the present owner bought as follows :
150 acres at 5s £37 10 0
450 do. at 10s............. 225 0 0
V
Total £262 10 0
Supposing Mr. V, to purchase the farm at the expiration
of his lease, he will pay as follows :
£25 yearly rent for 5 years £125 0 0
Cost of clearing 27 acres yearly 1300 0 0
600 acres at £5 an acre 3,000 0 0
Total £1475 0 0
waggon wheel in lieu of stairs. Having no churn he con-
trives and produces good butter and cream-cheese by tying
and securing well in a napkin the cream he skims from
the milk, which he places in the earth three feet deep for
18 hours. When any guests honour him with their pres-
ence he never fails to introduce new dishes and plates.
This he does by marking with his hatchet on the trunk of
a Kauri tree the shape and quantity required ; and when
the bark is peeled away he has a new, clean, spacious and
respectable dinner service. His drinking cups are always
new-made, and very tastefully, from flax leaves. His ways
and habits are quite colonial; and he with his family are
kind to a fault.
My joints had now become so stiff that I was scarcely
able to protect myself from being eaten up by the sandflies.
20th. There were no sandflies, and no roads ; the rain
poured in torrents, and the creeks and rivers overflowed.
The cat removed her kittens to a place of safety, but other
helpless animals were drowned. The next day the weather
improved, and the water cleared away. The cattle which
had strayed on the hills returned home to be milked. One
consolation during the w r et is that there are no fly-bites.
After the rain ceased we rekindled the bush fires, and then
went fishing for eels and trout.
26th. Mr. Y. invited us to see his six-hundred-acre
Deduction for original price of land and 5
years interest at 15 per cent per annum,. 459 7 6
Mr. S’s clear profit at the end of the 5 years
will be .......
4016 G 6


Mr. V’s pocket will yet convince him of the folly of his
present engagement. The terms would have been ruinous
though the land had been the choicest ever farmer wrought;
but it is such land that it will be at the termination of the
5 years dear at £2 an acre.
On Christmas day, which is midsummer there, I rode
20 miles to dine at Auckland. After dinner I was invited
to witness a Maori entertainment, upon the North shore of
the Waitemata which was given by Paora Tuhara and his
followers to welcome and honor the commander, officers,
and members of the scientific expedition, sent out in the
ship “ Novara,” under the instructions of the government
of Austria, to collect geological specimens, and report oh
the topographical position, take water-coloured sketches,
maps, and photographic views, under the direction of Dr.
Hochsetter and others.
At the introduction Paora and the chiefs of his tribe
advanced to meet them and said —“ Friends, I salute you,
and we are much pleased to meet strangers who come
hither in peace, friends of our Queen Victoria, you come
to make yourselves acquainted with the features of New
Zealand. You can travel in safety.
Six months afterwards, in July, 1859, as Dr. Hochsetter
was leaving Auckland, the Maoris assembled and their
chief Paora, according to the custom of his ancestors, spoke
to Dr. Hochsetter at a presentation meeting at the Hall of
the Mechanics Institute, as follows, which I copied from
the New Zealander. ...... ■
I address this farewell song to you,
While the misty clouds are rolling
Round the peaks of Tautari;
Let me weep in silent sadness,
For the loved one torn from me.
Friend, whilst though wert near me dwelling.
How my heart’s love clave unto thee.
But to distant lands thou goes,
Wandering, like a ghost of night.
And in midnight dreams I fancied
That we never should be parted; '
Soon alas ! thy form must vanish
Lost in distance—Fare thee well.”


K
w
t=i
o
02
w
o
g
w
ui
H
H
r'
o
w
c
g
H
w
w
w
t-H
<1
ft
£0
T)
>
w
cl
W
t>




Dec. 28th. On Mr. Manfreds farm we cut down a three-
acre field of red clover, second crop, and when it was col-
lected the weight was over 10 tons. Another field of red
clover measured 31 feet while standing : Fern measured
8 feet.
January Ist, 1859. I rode 20 miles to the Auckland
mce course. It was well attended, and well conducted.
The Europeans and Maori, both ladies and gentlemen,
were on horseback. There was no difference in style or
management from our races in England. I returned to the
bush to listen to the birds, for I had more delight in their
notes than in those of the canary. For the first time I was
sleeping in the warrie alone, with the exception of the
watch-dogs. I regard the locality in which I was as a
glorious place, but no one can say that the life of a farmer
in a new country is an easy one. He must be up early
and late superintending those whom he employs. In some
respects the labourers have the best of it; they have good
wages and little responsibility.
The government offers a free grant of 40 acres to every
emigrant, male or female, above 18 years of age, landing
in the province of Auckland; and 20 acres to every child
above 5 years and under 18. But settlers, if they would
succeed, must not expect to recline on easy chairs, and
have servants to wait upon them. A female servant’s
wages ranges from <£ls to £3O a year. Those, therefore,
who accept the grant must only expect a delightful little
farm with abundance of hard work.
By this time I had become accustomed to the sandflies, and
never felt their bites. lam sure I killed 2000 fleas myself
in six weeks : I accordingly got pretty free of these back-
biters. Of the existence of the musquitoes I became
scarcely conscious.
Mr. G., a farmer, who lives near Manfred’s has a farm of
350 acres. Four years ago it cost £175. A Mr. L. pur-
chased it shortly after for £llsO, and afterwards sold to
Mr. H., the money to lie at 6 per cent. Mr. H. laid out
£2,000 in improvements, and afterwards disposed of it to
the present occupier for £1550. The lease of the 6 per


cent was to terminate in June. Farms that change hands
in this way sometimes go back to the original owner.
The day-light in New Zealand is two hours longer in
winter, and two hours shorter in summer, than in England.
Although the heat of the sun is 12 degrees stronger than
in England, we never felt too warm. Though the climate
will grow figs, oranges, peaches, melons, etc., the breezes
during the day are cooler and more pleasant than in this
country ; they give a relish for outdoor exercise. Through-
out the summer nights, sheets, blankets and counterpanes
are required for comfort. The sun there has a similar effect
upon stiff, clayey soil to what frost has here. The cater-
pillars require watching, or else they will devour the crops.
They, however, immediately die if the herbage upon which
they are feeding is cut down.
The indigenous fruits are generally'poor. Yet one which
the English call capped-gooseberry, when cooked or pre-
served, is equal to any 1 have had elsewhere. In colour,
which is a bright yellow, and shape it resembles what we
term a bully or a small green gage ; it, however, when
mellow is enveloped in a transparent cap, like filigrane, the
shape of a little balloon. The plant runs up the tee tee,
and bears fruit half the year. Cattle are very fond of it,
and devour it whenever it falls in their way. Peaches are
so very plentiful that the pigs are fed with them. There
is an abundance of European fruits. The nuts, however,
yield no kernel, and the blackberry bushes no fruit.
February 20 th. Now is the season for large fly to blow
woollen goods, as clothing and blankets, and even cotton
counterpanes. Unless great vigilance is exercised they
become filled with thousands of maggots.
March 6 th. We rode over to the residence of Messrs.
Hall and Bassett, who visited us on the 20th of February.
They have 130 acres on the Manguru, rich, scoria soil, and
it will carry as many cattle as any farm in England of the
same extent. Their road from the great south road is being
macadamized, or more properly, scoriadized. To effect this
most desirable object, the landowners tax themselves one


shilling an acre to raise half the funds, and the government
furnishes the other htdf.
All men, even if they are just out of “choaky,” must be
hailed as “ good fellows well met.” In a few years it will
not be so.
20th. We were in our saddles for 10 hours. We rode
to and from the Waikato, a fine, broad, shining river, made
picturesque with islands. The township of Havelock is the
terminus of the great south road on the Auckland side.
Mr. Selby’s Monogortowiddi farm of 500 acres is park-
like and beautiful to the eye, with a fine undulating surface.
It is 43 miles from Auckland, and was purchased for £250
when there was no roads most part of the way. The road
has since been made two miles past his farm and is a chain
wide. It was plucky work for so young a colony to make
such a road, considering it is carried over the razor-back
and other mountains, and through heavy bush-land. One
dense wood was cut through for 8 miles. This great un-
dertaking was effected under the persevering superintend-
ence of a Mr. Williamson ; and his honour is worthy of the
gratitude and praises of all the province. Mrs. Selby pro-
vided us with an excellent dinner, and wines. We returned
without staying at a very tempting Hotel in Drury which
we passed, kept by a Mr. Young, and arrived as the moon
was rising at Mr. Well’s handsome large Hotel at Papakura,
20 miles from Auckland. We were then only three miles
from our homestead, so we took it easy.
Next day I attended the Court-house to listen to a trial.
A Maori had stolen two fine horses and sold them to a
farmer. A reward of £2O was offered for their restoration.
The Maori then went and stole them from the farmer to
whom he had sold them, and restored them to the adver-
tiser as having been found by him, and received the £2O.
He was, however, found out, caught, and brought to trial.
The missionaries gain much money by buying and selling
goods and cattle. They all have first-rate establishments,
and live upon the fat of the land. As pioneers, however,
they are deserving of all they get. They are likened for
their cajolery to the Roman Catholics who first landed in


South America. The missionary at Russell at the Bay of
Islands is admitted to be the most upright and honourable
person in his dealings to be found in the colony. But
there are others many shades below him. These people
have begged from the Maori thousands of acres ; they con-
stantly hold the best horses and cattle; and travel when
and where you may, they always form part of your com-
pany. Mr. R. B. is paying them ,18s an acre rent for the
land he farms.
We had a mob of 40 Maori felling bush, but missing the
manager, I called at his warrie to ascertain the reason of
his absence. I found him and his wife nursing a sick child,
both very sorrowful and attentive. I recommended a little
brandy with hot water. Their answer was ; —“ Waiperou
carpi , au de, au de ; stinking water good; nonsense!
At most of the farm houses they use no other beverages
than tea, coffee, milk and water. The whole of our harvest
was well secured, though the husbandmen used nothing
but tea, milk, and water. This system obtains generally,
if not universally, throughout the province.
The increased value of land about three miles from Auck-
land will appear from the following. At the sale of Mr.
Williamsons’ property the corner bit, which was fenced in
only four months ago, at the junction of the roads leading
to Onehunga and Otahuhu, sold at the rate of £2,000 an
acre.
Every time I visited Auckland I was surprised and de-
lighted with the vast improvements going on. It is at
present a thriving city, but the extent of its future pros-
perity no one can calculate. It promises to be a centre of
no small importance and influence.
I will now state one or two things in reference to the
colonies of New Zealand generally. The most of the land
which the provincial government of Auckland gives away
is undeniably good, especially that between the Waikato
and Thames. That in the vicinity of Kororarika near
Russell at the Bay of Islands is also good. At New
Plymouth it is 10s an acre. What a pity there is so little
to sell, for a better place for good land cannot be found.


U 2
>
Pi
#
A
*
t—i
pj
*—i
*
>
W
>—H
o
p:
H
t*
i—-(
hr 1
L -•
HH
Cl
CO




From Hawks Bay to New Plymouth and from Wanganui
to Mount Egmont it is the same price, and of first-rate
quality. The Wanganui part of the province of Wellington
is increasing rapidly. The land about the Waiarapa is ex-
cellent, Queen Charlotte Sound will develope itself some
fine day. At its east end are the extensive sheep runs on
the Wairau in the province of Nelson. The land sells ar
from 5s to 10s an acre ; and it is considered by many of
the old settlers the best in New Zealand. Near to the
Wairau is Pori Underwood. At Canterbury the land is
£2 an acre with very little wood. The entrance to the
harbour of Lyttleton is not free and easy ; and the road
from the Port of Lyttleton to Christchurch, 7 miles, is very
bad. Otago is at present little thought about by the
English.
Gold is found in New Zealand. At Coromandal it is
collected entirely by the natives, who every month bring
it 40 miles to the Auckland market for sale. There are
gold fields worked by Europeans at Aorere, near Colling-
wood in Massacre Bay, in the province of Nelson. The
Australian diggers who visit them believe them to be rich.
But the accommodation is at present insuffiicient, and the
approaches too troublesome. Diggers who had been at
them but were returning to Australia, said they would
return in two or three years, when, they hope, the Nelson,
government will have effected such alterations as will
induce them to remain permanently. In March, 1858,
£lO,OOO in gold was sent to Nelson from these Aorere fields.
In April of the same year, coal, and also small specimens
of copper were discovered near the gold fields.
Coal is found in several places <of New Zealand, but that
which has been used by the steamers has been obtained
from pits at Drury, 25 miles from Auckland on the great
south road.
I would urgently advise emigrants to encumber them-
selves with no more articles than are required for the pas-
sage. I have known new chums to be plagued with a
quantity of goods on landing, and having to place them in
the hands of a colonial auctioneer ; and the result was, as


is always the case, they found their receipts only one-third
the amount of what the goods cost in England. I would
repeat what has already been said, —as a rule avoid auc-
tioneers and lawyers, and convert as much of your property
as possible into hard cash, which is the best article they
can brinof out to these colonies.


w
ii
m ;
f* i
h-t ?
o
a
H
ml
O 1
d(
ui I
H J
3
O
i
o
t-H
d
w
t>
Kj ;
> y
d
CQ
S'
g
t-H




CHAPTER VIII.
From Auckland to Melbourne.
April 2nd We left Auckland in the brig Gil Bias. On
Good- Friday I assisted Mr. F. Brook in making plain and
plum “ hot-cross-buns.” On Easter Sunday we anchored
in Two-fold Bay, and took the ship’s boat to the town of
Eden, near Mount Imly, in the province of New South
Wales. Here we posted letters. The scenery of this little
township looking towards the sea is the loveliest I ever
beheld; towards the interior the land seems densely wooded.
In the town I walked over some choice greenhouse plants,
for they were growing wild. If ever there was a charming
day smiling upon enchanted ground, surely that was the
day, and that was the ground. We soon had our boat filled
with sheep, turkies and other articles of consumption. We
returned to tha vessel, and soon weighed anchor.
It was here that a Mr. B. Boyd expended the princely
sum of £40,000; for what purpose may be learned from
the following quotation from the Sydney Empire, Aug. 22,
1859. *“ Here will I found an earldom,’ was the ambitious
exclamation of one of our ‘ shepherd kings,’ as he proudly
surveyed his magnificient station of Newtown Boyd. ‘ My
titles to my runs are as good as freehold, and I mean to
stick to them/ was the outspoken assertion of a near rela-
tive of the would-be earl when, at the Royal Hotel, he filled
the chair at the largest gathering of squatters that has ever
taken place in this Colony, Both the speakers were men
—free-hearted and open-handed—eminently qualified to be
the founders of a territorial aristocracy—possessing great
wealth and influence, and determined to achieve at all
hazards, the purpose which brought them to Australia—
to become the fathers of patrician families, ‘ The Rodolphs
of a race’ of pastoral princes. They at that time were the
almost undisturbed possessors of territories from which
slices of the size of German principalities might have been


detached without being missed. Mr, Benjamin Boyd, when
he made the memorable statement above referred to, amid
the deafening plaudits of the pastoral paladins by whom
he was surrounded, was in possession of about three million
acres of the soil of this country, equal to the area of half-
a-dozen English counties of the average size I The sun of
Mr. Boyd’s prosperity was then in' its meridian.”
We had bad “ luck” on this part of our voyage. Being
nearly five weeks at sea before we neared the Melbourne
Heads, every article of provision was nearly consumed,
even all our honey from Wangaroa ; we therefore were
compelled to fish for baracuta to keep us in food.
May 6th. We sustained a severe disaster, and sad loss
when a few miles from the “Kip’ near Port Philip Heads,
and in sight of the lighthouse. The captain, the steers-
man, and two passengers were washed overboard by a
tremendous wave striking the vessel. I was, while fast
asleep pitched out of my bed into a pool of sea-water,
among broken glass, ships’ compasses, wood splinters and
fragments of furniture ; the captain’s hunk door and mine
being forced open. His young wife screaming for assistance
rushed from her bed, as did also a Mrs. Smith with her
babies. I called upon Smith-to look to his wife, and at
the same time persuaded the captain’s wife to assist me in
baling the water from the cabin. In twenty minutes we
had haled sufficient water to obtain an entrance for the
captain’s wife to a bunk occupied by two young ladies; and
in an hour-and-a-half afterwards we were all safe.
The following paragraph is from the Melbourne Argus,
Friday, April 6 th.
“Appalling accident—Four lives lost.—About six o’clock
yesterday morning as the brig Gil Bias was making for the
“ Hip” at the entrance of Port Philip, wind S. W., with a
strong ebb tide—a mountainous wave struck her on the
quarter and swept her deck. The round-house was carried
away bodily; and Captain Wedgwood, James Simpson,
who was at the wheel, and two passengers, named respect-
ively, Frederick S. Brook and J. Bell, were washed over-
board with the wreck. Steerage way was lost for the mo-


ment, and the vessel nearly broached to in the heavy sea ;
and those on board were so appalled by the dire occurence
they had just witnessed, that they were unable to render
any effective aid to the cast-aways. Two life-buoys were
thrown overboard, one of which was seen by Captain Wedg-
wood, who struggled hard but hopelessly to reach it; and
he, poor fellow, sank with his unfortunate companions to
rise no more. What makes the disaster more terrible is
that Mrs. Wedgwood was on board at the time, and was
painfully conscious of the sad bereavement that had be-
fallen her. The pilot cutter Anemone with great difficulty
bore down through the “ Rip” to the distressed vessel, and
signalised to the crew of the brig to follow her course in
entering the port. The assistance came at the most critical
juncture, for the Gil Bias was then within two cables
length of the reef; but under the direction of the Pilots
she was brought safely to an anchorage inside the Heads.
The weather was very thick, and the sea was higher than
at any time in the recollection of the oldest pilot on the
station.”
Our vessel was saved by the presence of mind and
courage of the steward ; a man who, strange to say, had
only a minute before secured himself in the rigging that he
might be prepared for the wreck which he seemed to con-
sider inevitable. On seeing the steersman with the others
washed overboard, he descended from the rigging, planted
himself upon the shattered rudder-beam, held the vessel to
the sea, and steered us from the breakers till three seamen
were able to go his assistance. They then secured jt with
rope, and manfully stuck to it for an hour-and-a-quarter,
or till we had crossed the bar and sailed into calm water.
The captain was a capital fellow, and had been married
only eight months. The helmsman was a promising mariner.
Mr. F. Brook, to avoid paying an award decided against
him in court, had left his wife and six children at Nelson.
He travelled by Auckland, hoping to meet them at Mel-
bourne. His friends reside near Huddersfield, England.
Mr. J. Bell, came from near Norfolk. England, but Bell
was supposed to be an assumed name. He hf d been from


five to six years near Adelaide, Australia, but latterly in
the province of Auckland on the north shore close by the
Maharangi River near Oma In the Matakana district,
55, miles by land from Auckland, he had purchased 110
acres of land. In February he had been unfortunate, being
burnt out while from home selling his ryegrass seed (at
14s. a bushel). He told me that four of his neighbours
suffered the same misfortune in one year. He had been
on his land four years, but sold it by auction for £75.


CHAPTER IX.
Melbourne.
At Port Philip Heads the navigation is at times danger-
ous (the end of the last chapter gives an illustration) aris-
ing from a ground-swell, or undercurrent. The entrance
to the port is two miles wide, the length of it 40 miles,
and the breadth 40 miles. There are two channels up to
Hobson’s Bay; and Melbourne is 8 miles from Hobson’s
Bay up the Yarra river.
One frontage of the Botanical Gardens is along the river
Yarra, from which the grounds rise gradually till they reach
the Parks. The natural and spacious swamps within the
gardens are well stocked with birds, waterfowls and ducks
in every variety ; but they have not yet been able to grow
the trees of New Zealand. Roads by rail, sea and land
from every quarter lead to these gardens.
The Museum is small, but contains the most useful
models used for trying reefs when searching for gold, and
all the most perfected machinery in operation at the diggins.
There are representations also of some rich claims with the
cuttings and sinkings, showing each successive layer in the
surface operations and deep workings; indeed the natural
aspect throughout.
On the pier at Sandridge there are machines erected and
worked by steam for loading and unloading the largest
vessels which may arrive from any nation.
On Emerald Hill the Chinese have erected a Joss House.
Every Chinaman goes, on landing, direct to this house of
prayer ; and the very poor or sick frequently remain in it.
The outside of this temple is singularly ornamented with
quaint designs of birds, animals, trees and hieroglyphics.
On the walls inside are emblems of the past, present and
future, of peace and war, of happiness and misery, of youth
and age, of the pregnant mother and new-born bribe, of
tragedy and comedv, of laughter and scorn, etc. The


Chinese all subscribe for the support of their religion and
poor. But if one may judge from their extremely dirty
appearance, their habits must be very filthy. They prin-
cipally reside and carry on their trade in little Burke street.
Their sign-boards are made from pasteboard or coloured
calico, are covered with peculiar characters denoting the
name and business of each firm, and whether dealers by
wholesale or retail. Their goods consist chiefly of sandal
wood carved boxes, fans, card cases, ivory chess-men,
puzzles, whist counters, purses, studs, dc., &c. The jargon
you hear on entering one of their Samshus, pothouses, is
remarkable. When smoking opium they seem to delight
in making the smoke pass through their nostrils. The opi-
um is handed round in little cups, and they'get completely
drunk for a halfpenny.
The north winds at Melbourne for short intervals during
the summer months are frightful. They come from the
interior; and from their nature one would think they came
from some infernal region, for a hotter place while they last
can scarcely be conceived. It is impossible to catch a
breath of fresh air while enveloped in the cloud of dust which
always accompanies them. Some people throw themselves
on the ground and he there till the wind abates and the
cloud of dust passes away.
The common city policemen receive 10s a day, and if
mounted, 12s ; out of this they have to provide their own
clothing. They also receive 2s for every dog they bring in
which is not registered. The person who drowns the dogs
receives sixpence a tail, Stone-crackers earn from 6s to
10s a day. Porters receive £3 weekly. Labourers will
not work more than eight hours a day; on Saturdays they
knock off at noon. Every one here is constantly seeking
after the almighty sovereign.
In the year between my visits an alteration for the better
took place in the price of consumable articles. At this
time bacon retailed at Is 9d lb ; butter 3s 6d lb ; fowls 8s
ft couple ; cabbages 2s each ; one stick of celery 2s; oysters
Isa doz.; eggs 2s 6d a doz.


All sorts of men reside in Melbourne, and accordingly
every one must be upon bis guard. Lying is a prevalent
vice, and boasting and blustering far too common. Liars
and scoundrels cannot be altogether avoided. There is
(indirect at least) encouragement given to swindlers like
Louis G., for be received only three weeks imprisonment;
and Raphael 1., for when convicted of fraudently receiving
a cheque, he was liberated on bail. The murderers of Green
—a young mounted policeman—were still at large w T hen I
was there. O. R., a Roman Catholic Irishman who brutally
and in cold blood murdered a man, had his sentence com-
muted to 15 years imprisonment. The woman S., who it
is universally believed, deliberately drowned a little boy in
a dam near Melbourne, was acquitted. If you receive a
cheque from a person owing you money, and the cheque be
dishonoured, and he has a balance of only lOd at his bank-
ers, you have no means of recovering your money. Cheques
for considerable amounts have been fraudently paid, a
trifling sum being purposely left in the bank. Frauds of
every description are practised. Good men, however, are
labouring hard to effect an alteration for the better. And
it is to be hoped that for the sake of the rising community
they will ere long be successful. Many of the people
attribute this sad state of things to universal suffrage. If
there be any truth in this charge, let the more influential
advocates of universal suffrage labour to wipe off the stigma.
A number of the expressions in common use are similar
to those used in England: “Well, I never;” “pon my
word ;” its frightful“ no fear “ don't you believe it
“goodness me, go on“just so“ no cockey.” There are
also a great many slang words. The gold fields are called
“ digginspotatoes, “ spudsa small glass of brandy, “a
nobbiera large glass, “ a spider;” tea or coffee, “ sling-
ingsluggage, “ swaganything that is unprofitable,
“ shisera lump of gold, “ a nuggetundermining,
“ kyottering ;” surface cutting, “ fossicking a kettle, “ a
billy a lunch, “ a tiffin a companion, “ a chumbread,
“ damper silence, “ kuibosh an idle fellow, “ a loafer
convicts “ v ds,” or “ vandemonians,” or “old lags,” or “gov-


eminent men.” The word bl—dy is used frequently and
after a strange fashion; “abl—-dy fine woman ;” “a bl—dy
nice dinner “ bl—dy good sermon ; “ a bl—dy tight
tent“ a bl—dy rich hole “ a bl—dy set of swindlers.”
A “ shout” means giving or standing a treat. A “ shout”
sometimes costs from £SO to £IOO.
The insolvent list shows that the debts of Mr. So-and-so,
who commenced business eighteen months ago with nothing,
are from £60,000 to £70,000, and no assets. From 2,000
to 3,000 failures happened in 1853, which represented
£3,000,000 loss. At one time in the same year there were
400 first-class ships in the bay, and the imports amounted
to <£22,000,000 ; all this was intended to supply the three-
year-old colony of Victoria! And yet the exports of gold
alone in that same year amounted to 93 tons. Land car-
riage has in a distance of 200 miles, varied from £ls to
£lOO a ton. Potatoes have varied from £2 to £4O a ton ;
and rice from £lO to £BO a ton.
May 26 th. I left my Hotel in Collins street, and resided
for the remainder of my stay at Richmond. The reason of
my removal was that every morning when I rose my face
was marked as if I had the measels by musquito bites. It
was not that I experienced any inflammation or itching
from the bite, as when I first arrived in the bush in New
Zealand ; but I did not care about having my countenance
disfigured.
New Zealand has an advantage over Australia in that it
has no venemous reptiles ; in Australia there are many.
While I was in Melbourne public attention was much en-
gaged in reference to an antidote for the poison of the snake.
A late convict from Tasmania, named U., offerd to divulge
a remedy if the Victoria government would give him a
penny a head on the population then residing in the prov-
ince. Some people asserted that his antidote was the fat
of a snake
At the gold fields a set of men have been known to work
for months, and at last be compelled to give up through
want. Others have taken to their location, and in a few
days made a fortune. Two sets of labourers may toil alike,
78


and while one become wealthy, the other become beggars ;
but the greatest number raise sufficient to pay them hand-
somely. All about the mines for miles broken drays, carts,
tents, dead bullocks and horses lie scattered. You may
often hear the bullock-driver swearing unmercifully over
his team of six, and making his long thong from its lengthy
stem crack, crack, crack, as loud as the report of a pistol.
The handle of the stock whip is only about eighteen inches,
and the thong eighteen feet. It can be used with effect
only by a stockman. The nearest gold field I visited was
about 20 or 24 miles from Melbourne, on 'the Dandenong
ranges.
Geelong is a fine large town of 13,000 inhabitants, and
distant from Melbourne about 45 miles. By steamboat the
fare is 2s 6d and 5s ; by rail 6s, 9s, and 12s, The land is
undulating with long declivities, the bush thin and stunted,
the soil sandy, except upon the extensive flats, where it is
good and very deep. The principal roads near Melbourne
are from 70 to 90 yards wide, and well mettled along the
centre ; and so is every outlet from 10 to 40 miles. The
bush not being thick and troublesome accounts for the ex-
tensive sheep-runs in Victoria. The Hotels established
along the roads are plentiful and good ; the excessive prices
charged for drinks will account for their number. House
rents have fallen one third ; a four-room wooden cottage
cannot now be let upon a main road for 25s a week in ad-
vance, as it used to be. House property, considering the
price of land and labour, is become a bad investment in
the suburbs; but a shop in Melbourne 26 feet square still
lets for £l,OOO a year. Even, a shed built of wood in
Flinders Lane 8 feet by 16 feet is let for 30s a week.
Australia is remarkably different from all other countries;
what a lot of things seem really upside down, The Emu
bird runs as swiftly as the horse ; the Kangaroo and some
other animals carry about with them their young in pouches;
there are fish without scales, oysters without shells, oysters
on trees, and rock oysters in abundance ; black cockatoos
have green top-knots, and the swans are black ; the stem


of the wood pear grows from the broad end; cherries have
their stones growing outside ; roses have no smell; trees
shed their bark ;in summer the rivers are fullest; Wes-
leyan chapels have towers and steeples; horses and men
wear veils ; and the most of business men have failed one
time or other!
Newspaper report of wages in Australia and New Zea-
land. But my opinion is that only two thirds of the an-
nexed amount can be relied on to insure constant employ-
ment.
Wages with rations
Female Cooks and laundresses, yearly £35 say £22
Thorough servants 30 „ 20
Housemaids 25 „ 16
Needlewomen 25 „ 18
Nursemaids 15 „ 9
Ditto 25 „ 18
Married couples without incumbrance 65 „ 45
Ditto ditto for Hotels 75 „ 55
Ditto ditto with families 50 „ 35
Farm labourers 50 „ 30
Shepherds 40 „ 20
Hut keepers 30 „ 18
Carpenters 75 ~ 50
Bush Carpenters 55 „ 40
Gardeners 50 „ 35
Wages without rations yearly
Carpenters 160 „ 100
Bricklayers and Plasterers 185 „ 120
Stonemasons 200 „ 130
Pick and Shovel men 100 „ 60
Gold shipped from the Colony of Victoria from the year
1851 to 1859 inclusive.
Years. Ounce
fears. Ounces. Tons. Value.
1851 145,145 or 5 £ 580,580
1852 1,974,976 73 7,899,900
1853 2,497,723 „ 93 9,990,892
1854 2,144,699 „ 80 • 8,578,796
1855 2,576,745 „ 94 10,206,980
80


1556
3,003,811 „ 112
2,720,655 101
2,636,983 „ 94
2,440,000 „ 91
12,045,244
10,882,620
10,150,032
9,760,880
1857
1858
1859
80,095,924


CHAPTER X.
From Melbourne to England via South America.
June 18th. I left Melbourne in the steam ship Oneida.
When fairly out at sea and confined to the cabin by the
weather, our principal resort to kill time was whist. In
fine weather, part of our amusement consisted in watching
the porpoises popping up and down, or rolling over like pigs
at play We admired the heavy roll and spouting abilities
of the whale. Dolphins also were seen. Round about us
we had the swooping gull, the wishful albatros, the beauti-
ful Cape pigeon, and mother carey’s chickens. In warmer
latitudes we had the wizzing of the flying fish skimming
over the sea, much like the swallows on land, and the
graceful nautelus or Portugese man-of-war sailing continu-
ally past. The rising and setting of the sun on the south
side of the equator is so truly gorgeous and sublime that
feelings of adoration instinctively arise as we gaze on the
divine glory of the scene.
Between Cape Horn and Staten Island our attention
was frequently directed to a peculiar luminosity on the sur-
face of the ocean, causing much conjecture among the sail-
ors and passengers. But I leave the nature of the phe-
nomenon and its results to scientific men. The appearance
of the luminosity was not uniform, our vessel left a trace
of fire, sometimes brilliant and dazzling, at others more
tranquil and pearly. These lights were grouped in endless
variety. Thousands of shining points may be seen floating
on the surface, then uniting into an extensive sheet of light.
A gain you fancy you see large sparkling figures like animals
in pursuit, or a spectacle like bringing up cattle in the bush
where they are incessantly vanishing and re-appearing.
The light seems to emit a pale yellow or sickly green gleam.
The surface of the water will often exhibit distinct patches
of luminous fluid, seen at a considerable distance from the
ship in brilliant ridges raised by the agitation of the billows!


td
HH
c
t?
w
CH
>
tzj
u
W
C
cc
c
a
H
HrH
HH
P>
I-*'
w
h—
o




The light from some of the crests nearer the vessel is the
same as that emitted from the diamond and other similar
substances, after exposure to the sun’s rays. If a bucket
of water is drawn up in a luminous state, there appears a
great number of shining bodies, “or shiny secretions,” vary-
ing from a quarter of an inch to one inch-and-a-half in
length and breadth, which move similar to a worm in water.
When taken into the cabin to the light of the candle their
light disappeared. One bucket of water would contain
nearly a thousand of them. Large fish could be traced as
they dai-ted through the water on a calm though dark night.
Some fish that we caught emitted when handled a vivid
prosphorescent light. The luminous gleam which some-
times had an intermittant twinkling character, and at others
shone steadily for several minutes together, entirely dis-
appeared after the.death of the fish. The shiny secretion
of some fish we had cleaned when alive, and which we had
throw-n into clean drinking water, had the same sparkling
appearance in the dark.
July 20th. We lost our bowsprit and rigging; our
milking cow
all went overboard.
August Ist. We arrived at Montevideo. We stayed
there six days, and took in 200 tons of coal. Sheep sold
at 6s each; cattle and mules £3 each ; horses £7 each;
beef and mutton lid lb; flour £ls a ton ; bread Id per
yard ; eggs Isa dozen ; butter Is lb ; land from 10s to 80s
an imperial acre. Oranges are plentiful, but woolly.
Scotch thistles are abundant, and destroyed by burning.
Locusts are troublesome, but are swept into the sea by the
monthly Pampara winds. From the town there are no
trees or bush within eight Field fences are made by
planting aloes. The steamboat Hotel stands A. I.
August 10th. We reached the Forts of Bio de Janiero.
It was a lovely day. The view of the mountain scenery
and the spacious bays which abound in the mighty harbour
was very fine. The picturesque buildings rising in bold
relief, and the pretty houses in the suburbs nestling among
the hills were a constant source of admiration. We coaled
85


the ship in three days by the employment of 60 negro slaves
Whilst suffering from the annoyance we are apt to think
that this coaling counterbalances all the pleasure and ad-
vantages of steam locomotion. Everybody, place and ar-
ticle are so completely coated with a thick layer of the finest
black coal dust, that disgust must be excited. But let me
not omit to mention, in addition to the advantages of steam
locomotion on sea, that of condensed water so plentifully
supplied for internal use espicially while in the tropics. Be-
fore we left Bio, so famous for its good water, swarms of
flies, fleas and bugs, I became tired of its long narrow
streets, confined hot air, and suffocating stenches, which
even the free public waterworks cannot remove. I there-
fore, while we remained, employed my spare time in collect-
ing oranges, lemons, coffee, pomegranates, figs, bananas,
cocoa and sugar canes. Every article, except the above
named articles, is shockingly dear. A light dinner is Bs. 6d.
a pint of ale Is. 6d. There are but few Hotels, and none
of them are good. Here as everywhere else I found that
those houses which are professedly for the English are the
worst. Probably we were charged extra because we were
from the land of gold nuggets. Mules and slaves consti-
tute the labour supply in Bio.
August 14th. It was a sunny Sunday morning, and we
steamed away in majestic style towards dear old England.
On our way we called at St. Vincent", one of the Cape de
Yerd Islands, and stayed 12 hours to take in coal.
September 6th. We landed at Southampton about 4
p.m. Early next day we passed the customs. 1 was charged
5s 6d, but for what no one knows ! Having stayed a lew
days in London, I arrived in Leicester all well on the 10th ;
having been absent one year and about seven months.


NOTE.
A number of friends wished to have, in a permanent
form, the substance of the letters I sent home while on my
travels, I have had no temptation to “extenuate, or set
down aught in malice.”
Composition, as will readily be discovered, is not my
profession; yet I hope my “ Bough Notes” will not be
cast aside because of their blunders.


