

Rough diary of journey from Scutari to Baghdad, performed on horseback in 1814
Unbridge, 1893
Li-tu'V S *© f'~v


ROUGH DIARY
OF
JOURNEY FROM SCUTARI TO BAGHDAD,
PERFORMED ON HORSEBACK IN 1814,
LIEUTENANT C. SAYANSTON,
~/ 12th Regiment Madras Native Infantri/,
BEARING DESPATCHES TO THE GOVERNOR GENERAL OF INDIA.




ROUGH DIARY
or
JOURNEY FROM SCUTARI TO BAGHDAD,
PERFORMED ON HORSEBACK IN 1814,
BY
LIEUTENANT C. SWANSTON,
2/ 12th Regiment, Madras Motive Infantry,
BEARING DESPATCHES TO THE GOVERNOR GENERAL OF INDIA.
July 3rd. —At five in the evening 1 quitted the hospitable palace of
Mr. Liston ; overwhelmed with the kindness, and attention of him,
and his Lady. Having crossed the water from Constantinople to
Scutari, I was detained at the Post house tlu-re, till eight o'clock. In
the mean time, the Janissary, or Tartar rather, whose name is Mahomed
Aga, not of the most prepossessing appearance, he being rather short,
extremely robust ami stout, stoops forward, very broad and high
shoulders, bis head rather sunk between them, with a Koman nose,
tho end of which has been ert off, or rather a slice to one side, with a
large head, altogether ns far as appearance goes, one whom I should
Dover have chosen ns my guide, ami companion for so long a journey,
insisted upon my smoking at least half a-dozen pipes, which he always
lit himself, and after smoking a littl) he presented the pipe to me,
which I took much against my will, but as it was attention on his part
I could not refuse.
Sitting in tho Caravansirai, I began considering on the long journey
I was about to undertake. Sickness might overtake me, 1 became
melancholy, I then whistled a tune, and took another pipe. My dinner
was now brought, consisting of boiled rico well greased, and milk, or
rather tyre, with a little cucumber cut into slices well oiled and
pepp jred. This was so rich I could not take it.




After having dined wo sot out. Our party consisting of, besides
myself, four Janissaries or Tartars, two guides, with four horses for tho
lugg.ign. My Tartar appears the leading man; no movement being
mado without his knowledge.
July Atk. —At three in tho morning we arrived at Gabiza, having
been sevcn-and a-half hours on horseback, and without one halt I
was quite fatigued, and several times fell asleep on my horse. The
road was tolerably good and lay along the sea coast We passed
through two villages. Having halted here three hours we again set
forth, and after fivc-and-a-half hours ride arrived at Imitz or
Nicomidia, beautifully and pleasantly situated on tho slope of a hill
rising from the water’s edge. The environs were very fine, tho land
laid out in vineyards and gardens. Fruit of every description appears
to abound, particularly the Cherry tree, which grows in every field.
Great quantities of salt is made here in Balt pits or pans.
The road lay over a ridge of hills, and along an arm of the sea, the
country bare, and little cultivated. We dined hero upon new milk,
cheese and bread. At five we again set out, and at ten arrived at
Subendji, where we halted for tho night. This is a small town
situated at or near the foot of a ridge of mountains; the road good ;
tho country better cultivated and well wooded. Crossed a river twico,
of no great breadth or depth.
July sth. —At four, having breakfasted on eggs and milk, mounted
my horse a little refreshed from my sleep; and after seven hours riding
arrived at ILindek. Tho country varies considerably; in some spots
well cultivated, in others very barren. On quitting Subendji the road
skirts a lake of fresh water, which appears about eight miles in length
and two in breadth. After four hours riding cross the river Sekatara
by a wooden bridge. This river has changed its course. The remains
of a stone bridge, which I was told was built over the river is now
three miles from tho present source.
The environs of Uandek are remarkable for the quantity of fruit
trees, amongst which are four sorts of Cherries; tho common, a white,
a small black kind, and one very hard but sweet. Ilandek is a small
town, but with a good bazaar. We were detained all the night on
hearing that the bridge over tho river Bouk-mdlan had given way, and
that a horse with baggage had been lost; we, in consequence, did not
like attempting the passage of it in tho night. The Caravanserai was
extremely fulL Amongst the travellers were two Russians from
Teblis. The people were insolent and troublesome.
July 6th. —At five quitted Handek, and almost immediately on
quitting it ascended a low ridge of mountains which we continued
winding amongst for two hours, the road extremely bad. On descend-
ing to the plain, the road becomes worse, having, from the appearance,
been inundated to the depth of six feet by the Bouk-m6lan, which we
crossed on the remains of the bridge, but with great danger to our
horses and baggage. From river to Doudjeh the road is worse; being
obliged to seek our way, the waters having entirely destroyed every


appearance of it. The corn-fields, as well as the whole country, one
confusion of trees, bushes, c., <fcc., and up to the horses’ chests in
mud. Near to, or one hour’s ride from, Doudjeh crossed a second tinio
the river, in breadth 300 yards, and depth three-ami a-lialf feet, good
bottom. The ridge of hills distant four miles a continuation of the
same that bounds the sea of Marmora. On the left the low ridge of
mountains still continues.
Doudjeh is a small town, with a poor bazaar; the country well
wooded, but little or no cultivation. The road from Subcndji to
Uandok is extremely bad, being entirely inundated by the overflowing
of the streams; or rather caused by the sudden melting of thn snow in
the mountains, and the very heavy rains which have fallen lately.
This distance from Subendji to Doudjeh ought always to bo travelled
in the day time.
From Scutari to the foot of the ridge of hills on nearing Ifandek,
there is the remains of a paved road, and has in former times l<een very
good, but is now so much broken up as to cause all travellers to go
sometimes ono mile distant to avoid it.
July 7th. —Handek to Doudjeh is seven hours journey, and distant
about twenty-five miles. Having halted at Doudjeh for three hours at
four in the evening we re commenced our march but did not reach Boli
till two the next morning owing to the bad state of the roads over the
mountains, the darkness of the night, and the heavy fall of rain almost
entirely impeding our advance. The ridge of mountains aro distant
two hours march from Boli and eight from Doudjeh, the passage of
which is extremely bad, and particularly dangerous in tho night, from
the steep precipices and deep ravines, and from tho obscure darkness
caused by the clouds descending, and covering tho whole mountain. I
was four hours In passing them, during tho whole of which time I was
entirely guided hy my horse as I could not myself see tho horse in front
of me, escaping by the greatest miracle with my life, my horse making
a side step went down a precipice of thirty feet, which was of clay. I
most fortunately clung by some bushes and hung, the horso falling
from under me and without injuring himself.
After descending,’ the road to Boli from their base is very good.
This distance I think is about twenty miles.
Boli is the chief town of the district and the residence of a Pacha.
We were here detained eight hours for horses, and three by the Pacha,
he being asleep, and wo could not start till wo saw the Firman. Here
my Tartar had a dispute with the Post-master, as I observed ho has
more or less at every town.
Departed from Boli about two in afternoon, arrived at Gendcth
late at night. Pass Chaga after three hours ride. On the left hand a
lake threo miles long and one in breadth. On leaving Boli ascend a
ridge of mountains. Chaga a few huts. Mountains right aud left,
country little cultivated.
July Bth. —Early in the morning quit Gendeth. Country little
cultivated. Mountains right and left; ascend a low ridge. Numerous


Roman pillars placed ns tomb stones, not able to decipher tho inscrip-
tions. Arrived at Hnmmunlee fivo-and-a-lialf hours joumcy, distanco
about thirty miles, llummunlce a few huts; appearance of great firo
from number of houses destroyed. Bainder four-and-a-half hours
journey from Gcndctli. Ilummunleo stands on bank of river at foot
of great ridge of mountains Remain at Ilummunleo two hours.
Cross river by wooden bridge, ascend ridge of mountains. Pass
through town of Cherchesh, environs well cultivated. Arrive at
Karajchlar Gvo-and-a-half houra, or thirty mile 3 journey; chango horses
and proceed to Karajuran two hours journey or twelve miles, where
remain for night Mountains right and left Find hero the Dragomen
of the French Consul from Baghdad; he is in Turk’3 clothes, address
him as such, find he speaks French, am much surprised, he discovers
himself.
July 9th. —At daybreak leave Karajuran, road continues in valley,
little cultivation. Mountains very high, clothed with fir trees. River
Guzermagh on right On leaving village pass a small ridge of
mountains ; arrive at Kodj-hisar five hours journey or about twenty-
eight miles. Find our friend the Persian Tartar who had left us,
detained, no horses. Kodj-hisar a middle sized village. Post-house
outside the town. Breakfasted and proceed on to Toscia, arrive after
eight hours march, or about thirty-three miles. Town in a valley on
small ridge, road bad, valley little cultivated. Toscia dreadfully
infected with plague; detained nine hours for horses, anxious not to
be detained one; returned thanks I escaped. Told Turks of village
bad, thieves, &c. My Tartar has dispute with another, becomes
serious, obliged to interfere, nmko uso of threat to shoot the Tartar,
becomes very submissive. Environs pretty. Fruit abounds. Little
to eat during tho day, eat nothing at this place on account of plague.
July 10th. —Early,in morning quit Toscia; after about six-and-a-
half hours journey or twenty eight miles arrive at Hadji-hunaza beauti-
fully situated on the bank of Guzermagh river, surrounded by an
ancient stone wall fortification. Fruit of all kinds in abundance.
Road crosses river Delon Derwen after threo hours march or twelve
miles from Toscia. River Guzermagh joins about two miles from
Hadji-hunaza. Mountains very high, little cultivation. A small
village, finding no horses proceed with the same, and halt at one hour’s
march from village for two hours to feed horses. Valley very beautiful.
Arrive at night after four hours, eighteen miles march, on bank of a
rapid stream, not able to discover tho road, obliged to halt for the
night; little food during the day only brown bread, cheese and onions.
July 11th. —At daybreak crossed the stream near to whero it
enters the Guzermargh river, and after two hours journey arrive at
Osmandjek on banks of river which cross by a stone bridge of thirteen
arches. A straggling village; mountain in centro with ancient
fortifications. Valley beautiful and cultivated, fruit in abundance.
At eleven o’clock quit Osmandjek; arrive at Mirsiwan at eleven at
nlgbt, being twelve hours on the road, distance about forty-eight miles.


On quitting the village ascend a ridge of mountains, the road steep and
bad, continuo amongst the mountains till pass the grand ridge called
Dinklu-bel, ascent extremely steep, descent little. A river crosses
the road several times, it rises on the table land above Dinklu bel,
seven hours march arrive opposite the village of Hadjikerim situated m
a plain. Valley eight miles in breadth, live hours more journey atrive
at Mirsiwan late at night.
July IStk. —At two in the morning leave Mirsiwan and arrive at
Amasieh after six hours march or thirty-seven miles. A pretty town
situate in a small valley, standing on the banks of the Tozaneo* river
which divides the town. Fruit of all kinds abundant. The road
after one hour’s march from Mirsiwan lays amongst ridges of mountains,
very steep and tiresome. My horso fell, in descending one, and
bruised me much. Remains of ancient fortified hill and prisons.
After a halt of two hours quit Amasieh, and after seven hours
march arrive at Turkal, a small and poor village; remains of ancient
hill forts. Distance about forty-one miles. Lato at night arrive at
Tokat after a march of six-and-a-half hours or forty miles. Cross the
Tozanee river within two-and-a-half hours march of town, in breadth
fifty yards; road winds in valley which is liitlc cultivated.
River on right, or south of road; mountains to North and South.
Tokat a large town stands principally on slope of mountain, dirty; largo
market; fruit abounds; wine made; envirous cultivated in gardens.
I visit the baths and receivo great benefit from them, large but not
very clean. Remains of ancient hill fortifications. Prisons curious,
cut out in the rocks. People civil. River runs to the North
July 13th. —At two o’clock quit Tokat and after sixteen hours
march arrive at Sivas, riding the same horses having halted but
quarter-of-an-hour on the road. Country mountains, road continually
ascending and decending, no cultivation or habitations, hills thinly
wooded with a species of fir.
July 14th. —At six o’clock in the morning arrive at Sivas which
standS' in a cultivated valley, in length four miles, breadth two. The
town is a mile long and three-quarters of a mile wide. Ancient
fortifications on hill to S.W. of towu. Mountains low and thinly
wooded. There are good workmen of all kinds ; a pipe manufactory,
good bazaar. Watered by a small river, falling into the Gurzermagh
river, which takes its rise in the mountains N. of town.
Leave Sivas at 4 o’clock, having been detained from want of horses
for ten hours, and after half hours march, cross the Guzermagh river
by a stone bridge of sixteen arches. River hundred yards wide, its
course east, and ascend the hills. Direction of road S. by W., and
after six hours march or thirty miles arrive at village of Oolash; Halt
n 4>ht’ dangerous to proceed on account of robbers. At Sivas,
Mahomed Tartar quitted us; furnished there with a Janissary by the
1 acha, as a guard to accompany me to Delucludash. His appearanco
more to be feared than his arms, consisting of an old French blunderbuss.
On the march were people calling out for assistance. Our guard


rides boldly forward, attempts to fire off hia arms, flash in the pan,
succeeds on second attempt which throws a blaring piece of doth in
the air, no hall in it, relieve a villager from being robbed. From
Tokat the horses very good.
July 16th. —Early in the morning quit Oolash, and arrive at
Delucludash after two-and-a-half hours march about thirteen miles. Road
amongst mountains, en route met a party of travellers, our guardsman
gallops forward pointing his gun, one from the opposite party docs the
same, halt when within fifty yards, then meet at full speed. Country
little or no vegetation, neither trees nor bushes. Hills perfectly bare.
Delucludash a very small village. Houses principally underground.
People civil. Detained till next morning from waut of horses.
July 16th. —Early in morning quit Delucludash accompanied by
four villagers as a guard, badly armed; one with a pistol, another with
a sword, another with a gun; little reliance to be placed upon them in
case of an attack. On road pass thro’.' a camp of a tribe of
Tourkamans; extraordinary appearance of camp, tents of a blackish
hue. Encampment occupied valley on each side of road. Springs of
fresh water. Surrounding plains covered with beards of cattle, horses,
sheep and camels. Enter into the camp, little attention paid to me.
After nine hours march, about thirty-six miles, arrive at Ullegekliran.
Country with little pasture, dry and arid, without a tree or shrub.
Ullegekhran a small village, part surrounded with stone wall, a little
cultivation in vicinity. People civil but inquisitive. After two hours
halt, leave attended by one villager as a guard, and four from a
neighbouring encampment of these wanderers, badly armed but well
mounted. On journey gallop on in front and amuse themselves by
throwing the spear. After a march of five hours, or about twenty
miles, arrive in the summer camp of the villagers of Hussain Chelcby,
in a valley on the mountains. Country the same, arid and dry
appearance; en route pass two encampments, obtain some sheep’s
milk from them. Hills now and then. Ascend the grand ridge one
hour’s march from the village.
Do not like the appearance of the inhabitants of the camp ; take
possession of the Headman’s tent, he is absent, presented with coffee
by his attendants, he arrives late at night attended by a guard ; tho
whole arise when he enters the tent, I keep my seat; an elderly good
looking man, with a handsome black beard. All the elderly men
assemble in the tent, one a songster amuses the company. They make
and drink coffee till late hour. He asks for a little brandy which I
give him.
The extraordinary mixture of noises of sheep, oxen, horses, asses
and goats all within the camp.
July 17th. —The camp consists of two principal tents, the remainder
about fifty, in no regular order. The Chiefs tent divided in two, one
part for the place of audience the other for his horses. He makes
great delay about giving us horses, attempts to extort money from the
Tartar; obliged to pretend to go away and leave our baggage; has the


desired effect, he sends for horses after detaining ns six hours I now
discover that these encampments are not of wandering tribes, hut of
the different villagers, who, as the ground becomes dry ami arid, are
obliged to quit their villages and encamp in the valleys, where they
find grass for their flocks, and springs of fresh water. This continues
for tlireo mouths in the year.
Leave this camp and after four hours march, of about eighteen miles
arrive at Hukeemekrany a large village with a bazaar. It is the frontier
town where the tolls are collected, it stands on the mountains. The
road winds principally in the bed of the river, and ascendsdhc great
ridge within one mile of the town.
July 18th. —Early in the morning leave Hukeemekrany, after
fivc-and-a-half hours journey, or eighteen miles, nrrive at the camp of
Hussain Baderuk at foot of ridge of mountains, a small miserable village.
Children very troublesome. Detained seven hours for horses. Quit
it late at night, and after six hours journey, or übout twenty-five miles
(July 19th) reach Aspcsso. Hoad lays across the plain, direction
south. Cross the Burce Soni two hours march, rapid and broad, at
the foot of the mountains; also the Buree Sultan Soni, a small river,
which jobs the Buiee Soni here.
Aspesso a large village with bazaar and Post-house famous for all
kinds of fruit Country around very barren and dry; Milika five
miles N. by E
Aspesso to Nolo, seven hours, or twenty miles, on the E. bank of
the river Euphrates, here rapid, deep, and broad passage by a boat
Three hours from Aspesso across the Buree Soni at foot of ridge of
mountains, which ascend, then road principally descent The
inhabitants of Nolo thieves and insolent. Disencumber myself of all
attractions, and hide my small pistols by order of the Tartar, he does
the samo before entering tho village. Detained ten hours for horses,
quit at half-past eleven at night
July 20th. —Arrive at Khrapoot encampment, on border of lake
about twelve miles in length and two in breadth, after a march of
eleven hours or fifty miles; road lays over ridges of mountains. Hills
very barren, abundant streams of water. The cast side of the ridgo
better peopled and cultivated. Halt for two hours and change horses.
Khrapoot to Argana fourteen hours or about forty-five miles, ltoad
winds along banks of the lake, very dangerous, ascending and decending,
pass the highest ridge of mountains I have yet ascended, road very
dangerous at night, it ought always to be travelled by day. Halt for
two hours at a Caravansirai in the middle of the mountains, six hours
march from Khrapoot. Mountains N. and S.
July 21st. —Arrive at Argana at six in morning, situated on the
mountain with an extensive plain to the South; rested all day on
account of heat. Very angry with Tartar, proposed starting at two, no
horses ready till eight in evening.
July 22nd. —After a march of fourteen hours, or forty miles, arrive
at Diarbekir. Horses hardly able to carry baggage into the town.


Halted at a village or encampment two hours from Argana and got a
guard of eight villagers who left us at daylight, road over a barren Hat.
At three hours inarch from Diarbekir pass a river very dangerous and
never pasted by night; haunted continually by robbers; sixteen Tartars
at different times killed and plundered in passing this place at night.
No water to be had.
Diarbekir stands on a flat, watered by the Tigris river, surrounded
by a wall with circular bastions at regular distances, Turkish loopholed
battlements on top, no embrasures for canon ; repairing it. Town very
miserable appcaranco inside. It is of an oblong form and to the Kor
S.E. is built on a rocky high ground commanding the river.
July 23rd. —Padro Guiseppi da Pojdico an Italian, head of the
Romish Church ; accompany him to his house; breakfast with him, his
Chapel, Dispensary, 3,000 of tho Romish Church, 15,000 Christians in
Kurdistan. Gives a deplorable account of tho Turks, tho Pacha has
seraglio, no women all boys. Tuko leave of good Pailrd and quit
Diarbekir and after seven hours march arrive at tho village of Bane.
Cross the river Tigris close to tho town. Road over a barren flat Pass
the small river Gok thrce-and-a-half hours march fron Diarbekir.
July 24th. —At two in the morning quit the villago and after four
hours march arrive at the villago of Dcsiner and breakfast. Pass a small
river at two hours. Quit the village and after seven hours march
arrive at Merdin, being eleven hours or about thirty miles. Country low,
hills with thin low wood, valleys a little cultivated. Fruit abounds,
and on the plains below very fine melons.
Merdin stands upon n hill; the town of considerable extent and
surrounded by a stone wall; approaches to it on all sides steep nnd
rocky ; the summit of tho mountain rocky, fortified, appears to bo in
ruins; impregnable if in order. Tho houses riso one above another
up and along the slope of the mountain. Go as usual to tho Post-
house. Invited to the English Vakeel’s, a fine old man, an Armenian,
does not speak French, make myself understood in bad Latin;
extremely kind and attentive, has travelled much; various religions
in the town ; contains 25,000 inhabitants. Intended to have started
at night for Nesiben, no hoises. Tartar not anxious, does not exort
himself, now learn which I had before suspected, trades in shawls, Ac.,
accounts for his having so much baggage.
July 25th. —Not able to proceed, no horses to bo had.
July 26th. —News arrives of great disturbance on the road to
Nesiben and on the desert The road frequented by a large party of
Wahabies who had plundered a caravan, and killed several of the
Pacha’s people sent against them. Tartar will not proceed in conse-
quence. Oiler 1000 Piastres for a guard of the men. Governor of
Merdin will not grant it, not being safe with so small a party.
Caravan going to Mousoul detained also.
July 27th. —No news from Nesiben. Learn in the evening I shall
be able to go to-morrow with a strong party of the Governor’s proceed-


ing to Baghdad, in company with :he Caravan. My Tartar yesterday
keeps out of tho way,afraid I should have forced him to leave Merdin,
and go on at all events.
Jul,/ 88th. —After breakfast Mahomed at last brings me word that
tho horses nro ready. Take leavo of my hospitable Armenian and
family, make some little presents to tho Women. Ilis son acctmi{ianics
me out of the town. Join a large party proceeding to the Caravan
encamped on the plain. After two hours march, halt during the heat
of the day at the village of Ilarec. The I’ostdiouse crowded with
travellers. One of the hottest days I have yet experienced. Mahomed
says his prayers no less than three times during tho afternoon, this is
thu first time he has done it during the journey, asking I suppose, the
Prophet’s protection whilst crossing the desert.
July 29th. —At eight in the evening leavo the village, and after
seven hours march, or thirty miles, arrive at Jscsiben. Pass the Caravan
cncaru|>cd on the road. Find three Tartars at Nesibcn, who have been
fourty days on the journey from Constantinople, waiting hero fifteen
days for the Caravan, daro not pass the desert. The country a
cultivated flat which extends from Merdin to Baghdah. Nesiben
wretched, remains of ancient and grand city, now a few miserable huts.
Over three hours journey in circumference. A river runs to the East
of it, over which are the remains of a stone bridge.
July 30th. —Observe Mahomed takes notice of the Postmaster.
In the evening takes the Firman ont of his saddle bag and equips
himself and then tells me that the Postmaster would not give mo
horses unless I paid thirty Roubles or ninety Piastres. In consequence
ho intended to return to Merdin and compiain to the Governor there.
Offers to go but is prevented by the other Tartars. This fellow tieats
the Firman of the Grand Senior with marked contempt; and as well
his superior and master the Pacha of Baghdad. Said to be a
plunderer and robber; all the travellers request mo to complain to
tho Pacha on my arrival at Baghdad of him. An elderly lady, his
wife, visits us tills day; tatooed all over, smokes incessantly ; treat her
with contempt, as well as the husband of whom I take no kind of notice.
Caravan does not arrive.
July 31st. —A lady of the village visits us, pretty and willy: My
Taitar makes love to her with whose attention sho does not seem
pleased, he not being one of the handsomest or most captivating of
men. Ho sings to her a lovo song, which however has no effect upon
her hard heart. He receives great praise from the assembly, quito
delighted. The lady wishes to have my pocket handkerchief which
lam obliged to refuse her. At night taking a walk lam waylaid by
the lady visitor but prove to her what she this morning proved to
Mahomed. Suffocatingly hot. Caravan does not arrive.
August Ist. —Caravan arrives this morning at 9. Introduced to
the Bashee of the Caravan, an elderly stout man the picture of
goodness. The Hadjee who accompanies us from Diarbekir (on his


return from a pilgrimage to Mecca) placed under Mahomed’s care, died
of a stroke of the sun. His poor horse was sold to the Postmaster to
pay the expenses of burial, &c. Hard now poor beast is your lot, you
will miss thine aged master’s kind hand. Ho had carried him from
Baghdad and was on his way back. He had shared his master’s little.
Now ho is no more. You must carry the burdens of the desert and
bear the whip of a cruel master.
August 2nd.— Become great friends with tho Bashce of the
Caravan. Invited by him to his tent at tho Caravan. In tho
evening quit Nesibec in company with the Bashee and retinue of
Arabs, and after a march of onc-and-a-half hour arrivo at the Caravan
encamped on the plain near a well of water.
August 3rd. —No movement of the Caravan. A hot land wind
blew tho whole of this day, which our covering gavo us not the least
protection from, being merely the shell of a small Subaltern’s tent in
India, without walls. The Bashee extremely kind and attentive. Tho
Caravan consists of four thousand merchants, fivo thousand Camels,
and twenty-five thousand horses, asses, mules, and bullocks, governed
by a Bashce and four Sheiks, with a Bashee who receives tho taxes.
A ugust 4th. —At six’in the morning'a body of mounted Arabs were
seen advancing from tho desert; formed line as tho body approached
the Caravan. Proved to lie a Tartar, carrying a Firman for the
Pacha of Baghdad, with his escort of 100 sjiearmcn, to seize and send
Mensil liana of Nesiben a prisoner in irons to Merdin, a great rascal.
All the Tartars rejoiced on tho occasion. In the evening the Chiefs
with their men form on the plain and exercise with spears. Itivide
into two parties, and draw up at the distance of three hundred yards in
lino fronting each other. From tlrcso lines challenges are mutually
given and received; this is done by a good horseman sallying cut
from one line, proceeding with all speed towards the opposite body and
tcuch'ng if possible any of its individual horsemen, and returning
withont being overtaken, which if he does he receives great applause.
Whereas on the contrary, if ho is overtaken by any of the opposite line,
he receivs argood drubbing from their spears.
August sth. —My body and limbs were sore from laying on the
ground exposed to the burning wind. Lice begin to torment me,
cannot change myself. All the Sheiks and chief merchants and
travellers in the caravan pay a visit to the Bashee; I become the
subject of conversation. Astonished that Ido not allow my beard to
grow as well as my whiskers ; admire my clothes, which are certainly
none of the finest or best. A number of strangers visit tho caravan,
who had come for the purpose of seeing a pair of white geese, from
distant parts on the borders of the desert.
August 6th. —Mahomed procures a little straw to make me a bed.
News arrives that the escort of two thousand Arabs are on their way to
join the caravan; during the course of the day they arrived, when I
immediately offered five hundred Piastres to the Chief if he would give


mo a small escort to accompany me across tho desert, offering to leave
nil niy baggage and only to carry tho despatches. The Chief asked me
if I were mad. The Singara Arabs, he said, were too strong, and that
to go without the caravan was certain destruction. Arabs in the
evening exercised as usual. After dinner about eight o’clock a party of
dancers and buffoons paid a visit to our quarters. The part}' consisted
of two musicians, one buffoon, and one dancing Ixiy. The buffoon
cracked many a joke, and particularly pleased the audience with his
extraordinary faculty of being able to break wind backwards at
pleasure. Tho l>oy danced and sang well. Tho Bashee and Chiefs
were highly delighted, and several times asked me if in my country I
had overseen the like, my answer being always in the negative, pleased
them.
August 7th.— Orders issued for tho caravan to move to-morrow.
Vultures begin to assemblo about the caravan. Tho wind this day was
intolerably hot and scarcely bearable.
August Bth. —The caravan moved forward about four in the
morning, and after a three hours march, or almut ten miles, halted on
the banks of a small stream near to the small village of Doocr.
August 9th. —Xo movement this day in consequence of the Arab
Sheiks requiring more Chout. At twelvo o’clock Sheik Mahomed
Haufa, Commander of the escort, arrived in the caravan from Merdin,
distinguished by the superb caparison of his horse. He is attended by
fifty Arabs, well mounted and armed. Breakfasted with him and his
-.tendants ; place of honour given to me. Our fare consisted of cakes
and olive oil. I bathed in the stream and destroyed all the lice that
bad accumulated in my clothes. Show my English pistols aud other
arms to the Chief. The Bashee becomes alarmed that the pistols might
go off. .Friend the Dervise whispers into the Bashee’s ear that the
Devil might firo them off, and begged that ho would request me to put
them up. Heat this day was extremely great.
August 10th. —The Caravan moved at twelvo o’clock am. and
after a march of six hours, or eighteen miles, halted at Chilla a small
village on the banks of the stream of water on the Ixtrders of the
desert. At the first, second, ami forth hours (Kissed three small streams
of water and ono village. Country cultivated, with large flocks of
sheep and cattle to be seen. We were joined at this village by another
body of Aralis armed with match locks and well mounted, number in”
about two thousand. ®
Our direction this march was E. by S.
This day onr. dinner was served up very hot. Tho Turks all
complain of it as it prevents them eating quick, Mahomed my Tartar
taxes the Arabs with eating too quick. Sheik Mahomed Haufa wishes
to become great friends with me, which I do not encourage, from learning
that tins Sheik was in league with tho Singara robbers, and an enemy
to tho 1 aclia of Mousoul, but in consequence of being well paid, ho
had agreed to attend the Caravan ucrosß tho desert with his tiibo.


Xews arrives this evening that, tho Singcra Arabs lia.l collected to
attack the Caravan on the desert in very great force. This intelligence
obliges the Chiefs to send expresses to collect more of their friends.
August 11th. —Caravan halts.
August I!?th. —Caravan.halts. Towards evening a small reinforce-
ment arrives.
August 13th. —Caravan moves forward and halts at Romilly Sonio
a small putrid stream of water. Our direction was E. by S.
August Hth. —Caravan moves forward and halts at Sophia Sonic
another small pool of water, very bad. Direction li by S.
August loth —Caravan moves to Kike Mousoul, fifteen hours or
about forty-five miles.
August ICth. —-A ten hours march or about forty miles to Mousoul;
and on to Karaoush four hours, about sixteen miles.
August 17th. —Early, at four o’clock left Karaoush village, two
hours or ten miles passed the Khraser river sixty yards broad, rapid,
two-and-a-half feet deep, one-and-a-half hour or six miles the Zorp river
two huudeod yards broad, deep and rapid ; crossed over on rafts nnd
bladders, Zerzet village on tho South bank, threo hours or twenty miles
Inkara village. Country open plains, cultivated.
August 13th. —March to Dooghcrkan village four-and-a-half hours,
twenty miles. Ifreel fort walls of thorns passed onc-a-half mile from
Zerzet. Attancoploo four-and-a-half hours or twenty-five miles, situled
on island in river passed stone bridge one arch.
A ugust 19th. —Five hours or twenty-eight miles to Kcrkouk ; half
hour, or two and a-half miles Tessen ; two-and-a-half hours, or fourteen
miles crossed hills ; two hours or eleven miles Tessen Khrousmaty on
lianks of Vinah river; two-and-a-half hours or fifteen miles l'aouk;
three-aml-a-half hours, or seventeen miles Tazcr Khrousmaty.
August 20th. —Kifiley fivo hours journey or twenty six miles;
fortified, road bad ; Karalapet three hours or eighteen miles; at two
hours Narcn river eighty yards wide.
August 21st. —Baghdad, twenty hours journey or eighty miles.'
August 23rd. —Left Baghdad for Bussorah by boat.
August 30th. —Arrived at Bussorah.
September 18th. —Sailed from Bussorah for Bombay in lI.E.I.C’s
cruiser.
October 10th. —Arrived at Bombay.


ROUTE FROM SCUTARI TO RAGHDAD.
Year
1811.
DATE.
STAOES
DISTANCE.
Month
Ait.
Dcp.
lira
Mia.
July
3
3
Scutari
4
4
Gabccza, SAW
n
45
Road fairly pood.
a
4
4
Imitz, S.
H
30
Road over hills. Salt
made here.
5
5
Subendji, S.
5
32
Read good. Small town.
ft
5
G
Handek, S.
7
35
Town small. Bazaar
good. Road bad.
it
G
G
DouJjch, S.
7
25
Road very bad. Small
town.
it
7
7
Bob', S.
10
35
Residence of Pacha.
Chief district to
it
7
8
GenJeth
7
39
Many Roman monumen-
tal pillars.
8
8
Ilummunlce
51
30
A few huts only.
8
8
Karajehlar
5|
35
Mountain very high.
8
9
Karajuran
o
12
Mountains right and left.
9
9
Kodj-hisar
5
28
Road ban.
if
9
10
Toscia
8
40
l’lague raging. Villagers
thieves.
it
10
10
Hadji-hunaza
28
Ancient fortifications.
Fruit abounds.
M
10
11
Bank of a rapid
stream
5
15
Beautiful valley.
H
11
11
Osmandjek
o
16
Straggling village
11
12
Mini wan
12
48
Road steep and kad.
>»
12
12
Amasieh
G
37
Pretty town. Road steep
and tiresome.
»>
12
12
Turkal
7
41
Small poor village.
»»
12
13
Tokat
H
40
Large town, with good
market
*1
14
14
Sivas
16
75
Good bazaar. Pipe manu-
factory.
l>
14
15
Uolasli, S. by V.
6
30
Robbers.
>1
15
1G
Delucludash, S. by
E.
n
13
Very small place. Houses
underground.
M
1G
1G
Ullegekhran, o.
by E.
9
36
Small village. People
inquisitive.
Jf
1G
IT
Hussain Cheleby
Camp, by E.
5
20
A summer grazing en-
campment
i)
17
18
lIukccmekrany,S.
E. by E.
4
18
Large place. Frontier
town. Tolls levied.
it
18
18
Hussain Badcruk,
S.E. by E.
51
18
Miserable place.
ti
19
19
Aspessoo, S.
6
25
Road across plain.
it
19
19
Nolo, S.
7
180}
20
886
Inhabitants thieves, inso-
lent


ROUTE FROM SCUTARI
TO
BAGHDAD (continued).
Year
1814.
Month
DATE.
STAQE8.
DISTANCE.
Air.
Dep.
II rs.
Mils.
180}
866
20
20
Krapoot Camp, R
11
50
Road over mountain
by N.
ridges. Water pleuti-
ful.
20
21
Argana, R by N.
14
45
Road dangerous, should
be travelled by day.
22
23
Diarbekir, S. by E.
14
40
Road infested by robbers.
23
24
Bane, S.E. by R
7
26
Road over barren flat.
24
28
Mcnlin, S.
ii
30
Fruit abounds. Iarrge
town.
28
28
Ilareo
2
8
i9
Nesibcn
7
30
Aug.
2
Nesiben
2
8
Caravan on plain
u
7
8
10
Dooet, E. by S.
3
10
10
13
Chilla, R by S.
6
18
A small stream here.
Border of desert.
13
14
Romilly Sonie, E.
3
12
Putrid stream in desert
by*S.
14
15
Sophia Sonie, R
8
24
Small putrid pool in
by S.
desert.
15
16
Kike Mousoul
15
45
Desert.
1G
16
Mousoul
10
40
Country open and culti-
vatod.
1G
17
Knraoush, R by S.
4
16
It
17
18
Inknra, R
H
35$
Country open plains cul-
tivated
18
18
Dooperkhan, S.R
41
20
18
19
Attancoploo, R
4$
25
On island in river.
19
19
Kerkuuk, E. by S.
5
28
n
19
19
Tessen
1
2$
19
19
Tessen Khrous-
2
11
Banks of Vinah river.
maty
19
19
Taouk
21
15
19
20
Tazer Khrousmaty
3j
17
20
20
Kiffley
5
26
Fortified, road bad
20
21
Karalapet
3
18
21
23
Baghdad
20
80
Total journey 1
performed on V
354;
1514
horseback J
30
Bussora
Sept.
18
Bussora
Oct.
10
Bombay
