

j
l
it
vH
ry
ii\
vi
wjL
SSJ* Jf
tr*
jA


hi f : ' *^^\-
f- <-fsl r 1 , '’ ?2 ’ 1 i'v ■ V- *'- < W - ' .*» -.<•
- ' -v-- - = -:-'■ ~C£ **' r-vi
■ JaMra, raw - • • ‘ ys
t jti* — GSqS' r *• ■rp*^^.', 11 :
(v, k * -i V v?>_ vC, ' • v v tj; .' - %--^r*
TfoNil _S rf? ’-J -IV 7 ■<• • *' 1(1.0 N—'•>, ri
" \ 'jV*- -t- «<V,V- VuV ..- ., _ : - # .rf^- : ' <Z*ip '~‘
f vV, *B- v -'v < ‘'* ✓y l». ■, / fT’j 7*^-*n*Jbv , V\ , <_X< s >^sl
* -
\ M . .
s/tr J,"V- -,-"V. • ?, £ ’■'>* a'" s v*
3# sssl r* w fV
o'/ •■,'7 * -js - «a * >-J _ r '. vvm/T^>^
/ cgwi .■' ..SsT/ ■;p. Cs~. _ r/' ■ ri Ri
~ -v? i v ’ >'
- * r>, . Vv- i " Nff) V _ £J (K c-^?§c
’ ;*=> .^^7'v6^ 1 £C/ , x . 1 - -,' A , V
V L <r — V>Iy jj ,/^
. r V -,-—«. r . _ VT —i' s««Wv v --VV 1 v ifTVV J ' -
1/ ' *“ J*7‘ 7
V-■ * ' '< y'm|r gf ‘ > nV -*r; ''v~S^52!‘.
• ’ —'^v- V> ,>i^^C
— --^ —'-’' ~ -'•‘'■-I ' ,-**” r~gi' ,* v , .-'jm
/ r stlTt- y? •• ; 1 ' —
- t* * J3^aJ'^v S Vvsb \ n<^
.
' -\T ,> y /g? \v, v^-
. .—~'c" ■ *- 1 c 'v/'i • V\c—_ . . ' ■ -, v 'Jf-
sJSltTp'W' ■ ■.-■ - _ . *• \ » Vv.'Vr" ~ -'


«r- wm ms^ : :
£>%£«• _ * ;U : :
3I'/ 'S- ’ *
'■


■
.
.
■
.
■
.
.
nA
-< 1 1^0
<■ ,


ROUGHING IT IN VAN DIEMENS
LAND
ETC.


*v


ybtehm
w
ROUGHING IT IN VAN
DIEMEN’S LAND
ETC.
THE AUTHOR OF
“THE BOY IN THE BUSH ”
STRAHAN AND COMPANY LIMITED
34 PATERNOSTER ROW, LONDON
All rights reserved


.
r
■
■ ::ljsos 4


10115
CONTENTS.
ROUGHING IT IN VAN DIEMEN’S LAND.
I. Building the Nest, . . . . i
11. Coventry Strike-a-Light, .... 5
111. Forebodings, . . . . . n
IV. Missing, . . . . . .15
V. Kangarooing, ..... 24
VI. Exploring, . . . . .29
VII. What had happened at Broadoaks, . . 33
VIII. Murkies and Murphies, . . . .41
IX. Duck-Shooting, . ... .49
X. Syme, the Snake-Charmer, . . .54
XI. Blackfellow’s Flat, .... 60
XII, Stolen and Strayed, . . . .67
XIII. With Tom Todd, .... 73
XIV. Fixes, .... . . 79
XV. The Bushrangers’ Defeat, , . .85
XVI, Bushrangers’ Bravado, . . . .91
XVII. Whaler Bill, 98
XVIII. The Black War, . .... 106
XIX. Buckley, . . . . .Ix 4
XX. Norman’s Creek and Dovecot, . . .122


THE ADVENTURES OF HARRY DELANE.
I. The Young Voyagers, . . . . 133
11. At Aunt’s, ..... 141
111. School, . . . . . .150
IV. School Experiences, -. . . .161
V. Running Away, . . . .168
VI. A Surprise, . . . . .179
VII. Summer Holidays, . . . .185
VIII. Harry’s Tip, 196
IX. Harry’s Presents, > 204
X. Mudcliffs-Super-Mare, . . . .213
XI, The World’s End, . . . .223
XII. Correspondence, .... 235
XIII. Examination, ..... 240
XIV, Mrs. M'Grath’s, . . . .247
XV. The Haunted House, .... 259
XVI. An Exploring Expedition, . . . 269
XVII. The Old Meeting-House, . . . 277
XVIII. Mr. Crichton, . , . . .290
XIX, Fire! ...... 296
XX. More Flolidays, .... 306
XXL Reward, ..... 314
XXII. Miss Crook’s Scare, .... 322
XXIII. A Day at Sea, ..... 332
XXIV, Conclusion, ..... 342


ROUGHING IT IN VAN
DIEMEN’S LAND




r — == == 7
CHAPTER I.
BUILDING THE NEST.
was Hobart Town, a very primi-
v tive bttle town, when the Monarch, of
igT)j and from London, let go her anchor in
Sullivan’s Cove—after a voyage so long
that her sea-wearied passengers had begun to think
either that their captain had lost his way, or else that
Tasmania, or Van Diemen’s Land, as it was called then,
must be a floating island, provokingly fleeing before
them. However, they had reached their Land of
Promise at last, and were well pleased with its aspect.
The magnificent estuary of the Derwent up which
they sailed, looking, when the sunlight fell upon it, like
polished steel inlaid with gold, seemed a sweet haven ot
peace after the wild waste of waters over which they had
wandered. In the distance, Mount Wellington raised
his hoary head—snow on his summit, and ferns of al-
most tropical luxuriance on his sides.
The passengers on board the Monarch had recovered
their good temper and made up the quarrels vhich a
long voyage is almost sure to cause. In the highest of


spirits they bade one another and the ship s officers
good-bye, and were carried ashore through the mud pick-
a-back or in literal «r;;/-chairs, by the grinning ship’s
company.
Amongst these adventurers was a Mr. Norman, an
English surgeon, who being fonder of farming and sport
than ol doctoring, had not succeeded in getting a paying
practice at home, and so had emigrated with his wife,
his three daughters, Mary, Janet, and Amy, and his
rollicking little son Frank, to the Antipodes, where he
intended to grow corn and breed sheep and cattle as his
business, and only to cut off legs and prescribe pills, &c.,
in a friendly amateur sort of a fashion.
There was not much to detain any one in Hobart Town
in those days—it was a “ city ”of slab huts, wattle-and-
daub hovels, and clay cottages very much like Irish
cabins. The stores sold all sorts of things like the shop
in an English village. Mr. Norman had soon got his
grant and his servants, his flour, sugar, rum, tobacco,
tea, &c. Mrs. Norman and the girls sat on one of the
laden drays, whilst Frank and his father on horseback
helped the hands that had been assigned them to drive
the stock to their new home. Mrs. Norman had not
been able to get a female servant, but at home she had
not thought it “ degrading ” to do housheold work when
necessary, and she had brought up her daughters to do
the same. They were not at all sorry, therefore, at being
left without a maid. “ All the better fun,” they thought;
“ housekeeping will be like a picnic every day.”
Mr. Norman called his Tasmanian estate “Broad-
oaks ” —that was the name of his father’s place at home,
and English settlers plant old English names all over the
world as they carry out English daisies.


Broadoaks stretched along the left bank of a river,
not far from the sea, and the new-comers, consequently,
were never in want of either fresh or salt-water fish.
Water-fowl also swarmed on the stream and the casua-
rina-fringed lagoons which bordered it; and the bush
abounded in parrots and pigeons, snipe and quail,
kangaroos, wallabies, and opossums, &c., &c, Frank
inherited his father’s sporting tastes, and soon found
plenty to do with hook and net and gun. The übiqui-
tous snakes gave a piquant spice of danger to his sport.
But first of all the nest had to be built
Whilst slab huts were being knocked up —the largest
for the family—the Normans inhabited a tent, and the
assigned servants slept either completely al fresco with
their feet to a wood fire, or curled themselves up in
blankets and ’possum-rugs under the drays.
The first Broadoaks mansion was a very rough-and-
ready structure, but the living-room was distinguished by
a refinement of luxury which made the old hands grin—
the walls were tapestried with coarse brown paper. The
convicts’ huts, scattered about the farm, had chinks be-
tween their slabs, which freely let in both light and air.
The roofs were not shingled like that of the “ cove’s ”
house, but thatched with over-lapping glistening sheets
of brown-grey bark, which effectually kept out the rain,
but also let in the wind. On their bedsteads of
bullock’s-hide, nailed on the tops of four stumps, or
stretched like cats before the blinking wood-embers in
the brick fireplaces that bulged out at the ends of their
wooden domiciles, the assigned servants —one of them, a
harmless fellow enough, sent out by mistake, or for some
mere trifle, but the others as black-hearted villains as
were ever suffered to go unhanged—snored, nevertheless,


with indistinguishable soundness the sleep of the
weary. Huts and a house of some kind having been
set up at Broadoaks, the work of felling, stubbing, and
fencing into paddocks was begun as vigorously as
Government hands can be got to work. During this
time Frank rode about, chiefly employed in keeping
horses, cattle, sheep, and pigs from straying, (his sisters
looked after the poultry),—sometimes fishing or fowling,
and at other times helping as best he could in the rough
bush carpentering.
At odd times he and his father helped the men in
building what was to be the permanent “ head-station ”
at Broadoaks —a weatherboard bungalow, with a
verandah on a brick foundation running round the four
sides of the one-floored oblong, and a detached brick
kitchen. A timber store and barn, slab stables, and
other outbuildings, were erected at the back of the
house, and a garden and an orchard laid out in front
and on one side.
Some weeks, however, before they moved into this
more commodious abode, the Normans met with their
first serious colonial adventure.


CHAPTER II
COVENTRY STRIKE-A-LICHT.
OST of Mr. Norman’s convicts were rascals,
but the majority were smooth-tongued
scoundrels full of lip-and-eye service.
The most honest in one sense, was the
biggest villain —at least, his offences against the law
were greater than those of any of his comrades.
“ Coventry Strike-a-Light ” —he was a Warwickshire man
who, besides having committed arson, was said to have
murdered more than one keeper in poaching affrays,
although the deed could not be exactly brought home to
him, —Coventry Strike-a-Light made no pretence of
being reconciled to his lot. His face wore a chronic
scowl; his foul tongue was as insolent, and he was as
disobedient and indolent constantly as dread of the cat
would permit. Sometimes his vile temper mastered his
fear of punishment, and he became outrageously insub-
ordinate and abusive.
Several times Mr. Norman overlooked the man’s
abominable behaviour, but at last he found himself set
utterly at defiance, and was compelled to report Strike-a-


Light and get him flogged. Mr. Norman’s neighbours —
the few of his own class, half-pay officers and so on,
neighbours who lived miles away—told him that he had
been wanting in duty both to himself and them in not
having had the man punished long before.
When the punishment came, it was no trifle. The cat
was laid on with a will, but when Strike-a-Light was
being escorted back to Broadoaks he managed to make
his escape. There were plenty of ticket-of-leave small
farmers in the neighbourhood, who would be willing
enough to shelter him, and concoct schemes with him
for robbing his master or any other of the “ swell ”
settlers, whom they hated with the most rancorous envy.
There were only half-a-dozen constables for the protec-
tion of a district spreading many a mile, and these were
ex-convicts, who sometimes would hunt down a runaway
eagerly enough—perhaps to gratify some personal spite;
but at other times were not to be in the least depended
upon. Either through laziness they let the scent grow
cold, or from fellow-feeling they wilfully suffered a fugitive
or a criminal to distance them.
Mrs. Norman was very glad that Strike-a-Light had
escaped. She had always dreaded the man, and hoped
that he would give Broadoaks a wide berth.
“ I’d rather have him under my eye, Mary,” said her
husband, to whom she had expressed this hope. “ From
what I hear it is as likely as not —” but there he checked
himself. He had been going to add, “that he is lurking
in the neighbourhood, on the look-out to do us a mischier,
and many of them,” but refrained through unwillingness
to alarm his wife.
“After all,” he went on cheerfully, but not very
adroitly, “ I don’t know that the fellow is a bit worse


than those cringing scoundrels we’ve got about us. They
make me think of wild beasts in a cage, crouching under
the keeper’s eye—they’d spring if he was to drop his whip.
Nothing but severity will do, my neighbours tell me and
I mean to be stricter in future for your sake and the
children’s as well as my own.”
Almost ever since Mr. Norman had come to Broadoaks
heTiad been exposed to peculation. His choice breeds
of English poultry diminished remarkably. That his
servants attributed to change of climate and the native
cats. Although the convicts’ beef and mutton rations
were more than they could eat, they did not spare Mr.
Norman’s pigs when they grew fat. When the pigs were
missed, the men would gravely assure their “ new chum
master that it was impossible to prevent swine from stray-
ing and running wild in Van Diemen’s Land ; when he
came upon them feasting on roast pork in one of the
huts, they as gravely maintained that it was the flesh of a
wild pig they had killed. #
But these were trifling matters in comparison with the
depredations to which Broadoaks was exposed after
Strike-a-Light’s disappearance.
Cows, calves, bullocks mysteriously vanished horses,
too—amongst them, greatly to Frank’s indignation, the
pretty little grey which he was teaching Amy to ride.
Frank was very fond of all his sisters, but being older
than Amy, he was able to patronise her, and to get from
her the looking-up worship of a younger sister, instead of
the half-compassionately looking-down motherly-kindness
of elder sisters ; and, therefore, Amy was Frank’s special
favourite. He asserted that he had broken in the pretty
little grey for her use ; at any rate, he had got flung over
the pony’s head when he was riding it in the early da)»


of its breaking-in on a side-saddle, and with a horsecloth
strapped round his waist by way of habit.
Sheep also disappeared. The men, when the flocks
were counted into the hurdles, flatly asserted that they
had brought home as many as they had taken out, or
else professed to be as much astonished as their master
at the numbers that were missing.
“ The black fellows must have speared ’em, yet they’d
seen no blacks,” &c.. See., &c.
These last losses were the more serious to Mr. Norman
because he had found out that sheep, cattle, and horses,
must be his money-winners. His corn crop had been
good, but there had been scarce any market for it, or,
indeed, for his pigs and poultry and their produce. He
did not like being robbed of these, but still, as he had
more swine and fowls and eggs than he could sell, or his
family consume, he did not grudge so much the loss of
such things. Of course he and his wouldn’t starve.
They had more corn than they and the pigs and poultry
between them could get rid of, and of the latter, as I
have said, a superabundance, in spite of the “ native-cats’”
marauding propensities, and the Tasmanian hog and
sow’s tendency to stray ; but it was not merely to get
enough to eat that Mr. Norman had brought his family
across the world.
He consulted his neighbours, not, of course, the
ticket-of-leavers, but those others of whom I have
spoken. They promised him all the help they could
give him, but all they could do for the time was to con-
firm his impression that Strike-a-Light, and the other
assigned servants, were in league to rob him, and that the
neighbouring ticket-of-leave farmers acted as “ fences,”
in more senses than one, for the thieves.


“This is how it is, you see, Norpian,” said Captain
Ruddock, an old bachelor who owned Penruddock, an
estate about fifteen miles off. -“The rascals you’ve got
yet play into the hands of that precious Strike-a-Light of
yours, and those infamous ‘ leavers ’—l’d string them all
up if I’d my way —they’re just robbers turned loose, with
a license to rob ; these double-dyed scoundrels either
buy your sheep, and so on, themselves, or else they dis-
pose of them on commission. You may be sure they
get a pretty stiff one. Perhaps there is honour amongst
thieves sometimes, after a tashion, but they take precious
good care to get paid well for anything they do for one
another. If your fellows, between them, can manage to
raise a bit of money, they’ll bolt, the lot of ’em. So it’s
your interest to keep a sharp look-out on them, and it’s
ours to help you. How do the ladies like their new life ?
It must try their nerves a bit. I’m thankful I’ve no wife
and children to keep me in a fidget when they’re out of
my sight. I’ve only to fight for my own hand, as the
Scotch folk say, though, of course, it will be always ready
to help a neighbour. It’s only sensible selfishness that
we of the right sort should hang together here. We’ve
got plenty of the wrong sort banded against us.
“ A fine little fellow that boy of yours is. If it comes
to a scrimmage Master Frank will play his part well, or
I’m a Dutchman. I shall be glad to see him over at
Penruddock whenever you can spare him, and you too of
course, Norman, and the ladies, if they can put up with
a bachelor’s quarters —though, by the bye, my house is
snugger than yours is as yet, Norman, When Broadoaks
Palace is finished, of course we shall fancy that Windsor
Castle has been brought over in a glass case.
“ Don’t you be mealy-mouthed with your ruffians,


Norman. I don’t mean be always bully-ragging ’em —
that’s as bad, pretty well; but when they do wrong let
’em suffer. Make ’em feel you’re their master. What’s
the good of transporting ’em if they’re to have everything
their own way ? Where’s the punishment in that ? It s
a duty you owe to the old country and to the colony, to
yourself, and to all of us, to keep ’em in order.
“By-bye; remember me to the ladies. I’m sorry I
can’t ride on and see ’em, but I’m busy. Mind what I’ve
told you, Norman. You’re fresh, but I know the lie of
the country. I’ll speak to the chief constable and to
Tom Steele; he’s not a bad fellow, but a bit too
squeamish for a magistrate. I’ll speak to ’em again about
Master Strike-a-Light. Tom’s a' deal too judicial for a
country like this. An honest fellow like Tom should
strain a point to get a rogue hanged. Evidence ! What’s
the good of finicking about evidence ? We all know well
enough what sort of gentry we’ve got to deal with, and
that it can’t be expected that those of their own kidney
will swear against ’em. If they did, I should begin to
think that the scoundrels were innocent for once in a
way. By-bye.”
So having spoken, the Captain pressed his heels
against the sides of his blue-roan, Tomboy, and cantered
back to Penruddock.


CHAPTER 111.
FOREBODINGS.
NE day Frank was sent over to Penruddock
with a message. He had to cross a lonely
ridge, covered with evergreen beeches and
i musk-trees, and in a hollow, he came
upon a “devil” {dasyurus ursinus) devouring the
carcase of a sheep. The greedy savage little brute
looked more than half inclined to fly at either Frank or
his horse. Frank, however, soon dropped it with a
pistol-bullet, and dismounting found, from the brand,
that the mangled wether belonged to his father. No
doubt it was one of the stolen sheep, but what had it
been doing there all by itself?
Taking with him the skin, or, at least, as much as was
left of it, he remounted his horse and rode on to Penrud-
dock.
The captain was very much interested when he heard
Frank’s story, and rode back with him to the spot where
he had found the sheep. The ground was too hard to
show footmarks, but riding now this way and now that,


Captain Ruddock found wool hanging on the outside of
the scrub which almost filled a deep gully. There was
more wool on the branches inside. No doubt the stray
sheep had struggled up from that direction. The
Captain told Frank to alight and tie up his horse.
Having done the same himself, he bade Frank follow
him quietly down the gully.
Ere long they came out upon a little flat shaded with
wattles. Here in a fold made of brush hurdles, a score
or so of Mr. Norman’s stolen sheep were mustered. A
hut, like a black fellow’s, was pitched near the fold, but
there was no one in it. A blanket, a tin-pot and panni-
kin, a broken spur, and a tinder-box were all that it
contained.
“ I’m inclined to guess that we’ve found Master
Strike-a-Light’s earth, Frank,” said Captain Ruddock.
“If we were to stay here quietly until he came back,
perhaps we should be able to nab him, but then per-
haps we shouldn’t—he might have mates with him—and
then we should lose the sheep. We’d better make sure
of them first. It seems almost a pity to let him know
we’ve come upon his snuggery—we might have netted
him here so neatly some day —but, at any rate, he’ll know
that this earth is stopped, and we must tru t to another
bit of good luck to find out his next. Go and fetch the
horses, Frank, my boy, and I’ll help you to drive the
sheep home.”
As the captain and his young friend were on their
way to Broadoaks behind the hide flock, a man in a
shabby slouched hat, faded blue woollen shirt, and much
worn moleskin trousers, suddenly rode out of the dull
blue-green foliage that bordered the track.
No sooner did he see the sheep and their drivers


tbiin he made his horse wheel as if its hind hee.s w r ere
a pivot, and galloped into the bush again.
“ Why, it’s Sirike-a-light,” cried Frank. “ Let’s give
chase.”
“No, my boy,” answered the captain laughing, and
laying his hand on his companion s reins. Not this
time. Now we’ve taken the sheep in hand, well get
them safe back to Broadoaks, and not leave them for
Master Strike-a-Light to pick up, and then laugh at us
when he’d given us leg-bail.”
Captain Ruddock received a hearty welcome at
Broadoaks —which he reached about sun-down from
the family, at least; some of the men glanced at one
another with a very “ queer ” expression of countenance
when they saw him riding in behind the sheep.
Tea, “damper” and “steamer” formed the evening
meal at Broadoaks House that night; tea with milk
as well as sugar in it, and damper well plastered with the
home-made butter, and kangaroo collops sending up
an incense that might have provoked an appetite almost
within “ the ribs of death.”
Full justice was done to the meal by all that sat down
to it. The captain, Mr. Norman, and Frank had been
riding about all day, and Airs. Norman and the girls had
been hard at work in and about the house. They did
not think it genteelly interesting to profess to live on air.
But though she had a good appetite, Mrs. Norman
was as anxious as the most fastidious lady perhaps a
good deal more so—about the safety of those who were
dear to her.
“Oh captain,” she said, in the course of the talk
which took place after supper, “ what do you think that
dreadful man will do next ? ”


“ Why, of course, my dear madam,” answered the
captain, “he won't be any better pleased because we’ve
stolen a march on him. Besides the grudge he bears
your husband, though Norman ought to have had him
flogged long before, he’ll have one against me and my
smart young friend Frank. I’m inclined to think that
the best thing we can do is to smoke him out —not shilly-
shally, but set to work with a will, and make the country
too hot to hold him. To say nothing about you,
Norman, he’s taken up his quarters too near my place for
my liking. If you’ll give me a blanket here, I’ll ride
in to-morrow, and speak to Tom Steele about it. It
would be only running back my tracks twice to go home ;
besides, I’ve been in the saddle almost ever since the
sun came up. It’s a comfort to have a good overseer
like mine. He was sent out, but there isn’t an honester
man in the colony than Quilter. When he’s at home,
my place is looked after every bit as well as if I were
there myself. You should get a man like that, Norman.
It would save Mrs. Norman a good deal of anxiety.
Shall we go out and have a pipe before we turn in ? ”
Whilst the tw r o settlers were smoking, Mrs. Norman
gathered her children together as a hen gathereth her
chickens under her wings. She always had evening
prayer with them, but this night she prayed with un-
wonted solemnity. She could not shake off an impres-
sion that the runaway convict would endeavour to strike
a blow at his late master through the children.


*
CHAPTER IV.
MISSING.
result of Captain Ruddock’s visit to the
magistrate was that the police received
orders to make a close search for Strike-a-
Light, and being kept up to their duty not
only by the chief constable, but also by the gentlemen
who rode with them as amateur detectives, they so
bestirred themselves that the runaway found it necessary
to leave the district. Petty thefts still took place at
Broadoaks, but its flocks and herds had rest for a time,
and as the days went by and Strike-a-Light still made no
sign, Mrs. Norman’s fears began to fade away.
But Strike-a-Light had not forgotten his flogging. He
was one of the men who, according to the Yorkshire
saying, would keep a stone in his pocket seven years,
then turn it, and keep it for another seven years, so that
he might always have it ready for his enemy. Vengeance
he was determined soon or late to take. He knew that
the hot police hunt after him would soon grow cold, if
he kept for a time at a distance, and that then he would
be able to return to his old haunts and work with his old


accomplices. At this time there "were a great many
bushrangers in Tasmania. Sqme, like Strike-a-Light,
had taken to the bush after a most amply-merited flog-
ging ' others after cruelly unjus’t punishment; others
because they hated labour and loved plunder ; others
because they were bent, if they could but stow themseh es
away in or seize a vessel, upon making their escape from
the island.
When I said that Strike-a-Light could dispose of his
stolen goods to the ticket-of-leave farmers round Broad-
oaks, you must not suppose that he obtained money for
them. In exchange for a horse, a beast,- or so many
sheep, he got rum, tea, tobacco, flour, and so on, or
perhaps a promissory note. Coin at one time was so
scarce in Van Diemen’s Land that the middles of dollars
were punched out and circulated as “ dumps,” the silver
circles left passing from hand to hand as “ ring-dollars.”
The best fisherman at Broadoaks was Penny, the
quasi-innocent convict of whom I have spoken.
One evening he and Frank started for the mouth of
the river. There they fished by moonlight and after sun-
rise. They landed, too, and knocked a good Billingsgate
bushel of oysters off the rocks. With these and a very
respectable take of trumpeter, mullet, and king-fish, they
returned to Broadoaks in the forenoon of the day after
that on which they had started.
Mary and Janet were waiting at the landing place at
the foot of the garden, to ask what luck, and to help, if
necessary, in carrying the shelled and finny spoil up to
the house.
“ Why, where is Amy ? ” cried both girls in a breath,
as the boat slanted in to the shore.
“ Amy! ” answered Frank, clambering up the bank,


“ why, you ought to know best about that. We’ve had
such fun. Didn’t the figh bite famous, Penny? But
what do you mean about Amy ? ”
“ We saw the boat coming up the river, and Amy -said
she would run to Piper’s Point and get you to take her
in. You stood in for the Point,” said Mary.
“Yes,” replied Frank, “but we were only making a
board. Poor little Amy’s lost her sail. She couldn’t
have got down in time, or we’ve missed her somehow.
But she’ll soon be back. Very likely she’s back already.
It’s a near cut to the Point by land, though the river
winds so.”
But when the children reached the house, Amy was
not there.
Frank forgot that he was tired, and ran down to the
Point at racing speed, but had to come back with the
report that he had seen nothing of her.
As she knew her way to the Point well enough, she
could not possibly have lost her way in the bush
especially since her wish to have a sail would have pre-
vented her from loitering or straying either to the right
hand or the left.
Mr. Is orman came in, and all the family turned out to
search the land lying in a straight line between the house
and the Point ; turning off, of course, now on this hand
and now on that, to make the search more thorough.
Not a trace of Amy could be found.
Penny had joined in the search.
V hat do you think of it, Penny ? ” asked his anxious
master.
Foul play o’ some kind, sir,” answered Penny, almost
m a whisper, and glancing round him as if he were afraid
of listening spies, “ Strike-a-Light’s come back. My
c


mates swore they’d do for me if I blew on him, but I
ain’t a-goin’ to hold my tongue now. A dear little gal
like that! And the poor missis lookin’ as if her heart
would break. The missis and the young ladies have
always been good to me. Tell you what it is, sir if
you’ll stand by me, I’ll stand by you. I never did you
any wrong myself, but I’ve seen wrong done you —partly
because I didn’t see any call to get my throat cut for
doin’ a good turn to a man that had never done aught
for me, and partly, p’r’aps, because I was half pleased to
see such as you—the sort of folk that lagged an innocent
chap like me —have to smart a bit theirselves. But I
can’t stand this. The poor missis and the young ladies
have always been good to me, and Master Frank’s a
downright fine young feller. And I’ve nothin’ to say
agin’ you, sir. Arter all, it ain’t your fault I’ve got to
work for you for nothin’. You stand by me, an’ I’ll
stand by you. What are my mates to me ? They ain’t
my sort. Such as them desarves laggin’ for what they’ve
done since, if they didn’t desarve it afore.”
“Well, Penny,” said his master after a pause, “I’ll
take you at your word, and give you a trial. I’ll make
you overseer, and if you behave yourself, I’ll get you your
liberty, and pay you well. It would be a comfort to
have some one to trust to. I shall leave you in charge
here, under your mistress. Come up to the house and
I’ll give you pistols and powder-and-ball. Frank and I
must be off to hunt up poor little Amy. How had we
best set about it ? Good God! You don’t think the
infernal villain would harm the poor little child ? ”
“ He’d do anything when he’s in a scot,” said Penny;
“ but it’s my belief he wants to make this pay somehow.
He wouldn’t harm the little dear so long as he thought


there was a chance o’ that. He’s got a bit of his
rewenge, you see, sir, through the fright he’s given you
and the poor missis, an’ then I expect he means to keep
the little gal till you come to terms o’ some kind. But,
there, the little dear will die o’ scare if she’s not took
from him at once.
“ A black tracker would be the chap, but there’s no
blacks about just now.
“ Best thing you can do, sir, is to take the country
between this and the sea—he ain’t likely to have crossed
the river—and ride it up and down and across, as if you
was choppin’ up a kangaroo’s hind quarters for steamer
—and send Master Frank off to rouse up Captain Rud-
dock and the other gentlemen.”
Penny’s advice was followed. Captain Ruddock sent
word to two other of Mr. Norman’s friends, and started
with Frank to search the district he had selected. He
tried to persuade Frank to stay and rest at Penruddock,
but seeing that the boy would certainly start off on his
own account if he left him behind, he took him with
him, insisting first, however, on Frank’s taking a good
meal.
“An empty stomach is good for nothing, my boy,”
said the hearty captain. “We shall find your little sister
all the quicker if we stay over the beef a little longer.
Beefs ballast and sails both. When you’ve a journey
before you, no time is ever lost in laying in provisions.”
The meal over, they started with blankets, pannikins,
and a tin pot, and two or three days’ rations strapped at
their saddle-bows. Both were armed.
They rode past swamps, in and around which the
white gum, and the blackwood, and the tea-tree
flourished. They crossed flats fringed with stunted gum-


trees, mounted ridges of iron-stone and granite, passed
through moist forests of dark-leaved beeches and pines
with twigs like celery. They skirted green-stone moun-
tains capped with snow, rounded lakes, and forded
creeks, without seeing anything of Strike-a-Light or Amy.
On the third day the captain had decided that it
would be best to work round to Broadoaks, in order to
ascertain whether any of the other searchers had been
more successful.
If it had not been for the melancholy character of their
quest, Frank would have had a jolly time. They had
camped out with the moon for bedroom candle, the
captain had taught him how to make tea and damper in
the bush, and praised them when made; they had sup-
plemented their farinaceous rations with wild duck,
pigeons, and parrots, which Frank had shot and cooked.
It must be owned that the cookery was not very recon-
dite —the birds were dressed, black-fellow fashion,
unplucked —but, in spite of their anxiety, both the
captain and Frank managed to enjoy their fowl fare.
They did not think it foul fare.
They were making for Broadoaks by a short cut, when,
in a valley between two mountain spurs, they came upon
the rough homestead of one of the ticket-of-leavers.
The site seemed to have been selected without any
regard to markets, in the ordinary sense of the word. It
was as out-of-the-way a place as any one need wish to
see ; but there the owner and his large family lived in
rude plenty on the produce of the soil —plus proceeds
of personal theft and dealings with the bushrangers.
The proprietor, “ Single-eyed Simpkins,” was one of the
batch of convicts that the first Lieutenant-Governor of
Van Diemen’s Land, Colonel Collins (who fought as a


subaltern at Bunker’s Hill), planted in the colony.
Simpkins owed his sobriquet not to any reputation for fair
dealing, but to the fact that he had lost the sight of one
eye in a rum-engendered free fight. In a sense, however,
he was, after all, morally single-eyed. His rule of action
was an exclusive regard for the interests of Number One.
That ought to have been his convict number.
He had “ spotted ” the captain, riding down with the
young “ new chum,” to his house, and met them at the
slip-panels.
“ You look tired, captain,” said Simpkins, as he took
down the rails, in a tone that was partly cringing, partly
defiant, in a monkeyishly-spiteful kind of way. “ You
and the young gentleman had better come in and have
something to eat and drink. What shall it be ? Give it
a name—though, of course, a poor man like me has got
nothing but tea and rum —and there’s little left of that to
set before gentlemen. Hows’ever I likes to be liberal.”
Perhaps he thought that his affectation of familiarity,
as coarse as he durst make it, would disgust the captain,
and induce him to ride on.
If so he was disappointed.
“ Yes, we will come in and rest a bit,” answered the
captain.
“Thankee, no,” he went on, when he and Frank,
having hung up their horses, were seated with Simpkins
in the hut. “We don’t want baiting, nor the horses
either, but—when did you last see Coventry Strike-a-
Light?”
The abrupt inquiry took the old man aback.
“ I’m an honest man now, captain,” he stammered,
“ whatever I was once.”
“ Glad to hear it,” said Captain Ruddock ; “ always


like to hear good news. But honest folk may happen by
chance to get sight of rascals, eh ? How can they help it
if the rascals will force themselves upon them ? I don t
say it's your fault, but I’m inclined to think that you may,
perhaps, have seen Strike-a-Light lately ; and if you have,
I needn’t tell a sharp fellow like you that it will be to your
interest to let us know when, and all about it. You’d
have a better chance, you see, of going on living
respectablv, and training up your children, and } our
grandchildren, in the ways of virtue.”
“ I assure you, captain,” the old man began to protest,
but Captain Ruddock cut him short.
“ Oh, don’t trouble yourself,” said the captain. “Of
course you know your own interests best, or you ought to.
If it will pay you better to keep that rascal’s secrets you’ll
do so, I know ; but you mustn’t be astonished if the
magistrate is rather curious to know what goes on in this
snuggery of yours. I shall see Mr. Steele to-morrow.
Come, Frank, we’ll be moving.”
Simpkins fidgeted about them as they mounted their
horses, and anxiously watched them off his premises.
When they had ridden some little distance the captain
drew rein.
“Take my word for it, Frank,” he said, “that old
rascal could tell us where to find your sister. I’ll plant
somewhere about here \ I can see what goes on dovn
there without their seeing me. And you ride into
Broadoaks as hard as you can gallop, and find your
father, and tell him to come out here. If any of the
neighbours are with him they’ll come too, and if you
should come across the chief constable all the better.
I’m inclined to think that we may pounce upon Strike-a-
Light at friend Simpkins’s, but he’s got a little army of


strapping sons, who haven’t been taught their catechism.
Thou shalt steal, and thou shalt kill, if necessary —that’s
their notion of their duty to their neighbours. So, if it
comes to fighting, it will be well to make the attack in
force.”


CHAPTER V.
KANGAROOING.
S perhaps you have had enough of Strike-a-
Light’s unpleasant company for the
present, I will content myself with saying
that he escaped when Amy was brought
home in triumph from Simpkins’s farm, and that the latter
worthy persisted to the last in maintaining that he
had not had the least idea that the little girl, whom
he had been employed to conceal, had been upon
his premises. Let us pass on to the time when she
was delightedly running about the finished new house at
Broadoaks.
It was not exactly, according to Captain Ruddock’s
prediction, a palace, but, for the bush, it was a very
comfortable home. Especially comfortable did it seem to
the bachelors amongst the guests who were invited to the
house-warming ; not because it held a little English
furniture, and actually a piano (both hitherto had been
kept in the cases in which they had made the voyage),
but on account of the presence of Mrs. Norman and her
children.


A cheerful hostess and daughters to match are a kind
of furniture which makes bush bachelors envious.
The day after the house-warming Mr. Norman and his
guests had a kangaroo hunt. Of course Frank joined in
the chase.
It was a regular hunt with dogs —wiry old Scottish
deer-hounds and their more or less mongrel descendants.
They soon found, singling from a little mob —some
napping, others cropping on all fours the brown kangaroo
grass, in a sunny little hollow —a tall boomah.
Off went the “ old man ” at a great rate, his huge, stiff
tail thumping on the ground.
Twenty and thirty feet at a time he bounded, clearing
logs and stumps and water-holes in his flying leaps.
After him went the galloping dogs, often distanced, but
never disheartened.
A broad creek crossed the line of chase ; kangaroo,
hounds, and mounted huntsmen all took to the water.
On the other side of the creek the country was more
open, and the dogs gained on their quarry.
Suddenly he turned, caught Mr. Macpherson’s Oscar
in his bear-like hug, flung himself on his side, and ripped
up the poor hound with a savage kick-out of his sharp-
clawed hind-legs. Up again he sprang, and bounded
onwards, with the irate Macpherson, vowing vengeance,
riding far ahead of the rest of the field.
The other deer-hound stuck to the boomah, and the
ground becoming swampy, without much brush, the pack
of mongrels came up in full cry. Into a water-hole
plunged the boomah, and ducked the dogs one after an-
other as they plumped in after him.
When Frank rode up the kangaroo was doing his best
to drown the boy’s pet dog, Jerry. Fierce was the splash


and struggle, piteous were Jerry’s howls when he
managed for a moment to get his head above water.
Frank leaped from his horse, and as the boomah
floundered towards the edge of the water-hole, hit it with
all his might behind the ears with the butt-end of his
loaded, metal-handled whip.
Jerry was released, and Oscar was avenged. “ Hech,
lad, I wish I’d had the doing of it—my purr Oscar! ”
said Mr. Macpherson, as he looked on the slain slayer of
his hound. (Both Frank and Mr. Macpherson seemed
to forget that Oscar and Jerry had been trying to kill the
boomah.)
When the forequarters had been skinned, cut off, and
thrown away, the great tail was thrust through a hole, cut
in the skin, at the neck, and the hind-quarter was sent
back to Broadoaks to be made into soup. That was
Frank’s contribution to the day’s late dinner, and no mean
one either. Perhaps you have tasted the kangaroo-tail
soup that is sent over to England in tins ? I don’t know
whether you like it, but it is considered a great dainty in
the bush. Besides providing the company with soup,
Frank brought Amy home a pet
A bright-eyed, brown doe was chased, and bounded off
at first as fast as the “old man.” Thump , lump , went
her tail (as hard as horn where it touched the ground)
like the celebrated Golden Leg, only Mrs. Kangaroo
travelled at a far more rapid rate than Miss Kilmansegg.
But the pace soon told upon her, for in her pouch she
carried a bright-eyed little son, “the very image of his
mamma.” Master Joey had been gambolling about his
mother, but as soon as she started off, scared by the
nearing dogs, he threw a somersault and snuggled down
in her warm apron-pocket, above which he peeped every


now and then, as she dapped along as if her feet were
made of india-rubber. But, alas, the doe soon ceased to
be a flying doe. She broke a leg in trying to take a
spring. The dogs were soon at her heels as she
floundered on in a very ungainly drunken-like fashion.
Fear for herself made her forget her love for her little one.
She put a forepaw into her pouch, and dinged the
Joey,” i.e.y threw away her son.
If she had escaped, she would have come back to look
for him, but she had no such chance. Her race was run.
In a very few minutes she had shared the fate of the old
man, and, springing from his horse, Frank had secured
the Joey as his prize.
It shook, chattered, and tried to bite when Frank first
took it up, but after a time it not only rode quietly upon
his knee, but nestled up to him for warmth.
Amy was delighted with her pet. She tended it as
little Barbara Lewthwaite tended her lost lamb, when the
dew was falling fast, the stars began to blink. She ga\ e
it milk, she made it pap, it soon would eat bread out of
her hand. She made it a snug bed out of a ’possum rug,
and ere long its collar was kept on only, like a cat s, for
ornament. The chain was removed, and Master Joey
hopped about the premises at his pleasure, helping him-
self to whatever took his fancy. He was very fond of
sugar, and would steal it out of the cup-board, if left un-
locked, as he shuffled about the house on moonlight
nights, when everybody else in it was asleep. He made so
free in the garden, selecting the freshest, crispest young
vegetables for his salads, that Mr. Norman had to tell
Amy that her pet must suffer the extreme penalty of the
law, if it could not be otherwise kept from its larcenous
ways. Amy, however, had little fear that this threat


would be carried out, and though she did try to keep
Joey away from the garden, yet she only saved him
trouble by doing so, since he got his delicate vegetables
brought to him by his mistress, instead of having to go
for them himself.
Joey was very fond of Amy. He would rub his nose
against her cheek, and, lying down on his side in a sunny
spot, invite her to tickle his warm fur. But he was also
very saucy to Amy. He would scold her if she did not
let him have anything he wanted the very moment, so to
speak, he asked for it, drum on her shoulder with his
forepaws, and sometimes stand up and spar at her with
them like a boxer.


CHAPTER VI.
EXPLORING.
HEN the new house at Broadoaks had been
inhabited for about a year, Mr. Norman
joined Captain Ruddock, Mr. Macpherson,
and a few friends who wished to take up
new country, in an exploring expedition.
Had the expedition been an equestrian one, Frank
would have been one of the explorers, but since, in
order to be free to go in any direction they pleased, they
were to travel on foot, “humping the swag”— i.e. carrying
all their impedimenta —it was thought that Master Frank
was not yet strong enough for such a journey.
Of course, he was very indignant at first, but after a
time he comforted himself with the thought that he really
was left in charge at home. His mother and the over-
seer he chose to look upon as lieutenants. The explorers
mustered at Penruddock, and thence they started with
their dogs, well armed and somewhat heavily laden.
One day, after having crossed stony ridges and dived
into densely wooded gullies, they were in the very heart
of a tea-tree scrub when they heard a black fellow’s cry.


Whites and blacks in Van Diemen’s Land in those days
hated one another like fiends for the most part. Both
had committed great barbarities, but it was the whites
who began the quarrel. The blacks were treacherously
fired upon when they wished to make friends with the
whites; no wonder they retaliated when they got the
chance, and then a war of races followed, in which the
weaker went to the wall; but in our explorers’ time the
blacks were still numerous enough to be formidable.
Captain Ruddock led his party out of the scrub —they
had to wriggle like snakes to get out —and then halted
in a comparatively lightly-timbered spot to reconnoitre.
But the blacks were beforehand with him. A darkie
scout looked out of the scrub just when the white men
struggled into the open, and then rushed back to his
countrymen.
The white men had barely time to extemporise a
breast-work by piling logs against a fallen tree, before the
blacks were on them : hurling spears and waddies, and
savagely shouting “ Wah, wah, wah ! ” But one volley
from the white men ensconced behind the timber gave
the black fellows pause, and a second made them turn
tail, although the numerical odds were nearly twenty to
one in their favour. Leaving their wounded on the field
of battle, to be looked after when their loathed but
dreaded conquerors should have taken their departure,
the unharmed blacks bounded back into the scrub.
Some of them, however, dogged the white men when
they resumed their march, and, therefore, the most
careful precautions had to be taken by the little party, at
whom at any moment poisoned darts might whizz or a
shower of thick clubs hurtle.
Fortunately, towards sundown they came upon open


country in which they could encamp with comparative
security.
A fire was soon lighted, over which tea was scon boil-
ing, and mutton frizzling and sputtering. Fuel was piled
up for the night, and a rough wind-screen erected out of
boughs and bark.
Supper finished, out came the pipes; and w r hen the
smoking and yarning were over, the pioneers rolled
themselves up in their blankets, and kangaroo and
opossum rugs, and soon began to snore—all but the
sentry, changed every four hours, whose duty it was to
look out for the blacks, and keep up the fire. The
blacks did not trouble them, and after a very primitive
toilette and another hearty meal of tea, damper, and
mutton, they took up their loads, and began to toil up a
high hill, or little mountain, thickly set with gloomy she-
oak. It was no gloomy prospect, however, they sighted
when they reached the top. Beneath them they saw a
verdant valley, lightly timbered like an English park,
with a stream winding through it, now hidden by the
overhanging trees upon the banks, and now showing in
reaches golden, silvern, or green like the western sky
after sunset.
When the travellers got down to it, some half-dozen
shovel-nosed, web-footed water-moles were tranquilly
floating on the water, but down they went in dire alarm
when they beheld white men for the first time.
Some time was consumed in making a survey of the
fertile country that had been discovered, w'alled in with
barrenness, and when those who intended to take up new
land there had drawn grass-blade lots for their selections,
a less pleasant discovery was made—to wit that tea,
sugar, flour, and mutton were running so low that, even


on short allowance, they would not last out the journey
home. But the explorers had guns and powder and
shot left—the misfortune was that they could not always
find game to use their ammunition on. However, once
or twice they shot a tender brush kangaroo—a very
different dish from a tough old boomah; wallabies and
kangaroo-rats, and bandicoots, too, they killed, and birds
sometimes : so they contrived to make a shift, and on
specially 7tiaigre days they buckled in their belts, and
smoked extra pipes to dull their hunger. The dogs
meanwhile did pretty well on the ’possums they managed
to pounce on, before they could scuttle up the trees
again and growl defiance at their pursuers.
When Mr. Norman returned to Broadoaks, he had
been away from it for more than a fortnight, and was
naturally very anxious to learn what had happened in
his absence. When the kissings and congratulations on
his safe return were over at last, when he had had a
meal a good deal more comfortable than any he had had
of late, and w’as smoking on the verandah, tilting his
chair and resting his tired feet on the rail, he heard as
follows.


CHAPTER VII.
WHAT HAD HAPPENED AT BROADOAKS.
assigned servants had been inclined to be
lazy anci sauc y> but Penn y haclstood well
by his mistress and young master, and so
the work had been got through after a
fashion. But the great piece of news, was that Frank
had fallen in with blacks, of a more friendly disposition
than those who had attacked his father’s party. At least,
though they had detained him for a time, they had
treated him kindly, and at last made no objection to his
taking his departure.
He had ridden down to the seashore in search of some
sheep which he thought had strayed in that direction,
and had got off his horse and was picking up sponge,
when a black fellow and three women came suddenly
upon him. One of the women was old, and had for
clothes simply a kangaroo skin at her back, and strips of
the same about her ankles. The other two were young,
and as pretty as black girls can be. They wore blankets,
given them by settlers, rather coquettishly draped about


their persons, and had stuck leaves of the sweet-scented
Tonka-bean wood into their woolly hair.
At a sign from the man the hideous old gin took hold
of the bridle of Frank’s horse, whilst the better-favoured
young ones laid hands on Frank himself. They showed
their white teeth in a friendly way as they did so, and
although the man brandished his club to intimate that
he would break Frank’s head if he attempted to run
away, he also gave what was meant to be a reassuring
grin. Frank was led into a hollow in which some scores
of blacks, male and female, were assembled.
Some of the men were sleeping off the effects of a
recent feast. Frank soon found out what had become of
his missing sheep. Certain horns and fragments of
familiarly branded fleeces showed that the black fellows’
banquet had not consisted simply of oysters and
opossum. Some of the men and boys were aiming at
marks with spears and waddies, others getting their hair
cut and their beards shaved off with sharp stones and
broken glass, and others smearing themselves with
coloured earths and otherwise “ decorating ” themselves
for an approaching corroboree.
In due time the full moon arose, silvering the tree-tops
of the bronzen bush. The gins waited within the ring of
blazing bonfires; Frank amongst them, left in charge of
the two young ones already mentioned, who kept on giv-
ing him friendly grins. The besmeared and bough-clad
warriors lay in ambush hard by, waiting to be challenged
by the taunts of the women to bound through the smoke
and flames into the fire-girt circle.
They had not long to wait.
Sometimes singly, and sometimes by the half-dozen
together, they dashed through the reek —the leaves with


which they were begirt often catching alight—and flinging
their arms about as if they were possessed, they sang, or
rather howled, their own praises, whilst those of the gins
who sided with them joined in the song, and carried it
on when they could screech and bellow no longer, beat-
ing time on their rugs with a noise like that of the tom-
tom.
IVah I Wah ! Wah ! whooped the warriors, when they
had recovered their breath, as they hopped in single file,
very much like children playing at “ honey-pots,” round
the fires. Wah ! Wah ! Wah ! again they shouted, as
they leaped in line through the bonfires, and rushed
over ground chequered with moonshine and the shadow’s
of bole and branch, and sprang into their dusky hiding-
places in the thicker bush; whilst, their masters gone, the
maids and matrons flung off their rugs and blankets, and
danced even more wildly “beneath de light ob de
moon.”
On the morning after the corroboree, Frank tasted
’possum flesh for the first time, and would have decidedly
preferred the roast mutton of one of his own sheep—not
because the ’possum had been thrown into the hot ashes
with its skin on (the sheep had been cooked in the same
way), but because it tasted so of peppermint. In the
southern bush white people leave ’possum flesh, that of
the grey opossum at any rate, for dogs to eat (and very
fond the dogs are of it), but black fellows w r ill devour it
greedily—in Australia, that is to say, there are no blacks
left in Tasmania to eat anything now-a-days.
But though Frank did not relish baked ’possum he
enjoyed a ’possum hunt, on which he accompanied the
black lords of Van Diemen’s Land creation, while their
born drudges were sent to knock off oysters from the


rocks, to carry them in skinfuls to the encampment, and
there to roast them for their masters’ refection —receiving
their leavings like dogs.
There are two kinds of opossums, the grey and the
ring-tail Both are very fond of lying up in or on gum
trees by day, and of coming down after sunset to devour
any nice thing they can find. (They have taken very
kindly to the settlers’ corn and garden vegetables and
peaches, preferring such viands, indeed, to their native
food.) White folk generally go ’possum-shooting by
moonlight, but black fellows, as a rule, do not like to stir
out of camp after nightfall, and so they generally do their
’possum hunting by day.
Well, when Frank’s sharp-eyed friend saw the scratches
of a ’possum’s claws on a tree trunk, or its prick-ears
showing against the blue sky, one of them with a grass
rope round his body and the tree, would begin to climb
it, cutting little gashes in the bark for his great toe to
rest in, and so scrambling up higher and higher. Some-
times he had to climb half as high as the Monument
before he came to a bough. Once on branches, it was
easy enough for the black fellow to find, but not always
to kill, his game.
Sometimes the ’possum would show fight, biting and
scratching like a vixen, when the black tried to drag it
out of its hole by the tail; sometimes it would get to the
very end of a bough not strong enough to bear its pur-
suer if he followed it, and there hang on until it was
shaken down; sometimes, especially if a ring-tail, it
would not be shaken down, and the huntsmen had to
chop the bough off; sometimes the ’possum would drop
to the ground, fall on its feet like a cat, scamper off to
another gum-tree, and if the black fellows on the ground


were not quick and sure with their sticks, clamber up
into a new city of refuge.
Not many ’possums once sighted, however, escaped
the blacks. They killed kangaroo also, wriggling on
their bellies like snakes, until they came within spear-
shot of them.
In this way provision for another feast was made, and
gins were summoned to bear the game to camp. Man’s
duty, according to the black creed, was to kill and eat;
woman’s, to carry and cook.
If rugs were wanted, the kangaroo and opossums were
skinned; otherwise they were thrown on to the fire just
as they had been killed, and afterwards “ carved ” in a
style that tallied with their cooking— i.e., were torn in
pieces tooth and nail, just as a “hyena” or “devil” might
have treated them.
Frank had had enough of “ lazy bed’’-cooked ’possum,
and he could not relish the kangaroo either so dressed,
though it was brush kangaroo, about which, when chop-
ped up and stewed in its own gravy, with pork, pepper,
salt, and onions, old Australian and Tasmanian bushmen
make as much fuss as old West Indians do about their
mysterious, lovingly lip-lickingly remembered “ pepper-
pot”
His hostesses, however, gave Frank plenty of the roast
oysters. They had taken a fancy to the little white boy.
I hey taught him how to spread the skins to dry, how to
score them on the inside with quaint devices, and how to
draw the sinews out of the tails, to make thread to sew
the skins together with.
On the second morning after his capture the old gin
brought Frank his horse and made signs to him that he
was to mount it and take his departure. He was


nothing loth to do so, and rode away beneath a vale-
dictory salute of grins.
How delighted his mother and sisters were to get him
back safe and sound need not be told. Still it was a
great mystery to them how this had come to pass.
If the blacks had no animosity against the boy, why had
they made a prisoner of him ? And then why, after
having done so, had they let him go, without having
harmed him in any way, but shown him kindness rather?
They could scarcely think that the Broadoaks people
would be impressed by the boy’s report of their numbers.
If they considered them so formidable, why, if they had
evil designs upon the farm, had they not attacked it
boldly, without giving any warning of their proximity?
And if they wished to be thought friendly, what could
be their object in that?
Altogether, take it any way, their behaviour was a
great puzzle. Penny, on being consulted, oracularly
remarked that “it would puzzle a Philadelphy lawyer to
make out what them black critturs had got in their heads
any time —they ain’t reasonable folk like us; but this
you may be sure on—take my word for’t—that, whatever
it is, ’taint for no good.”
This black mystery, added to their other anxieties,
made Mrs. Norman and her girls all the more pleased to
see the master of the house back, but he was as little
able to explain it as they were. One day, when Captain
Ruddock was at Broadoaks, Mr. Norman asked his
opinion.
“ Well,” said the captain, “ I’m rather astonished to
find that any blacks should be disposed even to sham to
be friendly. I’ve no reason to love the black beggars—
tut! I don’t mean that little brush we had with them the


WHAT HAD HAPPENED AT BROADOAKS. 39
other day. They’ve done me real mischief more than
once that I should find it hard to say I was saint enough
to forgive. It has been war to the knife between us for
some time past. Still, I’m inclined to think that there s
something to be said for them, if they could only get an}
one to say it —any white man, I mean. I dare say they
have plenty to say for themselves amongst themselves
and against us. If they were to get me into one of their
corroborees, like a frog-in-the-middle-and-can t-get-out, I
expect the women, to say nothing of the men, wouldn t
let me off as easily as they did my young friend Frank
there.
“ You see they were not treated fairly at first, I sup-
pose. Anyhow, they must look upon us as intruders,
although, of course, good land ought to be put to good
use, and not left to a lot of half-naked savages. It’s down-
right nonsense to say that the whole of this fine country
belongs to those beggars. But then, perhaps, we might
have helped ourselves to what we wanted with a bit less
bluster. We —anyhow, our men—have hounded the
poor beggars like kangaroo, shot ’em like bandicoots,
taken their gins, and anything else we’d a mind to,
though it isn’t much they’ve got to be robbed of, poor
devils. Of course it isn’t in man —and I’m inclined to
think that, after all, they are men and women of some
kind —it isn’t in man, I say, to stand that kind of thing
without giving tit for tat; and then, again, it isn’t natural
we should let ’em off scot free when they turn the tables
on us—often injuring men that never harmed ’em.
“ You 1 ve done them no harm, but don’t you trust to
that. If they’re in a rage with the whites, and you’re the
white readiest to hand, they’ll make you the whipping-
boy. Anyhow, you must have got a tremendous hold


upon them—more than any new chum can have —if they
don’t.
“ The best advice I can give you is to keep a sharp eye
on these friends of Master Frank’s, if they come hanging
about here, but not to do them any harm, so long as
you’re sure they’re not doing you any. I wouldn’t let
’em loiter too near the buildings, but I’m inclined to
think that they won’t want to do that.
“ And look’ee here, Norman. Don’t give ’em food
and baccy, unless they work for it; and to make sure
that you get your work out of ’em, see that it’s done
before they get their grub.”


CHAPTER VIII.
MURKIES AND MURPHIES.
gCCORDING to the latest advices, the salmon
had at last really been acclimatised in
Tasmanian waters, and the foolish Tasmanian
fishermen were catching the fish so fast
that the chances were that it would soon again
be “ conspicuous by its absence ” from the Derwent.
This would certainly be a great pity, since though
Tasmania has some good fish, it has not been petted by
Providence in the piscine way. Sundry of its fish are good
neither to look at, nor to eat —uncanny toad-fish, and so
on.
One of these is the stinging ray—a great fellow, some-
times five feet long, and more than a yard wide, with a
sharp bone, like a little spear, on his tail. He buries
himself in the sand, and if you tread on him, he drives
his dart into your leg, certainly laming you, and, perhaps,
depriving you of life.
Well, the Tasmanian blacks used to try to give this
savage gentleman tit-for-tat —to spear him, not for food,
but for the fun of killing him. When Frank and his


father rode over to visit his new friends, they found the
blacks engaged in a ray-hunt. Beaters, in a crescent,
howling, shrieking, and splashing, drove the rays towards
the head of a little bay into which the more daring
hunters leaped, armed with spears, which they plunged
into the fish. Some of the rays got away with the hunters’
weapons, sticking up above the water, and broke the line
of the beaters, but most of those that were skewered
were killed.
TV hen the hunt was over, the rays were left to rot, or to
be devoured by land or sea carrion-eaters, and the blacks
sat down to a feast of roast mutton-fish, which the gins
had got ready for them. The mutton-fish is a big
mollusc, that sticks to the rocks like limpets. The blacks
used to cook them in their ordinary lazy-bed fashion —
i.e., in the hot ashes of their camp-fires.
Mr. Norman and Frank were invited to the black-
fellows’ banquet, and apparently very amicable relations
sprang up between the two parties.
When the bulk of those who had assembled for the
corro boree dispersed, one party remained working nearer
and nearer to Broadoaks.
Its white tenants soon became quite accustomed to the
separate columns of smoke rising from the separate
family fires of the blacks’ encampment. Frank went
amongst them almost daily. He was greatly petted by
the women, and the men taught him how to climb trees
blackfellow-fashion with the grass-rope and the tomahawk,
to hurl the spear and the waddy, and to track strayed
sheep over ground where the untutored eye could not
see the slightest vestige of their passage. He went out
hunting also with the blacks. One day they killed a
wombat, dug him out of the burrow in which he was lying


up until nightfall, like a badger. The wombat is a fat
brown beast that cuts up into meat as good as pork in
bushmen’s opinion, and the grease serves them for
pomatum, lamp-oil, and blacking.
Mr. Norman did not strictly follow Captain Ruddock’s
advice. He sometimes gave the blacks food which they
had not earned, but, as a rule, he tried to get some work
out of them. The last job he gave them was to sow
a field with potatoes. Those potatoes never grew. The
blacks went by night and dug up the sliced bits they
had put in, and made a jolly feast of them. After that
they thought it well to give Broadoaks a wide berth for a
time; but when another potato-lifting season came round,
and there were potatoes to be lifted, Mr. Norman once
more found himself potatoless. Except that some of the
haulms looked rather limp, the ridges seemed all right,
but when the plants were dug up, behold ! there were no
tubers.
“ It’s them scoundrelly blacks,” exclaimed exasperated
Penny. “ They’ve got the devil’s own cunnin’. Come
and go like the wind, they can.”
It was not only the Broadoaks potatoes that vanished
in this mysterious way. All the farms round about were
robbed more or less in the same way, and loud were the
lamentations, and dire the threats of the farmers, gentle
and simple.
Now it happened about this time that Captain Ruddock
came over to Broadoaks, and he, Mr. Norman, and Frank
went out for a little kangaroo, not hunting, but shooting.
They took with them a man or two and a dog or two
to drive—not ground-devouring kangaroo-hounds, but
some of the mongrels.
The sportsmen were planted in the best shooting-places


at the foot of trees. The mounted drivers galloped
about, cracking their whips, and adding their shouts to
the barking of the dogs. On came the bounding game—-
crash-smash , thump-lump. Blaze-bang went the guns—
down tumbled a couple of kangaroo stone dead, and two
or three more that had been wounded were tracked by the
dogs and received their coup-de-grace.
More than one drive was got that day. In the evening
there was a pile of kangaroo skins at the camp, and
though some of the hind as well as the fore-quarters had
been left for wild birds and beasts to devour, there was
more kangaroo venison than the hunting party knew what
to do with. One or two of the finest hind-quarters and
tails were saved to make soup and steamer at home, and
others to be cured and smoked as hams. From some of
the others —brush kangaroo—succulent steaks were cut,
and grilled in the ashes of the fires.
There were two fires, one for the men and one for the
gentlemen. Frank proudly took upon himself to cater
for his party. He made a damper, he swept away the
ashes, he dredged the hot ground with meal ; down on
it went his round flat loaf, a good bit bigger than a
barrow-wheel; over it went the glowing embers, and when
baked, the captain, as well as his father, declared it to be
first rate unleavened bread. He cut up and cooked the
kangaroo, and his steaks were pronounced first-chop ;he
boiled the tea, and though they had only brown sugar,
and no milk, the sportsmen could not have enjoyed it
better if it had been Tokay. They were encamped on
the bank of a little creek, shaded by lofty white-boled
swamp-gums. The moon came up whilst they were at
supper, silvering the trees and the water, and making the
fires of a very unethereal red. Mr. Norman and his


friends and the men sat by the fires chatting and smoking
for some time after supper; but Frank fell asleep
almost as soon as he had finished his second
pannikinful of tea. When he awoke in the middle of the
night he found all his companions curled up and snoring—
the tired dogs as sound asleep as their masters. Frank
had kicked off the rug which his father had thrown over
him before turning in, and felt cold, since their fire was
going down. He went to get a log or two to throw on it,
when he heard a rustling in the scrub hard by. Presently
he saw two golden-green eyes looking at him half fiercely,
half fearfully, between the leaves, and off scuttled a
striped, stumpy-legged “ tiger,” which the scent of the
slaughtered kangaroo most probably had brought so near
to man and watchfires. Having made them up, Frank
crept under his rug and did not wake again until he was
roused by the loud cachinnation of two laughing jackasses
perched on a bough above him. That is a big-headed,
brown, blue-and-white bird, with a crest which it puts up
like a cockatoo when it is excited, a wide mouth, and a
sharp beak with which it is very fond of prodding snakes.
It is sometimes called the “ bushman’s clock,” because it
laughs before sunrise, at noon, and at sundown. Its
mirth of a morning makes you feel half angry at first,
when you hear it after camping out in the bush. It seems
to be so manifestly laughing at you—chuckling over
waking you (as an alarum set an hour too fast might do,
if it were conscious) some time before you need get up.
But as you listen to the harsh yet jolly laughter, it becomes
infectious. You join in the joke against yourself. After
all, it is no great hardship to be called a little too early in
the fresh, fragrant bush.
Frank had had his dip in the creek, had made up both


fires, and got his party’s breakfast nearly ready, before any
of the men awoke.
After breakfast driving began again, but this day they
did not have as good sport as they had had the day
before. With such game as they had shot they returned
to the place in which they had planted their spoils of the
day before, a long time before sundown. They had
not been over so much ground as they had traversed on
the previous day, and yet they felt more tired than they
had felt the evening before, because they had not had so
much excitement. They were to have more, however,
ere long.
As they had got back to the camp which they were to
leave the next morning for their homes too soon to begin
to make arrangements for the night—beyond lighting fires
and piling up fuel to feed them —both men and masters
strolled around the camp.
After a time they were coming in to see about supper,
when one of the men who had strayed farthest ran up
puffing and blowing, and in a great state of mingled wrath
and hilarity.
“ I’ve found out where the taturs goes, sir,” he said,
panting, to his master. “ I’d jest rose a ridge yonder,
when I smelt a smell as made me feel peckish. Presen’ly
I sees smoke, so I slipped down into the gully a bit, as
quiet as I could go, an’ tworn’t long afore I see a lot o’
blacks wi' their fires a-goin’ it like one o’clock, an’ blest if
there warn’t a great heap o’ taturs alongside ever)- fire, an’
more on ’em a-roastin’ in the ashes. Some of the beggars
was a-goin’ it still pretty tidy, but a lot on ’em had gorged
theirselves a’ready. There they was a-layin’ about on
their backs an’ their bellies an’ their sides, a-gruntin’ an’
a-snorin’ like pigs fit to bust. An’ they ain’t no better, no,


nor yet half so good, the black greedy willins ! It’s my
belief, gen’lemen, if we was to rush their camp now, as
we could nobble the taturs an’ them as nobbled ’em both
—leastways, a lot o’ the taturs.”
Although the numerical odds were greatly in favour of
the blacks, Captain Ruddock was of opinion that what
the man proposed was feasible, and therefore he and Mr.
Norman determined to try to give the black fellows a
scare.
The whole white party, taking with them some of their
dogs in leash, crept stealthily towards the blacks’ encamp-
ment. When near enough, the captain, Mr. Norman,
and Frank suddenly fired a double-barrelled volley over
their heads. Up jumped those of the black fellows who
had not stupefied themselves by over-eating in the wildest
alarm, and plunged panic-stricken into the bush. Some
of those who were lying half-insensible on the ground
managed to rise also, and staggered into the same retreat,
sorely harassed in the rear by dogs and and stock-whips.
Several, however, were too stupid to rise, much less to flee,
hese prisoners were thus utilised by their captors.
One of the Broadoaks’ men was sent home for horses,
sacks, and one or two of his mates. The other whites
meantime made themselves very comfortable in the blacks’
camp, eating with a very good conscience their own roast
potatoes, as a very welcome addition to their kangaroo,
tea and damper.
Next day, when the reinforcements had arrived, the
horses were laden with the kangaroo venison, which had
been brought from the other camp, and with some of the
stolen potatoes. The rest, the prisoners, who by that
time had recovered consciousness, were compelled to
carry, the stock-whip proving a potent persuader to the


4 g ROUGHING IT IN VAN DIEMENS LAND.
contrary when they showed signs of turning insubordinate
or lazy. On reaching Broadoaks they were threatened
with instant death on the morrow, and shut up in an
outhouse, which was purposely left unguarded. Of course
on the morrow the marauding blackbirds had flown, and
for some time neither they nor their fellows troubled the
Broadoaks neighbourhood any longer.


CHAPTER IX.
DUCK-SHOOTING.
T was January —that is summer in Tasmania
—and the creeks and waterholes swarmed
young ducks and their proud parents.
Frank and his parent used to shoot them
sometimes by day and then it seemed almost a
shame to disturb the snug siesta which the poor drakes
and ducks and ducklings were taking on the sun-
gilt water, shut in, as they thought, by scrub and reeds
and rushes from the reach of all enemies—and sometimes
by night, which certainly was better fun.
In the winding ways made by cattle between the tea-
tree poles they would creep down, holding their breath,
with their dog as silent and as gingerly walking at their
heels, to the moonlit water, smooth almost as a mirror.
All is still, except now and then the rustle of a leaf, and
the measured croaking of a chorus of frogs. But there
comes a sound of wings—wings that are flying lower and
lower—and the shooters shrink back farther into the
ebon shade that girdles the water’s silvery light. Down
nlump the ducks one after another, sometimes by the


50 ROUGHING IT IN VAN DIEMEN'S LAND.
half-dozen together. The pool is no longer mirror-like,
but rolls in little silver-gilt wavelets that break with a
musical faint wash about the reeds. The croaking
ceases ; splashing and quack, quack, quacking are no"
the order of the night, and other cries, which show that
ducks are not the only birds that have pitched, if they
were not previously quietly cruising near.
There are black swans performing a delicately loving
duet, the “ He,” as the old music books have it, as well
the “ She,” discoursing in the low and gentle voice which,
we scarcely needed Shakespeare to tell us, is an excellent
thing in woman. There are hissing and trumpeting wild
geese. When there has been silence for a second or
two, suddenly a bittern booms or a night heron again
begins to croak, as if in challenge to the awe-struck frogs
O *
to recommence their noise.
There are black ducks, and grey ducks, and mottled
ducks, whose green necks are sheeny even by moonlight,
and would look glorious in the sunshine.
But it is to “ pot,” not paint, that Frank and his father
have come out. The ducks pack. Being, bang , bang,
bang go the guns. Instantly there is wild tumult —a hurri-
cane upon the little inland sea. The little waves aie
changed to little breakers. Overhead there is a deafen-
ing rush of wings and strident clamour of startled voices.
Wounded birds are splashing in the mere. In plunges
the retriever and swims after them, sometimes capturing
them easily with an eager snap, at other times sorely
puzzled by a duck that dives and dives, to come up at last
in the dense fringe of rushes, into which the shooters
have to wade to seek it, and, after all, perhaps, it lies
most literally perdu.
Then again there is stillness. The birds have settled


at a distance, and the shooters, if not satisfied with their
first spoil, have to plod after them. Frank used to enjoy
these nocturnal expeditions greatly, although his little
sister said that it was cruel to kill such pretty things as
ducks, and asked indignantly how he would like to be
shot himself? He always managed to turn the conversation
without wounding her feelings by assuring her that he
would never dream of shooting such a pretty little duck
as herself, or some such subterfuge. Perhaps the fact that
Amy was very fond of roast duck dulled his compunctions
of conscience under her reproofs for duck-shooting.
One night, when he was out, his father sent him back
for a forgotten “pocket-pistol.” The “pistol” having
been found, filled, and pocketed, Frank started again at a
run for the waterhole at which he had left his father.
Having left his gun there too, he could take short cuts,
by wriggling through scrub, which it would have been
scarcely safe for him to penetrate with a loaded gun in
his hand.
Out of such scrub he had just wormed himself,
scratched, flushed, and eager to be back to his sport,
when he saw a man upon horseback. The moonlight
fell so full upon his face, that Frank instantly recognised
him as our old scoundrel Strike-a-Light, and slipped back
into the scrub to watch him.
The man dismounted, took the saddle, bridle, and a
rug off his horse ; hobbled his steed, which at once began
to crop the dewy grass ; and then, covering himself with
his rug, put his head between the hairy flannel-lined flaps
of his saddle, by way of pillow, and apparently settled
himself off to sleep. When he had ceased to kick and
plunge, Frank crept up to the horse, patted it quietly,
undid the hobbles leapt upon its back, and rode off.


There could be no harm in taking it, Frank reasoned,
since Strike-a-Light must certainly have stolen it from
some one, to whom, if recaptured, it might be restored.
Having ridden the horse home, and put it in the stable,
Frank again started for the waterhole —this time not
taking the short cut which would have led him past
the slumbering bushranger.
“ Why, what a time you’ve been, my boy ! ” said his
father, when he reached the waterside, “ I began to think
something must have happened to you. It has been dull
work waiting, for I haven’t seen a duck.
“ Ah, here they come at last,” he went on, before Frank
could tell him what had happened. Down plumped the
ducks, and Mr. Norman, weary of waiting for a chance,
fired at them with both barrels.
The usual hubbub followed, but not a duck had been
hit. A great deal more frightened than hurt, the flock
whirred away to other waters.
No doubt Mr. Norman felt a little put out, but he soon
forgot his disappointment when he heard Frank’s news.
Here was, in Californian slang, a “ Sydney duck,” far
better worth bagging than the Tasmanian ones he had
been trying for.
“ The impudent scoundrel ! ” he exclaimed, when he
learnt from Frank how near the Broadoaks house Strike-
a-Light was camping out. “ W hat can the rascal be aim-
ing at ? He didn’t light a fire, you say ? I suppose he’s
had his supper somewhere else, and is waiting for one of
his precious mates to rouse him up for some knavish
trick they’ve plotted. It must be our house they’re
after. Let’s see, what o’clock is it ? Past twelve, and
the moon will be down in an hour. That will be the time,
I expect, when they’ll favour us with the pleasure of their


company. If we could only catch the weasel asleep, eh,
my boy ? Wouldn’t that be fine fun ? ”
Frank piloted his father to the little scrub-begirt flat on
which he had seen the rascal, but not a trace of him
could they find there. The light of the sinking moon
made the place look like a dreamy island of peace
rather than a robber’s haunt.
On reaching home, Mr. Norman examined the out-
houses, and padlocked some of them. The moon went
down, and father and son stayed up on watch during
the dark hours. But the sun arose again in its summer
glory, and still nothing more had been seen or heard of
Strike-a-Light at Broadoaks.


CHAPTER X.
SYME, THE SNAKE CHARMER.
HE horse Frank had recovered belonged to
vkY"* Captain Ruddock, and that gentleman,
incensed by the robber’s audacity in
having taken it out of the stable at Penrud-
o
dock, once more got up so hot a police-hunt after him
that he was again obliged to lie quiet for a while.
During this time Frank made the acquaintance of
another bush-roamer of a more innocent character.
He was down by the river one day, whipping the
water for cucumber-fish, and a fine one had just risen
to his fly, when he heard his little sister call out in
great alarm. In his eagerness to rush to her assistance
he lost both fish and rod, which fell into the stream and
was carried away.
Amy had unconsciously got between a snake and its
hole, and though snakes generally are quite as anxious
to get away from human beings as human beings can
be to get away from them, under such circumstances
they are pretty sure to fly at their interceptor.
The hissing reptile had swollen out its neck, and was


just about to make its spring on Amy when her brother
caught up a stout stick and shied it at the monster.
Whilst the snake was wriggling round the stick, with
another one he broke its back, and then with a stone
smashed its head ; but still the body kept twitching, and,
according to bush belief, would continue so to do until
sundown.
Although Tasmania is not so hot as Australia, it
equally swarms with snakes, or used to. When Sir John
Franklin was governor, Lady Franklin offered a shilling
a head for every snake that was killed. In one year
she had to pay jC 700 ; 14,000 snakes had been killed,
and yet they seemed almost as numerous as ever.
When Frank and Amy were on their way home after
their little adventure they heard a flock of mina-birds
making a great to-do, and soon saw them fluttering in a
great fuss about a black tree-stump. The mina is a grey
bird about the size of an English thrush, with bright
eyes and pointed beak and claws; a very Paul Pry
amongst birds, except that it never hopes it does not
intrude. It pokes its beak in everywhere. A very
Irishman amongst birds also ; if minas can find no other
birds to fight with they will fall out amongst themselves.
It is not a chivalrous bird, for a flock of minas will
attack a stray strange thing simply because it is strange,
very much as, according to Mr. Punch, the inhabitants
of the Black Country' used to treat human strangers
who had wandered into their district. But this
gregarious rancour has one good result; the vigilant
minas spot a snake almost as soon as it shows itself in
their neighbourhood, and so give warning to less sharp-
sighted folk. Just above the rim of the hollow' stump a
snake’s head went from side to side, and, heedless of


the minas’ warnings, a little bird was flying down into
its jaws. Before Frank could throw stick or stone the
poor little thing was crunched, and then, finding that it
had more spectators of its feats than it had looked for, the
murderous mesmerist glided off into the under-world.
Frank, on reaching home, began to tell Penny of the
snake he had killed and the other he had scared.
“Ah, Master Frank,” answered the overseer, “there’s
an old fellow just gone up to the house could tell’ee a
deal more about, snakes than that. Hundreds —
thousands on ’em he’s killed in his time; and he can
charm ’em too, and cure them they’ve bit. He was a
sojer in India once ; that’s wflaere he picked it up. He’d
a wife, though, he w T as very fond on as was bit when he
was away from home, and she died ; and he took it so
to heart that ever since he’s done nought but wander
about like a bushranger, killin’ snakes, an’ charmin’ of
’em, an’ curin’ them they’s bitten. He’s a queer old
chap. He gives away his stuff, though many would be
glad to buy it. Of course it isn’t much he wants the
life he leads. He’s sure of his bite and sup whatever
house he likes to go to, and when he’s by himself in the
bush he’s a good shot, and there’s plenty o’ meat there
for any one as is; folk will give him powder and shot,
or swop wi’ him for it. He makes his own clothes out
o’ kangaroo skins and such, an’ he don’t care for rum or
’baccy. Tea-tree leaves is what he makes his tea out on
when he is by himself. He cured me once. I was
gropin’ in some hay for eggs, when a black snake that
was snugglin’ there laid hold o’ my arm just above the
wrist. Fortunately old Syme was handy, and he rubbed
in some o’ his stuff. He won’t tell no one what it’s
made of, not while he’s livin’. He says he’ll leave the


secret to the governor in his will. It’s an oily mess —
smells suramut like peppermint and turpentine mixed.
Lizards, when they’re bitten by snakes, always eat some
green stuff to cure ’em I’ve heerd ; so p’r’aps it’s that he
makes it out of. Anyhow he rubbed it in, and this is
how r I felt : first numb, and then sick, and then I
couldn’t turn my head, and directly arterwards I couldn’t
smell the stuff —though, as you may guess, the smell’s
strong enough—and then I thought I was going blind ;
I couldn’t see anything but black dots and smudges
whizzin’ about like flies. And then, arter a bit, I didn’t
have no more pain, but felt as if every mite o’ strength
was took out of me, just as if I was dead beat arter a long
day’s tramp. But old Syme’s goin’ to begin his games.
Let’s go up to the house, Master Frank.”
Syme in his kangaroo skins looked very much like
Robinson Crusoe in his goat skins. He had a long
grey beard —a far rarer ornament on an Englishman’s
face then than now—and dreamy grey eyes. He had
tamed snakes inside his kangaroo coat next his skin.
One of these he took out as he sat upon the Broadoaks’
verandah and twined about his fingers as if it had been a
lady’s curl. He put it to his lips. It hissed and darted
out its tongue, but kissed him, as it were, instead of
biting him, and then wriggled back to its warm resting
place inside his coat. He took out another and a
whistle he had made out of a reed. When he played on
the whistle, the snake began to dance, and when he
tickled it with his finger, it lay down and wriggled like a
tickled child, He let it crawl away, but the moment he
called it, it came back and ate out of his hand.
When he had put it back into his bosom, he said that
he would clear the verandah of whip-snakes, There


were plenty of them under the boards and, indeed, all
about the premises : lithe mud-coloured little wretches
that would worm their wicked-eyed little heads out of all
kinds of crevices, hugely to the alarm of Mrs. Norman
and her daughters. Frank and his father sometimes
tried to shoot the little nuisances, but they were gene-
rally too quick for them.
Well, the snake-charmer played a peculiar tune on his
reed-whistle, and then tapped on the boards with it;
and, sure enough, up popped four or five little snakes’
heads, but since their owners drew them back as soon as
Syme attempted to take hold of them, this part of his
performance could scarcely be allied perfectly satisfac-
tory. It needed no serpent-charmer to call snakes from
the verandah’s deeps; the thing was to get them out
and kill them. This Syme had failed to do, but he was
not in the least discomfited. He confidently affirmed
that if he stayed at the place for a fortnight, the snakes
would not only look out when he played to them, but
come to him to be killed when invited; however, to
remain a fortnight he refused, saying that he should feel
suffocated if he stayed so long in one place.
From a vegetable bed in the garden, Syme succeeded
in charming a large black snake. As soon as it had
wriggled out, he seized it low enough beneath the neck
to suffer it to turn its head and bite him. With his other
hand he then squeezed its throat until it let go its hold,
when he smashed its head against a stone.
There could be no doubt that the snake had poison
fangs, and Syme’s bleeding arm showed that he had been
severely bitten. Before he began this performance, he
had given a bottle of his “stuff” to Penny with direc-
tions as to what he was to do. In spite of its tan, Syme’s


face turned ashy pale, his eyelids quivered, he staggered
like a drunken man, and soon fell to the ground, where
he wallowed, foaming as if in an epileptic fit.
Penny then, getting his master to help him in holding
his patient, rubbed the oil not only into Syme’s wounded
arm, but also over his chest. Penny had no fear in
removing the tamed snakes that nestled there, since he
knew* well that their poison fangs had been taken out.
After about a quarter-of-an-hour of this rubbing, Syme
ceased to gnash his teeth and plunge, his breast no
longer heaved like ground in an earthquake, his eyes
opened, and he got up —cured of the poison he had
taken into his system, but looking at first very much
like a man just risen from the dead —quite ghastly,
white, and w’eary.


CHAPTER XL
BLACKFELLOW’S FLAT.
not know whether mensuration is taught
E%P at your school, or, if so, whether you learn
it. Supposing that to be the case, I think
you would prefer the system in vogue in
Tasmania, in Frank’s young days, to that employed by
English surveyors. The Tasmanian land-measurers tied
a string to a dogs tail, and when he stopped, they said he
had gone a mile. Thousands of acres were measured in
that way in those primitive times : and some years later,
indeed, Tasmanian professional people behaved in a
manner which would have made their contemporary
English co-professionals stare. For instance, the
manager of one bank used to trundle a wheelbarrow
every morning to another bank for cash—just as if he
had come for gravel.
One consequence of the very rough-and-ready system
of land-surveying was that there were frequent disputes
as to where one grant ended and another began. One
of Mr. Norman’s neighbours persisted in driving his
cattle in to feed on part of Mr. Norman’s farm. In vain


were they driven off; back they came again. The man
made no formal claim to the land when Mr. Norman re-
monstrated with him and threatened further proceedings,
but continued to assert what he maintained amongst his
friends was his right in this practical way with provoking
obstinacy.
This disputed “ march ” was, as may be supposed, in
an outlying part of Mr. Norman’s grant, and for a time
it was almost useless to him. He could not spend all
his time, or his son’s, or his men’s, in watching it, and
driving off his cantankerous neighbour’s cows and
bullocks, and if he put any cattle of his own on it, the
beasts, as soon as they were left unwatched, were sure to
disappear. There could be no doubt that Joyce—that
was the name of the rival claimant—disposed of them in
some way, but no proof of this could be brought home
to him. He did not impound them, and thus challenge
Mr. Norman openly to make good his legal right to the
ground. No, he quietly caused the cattle to disappear,
thus depriving his rival of the usufruct of the land, and
mulcting him in damages for trespass, without the
slightest cost, nay, with considerable profit to himself.
But if the Blackfellow’s Flat—that was how the disputed
tract was called (why, you shall hear presently)—was not
of much good to Mr. Norman as feeding-ground, it was a
famous place for quail. One day Frank started for the
flat with his dogs, and they were soon beating about the
waterholes’ lush fringe of long grass, out of which every
now and then came a note very much like that in which
a London sweep announces his arrival; and as the dogs
worked closer and closer, up, one after another, rose the
plump little beauties with a shrill. If Frank could
have killed all he flushed, he would not have been able


to carry home his game —as it was, he had no reason to
be ashamed of his bag.
As he plodded homewards along the bank of the little
creek that wound through the Flat, the moon arose, and
a sad sigh of night wind came with it, in which the long,
fibrous leaves of the fringing shea-oaks seemed to shudder.
The level light gave an eerie look to bush, water, single
trees, patches of scrub, and open ground ; and his two
dogs, Frank fancied, slunk up closer to his heels. No
doubt, they were tired ; but they seemed to Frank to be
frightened, and he felt himself, to his astonishment and
disgust, faintly shuddering like the shea-oaks.
He could not account for this feeling. Of course, a
boy does not like to think that he can be afraid of any-
thing, and then, supposing for the sake of argument that
he was afraid, Frank could not make out what it was that
goose-skinned his flesh and sent an aguish shiver through
his frame on that mild night. As to blacks and bush-
rangers, there were none about; and if there were, was
he to be afraid of them while he carried a loaded double-
barrelled gun, to say nothing of his dogs, and had his
wits and two fleet, even though fagged, legs to trust to ?
It would not be pleasant to be compelled to throw away
his bag, but still that could easily be done in case of
necessity ; and then, surely he and his dogs, after having
shown temporary fight if need were, could make their way
home all right. He got quite angry with himself when
he found the feeling of awesomeness growing upon him
instead of diminishing—still angrier with his dogs because,
to his fancy, they shared it with him.
The fact was that Master Frank had more fancy and
imagination than he credited himself with. Accredit he
would have considered such possessions; in his argu-


ments with his sisters on ghosts and such like he had
often been very loud and lofty in his contempt for the
folly of girls! —most superciliously emphasised—who
could believe such “ silly nonsense ! ”
Nevertheless, a story which Penny had told him some
time before was unconsciously working in his mind—the
story which had given the Flat its name.
In the earliest days of the colony some bushmen, most
of them great scoundrels, were camping out on the Flat.
They had set up their wind-screen, lighted their fire,
made their damper, baked it, grilled their kangaroo
steaks, boiled their tea, eaten and drunk their supper,
and then lighted their pipes ; and, as they sat by the fire
smoking and drinking some rum they had managed to
get hold of, they had begun, as is the manner of the
wicked, to brag of the bad things they had done at home
and in the colony—one or two of them all over the world.
Each tried to cap the last story told, and so long as none
played his trump card of iniquity at starting, this was not
hard to do. So these scoundrels passed the solemn
dewy evening, as the moon dropped lower and lower in
the sky, sending forth more and more level beams, and
the night wind sighed homelessly over the Flat, and the
curlew r gave its despairingly doleful wail.
At last said one double-dyed villain—and he spoke as if
he was going to say something very funny—“ I’ll tell
you what I did to a black. I didn’t know as much
about the bush then as I do now' —I’d back myself
against any of the black beggars now to find my way
anywhere—but then, I’d managed to get lost. Two or
three days I’d been trapesing about—very like run-
ning back my own tracks—and I began to feel un-
common queer. I’d had no grub, and I hadn’t got


anything to get it with neither. I was starving —that’s
how it was. After a bit I couldn’t go no further
couldn’t lift one leg to drag it after the other. ’ Twasn’t
so much the hunger then I felt, though it was that o
course had taken the strength out o’ me. I was dried
up with thirst. The part where I was for a wonder was
all dried up too —just like up the country in New South
Wales. This country is a sponge to that, as you, mates,
that was sent out there know well enough. But there
was a drought that time, and I’d been going here and
going there, fancying I heard water, but not a drop
could I find anywhere. The sun was awful hot, pretty
nigh as bad as I’ve felt it over there when there was a
hot wind blowing. By-and-bye down I went, just like
a bullock when it’s shot clean through the head in the
stockyard, and hain’t had no time to kick, and yet it
warn’t a regular sunstroke. I've had one, and down
I dropped then, but I didn’t know no more till I was
brought to again—that was up the Hunter. But this
time I’d kept my wits about me, and wished I hadn’t.
They warn’t no good except to tell me that I was awful
bad. There I should ha’ died if it hadn’t been for one
o’ them black idiots —him I’m telling about. He come
along, and when he saw me, up he come grinning
and jabbering friendly, and I’m blest if the confounded
fool didn’t hoist me on his back and carry me to the
camp. Him and his gins made a lot o’ me, and the
t’other blacks too. They’d got it into their wise heads
that I was a black that had gone dead and then jumped
up a white fellow. What asses them black fellows are !
I wouldn’t ha’ minded staying with ’em though if they’d
ha’ let me do just what I liked. But they wouldn’t. So
I wanted to be off, but didn’t know how. So I bribed


the chap that had brought me in to take me back to the
white fellows. It was fun to see the way he sucked in
my lies. I’d ha’ promised him anything o’ course. So
we slipped off together, and when I’d got to where I
knew my bearings, I borrowed his tomahawk and
dropped him. Wasn’t that fun ? The moon was
coming up then, and I see his face by the first light of
it just as he was dying. You should ha’ seen his teeth
grinding at me—it made me laugh. The beggar was so
bit. But he gave a screech just afore he died that made
me feel queer somehow. So off I set, and got home all
right That’s the way to treat them black beggars—
kill ’em off like the snakes whenever you’ve got the
chance.”
The faithless ungrateful braggart ruffian looked round
in the firelight for applause, but he did not get it. His
mates were afraid of him, but even they, in their dim
way, feared God or the devil more. To kill a black, pet
se, was , in their opinion, on the same level with killing a
snake; but to kill a black like that! For the first time
for many a drearily dark year a feeling of righteous in-
dignation was blown up into a flickering flame within
their breasts. They sat silent round their flickering fire,
eyeing the braggart askance with looks of detestation
which their dread of him could not entirely veil
Suddenly one of the weird sounds which startle the
nocturnal stillness of the Southern bush—often eerily
still by day—rang through the air.
The braggart started as well as his moody mates, but
he tried to shake off his fear by blustering.
“Who’s afraid?” he shouted, in his half-drunken
voice. “ Cooey again, and I’ll come to you.”
Again the weird sound rang through the darkness.


Forth into it rushed the braggart, but he never came
back —was never seen or heard of afterwards.
That was the unconsciously remembered tradition
which made Frank feel “creepy ” as he trudged along the
banks of the creek, dimly lit by the rising moon, which
winds through Blackfellow’s Flat.


CHAPTER XII
STOLEN AND STRAYED.
RANK suddenly remembered what it was
X that made him feel so “nervous,” but this
% recollection did not make him less so. It
was one thing to sneer at ghosts when at
home with his sisters, and quite another to think of the
murdered black fellow when crossing his Flat by the
light of a just-risen moon.
Our young “hero” would have liked to whistle to
keep his courage up, but somehow he couldn’t. Except
the sighing of the night-wind through the dangling she-
oak fibres, everything w r as so still. He started when he
heard an opossum chatter, and when a diving water-mole
made a little ripple in the moonlit water. When a
curlew cried or a crane croaked, he thought that the
dying black’s voice he had been dreading to hear had
come at last
It is not to be wondered at, therefore, that when
Frank saw what seemed to him an unsubstantial black
sitting in dimly-lit shade upon a log, his “ hair stood on
end.” (I have seen sundry terribly-frightened people,


and more than once in my life I have had a great scare ;
but I cannot honestly say that I ever saw, or felt, hair
standing on end. Still that, you know, is the “ proper
thing” for anybody to write down for a book when
describing what you boys call “an awful funk.”) But
the unsubstantial black, seen more nearly, turned out to
be the very substantial white, Joyce.
“ What are you doing here, youngster ? ” he asked.
“ Looking after cattle, eh ? You tell your father that if
he’ll take my advice he won’t pasture no more of his
beasts here. They’re safe to stray.”
“ They’d be safe enough to feed,” answered Frank
sturdily, “if some rascal didn’t drive them off. But
never mind—we shall catch him yet, and then you’ll see
how we’ll serve him out.”
“Hope you may,” said Joyce, with a sneering grin.
“ It must rile your father to lose cattle at the rate I hear
he’s been a-losing of ’em.”
“Ah!” retorted Frank, “those can laugh that win,
but never mind—it will be our turn next.”
“ What do you mean by that, young hop-o’my-thumb?”
Joyce went on in a bullying tone.
“What I said,” Frank replied as sturdily as ever.
“There’s some scoundrel that steals our cattle, and we
intend to find him out and make him smart for it.”
“Ha ! ha! ” laughed Joyce. “ We is a mighty fine
gentleman. If I was to buy We at my vallyation, and
sell him at his own, I should make a bargain, I should.”
“ All right,” said Frank. “ I’ve told you what papa
means to do, and if you should happen to know the
scamp that steals our cattle, you’d better tell him. It
might keep your friend from finding himself where he
wouldn’t like to be.”


“It makes me laugh, it do,” replied Joyce, “to see
the airs you give yourself, young Master Bantam—
swaggerin’ about wi’ your gun and your dogs, an’ sarcing
me that’s old enough, pretty nigh, to be your gran’father.
Take care you don’t get your comb cut, my cock’rel.”
“ You won’t cut it, my fine fellow,” said Frank, as he
trudged off.
His passage of words with Joyce had quite freed him
from his nervousness, and he left the Blackfellow’s Flat be-
hind him, without once again thinking of the black fellow.
Mr. Norman was not the only person to whose stock
Joyce helped himself. Any cattle, whether branded or
unbranded, that by any means he contrived to get, or
found by chance upon his farm, he very coolly appropri-
ated. If a foal or a calf, with a “ clean skin,” strayed on
to his property, instead of impounding it he clapped his
own brand upon it, and if the mare or the cow accom-
panied their young the brands upon them did not
prevent Joyce from keeping them to breed from, whilst
the branded fat cattle he stole from time to time he put
into his own beef cask, or sold to or “ swopped ” with
people who cared more for cheapness than honesty.
The Broadoaks grant had, therefore, you see, some
very unpleasant neighbours; but one gets used to almost
everything, and the Normans, for the most part, troubled
themselves as little about these nasty neighbours as they
did about the snakes, to which also they had grown
accustomed.
At least, this was the case with the father and Frank ; I
cannot say quite so much for Mrs. Norman and the girls.
When Frank got home that night he found them
lamenting the loss of an Ayrshire cow r , their best milker.
When his sisters had gone down to the Home Flat to


drive in the cows for milking, Bonnie Jean had vanished,
and not a vestige of her had they been able to discover.
The farm had been searched for some distance round
the house, but nothing had been seen of her.
Another piece of news was that the blacks had
come back and camped about a mile from the house.
They had at first been suspected of stealing the cow, but
Mr. Norman and Penny, who had been over to the
camp, could find nothing to confirm these suspicions.
On the other hand the blacks, wishing to obtain condona-
tion for their last raid on the potatoes, had been very
friendly, and offered their services as trackers. One had
been selected for this purpose, and when Frank got
home was sleeping off in the kitchen the effects of the
prodigious meal of mutton he had taken on his arrival
at the house —graciously pronouncing the succulent,
savoury chops “ plenty better ” than the native bread
which he had had for his last meal. The said native
bread, or Tasmanian bread-fruit, a big truffle which grows
about the roots of trees, being about the most insipid
viand known, it is no great wonder that Jacky-Jacky pre-
'erred the mutton. There was more for him next morn-
ing, but then he was no longer allowed to eat ad libitum.
Had he been suffered to do so he would have again
gorged himself, and then rolled himself up like a sowbug,
for a long snooze, instead of guiding Penny and Frank,
who had volunteered to accompany him in search of the
cow.
The glossy magpies, perched on branches, and hopping
about grey logs and black stumps, were hailing the
smiling mom with liquid music when the little party
started —Frank and Penny on horseback, and the black
on foot The locusts had begun their deafening clamour


as they feasted on the manna oozing out of the gum-trees.
Burnished pigeons were pecking at the jewel-like berries
of the wild cherry, set in green and gold.
For a time Jacky-Jacky was at fault, but when he had
once found Bonnie Jean’s tracks he scarcely ever lost them
again, although sometimes they were so very, very slight
that Frank, notwithstanding the previous instruction he
had received from Jacky-Jacky and his fellows, could do
little more than fancy that he saw them, whilst duller-
eyed Penny could make out no mark whatever.
Little mobs of kangaroo nibbling their dewy grass
were started in the early morning, but the traces they
left in bounding off never prevented the black from pick-
ing out the cow’s footprints. On he led the way, up
ridges, down into gullies, through stretches of sombre-
leaved white and grey-boled level bush, and over open
moors of sand and heather.
His quick eye noted every stick and stone upon the
ground ; he could tell you pretty nearly how long it was
since a leaf had been brushed past, a grass blade
downtrodden, a shrub whisked by the cow s switching
tail.
By-and-bye he skirted instead of crossing a dank,
dark gully, so densely foliaged that it was almost impene-
trable, and struck up the spur of a range of hills beyond.
He went along with the light ease of a cat everywhere,
but the rise was sometimes so steep that the horses
slipped backwards, and once or twice Penny and Frank
had to dismount to avoid dropping over their cruppers.
As they scrambled past stringy-barks, peppermint trees,
grass trees, sassafras trees, Penny began to grumble
that the black was either a fool at his business or else
was fooling them. Even Frank found it hard to be-


lieve that Bonnie Jean could have clambered up such
a rugged, shaggy height.
Suddenly, however, Jacky-Jacky gave an exultant
“ Wah ! ” and a high leap and eel-like wriggle in the air.
“ See dar! ” he exclaimed to the previously sceptical
and grumbling overseer, “ Jacky-Jacky plenty good
fellow.”
As he spoke he pointed to a cup-like green hollow in
the hill-side. In the middle at the bottom lay Bonnie
Jean, tranquilly chewing her cud.
She did not seem very well pleased at being disturbed
in her meditative munching, but with some difficulty she
was got down to more level ground, and finally to her
byre—to temporary imprisonment within which she was
sentenced, as a punishment for her vagrancy.
As Penny and Frank were driving the cow home Joyce
met them.
“ Good evening, young master,” he said to Frank.
hat, have you been out cattle-hunting again ? A
pretty cow that! If I d known she'd been missing, I’d
ha’ helped ye look for her.”
Thank ye all the same, but I’m glad we found her
first,” was Frank’s dry answer.


CHAPTER XIII,
WITH TOM TODD.
EAR the mouth of the Broadoaks river lived
an old man, Tom Todd by name, who
flagß supported himself by means of his gun, rod,
fishing-net, and general skill as a sportman.
His slab hut stood on a spit of land between the sea and
a lagoon embosomed in bush, so that he was within easy
reach of finny, feathered, and furred prey of various
kinds. He had not always a good market for his takes,
but he was always sure of food, and made enough by his
sales and barter to supply himself with a sufficiency of
everything else his tastes required. Although not a
homeless vagrant like Syme, the snake-charmer, between
whom and himself there was a little jealousy, he led an
even more solitary life. As a rule, he did not care for
any company, except that of his dogs and his tamed pets.
For some reason or other, however, he took a fancy to
Frank, and let him accompany him from time to time on
his expeditions.
The old man caught crayfish and kingfish, trumpeters
and mullet, gurnet and flounders. In oysters he ate up


a little fortune —according to their present price in
England. He dried mutton-birds, collected kangaroo
and opossum skins, brought up their young, and snared
parrots and such like for sale to the sailois and store-
keepers at Hobart Town.
I will give an account of one or two of the sporting
trips which Frank took with Tom Todd. One seems to
me a very cruel one, but I must tell you what people
used to do, perhaps still do, in Tasmania; and when we
remember how calves are bled to death to make their
flesh white (have you ever heard one moaning, at
intervals, all night long ?—if you have, I think you must
have lost your taste for veal), and how geese are tortured
that we may eat their diseased livers in pates de foie gras,
we on this side of the world must not give ourselves
great airs over people on the other on the score of
humanity. The hunt I speak of was after black swans.
The old Eton grammar example, Kara avis in terris
nigroque simillima cygno , must puzzle Australian and Tas-
manian schoolboys. “ Surely ?iigro is a mistake for aibo,”
they must say. And even at home the black swan is no
longer the rare bird it used to be thought. I dare say
you have seen one or more on some ornamental water —
a very pretty deep-black bird with snowy pinion feathers,
a rose-coloured “cere,” and a most musical voice.
When a flock of them are flying overhead on a moon-
light night, or a couple of them are talking to one
another, as they float unseen amongst the reeds and
rushes of a lagoon, their call-note is one of the most
melodious of the voices of the night I have heard it in
Battersea Park, and in an instant I was 16,000 miles
away from London. The cygnets are not black, but
gray, and when cooked as good as roast duck ; but it is


for its down that the black swan is chiefly prized.
Under its black coat it has a thick, soft, white shirt. It
was to get this that Tom Todd chased the swans, and
since Frank did not see the cruel sequel of the chase, he
enjoyed accompanying the old man.
The black swan always prefers swimming to flying, but
at moulting-time it cannot fly ; and then Tom Todd and
Frank used to go out in a boat and chase it, both on the
river and on the lagoon ; and, as I have intimated, Frank
thought it fine fun to row at racing-speed after the birds,
and then pull them, flapping and splashing, on board the
boat. But when Todd got them home he cooped them
up without food, and then killed them, just before
they would otherwise have died of starvation —and for
what do you think ? To get rid of the poor creature’s
fat, and so make their downy skins bring in more
money.
I have told you that Frank, when with the blacks,
helped to dig out a wombat; but Tom Todd took him
to a regular wombat warren. The ground was honey-
combed with their pits, and having succeeded in cutting
one—out, for a wonder, by day—off from his home,
Frank had no difficulty in running down the plump,
waddling, brown old gentleman. Thanks to Tom Todd,
too, Frank made another capture that still more interested
him. He had several times shot water-moles, but now
he got a couple alive.
He was walking with Todd one evening by the river,
and very beautiful the river looked in the light of the
setting sun. White water-lilies, with broad green leaves
floated on its bosom ; plumed reeds, glossy rushes,
arrowgrass, and waterweeds gently swayed in the almost
still air ; rich ferns, ripe-red berries, and the golden bios-


soms of the sweet-scented mimosa were reflected in the
glassy stream.
At a bend of the river where the weeds were very
thick, several water-moles were paddling about; then, in
a short time, down they would go, to come up again
after a minute or two for another paddle, or to float like
black bottles or bundles of dank weeds upon the water.
Presently Todd raised his gun and shot one ; the
others instantly disappeared, and were no more seen.
In plunged a shaggy old retriever, and brought the dead
mole to land, and at the sight of it a young dog, whose
bush experience was but small, began to howl, and then
slunk off with his tail between his legs.
The water-mole is certainly a very queer thing to see
for the first time, and, perhaps, the more you know of it
the odder it seems. It has greyish-brown hair with soft
fur underneath, and the young ones have white sheeny
hair on the under side of their tails, but this gets worn
off as they advance in years. It has stumpy legs, and
five-toed webbed feet. Its duck’s bill looks more as if it
had been put on as a muzzle than like a natural part of
the head. Each jaw—the upper one overlaps the lower
—has four teeth. The eyes are like little bright brown
beads. Mr. Mole is rather bigger than Mrs.—say about
a foot-and-a-half long. The black fellows eat them, but
Todd shot or captured them only as curiosities. He had
become almost as keen-sighted as a black, and, not far
from the part of the river in which the water-moles had
been floating and swimming, he soon found their tracks,
and followed them up to a burrow. It had two front
doors—one above, and one under the water.
“ If you’d like a water-mole for yourself, Master Frank,
or to give to that pretty little sister o’ yourn,” said Tom


Todd, “ you come over agin to-morrow, and we’ll sarve
a writ here—git in like the sheriffs officers an’ nab ’em.
They’re pretty safe to be at home.”
Next day accordingly Frank again found his way to
Tom Todd’s hut, and the pair started for the burrow
with a pick and a shovel. At last they laid bare the
inner chamber, and found Mrs. Platypus at home with
three little ones as fat as butter. All four growled and
scratched and wriggled in their loose skins, but they
were secured, and Frank was allowed to take two of the
young ones home as his share of the prey.
He kept them in a tea-chest, and at first they refused
to be comforted. They went round and round their
prison as you may have seen the ratels going round their
cage at the Zoological Gardens, but far less jollily. The
water-moles missed their mother’s milk and native mud,
and knocked their mandibles against the sides of the
chest and scraped them with their claws in impotent at-
tempts to regain home and liberty. When they found
that all their efforts were in vain they curled themselves
up sulkily, and went to sleep. They slept, off and on,
all day —sometimes on their backs, sometimes on their
sides, sometimes rolled up like sowbugs or hedgehogs,
and sometimes one would make a bolster of the other s
body. After sundown they began again to try to break
out of their prison, but when a day or two had passed,
they became reconciled to their lot, and crawled con-
tentedly about the loft in which the chest was put.
Sometimes Frank gave them a swim in a washing tub.
At other times he laid them out in the sunshine. After
basking in it a short time, they used to trot off to some
shady place and go to sleep. Sometimes they rolled one
another over as kittens do —sometimes they fought out-


right, but during the greater part of Frank’s waking
hours, his pets slept. If he roused them, they growled
like little bears, and then, after a yawn and a stretch, off they
wentto sleep again. I forgot tosay justnow that sometimes
they seemed to be playing at whoop-hide. One would
conceal itself, and after the other had blundered about in
search of it, would give a cry just as a hiding child does,
and when discovered, rush out and chase its companion
“home.” They were veiy fond of being tickled, and
brushed and combed themselves like little dandies.
Frank fed them on bread-and-milk, meat, and smashed
snails with mud sauce, and thought that he had com-
pletely attached them to Broadoaks ; but one day when
he had put them out on a sunny spot not far from the
river, suddenly he heard a splash—directly afterwards he
heard another. Both the water-moles had flopped into
the stream, and never afterwards did they have the polite-
ness to call upon their kind young master.


CHAPTER XIV.
FIXES.
=a-sjf N Australia there is a great tree-lizard, called-
the iguana, with a scaly skin of a greenish
brown colour, which looks like dried-up
mud. The beast has a big head, with
uncannily old-looking eyes, and a long lash of a tail. It
can bite, and bite hard, but still when it meets a man, off
it goes. It will not meddle with him if he does not
meddle with it ; if he does, he must look out for squalls.
The iguana is no coward when it is cornered. Then it
hisses and bites with right good-wall. Fortunately its bite
is not poisonous. Its natural food is frogs, locusts, and
so on, but it does not object to bullock’s and sheep’s
flesh when they come in its way as portable pieces of
beef and mutton, or carrion. En revanche bushmen and
black fellows eat it, and profess to think the tail when
cooked on hot wood ashes, very nice. Perhaps it may
be, but, at any rate, its owner, although neither venomous
nor vicious, if left alone, is a nasty thing to look at as it
swarms up a tree, W'ith its writhing tail and w r eird peering
visage showing now on this side, and now r on that of the
hole.


In Australia its length is sometimes nearly a dozen
feet, but in Tasmania not more than two at the outside.
In Tasmania also, however, it is a rather awesome (as the
Scotch say) creature, especially when it opens its wide
mouth, and its startled young ones post themselves in it
like dingy-wrappered newspapers. With one of these
iguanas Frank had a rather curious adventure. He was
out with his gun and tomahawk one day when an iguana
ran up a tree in front of him. Again and again he fired
at it while peeping out right and left as if it were mocking
him. If so grim-looking a creature could be supposed to
have any fun in it, you might have fancied it was saying,
“ Here I am again, you see, old boy. Not a bit hurt
Fire again by all means. You’ll have the same luck as
before, but never mind. You’ve to pay for the powder,
and you can take your choice.”
At last Frank got tired of firing. He put down his
gun, and climbed up the tree black-fellow fashion. As
he did not want to eat this iguana, and it was doing him
no harm, I cannot see why he could not leave it alone ;
I cannot understand the pleasure of killing just for the
sake of killing, but that, you know, is what a good many
sportsmen do.
At last he got within reach of the iguana, which had
turned, and stood, so to speak, at bay, upon a bough.
Frank struck at it with his tomahawk, but the iguana
caught the head of the tomahawk in its teeth, and held
on tight, dropping off the bough at the same time.
There it hung lashing at Frank with its long tail. Frank
could not lift it over the bough with one hand, and if he
attempted to use both, why, down he would go with a
run.
At last he was obliged to let the iguana fall with his


tomahawk still tightly held in its mouth. It dropped un-
hurt on a grass-tree, which it leisurely descended, and
then trotted off with the spoil of victory, which, if it had
not wrenched, it had at any rate lugged from the hand of
its unprovoked assailant.
Friend Frank looked rather disconcerted when he
reached the ground again, but he could not help having
a good laugh over the ludicrous way in which he had
been foiled and fined for assault.
Picking up his gun, he reloaded it, and trotted on in
quest of better luck.
On his way he came upon Tom Todd, who had
kindled a fire, and was making tea for his noonday meal.
He invited Frank to join him at it, and whilst they took
it Frank told the story of his recent mishap.
Dried up old Tom was no more a “ man of mirth”
than he was one of “ purple cheer,” but he forced out a
short sharp bark or two —that was his way of expressing
amusement.
“Well, that beats all,” he said. “I’ve had them
critturs ketch a hold o’ my gun with their teeth, but to
walk off with a tomahawk that fashion, as it it was
summut good to eat — wow , wore. But I’ve been in a deal
queerer fixes than that. I was arter pigeons once, and I
hadn’t to go far. There was lots on ’em about, in the
scrub and in the heather. I’d shot no end on ’em afore
—they’re first rate eatin’—but it came across me that I’d
never see what sort o’ egg they laid. So when I’d started
one from a nest in a honeysuckle—cock and hen sit turn
and turn about—up I went and got the eggs all right;
two on ’em, white. But I’d scarce got ’em when the
branch I was standin’ on snapt. Honeysuckle’s about
the rottenest tree in the bush, and there ain’t many on ’em


sound at heart. It’s a queer name they’ve give it. Not
much like the honeysuckle at home, is it ? But you see
there’s lots o’ honey in the flowers. Jest don’t the honey-
birds made a feed on ’em! Well, as I was a-sayin’, the
branch broke, and down I went. I’d a flannel shirt on,
and it flew out, and the sharp end of the stump of a
branch ran through it. The stump was strong enough to
hold me; so there I hung like one o’ them gilt sheep
you’ve seen hung out over the street in front o’ the inns
at home. The tree was pretty high for a honeysuckle, and
jest under me the ground was rocky. I should ha’
cracked my skull, or broken my neck, smashed most o’
my bones at any rate, if I’d dropt there; an’ I couldn’t
ha cotched hold o’the tree wi’out a deal o’ wrigglin’, an
I was afeared to wriggle, for, you see, I didn’t know how
long my shirt ’ud hold, or maybe the stump might snap.
Now, wasn’t that a fix ? For there wasn’t any one likely
to come along that way. Thinks Ito myself, ‘ You’re a
feed for the crows anyhow, I’m afraid.’ There I hung
till I was pretty nigh famished. All day and all night,
and pretty good part o’ next day. When I heard "the
pigeons cooin’ all about, jest wasn’t I savage! ‘Much
good your pigeonin’ has done ye, Tom,’ thinks Ito my-
self. It was enough to make a feller savage to hear them
confounded dows cooin’ away so comfortable, an’ me
without bite nor sup, an’ expectin’ every minute as I
should get saved from starwation through knockin’
of my brains out. My tea worn’t to my likin’, as the
old oomen used to say, I can assure ye. Sundown warn’t
far off, and thinks 1, ‘ Here’s another night under the
stars for ye, Tom.’ I’d camped out many a time, and of
course I thought nothin’ o’ that, for I’d had my supper
an’ my smoke, and I’d a rug to roll myself in, and a fire


to warm my toes, and then I could go to sleep; but it s
hard work for a chap to sleep triced up as I was, and I’d
been awful cold the night afore. Well, as luck would
have it, just afore the laughing jackasses burst out —
they’d haggerawated me pretty nigh as much as the dows
the night afore —I see a chap ridin’ by at the foot o’
the hill, an’ I sang out. I hadn’t got much woice left.
My tongue and the roof o’ my mouth and my throat felt
leather}'. But he heard me, and rode up pretty smart.
He got off, and shinned up the tree wi’ a rope. One end
he made fast to the tree, and swung me out the t’other.
When I’d got a good grip o’ that, why then I could give
a wriggle, an’ I did, and the stump snapped. But I’d
hold o’ the rope then, an’ didn’t kear. I was soon down
safe, and he arter me. ‘ Well, mate,’ says he, ‘do you
mean to lug that bit o’ timber about wi’ ye? You look
summut like a caterpillar on its hind legs, you do.’ A bit
o’ the stump, you understand, was stickin’ in my shirt,
like a horn. I took it out, an’ I’ve got it in my hut now.
Anyhow, though it did snap at the last, that there old
stump somehow saved my life. I’m as fond o’ my life as
a king or a clergyman can be o’ his, an’ hain’t I as much
right ? They’re a-livin’ and I’m a-livin’ —where’s the
odds? The chap that give me the rope was a good
feller. Me and him camped out together that night, an*
we’d summut besides tea for supper. He was a jolly chap.
I never was much in that line myself. Where’s the good
on it ? This world ain’t such a jolly place, as I see, that
you should be for ever goin’ about caperin’ and shoutin.’
But I felt a bit jolly myself that night, an’ didn’t mind his
bellerin.’ He’d done me a good turn, an’ given me a good
supper to boot. I’d a pleasanter evenin’ and a snugger
night than I’d had the night afore, I can assure you.


“ I’ve been in other fixes as queer as that, but I hain’t
time to tell ye on ’em now. I must be girtin' on. Are
you cornin’ my way, or are you bound for home ? Sh’ist!”
Tom raised his gun, fired, and killed a pigeon that had
been pecking at the wattle-seeds lying on the ground.
“ I’ve alius had a kind o’ down on dows since that
time,” he said, as he picked up his bird “ Seems more
of a pleasure like to pot ’em, anyhow.”


CHAPTER XV.
THE BUSHRANGERS’ DEFEAT.
HAVE not said anything about Strike-a-
Light lately, because I wish to bring you as
little as possible into contact with that un.
worthy. But although he had for a time
betaken himself to another part of the island,
he was still at large, and as big a rascal as ever.
In process of time he felt a wish to return to his old
haunts, and revisit, as he remarked to his mates, with
very emphasis, his “ old friends .” High
on the list of these stood Captain Ruddock and Mr.
Norman. If the former had noticed the look of hatred
in the eye of a bent old man with a long beard, past
whom he brushed one day, as he came out of the
“Collins’s Arms,” the chief inn of Hervey’s Tow r n, the
nearest township to Penruddock, to mount his horse for
his ride home, I think he would not have put it down to
the old man’s annoyance at being unceremoniously
jostled, but, in spite of his disguise, would have re-
cognised his stalwart and implacable foe, Strike-a-Light
The Hervey’s Town police, however, although they had


more than once had a special hunt after him, did not
recognise him, and the few Hervey’s Townites who did
know who he was were people far more likely to aid than
to betray him.
Having made his observations in and around Hervey’s
Town, the bushranger again took his departure, but
soon afterwards a rumour ran abroad throughout the
country-side that Strike-a-Light was back in far greater
force than before—at the head of a strong band of
desperate, well-armed, well-mounted men ; armed and
mounted, of course, at the expense of previous victims.
Some said that the bushrangers outnumbered the
largest local police force that could be brought against
them. At any rate, if this was an exaggeration, they
were far more likely to fight the police, than the police
were to fight them. A reign of terror set in, as home-
stead after homestead was robbed. Some of the better
class of settlers were so scared that they came into
Hervey’s Town with their families and their most
valuable portable property. Storekeepers in lonely
places, also, when they found that the bushrangers did
not spare their brethren in similar localities, brought
their goods into the little township. The consequence
was that Hervey’s Town itself, crowded with goods and
timorous people, became a likely place for a daring gang
like Strike-a-Light’s to make a dash at. Several of the
gentlemen settlers, however, determined to stand by
their homes, and defy Strike-a-Light. “Shall such a
man as I flee before him ? ” was one of the motives that
actuated them; another was the inconvenience of moving.
Amongst these gentlemen were the two on whom the
leader of the bushrangers was most eager to wreak
vengeance, Captain Ruddock and Mr. Norman. Both


had overseers on whom they could depend, and these
men slept in their employers’ houses now, instead
of in their own huts. Captain Ruddock had only his
overseer and his dogs besides himself to trust to.
Norman’s garrison consisted of himself, Frank, Penny,
and the dogs, effectives; his wife and two of his
daughters, possible but doubtful auxiliaries, and little
Amy, undoubtedly a non-combatant. Each farmhouse
was, so to speak, fortified, and their occupants looked
well to their fastenings and their firearms before they
went to bed. At all hours, both of night and day, indeed,
they had their weapons ready.
One afternoon, Syme, the snake-charmer, came to
Broadoaks and asked for Penny. He told him that the
gang had mustered within a couple of miles of the
house. He had seen them at dinner in a lonely hollow
in the hills, with their unharnessed horses grazing in
hobbles around them. They had evidently finished their
daylight journey for the day, and, therefore, the infer-
ence was obvious that they meditated a night-attack on
the nearest house. Accordingly Syme, who could glide
through the bush as noiselessly as one of his own snakes, —
eluding the rascals’ observation, had come on to Broad-
oaks to inform his friend Penny of their neighbourhood.
Mr. Norman offered the old man a handsome reward
if he would spend the night at Broadoaks to assist in
the defence if the attack should be made. The old man
cared next to nothing for the reward, but, being an old
soldier, he consented to remain for the fun of the
fighting. The Broadoaks garrison had thus obtained a
most valuable reinforcement, a veteran of trained nerves,
who had often smelt gunpowder burned in anger; of
unquestionable pluck, and a crack shot.


“ Let Mr. Strike-a-Light come now,” exclaimed Mr.
Norman exultingly, to calm and cheer his agitated
wife, “and I think we shall be able to give a good
account of him. With the dogs to look out and harass
on the flanks and rear, three men and a boy, well armed,
and with plenty of ammunition, and you and the girls to
help to load, and firing under cover, we ought surely to
be able to beat off a good round dozen of rascals in the
open.”
That night no one but little Amy went to bed in the
Broadoaks house. If the servants in the huts went to
bed, most likely they did not go to sleep, since no doubt
they were aware of the impending attack, and were
eagerly hoping that Strike-a-Light might win. One
thing at any rate was certain—that their master could
look for no assistance from them. The doors were
locked, barred, bolted, and buttressed with boxes and
furniture. The windows were blocked up with pillows
and bolsters, “pierced for musketry.” Everything was
ready, and as the half-hours went by the silent watchers
wished that, since it was almost certain that the robbers
meant to come, they would come at once. Even Mrs.
Norman and the girls felt that they would like to know
the worst, and have it over.
A little before twelve the long-expected barking of the
dogs was heard. Round the house it came. The
rascals, then, were going to take it in the front. Finding
that there was no chance of stealing a march on it, they
tried to rush it; but, although there was no moon, it was
a clear night, and the stars were bright enough to enable
the besieged to distinguish the robbers as dark approach-
ing objects. They took good aim and kept up a hot
fire; the savage dogs fastened on the villains whenever


they had a chance, and they were soon glad to beat a
retreat to cover at the bottom of the garden. Thence
for a time they kept up a’sharp fire, but it was answered
still more sharply. Sometimes, in the excitement of the
moment, Mrs. Norman and her girls rushed to the
windows and discharged the pieces they had just loaded.
If these discharges did not greatly increase the accuracy
of the fire ol the defence, at any rate they added to the
volume of its sound. The besiegers’ fire slackened —
soon it ceased.
“They’re stealing round to the back,” cried sharp-
eyed Frank, and the barking of the pursuing dogs con-
firmed his story.
But at the back also the robbers met with so fiery, a
reception that they durst not stand a second volley.
They fled, pursued by a dropping shot or two to hasten
their retreat, and in a few minutes the bush was once
more silent, and terrified little Amy was being coaxed to
go to sleep.
“Oh, let us thank God, my girls,” said Mrs. Norman to
her daughters, and they knelt down beside Amy’s little
bed.
“You must stand by me more than ever, sir, now,”
said Penny to his master. “ I’m in the same boat as
you now with a vengeance. If they was ever to get hold
o’ me they’d sarve me worse even than they would you.”
And the looks he got from the disappointed convict
servants next morning made this seem very probable.
“You couldn’t have behaved better, young ’un, if you
had been under fire as often as I have,” was what old
Syme said to delighted Frank.
Soon after sunrise the snake-charmer guided Mr.
Norman to the hollow in the hills. The bushrangers’


camp was broken up, but one of them had been left
behind too badly wounded to be carried along at the rate
at which, no doubt, they had to travel.
The ex-doctor did what he could for the rascal wh)
had tried to rob him, but when Mr. Norman and Syme
were raising him in his blanket to carry him down to a
spot from which he could be carried to the house when
help had been obtained, he died, and, without the cere-
mony of an inquest, they buried him where they had
found him.


CHAPTER XVI.
bushrangers’ bravado.
REAT was the rejoicing amongst the honest
folk of the neighbourhood over the discom-
fiture of Strike-a-Light and his gang. They
were not heard of now within a considerable
radius of Broadoaks. A small body of troops was
stationedat Hervey’s Town, and hunted the country round
with such assiduity that that side of the district was also
rid of the rascals. Most of the fugitives returned to the
homes they had deserted, and although they were rather
vexed that comparative new chums should have displayed
more courage than old colonists, they nevertheless spoke
very highly of the Normans’ behaviour. Those whom it
did not shame extolled it without reserve. One such
successful resistance as that at Broadoaks, they said, was
more protection to the district than a whole regiment of
soldiers. Captain Ruddock gave a complimentary dinner
to Mr. Norman at Penruddock. Frank was invited, but
Mrs. Norman, who feared that on such an occasion a
little superfluous hospitality might be indulged in, per-
suaded him to stay at home. Indeed, he stayed willingly


enough when his mother urged that she and his sisteis
would not like to be left without one of their natural
protectors.
The officer in command of the small detachment of
troops at Hervey’s Town had also been invited, but on
the morning of the banquet a lad on horseback had
handed to the sentry at the gate of the little Hervey’s
Town Barracks the following remarkable epistle, written
in pencil on brown paper :
“Mr Captan Yow Thing yer Self a Grate man No
dout Wee them red Cotes O yoorn But telly Wot Oil
cum tu ce Yow this veray nite.
“ Him Yow kent cotch prickly Turn Gully.”
“ Ha, ha, Mr. Strike-a-Light, you won’t gull me,”
thought Mr. Vance, the Lieutenant in command of the
soldiers, to himself, when he had read this elegant missive.
“We shall see you in Hervey’s Town to-night, I don't
expect; but if you think you are going to send me off on
a wild-goose chase to Prickly Fern Gully, you are slightly
mistaken, my friend. I shall stay in Hervey’s Town
to-night, to be ready for anything that may turn up any-
where. I wish Brown had stopped the lad who brought
this, but most likely we shouldn’t have been able to get
anything out of him but a pack of lies. Well, there’s one
good thing—my poor boys will be able to get a good rest
to-night, and they want it, after the marching and
countermarching they’ve had lately. It isn’t much look-
out they need keep except for news. But the rascal has
robbed me of a good dinner. I must put off Ruddock ;
I’d have liked going over, if I’d heard nothing new
of the rogue, but now I suppose I must stay —just
not to see him. Well, there’s no help for it —so here
goes,”


Whereupon Mr. Vance wrote and despatched the fol-
lowing note to his friendly inviter :
“Dear Ruddock, —I pray thee have me excused.
Strike-a-Light has invited himself to supper with me, and,
therefore, I cannot come to thy dinner.”
As Mrs. Norman had anticipated, Captain Ruddock
proved himself a very hospitable host. Long after
dinner he and his guests were still sitting over their wine.
Night had come, a very nasty night, and it had been
agreed that, in a convivial sense, they should make a
night of it, instead of returning to their homes, since the
weather was so bad and the country so safe. They were
pitying poor Jack Vance, kept away from them by his
strict sense of military duty. They were anathematising
the impudence of Strike-a-Light.
“ I do believe the rascal had somehow got to know
that I had invited Jack,” said Captain Ruddock, “and
so he sent him his saucy message just out of spite, to
keep him from joining us.”
“ Yes, Captain, I did know there was to be a feed,
and so me an’ my mates has come to jine ye instead o’
the redcoat captain,” growled a gruff voice, and into the
room stalked Strike-a-Light at the head of his gang, all
heavily armed.
They were dripping, but they had managed to keep
their powder dry.
The roaring of the wind and the lashing of the rain
had prevented the dogs from hearing them, and there
they were in Captain Ruddock’s dining-room, outnumber-
ing by more than two to one the six unarmed gentlemen
they had surprised.
“ It’s no good shoutin’ for your overseer,” said Strike-
a-Light, covering Captain Ruddock, however, with his


pistol. “If he was here he couldn’t help you, and as it
is, he’s fast tied a’ready. You needn’t look so white, man.
We haven’t strung him up, though he desarves it, and
you too, captain, an’ the most on ye. Your men will let
him out all right to-morrow; though, mind ye, they
don’t know nought o’ this little game. Tie their arms
behind them, mates.”
If the gentlemen had been able to get at the pistols
which, in the security of their feasting, they had laid
aside, they would have shown fight in spite of the
heavy odds against them. But it would have been mad-
ness when each of them was covered by a pistol held in
no squeamish hand.
“ Now then for business, mates,” said Strike-a-
Light.
Whereupon the gentlemen were robbed of their
watches and any other valuables they had with them.
“ And now look here, you Ruddock and Norman,”
said the bushranger. “If I was to shoot both of ye
through the head, it would only sarve ye right—it’s no
moie than you’ve often tried to do with me. But in-
stead o’ that, I’m goin’ to have a joke. There’s plenty
here to drink—though you don’t seem to have spared
the bottles, squires—but there’s nought to eat. So you
two shall cook a supper for us.”
Accordingly, under the penalty of having their brains
blown out, and their arms having been loosened enough
for the purpose, the captain and the lord of Broadoaks
were compelled to fry and serve up as many chops and
steaks as the bushrangers demanded.
When their Homeric hunger was appeased, and they
had emptied all the bottles, Strike-a-Light said —
“ And now, squires, I’m going to have another joke.


Perhaps you mayn’t like it as well as the last, out I
can’t help that; and as I might get riled and hurt ye if I
was to hear you say you wouldn’t do what I mean you
shall do—gag ’em, mates.”
The six unfortunates were gagged.
“ I’ll show you, squires, that you were whistling be-
fore you were out of the wood, when you were braggin’
that you an’ the red-coats between you had driven me
out o’ the country. I ain’t afeared o’ you nor the red-
coats neither. I mean to march you all, jest as ye are,
into Hervey’s Town, and to rouse up Mr. Jack Vance,
accordin’ to promise, this night—anyhow, afore sun-
rise.”
The bushrangers’ horses were brought up. The
rascals mounted, and the six gentlemen were obliged to
trudge on foot beside them into Hervey’s Town, notwith
standing the pouring rain.
Just outside the town the prisoners were halted, and
left in charge of two of the robbers. The others, more
than a dozen of them, leaving their horses also, stole in
the damp darkness into the town. No sentry stood at
the barrack-gates. The soldiers were all inside the
barrack-room—most of them asleep. Mr. Vance was
also asleep in his quarters on the other side of the
little barrack-square.
Down rushed the rain; as loud as ever roared the
wind. The bushrangers slipped into the barrack-room,
and surprised and bound all the soldiers. Then they
slipped across the yard, and the astonished lieutenant
awoke to find himself gagged and tied down to his bed-
stead like a madman. The six gentlemen were then
marched into the barracks ; and all the prisoners having
been left in charge of sentries, who were instructed to


shoot without mercy any of them who attempted to
escape, the rest of the robbers looted the township at
their leisure.
Owing to the presence of the soldiers, there were no
police in the town at the time, and inferring that the
soldiers had been mastered—otherwise, why did they
not shout ?—the inhabitants were paralysed with terror,
and multiplied the number of the bandits by at least
ten.
Having laden their horses with their plunder, the bush-
rangers rode off with it, when they had first apparently
relieved guard.
In the dusk before dawn, the prisoners could see two
armed forms still planted at the barrack-gates, and won-
dered how much longer they were to be kept in durance
vile.
But presently a form approaches the gate, and is not
challenged. He must then be a bushranger. No, he
must be a townsman rendered desperate by his wrongs,
for he makes a mad rush at the sentries, instantly dis-
arms them, and not content with that, strips their raiment
off them. Holding in each hand a blanket, an old hat,
and a soldier’s musket, he enters the barrack-room, and
when he sees the doleful wights assembled there, he
bursts into a roar of laughter, and then exclaims, when
he has ungagged them, and they have explained matters
to him —
“The gate-posts were the sentries—the rascals have
been gone ever so long.”
Mr. Vance was soon released, as well as the gentlemen
and soldiers. They were all very savage, and yet they
could not help laughing at themselves.
“Master Stnke-a-light shall not play me such a trick


twice,” said the lieutenant; the civilians said the same,
and they were right.
His impudence had become unendurable; he was
captured very soon afterwards, and hanged at Hobart
Town.


CHAPTER XVII
WHALER BILL.
NE day when Mr. Macpherson was at Broad-
oaks, he said to his host, as they were
1 smoking their pipes together on the verandah
after dinner, “ Norman, lad, what d’ye say
to tew lale fisher^. I’m thinkin’ o’ tryin’ it. Doonricht
fleein’ in the face o’ Prawveedence, I ca’t, to let the
beasties swarm hereaboots as they dae, an’ na endeevur
to mak’ oor ain use of ’em. The thing’s been tri’t by
ithers, an’ they’ve dune weel, varra weel at it. Sae ’tis
nae rash speculation, an there’s room for a good few mair.
I dinna mean for sperm, or hump-backs, or razor-backs,
but just bay-whalin’ in boats. The Drouthy Point an’
Tinder Box Bay stawtions did sae weel that the chiels hae
planted ithers along Bruni, an’ at the mouth o’ D’Entre-
casteau Channel, an’ I’ll e’en try my ain luck at it, an’ I
adveese ye, Norman, to follow my exawmple. The richt
whale here is the Balayna Airctica, as full of oil as a ripe
groset o’ juice.’”
Mr. Norman, who was not making a fortune so rapidly
as he had hoped to make one when he left England,


accordingly invested some of his spare capital in a whale-
boat, got a crew together, and tried his luck along a part
of the coast within an easy ride from Broadoaks.
When Frank had shot up into a tall, sinewy lad, as boys
of English blood do shoot up at the antipodes, he often
went out whaling; but he had been out before then,
although a boy is somewhat de trap on board a whale-boat.
Frank, however, ere long could, at a pinch, steer with an
oar very creditably.
One morning—the first time he went out —as the crew
of Mr. Norman’s boat ( Norman’s Luck it had been
christened) were lounging about their bark-roofed slab-
barrack and blubber-shed, planted just above the beach,
a whale was seen blowing, and soon some half-dozen or
more were made out standing along the shore in search
of molluscs and medusae.
The Norman's Luck was soon afloat and flying through
the water, and so were sundry other boats from other
stations ; women and children, where there were any,
straining their eyes and necks to watch the progress of
their husbands and fathers. As the Luck , which was the
foremost boat, neared the hindmost fish, it leaped from
the water in clumsy sport, and when it came down with a
mighty splash the boats danced like corks on the billows
it had raised. Then, as if pleased with the commotion,
it increased it by lashing the water with its tail, and the
noise was like that of a man-of-war’s broadside or a clap
of thunder, and then on again it went steadily in the
wake of its comrades that were solemnly puffing half-a-
mile ahead. One or two of these looked like not very
lovely floating islands, white-freckled with barnacles, and
half covered with tangle. See, down goes one in a fright
because a gull has alighted to peck at the whale-lice


that have honeycombed its back. But now the boats are
fairly under way again ; the rowers clenching their‘teeth
as they make their strong, lithe oars flash backwards and
forwards like a pair of wings.
The Norman's Luck is first in the field. Whizz goes
the harpoon, down dives the whale, out runs the line.
The gunwale begins to smoke, and has to be deluged
with water to keep it from catching fire. Up comes the
whale again, and shoots along like the engine of an
express train, towing the boat after it at such a rate that
the sea stands up on each side of her. Touch one of
those sloping, glassy walls, and down will come a drown-
ing flood. But less and less taut stretches the line.
The whale is slackening speed, the line is being drawn
in, lances are being got out.
Suddenly, however, down the whale goes again, and
yet the line is limp. The faces of the Norman's Luck's
crew gather blankness, and Frank learns, with a face to
match, that the harpoon has drawn.
The Norman's Luck is not solitary in her bad fortune.
Another boat that has struck a whale fouls, and has to
cut her line. Before the sun goes down, however,
Frank’s boat has struck and lanced a ponderous fish. It
dies hard, lashing the water into a loathsome syllabub as
it pours out its blood. But it is secured, towed to land,
and made fast, in readiness for flenching and trying out
upon the morrow, and the fishermen have a jolly supper,
with yarns to follow, in honour of their catch.
Sometimes, when a young whale was caught, they
feasted on whale-steaks, and Frank thought them quite
equal to any beef-steaks he had tasted. If the whale was
very young, no veal cutlets could have been more deli-
cate, in his opinion. The chief yarn-spinner was the


headsman of the Norman's Luck, who cut many a notch
in the. logger-head before he had done with her. Bill
Hull was an old Greenland whaler’s man, had gone
sperming and sealing in American whale-ships, and had,
indeed, sailed in quest of gain and adventures in a variety
of craft too numerous to specify.
I will run into one a few of the stories old Bill used to
tell—perhaps not all quite authentic.
“ Don’t you be running of the smoothbacks down.
I’ve seen a sight more of ’em than you ever did, or are
like to, anyhow to strike, and I say they ain’t poor, stupid
things—no, nor funky neither. Don’t you mind him,
Master Frank. He don’t know nought about whalin’.
He’s a landlubber, if ever there was one. Can’t you see
the hay-seed in his hair ?
“ I knew a smoothback once, that came at a boat I
was in, though she might have got away herself easy, just
to save her calf.
“ Talk about coming at a boat, though, bull sperms
are the beggars for that. I was once right inside a sperm’s
mouth, but just as he shut to his teeth with a gnash,
we backed water and saved the boat, though he pretty
nigh stove us in with the wallopin’ he made with his
tail.
“Narwhals I’ve caught. That’s the unicorn in the
arms o’ England, only they’ve made it a sort o’ horse
theer, wheeras it’s a fish They spar with their horns,
just like chaps playin’ at single-stick.
“ I reckon none o’ you chaps have seen a sword-fish
go in at a whale. I have. The sword-fish don’t fight
fair. It gets the thresher to flog the whale down on its
sword. Seals ! Lor’ bless you, I’ve killed ’em by the
hundred in these seas and up nor’ard. I don’t make no


count o’ seals nor walrusses neither. But I’ll tell you
what I’ve caught—dugongs out Moreton Bay way. Lots
of oil you can get from them, and the bones is like ivory,
and uncommon good the meat is. You should see the
black fellows walk into it, though arter all, that ain’t
saying much, for they’d eat anything, them chaps. The
skin’s pretty nigh half-an-inch thick—famous to make
glue out of. Turtle, too, I’ve took, at Moreton Bay and
in the West Indies, both. In the West Indies once I
went for a cruise on a turtle. I was dead beat, and I lay
down for a snooze on a stone as I thought—it was
night, and the moon hadn’t come up—but when I
woke up, I was out at sea on the back of a turtle—a
whopper. I wished I could have got him to land, but I
couldn’t manage that; so I just slipped off and swam
ashore. Two sharks came at me, but I jobbed at the
eyes o’ one and blinded him, and he ran bolt down the
throat o’ the other an’ choked him, and, in course, was
killed hisself.
“ Talkin’ o’ sleepin’ sound, if you want to, just put a
seal’s right foot under your head when you turn in.
There may be a noise fit to wake the dead all round, but
you won’t wake till your sleep’s out.
“ Yes, I’ve seen some queer things in my time. I
’on’t downright swear I’ve seen the sea-sarpint, but I’m
pretty nigh sartin I did once off Amsterdam Island when
I was aboard a New Bedford ship; and when I was in
Greenland I met with them as had seen it, Danes as well
as the natives; and so I did in Nome. Why, bless your
heart, when the sailors on that coast see its eyes shinin’
over the sea like two lighthouses, they clap on all sail,
for it don’t think no more o’ whiskin’ half-a-dozen men
off the deck an’ swallerin’ of ’em than you do o’ eatin’


oysters, and cuttle-fish will do the same. In Nome the
sea-sarpint goes ashore and helps itself to the fattest
bullocks it can find. I’ve heard it from them as had
lost ’em. And the bark-beast, they say is killed out,
ain’t. Anyhow there was one left ten year ago, when I
was with the Rooshians. I come across it lyin’ asleep
on the beach, and I thought it was a tree washed ashore.
Thirty feet long it was, and the skin just like knotty bark.
I tried to cut my name on it, but it soon broke the
blade of my knife. Then I went for an axe to chop it
up for firewood, but when I came back, theer it was
shufflin’ away to the sea, an’ in it floundered an’
swum off.
“ Queer things theer is in the Theer’s that
trepang, now, the Chinamen eat. I’ve been in an
American ship in the Torres Straits tradin’ for that.
The niggers dive for ’em. Their masters keep ’em at it
by night as well as by day. When theer ain’t a moon
they light torches, and down the chaps dive to the
bottom, and up they come with the queer-lookin’ things.
Sea cowcumbers some call ’em. I’ve tasted ’em, but
can’t say as I liked ’em. Land cowcumbers is a deal
more to my fancy. They boil ’em alive, an’ then split
’em up, and smoke and dry them. It ain’t a bad trade
swoppin with the darkies for the trepang, but it’s terrible
risky, for the niggers think nothin’ o’ rushin’ a ship, an’
murderin’ every man aboard if you give ’em the chance.
They killed all the crew in a schooner I was in except
me and the boy, but we beat ’em off at last, and took the
schooner safe to Batavia. The boy was a plucky little
chap and did his best, but in course he couldn’t do much.
It was a terrible anxious time for me. When I let go
the anchor my hair was as grey as ’tis now, though it’s a


matter of fifteen year ago, the time I’m tellin’ you about,
and I’d got a poll like a crow’s back afore.
“ But I’d a more wonderfuller escape than that. I
was all alone by myself for a whole winter in the ice—in a
whaler. No, not a Greenlander—an American ship that
had been trying her luck ever so far down south, though
’twas only razor backs and hump-backs she’d caught.
We were beset. Nothing but ice to be seen anywheers,
and the light fast failin’. The day arter the sun went
down for good, I woke up and found all my mates gone.
I s’pose they’d got' a scare in the night. Anyhow they’d
gone away an’ desarted me. If the moon hadn’t
shone bright all day I think I should ha’ gone
cranky. If there’d been on’y a dog left aboard
’twould ha’ been something, but there I was with nothin’
to listen to, but my watch tickin’ an’ the ice grindin’, an’
the old ship creakin’. The very wind seemed to be dead
at first, though I’d plenty of it off and agin afterwards.
Sometimes the ice would break up into a thousand bits
all bobbin’ about, an’ sometimes a long lane o’ water
would open right ahead, and I’d hoist jib an’ forestay-sail
an’ try to steer her through. An’ then she’d be frozen
up agin all round, till a great berg would come crash in’
an’ smashin’ through the floe. Many a time I’ve thought
they’d be the end of me when I’ve seen ’em steerin’ right
down on me, but. sometimes by good luck, and sometimes
by good management, I shaved clear of ’em. Well, my
ship was carried right round the Horn frozen up in the
middle of a great pack of ice; and when the sun rose
agin and had got some way on it the ice began to melt,
and the ship began to sink. I’d just time to lower a
boat and pitch in some oars and a water cask and a
bag of bread, and pull off out of the way of the down-


draught, when down she went. I was pretty nigh
sucked in.
“ What became of my mates I never heard, but I got
safe to Kerguelen Island, and theer I fell in with a
sealin’ ship that landed me at Tristan d’Acunha; and
from theer I got a passage to the Cape, and shipped
aboard a vessel bound for the colony that had put in
short of hands ; and here I’ve lived ever since, and don’t
intend to leave while whales is so plenty.”


CHAPTER XVIII.
THE BLACK WAR.
S HEN the Normans had been some years in
Tasmania, the blacks began once more to
trouble, not only Broadoaks, but almost all
parts of the Colony. Horses, bullocks, and
sheep were speared or killed in some way, and
so also were their owners and their families and
servants. If any one belonging to an outlying station
was ever so little late in returning to it, those who were
expecting him began to fear that the black fellows had
murdered him. Very often their fears were verified,
and it was not men only the blacks made away with.
Burning with revengeful indignation at what they thought
their wrongs, they had madly resolved to make a general
effort to exterminate their invaders —to destroy them
root and branch. Man, woman, or child—it mattered
not to these not unnaturally exasperated savages ; every
wearer of a white skin must die —the crueller the death
the better, so long as it was quite sure. The colonists
therefore had to go about their work armed, like Nehem-
iah’s labourers, and at night the farm-houses were


fortified like Border peels. Soldiers and police—some of
them blacks from the other side of Bass’s Straits fruit-
lessly strove to hold the aborigines in check. This state
of things soon became intolerable. Industry was almost
paralysed in the districts which had least protection.
The governor, accordingly, called upon the colony at large
to aid him in abating the nuisance.
“News, Frank,” said Mr. Norman, one day, on his
return from Hobart Town, as he took the Government
Gazette out of his pocket. “ Listen.” He then read a
proclamation by the governor, announcing his doughty
resolve to drag the country, as with a net, by means of a
widely extended body of regulars and volunteers, who
were to drive the blacks before them on to Tasman’s
Peninsula, thenceforth to be the only district in which the
aborigines were to be permitted to roam ; whilst small
parties were to be told off with roving commissions to
catch any stray fish that might just possibly manage to
slip through the human net. The governor proceeded
to call upon all settlers who could do so without leaving
their homesteads at the mercy of the blacks, to join him
at the head of as many servants as they could possibly
spare.
“ The townsfolk are cock-a-whoop about the affair,” said
Mr. Norman, “volunteering by scores—much good the
counter-jumpers will be ! Of course, it’s frolic, not fight-
ing, they want, and that is all that is likely to come
of it. Ruddock says that the scheme is rank nonsense,
and he ought to be able to tell, for there is no one knows
the country better than he does. But the governor’s
obstinate when he has once made up his mind about a
thing, and he has taken the bit between his teeth about
this. Of course we must volunteer, and take pretty near


all the men with us too, or else, perhaps, he will punish
us by not letting us have any. However, the store-
keepers will get some good out of it, and so may we
farmers too, if we look out —some have begun already.
Government is buying up meat and bread, flour, pork,
tea, sugar, boots, and blankets, and all kinds of things,
for its commissariat depots, for this grand army that is to
be; and nice prices it is giving for them. Some of those
unconscionable leavers are selling used-up working bul-
locks, that they are glad enough to get rid of, for the
price of prime beef. We won’t do that, but we’ve got
some decent stock we might as well get a fair profit out
of in this Black War, as they call it, instead of leaving
them for the blacks to spear.”
Penny and one ordinary servant were the only men
left at Broadoaks. Mr. Norman took the field at the
head of the rest of his shepherds, &c., and Frank at the
head of the whale-boat’s crew. Perhaps he was rather
inclined to give himself heroic airs when taking leave of
his anxious mother and sisters ; but Captain Ruddock,
who had called with his contingent, at Broadoaks, on his
way to the place of rendezvous common to the Pen-
ruddock and Broadoaks battalions, cruelly poured cold
water upon his young friend’s vapouring.
“ Don’t alarm yourselves, ladies,” said the captain.
“ Leave us alone, and we’ll come home and brins our
' O
tails behind us —except those that fall out, and they’ll get
home first. I’ll undertake to eat all the blacks that we
shall catch. The governor must be thinking of the times
when he fancied he could catch sparrows by putting salt
on their tails.”
The different detachments, having reached the
different places at which they had orders to assemble,


opened right and left like fans, until a line of men was
stretched right across the country that was to be searched.
By daytime they marched straight onwards—at least,
they were ordered to do so, but the nature of the country
and the state of the weather made their practice very
different from the governor’s theory. At night they
encamped around huge watch-fires, with sentries ever
tramping between them, and the cry of “All’s well,” if
all was well, or otherwise an alarm, running at frequent
intervals from one end of the line to the other, like flame
through sun-dried furze. That, however, is hardly an
appropriate simile, since the rain came down in torrents,
making the meshes of the human net a good deal wetter
than a literal tarred net would have been made in passing
through a pond.
They had a great variety of country to sweep over ;
land timbered with blue gums and white gums, stringy-
bark, peppermint-trees, Huon pines and celery-topped
pines, blackwood, and whitewood and pink wood, beeches,
muskwood, he-oaks and she-oaks, honeysuckle-trees, dog-
wood, laurel, wattles, tea-trees, iron-wood, box, native
cherry-trees and native pear-trees, currajong, fern-trees,
and stout rushes. Now they “rose a ridge,” anon they
dived into a gully, and presently they were splashing over
a marsh, floundering in a bog, or fording or crossing how-
ever they could a swollen creek. Very weary legs they
dragged along ; very glad were they, when heavy with
rain, heavy for sleep, and yet ravenously hungry, they
halted at night for food and fire, a smoke and unbroken
sleep, if they could only manage to get it.
This was by no means always Many were very poorly
equipped for camping out, and alarms—generally false
alarms —disturbed the rest of those who did contrive to


get a little slumber in their sodden garments on the sloppy-
ground. A large proportion of the sentries having no ex-
perience, or very slight experience, as bushmen, some of
the false alarms were very ludicrous.
“ Old men ” were taken for black men, and “ flying
bucks ” and “ flying does ” were also looked upon as
deadly foes. The grunting of opossums was supposed to
be the gruff whispering of sable-skinned conspirators,
and stray brood-mares and bullocks put the whole army
on the qui vive. Its numbers were rapidly diminished by
desertions, and since those who continued true to their
colours became daily more careless of the governor’s
commands as to their mode of marching, the blacks slipped
through the redoubtable long line by scores. One day a
farmer’s wife on horseback overtook it with the in-
telligence that a large party of the aborigines, who were
all supposed to be in front of the line, were behind it,
plundering her homestead. Her husband and sons were
in the army, but not in the part of it, which she had over-
taken. Captain Ruddock, who was chief in command in
that section, ordered Frank and his whalers to escort the
frightened woman home, and to drive off the marauders.
They took the shortest cut to the farm, but not the
quickest, since sometimes it seemed as if the thick scrub
would baffle both foot and horse.
When at last they got near the house, the farmer’s wife
was left, still mounted, in the bush, until the affray should
be over, whilst Frank and his men crawled on their
bellies through the long grass up to the fence of a
paddock which lay between them and the house.
The blacks had made good, or rather very bad use of
their time. They had lighted two or three fires just out-
side the house, using its furniture, its roof, and the


paddock-fence, as well as the chopped fire-wood, for fuel.
They had slaughtered half-a-dozen sheep, and broken into
the store, and were feasting on mutton half-charred, half-
raw, tea solid and liquid, flour par-baked and an naturel,
and a queer medley of salt pork, raisins, rum, pickles,
salt, butter, sugar, vinegar, pepper, and candles. The
governor’s orders were that the blacks were not to be
killed if their lives could possibly be spared, but either
taken prisoners, or else driven back before the line
through which theoretically they ought never to have
broken. Frank and his men, therefore, when they had
crawled as near to the house as they could without
being observed, suddenly rose and endeavoured to “rush”
the blacks before they could lay hold of their weapons.
They had not, however, all abandoned themselves
blindly to the delights of gormandising. A shower of
spears and other missiles came hurtling at the white
men.
Frank, who was in advance of his party, was
knocked down, and the leader of the aborigines
—quite a giant for a Van Dieman’s Land black —rushed
forward to brain him. With one hand the savage
brandished a tomahawk, and with the other a club, and
Frank’s days of roughing it would speedily have been
very roughly brought to a close had it not been for
Whaler Bill. Bill had insisted on making the campaign
armed with a harpoon instead of a gun. It was 10 to i
that he should miss, he said, if he used a musket, and
1,000 to x that he didn't if he got a chance of flinging his
familiar weapon. Just as the black fellow was bringing
down his tomahawk on Frank’s head, ■whizz went the
harpoon—right through the savage’s arm. With a howl
of pain he leaped from the ground, and then, with his


arm still transfixed, he bounded off into the bush, and his
tribe soon followed their chiefs example.
“ Oh, if I’d only had it fast to a line,” grumbled Bill.
“ That shot wouldn’t have drawn, I’ll go bail.”
Frank’s injuries consisted of a bad bruise and a bad
headache. They were disagreeable, but they did not
prevent hirm when he had come to himself, from enjoying
a more agreeable banquet than the black fellows’, which
the grateful farmer’s wife prepared for him and his sailor-
soldiers. As they had just previously been on short
commons, they did full justice to her bountiful ones.
Having feasted, rested, and put her place in order for
her to the best of their ability, they started to rejoin the
main body of the army. With it they marched to East
Bay Neck, the isthmus which joins Tasman’s Peninsula
to the main land ; the sanguine governor still believing
that he should find nearly all the blacks, of whom only
a couple had been caught, safely cornered there. Noi
one, had passed the neck !
“ I knew how it would be,” said Captain Ruddock, as
he rode back towards Broadoaks between Mr. Norman
and Frank. If the governor would only have listened
to common sense ! What a precious ass he has made of
himself, and of every' one of us too, except that lucky
fellow who’s to get 1,000 acres for nabbing those two
black beggars —and his men are to have their freedom for
helping him.
“ By-the-bye, though, didn’t I promise the ladies that
I’d eat all the blacks we caught ? and there are a couple
caught. However, it wasn’t we who caught them —no
such luck—wish we had. They’d be dear black game to
eat. I should like to know how many thousand pounds
a-head they’ve cost. Well, Frank, this is the queerest bit


of service I’ve seen yet. You learn a lesson from it,
my boy. If you’re ever a great man, don’t fancy
you must know better about everything than anybody
else. A big wig may have precious little wisdom inside
of it.”


CHAPTER XIX.
BUCKLEY.
years had passed. Broadoaks had lost
all look of rawness, and except for the
foreign look of the indigenous trees and
birds, and a superabundance of rail fences,
might almost have passed muster as an English gentle-
man-farmer’s homestead. Mr. Norman was no longer a
new chum; Mrs, Norman was quite reconciled to the
colony; Mar}’ and Janet were married and settled
within twenty and fifteen miles of her—which, for a
colony, is almost like having one married daughter over
the way and another next door, in England; little Amy
had grown up into the “ Broadoaks Beauty,” known also
as the “ English Rose,” and buzzed around by many a
bachelor. Frank was quite a man; but that he had
thought himself for some time past. Where he should
settle on his own account had, however, become a matter
of present importance. He and his father and Captain
Ruddock were one day discussing the question.
“ Well, for my part, Frank,” said the captain, “ I
should try my luck in Port Phillip. Your father has


made a nice place of Broadoaks, and Penruddock is well
enough for me j but you younkers will want more elbow-
room than you will be able to find here before long.
After all, Van Diemen’s Land isn’t such a very large
place, and you can’t stretch it like apiece of india-rubber,
while over there it will be a long time before all the good
country is taken up, and first come first choice. You
could pick out the eyes of the land. Henty got good
land at Portland Bay, and now John Batman has got up
a party to start from Launceston. Why not go and spy
out the fatness of the land, Frank ? If it should turn
out to be nakedness after all—though there isn’t much
chance of that—you will have gained some more colonial
experience and not have lost much time. Port Phillip
has long been a hobby of Batman’s, and no craze either
I m inclined to think. Batman knows what he is about •
lie’s a native-born Australian, and they are sharp enough’
whatever else they mayn’t be.”
Frank accordingly started for Launceston, but he was
too late. Batman’s tiny schooner, the Rebecca , had
sailed. ’
But when she came back and Batman made known
h.s adventures, Frank was more eager than ever to enter
bnld ,? I" d P ° S$eSS * e g °° d land ' Batman had
anded with his seven Sydney blacks, and marched
towards a native encampment they had discovered by its
columns of smoke. When they reached the camp fires
.South w!l J'h' JU I- d that . lhey were deserted; but the New
outh Wales blacks tracked their Port Phillip brethren
d came up with a score of their Port Phillip sisters’
Bamia„ 0 . r b e , nC k mbe m d f* ab ° Ut tTO doa ™ P-aninnS
wa al , C them that he, though a whiteskin,
"as a countryman of theirs, and he won their hearts by


giving them knives, tomahawks, and scissors; blankets
to cover them, necklaces to adorn them, and looking-
glasses to admire themselves in. Afterwards Batman
had fallen in with black men who, though at first inclined
to spit him on their spears, changed their minds and
proved friendly. The principal chief, as a proof of his
pacific intentions, gave Batman his best spear to carry,
himself carrying the white man’s gun ; and so they pro-
ceeded to a camp, where the chief bade the women and
children not to be afraid, and the explorer explained to
them that he had come to find a home for his wife and
seven children, and pasture for his sheep and cattle, and
promised that he would protect the blacks, give them
good wages in food and clothes if they would work for
him, and pay them tribute for the land he was about to
take up. The blacks of course, according to Batman’s
account, were quite delighted at the thought of being
able to part with their land to so amiable a white-skinned
fellow-countryman, and relinquished in his favour some
600,000 acres, for the conveyance of which he gravely
drew up a deed in triplicate, the chiefs executing the
deed by each handing him a piece of earth. This land
he described as being the finest he had ever seen—a
practically unbounded extent of well-grassed, well-watered
country. Batman had no difficulty in getting comrades
to go shares in this great estate, and though the Home
Government did not sanction his one-sidedly very ad-
vantageous bargain, he and Fawkner, the leader of a
rival expedition, afterwards known as the “ Father of
Melbourne,” founded between them not only that
magnificent mushroom, but also the go-ahead colony of
Victoria.
Frank, as I have intimated, belonged to Batman’s


party. He was busy with the axe one day with some of
his comrades, when the blacks who had gathered round
them, thinking very probably that however wise white
fellow might fancy himself, he was big fool to take so
much trouble, began to jabber and point their fingers all
in one direction, Frank first found out what they were
pointing at.
“ Why, here’s a half-bleached black fellow,” he cried.
It was a coffee-coloured giant, six feet five, or accord-
ing to some accounts, eight inches in height, dressed, or
rather undressed, like a black fellow, but with hair, nose,
and eyes very different from the blacks. He stared as if
he was half stupid, and yet there was a look in his eyes
as if he felt that he ought to understand what the whites
were doing and saying.
Bread ? said Frank, and pitched him a big bit of
damper. For a minute or two he looked not more
stupid but more puzzled than before—as if he were
racking his brain to secure some word that was fluttering
about the tip of his tongue. Suddenly a light flashed
across his face, and he stammered, “ Bread-beef— knife
—English.” Gradually at first, but more and more
rapidly as he heard it spoken around him by English
bps, his mother-tongue came back to him, and he
the new comers who he was, and what had happened to
him on the virgin soil they coveted.
Th's man , Buckley by name, had been a soldier a
veritable grenadier, but had been convicted of some
mi itar> offence, and had been Governor Collins’s bond-
servant when he attempted to found a convict establish-
ment in Port Phillip. The attempt was soon given up, but
m the meantime Buckley and three fellow-prisoners had
attempted to escape. One was shot down at starting


but Buckley and the other two got safe off. They
crossed the Yana Yarra—the ever-flowing river—and
worked their way round to Geelong, and so on to
Indented Head, living on the molluscs they knocked oft
from the rocks. But as this living was really half-
starving they began to repent of their enterprise, and
seeing a convict ship lying in the harbour they made
signals for a boat; one put off, but pulled back when it
had got only half way to the shore. Then, according to
Buckley’s account, his two mates resolved to plod back
to captivity by land, but he would not consent to do so.
They were never seen or heard of again. According to
one guess they were killed by the blacks; according to
another they died of hunger ; according to a third the
huge Buckley, to keep himself from dying of hunger, ate
them. Buckley next, he said, struck along the sea-coast
southwards. He still lived on raw shell-fish, and some-
times could not get a drop of fresh water to drink.
■\Vhen he reached the mouth of a fresh stream he
thought that he might go farther and fare a good deal
worse, and accordingly built himself a hut on a rock
beside it.
One day he found a black fellow’s spear stuck in the
ground. Thinking that it might be of use to him he
pulled it up, and it was of far more use to him than he
could have imagined. It had been put where Buckley
had found it to mark the grave of a black-fellow chief;
and his tribe, coming across Buckley as he was walking
about with it, believed, according to their “tumble down
black fellow, jump up white fellow” creed, that the
soul of their late leader had transmigrated into the body
of the big Englishman.
The blacks made as much fuss with him as bees do


with their queen. They fished and hunted for him, and
when they went to war, hid him, Achilles-like, amongst
their loobras.
Women, as has been the case from the time of the
siege of Troy, were often the causes of their quarrels. A
darkie Paris would carry off a darkie Helen, and her
darkie Menelaus would endeavour to recover her by the
aid of darkie allies.
Buckley learnt the black fellow’s language—the dialect
spoken by the tribe which had adopted him, that is to
say—and married a black wife, w r ho, however, soon left
him. Perhaps they would have got on better together if
he had not learnt the language.
Neither black men nor black women now delighting
him, he went back to his hermitage on the banks of the
Karaaf, as he had found out his fresh stream was called.
'U hilst he was enjoying solitude and plenty of fish there,
for he had invented a plan for catching them wholesale,
a black young lady belonging to the tribe he had left
looked in upon him, and—l cannot say whether it was
leap-year or not —intimated her intention of becoming
his wife.
She, too, grew tired of him, and he was once more left
to catch and eat fish by himself; but his forsaken tribe,
having heard of their chief’s piscatory skill, marched down
upon him en masse and insisted on reclaiming him. If a
white fellow was precious because he was supposed to
have a black fellow’s soul inside him, he became still
more so when it was seen that he could catch fish better
that any black fellow.
Buckley at last thought that he would never see a
countryman again, that he "was doomed to stay with the
blacks all his life, and he almost became a black fellow'


in habits and tastes. Once or twice he heard that a
“ big canoe ” had been seen in the harbour, but he had
no opportunity of communicating with these stray ships.
His subjects having informed him that a little canoe had
come ashore from one of these big canoes, bringing some-
thing which the white fellows had buried near the beach,
he went to the spot they pointed out, and dug until he
came to a corpse. Its face was the only white man’s
countenance he looked upon for more than thirty years,
during which he completely lost his own language, and
his reckoning too, to such an extent that he could only
guess that he had been in Port Phillip about twenty
years.
But at last he heard that another big canoe had come
into the harbour, and that white fellows and black fellows
had landed, and looked as if they meant to “ sit down.”
His tribe of black fellows held a council at which it
was determined that, as soon as the assistance of another
tribe could be obtained, the invaders should be attacked
and either slaughtered to a man on shore, or else driven
into the sea. It was taken for granted that Buckley, as
being, in spite of the colour of his skin (and the diffe-
rence in this respect was not nearly so great as it had been,
thirty-two years before), really a black fellow, would head
the attack.
He started, on the other hand, to warn his country-
men, but when he drew near them, he remembered, first,
that he could no longer talk English, and therefore they
would not be able to understand him ; and secondly,
that he was a runaway convict, and that consequently
they might be inclined to take him prisoner.
Accordingly, with his black fellow’s spear in his hand,
he squatted down upon the ground, and continued sitting


there, moodily staring at the white folk, between whom
and him so strange a gulf was placed, until he was
roused in the way I have described.
Before going on with and finishing Frank’s adventures,
I may as well tell you what became of Buckley. He ap-
pointed himself peacemaker-general between the blacks
and the whites. First, he persuaded his tribe to defer
their threatened attack until a more convenient season
for it should arrive, and at last, by large promises and
small gifts of things supplied him by his countrymen,
to postpone it sine die.
Buckley was officially appointed a constable, but
thought himself worthy of a higher dignity than the post
of full private m the police force, and consequently was
snubbed, to teach him proper subordination. The blacks
said that _ their late chief was playing them false ; the
whites said that their new constable was playing them
false; and, besides that, the poor man became a shuttle-
cock between the battledores of the Batman and Fawk-
ner factions.
1 er y llkeJ y Buckley wished himself back at Karaaf,
once more catching fish in solitary security—especially
when he saw how the newcomers ill-treated his old friends
and they retaliated.
He determined to leave the land in which he had
spent so strange a cantle of his life, and settled in
Hobart Town, where he married a third wife—one with
a white skin, and according to the rites of the Church of
England, instead of the bush. Government gave him
a httle pension, and he died at the age of fourscore
neariy.


CHAPTER XX.
norman’s creek and dovecot.
made his selection, landed his sheep
$ and his goods, and knocked up his huts,
if Roughing-it times were almost over at
Broadoaks; but in his new home they
reigned supreme. Indeed, in its earliest times the
Broadoaks cuisine had been almost luxurious in com-
parison with that of Norman’s Creek at starting. For a
time flour, not always free from a suspicion of mustiness,
and salt pork, or porked salt, as it was called with
brilliant wit, were the two staves of life there. Frank
and his men were too busy to have time to go pigeon,
parrot, or duck-shooting. They had to watch by night,
as well as work by day, for the dingoes, or wild dogs,
from which Tasmania is free, came down like wolves on
the folds. The dingo or warrigal is really the Australian
fox, but warrigals are not preserved in Australia as foxes
are in England. Frank and his fellow-settlers shot and
poisoned the wild dogs, as well as hunted them in the
legitimate Tallyho ! fashion. If the dingo only killed as
many sheep as it could eat, it would be a great nuisance ;


but not content with getting a rich meal of mutton, it
mangles right and left in any fold into which it leaps,
and the sheep which are not bitten often leap out in
terror and are lost. The blacks, in spite of Buckley, also
helped themselves to Frank’s ewes, rams, and lambs, just
as they had done in former times in Van Diemen’s
Land, and friend Frank was even angrier with them
than he used to be then, because these lost sheep had
been his very own.
The blacks, however, faded away fast before the whites.
ith one diminished tribe which hung about his place,
the young master of Norman’s Creek established toler-
ably friendly relations. He tried to get them to work,
but anything like hard or, if not hard, regular work they
very soon got weary of. They would go out with a flock
of sheep, but as to coming home with it, that was quite
another matter. The chances were that, as soon as he
felt bored, the sable shepherd, leaving his sheep to
wander as they pleased, would sit down and soothe him-
self with much-beloved tobacco, and then go tranquilly
to sleep. They soon learned to ride—to ride capitally.
A black would sit a bucking horse as if he and it were
blended into one being, like a centaur. But whether he
would ride the horse to the place to which he was told
to go, and whether—at any rate when—his master would
see man or horse again—these were quite open questions.
Sometimes the shepherd or the horseman vanished;
at other times, when hungry, they would present them-
selves before their employers after many days’, it might
be weeks’, absence, and intimate with the most cool
assurance their wish to have another “plenty big belly,”
demanding tea, bread, meat, and ’baccy as aright. If
Frank scolded them for being such a set of lazy loons,


they would gravely reason that it was proper for white
fellow to work, because white fellow liked it, but not
proper for black fellow to work, because black fellow
didn’t. Of course, when they had given up killing his
sheep, it was impossible for Frank to be long angry with
such comical fellows as these, especially since they
would mimic him to his face, in the most ludicrous
fashion, when he began to storm. This tribe soon
became a kind of retainers at Norman’s Creek. They
would do odd jobs for its master—fish for him with grass
nets, make him kangaroo and ’possum rugs, cooper for
him —that is, scoop out bits of wood into pails, and such
like, track his sheep when lost, and so on, and in return
he was expected to fee them from time to time with
flour and pork, tea, sugar, and tobacco. They would
have liked to add rum to the list of their honoraria, but,
so far as he was concerned, Frank forced them to
become teetotallers. Nevertheless he was a great
favourite with them. He had picked up so many of
their ways when a boy in Tasmania, and could compete
with them in so many of their accomplishments, that
they not only liked him, but admired him. He could
hurl the spear very nearly as accurately, and dodge spear
and boomerang very nearly as adroitly, as the best man
among them. He could run any one of them down, and
in muscular strength he was so manifestly their superior
that they looked upon him as quite a hero. He was also
much kinder to them than the other white men were.
Whether he was respected any more on this account, by
either the black fellows or their gins, may be doubted ;
but his easiness did not make them like him any the less.
Frank got a good deal of entertainment in one way
and another out of his blacks. Besides being very droll


mimics they were very long-winded and yet not heavy
story-tellers, and so helped him to wile away many an
hour which would else have been wearisome. Some-
times they bragged of their own exploits in war, and
those of their ancestors. Sometimes full to the skin of
white fellows’ food, the story-teller would bemoan the
arrival of the white fellow on his native shores. At
other times the stories were about the huge bunyip, with
its eyes of fire, breath of smoke, scaled coat, and teeth
and claws stouter and sharper than the toughest, keenest
steel—the mysterious monster which no new chum has
ever yet beheld, but which black fellows and old bush-
men affirm used to devour men, women, and children,
wholesale, and which still roams, according to the same
authorities, in the wildest fastnesses of the up-country
bush.
On one occasion, however, Frank’s blacks uninten-
tionally were very nearly the cause of his losing his life.
In another camp a black fellow lay sick—bewitched, of
course. The wise man of the tribe declared that*an
enemy had spit a bone at him. The skin of a corpse
was laid over him, but he grew no better. His gin
rubbed her gums, and spat out the blood most assidu-
ously, whilst other loobras chanted their belief that a bad
stranger had bewitched their kinsman, and their desire
that the bad stranger might be beaten ; but this ceremony
likewise proved of no avail. The man died, and the
women wailed, “Where is he? Where is he?” over
him as he was laid in his grass-covered, thatch-roofed
grave.
The wizard now declared who it was that had be-
witched the dead, fixing on a merry old member of
Franks tribe; and the dead man’s son, having made


himself more hideous even than he was before, by draw-
ing zebra stripes and all kinds of grotesquely grim devices
with red and yellow ochre on his black skin, took his
spear and his womerah, his waddy, boomerang, and
tomahawk, and came over to Norman’s Creek, bound
by a solemn oath to have the blood of poor Punch—for
that was the very unwizardly name which Frank had
given the funny old man —and to cut out his kidneys to
anoint himself withal, or to perish in the attempt.
He stole up towards the Norman’s Creek camp, and
planted himself in some neighbouring scrub. In the
evening, when the blacks were sitting round their fires,
Frank had come down to the camp for what the Scotch call
a “ crack.” Seating himself on a log by Punch’s fire, he
got the old man, nothing loth, to begin one of his yarns.
In the course of it he became so excited that he rose to
his feet in order to be able to gesticulate more freely.
No sooner did he show above Frank’s head than whizz
came a boomerang from the scrub. Punch dodged it,
but it cut the crown of Frank’s hat clean off, and shaved
off part of his scalp also. Instantly the camp was in con-
fusion.
Wah / Wah ! Wah ! shouted the men as they seized
their weapons and plunged into the scrub in search of
their unseen foe. They soon routed him out, but not-
withstanding his valiant resolve to do or die, he preferred to
take to his heels, and in spite of the spears that hurtled
after him, he made his escape in the uncertain light.
But now I must tell you of some good service the
blacks did.
A certain cousin Fred was sent out to Broadoaks from
England—a pleasant young fellow enough, but at home
he had not been able to settle down to anything. His


father accordingly sent him out to his uncle in Van
Diemen’s Land to see whether he could make anything
out of him.
Master Fred became a great favourite at Broadoaks—
not least with Miss Amy; but Mr. Norman thought that
he would pick up colonial experience more quickly and
have a better chance in life on the other side of Bass’s
Straits. Accordingly Fred joined Frank at Norman’s
Creek, and the two cousins got on very well together,
leading a jolly bachelor life—all the jollier in reality
because they had little time to be idle. 'Fred took very
kindly to life in the bush under such circumstances, but,
like most new chums, he was not able to find his way in
it very readily at first. He had not been long at Nor-
man’s Creek before he lost himself.
After a very anxious night, during which he had
scarcely got any sleep and had often fired off his gun and
cooeyed, Frank waked up his cook to get breakfast ready
and pack up two or three days’ rations for two or three
people. Then bidding another man run up a couple of
horses and saddle them, or rather one of them, he went
over to the black fellows’ camp and awoke, after some
difficulty, Punch’s Baby, as he had named Punch’s eldest
son—a strapping young fellow of some five feet eleven
inches. The blacks had had a specially sumptuous feast
the night before, and, therefore, Punch’s Baby slumbered
soundly. He soon shook himself together, however,
when he found that Frank wanted him to accompany
him as a tracker, and having eaten the hearty breakfast
which Frank had known well enough that he would want,
he mounted the barebacked horse, and rode off with
“ Mitta Moomah.”
Punch’s Baby might just as well not have had a horse,


for he was as often off its back as on ; dapping about
like a piece of indiarubber.
Ever and anon the black “ spotted ” Fred’s tracks,
but, owing to the stony ground, which sometimes brought
the tracks up short, and the purposeless, roundabout
course which the bewildered new chum had taken, a good
deal of time was often lost before the tracks could be
struck again.
Frank and his henchman crossed open downs, and
lightly timbered undulating country; rode over granite
and pumice stone, passed the craters of extinct volcanoes,
mounted ridges, and dipped into gullies ; they ran down
creeks, and rounded blindingly bright salt-water lakes,
and fresh-water lakes swarming with water-fowl. Twice
they had to camp out. They were riding along—
the black fellow looking rather crest-fallen, and Frank
trying hard, but not always successfully, to drive
back the terrible fear that was striving to establish
itself in his heart on the afternoon of the third day,
when Frank suddenly called out, and pointed to re-
covered horse tracks. The black was off his horse
in an instant, and peering about on his knees, with his
nose nearly touching the ground, for the tracks were very
faint.
“ Tame it Mitta F’ed,” said the black, but at the same
time he pointed out human foot-prints going in an
opposite direction to that which the horse had taken.
Its master and it had evidently parted company at this
point.
The human track was a comparatively easy one to
trace, although the foot-falls had evidently faltered-
Before sundown Fred was found, almost mad with thirst
and the awful terror which comes over any one who


believes himself to be hopelessly astray in the Bush.
His experiences during the three nights and four days he
had been lost—the hope that now at last he had found
the right road, the disappointment when that hope was
frustrated, the resolve not to bate one jot of heart and
hope, the sapping effect of repeated disappointments on
the hope, and at last the absolute despair of ever seeing
a human face again—had sobered cousin Fred con-
siderably, but they had made him all the better man in
every way. Frank got his cousin back to Norman’s
Creek, which Fred’s horse had reached long before them ;
nursed his cousin through a short but sharp illness ; and
then wrote to tell his people at Broadoaks of what had
happened. If the buzzing bachelors, who had rejoiced
at Fred’s elimination, as they supposed, from their rivalry,
had known what it was that made Amy so tearfully
joyful on the day on which Frank’s letter reached Broad-
oaks, they would not, perhaps,—good fellows though
they were,—have thought Frank quite so fine a fellow as
his sister considered him.
Tasmania is Australia’s sanitarium. As soon as he
could travel, Fred went to Broadoaks “ for the benefit of
his health,” and, to the disgust of the buzzing bachelors,
became formally engaged to Amy, When he returned to
Port Phillip, he took up a station of his own, nicely near
to Norman’s Creek—that is, about thirty miles off. Amy,
hearing that bronze-wing and wonga-wonga pigeons
abounded on it, and being of a somewhat romantic turn
of mind, directed her slave to call their new common
home (that was to be) Dovecot,
Frank went with his cousin as his “best man,”
when Fred crossed the sea to bring Amy to the
Dovecot.


“God bless you both,” said Mr. Norman, when she
and her bridegroom were taking their departure ; “ and
may your life in Port Phillip turn out as well as our
‘ Roughing it in Van Diemen’s Land.’


THE ADVENTURES OF
HARRY DELANE




CHAPTER L
THE YOUNG VOYAGERS.
IW| ARRY was christened Harry—
K which I think is the sensible way, since all
£ 2 Henrys get calk d Harry if they can. The
name has a frank, rollicking sound—worth
Henry a dozen times over.
Our Harry and his twin sister Kate were born in Tas-
mania, or Van Diemen’s Land, as it used to be called.
Their father was a halt-pay captain in the army, who had
turned farmer there ; and a very pretty farm he had.
Quite an English-looking farm, although so far away;
hedges, and lanes, and mossy gates, corn and hops, and
an orchard, cows standing up to their knees in ponds
under willows, and whisking off the flies with their tufted
tails; horses as well as oxen ploughing, men mowing the
long grass waving like a sea before the soft wind, women
and children tossing and raking sweet-scented hay, ricks
and stacks round the wooden barn which looked as old
as if it had stood in Dorsetshire or Essex, and a jumble
ltc en ve getables and old-fashioned flowers crowding
the farm-house, built of Tasmanian timber, but
quite in an English style.


A good many of the trees on the farm and about it,
to be sure, had a foreign look; gum trees, blackwood,
celery-topped pines, she-oaks and he-oaks, honeysuckle
trees, tea-trees, native pear-trees bearing wooden pears
about as eatable as the musical ones you buy at the toy-
shops, and so on; and the wild animals were different
from those in English woods; kangaroos, wallabies,
opossums, wombats, “ devils,” spotted native cats, flying
squirrels, watermoles, parrots, black swans, etc., etc. ;
but they only made the farm look the more English from
the contrast, and Harry and Kate, unlike a good many
colonial children, were taught to consider themselves as
much English as if they had been born in Kent. When
they were eight years old, they were sent to school in
England. Their mother was dead, and Captain Delane’s
maiden sister, who lived in a village near Dulchester, had
promised to look-after them, and let them spend their
holidays at her house.
They were very much alike, except that Kate was
goldenly fair, whilst Harry was goldenly brown; and
they were very fond of each other, somewhat in the same
way. Harry was proud of the beautiful sister whom he
had to protect, and Kate was proud of the handsome
brother who could protect her.
They came home round the Horn, and thought sea-life
at first very dreary. Their ship had sailed in June,
which is winter, you know, at the other side of the world;
where, I believe, you sometimes lancy that people must
stand with their feet uppermost— turned topsy-turvy like
the seasons. There was rain day after day at sea, and
then there came hail and snow, and scarcely a bird
could be seen on the wild waves—just the colour of dull
lead, except where they broke in foam and spray. A


little fun was got out of the snow when it lay in a deep
drift on the lee side of the ship, but the water that
washed on board generally made the snow too slushy for
snowballing. One great billow smashed the cabin sky-
lights, poured down into the ’tween decks, and sent the
tin plates and pannikins and squalling babies there afloat.
Icicles like long bayonets hung from the eaves of the
poop. The rigging froze so that ropes would not run
until hot water had been poured on the blocks. The
stars, w'hen there w T ere any to be seen, came out soon
after dinner —mid-day dinner. Almost every one on
board was either sea-sick or sulky; wet, numb, caring for
nothing but meals or a smoke. The cabin passengers
held Quakers’ meetings round the stove in the saloon ;
the ’tween decks passengers burrowed between the damp
blankets in their bunks, or sat back to back in the deck-
houses, trying in that way to keep themselves from
turning key-cold. Huge icebergs forged past, looming
with a ghastly shimmer through the gloom. The watch
looked like snow images when they left the deck. “ Ice
ahead I” —the ice-watch, just audible in the howling wind,
used to sing out drearily in the small hours. Spars
snapped like lucifer matches, and sails were blown to
rags. The booms and the water-casks and the pens for
the live-stock and the hen-coops got loose from their
lashings and made a dismal rumbling chaos. But the
Horn was doubled at last, —looking very much like a pile
of dim-purple cloud, and after more rough weather, our
little friends got into bright blue sea with a clear sky
above, golden sunlight, silvery moonlight, sea-birds al-
most always in sight, now and again a gauzy shoal of
flying-fish, and sails, daily becoming commoner, to be
signalled, boarded, or spoken.


Harry and Kate liked sea-life now. There was music,
singing, and dancing on board. Officers, crew,
passengers, all made pets of our two cheery little
Tasmanians, who had shown good-temper when every-
body else was cross. Except themselves and the
’tween-decks babies, all on board had crossed the line
before, but still on the eve of the crossing of the line,
Neptune boarded the ship with his red-herring, and
departed in his blazing car, and came next day with
Amphitrite and Triton to be carried aft on a car drawn
by growling and grinning bears, —to demand for his
mystic rites those who had volunteered for re-initiation,
and to have them given up to him for his barber to
operate upon with a strangely-lathered tar-brush, dabbed
more frequently into the mouth than on the cheek, and a
razor of rusty iron hoop, and subsequently to be ducked,
heels over head, in the water-tub on which they had sat.
A battle-royal with bucketfuls of water followed, in which
almost all the men-folk joined. Harry became one of the
water-firers to the best of his rising-nine ability to douse,
and Kate laughed until her sides were sore.
Next day the rigging was a Rag Fair of clothes hung
out to dry. Sails soon became so frequent that the
pleasure of speaking them palled, and when the Channel
was reached, there were so many standing out or
in that they took no more notice of one another than the
people do who throng the great thoroughfares leading to
the City. At night there was a star-dance all round of
rising and falling lights slung at mast-head and yard-arm.
About dinner time Beachy Head was sighted, and Harry
and Kate went without their dinner in order to stare and
stare at the old home of which their father had never
been tired of talking. The ship ran in so close to land


that they could see trees and churches, farm-houses and
cottages, ricks of fresh-cut corn, and sportsmen and
pointers in the stubble-fields. I daresay you have some-
times felt—“ Why all this happened to me somewhere
ever so long ago—l can tell what is coming next; ” that
is how Harry and Kate felt when they looked on the old
English fields, with the funny little trees in the hedge-
rows, lying so stilly bright in the autumn sunshine*
Towards evening their ship got its pilot and its tug, and
sped merrily past the seaside towns, —lines of lamps
twinkling like big glow-worms. The anchor was let go
off Margate, weighed again next morning, and the ship
was towed up the Thames, and anchored off Gravesend.
Harry and Kate did not think much of some of the pea-
soupy water they had come through lately, or of the
marshes they had seen on both sides, but still they felt
very jolly when they got to Gravesend, on a bright
September morning. There those of the passengers who
were too impatient to land, to be able to wait for the ship
to go up with the next tide into the docks, went ashore ;
some over the side, and some let down into their boats,
amid cheering and laughing, by a whip from the cro’jack.
Presently a shout of “ Pass the word for the little
Delanes ” rang along the deck, and Harry and Kate saw a
fat, good-tempered, old woman, who had just come
on board, waddling towards them. They were very
pleased to be claimed by any good-tempered body; but
still—they had expected that their aunt would have
looked a little more like their poor dead mamma. The
good-tempered old woman shook her fat sides when she
found that the children had taken her for their aunt.
“ Bless yer dear little hearts,” she cried, “ I ain’t a lady.
One would ha’ thought you might ha’ seen that from the


looks o’ me, but then you’ve been brought up in furrin
parts, pore dears. Charlotte’s my name, that’s what my
name is. I’m on’y Miss Delane’s servant, that’s what I
am. I remember your papa, Master Harry, and you’ll
be the very moral on ’im. I never see your pore dead
mamma, but I’ve seed her pictur, and your sister ’ill be
the pictur o’ that.”
The crew gave the two little Delanes a cheer when
they took their departure with the fat old woman.
Sailors are always jolly at the thought of getting ashore
(sometimes, unfortunately, they get so jolly coming up
Channel that they have black eyes and swollen noses
when they do land,) and besides, these sailors really liked
the two cheerful, plucky little Tasmanians, who had
sailed with them through so many sea chances and
changes. Harry and Kate sprang up the Terrace Pier
steps like kids, almost knocking the Titties out of the
hands of a white-haired, primly dressed old bachelor,
who was sitting reading in the mild sunshine through a
double gold eye-glass saddled across his hooked nose.
He glanced up angrily, and began to growl, but Charlotte
soon silenced him. “ Bless yer old heart, sir,” she cried,
“ they’re just off the ship there. Miles and miles they’ve
come—hundreds o’ thousands o’ millions, from the
t’other side o’ furrin counteries. Surely you wouldn’t
grudge ’em a chance o’ stretchin’ their legs when they’ve
got it.” The old gentleman grunted “ Oh, ow,
um, um, ah, very well; of course, under circumstances,
urn, ah, yes, of course, my good woman,” refolded
and smoothed his paper, refixed the gold saddle
upon his hooked nose, and before he recommenced his
reading, gave as kindly a glance as the flinty old
eyes peering through the spectacle pebbles could


flash out at the landed youngsters scurrying up the
steps above him.
Harry and Kate began to hope that everybody in
England would prove good-tempered; but they were
soon grievously disappointed. Miss Delane, their aunt,
did not turn out to be at all good-tempered. She
plumed herself upon her conscientiousness, and in the
excess of it had taken lodgings at Gravesend five weeks
before there was a probability that her nephew and niece
would arrive.
Miss Delane greeted her nephew and niece with a
peck rather than a kiss, and bade Charlotte instantly
begin to pack up. She had wasted time enough and
endured misery enough in those wretched lodgings, she
said—as if it was the children’s fault that she had taken
them ! The landlady, overhearing the remark, stood up
for her rooms, and so our little friends heard a wrangle
between two old ladies as one of their first English
experiences. They were very glad to leave the house,
and even their aunt’s bad temper did not prevent them
from enjoying their trip across the river in the steam-
ferry boar, and the ride up to London from Tilbury.
That may not seem a very interesting journey to you,
but it was quite new to them, although the names of
some of the places they passed were so familiar. And
then, after they had been dazed by the bustle of the
thronged city, their cab suddenly turned into a quiet old
square, with yellow leaves slowly dropping, and sparrows
leisurely hopping on the grass of the rusty-railed garden;
and they spent the night at an old boarding-house next
door to a bit ot black and grey chequered monastery
wall. “It was like living in a book,” the children said,
and dreamt at night of bleeding nuns, and friars of


orders grey. The queer old ladies and gentlemen stay-
ing at the boarding-house, who thought coming up to
London quite a daring adventure, looked upon the little
people who had come “by themselves ” from the other
side of the world as perfect prodigies of travel, and made
so much of them, that Harry and Kate would have liked
to stay longer at the boarding-house, to be listened to
like little oracles, but soon after breakfast their aunt
carried them off to the docks to clear their luggage, and
in the afternoon she and they and Charlotte took the
train for Dulchester. At the station a mouldy old chaise,
belonging to the inn of the village in which Miss Delane
lived, was waiting for them, and our little friends, who
were connoisseurs in horseflesh and had been taught to
believe that everything in England was better than its
kind in Tasmania, were considerably astonished by the
broken-kneed old screw that drew the vehicle. Both
Harry and Kate would have liked to sit behind a showier
horse, but, nevertheless, they enjoyed their drive through
the clean, quiet old town, and the hushed, hedged-in
country road to their aunt’s house.
“ Here we be, and glad enough I be to be back home
agin. I don’t hold with them lodgin’s no more than
you, mum,” exclaimed Charlotte, as the chaise pulled up
in front of a moated, one-floored, verandahed cottage
iust outside the village.
“ Oh ! what a dear little doll’s house,” cried Kate.
“ Don’t talk nonsense, child,” said offended Miss
Delane.
And then her other servant, a little country lass, came
out to open the gate, and stare at our young outre tner
friends in utter astonishment at finding they were not
black.


CHAPTER IT.
AT AUNT’S.
Harry were up before any one
fl 6^Se * n t^ie ouse was stirring next morning,
y /Av"W> and proceeded first to explore the out-door
premises. Their tininess amused them,
because they had been accustomed to plenty of room;
but their primness rather disconcerted them.
“ Why, it looks as if you mustn’t touch anything,” said
Harry. “ I do believe aunt dusts her flowers and the
gravel and everything. She ought to keep her place
under a glass-case, like the church on the mantel-piece at
home.”
Kate gave a little laugh; but then she said, “You
mustn’t make fun of aunt, Harry dear. I am sure she
means to be very kind.”
“ Oh, yes — ain't she nice ?” answered Harry, and he
looked so roguish, that although Kate tried hard to look
proper, she could not help laughing a good deal more
heartily than she had laughed before.
“ Charlotte’s a regular old brick,” Harry went on.
“ And I don’t think the other servant’s a bad lot —what’s


her name ?—Susan—Sukey, I mean to call her—if she
wouldn’t stare so with her mouth open, just as if we were
a couple of ghosts.” And Harry made a face like Susan’s,
and again made Katie laugh.
“ Oh, look here,” he shouted, as he looked into the
little moat, in which some minnows were darting about.
“ I wonder if these are young salmon ?”
Those were the English fish with which he was most
familiar by name, because the Tasmanians then were
talking about naturalising them. “ Comical little covies,
ain’t they, Katie ? They’ll have to grow a lot before they
get as big as the whoppers papa used to talk about. Why,
papa told me that up in Scotland somewhere a salmon
regularly towed him along.”
Then the children strolled into the village, and peeped
into the little cottages with their little front-gardens full of
bushy Michaelmas daisies, blue flap-shutters hanging
down like leaves of tables, blue wood-smoke curling out
of the chimneys almost buried in the damp, mossy, weedy
thatch, and shy, white-headed youngsters standing at the
doors, with their fingers in their mouths, and staring at
the young strangers with eyes as round as Susan’s.
Harry and Kate were not a bit forward, but at the same
time they were not a bit shy. They stopped at the
smithy, and made acquaintance with the big, grinning
blacksmith, and his bigger, grinninger journeyman, and
his grinningest small boy who was blowing up the fire.
They had a chat with the man who had driven them from
Dulchester, and with his master, who came out with
his mouth full from his breakfast in the little three-
cornered room behind the bar of the “ Plough ” to
look at the young Tasmanians—and after him came
his buxom wife, and his women-servants, exclaiming in


astonished chorus, when they had heard our young
friends talk, —
“ Lawks—deary me—lookee there now—if they don’t
speak English every bit as well as us !”
Which, by the way, was a very uncomplimentarily un-
just appraisement of Harry and Katie’s English-speaking.
“ The shop,” in which all sorts of things were sold, was,
like the pleasant scent and sight of the wood-smoke, a far
more familiar-seeming thing to Harry and Katie than it
would have been to the town-bred amongst my little
English readers.
“ Here’s the store,” cried Harry. “ Let’s go in and
buy something for jolly old Charlotte and staring Susan.
Papa would have sent them presents as well as aunt, if
he’d known what a good sort they were.”
So the youngsters went in, and bought their presents,
and won the hearts of the “ store ” people by their bright
faces and frank chat; and then they stepped carefully
over the graves in the green church-yard, and peeped on
tiptoe through a green glass window, at the slimy tablets,
and Creed, and Tables of Commandments in the old
church. Afterwards, they paid a visit to the roofless cage
on a corner of the common, and Harry put himself into
the rotten old stocks, and Katie fed a melancholy old
donkey in the pound, and both of them made a charge
on the geese that came waddling at them, hissing, with
their necks stretched out as stiff as pokers. The autumn
morning was so crisply pleasant that the children forgot
how time went, and got home too late for breakfast, and
to a long lecture from their aunt accordingly.
They got a good many lectures from their aunt. She
had lived alone so long, that the presence of the two
high-spirited children in her house was a trouble to her.


Charlotte did her best, however, to make up for her mis-
tress’s grumpiness, and when the children were driven
from the parlour, would give them special little treats in
the kitchen, where Harr}’ told long yarns about the
colony, to which staring Sukcy listened, as Charlotte said,
“ like the wery image of a stuck pig.” And then Char-
lotte would tell ghost-stories, and tales about the old
families of the neighbourhood; and the little party
before the kitchen-fire enjoyed themselves a good deal
more than the snappish old lady in the parlour enjoyed
herself.
Kate did not go to school until after the Christmas
holidays. She used to read to her aunt, and practise
her scales on her aunt’s queer old jangling piano ; and
then she would slip out and help Charlotte to make pies
and puddings, and so on, which she thought a great deal
better fun. But the second day after Miss Delane had
brought the children home, Harry was sent to the curate
of the village to be ground up for the grammar-school to
which his father wished him to be sent. Harry and his
aunt somehow could not get on together. She was always
snubbing him, and would pet Kate by fits and starts to
make him jealous. She did not succeed, however. She
only vexed Kate, who did not like to be treated more
indulgently than her brother. Harr}’ and Kate continued
fast friends, and I am afraid that Charlotte used to cosset
Master Harry a little more than she had a right to. He
was a great favourite of hers, and she was very indignant
at her mistress’s harsh treatment of her “ bonnie boy.”
A good part of the day he spent at the curate’s, either
saying or preparing lessons. The Rev. Peter Prendergast
was a prim, pompous, bald-headed gentleman, whom Miss
Delane and other old ladies thought awfully good and


tremendously clever. He was of the same opinion but
Harry wasn’t. Miss Delane had given Mr. Prendergast
a notion that Harry needed a great deal of “ checking,”
and he relished this even less than his aunt’s chidings
He could see that his tutor pretended to know a great
deal more than he really did, and to be very good
tempered “before folk,” whereas, to his own people and
Harry, he was as cross as a bear; and so Harry despised
Mr Prendergast as a bumptious cheat. I cannot say that
I think that Harry was wrong in this case, but you must
remember that when I am describing what he did, and
said, and thought, I do not always mean that I think he
ought to have done, and said, and thought so.
His wife and children were afraid of Mr. Prendergast
but they were all very fond of Harry ; partly, because he
was very kind and lively, and partly because he was not
a bit afraid of their common tyrant. Poor little Peter
Prendergast was Harry’s fellow pupil, and used to get
many a thrashing from his father because he was slow
Harry, who was quick, but often very careless with his
lessons, never got a thrashing— which certainly was not
mr, since poor little Peter could not help not knowing
fmm Sl \r Ul t Sald that Hany ° nly once S ot a Crashing
. . Prender gast ; and now for the history of that
first and last flogging. *
The little Prendergasts were often at Miss Delane’s
during the Christmas holidays. She did not give the
tt m i Ch fUn ’ bUt Charl ° tte made up for that, and
e little Prendergasts became great friends with our
yung friends. Little Peter wanted to be Kate’s sweet-
° f that Peter was only
month older than herself, and although she liked the
■L


little fellow and his sisters, and especially liked their
kind-hearted, sad-faced mother, little Peter had not dash
enough about him to take Kate’s fancy. When the
holidays were over she was sent to her school at Black-
heath ; and Harry would have very much liked to have
gone at once to his school; but, to spite him, as he said,
his aunt sent him for another half-year to Mr. Prender-
gast’s, as a weekly boarder. Harry soon hated Mr.
Prendergast’s, It was bad enough when he could go
home to his sister and Charlotte every day, but to be
handed over to Mr. Prendergast from Monday morning
to Saturday night (his aunt would not have him home on
the half-holidays) was a dreariness to Harry. Mrs.
Prendergast was as kind to him as she ever could be,
but she was too afraid of her husband to do much in that
way; and to see more constantly and closely than before
the unkind, selfish way in which she and her children
were treated by her husband sickened high-spirited
Harry. He was always getting into mischief, but for
months Mr. Prendergast contented himself with, in
Harry’s irreverent phrase, “ jawing” him. Poor Peter
went on getting flogged, however. His father seemed to
make him “ whipping-boy ” for Harry’s offences. For
once in a way Mr. Prendergast was sharp by accident.
Harry was sometimes kept from doing a thing through
fear of getting Peter a flogging, when he would have
braved the flogging on his own account, but this proxy
system of punishment did not make him like or respect
Mr. Prendergast any the more.
So things had gone on until the first week in June.
Harry was looking forward to Kate’s coming home for
the holidays in a week or two, and did not care a rap for
being kept in with his fellow-student, Peter, in Mr.


Prendergast’s “ study” on a warm Wednesday afternoon.
Summer had set in earlier than usual that year. Trees
had rushed into leaf, flowers into blosson, and insects
into life. There was a drowsy rustling of leaves in the
garden outside, a drowsy hum of flies both there and in
the room, and a sleepily sweet scent of wallflowers was
wafted into the dusty little chamber. It was the kind of
afternoon when work —especially over a task made
doubly distasteful through one’s having been kept in for
it—appears preposterous ; the kind of afternoon on which
all irritable people ought to go to sleep, and on which
they grow doubly irritable if they can’t go to sleep or are
roused out of it. Little Peter Prendergast, who had eaten
copiously of the heavy suet pudding which his father,
who managed domestic as well as scholastic concerns,
prescribed for his family’s dinner, and had put his slate
upon his desk, and on his slate a little pile of books, and
on the books his hands, and on his hands his head, lay
sideways on his hot ear, and snorted and snored as
tranquilly as his ponderous dinner would permit. Harry
was not so fond of the heavy pudding, and, besides, he
was a brighter boy altogether than poor Peter. So
Master Harry spent most part of his time in vaulting into
and out of the garden, throwing pebbles at the kitchen
window, and making grotesque grimaces and playing
monkey-tricks to force the servant inside to laugh. She
was very fond of Harry and thought him very funny ; but
she was also very much afraid of her master who was in
the room over her head, and so she almost choked herself
in her efforts not to laugh at Harry’s antics.
Mr. Prendergast had gone up into his bedroom to get
a nap, but, as Keziah told Harry in a whisper, he was
“routin’ about like a pig in the straw-er.” The unwontedly


early and excessive heat had not, as I have intimated,
improved his temper. Harry had leaped back into the
study and roused Peter from his slumbers ; and the two
boys were engaged in a very cramped game of “ foot it,”
when Mr. Prendergast burst into the room in a towering
rage. He caught Peter up, laid him across a desk, and,
not regarding Harry’s plea that Peter had been as mum
as a mouse all the afternoon until he had forced him to
play, began to whip the poor howling little fellow most
savagely. He thrashed him with less mercy than if he
had been a sheaf of corn, and Harry, in a wild passion of
pity and rage, caught up an inkstand and flung it at his
tutor’s head. It cut Mr. Prendergast’s forehead, and the
blood mixing with the spilt ink, made a nice mess of his
cravat and shirt-front. Harry’s turn to catch the cane
had come at last, and Mr. Prendergast laid on to him as
if determined to make up for lost time. At first Harry
kicked and struggled, but finding, of course, that his
strength was no match for his master’s, he contented
himself with doing his utmost not to shed a tear or utter
a cry. Peter, however, howled louder than ever, and
even timid Mrs. Prendergast, coming to find out what
was the matter, ventured to thrust herself between her
husband and Harry. Mr. Prendergast roughly thrust
her back, and in spite of her tears and cries, went on
thrashing Harr)’ until his hand shook from weariness and
excitement. Harry’s jacket and waistcoat having been
off when he was pounced upon, the punishment he
received was no joke—he had wheals on his back and
arms for months afterwards—but, although he could not
help letting a few tears squeeze themselves out, he bit his
lip through rather than cry or sob, and for this stubborn-
ness, of course, he was beaten all the worse. When


the flogging was at last over, Mr. Prendergast drove
before him his wife and Peter and the other children
and the servant, who were standing huddled in the door-
way like frightened sheep, and locked Harry into the
room.
The door was scarcely locked before he was out of the
room, and out of the garden, and running along the
village street, capless, jacketless, breathless, bruised and
bleeding; and vowing, in his sore little heart, that if ever
he grew to be a man, he would render unto Mr. Prender-
gast thrashing for thrashing wherever he might meet him
—unless, perhaps, Mrs. Prendergast should beg him, as a
special favour, to let her cruel monster off.


CHAPTER 111.
SCHOOL.
got no pity from bis aunt when he
If fvl?\ ;§ had frankly told her how it was that he
<o 1 had run home in such a plight. She
ordered him to go back to Mr. Prender-
gast’s at once and beg his pardon. This Harry flatly
refused to do ; he even declared that he would never set
foot inside Mr. Prendergast’s door again. Accordingly,
after having ordered her contumacious nephew to con-
sider himself under arrest in his own room, Miss Delane
set off to the curate’s, bent on bringing him back with
her to make Harry beg his pardon. But Mr. Prendergast
had no wish to have anything more to do with his
runaway pupil. He said that Harry was, he feared, an
incorrigibly bad boy—at any rate, that all his kindness
had been thrown away upon him ; and advised Miss
Delane to send him at once to school, and his bad
character with him, so that he might meet with no in-
dulgence. Harry was kept a close prisoner in his room,
eating the bread and drinking the water of affliction
(except when Charlotte managed to run a cargo of


contraband custard and so on), whilst his things were
being got ready for school, and his aunt was making
arrangements for his spending the midsummer holidays
there. During this time Harry saw very little of his aunt,
except once a day, or rather once a night. I suppose
she thought that keeping him in the dark would cow him.
At any rate, she allowed him no candle, but came in
regularly at dusk to prophesy all manner of evil con-
cerning him, if he did not mend his ways. Harry would
have been delighted at the thought of going to school, if
regular schooltime had been beginning, instead of just
ending; but he could not help thinking it a shame that
after the dreary half he had had at Prendergast’s he
should be bundled off to spend his vacation at school,
without even a sight of Katie. He begged hard to be
allowed one week, or even one day with his sister, but
Miss Delane was inexorable. She would not even take
him to Blackheath on their way through London.
Amongst his clothes Charlotte had packed up sundry
good things which she and Susan had made him, and a
little cake, which Mrs. Prendergast had sent upon the sly,
and a pegtop from poor Peter. The peg was rather
shaky, and there was a good slice pegged off one side,
but since the top was the only toy poor Peter had, Harry
felt half inclined to cry when he unpacked his boxes, and
found it wrapt up in a nightshirt—ready-wound, and with
the brass button, of which Peter had been very proud,
refurbished, still at the end of the whipcord.
I do not think that you would care to hear about
Harry’s journey with his aunt into the west of England.
Harry thought that he had been and was being shamefully
used, whilst Miss Delane, who had taken up Mr. Pren-
dergast’s notion that Harry, young though he was, was a


thoroughly bad boy, thought that he was getting off with
far too light a punishment after the perpetration of such
enormities. For a little boy to fling an inkstand at his
spiritual pastor and master, and shed the blood and scar
the brow of her favourite clergyman!—surely the world
must be coming to an end. Mr. Prendergast and his
old-lady admirers were as proud of his “brow ” as Peter
was of his brass button : being bald-headed, the Rev.
Peter was supposed to have “ such an intellectual
countenance.” Under these circumstances Harry and
his aunt did not find much pleasure in each other’s
society. At last the journey was over, and a fly bearing
Miss Delane and Harry and his boxes was crawling
along a coal-dusty lane, with more of the gritty powder
on the gapped but luxuriant hedges. It had passed a
good many untidy, red-tiled white cottages, and fierce-
eyed, white-teethed, black-faced men and boy's dressed in
coarse, loose, dark flannel, and carrying iron candle-
sconces stuck into their leather cap-bands, and others,
with their faces partially washed, dressed in heavy half-leg
boots, olue stockings, red neckerchiefs, white and black
chimney-pot hats, and velveteen suits with very deep
coat-pockets and very big mother-of-pearl buttons, idling
about with very blunt-nosed dogs slouching at their heels,
or sitting on their haunches, inspecting one another
with sulky curiosity, in the centre of a circle of the
colliers. Presently the driver got down and flung open
a pair of dull-blue wooden gates.
‘ Come on, Tom,” he said to his horse, and from the
outside twilight the fly passed into the deeper dusk of a
great play-ground overshadowed by trees. There was a
luscious scent of limes in the still, heavy air j but it
was so still and hot and heavy that Harry felt half-stifled.


In a corner he could make out the Head-Master’s house
lurking like a detective officer, and next to that stood
the gloomy chapel with just a blink of dull light on one
of its black windows, and then the fly passed the tall
fives-wall lifting its top almost clear out of the darkness,
and a flagged oblong with the lofty School-House and
low dim laundry and bake-house and so on, hemming it
in on three sides, and a squat pump in the middle, round
which uncanny shadows clustered. Next there stood on
the right a poplar towering like a man-o’-war’s mainmast,
and when that had been passed, the fly stopped between
the great School-House and the long, low range of
School-room and class-rooms. Harry could just make
out the tablet in the middle of the School-room’s front
gable, and, as he had dipped here and there into
Lempriere (when he ought to have been learning his
Latin Accidence), it reminded him somehow of Poly-
phemus’s one eye; and above the gable he could see
the school-bell hanging sullenly silent. Everything was
so silent that Harry felt as if he would be glad if even
his cross aunt would speak to him. When the flyman
gave a tug at the pear-shaped bell-pull, the School-House
bell clanged through the great, dark, hushed place as if
it wanted to wake up ghosts. It was a long time before a
servant came; but at last Harry and his aunt were
piloted along black passages into a dimly lighted room in
which stood a great glass-and-brass-fronted mahogany
book-case, with a black bust of Mr. Pitt—looking very
much like a mast-headed nigger—perched on
top, between a stuffed peacock and a glass case full of
some kind of queer creatures which it was not light
enough for Harry to make out. Here he and his aunt
sat for some minutes, listening in silence to the ticking


of the black marble clock on the black marble mantel-
piece. After a time there came down to them a bustling,
neat little woman, not in the best of tempers. Her hus-
band, the Governor and Chaplain, was ill in bed, and
Miss Delane had brought Harry two days before the
time agreed on, and having just got rid of a hundred and
more of troublesome boys, Mrs. Brown did not relish the
idea of having one, warranted to be specially troublesome,
left on her hands during the whole of tho holidays.
When Miss Delane began to expatiate on Harry’s ini-
quities, Mrs. Brown almost pooh-poohed her; answering
tartly that naughty little boys would soon be brought to
their bearings there —that there must have been strange
mismanagement somewhere, or else such a mere child
as that could not have become unruly. Harry half
relished the rap on the knuckles which his aunt got,
and half resented it, because he did not approve of any
stranger venturing to scold his father’s sister, and at the
same time he did not approve of being called a mere
child, and of having his insubordination made light of.
So much fuss had been made about it before that he had
begun to think that he had performed a very dashing
exploit. His heart softened to his aunt, even in con-
sideration of the solemn lectures she had given him—so
different from the contemptuously curt way in which Mrs.
Brown had given him to understand that, kick as he
might, he would easily be broken in at school.
“ You’ll give my love to Katie,” he almost sobbed to his
aunt, when she had given him her good-bye peck of a kiss.
“ A naughty little boy’s love can do good to no one,”
Miss Delane answered; and then Harry’s heart hardened
towards his aunt again. She, too, besides scolding him,
was going to treat him as a mere child.


“ Do you want anything to eat, Delane ? ” asked Mrs.
Brown, when she had come back after seeing Miss
Delane into her fly.
“ No, thank you,” answered Harry, who was making
his supper off his own heart.
“ Well, then, you had better make haste to bed. I’ll
ring for a servant to show you where it is. After this, of
course, you’ll be able to find your way to it without a
candle. 1 expect you, of course, to be in bed by day-
light. But the servant will tell you all about that, and
your meals, and so on. When the Governor gets well
enough, he will set you some lessons. In the meantime,
remember, you are not to go out of bounds, or to get
into any mischief. I hope you will be a better boy than
I hear you have been. Good-night.”
So speaking, Mrs. Brown rang the bell, and whisked
out of the room. The maid who came to show Harry
the way to his room, was softer-hearted than her mistress,
and bade him cheer up, but naturally she too looked
upon him rather in the light of a nuisance. He might
not give much trouble, but still it would be all extra.
Harry’s bed was made in one of fifty bedsteads, arranged in
rows of twenty-five—all empty but his—with the windows
of two empty ushers’ rooms staring at them like unclosed
dead eyes. This was the Little Boys’ Dormitory, and
there was nothing between it and the roof of the many-
floored school-house except a dark garret, which Harry
was told, that very night, was haunted. Now Harry,
though a plucky little fellow, was, like the Athenians, too
superstitious. He had picked up from “ old hand ”
servants in Tasmania, their own and the black fellows’
grisly legends of lonely darkness. Charlotte and Susan
had added to his stock of such grim stories, and now


this school-maid, in expressing her pity for his solitude,
had added another ; of course, to my well-instructed little
readers of the present day all such tales seem “silly
nonsense,” but Harry, you must remember, had not had
your advantages. Therefore, when the servant’s footfalls
going down, down, down, to unknown depths—no
longer fell upon his ear, and the long-wicked candle she
had left upon the floor, flickeringly widened and narrowed
its circle of light, and sent vague shadows in and out
between the nearest bedsteads, whilst those in the dis-
tance were buried in gloom, that seemed to be swelling
and constantly reshaping itself like clouds, Harry, though
he is our little hero, felt rather uncomfortable. However,
he said his prayers, not forgetting absent friends ; popped
the extinguisher on his candle, jumped into bed, and
slept like a top.
Next morning he awoke fresh as a lark, and when he
found that, owing to the Governor’s continued illness, he
was free to do pretty nearly what he liked, he rather
enjoyed his loneliness at first—except at bedtime. But
he soon grew tired of having nothing to do, and nobody
to speak to. He saw nothing of the Governor and his
wife, and only now and then got a passing word or smile
from the women-servants, or the man-of-all-work when he
drove in or out the cows or led the horse to water.
Harry began to feel that he did not belong to any one,
lor his aunt never wrote to him, and tried to keep Katie
from writing to him. I need not tell you that Katie was
very indignant when she found that her darling brother
had been sent off in disgrace to spend his holidays at
school without their having been allowed to see each
other even for an hour. She was half inclined to be very
angry with little Peter Prendergast as well as his father


until Charlotte told her about the peg-top, and then
Katie made a special pet of little Peter. Katie did not
know Harry’s exact address at first, nor Charlotte either ;
so when Miss Delane had refused to direct her letters to
him, Katie asked Mrs. Prendergast to do so. But
Mrs. Prendergast said it would be wrong. Katie said
it was only because she was such a coward that she
was afraid of that cowardly husband of hers, and would
not have gone on liking her, had it not been for the little
cake which Mrs. Prendergast had made for Harry. At
last, at her wits’ end, Katie addressed a letter,
“ Master Harry Delane,
West of England.”
I am very sorry to say that it did not find him, since
Harry, as I have told you, soon began to feel very lonely.
In the dining hall he found his meals waiting for him,
like the meals in fairy stories —except that his were
neither rich nor rare, either in themselves or in what they
were served in. Of course Harry, in spite of his loneli-
ness, had a healthy appetite, and did not often neglect
his meals, but when he did, if he came back hungry at last
for dinner, he found it cold, or just cleared away for his
supper of milk and bread. In spite of his hunger
Harry’s were dreary meals. He took them at the end
of a long table covered with forms laid upon their backs,
and commanding a prospect of similar tables similarly
covered, a black stove in the middle of the room, and a
life-size portrait of the Founder of the School, in gown
and bands, with long, curly white hair cascading over his
shoulders, and a red Bible in his hand, whose ever-
following eyes seemed to Harr) 7 to grudge him every bit


he ate, every drop he drank, and to reproach him for
everything he did or thought. Between meals Harry
wandered about, doing mischief, of course, through want
of something better to do, trying to amuse himself by
“ making up ” histories in which he played the hero’s
part, with intervals of waking up to real life, for days
together; but on the whole he felt, in schoolboy phrase,
a very lonely little beggar, as he wandered about in the
School-House garden, where he was pelted with stones
by colliers passing through the black-blotched meadows
outside the hedge, and in the great playground, into
which bands of collier-lads made forays, through whom
Harry had to fight his way as they tried to cut him off
from the House with shouts of “gie oi zhut knoife or
strolled through the long schoolroom, longing for the time
when the unwound-up clock would begin to tick again
and masters’ desks and boys’ forms be occupied once
more; or clambered through a side window into the
gloomy chapel, and wondered which would be his seat
when the boys came back. Mrs. Brown had told him
not to go out of bounds, but as he had not given his
word that he would not, and could not see that he was
bound to obey Mrs. Brown, Harry often did go out of
bounds. In spite of coal-dust and untidiness, some of
the country round about was very green and pleasant,
and he felt less as if he would choke outside the play-
ground wall. When he fell in with collier-lads he had to
flee from them or fight his way through them, but so he
often had in the play-ground; and the countrywomen,
picking peas in their little appletree-shaded gardens, or
riding to market with their eggs, dressed in blue, caped
great-coats, and bow-decked hats, like those in old-
fashioned pictures of the Seasons, had always a cheery


word for Charlotte’s “bonnie boy.” They pitied the jolly
little fellow trotting about the place all by himself, while
other boys were enjoying themselves at home. Some-
body else took pity on him. The widow of a brother-
officer of his father’s, who lived a few miles from the
school, happened to hear how Harry had been left
there. Her husband and Captain Delane had been
bosom-friends, and she at once drove over to the school
and carried off Harry to spend the remnant of his
holidays at her house. Mrs. M'Grath was very indignant
with Miss Delane in her talk with Mrs. Brown, and Mrs.
Brown, thereupon, after clearing her conscience as the
Governor’s wife by laying down general rules as to the
way in which unruly little boys should be treated,
admitted that, after all, she had not seen anything so
very bad in Harry. It would have been strange if she
had, since she had scarcely set eyes on him from the
time his aunt left him to her care. It was a very short
time Harry had left to spend with Mrs. M'Grath, but
they were very jolly days. She let him drive her home,
and afterwards he had the cob to ride whenever he liked.
She had a big St. Bernard’s dog, and pigeons, and
poultry, and tame pheasants to make friends with.
There was a bit of sandy land in her tiny grounds
sloping down to the river in which there were rabbits,
and the man-servant let Harry have his old gun to pop
away with at them ; and the maid-servants made a pet of
him, and Mrs. M'Grath was always praising his father, and
then saying that Harry was the very image of him. So
Harry had altogether a very good time, as Americans
say, at Mrs. M'Grath’s. She tried to prevail upon Miss
Delane to let Katie come and spend it with him, but
this Miss Delane haughtily refused to do ; intimating at


the same time that she thought that Mrs. M'Grath had
taken a great liberty in inviting Harry to her house, and
that Mrs. Brown had been guilty of a great dereliction of
duty in allowing him to accept the invitation.
Ah, well, said Mrs. M‘Grath laughing, when she
had read the letter, “we won’t trouble ourselves about
the poor old lady, Harry, dear. It’s one of the mysteries
how she can be own sister to her own brother, that you
are the image of, my darling. I wish I could ask you
again at Michaelmas, and at Christmas, too, for your
aunt, more shame to her, says that she does not mean to
have you home then. But I’m going abroad, almost
directly. However, I’ll write to you, and you must write
to me, Harry—regularly, mind.”
Mrs. M Grath took Harry back to school a day or two
after time, and Harry enjoyed the dash he cut when he
drove into the playground, dotted all over with shouting
boys, instead of being the silent solitude he remembered
it, with a handsome, kind lady, smiling proudly at him,
seated by his side.


gfrfiigaHggl
CHAPTER IV.
SCHOOL EXPERIENCES.
aARRY was the youngest of the boys at
school, and instead of “ fagging,” which is
really a protection to a little boy, the
notion prevailed there that any elder boy
might “cock over” any younger boy, and that it was
“ saucy ' on the part of the younger boy to resist such
cocking-over; and since Harry had no notion of being
ordered and knocked about without resistance, he soon
got into \ ery hot water. Some of the boys, of course,
were nice fellows, who would not let him be put upon, if
they happened to see any one trying to do so ; but even
these contented themselves with only shamming to strike
with their knotted and stone-loaded handkerchiefs, when
for some breach of non scripta schoolboy lex , Harry was
condemned to “run the gauntlet.” A good many of the
“big fellows” were very cowardly bullies—very shy of
fighting with one another, but very fond of knocking
little boys about by daylight, and of making “bolstering”
invasions oi their bedroom, armed with pillows, whose
cases also held fives-bats, rulers, and Ainsworth’s Latin


Dictionaries. The Governor, who had recovered his
health, and not lost much of his flesh when Harry
went back to school, was a very fat man, lazily good-
natured, after a fashion, but easily irritated. He would
pull off his slipper, and shy it at a boy whom he thought
inattentive at family prayers, and if he saw any one fling-
ing stones at the horse-chestnut trees in the playground
—to bring down the nuts to play at “ conquerors ” with
—“ Daddy,” as the Governor was called by those he
professed to govern, used to fuss and flounder like a
wounded whale. Harry was called up to have his ears
boxed for having committed this dire offence, in Daddy’s
eyes. But when Hairy saw the Governor’s plump paw
in the paulopost-future of boxing, he ducked, and Daddy
spun round like a black humming-top. The old
gentleman was, naturally, indignant when he had stagger-
ingly recovered his balance. He knew that his young
subjects made fun of him —talked about walking round
him to get an appetite, called his bulging waistcoat Mont
Noir, and so on. The Head-Master was a wiry, dark,
tall man, who had been born in Gibraltar, and therefore
was nicknamed “Spanish Gipsy.” He, too, was rather
fond of boxing ears, and of laying boys across the desk,
with screwed up nether clothes. But since he always
seemed to have some reason, unlike the Governor and
the other masters, for his thrashings, the Head-Master
was only feared, not disliked. The pluck he showed
collier-wards, made him a kind of favourite with the boys.
The colliers were very fond of appropriating any balls
that went over the playground walls. If the robbers
were only hobby-de-hoys, the big schoolboys made a rush
and recovered the stolen property; but sometimes a
grown-up collier would pocket the lost ball. Then, as


the other masters were good for nothing in the fighting
way, the boys used to go to the Head-Master’s house,
where he sat in the midst of books on the walls and
the floor of his study, and a litter of scientific apparatus,
and report their grievance. He always pretended to be
annoyed at being disturbed in his pursuits, but really
relished the prospect of a row. The colliers stood in
fear of the “ Black Devil,” as they called him. When
they had attacked him en masse in dark lanes, his lean,
long sinewy arms had knocked them over like nine pins.
So when he came out sauntering in his dressing-gown
and slippers, the colliers beat a retreat from the play-
ground gates, and huddled together about the stile of a
meadow opposite. The “Black Devil” would quietly
walk after them, and collaring the one accused of steal-
ing the ball, fling the hulking fellow’ across his knee like
a child, and search his capacious pockets. If the ball
could not be found, he coolly took off the hats of as
many of the colliers as he could reach, and beckoned to
one of the biggest of the boys to come and carry them
off to the school in a pile, one on the top of another,
old-clothes-man fashion—as hostages for the return of
the missing property. It w’as almost always restored,
and it was great fun to the boys to see the colliers come
slinking up to the Head-Master’s house for their hats,
looking sulky and shame-faced, but yet not quite able to
keep from grinning.
dhe other masters w r ere known as “ Skinner,” “ Bear,”
“Crane,” “ Dumpty,” “Horse,” and “Pig.” Skinner
had a knack of taking the skin off wdth his lithe doubling
cane ; Bear w’as always growling; Crane had long legs, a
-eng neck and a long nose, and was always pouncing on
plump small boys ; Dumpty had no neck, and was looked


upon as almost beneath contempt, because he was only
writing-master; but if he could not construe, he could use
his fists spitefully enough on the heads of the saucy
youngsters who took their Caesar and Virgil up to him,
shamming to ask for help ; “ Horse ” and “ Pig ” were
the little boys’ ushers. Ido not know why Horse was so
called. Harry asked, but could only learn that it was
because the usher was a beast, and kept on playing the
flute in his room at bed-time “ when a fellow wants to go
to sleep ” —but that does not seem quite a satisfactory
explanation, does it ? Pig was a greedy, dirty pig ; afraid
of the big fellows, but very fond of boxing the ears of the
little ones with a clothes-brush in each hand. Altogether,
o •
Harry thought that he might have fallen in with a nicer
set both of masters and boys. He was a bit of a favourite,
as I have said, with a few of the nicer of the big fellows,
and he soon became a kind of hero amongst the younger
ones nearest him in age; but, owing to the bad tone of
the school, the bulk of the boys persecuted him because
he would not submit as quietly as other little chaps to
tyranny —was even “cocky” enough to take the part
sometimes of little chaps older than himself against their
tyrannising seniors. The only people about the place
who were really kind to Harry, were the young wardrobe
woman, and the old collier’s wife who was licensed to sell
fruit and sweet-stuff in the play-ground, and at whose
little shop, just outside the play-ground gates, the boys
bought forbidden gunpowder, and winked-at pats of butter,
red-herrings and so on. His chief comfort was hearing
from Katie, but her letters seemed to him to have had
the bloom taken off through having been opened and
previously read by Daddy. Harry was supposed only to
write monthly letters to his aunt, composed for him by


the school authorities, and, therefore, very complimentary
to them. But he sent Katie a very different account of
them in the private correspondence he managed to keep
up with her in spite of aunt and Governor; and Katie,
not knowing at first that her letters were read by any one
besides her brother, had been so uncomplimentary in her
remarks on the school generally that Harry had got into
deeper disgrace, and been threatened with the stoppage
of his sister’s letters. The leaves had fallen from the
play-ground trees, and been gathered and heaped around
their roots into red and brown and yellow “ squats ” by
gangs of small boys for the big fellows. Frost had come,
and the big fellows in the bitter evenings monopolised the
schoolroom fires, only admitting little chaps inside their
circles to be roasted and then rubbed down. The young-
sters had to serve as warming-pans to their seniors’ beds,
and to sit on their toes in chapel. But at last the examina-
tion was over, and breaking up, and Harry began to feel for
the first time cosy at school, although he was to spend his
Christmas holidays there, far away from Katie, and still
farther from his papa. The bullies were all gone. The
two or three boys condemned, like himself, to spend their
Christmas at school, were little chaps who thought Harry
a very fine fellow, and the kind wardrobe-woman who had
charge of them made them as cosy as she possibly could
in the workroom. It was not a luxuriously furnished
chamber, but still, after the bare cold schoolroom, it
seemed like a palace to the little fellows as they snuggled
round the fire, none daring to make them afraid. The
wardrobe-woman gave them treats, and as they had had
hampers sent them, they treated her and one another.
1 here was no necessity now for bedroom-suppers on the
sly. A few days after breaking-up, the Governor and his


wife went to spend a short time with a friend. It was
quite a sight to see Daddy drive out. He drove what
used to be called a Coburg—a very substantial one,
drawn by a very stout horse. Strong as both steed and
vehicle were, however, the horse staggered and the Coburg
reeled, when plump Daddy clambered to his seat. If he
had not sat just in the middle, he would have capsized
the Coburg. Little Mrs. Brown seated by her husband
looked like a sparrow perched beside a dodo, and the
colliers used to make fun of them when they took their
drives abroad together. The man-servant went with
them on this afternoon to bring back the Coburg next
day. The Head-Master was away, but was expected
back that night. But this the colliers did not know-
They thought that the little boys were the only male folks
left on the premises, and three or four of them, who were
very black sheep in character as well as skin, resolved to
break into the School-house that night.
O
Harry was lying awake when he fancied that he heard
a grating sound. Looking out of one of the bejroom
windows, he could just make out by the clouded light of
the moon two or three dark moving objects near one of
the dining-hall windows. For a moment the moon shone
out brightly, and he saw men. They raised the window
and dropt one after another into the dining-hall. Harry
went to the top of the stairs to listen, and presently heard
screams coming from the wardrobe-keeper’s room.
Catching up a full water-jug, he hurried down to the
rescue. He dashed the water at the man with whom
she was struggling, flung the jug at the head of another
of the villains, and then before they had recovered from
their surprise, rushed off and began to ring the great
School-house bell with all his might. It had not long


startled the stillness of the night before a horse could be
heard coming up to the house at a mad gallop. The
moon had come out again, when one of the burglars
looked out. “It’s the Black Devil come back,” he
growled with a disappointed oath, and all three hurried
back to the open window below, and giving the Head-
Master the slip in the playground, escaped for the time,
vowing vengeance on him and Harry.


CHAPTER V,
RUNNING AWAY.
I TER the house-breaking adventure, the ward-
robe woman and the little boys thought more
of Harr) r than ever, and the Head-Master be-
gan to take notice of him. When he drove
about to the police-station and so on, making inquiries
as to the burglars, he used to take Harry with him in the
gig. In this way the guilty colliers came to know Harry
very well, and vowed that they would settle him if they
ever caught him outside the play-ground walls by himself.
After the holidays, too, the boys who had persecuted
him before persecuted him worse than ever, the few big
boys who had taken his part having left; and the masters
were no kinder to him than before, except the Head-
Master, who had very little to do with the little chaps,
and the wardrobe-woman had no chance of petting
Harry, as she had done during the holidays.
At last Harry thought that he could bear school life
no longer. He determined to run away. He saved up
some bread and cheese and hid it in his clothes-box,
together with a Latin Grammar , and Delectus , and Ellis’s


Exercises , which he meant to sell to supplement his
pocket-money, reduced by his free-handedness to a single
penny. The books he smuggled up to bed with him, and
his cap also, the night before he ran away. When all
the little chaps were supposed to be asleep, and the
usher on duty had gone down to supper, Harry had a
task to get through which tried his courage. He wished
to run away in his best clothes, and they were kept in
the haunted garret overhead. Harry had been up there
by daylight —always dim up there —with companions, and
had been shown cloven foot-marks in the floor. The
thought of what he might see there after dark, made his
heart go pit-a-pat. He had to grope his way to the very
end of the long room to get his bundle. Just as he
reached it, he saw two round bright eyes staring at him
out of the darkness —the next minute a wing brushed
against his face. The touch of the warm feathers cured
him of his fright. He had sense enough to reason then,
that it must be an owl that had got in through the sky-
light having been left open. Nevertheless, he hurried out
of the garret as fast as he could without making a noise
that might have betrayed him.
When he awoke the next morning, a winter moon was
shining into the room, making slanting windows on the
floor, and up-and-down ones on the tumbled beds.
Harry could tell from the regular snores of his room-
mates, that he had not overslept himself. Still, he
dressed himself in haste, and I am afraid rather hurried
over his prayers. Then he stole on tip-toe out of the
room, and down the great stone staircase, holding his
breath when he passed a bedroom door. Daddy’s snores
could be heard within one just like those strange noises
one hears when walking through Regent’s Park near the


Zoological Gardens. Harry groped his way to his pigeon-
hole in the shoe-room, slipped on his shoes, undid the
swing-bar of the great front door, and began to try to
turn, with both his hands and all his might, the huge
key in the great lock—as big as a good-sized box. He
had to stop once or twice to take breath, but the tick-
tick, which he could hear behind him, coming through
the darkness of the close-shuttered dining-room, hurried
him on, and at last the great iron-sheathed door slowly
swung upon its hinges, and the frosty air blew in refresh-
ingly upon Harry’s face and hands, which he had not had
time to wash. Opposite, with the moonlight shining on
the rime that silvered its rust, hung the school-room
bell, which in an hour or two would be tolling-in his
mates to another dreary day of drudgery, but where would
he be then ? Over the hills and far away. Like a
greyhound he bounded over the black quaint shadows
with which the leafless trees barred the moonlit play-
ground. Quaintest was that cast by the boarded-up>
blasted Founder’s Sycamore. One pair of its arms
seemed held up in astonishment at his audacity, and
another to be stretched out to stop him.
In a couple of minutes he was outside the playground
walls, and in his delight at being free, he could not help
banging the play-ground gate behind him ; but as the
moon went down, and red and yellow lights began to
blink in the windows of the cottages he passed, and now
and then he heard a gruff voice within, he remembered
that he was passing through the colliers’ country, and
that it might fare badly with him if any of his enemies
got hold of him. Once, as he was trotting along the still
dark, hard-frozen road, he heard heavy footsteps coming
towards him. There was a churchyard close by, with an


old church rising dim in the middle, and old dim tomb-
stones looking down into the road over the churchyard-
wall like a rank of ghosts. Harry climbed up into the
churchyard, and hid behind one of the tombstones until
the men whom he had heard had passed. They were
colliers—amongst them the very man at whom Harry had
thrown the water-jug, and he was threatening all kinds
of vengeance against the “Black Devil” and the “little
devil,” as he called Harr}’, if he ever got a chance of
serving them out in the dark. For one thing, he vowed
u ...
that he would carry Harry down into the pit with him,
and make him slave there for him before he broke his
neck ; for another, that he would pitch the Head-Master
down a very deep, disused, flooded pit near the school.
Its bank had been fenced in and had become overgrown
with nettles and briars ; but Harry had climbed up it,
and had peeped between the rotten fungus-grown planks
with which the pit’s mouth was boarded over, down the
dark shaft which seemed to go down, down, down to the
very’ centre of the earth. He had dropped pebbles down
and had held his breath whilst he listened for the far-off
splash which did not come until ever so long afterwards.
That shaft seemed to Harry the most dismal place
in the whole world, and the thought that there could
be any one in the whole world fiendish enough to wish
to throw anyone down it, and other people fiendish
enough to say “ sarve him right,” and chuckle over
the threat as if they had heard a good joke, made Harry
shudder.
He took care to let the colliers get well on their way
before he came out from his hiding-place. By-and-by
the sun came out, and he went on his way in raised
spirits. As he was crossing a tramway which ran athwart


his road where it reached the outskirts of the great
seaport for which he was bound (of course, he was running
away to go to sea), a collier seated on a coal-truck flung a
good-sized knob of coal at him ; but this the collier did,
not out of any special spite against Harry, whom he did
not know from Adam, but just as he would have thrown
it at almost any one just then. The cold had put him
into a bad temper, and a minute before, as the truck was
coming to a standstill, he had been obliged to jump off
and give it a shove with his numbed fingers, which before
he had kept snuggled under his arm-pits.
There was a frost-fog in the streets of the great city
when Harry reached it, and he thought that its houses
looked a good deal more mean and dingy than might
have been expected in so rich a place; and the servant-
girls beating mats, the blue-nosed early clerks hurrying to
business, the shopmen taking down shutters, the artisans
lounging, smoking, to their work, the frozen-out mechanics
who had got no work to do, the shivering dock-labourers
hanging about in crowds on the look-out for jobs, and so
on, and so on, did not seem to him a very cheerful set of
people. Seeing a little knot of them about a coffee-stall,
Harry sidled his way up to it and had a smoking-hot cup.
This raised his hopes so, that, being very hungry, he ate
almost all his bread and cheese for his first breakfast.
His books he thought would bring a good deal more than
enough to buy him a dinner, and before nightfall, no
doubt, he would have obtained a ship, and be snug in
his own little cabin —which Harry fancied would be, not
quite so cosy, but something like the state-room in which
he had slept on his voyage to England.
In the meantime there was no hurry—he would wander
about and look at the place. He walked until he was


tired and hungry again, out to a pretty place, very
different from the dirty city, where the river ran between
a wood and high rocks. Still it was the busy parts in
which the ships were, the Floating Harbour and so on,
that chiefly interested him. He came back to the city
and found a low, long narrow shop to which you had to
go down by steps, with books on shelves and in boxes in
front of it, books piled on the pavement, books in the
window (at least where most shops have windows), books
on the walls, and books on the floor inside. Harry
began to fear that the old man who was sitting within
reading, and yet keeping his eyes on every one who
stopped in front of his shop, must have too many books
already to want any more. However, it occurred to him
that as the old man’s books were so very, very old, he
might like to buy some newer. Harry had not had his
long enough in use to take all the fresh gloss off them.
So he went down into the low shop which felt pleasantly
warm, after the cold air without, and asked the old man
what he would give for the Ellis's Exercises , &x. The
old fellow glanced up from his book at Harry’s books,
growled, “ Can’t be buyer and seller both—name your
price,” and then went on reading.
“ Perhaps, sir, you’ll give me a shilling apiece. They
cost a good deal more than that—here it is marked inside
the covers—but of course I don’t expect as much as that,
because I have used them a little,” said Harr) 7 .
“ Threepence for the lot —only as a favour—’tain't
exactly right to buy little boys’ school-books —but then,
there, you see —l used to run away myself,” growled the
old man, glancing up very slyly, and immediately after-
wards went on reading as before.
Harry was so alarmed by the hint about running away,


that he took the threepence, and hurrying to the nearest
pastry-cook’s, bought a sausage-roll and a penny bun, of
which he made his dinner. Then he wandered along the
quays, getting hold of any one he could belonging to the
vessels, and begging them to take him as cabin-boy. He
was laughed at, sworn at, and still more unceremoniously
treated for his pains. In the olden days of that port, he
would have been kidnapped and carried as a little white
slave to the American plantations ; even now there may
be skippers who would not hesitate to appropriate a
likely little sea-struck fellow as a personal drudge if they
thought that they could do so with impunity, but Harry
did not look the kind of little boy who could be taken
without a fuss being made about it. The only captain
that spoke kindly to him was a mahogany-faced old
fellow in a pea-jacket and a cap with a greasy gilt band.
He was waiting for a boat that a big lad, standing up and
swaying from side to side, was sculling from a ship that
lay in the stream. Harry got up to the old man just as
the boat touched the bank.
“ you please, sir, I want to go to sea,” said Harry.
“ Will you take me?”
The hobby-de-hoy in the boat looked round and gave a
monkey-grin ; but the old skipper, smiling good-naturedly,
said :
“ Cut back to school, my little man, as fast as you cut
away from it. It’s a dog’s life is a sailor’s—a boy’s life in
a ship is a doggeder. You’d wish yourself ashore before
you’d been an hour aboard. You cut away back to school,
my lad, if you hain’t got a home nigh at hand to go to.
I’d see you did go to one or other of ’em, if I’d only a
moment to spare. I’ve had little boys of my own, and
your ma would thank me, I know But there, Iha in't a


moment to spare. You be a sensible little kid, and mind
what I say.”
The skipper stepped into his boat, and discouraged
Harry began to wish that he had a home to go to.
Evening would soon close in, and where was he to sleep ?
If only Mrs. M'Grath were in England! He did not
know exactly in what direction her house lay, but he knew'
that it could not be many miles away, and he had an
English tongue in his head. Suddenly it occurred to him
that, although Mrs. M'Grath was out of England, she had
probably left one or more of the servants, who had been
so kind to him, in charge of her house. Accordingly he
made his inquiries, and started on his new journey. The
village in which Mrs. McGrath’s house stood was farther
off than he had been told, and, having to travel by cross-
country roads, he more than once lost his way, especially
after dark, which soon set in. He had a weary, dreary,
cold, foot-sore walk between dry-stone walls and leafless
hedges, through which lonely winds, wandering over wide
fields bare of everything but deep shadow', whistled
dismally. He had begun to think that he had not only
lost his w T ay again, but that he might wander on all night
—if the cold did not kill him—without finding any one to
set him right, when a blink of the moon, which had just
risen, fell on a familiar-looking church. The moon came
out brighter, and he instantly recognised it—he had
reached the village he w'anted. When he went through
the village street, the moon had gone in behind the clouds
again, and not a light w'as to be seen in any of the
cottage-windows or even at the inn ; but Harry knew'
where he w'as now'. He w'alked through the village to
the white gate of Mrs. M'Grath’s little grounds just
outside the village street. In trying whether the gate


was locked he shook it, and instantly the St. Bernard’s
dog began to give his deep bay, and almost before Harry
had clambered over the great gate, the dog had galloped
down the carriage -drive, and seized him by the collar.
Harry was knocked down by the shock, but as soon as
he had recovered himself enough to say, “ What, don’t
you know me. Monk, old fellow ?” the dog let go, licked
his face, and allowed him to rise. As they were going up
the drive, Stephen the man-servant came outside, half-
dressed, with his gun in one hand, and a lantern in the
other, shouting, “ Shool him—stick to him, Monk—hold
him, good dog !” Stephen and his wife, the cook, were the
servants left in charge, and since the house stood some
distance back from the high road, and there had been
several attempts at housebreaking in the neighbourhood
recently, they felt rather anxious after nightfall. Both of
them were utterly astounded when Harry walked up to
the front-door on the best of terms with Monk. The
kitchen fire had not gone out, and Mrs. Stephen soon
blew and fed it up into a roaring blaze, put on the kettle
and was frying eggs and bacon, whilst Stephen was set to
make buttered toast, and get out cups and saucers.
Harr)- basking before the great fire greatly enjoyed his
late supper or very early breakfast, and Stephen and his
wife ate and drank almost as heartily as he did. When
the cosy meal was over, Harry told them about his
encounter with the burglars, and all his other adventures,
to which the good couple listened with an admiring
attention and an outspoken denunciation of all and sundry
who had been unkind to him, which was, of course, very
agreeable to Harry.
After a long chat, Mrs. Stephen said,
“ But there, we’re letting you talk when you must be


fit to die of tiredness, poor dear. How you manage to
keep your eyes open is a mystery to me.”
So Mrs. Stephen filled the warming-pan with hot coals,
and went up and warmed Harry’s bed, and he was
scarcely into it before he was asleep, as sound and as
snug as a dormouse.
Meantime Mr. and Mrs. Stephen sat before the fire,
before they went to bed, consulting anxiously as to what
they were to do with Harry. They did not like to force
him back to school, but what were they to do? If their
mistress had been at home, she, of course, could have
acted as she pleased. It was no use lending him money
to take him to his aunt’s, since she would have at once
hurried him back to school with ignominy. And they
could not let him go wandering about the country, even
if it had not been winter, like a friendless little beggar-
boy. Accordingly they determined to make a prisoner of
him in a friendly way, and after a day’s rest Stephen was
to take him back to school.
“ I’ll lock his bedroom door,” said Mrs. Stephen.
“ If you do, you’d better bring his clothes away, too,”
answered her husband. “If he was to wake in the night
and find his door locked, he’d climb out of the window
—he’s that high-spirited—if he’d anything to put on.”
“ Why, then, of course, there won’t be no need to lock
his door, if I bring his clothes away,” rejoined logical
Mrs. Stephen.
When she had tucked Harry in, she made a clean
sweep of his apparel and carried it off to her own room.
Hany' slept very late next day. He did not think
anything of the disappearance of his clothes, supposing
that they had been carried off to be brushed—and so
they had been thoroughly, when they were brought back


to him, and his shoes shone as the school-blacker had
never polished them. Mrs. Stephen, moreover, had got
him a clean shirt and pair of socks ; so that when he sat
down to an ad libitum breakfast of good things—cream-
ingand sugaring hiscoffee himself, carvinghis hamhimself,
spreading his butter and marmalade himself, etc., etc., —
with his slippered feet on the bright steel fender of a
cosily carpeted room hung with pretty pictures—he felt
a very different being from the persecuted schoolboy he
had been two days before ; the tired, travel-stained little
vagrant he had been the night before. He was at first
hotly opposed to the notion of going back to school, but
ere long was talked over to it. The recollection of his
lack of success amongst shipmasters the dav before had
a good deal to do with this. Accordingly he consented
to return to school for the present, with the intention of
maturing his plans better for his next running-away.
He only begged to be allowed to stay two full days in
the snug quarters he had stumbled upon, and Mrs.
Stephen and her husband, who, of course, petted the
little fellow a great deal too much, took upon themselves
the responsibility of letting him do so.
On the third morning, snugly wrapped up, he took his
place on the driving-seat behind the cob, with a basket
full of Mrs. Stephen’s good things behind his feet, and
Stephen in his livery great-coat beside him, and drove
himself back to school c making a quasi-triumphal entry
into the playground such as a professedly repentant little
runaway schoolboy surely never made before,


CHAPTER VI,
A SURPRISE.
enlarged to the best of his ability
on the voluntary nature of Harry’s return, but
Stephen’s eloquence did not go for much,
a and Mrs. Brown’s sharp eye falling upon it,
the basket of good things was instantly confiscated. More-
over, after having been solemnly lectured in the hall by
the Governor, and formally flogged in school by the
Head-Master, Harry was condemned to a fortnight’s
solitary confinement on bread and water, in a dreary little
barred room, looking out on a high brick wall, and a
narrow flagged passage, along which no one passed,—a
room without a book in it or anything he could turn into
a plaything. Harry grew so utterly weary of having
nothing to do, that he longed to be back again amongst his
former persecutors. The Grossest of the servants had
been chosen to make his bed, bring him his bread and
water, and periodically appear, with a tiny poker in her
hand, to attend to his mite of a fire, which was caged like
the top of the Monument; and she strictly obeyed her
orders not to speak to him. The only breaks in the


So THE ADVENTURES OF HARRY DELANE.
monotony of his existence, were long letters from his Aunt
Delane, reminding him of the lectures which he used to
receive from her when a prisoner at her house.
At last, he was released, and he felt so pleased to be
able to ramble about the playground again, that he
wondered how it was that he had ever wanted to run
away from it. At first it appeared improbable that
he would ever have a chance of running away from
it again. He was never allowed to go out of bounds
openly, and a strict watch was kept to see that he did not
break bounds on the sly. All his pocket-money to the end
of the half-year, was confiscated to pay for a new Delectus,
etc., in the room of those which he had sold. The Head-
Master was annoyed at his having run away, and no longer
showed him the trifling marks of favour which he had
begun to show after the house-breaking affair. The
Governor lifted up his eyes and hands over Harry as if he
had been a hoary sinner of eighty, and Mrs. Brown owned
that his aunt had, after all, been right in calling him a
thoroughly bad boy. Even the kind wardrobe-woman
was not so kind as before, or was afraid to seem so. The
undermasters also lost no opportunity of showing Harry
that he was in disgrace, but at first they did not cane
him and box his ears quite so often as before. The
Head-Master had made inquiries, and had let his opinion
be seen that Harry had been treated with undue severity.
Partly for the same reason, and partly because they had
begun m a modified way to look, like the little boys,
upon Harry as a bit of a hero whom it might not be safe
to bully, the tyrants amongst the big fellows at first let
Harry alone. 7 o that extent, no more, had he benefited
by his running away, and things soon became very much
as were before. However, Harry was getting hard-


ened to unkindness, and tried to get as much fun as he
could out of his life. Drubbings must needs come, like
storms, but then like storms they would also pass away.
There was no good to be got from always looking out
for squalls. Besides, Mrs. Stephen had promised to
write to her mistress and tell her about his running away,
and why he ran away, and Harry felt sure that as soon
as Mrs. M'Grath got to hear all, she would advise his
father to put him to a better school. week
was bringing him nearer to the midsummer holidays and
Kate. He knew that he would not have to pass the
vacation at school, because Mrs. Brown had declared
that for no consideration would she again take the re-
sponsibility of such a young plague during the holidays,
and he was convinced that even if his aunt could be cruel
enough to wish to keep him apart from his sister for
more than a year, Mrs. M'Grath would somehow shame
her out of doing so.
He watched the red buds bursting on the playground
trees, and the light-yellow leaves shaking out their
rumples and deepening into virgin green ; and the birds
coming back to the trees, and the garden-hedges sprink-
led with “bread and cheese,"’ and blossom hiding the
black branches of the fruit trees in the garden, and
black-thorn and white-thorn snowing the mound of the
old coal-pit, and buttercups scattered like guineas over
the meadows round, in spite of their cinder-paths, and
wall-flowers blooming under the little apple-trees that
had almost buried the red roofs of the white cottages
within sight in pink and white, and daffodils, purple flags,
lilac, laburnum, and at last roses coming out in the great
School-house garden, more learnedly than he had
watched buds and birds, and leaves, and flowers, the year


before—his first spring in England ; and more lovingly,
because he was longing to get away from school, even
more than he had longed to get away from Prendergast’s.
There were still a few more notches to be cut off his
stick calendar, a few more squares to be blotted out on his
card-board one— i.e., some four or five days and nights of
the school-half had still to be got through (which, because
they were the last, seemed to lengthen themselves out
into a month) when Harry received a startling surprise.
Afternoon school was over, and Harry was engaged in
one of those listless games which fill up the leisure of
the last few days at school, when the great blue gates
opened and a fly drove up to the School-house. Harry,
like the other boys whom it passed, looked into it, and
saw a light-haired, blue-eyed, merry-faced young clergy-
man, but Harry knew nothing about him; so merely
thinking what a much nicer parson he seemed than
Daddy or Mr. Prendergast, Harry went on with his
game. In about a quarter of an hour’s time, however, a
shout was raised for Delane, and he received orders to
go up into the workroom and titivate himself, and then
descend into the Governor’s parlour, the grim room in
which Mrs. Brown had first received him. The ward-
robe-woman who combed and brushed his curly hair into
something less like a marsh colt’s mane than it had been
five minutes before, could not tell him why he was
wanted, and he entered the parlour in a bit of a twitter.
There he found the Governor and his wife, and the
pleasant-looking young clergyman, to whom he was
introduced as Mr. Summers.
“ This gentleman,” said Daddy, “is about to take for
a time the duties of Mr. Prendergast, your former tutor,
from whom you brought, I regret to say, no good char-


acter: Mr. Prendergast is ill, and needs repose. Your
aunt has thought that it would be well that you should
travel home under Mr. Summers’s care, since she will
not be able to come for you when the school breaks up.
I have explained to Mr. Summers that you are not a boy
in any degree entitled to the indulgence of an extended
vacation, and that had not you of late become a little
more amenable to discipline, I should certainly have
been compelled to refuse Miss Delane’s request, but
under the circumstances I have consented that you
should accompany Mr. Summers. I trust you will not
abuse my forbearing kindness, and that, should we re-
ceive you again, you will endeavour to redeem your
character. Your conscience will tell you that it is
nothing to be proud of during the twelve months you
have been with us. My dear, will you have the good-
ness to give the necessary directions to Matilda ? ”
Then Mrs. Brown carried off Harry and gave her
orders to the wardrobe-woman, and another long lecture
to him. When she had done and was gone, Matilda,
who had become as kind to Harry as ever, and had
grown bold because she was not coming back after the
holidays, but going away to be married, kissed Harry 7 ,
and told him that she was glad that he was going to
have a treat after the shameful way in which he had been
put upon, and that he must be sure never to forget her.
His packing did not take long. Before the boys were
rung in to evening school Harry 7 was riding out of the
playground side by side with Mr. Summers.
They slept at a nice inn in the port where Harry had
wandered about looking out for a cabin-boy’s place. He
told Mr. Summers his adventures, and though Mr.
Summers pretended to give a little lecture, he could not


help smiling, and then he told Harry that he was not
going to live at the Rectory or at Mr. Prendergast’s, but
m lodgings, and invited Harry to come and see him as
often as he liked. “ I won’t bother you with lessons,”
Mr. Summers said. “ I expect you have had enough of
them for awhile.”
Next morning they were whisked by the Great West-
ern to London, and crawled by the Great Eastern to
Dulchester, where Mr. Summers took the smartest cab
he could find at the station—quite like a private
brougham, so that Harry entered the village in a
manner much more agreeable to his notion of dignity
than the way he had been driven into it on the former
occasion.
hen the cab passed Mr. Prendergast’s, little Peter,
since his father was gone, ventured to shout “ Hooray ! ”
and then ran in to tell his mother and sisters that Harry
had come back. Charlotte and Susan were both stand-
ing at Miss Delane’s gate to welcome Harry, but Kate,
i\ith her golden hair flying in the wind, came bounding
o\er the little moat-bridge like a fawn, and flung her
arms around Harry’s neck almost before he got to the
ground. And so, for the present, we will leave brother
and sister, kissing each other.


CHAPTER VII.
SUMMER HOLIDAYS.
S DELANE received her nephew very
stiffly, but that did not trouble him greatly ;
since on the very day after his
return from school, his aunt was unexpect-
edly called up to London on business which kept her
away from home for more than half of the holidays. The
cat being away from Moat Cottage and also from Mr.
Prendergast’s house, the mice in both houses had a great
deal of unusual play, separately and together. Good-
natured Charlotte did her best to spoil, as the phrase
goes—although I sometimes doubt whether kindness
really does spoil any one, unless the kind person be
downright silly, or the recipient of the kindness “ a bad
sort,” who would have gone wrong under any circum-
stances —her children, as she called Kate and Harry.
She let them turn the primly trim house “topsy-turvy”
in their games, and have their meals just when they
liked, and of what they liked. Mrs. Prendergast, too,
let them have the run of her house, and entered, in her
startled way, as heartily into the children’s fun as they


did—enjoying the novel sensation of being able to do as
she liked in her own home.
The new curate was very kind to both the little
Delanes and the little Prendergasts. He invited them
in turn to breakfast and take tea with him in his funny
little parlour—they would have trodden on one another
if they had all been asked at once—where the round
table, though it was not very big, seemed almost to fill
the room, —the round table, so crowded with plates of
bread and butter, cake, strawberries, red and white
currants, and so on, that it was almost impossible to see
a square inch of tablecloth.
Mr. Summers, moreover, and Mrs. Prendergast, and
Charlotte got up between them a picnic for the young-
sters. Susan and Keziah, and the little girl who waited
upon Mr. Summers went to it as well as Charlotte, so
that it was necessary to borrow two boats at the old water-
mill for the pull down the little winding river to the ait
in the middle, where the picnic was to come off. The
evening before, leaden clouds gathered and hid the blue
sky, and the children were in agonies lest their treat
should have to be put off; but the next morning, al-
though no rain had fallen in the night, the clouds had
dispersed; and golden-blue summer again blazed upon
the earth. The heat, as is generally the case in England
on one or two days in its year of strangely jumbled
weather, was downright tropical; but what do children
out for a holiday care for heat ? It is a very different
thing after dinner in a close school-room. Our young-
sters could scarcely eat a bit of regular breakfast. They
kept their appetite for the clubbed dinner of veal-
pie, and fruit-pie, tarts and sandwiches, salad, cold
fowl, etc., etc., etc., stowed away in the hampers, which a


rigid economist would have declared to be shamefully out
of proportion to the numbers of the party, even though
it did include more than half a dozen healthy children.
Traveller’s joy was out in the hedges—a good omen
to the starters for a day’s pleasure in the country.
Buttercups and mallows were everywhere in blossom.
The youngsters made the yellow blossoms of the bar-
berry begin to shut up as they brushed past them. Red
poppies and purple corn cockles spotted the golden
green corn. The blossom-clusters of the maple hung
almost motionless in the scarcely moving air. In the
meadow through which the path leading to the mill ran,
there were big blue crane’s bill blooms and guelder-
roses, and dog-roses all round it. Mare’s-tail stuck up in
the stagnant water of the ditches.
“ Well, yes, sir,” said the old miller, who had come
out to meet the party, to Mr. Summers, “ I thought
last night you’d have had to put off your expedishun, as
you call it, and I ain’t sure yet but what you may git
caught before you can git back. Not that I want to
spoil sport; only when them dark clouds gather and then
go away agin, as they did last night, I’ve ofen noticed
it’s a kind o’ dodge like. Back they come and take you
unawares. There’s some of ’em hangin’ about yonder,
blue as the sky is. I don’t know that the crops want it,
and they might git laid if it was heavy, but a drop o’ rain
wouldn’t do my garden no harm, no, nor the mill
neither, for the water’s gittin’ rather low. Good mornin’,
Mrs. Prendergast, mum, I hope that you’ve heard good
accounts of Mr. P.—not that we’re in any pressing hurry
for him to come back—no offence to you, mum —now
the old rector’s stumbled on such a good gentleman to
take his place as Mr. Summers.”


Even Mrs. Prendergast did not look as if she par-
ticularly wished to have “ Mr. P.” back—at any rate
that morning. Certainly no one else of the party had
any such desire. The victuals and the passengers were
divided between the two boats, the bigger of which Mr.
Summers pulled, and Harry and Peter the other, or
rather Katie took turns with Peter, and if the truth must
be told, rowed quite as well as Peter, or her brother
either; who, though he talked as if he must know all
about boats because he had come across the sea, had
had no boating practice anywhere, and consequently
caught almost as many crabs as his young English friend,
who was in the same predicament. Mrs. Prendergast
made a good-naturedly feeble attempt to steer Mr.
Summers’s boat, but since she invariably found that it
went just the way she didn’t want it to go, she dropped
the rudder lines in despair, and Mr. Summers thereupon
unshipped the rudder; the boat afterwards behaving far
less like an obstinate pig, rushing right and left, in their
tortuous progress along the much-winding little river.
Charlotte, who knew as much about steering as Mrs.
Prendergast—in her own phrase, “no more nor a cow
knows o’ Sunday ’’—persisted, nevertheless, in acting as
pilot to Harry and Peter’s boat. However, there was no
hurrj, and so it did not matter how often she ran them
into the reeds or ashore. “It was all in the day’s work,”
and the more mishaps, the better fun.
On the two boats blundered merrily, sometimes, in the
first part of the voyage, bumping one another between
the alders and the weeping and pollard willows that
fringed the stream. They passed the mouths of tinier
tributaries choked with blue-blossomed brook-lime, and
white and yellow-blossomed cresses and water-parsnips.


The arrow-head bent its green leaves beneath their bows.
White and yellow water-lilies, just peeping from their
buds, swayed right and left as Charlotte steered stem on
into their floating jungle. Butterflies fluttered across the
sunny stream, swallows zig-zagged athwart it, swooping
with dipping wings at the burnished flies that buzzed
above it. Now and then a ftsh leaped and made a
silvery splash. Grave cows, in riverside pastures, stared
with mild brown eyes, or wicked red ones, at the frolic-
some boats’ crews that had disturbed their repose.
Peter, put on his mettle by Kate’s not very respectfully
watching eyes, tried to take a stroke so long and strong
that he missed the water altogether ; tumbling backwards
from his seat, whilst both his cap and his ar tumbled
into the river. In spite of Charlotte’s eccentric steering,
the oar was at last recovered, but the cap had sunk ; and
since, in spite of the willows, the sunshine was pouring
down too hotly for any one but a butcher’s or a Blue-coat
boy to bear bareheaded with impunity, Kate, whose
conscience pricked her for her share in the mishap,
made Peter a turban out of her scarf; and Peter, when
he remembered whose favours he wore, and saw himself,
as he fancied, when he caught his reflection in the water,
looking just like a romantic Mediterranean corsair, be-
came so conceitedly excited that he caught more crabs
than ever, and missed his stroke more frequently than
ever, in his ambitious endeavours to figure before his
lady-love as a first-rate oarsman.
Harry’s boat was so much behind Mr. Summers’s in
reaching the trysting ait, that when it did get there, it
met Mr. Summers, who had just started on a return trip
in his boat to see what had become of his young friends.
Young and old, or rather oldish, middle-aged, younger,


190 THE AD VENTURES OF HARR V DELANE.
and youngest, had a very jolly day upon the ait Mr.
Summers caught some trout, and Harry and Peter tried
to do the same but failed, and it was thought a great
joke when Mr. Summers said that they were better
hands at catching crabs. There were water-voles to
watch, and a couple of brilliant kingfishers flashing up
and down and across the stream, and a long-legged
heron standing in it as still as a statue. Kate gathered
ferns for her aunt’s rockery. The sen-ants gossiped to-
gether, and romped with the children, and nursed the
baby, and poor Mrs. Prendergast, who generally had to
nurse and look after a dozen other matters at the same
time, enjoyed herself by simply sitting still and wondering
that she had nothing to do but eat and drink and smile
at everybody who spoke to her.
The cold dinner was a great success, but the gipsy tea
was a greater, because a fire was needed to boil the
fettle, and there w>as the fun—for picnicers—of gathering
the sticks, and blowing up the blaze with their mouths°
and getting the smoke into their eyes and down their
throats. (If you cannot see fun in things like those
you had better not go to a picnic.) And at tea-time the
great joke of the day came off. Plump Charlotte, who
was nervous about damp, instead of reclining after the
manner of the ancients, had seated herself in a little
child’s chair that the party had brought with them, and
when she got up in a hurry to w-ait on Mrs. Prendergast
the chair stuck to her like a very small shell on a very
big snail, 3
The kettle had taken so long to boil, and there had
been so much laughing over the tea, that Mr. Summers
had forgotten how time was going. He had meant to get
home early m the evening, since he had noticed the


sullen clouds of which the old miller had spoken, slowly
working their way back. Whilst the party sat over their
tea, the sun was suddenly darkened, and looking up they
saw that the black clouds had already mounted a good
way up the sky and were rapidly closing in. The ham-
pers were repacked in a hurry, and there was a scamper to
the boats. There might yet be time to get at least to the
mill before the storm broke. Off went the boats in a
business-like way, very different from the leisurely lark-
ing way in which they had come—at a rush which con-
trasted strangely with the hot hush of the gloomy air
through which they rushed.
Before they had got half-way to the mill, however,
the first flash of lightning had made their crews’ eyes
blink. Then came another, followed by a louder, closer
clap of thunder. Then a cool rush of wind, behind
which they could hear the hissing of the fall of water,
rippled the river and shook the willow leaves ; and then
down came the rain in a deluge. Flash followed flash
now almost every second. The thunder, directly over-
head, seemed to shake the earth, and sounded as if a shat-
tered solid firmament were falling in mountain-like masses,
clashing, crashing, rebounding, booming. Mrs. Prender-
gast crouched down in the bottom of her boat, gathered
her younger children and Keziah about her as a hen
gathers her chickens under her wings, flung her shawl
over them, and then hid her own head under it, shutting
her eyes to danger, after the manner of the ostrich, but
not deriving much comfort from her scheme. Mr.
Summers packed some hampers and wraps about
his cowering party in the best way he could to give them
shelter, shouted some instructions to the boat behind,
and then put on his coat and a spurt; wishing that he


had some one to bale out the water that was beginning
to wash about in the boat very uncomfortably. In
Harry’s boat Susan was as terror-struck as Keziah, and
good Charlotte was not much better. She wanted to
smuggle Katie under her shawl, but she was too frightened
to force her to come to her. Katie was awed, as I
think almost all living beings, brutes included, are by a
v lolent thunder-storm. She had been brought up in the
almost grand superstition—relic of our heathen fore-
fathers’ faith that thunder is the actual voice of an angry
God talking down to the earth from heaven. But
during part of their voyage to England Katie and Harry
had heard thunder of some kind every day, and they
had experienced two or three tempests more terrible
than the one they were passing through ; so Katie kept
her presence of mind, and quietly baled away, whilst
Harry and Peter both pulled away like little bricks,
though their faces could not, any more than Katie’s, help
blenching, and blanching, as well as their eyes blinking,
when the pink, blue, yellow—sometimes almost white-
hot—lightning zigzagged between the willows, and
ighted up the dark rain-pitted river, in a very different
style from the kingfishers.
Again Harry’s boat met Mr. Summers returning to
look after it; but this time he had got a good bit farther
on his way. Hastily fastening his own waterlogged boat
to a river-side willow—to be left till called for—Mr.
Summers stepped into the other boat, and, having first
insisted that Katie should take shelter under Charlotte’s
shawl, relieved Harry and Peter’s aching arms and
burning blistered hands by pulling it back to the mill at
racing speed.
Just as the boat was brought alongside the little


wooden landing-stage projecting from the miller’s yard,
there came the most blinding flash of forked lightning,
shivering the heavens like a pane of smoke-dimmed
ground glass, followed by the most deafening clap of
thunder, that had been seen or heard throughout the even-
ing. Charlotte and Susan sprang up with a shriek of terror
towards the landing-place, and the boat was capsized.
Charlotte and Susan clung to the little jetty, and were
soon dragged up from the water by the miller and his
men. When Mr. Summers’s head came above water, he
saw Peter clinging to the bottom of the boat, whilst its
painter, stretched at length on the water, was within
grasp. Catching at it, Mr. Summers struck out for, or
rather in for, the little jetty, close at hand, and he and
Peter were soon safe on shore. But where were Harry
and Katie ? Presently they saw Harry’s head come up.
He had been carried down, by the already swollen stream,
a good deal nearer to the mill-wheel, but he caught at
and clung to a ringed post which rose above the water.
He had scarcely secured his hold before he saw his
sister’s head come up almost close to him. He let go,
and made a dart at her. He clutched her frock, but it
was a question for a second, whether both children
would not be carried down on to the wheel. Once more,
however, just as they seemed to be certainly floating
past, Harry flung one arm round the post, still keeping
with the other hand a firm grip upon his sister, who had
come to herself enough by this time to help intead of
hampering him in his efforts to save them both. Mean-
time the miller’s men had made fast a long line to a
clumsy, leaky, oarless old punt, which was the only
available craft left of the mill’s flotilla of three. Mr.
Summers and the miller got into it, and guided the tub


194 THE ADVENTURES OF HARRY DELANE.
with bits of boards used like paddles, whilst the men
paid out the line. The punt was soon veered down to
the post, Katie and Harry were taken on board, and
then just didti t the men haul in, hand over hand with
a will ?
The miller, even with the aid of one of the men who
lived in a cottage on the premises, had some difficulty
in providing change of raiment for the miscellany of
moist people thrown upon his hands ; and very queer
objects some of them looked when they had at last
donned their borrowed garments. But when they had
gathered round the fire in the miller’s stone-flowed
kitchen its heat acceptable after their drenching or
ducking—and were drinking the second tea which & the
miller’s wife had soon put on the big black kettle in
order to get ready for them—they were a cosy party,
although the lighning continued to flash, the thunder to
roar, and the rain to rattle on the roof, and dash against
the panes.
“If it don’t hold up,” said the miller, laughing, “I
must keep ye all here. I shouldn’t have the heart to
turn a dog out such a night as this, if it goes on this way.
Tell ’ee what, though—some of us ’ll have to have a
shake-down here on the floor,”
“ I couldn’t wish for a cosier bedroom, Mr. Meal,”
answered Mr. Summers, laughing back.
But in another half hour the storm had worked off.
The miller then ordered out his waggon, and had it
padded ■with sacks and straw; and in it, by a grinning
carter, the queerly dressed picnicers were driven into
the village, to be dropped at their respective residences.
“ You’ll not forget your day’s plasurin’ in a hurry, I guess,
parson, said the grinning miller, as the grinning carter


cracked his whip and uttered his “ Heit ! Come heether,”
and the waggon ground out of the mill-yard.
“ Nor you, neither, young folks, I expect,” the good-
natured old man shouted after them. “ I’m main glad
things has turned out as they has, and you’re goin’ home
so jolly.”


CHAPTER VIII.
Harry’s tip.
FTER that storm there was a week of deli
cious weather —of summer cooled and braced
by a bath; and in the course of this week
Harry received a long letter from his kind
friend, Mrs. M'Grath. It gave Katie even more pleasure
than it gave Harry—she was so pleased to find that
Harry was so liked by a lady who had known her papa
well and admired him so much. Mrs. M'Grath’s letter
concluded thus:—
“-P-S. —l can guess that your aunt does not over-
burden you with pocket money—you may show this to
her, if you like, Harry darling—and I know that you
boys like tip. My brothers did, I know, so I send you
this. Don’t send it back, or I might spend it, when I
was run out of ready money. My husband’s wife oughtn’t
to see your father’s son pinched for a penny, for Captain
Delane—that you’re the very image of, my darling—often
helped poor dear M'Grath over a stile, and myself into
the bargain. From the way you talked about her, I
know that you’ll spend the most on your Katie, but


mind you buy something for yourself. Tell Katie I’m
half jealous of her, because you’re so fond of her. I
want to see her, —she’s the image of your poor dead
mother, isn’t she ? When I get back to England, I
mean to come and carry you both off to my place for a
stay, whatever aunt may say. There, you see, I’m a
poet , though I didn’t know it. I’ve written to your father
about that hateful school you’ve been sent to. Make
your mind easy, you may be sure he’ll take you away
the very minute he reads what I’ve told him about it.
You w r ere my own boy to come to my house. If I’d
only been at home, I’d have taken you back, wouldn't I?
Well, yes, I would —just to speak my mind plain out to
the whole tribe of the savages—have snapped my fingers
in their faces, and then carried you back in spite of them.
I’d have adopted you, my dear boy, only it’s so little I’ve
got to adopt you to. You and me and Monk and the
cob would have managed to cut our way out through
those ugly blue gates, —wouldn’t we, Harry? I say
nothing about Stephen. I’d half a mind to give him
and his wife warning when I heard what had happened,
but then I wholly changed my mind, and raised their
wages. Much love to Katie.
“C. G. M‘G.”
The “ this ” referred to in this lengthy P. S., —which,
according to the old jest that never grows stale because
the fact on wduch it is founded is always cropping-up
again as fresh as ever, the most important part of
the lady’s letter —was a Bank of England note for an
amount so large as a little school-boy’s tip, that Harry felt
that, if Katie heard of it, she would say that he ought to
send it back. Now, Harry did not wish to send it back,


because, though his papa had told him never to take
money, except from some very kind friend, he felt that
Mrs. M'Grath was a very kind friend, and that she
would be very much offended with him, if he returned her
liberal “ tip,” and that if she got to know that he had
done so at Katie’s instigation, she might dislike Katie.
Besides, Harry for a long time had been starved in the
pocket-money way, and being very fond of spending—
more on others than himself—he could not help luxuriat-
ing in imagination on what he could buy with the hand-
some amount Mrs. M'Grath had sent him. So he
pocketed the P.S. to her letter—it was written on a
separate slip of paper—and did not let Katie read it
until after he had cashed his note. His puzzle was how
to cash it as speedily as possible. He knew in a general
way, that a Bank of England note was “ good ” almost
anywhere, but then he did not understand exactly how
he was to get change for it. He did not like to take it
to the village “ store,” because he was not going to buy
his presents there, and the people who could have given
him the information he wanted, were some of the people
he wanted to give presents to, and so he could not ask
them. He locked the note up in his box, and when two
days had passed without his having been able to hit
upon a plan for getting change, he began to look upon
the crisp bit of water-marked, black-marked paper as very
much like the withered leaves into which, he had read in
his fairy stories, magicians had turned gold. But on the
third morning Mr. Summers, driving a “ four-wheeler,”
which one of his farmer parishioners had lent him, drawn
by the showiest horse which the farmer had to put into
chaise-shafts, —for in a very short time Mr. Summers
had become a very great favourite —pulled up in front of


Moat Cottage. Peter was sitting beside Mr. Summers,
and held the reins whilst the curate ran into the
house. _ .
“ Good morning, Charlotte,” he said. “ I hope you
and Susan are none the worse for your ducking. Another
time, though, my good creatures, don’t cry out before
you are hurt, because, you see, it might have led to other
people, as well as yourselves, getting hurt. We’re nice
creatures, you and I, and all the rest of us that day, but
still we don’t exactly feel like ducks, when we’re splashing
about in the water, do we, Charlotte ? Where are the
little folks ? Now they are regular ducklings. Oh, here
you are,” he went on, as the children came running up
to him, —“ glad to see you so blooming. I’ve been too
busy to look you up before, as I heard you were all right
My little Katie doesn’t look like a rose that has been
washed, just washed, in a mill-stream. Now then, be off
with you, and get your things on in next to no time. I’ve
to go into Dulchester to-day, and so I thought I might as
well drive you and Peter in, just to keep you out of mis-
chief.”
“ He’s a nice gentleman that, though he do make fun
of a poor body for tumbling into the water, w T hen she
could’t help it no more nor hisself,” said beaming
Charlotte, as she went up stairs to act as lady’s maid to
her little mistress. “If you’d been sent to his’n instead
of that Prendergast’s—and if it wasn’t for his poor lady’s
sake, I’d never wish he’d git well enough to come back
agin—not as I see it’d do her any good, but jest the
contrary, poor dear kind lady that wouldn’t say bo to a
goose —you’d have shied the inkstand at that nice Mr.
Summers’s head, I don't expect, Master Harry.”
When Mr. Summers came out with Katie, Peter had


to retreat into the back-seat, where Harry joined him;
and off the four drove merrily between the freshened
hedges, beneath which lay a litter of sodden dog-rose
petals pelted off by the late storm. Before he started,
Harry had slipped his precious note into his pocket.
When Mr. Summers had put up the horse and chaise, he
took the children to the house of a friend, who had a long
garden in which there were big strawberry beds they were
free to pick from ad libitum , a fountain they could stop
and set going at pleasure, a pond with gold and silver fish
in it, a peacock and peahen, a pigeon-house, a grotto, a
swing, and sundry other delights, which so took Katie’s
fancy that she was astonished that Harry should want to
go out into the town.
“ sa ' v the houses, and the old churches, and the
castle, and so on, as we came,” she said, “ and we shall
see them again as we go back. And here’s a bit of
the old town wall that we didn’t see in the streets; and
this is such a dear, sweet old garden—it looks as if
it had been a garden for hundreds and hundreds of
years.”
Oh, I don t want you to come, Katie, nor you either,
Peter. You can stay and eat the strawberries,” answered
Hany.
A ow, though strawberries ad libitum were a temptation
to Peter, he still could get some at home in their own
garden ; under ordinary circumstances a stroll about the
town with his boy-of-the-world friend, Harry, would have
been a greater treat than the old garden to the little
country-boy who had been confined almost all his life to
his native parish ; but the old garden plus Katie was a
very different thing, and Peter willingly consented to stay
and eat strawberries with her.


Harry had reasoned that there could be no difficulty
in getting change for a bank-note at a bank, and he had
noticed two banks in his ride through High Street. To
one of these he set off at a run, as soon as he had got
outside the old garden’s leaden-blue side-gate. Up the
bank steps, however, he stalked with dignified decorum,
and pushed open the swing door as if he had come to
deposit Placing the note upon the counter
with great aplomb , he said to the cashier, as soon as a
whispered conversation between him and a member of
the firm was over, “Have the goodness to give me
change for this.”
Something in Harry’s tone amused the banker, a jolly,
rollicking-looking man, who was going back to his parlour.
He stopped, took up the note and said, “ Well, my little
man, what’s this ? ”
“ A five-pound Bank of England note, answered
Harry. “ It’s a good one, isn’t it, sir ?’'
“ Oh yes, it’s good enough, but whom did you bring it
from ? ”
«jpg my own —it belongs to me,” answered Harry,
somewhat indignantly.
“Ah, but how did you come by it?” continued the
banker, enjoying the fun of Harry’s lofty tone.
« A friend of mine, a lady, gave it me for tip.”
“ Tip ! ” exclaimed the banker, with a whistle of
astonishment. “ You must be a very lucky little boy.
Why, when I was at school, the biggest tip I ever got at
one time was a sovereign. This really is a most sus-
picious affair. I must trouble you for your name and
address, sir.”
“My name is Harry Delane. My papa is Captain
Delane that lives at Myrtle Farm, Tasmania, but I am


staying now with my aunt, Miss Delane, at Moat Cot-
tage ”
“Ah ! ” cried the banker, pretending to relax. “ Why
didn t you mention that before ? That explains matters.
Of course, it was your aunt who gave you the note. She
is a customer of ours.”
There was a twinkle in the teasing banker’s roguish
eye which showed Harry that he knew that his aunt was
a bit of a screw. But Harry wasn’t going to join with
strangers in getting fun out of his relations, and so he
answered distantly,—
“ No, sir, it was another lady.”
“Well, well,” returned the banker, more and more
amused, “ under the circumstances, no doubt we can ac-
commodate you, without troubling you for the name and
address of the other lady, if you will favour me with your
own on the back of the note.”
Harry gravely wrote them, the banker as gravely turned
the wet ink down on the white blotting-paper, and then
borrowing the grinning cashier’s scoop, asked deferen-
tially—
“ How will you take it, sir ? ”
(( I d° n *■ want to take it,” replied perplexed Harry.
“ I want you to take it, and to give me some sovereigns
for it.” &
Oh, exactly, in gold; ” and the banker shovelled over
to Harry the live bright pieces.
“ Thank you, sir ; good morning,” said Harry hurrying
off with his spoil.
“ Good morning, my boy. Mind you don’t spend it
all on tarts and toffy. I wish I could be ground as
young as you again, and had got kind lady-friends to tip
me with fivers.”


The banker went back to his parlour, where sometimes
he really gave hard, serious attention to correspondence
and accounts, sometimes chatted about all kinds of
things with friends who had dropped in, sometimes sat
idle over his papers longing for the far-off hunting season,
that would give him an excuse for cutting the bank three
times a week, or anticipating the dinner-party he was
going to give in the evening, or thinking, pretty fre-
quently, of the manly, funny little fellow, whose freshness
had amused him, but also made him feel half envious.
Harry meantime had been making a most miscel-
laneous series of purchases, stowing the concealably
portable articles he bought about his person, and order-
ing the bulkier parcels to be sent to Moat Cottage by
the village carrier.
Owing to the weight of the secret which rested —very
pleasantly, however,—upon his mind, Harry was so
solemnly silent during the ride home, that Katie and
Peter wondered, and amused Mr. Summers “ chaffed ”
him every now and then. At last the curate exclaimed,
as if suddenly enlightened, “ Ah, by-the-by, I remember
now. I saw you rushing out of the bank, Harry, as if
two dozen policemen were after you. I hope you
haven’t been breaking open the safe, or committing
forgery, Harry ! ”
Harry could not help letting a feeble flicker of a grin
relax his lips, and then again he sealed them tightly.
He was not going to let even Mr. Summers “ draw ”
him.


CHAPTER IX.
Harry’s presents.
SARRY waited until the carrier brought him
his parcels before he began to distribute
his presents, and by that time his aunt had
returned from town. When the carrier
stopped in front of her gate, she was in her garden,
arrayed m her gardening gauntlets, her gardening apron’
with a pouch like a barber’s, and a round gardening hat
as big as a middling-sized target; using her tiny watering-
pot as mincingly as she tilted her little cream jug, or
dibbhng up a weed with her toy spud as daintily as’she
stirred her tea with her slender old-fashioned tea-spoon.
“ What is this, Tilt ? are these for me ?” asked Miss
Delane In astonishment, as the carrier crossed her little
bridge with a pyramid of brown paper parcels between his
hands and his chin. #-
“ No > mum > not for you azackly, but for your nevvy
mum, Master Delane,” answered the carrier with a grin’
“ There ain’t nothing to pay, mum. The young gen’leman
left orders as the carnage was to be paid. I’ll carry ’em
up to the house, mum, an’ give ’em to one o’ the maids.”


Susan generally made an egg of her mouth when in the
least surprised, but she made an orange of it as she took
Master Harry’s parcels one by one from the grinning
carrier, and piled them up against the wall of the “ hall,”
as Miss Delane loftly called her little passage, in which
“ Daddy ” would certainly have stuck. This view of the
case had often tickled Harry’s sense of humour. “ Oh,
what a lark it would be, Katie,” he one day startled his
sister by crying out suddenly, “ if Daddy tried to call on
aunt. If he put one foot on the bridge, he’d be sure to
break it down ; and if he got across the moat he couldn’t
get through the gate, and if he climbed over the hedge
and managed to get in sideways at the front door, he d
be certain to stick in the passage, and we should all have
to run and make butts at him, and ram him with mops
and pokers and carpet-brooms, to save him from
choking. Oh, what a lark it would be ! But I expect
Aunt would have to go out to him, or else he would
shout in what he had to say from the other side of
the moat, just as if we were living in a castle or a
besieged city.”
\Vhen Susan had piled the parcels m the passage, she
ran to call Charlotte. Mr. Tilt lingered, blocking the
door-way, and Miss Delane, coming up, was obliged to
say sharply, “ Well, my man ?” before she could get into
her own house.
“ I humbly beg your parding, mum,” said the carrier,
tugging at his forelock and backing on to a flower-bed.
“Oh, lawks! Thank Heaven I hain’t done no mischief;
but these paths o’ yourn, mum, are so hextry narrer,”
said flustered Mr. Tilt; but when he had smoothed out
the print of his big boot with his big hand, he still
lingered.


206 THE ADVENTURES OF HARRY DELANE.
“ Well, my man ?” repeated Miss Delane, with increased
tartness.
• mum ’” re P lied the carrier, beginning with a
md of echo, as he mopped his brow with his blue and
W lte pocket handkerchief, and then smoothed down the
ragged forelock upon it, “ //you please, mum, pVaps I
might say as it’s dry work carryin’ in o’ parcels sich a
evenm as this, mum, though the carriage be paid.”
“ Draw Master Tilt a mug of ale, Susan,” said Miss
Delane severely.
U hen Tilt had emptied his pint mug, and, for politeness’
sake, turned it up to let the heeltap of froth drop upon
t e gravel, handed it back to Susan with a “ Thankee
kindly,” touched his hat to Miss Delane, and taken his
departure, that lady, pointing with her spud to the parcels
inquired sternly, ’
“ Do y° u know th e meaning of all this, Susan ?”
No indeed, mum,” answered Susan, bobbing up and
down like a steam-engine piston in a continued series of
terrified curtsies, “Wisher may_if I was-no, indeed,
mum, not no more than a innocent babe unborn ”
Do y° u know anything, Charlotte ?” inquired her
mistress.
“ " ell, mum, I can't rightly say as I knows anything ”
answered chuckling Charlotte. but I guess it’s one o’
i laster Harry s games—his larks, as he calls ’em. He’s
al ajss up to them as is on’y nateral in a young gentleman
of his age, mum.”
“ Charlotte,” replied Miss Delane, with dignified
. ® rblty ! J > as hj s natural guardian, am the only proper
judge of my nephew’s behaviour,” and so having spoken
she waved her sen-ants back into their kitchen.
Harry and Katie were out for a walk, and remained


out. so long that Miss Delane began to argue with herself
as to whether, as “ natural guardian,” she would not be
justified in cutting the strings of the parcels. She con-
tented herself, however, with reading the addresses over
and over again, and pinching and nipping and poising the
packets to enable her to give a guess at their contents.
Every now and then she marched impatiently down to
her garden-gate, and craned her long lean neck over it,
to see whether her young truants were in sight, always
keeping on her big round garden-hat. She was returning
disappointed from one of these exploring expeditions when
the children caught sight of her.
“ Oh, Katie,” cried Harry, “ doesn’t aunt look just
like a music-stool, taking its evening walks abroad ? ”
“Fie, for shame, Harry,” answered Katie; but they
were both laughing when they stepped into the “ hall,”
and found their aunt peering through her double eye-
glass at the address of a big stiffly angular parcel.
“ What is the meaning of all this, Harry ? ” inquired
Miss Delane, holding the spud in one hand like
Britannia’s trident, and waving the eye-glass like a
brace of small shields with the other.
“ Mrs. M'Grath sent me some money,” began Harry,
stammering and blushing.
“ Mrs. M'Grath would have shown more sense if she
had kept her money in her pocket; she wants it a great
deal worse than you do,” Miss Delane interposed.
“And so I thought I’d buy some presents,” Harry
went on.
“ Mrs. M'Grath might at least have had the common
courtesy to entrust her gift to my more judicious keep-
ing,” Miss Delane’s comment continued.
“ And so I’ve bought them,” Harry abruptly concluded.


“ And what are the contents of this parcel ? ” asked
Miss Delane.
“They are for you, aunt, with my love,” answered
Harry.
“For me, child,” exclaimed Miss Delane, half sur-
prised, half gratified ; “ I certainly never either wished
or expected you to buy presents for me. Ido my duty
towards you, and find that that duty, however little
appreciated by those who are benefited by it, brings its
own reward.”
“ Well, aunt,” said Harr} 7 , beginning to untie the
knots of the angular parcel, but then, getting impatient,
pulling out his knife, and, to the horror of twine-disen-
tangling, neatly hanking, and long-preserving Miss
Delane, slashing away at the string like a hedger-and-
ditcher “plashing” overgrown hawthorn, —“Well, aunt,
I was downright puzzled what to buy for you. But then
I remembered hearing you say that books were the only
things worth buying, and that the binding did not signify,
so long as they were good, religious books. So I went
to that civil second-hand book-fellow in Head Street,
and told him to make me ten shillings’ worth of Sunday
books—the more, the better—and it didn’t matter about
the covers. And I’m sure I think he’s made a jolly good
ten shillings’ worth,” remarked Harry, as he took off the
successive layers of brown and newspaper, and let the
medley of Sunday literature, volumes of all sizes, some
without any binding, tumble down upon the floor. “ I
couldn’t have picked them half a quarter as well myself.
Look, aunt, they’re all Sunday books, sermons and
tracts, and Lives with old ladies’ pictures in them in
spectacles, and parsons in their pulpit things, and im-
proving anecdotes, and that sort.”


As he spoke Harry moved his hand about in his dusty
purchase, with genuine pride in his bargain.
“ You might have made a far worse selection. I will
inspect the books at my leisure to-morrow,” said Miss
Delane ; but she did not appear to be overwhelmed with
delight and gratitude as she stalked upstairs to take off
her garden-hat, which she was in the habit of spreading
out like a huge jelly-fish on the second shelf of her deep
wardrobe, a slide devoted entirely to the hat.
Charlotte made amends for her mistress’s insensibility
when, her parcel having been unpacked, her delighted
eyes fell upon the “ loudest ’’-patterned print dress Harry
had been able to find—a feminine coat of many colours,
a pocketed apron elaborately embroidered with scarlet
braid, and a cap with rosettes and streamers of bright
pink ribbon.
“ Bless his dear heart,” exclaimed Charlotte in an
enraptured soliloquy, or vague address to the world at
large, “ what a taste in dress he have ! It’s heasy to see
Master Harry’s a gentleman born ! ”
The bandbox which contained Susan’s present had
“ caved in ” beneath Miss Delane’s punches, and, there-
fore, Susan felt rather anxious whilst the tight lid was
being wriggled off. When, however, there arose from
its depths—like “ a sea-Cybele fresh from ocean ” —an
undamaged bonnet which would have made a Dulchester
factory girl ready to die of envy, Susan also went off into
ecstasies.
“ Oh, thank’ee Master Harry; I am so mvch obleeged.
Ain’t it a regular duck, Charlotte ? ”
For a time after that Susan gazed upon her bonnet
with eyes and mouth at their roundest, but suddenly her
chin fell.


“ She’ll never let me wear it, Master Harry—Missus
won’t”—exclaimed poor Susan, ready to cry; “it ’ud
take the shine out on ’er so. Folks ’ud say as it was me
as was the missis.”
For Katie, Harry, whose taste in dress, it must be
confessed, was somewhat negro-like, had bought a plaid
satin sash ; but he had also bought her a very pretty
papier-mache writing-case and a little blue-enamelled
locket. When they had been duly admired, and Katie
had cut off on the spot one of her brother’s glossy curls
to put into her locket, Hafry said, “ Come along, Katie,
and help me carry these things to the Prendergasts ? ”
“ Why, whatever be that big crinkly parcel you’ve got
on your shoulder, Master Harry ? ” asked Charlotte.
“ That’s tellings,” answered Harry mysteriously.
“But do’ee tell,” wheedled Charlotte.
“ It’s for Keziah,” Harry admitted.
“ But what be it, Master Harry ? ” persisted Charlotte.
“ Well, if you’ll promise not to tell, then,” answered
Harry. Keziah says that she’s going to get married as
soon as she and her young man between them have got
things enough for a house, and si I’ve bought her a
coalscuttle.”
Peter s presents were a man-faced kite, almost as tall
as a man, and a humming-top as big as a decent-sized
pumpkin. The little Prendergasts got sweeties, and a
Noah s ark, and a box of bricks. For Mrs. Prendergast
Harry had bought a musical-box, which played, “We
may be happy yet.”
“ Whatever did you choose that for ? ” asked Katie.
“ Oh, it’s to remind her,” answered Harry confiden-
tially, “that that beast of a husband of hers can’t'live for
ever. She’s twenty million times too good for him.


He’s ever so much older than she is, and if he was to
die, she’d be able to marry some one she liked that
would be kind to her. Wouldn’t it be jolly if it was Mr.
Summers ? ”
“ But do you think Peter would like to have a new
papa that didn’t really belong to him ? ” said Katie. “ I
know 7 shouldn’t. How would you like a new papa or
mamma, Harry ? ”
“ I should like to see any one calling himself my papa
that wasn’t my papa! ” answered Harry, hotly ; “ I
wouldn’t mind one word he' said, if he kept me on
bread and water, and whacked me all day long. But
about a new mamma, I don’t exactly know,” Harry
went on dubiously, in a softened tone. “Now, if Mrs.
M‘Grath ”
“ Mrs. M'Grath indeed, or Mrs. Anybody else ! ” ex-
claimed Katie, indignantly. “I’ll never call any one
mamma except my own dear dead mamma. But dear
papa never would you ought to be ashamed of your-
self for thinking of such a thing, Harry.”
Katie, generally so fond of him, had set up her feathers
so fiercely that Harry thought it prudent to hold his
tongue.
His present to Mr. Summers was a mounted walking-
stick, and to Mr. Summers’s little maid a pretty picture-
book.
Two of the parcels he had left at Moat Cottage
contained presents for his good friends Mr. and Mrs.
Stephen.
“ But haven’t you bought anything for yourself, Harry
dear ? ” asked Katie as they walked back to their aunt’s.
“ Well, Mrs. M‘Grath made me promise like that I
would,” answered Harry, “ so I bought this,” lugging out


212 THE ADVENTURES OE HARRY DELANE.
of his jacket-pocket a big wooden snuff-box with a picture
on its varnished lid of a young lady with very big, blue
eyes and very long golden hair. It was not a bit like
Mrs. INI Grath, but Harry’ fancied that it was, and that
was the reason why he had bought the box. He did not
dare to tell Katie so, however, lest in revived antipathy
against her, Katie should return the presents which Mrs.
M'Grath’s money had bought
“ Bu t you don’t take snuff, Harry,” said Katie, laughing.
Oh, that don’t matter —it’s all the same,” answered
Harry, loftily. “Other chaps don’t have snuff-boxes
because they like snuff, but because—because— because
—it’s the proper style of thing, you know,— you under-
stand.”
Ko, I don't” said Katie, laughing more merrily than
ever; and descending from the stilts of his loftiness,
Harry burst out laughing also.


CHAPTER X.
MUDCLIFFS-SUPER-M A RE.
ISS DELANE did not take to Mr. Summers,
and was very angry with the village people,
and her own household, for liking him so
much better than her pet Prendergast.
She snubbed Peter for being so jolly while his father was
away. As to Mrs. Prendergast, Miss Delane seemed to
think that she ought to be like the lady in the Ethiopian
serenades’ song, who was “sitting by the river and
weeping all the day;” and when Mrs. Prendergast,
instead of running down the new curate in full cry with
Miss Delane, actually plucked up courage to say that
she thought him a “clever, well-disposed, exceed-
ingly kind-hearted young man —no wonder the children
and everybody liked him—” Miss Delane was struck
speechless, for once, with indignant astonishment. She
called on the rector to find out what he thought of the
new curate, and the easy, almost superannuated old
gentleman nearly choked her with his praises of Mr.
Summers —“fine young fellow, Miss Delane —does so
much in the parish-makes himself so popular —why,


those poor Dissenting people like him—staunch Church-
man, Miss Delane, after your own heart —never makes a
fuss —I’m never bothered now —if the living were in my
gift, I do think I’d give it him when I’m gone—that is,
you know, if I could give away anything then —did un-
commonly well at the University—well recommended —
fine active young man —just after my own heart —never
bothered now —that’s a comfort to a worn-out old man.”
“The lazy old idiot,” Miss Delane was ungentle-
womanly enough to mutter to herself as she hurried
down the rectory carriage-drive, holding in her skimp
skirts as if the touch of the variegated laurels would con-
taminate them with latitudinarianism. “Much he knows
of what a flock needs from its pastor. It really was a
mercy, poor old man, when he found out, at last , that
he couldn’t read his dry sermons without making half a
dozen mistakes in a sentence. And now to think of his
praising that frivolous Mr. Summers as a model priest,
and never saying one word about poor dear Mr. Prender-
gast, who has worn himself out by his pulpit labours for
us.- Mr. Summers, indeed! ” exclaimed Miss Delane,
becoming still more vulgar in her intensified wrath, “ why
Mr. Prendergast could preach his head off ! ”
Miss Delane, worried by her London business, still more
worried by the state of things she found at home, arrived at
the conclusion that she required a change by the sea-side,
and determined to take her nephew and niece with her
to a neighbouring watering-place, so that they might
spend the remainder of their holidays under her own eye,
out of reach of Mr. Summers and the other contamina-
tors who had done so much during her absence from
home to corrupt their, in Miss Delane’s opinion, never
particularly good manners. Not even Charlotte was


allowed to be of the party. Having engaged lodgings
by letter, Miss Delane ordered from the Wheatsheaf that
ramshackle “ one-horse shay ” of which you have already
heard that Harry did not entertain the most reverential
opinion. He chafed when it pulled up in front of his
aunt’s gate, and was still more incensed when he found
that he was not to be allowed to sit on the box, where he
could have had a grown-up chat on things in general
with the driver, whom Harry respected a good deal more
than the horse and chaise he drove, but that he would
have to sit on the back seat like a baby-boy, staring at
his aunt and holding his tongue, unless when she cate-
chised him apropos of anything or nothing to ascertain
his proficiency in general knowledge.
Another disappointment awaited him in Dulchester.
His aunt took an inside place for him in the omnibus
which was to carry them to Mudcliffs-super-Mare. The
afternoon was sultry, all the inside passengers except
himself were of what his Latin grammar had taught him
to consider the less worthy gender ; most of them were
very fat, several nursed babies who never ceased to squall,
and as fast as one perspiring matron let down a glass on
one side of the omnibus, another draught-dreading
matron insisted on pulling a glass up on the other.
Harry began to think that he should never like stewed
pears again, he felt so much as he fancied they must feel
while stewing. He could hardly keep from making
hideous grimaces on the sly at the howling infants who
were called “ ickie darlins,” and hugged by their mothers,
as if they had performed some heroic deed of virtue when
they poked their moist fingers into his eyes, or slobbered his
jacket-sleeve. On rumbled the heavy, luggage-piled omni-
bus along a dusty road running between dusty trees and


216 IHE ADVEN7URES OF HARR V DELANE.
hedges, with fields of basking corn—almost ripe—beyond-
past road-side public houses, cottages, wheelwrights’yards’
farmyard 5 , pounds, cages, rotten stocks; over geese, pig
and donkey-dotted furzy commons ; and through villages
sound asleep round their old churches-at least they would
have seemed sound asleep if it had not been for the clank
and clinking rattle of the blacksmith’s hammers in the
httle forges which were keeping up what appeared
absurdly roaring fires on such a blazing day.
But toward evening a cool, salt-scented breeze blew
into the bus, and instantly down went all the glasses.
The sea, the sea, the open sea !
exclaimed the most delicate of the stout matrons, lon*
e ore any sea was visible. Their doctors had told them
that sea-air was indispensable for the reinvigoration of
their frail frames, and they were determined to get as
much of it as they could for their money. WTien the sea
was seen, the fat matrons went into fresh ecstasies, but
the young Delanes were disappointed. The greenish-
>e ow water tumbling in tiny waves was very different
rom the great sweeping blue billows they had been
hoping to see once more; and the “town” was just
towmsh enough to be spoilt as a village, without being in
the least like the grand affairs they had heard that
Dnghsh watering-places were.
When the ’bus put them down at their lodgings in one
of a row of bald-looking houses on a terrace with a
cracked sea-wall, and they found that they must not run
all over the house, but “behave properly” in the scantily-
furnished “ drawing-room ” their aunt had hired—with a
fox-eyed, fox-nosed landlady peeping in every now and


then to see whether they were not doing some damage to
her precious furniture which she could put down in her
bill—Harry and Katie wished themselves back in Moat
Cottage, even with their aunt in it. For the first day or
two, moreover, Miss Delane would not let them go out
by themselves. They had to take solemn walks with her,
and hold still solemner sessions on the beach. When
once she gave them a donkey-ride, she would not allow
the donkeys to be urged even to a trot, and walked be-
tween her nephew and niece’s steeds with a hand on the
rein of each. The donkeys, although they did give Miss
Delane a squeeze now and then, as if they wanted to
crack her like a nut, perhaps relished this arrangement;
but the riders, who had galloped on horseback before
they came to England, were very disgusted.
Miss Delane, however, got tired of having always to
look after her nephew and niece: Harry and Katie, so
long as they were indoors in good time for meals and bed,
were allowed to ramble as they pleased, and then, though
it is not the most beautiful of watering-places, they began
to enjoy their stay at Mudcliffs-super-Mare. They made
friends with the blue-jackets at the Coast-Guard station
and the Martello tower, and the grey-haired lieutenant
took a fancy to them—more especially when he found
that they were the children of an officer whom he
just remembered as having gone to North America
in a troopship of which he had the command. He
listened to their talk about their Tasmanian home,
and wished that he had the good luck to retire from the
service into a pretty place like that; he told them sea-
yarns in return, and sometimes gave them a row in the
white galley. They made friends also with the pleasure-
boatmen —hard-working fishermen, when Mudcliffs-super-


Mare was deserted by visitors, and doing a little-make-
believe sort of fishing even during the season—hawking
about their catches before breakfast in stagey scarlet
nightcaps dangling down nearly half a yard. They, too,
told the children stories—how that the old church had
been washed away one wild winter’s night, and that one
of the stalls in St. Paul’s was called “ Consumed by the
sea ” because the lands that endowed it lie under water
now beyond the end of the jetty.
The jetty, when the steamer touched at it, or the band
played on it, was a favourite resort of Harry and Katie’s,
but at other times they liked to wander farther afield,
stopping sometimes, when they could find snug undress-
ing-places beside the breakwaters, to have a bathe.
Along the beach they strolled, leaping the break-waters,
and sometimes splashing into the pools like steeple-
chasers. On the very edge of the sloping earth-cliifs
corn was nodding heavy ears, and the pink blossoms of
field bindweed garlanded the brink. Lumps of soil on
which grass and poppies and wheat still stood almost
erect littered the slope. Lower down the lumps were
studded with pebbles and smashed shell, which looked
like the fruit and suet of cold plum-pudding. Other
lumps lay on the sands, soft as dough, or beaten by the
waves as hard as stone. The youngsters clambered up
the “antediluvian cliff” to gather shells “turned the
wrong way,” and up the slippery cliff staircase to the
Landmark tower, and up that to get a peep at Harwich,
and a look-out over a wide sweep of land and sea.
Behind the Landmark spread a lonely backwater with
dreary marshy shores—at least they looked dreary from a
distance, but Harry and Katie somehow found great
delight in getting over their ankles in mud upon those


marshes —greatly to the discontent of their landlady’s
husband, who, before he went to his proper work, had to
clean his wife’s lodgers’ boots and shoes. Part of the
marsh nearest to the town had been blighted by copperas
works. A few heaps of their black bricks still remained,
with pools of inky water scummed with dull rainbows.
Those pools were the only moist things there, but else-
where, except where there was sand, the marsh was as
wet as sop. Crowfoot, marsh marigold, scurvygrass, sea-
kale, sea-cabbage, sea-heath, mare’s tail, eryngo, wild
celery, samphire, the wild carrot, burdock, thistles, sea
wormwood, butter-bur, buck-bean, red-rattle, hairy mint,
milk-wort, sea lavender, plantain, shore-weed, orache, sea-
beet, salt-wort, glass-wort, water-soldier, marsh orchis, flags,
rushes, arrow-grass, and sedge, were mixed with the coarse,
rank herbage on which the sullen-eyed black bullocks fed.
Little green crabs sprawled over the reeking mud-banks
and sand-spits strewn with sea-weed. A water-bird might
now and then be seen paddling in and out of the groves
of bulrushes —still rarer was the sight of a tanned-sailed,
blue and red-streaked barge slowly sailing up the tide-way
of the solitary sheet of water.
The day before Miss Delane had arranged to return
home, Harry and Katie paid a farewell visit to their
beloved Backwater. In the course of their ramble along
its shore they came upon a barnacled seaweed-streamered
post, to which a boat was fastened by an unpadlocked chain.
“Let’s have a row, Katie,” said Harry. “The boat
looks as if it belonged to nobody. Somebody must have
left it here ever so long ago, and forgotten all about it. If
it does belong to anybody, and he sees us, why we can pay
him for hiring his boat without his leave. I’ve got a
shilling left, and you’ve some money, haven’t you, Katie?”


220 THE ADVENTURES OF HARRY BELANE.
They jumped into the boat—a much bigger and more
clumsil}-built craft than the one they had rowed on the
day of the pic-nic. Ham unhooked the painter, shipped
with some difficulty the heavy, rough-hewn oars, and away
they pulled. The oars, however, were so very heavy that
they were soon glad to rest. Meantime the boat drifted
on and on, until it stuck fast upon a mud-bank. In vain
did the children try to push off. Their oars merely sank
into the mud so deep that it was difficult to pull them
out again. The tide was running out, and our young
friends found that they were stranded for some twelve
hours to come. Even if any one saw them from dry
land, it would be impossible to get to them. The mud
could not be walked over, and the water soon sank into
shallow winding threads that would scarcely have floated
the little Prendergast’s Noah’s Ark.
“ A nice I’ve got you into, Katie,” said Harry. “I
do hope it will be light when the tide turns, else we may
pull out to sea instead of ashore. No, we won’t, though
U e’il just keep her head straight, and let the tide take
her where it likes. We must come ashore somewhere or
other, and one place is about as good as another in the
marsh. Just won’t aunt blow us up, though !”
For a time the children kept their spirits up, and
laughed over their mishap; but as the hot day wore on
they began to feel rather doleful on the steaming mud’
tthen they were missed at their early dinner-time, at
which they had never been missed before, Miss Delane
became like unto a hen that has hatched missing duck-
hngs. The landlady grew weary of answering the bell
and her inquiries as to whether the children had not yet
come in. 3
Such a fuss about two mischievous little monkeys,”


she said to her husband, who had come home for his
dinner; “ they’ll come back when they’re hungry—trust
’em.”
Miss Delane, who, in spite of her cantankerousness,
was fond of her niece, and even of her nephew, in her
way, could scarcely eat a morsel. She rang for the table
to be cleared about ten minutes after the cloth had been
laid, and putting on her bonnet and shawl again, went
out to make inquiiies—running back to her lodgings
every five minutes to find whether the truants had re-
turned. The old lieutenant and his men and the fisher-
men, like the landlady, at first laughed at her anxiety,
but when tea-time had come, and the children were still
missing, all who knew them—all of whom, even the land-
lady included, liked them—manifested more sympathy
with Miss Delane’s concern. They could give her no
help, however. No one, as it happened, remembered
having seen Harry and Katie out that day.
A star or two shone out fitfully now and then from a
clouded sky when the boat floated again. Steering with
an oar, just to keep her from floundering about broadside
on, Harry let her drift with the inflowing tide.
“ Why, Harr)-,” after a time said Katie, beginning to
feel frightened, “ we must be ever so far from Mudcliffs.”
“Never mind, Katie,” answered Harry; “we must run
ashore somewhere, if the Backwater doesn’t run right
through England.”
A few minutes afterwards the boat bumped against a
more solid obstacle than the reeds she had more than
once driven her nose into. Just then the moon shone
out, and the children found themselves alongside a
wooden pile-faced wharf. Harry soon slipped the chain-
painter through one of the rings on the projecting posts»


and helped his sister to scramble ashore. When they
had reached the moonlit wharf, the only building within
sight was a two-floored gabled, many-angled public-house,
with a sign creaking in the night wind, a dim light or two
in the upper windows, and a ruddy glow in those of the
tap-room, in which a rustic chorus was being roared in
uncertain time and tune.


CHAPTER XI
THE WORLD’S END,
G£S=?~SC3HE house the children had reached was the
World’s End Inn. It had a somewhat
drearily lonely look by night, but looked
still more dreary by day, because then one
could see how lonely it really was. There was not a
house in sight of it, except one or two, miles away, that
looked mere specks of white on the swelling land that
rose a little above the flat marshes which bordered the
Backwater. The World’s End stood almost at the end
of the Backwater. On the wharf, besides which ran up
a little “ hard,” there was a ramshackle little warehouse,
with a rusty-chained crane on its upper floor. When
Katie first saw this crane by the uncertain light of the
moon, it made her think of one of the lonely gibbets with
murderers’ mouldering corpses dangling from them, of
which she had read in her story-books. In front of the
inn stretched an old leaky wooden horse-trough, and
beside that stood the sign-post on which creaked the
World’s End’s weird sign, a cracked, warped, weather-
dimmed picture of a globe wrapped in smoke and flame.


Hard by the front door there was an old mounting block,
pitted with basin-like hollows ; generally, except in very
hot or very cold weather, half full of stagnant water.
Katie and Harry did not much relish the look of the
World’s End, but still where else could they go to for a
night’s shelter ? Perhaps, however, they might have
been inclined to sleep in the open air, instead of going
under its roof, if they had known what a bad name the
orld s End had. If it had not stood so far from other
dwellings that there were no neighbours to be annoyed
by its goings on, it would have lost its licence. The
landlord, who was chief owner of the barge or two, and
the billyboy schooner that came up to the wharf, had the
reputation of making more money by smuggling than by
legitimate freight. The craft discharged most innocent-
looking cargoes of manure, “breeze,” lime, coals, &c.,
on the wharf, and carried off from it equally common-
place loads of corn, hay, straw, and so on. Nevertheless,
the spirits and tobacco sold at the World’s End were
remarkably good and cheap both. As these advantages
were not confined to the World’s End, but radiated from
it, a good many of the people round condoned the land-
lords asserted revenue-defrauding proclivities. The
riding officer of the district very seldom visited the
World’s End. Some folk said that he was bribed ; others
that he shied the place, because—fierce-looking fellow
though he was, with his dark eyes and dark whiskers almost
hiding his dark face, as he trotted along in his gilt-buttoned
blue coat on his high stepping bay horse, with brass-
mounted pistols in his holsters, and brass-hilted cutlass
clattering at his side he was just a little bit afraid of the
sometimes reckless rowdies who used the house.
Poachers frequented it, and prizefighters sometimes went


into training there. The most disreputable of the
farmers’ men and mechanics of the neighbourhood, lazy
fellows who loafed more than half of their time away,
and although they would not work regularly for honest
wages, were not particular as to the legality of anything
the landlord bribed them to do with bottles of brandy and
gallons of beer, were other customers at the World’s End.
The bargemen were a rough, brawling, dog-fighting
lot. A few of them were nautical dandies —wore striped,
tasselled, dangling night-caps, curls, ear-rings, red shirts,
and long knives like foreign sailors, and were as free,
too, as foreign sailors in the use of their knives in quarrels.
There were often tremendous rows in the World’s End
skittle-alley—rows that left red stains on the boards and
pins. The landlord, a big, strong, fearless man, who
always kept his head clear, although he often drank a
good deal more than his quarrelsome customers, at whom
he sneered for getting drunk and fighting when they
could gain nothing by it, would interfere when he thought
it likely that downright murder would be done, but for
the most part he let the combatants fight out their
squabbles, smoking his pipe and sipping his grog in
contemptuous indifference ; whilst the rural police con-
stables gave the World’s End a wider berth even than
it got from the riding officer. Of all this, however,
Harry and Katie knew nothing. They wanted some-
thing to eat, and then to go to bed ; and therefore they
were glad enough to see a house before them, and hurried
towards the inn’s front door.
It was ajar. When they had pushed it open, a woman
who was sitting in the bar gave a start. She did not look
by any means a good woman, and yet there was some-
thing good-natured in her face.


“ Why, wherever did you spring from ? ” she cried.
“ What a place for children like you to come to ! ”
Harry told her their story, and just as he was finishing
it the landlord came to the window of the bar.
“Yes, we can give you bed and board,” he said,
“ though we only promise good entertainment to man
and beast, and you ain’t nayther. Anyhow you ain’t a
man, and I suppose you wouldn’t like any to say you
was a beast. Of course you must pay me. We can’t
afford to give free lodgings, especially to young ladies
and gentlemen. Let’s see what money you’ve got.
Fork out, young un.”
Harry pulled out the little handful of halfpence, which
he had found was all that remained of his and Katie’s
ready cash, and for half a minute the landlord looked
disappointed.
Harry offered him the money, saying—
“ That’s all Fve got here, but if you’ve a trap, we’ll
hire it, and you can drive us back to Mudcliffs, and
aunt will pay you, and give you something for your
trouble as well —that is, if you don’t ask too much.
Or, if you know the way, you could go back with us
in the boat. That would be better fun, and besides,
we could put it back where we got it from without any
fuss.”
“No, no, my young squire, put back your coppers,
I don’t want ’em; I was only jokin’. We’ll make you
as comfortable as we can—of course you won’t expec’
silk curtains an’ goold plate in an out o’ the way place
like this —an’ I’ll git you back to your aunt somehow or
t’other. Make your minds easy about that. An’ now,
missis, I’ll leave the young lady and gemman to you.
When they’ve had summat to eat, you’d better put them


to sleep somewheres out o’ the noise. Good night, miss;
good night, young master.”
The children had a snug supper in the bar, and
then the landlady took them up to their beds in
two funny little cupboard-like rooms opening into
one another. The door between they left open, and
tired though they were, had a chat before they fell
asleep.
“ The landlady seems very kind,” said Katie.
“And so’s the landlord,” answered Harry; “only, of
course men don’t go kissing every one like you women.
I hate such slobbering. I don’t mind you kissing me,
and Mrs. M'Grath, and Charlotte perhaps, and Mrs. Pren-
dergast, but I feel just as if a snail was crawling up my
face when other women kiss me.” Having made this
ungallant speech, Harry fell asleep, and Katie soon fol-
lowed his example. If Harry could have heard the
landlord’s share in a conversation which took place whilst
they slumbered, he would have altered his opinion as
to the landlord’s kindness.
“ Look here, old ooman,” Boniface was saying, “if I
was to take ’em back to-morrer, I could only charge for
supper, bed and breakfast, and chaise-hire, and it ain’t
much I could clap on to that, and I doubt whether I
should git much for my trouble out of the old gal till
she’s regular scared. I can make out from what the
young chap says, that’s she’s a screw; but she’s got the
charge on ’em—is ’sponsible, you see, for ’em to their guv-
nur. So she’d be likely to stump up pretty tidy to get tidin’s
on ’em, if they was kep’ back for a bit. It’s like as it is
with the dawgs. The more folks valleys them, and the
less chance they’re afraid there is they’ll git ’em back
when they’re stole, the more they’ll offer for ’em. We’ll


wait till there’s a reward for ’em, old gall, afore we let the
young swell hire that trap o’ ourn he talked so flash
about. Oh, yes, treat ’em as kind as ever you like.
That’ll pay. Anyhow it’s your business, not mine.
Mine’s to git money out o’ the kids, and I mean to do
it, for I’m precious hard up jest now. So you see they
don’t give us the slip when I ain’t in the way. It’s a
safe game to play. It’ll be easy to flummox the kids,
and if they was to find out and tell tales arterwards, there’s
our words and a dozen more to set agin theirs ; mind
you keep a special sharp eye on the boy. If havin’ his
sister with him didn’t tie him by the leg like, we
shouldn’t be able to keep him here long, I guess, unless
we locked him up in the cellar.”
Harry had been asleep for about an hour when he
was awoke by a noise in the room. He started up in
his bed, and by the light of the moon saw a man feeling
in the pockets of his clothes, which he had hung on the
back of a chair.
“Who’s that? What do you want here?” shouted
Harry.
“All right, young master, don’t flurry yourse'r,
answered the landlord. “ You see I’m ’sponsible for my
lodgers’ property, an’ I on’y wanted to see whether you’d
a watch or any walleybles like that as I could ha’ took
charge on till mornin’, becos, you see, a landlord can’t
pick his customers,let him be ever so respectable hisself,
and there’s queer folks as gits beds here at times. There’s
your clothes and your coppers all right—see, one, two,
three, four, five, six, seven, eight, nine, and three ha’-
pence, jest as you counted ’em to me. Good night, sir
sorry I roused you out o’ your sleep. Look, here’s a
bolt at the top o’ the door. You git on a chair and


shoot it when I’ve gone out. Then nobody can git in
to molest ye.”
In the morning the landlord professed to have sent a
man to a village some miles off to borrow a gig.
“ That’ll hold the three on us,” he said. “ I’m
pretty big, but then you’re little ’uns, so we shan’t have
to squeege much. Besides there’s nothin’ else to be got
about here, excep’ a dung-cart.”
The World’s End had an old high-walled garden, in
which the children were allowed to be by themselves,
and they -were free to make play-rooms of some empty
garrets, but if they went out into the yards or on to
the wharf, the landlord or his wife was sure to join them.
The woman did her best to amuse them, and in a gruff
way, the landlord did a little to help her, and at first
they were amused. They had pigeons and poultry, and
cows and pigs, to look at, and quite a little menagerie of
fighting dogs, fancy dogs, and sporting dogs belonging
either to the landlord or to his customers. As they
were poking about in one of the yards w r ith the landlord,
Harry peered through a chink into a chaise-house, and
suddenly cried out —
“ Why, there’s a gig, and a light cart in here.”
“ Ah, but,” said the landlord, not in the least abashed,
“ they’re both broken, else do you think I should ha’
sent all that way to borrer a gig? Besides all my horses
are down at grass with their shoes off, excep’ the one the
chap’s got I’ve sent arter the gig.”
For a time these excuses satisfied Harry, but as hours
wore on, and no man appeared returning from the village,
our babes in the marsh began to get fidgety. Harry asked
the landlord whether he could not take them back to Mud-
cliffs in the boat, or send some one with them.


“ Lor bless yer ! ” said the landlord, “ if I was to try
to find my way back to Mudcliffs by water, I should
lose my way pretty nigh as soon as you would if you was
to try by yourselves—an’ that’s in two twos ; an’ I haint
got ne’er a one to send as does know the way, even if I
could spare him. Besides, that ’ere boat as you made
uncommon free with yesterday—axin’ your pardon, m ss,
but your brother did ought to ha’ known better, —be-
longs to a old chap that don’t live far from here ; so I
sent it round to him this mornin’ afore you was down.
He’s an uncommon queer old chap. He’d cut up un-
common rough if he knew how the boat got ’ere. Lucky
for you he don’t. He’d ’ave ye up for stealin’ as sure as
yer name is what it is. But I didn’t let out. He
thinks she got adrift. Make yer minds easy. If my
chap don’t turn up afore night, we shall be able to start
to-morrer mornin’.”
Harry began now to doubt the landlord’s good faith,
and as the day wore on his suspicions increased. To-
wards evening the children were standing with the land-
lord on the wharf. Even the leaves of the row of
poplar-trees that lined one side of the inn-garden, were
quite still. A flock of rooks flying home to their distant
roost blotted the crimson and orange western sky,
but the time for the inn’s revels had not commenced.
A dull rumble, followed by a clash of scattered pins
came now and then from the skittle-alley, but there was
only one man in it; playing by himself to get his hand in
for more serious pastime. Every one belonging to the
inn stood on the wharf watching a barge which was
slowly coming up the Backwater. Her bowsprit was
hauled up at almost right angles. Her red mainsail had
not been furled, but it gave her no way. She was being


towed by her boat. The mate had stripped, and swum
beside her in the glassy water, with his dog paddling in
front of him; and neither had any difficulty in keeping
up with the craft.
At last the barge was moored alongside the wharf, and
on it the bargemaster stood chatting with the landlord.
He noticed the children, and asked who they were. The
landlord stepped aside before he answered.
When he had muttered something, the master gave a
grin, cast a curious, amused look at the children, and
then saying, u Well, mate, it’s no business o mine , I
won’t spoil sport —I’m off to the village, I shall be back
in an hour,” struck into the rough little road which led
from the wharf on the right.
Harry had quick eyes and ears.
“ Oh, oh,” he thought, “ there’s a village not so very
far off then.”
That night, when he and his sister were snug abovestairs,
Harry whispered to his sister his conviction that the
landlord wanted to keep them prisoners. “ But he shan’t
though,” Harry went on. “ We’ll put out the candle;
but don’t undress, Katie, only keep as still as if you were
sound asleep.” They found it hard work to sit quite
still; at the most only whispering to one another almost
inaudibly, without going to sleep ; but at last the house
was shut up, and quite quiet Harry allowed the reveller
who was last to leave, half-an-hour’s start, so that he
might get well upon his way, and then proceeded to
business.
He knotted their sheets together, tied one end of the
rope thus made to a post of his bedstead, which, even
if it had not been very heavy, was so jammed in the little
room that it could not possibly have been dragged even


an inch along the floor. Then opening his window softly
he lowered the other end of his rope to the ground, and
having directed Katie what to do, slid down and steadied
the sheet ladder for Katie to descend. Noiselessly as
prowling cats they crept past the inn, but once fairly in
the little rough road, they sped along it, hand in hand,
as fast as hares. They had not run more than a
quarter of a mile before they had a great fright. They
stumbled over a drunken man, who was snoring, stretched
right across the middle of the lane. After giving a grunt,
a growl, and a kick, however, he snored himself off to
sleep again, and they hurried on unharmed. In less than
half an hour’s time they reached a village. In spite of
the difference in the weather, and other circumstances,
Harry could not help thinking of the night on which he
reached Mrs. M'Grath’s village, since the moon, which
had been clouded, suddenly shone out upon a church
which Harry felt almost sure they had passed upon their
road to Mudcliffs. A finger-post a little further on proved
that he was right. “To Mudcliffs, ” they read in
the bright moonlight, and along the Mudcliffs road once
more they scampered.
An early cart jogging towards the little watering-place
with fruit and vegetables, gave them a lift, and dropped
them at their lodgings before their aunt had come down
to breakfast. She was so overjoyed to hear of their safe
return, that she rushed down to greet them in her peignoir
and without her false front.
The normal Miss Delane, however, soon re-asserted
itself.
She rated the children soundly because, owing to their
escapade, she had been obliged to take the apartments for
another week, and to advertise a reward for tidings of


them —both being expenses which their escape had
rendered useless. When the county paper reached the
World’s End in the course of that Saturday, and the
landlord found from Miss Delane’s advertisement what a
nice little sum he had lost through Harry’s having been
too wide awake for him, he swore terribly at the children
and things in general. He threatened to horsewhip his
wife, and in the evening fought with the bargemaster, one
or other of whom he maintained had helped the children
to get away. It was owing to these quarrels that the
truth about his little scheme at last leaked out. After
all, he got far more than he deserved. Miss Delane
laughed Harry’s suspicions to scorn, said it was perfectly
ridiculous, most highly unbecoming, and exceedingly
ungrateful for two decently-brought up children to have
stolen like thieves in the night out of the house of a
respectable man who had kindly sheltered them—spoiling
his bed-linen, too ; and in spite of her general stinginess,
sent the “ respectable man ” a little present in addition
to payment for her niece and nephew’s board and
lodging. She got a little value for the additional rent
she had to pay, since she remained at Mudcliffs until the
Monday morning. All this time Katie and Harry were
strictly confined to the house, except when their aunt
marched them to church, just like prisoners, on the
Sunday. She seemed, indeed, half inclined to handcuff
them.
Harry was delighted when the Dulchester omnibus
stopped to take them up, even though he had again to
ride inside. The thought of being once more with Mr,
Summers, and Charlotte, and Susan, and Peter and Mrs.
Prendergast—with such adventures to relate, —quite re-
conciled him to leaving Mudcliffs.


ln front of a public-house in the village which he and
Katie had first reached when they ran away from the
World’s End, stood the bargemaster, with a black eye.
He did not notice them as the omnibus rocked past
beneath its high-piled load of luggage, but they instantly
recognised him.
Little did they think that he had to thank them for his
black eye. However it did not seem to have done him
much harm. He was quite used to such trifling accidents,
and was cracking jokes and sharing a pot of beer with
some village folks, bearing apparently no malice to any
one.


CHAPTER XII.
CORRESPONDENCE.
ARRY and Katie, after a brief farther stay
k WA B at their aunt’s, went back to their schools,
o ICTI h How Harry got on at his shall be told in
his own words :
“ Oct. 18th, 18—,
“Dear Katie —l hope you are quite well and jolly. I ain’t.
This is a beastly hole. Beastlier than ever, I think. What do you
think that old screw of a Daddy has been and gone and done stopt
my pocket-money again and I shan’t be able to subscribe to the fire-
works isn’t it a shame. And it wasn't my fault. Not all only some
of the fellows here are such sneaks. A lot of us had been shying,
and one of the stones went through Daddy’s own window and
smashed his lamp as well. It wasn’t me that threw that one but
when Daddy came out like a raging bull and collared me I was not
going to tell a lie, and say I hadn’t been shying. All the other
fellows sneaked off except Steele. You would like Tom he is true
as steel Tom is. He hadn’t broken the window any more than I
had but he came back and said that it was as much his fault as mine
and I said it wasn’t a bit his fault and then Daddy said Well then
I’ll punish you both because I’ve no doubt you both were to blame
so he stopt Tom’s money as well as mine. He caned us besides but
we don’t care for his canings he is so fat he can’t hit hard and he gets
out of breath so soon. But I shall look so mean if I don’t subscribe
to the fireworks and I haven’t a penny left. I say Katie, could you


236 THE ADVENTURES OF HARRY DELANE.
lend me five shillings. I’ll pay you back at Christmas. Do you
know where we are going to spend Christmas. At Mrs. M ‘Grath’s
won t that be jolly. I shall ask her to ask Tom Steele too. He is
such a capital fellow, and his friends live in France, and his father’s
m the army out in India. She is coming back next month, and
papa has given leave, and she says she will have us if she has to
charge Aunt and Daddy and all the rest of them with fixed umbrellas.
1 ® he , a funny bnck - Have you heard from papa. He only sent
me a little note saying that he hoped I was not a milksop afraid of
a few knocks and that whatever other people round me mio-ht do I
was always to remember to behave like a gentleman. But he has
written a long ktter about it to some gentleman he knows, and Mrs.
- Grath knows. I don’t know his name but he is to make inquiries
and if he says this is a bad school I am to be taken away at Christmas
and sent somewhere else only not back to old Prender<mst’s. lam
sure he can’t say it’s a good one. Most of the fellows are such
blackguards. They bully and tell lies and tell tales, and what do
you think Kahesomeof them prig. I don’t mean robbing the orchard
- hlD f lke that ~ Jt s Pnme fun slipping down by the water-
pipe and getting your pillow-case half full of apples-that’s only
spoiling the Egyptians but some of the sneaks crib things out of
one another s lockers. Daddy sometimes says that if Igoon as I
do, he n expel me before the half is out. I only wish he would.
Black De\ il is the only gentleman about the place and he is going
to leave because he can’t make anything out of such a set of sweeps.
Give my love to your friend Miss Violet Vivian and say I am sure
she must be very pretty because she has got such a pretty name. I
send the lock of hair she wants next time. I can’t send any
US Ae ** before yesterday and 1
got to pick up any of mine and he has cropt us so close that
of T ° ff WC lo ° k juSt Hke a lot <>f chaps let out
gol Comical little Perks minor says that he likes having his
ct‘e Xh U £ that bCaSt ° f a Pl - can>t P u]l M? Pig
it on v 7 , He knOWS 1 should P itch into him ifte tried
t on, \ou can t think what a coward the fat lubber is.
I remain, my dear Katie,
“ Your very affectionate brother,
“ Harey Delane.”
You won’t forget the 51-. Katie.”


To this Katie replied—
“ Barbauld Bower, Blackheath,
“near London, Oct. 2gtk, 18 —.
“ My Darling Haery,
“ I was so pleased to receive your beautiful letter, but why don’t
you write a little plainer ? I suppose it is because you have to wiite
so many Greek exercises. Do you do parsing in Greek ? Ido not
like parsing, it is so tiresome, and I cannot see the use of it, and
Violet says just the same. We can talk well enough, she says, with-
out knowing that we are talking adverbs, and degrees of comparison,
and infinitive moods, and all that nonsense. I had to get dearest Violet
to help me read your sweet letter. She is a little offended with you
and says that she hopes you will not presume to send her a lock of
hair which the barber has cut off, and you have picked up from the
floor. She says she never heard of anything so unromantic. She
pretends to like Master Steele best now, but that is only to make you
jealous, and me too, for lam quite fond of him, only I am sure I
shall never love any one except my own dearest Harry. I am
different from Violet. She does not seem to care much for her
brothers, but then she has ever so many of them, and they do tease
her so when she is at home. One of them actually set her beautiful
hair on fire, on purpose! I send you a curl that you may see what
very beautiful hair it is. Violet wishes me to say that she knows
nothing about my sending it, else it would not have been sent, but
don’t mind, Harry, lam sure she loves you in her heart. We were
hath very, very sorry to find that you were so unhappy. lam afraid
Mr. Brown is a very wicked old man. I am sure he is very cross,
though they say fat people are good-natured. Violet says that if that
is true, he must be very good-natured, whatever you may make out,
according to your account of his size. I often make her laugh by
telling her the stories you have told me about him.. What does he
do with your pocket-money, when he stops it ? Violet says that she
believes he gives it to Mrs. Brown to buy caps and aprons. At our
school they keep the forks and spoons the girls bring with them.
The plate-basket looks so funny, just as if it belonged to the whole
alphabet, but I wonder they don’t feel ashamed when they give parties.
Violet says that they make out it is family plate, and that there are
so many different letters on it because they have had ever so many


more ancestors than other people. Five grandmothers apiece , Violet
says. She is a very funny girl, and wouldjust suit you. I send you
ten shillings, Harry dear, with my very best love. I have put it into
a sht in a bit of cardboard, and tied it round with silk. I hope no
one will steal it. I have wrapped it up in wadding, so that it may
not befell. I had only five and sevenpence-halfpenny, but Violet
cut me the rest, and one of the big girls changed it for half-a-
so\ereign. She ga\e me a halfpenny in, when she knew why I
wanted it. Violet had just a half-penny too little. Of course I
mean to pay them both back. It won’t be any trouble, for lam
not so extravagant with my presents as you are, Master Harry. The
girls here say that you must be a dear boy. I hope you will get it
m time, and that you will enjoy your fireworks. I would have sent
it before, only I could not. I don’t know how it is at your school
but we can only write a long letter here on the sly, a little bit at a
time, and it is no good writing at all, if you don’t send a long letter.
1 liked yours so very much because it was so long for you. I should
have sent the money at once, only we girls cannot break bounds like
you daring boys. Violet laughed about the waterpipe, and said you
must be very brave, but I hope you won’t do it again, Harry dear.
\ou might slip and break your neck, and do you think it is quite
right ? Even Violet would not say so. She only said that she was
sure that none of the sneaks would have dared to do it, though most
likely they ate most of your apples and pears, and then were ready
to tell tales. I don’t want, my dear Harry, to do anything the least
mite of a bit like those nasty boys. Violet calls them toads, and if
I were you, Harry, I would not call your nice head master that
naughty name, like the other boys. Violet says that this time she
shall send her love to Master Steele, next time, if you have sent your
hair, and Master Steele has not sent her a lock of his first, perhaps
she will send you her respectful compliments, and the time after her
kind regards, if you behave yourself, but she does not mean to send
you her love again until she has seen you, to find out whether you
are worthy of it, and you have gone down on you? knees, and humbly
begged her pardon for the gross insult you have offered her If you
do it very prettily, she says that, perhaps, she will let you kiss her
shoe the second time you meet. She is such a comical girl Fancy
you kissing any girl’s shoe, I tell her. She is almost as glad as I
am that you are sure to be taken away from that hateful school.


What fun it would be if you were to come to Blackheath. —Your ever
fondly loving, Katie.”
“ P.S '.—It will be delicious to be with you at Christmas, and I am
sure it is exceedingly kind of Mrs. M'Grath to invite us, but you
must not be angry with me, Harry, if I am afraid that I shall not
like her quite so well as you do. Mr. and Mrs. Stephen, and Monk
and the cob seem like old friends to me, though I have never seen
them, but I have not quite made up my mind about Mrs. M Grath. ’’


CHAPTER XIII.
EXAMINATION.
ITH growing glee had Harry cut off the
notches on his stick calendar, blotted out
the squares upon his card.
! ” he cried. “ There’ll be no
more regular work. Examination begins to-morrow.
It 11 be a bore, but there 11 be no lessons to learn, and
when it’s over, good-bye to this hateful old hole ! ”
Harry felt that he had reached the last stage in his
drear} school-journey—that he had, so to speak, given up
his ticket, and his train was rolling into the terminus.
That night “ evening-school ” was discontinued. A
few of the fellows kept indoors, getting up their pro-
positions, grinding away at their irregular verbs, and so
on ; but Harrj’ was one of the large majority who
preferred the long black gleaming slide that had been
cut out through the moonlit snow. Scur-r-r — hum-ni-tn
went the grinding heels. Tap-tap came the “postman’s
knock.” Up and down, with feet close together,
as if they were sliding a sailor’s hornpipe, bobbed some
of the boys. Others went down the slide like Mr


Pickwick, with their feet about a yard apart, and losing
their impetus turned round and flopped upon their backs
or knees and noses. “ Keep the pot boiling ! ” was the
general cry. One fellow cuts up another, he knocks
down the fellow in front of him, and the slide ends in a
kicking, cachinnating chaos of overturned urchins jumbled
against the play-ground wall like scared rats in the corner
of a rat pit. Up they scramble and race to the top of the
slide, again to go down it and down upon it once more
in jolly confusion. The school-bell rings, but discipline
is getting relaxed, and nobody heeds it until the scarred,
powdery slide has been swept, and bucketfuls of water
swished down it, to make it gleam unscarred once more
beneath the clear, cold moonlight. Then in the
youngsters, glowing, tingling, panting, tumble to evening
prayers, and afterwards file up to bed. As soon as the
ushers have gone down to their suppers, out come the
boys’ queer jumbles, including marmalade, pickled onions
and pork-pies, which derive additional zest from having to
be eaten on the sly. The writing-master, who, in spite of
his ravenous appetite, is very fond of hurrying over his
own supper, in order to have a chance of stealing up to
surprise the boys at their clandestine ccetuz, slinks up
the stairs as soft-footed as a cat, and suddenly makes his
appearance in Harry’s bed-room. In spite of his soft-
footedness, his tread has been heard, and glims are all
doused when he looks in. There is a bewraying scent of
sundry suddenly blown-out candles ; but the revellers he
had hoped to surprise are apparently all sound asleep,
cuddled up together with the remnants of their feast in
their blankets.
“ You can’t deceive me,” says Dumpty; but still the
boys snore on, louder than before.


One of the snores, however, ends in a smothered
giggle, and Dumpty pounces on the culprit plainly guilty
of having emitted the same. Dumpty puts down his
candle beside the culprit’s bed, pulls off the clothes, and
discovers Harry’s one school-boy friend, Tom Steele, and
also a curious miscellany of banqueting apparatus, which
Tom has swept up hastily under his counterpane. Inter
alia , Harry’s knife, with which Dumpty is well acquainted,
owing to the times he has confiscated it, when he could
get hold of it, as a punishment for the splitting of his
cane for the insertion of a farther-splitting hair, &c., &c.
Dumpty hates Harry even worse than he hates all the
other boys in the school.
“ Delane ! ” Dumpty thundered, or rather attempted to
thunder, since his voice, like that of the Monument in
the old song, was “ rather weak than strong,” although he
believed it to be like St. Paul’s, which, according to the
same song,
“ shook the very walls,
And sounded like a Chinese gong. ”
A snore, like a blast from a defiant trumpet, was Harry’s
answer, and Tom Steele’s bottled-up merriment exploded
in a roar of laughter.
“ What are you laughing at, sir ? ” growled Dumpty.
“A funny thought,” answered Tom; and then Harry
laughed outright. Dumpty would have liked to drub
them both until he could drub them no longer, but when
a “ discipline ” enforcer inspifes no love or respect in
those whom he bullies, he, out of consideration for his
own skin, is apt to be cautious as to the extent to which
he pushes his “ authority ” when the term of his precious
discipline is drawing to a close.


Dumpty contented himself with setting the two boys a
lot of “ Latin lines ” to write out in play-hours on the
morrow—“ xst Book of Virgil.” Dumpty to have saved
his life could not have construed a Latin sentence five
words long ; but he pretended to be a classical scholar,
and used to frown most profoundly over the “ lines ”
brought up to him as the result of his “ impositions.”
Through having set a good bit of the first Book of the
time after time, he had got to know the first few
verses by sight. Harry and Tom, therefore, next day
began their task with the proper Anna virumque, <fec. ;
but a long string of “ nonsense verses,” copied out of
their Bradley's Versification , came next, spangled with
such gems of Mantuan minstrelsy as the following ;
“ Odi te, Bestia ! Tu es magnus stultus! Ut tu es !
\ erte circum, et rota circum, et salta Jacobe Corve !
Hoki Poki \\ inki Wurae ! Quomodo amas poma tua terrse facta?
Fuit anus, ut ego audivi dictum, quae ivit in forum ut porcos suos
venderet.
Rosa, Rosa, carboni simillima Rosa !
Utinam incremer si non amo Rosam.
Humptius Dumptius sedit in murum,
H. Dumptius magnum casum habuit,
Et quum fl. Dumptius resurrexit,
Nec omnes regis,' equi, nec omnes regis homines,
Humptium Dumptiun rejungere potuerunt.”
Harry and Tom were not the unassisted authors of
these brilliant, idiomatic, and most metrical effusions.
Bad as the tone of the school was, all the fellows had,
at any rate, good feeling enough to hate Dumpty for his
brutal tyranny over those he ventured to tyrannise over,
although a good many of them did just the same kind of
things themselves.


The lines were handed up to Dumpty just when the
boys were rung in for the beginning of the examination.
Most gravely he perused them, whilst the whole school
giggled. The head-master came in. The giggles were
instantly hushed; but he had noticed them, and asked
Dumpty to allow him to look at the remarkable composi-
tion the lines of which Dumpty was counting. When he
had seen what it was, the head-master could hardly keep
from laughing outright in the face of the despotic little
dolt who had been gravely perusing it. Scanning was
the first word that ran to the tip of my pen, but in such
a case it would be ridiculous, of course, to talk about
scanning. However, the head-master kept his countenance,
and said, as sternly as he could, “ Go to your seats, boys.
Understand, I shall allow no liberties to be taken just
because the holidays are coming,” and then carried off
the tasks to his own desk, behind the lid of which he
was soon detected studying them at his leisure, with ever
and anon a suppressed chuckle, which almost choked
him, of most unarchididaskalian amusement.
The examination papers were given out. The assis-
tant-master sentries walked their silent rounds to guard
the school from crib or copy. Tick, tick, tick went the
fat-faced clock, which also seemed to be looking forward
to a vacation in which it would have no more ticking or
striking to do, but would slumber on in unwound-up re-
pose. Scratch, scratch went the pens, but ere long heads
began to be scratched as well as paper. The bulk of the
boys had answered as many as they could manage of
their first set of questions and were yawning over their
unused scribbling paper, half admiring, half sneering at
the fellows who still kept pegging on—undismayed by
the longest and most learned questions, only stopping


the racehorse speed of their pens now and then to glance
anxiously at the clock in order to discover whether they
had still time left to answer every question. Ere long,
however, it gave its chokingly gurgling warning, a wel-
come sound to every one except the unfinished indus-
trious ones. The twelve strokes of noon tinged out.
The variously inscribed, and for the most part very
scantily scrawled over slips of answer-papers were
gathered in, and all, except a few hyper-industrious
students who immediately lugged out their books to
refresh their memories as to the afternoon’s examination
subjects, rushed out to refresh their bodies in the play-
ground’s frosty air.
Although a dab at taw, Harry was not a dunce at
Syntax, and, indeed, I think that anybody who is a
downright dunce at any one thing is pretty sure to be a
dunce at most things ; but I cannot pretend that Harry
took very much interest in that examination. He only
wanted it to be over. He was going to leave the school
he hated, and that “brick of a Mrs. M'Grath” had
invited Tom Steele as well as Katie to spend the
Christmas holidays whth him at her house. Katie, Mrs.
M‘Grath, Tom, Monk, the cob, Mr. and Mrs Stephen,
all together, and no aunt! No wonder Harry’s bosom’s
lord sat lightly on his throne at the anticipation of such a
vacation. If only Charlotte had been added to the party,
and Mr. Summers and Mrs. Prendergast, and Peter
could look in every now and then, and papa arrive unex-
pectedly from Tasmania! However, Harry was de-
lighted enough with things as they were.
At last dawned the morning, big with the pleasant fate
of Harry and of Tom. Stephen and the cob had come.
It did not take Harry long to get through his farewells.


The head-master was the only one left at the school to
he was sorry to say good-bye. Light luggage was
stowed away in the little chaise, heavier luggage being
left for the carrier. Harr} 7 took the reins and his seat in
front, with Tom beside him, Stephen climbed to his
perch behind, and out between the great blue gates the
willing cob went at a gallop.
“ lou needn’t hold him in, sir,” said Stephen, “if he
wants to go. He’s been roughed.”
As soon as Harry got outside his prison walls, he stood
up, and looking back and waving his whip, he gave
three hurrahs so hearty that Stephen was obliged to
catch hold of him to keep him from over-balancing him-
self, whilst even some grim colliers, who were passing,
relaxed into a grin.
“Oh, Tom, ’cried Harry, as he dropped back into
his seat again, “if you weren’t going back either, I
should be so jolly. But never mind, we’ll talk to Mrs.
M‘Grath, and she’ll manage, you see, and you’ll be sent
to the jolly school I’m going to. I don’t know where it
is yet, but I’m sure it must be jolly, or else I’m sure she
wouldn't have had anything to do with it.”
Stephen, in a decorous way, was quite as fond of a
bit of fun as the boys. The news he had brought from
Mrs. M‘Grath’s was very pleasant, about everybody and
everything including the “ bearing ” power of the ponds.
So, altogether, it was a very jolly ride the boys had be-
hind the cob, whose armed hoofs rung on the hard
shining road as he hurried home to the plentiful proven-
der and snug shelter of his own stable.


CHAPTER XIV.
MRS. M‘GRATH’S.
E will pass over the greeting, of his share in
Jft'SAWv which Tom had no reason to complain.
The boys reached Killarney, as the patriotic
Mrs. M'Grath had called her pretty little
English place, though its “ lakes ” were only two ponds,
in good time for luncheon, after which Mrs. M‘Grath
and Katie, and Harry, and Monk went out to show Tom
the lions of the locality. So far as her own possessions
were concerned, there was plenty of time to do it in, al-
though Mrs. M'Grath dined at four or five —a comfort-
able common-sensical hour, however barbarously early it
may seem to the people who now-a-days, as Mrs.
M'Grath would have said, will soon eat their to-day’s
dinner to-morrow morning before breakfast. Tom had
already made acquaintance with Monk, and, of course,
the cob, whose surname was Dumpling ; but now he had
to be introduced to the cows, an Alderney, a Brittany,
and “ Mee counthrywoman,” as Mrs. M'Grath, who, be-
cause she had hardly ever lived in Ireland, was rather
fond of exaggerating her Irish womanhood, called her —


a little roguish-eyed Kerry cow ; and to the peacock and
peahen, the tame pheasants, the guinea-fowl, the laying
hens, the frozen-out fancy water-fowl, and other perma-
nent poultry pets, by name; but “ I couldn’t find it in
my heart to make a pet of a creature I was going to
make a dinner off, and so I never give the fowls we just
keep for killing names,” said Mrs. M'Grath. “Stephen
shoots the pigeons now and again, the cruel wretch. It
goes against my heart to let him, though I’m
monstrous fond of pigeon pie. Sure, I keep pigs—didn’t
I tell ye I was an Irishwoman ? Come and see them.
This ‘gintleman’s ’ name is St. Pathrick ! D’ye see now
how he hears me and comes up to have his ears
scratched ? Ye’ll have a bit of his own brother, Peter,
for breakfast to-morrow.”
Mrs. M'Grath was not very logical, but evidently she
was very fond of having pets, and treated them very
kindly whilst she kept them. In one of the prettiest
parts of her garden she had a wire aviary for English
small birds, with curtains to keep out the sun and wind
and rain when inconvenient, and indoors she had a cage
full of canaries, and half a dozen more hung here and
there in separate cages; a pet goldfinch that could draw
water for itself, a grey parrot, a red and green parrot, a
cockatoo, a pair of shell-parakeets, and a toucan; an
aquarium, a bowl of gold-fish, a dormant tortoise wrapped
up in wadding, a Persian cat, and a pug, and a King
Charles s spaniel, which last two quarrelled worse than
cat and dog. It was quite a work to look after Mrs.
M'Grath’s pets, and, of course, it was just the kind of
work which boys and girls would like to have a hand in.
When the live stock had been inspected, Mrs. M'Grath
took her young friends through her greenhouse and her


garden and her orchard, proudly showing her flowers
and her fruit trees and her miscellaneous vegetable pos-
sessions, and praising Stephen, whom just before,
perhaps, she had been calling a wretch, or something of
that sort, up to the skies for the admirable way in which
he managed everything and looked after the helps he got
in, and Mrs. Stephen, who, too, perhaps had but a
minute before been blown up sky high, for the inimi-
table manner in which she looked after the dairy and
poultry, and yet kept “ those girls ”in order. “ They’re
good girls,” Mrs. M'Grath would say, rolling her r’s to
prove that she was an Irishwoman, “ and yet they’d rob
me night and day just out of carelessness. Right and
left I should be robbed if it wasn’t for good Stephen and
his wife. They’re not bright like the Irish—they’ve no
fun, no ‘ divil ’ in them—but they’re ten times as honest
and industrious. I’ve tried Irish servants, but I could
never get on with them at all, for I’ve no head for man-
agement myself. I was never meant to be mistress of
anything except another man’s house, —my own hus-
band’s I mean, and sure he ought to take all the trouble
of that off my hands. What d’ye marry a man for,
Katie, darling, if the woman has to look after the
house ? ”
Very much amused with their good-natured, chattering
hostess, the children followed her down to the pond in
the little paddock. A hole had been broken in it for
the geese and ducks, but the rest of the surface was a
thick sheet of ice. Having first taken a slide up and
down, the boys launched the high and dry little punt
for a sledge. Mrs. M‘Grath and Katie got in, and the
boys drove them backwards and forwards merrily.
Sometimes the drivers dropped upon their noses, and the


sledge running away from them went with such a bump
against the bank as almost to upset the freight, but that
only made the fun the greater. Mrs. M'Grath enjoyed
it as much as her young friends, and the children, big
and little, were still busy over their game, when a bell
from the cottage reminded them that dinner would soon
be ready. Their exercise had given them an appetite,
and yet they were almost reluctant to leave their lark on
the “ lake ” of Killarney. As they were walking up to
the house, all a-glowing and laughing, a turkey-cock
suddenly gave a gobble, gobble, gobble !
“Ah, poor fellow,” exclaimed Mrs. M'Grath, instantly
made serious. “We’re to have him for dinner on
Christmas day. Isn’t it a shame to kill a fine fellow like
him that we may gobble, gobble, gobble ? I declare I’m
often ashamed to look my own cocks and hens in the
face, when I think how I’ve eaten ’em up. You remind
me, Harry, to speak to Stephen, if I don’t happen to see
his wife, about the turkey. It’ll be tough if it is killed
a minute later than to-night, especially if this weather
lasts.”
Fresh from school fare, the children thought Mrs.
M‘Grath’s ordinary little dinner an extraordinary little
feast; afterwards they spent a very pleasant evening.
“ It’s a treat to have ye,” said Mrs. M'Grath ; “ye
amuse me.”
They certainly thought it a treat to be had, for she
unquestionably amused them and made them so com-
fortable, to boot.
That night, as Harry and Tom lay in their pretty
double-bedded room, on bedding, oh! how different
from that on which Dumpty had pounced, Tom said to
Harry —


“ You were quite right about Mrs. M'Grath, Delane.
She’s a regular brick.”
“That she is, and no mistake about it,” Harry
enthusiastically replied.
“ But then, Harry, I don’t think she’s nearly as pretty
as you made out,” Tom went on. “Your snuff-box is
prettier, and that isn’t a beauty.”
“Mrs. M'Grath not pretty!” Harry retorted, in lofty
indignation. “Much you know about women, Tom.
You show me a woman that’s prettier. I ain’t talking
about snuff-boxes, though I’m sure mine is the image of
her, except that it isn’t nearly good-looking enough.
You show me a real live woman half as pretty as Mrs.
M'Grath! ”
“Why, there’s your sister,” cried Tom, readily
accepting the challenge. “ Miss Katie’s ten times
prettier than Mrs. M‘Grath.”
“ Oh,” answered Harry, only half mollified. “ Katie’s
a very good-looking girl, I know; everybody says so,
except aunt, and I should not care if nobody said so—
I should know it for myself. It isn’t because everybody
says she’s like me, only better-looking. Mrs. M‘Grath
says she isn’t better-looking, but that’s all nonsense. If
it wasn’t, I shouldn’t care. It’s women have to care
about being pretty, not men. Just fancy being a
pretty man, Tom—blushing and having nosegays and
smelling-bottles given you, and having your hand-
kerchief picked up. I know my sister’s a very pretty
girl, but I was talking about real women, Katie’s only a
girl.”
“ Isn’t she about as old as you are ? ” asked Tom, in a
half-snoring tone of voice. He was nearly asleep, but
still he had not quite got over the insult he had received


in being told that he, nearly three months older than
Harry, did not know anything about “ real women.”
Katie, lying awake alone, had also been, not talking,
but thinking Mrs. M'Grath over. So far as her beautiful
little bedroom went, she was delighted. If she had been
Queen of the Fairies, she could not have been more
delicately lodged. And then Mrs. M'Grath had been so
exceedingly kind, in so many ways—in spite of Miss
Katie’s rather obstinate determination not to be pleased
with Mrs. M‘Grath, she had been forced to like her so
much that she was half ashamed of still cherishing any of
her old prejudice against her hostess ; but still she could
not have praised her as Tom Steele praised her, whilst
Harry’s raptures about her would have seemed perfectly
ridiculous to Katie.
Next morning, after breakfast, Mrs. M'Grath said,
“ Well now, young people, we’ll have Dumpling put in,
and I’ll take you round and introduce you to my friends.
I have not many in this part of the world. Ido not
condescend to call upon the stuck-up county people.
Or, perhaps, it is they think themselves too high and
mighty to call upon me, though I come of good blood on
both sides, and married into a good family ; while some
of them—but every one knows what all but a few of
your English families are. Anyhow, it’s all the same.
We both of us get on a great deal better apart. I’ve
picked my friends, and they like me every bit as well as
I like them, and we’re exceedingly comfortable together,
I can assure ye.”
When the little chaise came round, Katie, who had
been scarcely able, as she silently complained, to get a
single word all to herself with Harry, hoped that the back-
seat would be assigned to him and her, but Mrs. M'Grath


said, “Now, Karry, why don’t you hand me in? You’re
my beau, you know. Jump in yourself,” she added.
“ You’re to drive. Katie and your friend will be very
snug behind. They can bill and coo like a pair of turtle-
doves or two young pigeons.”
Katie felt very disappointed at first, and half disposed
to hate Mrs. M'Grath, but she soon recovered her spirits.
A little snow had fallen in the night, but the sun was
shining brightly again from a blue sky, and Tom proved
himself a preux chevalier —looked after her wraps
assiduously, and chatted away in a style very different
from that of her first declared admirer, poor little Peter
Prendergast’s bashful stammerings.
They drove through the village, which looked very
pretty with its white-thatched roofs peeping from between
the white coral branches of the engirdling fruit-trees, and
paid their first visit to the vicar, a learned, kindly,
courteous old bachelor, whom Mrs. M'Grath called a
darling old duck of a man. As, however, children were
a puzzle to him, in reference to which he could only in-
quire anxiously every minute or so whether something
ought not be given them to eat, our young friends, who
had had a very good breakfast, were not sorry when they
started once more on their journey. They had an ex-
ceedingly pleasant ride, zig-zagging and winding from
house to house for hours, through a very pretty country.
The rooks looked extra black in more senses than one,
and the hares and rabbits rather shivery as they limped
about the furrows, brown-white like their own fuds; and
so did the sheep, munching turnips within hurdles. But
the deep-strewn straw-yards crowded with horses, sweet-
breathed cattle, snuggling and routing pigs, and pecking
and scratching poultry, had a cosy look, and the corn-


ricks and hay-stacks seasonably reminded the little party
of uncut and cut twelfth-cakes. Ever and anon, too,
where the sunlight lay warm, the snow melted and fell in
flashing jewels, or a breath of wind shook a spray, scatter-
ing the snow in powdered silver, and instantly hips and
haws gleamed out, and above the glossy, prickly dark, or
variegated leaves, the coral berries of the holly. Western
and well-wooded though the country was, there were not
many mistletoe berries to be seen. The oak trees and
the apple trees had been too well stripped of the dull-
green, pale-berried boughs for local and London con-
sumption. Christmas being so near at hand, everybody
on whom the children called was very jolly, and wanted
them, like the old vicar, to have something to eat and
drink, although they did not seem to think, like that good
old man, that they would need to be fed with a spoon
out of a basin, perched up in high chairs with bibs
fastened under their chins; and as their appetites
sharpened as they drove about through the keen winter
air, Katie and Mrs. M‘Grath, too, as well as Harry and
Tom, found that they could take a snack here and a
snack there, and yet have a good relish left for a regular
lunch to which they were invited, at a rambling old house
at which there was a swarm of children. All these, like
all the children of all the other friends on whom she
called that day, Mrs. M £ Grath invited to a grand juvenile
party she was going to give in honour of her young friends,
promising to find beds for her guests.
“ Why, my dear Mrs. M'Grath,” cried the mother ot
the swarm, “ where on earth could you stow mine with
all the rest you’ve invited and are going to invite ? ”
“ Oh, never fear,” answered Mrs. M £ Grath, “we’ll give
them a shake-down somewhere or other. If there’s a little


crowding, all the better fun at Christmas ; the more the
merrier, isn’t it ? ”
The children on both sides carried the proposition by
acclamation and with loud applause, and then Mrs.
M'Grath’s young friends received an invitation to a return
visit at the Manor House.
“We shan’t be able to give them half as much fun as
you can in other ways,” said Mrs. Golding, its mistress,
“but at any rate we can promise them plenty of room.”
“ Yes,” cried her eldest boy, Fred, “ I think we could
lodge pretty nearly halt the county, if the ghosts would
only be polite enough to give up their rooms for a night
or two at Christmas. I suppose we shouldn’t be thought
nearly so respectable if they got notice to quit and
minded it; but it would be a deal more convenient.
They frighten people away so. It’s a good thing there’s
such a lot of us, so that we can keep our courage up.”
Fred gave a hearty laugh, and Horace the brother
nearest him in age, tried to laugh as heartily ; but the
younger boys and girls, and Mrs. Golding looked grave,
and so did Mrs. M'Grath, who had heard a good deal
about the Marie Manor ghosts.
Our young friends, who had never heard of them be-
fore, looked up and stared with great interest.
“ I think it is as well, Fred dear, not to speak on such
subjects before young children,” said Mrs. Golding.
“ O mother,” answered Fred, “ I’m brave by daylight
—I can talk big enough then, but I haven’t any of what
Buonaparte used to call ‘ Two-o’-clock-in-the-morning
courage.’ I’ve been as puzzled as anybody then at the
noises I’ve heard; yes, and sometimes at the sights I’ve
seen, I can promise you.”
After luncheon, Katie, Harry, and Tom gladly accep-


ted an offer from Fred to show them a little of the old
place.
“ I’ll show you a little of it now,” he said, “ and a little
more when you come to stay with us ; but it would take
years to get a general knowledge of the place, and years
more to know it thoroughly. Though I was born in it,
and know it about as well as anybody, I don’t think I’ve
been in every hole and corner of it yet.”
The rooms that were kept in repair made a very good-
sized house; and besides these, there were rooms to a
certain extent habitable, but more or less in a state of
dilapidation, separated from the lawfully inhabited part
of the house by bricked-up ends of passages, and thick,
double-locked, heavily-bolted, strongly barred, stoutly-
studded, and nailed-up doors; and utterly dilapidated
chambers ; and chambers turned into offices ; and whilom
offices mere heaps of ruin.
It was a very pleasant place to ramble about in by day-
light, but after dusk, especially in winter, Katie thought
it was the kind of place in which the people would like
to keep very much together, with plenty of light in all
the rooms and passages, and servants would be very shy
of answering knocks at the door, more particularly the
back, or of going out of doors for anything.
“ Oh,” she cried, “ I hope there’ll be ever so many
people here when we come. I shouldn’t like to sleep
here except in a room with ever so many in, and rooms
all round with ever so many in.”
Harry asked what the ghost story was.
i£ The ghost story! ” answered Fred with a laugh;
“ why this place swarms with ghosts, as it does with rats.
No, not our ancestors’. The swells this place used to
belong to —the Maries, or De Maries, as they called


themselves—died out long before we were ever heard of.
And a good thing, too, for they seem to have been a
precious bad lot, judging from the rascals they’ve left be-
hind them. They’re not content with walking here, but
this place seems to be the house of call for all the unlaid
De Maries in the kingdom, and they can’t leave off their
old tricks now either. There’s one goes out from here,
in all kinds of forms, and plays all kinds of pranks in a
lane he haunts, called Marie’s Lane. It lies between
this and yours.”
The party stayed so long at Marie Manor that they had
to pay very hurried visits to Mrs. M'Grath’s other friends,
and darkness had fallen before they set out for home.
They had gone some way down a very dark lane, when
Mrs. M'Grath suddenly whispered—
“ Oh, this is Marie’s Lane. Make Dumpling go at
full gallop until we are out of it, Harry.”
Dumpling was nothing loth; but when they were half
way through, a tall dimly-white something glided from
the black hedge and clutched at the reins.
Dumpling gave a shy, Mrs. M'Grath gave a scream,
and clung to Harry', who, standing up, lashed across her
at the ghost, whilst Tom caught Katie in his arms.
Dumpling, when he had recovered the ground lost by
his shy, tore along like a mad thing, but the party reached
home unharmed, though very much excited.
Harry stoutly maintained that the ghost was a man in
a smock frock. “The lash caught in his sleeve,” he
said, “ and I had to give a good tug to keep the rascal
from catching hold of it. I only wish we’d had Monk
with us. He’d soon have pulled him down.”
But though everybody applauded Harry’s undaunted
prowess, he could get no one to side with him. Even


Tom observed neutrality, saying that he’d been too much
taken up in looking after Miss Katie to be able to give
even a guess as to what the creature was. “What a sperrit
that Master Harry have, sure/y, to be sure,” said Mrs.
Stephen to her husband as they were getting into bed.
“ Horsewhippin’ a ghost! Did ever anybody hear the
likes afore ? ”


CHAPTER XV.
THE HAUNTED HOUSE.
HE juvenile party at Mrs. M‘Grath’s was a
great success. It was no mere beggarly
“ tea and turn out.” The guests were in-
vited to spend a good part of the day, all
the night, and to breakfast next morning at Killarney—
that is, those who lived too far from it to get home quite
comfortably at night when the festivities were over. And
the servants who came with and for their young masters
and mistresses had no reason to complain of any lack of
hospitality. Mrs. M'Grath never did anything by halves.
Her young friends had a jolly day, out of doors and in,
a jolly evening, a jolly “ getting up-stairs ” to their ex-
temporised couches at night, and a jolly breakfast before
they parted iu the morning.
But Killarney was not a haunted house—it was far too
new and bright for ghosts to walk in; and since it is of
ghost adventures I want to tell you now, I will hasten on
to the second visit that Katie, Harry, and Tom paid to
Marie Manor House, which, as I have told you, was as
mouldy as a mity cheese.


The three children were to stay for a day or two, and
happened to be the only visitors stopping at the house.
There were so many young Goldings, however, that it
seemed comfortably full even to Katie, and when she had
spent one night in it —in just such a plentifully-tenanted,
cosily-environed bedroom as she had desired, without
seeing or hearing anything dreadful, her awe of the
Manor House was considerably abated. She found that
life went on there much as it did in unhaunted houses —
that the teeth of her new acquaintances did not chatter,
their hair stand on end, and their trembling legs refuse
to support them, every two hours or so, on an average,
as she had supposed must be the case. Still she did not
enjoy rambling about the haunted parts of the premises
so much as the boys did, even by day—to tell the truth,
she was rather shy of those parts of the unhaunted
premises, which were only separated from the haunted by
the double-locked and barred doors, bricked-up ends of
passages, &c.
Nothing could have induced Katie—unless, perhaps, a
wish to rescue her brother from some dread being bent
on carrying off to Hades the presumptuous intruder on
its earthly “ walk,”—to join Harry' and Fred in their pot-
terings about the old ruins after dusk or by moonlight.
I do not suppose that Tom Steele was really much more
afraid of ghosts than Harry was ; but Master Tom was
very' fond of Katie’s society, and, therefore, preferred
staying in the house with her to accompanying his friend
on these occasions.
Some of the stories which Fred Golding told Harry'
were eerie enough to try his nerve.
There was the Black De Marie’s stable —a mere heap
of mossy, lichened, or snail-slimed stones —beside which,


nevertheless, at midnight, on the anniversary of the
Black De Marie’s death, there stood waiting for him a
black charger, with a fiery star in his forehead, and eyes,
bit, and stirrups gleaming luridly through the gloom like
phosphorus.
Yonder was the crumbling old doorway, up to which
at the same witching hour the invisible “ dead coach ”
was said to rumble most audibly just before any death
could take place in the old Manor House.
“ I shouldn’t like to fancy that I heard that,” said
Fred. “ You see, as there’s nothing to be seen, I could
not prove to myself I hadn’t heard it.”
There was the gapped, winding stair leading no
up which the eastern magician climbed with his crystal
to enable a wife of an old De Marie to see what had be-
come of her husband, and when she had looked into the
magic glass, she had gone mad, and might still at times
be seen flitting up and down the broken stair, gibberingly
wailing and shadowily wringing her hands.
There was the other, comparatively sound staircase on
which any one bold enough to stand to listen after night-
fall, might hear heavy footsteps coming down, down,
down, nearer and nearer to him, and then going up, up,
up, farther and farther away from him, for hours and
hours together, and yet could not see or touch any toiler
up and down the same.
There was the banqueting-room used for storing fire-
wood and coals, but gifted eyes could see at night ghosts
therein, in the shape of mouldering corpses, sitting
motionless over mouldering viands and mildewed wine in
rusty dishes and goblets. For many a year, the story ran,
dead corpses had so sat, but when the long-locked door
pf the banqueting room fell from its hinges, the corpses,


table, vessels, viands, wine, all vanished, to reappear only
by night, and in semblance.
There was the headless, waistless, footless Cavalier,
who walked beside the old granary—a grisly phantom of
legs and half-cuirass floating above them, and extending
a handless arm, beyond which floated, upright, an un-
grasped sword. There was the Marie Manor Raven that
was said to be hundreds of years old—to have seen the
old house built, and, after having disappeared for a life-
time, to come back, perch on the oldest roof-ridge it
could find left standing, and croak all day just before the
Dead Coach might be expected.
There was the Haunted Well, with the wicked face at
the bottom, and the wicked finger beckoning any one
who peeped in, to leap down to death. And then there
was the Haunted Bell. Just outside the Manor House
curtilage stood a tiny ruined church, with a few cracked
old tomb-stones in illegible “ memory ” of long-forgotten
dead folk, left leaning at all kinds of angles about it. The
ragged ruin was roofless, and almost smothered in ivy,
out of which peeped here and there a grey, mossed,
lichened, broken mullion, and above which peered the
top of an old gable in which a rusty bell still hung. It
was a very pretty place in spring, summer, or in a calm
autumn day. Furze, broom, and fern had invaded the
churchyard, giving cover out of which rabbits popped,
above which small birds fluttered and chirped and
chattered, and from which now and then a stray
pheasant rose with a startling fuss. All kinds of mosses
grew on the tumble-down churchyard wall. Tangles of
dog-rose sprays were matted on it, and glossy docks and
beautiful primrose-clusters came out in luxuriant tufts
from every damp cranny between its severed stones.


the haunted house.
Besides the ivy, wallflowers and other wild flowers and so-
called 4< weeds,” almost as pretty, grew, wherever they
could find root-room, on the old church walls, in which
innumerable sparrows built.
But on a dark winter night or a dreary late autumn
evening, Marie Chapel was not the place which many
people would choose to visit. _
The rusty bell gave ever and anon a dismal toll.
There was nothing very remarkable in that, you will say,
if the wind happened to be blowing; but according to the
country tradition, the bell was haunted by the troubled
spirit of the Red-handed Marie, who, instead of a pious
legend, had inscribed it with wicked mockery.
& A fragment of what was said to be his tomb, remained
in the chancel of the little church.
It was nothing but a chipped, pitted block of black,
grey, and green stone, swarmed over by slimy creeping
things and almost buried in rank nettles and purple-
blossomed, black-berried dwale.
The precise wickednesses of which the Red-handed
Marie had been guilty, tradition did not specify. They
were very dreadful, however. He and the Black Marie
were the blackest sheep of the “ precious bad lot,” as
Fred Golding called the ancient holders of the manor.
Of the Marie Lane ghost, Fred could tell Harry
nothing more definite than that the lane was haunted by
a mysterious being who assumed various forms, did very
mischievous deeds, and was seen at times flitting about
the old ruins.
Harry’s interview with the Marie Lane ghost, however,
had made him very sceptical about the Marie Manor
ghosts in general, and what he saw as he poked about the
place with Fred increased his Sadduceeanism. They had


come at times on stale crusts, bird-bones, mutton-bones,
scraps of fat, black patches of ashes in the grass that were
plainly the result of unsupernatural camp fires, and such
like things.
“ fr’s my belief, Fred,” said Harry, as his summing up
of the matter, “ that your precious ghosts are only a lot
of rascally tramps. The constables ought to be set on
them to rout them out, only constables are never any
good when there’s anything to be done. Perhaps the
scoundrels will bum your house down some night.”
“ Oh, I don’t doubt that tramps now and then shelter
here—they’ve plenty of corners to pick from—but that
won’t account for everything I’ve seen and heard,”
answered Fred, who, though he might indulge in private
infidelities, was unwilling to have the whole tribe of Marie
Manor ghosts accounted for in so prosaically sweeping a
manner as that which Harry suggested. “Tramps would
not be likely to make the strange noises that have woke
me up sometimes in the small hours, or to carry the lights
either that I’ve seen dancing about the old building when
I’ve looked out.”
Harry could not see the force of this reasoning, and
an argument followed, in the course of which both of the
boys had their tempers ruffled.
Fred did not approve of “a little fellow,” and a stranger
to the place, presuming to tell him, who had lived there
all his life, that the Marie Manor ghosts were all non-
sense,—to half-hint that he was a bit of a coward.
Harry did not approve of being talked down to as a
little fellow, and sneered at as wanting to show off sham-
valour, because he happened not to have to live amongst
the sights and sounds which he affected to make light of.
On the last night our young friends spent at the Manor


House, they and their entertainers sat up later than
usual.
They were resting after some round game, and to fill
up the interval Fred (his mother was not in the room)
was telling one of his ghost stories, to which his hearers
were listening with breathless attention —all except Harry,
who pretended not to be listening, but plainly showed
that he was by the intensified curl of scornful incredulity
which he gave to lip and nose when Fred, who could not
resist the temptation ot talking at Harry, had made, as
he thought, a point.
It was a bitterly cold, very dark, remarkably still night.
Except the story-teller’s voice, an occasional rustle of
dress, rubbing of feet upon the floor, and creaking of
furniture as his hearers flesh-creepingly cringed and
cuddled closer together, the flapping and roaring of the
flames in the high-piled fire-place, and now and then the
dropping of a glowing cinder on the hearth, not a sound
could be heard. Not a breeze sighed, not a twig
scratched, not a leaf rustled outside.
Suddenly there was heard a low, measured tolling of
the chapel bell, and every one in the room gave a start.
“What do you say to that, Master Harry?” asked
Fred, triumphantly.
“ It’s the wind,” answered Harry.
“ Wind ! and not a breath stirring ? ”
“ Then it’s the tramps.”
“ They’d be likely to ring the bell to say they’d come
to trespass, wouldn’t they ? ”
“Well, then, an owl or something brushed against it.”
But just then there came again a longer measured,
melancholy, low, half-muffled tolling of the bell.
“ The owl that did that must be a strange one,” said


266 THE AD VENTURES OF HARR Y DELANE.
Fred. “Are you game to go and have a look at it by
yourself, Harry the Dauntless ? ”
“ Yes,” answered Harry stoutly.
i Katie entreated him not to go. “It might be tramps,”
she said, her dread of supernatural beings for the moment
mastered by her fear as to the more readily-realisable
injury which vagrant flesh and blood might inflict on her
darling brother.
“ Oh, never fear, as Mrs. M‘Grath says, Katie,” cried
Fred. “Tramps would be likely to choose snugger
quarters than the chapel on such a night as this. Harry
has only to sing out if any one wants to hurt him. I’ll
keep a sharp look out, and go down and rouse up the
men. They’re nodding over the fire by this time, but
they’ll be ready enough to rush out with the dogs if it’s
only tramps they have to deal with. Perhaps, though,
you’d better not go, Harry. / don’t want to make you!
You might increase your cold. Your teeth seem to be
chattering already.”
So stung, Harry broke away from his sister, ran down
stairs, seized his cap, and plunged into the outer dark-
ness.
Y hen his first spurt of offended heroism was over,
however, when he felt that he must be quite out of shot
of the eyes that were peering after him, he not only
slackened his pace, but also began to repent of his enter-
prise.
As he stumbled, as noiselessly as he could, farther and
farther from the house, passing silent buildings, trees
bushes, only distinguishable from the general gloom as
vaguely shapeless blotches of deeper blackness, he felt
very lonely.
At last he crept into the ruined church; and hardly


had he entered it before the bell began to toll once more.
Harry cowered down, his heart going pit-a-pat far faster
than the bell swung.
The toll ceased; and he heard something heavy
scrambling down the ivied gable, and afterwards brushing
through the briars, &c., that grew within the ruin. The
tread was as the tread of a slouching, heavy man, and
now and then there came a sound as of the striking of a
hobnailed boot upon a stone, followed by a flounder, and
a very common-place human growl.
Harry’s suddenly-aroused dread of immaterial mal-
treatment vanished, but he thought it would be advisable
to creep off as quietly and quickly as possible, to avoid
the chance of a mauling from ponderously-material hands.
As he was preparing to do so, he heard a gruff voice
which said, “They’re keepin’ it up yet at the House-
four or five o’ the windies is alight yet; but that’ll settle
’em. They may grub about here by daylight, but there
ain’t one on ’em as ’ll look us up here, now the bell’s
tolled three times over —’cept it’s that young devil as give
me the cut over the face in Marie s Lane ; pretty nigh
took my eye out, he did. If I ketch him and his lot
goin’ home arter dark again, I’ll play em a better trick
next time. Cut the young bantam s comb, I will. W c
can light up now. If they happen to see the fire, they’ll
on’y think it’s Red-handed Marie at some of his games.”
Curiosity conquered fear, and Harry crawled towards
the spot from which the voice came —a little vestry, with
some kind of roof left on it, projecting from the chapel.
He heard two or three matches struck, with following
growls because they had gone out. Presently, peeping
in cautiously, he saw by the light of a sudden flicker of
flame three faces blowing at a fire—of an ill-favoured


woman and of two ill-favoured men—one of them with a
wheal across his forehead and left cheek and chin.
A whiff of smoke made Harry cough, and he took to
his heels with the fire-blowers after him. He saved his
breath as long as he could to help his running; but find-
ing that his pursuers were gaining on him, he shouted as
he neared the brightening house-lights, “Tramps, tramps
tramps ! ” 11
The minute aftenvards he stumbled, and the tramps
pounced upon him.
But Fred and Tom Steele and Horace, with the men
and dogs, made a sally; Mrs. Golding and Katie also
tO / he rescue ’ and some of the maid-servants
rushed with them, because they were afraid to be left
behind.
.J he relieving force was so formidable, that the man
with the wheal across his face was captured, and required
to give an account of himself next day before a magistrate.
It proved to be so unsatisfactory, that for some months
afterwards the Marie Lane ghost was unable to “ walk ”
anywhere, unless, perhaps, on the treadmill; and the
rural pohce having, at last, been put upon the alert, all
the Marie Manor ghosts were, for a time, at any rate as
ReTse” 7 laid> " lf thCy had been consi gned to ’the


CHAPTER XVI.
AN EXPLORING EXPEDITION,
are the adventures, not the annals, of
/SI Harry Delane. I must now, as you say,
skip a bit. The “jolly school,” at which,
w hen I take up his story again, Tom Steele
was once more Harry’s schoolmate, was an old grammar
school in a little South of England town even duller than
Dulchester, on a little “ river ” even smaller than that
which ran past the village in which Miss Delane lived.
The Head Master plumed himself on turning out
<' scholars and gentlemen,” and on the average had no
reason to be ashamed of his pupils. He did not seem to
take any particular trouble, but being a kindly, scholarly
old gentleman, he made his boys catch somehow, at least,
a little of his character. The charge of the boys out of
school he entrusted entirely to the second, who was also
Mathematical Master—another nice, studious, easy-going
fellow, who passed on the trust almost entirely to the boys
honour —and the plan answered better than might have
been expected.
For one thing, the town was a very little one where


everybody knew what everybody else did ; for another,
the boys were, as a rule, “a good sortand for a third,*
there were not many of them—a dozen boarders at the
School House, and still fewer day-boys on the Foundation.
The bulk of the town-boys went to a Commercial Academy
and the “Charity Place,” as the Foundation boys some-
what scornfully called the Green Coat School, forgetting
that they were charity scholars themselves.
Sometimes there were little rows between the Grammar
School and the Commercial Academy, but the Grammar
School boys were quite competent to hold their own, in
single combat, against the Commercial Academicians, and
ha' in § more esprit de corps , they stuck more together,
and consequently, on the rare occasions of general
scrimmage between the two schools, in spite of the over-
whelming odds against it, the Grammar School, even when
compelled to retreat, displayed a prowess which made its
opponent once more shy of tackling it. The Grammar
School boys, on their side, were equally disinclined to
have anything to do with the Commercial Academy boys,
considering such contact infra dig. They were the
scholastic aristocracy of the little town. They thought it
a great piece of urbanity on their parts when they & once
condescended to accept a cricket challenge from the*
Commercial Academicians. Altogether, Harry and his
schoolmates had a very pleasant time at Wringford
Regis.
The masters kept them up to their work in school, but
the work was made so agreeable that that was no hard-
ship , and neither master had any objection to extemporise
holidays to supplement those which the calendar and
custom demanded under penalty of mutiny.
I am thinking of giving my class whole leave to-


morrow. What do you say, Mr. Newton ?” the Head
Master, at the close of afternoon school, would remark to
the Mathematical Master seated at the other end of the
old, low-pitched schoolroom —not so very big after all,
but so scantily tenanted that there seemed to be a great
gulf between the two desks.
“ I have not the slightest objection, with your permis-
sion, to grant mine one also, Dr. Bentley,” Mr. Newton
would reply.
Whereat the boys’ hearts were glad—but they were so
accustomed to the formula that, having heard the phone,
they did not wait for the antiphone, before they began
their rejoicings.
On a bright eve of what would probably turn out to be
as bright a day in June, the stereotyped conversation
given above had stirred into vivacity the sungilt dust-
motes, that previously had seemed almost asleep in
drowsy-looking old Wringford Regis Grammar School,
and as soon as they got out of school, Harry, Tom Steele,
Jack English, and Walter Crisp convened themselves in
committee, and resolved to carry out next day an
intention they had for some time entertained of “ ex-
ploring ” the Wring—going far beyond the limits of their
ordinary half-holiday pulls upon it.
Their imaginations had been excited by the books of
travel they had been reading. Harry, as having sailed
across the globe, and likely, if he lived long enough, to
go quite round it, was unanimously voted chief of the
Exploring Expedition. Tom Steele was appointed second
in command, because he was Harry’s chum, and his
father lived in India, and the rest of his people in France.
Jack English at first protested, saying that he did not see
what that had to do with it—where the folks you belonged


to were—Tom had never been out of England himself.
To which dry W alter Crisp retorted, —
ell, then, he’s as likely to know about England as
you, Jack Ye ain’t going to France or to India. You
needn’t mind what he says, if you don’t like. It’s only
for the fun of the thing, Jack—there’s always a second in
command in exploring expeditions.”
This little difficulty having been smoothed over, the
four trotted amicably into the town to “ lay in stores ”
and “ charter their craft.”
They hired the boat in which they generally took their
pulls. It was the one boat on the river, and belonged to
an old man who had a market-garden on the river’s bank.
His neighbour, the basket-maker, owned a punt, and this
also the explorers had thoughts of hiring as a “tender.”
Fortunately they tried first, one after the other, to pull it,
and having only succeeded, seriatim , in making it spin
round like a cockchafer on a pin, they condemned it as
“ unseaworthy.” Telling “Old Sprouts” not to be
astonished if he found his boat gone when he got up next
morning, they returned to school, and went early to bed
in order that they might be early to rise.
If they had told Mr. Newton that they wanted to begin
their whole leave out before breakfast, he would at once
have given them permission. If they had asked their
school-mates to report them next morning as having gone
up the nver for the day, he would have been quite
satisfied. But the explorers wanted to keep their
expedition a secret—to advertise it beforehand would
take the bloom off it.
They got up in the pleasant morning twilight, and stole
out of the playground just as the rising sun gilt the dim
bent hands of the old church clock, pointing a quarter to


four. The gardener’s dog barked fiercely when he heard
them scrambling up the garden fence, but as soon as
they dropped into the garden, he recognised them and
wagged his tail in apology. They brushed off the dew
from the many-blossomed rose-bushes as they raced down
the garden to their “craft.” “Jim Crow” were the
words really painted on its stern, but as that did not seem
a sufficiently dignified name for a river-exploring vessel,
they compromised matters by calling it the Niger.
Oars were shipped and away they went merrily over the
sluggish, sun-dimpled stream. When they got beyond
the limit of their usual pulls, they were rather disappointed
to find that they had nothing very novel to discover.
Bur-reeds, arrow-heads, flowering rushes, crowfoot, water-
lilies, pollard and weeping willows, alders, white-blossomed
elder bushes, lush uncut grass, hay in swath and cocks,
pastures with cows in them, a little bridge or two of wood
or stone —these were the results of their “ observations ”
during the first three or four hours of their voyage.
“ Strike eight bells and pipe to breakfast, Mr. Steele,
as soon as we have doubled that cape; we will name it on
the chart Point Porcupine,” said Harry, pointing to a
head-land, shaggy with rank grass and water-weeds, rising
to the stupendous height of about eight feet “ above the
level of the sea,”
But scarcely had Point Porcupine been rounded, before,
the water shoaling, the Niger ran into a tribe of “naked
natives,” bathing. The savages raised a howl of exulta-
tion, and attempted to board and plunder. When beaten
off, they rocked the Niger like a cradle, only far more
roughly than any cradle would be rocked, unless the
rocker wanted to addle the rockee’s brains.
They tried to swamp her; they ran her aground, and,


the crew still fighting valiantly, they finally, so to speak,
kicked her on her way with another howl of mingled dis-
appointment and would-be derision. When the Niger had
cut her way out from the pirates and shown for a quarter of
an hour a clean pair of heels, her captain put into a ditch
“creek,” the explorers called it—for overhauling pur-
poses.
Beyond a sprung thole the craft had come to no grief
which baling would not remedy, but the stores had been
reduced to a state of hopeless sop—what was left of them.
Lieut. Steele and A. B. Seaman Crisp, accordingly were
despatched to a village whose thatched roofs rose in the
distance, to purchase provisions. They returned with a
loaf and a small fragment of cheese, and the facetious
Walter advised his captain to get out into the “ offing ” at
once, since they had exhausted the local supply of food,
and might, therefore, expect the famishing natives at any
moment to rush down on them in indignant fury.
After a breakfast of bread and cheese and water-cress
plucked from the ditch, the Niger again entered the
“ stream,” officers and men pulling in turn, without any
distinction of person. Indeed, Jack English had declared
he would mutiny if anybody wanted to keep him pulling like
a galley-slave all day long. Nobody wanted to, but Jack
was getting sulky : the expedition not having turned out as
amusing as he had anticipated. The pollard willows,
eta, came over and over again rather wearisomely to
Jack’s taste.
About i p.m. —or, perhaps, I ought to write “two
bells”—Capt. Harry Delane ran his ship into another
tree-shaded “ creek ” —to be named on the chart “ Re-
freshment Cove ” and ordered his crew to strip for bathing
and fishing. The splashing somewhat interfered with the


fishing. However, some minnows were caught and cooked
in a primitive style on a fire of sticks, kindled with Crisp s
burning-glass ; the Niger’s matches having been rendered
useless by the outrageous behaviour of the bathing natives.
After this little bit of excitement, the voyage again
became monotonous until, late in the afternoon, the Niger
passed a brick-field, round which the Wring wound like a
semi-torpid snake. The younger brick-makers shelled,
with oyster-shells, the strange craft as soon as they got
sight of her, and when she drew nearer to them, opened
a hot fire of brickbats upon her.
Captain Delane instantly ran his ship close in shore,
ordering his Lieutenant to tell off a landing-party, consist-
ing of the Lieutenant and all the crew. The captain,
mastering his scruples as to the propriety of leaving his
ship unguarded, joined and headed the party as soon as
it had landed, and it obtained a temporary advantage
over the young barbarians; their seniors remaining
grinningly neutral.
But the young barbarians mounted their impregnable
clay, brick, and breeze-heaps, and sorely harassed the
Nigers on their return to their vessel.
“ We retired, we did not retreat,” said the commander of
the expedition, when the Niger was out of brickbat range.
“Anyhow, captain, we had to cut away,” remarked
A.B. Seaman Crisp.
The banks of the Wring came closer and closer to-
gether, the water grew shallower and shallower: the
lieutenant and the crew informed their captain that they
thought it was time for them to turn back, if they wanted
to get back at all by water.
But Harry was in a Columbus vein.
“Let us get the boat past that bridge, and then you


shall do as you please,” he cried, pointing to a low plank
foot-bridge.
They got the Niger up to the bridge. They tried to
pole and push her under it, —and when she was half
under it, she stuck so fast between the piles—if so big a
word may be applied to such funny little props—that
they could not make her go one way or the other.
Moreover, they had started her planks, and the water
was coming in fast
“ Hallo, young gentlemen, what are you doing here,
trespassing on my premises ? ” said a jolly farmer, who
had strolled down to the little bridge, attracted by the
hubbub.
“ Well, well,” went on the farmer, when the boys had
explained their plight, “ there’s no great harm done.
You’ve come a round-about way from Wringford, but I’ll
rattle you back there in next to no time in my trap. I
was a boy myself once. And you tell old Sprouts, as you
call him, that he ought to be ashamed of himself for
letting out an old sieve like that; it’s lucky she didn’t
begin to leak till she got to where it would puzzle any
one to get drowned. However, I’ll have her got out,
and taken care of till old Sprouts sends for her ; and now
come in, boys, and have something to eat and drink.”
After a hearty tea-supper at the farm-house, the farmer
according to promise, rattled them over to Wringford.
The only scolding they got from their masters consisted
in Dr. Bentley’s mildly facetious “ Well, my young
Argonauts, and where is the ‘Golden Fleece ?’ ” And in
Mr. Newton’s more sarcastic comment on Euclid-loathing
Tom Steele’s geometrical failures, “You seem to have a
faculty for sticking at the Pons Asiuomm. Thomas,”


CHAPTER XVII,
THE OLD MEETING-HOUSE,
OR some reason or other, or more probably
M f° r no reason > Miss Delane took a dislike
t0 Barbauld Bower, and wrote to inform
her brother that in her opinion Katie ought
at once to be removed from Blackheath. Captain De-
lane did not object to her being removed after due notice,
but stipulated that the friend who had selected Wringford
Regis Grammar School for Harry, should choose a new
school for Katie also. Now this friend knew a clergy-
man’s widow who kept a “ Select Establishment for
Young Ladies” at Wringford, and to this school accord-
ingly Katie was sent, and Violet Vivian accompanied her.
Saucy Miss Violet had openly informed her mamma
that she would strike learning—“give up improving, for
good,” if she were sent back to Black heath after Katie
had left, —if she were not also sent to Wringford.
You can guess how jolly Harry and Tom Steele were
when Katie and Violet’s names were added to the roll of
Mrs. Marcet’s young ladies. Mrs. Marcet’s back
windows commanded the Grammar School playground.


The garden in which the little girls used to play—at games
which were incomprehensible to the scoffing Grammar
School boys, and in which the more interesting bigger
girls used to walk about with their arms round one
another’s waists, was only divided from the Grammar
School playground by a not very lofty brick wall. The
trees of the garden and the trees of the playground
blended boughs. The playground trees were fruit-trees
as well as those in the garden, but unlike them, had
long ceased to bear fruit Perhaps, if they had, they
would not have borne it long, but the boys felt on their
honour towards Mrs. Marcet’s fruit so far as they were
concerned. They did not scruple, however, to pitch
down her pears and medlars to her pupils. Seated in
those blending boughs the boys carried on flirtations
with the strolling beauties beneath; notes were exchanged,
and smelling-bottles and such like presented. The
Grammar School boys could do as they liked, but the
“ teacher on duty ” sometimes came up in a great flurry
and marched the rebelliously lingering girls as fast as
she could away from the wall. Such little interruptions,
of course, made the stolen interviews all the sweeter.
In coming out of church, again, not only correspondence,
but hand-squeezes, could be exchanged. Walter Crisp,
however, who went in for facetiousness rather than fond-
ness, used to avail himself of these opportunities for
purposes the reverse of gallant. He would tickle, and
sometimes, I am almost ashamed to write, pinch the
more dumplingy of the little girls. At the bottom of
both the playground and the garden lay an old disused
burying-ground. Beyond that stood an ancient dilapi-
dated chapel, patched up to enable it to serve as an
Infant School, and at the side of the burial-ground, and


running into the playground, a dim, square meeting-
house, with curly-tailed figures carved on its front,
which showed that it had been built at the time of James
the Second’s Indulgence. It had come to belong to no
denomination in particular, and was only occasionally
use( i—sometimes for service, and sometimes for lectures.
Dr. Bentley did not approve of its nonconformity, but
being a bit of an antiquary, he took a mild interest in
its history, and his boys were willing enough, especially
when the narrative interrupted lessons, to hear that the
minister for whom it was built had ridden with a green
bough in his hat to meet Monmouth at Taunton, had
helped to strip the lead off the roof of Wells Cathedral,
had preached in jack-boots, on the Sunday before
Sedgemoor Fight, in the Bridgewater Castle Field, had
shouted “ King Monmouth,” and “ God with us,” when
challenged by the Royal Guards upon the moor, and
had been cut down and left for dead upon the bloody
field —escaping capture only by the skin of his teeth
when he came to himself—escaping a very unpleasant
share in Jeffrey’s Bloody Assizes as narrowly—and
afterwards wandering about like a wolf with a price on
its head, until in 1687 he was once more able to worship
and preach openly according to his own conscience.
But the old meeting-house was chiefly interesting to
the boys as a famous place to lark in, and moreover, to
invite Mrs. Marcet’s young ladies to picnics in. It was
easy to slip back the catch of one of the dim old windows
with a pocket-knife, and to clamber inside from the play-
ground ; and, once inside, was it possible for boys to
resist the temptation of having a bolstering match with
the dusty old green-baize pew-cushions, a bombarding
match with the ragged old matting hassocks? The


pulpit made a first-rate fort, with a scaling-ladder ready
provided. In the dusk of evening, moreover, what place
could be better for a game of whoop-hide ? Nervous
passers-by in the twilight were startled by the eerie cries
they heard, the scuffling of feet, banging of pew-doors in
the body of the building, and the echoing galleries, and
believed more firmly than ever that the old meeting-
house was haunted. Moreover, it was, so to speak,
pierced for musketry.” Hidden marksmen, armed
with squirts and pea-shooters fired down volleys from its
upper windows upon unprepared wayfarers through the
quiet lane beneath. Ingenui vultus puer , ingenuique
pudoris, hast thou ever noted the blank look of astonish-
ment which overspreads the face of him on whose
resounding hat-crown a rattling jet has descended from
an unseen syringe ? If thou hast, I fear me that thou
wilt be inclined to repeat the process.
Still it was the picnics that gave the old meeting-house
its chief charm in the eyes of the Grammar School boys.
With their assistance, the bolder spirits amongst the
young ladies scrambled over the garden-wall into the
graveyard, and then were politely handed through
one of the open windows into the old meeting-house.
Katie at first objected to join these parties, saying that
it was unbecoming to do so ; but Violet laughed at her
so unmercifully, and so energetically proclaimed her own
intention of going, even if she had to go alone, that Katie
consented to go also—just to see that dear Violet did
not get into mischief. Sooth to say, Katie was not
sorry to have an excuse for being with Harry and Tom
Steele, or rather Tom Steele and Harry, for Violet
almost monopolised the latter. Of course, Katie was very
glad that her brother and her bosom friend had taken to


each other so, but still she could not help thinking it
rather hard that Violet, like Mrs. M'Grath, should crowd
her out, so to speak, from her brother’s company. How-
ever, Tom Steele did his best to make amends, and he
and she got on very well together, whilst Harry and
Violet clambered about the old place, Miss Violet
applauding and joining in all Master Harry’s mischievous
pranks, and daring him to fresh.
One of Mrs. Marcet’s teachers was a thin, very watch-
ful old maid, whom the boys ungallantly called Miss
Weasel. When she was on duty, it was impossible for
the girls to escape from the garden, and even when she
was not, she frequently made a sally from the house, and
nipped their enterprise in the bud.
One Wednesday, however, after morning school, when
Harry was sitting astride on a bough of Mrs. Marcet’s
medlar-tree, Violet ran under it, and looking up, and
looking round to see that the governess in charge did
not notice her, whispered, “ Oh, Harry, such fun !
Weasel’s gone out for the day. She won’t be back till
bedtime. You must give us a feast in the meeting-house.
I’ll bring ever so many girls, and we’ll have such larks.
We shall be ready directly after dinner.”
“ Hooray,” cried Harry, and backing along the bough,
he dropped into the playground, and ran off to find his
special chums, his comrades in the exploring expedition.
Tom Steele, of course, gave in a hearty adhesion to the
proposed entertainment, and so did Walter Crisp—not
because he cared about love-making, but because he
liked “ larks ; ” but Jack English turned sulky.
“ Oh, bother,” he said, “ I don’t see the fun of sticking
in that stuffy old place, and standing treat to a pack of
greedy girls. They might share fair, when they don’t


have to pay anything; but I can’t ever get my whack.
Talk about us tucking in—just can’t they ? When the
parson read out ‘W e have power to eat and to drink ’
the Sunday before last, I gave that precious Miss Violet
of yours, Delane, a wink and a nod, and she made a face
back at me. She knew what I meant She beats the
''hole lot for walking into grub, when there’s anything
good going. They’ve got as much money as we have.
Vhy can’t they buy tuck for themselves ? I ain’t going
to spend any more of my money, just for the pleasure of
seeing the dear critturs gobbling as if they hadn’t tasted
food for eleven year, come Martinmas, have I, father?”
Jack was quoting a circus-clown over whose comical-
ities the boys had recently roared, but he could not raise
even the faintest snigger of a laugh. With a “ Yah !” of
contempt, the three other boys turned their backs upon
their ungallant companion, and hurried into the town to
purchase materials for a “cold collation.”
They bought ginger-beer, raspberry vinegar, and a
bottle of raisin-wine ; parliament, gingerbread-nuts, jam
tarts, mutton-pies, sausage rolls, and sixpenn’orth of
pickled cabbage, pickled walnuts, piccalilli, and mixed
pickles; barley-sugar, burnt almonds, hardbake, bull’s
ejes, brandy-balls, a pot of marmalade, cherries, goose-
berries and currants, green-gages, and a huge cucumber.
As soon as they had had their dinner, they arranged
their dainties on the seats of the biggest square pew in
the meeting-house, placed hassocks for chairs, and then
went to the foot of Mrs. Marcet’s garden-wall to help
their Dulcineas to descend.
Violet soon made her appearance, followed by Katie
and three or four more. They scurried across the grave-
yard, were politely helped in at the open window, which,


as soon as they were inside, was refastened, and were
then as politely handed to their seats. Both boys and
girls having just had a hearty dinner, deferred the
substantial portion of their banquet to a more convenient
season, but instantly proceeded to do full justice to the
dessert, including the cucumber, which was cut up into
lumps to be munched like apples.
Dessert over, frolic began.
Harry had bought a new squirt, which he presented to
Violet, who was far more delighted than if it had been a
diamond ring. Armed himself with his old one, he
piloted her to a coign of vantage, where he had placed a
bucket full of water, and whence, lolling at their ease on
some steps which he had cushioned, they could take
leisurely aim, through a broken pane, at passen-
gers below. They had excellent practice ; and, rendered
reckless by impunity, soon no longer made any discrimi-
nation, but impartially fired, or rather watered, at every
passer-by. Violet even had the impudence to douche Dr.
Bentley, and to aim a shot, which fortunately miscarried,
at Mr. Newton’s green spectacles. She hit his nose
instead, but being deep in some mathematical calculation,
he merely pulled out his pocket-handkerchief and wiped
off the water in absent calmness, as if it were the most
natural thing in the world that on a blazingly-bright
August day a single jet of water should suddenly de-
scend from the blue, cloudless sky. Dr. Bentley was a
little more startled, but went on mildly mumbling
-perpurutn tonanles
Egit equos.
Such tame quarries did not suit Miss Violet’s fancy.


“ I w ish we could make some one down-right angry,
Harry,” she very unamiably observed.
Just then a sloped black hat-crown came within range.
Violet pulled trigger and made a bull’s eye. Instantly
the sloped hat-crown was sloped the other way. Peeping
out to discover whom she had hit, Violet saw—and even
she was afraid to see—the choleric little doctor who
attended Mrs. Marcet’s school, and made everybody in
it, from the mistress down to the scullery maid, tremble,
peering up at the eaves of the meeting-house.
Disgrace to the town,” he grumbled, as he wiped his
hat, “ that the rubbishy old place isn’t pulled down.
It 11 soon save them the trouble, though, by tumbling
down, and I hope the mayor and corporation will be
passing at the time. Nicely stagnant stuff it must be,”
he went on, as he tried to obliterate the water-marks on
his hat-crown, “putrefying up there three weeks and
more. Not a drop of rain have we had all that time.
The sun has split the rotten old pipe, and let the stink-
ing stuff out. \es, that’s the one, I can see it quite
plainly. Why on earth did I ever bury myself in this
Sleepy Hollow ? The Wringford people are never really
awake from the time they are half born to the time they
shut their eyes for good.”
So having spoken, Dr. Stickleback once more fiercely
cocked his beaver, and went ahead at his usual angle of
about 45 , presenting the nape of his neck so tempt-
ingtyj that Harry would have been more or less than
“ soaring human boy ”if he had not fired. The shot told
—the charge took the starch out of the doctor’s shirt-
collar, and trickled down his back. He turned in wrath,
and seeing one of the smallest of the Green-coat boys a
few yards behind him, set the youngster down as the


culprit, and rushed at him with uplifted cane. Poor
terrified little muffin-cap fled as fast as his knee-breeched,
shoe-buckled little legs would carry him, his bands and
coat-tails fluttering in the wind himself had raised, and
after him pounded the puffing and perspiring doctor; but
just as he put forth his hand to clutch his chase, the
youngster doubled, and diving down a court, was lost to
view. Violet and Harry had reloaded to give the doctor
another raking, but he seemed to have had enough of
the old meeting-house, and turned up into the High
Street.
All this was very pleasant, but now there came a
difficulty. The boys were free until evening prayers, but
the girls would be missed if '•hey were not present at the
tea-table. They had determined accordingly to show
themselves there, and then to return to the meeting-
house for more fun and supper. Just, however, as they
were preparing to slip across the graveyard, Mrs. Marcet
and some friends came into the garden, followed by
servants bearing chairs and tables. The tables were
pitched close to the dividing-wall, and Mrs. Marcet and
her friends and the school sat down to an alfresco tea.
There was no chance now of our truants getting back
unobserved. They peered anxiously out of the windows
to discover whether they had been missed, but apparently
their absence had been overlooked.
“ Well,” cried Violet, “we are trapped. Here we must
stay till those tiresome people make a move. But what
is the good of being glum ? I want my tea. There is
plenty here to eat; but do go and get us some tea like
dear good boys.”
Harry volunteered for this service.
“Why, tea is just gone up into the hall, Master


Delane ; why don’t you go and have some there?” said
the school-house cook, when Harry had slipped down
into the kitchen and made known his wants.
“ Oh, it’s for a lark,” answered Harry 7 , who was a great
favourite with the cook. “ Make me a lot in a jar, like
a dear old soul .... That’s right, put in a lot of milk
and sugar ; now in with the cork, you good old cooky.”
Harry had some difficulty in conveying his heavy jar
of tea unseen to the meeting-house. He managed to
do so, however, and found the rinsed-out mugs they
had used for their ginger beer, &c., waiting for his more
refreshing beverage.
“ Oh, you dear, sweet boy,” cried Violet, when she
had drunk her mugful; “ I was so thirsty, I could kiss
you.”
“ Then do by all means,” answered Harry, “ and you
needn’t be afraid that I won’t pay my debts in ready
money.”
“ When they had had their tea, and found that they
still were not missed, Katie and the other girls grew
almost as high-spirited as Violet. They were all looking
out of a window, amusedly watching their school-mistress
and mates, who had no suspicion that they were away
from school, and yet so near, when suddenly Violet ex-
claimed,
“ Oh, dear, what shall we do ? We’re in for it now.
She’ll be sure to miss us. There’s Weasel, the story-
teller ! She said that she was not coming back until
after supper. I do believe she did it just to catch us.
Isn’t she a sneak, Harry ? ”
Violet’s fears were well founded. Miss Weasel had
not long taken her place at the tea-table before she be-
gan to look about her suspiciously. Presently there was


commotion, and in a few minutes all the girls were
marched indoors.
“Now, we must make a rush for the wall,” said
Violet.
But although Mrs. Marcet had gone in with her pupils
and teachers, her friends still sat in the garden, and,
therefore, Violet’s plan could not be carried out.
“ Tiresome old things !” she exclaimed, stamping her
foot, “how would they like it? ”
Time passed. Some heroic remedy must be adopted.
The girls were beginning to listen seriously to the boys’ pro-
posal to smuggle them into the playground and then drop
them into the garden beyond the ken of the tiresome
old things ” who, in the midst of all this excitement went
on with their tea with a placid enjoyment which was ex-
asperating to Violet, when a grating sound was heard.
One of the main doors of the meeting-house was thrown,
or rather pushed, open.
Down cowered all our young friends in the gallery
pew, which was their council-chamber, except Harry, who,
peeping between the faded curtains, saw enter —the bent
old chapel-keeper with a bunch of rusty keys in his hand,
Mrs. Marcet, Miss Weasel, and Dr. Stickleback.
“ Miss Delane, Miss Vivian, Miss This, That, and
Tother,” squeaked Miss Weasel, as loudly and impres-
sively as she was able.
No answer.
“ Ah, we must hunt the young pusses up,” said Dr.
Stickleback. “ I’ll eat my hat if they ain’t here. When
I got the water on me I thought first that it was from the
eaves, and then that a young scoundrel of a Green-coat
boy had squirted it. For it was squirted, but he didn’t
do it. As soon as I heard that your girls were missing,


I smelt a rat. They’re in here somewhere, in league
with those pestilent young rascals, the Grammar School
boys, or my name isn’t Stephen Stickleback, M.R.C.S.L.
and L.A.C We must hunt them up.”
From pew to pew below the searchers trotted, Miss
Weasel running up into the pulpit to explore, even to the
upturning of its cushions.
They stamped up the gallery stairs, and ere long the
Doctor shouted, “ Soho ! Here are the hares upon their
forms, or rather under them, packed like a nest of field-
mice. ”
The youngsters did not look exactly heroes and hero-
ines when they crawled out from their hiding-places under
the seats; but Harry soon recovered himself.
“It was all my fault, Mrs. Marcet,” he said. “My
sister and the other young ladies wouldn’t have come if it
hadn’t been for me.”
“ Don’t tell fibs, Harry,” cried Violet “ I made you
ask us.”
“ Mighty fine ! you’re a cheap Paladin, young gentle-
man,” growled Dr. Stickleback. “ You know you’re
skin’s safe. Schoolmasters weren’t mice in my day. I’d
lace your jacket for you, sir, if I were your school-
master.”
“ But you are not my schoolmaster, sir,” said Harry.
“No, I’m not; lucky for me, and lucky for you, too,
my young sir,” answered the doctor with a grin. “ And
now,” he went on, “ who was it spoilt my hat ? ”
“ I did,” replied Violet, almost choking in her efforts to
keep in a chuckle as she called to mind the water
pattering on the smooth-brushed crown.
“ You, you young monkey; and you’re laughing at
it! ” grunted the still grinning doctor. “ Don’t you ever


be ill again, miss, or you shall suffer, so help me Phar-
macopoeia ! ”
It was owing to the grumpy old doctor, whom they
had thought an ogre in black broadcloth, that the girls
got off as easily as they did.
Miss Weasel made a tremendous fuss about their es-
capade, but Dr. Stickleback laughed easy-going Mrs.
Marcet into condonation of it. She would, of course,
have thought it necessary to make a great fuss herself,
had she not had such an authority to sanction her
laches.


CHAPTER XVIII.
MR. CRICHTON,
Mr. Newton, having had a living
°ff ere d him, took orders and his departure
from Wringford. In his stead, on their re-
turn to school after midsummer holidays,
the boys found installed a very different kind of master,
Mr. Crichton, a good scholar and mathematician, but
also a good cricketer, a decent shot, a first-rate rider and
rower, and as fond of a lark as Violet Vivian. He was,
moreover, very good-looking and free-handed, and con-
sequently soon became first favourite with almost every-
body at Wringford.
He was a demigod in the eyes of the boys, and Harry
swore by him, if possible, even more than the others,
because he knew Mr. Summers, and Mr. Summers had
commended Harry to his favourable notice. The school-
house servants would have done anything for him. The
fat old cook was quite motherly in her provisions for his
comfort. She and the housekeeper almost quarrelled in
their rivalry to serve him, and the younger maids quar-
relled outright as to which should answer the bell when


he rang it. Even the misanthropic young man-of-all
work, whose hand had been against every one, and every
one’s hand against him, who brooded over dirty boots as
palpable leather wrongs, took a pleasure in polishing Mr.
Crichton’s, and rushed briskly from his blacking-scented
hermitage to run errands for him. Dr Bentley regarded
his colleague with gentle wonder mixed with pride. Mr.
Crichton was a puzzle to the good old doctor, but still a
satisfaction.
“ There, boys,” his mild old eyes seemed to say,
when he had been watching his junior’s athletic exploits,
“ you see that a scholar and a schoolmaster can be a
homo factus ad unguem according to your own notions.”
Every member of Mrs. Marcet’s establishment was in love
with Mr. Crichton. If Harry and Tom Steele had not
been devoted to him, the way in which Katie and Violet
talked of him would have made them savagely jealous.
MissWeaselleft off spectacles, and dressed herself, as Violet
phrased it, “ old ewe lamb fashion ” to captivate him.
The other teachers were always looking out of the corners
of their eyes at him in church. The girls made no
secret of their attachment. They begged his autographs
from the boys —if only corrections of Latin exercises—
and made them find out his birthday. By messengers,
who fled as soon as they had handed in their parcels, and
by the post, Mr. Crichton received quite a pile of slippers,
bead-bracelets, hair watch-guards, book-marks, &c., in
honour of his nativity. The only person in Wringford
who seemed to dislike Mr. Crichton was testy little Dr.
Stickleback, who was thrown somewhat into the shade by
the dashing young schoolmaster. The doctor had no
patience with the homage that was paid “ Mr. Feather-
pate,” as the doctor called him, and was always criticising


his performances. His good riding being undeniable,
the doctor relieved himself by maintaining that the
“ young coxcomb ” spent more than his salary in horse-
hire, and when in the hunting season Mr. Crichton once
or twice followed the hounds, the doctor waxed virtu-
ously indignant, and declared that if no one else would
interfere, he should really consider it to be his duty, as a
public man, to call the attention of the school trustees to
such disgraceful' conduct, so highly unbecoming in one
appointed to train the minds and morals of the young.
As a consequence, the doctor soon lost the little favour
he had won with boys and girls by his behaviour in the
meeting-house affair.
“ That little monkey of a man to presume to find fault
with such a duck of a darling,” the girls exclaimed in-
dignantly, and the boys followed suit.
One of Mrs. Marcet’s “ girls ” was quite a grown-up
young lady—Miss Marion Liddiard. Harry stoutly
asserted that she was not nearly so good-looking as
Violet, and Tom Steele that she was not nearly so good-
looking as Katie; but both confessed that she was the
second-best looking girl in the school. Most people
called her the beauty of the establishment. The teachers,
especially Miss Weasel, carped at her face and figure,
but her younger fellow-pupils considered her their queen,
and the boys also liked her very much, since—although
of course, only in a mamma-like way—she was very kind
to them.
Miss Liddiard could not express her admiration of
Mr. Crichton so openly as her schoolmates did, but it
"as plain that she was more smitten than any of them,
and when it was observed that Mr. Crichton was equally
taken with the adorable Marion, both the Select Estab-


lishment and the Grammar School watched the progress
of affairs with intense interest.
The love-making on the sly was prime fun for Harry,
since Mr. Crichton made him his Mercury. Once or
twice a day he conveyed a billet doux to the beloved, and
two or three times a week he was sent to the nursery-
garden to buy hot-house flowers for the same fair re
cipient, who, of course, made a great pet of him.
So matters stood when the Fifth of November came.
Under Mr. Crichton’s liberal auspices, Guy, bonfires,
fireworks, and fire-balloons had been got up on a scale
which made the Commercial Academicians turn as green
as the Charity boys’ coats with envy, and brought half
of the town into the old burying-ground. Dr. Stickle-
back tried to bribe the firemen to play upon the bonfire,
but they would have been far readier to play upon him
if Mr. Crichton had hinted a wish to have that done.
It was a glorious display, not the least glorious part of
it being that Mrs. Marcet’s young ladies had been invited
to witness it from the school-house. You can
how the Grammar School boys showed off before such
spectators ; how they let squibs bang in their hands, put
lighted crackers in one another’s pockets, struck attitudes
in letting off the Roman candles, braved any amount of
fizzing fire unflinching, followed Mr. Crichton in his
leaps through the bonfire flames, rushed after him to aid
in expelling the roughs who had made a raid into the
playground, and vied with him in handing about with
gunpowdery hands the cake and wine to their charmers,
and paying compliments (and peradventure trying to
snatch kisses) with smoke-begrimed lips.
Free-and-easiness was the order of the night. Good
old Dr. Bentley, after seeing a few of the fireworks com-


placently, had retired to his study and his treatise on
the Digamma. Mrs. Marcet had not been able to come,
and the teachers, Miss Weasel included, were too anxious
to secure Mr. Crichton’s attentions to have much time
to look after their charges.
“ Oh, Harry, this is downright jolly,” said Violet, who
had run out into the play-ground to let off a flower-pot
which Harry had given her.
But all that's bright must fade—passing away is
written on Fifth of November joys. As the Sixth of
November was drawing near, the young ladies were
summoned to take their departure.
Miss iolet took hers by scrambling, with Harry’s
assistance, into Mrs. Marcet’s garden. That was a
shorter way back than going round by the lane and
street, and decidedly more “jolly.” Even Miss Weasel
did not miss her, being too busy in manoeuvring to secure
the arm of the girls’ escort home. To her disgust, how-
ever, and that of the other teachers, Mr. Crichton offered
it to Miss Liddiard.
I do not know how grown-up young ladies are punished
at school. Whatever the extremest mode may be, her
instructresses would so have punished Miss Liddiard, if
they had dared.
They were delighted when Dr. Stickleback, meeting
the train on its way back, said pettishly to Mr.
•• You’d far better be attending to your duty, .young
man, seeing that those precious young scamps of yours
don t burn the town down. If anj-thing happens,
remember that I shall hold you responsible, young
man.”
The girls might be marched back to school, but dis-
cipline was so relaxed that it was difficult to get them to


bed, whilst their admirers remained in the adjoining
play-ground, handing over the potatoes that had been
baked in the embers of the bonfire.
At last, however, both boys and girls filed up to their
dormitories, leaving the bonfire still smouldering.


CHAPTER XIX,
FIRE !
BARRY was dreaming about Violet. Although
he pulled back her hand, she would thrust
a redhot poker into a barrel of gunpowder.
It blew up and Harry woke up, and found
his bedroom full of a strange red light. Mrs. Marcet’s
house was on fire. The wind had risen during the night,
and blown some of the hot bonfire-ashes on to some
fire-wood piled in a corner of the play-ground, and so
the flames had spread to a dried-up old tree in the adjoin-
ing garden, and from that had passed on to the house.
Its inmates had just awoke to their position, glass was
being smashed, and soon wild screams rang out and
startled the slumbering town. The Grammar-School
boys, and masters, and man were dressed after a fashion
m next to no time, and rushed forth to the rescue.
Good oid Dr. Bentley made his appearance in slippers
without stockings, a tasselled night-cap, and a night-shirt
imperfectly tucked into his bulging black breeches,
bearing in one hand his ewer and in another an old
watering-can which he had picked up.


The whole town was soon awake. “ Fire ! fire !!
fire !!! ” ran along the streets and lanes. A rush was
made to the Corn Market. The engine was hauled out,
and, not waiting for horses, the mob harnessed them-
selves to it, and dragged it down High Street at a rate
that made it rock again. “ Hi! hi! hi !hi ! ” the fire-
men running beside it, holding on, and standing up on
it, shouted incessantly, as their wild team dashed through
the ever-thickening throng, knocking down any persons
who got in their way like ninepins. The entire police
force of the burgh —a superintendent, a sergeant, and
four constables, —for some inscrutable purpose, rushed
about “ promiscuously,” springing rattles. “ What is it ?
Where is it ? ” was shouted down faster and faster, as
window after window was thrown up. In a very short
time the little street in front of Mrs. Marcet’s was close
packed with whitefaced people, except where a little
space had been kept for the engine. The plug had been
found, and a gang of volunteers, which many another
gang was eager to relieve, energetically pumped the
handles up and down, while brass-helmeted firemen
clambered about as if they had charmed lives—now
turning the hose on Mrs Marcet s house, and anon, for a
minute or two, diverting it to play upon houses which
had caught on the other side of the narrow street, and
hewing down with their clashing axes kindled beams, that
fell with a shower of sparks, and amid a tumult of screams
and angry cries, upon the crowd below. Dr. Stickleback
and the other medical men of M ringiord had their hands
full pretty speedily, but, chancing to run up against Mr.
Crichton in his bustle, the crusty little doctor trium-
phantly exclaimed —
“ You see what has happened, young man. I told you


how it would be. You shall be held responsible—you
shall be held responsible for this, young man. Don’t
think to escape ; if I’ve to lay the information before the
magistrates myself, young man. A feather pate of a
young puppy burning silly young girls, and respectable,
reasonable elderly persons, in their beds—a nice pass
things have come to ! You shall answer for it, and pay
for it smartly, too, or my name’s not Stephen Stickleback,
young man,”
Mr. Crichton paid not the slightest heed to the irate
little doctor, but shouldered him on one side, just as he
shouldered Binks, the drunken cobbler, who also was
getting in his way for no purpose, on the other side. Mr.
Crichton was as white in the face as anybody in the
crowd, not through fear for himself, but from anxious
alarm about Mrs. Marcet and her girls, for whom he
would have been very much concerned under any cir-
cumstances, but whom, under the circumstances, he felt
himself to be specially responsible for. Making a
speaking-trumpet of his hands, so that he might be heard
above the roar of the flames, the murmur of the crowd,
the crackling of timber, the fall of masonry, the hiss and
splash of water, and the clanking of the engines, Mr.
Crichton shouted to the terrified women and girls, who
were huddled in the top rooms of the front of the house,
on which the fire was fast gaining, to go to the back,
the top of which was untouched, while the fire, blown on
by the wind, was sinking in the lower stories. But the
poor creatures paid no regard to him—did not recognise
him in their terror. Still they thrust out their hands
imploringly, and shrieked out their blood-curdling cries
for help. Y hiter than ever grew Mr. Crichton’s face ;
his sternly indrawn lips were almost as pale as his cheeks.


Savagely butting with his broad shoulders, and jerking
out °his squared elbows, he ploughed his way back
through the throng. The master of the Commercial
Academy and his usher, who were standing doing no-
thing, ventured to sneer at him as he passed. ‘ Like all
them show-off chaps,” sniggered the “ Principal ” of the
Commercial Academy, “ when there’s anything like real
danger he turns tail.”
“Yes, sir, that’s always the way,” chimed in the
washed-out assistant, who could not “do anything ”
not even the poor work by which he professed to earn
his bread —properly, and who hated Mr. Crichton with
most envious rancour —not the less rancorous because, in
spite of his conceit, he could not help feeling that Air.
Crichton would have been infinitely amused if he had
known that such a being had presumed to be jealous of
him. Mr. Bills-and-parcels was not sure that Mr.
Crichton was even aware of his existence —at any rate,
as Mr. Bills-and-parcels; he might possibly know, if he
gygj* condescended to think about such matters, that Air,
Redink kept a “ young man ; ” and to be thus genuinely
ignored by one whom the usher tried hard, but tried in
vain, to consider merely an “ under-master,” like himself,
was gall, wormhood, verjuice, vinegar, and bitter aloes to
Mr. Bills-and-parcels. Hence his ready chiming in with
the depreciatory dictum of his “ Principal,” whom, in his
heart, he did not love much better than he loved Mr.
Crichton, except in so far as Mr. Redink’s natural gifts
and acquired accomplishments did not “ sit upon Mr.
Bills-and-parcels as Mr. Crichton’s did. Mr. Redink,
his usher thought, was jealous of him —otherwise he
would have given him a better salary.
Pursy little Podger, master of the Greencoat School,


retiring, temporarily blown, after a most manful spell
at engine-pumping, chanced to overhear the conversa-
tion between the instructors of the Commercial Academy.
Now little Podger, like most of the Wringfordians, had
a great liking for Mr. Crichton. Mr. Crichton had
always been courteous to him, and he had also been
kind. Podger had an ambition to “ rub up his Algebra ”
which meant to acquire, for the first time, a smattering
of it in after-school hours ; and Mr. Crichton had helped
him to master certain Simple Equation puzzles which
had gravelled him. Worthy Mr. Newton had been
equally willing to help the little man on, but Mr. New-
ton was so absent-minded and so profound a mathema-
tician, that Mr. Podger had not derived much benefit
from his instructions. He took so much for granted,
considering *’s (which were “Ebrew-Greek,” or Sanscrit,’
to Podger) the commonest A, B, C, and had so often to
be brought back to the point he had left mexplicated.
Moreover, esprit de corps actuated Podger. He, too,
was a “Foundation Master,” and was not going to’have
a brother of the guild run down by mere adventure-
schoolmasters.
“ Mr- Crichton isn’t the sort of man to funk, Mr.
Redink, Mr. Podger loftily observed. “ He’s gone away
to do something sensible, else he wouldn’t have gone. If
you and your young man took a turn at the engine,
instead of standing there chattering away, like two old
women, perhaps that would be the sensiblest thing you
could do. You ain t likely to risk your precious necks
for anybody.”
The Commercial Academicians as well as the Grammar
School boys looked down on the “ Charity place ; ” but
the Grammar School boys did it good-temperedly, from a


height which Mr Podger did not for one moment dispute
their right to hold ; whereas, on the other hand, Mr.
Podger would have considered himself insulted if the
education he gave his scholars had been pronounced
merely equal to that which the lads at the Commercial
Academy received, and, therefore, he was not disposed
to put up with the sour, vulgar disparagement liberally
bestowed on his instructions and instructed, to say no-
thing of his own “social status,” by the pupils and
teachers of that pretentious but flimsy establishment
“no better than me and my boys, nor half so good ”
Mr. Podger would very frequently remark. Accordingly,
independently of his loyalty to Mr. Crichton, Mr Podger
greatly enjoyed his administration of “ a pill ” to Messrs.
Redink and Bills-and-parcels.
They received it in silence, which they strove to make,
or, at any rate, think, dignified; but not succeeding, they
edged off, as speedily as the press would permit, from
the neighbourhood of honest little Podger.
Mr. Crichton, meantime, had gone round to the back,
where he found the instructions he had given before he
went to the front in course of execution. There was a
pile of blankets in Mrs. Marcet’s garden ; the young man
of all work, Harry, Tom Steele, and other boys —most of
whom rather hindered than helped —were laboriously
raising a ladder to one of the back windows. Good,
bare-legged, black-breeched Dr. Bentley was actually
dancing about in a state of gallant but bewildered
excitement.
“ That’s right, boys—that’s right,” he would exclaim,
rubbing his hands —“ I wish he would come back —I
hope he has not rashly plunged into the flames —run and
ask what has become of Mr. Crichton.”


When Mr. Crichton made his appearance, “ Euge / ”
shouted the Doctor. “ Made nova virtute,puer, sic itur ad
astra , he went on, when Mr. Crichton’s strong arm
swayed over the ladder, and steadied it down to its
resting-place. As soon as it was settled, Mr. Crichton
rushed up it as in the old days, when a captain had sworn
to flog the last man off the yard, man-of-war’s men
scampered up the shrouds to reef. Harry and Tom
would have followed, had not the Doctor heroically but
very deliberately taken the pas. Upwards he ponderously
plodded, but midway, made giddy by the height, sick by
the smoke, and generally bemazed by the unwonted state
of affairs, he stuck fast.
“ Please , sir, go on,” pleaded Harry, who was close
behind him.
But the Doctor stirred not.
“Are yon going on, sir?” cried Harry, in more
staccato tones.
Still the Doctor neither moved nor spoke, and Harry,
too impatient to linger longer, climbed over him much
as a monkey mounts to the shoulders of a tame bear.
The novel experience of being swarmed over by one of
his own pupils brought the Doctor back to consciousness.
He cast one timorous look beneath him, then closed his
eyes again, and began to slide slowly down.
Tom Steele, who was next behind, had just time to
swing himself under the ladder, and the Doctor passed
over him with accelerated velocity.
“ Thank God,” exclaimed the good old man, taking off
his nightcap, when his feet once more touched the ground,
and the boys clustered round the foot of the ladder
cheered him most enthusiastically. If he had not saved
any one except himself, at any rate, he had meant to save


the whole of Mrs. Marcet’s establishment at any personal
risk. He was a magnificent hero in vel/e, and ever
afterwards the boys thought more highly of him,
and he held his head more erect when athletic perfor-
mances were the subject of conversation—nay, when
the exact particulars of his exploit had become blurred
by lapse of time, the Doctor would refer with modest
pride to “ the time of the fire, you know, when I ran up
the ladder.”
By the time Harry and Tom Steele had run up it, Mr.
Crichton, creeping on hands and knees through an
intervening room on which the fire had fastened, had
dragged Miss Liddiard from the front, and was pre-
paring for another venture. Harry and Tom Steele
crawled after him, and Harry, collaring both Katie and
Violet, Tom had to content himself with miscellaneous
prizes. Two firemen joining the rescuing party, Mrs.
Marcet and her girls, her teachers and her servants were
all got safely to the back. Miss Weasel fainted, at least,
so she said —at any rate, she hugged Mr. Crichton so
tightly round the neck that he almost fainted. He did
not look in the least flattered when, having suddenly
brought her round by flopping her down upon the floor,
she declared that she should consider it her duty to devote
her life to constant manifestation of her gratitude to her
Warm-hearted, her Heroic Preserver. (Miss Weasel had
a way of talking in capitals, which the girls did not like
when her epithets were cantankerously opprobrious, and
which Mr. Crichton did not seem to relish any more
when they were effusively affectionate.)
In one way or another all the womankind were got
safely to the ground except Katie and Violet. When
these young ladies found that the back of the house was,


as it .was supposed, safe, they—Katie to be with Harry,
and Violet for a lark—managed, in the general confusion,
to remain and help Mr. Crichton and the boys and the
firemen, in throwing as much of Mrs. Marcet’s furniture
as they could lay hold of out of window. A good deal
of smashing took place, and I am afraid the whole of this
could not be fairly attributed to what Violet afterwards
gravely called “the excitement of the moment. ” At any
rate, she was self-possessed enough to mimic very
comically the firemen’s gruff “ Below there? ” before
flinging down a wash-hand basin or a looking-glass. She
was suddenly sobered, however, in the midst of her fun.
Mr Crichton and the firemen had gone down to shift the
ladder to another window, which they thought would be
more convenient for their purpose, when the wind shifting,
rolled back the smoke and flames to the rear of the house,
cutting off its upper floors. Mr. Crichton’s presence of
mind did not desert him. Some of the people below
were going to replace the ladder in the very thick of the
fire, but he pounced on two big blankets, summoned all
hands to hold them out, and then shouted, “ Muffle the
girls up, boys, and then jump ! ”
Tom Steele was fortunate enough to secure Katie this
time. Having swathed her as securely as time would
allow, and Harry having performed the same office for
Violet, each took his living mummy in his arms and
made the leap through the blinding, suffocating smoke.
The boys were a little singed, but no other harm
happened to any of them.
Harry and Violet came down with such a thud that the
Doctor, who was holding one corner of their blanket, was
brought upon his knees.
But even Violet, oddly though he was dressed, was not


graceless enough to laugh when he rose from them, and
patting her on the head, said gently, “ I think, my dear,
that is where we all ought to be after the wonderful
deliverances we have seen to-night.


CHAPTER XX.
MORE HOLIDAYS.
RS. MARCET’S house was nearly gutted,
but as both
she and her landlord
were insured, the insurance offices,
whose business it is to lose sometimes, or
else there would be no need for them, were the chief
sufferers in that respect. Of course, the good lady was
put to a good deal of inconvenience. She had to break
up before the end of the half, to find temporary lodgings
for her pupils, look up dressmakers in a hurry, bear the
black looks and sour speeches of parents wffio somehow
would hold her responsible for the burning down of her
house and destruction of their daughters’ apparel, etc. ;
give longer holidays than usual, fearing all the time that
she would lose scholars by doing so, and endure the
miseries ofhouse-hunting in winter.
But I am afraid that she did not get much commisera-
tion from her young ladies in these distresses. What was
misery to her was jolly fun to them.
Dr. Bentley, like a gallant old gentleman, offered the
shelter of his roof to his old neighbour, and asked her to


bring with her as many of her young ladies as the school-
house could accommodate. Miss Weasel tried hard to
be included in the number, but fortunately without
success.
Mrs. Marcet brought with her her three beauties, and,
if the truth must be told, favourites —Miss Liddiard,
Katie, and Violet, whose presence in the dark old house
was sunshine, of course, to the three heroes of the fire,
Mr. Crichton, Harry, and Tom Steele.
When, after a day or two, they departed for their
homes a double gloom seemed to settle down in the low-
pitched old chambers. However, for the rest of the half
the fire provided the town in general, and the school-
house in particular, with abundance of excitement. There
was the searching, and afterwards the removal of the
ruins to be watched, and then the school-house was
threatened with “legal proceedings ! ”
The gallant manner in which Mr. Crichton and our
young friends Harry and Tom behaved had caused the
townsfolk, Dr. Stickleback excepted, to condone the
carelessness on the part of the Grammar School which
had caused the fire ; but assurance companies do not
take sentimental views of things. However, either from
the difficulty of fixing the responsibility, or from that of
procuring evidence, the lawyers’ menaces proved bruta
fubnina.
Dr. Stickleback would have given any amount of
evidence to cut the comb, as he phrased it, of Mr.
Featherpate; but Dr. Stickleback was too willing a
witness to be acceptable. Mr. Crichton ate his Christmas
dinner without any dread of heavy damages and costs to
interfere with his digestion.
I can best give an idea of what happened to those in


3 oS THE ADVENTURES OF HARRY DELANE.
whom we are most interested during the Christmas
holidays, by citing two letters which passed between the
dashing young schoolmaster and his favourite pupil.
“My dear Harry, —l hope you have enjoyed yourself, and have
not left off doing so. Of course, you cannot, since to-morrow is
Twelfth Day, and mince-pies have the pull over magnesia until that
is past. I especially hope that my brave, calm young friend Katie
has had a merry Christmas, after all the perturbation she went
through so quietly. Miss Violet, of course, is, as you no doubt are
ready to maintain against all comers, a ‘ jolly brick, but isn t
she, ray boy, though as pleasant a little soul as ever lived, just a
trifle 4 loud ? ’ Calmness is the proof of strength. A worn an should
be quiet in danger.”
[“I know why he says that,” growled Harry, breaking
off from his reading. “ Miss Liddiard was precious quiet.
She’s a dear, kind, nice girl, but I did think she’d got
more go in her. Katie’s worth a dozen of her, when
there’s anything to be done, let alone Violet. And
Crichton’s a nice un to talk about being calm, and all the
rest of it! Wasn’t he rushing about like a flash of
lightning? Xhe firemen said they d never come nigh
sich a feller.’ Ido believe the new chap thought at first
that Crichton wanted to chisel him out of his chance of
any rewards that might be going ! ”]
“ The Doctor was very well -when I left Wringford. I really
think that he considers the fire a piece of good fortune. No man
knows what he can do until he tries, and the Doctor is delighted to
find that he possesses a long unsuspected fund of youthful agility.
He has become quite a ladies’ man. Can you keep a secret,
Master Harry? If so, I may tell you that it is just possible that
Mrs. Marcet may become Mrs. Bentley. The dear old people bill
and coo like a pair of elderly turtle doves or two old pigeons. It
makes one think of a courtship in antediluvian days. She has
somehow come to believe that it was the Doctor who dragged her


out of the fire, and brought him round to a bewildered semi-
acceptance of the same faith. Well, if the will is as good as the
deed, Mrs. Marcet ought to be grateful to him, since he certainly
wanted to risk his life for her, and would have done so if he had
only known how. Mrs. V ardrobe is furious at the prospect, and
Cook vows that she will give warning. Mrs. Marcet may be a
very good sort of lady, she says, but she ‘ ain't a-gom’ to have an
old missus pryin’ into her kitchen at her time o life. \ou aie
familiar with good Cook’s elegant modes of speech. ‘ Now it
would be different,’ she says, says she, ‘ if you was goin’ to bring a
beautiful young lady to the Schoolus, Mr. Crichton. I’d work my
fingers to the bone for that sweet young crittur, I would, and take all
the trouble o’ orderin’ the dinners off her mind. V oung missuses
wants old servants, and old servants can’t get along wi’ old missuses
put all of a sudden over their heads. Them's my opinions, Mr.
Crichton, and I don’t care who knows ’em, though the Doctor’s a
dear kind old gentleman as ever lived I on’t deny, and it beats me,
it do, why he can’t go on as he’s done this ever so long with Mrs.
Wardrobe. I’m sure we was very comfortable, hain’t we been, Mr.
Crichton, though me and her does have words occasional ? ’
“There, Harry, as I expect you are a lazy fellow, neglecting
your composition, turn that into Ciceronian Latin, or if you like,
you may render it after the manner of Terence or Plautus.
“ I have another bit of fun for you. Doctors are likely to differ
seriously. Our doctor has a rival in whom do you think ? My
peppery little friend, Mr Stickleback ! He never told his love,
but let concealment like a worm i’ the bud feed on his port-wine
cheek, but it has come out now with a vengeance. If he calls Dr.
Bentley out, of course I must be his second, and I shall insist on his
having the choice of weapons. Will you and Miss Violet lend us
between you a brace of duelling squirts ?
“ Mrs. Marcet left Wringford the day before I did, and I accom-
panied her to the coach. On the way we met the chirurgeon with all
his bristles up. ‘ Good morning, ma’am,’ he said, ‘ there was a time
when I should have regretted to see you leaving Wringfcrd. Can’t
say as much now. Glad to find you’re going in such good company. ’
“ My coach-companion next day was Miss Shum —such is her
name amongst the Immortals, by saucy schoolboys called Miss
Weasel. On reaching the railway I might still have enjoyed the


inestimable privilege of her society, had I not been inappreciative
enough to prefer solitude and a cigar.
“ N. 8 .—1 hope you have no silly precocious hankerings after
the weed, Master Harry. Unless you wish to be a puppyish,
tallow-faced, pithless mannikin, you will not begin to smoke until
you are one and twenty, and if you don’t want to then it will be all
the better for you.
“ I had a pleasant time at starting at my brother’s, where I am
again staying, but between I have spent Elysian days—so happy
that I forgot all about my promise to write to you.
‘‘ I have been visiting a certain family, the most interesting
member of which is a certain fair lady of your acquaintance, who
sends you her love, and says that though it is very nice to have
everything settled, she is half sorry that she is not going back to
Wringford and her preux chevalier of a young postman and flower-
bearer. She sends much love to Katie also.
‘ ‘ Much of mine to Katie likewise. Ever yours,
“W. R. G. Crichton.
“ P.S. —Write me a long letter at once, you have no excuse for
not having done so long ago. ”
Just as Harry had finished reading his letter, Katie
came into the room.
“Hooray !” shouted her brother, “ Crichton and Miss
Liddiard are going to get spliced, and Stickleback and
the Doctor are squabbling about Mrs. Marcet —oh, it’s
such fun —but there’s the letter —you can read all about
it for yourself. Here’s Crichton blowing me up for not
writing to him. He’s a nice un. When he said he
should write ever so long ago—and he’s cracking up you,
and running down Violet. I don’t mind his cracking up
you, but he’s no business to make out that Violet’s
vulgar. Not a bit of it—is she, Katie ? But he’s a jolly
brick all the same—so here goes.”
The following is Harry’s letter to his schoolmaster, as
it was at last dispatched after sundry recensions suggested


by his sister. In its latest edition, it did not quite meet
with Katie’s approval, but Harry was sick of blotting out
and altering, and vowed that he would put his letter
into the fire if he did not put it into the post-office box as
it stood.
«• Dear Mr. Crichton,— -I was glad to get a letter from you at
last, and that you had been enjoying yourself so much. Please
give my kind regards to Miss Liddiard, and tell her that I am \ ery
sorry she is not coming back to Wringford, only I suppose she soon
will be, to stay, or are you going to live somewhere else ? How
jolly it would be to have Miss Liddiard at the School-House for
good! Cook wouldn’t give warning then, I’ll be bound. Katie
sends her love, and is much obliged to you, but she says Miss Vivian
is the nicest girl she knows.
[“ I didn’t say that, Harry,” cried criticising Katie.
“ gut you meant it —is there anybody you like better?
answered Harry.
“ But he won’t like it,” persisted Katie.
“ Then he may lump it,” retorted Harry. “ W hat
business has he to run down Violet just because he is
going to get married? Though I’m jolly glad he is. Oh,
what larks we shall have if he stays at V ringford after
he’s married, but I’m afraid that won’t be good enough
for him then, unless the Doctor gave up his berth and
Crichton got it,”]
“ Katie wants to know when you will be married, and where
you’ll be married from, and what Miss Liddiard will wear, and how
many bridesmaids there’ll be, and what they’ll wear, and a lot more,
but I tell her she ought to write to Miss Liddiard about all that.
Plow should you know? Will Mrs. Marcet give up her if
she marries ? I hope Miss Shum won’t get it. If she does, I m
sure Miss Vivian won’t go back, and I shall write to papa to take
Katie away. You can’t think what a sneak and a screw she is. I
don’t mean Katie but Miss Shum. Of course she daren’t try on
her games with Miss Liddiard.


[“ Oh, what a vulgar expression, Harry, dear,” ex-
claimed Katie.
“ Bother,” answered Harry, “ I ain’t going to scratch
it out; you may, if you like. People talk like that, and
why shouldn’t they write it down?”] •
" I wish Mrs. Marcet and the Doctor would both give up school-
keeping, and let you and Miss Liddiard have the schoolhouse, and
go and live in some nice place where they could have us over for a
spree, close by, to plague old Stickleback.
[“ Oh, he won’t mind that,” interjected Harry, in reply
to an expostulatory shake of Katie’s head.]
“ I hope they won’t .be silly enough to have him for their doctor,
.he’d be sure to poison them. We haven’t had much fun these
holidays. If it wasn’t for Katie, it would be ever so much jollier
at school. We haven’t been to a single party. Mr. Prendergast,
that’s our curate, you know, that Mr. Summers did duty for, says
it’s wicked to go to parties, so aunt won’t let us. He and poor
Mrs. Prendergast and Peter, that’s their son, and the other children,
spent Christmas Day here ; but we had to be as mum as mice, and
he kept on interfering about what we ate and drank. Like his
impudence !
[“Remember he’s a clergyman, dear,” remonstrated
Katie.
“ Oh, blow ! ” rejoined her brother, exasperated by
the pains of letter-inditing, which, after all his trouble,
had not secured unqualified approval. “ Why don’t he
behave himself as sich ?”]
I haven’t had time for any Latin composition these holidays,
but I’ve done some English verses—
“ ‘ Sticklebackus
Wants to whack us.
Prendergast
Would make us fast.’


[“Oh, fie!” was all the . remonstrance which this
quatrain provoked from laughing Katie, who was sur-
prisedly proud of her brother’s suddenly manifested
poetical abilities.]
“Mr. Prendergast takes good care not to fast himself; he says
it’s Popish. The rector is a very nice old gentleman. He tried
hard to get us to a juvenile party he gave, but somehow he seems
afraid of Mr. Prendergast and Aunt. Aunt is very angry just now,
because Susan, that is one of our servants, is going to get married.
Aunt seems to think that it is wicked to get married. I suppose
because she isn't, and jolly old Charlotte has been laid up all the
holidays with rheumatism, and we have had a woman in from the
village, as cross as two sticks, because Aunt is always blowing her
up. So you may fancy we’ve been uncommonly jolly. I’ve only
had anything like a spree once. Last week, when there was all
that snow, I lugged Peter Prendergast out, and we, got behind the
hedge by the cage, and had a snowballing match with everybody
that passed. We held our ground until it was dusk, and then we
saw somebody coming up the lane, and Peter let fly and knocked
off his hat. But it was his father, and he gave poor Peter a
tremendous welting, so that spoilt it all.
“ With love from Katie,
“ I remain,
“ Dear Mr, Crichton,
“ Your affectionate Pupil,
“ Harry Delane.”


CHAPTER XXL
£IOO REWARD.
HERE was a “prophetic strain” in Harry’s
letter. When he and his sister left Wring-
ford at the end of the next half, —they went
to school in the pre-“term” era—matters
stood thus
“ Weasel,” after the holidays, was to reign in Mrs.
Marcet’s stead, not numbering Katie and Violet amongst
her subjects ; during the holidays Mrs. Marcet was to
become Mrs. Bentley, and, after a honeymoon in the
Isle of Wight, to take up her abode in a pretty little place
just outside Wringford, in which her rejuvenated love
would be able to devote himself without interruption to
his Treatise on the Digamma; and Mr. Crichton was to
wed his Marion, and, after their honeymoon, somewhat
farther afield than the old people’s, to step into Dr.
Bentley’s shoes. This last arrangement made Mr.
Stickleback more furious even than the loss of his
secretly-beloved. “ Good match—birds of a feather flock
together—no fool like an old one,” was the frequently
repeated formula under which he strove to hide, and at


last with very considerable success, his annoyance at Dr.
Bentley’s paulopost-future nuptials ; but he had fought
tooth and nail against Mr. Crichton’s appointment. He
denounced it with would-be withering satire in his pro-
fessional and social visits ; he mote against it in his own
name, and over a curious collection of indignant noms de
plume in the Wringford Sentinel; he lodged formal pro-
test against it with the school trustees. In vain; the
trustees had themselves fallen in with, or heard most
favourable accounts of, Mr. Crichton. His dash had
infected them. They conceived the ambition of raising
their trust above the status of a mere vegetating country-
town grammar school, and believed that they had found
in Mr. Crichton the very man to enable them to effect
their purpose. He was unanimously elected to the head-
mastership, vice Dr. Bentley, radiantly resigned ; and re-
ceived, moreover, encouraging hints of subscriptions that
would be forthcoming—if he satisfied the expectations the
trustees had formed of him —for new buildings, scholar-
ships, &c. When their decision had been made known
to the town and county in the Wringford Sentinel , which
expressed its approval of the same in, for it, a most
lengthy and a most eulogistic double-leaded leader (in
which, to show that he had received a classical education,
and was competent to judge of schoolmasters, the editor
spoke of Mr. Crichton as Aschamior Aschamd) poor Dr.
Stickleback, I think, must have needed the whole of his
stock of blue pills for personal consumption ; and Mr.
Bills-and-parcels at once made up his mind not to return
to the Commercial Academy’s “ first mathematical desk ”
after the vacation. He could not live in Wringford with
that other “ under-master,” promoted, amid general
applause, to the head-mastership of the supercilious


Grammar School, and in possession, moreover, of the
adorable creature whom Mr. Bills-and-parcels, from his
observation of her behaviour when he stared at her in
church, or when the Select Establishment and the Com-
mercial Academy crossed orbits when out for a Noah’s
ark-like, two and-two promenade, had fatuously supposed
to be over head and ears in love with himself.
When Harry and Katie reached their aunt’s they found
the village sleeping as usual in the summer sunshine.
Its elm-trees drowsily rustled in the warm air, its lime-
trees, and its bean-fields breathed forth their luscious
fragrance. Bees buzzed in all the cottage gardens, and
filled the air with their swarming hum. The flashing
scythe swished in the long grass. The green corn here
and there was turning golden. Little crow-keepers,
perched on gates, now and then shouted in shrill treble,
sprang their crazy rattles, or let off their rusty horse-
pistols. Butter-making mistresses, and maids, perplexed
by the caprices of their manufacture, were not quite so
cool as the moist-smelling shaded dairies in which they
worked. Cottagers’ wives looked out through open
windows over their jumble of roses, wall-flowers, honey-
suckle, nasturtiums, potatoes and cabbages, with their
arms deep thrust into their washing-tubs. Pigs, geese,
and clogged donkeys strolled leisurely about the grassy
lanes.
The doctor’s man was spinning round and deluging
with bucketful after bucketful of water the upraised wheel
of his master’s gig. The Plough was cool and quiet in its
morning off-time, scented with stale tobacco-smoke and
beer fumes only, which the sweet air that stole in from
the outside was fast obliterating. Hammers tinkled,
bellows roared at the forge ; already there were three


horses in the traverse, newly perfumed with singed hoof,
and a little crowd sprawled their elbows and shoulders
half inside the smithy.
Harry had stopped there on the first morning after his
arrival, to learn the village news, when a bill-sticker made
his appearance with his pot, brush, toothless rake, and
a great sheaf of damp placards. Pulling one out, he said
to the master-smith —
“The police has just 'sent me these, Jarge. I can
stick un up here, can’t I ? ”
With greedy eyes those of the yokels who could read
read, with greedy ears those of them who could not read
listened, to the contents of the bill, which was soon posted
up all about the village, and on dead-walls, cart-lodge
gables, and such like coigns of vantage along the turnpike
road which led through it, and the lanes which encircled
it with a most complicated net-work.
Thus the bill ran ;
jQ too Reward.
Whereas, Izaak Crook, Gent, of Pepper Hall, in the
parish of St. Etheldreda, County of Essex, left his home
at, or a little before or after midnight of Wednesday,
j une — —, and has not since been heard of, This is
to give notice, that whosoever will give such informa-
tion as may lead to the recovery of the said Izaak Crook
shall receive the above reward.
Description.
About sixty years of age, very tall, spare, and wrinkled.
Stoops much, hooked nose, dark hair and eyes, with a
wandering expression, yellow complexion. Has the look
of a foreigner, or one wdio has spent many years abroad.


Can talk French and Spanish. Usually wore when from
home nankeen trousers, pumps, and straps, short-waisted
brass-buttoned dress coat, buttoned up to the neck, stiff,
high white cravat, and black beaver hat with curled brim,
sloping inwards from the crown. Rode with loose rein
and long stirrup leathers. May have on red and purple
smoking-cap, green flannel shirt and trousers, and gilt
Spanish leather slippers, tattooed on the arm with crown,
cross, anchor, and B. V. M.
The above reward will be given, under the conditions
specified, by Miss Crook, Pepper Hall.
Apply or address Pepper Hall, police station
or to Sup. Shairp, Moot Hall, Dulchester.
Mr. and Miss Crook had arrived a year or two before
to puzzle the public mind of
They were very
much like parrots plucked and tanned in the face —indis-
putably brother and sister. They were said to have made
or inherited an enormous fortune “ somewhere in the
West Indies,” and to be both more or less “cracked.”
They had the reputation, moreover, of being miserable
skinflints, except towards their very few servants —not
more than two or three, and these all “ furriners,” i.e.
non-village folk, —whom the queer couple were reported
to bribe with “ king’s ransoms,” to keep their secrets. It
had got abroad, however, somehow, that they quarrelled
like cat and dog when more than ordinarily in their lunes.
Miss Crook scarcely ever stirred abroad. Mr. Izaak’s
appearance when he favoured the public with the light of
his countenance, has been sufficiently described in the
reward bill.
He was not exactly an inestimable member of society,
but his disappearance caused more excitement than


might have been occasioned by the loss of a far worthier
man. Pepper Hall became a place of intense interest
to the villagers—they went on pilgrimage to it and stared
at it with their mouths very wide open, as if in that way
they could elucidate its mystery. It stood between two
and three miles from , and had long been
empty before the Crooks took possession of it. It was
built of dim red brick, with lanky windows in sun-cracked,
rain-rotted, once white frames. Its great gates were of thin
twisted, rusty iron-work. The paint of its yard gates was
blistered and scaling off. It was flanked by two reaches
of mud and dust-furred dead wall, topped with dusty ivy.
A great yew tree darkened the forecourt, the chequer
stones of which were all cracked.
Before the Crooks had become the tenants of the Hall,
the village people had rambled freely over the dilapidated,
neglected premises. Lead had been stripped from the
roof, a sound window-pane was a rarity, the walls were
painted with green slime and arrased with cobwebs.
Great patches in the floors had turned to touchwood.
Heaps of fallen plaster —cornice and moulding—lay in
corners, swarmed over by slimy, creeping things.
The pleasure garden had become a wilderness. Its
gravel walks were green, its box-borders had vanished
or grown up into unseemly bushes, frogs croaked in its
duck-weeded fountain basins, its mutilated statues lay
about like damp Dagons, weeds had choked its flowers.
In kitchen garden and orchard everything had equally
gone to rack. Most of the fruit trees had been carried
off for firewood, and the few that remained bore no fruit,
or none worth eating. What was left of the tarred fenc-
ing looked like gapped, decaying teeth. The hedge of
the paddock was breached on all sides, and trespassers,


both two-footed and four-footed, did as they pleased in
it. The stable-yard was grass-grown, and so were its
roofs. The smashed greenhouse held only a few broken
flowerpots, dried-up flower-stalks and lumps of hard-
baked mould. Desolation was written in big capitals all
over the place. The Crooks made it habitable after a
fashion, and had brought the gardens, it was said, back
to a state of remunerative fertility. Cows, that were not
strays, once more grazed in the paddock, and a handsome
horse shook his halter in the echoing stables, in which
there was room for a dozen more. But Pepper Hall was
almost cut off from the outside world. Its master and
mistress had, apparently, no acquaintances anyw here at
least none ever visited them, and they scarcely ever got
any letters. Their servants were glumpily gossip-proof,
and they owned sundry fierce dogs, which effectually
guarded their abode against uninvited visitors. Even
during the search for Mr. Izaak, scarcely any one but
the police got admittance to the premises.
The police as well as the villagers were soon non-
plussed, although the former would not, of course, admit
that they were puzzled, shaking their heads with an air
of more and more profound sagacity the more and more
hopelessly they felt they were at fault.
They had searched up to the extreme limit of their
light, but nothing had they found.
The only facts they had to guide them were these : that
the two suits described in the reward bill had disappeared
as well as Mr. Izaak, and that the evening before he dis-
appeared, he had had a quarrel with his sister, and vowed
that he would make her repent of her impertinence.
Mr. Crook’s disappearance was a puzzle to Harry as
well as other people, but it was not on that he was medi-


tating when one evening, two or three days after the
eccentric old gentleman had vanished, our young friend
was passing through a little wood which skirted the village.
Harry was thinking rather, according to boys’ wont, of
the “ live things ” he might possibly catch.
Hearing a rustle, he stopped and then went on more
cautiously. Peering into an old woodcutter’s saw-pit,
half full of dead leaves, he saw, snuggling at the bottom,
munching a crust, in his flannels and with a bundle
beside him, Mr. Izaak Crook.
“By Jove,” thought Harry, “ what a lark ! I’ll slip off
and get a constable or some one, and we’ll nail him.
He’s settling himself for the night.”
As the little police station was the last house in the
village on the wood side, Harry made sure of his prize.
But scarcely had he crept out from the wood, and begun
to run along the road before, glancing over his shoulder s
he saw Mr. Izaak Crook also creeping out of the wood.
Harry had not retired from the sawpit so unobserved as
he had supposed. After him, savagely yelling, came the
runaway, at a tremendous rate. His long lean legs, in
spite of the somewhat cramping short flannel trousers,
which partially encased them, devoured the ground.
When panting Harry was within a few yards of the police
station, Mr. Crook overtook him, clutched him by the
collar, and flung him into the ditch, shouting, “ You
shan’t get the money, you young interloper ! ”
Then he bounded on, and burst into the police station,
exclaiming—
“ Here I am, Isaak Crook, and I brought first word of
him. Bear witness! And if you don’t make Suke pay
me the hundred pounds, there’s no law nor iustice to be
had in England.”


CHAPTER XXII.
miss crook’s scare.
ow Mr. Izaak Crook and his amiable sister
“ Suke ” settled matters between themselves,
I cannot say, but carrying out their general
queerness, they both of them took a great
dislike to Harry. Mr. Crook used to make hideous
grimaces, and shake his riding-whip menacingly, when
Harry met him jolting along like a pair of tongs on
horseback. Miss Crook, sometimes in her own name,
and sometimes by anonymous letters, in which she did
not make any attempt to disguise her hand or style, ac-
cused him to his aunt of a most curious collection of
iniquities. The following are a few of the counts of her
never-failing indictments.
Harry was an impostor, not his own aunt’s nephew,
nor his father’s son. All the parish knew he was secretly
plotting his aunt’s death. He came home at midnight
in a disgraceful state of intoxication, and was frequently
to be seen lying dead drunk at noonday in front of the
Plough, out of which he had been turned because his
cash and credit were exhausted. He bribed the man at


the Post Office to let him read her, Miss Crook’s, letters.
He was going to be married clandestinely to the black-
smith’s daughter. He was teaching poor young Peter
Prendergast to smoke, and leading him into all the
vulgar haunts of wildest dissipation. He had spread
abroad a report that his aunt had incited Mr. Prender-
gast to murder his wife, so that he might be able to
marry her, Miss Delane. It was well known that the
young villain had repeatedly bought oil of vitriol for the
purpose of poisoning his sister, of whom, as a joint-
heiress with himself, it was notorious village talk that he
was madly jealous. He went out poaching, and the
abominable old Charlotte, who was in league with him in
all his enormities, let him in when he came home in the
morning. He was more than suspected of burglary. It
was certain he stole sheep and hamstrung horses. He
was an atheist. He was a Jesuit in disguise. He had
poisoned the village pump. He had tried to burn the
pound-keeper in his bed. He was a forger. He was an
utterer of base coin. He was an escaped convict. He
was an Irish rebel. He studied witchcraft. He didn’t
know his ABC. Goaded by conscience, he had fre-
quently attempted to commit suicide. He was a kid-
napper. He was a young ogre, who ate boiled babies.
He robbed all the hen-roosts in the parish. He was in
a galloping consumption, brought on by his evil courses.
He was going to turn Mahometan. He had cut the
rope when the mason had gone down in the bucket to
mend the well at Pepper Hall. He had tried the vestry-
door in hope of stealing the church plate. He had set
Farmer Wicks’s ricks on fire. He had barked the Park
trees. He had cut off the tail of the doctor’s horse. He
had brutally horsewhipped the poor old rector in a dark


324 THE ADVENTURES OF HARRY DELANE.
lane. He had been detected filching coppers out of the
shop-till. He had sold his soul to the devil No ex-
tremes of villany were sufficiently remote to prevent the
malevolent, maleficent Harry from oscillating between
them, according to Miss Crook. When these grave com-
plaints against her nephew first began to pour in upon
Miss Delane, his aunt, by no means possessed of the
charity which thinketh no evil Harry-wards, but rather
prone to think it, although he was soon accused of
a breach of every law in the Decalogue, shook her head
seriously, and said there never was smoke without fire;
there might be some amount of exaggeration, but still,
doubtless, there was a good deal of truth at the bottom
of these charges, however strangely they might be worded.
At first, Katie, when she found that her model brother,
with whom she would allow no one but herself to find
fault, was really believed to be to some extent guilty of a
series of misdemeanours and crimes of the blackest dye
and most unheroic character, flamed out in indignant
wrath against her aunt, quiet though Katie was at most
times. But her sense of the ludicrous soon led her to
change her tone for one of ridicule, and she openly told
Miss Delane that she must be as mad as Miss Crook to
fancy, even for the twinkling of an eye, that there could
be the least shadow of the shade of a foundation for the
charges brought against Harry. “ They would be atro-
cious calumnies,” she said, “ were they not, self-evidently,
so outrageously absurd.” Charlotte, in a less outspoken
way before her mistress, was of a similar opinion, and
Rachel, who had been appointed under-housemaid, vice
Susan promoted by marriage, declared, in the confidence of
the kitchen, that “if it hadn’t a-been as it was the missis
as went on, she shud a-said as anybody was a dunder-


headed old dolt as wud go fur to make believe fur to be-
lieve sich thinx agin Mister Harry, whoever d said em,
let alone that screechin’ old mad she wild cat at Pepper
Hall. She never know’d no harm agin Mister Harry,
not she, ’cept he was uncommon fond o’ stealin’ kisses
now and agin, and she didn’t know as there were any so
mighty great harm as missis made out in a young
gen’leman a-doin’ o’ that” From the energy of pretty-
faced Rachel’s language, it will be seen that she took a
very lenient view of this, in her eyes, sole offence of
Harry’s.
Miss Delane, her nephew being the person implicated,
could not be brought to admit that there had never been
the slightest grounds for Miss Crook’s accusations. But
alibis forced themselves upon her, unwilling witness
though she was, with such triumphant force of crushing de-
monstration, that it was not long before she wrote tartly
to Miss Crook, requesting her to trouble her with no
more of her either most wicked, or else idiotic, trumped-
up charges. Miss Crook, how r ever, did not desist. She
merely added to her attacks on the nephew companion
attacks upon the aunt.
At last, Miss Delane had to get her lawyer to interfere,
and he wrote to the crazy mistress of Pepper Hall to in-
timate that, although his client had hitherto compassion-
ately overlooked her actionable, if not utterly absurd,
behaviour, yet, if such conduct were persisted in, it might
be necessary to prove her irresponsibility for her actions
to a degree which she would find incompatible with pre-
servation of her personal liberty.
It was not until the end of the holidays, however, that
this decided step was taken. It had its effect, for Miss
Crook had method in her madness, but Harry in the


meantime had adopted his own scheme for punishing
the slanderous old lady who had abused him like a pick-
pocket, for no other offence than eagerness to convey to
her intelligence that the lost brother she had advertised
for was found.
“ I wish Violet was here —she’d go into it with a will,”
Harry muttered to himself, as he thought over his plan.
“ I mustn’t tell Katie —she’d say it wasn’t proper.”
Neither could Harry tell Peter Prendergast nor any
other of his village acquaintances, for fear of getting
them into trouble in case of detection. Alone he must
do it.
Mr. and Miss Crook had a bad name in their neigh-
bourhood for a good many reasons—chief of all, how.
ever, perhaps, w r as the fact that they never under any cir-
cumstances w r ent to church. Those of the working-
people who very rarely, if ever, went to church them-
selves, were just as hard on the Crooks as the most
regular churchgoers.
“ They’s naw better than haythen,” would exclaim
Ben, the blacksmith’s journeyman, a
“ Parcus deorum cultor et infrequens,”
■who never went inside the church door except on Club-
day. It was considered an imperative duty in that
neighbourhood for any one who made any pretension to
“ quality ” to be able to show a decent average of attend-
ances at church.
But if the Crooks were not very religious, they were
exceedingly superstitious. In spite of the seclusion in
which they lived, it had got abroad that they believed in
“ all sort o’ divils they’d heerd tell on in furrin parts —


them parts where they was ” (wherever that might be) ;
and that, in addition, they accepted all the local mytho-
logy of ghosts, witches, etc.—and there were a great
many horseshoes nailed on doorsteps and lintels m
“them parts” whose Anglican inhabitants spoke with
scorn of the “ haythen ” proprietors of Pepper Hall.
Pepper Hall itself had a ghost, through which the
Crooks had been able to get it cheap, for it was, or was
said to be, owing to the ghost that it had so long stood
empty. Thus the story ran.
A former proprietor of the Hall had been in the habit
of depositing his money in a huge honey-pot, built into
the wall on a disused side of the house. When he had
any money to put away, he went at midnight to this
queer bank, bearing a light and followed by a black dog,
and dropped the cash, coin by coin, through a chink
into his pot. But one night when he went to make a
deposit, no metallic sound came back when he dropped in
his first guinea. He dropped no more in, but began to hunt
for those that he had dropped in bygone years. Pulling
down the wall, which came out with a suspicious ease, he
found his honey-money-pot was gone. And evermore
until he died, the old man started at midnight with his
dog and light to renew the search. After his death, the
wraiths of old man, dog and light still went wandering in
the small hours, and the tradition asserted that one night
he would discover his long-lost gold, but that any one
still in the body who should witness the find, might claim
the treasure, if he could call “ mine ” before the ghost
could see him ; but if the ghostly eyes at any time fell
upon the material watcher, the most awful consequences
would be the punishment of his prying presumption:
What they were precisely to be the legend did not state,


but they were, therefore, dreaded all the more, just as
honourable members, whom nothing else can tame,
shake in their shoes at Mr. Speaker’s threat that he will
“name ” them if they do not return to good behaviour,
though they have not the slightest idea of what would
happen to them, if this awful menace were carried out.
In the foregoing, to fall into Parliamentary lingo, “he ”
is to be taken as meaning “ she” likewise.
Now, one of the few retainers of Pepper Hall, in a
moment of rare (at any rate, in public) inebriety, had let
out that Miss Crook watched every night in the Ghost’s
Wing, in the hope of claiming the hidden hoard, and
this report having spread had suggested to Harry his
scheme of vengeance.
In the first place, he had to make a preliminary recon-
naissance of the premises, and this he found to be a work
of great difficulty—however, indignation sharpens wit and
strengthens patience as well as makes verses, and Harry
accomplished it. In the next place he had to construct
his properties, and contrive for their conveyance to
the scene of action.
To escape his aunt’s surveillance was not so difficult.
At Moat Cottage he slept in a ground-floor room with
French windows, so that, had he been so disposed, he
could any night have gone out “poaching,” and after-
wards returned to his unvirtuous couch, without the
connivance of the “abominable old Charlotte.”
Moat Cottage shut up for the night-lights, indeed,
were supposed to be extinguished therein—at ten p.m.
Harry, therefore, after “ retiring to rest ” had ample time
to get to Pepper Hall before midnight.
Behold him, then—as well as the dimly-shining stars
will suffer—arrayed in a woollen nightcap, a Welsh wig,


and an ancient old man’s suit, the different items of
which have been selected from the wardrobe of scare-
crows out of employ, bearing in one hand a battered
rusty, unlighted stable lantern, and under the other arm
a dingy old footstool, which dragged along in the dirt of
the Ghost’s Wing, may pass muster, to a terrified imagina-
tion as the spectral Black Dog—stealthily hurrying along
the dark lane, lying curved, like a slumbering snake, be-
tween the village and Pepper Hall.
He passes the first reach of dead wall, on whose top
the ivy rustles pettishly in its sleep, as if sick of being
splashed with winter mud and thick-powdered
summer dust He can make out the yew tree, as a
deeper blot on the darkness of the clouded, sometimes
starless summer night, and fancy that he can indistinctly
make out the dim, tall, gaunt, always unhomelike house
behind. As he passes the big gates of the stable-yard,
one of the watchdogs begins to make those uncertain
noises by which a Cerberus intimates that he is not quite
certain as to whether duty requires him to burst into
blatant proclamation of his vigilance.
Harry stands stock-still, and holds his breath. No
ferocious eruption of barking follows, and he steals past
the other long reach of ivy-topped dead wall, scrambles
into the paddock, and slants across it to the side garden-
wall. It is comparatively easy to mount it by one of its
buttresses, but it requires both wariness and courage
to drop from it—especially cumbered as he is—and
steal across it, filled as it is with so many things a
brush or stumble against which may bring down on
him the leonine, loose mastiff to whom the guardian-
ship of the garden, he has leamt from reconnaissance
experience, is assigned at night—a mastiff not to be


quieted, like his Killarney friend, by a “ Well, Monk,
old fellow.”
Treading like a cat walking over the broken bottles on
the top of a wall, Harr) 7 , however, manages to thread the
garden, and to reach the granary-like steps leading up to
the first floor of the so-called “ Wing,” really an atmexe
built back from the house. The door at the top only
needs to be pushed back with cautious leisureliness.
Harry enters, crouches down in a corner, and prepares
for “further proceedings.”
After a time, the village-church clock —rather grumpily,
as if not over pleased at being roused from its sleep, at
any rate, somnolent solitary tick-ticking, to do so, and
getting over the last stroke or two in perfunctory haste—
strikes twelve. Soon afterwards there is light upon the
ceiling of a staircase, and ere long there rises above its
top step a hook-nosed head in a turban. Higher and
higher it rises, until the stately figure of Miss Crook is
visible at full length—a figure as of a stick in a sack,
Miss Crook being attired in a robe de nuit, with her
flannel petticoat about her shoulders by way of shawl.
Shading her candle with her hands, she begins her
stealthy wanderings through the Ghost’s Wing—looking
very much like a ghost herself.
From the only pocket in his tatterdemalion suit still
sound enough to hold it, Harry produces a box of
matches, strikes a lucifer as quickly as he can, lights the
candle in his lantern, and taking up his “ black dog,”
steals after his slanderer. Having got himself into an
effective “ pose,” he draws his “ dog ” along the floor.
Startled by the grinding noise, the treasure-seeker
turns, beholds the “ old man ” warningly waving his
lantern, and rushes past him, uttering wild shrieks of


terror, which bring up the garden-guard at a panting
gallop. He plunges after his screaming mistress down
the staircase by which she ascended, and Harry makes a
bolt to the door by which he entered, pulls it to as soon
as he is out, and racing across the garden, effects his
escape : all the roused dogs of Pepper Hall making night
hideous with their yells as he runs village-ward at the
very top of his speed.
Miss Crook never, in so many words, connected Harry
with her midnight fright, but I think that she must have
dimly conjectured that he had something to do with it,
since it was at this time she began to accuse him of
having made the dreadful bargain with the Evil One I
have referred to.


CHAPTER XXIII.
A DAY AT SEA.
HAVE one more summer holiday to write
of, and then I must wind up these Adven-
tures in Chapter Last.
Miss Delane thought Harry and Kate
quite trouble enough, but in the vacation 1 speak of, she
had added Violet Vivian and Tom Steele to her house-
hold. Their friends had frequently invited her niece and
nephew to their houses, and Miss Delane wished to make
some return for their kindness.
It might have been thought that the prim, reverence-
demanding maiden lady, and rollicking Violet, who had
no respect of persons, would never have got on together ;
but such a queer thing is human nature, Violet and the
old lady, after one little breeze, became excellent friends.
Violet’s defiant rattle, which she would have considered
an unpardonaole offence in Katie, somehow took Miss
Delane’s fancy, and owing to the favour which the saucy
puss found in the eyes of that generally grim guardian,
the young people obtained a licence which enabled them
to spend a very “jolly ” vacation.


To make it all the jollier, Mr. Summers was once more
doing duty for Mr. Prendergast, his precious health
having again broken down. This time, however, through
the Rector’s kindness, his family had gone with him, and
in spite of their regret at losing the society of Harry and
Kate, and the strange young visitors, and the severe
conditions under which their holiday would be spent,
the little Prendergasts, when they rode out of the village,
could not help exulting greatly over so unwonted an
event in their lives as six weeks at the seaside. Violet
and Mr. Summers instantly struck up an alliance, but
Miss Delane still regarded him coldly, spoke behind his
back of his frivolity, and before his face praised Mr.
Prendergast so outrageously, as a pattern of all pastoral
virtues, that Violet would fire up, and, to the horror of
her hostess, proceed very plainly to give Mr. Prender-
gast’s character, according to the data she had derived
from Harry. When I relate that, soon after having called
her pet parson “ a beast,” Violet recovered Miss Delane’s
favour, it will be admitted that the hold she had got on
that precise champion of the proprieties might almost be
termed magical.
It was Mr. Summers who suggested it, but, neverthe-
less, Violet got leave for him to take the young people on
the excursion I am about to describe.
The sluggish air of Dulchester at that time was agitated
by the Wars of the Steamers, the Battle of the Boats.
The rivalry was the more keen, inasmuch as these were
the first steamboats the Dull had ever borne. In spite
of its being a port, curious people have to ask “ M here
is the river ?” in Dulchester proper. “ Why, you crossed
it, as you rode from the railway,” is the indignant reply.
“ Do you seriously mean to say that you do not remem-


ber coming over the magnificent iron bridge, which was
constructed, design and all, without going beyond the
limits of our borough for anything but pig-iron and coals?”
Perhaps the stranger is tempted to say that he does
remember something of a broadish ditch, with pollard-
willows stuck along it like worn-out brooms; but let him
put a bridle on his lips, or he will rue his rashness. The
people of Dulchester are, perhaps justifiably, very proud
of their river, though even in front of their Custom House,
it appears to consist during the greater part of the twenty-
four hours of a thin thread of treacly water trickling be-
tween banks of deep brown mud, in which black lighters
and small coal-craft wallow on their sides like swine.
Two or three miles further down the river at high tide
begins to look something like a river, and very proud
are the Dulcastrians because yachts are built at one of
the fishing villages on the banks, and tradition says that a
“ man-of-war ” —surely one of the tiniest of its kind —was
once built there. At low tide, the brigs and schooners
here, too, lie down upon their sides, and yachtsmen who
have only just saved the tide in getting in, are quite unable
to get ashore, but have to remain on board their vessels
until the tide turns again, engaged in the pleasant con-
templation of expanses of shiny, steaming slush, on which,
if they were to set a foot, they would instantly disappear
to unknown depths. Such is the river into which a go-
ahead inhabitant of Dulchester determined to introduce
steam navigation, his ambition being to bring his vessel
up to the very foot of the town. He went up to London,
accordingly, and bought a superannuated ocean-steamer,
so big that before she could be brought even within sight
of her proposed mooring-place, her owner had to hire
navvies to widen and deepen the tideway. At last, it


was reported from the mouth of the river, that the
steamer’s majestic form had been seen looming in the
distance, and all Dulchester poured down to the quay to
greet her on her arrival with enthusiastic cheers. But,
alas! she took the ground at the river’s mouth, and
sulked there for a week. At length, however, she did
reach her wharf, where she lay like a big bung in a small
bottle, and was visited with as much interest as if she
had been the Great Eastern or the Channel Fleet rolled
into a single vessel. She was crowded with passengers
when she made her first run, and hundreds of excited in-
dividuals assembled to see her start. She did so stern-
foremost, backing like an obstinate pig ; the men on both
banks hauling at the warps, heightening the resemblance.
Alas ! she broke down on her first run, and ever and
anon she kept on breaking down, running aground, get-
ting blown into a wrong port, or something or other. It
was found impossible, moreover, to make the quay at the
foot of the town her point of arrival and departure.
Sometimes she could not even be squeezed inside the
river, and her passengers had to be conveyed to and from
her as she lay at sea, in a curious caravan of mildewed
omnibuses dragged out of dark recesses, stage-waggons
with malodorous black-greased naves, and teeth-rattling
fish-machines. Moreover, at the very height of the
season, an opposition boat was started, a spry little
steamer just adapted to the river, which started and
arrived when and where her owners promised.
This neat little craft, the Dulchester , and her ponderous
rival, the Blunderbuss , had advertised excursions on the
same day. Both were largely patronised, but the more
reputable inhabitants of the town and neighbourhood
bought Blunderbuss tickets. The English rustic mind


somehow associates slowness with respectability. It was
thought fast to go in the fast Dulchester.
If Mr. Summers could have got rid of his cloth, and
gone in for fun, he would probably have cast in his lot
with the Dulchester —the chances of getting to the Nore
and back were ten to one in her favour ; but since he was
a clergyman, and had girls as well as boys to look after,
he .was obliged to choose the Blunderbuss.
So long as they went to sea at all, our young friends
did not care a straw by which boat they went.
It was jolly getting up in the early summer morning,
only to sham to eat the early breakfast which Charlotte
had got ready. Then Mr. Summers came with the trap,
and they rattled at a spanking pace into Dulchester*
which was only partially beginning to wake up. As they
v ent down the hill that led to the port, however, there
was more stir in the street, and night-capped faces peeped
from the diamond-paned lattices of the old white-gabled
plaster-and-timber houses, at the little bands of excited
excursionists hurrying to their respective boats. On the
quay there was a buzzing as of swarming bees. The
Blunderbuss , having made the finish of her last inward
voyage stern foremost—swinging to the bewilderment of
her passengers when near her journey’s end—was for
once in a position to start stem foremost. Behind her
lay the little Dulchester, thronged with ticket-holders,
who jeered at the “ big thing that stopped the way,” and
shouted to the “brewer’s dray” to “move on.” From
her lofty stern, the Blunderbusses, who plumed them-
selves on their superior respectability, looked down
with silent superciliousness on the excitement of the
Dulchesters, but the Dulchesiers did not care one fig,
and the more the aristocrats went on silently disapprov-


ing, the more the plebeians went on obstreperously don’t-
caring.
At last, the warps were all ready, and the Blunderbuss
began to move, raising a wash with her paddles,
cautiously though she half-turned ahead, that made the
little Dulchester frolic at her moorings, like a frisky filly
trying to get her head out of the halter. Those on board
both vessels cheered—the lustier hurrahs of the Dul-
chesters being the reverse of respectful. “ Good riddance
of bad rubbish,” shouted one varlet; “ The dirt goes
before the broom,” squeaked another; and the amphibious
population dotted along the banks, and tossing on the
stream, added their gibes as the Blunderbuss went
floundering on her ponderous but not majestic course.
“ Half-turn ahead —ease her —half-turn astarn —stop her”
—now a haul on this warp, and now on that—such was
her style of progression over the muddy waters. She
fussed, indeed, very much like a huge humble-bee in a
doll’s saucefful of treacle.
But when, at last, she was fairly under way, a rush was
made to breakfast. The majority of the excursionists
had doubts as to whether if they postponed that meal
until they got outside, they would be able throughout the
day to take a meal at all. Below and on deck —they
didn’t talk about going up and down stairs—Harry and
Katie, being used to the ways of a ship, gave themselves,
if the truth must be told, some little airs over their less-
travelled companions. Even dear Katie did not always
like to be thrown in the background by her dashing
friend Violet, and was glad to have an opportunity of
showing that on board ship, at any rate, she was the
more experienced person, whilst Harry, much as he ad-
mired Mr. Summers, did not quite approve of Violet’s


holding him up constantly as a model of perfection in
everything, and, therefore, corrected with drolly obtrusive
good-nature Mr. Summers’s little slips in nautical phrase-
ology.
Still further to impress Violet, Harry, as soon as the
Blunderbuss had blundered out to sea—the band bravely
playing Rule Britannia /—took it upon him to declare
that there being a bit of a sea on, she would get to the
Nore and back long before her rival. “ The Dulchester
was so crank,” said the experienced Harry, swaying
steadily as a cabin-table on his firm sea legs, “ that she
would be forced to put back.”
“ Ah, luckless speech and bootless boast ! ”
Even whilst he spake, the Dulchester , which had been
rapidly overhauling her rival, notwithstanding the amount
of “ law ” wTich she had given her, could be plainly made
out, coming up hand over hand, and almost immediately
afterwards, one of the Blunderbuss's engines broke down,
and she began to go hippety-hop over the chopping
waves, like an old woman who has lost one patten over a
ploughed field.
On came the Dulchester , black and white with merry
mockers, some of whom mounted the rigging the better
to send their scoffings across the troubled waters. Three
times she circled round the Blunderbuss , as easily as a
sea-bird, the scoffers raising derisive cheers, and then she
sped upon her way, the last utterance heard from her
being a shout of
“ We’ll tell ’em you’re coming—some time between
this and the middle of next week.”
“We shall be in hours before you—shall we report
you ? ” Harry defiantly bellowed back, making a speak-


ing-trumpet of his curved hands, but even those who had
most faith in him as a prophet felt their faith severely
tried. However, he had asserted his manliness, his
seamanliness, with effect before Violet, and Harry was
content.
Very few other people on board the Blunderbuss were.
They would not hear of putting back; they insisted on
having their money’s worth —and got it in a very peculiar
fashion. In spite of the respectability of the Blunder-
busses, the majority of them flew to brandy-and-water and
bottled stout for solace to an alarming degree.
The weather grew more and more disagreeable, a
drizzling rain being added to its other comforts. Sea-
sickness and dissipation shared the Blunderbuss between
them. Limp women, for a moment raising their heads
pathetically from their basins, implored all and sundry
to make the captain land them that very minute. Mean-
while wild choruses were being howled in the cabins,
and half-a-dozen dances were going on on deck. Such
dances ! The decks greasy, the band drunk, and the
landsmen dancers drunk also. Fighting took its turn
with festivity and mal de mer. If Mr. Summers and the
boys had not acted as peace officers, one gentleman
would have been pitched overboard by the suddenly en-
raged boon companions with whom the moment before
he had been gieing hands in memory of Auld Lang
Syne.
Perhaps Harry was the only Blunderbuss who got any
enjoyment out of the trip. He was the only one of his
party, the only landlubber, indeed, who was not more or
less seasick. Madcap Violet, in the intervals of her
sickness, would insist on having a waltz with Harry, and
declare that she had never been jollier in her life, but I


do not think she was sorrier than any one else when
the Blunderbuss —without having got near the Nore
—returned to the quiet waters of the Dull. In pass-
ing, she had hailed the Guard-boat for tidings of the
Dulchester.
“Back from the Nore this hour or two —everybody
aboard of beds abed by this time.”
The poor blundering old Blunderbuss tried to get up
to the wharf, so that her passengers also might sleep in
their own beds, but owing to the state of the tide, was
soon obliged to bring up, and those on board were told
that they must make themselves as comfortable for the
night as they could where they were. At the cost of a
walk back to Dulchester along the river-wall, beds at the
old inn at which the chaise was put up, our party de-
cided, would be far preferable to a night on board the
steamer.
“ Them as comes to sea for plasur’, ’ould go to —I
mustn’t say vheres, young ladies—for divarshun, I’ve
heered tell,” growled the tired sailor who sculled them to
the river-bank.
It was jolly fun scrambling up it, jolly fun blundering
up against the little swing gates on the top of it—invis-
ible in spite of their white paint, jolly fun floundering
occasionally into the bulrushes in the dyke on the land-
ward side, jolly fun stumbling, all five of them, over a
couple of bullocks that had come up from the marshes
to sleep on the river-wall—everything was jolly according
to Violet, who, with her foot on terra firma once more,
had recovered all her old spirits, and Harry, with such a
companion in special charge, one, moreover, who looked
upon him as the special “ brick ” of the party, was of the
same opinion. Those two were almost sorry when they


came to the end of their long walk, and almost angered
their respective bedfellows, Katie and Tom Steele, as
they pulled the bedclothes ovei them in the old Hythe
inn, by declaring that, after all, they had had an uncom-
monly jolly day.


CHAPTER XXIV. AND LAST,
IGHT or nine years had passed since that
autumn day on which, at Charlotte’s behest,
the word was passed for the little Delanes
off Gravesend. Harry fancied himself
quite a man, and Katie was almost a woman. And now
another autumn had come. Their father had been in
England several months—visiting old friends, buying
pedigree stock, and so on, —and they were about to
return with him to Tasmania.
“ Isn’t it queer, Katie ? ” said Harry, the last night
they spent at Moat Cottage; “ I used to hate this place,
and now I’m half sorry I’m going away. I believe I
shall miss old Prendergast even. I suppose you’d miss
salts and senna if you’d got used to it. And aunt wasn’t
salts and senna—not always—and poor old Charlotte !
I believe she’ll break her heart when you’re gone,
Katie.”
“ Oh, you’re Charlotte’s favourite,” answered his sister,
hardly able to keep from crying as she looked round
upon the familiar objects amid which she was to sleep
for the last time.
Next day Miss Delane showed, for her, a great deal of


feeling. “ Brother,” she said to the captain, in a voice
that trembled in spite of its primness, “ I have done my
best for your children. lam sorry that I have not
been able to win their hearts, but I do not think it is my
fault; I have done my best. I shall miss them very
much. I have loved them, though they have not loved
me. Good-bye, brother, we shall never see each other
again in this world.”
The little lady, who considered display of emotion
unbecoming, fairly broke down, and sobbed as well as
wept as she speeded her parting guests. But what was
her emotion to Charlotte’s ? T. he poor old soul s head
literally became a river of waters —nay, a very Niagara.
She did not sob—she bellowed like a cow bereaved of
her calf, and she shook all over like a high-pressure
steam-engine about to blow up.
When Harry and Katie last saw their old friend, she had
flopped down on the little bridge across the moat, and
flung her apron over her head, in order that she might
indulge her feelings unrestrained, and Rachel had flopped
down beside her, and flung her apron over her head,
partly out of genuine grief, and partly to be in the
fashion.
There was something comical in the spectacle of those
two squatting specimens of veiled, heaving ancillary
humanity, but the eyes that looked back upon it were
too dim to detect the ludicrousness of the situation. All
the travellers seemed for a time to have lost their tongues
as their chaise rolled along the sun-and-shade-laced Dul-
chester road, between trees and hedges just singed, so to
speak, by Autumn’s fingers. The Captain was thinking
of what his sister had said to him —how in all probability
he would never see the old land again, of the old times


he had spent in it, of the hosts of old faces that had
already vanished from it—of his dead Katie whom he
had begun to woo when scarce older than her living
image seated beside him. The young people, of course,
had no such melancholy recollections, but they, too, had
their memories. They were leaving England in just
such weather as they had found it basking in on their
first coming—a kind of weather which seems to compel
one to find something to make-believe to be melancholy
about, if no real sorrow is forthcoming, in order to enjoy
the luxury of the operation.
Except now and then the crack of a gun in a stubble-
field, the mellowed shout of a distant voice or grinding
of a distant waggon, there was scarce a sound to be heard
save the rustle of twigs and the hum of insects. A
battered wheelless waggon of almost indistinguishable
blue and red, sprawled on a warm reach of roadside turf
like a superannuated pensioner asleep. A tortoise-shell
cat lay fast asleep, with her front paws tucked under her,
on the wooden granary steps of an old roadside inn. A
bucket with a rusty chain slept beside its well; holly-
hocks nodded drowsily in its side garden. On its door-
step sat a young woman who had gone to sleep over the
knitting in her lap. The ducks and a leaky old punt
had got together in the shade of a half-fallen willow
which overhung a pond hard by, and all seemed fast
asleep. The silent, dreaming travellers rolled past a
pound in which a pony hung his heavy head and
dreamily switched his sides with his burbuttoned tail,
and strawyards in which somnambulist bullocks gazed at
them with no speculation in their eyes. A few black-
berries only had been left, but the scarcely swaying
hedges were red with hips and haws and green with fresh


young shoots. Films as of gilt glass floated in the air,
brown butterflies fluttered about, and now and then a
sere leaf fell. In the distance brooded a dreamy, warm
lavender haze. Little willow-shaded streams stole like
silver threads through the ridged, shorn hay-fields, dotted
with yellow stacks of the first and green stacks of the
second crop. Holiday-making cart-horses flung up
their flashing heels in their uncouth gambols in the
pastures. Ripe tile and mossy thatch, brick and beams,
grey weather-board, tarred weather-board, and white-
washed clay and plaster peeped from between the trees,
and ivy-covered church towers and wooden bell-turrets
rose above them. When a church clock struck, it only
made the previous hush more emphatic, and deepened
the hush that followed. Everything was so still and
restful that it would have been impossible for the tra-
vellers to realise that in an hour or two they would be
jolting through thronged, rumbling, grumbling London,
and then hurrying thence to Plymouth, to join the ship
waiting to carry them across the world.
They did not think about it, but rode as in a dream
past oaks, elms, copper beeches, crimson and golden
maples, lichened park palings, deer lying couched in
russet fern, poultry clucking in dry ditches, somniferously
sing-songing village schools, motionless wind-mills,
houses covered with vine-leaves, white cottages bowered
in jessamine and clematis, toy-like little pent-housed
butchers’ shops displaying single sheep, thatched arbours
like big beehives, bee-haunted jumbles of monthly roses,
flame-red and golden nasturtiums, sweet-pea blossoms
and sweet-pea pods, scarlet geraniums, Michaelmas
daisies, white and pink convolvuluses, runner bean-leaves
green and yellow, bean blossoms, bean pods, firm, green,


and juicy, bean pods soft, yellow, cracked and shedding
their seeds of amethyst and jet, tiny black and green
grapes, purple plums, and brown, ruddy and rosy-cheeked
apples.
“Why, children, what has come to us?” said the
bronzed captain, rousing himself, as the chaise entered
the outskirts of Dulchester. “We all seem to have
joined the Quaker persuasion.”
The spell being broken, Harry and Katie also roused
themselves from their semi-comatose state, and the party
did not go to sleep again until they reached their inn at
Plymouth,
Scarcely had they finished their breakfast next morn-
ing, when the waiter brought in two cards —“Mrs.
M'Grath,” —“ Miss Violet Vivian.”
“Ah, Captain,” said Mrs. M'Grath, as she entered,
“ you thought to leave me without saying good-bye, but
I was determined to see the last of ye. Harry, my boy,
what a man we’ve grown ! Which is you, and which is
your papa ? Faith, I might make a mistake, though sure
I oughtn’t to kiss you now, such a giant as ye are. See,
here’s a friend of yours you’ll be wanthing to kiss. She’s
a good girl. She’s going to die an old maid for your
sake and for mine. Live together we mean to, to com-
fort each other, wearing the willow and singing all day
long, He loves and rides away ! Ye mustn’t mind me,
Captain, Harry and I are old friends. Till Violet came
in the way, there was a chance ye might have had me
for a daughter-in-law. How would ye have liked me ?
Katie, my darlint, how are ye ? ”
Katie was by no means so well pleased as Harry at
seeing Mrs. M'Grath, but both were delighted that Violet
had come with her to see them off. Their two friends


went with them in the boat to the ship, and when the
time of real parting came, Harry, in his new character of
young man, tried to make the farewell scene between
himself and Violet sentimental, but Violet would not
hear of such a reading of the parts.
“Don’t be a goose, Harry,” she said, “though it is
Michaelmas time. I shouldn’t like you to be a goose.
You’re too young to spoon. Oh, yes, I’m precious
sorry you’re going. I shall miss you every day of my
life at first. We’ve had jolly larks, haven’t we ? Do you
remember the chapel and old Stickleback’s hat ? Well,
yes, you may give me a kiss, if you’re good—’twon’t be
the first time. They’ll think I’m your cousin, or aunt, or
grandmother, or somebody. Besides, who cares what
they think. They’ll never see me again
Good-bye, old fellow, good luck go with you ! ”
I will wind up my chronicle with two letters :
“ Myrtle Farm, Buckingham, Tasmania,
“ Jan. —, 18 —
“ To Miss Violet Vivian.
“My own dear, dear, ever dearest, —I am safe back in my
own home with the best of Papas who makes a great deal too much
of me, but still my thoughts will wander to old England, and the
half of my heart I have left there. I did not know how much I
laved you, Violet, until I was parted from you. The night we left,
all the passengers gathered on the poop, and sang * Isle of Beauty. ’
“ I watched the blue hills fade and Eddystone’s star flashing
keener and keener through the gloaming, oh, how I thought of you,
Violet. If I could have got on board the first vessel we spoke, I
think I should have asked Papa to take me back to say Goodbye to
you once more. I watched her until she faded in the distance. I
was only sick in the Bay of Biscay. Afterwards I should have
quite enjoyed the voyage, if I had had you to enjoy it with me. The
Sunday evening services on deck, when it was fine weather, were
very sweet , only, what do you think, Violet ? Some of the men, —


passengers who ought to have known better, kept their hats on, and
smoked and talked quite out loud! We had lovely moonlight nights
and a flying-fish flew right into my lap. We buried one poor
young fellow who was going out for his health. It was very
solemn when the sails flapping and the waves washing against the
ship were the only sourds you could hear, until the clergyman, who
had stopped, went on ‘ We commit his body to the deep, ’ and they
dropped the coffin in with a plunge, and then the sails were put
right, and we went on and left him all alone. I could not help
thinking of his poor mother. But I know, you naughty puss, that
you make fun of buiials at sea, and say they are all taken out of the
same book. I have something, however, to tell you that will
interest you. The crew got drunk and mutinied, and if Papa and
Harry had not stood by the Captain and first mate, I do believe
they would have taken the ship. I was so proud of my Papa and
brother, and Papa who does not praise much anybody except women,
was exceedingly pleased, and told Harry that he had behaved
admirably. The other gentlemen said afterwards that they were
going to do ever so much, only they didn’t do anything at the time.
Dear Harry, he is so fond of you, Violet. Most boys of his age are
boys, but Harry isn t like that, and I really think that you ought
not to make fun of his attachment, Violet, just because you are a
woman. I know I should not, if I had any one like Harry so
devoted to me. Oh, how sweet it would be to have you for a real
sister. This is a very pretty country, and the people are very
warm-hearted. I think you would take to them. I am sure they
would take to you, you dear warm-hearted, funny girl ! How
strange it seems ! It is brilliant summer here, and you have snow
at home! \ou said that I should carry out the fashions, but for
once you were wrong. The French fashions had got out before us
by the mail. The first Sunday I went to church, the girls stared
at me in astonishment instead of admiration. So late from England,
and yet such a dowdy ! They wear, I find, double skirts now, etc.,
etc., etc., etc. You have hardly got to that yet at home, have
you?
Harry sends oceans of love. Ido wish you would write to him,
and let him write to you. I can assure you that he is considered
quite a grown-up man here, and dear Papa has taken quite a fancy to
you. He often talks about you. He is such a dear Papa.


“If you ever visit at Killamey, please give my kind regards to
Mrs. M'Grath, and Papa’s grateful remembrances of herkindness to
his beloved wife's children. She was exceedingly kind, but still I
don’t exactly like her. She seems to me forward. Ido believe
she proposed to Papa—he looked so awkward when she came to
Plymouth talking her Irish, though I don’t believe she’s a bit more
of an Irishwoman than I am, because dear Papa was a good friend
to poor Captain M'Grath. Perhaps, if the truth were known, his
wife gave him too much excuse for his reckless ways. My Papa,
indeed ! For her to fancy that she could carry him off at last, at a
minute’s notice, before my very yes! How on earth a woman can
ask a man to marry her / cannot conceive, but when she has been
refused —dear chivalrous Papa ! how puzzled he must have been to
find out the kindest way to say no—for her to try again, makes me
blush jor my sex. Of course, I dare not say a word of this to Harry.
He still believes in Mrs. M'Grath, because she was so kind, and that
I will not deny, but she used to flatter him to his face in a way that
I wonder a sensible fellow like Harry did not see through. Mr.
Steele did. Give his, Harry's I mean, and my grateful remembrances
to those good souls Mr. and Mrs. Stephen, and our very kind
regards to the Goldings. (
“ With our united warm love to your dear circle, and Papa’s
best love to yourself.
“ I remain,
“ My own Violet,
“ Your fondly attached for roer,
“ Katie.”
“ Myrtle Farm, Jan —, 18—
To Thomas Steele, Esq.,
Wringford Grammar School.
“ Dear old Boy, —Here 1 am, monarch of all I survey, except
the Governor. I got precious sick of the voyage before it was over.
The cabin passengers were a set of snobs, and the people forward
a set of roughs. There wasn’t a woman worth speaking to on
board, except Katie. Such a quarrelsome lot, always setting the
men by the ears. Tell Crichton I have taken to the weed at last.
Smoking is the only thing you can keep on doing at sea. You get


too lazy to read long. The Governor and I tried chess now and
then, but we soon bored each other, and I don’t care for back-
gammon and cards. Sometimes we played grummets and pitched
porter bottles overboard and popped at them, but there isn’t much
sport in that. We fished a bit, but didn’t catch any fish except a
whopping shark with a Bible and a carving fork in its belly. I
went out on the martingale stay and grained a porpoise, by the bye.
In the tropics I couldn’t do anything except 101 l in the main-top,
smoke and drink fizzle. My costume was simplex munditiis, straw
hat, shirt, and trousers. The skin peeled off my nose and hung at
the end in graceful shavings. Katie said that I ought to have my
portrait taken to send to Violet. What a jolly brick that girl is !
She came to Plymouth to see us off She is as full of go as ever
and ten times handsomer. There wasn't much fun in the skylarking
when we crossed he Line. The crew were such a set of ruffians—
half foreigners, but the Britishers were every bit as bad. They got
mad drunk in the evening and some of the steerage rowdies joined
them and we had a bit of a scrimmage. They knocked the second
mate and the boatswain down, and the third officer crept into his
bunk, but the skipper and the first mate showed pluck. You
should have seen the Governor hit out ! All the other passengers
and the Doctor funked. I got one for my nob, but the chap who
gave it hadn’t any reason to brag. Talking of the merchant
service, almost the first person I stumbled upon in Hobart Town was
that droll fellow, Walter Crisp. 1 didn’t know him because he was in
guinea-pig’s togs, but he knew me at once and came up and said,
‘ Allow me, sir, to introduce you to Mr. Midshipman Crisp of Her
Majesty’s Mercantile Marine. My old dad gave ever so much tin
to make a maid of all work of me. I look a swell now, but you
should see me on board—they make me clean the lamps and swab
the deck.’ Isn’t it a shame that a jolly fellow like Crisp should be
thrown away in that fashion ? We had him over to our place for
a day. He couldn’t stay longer because his ship was going to sail.
I have spoken to my father and he is going to try to get Peter
Prendergast out Poor Peter hasn’t headpiece for a profession,
but he may make a very decent settler. It is a jolly kind of life,
but I sometimes fancy that I shall grow tired of it after a bit, and
half wish I was back in old Wringford grinding away for Woolwich
along with you. If Katie were in, I am sure she would send you


her very fondest love. She has just come in, and says that she
sends nothing of the kind, so I suppose it must be her very bitterest
hate. Her kind regards to the Crichtons. Mine, too, to the jolly
old boy and Mrs. Crichton. Miss Liddiard I was going to write.
What a fortune that fellow used to spend on her in flowers. He
never did anything by halves.
‘ ‘ Remember us to the Dr. and Mrs. Bentley, too.
“ Yours ever,
“ Dear old Tom,
“ Harry Delane.”
THE EN D.
S. Cowan 6° Co., Printers, Perth.


-
■
'
*
' - •
'
-
'
.
.
r
/V^


■ ■
-
■ ■
'
*
I
-




T 'tm ’l" - r rf'. ’fiC-'*' ' v \\ n ~y ■T_L.


