

ROUND THE
MEDITERRANEN.
A PLEASURE CRUISE.
BY F. C. SMITH.
ADELAIDE:
W. K. THOMAS & CO., GRENFELL STREET.
1895.




ROUND THE
MEDITERRANEN.
A PLEASURE CRUISE.
BY F. C. SMITH.
ADELAIDE:
%. K. THOMAS & CO., GRENFELL STREET.
1895.




THE following account of a cruise in the Mediterranean is republished
from the South Australian Register. The writer, in the course of a2l months’
tour of the world studying fruit culture and markets in various countries,
spent two months on the Orient S.S. “Garonne,” from mid-February to
the middle of April in 1894. He has recorded his impressions, and reprinted
them for distribution among his old friends, the fellow passengers and officers
of the cruise.
He hopes that it may help them to recall memories of what, to him
at least, was one of the pleasantest two months of his life.
FRED. CALEY SMITH,
Yalumba Vineyards,
Angaston,
South Australia.




ERRATUM.
On Page 7, first column, line 37, “ Trees of Carnation”
should read “ Trees of Camellia,”


ROUND THE MEDITERRANEAN.
A PLEASURE CRUISE.
LISBON AND CINTRA.
For those who can leave England
during the first three or four months of
the year no more pleasant form of
travelling can be imagined than to tour
round such charming shores as those of
the Mediterranean on a well-appointed
steamer in pleasant company. England
during the first three or four months of
the year is not the pleasantest place to
live in, particularly for Australians.
Most of those who can do so make
it convenient to be absent, and
spend the winter in some milder
clime. So large is the class
who regularly go abroad that many
agencies are engaged in making sight-
seeing comfortable for tourists. The
great Steamship Companies lay them-
selves out for the purpose, and work
hand in hand with the tourist agents,
Cook, Gaze, and others to facilitate
travel, and competition has reduced rates
to a comparatively low figure when one
considers all the advantages to mind and
body that accrue from recreative travel.
In addition to the great Companies
many private schemes are carried
out to personally conduct visitors
from England and America to
the places of most interest in the Old
World. One can go alone or in company
of from a few dozen to as many hundreds.
Being alone one can stay as long or as
short a time at each place as one likes,
but then the pleasure of company is
lost. In the latter case one has to go by
a certain route, and be at and. leave cer-
tain places at stated times, but the ad-
vantages of companionship are more than
compensating, while the purse is certainly
not taxed so heavily, and there is in
many ways more comfort.
With the object of seeing something of
the Mediterranean and its shores during
the two months from mid-February till
mid-April, I early secured a cabin in
the Orient Company’s steamer Garonne,
and on the day of sailing found myself,
in company with ninety other passengers,
seated in the special train bound from
Fenchurch-avenue to Tilbury Docks.
By 1 p.m. we were off and down
stream, and by dinner-time at 6 o’clock
we had all chosen the places at table
that we were to keep, for that
meal at lease, for the next two months.
Next day found us in the Channel,
and soon in the Bay of Biscay, where
the feelings of wonderment as to who
was who and what sort of companions
we were going to have changed to
emotions which can best be described
by the old saying that “one moment
they were afraid they were going to die,
and the next they were afraid they were
not.” Four days passed, during which
land was sighted two or three times, till
we got near to the coast of Portugal,
following which for several hours
we arrived, late in the noon,
at the Tagus, up which we
steamed, casting anchor opposite Lisbon.
Most of us landed for the rest of daylight
to see all we could of our first foreign
port. Our first impression of the Por-
tuguese language was derived from the
boatmen who besieged the tender on
which we had come as near the apology
for a wharf as we could, and it reminded
me of a chain rattling through a hawse-
hole. Captain Harry, our genial cicerone,
soon made arrangements with a guide for
showing us round for a couple of hours,
and taking us to Cintra next day. The
first thing that struck us was the very ap-
parent poverty of the people. The clothes
of the men in particular were all patches,
cotton generally, of two or three or more
colours. Our preconceived notions of
the beauty of the senoritas of the Penin-
sula were rudely disturbed ; we did not
see a single handsome woman. Both the
men and women were as a rule diminu-
tive-looking and unshapely. Even the


beggarly looking soldiers slouched along
in a most unmilitary style. It is
said that constant intermarrying has
affected the physique and general appear-
ance of these people. Some of our ladies
were most indignant at the spectacle of
men standing calmly by, their arms
folded, and smoking the inevitable cigar-
ette, contemplating the women carrying
great baskets of coal on their heads from
the barges to the stores. One of the
funniest sights that we saw in the day
and a half we were in Portugal was that
of the horsecars or trams which run in the
Lisbon streets. These do not wait for
the bullock and other carts on the track
ahead of them to get out of the
way, but pull off the line while the
driver whips up the horses, which rattle
the tram over the cobble-stones until it
is ahead of the obstructing vehicle, shak-
ing the passengers up in a most un-
pleasant way. The self-complacent lazi-
ness with which the drivers of these ox
and other carts seemed to appropriate
the whole right-of-way was most ex-
asperating to us. Piles of pine brush lay
along the seawall, being brought from
inland for sale in the city for fuel.
We visited the fine old Hieronymite
Church at Belem, which contained some
marvellous mosaics depicting various
Scriptural incidents. As we went from
picture to picture and room to room we
began to mentally place our guide among
the greatest liars of the age, as he coolly
informed us that this, that, or the other
picture or Chapel or altar had cost so
many millions of francs. He capped
the climax by declaring that one of
the swell Chapels had cost 28,000,000 f.
(over £1,000,000), and thac it had
been built in very recent times.
About an hour before we had tried
to get change for English gold at the
General Post-office of Lisbon, but found
that even there it was nearly impossible.
All the gold and silver currency seems
to have been taken out of the country,
and paper currency is what the internal
business is carried on with. The smallest
banknotes in the world are used in
Lisbon, viz., for 2|d.; for a sovereign
quite a wad of notes was handed
out. With these facts in our mind and
the general appearance of poverty,
though not misery, amongst the
people, we were hardly prepared
to believe our guide’s little fairy
stories about the cost of the merely
ornamental in this Church. Coming
back from the Church our guide,
Ricardo Monteira by name, promised the
tramdriver 6d. if he would get us back to
the starting-place before the six or seven
carriages which some of the other pas-
sengers had hired privately, so we had an
exciting race, continually pulling off the
track to get ahead of the vehicles in front,
and being jolted unmercifully for the sake
of the driver’s 6d., but nearly all seemed
to enjoy the fun.
Next day some thirty of us made ar-
rangements for Monteira to take us to
Cintra, a fine old Moorish castle richly
encrusted with mosaics, and now used as
the chief summer residence of the Portu-
guese Royal Family. After an hour or
two in the city we took a ride on a
modern cable car running up a short and
very steep street for about 300 or 400
yards, saw an American elevator for
carrying people from the lower part of the
city to the higher, up perhaps 100 ft.,
and saw also in one or two places
the electric light. These things seemed
incongrous alongside the other moss-
grown time- tvorn customs and the general
poverty of the place. We secured our
passages for Cintra by the “express.”
This train took just over an hour to cover
seventeen miles, and we stopped at every
station a few minutes. I noticed what a
number of guards in uniform and gold
braid there were at most of the places,
and I asked the guide what they
did with them all. He replied that they
were not necessary, but they or their
friends had had a “ pull” on the
Managers of the Company. Before the
train started these guards carefully
walked up and down, sometimes trying the
same door three or four times to see if it
was locked. Then the engine would
whistle, and after eight or ten seconds
the old train would gradually start to
creak off. A well-built aqueduct 150
years old is one of the features of a trip
to Cintra The fields of beans, clover,
lupins, rape, barley, &c., along the
country-side and the small vineyards
and orchards in the deeper soil of the
valleys showed some little attention to
agriculture, though fearfully poor land
was under crop there. In conversation with
our guide I learnt that the politics of the
country were very unsettled, that there was
a growing feeling among the people—
not a quarter of whom in the country
at least could read—in favour of a Re-
publican form of government, and that
gross subterfuge has had to be resorted
to in order that the Royalist majority
might be maintained in power in th 9


Parliament. Since the quarrel with
England two or three years ago about the
railway line from the British possessions
in South Africa across Mozambique the
British squadron—the head-quarters of
which for very many years had been in
Lisbon, where they spent a great deal
of money every year—had moved north
to Vigo Bay, in Spanish territory.
This had meant a considerable
loss to the Lisbon people annually.
Then the dethronement of the Emperor
of Brazil, which had placed a set of
adventurers at the head of affairs there,
who were in for all they could get, com-
pelled most of the wealthy Brazilian
gentlemen planters and others to go back
to Brazil to look after their interests.
The guide strongly condemned his
countrymen for their foolish attitude
towards England in 1891, and said that
they had now realized their stupidity.
Upon reaching Cintra Railway Station
we found eight or ten open carriages
waiting for us, in which we drove some
distance up steep roads till we reached
Lawrence’s Hotel, where we stopped for
dinner; after that we commenced an
ascent which lasted for half an hour,
circling the mountain once or twice, and
revealing lovely glimpses of the steep,
tree-clad valleys and the plains and seas
in the distance. At the gates of the
gardens of the King’s palace we all
alighted and walked for half a mile up
the zigzag paths, passing through lovely
wooded spots. Trees of carnation 8 ft.
or 10 ft. high in full flower, and all
sorts of flowering shrubs in bloom, foun-
tains, small lakes and islands, and arti-
ficial rustic bridges—ivy and moss-
grown—made the whole scene and
situation one full of charm to us
pilgrims from a land which we had
left behind us—-rainy, foggy, and misty.
Soon we reached the wicket gateway
of the castle, stepped over the portals,
and trod the entrance corridor which
centuries ago had echoed to the tread of
mailed Moorish warriors. Permission
had been given to us to go into certain
portions, including the more modern
Church of the castle, and to go round
the outside parapet. We were forbidden
to use our cameras within the grounds of
the Royal domain. Clouds had formed
and spread away down below, filling
the valleys and obscuring the other-
wise glorious prospects, though two
or three of the surrounding heights
stood clear out of the encircling
pall of mists, and upon their very sum-
mits ruined castles, the relics of medi-
aeval times, lent that air of poetry and
romance that is so characteristic of these
old southern lands. Here we remembered
the great deeds of England’s armies in the
Peninsular War, fighting to relieve two
nations from the French yoke. Strange
that this little country should in a moment
of offended pride forget altogether the
friendship of nearly a century; and
forget, too, that there was a humorous
side to the situation, in which she herself
was the butt, in the bluster which talked
of fighting.
An Englishman, who lives in Portugal
five or six months out of every year as the
agent of a firm of London fruitbrokers,
told me that some years back the Portu-
guese Admiral was sent down to the
Madeiras on a mission, but made some
mistake in his beariDgs and missed the
islands, and after some time came back
to tell the authorities that the islands
had disappeared, probably under some
marine convulsion. A messenger
was sent to the telegraph office
to enquire about it, and a cable was sent
to Madeira, and a reply immediately re-
ceived from the islands to say that they
were all there. This would have been
rather an unhealthy mistake for a British
Admiral to make, but not so with the
Portuguese. Some years ago, when the
Prince of Wales was in Lisbon, the
vessels conveying and convoying
him were as a mark of courtesy
being themselves convoyed down the
river by a Portuguese man-of-
war. The latter was of English
make, but through the carelessness of
the authorities in allowing her machinery
to go without regular examination and
attention the English ships had to slacken
speed in order to allow the local vessel to
keep ahead. She had a fearful head of
steam on, and only running about six
miles an hour ; and at last the vessel
grounded against a sandbank, and was
held there while the other vessels steamed
off. This boat was over two years before
getting off, the supineness of the people
and their carelessness being beyond
belief.
Before dark we were once more in the
city, and soon on board. As we steamed
down the broad Tagus the strains of a
band playing upon the city front facing
Black Horse-square died away, and the
twinkling lights of the city—still in view
as we came up from dinner to enjoy the
quiet and cool of the deck—gradually


disappeared into the darkness of the
night. Lisbon had broken the ice,
and soon we began to know each other,
and during the two days of calm steaming
before reaching Tangier two or three of
the ladies (single ones) had begun to
mark off those they knew upon their
passenger-lists. At Lisbon a Yankee
came aboard, but got off at Nice. He
and I were the only two real outsiders
among the ninety odd passengers, all
the others being British except two or
three Swedes and Germans who had lived
nearly all their lives in England. Not
another colonist except the writer was in
the company.
TANGIER AND PALMA.
After two days’ calm weather we
arrived early one morning off Tangier.
The little steamlaunch was fired up as
it was on the davits and lowered into
the water, and we descended the gang-
way ladder into it, soon filling it. Indeed*
two boats were attached by ropes to the
launch, one behind the other, and were
crowded too; and so away we steamed
for shore. As we neared the poor little
sixty-feet jetty a boatload of Moors
passed us, and the last man in the boat
gesticulated at us in a way which left us
in no doubt of the supreme contempt
with which we Christians had in-
spired him. Upon landing we were
besieged by would-be guides, and soon
we broke up into parties, Captain Harry
heading us, till we reached the Hotel
Continental, whence we started out.
Oh ! the filth of the corners of the
streets ! It was abominable. But
growing high above all, and cling-
ing to shady nooks and gathering
moisture from goodness knows where,
highly scented little plants of mignonette
bloomed sweetly, recalling our minds
from our Eastern surroundings to home
scenes. In the narrow streets too
narrow and too winding for vehicles —we
jostled against camels and donkeys laden
with barrels of olive oil, cases of kero-
sine (Baku), skins of oil, and bags
of meal and of fodder. Sometimes we
passed through a flock of sheep. Here
we found the natives unwilling to be
snapshotted. They turned their backs
upon us directly they noticed the camera
directed at them. The only way to
impress their countenances upon your
paper was to get the camera rested on a
wall, or step, or something, to turn it the
way you wished, and look in your sight-
finder from a side direction and ahead
of you; then you took their
pictures without their knowing of
it. Before the place became so
much frequented as it is by Europeans,
and before the advent of hotels, it was a
most hazardous thing to try time ex-
posures with the old camera. The dirty
Arabs in the streets of Tangier to-day are
not less fanatical than the older genera-
tion were, but they daren’t ill-treat
foreigners.
Most of us got our first experience of
Oriental life here, and we were soon
bargaining and hammering away to reduce
prices as if we had been years at it. And
how the ladies enjoyed it! How glum
some of them looked, too, when they
came afterwards to discuss their bargains,
and found that in many cases 50 and even
100 per cent, too much had been given
for the articles they had bought. The
weekly “ Soko,”or bazaar, or market, was
going on the day we got there. It is held
in a large open space, surrounded on three
sides, containing a number of sheds and
stalls, where produce was being offered
for sale. There is very little soliciting
for custom in Oriental countries, except
by Jews and Armenians or Greeks. The
genuine Mohammedan seems as a rule to
be above asking for trade. Two or
three groups of brown sack tents,
with camels and donkeys, and Chris-
tian women, with white dresses
and their faces uncovered, moved
about among the throng of strange-
looking, swarthy, impassive Moors.
Water-carriers with goatskin bags,
greasy-looking and dirty, offered you a
drink of water for about one quarter of a
farthing. The centre of attraction at one
time was an old black Soudanese snake-
charmer, horribly ugly and grizzled.
The snakes he had in a bag tied up, and
while the plate was passing round for
the shekels he danced to the clamour
of four or five tambourine and
tom-tom players. Several shillingsworth
of silver* were placed in the upturned
tambourine, but the old wretch wasn’t


satisfied with that, and would not bring
out the snakes ; so we left, after snap-
shotting him and the “musicians” from
between the crowd. On the previous
night an American excursion steamer had
anchored off Tangier, and more than a
hundred Americans as well as our
party of English were scattered over
the dirty, quaint old town. A
number of them carried cameras too, so
that the Moors had a treat that day,
confronted at nearly every corner with the
infidel Giaours’ picture machine. Some
of our lively cousins were mounted on
horses, and strings of them paraded thus
through the streets and alleys of the
town. They had secured nearly all the
hotel dining accommodation too, and we
had to take what we could g'jt.
Two other camera friends and myself
accompanied a party of five or six ladies
and gentlemen—two of the ladies had
cameras—round to the gaol and Sultan’s
Treasury and a harem. We passed a
guard at the doorway, and, entering a
small inner room, were able to see into
the prison. The wretched prisoners
are left almost to die of hunger
there. The Government don’t feed
them. They have to depend upon
friends or the charitable, or upon doing
some kind of work for which they can
get a little money. We bought two or
three small woven reed satchels, and
after staying five minutes altogether we
each gave the man at the door a shilling,
and went out. Just outside the Moorish
policeman wanted a shilling too, but to
this double extortion we were not pre-
pared to submit, and told him to go
halves with the guard at the door. This
he wouldn’t do, probably knowing the
other robber too well; so he
tackled me, and for five or ten
minutes I failed to make much progress,
as the fellow kept getting in front of me,
gesticulating, and bellowing swear words
in Arabic, while my guide and I shouted
back. As fast as I got round him he ran
in front again to keep me back, and a
crowd collected. Soon the others of the
party who had been looking—the ladies,
I mean—through the harem came along
with the rest of the gentlemen, and
encouraged me to remain firm and not
be robbed. At last the policeman seemed
to be working himself into a fervour of
wrath with my guide, and I saw the
cameras getting ready. Therefore, ges-
ticulating and shouting like the other two,
I kept their attention till the shooting
was accomplished. Then the Moorish
copper, seeing that he was not going to
get anything after all, and that we had
his picture into the bargain, went off in a
tearing rage, eloquently relieving his
mind of the very lowest kind of Arabic
Billingsgate, with appropriate action. I
was glad to leave him, and no mistake.
Some of us spent part of the afternoon in
riding on donkey-back three or four miles
into the country, over the hills on to a
large plain, where some horseraces were
being run. It was under French
management, and the horses were ridden
by French jockeys. Moorish mounted
police in their Arab costume rode up and
down to keep the strange motley crowd of
Africans back from the track. An old
black grizzled dancing musician, with a
kind of rough-stringed instrument and
his hair fringed with cowrie shells, and
the same shells hanging from all parts of
his garments, was a good subject for the
cameras; but he would not face them
until I took his attention off them by
dancing to his music for three or four
seconds. Then, the business done, he
saw through the ruse, and we had to give
him backsheesh. Most of the donkeys
here had sore hindquarters from the
chafing of a roughly plaited strap round
them, holding on the saddle. The cruel
young brutes of donkey-boys actually
struck them on these places, because it
made them wince and move along. Some
of us gave the urchins a piece of our minds
about it, and prevented them doing it;
but it was impossible to make them
understand what compassion meant.
They don’t seem to have a word to re-
present it. In Tangier as well as Lisbon
there are some fine eucalypts, and one
green lane leading into the city from the
south had beautiful specimens—in full
bloom—ot the fluffy white - flowered
clematis that grows wild in our Austra-
lian bush.
There are three foreign post-offices—
French, English, and Spanish. There is
no Moorish postal system, and there are
no stamps. At the English post-office
Gibraltar surcharged stamps, and at the
others French and Spanish surcharged,
are used. The stamp-collectors, of whom
several were on board, soon found this
out, and bought full collections of
stampsand postcards. The commonmoney
of the country is a rough, ragged-cast coin,
ten or twelve of which are equal to a
penny. Some of us bought sixpence
worth of this money, and had to get
small grass baskets to carry it in.
Beggars were plentiful, but they were


very disdainful of this sort of cash, and
one could pick up a handful of it and
give away and feel like a millionaire for
once. We found that on the whole the
guides were as great cheats as the
shopmen, and were evidently in league
with them. My boy guide one time let
the money-changer from whom I was
getting a bulk supply of coin cheat me
out of about Id., but a little American
lad, about eight or ten years old, son
of the clerk of the American Consul,
with whom I had been talking, stayed
behind after I had gone, and of his own
accord made the money-changer disgorge,
and came running after me with the
balance. He talked Arabic like a native,
as well as English.
A little while before we got to Tangier
a native had been beaten to death for not
performing some religious ceremony, and
at another place some distance off the
head Sheik of the village, who
is appointed by the Sultan, had a
man arrested, placed in an oven,
and roasted alive for daring to apply to
the Government for his place as Sheik.
At Tangier is gathered a good deal of the
scum of Europe—men who are social
outcasts of different nationalities, and
altogether a queer lot. Of course there
are a number, too, of quite a different
sort, such as those attached to the
various consulates. During the season
boar hunts are regularly organized,
and British officers from Gibraltar
make frequent visits to join these
parties. Tangier is only two or three
hours’ steam from the Rock, so it is
easily accessible, and the fun helps to
relieve the monotonous life of the troops
on the famous fortress. Tangier be-
longed to England some 300 years
or so ago, being part of the dowry
of a Portuguese princess who married
an English king, but it was aban-
doned, and the breakwater built by
the English was partly dismantled. Part
of it still exists just below the water, and
is sufficient to break the force of the
Atlantic rollers and make Tangier a
sheltered port for small craft. From
the heights behind the town a fine
view across the Straits and over the
Spanish coasts was obtainable, and the
mountains formed a noble background
to the view.
We were not sorry to return at night
to our comfortable quarters aboard. The
Tangier streets were in some places laid
down roughly with large pebbles and
stones, which were very bad for the
feet. Soon after dark anchor was
weighed, and next day for hours we were
passing the beautiful Sierra Madre
Ranges in Southern Spain. Two days
of perfect weather succeeded. The sea
was smooth, the air was warm with sun-
shine. We reclined lazily on our deck
chairs, chatting, reading, or listening
to the eternal “Linger longer, Loo,”
or “Daisy Bell” of the string band.
On Saturday noon we were passing the
remarkable cathedral rocks and the rugged
coasts of the little island of Formentara,
the most southern of the Balearic group.
By 4 o’clock we were opposite to Palma,
the capital of the islands, which is
situated on the main island of Majorca.
Soon the British Consul and the
Spanish medical official were aboard,
and we had an hour or two
of daylight, of which we took
advantage to get ashore and see some-
thing of the town. One of the finest
breakwaters I have ever seen anywhere,
with upper and lower promenades, 15 or
20 ft. high, and half a mile long, is built
here. We were very much surprised to
find such a well-built, clean, well-kept
little city, and still more astonished
at the wonderful difference between
the miserable-looking Portuguese and
the well - dressed Palmesans. Our
only difficulty was that, owing
to the place being so little
visited by tourists, no one could
speak English. I was told that there
was only one other Englishman beside the
Consul residing there, and with the
American Consul these three constituted
the English-speaking population. The
British Consul’s clerk, who had been sent
to help us in the way of getting change
and postage stamps and act as substitute
for guide, was a Palmesan, and spoke
only a little English, which he had learned
himself with much difficulty.
Next day was Sunday, and all the people
seemed to be out and in their best
clothes. Paris fashions have not taken
such a fatal hold here as they have in the
cities of the mainland. Among the crowds
promenading after Church along the mole
and the seawalls were hundreds of
women wearing the graceful black lace
mantilla the old national head-
dress and much more beautiful
than a portable flower-garden or a skull-
shaped bonnet. The comeliness of the
Palmesan women was the subject of uni-
versal comment. Here the dark-eyed
senorita of poetry and romance was a
visible entity and a charming reality.


In the fine fifteenth - century Cathedral
of Palma we were pleasantly surprised to
find a group of statuary in memory of
the Peninsular War, and one of the three
or four figures was that of our own
Iron Duke. During the Sunday noon
a market was in full swing, all
sorts of produce was being sold, shops
were open, and a circus procession was
parading one street. It was Continental
Sunday. A horse-car runs through the
town and out to the suburbs for three or
four miles. From the top of the tower of
Bellver we obtained an enchanting view
of the mountains and plains, the sea, and
the harbours. The to wn boasts a fine club
building and at least one well-appointed
modern hotel. The charm of the
place is that it has not become
a tourist resort, with all its accompanying
unpleasantness. I am afraid, though,
that very few years will see all this
changed. There is a mail steamer from
Barcelona to Palma every day. The
prices asked for things, and the kind way
in which we were regarded generally,
were very pleasant to us, showing that
tourist traffic had not yet made
the people greedy for extra gain.
The generally prosperous condition
of the residents was most apparent.
England had possession of the island of
Minorca for fifty years or more in the
last century. Certain words and
children’s games and some customs in-
troduced by them still linger in the
island, and it is said that the Minorcans
are still extremely well disposed to their
old masters. Some of the passengers
went to the Austrian Archduke’s castle
at Miramar, three hours’ journey inland.
The Archduke is very tond of work,
often dresses like one of his own work-
men, is very eccentric, very learned, and
a clever linguist. He was in working
costume when the visitors called. Among
these were two English lords, and the
story leaked out on their return that one
of them had offered to tip the Archduke,
not knowing who he was.
NICE AND MONTE CARLO.
The day after leaving Palma we got
into the dreaded mistral —a strong,
bleak, land wind that sweeps across the
Gulf of Lyons from the north ; and a day
and a half of very unpleasant weather
was experienced, until we were across
the gulf and near the French coast.
Then for several hours we coasted along
in sight of the snows of the Maritime
Alps. A good big mail was awaiting us
at Nice, and great was the excitement of
the company at getting news from
home. My hopes went down to
zero as I saw the huge pile dis-
appear without my name being once
called. I found, however, that the
postal agent had a bundle for me, which
he was waiting to deliver himself, as he
wanted to ask me for the Australian
stamps. I was glad enough to let him
have them. The company landed later,
and soon broke up into parties and
set off for Nice proper in chaises along
the beautiful coast road, passing many
bands of soldiers and carriages of pleasure-
seeking tourists like ourselves. At Nice
some of my own party knew the ground,
having visited it before ; so we went
to Cook's office and secured seats
fpr some twenty of us in two drags,
which would on the morrow convey us
over the mountains to Monte Carlo and
Monaco. After a walk along the beauti-
ful Boulevard Anglais facing the sea,
where the recently built Nice Casino,
standing on piles over the water, is a
prominent feature, we traversed some of
streets, buying flowers and sweets, and
made our way to the railway station,
where there is a fine row of eucalyptus-
trees. There we bought tickets for
Monte Carlo, and by dusk we had
reached the terminus. Here a hydraulic
lift of over 100 ft. transfers one from the
station up the steep cliff to the charming
gardens of the little Principality of
Monaco.
After a good French dinner at the
Hotel Anglais we adjourned to the cele-
brated Casino. Upon presenting our
cards to the clerks in a large office we
received others, which admitted us to the
great promenade halls, where, seated on
lounges and sofas, and walking about,
were scores of people of all nationalities.
The “ business’' part of the Casino is
situated in rooms at one end of the large
hall. Here were twenty or more tables,
each with its group of men and women,
most of them pretty “ tough looking,” as


an American would say. Excitement,
fear, hope, despair marked white
or flushed faces. Men and women
with little printed books ticked off
in them numbers which they had selected
by following some “system,” and which
they struck off as the money placed upon
each was successively lost or won. The
hard features of the women especially
were very noticeable. Here was con-
centration of mind with a vengeance ! —a
total absorption of the faculties in the
game. One could not fail to observe also
the unconcern of the croupiers as they
scooped in the money, paying out just
as coolly after every spin of the machine
in the hollow in the centre of the table.
Some of the ladies of our party risked
their 5-franc (45.) pieces, for the sake of
saying that they had done so, some of
those who won intending to have the
coin made into a brooch as a memento.
One of the passengers gained over £BO
and lost it as soon as it had come. Many
girls under twenty-one years were round
the tables, absorbed in the game as much
as their elders were. The whole pro-
ceedings are conducted with perfect
decorum, and rules of etiquette are
strictly enforced. In the grand hall
gentlemen promenade with hats on, but
upon entering the gambling-rooms the
uniformed attendant —if the visitor be
ignorant of the rule —politely informs
monsieur that he has his hat on. This is
a gentle hint to him to remove it. The
halls and rooms of the building are very
richly ornamented with gilded frescoes
and scrollwork, and beautiful paintings of
figures symbolical of the seasons are
framed by similar decorations of
elegant design. Outside the bril-
liancy of the electric lights, the dashing
to and fro of carriages drawn by splendid
horses, and the music of one of the best
bands in Europe composed scenes and
sounds not easily effaceable from memory.
On our way back to Nice in the train an
old German entertained us with some of
his experiences of the place and its fre-
quenters. He told us he had often been
asked for the loan or gift of money by
female gamblers whom he had never seen
before, but whom the passion for gaming
had made reckless of all the conven-
tionalities, and capable of even begging
a small loan so that they might “try
again.”
Next morning those of us who had
bought tickets for the return drive to
Monaco and back assembled at Cook’s
office, and in another half-hour were op
oar way to the Principality, Captain
Harry and Cook’s conductor being on
the front drag. That drive I shall never
forget. For variety of scenery in a short
space it is not easily equalled. For two
hours we were gradually rising—here
hugging the cliff side of a huge mountain
bluff, there crawling up the zigzag of
some much-terraced and highly cultivated
hillside ; getting round in places to posi-
tions whence we could see, far below,
the roads that we had laboriously
traversed; alighting to walk up
some steep pinch, and stopping to
snapshot some exquisite little view—here
an old ruined castle perched high above us,
there a glimpse of the Mediterranean,
the horizon of which ever rose higher and
higher, until, when we reached the
summit of the range, the sky and sea-
lines seemed to meet far away on the
bright blue vault of space. Then showed
up clearly the various promontories jut-
ting from the coast, the lovely little har-
bours, the miniature vessels, and the
seaside towns. Monte Carlo lay far down
below us on the other side, and views
of Cannes, Mentone, and Bordighera
were caught from afar, while the snow
peaks of the Maritime Alps shot up in the
north. All these rapturous sights,, com-
bined with the pleasant company and
cheerful warmth and brightness of the
sunshine, made that day’s entries gilt-
lettered in the diaries of most of us. As
we descended the steeper slope of the
Monaco side of the range the slowly accu-
mulating beauties of the other side were
changed on this one to a rapid
succession of pictures of houses, ham-
lets, valleys, and gardens, until we
rounded the curve of the cliffs just
above Monte Carlo. Then the nearer
view brought out as in a large painting
the beauties of detail which the unique
position of this little town furnishes more
perhaps than any other in the world.
The money of wealthy men all over the
globe has been spent here to make the
rocks and crannies blossom with bougain-
villea and clematis, and to turn the
gardens into Edens of delight, with their
sub-tropical palms, ferns, and flowering
shrubs brought from every country and
planted high up on the mountain slopes.
The surrounding villas are built by the
most modern architects, and everything
else is in proportion. In short, one finds
here —in the perfection of climates, away
from the poverty of cities and the sordid-
ness of mere business —all the elegancies
and luxuries which civilization can pyo-


duce. The place seems a paradise, but
things are not always what they seem.
As we came close to the outskirts of
the town we were reminded of this im-
pression by the sight of beggars, with all
sorts of physical defects, holding out
their caps to us. Some of them appeared
to be ablebodied fellows, whose poiite
greetings changed to undistinguishable
sounds of most impolite language as we
passed them without noticing their
appeals for help. We were glad bo get
down at the “London” Hotel, where we
found a good dinner ready for us, thanks
to Cook’s agent and the telegraph. Soon
we found our way once more to the
Casino, passing through gardens where
great beds of pansies, phlox, stocks, and
other bright flowers were in full bloom.
Here some of those who had not been in
the Casino itself on the previous night
went to try their luck or to gratify their
curiosity. One young fellow, travelling
with his father, did not know how
he was going to have a chance at
the tables without his parent’s con-
sent, but fortune favoured him twice.
First, no one being admitted unless he
has a white collar and a hat on (caps not
being permissible), his father, who was
that day wearing a white flannel shirt and
collar and a cap, was stopped at the
door, but the son was admitted. Secondly,
when it was time to go the boy found that
he had come out over £2 ahead of the
bank, and, being a jovial, good-hearted
fellow, he wanted to spend it in cham-
pagne when he got back on board, and
insisted—it didn’t require much persua-
sion—upon our singing “ The man that
broke the Bank at Monte Carlo” as we
drove home. The square, in the centre
of which is a fountain with seats round it,
is faced on three sides oy the Casino and
the fine buildings connected with it, and
on the other opens out upon the beauti-
ful grounds and gardens. The con-
stant passing of carriages, deposit-
ing their well - dressed occupants
at the foot of the Casino steps or
taking them away ; the lively strains of
the band ; the hundreds of people of all
nationalities seated around or walking
about these, combined with the unique
surroundings and the charming weather,
made us all wish to stay ; but we had to
be back early at the steamer. So, after
we had spent an all too brief half-hour,
the two drags drove up in front of the
Casino for us, and we were once more
bound for our floating home. This time,
however, we took the coast road, running
within 20 or 30 ft. of the sea, and here
and there getting a view of the winding
track by which we had come, far off on
the mountain sides. Along this thorough-
fare in places houses had been built up the
sloping cliff's one above another, some on
the corners of the cliffs, and everywhere
was a profusion of trees and climbing
plants. Lord Salisbury’s house and
grounds are among the best in Monaco.
Next morning upon awaking we
found ourselves close to Leghorn, where,
after early breakfast, we made fast to
iron posts inside the fine hydraulic stone
breakwater, and were taken ashore by the
launch and boats. Leghorn is one of the
dullest and most uninteresting places
imaginable. I did not want to waste
an hour and a half there waiting
for the train, so I joined three
others and we hired a carriage
to drive us to Pisa, and on the way we
saw something of the country people, the
villages, the fields and orchards, methods
of cultivation, draining, and irrigation.
Once in Pisa we first proceeded to the
wonderful Leaning Tower. Most of the
party climbed this structure, from which
there is a grand view of Pisa and the
plains to Leghorn and the sea, a range
of hills being at the back. In the
fine marble Cathedral are some of
the old masters’ works and a great many
beautiful paintings by modern artists.
Another spacious building adjacent
known as the Baptistry is remark-
able for its wonderful echo, and,
still another old place (the Campo
Santa)—all of them on the same
open piece of land consists of
rooms round a large courtyard or en-
closure, with a wide verandah on the
inside. On the high walls under this
verandah are some quaint pic'ures painted
three or four centuries ago by celebrated
artists. Some of them, representing
the tortures of the damned, are most
interesting—to us spectators of course—
as showing what horrible beliefs were
held by some people in those days. Later
we took a walk round the bazaars
and markets and sculptors’ studios, and
in the afternoon drove back by the same
road as we had previously traversed.
We were much amused at two
carriage drivers. One was in front
of the vehicle with his friend, and
left his horse to follow, and as the front
one would trot or canter or walk so did
the back one, even following it across the
road from side to side. The driver
seemed quite proud of the attention his


steed attracted from us and the amuse-
ment it afforded us. Some of us went in
for real “ Leghorn” straw hats at that
city on the way back, but did not need
them very much. By 7 a.m. we were off
once more, well pleased with our visit to
the Leaning Tower and the other places.
Two nights and one delightful day on
the water. Early on the morning of
March 10 we neared t»ie coasts of Sicily,
and by 9 were at anchor in the harbour
of Palermo, close to the Italian warship
the Lepanto. We finished breakfast
and waited impatiently and long
for pratique—thus wasting half of the
day. Our mails, however, were brought
aboard, and we had more than
enough time to devour them. The
rest of the hours were filled in by
listening to the whistling of a native of
Palermo, This man could make the
strangest noises imaginable with his
mouth only, and without the aid of any
instrument. He seemed to be able to
imitate any bird, and did the trilling of
the canary in a marvellous fashion. He
is a young fellow, but is already
well known to Mediterranean tourists,
and has had many most tempting
offers to go to England and America
to perform, but has steadfastly refused to
leave his native city. The occasional
amazing contortions of his face when
achieving a particularly difficult part
created roars of laughter from our com-
pany, and many were the silver coins
dropped into his boat, while whole
handfuls of copper centisimi rewarded
his efforts. At intervals he stopped and
gracefully acknowledged with a most
princely bow our largess. Once on shore
most of the party went to the Church of
Monreale and some to the Catacombs, or
the Rojal Palace, or the fine public
gardens. I spent the afternoon looking
up a lemon-packer, to whom I had a
letter of introduction, and visiting some
of the large packing houses, making
enquiries as to various details of
work likely to interest Australian fruit-
growers. Next day the guide whom I
had employed the previous day again
took me to the packing-houses. Though
it was Sunday the hands were at work for
a part of the day, as it was necessary to
get the fruit shipped immediately. Get-
ting my guide to hire a carriage for me,
we went also to the old Church at
Monreale, situated in a suburb of
Palermo, two or three miles out.
It is situated on high ground, and
the road to it gradually ascends,
passing through two or three small
villages and along the steep side of the
hills, the latter being clothed with prickly
figs. Up on the steep, craggy slopes
goats were grazing, and in a few odd
patches, wherever a hollow could be
found and enough earth scraped together
to fill it, almond-trees and figs were
maintaining a precarious existence. The
valley below us, two or three miles wide,
was covered with orchards of lemons
and oranges. At Monreale my guide,
who, though a native of Palermo, had
been educated in Liverpool till he was
twelve or thirteen and then had spent
two or three years in New York, took me
through places where others of the com-
pany had not been. The Church is
chiefly notable for the fine mosaic-work
pictures on the walls, and even the
pillars and ceiling are covered with the
same ornamentation. The people seemed
to be quite used to having curious visi-
tors peering about the place and tiptoeing
around while service was going on—at
any rate they took very little notice.
Then we drove to the Catacombs.
Here we were shown corridors full of
grinning skulls and mouldering raiment
on bodies that had not been dead more
than fifteen or twenty years. It appears
to be a common custom here for people
to get the skeletons of their relatives
exhumed when sufficient time has elapsed
for them to thoroughly dry, and have
them placed on view in rows, with a
ticket on each, so that friends and rela-
tives may go and see them whenever they
like. Such a ghastly spectacle I have
never observed before, and don’t want to
see again. The idea of the whole thing
seems repugnant to our English notion of
things. Cremation and urns would be
far more agreeable and safe than the in-
sanitary method which is adopted here.
The guide told stories of the deeds of this
skeleton and the piety of that one, and so
on, in a most commonplace style as we
walked around the gruesome place. It was
very interesting no doubt, but we were
fastidious. Every one of us was glad to
get into the fresh air again. A feature of
the city is the number of water towers for
supplying the inhabitants. Most of these
leak a little or overflow, and on all of
them where the walls were damp maiden-
hair fern growing profusely. Our
guide next took us to the Royal Palace,
where King Humbert and Queen
Margherita live when they visit Sicily.
We were conducted through suites of
rooms, in no way extraordinary for royal


apartments but evidently a matter of
great pride to the Palermans.
The main Btreets of the city were
crowded during the afternoon and most
of the shops were open, though it was
Sunday. A large proportion of the
people were soldiers. They had been
sent over some weeks before in conse-
quence of the labour and agrarian riots in
the island. The ordinary residents are
not only taxed up to the neck,
but the tax-collectors are too often
utterly venal, and harsh, too, in
carrying out their work—so much so
as to goad the populace into revolt. The
income tax in Italy is per cent.
Think of it, Australians ! Silver was
nearly as scarce at Palermo as at Lisbon ;
the people had the idea that the French
had taken all the white money, and the
Banks and other places were working on
a paper circulation. The scale of living
is not very high in this place, where
numbers of labouring men earn
only from £lO to £2O per year, and
have to keep a family on it. Their
recipe for doing this would be worth
having ! One lira (lOd.) Bank notes were
the smallest that I saw ; in fact, I
foolishly put a wad of them in my over-
coat ticket pocket, forgot them, and have
them still. I liked the appearance of the
people. They seemed to be good-
tempered, jolly folk like the Palmesans.
Things very noticeable everywhere were
the macaroni and vermicelli hanging
up in hundreds of houses and yards to
dry in the dust of the street, thus
almost ensuring the adhesion to them of all
sorts of germs and filth particles. Not a
very appetizing article of consumption for
people with some idea of cleanliness !
Yet Europeans in Australia eat it with a
relish. Then -everywhere the thrifty
people had strings of orange-peel hang-
ing from windows, across alleys, and in
all sorts of odd corners, and loose pieces
out on the window-sills, and actually on
the footpaths and in other places.
It was all being dried in the
sun for shipment to Holland, Scot-
land, and other countries, where
large marmalade factories exist. Of course
the boiling probably kills the germs, but
it isn’t nice to think that they have to be
killed. It was pleasant to know and to
see that the people of the Italian cities
that we visited look upon us English as
friends, and the entente corcliale existing
between the Governments of London and
of Rome was plainly exhibited by the
Italians towards us.
FROM PALERMO TO BEYROUT.
After leaving Palermo we steamed all
night along the north coasts of Sicily and
through the Straits of Messina. About
5 o’clock in the morning a number of the
passengers were up to see the far-famed
scenery of the straits, and perchance get
a glimpse of that strange natural pheno-
menon, the Fata Morgana, a species of
mirage in which all the varied points of
interest, such as hills, valleys, rivers,
castles, gardens, shipping, promontories,
and inlets, are reflected upon the clouds
on the opposite shore. This we were not
fortunate enough to see, but though the
Italian coast was shrouded in mist and
clouds that of Sicily showed up for three
or four hours, presenting until we
reached Taormina a constant succession
of hills and vales, rocky watercourses
like pebbly moraines, lighthouses,
towers, old castles and ruins, towns,
Churches, orange and fig groves, capes,
and bays. At last, about 8.30 or 9
o’clock, the broad, snow-covered
shoulders of old Etna, with its curling
smoke streamer, loomed into view, and
by 10 we were anohored off the little
village of Taormina, which straggles
along the shore at the foot of the moun-
tains. After waiting for pratique we
were allowed to get into the boats of the
native fishermen, which were wait-
ing alongside. The people of
this place are turbulent and igno-
rant, and the Orient Company, in
order to conciliate them, have allowed
them to convey the passengers to and
from the ship, and to pay them for their
services, the arrangement with the passen-
gers being that the cost of landing and
returning shall be included in the passage-
money aH through the trip. We had very
little difficulty in getting ashore. The
leading rower in my boat persisted in
trying to make us understand Italian, and
one of our party attempted to reply in


the nearest language to Italian that he
could remember, stringing together, with
appropriate gestures, words like the fol-
lowing, “Belladona, potato, nux vomica,
tomato, macaroni, basso profundo, vermi-
celli, eucalypti, veronica, pyrotechnics,”
&c. The boatman was none the wiser,
but judging by the laughter of his passen-
gers that there was something funny
somewhere he good-naturedly laughed
too, though he was a black-looking,
swarthy, muscular rascal.
Upon landing we found that even in
this out-of-the-way place the Company
had arranged to have carriages for us,
and soon we were all winding in a long
procession along the zigzag road leading
to the town high on a steep ridge. Far
up perched upon a higher ridge and
hanging over a cliff was another town
and old castle. We stayed at the first
place, left our carriages there, and
walked to the well-preserved ruins of
an old Greco-Roman theatre. Here the
snapshotters all set to work on groups,
and upon the fine view of old Etna wit-
nessed through a great break in the wall
of the theatre. Perched close to
these ruins were two modern hotels
for the convenience of tourists
and winter visitors, and an ar-
tist’s studio and photographer’s Bhop,
good photos being obtainable at about
half, and in some cases one-third, of the
price of similar pictures in London. At
the back of the theatre, which was pro-
bably 200 yards across and formerly
capable of seating 20,000 people, were
terraced and highly cultivated slopes,
while among the rocks were a profusion
of beautiful wild flowers, the single purple
and pink anemones predominating. After
a study of the plan and purpose of the
amphitheatre and luncheon in the town
below, some of the party drove back down
the long winding road ; others of us walked
by a shorter and steeper path, plucking
the wild flowers, and stopping here and
there to rest and enjoy the varied and
novel view before and around
us. Arriving at the landing-
place we found that the boatmen,
who evidently thought they had us in a
corner, were inclined to drive a hard
bargain with the ship’s majordomo
(Captain Harry), and for over an hour
they kept their boats just out of reach,
until a price to suit them was agreed
upon between their head man and the
captain. On the way back to the vessel
our boatman stopped halfway, hoping to
get a promise of something extra for him-
self, but we would not yield, and he
gave in and took us on. The ladies were
a little nervous about it all, and very
relieved to get aboard again. By the
time second dinner was “on” the sun
had set, darkness was settling dowri, the
towering snowclad form of Etna was dis-
appearing, and we were full steam ahead
for Santorin.
Next day the Amusement Committee,
which had been elected before we
reached Palermo, began its work, and
soon a fund was provided by voluntary
subscription to buy prizes for and meet
other expenses of the sports engaged in,
and until we reached Beyrout the princi-
pal interest of those on board consisted in
watching the different contests. About
midday on March 14 the first glimpse of
Santorin was gained, and when we got
close to the group the steamer “slowed
down” and we steamed among these
strange volcanic islands. The first view
was that of a circle of land sloping from
a central height, while all round were
well-cultivated and terraced vines and fig
and mulberry trees. Presently an abrupt
break in the circle revealed the volcanic
character of the origin of the forma-
tion. What appeared at first to
be white rocks on the edge of
the cliffs proved as we came closer
to be houses, and upon these lonely little
islands we counted six or seven villages
and towns, all well whitewashed, and
nearly all perched upon the edge of the
crater. The group had at one time con-
sisted of but one island, but some terrific
outburst had caused the interior of the
cone to flow over the outside, and had
split the cone itself into three or four, let-
ting in the sea, and it was through on 6of
the breaks thus made that we slowly
steamed. So high up were the villages
perched that it was only with glasses that
we could distinguish signs of life in
them, the villagers gathering in groups
upon the apparently overhanging
ledges of wall to watch the strange
sight of a pleasure steamer cruis-
ing through their volcanic home.
The interior walls of the group presented
an utterly forbidding appearance of grey,
brown, and black rock, except in one
place, where a slight incline had enabled
a zig-zag road, with about twenty turns in
it in the short distance up to the top, to be
made. At corners here and there on this
road odd-looking houses are built close to
the water ; while at the foot a tiny village
nestles close to the protecting mountain
wall. With our glasses we could make


out*attempts at cultivation in every nook
and cranny of the broken face of the cliff,
a long wooden staircase in one place
having been built up to a little walled-in
green patch of only a few square yards
upon a ledge of rock. On the slope, too
steep for cultivation, stunted prickly
pears clung to the scanty soil. Far
away up on the cliff top, sil-
houetted against the sombre sky—
for the day was unfortunately dark and
cloudy—we could with our glasses just see
three horsemen proceeding along a road
that evidently was made on the very
verge of the crater. About thirty years
ago the people of these islands were
terrified by an awakening of the slumber-
ing giant below, and in the middle of the
water space inside of the crater an island
several acres in extent and about 100 ft.
high, consisting of scoriae, ashes, sulphur,
&c., was thrown up. In two or three
little bays of this ash-heap island there
were some venturesome small vessels
loading up with sulphur. It was winter-
time when our visit was paid, and hardly
any evergreen trees were to be seen, while
none of those visible were more than 10
or 12 ft. high. Their diminutive
growth speaks eloquently of the winds
which must at times sweep over the
unprotected slopes of the group. Our
snapshotters were very much disappointed
at not being able to get good views of
these islands, which are little visited,
owing to the cloudy weather.
For the next two days our attention
was divided between sports and viewing
the coasts of Rhodes and Cyprus, which
we passed at a little distance off. At
last, late at noon on March 16, the moun-
tains of Syria were discovered as a thin
line ahead of us, and all glasses were
directed to the land, which as we ap-
proached Beyrout was seen to be pretty
well populated, for I counted no fewer
than forty villages scattered along the
hill slopes for twelve or fifteen miles. As
we steamed up the open roadstead oppo-
site Beyrout another large steamer from
the North, containing some 200 tourists,
anchored about a quarter of a mile away.
Beyrout, with its many large buildings,
roofed with red tiles, looked more like a
European than an Eastern town. There
are several fine educational institutions,
colleges, &c., and hospitals and Churches ;
and many thousands of young Syrians,
both boys and girls, have been educated
here under the American and English
missionaries. Next morning at 5 o’clock
all who had arranged at Palermo with the
purser to do the Syrian tour were up.
Carriages had been telegraphed for from
Palermo for seventy odd passengers, and
at 6 o’clock, after an early breakfast, we
were all rowed ashore by Cook’s boats.
Thenceforward for the next six
days we were to be under the
care of Mr. Catani, Cook & Sons’
efficient agent at Beyrout. In less than
a quarter of an hour after landing the
Customs were passed, our luggage was
all on top of the eighteen or twenty
carriages waiting outside the Customs
offices for ut, and, as for days before our
parties had all been made up, Mr. Catani
had on the previous night given us
numbered tickets which corresponded with
the number on the carriages, so without
the slightest confusion or delay we were
able to start off on our twelve or thirteen
hours’ drive. The sleepy tradesfolk were
just beginning to move about as our long
procession defiled through the town and
down the mile or two of steep road
before we began the ascent of the
Lebanon, which was to take us five hours,
the track being hill nearly the whole
way. The road, which proved to be an
excellent one in all respects, had been
constructed seventeen or eighteen years
before by a French Company. It runs
to Baal beck and Damascus, and the
Company levied a rate of £4 per carriage
upon Cook & Son for the use of it for the
return journey.
It was with a delightful feeling of
novelty that we began our ascent of the
mountains that guarded the old Kingdom of
Syria. For the first four or five hours we
were able frequently to relieve the
monotony of riding by getting out and
walking up the steepest of the roads and
going on ahead of our vehicles at every
stopping-place. Many, too, were the in-
ducements to alight. The season was that
of the wild flowers, and countless lovely
cyclamen, iris, orchids, daisies, single
anemones, marguerites, ranunculi, and
other kinds that I did not recognise
carpeted the road sides, growing out of
the dust blown into crevices of the rocks,
or hanging from rock walls and
covering the hillsides for the first few
miles. As the elevation increased these
flowers gave place to others less beautiful,
until for long distances we saw scarcely
any. How desolate some of these valleys
looked ! Such a dreary waste of rocks,
rocks, and nothing but rocks. The
monotony was only occasionally relieved
by signs of cultivation, in irregular
terraces along the hillsides, while here


and there villages were passed. The
journey itself was not wearisome, at least
not to the younger members of the party,
as many novel sights combined with fine
weather kept one’s faculties always on
the alert. The strings of camels slowly
threading their way along the fearful
apology for a road, thickly strewn as it
was with great boulders, caused me often
to wonder whether people did not some-
times “steal a march” on the Company’s
road, but as mounted guards patrolled it,
and as stopping places or stations
occurred every few miles, there appeared
to be little chance of that. Occasional
files of donkeys, often mingled with
camels, passed us proceeding to the sea-
port, laden with wheat, fuel, oil in skins,
or fodder. Other strings on their way
to the interior carried manufactured
goods, &c.; Russian kerosine oil from
Batoum, in the same-sized cases as the
American that we are so accustomed to,
being largely represented. At one place
we skirted a steep mountain side for two
or three miles. A valley lay some
hundreds of feet below us, hedged in on
all sides but one by mountains.
Scattered in this valley were small
villages of flat-roofed houses, parted by
cultivated fields. There were no fences
anywhere, no roads, as we under-
stand them, but tiny pine forests,
or poplar groves, and people
moving about. On the surrounding steeps
a few flocks of black, brown, and white
sheep browsed on the stunted and sombre
herbage ; and at the farther end from
some snow-capped peaks poured down a
rushing stream of bright clear snow
water. This valley, with all its perfectly
Oriental characteristics, could be looked
down upon in many places from the rail-
way line chat is being at present built in
many different sections between Boyrout
and Damascus. Here we passed within
a few yards of snow, but it was very
dirty on the surface from the
dust off the road, although white
enough below. We noticed carts being
filled with it by men with shovels,
and found afterwards that it was scat-
tered over newly blinded roads to harden
and set the repairs. Farther along, when
we reached our highest point, between
5,000 and 6,000 ft., we were passing
through the snow, the bank on one side
in some places being 5 or 6 ft. thick
through. While going up the slopes we
snowballed, some of the Scotch ladies of
the party proving excellent shots. The
idea of snowballing in the country where
“ the shadow of a great rock in a weary
land” is so welcome impressed us as
most novel, and some of us fell-to and
pelted each other well, though the snow
was not very adhesive, being in a hail-
stony condition. We quenched our
thirst and washed our hands with snow.
About 11 o’clock we came in sight of
the snowy range of the Anti-Lebanon
and soon after of the Bekaa Plain. It
was a relief to see level country again,
and such a country too. As we came out
upon a jutting prominence of the range
the plain widened out to north and
south till it was lost in the distance
between the Lebanons. Black spots a
distance off on the plain we found as
we got nearer to be herds of cattle
grazing. Our road could be discerned
winding along for many miles in the
direction of Baalbec. Where it de-
bouched upon the plain, many hundreds
of acres of trees planted regularly ex-
tended out into the valley. These we
found to be principally mulberry-trees,
with some vines and almonds. The
village of Stora with its modern stone-
built “Victoria Hotel” and stables lay
away off beyond these. By 12.30 we were in
Stora, and soon a change of horses was
effected and most of the party were at
dinner. I was detained by an Arab, who
asked me in good English what country-
man I was, and when I told him “Aus-
tralian” he was delighted, for it seems
that Australia was the only English-
speaking country he had been in, and he
immediately wanted to know whether it
was true that five of the Banks there had
suspended payment. It seemed a strange
situation to me to be questioned by an
Arab in his national dress so far away
from home as to the condition of the
Australian Banks. This man had lived four
years in the colonies of Victoria and New
South Wales, and as an itinerant sales-
man or hawker he had accumulated £4OO
or £SOO in that time. After dinner,
while getting iato our carriages one of
them somehow gave way and began to
slowly turn over, with two ladies inside
and a gentleman in front. The former
were helped out before the carriage was
quite down, and the latter, a well-known
Newcastle-on-Tyne architect, who was
soon rescued, was involuntarily trying to
stand on his head inside, while his feet
still waved about in front. Nothing
more serious than this took place,
and soon we were on the way to Baalbec.
The Australian Arab rode alongside our
carriage on his fine donkey, for which he


had paid £7. My three friends and I plied
him with questions, and he said that many
thousands of Syrians have in the last
twenty or thirty years gone to the United
States and Australia, and hundreds come
back with what is to them a fortune.
We found that our new friend had paid
£IOO for his wife, and in reply to our
question as to whether he thought she
was worth it dolefully informed us that
he did not think she was. He intended,
he said, soon to return to Australia.
BEYROUT TO BAALBEC.
Our way for the next five or six hours
lay along the plain. A few miles out
from Stora the Arabs were very busy
planting mulberry-trees. Many men
were at this work, and some tens of thou-
sands of trees were being put in, many
hundred acres of new plantations being
formed. Along this road the great
majority of the camels were carrying fire-
wood, dead orchard trees, and vines, and
thorn hedge plants. Yery many of the
animals were heavily laden with young
mulberry trees, and no attempt was
made to shelter the roots from the
sun beyond casting a sack loosely over
them, nor were the long rods of the trees,
9 or 10 ft. in most cases, pruned
back. Planted out they looked not
unlike a field of hop poles. On some
parts of the plain fine clear rushing
streams of cold snowwater were careering
along, the current being only partly les-
sened by the rough irrigation of the Arab
peasants. With their long - handled
shovels they blocked the Bub-channels
with earth to allow of an overflow, and
removed the impediment when enough
water had been supplied. How they
stared at the long procession of mad
English who were coming so far to see
some old stones ! Just out of Stora
scores of peasants were ploughing their
fields, and, except in the villages, not
one fence did we see for thirty miles
along our route. Everywhere the same
kind of wooden plough, sometimes shod
with iron, was being dragged by the same
kind of oxen —sometimes by an ox and
an ass together—as were used in the
time of Naaman the Syrian. Many little
groves of poplars growing in swampy
ground were to be seen from the road-
side. All the villages are perched up on
the hillsides, and every foot of inter-
vening plain is cultivated as carefully as
the native methods will permit.
Our course lay between the Lebanon
and Anti-Lebanon, both snow-clad above
a certain height. We were frequently
close to the Anti-Lebanon, and were able
to see the people, the mud villages, the
flat-topped houses, and the vineyards.
A great many of the inhabitants on this
plain are Greek, or Maronite Christians,
or Druses. On the roofs of most of the
houses was a small stone roller with a
hole in each end, a yoke-stick with the
ends fitted in the holes being used to
pull and push it along. After rain the
slightly sloping roof-top is always rolled,
so that a slippery surface may be made
for the water to run off instead of soak-
ing through. The house rafters are
made of poplar poles, the trees
grown for this purpose fetching a good
price. I wondered often whether those
stone rollers were made by the Arabs, or
whether they were pillars that the rascals
had stolen from some old ruin. At one
or two villages where we stopped the
children came out, and some of them re-
peated off the alphabet in English, for
backsheesh. We were never out of sight
of villages, and the whole afternoon I
counted thirty or forty along the way on
the hillsides. I did not once see a horse
used for ploughing or menial work.
A few miles from Baalbec we saw the
circle of pillars a mile or two out from
the ruins, and by the time the out-
skirts of the old place had been reached
darkness had come on, and it had got so
cold that rugs were in requisition. At
Baalbec Catani had made all arrange-
ments for our accommodation, and the
three hotels in the place were just about
filled by our large party. At the hotel
at which I stayed we had the honour of
being waited upon by a learned scholar
and author, M. Michel Alouf, and after
dinner the gentleman himself brought
out the work which has made him im-
mortal. It is a history of the ruins of
Baalbec translated into English. The
peculiar cart before the horse style of the
translation has converted the book into a
mine of humour of a unique sort. This
work was placed in front of us at meals,
and the waiter explained its excel-
lences to us one after the other.


The next day was Sunday, a bright,
warm, sunny day. In the morning
before breakfast I was out, and took a
turn round the houses along a lovely
rushing stream, and was much interested
in watching an Arab miller, who was
grinding flour from wheat and maize
between great, flat, round stones, the
motive power for which was supplied by
a small water-wheel turned by the stream.
After breakfast we all went along with
M. Alouf and other notables, including
the local policeman, to the ruins, enter-
ing them by a long, wide, arched tunnel
which opened into the centre of the
Temple. These ruins, which had at one
time been beautified by Roman and
Grecian sculpture, had long after been
despoiled of the latter by the Saracen
ballistai or catapults. The many carved
heads of mythological characters had
been thus destroyed, it being against the
teaching of the Koran to delineate any
animal in stone, or in any other way.
The interior of the great main temple,
several acres in extent, was strewn with
parts of the old walls.
M. Alouf, who had made a careful
study of his subject, proved to be an
interesting lecturer or showman. From
the walls a fine view of the gardens and
fields below, the plain that we had come
over the previous day, and the snow-
slopes of the Lebanons, was obtained.
Many a hard battle has been fought in
sight of the old town, and hundreds
of bloody human sacrifices have been
offered in the smaller Temple of Jupiter
in one corner of the great ruin. Phoeni-
cian, Greek, Roman, and Saracen, all in
turn have occupied the place, and all
have added to the buildings ; the last, as
usual, using the stones of the walls, so
laboriously quarried and put in place by
more energetic and enterprising peoples.
The few grand old columns, 60 ft. high
in three pieces, and 7 ft. through, are
still standing, and were the wonder and
admiration of all, as they gave us some
little idea of the majesty of the building
when scores of these columns were in
position. The contrast between these
mighty ruins and the squalid hovels of
the dirty people who live within their
shadow is sad in the extreme. Many
good snapshots were that day taken of
the Temple of the Sun and the Greaij
Court and the general view of the whole
place, the weather being all that could be
wished for. Looking at the ruins from
the outside on the west the respect
of our travellers for the builders was
increased by the sight of the three im-
mense stones set firmly in the wall, 15 or
20 ft. from the ground, each being over
60 ft. long and 13 ft. square, and weigh-
ing many hundred tons. How they got
them up there was the question, and the
most feasible solution was that they were
rolled up a series of earth mounds on
rollers, and that the labour of thousands
of men with ropes was used to pull and
push the blocks into their places. In a
moat along the wall just below those
three giants apricot and walnut and mul-
berry trees were growing, the first just
commencing to bloom. As Baalbec is
situated at an elevation of 4,000 ft. above
the sea it is, of course, colder, and a
little later than some of the fruit dis-
tricts.
BAALBEC TO DAMASCUS.
I got a very good photo, of the great
Stone in the quarry abouta quarter of amile
from the ruins of Baalbec. This stone had
been hewn and moved a few yards and
for some reason left by the builders. It
is supposed to be the largest quarried
stone in existence, being over 70 ft. long,
14 ft. high, and 16 ft. wide. A number
of Christian children and older people
were sitting on the hillside, and they
came down and grouped themselves upon
the stone, while my friend and I bargained
with two Arabs on the roadside to bring
the camels and donkey they were driving
down alongside the block. My com-
panion having mounted one of the camels
I kodaked him, and he afterwards did
the same for me. The camels, loaded up
well as they were, appeared perfectly
insignificant alongside the monster
block. In the afternoon some of
us visited the British Syrian Mis-
sion School, where for years an English
lady medical missionary has worked.
Going round one of the class-rooms she
pointed out some of the pictures, which
had been, I believe, presented to the
mission, showing the road to heaven and
hell. The quick-witted little Arab
children at once noticed with great satis-
faction that on the road to the warmer
regions there was not one Mohammedan,
and took occasion with much mirth to try
and disconcert the teacher upon the fact.


Of course it was an English picture, and
all the broad road pilgrims were dressed
in European garments. There is one
other missionary in the place, and he is the
representative of the American missions.
He is a young Syrian, who was educated
at Beyrout and speaks English tolerably.
The lady introduced me to him,
and asked him to accompany me
round the gardens below the town
ana answer any questions that I asked
regarding the fruit-trees, &c. So we
spent a couple of hours in the gardens.
I refer to this because of a funny inci-
dent that happened on our way round.
I had asked him the age of some very
large apricot-trees in one of the gardens.
These trees would certainly have been
forty years old in Australia or Cali-
fornia. So we went down into the field,
for it was just a field with a few trees
planted irregularly about it. As we
approached, a group of six or seven
Arabs who were grubbing stones
out of the soil, and perhaps, too, look-
ing for coins and antiquities, stopped
work, and stood leaning on their imple-
ments awaiting us. My friend asked the
oldest man of the party about the age of
the trees, and he replied twenty years.
I could not swallow that, as different
indications served to prove them to me
to be at least thirty, so I said—
“ Ask him if that is really so ?”
To my utter astonishment the reply
came from one of the blackbearded,
turbaned fellows, in a broad American
accent.
“Why, yes! you can bet your sweet
life, that’s so.”
I looked of course with surprise at
him, and then remarked,
“You’ve been to America, I see,” to
which he, recognising the Yankee inflec-
tion into which I had been surprised,
replied—
“ And I guess you have, too.”
I had been conferring with my guide in
English, not dreaming that one of the
group could understand it at all. He
had been, like many other natives of
the Bekaa Plain, in the States as a
hawker.
At 5 o’clock my guide and I walked out
along a fine avenue of over - arching
acacia - trees for a mile, to the
stone reservoirs through which the
stream that supplies the village runs.
Some revenue is made by the local
authorities from the sale of the wood
which is got from cutting back this
avenue of trees. I was pressed to sup
with my guide, but had to refuse, as I
wished to meet Mr. Gibson, the American
Consul, that evening and gather some
information from him. However, I was
shown round the clean, tidy house, and
introduced to the wife and assistant
teacher of the guide. During the evening
the Consul and one of our party and a
very intelligent young Syrian and I
chatted for a long time, and we were
most interested in the account of our
Syrian friend. He had been educated in
the Missionary College at Beyrout, his
people were from Damascus, he had
learnt French and English there, and so,
like many hundreds of young Syrians, had
a good command of threelanguagesatleast.
He had been at school in America, and
when the World’s Fair started was one of
those who were employed to shout aloud
on the Midway Plaisance the beauties of
the ladies who took part in the Persian
Theatre, and who so shocked some of the
good people of Chicago by their Oriental
style of dancing. I had probably seen
and heard him when in the Midway
recently, but did not remember his face.
He was certainly a very modern up-to-
date young man, though there was an
Oriental quaintness combined with a
rich profusion of genuine Americanisms
in his speech.
Next day at 5 o’clock we were up, and
by 6 had finished breakfast and started
ior Damascus. The early morning haze
spread over the long plain in front
of us, the gleam of the sun fell on the
snow of the Anti-Lebanons to our left,
the purple mist hung over the sides of
the Lebanons to the right, and the long
shadows of the peaks of the latter
stretched far out to the Anti-Lebanons,
so that for a little while we were riding
from shadow to shine, until the former
retreating rapidly toward the sun left us
in the broad glare of another day. The
freshness, novelty, and charm of all these
things will be remembered by the writer
for many a year. About an hour out on
the plain the carriage ahead of the one I
was in stopped, and the driver got out
and picked up a dead mole which
was lying on the road, but threw it down
again and drove on. The carriage behind
ours, which was the last of all, was
stopped by its driver, who left his horses
and ran on ahead of us to pick up
the animal, being afraid our driver would
getit. In the meantime his horses, having
no one to mind them, walked down the
embankment on the roadside, and for a
few seconds we watched the vehicle


totter on the point of turning over, but
it slowly righted itself as the horses
pulled it into the ploughed field. The
ladies inside showed much presence
of mind and stayed in their seats, not
making a sound. Our drivers were more
reckless on that day’s journey than no
the others, and when we got to an open
place where the road was level with the
fields cantered round each other, thrash-
ing their horses to make them go, and
badly scaring some of the ladies. This
was too much of a joke altogether, and
Catani, who was behind, soon came up
and spoke some evidently polite Arabic
to the drivers to cause them to desist.
On our way to Stora we passed more than
one well-dressed Arab riding his fine-
looking steed, and who spoke English to
us. They too had been in America, and
much amused some of the ladies with
their talk of their wives or their sweet-
hearts, for, strange to say, one of the
questions bmnd to be put sooner or
later by the ladies had reference to their
matrimonial condition. Sometimes too
the travellers had questions of the same
sort put to them by the Arabs.
We passed a well-built stone wine cellar
noar Stora, which was owned by some
foreign Company who buy the grapes to
press. By midday we had again reached
Stora, and after lunch resumed our
seats behind fresh animals; again we
traversed the Bekaa in the opposite
direction, crossing the Leontes, which,
starting just above Baalbec, is here
a shallow, sluggish stream 20 or 30 ft.
across. A few miles more, and we were
beginning to climb the Anti-Lebanons,
passing several villages perched upon
slight elevations near the foothills. For
some distance the road was a long steep
two-miles ascent, up which many of
us walked till we reached the top. This
part of the journey was for hours exceed-
ingly dry and uninteresting, there
being little or no cultivation near the
main road. About halfway we passed
some eight or ten carriages containing
tourists, looking dusty and tired. They
belonged to the party on the vessel that
arrived outside Beyrout at the same time
as we had. Owing to Messrs. Cook and
Son having secured so many of the
available carriages at the seaportfor us the
200 passengers had to draw lots as to who
should have seats in the few vehicles left.
Horses were changed halfway in a deep
valley, and most of us set off uphill by a
short cut, leaving the vehicles to follow
the long winding zigzag ascent ; but
there were none of the lovely wild
flowers of the Lebanons, and only one
pretty white bulbous flower growing close
bo the earth. But for a few fine bold
cliffs that we passed and one lovely little
stream where watercresses and pepper-
mint flourished, the road was extremely
uninteresting, and for the last hour or
two so dusty that we had to keep the
curtains closely drawn on the windy side.
Our clothes, rugs, handbags, &c., were
coated with fine whitedust. For miles before
we reached Damascus we were passing
through the long narrow valley of the
Abana, with its hundreds of gardens of
apricot, peach, almond, fig, mulberry,
pear, apple, plum, and orange, with
lemon groves and poplar plantations ;
but what would otherwise have been a
delight, especially after the dulness of
the long drive from Stora, was spoilt by
the clouds of dust. Glad were we,
shortly after emerging upon the plain, to
view the white roofs of mosque, tower,
and minaret, and to see the splendid
stone-built canal by which the Barada is
carried broad and clear through the old
city.
DAMASCUS TO BEYROUT.
As we arrived and drew up in line in a
main street opposite Dimitri’s Hotel,
Catani distributed to the passengers
tickets entitling them to the rooms num-
bered on them. Not much sightseeing
was done that night; we were glad to
get a bath, dinner, and bed. There were
two different parties of Americans at
dinner with us, and they proved
very friendly. Some twenty of them
had journeyed from Jerusalem on
horse or camel back, taking easy
stages of from twelve to twenty miles
per day, and camping out, engaging
their own dragoman, and proceeding in-
dependently. In Palestine and Syria
breakfast is invariably boiled eggs, bread
and butter, and coffee, and honey and


jam, but never meat or bacon. Never in
any circumstances was this list enlarged.
We didn’t grumble at the eggs because
they were the only plain, unvarnished,
unsophisticated food obtainable, and the
mysteries of Oriental cookery are not
to be lightly revealed if a due regard for
one’s appetite is to be observed.
The following day, Catani having made
arrangements, we selected our dragoman
and were allotted our carriages, and set
off in different directions to see the
strange old city, sometimes going up
streets so narrow that when
meeting other carriages the drivers
and all the passengers had to get out and
lift the vehicles bodily close to either
wall, in order to allow them to pass each
other. During the two days we were there
our party must have spent many hundreds
of pounds in the city buying costumes,
inlaid walnut furniture, jewellery, silk
goods, tiles, arms, &c. Eighteen years
ago wheeled vehicles were not known in
Damascus, but as soon as the road of the
French Company was finished the hotels
and tourist contractors very quickly sup-
plied the lack, and to-day many scores of
French-made carriages are in use.
During the first day most of us went
through the old street called ‘ ‘ Straight”
down the narrow lanes to the site of the
house of those patron saints of fiction,
Ananias and his wife Sapphira. Native
Christians still live down in this quarter
of the town, and the busy hand
silk - looms of these people evidenced
their industry. We went round the
walls of the city, past the supposed
house on the wall from which St. Paul
was let down, and the house of Naaman
the leper, still occupied by lepers, near
the place where St, Paul was struck
blind. We couldn’t for a wonder get our
cunning old dragoman Ibrahim to point
out the exact spot.
In the afternoon of the first day I had
the pleasure of going, in company with
two of the ladies of the party, to see Dr.
McKinnon, of the Scotch Presbyterian
Mission. He lives in the heart of this
fanatical Moslem city, where fifty years
ago no European Consul was allowed, and
where, only thirty-four years ago, one of
the bloodiest massacres of this century
took place. On this occasion the
Moslems rose and attacked the un-
armed Christians for the law for-
bade the latter to possess weapons—
and slaughtered 6,000 or more of them
during two or three days of horror. Here
wehadthepleasure of taking afternoon tea
in a charming little English house, where
were all the refinements of home life,
even to a piano and the latest illustrated
magazines and papers, while in the little
courtyard grew many of the plants so
familiar to us in Australia, among them
being Marechal Niel roses, convolvuli,
junipers, and peach and apricot trees,
and all sorts of pot-plants. The two
little boys, aged four and six, were old-
fashioned little fellows, having until
lately had no other English children to
play with. One of them was already
cultivating a taste for stamp-collecting.
The doctor, who is a very busy
man and commands a large prac-
tice, was for years the only European
medico in the place. He has been
here ten or eleven years, and last year
had to secure the help of a colleague,
while the Mission had sent another
gentleman to assist him. After tea we
werefortunate enough to have the doctor’s
company round the city and up to the
village of Salahiyeh, whence we had a
vision of beauty, the many towers and
minarets of the city rising out of a sea of
pinky-white apricot bloom. No wonder
the doctor waxed enthusiastic about it.
The plain for miles was white with bloom,
plainly showing what a large part the
apricot plays in the horticulture of the
country.
We visited, among other places, the
site of the future Mission Hospital of
Damascus, a block of land of three or
four acres, a little way outside the walls
of th 6 city. The story of how this land
was finally secured to the mission against
pretenders to rights over it was to us an
intensely interesting one, and I wish I
could tell it as it was told. As related by
the doctor, it is substantially as follows :
—Owing to increasing need for a central
place where the patients of the mission
could be treated all together in one place
and thus save the time of the much too
hard-worked medico, the Presbyterian
Mission authorized him to buy in a
healthy spot a block of land for a hospital,
and for some £1,200 or £1,500 a plot of
three or four acres outside the
city walls was secured. One of
the foreigner’s difficulties in purchas-
ing land in the Sultan’s dominions is
the insecurity of his position in all sorts
of ways. This leads to his being harassed,
and to endeavours being made to steal
his holdings from him. The doctor had
to settle with several claimants ; but one
case where pretensions were made to
some rights over a central portion of the


property remained. This, if recognised,
would have ruined the rest of the land
for the purpose of a hospital site, or the
Mission would have been bled severely.
So the doctor, who was perfectly con-
vinced of the justice of his position,
resolved to fight the matter in the
Courts, and engaged the best local coun-
sel on his side. All the same, he was
very anxious and worried over the
matter as it is, to say the least, not only
not easy but almost impossible to obtain
justice when it is a case of a true believer
versus a Christian. The Chief Judge of
the Yilayet of Damascus possessed an only
child, a little boy. This little fellow was
taken ill, and was attended by Dr.
McKinnon, and no doubt, under his
skilled treatment, would, in the ordinary
course, have soon recovered. Now,
however, occurred one of those strange
things that look more like interventions
of Providence than mere coincidences.
A young Constantinople medical practi-
tioner, who had only just completed his
studies in the capital, and had started
practice in Damascus, managed through
an enemy of the English doctor to have
the little boy’s case transferred to his
charge. The latter could not help him-
self, and had to acquiesce, though with
many misgivings.
A few days passed, and one evening, as
Dr. McKinnon had just sat down to
dinner after a long and tiring day’s
work, a messenger from the Judge’s house
came to summon him. Promising to at-
tend immediately after he had dined, he
went on with his meal. Soon afterwards
another messenger, and this time it was
the Judge’s Private Secretary, appeared
and insisted that the doctor should come
at once, as they were afraid that the
little boy was dying. So the meal was
left and as soon as possible the couch of
the little patient was reached. There it
was found that the wrong course had been
pursued by the young Turkish doctor,
and that the life of the child hung upon
a thread. After a most anxious three
hours’ close watching and attention
Dr. McKinnon’s treatment prevailed,
and he was able to assure the
distracted parent that the child’s life
was safe provided his directions were
observed. From his strong chest the
father took a handful of gold toS ; pay the
doctor for his services, but the latter,
who is in the habit of treating thousands
of poor people gratuitously, protested
that he had only done what he would do
for the poorest beggar, and declared that
he would only accept the usual fee
exacted from Mussulmen who could
afford to pay. The delighted Judge
could hardly find words to express his
gratitude, and told the doctor that if ever
he had trouble of any kind with the
people and would let him know of it,
justice would be fairly dealt out to
him. “And,” His Honor added, “with
regard to that hospital land case, you
may consider it already settled.”
Nor was this all, for a few days later,
when the Judge had to deliver his decision
in the matter, he publicly told the people
that the “ English doctor” had performed
a miracle and cured his little child. The
Moslems, it must be understood, hold
Christians, and especially Europeans, in
the profoundest contempt, and in Damas-
cus no respect is shown even for the
Consuls of the mightiest Empires in
Europe. When, however, the doctor
walked into the Court that day the un-
precedented happened, for having heard
what had taken place the people, led by
their Chief Magistrate, rose as a mark of
unusual respect. The plain simple facts
of the case, so modestly related to us,
were told with no idea that they were
going into print. I may add that the
doctor had been an amateur photo-
grapher, and by his kind permission a
friend and I were able to use his dark
room to change our films.
The next day was spent in sightseeing
and making purchases. With two or
three others I hired a young Christian
dragoman. We found he had been
brought up in the Mission Schools, and
spoke English fairly well. He told us of
the massacre of Christiaos by the
Moslems, and how hia mother, who was
then a girl, had walked over the dead
bodies of her parents. There was one
thing that the Christians have never for-
given the Moslems for, and that is the
vile treatment of the women during that
awful rime. The guide told us that the
men had no weapons to defend them-
themselves, and that one man—a Russian,
add, of course, a Greek Christian—
managed to smuggle some guns into his
house, and from that vantage ground he
had shot a number of Moslems, and had
finally, when order was restored, safely
escaped. Now, owing to the interven-
tion of the European Powers, not only are
the native Christians allowed tocarry arms,
but Damascus has a Christian Governor.
Our dragoman took us into one of the
orchards where the Christians were pic-
nicking and observing some holiday;


and close to the walls of the city he con-
ducted us to a coffee-garden, where we
had something light to drink and a
smoke, and watched the groups of holi-
day-makers. The men sat at tables
separated from the women, and the latter
were enjoying their cigarettes and nar-
gilehs or hubble-bubbles aB well as the
sterner sex. These gardens on both sides
of the Barada belong to and are only
used by, the native Christians. This was
the place, we were told, where the well-
to-do merchants of the Christian quarter
meet for social converse and to pass away
their time. The Christian women could
always be distinguished by the white
sheet that they wear over the head and
which falls down to the feet. The face,
however, is shown, and many of them
are very handsome.
It was a great pleasure in one place
down near the house of Ananias to meet
with people so friendly and kind as these
Armenian Christians are. One of our
party of four was inspecting some walnut
furniture constructed by the good man of
the house, and the ladies of his family
showed us a beautiful little private
chapel and shrine, all the exquisite
carvings of which were home-made. Then
they took us to the housetop, whence we
had a good view of the surrounding
country over the walls close by, and of
the city on the other side. In the court-
yard was a beautiful little fountain and
reservoir, and growing against the walls
were some tall lemon-trees covered with
large yellow fruit. On the opposite
side there were fine flowering
yellow roses and marigolds. I had been
deputed by the Sports Committee to
buy Oriental goods for prizes for the
passengers’ sports. Like the rest, I
soon found that there was no such thing
as a “straight price” among these
people, but the elementary arts of
Oriental bargaining were soon learned.
At times 400 or 500 per cent, more than
the owners were willing to take for an
article was asked, but generally the
demand was about 50 per cent, in ad-
vance. At one place my dragoman en-
quired for me the price of a shepherd’s
sling, and was told that it was Is. Upon
this I remarked, “ I suppose the fellow
has asked 50 per cent, more than he’ll
take ; offer him 6d.” What was my
astonishment to hear the shopkeeper
reply, with a strong American accent,
“That’s all right, mister; I used to
get 75c. for these in the States.”
I was too surprised to speak, and
paid my shilling without any more
ado. The people seem to have no
idea of cleanliness in their eatables, for
the figs, dried apricots, and apricot paste,
raisins, and dates that one saw every-
where on the open stalls were all un-
covered, and dust and flies had rendered
them, to say the least, most unattractive-
looking goods. Specimens of greasy
cookery of various sorts and of dishes of
stuff that looked like uncooked custard
were also exposed for sale on open
benches and stalls. All this reconciled
us to the hotel fare ; indeed, it was the
height of luxury compared with the food
obtainable from the stalls. The only
place which the party had to visit
as a whole was the Great Mosque,
and as it had been nearly all
burned down there was very little
to see there. Even in Damascus stamp
collectors drive a trade, and installed
in the centre of the hallway at Dimitri’s
Hotel, evidently “doing” some of our
passengers, was one of these, with a large
assortment of used stamps on a table
before him. In the British Consul’s
garden is a tennis-court, where some of
the few members of the European colony
find recreation.
One of the facts that left the deepest
impression on my mind with regard to
Damascus was the marked influence of
the French everywhere. Ever since the
occupation of the city for nine or ten
months some thirty-four years ago by a
French army of 9,000 this influence
has been growing, and French roads and
railways have necessitated the constant
employment of many Frenchmen in the
city and country as far as Beyrout. In the
shops andbazaars the European language
used is French, and many hundreds of
the people can speak it, though
they may not know a word of English.
Between Damascus and Haifa, a Syndi-
cate of Manchester capitalists is, I under-
stand, constructing a railway 150 miles
long. They are wisely avoiding the
French error of building across two
chains of mountains, and are carrying
the line along the fertile plain of the
Hauram, skirting the mountains. The
result is that they will spend less money
and serve a more reproductive tract of
country, while the railway will bring
Damascus within five hours of the sea.
I believe a scheme has been broached to
extend the line to Jerusalem, and that a
firman authorizing the work as well as
the connection of the Syrian and Egyp-
tian lines has been issued. The permit


thus granted will not, however, be taken
advantage of for many years.
Having spent two days and three
nights in the oldest inhabited city of
history, we were all awakened at 4.30 on
Thursday morning, and after an early
breakfast started off by daybreak for cur
floating home. In the bustle of depar-
ture Catani, who had paid out over £SO
for carriage hire while we were in the
city, had his bag stolen by some thief,
who had closely watched for an oppor-
tunity to make off in the dusk with his
plunder. The journey back was very
unpleasant owing to the dust and heat.
As before, we lunched at Stora. This
place is not marked on the maps, but is,
I think, either the same as Zaleh or near
it. There was very little diversion on
this return trip and much discomfort, for
we were only able to dismount a few
times, and only once where the wild
flowers were. This was on the
sea slope of the Lebanon.
The snow that we passed was covered
with dust, though it was white enough
an inch or two below the surface. We
were all extremely glad to reach Beyrout,
and the fifteen or twenty passengers who
had stayed behind on board laughed to
see us covered with fine dust. It was
like returning home to again experience
the many comforts of shipboard, and the
champagne flowed freely that night at
dinner, so glad was everybody to see every-
body.
Note.— Since writing this I have had a letter from Mrs. McKinnon, saying that the hospital building was
being put up and that the French railway was to be opened at the end of 1895.
BEYROUT TO HAIFA AND JERUSALEM.
During the night the Garonne steamed
slowly down the coast to Haifa, and on
Good Friday morning we were anchored
outside in the roadstead. As soon after
breakfast as possible we all landed, and
during the day made the pilgrimage to
to the cave of Elijah, under the rock in
the Carmelite Church and Monastery on
the summit of the mountain. The long
steep road up the mountain from the
town was through a perfect wilderness of
wild flowers and flowering shrubs, all in
bloom. Away down below us lay the
little plain, with the German colony and
the native town of Haifa. The former
was a perfect model of neatness and
careful cultivation, and a striking con-
trast to the native properties. I had the
pleasure of testing some very light
white and red wine produced in the
German colony at Mount Carmel, in the
American Consul’s house. The latter was
a German, who had lived for many years
in America. When I called they were
all out at service, Good Friday, of course,
being held as sacred as, or more so than
Sunday, by the Lutherans.
I was very interested to see the signs
of progress being made by these Germans.
I had a long chat with the gardener of
a wealthy settler, whose fine house and
garden were a feature of the wide, well-
planted street in the German quarter,
where all the foreign Consuls’ houses are»
and the One Protestant Church. A road
from Haifa to Nazareth has been made,
largely through or by the Germans. The
Arabs are beginning to employ vehicles,
which they have learned to use and to
buy from the same people. I spent a
very pleasant afternoon with four of the
genial and good-natured Germans, and
they showed me over their settlement,
and over one of the best of their vine-
yards, giving me a good deal of informa-
tion, both useful and interesting. It
quite took me back to Angaston again to
get among German vinegrowers once
more, and they were very pleased indeed
to hear of the consideration and esteem
in which their countrymen in Australia
were held as citizens by us. They loaded
me up with flowers, and insisted on
walking down the town to the boat to see
me off. By 6 o’clock we were all once
more aboard and off for Jaffa, where we
found ourselves anchored next morning
when we woke up.
This place is noted for its bad
anchorage and its unprotected landing-
place. Often the mail steamer, finding
it impossible to land mails, proceeds on
its way, and the people ashore have to
wait till next trip. We were fortunate
in having good weather to land, and
Cook’s immense boats, manned by twenty


sturdy rowers, came off for us. Two
hours were spent here waiting for the
train. While waiting I went to Hardegg’s
Hotel, in the German colony, to find Mr.
A. H. Irwin, to whom I had a letter of
introduction. He is the representative
at Jaffa of a large London orange broker,
and has for six years lived there for four
or five months in each year. I made
arrangements with him to come back
from Jerusalem a day or two before the
rest of the party, so that he could show
me something of the orange industry of
the place, &c. Most of us first got our
mail, then visited the house of Simon
the Tanner, and about II o’clock we had
taken our seats in the cars bound for
Jerusalem.
Mr. Clarke, Cook & Sons’ energetic
and amiable agent, had arranged for a
special train for us, and soon we had
the novel experience of rushing along
the rails toward the Holy City.
The carriages are a sort of compromise
between the American vestibule and the
English side door, small-compartment
style, being divided into compartments,
but the entrance being at both ends,
doors in the middle allowing passage
through. A plain kind of lunch of bread
and hard-boiled eggs and oranges was
distributed about halfway. How familiar
the names of some of those stations
seemed, and what a strange fate it was
that now made them notable, not for the
memories of the long past, but because
of events of yesterday.
It is less than two years since the open-
ing of the line. It is of course foreign
capital and enterprise that has built it, as
it is in nearly every instance where pro-
gress has been made in the lands of the
“ unspeakable and paralyzing” Turk.
First through groves of orange-trees for
a mile or two, then through fields of
corn, sandy hillocks of vine, then olive
plantations, and more fields, till we had
crossed the Plain of Sharon, the old
land of the Philistines, and entered the
hills. All too rapidly we passed by the
lovely patches of scarlet anemones,
daisies, buttercups, poppies, and mar-
guerites, and occasional blue irises and
scarlet tulips, and other bulbous flowers ;
occasional flocks of sheep or goats, and
here and there in the valleys a little cul-
tivation—in odd places a few vines, and
mulberry, fig, almond, and olive trees —
were all there was to bear evidence to
the fact of the country having been at
one time a land flowing with milk
and honey. Centuries of misrule have
no doubt led to the neglect of
the conservation of the soil by terracing,
and the hills present generally a deso-
lately barren appearance. No difficult
engineering obstacles seemed to have
been encountered, and with the exception
of one stiff gradient nothing of note is to
be reoorded as to the route or construction
of the line.
About 2.30 or 3 o’clock we reached the
neat little terminus, some three-quarters
of a mile from the gate and tower of
David, and found carriages ready to
convey us to our several hotels. It was
Easter time, and Jerusalem was crowded ;
so some of the party had to lodge at the
Russian Convent. Several thousands of
Russian, Greek, and Christian pilgrims
were in town to attend the services of
Easter Sunday. Some scores of those
indefatigable modern pilgrims, the
Americans, were there, also English,
only one Australian, as far as I know, a
few Germans, and a German and French
prince or two. When our lodging arrange-
ments were completed—they took some
time to finish, as some of us ‘ * kicked
right hard” at having to sleep on sofas in
a parlour when we had paid for beds and
rooms—we dispersed over the old town.
The first afternoon was of course spent
wandering abouc the little city, visiting
some of the usual sights, and observing
the polyglot mixture of races, their
curiously varied dresses, &c. The
marvellous history of Jerusalem and the
tremendous influence it has exercised
over the destinies of the world, its
strange vicissitudes of fortune, its reoord
of sieges, and most of all the fact that it
was the central spot of Biblical history
and the scene of most of the chief events
of our Lord’s life, all these things had
made us anxious to see the spot where
such supremely momentous events had
transpired. lam afraid our realizations
were far different to our anticipations,
and yet it should not have been so, be-
cause the filth, the disagreeable odours,
the narrow streets, the smallness of the
place, the dry, arid character of the
country surrounding, the fact that hardly
a single spot in the whole place could be
identified beyond all doubt as the site of
the buildings or the events that have
made the place famous, have again and
again been described by travellers. The
sanctity of the plaoe, its association with
all that we hold sacred in the Christian
religion, and that we expected to feel
with greater intensity on the very spot
itself, was not apparent in the face of the


actual facts of the place as it is to-day. I
eannot adequately express my disappoint-
ment with it all, and in fact, as several
of our party remarked, we almost wished
we had not visited it. Had it been in
ruins and absolutely desolate a visit
would have been much more satisfactory.
As it was it seemed almost as if a beauti-
ful illusion had been shattered.
The day after we arrived was Easter
Sunday, and most of us spent several
hours in the Church of the Holy
Sepulchre watching the gorgeous cere-
monial of the services, first by the
Roman Catholics, then by the Greek
Catholics. The sonorous ohanting of
some of the priests in parts of the latter
service was exceedingly fine. For a long
time the procession, with high candles
lighted and burning censers, moved round
the supposed site of the Holy Sepulchre,
occasionally stopping, and last of all the
Archbishop, Cardinal, or Patriarch,
whichever it was, led the way into the
marble, gilded, and much ornamented
mausoleum, where the body of Christ is
supposed to have lain, and the long pro-
cession followed. I was very much struck
with the absolute faith and the touching
simplicity and reverence of the Russian
peasants as they came into the holy
plaoe, woollen caps in hand and in their
national costume, some of them very
poorly clad, bowing and crossing them-
Belves or kneeling in front of all sorts of
places which tradition had associated
with the various events that have hap-
pened there since the beginning of the
greatest tragedy of history. About 11
o’clock the services were over, and we
wandered through the place into the
Greek, Armenian, and Latin chapels.
The latter I got part of the way into and
had to retreat, as the sanitary arrange-
ments of the place were evidently out of
order, for the effluvium proceeding from
the far end of the chapel was simply
suffocating.
I do not intend to try to describe the
places of interest to pilgrims in and
around Jerusalem, as it would take too
much space, and they have all been so
frequently and so fully noticed by well-
known and able writers. Many of our
party went from the Church of the Holy
Sepulchre to the little English Church
past Cook’s office and near the tower of
David. The place was full of English
and American tourists ; and the novelty
of hearing a sermon preached in English
in Jerusalem itself on Easter Sunday
filled the plaoe to the doors. During the
next two or three days excursions were
made to Bethlehem and the pools of
Solomon in carriages, and on donkey
back to the top of the Mount of Olives,
where a Carmelite convent has been
erected, inside is a courtyard on
the walls of which are copies of the
Lord’s prayer in forty different languages
From the mountain top a view of the
city and surrounding hills and villages
and the main points of interest was
obtained. Away on the other side far
off the silver streak of light we found was
the Dead Sea glittering in the sun.
Past the house of Martha and Mary, and
the great cemeteries on the lower hill-
sides, with their rook tombs covered with
flat stones, in which the bodies of Jews
from all parts of the world find a final
resting - place ; past the tomb of
Absalom, till we came to the
spot where the last great mental
struggle of the Saviour terminated in
the complete renunciation of self even
to death on that memorable night at
Gethsemane. Here the Carmelite monks
had charge of the only really old olive
orchard around the city. It was closed
in by stout painted iron railings, and
some of the olive-trees one could readily
believe were many hundreds of years old,
possibly 1,900. The priest in charge kindly
gave us olive twigs and flowers plucked
from the garden as mementoes of our
visit. Close by is a handsome residence,
built for the use of the Russian Imperial
Family when any of them visit the city.
Here, as elsewhere, the beggars beset
the place, congregating in every narrow
passage-way in order the better to inter-
cept tourists. They flock in from the
country about Easter time, to reap the
harvest of pilgrim alms, with wretched
dress, leprous sores, and, in some cases,
blind and beseeching faces, and cries of
“ Howadji backsheesh, backsheesh
howadji, howadji” (pronounced “ How-
ah-jee”) lengthening them out in an
extreme of pitiful beseechfulness and in-
sistency that I had never heard equalled
anywhere. The memory of it still lingers
with me. One rather lusty beggar in the
Via Dolorosa, who was given a coin of
very small value, threw it upon the
ground and contemptuously spat upon it,
but still keep his eye upon it, pro-
bably with a view of carefully picking it
up when we were out of sight. Many of
these mendicants had large tin cans,
which they held out for us to put our
small coins into.


On the Easter Sunday noon I noticed
several processions of little boys
and girls in charge of sisters of some
charitable institution. They were either
orphans or foundlings, many of them
illegitimate. It cast a deep shade of sad-
ness over my mind to think of the misery
to which so many of these little ones had
been born. A great number of them
were fearfully marked by disease, though
they were all well dressed and washed
and otherwise clean-looking. Part of
one noon we spent in looking through
the beautiful Mosque of Omar, permits
having been obtained through the British
Consul for a certain number to be ad-
mitted. Each Consulate has one or more
Kavasses, or native servants, wearing a
livery and badge, and their work is prin-
cipally to accompany pilgrims of the
country they represent on their rounds
and generally to afford assistance to
them. The English Kavass, a most
gorgeously dressed individual with a long
polished rod with a large silver knob on
top, took us round the Mosque. The
immense quantity of beautiful tilework,
principally blue and green, over it both
inside and out, its lovely shape, and the
large open space called the Harem plat-
form around it, made it one of the most
beautiful and remarkable buildings I
have ever seen. It is a wonder that the
tiles have not all disappeared ere this—l
mean that the Turks have not seized
them and sold them to tourists, consider-
ing their rapaciousness and want of reve-
rence for old things in other directions.
We were allowed to go inside the Mosque,
after covering our feet with shoes made
of bags roughly sewn together. In one
portion of the building sat a mollah or
priest in front of a stone embedded in
the floor, in which were a number of
holes, some four or five still having
nails in them. The tradition is
that Mahomet drove the nails into
the stone, and that every hundred
years one of them disappears, and that
when the last one is taken the world will
be destroyed. There are four left. The
priest, it was explained, would sell us
seats in Heaven ; we were only required
to plaoe 3d. on the stone. So one of our
party, a Yorkshireman and the joker of
the ship, placed 6d. down, saying he
would have a front seat in the bald-
headed row. We all for the fun of it
followed suit, and the mollah went off
smiling with a handful of silver, which
the silly infidels—whom he no doubt
mentally consigned to the lowest depths
of the stokehole in the other place—had
given him.
The Mosque, like every other public
place in the city, had its traditions, some
of which were even more improbably
foolish than those promulgated by the
Christian priests. We were shown in
the cave under the immense rock on the
top of Mount Moriah, and in the very
centre of the Mosque, a large hole in the
solid rock, which Mahomet had made by
striking his head against it; and in
another place a hole where Mahomet had
pressed his thumb against the solid stone,
leaving a spot big enough for an ordinary
man to place his bare heel in. An
admirable thing in these Moslems is the
close attention that they bestow upon
their religious devotions, reading or
praying for long periods together, and
not noticing the strangers passing by
them, or rudely staring at them from a
few feet distance.
A visitor could spend weeks in and
around J erusalem if he were to visit all
the places there that have been written
about, and he would then have the satis-
faction of knowing that not more than a
fraction of them are agreed by common
consent to be without doubt the places
they are represented to be. Even for
Calvary there are two parties claiming two
distinctplaces, so that possibly thefifty two
shiploads of soil that pious Archbishop
Übaldo, of Pisa, in the Middle Ages im-
ported from Mount Calvary to make the
Campo Santo in Pisa was from some other
hill altogether. Just below the present
Gordon’s Calvary there is a deep quarry
with a large excavation, filled at
present with water, two smaller holes
higher up, and this lower one gives the
impression of a skull when seen from a
little distance, this is considered suffi-
cient evidence to identify it with ‘ * the
place of a skull,” Golgotha.


JERUSALEM TO JAFFA.
Jerusalem has several hospices, some
thirty monasteries and convents, and a
number of Synagogues, besides Cathe-
drals and Churches. There are ten
Greek Catholic Bishops of little villages
in the territory, of which Jerusalem is
the centre. The Patriarch of Jerusalem
himself only divides honours with
Bishops of other Christian sects in this
little city of about 30,000 people, covering
210 acres. Quite a considerable portion
of the population consists of members of
the various monastic orders; another
large portion is composed of poor
pilgrims who have settled in Jerusalem,
and are partly kept by charitiesfrom all the
Cnristian countries, especially Russia. I
was told on good authority that fully 20
per cent, of the people are kept by
these charities, while quite 40 per
cent, are given free lodging, and some
eurious customs have grown up in con-
nection with the distribution of them.
A man dying and leaving two or
more houses will give one to a convent
on condition that his children—should
misfortune overtake them—shall always
have the use of one or other of these con-
ventual homes, and the law has it that
twenty years’ continual residence by the
ohildren in the house which belonged to
their family entitles them to ownership,
so that they are always provided with
other houses or have to change houses at
some time or other. Thousands of the
visiting pilgrims go to the Holy City to
stay a few months and then return home,
unless they find they can support a con-
tinued existence on the spot. Some of
the hospices provide lodging at the rate
of 12s. 6d. per three months, and after
that time the pilgrim has to move. The
food of these people consists, as a rule, of
meat once a week, and for the rest of the
week of tea and bread, olives, figs, raisins,
radishes, and lentil or pea soup. The
following figures give some idea of how
cheap living can be made there : —Dried
figs, Id. per lb.; common raisins, 2d.; and
best. 4d.; olive oil made there can be
bought for from 2s. to 3s. per gallon ;
Is. 6d. per day will just keep a poor
family of four. In a great many cases
soup is provided free, and in others
twenty-four small loaves of bread per
week are allowed per family.
The dispensing of justice here is like it
is in most of the Turkish dominions, and
it is only by constant bribery, or by
placing oneself under the protection of
the Consul, or remaining a foreign
subject that one can obtain any sorb of
redress. Like Damascus, “only more
so,” the price of land round Jerusalem
has risen enormously, and in some cases
nearly a thousand per cent., owing to
the building of the railway and the
increase of hotel building, &0., to
accommodate the tourist traffic. A
German named Bergheim, who had a
block of land near the city, found that
it was growing beautifully less every
year owing to the removal of the
boundary marks by his Arab neighbours,
so he took the case to Court, but could
get no satisfaction, and went to see the
Judge privately. This official told him
that he would have to bring 100 witnesses
who had seen the removal of the boun-
daries. The German went out in
despair, but was stopped by the J udge’s
clerk, who asked him how he had suc-
ceeded. The clerk laughed at his reply,
and told him that the 100 witnesses were
SIOO, so as the land was very well worth
it Bergheim brought them in next day.
The clerk asked for the bag of coins to
count them over, and kept out twenty,
handing the rest back. The surprised
Teuton exclaimed that he couldn’t appear
with less than the hundred before the
Judge ; but the astute clerk told him
to tell the' Judge that twenty of the
witnesses were too infirm to mount the
stairs, and it would be all right. So it
turned out, the infirm witnesses being
old acquaintances of the Judge, whom he
seldom saw, but who often got as far as
the foot of the stairs, and no further.
The taxes are farmed out to the men who
will pay the highest for the privilege of
gathering them, and as they often have to
pay exorbitant sums, they accordingly
make the peasants suffer. * ‘ But, ”1 asked,
“if the law is that one-tenth of the crop
goes to the Government how can they
make them pay more than one-tenth ?”
“Oh, in scores of ways,” said my in-
former. “For instance, the tax collec-
tor himself must measure the man’s crop
before it is placed in his barn, and if a
peck of it is moved before this is done
without permission, even if its owner is
starving, heavy damages are exacted by
law from him ; so until the grower con-
sents to give the collector himself, over
and above the one-tenth, a good share,
his crop may, and sometimes does, lie out
in the field till it is in danger of spoiling.
Then the owner comes to his senses and


pays up.” Many other ways as ingenious
as this are resorted to to squeeze the poor
peasant, till his life becomes nothing but
a struggle to keep himself alive, without
endeavouring to amass wealth, as that
would surely mark him out as a victim.
After about three days of sightseeing
in and around the old city, part of the
party, some nine or ten, went on horse-
back to the Dead Sea to camp out for a
day or two, and eighteen or twenty others
returned to Jaffa, the rest continuing to
more closely explore the place. Sitting
alongside me at the dinner table in Jeru-
salem were some Americans, and they,
with their usual independence, were
travelling without Cook or the other
agents, engaging their own dragomen,
&c. They got about halfway to the
Dead Sea, and the dragomau and a
number of his brigand - looking
friends swore that the horses were
only allowed to go halfway, and
that the travellers must return to
Jerusalem. This was a pretext for ex-
tortion, and as they didn’t care to walk
either on to Jericho or back to the city,
they eventually had to pay a stiff price
to be allowed to ride back, without
having been to the Dead Sea at all. The
arrangements for conducting tourists
through Palestine and Syria are not con-
fined alone to Thomas Cook & Son, though
they do the largest share of the work.
Gaze and others, even native Syrians,
have taken up the work, and one of these
is Demetrius N. Domian, a most intelli-
gent man indeed, speaking three or four
languages fluently. I spent a very plea-
sant evening with him at the hotel, and
gathered a great deal of information
from him. I do not know of a better
man to personally conduct either a small
or a large party anywhere in the East.
I found that he had the names of several
Australians upon his books who had
travelled with him.
I returned to Jaffa on Wednesday
morning, as I had promised Mr. Irwin,
and put up at Hardegg’s Hotel, in the
German quarter, where he was. During
two days I had the pleasure of visiting
with Mr. Irwin the orange groves of Jaffa
and the Rothschild colony. Considering
the crude methods and the want of scientific
knowledge of the orange-growers round
Jaffa, I was surprised at the results at-
tained, and though some big stories are
told of orange yields in Southern Cali-
fornia, Jaffa, too, has results to show
that quite equal them. The move-
ments in progress in this old land
to better the condition of the
Jews living there and to settle still
more are being carried out by foreign
capital, Barons Hirsch and Rothschild
being, I believe, the principal movers.
Within seven miles of Jaffa a scheme is
being prosecuted which will eventually
result in Palestine having perhaps the
model institutions of the kind in the
world. One thousand arces of vines are
already planted, part of which area is in
bearing. It is laid out in blocks of 50
acres or so, with main roads crossing the
whole place at right angles; these are
being planted with avenues of mul-
berry and eucalyptus trees, which at
present of course are small, but
the eucalypts have already shown
promise of making good timber
within a few years. The village itself is
situated on three sides of a large open
space ; at one end are the synagogue and
schools, and the other opens out on to
the plantations. In a valley be-
tween the village and the fine
cellars is a general fruit, vegetable,
and flower garden, and in it are one or
two acres of oranges, planted out at
proper distances apart, and well culti-
vated and irrigated. I visited the place
in company with two or three others of
the party, and we walked through the
garden up to the cellars on the other
side. The French manager of the
cellars and the English engineer showed
us every courtesy in explaining every-
thing. In short, I found that the place
is being conducted upon the latest and
most approved methods, and that no
expense is being spared by its millionaire
patron to make it a model establishment.
Already a light wine of a Sauterne
character is being sold from the place at
3d. per bottle, three years old. Ulti-
mately 1,500 acres will be planted and
over half a million gallons of wine
annually casked.
At another of the Jewish Colonies—■
and I understand there are about forty
altogether—glass bottles are being manu-
factured as an adjunct to the winecellars.
At another, in Jerusalem, foundry
work and coachbuilding are being done,
and technical and elementary training is
being given at several schools. At
Mikweh Israel, near Jaffa, there is a
Jewish Agricultural School, where nearly
100 Jewish lads are receiving a practical
agricultural education. These instances
that I have given show the best of what
is being done in that way. There are
stories ip common circulation not so


oreditable to the movement. In some of
the Hirsch colonies, I was told, the Jews
are given 2 francs per day (Is. Bd.) per
man, and the rest of the family propor-
tionately, to help them live till their
farms become productive and self-
supporting. Many of them pay a native
labourer 1 franc per day to do the work
for them and live idly on the rest. The
opinion is current that the Jew will never
return to husbandry, but Baron Hirsch
says that by taking extraordinary care in
the selection of his colonists he is, after
an immense amount of work and trouble,
demonstrating the fallacy of the state-
ment in his Argentine settlements. I
hope it is so ; if it is there is yet hope,
not that Jewish financiers will once more
settle in Palestine, but that the country
may eventually become a Jewish State or
Republic, upon the breaking up of the
Turkish Empire. That would'once for
all settle the question of who is to have
the Holy Land.
Another interesting development in
Palestine is the planting of German
colonies. The Haifa colony I have re-
ferred to ; there is also one at Jeru-
salem and one at Jaffa. These settle-
ments seem to have been religious in
their origin, and the Jaffa colony has
split up into a number of sects, all differ-
ing upon some apparently trivial points.,
HostHardegg, of the “Jerusalem Hotel,”
at Jaffa, is one of the greatest cranks I
have ever heard of. The book that he
has published, and that he places in all
the rooms of his hotel, is the most curious
jumble of facts, statements, rules of
conduct, &c., that I have read for many
a day. However, he has an irreproach-
able character for honesty. The hotel
was crowded while we were there, and
the host had to get the help of several
of the German girls on the settlement in
the kitchen, and as they washed up the
dishes or peeled potatoes they sang
Moody and Sankey’s hymns in German;
taking me back to the canning factory
at Yalumba, where the “Deutsoher
madchens” frequently regale the rest of
the hands by singing these same songs,
and in German too. A peculiar feature
of these colonies is their coinage of
brass tokens, both round and square.
These are supposed to be only for use on
the settlement, but they are used in both
Haifa and Jaffa as commonly as the coin
of the realm. They are manufactured in
Germany. Germany retains certain
rights of protection over these settlers ;
and it has been found very neoessary to
do bo, as, in the Jaffa colony particularly,
a large portion of their land was being
robbed from them by the rascally thiev-
ing natives, by the removal of boundaries,
false claims, &c., until the German Go-
vernment had to step in and protest
strongly. Then it was put a Btop to.
In the J affa colony the high gates of the
lofty palisade fence that surrounds the
village are regularly closed at a certain
time every night and opened at a certain
hour in the morning. Cook & Son’s
office is in the colony.
I do not give any details here of
the horticulture of the couuntry; they
will be found elsewhere.
We were to have left Jaffa on Friday
noon, but the sea was too rough, and the
Garonne had to keep off for twenty-four
hours, before it was deemed safe to
attempt to rev out. All Friday and
Saturday it was too wet to be able to get
about much, and on Friday a telegram
had to be sent to Jerusalem to Mr.
Clarke, Cook’s agent, to keep the party
back till next day, as there was no more
hotel accommodation, every available bed
and sofa of the three hotels being occu-
pied. Indeed, it was with difficulty
that their high mightinesses the
French Orleanist Prince and his
party could get a dining-room apart
from : ‘the common herd.” As we
sat at meals at Hardegg’s, on my left was
Mr. John Cook, of Cook & Son, on the
right Mr. Irwin, then in succession an
Austrian, Armenian, Greek, and German,
They all used French as a common
language. With my British insularity I
felt that it should have been our tongue,
but had the grim satisfaction of feeling
that our time is coming, and rapidly. As
in Jerusalem, so here Messrs. Cook and
Son provided carriages in the town for
the use of the party, the cost being in-
cluded in the first oharge made, namely,
£l3 for the Syrian trip and £lO for the
Palestine. Many of ’the passengers,
however, to my knowledge, paid the
drivers themselves, and then the scamps
put in a requisition after to Cook’s agents
for the right fare for so many hours, and
got it, too. This fact was not generally
understood as it should have been.
On Saturday, the weather having
moderated, word was sent for our
Jerusalem pilgrims to come on. At 1
o’clock those of us in Jaffa proceeded to
the embarking place, where there was a
crowd of natives to see us off. Mr.
Irwin pointed out a boatman who during
a rough landing some years ago had un-


fortunately had his boat upset and
several passengers drowned. This man
actually saved the lives of eight of the
passengers by dashing into the surf for
them. Then, to reward bravery, the
Turkish Government plaoed him in
prison for a term of years, while the
Royal Humane Society of England, I
believe, bestowed a gold medal upon
him.
At the landing-stage was an enormous
negro, about 6 ft. 6 in. high, with a very
large wen upon his nose, and altogether a
remarkably ugly-looking fellow. I snap-
shotted him, much to his apparent dis-
gust and to the delight of the crowd of
Syrians and Arabs, who roared with
laughter. When we were all aboard the
head boatman pushed off, and then some
careful manoeuvring took place to steer
us through the break in the surf. As we
got out upon the open sea and the boat
began to rock a bit, most of the ladies
became perfectly white. One moment we
were apparently going to be swallowed by
an immense oncoming wave, then a tre-
mendous heave, and we were momentarily
on top of it, and able to see Joppa and
the land behind us, and the ship, still
very small and a long way off in front of
us ; the next, we were in the deep trough
of the sea. The shouts of the twenty
boatmen, as they slowly but steadily
gained ground, only helped to make the
ladies—who with white faces and closed
eyes fearfully waited for the end—more
nervous. At last the ship’s side was
reached, and at each lift of the boat a
passenger would be seized in the brawny
arms of one of Cook’s fine fellows, for one
instant the boat would be above the
gangway platform, and the next three
feet below. We were all more than
pleased to get back home again, and in an
hour’s time had the pleasure of seeing the
second boat with the others coming off.
CAIRO AND THE PYRAMIDS TO ALEXANDRIA.
One night and one day more—“ All
Fools’ Day”—and about 5 o’clock in the
afternoon on Sunday we anchored in the
harbour of Alexandria. We had passed
along the low-lying shores of the Nile
Delta for hours and a British squadron
just before getting into harbour. That
night Cook’s men were aboard, and had
sold return tickets to Cairo and back to
nearly all; and next morning another
large and welcome batch of mail was dis-
tributed before we landed. After eur
small amount of luggage had been per-
functorily examined we took our seats in
the carriages which were to oonvey us to
the station. My own feeling, and that of
many others, I know, was that of
pleasure at landing on what seemed like
British soil once more. We passed
through that part of the city which had
suffered most from the bombardment,
and which has since been built up into
fine square blocks of streets, well paved
and kept. Soon the station was reached,
and for three hours we were speeding
across the lowlands, passing numbers of
little mud villages, raised on slight
mounds so as to be above flood level.
Most interesting was the sight from the
train as we passed. The various agricul-
tural occupations of the people, their
gpimals, especially the humped buffaloes, j
whioh most of us saw for the first time,
the camels loaded up with lucerne or
clover, the strings of natives riding on
donkeys, the water-wheels worked by
buffaloes, the shadoofs by men lifting
water from the canals or wells, the canals
and rivers and lagoons, the gardens with
their big tamarisks and sometimes olive
and orange trees.
At last we got to Cairo, where carriages
again conveyed us to the hotels ; some
to the new hotel, others to Shepheard’s.
That afternoon was spent in wandering
about the bazaars and streets watching
the still strange life of the East, for there
was novelty everywhere, every Eastern
city having as distinctive differences as
those of the different cities of the West,
and in some respects more. Along with
three or four others and a dragoman I
sauntered out through the Esbekeyieh
Gardens, which belong to the Khedive.
It was just after the little affair with the
British authorities, in whioh that young
gentleman had asserted himself not
wisely, but too well, and had had to eat
a proportionate quantity of leek. I
questioned the dragoman as to the health
of the Khedive, as to whether the severe
attack of indigestion had passed off. He
didn’t know that his ruler was ill, or that
such a large-sized leek would be apt to


disagree with his august highness. From
the great raised verandah of Shepheard’s
Hotel one of the most varied and in-
teresting sights in the world can be seen,
the brilliant costumes of the East, the
gaily dressed ladies of the West with
their gorgeous silk-clad footmen and
attendants, the Egyptian officers and
British soldiers and officers, the donkey-
boys and their animals, the dashing equi-
pages with pioturesque syces running in
front with their long wands—at a certain
time of day a constant flow of life full of
strangeinteresttothe civilian Britishers, in
whose country’s hands fate seems to have
placed the destinies of this great country
and its twenty millions of people. In
Sharia el Gamal-street, or the Street of
the Camels, where most of the best Euro-
pean shops are, an attempt is made to
imitate the Continental style of having
little tables and chairs placed on the wide
footpaths in front of the capaoious beer
saloons, where people may sit drinking
and smoking out in the street.
Most of us selected Tuesday to visit
bhe Pyramids. Starting about 10 o’clock,
we passed the barracks of the British
army of occupation ; the men were out in
the spacious enclosure close by playing
football. Not far off General Kitchener’s
residence was pointed out to us, and a
little further on, after traversing the
modern quarter of the city, we crossed
the fine bridge over the Nile, with its
two pairs of bronze lions at either end.
For several hundred yards we drove,
with the Nile on our left, and the walled
gardens of the grand palace of Gizeh, till,
turning the corner, we came in view of
the seven miles long avenue of acacia
trees that extend from Cairo to the
Pyramids. This road, which is elevated
12 or 15 ft. above the surrounding
low country is, during the Nile season,
simply a causeway across a shallow lake.
Fields of flax, barley, rye, lucerne, and
clover, &0., covered this land when we
were there. Some things I have been
quite disappointed in seeing—the descrip-
tions having probably been too roseate—
but the Pyramids struck me as by far che
most imposing and wonderful of the
works of man that I have ever seen.
Having no hills at the back to dwarf
them, they loom up against the sky like
mountains with sharply defined outlines,
which as one gets nearer grow more
immense, until when quite close the
sense of proportion is lost, and one only
sees a great rough slope of hewn stones
and one side of the base. As one begins
to climb, however, as I did, expecting to
be able to reach the top easily without
requiring the help of the Arabs and
without resting, one realizes, as he has to
take breath three or four times, that it
is no joke to accomplish the ascent
without aid. Many of our party, and
some of them ladies, reached the summit
of the Great Pyramid, having an Arab at
each hand to pull and one behind to
push. One of the younger ladies—a
Scotch girl and one of the most popular
of the ship’s party—had a most gallant
Arab, son of a sheik, to help her. He
told her that she was a gazelle, asked her
if she was married and her age, and upon
finding that she was single remarked
that he was only twenty himself and had
two wives, thus inferring what pleasure
and honour were in store for her if she
would settle in the country. The in-
ducements, however, were not quite
sufficient. As one of us had carried a
camera Blung on his back to the summit
we submitted to being snapshotted with
our ten or fifteen Arabs on the top of
Cheops. The old joke of Mark Twain’s
was revived by one of our incorrigibles
asking if the guides had met him. Several
of the younger ones, who had evidently
been born since the genial humourist was
there, stoutly averred that they had seen
him when he visited the Pyramids. We
didn’t see McPherson, however.
Coming down was, contrary to my ex-
pectations, very much easier than going
up. We paid one of the Arabs to go
down the Great Pyramid from where we
were, and ascend the second to the
summit in ten minutes. This he did, and
brought down some stones from the top
for friend Marshall of Angaston. The
Sphinx, after the Pyramids, was to me,
at least, a most disappoing object, and
not at all imposing. Each person ascend-
ing the Great Pyramid has to pay a toll
of 2s. to the Sheik of the Pyramids, an
old Arab, who, in turn, is supposed to
keep the guides in order and prevent ex-
tortion on their part, which latter he
doesn’t do. A first-class hotel, Mena
House, ornamented inside in imitation of
ancient Egyptian style, is situated near
the foot of the Pyramids ; and charges
for meals and accommodation are quite
moderate. On the way back we spent an
hour or two in the Gizeh Museum, which
—formerly a palace- -now contains all the
contents of the famous Bulak collection.
Dozens of fine rooms here are filled
with the visible and constantly accruing
evidepces of an ancient civilization, which


it is the merest commonplace to say
excites our utmost wonder and admira-
tion. The period of time covered by
these antiquities, the beauty and perfec-
tion of work of many of them, the power,
knowledge, and wealth of their owners,
and the still very incomplete account
of the history of those long-buried
centuries, all contribute to make
the work of the Egyptologist one
of rarely fascinating interest. The
immense field still hardly touched,
in which important discoveries are being
made every year, and which help to
fill some wide gap in the continuity of
the history, serve to inspire the explorer
with a constant enthusiasm, for he knows
not what strange revelations may be dis-
closed behind any shovelful of sand that
his Arabs are throwing out. In one room
of the Museum we were shown a large
glass case of solid gold ornaments of all
sorts, some so delicately inlaid and
fashioned as to more than bear compari-
son with the best skilled work of Europe.
These had been discovered at Luxor less
than six months before. In Cairo I
noticed in the book shops how many
works had been published on the results
of explorations year after year. Every
new discovery makes the history that
was before up to date behind the times,
and a good deal of unprofitable publish-
ing must result. We reluctantly left the
Museum, where, instead of two hours two
weeks could have been interestingly
spent.
Next day some twenty of us took pas-
sage in one of Cook’s splendidly fitted-
up boats for Memphis and Sakkarah,
under the charge of Mr, Dionysius Skey,
Cook’s head dragoman. He, I found,
was a native of the lonian Islands, and
was born a British subject, as his birth
took place six months before England in
her generosity handed over the Islands
to the then newly founded Grecian
Kingdom. He was very proud of the fact.
In the course of conversation I
asked him how the people liked the
English occupation. He said not
at all, though they preferred us to
other foreigners. He said, “ Sometimes
Arab Sheiks ask me ‘ when are the
English going to leave Egypt?’ and 1
always say,” here taking hold of his ears
and bending them, “when you can see
your ears without looking in a looking-
glass chen they will leave Egypt. ” It took
about two hours’ slow steaming to reach
the Memphis landing-stage, where a
crowd of donkeys and their drivers
awaited us. Soon, our selection having
been made, we straggled off in a long
line, passing through a succession of
barley, flax, and lucerne fields, and
occasionally one of onions, beans, or
marrows and melons, over rich black soil
which in some places seemed to have been
left too long after irrigation, as it was
lying in great hard lumps of dried mud.
Passing through the groves of tall date-
palms and by mud villages and the im-
mense recumbent statues of Ramesesand
Metnnon, we came to the sandhills where
is the pyramid of Sakkarah, very loosely
built, and nob half as big as that of
Cheops. For miles our way lay among the
desolate-looking sandhills, and anything
more absolutely devoid of outside interest
than these wastes it is hard to conceive.
However, for fifteen or twenty miles to
the north and many miles south they
cover the tombs of probably a hundred
generations of Egyptians, millionsof whom
must have been here interred to have
madesuch a vast burial-ground. Andthese
same dreary sandy wastes have hidden and
preserved for thousands of years the
history of a hoary and wonderful civiliza-
tion, and restrained the curiosity and
rapacity of man, till an age when their
discovery meant an even safer keeping of
their records in the multiplying power of
the Press. One very fine series of under-
ground chambers that we visited, beauti-
fully sculptured, telling the chief events
in the life of the notable whose tomb it
was, had only been opened for the inspec-
tion of the public about three months.
This and the tomb of Tih were both in a
splendid state of preservation. It was
very refreshing to get below ground out
of the great heat and dust. Last of all,
we went through the Serapaeum or
“Tomb of the Sacred Bulls.” This place
consists of several broad and long arched
galleries. Off the galleries are twenty-
four rooms, each containing an immense
black granite tomb, with a great slab of
the s*me stone over it, but ages ago the
tombs had been robbed of the bodies of
the bulls and whatever valuables had been
enclosed, and the slabs all pushed aside.
Only one body of a bull was left, to re-
ward the later discoverer. We were glad
to get away from the unpleasant closeness
of these galleries, and set out on our return
ride. During a great part of the way we
were accompanied by Arab boys and men
who had antiquities for sale, from Coptic
clay lamps and ancient Egyptian beads
and figures, to skulls and mummy hands
and imitation soarabei manufactured at


Luxor, on the Nile. One of the donkey-
boys, who spoke English well, told us
that last year he had accompanied
a “gentleman” out to the tombs, and
that he was a real gentleman, that there
was no sham about him, but that he was
the real genuine article. This he re-
peatedly insisted upon as we chaffed
him, because he gave away his money by
the handful—in fact threw silver about
to be scrambled for and gave away gold
for tips as we might give silver ; above
all, this gentleman was a Scotchman, if
you please. The guide was evidently
very much disappointed at exciting only
our derision instead of our generosity. I
learned from one of the party who was
Scotch that the guide’s story was per-
fectly true, as he gave us the name, and
my friend happened to know the “gentle-
man” very well by repute.
Passing through one of the villages,
we were shocked at the horrible state of
filth in which these fellaheen live. The
children seem to allow the clouds of flies
which settled around their eyes to stay
there without any effort to drive them off,
and I don't wonder at ophthalmia being
such a common complaint. Used as we
are in Australia to mosquitoes, I did
not suffer from them at all, but some of
our party were positively ill from their
bites. Probably where there is so much
filth and such an insanitary state of
affairs as at present exists in Egypt, it is
easy for the germs of disease to be trans-
ferred through flies and mosquitoes to
the eyes or to the blood of human beings.
Dinner was waiting for us when we got
aboard, and a carriage-drive back to
Shepheard’s terminated a very pleasant
day. As we sat on the verandah of the
hotel we were tempted to buy young
crocodiles stuffed at Is. 3d. each.
They were actually only large lizards ;
We were also offered “real rhinoceros-
hide” walking-sticks at 155., the seller
ultimately accepting 3s. 6d. I tried to
bend one, and it broke in two places,
where dowell screws were used to con-
nect them ; then I took it inside to Skey,
and found it was as I suspected—only
common buffalo hide, and that rhinoceros
sticks were worth 20s. or 30s. apiece.
On confronting the stick-seller again and
denouncing him, he of course vehe-
mently protested his honesty, frequently
repeating “You tink I lie, you tink I
lie ; I come from the American Mission.”
The latter place is not a hundred yards
from Shepheard’s, and he thought that
that would be a perfectly convincing
argument. The last evening was spent
in company with three or four of the
party and a dragoman driving round the
city at night for two or three hours.
Next day, Thursday, we all returned
by train to Alexandria and to the
Garonne, where some more mail awaited
some of us. By 5 a.m. we were off, and
Alexandria, with its palaces, minarets,
and forts soon faded from view, as we
made a straight course for Malta. For
three or four days, during which we had
perfect weather, the sports’ programme
for the passengers was gone through,
energetic Eccles, our popular Secretary,
as is usual with that official, doing more
than half the work. One thing we
missed very much was the absence of a
ship’s paper, and it was felt that had the
Orient Company provided a typewriting
machine and *a cyclostyle the small
extra expense would have been
nothing to the amount of amuse-
ment that it would have caused,
for hundreds of copies of well-printed
matter could have then been issued.
Several ooncerts had been held, and
arrangements were now made for a ball
at Malta, which didn’t come off. I was
very much amused during a discussion on
the English in Egypt to hear an enthu-
siastic English Jew declare that every-
thing in the country had been improved
by our rule, and that even the hens were
laying larger eggs.
MALTA AND ALGIERS.
Arriving off the coast of Malta early on
the morning of April 9 we welcomed the
sight of the lovely little harbour, so well
known to so many Australians. The
Garonne coaled here, so most of us kept
away from her the whole day. A large
mail had accumulated here for us. By 9
o’clock we were ashore, end scattered over
the narrow end steep streets of the queint
little city. It was a pleasure to see
English shopsigns up everywhere here,
and to find that nearly every one spoke
English, and that English coins were in
use. Of course the beautiful old Church


of the Knights Templars, and the
Armoury, Museum, the Library, the
Opera House, and the rest had to be
visited, and the drive round the town to
the various battlements, a fine view of
the island and the harbours with their
numerous shipping, the war vessels, the
old wooden training ship, the little
steamer plying to and fro across to the
suburb of Sliema, and the many boats
gliding over the waters. It was all
delightful. The main-street, the Strada
Reale, was quite crowded with people,
very many Englishmen and women
being among the passers by, and a
good sprinkling of red-coats from
different regiments. The presence of
soldiery everywhere and the sentinels,
drawbridges, and forts, made the military
character of the place very plain. Malta
has three or four papers published in
English. Two of them are military organs,
almost exclusively, and the other two are
very small. There is one short line of
railway belonging to the Government,
six miles long, between Valetta and
Citta Yecchia. It is certainly one of the
strangest looking concerns I have ever
seen ; apparently the carriages must have
seen service in the early days of steam
somewhere, and been bought up cheaply
for this special service. It is crowded on
Sunday only, I was told, when the people
ride on it for the excursion.
The drive aoross to Citta Veoohia
is through walled fields—for here every
little field is walled-in—and there must be
many hundreds of miles of these stone
walls on the ninety square miles of the
island. Owing to this it is impossible to
see the orange groves, for which Malta
is so famous. They are all well out of
sight, and one would never know of their
existence unless he were told. Half-way
to Citta Vecchia, the ancient capital of
the island, I stopped at San Antonio,
where is the palace of the Governor,
with the Government gardens, the latter
covering about eight acres and being the
largest in the island. Visitors are allowed
in here, and Mr. Durward, the English
gardener, kindly showed me through
the orchards, glasshouses, and flower
gardens. Most of the annuals that
are in bloom with us in October were
here in full flower, and the Australian
eucalyptus and sheaoak trees and the
Norfolk Island pines reminded me of
home. Many of the wild flowers that
are common in England here also were in
full bloom along the roadsides, especially
the daisies. In the fields of wheat and
barley I noticed many plants in bloom
of a pretty purple gladiolus growing
wild. Early potatoes for the London
market are quite a considerable crop in
Malta. Some of our passengers took
several basketsful of them with them
back to England. The fields of clover
(sulla), with their large pink flowers,
were a lovely sight. Only a few stunted
carob-trees were all that could be seen in
the way of tree culture from the roadside.
The old church at Citta Yecchia contains
some silver railings, which the priests
bronzed over while the French were in
possession of the island last century, to
prevent their stealing them. A number
of summer residences at Oitta Yecchia
are used by the people of Valetta or by
visitors during the season.
In conversation with one of the lead-
ing merchants of Valetta I found that
the people were very proud of the fact
that though the islands were classed as
British possessions, they were not con-
quered by England, but ceded to her by
the people at the end of last century.
Napoleon conquered Malta on his way to
Egypt in 1798, and the Maltese, by
the help of the Neapolitans and some
British, drove the French out, losing,
though, 20,000 of their small population
in the struggle. Then they ceded the
island to England, and when the demand
for self-government was made by most of
the colonies in the middle of the century,
Malta was allowed to elect part of her
Council. The elected members were in
the minority though, and for years an
agitation to increase them was kept up,
and finally the British Government, a
tew years ago, granted the measure, so
that now fourteen members are elected,
and six only appointed by Great Britain.
Since then the Maltese have formed a
militia corps of * some 2,000 men,
officered by their own people, and they
are very proud of it. These people are
a very strange race, of very mixed
origin, having, it is said, more of the
Arab than of the Sicilian in them.
I spoke of them as Italians, but my
friend protested that they were not aud
had no sympathy with them ; though the
upper classes and the nobility speak
Italian, the lower classes speak a mixture
which is half Arabic. Notwithstanding
this, they are strong Roman Catholics.
They are most loyal to the Empire.
Many strange little communities of this
sort exist under cur wide-spread rule and
bear evidence to its justioe and its world-
wide oharaoter.


Most of the land of Malta belongs to
the Government, which took it over from
the Knights, and a large part of the
revenue, I was told, is derived from
rents, there being no taxe6 except upon
spirits, tobacco, flour, and one or two
other things. My friend was, he told
me, renting his office and tobacco ware-
house from the Government, and had
no taxes to pay other than the rent
of the place, which was very small.
Things are cheap in Malta. At one time
small copper coins called grains, twelve
of which made a penny, used to be in use
at the place, and that was the smallest
coin bearing the Queen’s head that I have
seen. Two of our passengers were
arrested (one was a lady), and taken to
the guardhouse for snapshotting the
fortress, but immediately set free again
on explaining. After an exceedingly
pleasant visit, we left Malta at 3 o’clock
in the morning for Algiers.
Two days more upon the water, during
which we passed the Island of Pantel-
laria, a convict station between Sicily
and Tunis belonging to Italy, then for
one whole day close along the African
coast, when all the spy-glasses were in
use most of the time. Two days of
perfeot weather they were, which the
snapshot fiends utilized to take a great
many deck groups. We were all very
disappointed at nob arriving sooner at
Algiers on April 12. Our time was 8
o’clock a.m., bub we did not get off the
vessel till nearly noon, and so had only
half instead of a whole day. With Mr.
Kingsford, Mr. J. Cook’s Private Secre-
tary, who spoke both Arabic and French,
I took a carriage almost as soon as we
landed to visit the celebrated Gardens
“d’Essai,” a few miles out of the
city. These gardens contain the finest
collection of sub-tropical plants and trees
that I have seen, and with their long,
shady, leafy avenues were well worthy a
visit. On the way back we passed some
lovely orange and olive groves, and steep
hillsides covered with vines just com-
mencing to break into leaf. Many fine
eucalyptus-trees, some of them fully 100
feet high, grow along the roadside near
the gardens d’Essai and in Algiers itself.
Some of the species were in bloom. We
drove through the fine suburb of Mus-
tapha Superior on our return, which re-
minded me very much of places in Aus-
tralia and California. Many English and
Americans live here in the winter, and
some fine houses belonging to some of
our wealthy countrymen were pointed
out to us. There is a modern or French
quarter, well laid out, and with Euro-
pean shops and houses and people ;
and a native or ancient quarter.
In the latter our guide showed
us the chains still hanging from
the cross beam of a large door of the
Dey’s old palace, which in old times men
fleeing from justice or from the oppressor
could seize hold of, and were free from
molestation till their case was tried. Two
ways lead from the lower to the upper
town, one a long series of stone steps,
the other by winding roads. A small
company of French soldiers passed us
near the Dey’s palace, and my friend and
the guide laughed at a remark one of them
made. I asked whatit was. “Oh,” said
my friend, ‘ ‘ they have only spotted us for
Englishmen.” The remark was “there go
some more Goddamns,” a very impolite
and blasphemous characterization of our
nationality.
After passing them we went back to
the lower portion of the city, traversing
long, narrow, winding streets, steep and
dirty. Here the cookshops were in-
teresting, being, like all their other
shops, mere holes in the wall. In all of
th<*m there was a ledge of stonework or
brickwork, having several basin-shaped
depressions with grates in the bottom.
Fires were made in these basins, and the
cooking pans or pots and long skewers
of pieces of meat were placed over them
to oook. Through these thickly crowded
lanes, even European women, nurses, and
others with their charges, moved as
safely as in Paris, yet little more than
half a century ago thousands of
Christian prisoners were held in
captivity by the fathers of these
Algerines. Many of the streets were
arched over in places, the houses
being continuous over them. A visit to
the market, where we purchased oranges,
fresh ripe dates on the stems, and some
bunches of flowers, then to the photo-
grapher to buy views, and our time
was up. By 7 o’clock we were aboard,
and by 8 anchdr was up and we were off
for Gibraltar.


GIBRALTAR.
Again we got a view of the Sierra
Madres mountains along the Spanish
coast, and finally, on April 14, late in the
afternoon, viz., at 6 o’clock instead
of at 1 o’clock, we cast anchor
off Gibraltar. It was a great dis-
appointment to most of us not to
have more time at Gibraltar. We had
not expected to land at all, it was so late ;
however, we got an hour and a half on
land. Some took carriages and drove out
to the Neutral Ground, and back through
the town. I preferred to go and see the
gardens of the Alameda, between the
commercial part of the town and the
residential quarters of the officers and offi-
cials. I had always pictured Gibraltar as a
great barren rock, and was surprised at
these lovely little gardens, with their
sub-tropical trees and plants and wealth
of flowers—well-laid-out beds—and in
one place a small depression or gorge in
the steep mountain-side, with climbing
plants around it, a rustic bridge across,
and on the flower-beds plants worked
into two large designs of the British Royal
arms and a castle. These gardens, with
the roads through them and the
parade-ground, covered a space of
five or six acres. In a small
grass field below children and their
nurses were playing. Climbing up away
from the gardens and overlooking a hedge
I could see on the other side, in the resi-
dential quarter away down below me,
perhaps 150 or 200 ft., people playing
tennis upon two well-kept courts. Still
farther up, I got among the scrub and
brush that cover many acres upon the
steep slope above the town, where I
plucked a large bunch of honeysuckle
and other flowers and a very pretty grass
that I had not met with elsewhere. I
was afraid to go farther, as time was about
up. The Garonne lay away down in the
harbour, Algeoiras some miles off on the
opposite curve of the Spanish coast,
Ceuta and the Morocco coast opposite,
and the towering mountain cliff behind.
I noticed olives, bananas, oranges,
eucalyptus, pinetrees, and many others
growing in the gardens and along the
road sides. One of the passengers had a
young soldier friend among the Engineer
Corps on the Rock, and driving through
the town to the Post-office and back, he
told us that in a garden attached to one
of the barracks a nice little corner of
bananas and oranges grew, and the
monkeys on the Rock, like other
monkeys that Australian papars complain
about sometimes, won’t let the fru i
alone. They often see the animals, he
said, but there was a very heavy fine im-
posed upon any one killing them. They
were very mischievous and curious* and
one morning the soldiers discovered one
of them out in the garden with a porce-
lain jug over his head that he
couldn’t get off. One of the Engi-
neers was ordered to go and release
him, which he did, having to break the
jug, and getting pretty severely scratched
and torn for his pains. Speaking about
the amusements of our troops on the Rock,
he told how a little while before a number
of his companions had gone to Bee a bull-
fight on the Spanish mainland, and how
they came back disgusted and sickened
with the sight of horses with wide gaping
wounds stuffed with dried grass to keep
the entrails from protruding and make
them last a little longer. On the very
highest peak of the cliff is a cannon
mounted ; it stands out plainly against
the sky. Just lately cable communica-
tion between the signal station on top
of the Rock and the forts has been
established, and along the stout steel
rope a basket large enough to carry a
man cr provisions, &0., is hauled rapidly
to the top. Before, it took two hours
of climbing to accomplish this. The
clouds frequently obscure the crown
and flanks of the great rock from
the sea, but the defences have been
so carefully studied and skilfully
planned that from an office at head-
quarters the exact range of all the guns is
known, and they can be raised or lowered
accurately aimed and fired from behind
the clouds by manipulating the various
electric apparatus, and sudden death and
destruction carried at very short notice
to attacking fleets. Provisions, estimated
sufficient to last the garrison for seven
years, are always kept stored in case of
emergency. The last mail from England
was delivered to us here. It was dark
before we got away from the famous old
fortress, interesting in so many ways,
and especially to all Anglo-Saxons.
We steamed away over smooth waters
into the darkness, onr band playing, and
as the twinkling lights of Ceuta, Gibral-
tar, and Algeciras faded slowly out, a
spirit of Badness filled many hearts to
think that we were so soon to part;
that the pleasant companionship of two
months, which had not been disturbed by


a single disagreement or untoward inci-
dent, was so soon to be a thing of the
past. Many friendships had ripened,
a broader view ot our fellows and
of foreign peoples, a greater
toleration of many things that in
our ignorance we had become bigoted
about, had been gained. A shattering of
some pleasant illusions, a maturer ex-
perience, a greater regard than ever for
the power and the destiny of our race, a
study of strangely diverse characters, an
accession of health and vigour to some, a
lightening of the pocket and a filling of
the mind—all these things, every one
was agreed upon, had made our journey
of nearly 8,000 miles a delightful ex-
perience to be looked back upon with
pleasure when many other things were
forgotten, and to be repeated as
soon as possible. We were going
to lose them all. There was the
ship’s practical joker and inveterate
smoker, the credulous individual who be-
lieved the story that was foisted upon
him that the fish that we had for dinner
were always caught overnight; the staid
and solemn Scotchmen ; the spinsters of
proper demeanour ; the lively young
married women ; the merry middle-aged
bachelors with their whist and their
whisky ; the wealthy old widowers ; the
smoking-room coterie ; the athletes who
always kept up the cricket ; the
“shadows” from the coast who left us at
Mont Carlo, and joined again at Algiers;
the Lords of high degree, the young men
who behaved with discreet aloofness on
deck, and spent all the evenings possible
ashore ; the artists ; the lady who had a
different dress on every day ; the dear,
wonderful old lady who had travelled
everywhere, and “Dear me, yes ; had
seen larger hewn stones than those at
Baalbec, and bigger monuments than the
Pyramids the clever young girl of
eighteen, who had read many
books in French, German, and
Italian ; the genial and popular Sports’
Secretary; the young lady, who was
always in anything that helped our fun,
whose good nature and humour made her
a prime favourite; the lawyers and minis-
ters ; the merchants and schoolmasters ;
the brewers and the two
Swedes inseparable as twins ; the lady
chessplayers. There was the dinner-
table that was always noisiest and most
mirthful ; there were the interesting
invalids ; the gentleman of the long spy-
glass ; and the man, too, who would in
forgetfulness stop you three times in a
day to tell you the same story ; the
stamp collectors and the snapshotters;
the man with the animals who brought
lizards and chameleons aboard and
soared the ladies sometimes ; stout
Liberals and strong Conservatives;
the regular attendants of Sunday
service and the wicked people who stayed
on deck all the time ; but I might inde-
finitely prolong the inventory and the
agony, so I Will just say that passing the
Peninsular coast we struck the Bay of
Biscay —where some of us wished we had
stayed at home—and on April 19 the
shores of old England were once more
reached, half of our company leaving
there while the others spent a desolate
and mournful day more on the water,
parting next day finally at Fenchurch
Station.
As to the service of the vessel, the
cuisine, the attendance, the personal
friendliness of the officers and their
willingness to help in providing for our
amusements, I can only say that we could
not have wished for anything better. The
Orient Company certainly did their best
to make us comfortable in every way.
W. K. Thomas & Co., Printers, Adelaide.


LIST OF PASSENGERS.
Mr. G. Ambler, London
Mr. H. W. Arnold, London
Mr. Ralph Atkinson, Newcastle-on-Tyne
Mr. R. Bell, Edinburgh
Miss E. M. Bell, Edinburgh
Rev. R. L. W. Brown, Alness, N.B.
Mrs. Brown, Alness, N.B.
Mr. S. Cater, Plymouth
Mr. C. C. Cobbold, London
Mr. C. Craddock, Stockton-on-Tees
Miss Craddock, Stockton-on-Tees
Miss Craggs, Stockton-on-Tees
Mr. C. C. Craig, Belfast
Mr. A. L. Cohen, London
The Misses Cohen, London
Mr. and Mrs. J. P. Curran, Tunbridge
Wells
Mr. W. H. Deverell, London
The Misses Deverell, London
Mr. M. Dobson, Brighton
The Misses Dobson, Brighton
Mr. J. Eccles, Preston
Mr. W. Eccles, Preston
Mr. Tristram Ellis, London
Mr. and Mrs. D. Ford Goddard, Ipswich
Miss M. French, Eastbourne
Mr. G. Galloway, J.P., Preston
Mr. C. Galloway, Preston
Mr. B. Greatrex, Birmingham
Mr. W. Hartmann, London
Mr. and Mrs. W. Harwood, London
Mr. W. Glasgow
Miss J. D. Higgins, Glasgow
Mr. T. Holmes, London
Mr. W. 0. H. Hughes, London
Mrs. E. Jackson, London
Miss M. S. Kennedy, Glasgow
Mr. Kingsford, London
Mr. W. Knowles, Bolton
Mr. and Mrs. A. Knowles, Bolton
Mr. and Mrs. J. Lamb, Newcastle-on-Tyne
Mr. St. Leger Langford, R.N., Bath
Mr. J. Liver, Preston
Mr. and Mrs. J. Logan Mackie, Edinburgh
Mr. J. Loye, Plymouth
Lord Macdonald, Armadale Castle, Lin-
lithgow
Mr. and Mrs. D. J. Macfie, Edinburgh
Dr. F. B. Mallett, Bolton
Mrs. Mallett, Bolton
Mr. T. Mcßeown, Belfast
Mr. W. J. Middleton, Hampstead
Miss Middleton, Hampstead
Mr. E. W. Nicholls, London
Mr. F. J. Nicholls, London
Mr. J. G. Orr, Neilston, N.B.
Mr. J. G. Paterson, Ramsgate
Mr. and Mrs. R. S. Paul, Ipswich
Miss Poison, Glasgow
Mrs. Praed, Brighton
Mr. F. Ramadge, London
Mr. and Mrs. A. G. Renshaw, London
Mrs. Robertson, Brighton
Rev. C. E. Sanders, Betchworth
Rev. G. Simpson, Airth, N.B.
Miss Simpson, Airth, N.B.
Mr. F. C. Smith, Adelaide, So. Australia
Mr. and Mrs. J. Steel, Edinburgh
Mr. R. Thegerstrom, Stockholm
Mr. F. H. Trench, London
Miss A. H. Troup, London
Mr. 0. Trummer, London
Mr. H. Vincent, Southampton
Mr. and Mrs. J. Wainwright, Stretford
Miss Watney, Brighton
Captain Watson, London
Mrs. Watson, London
Lord Westbury, London
Mr. C. P. 0. Wood, London


W. K. Thomas ft C >., Krikters, Grekeo,l Street. Adelaide.




