

ROUND THE WORLD
WITHACIRCUS
PRICE
2/-
MEMORIES
TRIALS, TRIUMPHS
& TRIBULATIONS
BY
GEORGE WIRTH-


For that
SKIN DISEASE
You Need a REAL
SKIN MEDICINE
DON’T disregard the earliest
signs of skin trouble—-un-
pleasant irritation or itching,
or any little rough patch or
tiny sore! Fiery eczema, blood-
poison and even flesh-eating ulcers,
may be the eventual result of neglect
or wrong treatment
Anoint any troublesome place at
once with Zam-Buk. This rich herbal
balm is so refined that it soaks into
the tiny pores (or breathing holes) of
the skin and thus attacks and defeats
disease at its very roots.
Daily dressings of Zam-Buk will
C
jT>.
f.
%
S
Hi
m
Wa
7
purify and heal the whole tissue, draw
out al) poisonous and offensive matter
and grow new healthy skin.
The regular use of Zam-Buk and
Zam-Buk Medicinal Soap is the surest
way to eradicate skin trouble, both in
children and adults. Try this combined
treatment to-day. Don’t experiment
with worthless dressings.
r amM
BE SURE THAT YOU
GET ZAM-BUK!
No ointment containing rancid
fats and cheap drugs can possibly
do the same good as Zam-Buk,
which is a super-balm containing
extracts of exceptionable curative
power.
Thousands of cases of Eczema,
Itch, Ringworm, Ulcers, Absces-
ses, Boils, Bad Legs, Poisoned
Wounds, Piles, Scalp Disease,
etc., have been successfully
treated by Zam-Buk, whilst its
swift antiseptic healing of Cuts,
Burns & Scalds averts Festering
and Blood Poison.
Zam-Buk is obtainable of chemists
and stores everywhere or direct from
C. E. Fulford (Aust.) Ltd., Sydney.
1/6 and 3/6 per box.
SUCCESSFUL FOR
GENERATION.


ROUND THE WORLD
WITH A CIRCUS
MEMORIES OF
TRIALS, TRIUMPHS AND
TRIBULATIONS
BY
GEORGE WIRTH
iftelhournc ;
TROEDEL & COOPER PTY. LTD., PRINTERS,
BANK PLACE.
MDCCCCXXV
Ai


FOREWORD.
IHAVE repeatedly been asked by newspapers
and by individuals to record permanently
my memories of circus life and its attendant
travel and adventure.
“The N.Z. Free Lance/' of February 4, 1920,
said : “Some time before Mr. George Wirth, now
piloting Wirths’ Circus through the Dominion,
takes his departure from this vale of tears—and his
countless friends all over the world hope that that
time is a long way off yet —it is to be hoped that
he will sit down at his table with a thick pad of
paper and a large bottle of ink in front of him
and tell the world the story of his life and adven-
tures as a circus proprietor.”
In complying with these oft-repeated prompt-
ings, I would like to make it clear that I am proud
of the position I have attained as a circus pro-
prietor together with my brother, for I think
there is no better calling under the sun than
that of the honest showman. I reckon that
we have made more people happy than any
other men on earth. Tg my mind, there is
nothing better worth remembering than the
truism, “ The greatest thing on earth is making
others happy,” and this has been the motto
of both my wife and myself through life.
While many struggle selfishly for wealth, often
depriving others of their fair shares of this world’s
goods, the honest showman toils to bring laughter
to young and old. In his hurrying career, he
makes men, women and children forget their
sorrows, causing smiles instead of tears, and
bringing joy instead of pain, so that his is truly a
goodly life well spent.
G.W.
Sydney,
May, 1925.


CHAPTER I.
INTRODUCTORY.
Gold rush days —Genesis of Wirth’s Circus —
Fickle Fortune — Overlanders’ Experiences—Stuck
Up by Bushrangers —Contrast in Outlaws —
Thunderbolt keeps his Word.
»UR family started with nothing in the
old days, when poverty often reigned
in this land of milk and honey. Gold
was often said to be picked up
in the streets, and nuggets of the precious
metal were supposed to be hanging on to
the roots of grass. These may have been found
by a select few, but the majority in those days
found it very hard to live. My father, who
was one of the old pioneers and prospectors,
never had any luck in this way. Dig and search
how he might, nothing payable came his way,
so he sought other means of getting what every
one in the world is after, and the most prosper-
ous, and at the same time, most to his liking,
was giving enjoyment and recreation to others.
He was a musician of great ability, able to play
any instrument from a piano to a Jew’s harp, or
from a clarionet to a double bass. Wind, string or
ivory instruments was all the same to John
Wirth, senr. And therein lay the genesis of the
Wirth Circus—though not immediately by him.
My mother —an English lady of refinement —
always travelled with him.
It is astonishing, when one looks back on it
all, how she got used to roughing it in the way
she did. It was rough in the old pioneer days
with no railways and no made roads, but they
travelled from one end of Australia to the other
in search of gold. The fever in those days was
in everybody’s blood, and they followed gold


rush after gold rush —Bendigo to Ballarat, to
Beech worth, to Tumburumba, to Hill End, to
Lambing Flat, in fact, everj/where where gold
was being sought. But everywhere luck was
against the young couple with their babies.
Now and again they would strike paying dirt,
but it would not last. Then, on they would go
to another rush.
In Tamboroora, they erected a sort of res-
taurant and dance hall, receiving gold dust in
exchange for food or entertainment, but my
father did his usual digging for gold without
any luck. He therefore sold his hall and went
to another rush —only to be once more disap-
pointed, while, to make things worse, he heard
that the man who bought his hall in Tamboroora
had sunk a shaft right under where the dining-
table used to be, and had struck gold in plenty.
In fact, he had made a fortune.
Near Bendigo my father seemed to have some
luck and thought he had struck his fortune at
last, and, with other lucky miners, did some
very ridiculous things, such as lighting his pipe
with a £5 note. One of his friends even shod
his horse with shoes made of gold, but this man’s
luck lasted, whereas father’s ran out, so once
more he took to travel, this time with a travel-
ling circus.
A monument to the memory of the lucky
man referred to, stands in the Pall Mall,
Bendigo, to this day.
My parents traversed the continent from south
to north and back from north to south, over
unmade roads, but with plenty of flour, sugar
and salt, the men of the party relying on their
rifles for more substantial food. They went
through severe hardships and had very many
exciting experiences.
In the latter part of iB6O, when my brother
Harry was only a few months old, my parents
camped with the Burke and Wills’ exploring
party for a while, and father was able to give them


valuable information concerning roads through
Victoria to the Darling River.
My father was stuck up by bushrangers on
several occasions. Once, in Victoria, the
notorious Morgan took all the cash they had,
leaving my father and mother —who was travel-
ling with him in a hooded spring-cart—stranded.
After this, my mother, when travelling, would
sew their money into all sorts of hiding places,
so that when later they were bailed up by
Gardiner and his gang, mother had sewn most
of their money in her baby’s clothes. My
brother Harry was the baby, being then under
two years of age.
It was an awful experience for my poor mother.
She told me it was in the early morning, just
at daybreak, when four men came thundering
down on horseback on their camp and hurried
my father, mother and their three little children
from their night’s sleep in the spring cart out on
to the cold wet grass. After searching them
personally, they went through the cart, throw-
ing everything about, and searching amongst the
bedclothes, etc., for money. They took all the
provisions, several blankets and all father’s
clothes, and were about to take the horse when
they heard horsemen approaching. They then
got on their own horses and hurried away into the
woods.
A few seconds later, a posse of mounted police
rode up, and after a few enquiries, hurried on
after the fugitives, who, my mother learned from
one of the police, had just committed a foul
murder and robbery. One of the robbers had
his face bound up with a bloody bandage, having
received a terrible wound with an axe from a
young fellow who tried to defend his mother
from a brutal outrage, but who was killed for
his temerity.
On another occasion, my father and my two
oldest brothers were stuck up near Tenterfield
by Thunderbolt, who took £2O from my father,
saying he was in great need of cash. My father


replied that the money was for my mother in
Dalby, who had not received any money for
quite a while, and who would be in sore straits
if she did not receive it shortly. Thunderbolt
thereupon told my father to call at the Warwick
Post Office on his way through there and he
would receive the full amount back, which he
did.
While on these wanderings, my parents also
lost a little baby through sickness brought on
by want of water.
Eventually, they arrived at Dalby, in Southern
Queensland, and there they decided to settle
down. My father accordingly bought land and
erected a home and a large dance hall. We chil-
dren went to school, and our two sisters were
born there —one, Marizles, in 1870, and the
youngest, Madeline, in 1873.
But Ashton’s Circus arrived in Dalby about
1870, and induced John Wirth, senr., to join
them, and off he went again—this time by him-
self. It was not long, however, before he
came back and took the three eldest boys —
John, Harry and Philip—with him, and he never
stopped travelling again.
This is where my personal recollections
commence.
CHAPTER II.
BOYHOOD DAYS.
My First Circus —Scares in the Bush—Circus
Education Commences —Off on the Roads —Caught
in a Flood —Country Opium Den —City Jobs that
didn’t Suit.
My earliest recollection is of playing round a
waterhole in our backyard in Dalby (Q.) with
my brother, Philip. I fell in and sank to the
bottom, but came up to the top. Then I sank
again, and perhaps would have stayed there had
it not been for the laughter of my brother, who
thought it great fun seeing me make bubbles
and come to the top and then disappear. He


called out, “ Look at him making bubbles, and
he can swim ! Look at him bobbing up and
down !” My father ran out of the house, and
sizing up the situation, had me out in a jiffy by
the heels.
My next recollection is of Ashton’s Circus
coming to town. For weeks before its arrival
I was all excitement, and kept counting the days.
The night before it was due I did not sleep
and was up at daylight, long before there was
any sign of the circus. I could not eat break-
fast, and at last, towards noon, I heard the far-
off sound of the drum.
I can never forget the sensation that passed
through me at the sound of the rhythmical beat.
I was out of the house and down the road like
the shot out of a gun, and away in the distance
I could see the cavalcade of gay horsemen, wagons
and horses led by the band wagon. The musicians
with their white helmets left an everlasting im-
pression on my mind, and I have always been
a believer in white horses, as they show up so.
I always had a team of eight white horses —with
flags in their headgear—in our own advance
band chariot, for in our earlier days we travelled
by waggons from country town to town, and a
good band waggon with a good band was essential
if one wanted to draw the crowds. Another
thing, we always kept our horses in good nick
—but lam getting ahead of myself.
My next impression concerned a blacks’ camp
which grew up just outside the township. A
large number of Myall blacks with their gins,
dogs and bark huts came from goodness knows
where to town annually on May 24th, for free
blankets from the Government, and the first
time I saw them was at night at their huge
camp fire. All the young people of Dalby turned
out to see them. The blacks gave a corroboree,
and their weird dancing in the pale moonlight,
and by the light of the big fire they had lit in an
old dead tree, gave me an uncanny feeling, while
the aroma from the burning eucalyptus tree,


mixed with that of the blacks, left an everlasting
memory.
But the great event of my young life was when
I took my first trip with my father and brothers
from Dalby to Gayndah, and thence to Gympie,
returning to Dalby. It must have been in the
winter, when, because of the intense cold in the
mornings in camp, it took my father all his time
to get we four boys out of bed.
On this, my first trip, I must meet with ad-
venture. One night, my father and brothers
went into a town or station and left me alone
in the camp. I sat by the fire for awhile, and
could hear the horses munching their corn, but
presently I heard a blood-curdling howl. A
great fear came over me, for my brothers had
told me all about the wild dingoes and how they
were known to tackle a human being if they were
really hungry and the person was alone. And
here was I, a child of seven or eight years old,
on my first trip away from my mother and home,
left alone in the camp out in the bush. And the
Australian bush is lonely at night. I did not
know what to do. I thought that if I sat in
the light of the fire the dingoes would see me and
come for me, so I got up and went over to where
the horses were feeding, in their mangers. In a
little while I could see fiery eyes peering at me
through the darkness, and as the horses were
becoming restless, I went back to the fire. Whilst
going there, I was certain one of the dingoes
made a rush at me. I yelled, and ran to the fire
and instinctively picked up a fire stick and
threw it towards them. I kept this up for some
time until I had no more firesticks. Then I
could again see hundreds of fiery eyes blinking
in the darkness, so I made one rush for the wag-
gon, clambered in and got into a chaff bag half
filled with chaff, and there I went off fast asleep.
When my father and the boys came back to camp
they could not find me in the tent or anywhere
else. They searched the bush, coo-ee’d, and
spent a couple of hours looking for me ; but


eventually gave up the search until morning, and
when they were going to feed the horses they
found me in the chad bag well asleep. When
I explained the reason, they never left me by my-
self again at night.
It was on this trip that we came across
Ashton’s Circus at Gayndah. My father and
brothers played with Ashton’s band and im-
proved it considerably, for I remember the Ashton
family all coming around to hear it. Father, of
course, took charge, and gave them some new
tunes. I, of course, was in the seventh heaven
of delight. I felt part and parcel of a real live
circus, for was not my father leading the band.
Besides, he gave me a triangle to beat, and I
must have played satisfactorily, as Mr. Ashton
came up and gave me a whole half sovereign—
which his youngest son, Fred, promptly shared
with me.
The Ashton’s made a great fuss of us, which
surprised me greatly, for I then thought they
should have been made a fuss of. Were they not
the owners of that greatest of all great things
—a Circus ? I did not know then that my own
father had owned circuses, and that he had
been thought a lot of by other circus proprietors,
as well as being recognised as the finest musician
of his day.
It was here with Ashton that I first saw Combo
Combo, a half-caste, and one of Jimmy Ashton’s
apprentices—a very clever tumbler, leaper and
rider. Mr. Ashton turned out several good half-
caste performers. Mr. Ashton must have been a
marvel in his way, as he built up his circus with
raw material, teaching, besides his own family,
a number of young men to ride, tumble, leap,
trapeze and clown. In fact he was heard to say
that he could chop a clown out of a gum tree.
He must have had a great repertoire of gags, as
I hear some of his quips and gags to this very
day. He was also a great traveller, for he was
always on the move, from one end of the Con-
tinent to the other, This was his second trip


overland from Adelaide to the very north of
Queensland. His first was in iB6O. He was one
of the good old sort —generous, kind and benevo-
lent, and was a circus man pure and simple.
My father was the strong man of the period.
For instance, two half-castes (Combo and
Callaghan) were punching Bandmaster Smidth
when father came, and picking Smidth bodily
up, pushed him through an open window of an
hotel parlour, and when Combo rushed him for
interfering, he picked Combo up, lifted him high
into the air, and threw him at Callaghan. There
was no more fight, and no one else ever wanted
to fight him.
But father did not like circusing. There was
no money in it in those days. He did better with
his band at balls, parties, processions, etc. No
big function was complete or successful without
Wirths’ Band of “ Sweetheart Waltz ” fame, and
many a town band he started and left flourishing.
He taught all us boys music, and John and Philip
did him credit in that line.
On my return to school in Dalby I was a bit
of a hero in a way. I had travelled, so the boys
thought I ought to be able to fight, and I was
pitted against one boy and then another until I
met my Waterloo, and then I was left alone.
Now my circus education commenced. I
rigged up a horizontal bar and a trapeze in our
big dance hall with a couple of broomsticks and
rope, and fixed myself a pair of trunks, and with
a couple of other enthusiasts started in to become
a circus performer. This early training did me
a lot of good, for besides the few tricks I learnt,
I became wiry and muscular, and even healthier.
Early in 1876 our family left Dalby and went
to Sydney. Rather, my mother, my three sis-
ters, and myself went to Sydney. My father
and brothers were travelling, and did not get to
Sydney until some time later.
It was in 1876 that I saw John Wilson's Circus
in Phillip Park. A year later, Cooper and Bailey’s
Great American Circus opened in Sydney. This


was the first time I saw an elephant. They
played on the Market Square, and re-visited
Sydney in 1878.
In 1876, Messrs. Hiscox and Watkins brought
a circus from India or Japan called the Royal
Tycoon Circus, with a number of clever Japanese
performers —Bungaroo and Itchie, Dicinoski and
Uher, Joe Taro, Scho, Como Kitchie and several
others ; but they were unlucky that the John
Wilson Circus from San Francisco met them in
Rockhampton and knocked them out. A Mr.
Ridge bought the outfit and engaged my father
and brothers as band, and came to Sydney between
the two visits of Cooper and Bailey, and played
there to big business for quite a long time.
Eventually Mr. Ridge put the show on waggons
and toured New South Wales and Queensland.
And a very happy party it was —all nice people
connected with the show. We went through the
Northern River Districts up into Queensland,
and then returning to New South Wales through
some splendid country, the blue grass on the
Barcoo River being five and six feet high, and
very fattening for our horses, We also crossed
the Paroo River and the Warrego where we came
across large tribes of blacks. In one tribe their
bucks averaged over six feet high. They wore
absolutely no clothing, and were semi-wild. Our
caravans greatly interested them. They would
follow our circus waggons for days, and at night
camp half a mile or so away from our camp.
To tell the truth, we were all a little afraid they
were up to some mischief, so we kept a watch on
them very closely.
Their mode of travel interested us. The little
personal effects they possessed were carried by
the gins, as well as their picininies. Some of the
women were loaded up like pack-horses while
the bucks just carried their spears and boomer-
angs and nulla nullas (waddies), and a lighted
fire-stick. They did not keep to the road all
the time, but would cut through the scrub,
making a bee-line for their destination, so that


they cut off miles of their journey. They all
suddenly left us, and when we came to a station
or run owned by a man named Tierney, and told
him of the blacks, he seemed surprised that
they travelled so far south or so close to his
settlement, as they had occasion to fear him,
for he had a permit from the Government to shoot
any black he came across, because they, or
rather some blacks, had killed all his family
several years before. He said he had lost count
of the blacks he had shot, but was getting tired
of it. He said it had a hold on him so much
that he could hardly restrain himself from
shooting white men as well as black ones. When
he had occasion to ride into town and came
across aboriginals on the way he would gallop
after them, and they would run for their lives
and stick their head under a bush like the emu or
the ostrich.
We caught splendid fish and shot delicious
eating turkey and hunted the kangaroo. In fact,
it was a huge picnic, and the healthy atmosphere
made us all appreciate it all the more. I often
long for just such another trip, but do not want
to experience another flood similar to the one
we ran into then.
Going from Goondiwindi to St. George’s
Bridge we were overtaken by the flood waters
of the Condamine River. It had been raining
heavily some time before, and the river had over-
flowed its banks, and forced its waters up the
billabongs. On one calm, beautiful moonlight
night, as we were camped on a hillside near a
river, we saw, coming towards us, a huge sheet
of water, travelling in the opposite direction to
that in which the river was flowing —it was the
back waters at the billabong, and in a few hours
we were in the centre of a huge lake of water,
which rose higher and higher until it reached to
the bodies of the waggons —nearly four feet
high, and it was a good thing we had pitched
our camp on the hill. As it was we had the
scare of our lives ; the water did not rush madly


over us, but just simply backed up over the
whole country, covering it for miles and miles
around.
We had an anxious time of it that night,
watching the water rising higher and higher.
Slowly yet surely it rose all night and next
morning, until about midday, when it seemed
to have reached its zenith, and, thank Providence,
stopped rising.
We then found out we were hungry, and
waded over to the provision waggon, where there
was plenty of corned beef, tinned meats, flour,
and potatoes, and had a meal, and then when
we looked around us we saw we were on abso-
lutely the highest point for miles, and could see
nothing but water wherever we looked. The
water was infested with snakes and other rep-
tiles, and we thought it would recede as quickly
as it rose, so we waited and watched. Yes, waited
and watched all that afternoon and night, and
for many more afternoons and nights. We were
there for days, the horses all this time having
nothing to eat, but standing there with their heads
out of water, looking appealingly towards us.
We had given them all there was of the fodder,
hoping the flood waters would soon abate, and now
they were all starving. No, not all, for one,
“ Almarra ” —a cute customer —could be seen
diving his head down into the water, always in
the same spot, and lifting it again, and start
chewing, with a fine look of contentment on his
intelligent face. We were all puzzled, for he
was some distance away from our camp, and
until after the water went down —which it did as
suddenly as it rose six days before —when we
discovered that “Almarra” had found a bag
of maize which had fallen off a hawker’s waggon
that had stood there just before the flood,
but had shifted to higher ground when the
water came up. He had finished a bag of corn
to his own cheek.
The back waters of the billabong had abated,
but left the country in an awful mess. The


river was still high, and we had to cross it to
get to our destination, for there was a station
a few miles away, and we must try and make
it. Our food had all gone, except flour, and as
there was no way of cooking that, we were eating
it now just wetted into dough, so we made a
raft with some seat boards. To get across the
raging river was another task —an almost impossi-
ble one ; but my brother John —a most powerful
swimmer essayed the miraculous task, tying
round his waist a fine rope, and into the raging,
tossing, flooded river he went ; down stream
he was taken like a cork on a boiling torrent,
we running along the bank after him with the
end of the rope, playing it out as he went.
Down we went for over a mile, when, on the
river turning a bend, he seemed to be carried
right across to the other side, where he scrambled
out of reach of the water, and lay down exhaus-
ted for some time. Then, with the rope in his
hand (the other end we had across with us) he
walked back again up the river bank until the
place we had picked as the ford was reached.
He then pulled over a light block and tackle,
then a heavy rope, which was fastened to a tree
on his side, and pulled tight on our side with
a block and tackle. A bath tub had been slipped
on the rope previously to its being made taut,
and the end of this rope tied to one of the handles.
We put his clothes into the tub, and he pulled it
over. We had a rope, and by pulling were able
to bring it back again. After he had dressed
he went to the station for provisions, and next
day brought back plenty for both man and beast.
This was continued for some time until the river
went down and we could pull the waggons across
on the raft we had made ; we then swam the
horses over, and hitched them to the waggons,
and once more went on our journey to St.
George’s Bridge, which was eventually reached
six weeks after our advertised time.
We then made our way to Brewarrina and
Bourke. In those days the journeys down the


rivers were all very pleasant. Fishing and
shooting continued, and grass was in abundance
right till we came to Cobar. Then grass was
scarce and very little water. We were charged
1/ a bucket for thick, red water, and as there
were about 60 horses to water, one can imagine
how anxious we were to get away from such
conditions. To make things more unpleasant,
there was a plague of snakes. In the first night
camp from Cobar we must have killed, between
the whole company, at least a thousand snakes.
They were in our beds, in the tents, and we had
eventually to sit up on the top of the waggons
until morning, when we could see them and
despatch them. They were with us for days,
as they had been picked up with feed bags, calico
tenting, etc., and brought along with the show.-
In Warren, one of the sights to strangers was
the opium den in the Chinese quarter, which
in those days, was of goodly size. I was only
a boy of ten years old, but it was fascinating to
me to see the Chinese make up the little pill and
put it on top of a pipe, and then lie down on a
hard matting bunk, suck the smoke through
the pipe from a dirty lamp glass, and go off to
drowsy-land. It was not only men who smoked
it, for I am sorry to say several women were
indulging in the terrible habit. One of our men
took exception to the women smoking and tried
to take the pipe away. He forced it out of one
woman’s hands, and she screamed and fought
and brought all the Chinese from their bunks
and huts like rabbits from their burrow's. They
fought and clawed at “ Jack the Teamster ”
(that was the only name w r e knew him by) who
hit out straight from the shoulder, sending
Chinaman down after Chinaman. Then some of
the Chinamen brought out their carrying sticks,
and some knives, and all the circus men that
were there had to join and fight for their lives
to get out of the place. I can always see Jack’s
tall figure punching his way out from that
swarm of little yellow fiends, who were belting


him with sticks, bottles, cans and whatever they
could lay their hands to.
My father and I left the circus at Warren,
and were going to Sydney, but I cried all day
in the waggon as I drove along, until father
could stand it no longer, so we rejoined the
show again, to my huge delight. But we had
to leave the circus later as he got sore eyes.
So to Sydney we went, and as I had to drive,
I had to go with him. I was awfully sorry to
leave the circus, but was soon consoled when
I remembered that I should soon see my dear
mother and two little sisters. I was afraid
to meet my eldest sister, Mina, because she
had always wanted me to keep away from the
circus, and learn some trade. On our arrival
in Sydney she did not miss this opportunity,
for I was put to one trade, then to another, but
not one of them did I like.
I think I tried every trade there was in Sydney,
but none could I stick to. Bookbinding held me
the longest. It was at Jerrims.’ I suppose I
stayed there six months, and when he left the
premises (he was in George Street) to go to
larger ones in Clarence Street, he gave me a two-
wheeled cart to carry books, etc. I objected to
being a horse, and left. Mr. Jerrims came to
our house and wanted me to come back, but
I wouldn’t go. I then became a shop boy and
a salesman at a fancy goods bazaar in George
Street, and liked this very much. Although I
used to keep up my practising of tumbling,
bending and horizontal bar, as I was very fond
of that, yet I was becoming to be contented
in the bazaar until my brother Harry and Jimmie
Ashton, junr., came to the shop and began to
make fun of me.
Previous to this, however, my father had
died, and the boys had left Ridge’s and joined
Ashton’s Circus as performers, for by this time
they had become most versatile circus per-
formers as well as splendid musicians, Harry
being absolutely the greatest spring-board


leaper ever seen in Australia, as well as the
finest forward somersault tumbler. John de-
veloped into a first-class talking clown and
business manager and advance agent, as he
often went ahead of the circus to make arrange-
ments to play the different towns, and it was soon
recognised that the towns he did turfied out
the best business, because he properly adver-
tised the date of opening, and by his genuine
faith in the merit of the performance he prom-
ised the townspeople, he gained their confidence,
and they really looked forward to something
good. In a word, he got the public interested
in the coming of “ Ridges’ Royal Tycoon Circus,”
or “ Ashton’s Circus.”
My brother Philip was too good a musician
to be left out of the orchestra, but he found time
to practise and do many things. Being of
the heavy build, he went in for strong work,
such as bottom man in acrobats, etc., but, as I
say, he could not be spared from the band. Let
me say here that both John and Philip were at
that time Australia’s leading players. John was
the best cornet player, with his wonderful double-
tongueing polkas and high register, while Philip
was an all-round musician, playing any brass
instrument well. They were both excellent
readers and composers, and were equally good
at playing by ear ; but let me tell you this, that
Harry’s wonderful tumbling, and the other
brothers’ music were learnt only by hard work
and continual practice.
CHAPTER III.
WIRTH'S CIRCUS.
Starting on our Own —My Advent as a Partner
—Fruition of Home Practice—Delivering the Goods
—Wonderful Open-air Life —Fishing “ de Luxe.”
Now I come to the turning point in our career.
To use a horsey phrase, here’s where we headed
for home. We took the bit in our own mouths


(or teeth) and guided our own destiny. We had
done with working for others, and getting nothing
for it, or, at most, very little. John saw that the
bosses were not doing the thing correctly. He
saw that if a man wanted to advance in this world
and be successful he must work, and go about that
work in the proper way, for there was not only
yourself to consider, but others who depended
on you. Here were we giving the best of our
young lives to men who could give nothing in
return.
To be “successful/’ I don’t mean rich. Riches
are not everything. Any pinhead or boob can be
rich if his father or forefather leaves him money.
But even they can be successful in life. If they
try, they can use their wealth to become success-
ful. The big thing in life is to make good.
For example, an American negro working for
us in our early life saw us practising the spring-
board leaping. He tried a hand, and at first had
some awful falls. He would spring off the
springboard high into the air, but could not turn
the somersault, and would land on his back on to
the mattress, knocking the wind out of himself.
He would try and try again, and said, “ I’ll stay
with you till I’m dog poor.’’ That is the spirit.
Now I’ve got that off my chest, I’ll get back
to the story.
The last circus proprietor my brothers were
with could not pay them any wages, and as there
was a goodly amount owing, they accepted a
light waggonette and a couple of horses in lieu,
and decided to try for themselves. I was sent for,
and made a partner. I was to receive an eighth
of the profit, Como (a clever Japanese) an eighth,
Romeo an eighth. Philip, Harry and John,
besides their eighth each, were allowed an
eighth for their horses and waggon, and the other
eighth share went to a musician we wanted.
Anyone, or anything else that was wanted was
to be paid for out of the takings.
We had several days’ practice at the pro-
gramme to be given, for no risks were to be run.


The show had to be a success —no hoping or
wishing it to be. First of all we billed a town
with all sorts of bills, mostly of our own making
with Ricketts’ blue on the wrong side of wall
paper, which made very fine streamers that
caught the eye of the townspeople, who wondered
who had the cheek to disfigure the walls of their
houses and shops. Then we had rolled the sides
of our waggonette up and made it look as
much like a band chariot as possible, and let
blaze at them with all the force of our young
lungs and a big drum and cymbals. It was
good music, although noisy, and kind of startled
the inhabitants, yet it made them curious to
know what sort of invaders we were, so they
rolled up that night to the local hall, and paid
their i/-, 2/- and 3/-, mostly 1/-.
My first act in our own show was what I had
learnt at home in Dalby by imitating the per-
formers I had seen in other circuses—a single
trapeze act. The trapeze bar was a cricket
stump with the sharp point cut off. The rope
was spliced on to the bar by my brother Harry,
but was not rivetted, and consequently would
slip off one end occasionally, and one night I
had a rather serious fall, as rope and bar separa-
ted, and let me down on to the stage very
heavily. We had it rivetted after that, and it
was O.K. ever afterwards.
A second act, which was learnt a day or two
before our opening as a fill in, was a clown entree,
with my brother Philip, called “ Dead and Alive;”
a little acrobatic tomfoolery with a few acrobatic
tricks introduced, which after a while became a
really good act. My brother Philip did a clown
stilt act with Como the Jap, and I remember on
one night when we had occasion to finish the
night’s entertainment with it, my brother John,
making the usual announcement thanking the
people for their patronage, etc., finished up by
saying that the night’s performance would now
conclude by a comic stilt act by the Crummy
Brothers. This so offended Philip that he took


off his stilts and would not go in, so John him-
self had to be one of the Crummy Brothers, and
Philip asked him afterwards how he liked being
“ crummy ? ”
As far as I can remember, our programme ran
like this :
1. Overture : ” William Tell,” “ Norma,” or
“ Robert le Diable “ —Wirth’s Band.
2. Roman Rings—ComoKitchie and H.Wirth.
3. Single Trapeze —Master George Wirth.
4. Risley Act —Como Kitchie (Kicking
(Barrels).
5. Comic Entree—P. and G. Wirth.
6. Song : “ Poor Old Joe,” Character Song—
J. J. Wirth.
7. Ground and Lofty Tumbling by the Com-
pany.
8. The Quaker’s Kats Pie—J. J. and Harry
Wirth and Como.
Interval.
9. Popular Airs—Wirth’s Band.
10. Double Trapeze—H. Wirth and Como.
11. Comic Songs —J. J. Wirth.
12. Bamboo Perch Act —Como.
13. Double-tongueing Polkas and Cornet Duet
J. J. and P. Wirth.
14. Comic Stilt Act —Como and P. Wirth.
15. “ The Ghost in the Pawn Shop ” —“ Pro-
prietor, ' J. J. Wirth ; Negro Comedian,
H. Wirth ; “ The Ghost,” Como.
“ God Save the Queen.”
After the first night we knew we had the goods,
as the American says. We had now only to let
the world know, and to sell them.
John took on himself the management of the
show, and although the route was discussed and
approved by the other members of the Company,
John was publicity man, manager and general
agent. It was his business to go into the next
town and make all arrangements for our opening,
and let the people learn what a treat was in
store for them, while the rest of us remained


in camp a few miles out, fishing and shooting.
We were very fond of what we liked, and we
did like fresh fish and wild game of all sorts.
We lived like kings, but kings could never have
had the delicious food we had, nor the healthy
appetite to appreciate it.
We had tried all sorts of fishing and shooting,
but it was on the Nambucca River that we got
the greatest thrill. A young man asked us if
we ever tried scoop fishing, and as we had not,
he volunteered to give us a treat, and that night
—without a moon, but starry—we got into a
boat 15 to 20 feet long. My three brothers and
Como pulled, while I steered the boat, the young
man being in the bow with a wire scoop on a long
handle. I was instructed to follow the glow
of phosphorous which the scurrying fish made
in fleeing from the light at the head of the boat,
while the four oarsmen had to pull as they never
did before. It took a little time for us to come
up with the shoal, for as we drew nearer, the
faster they swam. Away they went, and away
we went after them. It was an exciting chase,
and when we caught up to them, more excitement,
for the man at the head of the boat was scooping
the fish up in his wire scoop and flinging them be-
hind him into the boat. We in the back of
the boat received quite a bombardment of fishes
in our faces. The oarsmen got most of the fish
on their backs and necks, but I got most of mine
fair in the face, as I had to face the way we were
going. At last the boat was quite full of fish
after a chase of several miles, and it was time we
pulled up, for as we did we heard the roaring of
the ocean beating over the bar. It was a thun-
derous noise in our ears, and in the semi-darkness
had a weird effect. We thought how lucky we
were to pull up when we did as otherwise we
would have been carried out to sea, so we turned
back for home with the biggest catch of mullet
and garfish we had ever seen.
But it was not all fishing and eating while we
were in camp. We had a lot to make and a lot


to get ready. Harry was an expert at making
tights from ordinary men’s worsted underwear.
The old style of circus tights were just the under-
pants with socks on them, but the seams around
the leg of the tights where the socks met the
pants displeased Harry, and he used to sew the
feet into the bottom of the pants and make it
all one without any seam but the one that ran
up the inside of the leg. He was also very good
at making trunks. He taught me to sew spangles
on them, and I also became a good trunk maker.
Then there were the calico shoes to make and
clowns’ dresses. I don’t know who taught Harry,
I never heard of anyone who did, but his work
became renowned, and he got orders from any
circus man who could afford them. The dyeing
of the tights was another art known only to a
few, and Harry was one of the few. So we
were fortunate in that we could dress our show,
as very few others could.
So Harry, and I, and Comb made the dresses
for the show, Philip would see that we had plenty
of fish and game, and the other two men got the
water and firewood, and cooked and washed up.
Harry attended to the horses, harness and the
waggon. I used to ride into tpwn and buy the
other provisions, get the mail, etc., etc., and
John would have all ready for our next opening.
We were in no huny to make money. The life
we were leading was satisfying us immensely,
and would have gone on indefinitely, but John
wanted to get married. He took it into his head
suddenly, and we wondered what had happened
him. He became poetical, fitting love-words to
some of our tunes. Why, in all the blithering
blazes —as Billy Hughes would say—did he want
to get married ? And to whom ? He certainly
had us guessing. Who ? Then it dawned on us
that it did not matter so much, for no matter who
she was, she would certainly spoil our picnic. The
camp would never be the same with a woman in
it. So the weeks went on until we reached Tam-
worth, and then suddenly John introduced his


wife. We knew her, we liked her, and she became
one of us, and we soon forgot our imaginary trouble.
But we noticed that John wanted to work more
and cut our lovely, lazy life in camp shorter.
In fact, he was after money We must play a
fresh town every night and not lose time as we had
been doing We worked our way down to Mait-
land and then up the Rivers, but the money was
going out and not coming in. We know the
reason now, but did not then. We had no John
ahead of the show, no agent to work up the
people as he used to do, so when we came across
a big town and found the town hall let and had
either to wait or miss the town we decided
that we would be independent of their halls, so
we bought a tent, and we opened in it at Paddy’s
Market, Sydney. And it has been a tent ever
since.
CHAPTER IV.
UNDER THE BIG TOP.
“ Line-up ” Shows —Start to Realise an Am-
bition —Honest Showmanship Prevails—The Ban-
vards—Melbourne Cup of Years Ago—Practice
and Hard Work make Perfect —My First Real
Fight —Silencing Opposition—But Elements In-
vincible.
We started our tenting life on New Year’s
Day, 1880, with Bungaroo and Itchie, and several
other Jap performers. It was more a try-out
for our new tent and practice for the perform-
ers. We had a “line-up” board erected outside
the tent where we would all parade, and a fine
show it must have been. Harry, Philip and
myself were in different coloured tights and
beautiful new trunks of Harry’s best work-
manship. John was made up as a clown, and
the four or five Japs in their beautiful Japanese
wardrobe, giving a touch of Oriental splendour.
Our music was of the finest, the cornet and
trombone playing of John and Philip being a
revelation to Sydney, and a great crowd


assembled before our "line-up” board to listen to
the band. We had arranged to play four or
five tunes on the outside, before going inside,
but the crowd was so great after the first tune,
that we decided to give only one more short
tune, and then John told the crowd what they
would see on the inside of the tent if they paid
one shilling. There was a rush, and Bungaroo,
who was to have taken the cash at the door,
was overcrowded, and Harry and Philip had to
go to his rescue. The tent was filled in no time,
and we had to close the door and start the show.
In half an hour we had given the people some-
thing they had never dreamed of seeing in such
a small company. After that first show, we
saw we could get another before tea-time, so
we went through the same procedure as before,
with the same result. That night, from 7 till
11, we worked in and out, and cut the pro-
gramme down to a quarter of an hour for each
show so as to be able to give the more shows.
We took a lot of money that night, which was
a great surprise to us, as we did not think we
would have taken half the amount. We therefore
decided to show there the next Saturday after-
noon and night with the same crowd of perform-
ers, and business was even greater. When we
proposed to the Japs to do the same the follow-
ing Saturday again, however, they demurred,
and said they were the draw, and should get
more of the money. We argued that we thought
the division of the takings was fair, but they
declared they would work on their own the
next Saturday. So we booked the same stand
right away for the next Saturday, and Bungaroo
got another piece a little away from ours. We
engaged a couple of bar performers, Conny
Moreni and another, and opened up opposition
to our former partners. Of course, each party
tried to out-do the other, with the result that a
lot of time was wasted outside trying to make
the public believe that each show was better
than the other, and consequently neither of us


did as well as when we were together, but when
we counted up the day and night's takings, we
found we had more for our share than when with
the Japs, so we decided to stay as we were, although
though Bungaroo held out the olive branch.
Others, however, came on the scene, and soon
Paddy’s market on a Saturday looked like a
regular fair, with merry-go-rounds, swingboats,
shooting galleries, pea and pie stalls, and all
kinds of side-shows from the snake charmer to
the armless woman, black art, and sword swallow-
ing shows, and eventually even full circuses
made their appearance, and then the opposition
started with a vengeance. The circuses would
do all their show on the outside so that the public
would not go to their opposition, and conse-
quently none of them did any good. We thought
we would let them have the market to themselves,
especially now that some were only money-mak-
ing schemers without any talent or performers
to show. They would have 20 or 30 girls
dressed in all sorts of fantastic gowns, singing and
making the night hideous, and when the public
went inside they saw very little for their shilling.
It did not take long for these so-called show-
men to besmirch the name of “ line-up-shows,”
so once more we were off to the country —the
sweet smelling, healthy country ; but this time
it was work, not pleasure we were out for. We
had tasted the sweets of success and we meant
to keep on being successful.
Our great money-making opportunity was at
the country agricultural shows. We would per-
form sometimes twelve times a day at some of
these shows, and as our show was always clean
and clever, we were an attraction to the shows,
and secretaries would always invite us to their
next year’s show.
So we went on, making money and many
friends, and improving ourselves in our pro-
fession. We had few worries in those days,
until others came to hear of our success and
opposition soon became the vogue. At first it


was clean opposition by bona-fide showmen,
but after a while it was from fakers and unprin-
cipled spielers ; but these did not last very long,
for the public soon got their measure, but while
it lasted it was unpleasant, as we were very
jealous of the fair name of showmen. It was
ever our aim to uphold the name of circus or
anything appertaining thereto, so when we came
across any of these who were not clean and
level in their business, and were using the show
business as a blind for unlawful practices, we
would make it too hot for them to come near us.
We were so proud of our name that we thought
seriously of becoming the big show of Australia,
and, after taking in as partners such straight
men as Sam Bernard and Adam and Jack West
—who were the soul of honour themselves —
launching out in a bigger scale than previously,
touring the country as a great big show, but
not a circus. Unfortunately, there were too
many bosses and very few men, so these bosses —
all men of brains —failed to agree, and one by
one they dropped out and started for them-
selves.
In 1884, we coupled up with another showman
with equal pretensions to ours. His was also
a family show —himself (Ted Banvard), an ap-
prentice named Peter, who performed as a girl
—and a very pretty girl too as well as a clever
one —and two other children old enough to per-
form, with other younger ones learning.
We wintered in Ballarat and bought a couple
of horses to train to run the ring. One horse,
Badger, we paid forty guineas for —an enormous
price for a horse in those days. Badger used to
draw a sulky 35 miles to a sale and return with
Mr. O’Farrell, his former auctioneer-owner, the
same day, thus doing 70 miles a day. He was a
stunning-looking horse, with strength for what
we wanted him—to throw somersaults on his
bare back. You see, we bought the horse be-
fore we could throw the somersaults on him,
or even ride, for that matter. But we were


optimists of the first-water, so we took a house
in Ballarat to live in and a loft in which to make
the necessary circus tent. Philip and John were
to make the tent with the aid of a sailmaker,
and Banvard, Peter and I took the old tent to
Smythdale to train the horses in.
We would have done better if we had engaged
some old foundry or factory, of which there were
plenty those days in Ballarat, as it rained pretty
nearly all the time in Smythdale, and the ring
was like a puddle, but Peter and I did not mind.
We fairly revelled in the mud, and so broke in
our first two ring horses, “ Badger ” and “ Jimmy
Lewis.” Eventually we had to come to
Ballarat and rent one of the old foundries so as
to finish the horses’ training.
Ararat was our first town played with a full
circus, Peter and I being the riders. Peter also
did a wire act and a trapeze, and a double trapeze
act with Banvard, and acrobats with the two
younger Banvards. I did the horizontal bar
act with Peter and my brothers Philip and Harry.
I also did a trapeze act, a polandric ladder act,
acrobats, clown and tumbling, so you see it was
left to Peter and me to give pretty nearly all the
show between us. Banvard and J. J. Wirth
were two very good clowns. In fact, Banvard
was one of England’s best clowns before he left
there two years before. Peter and I did four riding
acts, Peter doing the " Voltiguer” and “principal”
act, and I did the “ Indian ” and “ Sailor.”
We were not long in improving ourselves as
riders and soon had a trick pony added to our
programme, Philip training a pony called “ John
Bull ” to do a nice little act.
We then thought we would play Melbourne—not
in the itself, but on the Agricultural Show
Grounds. Getting permission, we erected our
tents and opened the first day to fair business,
but the very next morning when we went out from
the city to the grounds, we found our beauti-
ful new circus tent blown to little bits. All
our winter’s work had been blown away in one


night. Little pieces of our tent could be found
all over the ground, but not any one piece large
enough to make a bed sheet. This was our first
big knock.
We were to get bigger ones later on through
life, but this one we thought gigantic. Here
in one night we had lost our chance of fortune.
We had lain up all the winter and spent all we had
on the building of our first circus, only to have
it blown away in a few hours, while our seats
and poles were nearly all broken.
Peter and I went into Melbourne and made
up our minds to start a gymnasium. We looked
for prospective pupils and got the promise of
several, so we looked around for a gym. But
John and Philip had got busy and persuaded a
firm of tent makers to make us another tent on
credit, and so we started out again.
Melbourne seemed unlucky to us. We had
tried it nearly a year before, at the Derby and
Cup on the Flemington racecourse in 1883, but
no one came to see us, as they were all too in-
tent on the races, so we joined the crowd and
saw the races, when the one colt Martini Henry
winning both Derby and Cup.
Flemington was very different in those days
to what it is now. Fast and furious motor cars
have taken the place of the picturesque drag
and four-in-hand with bugles blowing and fair
ladies, sweetly-innocent looking, in rich but de-
mure frocks with the least suspicion of white
showing somewhere around the ankles. They
demanded and deservedly received respect in
those days. They were out for an outing
and not to show a yard of brazen leg and to ape
their males in customs.
Forgive me, I am diverging —and I, above any
one else, to object to the showing of legs, consider-
ing that all our people have been doing this for
years ; but perhaps that is the reason I do not
like outsiders to copy.
Leaving Melbourne, we made our way to the
country agricultural shows again. Mr. Banvard


and family left us and went their own way,
leaving with us Peter and a couple of horses and
a waggon —his share, or what he could afford
—of the losses since we went into our winter
quarters to build up a circus. We struggled hard
to clear ourselves of the debt we incurred in buy-
ing the new tent, and very soon we were out of
our troubles and once more on the road to success.
We had easy stages through Victoria, and the
tent was soon erected and hard practice in-
dulged in. We put on new acts like the spring-
board, leaping over horses, etc. My ambition
was the jockey act, jumping from the ground
on to the bare back of a galloping horse. This
was a new act in the Old World and first intro-
duced to Australia by “Archie” O’Brien, with
John Wilson’s circus. I practised very hard
every moment of the day, jumping over fences
and on to horses’ backs. It seemed very hard
to jump on to a horse’s back, but to stay there
when you did get there, was harder still. At last
I learned the knack of staying there, and I soon
perfected the trick once I knew how it was done.
We had no teachers, and all we learned we did
ourselves by sheer grit and perseverance. There
was no such thing as a mechanic to hold one on
the horse, and consequently I had some severe
falls. I know positively that riding is the hardest
and most dangerous thing in circus business,
yet it is not nearly so thrilling as the flying
trapeze. The latter can be learnt in a very few
weeks, whereas riding takes months and years
of practice to get a balance. Then, when the
balance is gained, tricks have to be learnt —
somersaults, pirouettes, and the jumping through
small hoops. All these take time and nerve,
and must be first learned on the ground.
Our mother and two young sisters joined us
early this year. My sisters, learning to ride
and do other acts, were soon an acquisition to
the show. Like their brothers, they were quick
at learning, and were both enthusiasts. Besides,
we had trained a very fine looking horse as “Black


Bess,” and were proud of the way we produced
“ Dick Turpin’s Ride to York,” or “ The Life
and Death of Bonny Black Bess.” This used to
be our drawing card for the third night in a town,
our draw for the second night of the season being the
Grand Liverpool Steeplechase, introducing high-
jumping horses and a couple of fine comedians.
We seemed to be well established now, and bought
comfortable living waggons, the beds in which,
we felt, were much cleaner than those in the
average country hotels.
Our horses were in the best of nick. They
had plenty of hard food as well as an abundance
of grass, and could do 60 miles in a day when
required, arriving in the next town in time for
us to erect the tents and show that same night,
though they were very seldom called upon to
do this.
It was about this time that I had my first
man fight. It was a show day at Boort. I was
passing an hotel when someone with long
ginger whiskers stepped out of a verandah bed-
room with a basin of soapy water. His inten-
tion was to have thrown it on the street, but I
was in the way, and got the lot all over me, so
I called him a silly, blithering blighter, or words
to that effect, and told him he should look what
he was doing. He resented the name I called
him, put down the wash-basin, and started in
to lick me ; but I was ready for him, and met
him with a counter. Then we both ‘Togged
in,” he to teach me civility, and I to defend
myself from further harm. I waded in with such
good intent that he soon became the defender
and I the aggressor, and soon had his face the
colour of his whiskers. Right into the dining
room we fought, and when his friends saw the
plight he was in, they came to his rescue, and
although I was only a boy, they would have
set about me had not several of our tent hands,
who were dining there, called out, ‘‘ Let them
alone ; let them fight it out themselves.” He
soon called enough and you can’t imagine how


proud 1 was to be able to lick a man a couple
of stone heavier than myself.
It was the usual thing when a show came to
a town to be asked which was its best fighting
man. We would often have to produce one
to meet the local crack, and down to the river
or creek bank we would all go to see the result.
One season through the Monara we met many
good fighting men. In fact, they were too good
for any we could bring, until a young American
horizontal bar performer and tumbler named
Dick Mathews joined our show. He was a fine
man to look at—over 6 feet high, with a com-
plexion like an English schoolgirl, and 21 years
old. He saw several of our champions get a
licking from the best of the town fighting men,
and also saw our champions give some of the town
fellows a licking, but he never interfered or
passed an opinion one way or another. He was,
like most Americans, fond of a game at cards,
and one night at a game of poker in the local
hotel-parlour, which was next to my bedroom,
the town bully, not having the best of luck,
started in cheating, when Mathews detected
him. He was not a bit put out, but laughed at
Mathews, and told him to pay up. Dick refused,
and offered to play on, but play straight. The
bully—a noted fighting man—demanded the
money he had won unfairly, but Dick still refused.
“ Well,” said the bully, “ I’ll thrash you first
and then take all you have.” Dick said, “ I'll
bet you all the money you have you can’t lick
me,” and as Dick put his hands in his pockets
to get the money out and count it, the bully did
not wait any further, but jumped at him, and
swinging a terrific blow at his head, said, “ I’ll
count it after I’ve licked you.” But Dick saw
the blow coming at the very last moment, and,
ducking his head enough for the vicious blow
to pass over, swung his left up, quickly catching
him on the jaw. Then a terrific battle com-
menced between the two big men, and the fur-
niture in the small parlour was all broken up in


no time. Dick, although tall, had not the
weight of his burly opponent, so he kept away
from him as much as the small space of the
parlour would allow him, and kept him off by
jabs and straight lefts. Someone opened the
door leading out to the yard, and Dick made
for that and was outside in a jiffy. The local
man thought Dick was clearing out and was after
him, but when once Dick got him in the yard,
with plenty of room to jump in and out, he soon
let the bully know he had met his master. For
Dick would evade the wild swings and the bull
like rushes of the other, and at the same time
get in a short, sharp jolt on to his adversary’s
face or body that would set him wondering and
floundering about like a novice. Eventually he
got him a smart tap on the point of the chin,
and the big fellow gave way at the knees, and
went to sleep for fully an hour.
The news spread all over the Monaro. Dick
had to fight one or two more battles to prove
that it was no fluke, that he knocked out the
champion of the Monaro, and he became
the biggest drawing card we had.
The townmen were similar to the school boy in
this respect, I suppose this state of affairs was
brought about by the literature we young Aus-
tralians read about that time, such as Jack
Harkaway, and The Travelling Schoolboys, etc.
Goodness knows what would have happened if we
had read the books that are published to-day,
especially by some of the American authors, whose
heroes think nothing of shooting a dozen of their
fellow-creatures before breakfast.
We had plenty of opposition in those days,
and many a fight to gain supremacy, and we
generally won out, which gave us so much con-
fidence that we decided to play a city on our
own. We picked on Adelaide, with splendid
results. We fairly conquered that city, after which,
with the city hallmark fresh upon us, we toured the
country towns and conquered several circuses en
route, greatly to our surprise and satisfaction.


One show in particular came all the way f r om
Victoria to catch u c and thrash us. Tney put
up their nice new dry tents rn the town where
they caught us up, and had a splendid lot o'
horses, ring and waggon horses, and a ready
tip-top band. The bands played side by side,
tune for tune, and the populace enjoyed the
fun immensely, but they followed our band into
our tent. Not a soul went to the other show,
and after we had opened, their whole troupe,
now looking very dejected, came to see our show.
The next town was the same, and the next, and
the next, so then they decided to leave us the
field, and away they went. Strange to say,
away went our good business, for so long as the
opposition lasted, the public came to us no
matter how it rained ; but as soon as the op-
position quit, so did the people quit coming out
in the rain to see us.
Just as we were feeling fit to conquer the world
we met a severe rebuff. We found that there
was one thing we could not conquer, and that
was the elements. The rain beat down on us
mercilessly, town after town, and day after
day. Our tents were all soggy, with water and
mud everywhere and on everything. Even our
beds were soaking wet. At last, foot-weary,
horses poor and knocked up, broken in spirit
and nearly broken in pocket, we reached Murray
Bridge and decided to put all the tents, boxes,
poles and paraphernalia on the train —which
had not long been opened across the 90 mile
desert. After sending off the material, we
rested the horses for a day or two, and then had
them pull the empty waggons across the dreary,
monotonous desert. Talk about the perversity
of Fate. As we were waiting in Murray Bridge
to spell the horses, and at the very moment our
goods left per train, the rain ceased, and the
following nights were beautiful. We had lovely
weather all the way across the desert, which was
one blessing, -for, oh, the desert. One can’t
imagine what it is to ride in an empty waggon
B 1


over Mallee roots, which have three or five short
legs or prongs. When one of the waggon wheels
lodged on a root, the root seemed to rise up on
one of its short hind legs and hurl the waggon on
to another root yards away. This root would
do the same thing, and so it would continue all
day. One would never know which way the
root was going to throw the waggon. Sometimes
it would even throw you backwards. At the
end of the first day none of us could stand, for
we were so beaten and bruised and sore from
the throwing about on the waggons.
After four or five days we reached Border-
town, and intended to play there three nights
so as to give the horses another spell. We
pitched our tent on the town common, but no
sooner was it erected than the rain poured down,
and the whole country was very soon again under
water. It was so bad that after an hour or
two we could not reach the tent from the rail-
way. We pulled the empty waggons on to the
hard road some distance away, and whilst the
horses were resting we were pulling down the
wet, soggy tent, dragging it over to the road,
and loading it on to the waggons. We were days
doing this, because all our workmen left. They
had had enough, so they quit, and got jobs
somewhere else, so we four brothers, with our
agent and four old German musicians, pulled
down and packed up the tents, seats, poles, etc.,
on to the waggons and made for the next town.
My mother and sisters had to drive a waggon
apiece as we were so short-handed.
Luck and rain were dead against us again as
we went from town to town. Day after day it
rained, and yet we struggled on. We put up the
tents in Nhill and several hundred venturesome
persons turned up to the show, but we were hard
put to it to give a show at all, as we had no men to
wait on the ring or harness up the horses for the
ring, but we managed it, wet and miserable as
we were. We stuck to the business as a loving
parent would to a dying child.


After a few more weeks, we got a fine day at
Donald. It was show time, and that meant the
town full of people. We forgot all about our
last few week’s nightmare in getting the wet and
mildewed tent up and erecting the seats in an-
ticipation of a bumper house that night, and we
were not disappointed. No one to have seen
that performance that night would have thought
we had gone through such heart-rendering times
for the last six weeks. This was in the winter
of 1885.
Soon it was spring, glorious spring, and all our
hopes and confidence returned as if by magic.
That year we played Melbourne city for the first
time, in Swanston Street, near the gaol, in con-
junction with Ridgeway, who had just arrived
from India with a purely gymnastic entertainment
and a very fine aerial act. Together we made a
fine show, we having the equestrian part, and
he the gymnastic portion of the programme.
After several weeks in Melbourne we (the
Wirth’s, not with Ridgeway) went to Gippsland
and through Victoria, then New South Wales.
Returning to Melbourne in 1887, we played at
the Alexandra Theatre, now His Majesty’s, on
a matting ring which was very slippery for the
horses. Many a fall I had there, especially
when riding my seven horse act. Sometimes the
whole seven were huddled on top of one another
with me in their midst. Pollard’s Lilliputian
Opera Coy. were rehearsing there and Charlie
Pollard used to come to my dressing room and
say he would s*tay to see me killed under the
horses and then he would go. We were all glad
when we were on the earth rings again. Even
the horses disliked the stage.
We travelled Gippsland again, this time with
a slap-up show. This year I drove eight horses
in our band waggon through the Gippsland bush,
and it was some bush in those days, with tall,
straight, beautiful trees as thick as grass. One
wonders where they have all gone to, and wonders
why, why they have been allowed to go.
n-j.


In due course, in iSSS, we decided to make our
first sea journey with our circus and run across to
Noumea, New Caledonia. We were all excite-
ment, as we were going to conquer new territory
and see new lands. We were ever venturesome,
at least I always was, for I can remember in
my baby days wandering all around Dalby on
my own. In Sydney later, I would explore the
scrubby country around Rose Bay and Watson’s
Bay, feeding on berries and geebungs, three
corners and mushrooms ; and later on again in
Tam worth, after school hours, I would explore
the mountains at the back of the town. On
several occasions I spent the night at a boy
friend’s parents house on the side of the hill so
that I could get up early and have a longer day
in the solemn solitude of the fascinating moun-
tain bush.
We had been playing in Sydney for six weeks
to big business and had a very versatile com-
pany, or rather, family, as the other members
of the company were engaged principally on
the merits of their respective acts. “ Paddy ”
Montgomery, for instance, was engaged for his
bounding Jockey Act and horse training capa-
bilities ; Joe Romano, for his horse training;
Charlie Redman for his swinging slack rope act
and stone swallowing novelty ; Alf. Harris was
dummy clown.
Paddy Montgomery was at this time con-
sidered the best jockey rider in Australia, and to
show how I had improved, I will here relate a
little incident. The first two weeks in S} 7 dney
Paddy did the jockey act. The next w 7 eek I did
it, and the next, the fourth, we both were in the
ring together doing the act on our separate
horses. The fifth week was a challenge week ;
that is, we challenged each other for the cham-
pionship of Australia, the public to be the judges.
Each member of the audience was given a voting
coupon, and after the act, pressmen would carry
ballot boxes around so that the audience could
slip their votes into the locked boxes. The


votes were counted each evening, and at the end
of the week, after the big Saturday’s night
audience, the result was made known to the
public, I being proclaimed by a large majority,
victor and champion rider of Australia. In the
short space of four years I had become champion
rider of Australia ; but I did not stay still. I
continued to practise and improve myself in
riding, and some of the tricks I invented then,
I see other riders from the Old World performing
to-day.
CHAPTER V.
NEW CALEDONIA.
Tempestuous Trip —Wonderful Experience in
first Strange Land — Noumea’s Famous Band —
A Tragedy —“ Oui Papa
We left Sydney on July 4, on the s.s. Gunga.
Our horses had stalls built on deck, and they
looked as if they were in their own stable, with
comfortable bedding underneath and railed off
from one another. With a canvas trough at their
heads for feed and water, they were lined up each
side of the deck, with their heads facing inwards.
All went well for the first two days, and then
a storm struck us. It was a cyclone, and a severe
one too. This was our first trip away from
Australia, and it nearly proved the last. In
this frightful storm, the old Gunga nearly broke
her back. She was tossed about on the raging
waves, creaking and groaning like a living thing.
For two whole days she lay to, and we went
whither the wind took us. Huge waves like
mountains would come rolling down on her, and
into her ; in fact, all over the steamer, wash-
ing everything before them. Right into our
cabins the water came, washing all movable
things out of the door into the passage and on
to the deck. My brother Philip and I did not
care what became of us or the whole ship. We
were so sick, I think we even prayed that it would
sink and get it all over at once. The horses


had been swept from their stalls and were washed
up and down the deck, together with boxes,
casks and other gear. Their cries were pitiful,
and my brothers, John and Harry, together
with J. Walhalla and P. Montgomery, and some
of the passengers and sailors battled hard to
save the poor beasts. Those that had been
knocked down were held down and their
legs tied, and then others were secured, thrown
and tied down. It had been dreadful to see the
poor things battling for their lives. Some tried
to jump over the side of the vessel, but the
height of the side saved them, and they fell back
on to the deck with a sickening thud. Two
died from the buffeting they got, and all were
more or less torn and knocked about. If the
steamer had been kept to her course instead of
being let run with the wind she would have gone
down herself, and that would have ended the
whole business. Several of the brave passengers
were very badly hurt ; but they stuck to their
terrible task and had the satisfaction of rescuing
all but two horses —a splendid performance in
the face of such peril.
I lost my forty guineas horse, “ Badger ” and
my brother Harry’s mare, “ Cinderella,” was
also killed in the mix-up, while most of the other
horses carried scars for the rest of their lives.
We reached Noumea two days late, and as
the inhabitants had not heard of us, we were
thought by many to have been wrecked, so
when the boat was sighted at last from the
island, such a welcome cry was raised by the
natives that we could distinctly hear it on the
steamer five miles away, I’m sure.
You see, we had been reported missing, and
the cry, if it had been in English, would have
been, “ There they are !” It was the articula-
tion of feelings long pent up, and it was echoed
by thousands of natives, seemingly from all parts
of the island, and carried far into the interior.
I imagined the natives had been experiencing the
feelings I had at my first circus.


It was like coming into some new world, arriving
in Noumea. Everything had a different flavour,
a different atmosphere about it, and the language
(French) made the illusion more distinct. The
naked natives were all as pleased to see us as
if we were old friends returned after many years.
They put me in mind of how one’s dog jumps
around one when he is let off the chain and
anticipates a run with his master and friend.
We soon forgot all about the terrors of the trip.
We had a very pleasant seven weeks there,
and became great favourites with the natives,
the French soldiers stationed there, and the
public in general. We changed our programmes
weekly, even playing " Dick Turpin’s Ride to
York,” which, strange to say, was very popular.
It was in Noumea that we listened to the finest
band or orchestra we have ever heard —the con-
vict’s band, which practised seven hours a day.
It played like some rich organ. You could not
hear one instrument above another. The con-
ductor had been a conductor at the Paris Opera
House, and the story went that he was out there
for killing his wife’s lover and giving his wife
her lover’s heart, cooked, to eat one morning
for breakfast.
We got a note from one of the, convict
musicians asking us for aid. He was an English-
man and had come to be there through being
mixed up with his bank manager in some fraud
his manager had committed in Paris. He stated
that he had a wife and two bonny little girls in
England awaiting his escape, and said if we were
in sympathy with him to wear a white flower
in our button hole. At their next concert —
these concerts were held every Tuesday evening
on Coconut Square—we all had white flowers in
our coat buttonholes. I don’t know what help
we gave him, or what he expected, but the follow-
ing Tuesday he was missing, and we never saw
him again.
While in Noumea we were invited to the
officers’ dinners, to the Governor’s ball —with


music bv the convict band —in fact, we were
sJ '
feted and fussed over b\ T the better class resi-
dents, end our stay was a delightful picnic, and
one huge round of pleasure.
Of course, there is always something to upset
the pleasures of life, and here was no exception.
Charlie Redman, our slack rope performer and
stone swallower, was killed by a young fellow
belonging to a well-to-do family of Noumea.
We naturally demanded that action should be
taken by the authorities, but nothing was done,
and we were very sore for a time. Eventually
we were promised that the young man would be
punished, and that is all the satisfaction we could
get out of it. As Redman turned out to be of
French birth, we had no further claim on the
French authorities—or, at least, we thought not,
until, some time afterwards, we got a bill from
the French authorities for his funeral expenses,
although they kept his belongings.
I remember I was very wrath with the doc-
tor in the case. We had high words, and I could
have had a duel if I had cared, but as I did not
care, and the doctor did not understand anything
about “box-on” as he called it, knowing only
sword play, I forgave him, and called honours
even, although I had my revenge on him later
in a way he did not know, although he sus-
pected.
The New Caledonian natives were an innocent,
lovable (if one can use this word on a black)
people, more like little simple children. They
would follow me whistling the tune our band
played for me when I rode in the seven-horse
act —the “Post Horn Gallop” —and would imi-
tate my call for a horse when I wanted another
horse to be sent to me.
They would also follow my sister, Marizles,
with birds on their shoulders in imitation of her
act on the wire when a number of pigeons would
be turned loose into the tent, and after flying
all around the tent, would at last alight on her


head and shoulders. Then, after we had played
“Dick Turpin,” they would follow my brother
John, calling out “ Oui Papa,” his French for
“ Yes, Daddv,” in his character as “ Sammy.”
Wb en we were leaving the island, and the
steamer was sailing away, we could hear them
whistling the “ Post Horn Gallop,” and the
very last thing we heard as land was fading away
in the mist, was one gigantic “ Oui Papa ! ”
shouted simultaneously by thousands of natives.
It was so weird and impressive that I will never
forget that send-off.
Incidentally, I might mention that I had
my twent3 T first birthday on this island.
CHAPTER VI.
DISCONTENTED WITH OLD LIFE.
The City Calls —Old Friends always Remem-
bered—Launching Out—First Trip to New Zea-
land —Opposition Again Overcome.
We left Noumea on Monday, August 20, and
arrived in Sydney on Saturday, August 25. We
played at Crows Nest on Tuesday, after which
we played several other suburbs so as to give
us time to get the horses and waggons in readi-
ness for the overland trip to Melbourne. The
horses had been pastured out on a farm a little
way out from and Mr. Geo. Anderson —
now our manager, then our schoolmaster —had
stayed behind from New Caledonia to see that
they were well looked after, getting two hard
feeds a day besides the grass. They were all
looking fit, and the waggon had been renovated
and painted, and so in easy stages, we started
out again on the waggons.
But somehow the old life did not appeal to
us as before. The talks around the camp fires
at night now seemed to have lost all its pre-
vious romance. We could think of nothing,
or talk of nothing, but Sydney and Noumea —
the good time we had had in Sydney and the


exciting time in New Caledonia. The early
spring was cold, the roads wet and boggy, and
the horses soft, from their spell from work. In
camp at night we would call out the band, and
we four, joining in, would practice as of old,
making the distant mountains re-echo with our
sweet music, and drawing several farmers and
cockles to our camp. But nothing seemed the
same. Even fishing and shooting seemed a waste
of time. Our grand parade into the different
towns —when the whole populace turned out to
see the gaily be-ribboned and be-flagged caval-
cade of horses and waggons led by our famous
band, uniformed in dazzling red and white—
had lost its thrill, and although the town and
country girls were there just the same as of yore,
blowing kisses to us as we passed, this time we
did not blow them back with the same enthusiasm
as previously.
Things had altered. Sydney and Noumea had
altered the whole tone of our life. The roads
were the same, the horses, towns and people were
the same. There were the same old sweethearts,
but we did not think so. We looked at life with
different eyes because we had changed. We
seemed to have moved on to a different shelf,
and we felt that we must drop the old life and
say goodbye to our little old sweethearts —for,
like the proverbial sailor, we had sweethearts in
every port —and say good bye to old habits,
but not goodbye to old friends. No, even here
we recognized the value of old friends, and we
felt ambitious to have them proud of us, proud
of our progress, so we decided that ours must be
a city show, with up-to-date acts and actors.
So to Melbourne we must go.
But here, again, we found opposition, for a
party of speculators had engaged the lot in
vSwanston Street, and offered to play us there 50-50,
they to find all outside expenses, so we played
under the management of Lyons and McMahon.
The city and suburbs were ablaze with attrac-
tive pictures and posters, and we engaged several


more artists, amongst whom were our old-time
associates, Bungaroo and Itchie. Bungaroo was
the same little old 8-stone man, but Itchie had
filled out to 12 stone, and the wonder was how
Bugaroo could still throw Itchie about on his
feet as he did years ago when Itchie was but
six or seven stone. It was because they had
continuously performed the same feats over and
over every night without a break, that Bungaroo
did not notice the gradual growth of his partner.
From Melbourne, after the Cup festivities, we
went to Tasmania, still under the management of
Harry Lyons and McMahon Bros., and had
Christmas in Hobart , as well as one of the biggest
fights —up to that time —that we were ever in.
We got into holts with a local football crowd
who tackled us en masse one night in the Rock
Hotel, and had it not been for police intervention,
something serious would have happened. As it
was, three of the local fellows had their Christ-
mas and New Year’s dinner in hospital, while
Harry and I could not eat anything but soup for
days. It was all through a misunderstanding.
They thought two members of their party had
been set upon by an unequal number of ours
and severely hurt, whereas it had been caused
through one of their members getting the worst
of it in a single fight with one of my brothers.
He told his friends, however, that he had been
set upon by several circus hands, so between
30 and 40 of them came to our hotel that night,
and, although they only saw my brother Harry
and myself in the hotel parlour, they tried to set
about beating us up. We stood at the door,
however, and as they came in we hit out with
all our might and to very good purpose. Hearing
the rumpus, my brothers, Philip and John, and
Harry Lyons came from their bedrooms and
helped in the fight, and although Harry and I
had very sore jaws, we had no marks on our
faces. Eventually we and the footballers be-
came very good friends, when everything had
been explained.


After our Tasmanian tour we returned to
Melbourne, where our horses had been again
turned out to grass, and after playing a couple
of suburbs, we took to the railway while some
new waggons were being built. We played
Geelong, Ballarat, Bendigo, Castlemaine and
Dandenong, where our horses and waggons were
waiting for us, and then toured Gippsland with
the waggons.
Once again, however, the same discontented
feeling came over us all and we decided to take to
the train for good, so we sold our working stock,
horses and waggons —burnt our bridges behind
us as it were —and took train for Ararat, en route
for Adelaide.
This time we stuck to the railway and thus
begun a new phase in our life. We pla}/ed
Adelaide for five weeks —a record length of
season —then to Broken Hill and return to South
Australia. Followed a return trip through Vic-
toria and into N.S.W., right up the northern
line to Brisbane —our first visit to this city
with a circus—then to North Queensland, up as
far as Charters Towers. Thence we shipped
direct to Melbourne for the Cup season. Tas-
mania saw us again, and then came our first
trip to New Zealand, opening at Invercargill
in a wind storm, Wednesday afternoon, December
18, 1889.
Several of our horses were very bad after the
trip, but we managed to bring them all around
except our “ Black Bess,” whose death was a
severe loss. Dunedin was holding an exhibition
which drew man}/ people to it, and so we did very
well, and I became a partner in the show. I
had been paid a fixed salary ever since the West
Bros, and “ Sammy ” Bernard had joined my
brothers as partners in 1883. They thought
then that a boy should not get an equal share
with men, so I was put on a salary, and stayed
on a salary long after Bernard & Co. left. Now
I had saved some money and was able to put up
a few hundred pounds, but this was not accepted


by the brothers, the amount of my “buy-in”
money being taken off my share of the profits as
we went along—which wasn’t long.
We had a splendid company of performers,
nearly all of the men having been proprietors
themselves. There were the Walhalla Bros. —
Ted and Jack —Joe Walhalla, Paddy Montgomery,
Charlie Matthews, Gus. and Alf. St. Leon, Charlie
Brown, Joe Romano, Tommy Reese, Mrs. T.
Walhalla, Mrs. Alf. St. Leon, my sisters, Marizles
and Madeline —both at this time exceptionally
fine performers and horsewomen—Mrs. J. J.
Wirth, two apprentice girls —Gerty and May—
three apprentice boys Alfred and Herbert
Warren, and “ Carl ” Willie Bullus—and we
four brothers, with a splendid band under
Bandmaster George Schmidt. We met opposition
in Wellington in Hicks’ American Coloured
Minstrels, who had a splendid band also, so that
the Wellington people had the pleasure of hearing
at the same time two of the very best bands
that had ever been in their city, playing tune
for tune alongside each other.
Hicks it was who told us there was a circus in
Auckland just arrived from California, and he
had got bills out for us before they opened,
telling the people to wait for Wirth’s Circus. He
did them a lot of harm, in fact, so much that
Harmston —for that was the proprietor’s name
—decided to leave us alone in New Zealand and
go to Australia ; but he did not leave us alone
entirely, for he sent down an agent who offered
all our artists just double the salary we were
giving them, and they all accepted the offer,
and joined him in Melbourne, except Gus. St.
Leon, who stayed on with us. We thought at
the time that we would suffer by the loss of so
many good artists, but business improved from
Wellington on, and we did not have as much
in salaries to pay as we had previously, so Harm-
ston really did us a good turn in a way, although
we would rather have kept the company, even
if it had been a little less profit to us.


CHAPTER VII.
WILD WEST WORRIES.
Engagements and Cancellations —“ The. Real
Thing’ at Last—Auckland Excited—More Cow-
boys in New Zealand than in Texas —Indians
“ Play Up.”
About this time, the weeklies and monthly
magazines were full of pictures of Buffalo Bill’s
Wild West Show in Europe. The crowned heads
of all nations were patronizing that show. In
fact, it was the talk of the Old World and of
America, so I was very keen on getting my
brothers to bring a Wild West Show of our own
from America. As Australasia had never seen
real American Indians and Cowboys, and there
was such a lot of newspaper talk of them, we
thought there would be a fortune in it. We
accordingly decided to have a Wild West Show ;
but which of my brothers would go to America
for it They all wanted me to go, but I pointed
out I was only just 21, and looked only 17, and
that I would not be taken much notice of in
America, especially as we had heard that the
Americans were such a shrewd people in business.
Eventually it was arranged that Harry
should go, and a little later we received news
that he had got just the men we wanted —
" Happy ” Jack Sutton, the originator of Wild
West performances.
In 1882, Jack Sutton, with a number of cow-
boys and Indians, was absolutely the first to
present a genuine Wild West show in America,
and was so successful that he had many imi-
tators immediately. Sutton was engaged, and
as he was, or had been, a Government scout
and a Sioux interpreter, Harry left it entirely
in his hands to form a Wild West Show com-
plete with cowboys, Indians, and their squaws
and papooses, Indian beads, mats and curiosities.
Harry and Alexander, an agent, went East to
buy printing and to have a look around “ God’s


Own Country,’ ’ while Sutton got together a
number of cowboys, scouts, trappers and hun-
ters. Then he went to the Sioux Reservation
where he was well known by the Indians, picked
out several of his old Indian friends who had
been with him in his first venture in 1882, got
together several fine young bucks and some older
ones with their squaws and papooses, and a good
collection of curiosities, and brought them all
down to San Francisco, there to await the sail-
ing of the steamer for New Zealand in a couple
of weeks. He had them properly housed, but
one of the squaws had an addition to her family,
and the infant died, so the whole tribe took it as
a bad omen. They thereupon demanded their
passage money back to Red Gulch, and as
Sutton knew his Indian, he sent them back and
went to another reservation and secured another
batch, which he brought to ’Frisco. He bought
them clothes and rigged them up for their pros-
pective journey across the ocean, and all seemed
satisfied, and were enjoying themselves seeing
the sights of the city, when their chief came from
their reservation in Lakeport Lake country.
He argued with them, pointing out to them
the big water they were to cross, and told them
that they would never see their friends and
relatives again, that Australia, the country they
were going to, was away under the earth, and
finally persuaded them to return.
By this time, Harry had returned from the
East, where he had seen several circuses, which
ran three rings in their tents with a hippodrome
track around the rings, making a miniature
racecourse, and he decided to run a similar
circus and hippodrome races in conjunction with
the Wild West Show. It was only a few days
before the steamer would sail and Harry and
Sutton were at their wits’ end. They had never
anticipated any trouble, and here they were with
a Wild West Show but no Indians, and these
Harry considered the greatest attraction of the
whole lot, for all Australia had read Fenimore


Cooper’s exciting tales, and the Show would be
incomplete without Indians.
Sutton went scurrying into the interior, while
Harry made enquiries around San Francisco ;
Sutton was lucky meeting up with a “Medicine
Show ” that had several Indians and a squaw
with a papoose. They happened to be two
Sioux braves known as Eagle Elk and American
Bear. The Indian with his wife and child were
Cognogowogga Indians, while the sixth member
of the party was a huge Pawnee Indian, 6ft.
Bin. tall, straight as an arrow, well-formed and
athletic —a regular Adonis. Sutton brought his
lucky find straight down to ’Frisco, and straight-
away put them on the steamer with a guard
to keep them there until the boat sailed. Harry
had been nosing about to such good intent that
he had secured several more of different tribes
who had wandered down to ’Frisco or its pre-
cincts, so altogether they did better by having
the Indians of different tribes than if they were
all of one tribe.
While Harry was in America, the circus was
playing all the principal towns on the North
Island to the biggest business we had yet ex-
perienced. The Maoris would follow the show
from town to town, and we became great
favourites everywhere we went. We bought two
thoroughbred stallions, Bannockburn and Saturn,
and broke them to a menage act. We also bought
several thoroughbred mares, and consequently
we had a very fine stud of horses and ponies.
New Zealand, in those days, had not the rail-
way facilities it has now, especially on the West
Coast, where we did a lot of travelling on steam-
ers and teams. At one place the whole circus
was swung across a gorge in a cage. The roads
on the gorges were very narrow, with only room
for one vehicle to pass at a time, and the danger
thus made the more exciting.
A whole book could be written- about the
scenery in New Zealand bush and its game, and
more again about the Maoris and their customs.


I have seen two old women meet and put their
noses together and cry, with huge tears running
down their faces, while they made some kind of
a wailing noise for several hours at a time. But
they were great circus-goers, and,happy enough.
Eventually we opened in Auckland, and did
so well in the big hall, which was known variously
as the drill hall, the skating rink, the market, and
the agricultural hall, and we played there for
three months, awaiting the advent of the Wild
West Show.
Alexander had sailed on the “ Mariposa ” a
month before, so when the show left ’Frisco, he
was already with us in Auckland, where we were
busy building chariots, a “ Deadwood ” coach,
emigrant waggons, hunters’ cabins, etc. Harry
had set us a task we never dreamed of when we
set out to get a Wild West Show. He wanted a
reproduction of Barnum & Bailey’s Three Ring
Circus, Hippodrome and Wild West Combined
Shows, so we hired a piece of spare land in Auck-
land and practised hippodrome racing on two
and four horses in chariots and bareback, and
we had to perfect the system of performing our
circus work simultaneously in three rings. The
whole city was agog with excitement, and on the
early morning of Saturday, September 13, 1890,
the jetty was crowded by thousands of towns-
people, as well as the circus people, to witness
arrival of the first Wild West Show in the An-
tipodes. All the circus hands wore cowboy
hats and a goodly number of Aucklanders also
sported these huge head coverings. It was then
the fashion to look American, and the cowboys
on the “ Zealandia ” when they saw so many
people wearing these hats remarked that there
were more cowboys in Auckland than in Texas.
We had arranged for a week’s rehearsal, but
when the Company had landed, Harry, with a
few instructions to us how to run the three rings,
hippodrome and Wild West, left for Sydney on
the steamer by which he came from America.
We remonstrated, but all he would say was,


“ You wanted a Wild West Show, and now you
have it. I’m going to Sydney for a rest,”
adding that he would engage ground there.
From the very start we had trouble. At first
it was the Indians. We had put them in a house
to live, and one of the cowboys undertook to look
after them, cook for them, and see that they kept
themselves sober and decent, and ready for their
work ; but this cowboy got drunk and made a
few of the Indians drunk as well, and a free fight
occurred. Bowie knives and revolvers were freely
used, so we had to call in the police, and after
a lot of trouble locked up the worst, and put the
others to sleep. So ended the first day of trouble.
CHAPTER VIII.
Series of Tribulations—Aucklanders fail to Ap-
preciate “Wild West”—lndians still Play-up —
Small Boys learn lassoing—Cowboys Break Away
—Riot at Palmerston.
On Monday night, September 22, 1890, we
opened in Wellesley Street, with our Three Ring
Circus, Hippodrome and Wild West Combined
Shows, the prices, notwithstanding the great
expense, being as usual, 1/-, 2/-, 3/- and 5/-.
The circus part of the programme with three
circus rings performing simultaneously went off
very well, and the Hippodrome races were tolera-
ted, as the public were impatient to see the cow-
boys at work. Most of the latter were straight
from the ranches in America and only two were
what are known as showmen cowboys, i.e., Capt.
Sutton and Broncho George.
Charlie Meadows was boomed as the boss
cowboy as he was a very tall, fine-looking fellow,
with plenty of assurance, and of cultured manner.
He was 6ft. yin. tall. Another tall man and a
good looker was George Felton. Then Jack
Brown, was 6ft. 6in., these three men being
exceedingly well built, athletic, supple and mus-
cular. Sutton himself was over 6 ft. high and


was the most picturesque of the crowd. With
his long black wavy hair hanging down over
his broad shoulders, the Maoris christened him
Jesus, because of the resemblance to Our Lord’s
pictures. Two other tall men were Keogh and
Arkansas Kid. Ralph the Mexican, was of short
stature, with a very handsome face. I con-
sidered him the best all-round man in the outfit,
as he was a splendid roper, buckjump rider and
rider of steers, and would fight a wild bull as
well as any Spanish toreador I have ever seen.
All these splendid looking fellows were direct
from the ranches and prairies. Captain Sutton’s
wife, " Prairie Pearl ” died on the “ Zealandia ”
on the way out, and was buried at sea. She was
a sharp-shooter and helped in the Wild West
programme in “ The Chase for a Bride,” in which
she was snatched from the back of a galloping
horse by a cowboy chasing on another galloping
horse. She had to be a straight shot as she had
to cut with a bullet from a rifle the rope by which
the horse-thief was hanging from in mid-air.
My sister Madeline undertook to play this
part and right away had to learn to shoot and
lasso, but knowing how dangerous it was to
discharge a loaded rifle in a crowded tent, we
took the bullets from her rifle, and faked the
rope with a "dog slip.” In fact, we had to take
the bullets from the cartridges in all guns and
revolvers, so to save time and expense, we had
a firm make the cartridges without bullets ; but
some of the wads fired from these firearms did
considerable damage if they struck anyone, which
they did occasionally.
The show was run on exactly the same prin-
ciple as the Barnum & Bailey’s American Show,
even to the concert after the main performance,
for which an extra charge of a shilling was made.
But this the Australasian public did not cotton
on to. Selling tickets for the concert went on
all night during the performance. “ Gentlemen
ushers” (as they were called) would pass around
and sell these tickets for the “ grand American


concert.” Harry had brought out Perry Ryan
and his wife, Lulu, and Billy Ackerman and his
wife, Pearl, while the rest of the concert company
was to be made up from our performers, who
thought they could sing, or had some specialty.
My two sisters were engaged, and Conny Moreni
did a song and dance. Poor Conny, he was
singing a song entitled, “ I Should Smile,” and
after the first verse I threw a brick on the stage.
It landed with a loud thud, and while he was
dancing, he was eyeing this brick. Even in his
second verse he could not keep his eyes off the
brick. Goodness knows what was going on in
his mind. He looked as if he were afraid it would
suddenly jump up and bite him, or perhaps he
was thinking of picking it up and firing it back
at my brother John (who, he thought, had thrown
the brick) as he was always up to practical jokes.
Throwing the brick shows how lightly we took
life, for notwithstanding that this night was one
of our saddest disappointments in all our lives,
we took it gamely and even joked about it.
Instead of the public at the termination of
the performance calling for the Wirth Bros. —as
we had dreamed —to thank and cheer us, they
actually thought they had been “had.” Why,
the cowboys could not teach them anything, and
as for the Indians and their silly old Sun dance,
and their blood-curdling yells, why, the larrikins
in the street could make the same noises.
We explained through the papers the next
day that the cowboys did not come out here to
show the Australasian public points, but merely
to show them the American methods of handling
wild horses and cattle and illustrate lasso-throw-
ing and life in the Wild West of America —its
dangers and hardships to the early settlers, etc.,
but no, they were not convinced, and everywhere
we went the same feeling was met with.
We had a lot of trouble, first with the cow-
boys and again with the Indians. The latter
were a terrible bunch to run. They would at
every possible opportunity get drunk, and then


begin fighting, if not among themselves, then
with the townspeople. Sometimes we would have
to knock them out and then carry them to the
train so that they would be with the show at the
next town. They were always trying to stay
behind, and we would have to have a round up
an hour before the train started to see if they
were all there. If any were missing, away
Sutton and I would go on the look out for them,
and many a long hunt we had.
Then, again, one or more of the cowboys
would absent themselves, and we would have to
hunt for them. When the cowboys ran amuck
there was always trouble, for they had revol-
vers and would use them freely. They even
had the police afraid of them. I remember a
sergeant remarking, just as our train was leaving
the platform, “ Thank God, they have gone. I
say, Wirth, don’t for heaven’s sake bring such
another show around.”
Lassoing became the craze after seeing our
cowboys at work. Every boy and 50 per cent,
of the young men could be seen with a rope,
practising the art. The boys were the worst
danger, for they very soon learnt, and would lasso
anything and anybody. I’ve seen Chinamen
lassoed and hauled head first from their carts,
one being seriously hurt, by these mischievous
urchins. One little boy, imitating our hanging
of the horse-thief, lassoed his little baby sister
and hung her up to the chandelier, her cries being
heard by her mother just in time to save her
life. In fact, some of the State authorities pro-
hibited lassoing by the public, as it had become
just as big menace as the catapult.
We gave what they called a “ Paddock Show”
with the cowboys in Auckland at a place called
Potter’s Paddock, showing the American method
of handling wild horses and cattle on the Ameri-
can ranches. We hired and bought a number
of unbroken horses and wild cattle which were
all turned loose in the paddock. A very strong
post and rail fence kept the animals away from


the public, and there was a grandstand there.
Sutton asked me to help him stage-manage the
show as the would take more notice of me,
so I dressed up in cowboy outfit with saddle,
bridle, spurs, quirt, lasso and tapaders. I felt
fine, and thought I looked like Buffalo Bill —
without the goatee —but anyhow I was to hustle
the cowboys on with their work, informing them
of their next stunts, and seeing they got on
without any delay.
After the bucking horses were finished with,
we started on the wild cattle, showing their
method of roping, tying and branding young
cattle, as well as riding them. This was the
funniest sight of all seeing the clumsy steers
trying to buck the boys off. Of course there
was other Wild West items, such as picking up
objects from the ground whilst riding on galloping
horses, the hanging of the “horse thief/' sharp
shooting, “ Dead wood Coach," and the “ emi-
grant waggon " attacked by Indians and finally
driven off by the cowboys after a lot of shooting.
It was all very exciting and interesting, and
the public very much liked this show, and we
gave it in every town where we could engage
the racecourse. The cowboys themselves re-
cognised that this was their best performance,
and done without the aid of the circus staff. On
our way home on our horses one day, one said
to the others —evidently forgetting my identity
—“ Say, fellows, we gave this afternoon’s show
all on our own. Why not quit these suckers ?"
On this, I rode alongside him and told him there
was such a thing as a legal contract by which he
and the others were bound. He galloped off with-
out a word, but apparently his seditious suggestions
did not fall on altogether barren ground.
It was in Palmerston North that the break-
away came, though that had nothing to do with
the riot that occured there, as the cowboys had
their minds made up to leave us.
The riot happened this way on October 8, 1890.
This was before the railway from Woodville


to Palmerston was built—so we had to hire
waggons, lorries and all sorts of drays to carry
our tents, poles and paraphernalia. The com-
pany travelled by coaches through the gorge,
and the horses, of course, were ridden over. The
company all arrived early enough in Palmerston
and all the preliminary work was gone on with ;
but through one of the waggons breaking down
in the gorge, and therefore holding all the others
behind it up, the last of the stuff did not arrive
in Palmerston until 10 o’clock that night.
There was a great crowd of people waiting,
who even helped to erect the tent. They said
they would be satisfied with the Wild West por-
tion of the programme, as they had seen our
circus a few months ago, so we put up the tent
and gave the Hippodrome races and the Wild
West Show, commencing at about n p.m. We
did all this part of the entertainment, finishing
at i a.m. We generally finished with what
was known as “ The Hunter’s Cabin ” —a scene
in which the Indians shoot the hunter, scalp him,
and burn his cabin; but this night the cabin did not
arrive, and we decided to finish with the lassoing.
But the equestrian director forgot to inform
the bandmaster of this, so, after the lassoing,
there was a wait until the Ringmaster ran and
told the band that there was no “cabin”
and to play " The Queen.” But it was too
late. That wait in between did the trick. The
audience thought there should have been more,
and that we had suddenly decided to give them
no more, and had played “ The Queen ” in the
middle of the performance. They commenced
by a few hissing, then a hooting, then a cry,
“ Give us back our money.” Then came the
tearing down and breaking of seats, while some
demanded the whereabouts of the proprietors.
A lot of them had been drinking while waiting
for the commencement of the show, and these
started to destroy our property. They were
cutting the ropes to let the tent down on the
huge oil lights, which would have meant sure


destruction fire of the tents and seats, poles,
etc. ; but as they cut one rope and passed along,
I had several tentmen tying them together again.
The cowboys and Indians had ridden into the
dressing tent and lined up like an army of cavalry
with drawn revolvers well loaded, and when the
crowd came down on them they fired over their
heads which made them clear back again to the
big tent. One man got on a pedestal and made
a speech. He wanted the crowd to mobilise
and beat, burn and tear up everything ; but by
this time I had got together the whole of the
company of artists, band and tent hands, leaving
the cowboys and Indians on their horses in the
dressing tent, and armed with sticks, pick-
handles and any old thing we could find, we formed
into a body and marched on the mob. Rather,
we ran among them and succeeded in beating them
all off the field. Then we lowered the lights
and let the tents down, the crowd outside mean-
time pelting us with stones. After one or two
of us were hurt we again formed into a body
and charged, and cleared them away.
We got away in the early morning without
further mishap, but found that all the cowboys
and two Indians had left us —all but two, Cap-
tain “ Happy ” Jack Sutton and Keogh, one of
the boys who had fallen asleep in a railway
carriage. We had to play Wanganui that night,
and the Wild West was to have been our big
attraction. Sutton said he and Keogh would
do the lassoing and riding the bucking horses
and bullocks, and some of the circus artists could
dress up like cowboys and help out. My brother
Philip and I, my sisters, Rill and Madeline, Conny
Moreni, Gus St. Leon and George Anderson had
already practised throwing the lasso, so we
took the place of the truant cowboys and gave
a creditable showing.
Sutton then went back to Palmerston where
the cowboys had given a paddock show without
much success, and enticed them all but four to
come back. The other four started touring New


Zealand, giving shows on their bwn, but we saw
to it that they did not do very well. We could
not lawfully compel them to return to us as their
contracts were for Australia, no mention being
made of New Zealand in the contract. Two
more of the boys came back to us, but the other
two, with one Indian, went to Australia, and
joined an opposition show there.
CHAPTER IX.
OTHER RICHMONDS IN THE FIELD.
Back to Australia —On the Sydney Show Ground
—Larrikins Effectively Countered —A Circus Wed-
ding —Show Divides for First and Only Time —■
Friendly Rivals —Fillis and Fitzgerald on the
Scene.
After a not over-successful tour of the Domion
ion we chartered one of the Union S.S. Co.’s
steamers from the Bluff, and arrived in Adelaide
late on December 15, 1890, only to find
another Wild West Show lying in the harbour
in a German steamer. Sutton and I went over
to it on the Custom’s launch, and although
nearly all were asleep, we managed to find out
that the show was Doctor Carver’s, which had
just completed a most successful season in
Europe with Buffalo Bill’s Wild West Show.
In fact, Dr. Carver was a partner of that re-
nowned man. He said he was quite astonished
on his arrival in Adelaide to find another show
of the same kind as his there. Our bills had
stopped him from disembarking at Adelaide-
and we arranged right there not to play opposi-
tion to each other. They were to play Mel-
bourne and we Adelaide and then Sydney, after
which we were to have Brisbane, seemingly a
very good arrangement for us ; but we had the
biggest show, as ours was a three-ring circus,
Hippodrome and Wild West combined show,
whereas his was a Wild West Show only, and
again our cowboys were better than his, although


his Indians were" a better-looking crowd than
ours. Dr. Carver was the acknowledged cham-
pion sharp-shooter of the World. They played
in the Friendly Societies’ Grounds in Melbourne
and in Moore Park in Sydney, nearly opposite
to the Show Grounds, where we were playing.
They did not last very long as Whitney (the mana-
ger) took most of the Indians and cowboys back
to America, leaving Carver in Australia to pro-
duce a couple of Wild West dramas in the Alex-
andra Theatre. One drama was called " The
Scout,” with a scene where a horse and rider
fell through a broken bridge into water below.
Their trouble was to get a horse to cross that
bridge more than once.
We had other opposition at this time. Harm-
ston’s Circus that had come from America and
had engaged nearly all our artists from New
Zealand, also engaged the two cowboys and
Indian that left us in New Zealand, and was
lucky to have bought some very fine Wild West
posters that had been lying in Adelaide, left
there by a syndicate that intended to bring out
a Wild West Show, but they, after getting the
printing, and sending it out, had failed to get a
show together through some cause or another.
Anyhow, Harmston billed Wild West and
Circus, and with a lot of tentmen painted up as
Indians and some performers as cowboys, he
put on a very indifferent showing and was hurting
the name of Wild West. He was playing ahead
of our dates, so my brother Philip and I had a
short interview with Mr. Harmston, asking him
to cut out the Wild West part of his show, and
we would buy the printing he had. We offered
to pay him for anything that he had laid out on
producing the show, and guaranteed not to play
opposition to him at all; but he said he did
not want to know Wirth Bros., and turned away
from us. I said, “If that’s your attitude, you
will be very sorry you ever heard of us.” We
had nothing to do but to fight him, and we did
this very successfully. We sent a man named


Frost —a good lecturer —-ahead of our show with
a hot air balloon, and a man to make an ascent
and a parachute jump from the clouds, before
doing which he would release thousands of
handbills which would come floating from the
sky like snow all over the town. On them was
printed “ Wait for Wirth’s Original Wild West
Show,” and the date of our show with an an-
nouncement that there would be a night ascent
with an illuminated parachute dive and fireworks.
As this was all carried on in the town in which
Harmston was playing, and was free, it did the
trick for Harmston.
All this time, our show made long jumps from
Adelaide. We had Christmas there, and New
Year of 1891 at Ballarat. The cowboys tried
to give us trouble, but we had them under con-
tract here in Australia, and after one law case there
was no more trouble.
We opened in Sydney in the Agricultural
Grounds on January 24, 1891. We began with
the "paddock” show in the afternoon when the
gates were rushed, and the back fence of the
grounds was pushed down, and thousands of
our fellow countrymen rushed into the grounds.
Not content with being in the grounds for nothing,
they must rush the enclosure where the cowboys
were working. I stopped the show and tried
to clear the enclosure, but was nearly pulled
off my horse by the crowd, so two of the boys
tied a lasso from one saddle to another, and
with the lasso trailing between them galloped
through the crowd of larrikins and virtually
mowed them down. There were a few hurt,
but it proved effective and cleared the ground.
That night the show went much better, and
the following Monday afternoon (Anniversary
Day) the takings were much bigger, and the
crowd well-behaved.
In February, my sister Marizles was married
to Jack Martin in St. Andrew’s Cathedral, and
had her wedding breakfast under the Big Top.
Long tables were laid out in the Hippodrome


track, and on the party’s arrival from the
Cathedral, all the performers, cowboys, Indians,
tent hands, grooms and musicians lined up and gave
the couple three hearty cheers, the band striking
up the “Wedding March.” The bride’s favour-
ite horse (Rose) was brought into the tent and
given a bit of the wedding cake and a feast of
carrots. We danced on the two stages, and
when it came time for their departure for their
honeymoon trip, we showered them with rice and
good wishes.
From Sydney we ran two shows —one with
my brothers Philip and Harry with the cow-
boys and Indians going north and into Queens-
land, while I took the three-ring circus Hippo-
drome and Wild West Show out to the West of
New South Wales. The Wild West portion of my
show consisted of only one American Cowboy,
Jack Brown, and a Maori as an Indian. Jack
Brown, one of the finest all-round cowboys going
was over six feet tall, and a very good
looking chap. How he could ride. He was never
thrown from a horse and was an expert with the
lasso. He also had a dry wit. I was waiting for
him in a barber’s one day, and heard the barber
ask the usual, “ How is the razor ?” Jack replied,
“ Oh, if you are skinning me, it’s easy ; but if
you are shaving me, Oh, Hell !”
On this tour I became very expert with the
lasso and clever at picking up objects from the
ground whilst at full gallop on horseback, and
was a great assistance to Brown. In Dubbo, on
March 17, I bought the race gates as they were
holding their annual race meeting there, and we
gave a “ paddock” show in conjunction with the
races. I charged an extra shilling for admission,
i.e., 2/-, and between each race we gave one or
another of our Wild West stunts, even to riding
buckirg horses and wild bullocks.
In Newcastle the two shows met and combined,
and we swcre we would never divide again, as
the public did not give either show all its patron-
age, though, as a matter of fact, either show


was complete on its own. My brother John,
who had been ill, had rejoined the show a few days
before Newcastle, so all the four brothers were
together again.
We then ran a Three-ring Circus, Hippodrome
and Wild West Combined Shows right through
the north of N.S.W. and into Queensland, open-
ing in Brisbane on June 9th, in iVlbert Street
Town Hall Reserve. The Governor visited the
show during this season, and I dramatised the
Wild West portion of the show, calling it “ The
Scout’s Revenge.” It went very well. We after-
wards played this same drama in Buenos Aires
in 1895.
In November, 1891, Sells Bros.’ Two-ring
Circus and Hippodrome arrived in Sydney, but
their horses were quarantined, and put on Shark
Island, whilst their wild animals were quaran-
tined in the Sydney Zoo, thereby playing op-
position to their owners. This was the first time
a hippopotamus was ever seen in Australia.
The Sells Circus had two, which used to walk
around the hippodrome track, and were a great
novelty.
We were playing Melbourne at the time of their
arrival, and when we heard that their horses were
not allowed to land on account of glanders, we
offered to lend them 20 of ours free, but they
would not take them if we would not sell them.
We did not want to sell them, so they bought
new ones and broke them in. This did not do
their riders justice as it takes a horse from six
to twelve months to get a balance in the ring ;
but their other performances were very good,
and on the whole they did not do badly in Aus-
tralia. They said they came over to Australia
for the advertisement it would give them in
America, as Barnum and Bailey went to England
with their American circus for an advertisement.
Sells thought that on their return to America
they could advertise that they had travelled
four times as far as their rivals. .
They played in Melbourne at Christmas and


New Year and on to Adelaide after we had left
these places, and they followed us through the
country towns, but never once put a bill up in
opposition to us. We were in New Zealand
when they left for America, and we engaged a
number of their Arabs, as these people had not
been seen in Australia before and were a dis-
tinct novelty in New Zealand with their mar-
vellous gun-spinning and lightning tumbling and
pyramids act.
Our brother Harry sold out his shares of the
show on February 6, 1892, in Hobart, and went
into the hotel business in Melbourne, taking the
Albury Hotel in Bourke Street. This house only
comparatively recently went into the delicensed
discard after having been kept for years by
Harry Schwartz, one of Melbourne’s best-known
publicans, who often addresses me as “ Harry.”
One day in Hobart as I was riding home with
one of the cowboys after a “ paddock ” show,
where I had been helping to lasso wild bullocks,
etc., I asked him where he had come from. He
said “ Texas.” I asked him how Sutton had
found him, and he replied that Sutton didn’t
find him, he found Sutton. He said he had been
riding for his life to California when he overtook
a number of other cowboys, all fully equipped
with horses, saddles, guns, lassos, etc., making
for the same State. He found out from them
they were going to join Wirth’s Australian Wild
West Show, which was leaving San Francisco in a
little while, so he rode with them, and on arrival
spoke to Sutton, and joined the outfit, and here
he was. I asked why had he been riding for his
life away from Texas ; was it through a girl ?
He said that that was the excuse he had then given,
but the fact was there had been a shooting-up
of a whole family of cattle-duffers. They had
been the terrors of the country, being horse and
cattle thieves of the very worst character, men-
killers all—the father and four sons —so the
ranch owners who had suffered decided to get
rid of them, by taking the law into their own hands.


One fine day they surrounded the district where
the outlaws lived and rounded them all on to their
(the outlaw's) own ranch. It took days to do it ;
but the ranch owners with their cowboys, suc-
cessfully surrounded them, and after a day or
two’s shooting they were all laid out, not without
a few casualties on the attackers’ side. I asked
him if he thought he had shot any of them him-
self, and he replied, “ I don’t know, I was the
only one with a Winchester. The others only
had revolvers.”
We had a very prosperous season through
New Zealand, and returned to Sydney, opening
in the York Street Skating Rink on December
23, 1892.
Frank Fillis had arrived before this time with
his African Circus from India, where he had been
playing to successful business, but the Indian
style of running a circus would not do for Aus-
tralia. In India one had to lose a night in each
town before playing there. If you tried to open
the same night as you arrived in a town, no
one would turn up, thinking the circus would
not be ready, so when Fillis arrived in Australia
he thought it would be the same ; but it was the
reverse, for if one lay off in an Australian town
for a day the novelty and the excitement of the
arrival of a circus with their queer animals and
beautiful horses, ponies, etc., would wear off,
and very few would turn up to see the perform-
ance. He soon got wise, and while in Australia he
did as Australians did. He was playing in Crown
Street when we arrived, and when we got off the
steamer we all went to his matinee. He had a
very clean, first-class one-ring circus. Frank
Fillis was a lover of the “ Haut Ecole ” or “ High
School ” Riding, and had some very clever “High
School ” horses and some very well trained
liberty horses, i.e., horses that performed by
themselves with no one riding them. Fillis was
a very nice fellow and a true gentleman. His heart
and soul were in the ring and therefore the
business part was neglected, so after a couple of


years, he and his company had to be assisted back
to Africa.
It was in 1893 that Fitzgerald Brothers came
to the fore. They opened in Sydney in the
George Street Benevolent Grounds in opposition
to Fillis, who was playing a return visit after
touring New Zealand. Fillis was in the Exhibi-
tion Buildings, Prince Alfred Park, and had a
few new performers amongst whom were the
Feily Family; but Fitzgerald Brothers, with
their purely Australian circus, had the best of
it, and when Fillis went to play the country
towns he found Fitzgerald with him, and so they
continued until Melbourne was reached, Fitz
having a bit the best of it, as their expenses were
not nearly so high as Fillis’, who was travelling
by train, whilst the Fitz’s were travelling by
waggons and with an inexpensive company.
We had gone to South Australia and to the
West, where there was a gold rush on. Cool-
gardie had been found, but we could not get there
with our circus. We did very well, however,
in Perth, and, in fact, all through the West.
But Australia was now in a very bad way through
the “Land Boom’’ failures and banks closing their
doors, leaving the public with very little ready
cash, so, deciding to take a purely Australian show
to England via South Africa —and banking on what
an advertisement such a trip would be for us on our
return—we sailed from Port Adelaide for Cape Town
by the s.s. “ Damascus,” on November 7, 1893.
CHAPTER X.
SOUTH AFRICA.
An All-night Argument —Circus Cricketers —
Ever-interesting Country and its natives —Johannes-
burg—A Scare —The Wild Old Days—Death of
John Wirth —The City of Diamonds.
We had a delightful trip across the Indian
Ocean. We would practise every day to keep
ourselves fit, and in the evening we would have


the band out on deck and play classical and
dance music. We would exercise our horses, of
which we had over 40, every morning before the
decks were cleaned, and while the sailors were
washing the decks, they would let the salt water
play on the horses’ legs, and wash their stalls out.
Early on the 30th, we sighted great, big,
solemn Table Mountain. We were all awe-struck.
The great mass seemed to warn us not to ap-
proach it. It looked as if it would draw us to
it and crush us ; but when we turned into Table
Bay the scene was different. There, lying peace-
fully in the hollow of its arm, was a charming
city. The change of scene from the solemn
mountain to the inviting brightness of the bay
was most impressive, and sent our hearts gladly
beating again at the prospects ahead.
It had been the intention of the shipping
authorities to lie out in the stream and unload
us, with our horses and paraphernalia and Aus-
tralian wild (?) animals into lighters, but we
insisted on being taken up alongside the wharf,
or jetty, as it is called there ; we had to pay the
extra cost. But while we were lying there a
steam launch came out to us, and a voice called
out, “Is Fillis on board ? ” Someone on board,
knowing the man, told us that it was Mr.
Bonamicci, a South African theatrical manager.
I called out, “ Yes, come aboard.” So he came
up, and I, taking my niece by the hand, led her to
him and said, “Here she is.” He said, “ Oh, no,
I mean Frank Fillis. I heard there was a circus
on board, so thought it might be he.”
We had previously arranged that my brothers
John and Philip should go ashore and engage
the ground to perform on, as we were told there
were only two pieces large enough for a circus
to play on —the Market Reserve and the Parade
ground, and as Bonamicci had grand opera play-
ing in the New Opera House, we were afraid he
would engage them and keep us out. As our
funds were getting very low by this time, we
wanted to start right away, so Philip and John
a


went into Capetown on the steam launch and I en-
tertained Bonamicci while they secured the ground;.
After about an hour, the “ Damascus ” pulled
in alongside the jetty, and my brothers were on
the wharf to meet it. I asked them if they had
secured the ground, but they said they had
only secured hotel accommodation as they had
been told that Mr. Bonamicci had just engaged
the lot. That night Philip and I went to the
opera and saw Bonamicci. We did not see
any of the opera as we were in Bonamicci’s
office trying to get the land off him to play
on, but he said it would ruin him if we played
opposition to his opera. We had heard that
he had a pantomime in preparation for Christ-
mas for the Opera House, so I told him
we had a pantomime with us with which we
finished the show, and that we would wait and
play opposition to his panto. We then suggested
that he should close his opera and play it some-
where else and play us in the Opera House. He
was amazed at first, but when I pointed out to
him it was nothing unusual with us, that we had
played in the Alexander Theatre, Melbourne,
and the Princess, Bendigo, and the Royal in
Adelaide, he started to listen, and we talked terms.
Then he wanted us to play under his manage-
ment in Johannesburg and Pretoria. We did not
want this, but when we found he would not give
us the opera house we gave way, and completed
the deal somewhere about four in the morning.
He was to go to all the expense and put a ring
on the stage, and to supply extra musicians, bill
the town, find the theatre lights, and all other
expenses for 45 % of the gross takings. Then
he was to pay our railway fares and expenses
to Johannesburg and play us in his Amphitheatre,
pay all outside expenses and receive 30 %. Thep
to Pretoria, where we were to play in our own
tent ; but he was to pay all outside expenses
and receive 30 %, we taking 70 %, and to find
the company.
After making these arrangements, and having


drawn up a contract or an agreement, which we
signed, we had a drink, and went home to our
hotel, Bonamicci having in the meantime put up
a notice closing the opera.
We got busy on the Sunday and had the loam
carted on to the stage. On the Monday night
we gave a full dress rehearsal, and on the Tues-
day night we opened to a very hne house, al-
though the residents, or, rather some of them,
were very indignant with Bonamicci for closing
the opera season and playing a circus there
in their brand new Opera House, but after they
had seen the good, clean, refined show we put
on they said nothing more. Those who figured
on our programme included the Walhalla Bros.
(Ted and Jack and their wives), Valazie, Box-
hall, Bush, Turner, Joe Romano, P. Durney, Mr.
and Mrs. J. J. Wirth, my brother Philip and
myself, Mrs. Martin (Miss Marizles) Miss Madeline,
Misses Edith, Gertie and May, and Carl Bullus.
We played there nearly three weeks, and in the
meantime we had played the local cricketers
and beaten them all. Just about that time there
was an Australian XI. in England doing the
same, and it was because we were Australians
that the South Africans appeared afraid of us,
and made themselves into victims, whereas, if
they had not thought so much of us, they would
have perhaps beaten us, as ours was not such a
very great eleven. We always carried a cricket
team those days.
We left the City of Flowers on Dec. 21, by
rail for Johannesburg —1,013 miles, I believe.
It took us about three days to do the journey,
but we enjoyed every minute of it It all seemed
so strange, the country being so different to
anything we had been used to. First we travelled
through country that was singularly fertile and
pleasant to the eye —very picturesque, old-
fashioned towns with fruit trees growing in the
streets and seemingly no footpaths, the gutters
running with water pure and fresh, for the Dutch
are great believers in irrigation ; some beautiful
cs


valleys with vineyards spreading right back to
the mountains, and broad rivers with huge
mountains in the background Then we passed
by these beautifully peaceful scenes to the more
imposing Great Karoo, seemingly barren country
with flat-topped hills devoid of any vegetation,
excepting what is known as the Karoo bush,
the roots of which descend to great depths in
the earth. It is therefore very succulent, and
is the main food for the sheep, goats and
ostriches that abound there. One was struck by
the dryness and clearness of the atmosphere.
It seemed so healthful, giving one a remarkable
feeling of strength.
The natives were another source of interest
with their meagre clothing and their habits.
The babies were absolutely naked, and firm fat
dumplings they appeared to be. Some .of the
boys—they are all called “boys” even if their
age should be 100 —would want to sell for a
“ticky ” (3d.) a bottle of goat’s milk which they
carried across their shoulders in pockets in bran
bags. We were just as interesting to them as
they to us, and the stations were always full
of curious natives of different tribes—the diminu-
tive Bushmen (with their peculiar figures), the
Hottentots, the Kaffirs, the Cape boys, etc.
Leaving the Karoo we passed into what is known
as the “veldt ” —the large plateaus of the Orange
Free State and the Transvaal, a country of
intense silence and loneliness, with native villages
composed of hundreds of little thatched huts
resembling beehives, and composed of mud walls
and thatched roof with cowdung floors and
inner walls. The cowdung is plastered on the
floor and walls with the natives’ bare hands,
and becomes very hard and polished. They
gather it up all fresh on the road or veldt, pat
it into cakes with their hands, and place it on a
tray and carry it on their heads to their huts.
What is over from the walls and floor, they dry
in the sun, and it is then used for fuel.
Another pleasing sight was furnished by the


fields of mealies (their national food), and their
naked women walking gracefully with great loads
carried on their heads, and their babies, or picanin-
nies, slung on their backs, or astride their hips.
At last we arrived at the corrugated-iron
city of Johannesburg a city of dust and no sewer-
age system, the residents throwing their waste
water out on to the streets, and very often on
to some poor unfortunate human who chanced to
be walking there at the moment. I received
several such street baths whilst there, so found
it safer to walk on the roads than the footpath.
We opened in Fillis’s Amphitheatre —a huge
corrugated-iron affair —on Boxing Night, and the
size of the takings astonished we three brothers.
It was the most money we had ever taken at
one performance, the prices were 2/6 (native
gallery), 4/-, 6/- and £2/2/- (for a box holding-
four persons). We played Johannesburg eight
weeks to enormous business, changing our pro-
gramme every week, and it was when we changed
the programme to a Wild West Show that the
amphitheatre was nearly burnt down.
“ The Johannesburg Star ” of January 24,
1894, thus briefly recounted the incident
“ Excitement at the Circus.”
“ Last evening Wirth’s new programme was
repeated to the satisfaction of a big audience.
A mishap occurred while the settler’s hut, in
the Wild West part of the programme was
burning, the decorative curtains away in the
dome of the buildings, 70 feet high, catching
fire. The huge audience took fright, and was
about to stampede, but by the prompt exer-
tions of Mr. Geo. Wirth, who set an example
to one or two others of the company, everything
was put right in a few minutes, and no harm
resulted.
“There was an exciting scene all the same.
For one moment, when the flames were mount-
ing towards the rafters, the fate of the build-
ing seemed to hang in the balance. Mr. Geo.
Wirth shinned up the ropes and poles right


into the dome amongst the flames. The
audience who were rushing out nearly panicky,
stayed to see the result. He was up in less
time than it takes to record the fact, and he
and the other (Edward Murphy) who had
followed, pluckily beat out the flames with
their cowboy hats and gloved hands by pulling
the burning material down and letting it fall
into the arena below, where it was quickly
put out. Other members of the company
were busily shifting the horses and live stock
from the building, whilst others again were
hurriedly removing their personal effects and
luggage.
“ Mr. Arthur Bonamicci publicly thanked
Mr. Geo. Wirth. He said he certainly was
the hero of the evening and the one to whom
was due the salvage of the Amphitheatre, and
probably the saving of several lives, as a
stampede was imminent. To Mr. Wirth he
gave his everlasting gratitude, and to Mr.
Murphy he gave a fiver.”
As I have already stated, nearly all the houses
in and around Johannesburg were of corrugated-
iron. The hotel I lived at was built of this
material, and some of the rooms were built cabin-
like with two bunks in (top and bottom) just
outside the hotel. The attendants were black
boys. Even the, chamber “maids” were boys,
and so, of course, were the kitchen staff ; but
it gave us quite a turn when one day we saw the
kitchen “slushies” licking the plates with their
tongues instead of washing them. They liked
the gravy, but we saw to it after that our plates
were washed just before we used them.
Of course, Johannesburg was a new mining
town ; in fact, little better than a camp. There
were liquor bars in hundreds. Every few yards
one would come across these bars with no ac-
commodation. Some were just one little room
turned into a bar, with a left-behind actress or
erstwhile vaudeville star, who had forsaken the
profession, as hostess.


Johannesburg in these days had very few white
women residents, and whenever any new woman
arrived, she was very much sought after by the
bucks of the city. Many a mixed vaudeville
team was broken up by their female members
leaving to live the life of luxury with a Rand
millionaire. Whenever a new actress was ad-
vertised to appear at one of the theatres, in-
quiries were made from the theatrical manager
by these bloods, and if the report was favourable
—the lady was young or good looking —they
would crowd the theatre the first night, and the
lady would be the recipient of some fine bouquets
and several diamonds, with requests to sup with
the giver at a leading hotel. The lady dazzled
by the richness of the gift, would probably con-
sent at the first time of asking, but if she didn't,
the swain would persist, and finally get the
manager to introduce him to her at the back of
the stage. If the lady were married or had a
partner, then the male member would be ap-
proached and invited to supper into the clubs,
etc., for a night or two. Then the wife, or part-
ner, would be introduced later, and would have
such favours showered upon her that often she
soon lost her head to the wily one, and the rest
was only a matter of time —and very short time
at that. After a month or so, however, her
admirer would cool off, and would be seeking a
fresh beauty, and inevitably the bar would be her
finale. Some few made good, but the majority
suffered.
These shanties would be kept open all hours
of the night and far into the following morning.
Then they would be closed until the afternoon.
Whisky was 1/6 a glass and soda i/-, so that a
whisky and soda was half-a-crown. Money was
no object in these days with some people, although
there were hundreds of men pretty nearly starv-
ing. They were clerks and professional men of
every denomination who could get nothing to
do. There was plenty of work for the labourer
and tradesman, but nothing for the clerical, and


to relieve them we gave a free dinner daily at the
Amphitheatre. This was attended by scores of
the poor, but still gentle folk.
After Johannesburg we went to Pretoria, the
capital of the Transvaal—-a picturesque city of
Dutch population, built in the regular Boer
style, with the church and market in the centre
of the town and with all streets leading from it,
giving a clear view right out to the veldt. They
built their towns in those days in fear of the
natives, and prepared accordingly.
We played in General Joubert’s paddock ad-
joining his residence. The General and his wife
paid us several visits, for he liked the circus
immensely. President Kruger also paid us a
visit at one matinee, as he never went anywhere
at night, but retired early and rose early. He
was a very religious man.
Our stay in Pretoria lasted three weeks to very
good business, which was remarkable when one
takes into consideration the size of the town.
In Australia we could only play a town of this
size one night. We then travelled to Bloom-
fontein, East London and King Williamstown,
playing each of these places a week. We then
toured to Queenstown, Molteno and Aliwal North,
two nights each.
In the latter town we had the misfortune to-
lose our eldest brother John on March 17,
1894, after only a day’s illness. His grave is on
the Orange River, and is marked by a broken
column. He was only 36 years old, but always
looked older. In fact, he was generally taken for
our father. The Masons of the town gave him a
Masonic funeral. This incident served to im-
press on us the fact that the South Africans are
amongst the most hospitable people in all the
world. This includes the Dutch as well as the
English residents.
Next we arrived at the wonderful town of
Kimberley, where diamonds were so plentiful.
We saw them being won in millions and registered
a vow that we would not buy any more


diamonds, as we weresure they would become a
glut on the market. That was over 30 years
ago, and now diamonds are five times the price
they were then.
We were told that in 1867 — m y birth year—
a poor farmer’s child whilst playing on the banks
of the river found a pretty stone and brought
it home, and was playing with it along with a
number of others on the floor of their home. A
neighbour —one van Niekirk —who was visiting
them at the time, saw it and offered to buy it,
but the mother gave it to him saying, “ It is only
a pebble.” Van Niekirk took it away and offered
it for sale, but could get no buyers for it until
Mr. Lorenzo Boys, Civil Commissioner at Coles-
berg, came to see it, and immediately detected
its true character. Thus the discovery of this
stone by a child at play led to the location of
the greatest diamond mine the world has
known. Kimberley in 1870 was just one deso-
late expanse of plain, yet in 1871, a canvas town
sprang up in a night as it were, and before the
year was out there was a presentable township,
with its theatres, stores, butchers, bakers and
shoemakers’ shops, billiard rooms, bars and hotels.
I was told that within nine months of the dis-
covery of the first “ pretty pebble,” 50,000
people were on the spot, camping in tents and
rude huts on the sloping “ kopjes,” all crazy to
get rich quick.
In 1894, it looked like a city a hundred years
old. Of course, in the early days, robberies were
prevalent, diamonds being stolen from their
rightful owners, and many a fine story I have
heard of how they got the rough diamond out of
the territory.
Of course great care was taken to prevent
the natives and miners stealing and smuggling
these gems out of the pits. A law was passed
that a person found with a rough diamond in
his possession would get seven years’ hard labour
on the Capetown breakwater, and all employees
were stripped of their clothing and rigidly searched


whenever they left the diggings ; but devious
and cunning ways were found to purloin and
smuggle some of the choicest stones out of the
fields. In some instances it was known that
cattle and other ruminating animals were kept
in hunger until they would devour their food
ravenously, and then were given bran and soft
grain containing the gems to be swallowed at a
gulp and re-masticated later. But before the
animals had time to re-masticate and finish that
part of their natural function, they were driven
out of the district to the slaughter, where their
stomachs were carefully secreted for further in-
spection, and the balance of the carcass sold for
consumption or left on the roadside to rot and
dry up. One story is told about a well-known
man who owned a beautiful black stallion and
used to cross the border frequently; it was
afterwards ascertained that he had fitted a
small rubber sack or bag of the same colour to
the scrotum of the charger in such a manner as
to completely conceal its contents, and this
rubber pouch held in position by an elastic
band, often contained the rarest gems, which
were removed after they had passed the inspec-
tion lines.
CHAPTER XI.
SOUTH AFRICA (CONTINUED).
A Wedding Surprise —Madagascar and Mauri-
tius —Forestalling an Opponent—Treking on the
Wonderful Veldt —Savaged by a Stallion — Out-
lander v. Boer —Murmurings of Trouble to Come
—Too Exciting for the Natives.
We went from Kimberley to Middleburg,
Grahamstown, Uitenhage and on to Port Eliza-
beth, where we stayed four weeks, in fact, long
enough for me to enter into the greatest contract
of my life —I got married.
It was the surprise of the day, not only to our
show folk, who thought I was the last in the


world to get married, but to the townspeople,
as it was done on the last day of our stay in
Port Elizabeth, and was of a runaway nature.
We (my bride-elect and I) took train to Uitenhage
and obtained a special licence, and did the deed.
Then we wired to my brother and my wife’s
mother the fact, and that we were returning
on the mid-day train. The news spread like
wild-fire through the town and thousands were
on the platform to meet us ; but they were dis-
appointed as we missed the mid-day train and
I had to engage a Cape cart and drive from
Uitenhage to Port Elizabeth, as we were sup-
posed to sail that day for Mauritius with all the
circus complete.
On our arrival we were smothered with rice,
and I had some trouble with my wife’s family,
as they greatly objected to the marriage ; but my
sisters and brother intervened, and persuaded
them that it would not be such a bad match, as
I was a really decent young fellow.
Here is what was published in the “ Eastern
Province Herald,” of June 30, 1894, which was
forwarded to us to Mauritius :
“ Romance of the Circus.”
“ The Wirth Bros. Circus Troupe left by
the s.s. “Dunbar Castle” for Mauritius on
Friday afternoon. In any case a goodly num-
ber of friends were expected to see them away,
but this number was considerably augmented
by a little sensation which was bruited abroad.
Just before noon a telegram was received from
Uitenhage stating that Mr. George Wirth had
been married there that morning, The event
had been kept so very quiet that no one even
knew the fortunate lady’s name. However, this
became known after a while when the mother of
the bride began to make enquiries of her
daughter. She was as much in the dark as
everybody else, and when the runaway couple
turned up on the scene some trouble was brew-
ing for them. The mother naturally objected
to being deprived of her daughter so summarily,


and it was not till late in the afternoon that
the intervention of peacemakers smoothed the
path of the happy pair. Meanwhile the story
had got abroad and the ‘jetty’ was crowded
when the bride left by the launch to accompany
her husband on his travels. The bride, Miss
Margaret Bain that was, is well known in town,
and her sudden exit has left a void in man} 7
an aching heart. We wish the young couple
every happiness.”
The captain kept the steamer waiting for me
as we had his sympathy. He knew my wife,
and had known me for some time, for I had met
him in Capetown and we had become quite
friendly. He had a fine wedding cake made
by the ship’s baker, and we celebrated our wed-
ding on the high seas. It is now history how quickly
everyone loved my wife. Although she was still
in her teens, she soon adapted herself to the
new mode of life, and before the trip to Mauritius
was finished, she was making wardrobe for the
artists and myself. She proved an adept needle
woman, and although it is now over thirty years
ago, she is still taking a keen interest in the
dressing of the show. All the beautiful dresses
that are to be seen either on the horses, elephants,
ponies or artists at each performance of Wirth’s
Circus are either designed or made by “ Mrs.
George,” as she is affectionately called by mem-
bers of our cotnpany. The adage, “ Marry in
haste and repent at leisure,” does not apply in
our case. But we may be the exception to the
rule.
We had a very fine passage across to Madagas-
car and Mauritius, the steamer staying nearly
two days at Madagascar where a picturesque
town lay cosily beneath a huge mountain. There
were no wharfs or jetties, but the passengers
were lowered over the side in baskets into small
boats. Then the natives pulled into the bay for
the beach, and when the boats ran as far up the
shallow beach as they could, the niggers got
out into the water and lifted us in their arms.


one by one, and carried us ashore. Then we rode
in chairs each carried on the shoulders of two native
boys all round the town and up into the mountain.
When we returned to the steamer there were
dozens of natives of both sexes with the most
wonderful lace for sale —beautiful silk lace, some
as fine as a spider’s web, while others were more
heavy, with the most beautiful designs. We all
bought as much as we could afford, and my wife
still has some of it left.
Mauritius, we found, was occupied by French
people, although it was an English possession.
They were a handsome people, mostly Creole in
complexion. Indians predominated the population.
One of the prettiest sights I ever saw was on
their racecourse on a race day when thousands
of Indians congregated in their richly-coloured
heavy and expensive silks, all the colours of the
rainbow, making the finest showing of colours
I ever witnessed.
Mauritius, where we spent a couple of months,
is a delightful island, giving one the impression
of romance, and one’s thoughts would go back
to the gay days of France when its kings lived
for nothing but love and pleasure.
We toured inland from Port Louis, the capital,
to other delightful towns, all with their mixture
of French and Indian, and we were welcomed
everywhere we went.
Port Louis had just had a terrible fire which
had burnt down their best hotels, so we had to
live in a furnished house, engaging coolie ser-
vants to cook and keep house. We were very
amused, and our women .folk frightened, at the
little chameleons which ran all over the walls
and ceilings of the houses, making funny little
noises as they darted after other insects which
they devoured. These lizards are allowed full
freedom and are never killed, as they exterminate
the flies and other more repulsive insects.
Crossing to Natal, we opened in Durban on
September 26, 1894, and although the proper
season there is in the winter months, viz. : May,


June, July, August, we found it very pleasant
and profitable the three weeks we had there.
Of course we caught the rainy season which
we would have missed had we played there in
the months mentioned above. After playnig
Pietermaritzburg a week in the rain, we re-
turned to Capetown where the Gilford’s Statue
performers—our first importation from America
to Africa —joined us.
We had heard that Frank Fillis, who was very
popular in South Africa, was returning from
Australia and would be playing opposition, so
I hurried from Natal ahead of our show to get the
ground in Capetown to play on. I was coming by
steamer and on board was Harry Friedman, who
had married my sister Madeline, in Durban. He
was also going to Capetown to engage ground
for Fillis. The boat called in at East London
and I went to send a telegram to my wife’s
mother at Port Elizabeth that we were coming
by the steamer ; but when I got to the telegraph
office I saw Friedman coming out, and when I
took up the pencil to write on the telegraph
form telling Mrs. Bain that we would be arriving
in Port Elizabeth in a day or so, I noticed on
the uppermost form the scratchings of the pre-
vious message, the imprint of which I could
distinctly discern, reading, “ Nannucci, Cape
town. George Wirth and wife on board. Secure
ground for Fillis before we arrive. Friedman.’’
So, instead of sending my mother-in-law a
message, I at once returned to the hotel we were
putting up at for the night, and told the manager
to send to the steamer for my things as secretly
as possible, which he did, and I took train to
Capetown, as that would get me there a few
days before the steamer. As soon as I arrived
in Capetown I went right away and engaged
the two pieces of ground, i.e., the Market and
the Parade, and whilst returning from the Castle
I saw Nannucci coming out of the Town Hall.
He got into a cab and told the driver to go as
fast as possible to the Castle, so I stopped him


and told him he would be too late there also,
as I had just come from there, and showed him
the receipt of the deposit, both for the Parade
and the Market. Then I took him to my hotel,
where my wife had gone before me, and we had
breakfast —a late one —and talked over the situa-
tion, finally coming to an understanding that
Frank Fillis would not play opposition to us
but go to Kimberley as soon as he arrived from
Australia.
Now was the time that we thought we should
make our way to England, and Philip sailed in
one of the Castle steamers to make arrangements
for our English tour, while I took the circus
through the country towns of South Africa
which we had not yet played. We therefore
broke away from Bonamicci and went on our
own, firstly to the beautiful Dutch towns in the
Western Province of the Cape, and then up in-
land again to Graff-Renet. On the road to this
town we saw elephants in the wild, and thousands
of baboons. Whole colonies of the latter could
be seen travelling across the hills, led by a giant
baboon. Ostriches were also very plentiful.
Although most of the towns on this trip were
on the railway, some were off it, and w T e had to
trek it in bullock and mule waggons. Our first
trek was from Johannesburg, or, rather, Heidel-
burg to Standerdton, and from Standerdton to
Charlestown. I forget how many teams it took
to carry our stuff, but I do know it was a novel
experience for us to be driven by black boys
with very long whips on very long handles, and
their queer shouts of encouragement to their
mules. With 14 or 16 in a team we would go
at breakneck speed down winding gully and up
to the next rise. These black boys had a way
of their own for identifying people. They would
quickly pick out some peculiarity in a person
and name them by it. I was known as “ Quick
Eye.” I forget the word in their language.
It was lovely travelling in the warm sunshine
and the nights with the clear moon were also very


fine, but near morning a cold snap would steal
across the veldt, and it was then we had to be
careful of our horses, especially if they were
out in the open. We tried always to get them
under shelter, but could not always get them
all under, and several valuable animals died.
On one occasion when a couple of our stallions
were left out I got up about four in the morning
to see if they were all right, and noticing Satan’s
rug hanging around his neck to the ground, with
the rest of his body exposed to the cold, I pro-
ceeded to remedy it, and was pulling it on him
when he grabbed me in his mouth and started to
shake me like a dog does a rat. I lay across his
neck rope with a mouthful of my clothes and a
portion of my ribs between his teeth, and I never
felt so helpless in my life, nor have I ever since
experienced the same sensation. I was in great
pain and dizzy from the shaking I was undergoing,
and was losing consciousness, when suddenly
I was dropped to the ground, and before he
could make a further attempt, I rolled out of
danger, and got my ring whip and gave him some-
thing for his temper. I never arranged his rug,
but woke the landlord of the hotel and got him
to give me some brandy, and went to bed with
my ribs sorely crushed and a hole in my head where
he first bit me before collaring me by the body.
It was while treking that I first became aware
of the soreness of feeling the Outlander had for
the Boer. It appeared that the Outlander had
no vote or say in the government of either the
Orange Free State or the Transvaal, although
if there were any trouble with the natives, the
Outlanders were the first to be called up to
fight alongside the Boer, and many had been killed
in these conflicts.
A young Africander, of English parents who
owned the hotel we were stopping at, one night
asked me to go spring hare shooting, and said
he would show me some sharp shooting. He
said he would show me that the Outlander was
as good a shot with the rifle as the best shot


amongst the Boers. He carried a bulls-eye lan-
tern, and he would flash it every now and again
and ahead of us we could see a couple of green
shining eyes. They would only be there for
less than a second, for as soon as they saw the
light they would be off, but no sooner did my
friend see those shining eyes than he would up
with his gun and fire. Then he would say to
me, “You will find a dead hare there/’ and true
enough there would be one freshly shot. He bag-
ged quite a number, and I also tried it, and
although in the day time I am a good shot, I
never shot one of these hares that night, as I
was not fast enough with the gun.
He then told me his grievance against the
Boers, and how shortly it was to be all altered.
They were going to overthrow Paul Kruger
and Stein, and make it one British colony. Dr.
Jamieson was coming to their aid. He would
march on Pretoria, and while the Boers were
fighting him, the Outlanders’ army would fall
on the Boers, and have them between two fires.
I thought at the time that he was only ro-
mancing, but after events proved that he knew
something, and the next time we played
Johannesburg in Fillis’s building I saw in a huge
well, 10 ft. wide by 10 ft. deep, that ran right
across the 42 ft. ring, thousands of rifles. I
don’t know to this day whether they belonged to
the Dutch or to the Outlanders.
It was about this time that I got word from
my brother Philip in England that the conditions
there did not warrant us taking our show there,
as the prices were too cheap. Sixpence and a
shilling was all we could charge. Then, again,
the circuses playing there gave big parades
through the streets, with all kinds of showy
waggons and it would have cost too much to build
these waggons. We therefore played a third
season through South Africa, Philip, in the mean-
time, rejoining us.
An incident occurred in Petermaritzburg that
will give some idea of how careful the authorities


have to be regarding the ruling of the native
element, as they outnumber the whites 100
to I.
We were playing a piece I composed for an
afterpiece based on an event of the Matabele War
—'“ Major Wilson’s Last Stand,” or “ Fighting
to Save the Queen’s Colours.” It depicted Major
Wilson (my brother Philip) and his handful of men
being surrounded by an impi of Matabele, all being
killed after a terrific battle, it being left for the
Major’s horse, which Philip had cleverly trained,
who has been only wounded, to roll his master
over and over until he gets him to the water,
where he refreshes himself, etc., etc. We had
engaged about a hundred Zulus (rickshaw boys)
to play the part of the Matabele. They were
armed with knob-kerries and assagis, with cow-
hide shields, and they entered into the fun with
such earnestness that it took us all our time
from being either struck down or speared. Of
course their sticks hurt us very much more than
our blank cartridges did them. In one scene,
where I was supposed to ride through them
for succour (I being Burnham, the scout) I was
riding " Bannockburn,” our black thoroughbred
stallion performer, and I was supposed to fight
my way through them, but they came at me with
such ferocity, clubbed me and threw their assagis,
that I was nigh being beaten back from the scene.
I wrenched a knob-berri from one of them and
charged them at full gallop, swinging my stick
in grim earnest. I knocked down several be-
fore they would give way, and in that way I got
through. They were all very much excited over
their seemingly success over the whites, and for a
long time that night after the performance they
were still yelling and making passes at the people
who attended the performance. They were still
at it the next day, and the Government sent down
to us and ordered us to discontinue that part of
our performance, declaring that we were nearly
the cause of a native uprising.


CHAPTER XII.
SOUTH AMERICA.
Telephone Novelty —Objections to Garden of Eden
Fashions —Uruguayans Lionise Popular Idols
Monte Video Captured —Burned Out —Englishmen
Prove Worth among Strangers —Confusing Cus-
toms —Sharp Practices —Excitement in Brazil —
Cold-blooded Tragedy.
We now decided to leave South Africa, and as
England was out of the question, we called all
our artists together, and told them we thought
we would go to India, if they were all agreeable.
Some of them answered that it was all the same
to them, but one star turn absolutely refused
to go to India as they were afraid of their health.
We had to consider them, so we asked them
had they any objection to going to South America,
and on their replying that they would very much
like to see that great country, we decided to go
there. As there were no regular boats plying
there, we had to charter the s.s. “ Umona.” We
had all our things aboard and notified everyone
of the day and hour of sailing, but when we were
ready to start we found that the pair who had
jibbed at India, were not on board. We delayed
the sailing and searched Durban for these two
men and their wives. And a long search we had
too. They were in hiding as they did not want
to go to South America, and they did not want
us to meet them because they thought we would
persuade them to go against their will. We
eventually found them and pleaded with them,
but in vain. We were all one day and a night
trying to get them to come, and as we had to pav
£IOO per day demurrage for any delay of the
steamer, we eventually sailed without them.
It cost £ 2,000 to charter the “ Umona,” and we
sailed from Durban on August n, for Monte Video.
We had on board with us as novelties a num-
ber of fine, big upstanding Zulus, a couple of Cape
boys, a Hottentot, and a Bushman. The latter


was quite a little fellow, who had never seen the
sea, and when we left Durban, and he looked away
on the horizon he said, “My alamaghter ! What
a large sproot ” (creek). After two or three
days, as we were passing the Cape of Good Hope,
two of the Dutch performers who had never been
away from home before, and who were watching
the land recede in the distance, suddenly became
homesick and were for jumping overboard to
try to swim to land. It took us all our time to
prevent them, and we had to lock them in their
cabin. One of our dingo pups fell overboard
and it was pitiful to see it swimming after the
steamer. We could see it in the wake of the boat
for quite a while, and it made us all feel sad.
We had a delightful trip across, and a good
job it was for us that it was fine The steamer
had no cargo, but had sand for ballast. The
sand, however, was just emptied into the hold,
and if the boat had rolled the sand would have
rolled also, and I donT know what would have
happened. The horses stood on the sand, and
we would practise down there to keep ourselves
fit. It was beautifully calm all the way, the
sea was like glass, with a sort of shell fish sailing
along with their sails set, and one night a great
number of flying fish flew on board. We quickly
caught them and had them fried for breakfast
in the morning. We also saw some waterspouts
rise out of the sea in great columns not a very
great distance from us.
We arrived in Monte Video on Sunday morn-
ing, September 1, and opened at the “ Nuevo
Politeama ” there on Saturday, September 14.
A long distance telephone from our theatre to
the Theatre San Martin in Buenos Aires con-
veyed to the manager of that theatre an idea
how our show was taking on. They spoke to
me through the ’phone, and told me they could
hear the applause of the audience after each
act, and I right there arranged with them to
open in their theatre when we played Buenos
Aires. This was the first time I had ever heard


of a long-distance telephone, as it was not in
Australia in those days.
The manager of the Theatre San Martin told me
over the phone that night that he had heard that
we had a troupe of black people who were walk-
ing about Monte Video nearly naked. I told
him that they were in their native dress as they
were semi-wild Zulus. He said he had heard
that the citizens there were taking objection
to them walking about like that, and when I
explained that it was their native costume, and
that I thought it a good advertisement for the
show for wild Zulus to be seen in the streets of
beautiful Monte Video, he advised me to clothe
them properly or we would get into trouble
with the authorities. True enough, we were
ordered to clothe them properly in European
clothes, and as most of them had never had on
a pair of trousers or a pair of boots in their lives,
they objected to wearing them, so we had
trouble both ways. But the Zulus themselves
solved the question by clearing out from us.
We never heard where they went, but we had
an idea that they were taken away by someone
on a ranch and made work.
We found Monte Video a beautiful clean
city with wonderful hotels. We had to wait a
fortnight before we could open as the “Politeama , ’
was occupied by an Italian Grand Opera Com-
pany. We played in the theatre the night
after they closed. The place had been built
expressly for theatre and circus, so there was
no trouble at all. The circus ring was right
in the middle of the auditorium. The floor had
to be taken up, and underneath was the ring.
Then the stage came away in the middle, about
10 feet, for our artists and horses to come
through on to the ring, while the stage itself was
turned into a dress circle with upholstered chairs.
We found the populace, who were Spanish,
very emotional and enthusiastic. If they liked
a person they would make him or her their hero
for the time being.


A few nights before we opened in the “ Poli-
teama,” and just after we had retired for the
night at the St. Martin Hotel, we heard a great
commotion up the town. We could distinctly
hear firearms, as well as shouting, and bands
playing. On looking out of our bedroom win-
dows we saw a great crowd turning from the
main street into the street we lived in. They
were chairing some person shoulder high, and
cheering him madly. We were positive it was
a newly-elected President of Uruguay, and ex-
pected to see the Government troops open fire
on them. We were all excitement and got more
excited when we saw the crowd turn into the
front door of our hotel. We now expected that
we would be right in the middle of it, so we all
got up fearfully and dressed, and, looking down
the well of the hotel to the vestibule, saw the
crowd still making a fuss over the same man.
He was being hugged and kissed by both sexes
in the crowd. One of our company—Gil Eldred
—had been in Manila and could speak a little
Spanish, so when we saw a “mozo” (waiter) he
asked him if they had elected a new President,
and was that he they were making such a fuss
over. The waiter replied that the hero was
the celebrated tenor of the Italian Opera Company,
who had been making his farewell appearance, and
who was such a favourite that the public could not
make enough fuss of him during this his send off.
During the fortnight we were idle in Monte
Video, both my brother and myself were learn-
ing Spanish. It is not the real Spanish, but we
did not know that. We only wanted to learn
their language, as I had to clown, and Philip had
to answer me as ring-master. He also had to
drill a school of horses in Spanish. Our efforts
in that direction on the first night brought down
the house, as we were saying things all back-
wards, and this made a bigger hit than if we had
spoken the words perfectly.
We became great favourites in Monte Video,
and when my sisters had finished their acts


they were encored and called upon to “ Bade ”
(dance), whereupon my sister Marizles broke
into a Highland Fling. She had to respond
again, and this time she did a Sailor’s Horn-
pipe. The audience threw their hats into the
ring, and now she had to return these to their
owners personally. I thought they were crazy,
but this was part of the performance that went
on night after night. Madeline, who didn’t
dance, was kept very busy • returning hats. We
had engaged some Spanish clowns, but after the
first night the audience would not have them, and
would call out, “ Fuera ” (get out). I asked them
why they left the ring, and they said if they
had stayed, they would have had chairs thrown
at them. The audience would call out for the
“ Clown Australiano ” or “ Clown Englishe,” so
I had to clown two and three times a night, as
well as ride, do the horizontal bars, an acrobatic
act with Philip and Eldred, and a carrying act
with my sister Madeline, or Olympians, with
either mv niece Edith, or Eldred.
We played four weeks in Monte Video to
good business and arranged to open in Buenos
Aires on October 12. We had packed up every-
thing ready to go on the steamer on October 7,
but the theatre with all our wardrobe, harness and
paraphernalia was burnt to the ground during
the early morning. The horses had been removed
to a stable after the performance, or otherwise
they would have gone with the rest of the things.
We were searching among the ruins the follow-
ing day to see if we could find the steel frame of
a pad, but everything was burnt to a cinder.
While we were searching, an English lady
(Mrs. Saunders) came up to me and sympathised
with us at our loss, as we were not insured, and
in a strange country, with a strange language,
and we were but youths, the pair of us (Philip
and I). She asked us if she could help us
monetarily or otherwise. I thanked her and told
her w r e could not accept money for nothing, but
she said, “ Let me loan it to you,” and she put a


purse of seventy sovereigns into my hands, and
got into her carriage and drove away. We never
saw her again, but this is .how one finds the real
English. They are the finest people in the
whole world when they are away from England
in a strange land. It seems to be their one
thought when they are out of their own native
country to make a foreigner respect the English,
never to do a mean action, but always to be the
gentleman. We found the worth of the English
while we were in South America.
We were to open in the San Martin Theatre,
Buenos Aires, on Saturday, October 12, 1895,
and after the fire we sailed up the River Plate
in a palace of a boat, and after arranging at the
Hotel San Martin for our accommodation, we
went and saw the theatre and started to get
wardrobe, harness, properties, spring board, carpet,
trapezes, bars and everything that was needed for
our circus. We only had four days clear to do
it in, and it speaks volumes for our energy when
I tell you we had it all ready for our opening
on the 12th, and we played over five weeks to
very good business.
I must here tell how we were helped by a
fellow showman in Mr. Frank Brown, who had
the monopoly of circuses in that part of South
America, and who, by all the laws of nature,
should have wanted to see us fail instead of pros-
per. He went around with us and showed us
where to get the things we needed —his circus
was in Rio Janeiro at the time, or else he would
have lent us all his plant if we wanted it. We
had to buy the material needed and have the things
made, and of all the countries in the world to
get things made in a hurry, South America is
the worst. Talk about South Africa’s “ Wacken-
bitchie ” ("wait-a-bit ”), here it was, “ Manana ”
(“ to-morrow ”). They were always going to do
it to-morrow, and we all know that to-morrow
never comes, so Frank Brown and Philip stayed
right with them until it was finished. My wife and
all the ladies with the show were making new


ring clothes for the artistes. I did most of the
cutting out and fitting the clothes, and the ladies
did the rest. It was a strenuous time for all
concerned, but we all took it light-heartedly,
and the thing was done, so that we opened to
our advertised time.
At first I did not like the manners and customs
of the people, and many a row I got into. One
night as my wife and I were coming out of the
theatre, I saw several men proving that there
were no such places as public conveniences, and
I was so disgusted that I kicked the nearest man
off the footpath into the roadway. The kick
was given so much in earnest that he went spraw-
ling on his face, but he immediately got up and
came running towards me with the inevitable
dagger. Before he could use it, however, I threw
my bundle of circus clothes I was carrying home,
into his face, and taking my door key out of my
pocket, held it towards him as one would a pistol.
This held him back, but he followed me all the
way home to my hotel. There I told the pro-
prietor, who laughed, and said I must not be
offended or I would be kept busy until I died,
which, he added, would not be long if I continued
kicking people. He could speak English, this
landlord, and in Spanish explained to the irate
man the circumstances, which partly satisfied
him, so, with a scowling look, he departed.
From Buenos Aires we went to Rosario, a splen-
did city in the interior, where we had Christmas
and New Year. This was a city of festivities,
all kinds of fun —water carnivals, confetti carni-
vals, races, dances, etc., all in fancy costume.
If you were not dressed in fancy costume you
would be nearly drowned by balloons filled with
water, and even buckets of water would be
thrown over you in the streets. It was only safe
to go out in costume while the carnival lasted.
We stayed at the Hotel Ingles, where the landlady
spoke English, and was very nice. This is* the
town where I noticed how the Englishman could
drink cocktails. In the early morning one would


get a cup of coffee and a roll. Then the people
were supposed to go to work until n, when
breakfast was on till 2, then followed siesta till
4 o'clock in the afternoon. The hotel was
opposite a club frequented by the English, and
it was there I saw them go for their
dozens each before breakfast.
South America, like England and North
America, allows private companies to run the
trains, and very comfortable they are too, with
dining saloons and bars on board. They are
mostly English companies managed by English-
men. From Rosario we returned to Buenos
Aires, opening there with a three-ring Circus,
Hippodrome and Wild West. We had to engage
a native circus to complete the three rings. The
proprietor of this, named Anselme, had a very
clever family and other artists, one of whom
broke his neck while doing the leaps over the
horses, etc., the first night we opened. He tried
to go as high over a banner as our champion
leaper, Eldred, did. He got as high, but could
not turn, and landed on his forehead on the
mattress.
We played on a fine lot just off their fashion-
able street, Calle Florida, where horses and
vehicles were not allowed in the afternoon as the
elite of the city promenade there, and where
some of the finest jewellers' shops in the world
were to be seen. The ladies, dressed in the
latest fashion, with diamonds in their ears as
big as marbles, and even pigeon eggs, were out
on show with their gay Caballeros at heel. And
these same gentlemen were quick to take offence.
For instance, one of my gags while clowning
was about how the ladies of different nationalities
received a kiss from the men, concluding with
the localising of the gag by saying, “ Now, when
you kiss an Argentine young lady, she won’t slap
your face, or do the silly things the other ladies
do.* No, when you kiss her on one cheek, she
will turn the other and say, Kiss that one too,
it is so nice. " In other countries, this always


gets a laugh, but in the Argentine there was not a
smile, and the next day I was asked to cut it out.
Another “gag” was as to who could tell the
biggest lie —the clown or the two ring-masters.
The latter tell two terrible lies, which makes the
clown nervous about telling his, and he offers to
forfeit his money, but they persuade him, and
he begins with, “ Well, I once knew an honest
lawyer .” The ring-masters at once stop
him and say, “Go no further, you win.” Next
morning a deputation of budding lawyers called
on me and asked what I meant by insulting the
legal profession. They all seemed very cross,
and it took the interpreter some time to explain
that it was all meant for a joke, and went big in
England, where they laughed at such fine wit.
I had to promise not to repeat the joke.
On another occasion, offence was taken when
one of our Hippodrome riders, on receiving an
Argentine flag as a token of having won his race,
retired to the back door, and threw down the
flag, where it could be picked up by the starter
of the races and used for the next winner. This
throwing of the flag to the ground was considered
an insult to their nation, and we were asked to
discontinue the practice. They raised no ob-
jection to our use of the British flag.
We had to engage an interpreter through whom
to do business and at first we thought he was
a splendid fellow. It would be no time before he
would be having high words with the man we
wanted to do business with, and he would explain
to us in English what a scoundrel the man was he
was talking to. They would stick their faces
into one another’s and go at it hammer and tongs.
If it had gone half as far in Australia there would
have been blood, hair and teeth flying all over
the place. So we admired our interpreter until
a friend of ours we happened to meet there,
listening to one of his arguments, asked, “ Do
you know what your interpreter is quarreling
over?” We replied that we thought he was
trying to get the best terms for us he could.


"No such thing,” was the reply, " he is telling
that man that before he does business with him he
must pay him so many dollars for himself and
charge it to you if the deal comes off.” Of
course, we passed him out there and then.
Another thing we had to put up with was when
we made arrangements for the theatre we were
told that there were a hundred proprietors’
tickets that we could not sell as they belonged
to the shareholders of the theatre, but that the
proprietors would not be all in the one night
—perhaps not one in the whole season—and
the seats we could sell ourselves if the pro-
prietors were not in by g o’clock, which was
the time of commencement of the theatres.
What was our surprise to see on the opening
night a number of people selling tickets on the
footpath. I brought a policeman up and
wanted him to arrest the man for selling tickets
unlawfully; but the policeman refused, and
when I started to hustle the fellows off when
they approached a carriage with intending'
visitors to our show, the policeman threatened
to arrest me. I went in to see the manager of
the theatre, and he explained, smilingly, that
the men were quite right. They were selling the
proprietors’ tickets. As they were for the best
seats in the theatre, these tickets would sell
first, and there would be a hundred people in our
best seats before we could sell one for ourselves.
When we went to pay our stable account,
and offered the amount contracted for, this was
refused, and we were told that it was not so
much a week they had agreed to take the horses
in for, but so much a day. They thereupon
confiscated them until they were paid seven
times as much as they had agreed to take.
Hundreds of these sort of things would occur,
and it was no use going to law, as the law was so
slow it would take over six months to get a
hearing, so we decided to have someone who
would take over this responsibility and pay all
outside expenses, we to find the performers.


A couple of fine looking Spanish gentlemen
contracted to take us through the country, pay-
ing all outside expenses, such as band, stables,
police, license, ground rent, billing, transport,
etc., and for this they were to receive 50 % of
the gross. This arrangement we made after
we had been on our own to San Nicholas, Rosario,
Santa Fe, Parana, and return to Buenos Aires.
The two gentlemen mentioned paid our steam-
er and rail fares to Rio Grande, where we opened
on April 11, then on to Palotes, Port Alegre
and Santos. They were to have taken us to
Sao Paulo in July, but in Santos —then known
as the “ white man’s grave ” —they refused to
go any further, so we decided to go on our own.
As Sao Paulo was billed, we were going there
first ; but when I tried to cart our tents and
paraphernalia from the lot we were playing on,
I was stopped by someone holding a lien on our
things, as the ground rent had not been paid.
I told him it was not our obligation, but he said
he did not recognise anyone but the proprietor
of the " Circo Australiano,” and therefore if I
did not pay he would hold our things. I went
to our two fine gentlemen who said they were
very sorry, but they had no money left to pay
the ground rent. I then went to the British
Consul and explained the whole matter to him.
He told me it would be best to pay the ground
rent if we wanted to get to Sao Paulo in time
for our opening, and we could sue the two gentle-
men responsible; but it would take perhaps
a year or so to get the case brought on.
So I went to the ground and paid the rent
for the whole of the time we were there, and
was about to remove the things when the police
came and demanded payment for their band
for the whole of the performances, as our sup-
posed managers had not paid it. I went to the
Consul again, so he came down with me and
questioned the police who told him they were
promised to be paid at the end of the circus
season. I paid them, and sent the things to


the train, but when it was time to take the horses
out of the stables to take them to the train, we
found there were distraints for stable rent,
newspaper advertisements, billing, in fact, for
everything the two nice gentlemen should have
paid, so we had nothing to do but to dig down
and pay up, and grin.
We were too late for the opening in Sao Paulo,
so we had to advertise the cause of our delay,
and mentioned the two nice gentlemen’s names
as the cause of it. The pair then issued a writ
for defamation, claiming two thousand million
reils. That sounded big, but it was really £BO.
We compromised with £4O. These two gentle-
men cleaned up about £I,OOO.
It was at Sao Paulo that I nearly lost my life.
We had been showing to very good houses, when
one night, after the performance had started,
it began to rain, and the rain came through the
tent on the cheaper seats. A number of students
who were sitting there moved into the best
seats and crowded our best patrons out, so next
morning I spoke to our manager (Williams) and
said it was a shame that he let those people
who had only paid one milrea crowd the people
who had paid six milreas. Williams said they
were the students who pushed down the big steel
gates that crossed the bridge, and which were
closed at sunset every evening. They were the
tough terrors of the city of Sao Paulo, and did
not pay to go anywhere. They had been in the
show every night without paying. I said, “ They
won’t get in to-night without paying,” so I went to
the Chief of Police and told him I would stop
the students from coming in free to our circus
and taking up the best seats. That night I was
at the front door of the tent, and just before
starting time, sure enough up came a couple of
hundred students who were for passing into the
tents without as much as “By your leave.”
I stopped them, and said in Spanish, "No entrada
aqui.” The leader replied, “ Bueno no entrada
aqui, entrada Alla,” and making for another


part of the sidewall of the tent, pulled out a long
dagger, and straightway slit it down. I jumped
in front of him and the others who were follow-
ing, and drawing my revolver, pushed it in his
face, and told him, “ Fuera sta pronto,” He
backed and so did the rest of the crowd, but
only for a moment. He was coming on again
when I fired above his head. This again stopped
them, but with one accord they all pulled their
daggers and came at me again. I was just about
to fire straight into them when the mounted
police rode up and kept them back. Then I
parleyed with them through our manager who
could speak their language well. I asked them
how did they expect to be let in night after night
for nothing ? How were we to pay our way ?
We would meet them, however, by charging
them half-price to the better seats, as they were
all gentlemen and the best seats were the seats for
gentlemen. This had the desired effect. They all
paid three milreas and got front seats, and each
time I made my appearance in the ring I was
given a hearty welcome.
It was in this town that I saw a tragedy.- It
was the time when the Italians had had a re-
verse in Abyssinia against King Menelik, and when
these students saw an Italian they would yell
out, “ Menelik !” I was in a restaurant with
one of our artists (John Cooke) when a young
Italian couple came in and sat at one of the
tables. They had ordered wine, when several
Brazilians came in, and, seeing them, called
out, “ Menelik !” The young Italian lady
clapped her hands and went forward offering her
hand to the student. He took it, and as he did
so, the lady drew a long dagger and thrust it into
his stomach. Then she pulled off her skirts>
threw them at the students, and ran out of the
place. It was a man dressed up as a woman to
trick the students.


CHAPTER XIII.
SOUTH AMERICA (continued).
Whisky v Smallpox—lnterpreter s Tricks —
Harbours Compared—Touchy Brazilians lnte-
rnational Feeling Runs High—Saved from Taking
Man’s Life —“ Mouth of Hell ” —Off to England.
While in Brazil I was told by one friend that
if I did not want to die with yellow or black fever
or smallpox I must drink plenty of whisky—
and then plenty. I did my share, but our busi-
ness will not let us go to extremes. All the same,
we had many a late night, with many a sore head
in the morning, but my friend was right about
whisky and smallpox.
I remember riding on one of their mule tram-
cars one day, with a man on the seat behind me
who would lean his head on my back and shoulders.
I swung him off several times by jerking back-
wards, and as he still persisted, I turned round
to remonstrate with him, and after one look .at
his face, which was covered in smallpox blotches,
I sprang from the tramcar right into a cafe and
ordered two or four whiskies. I then gave orders
that everyone in the show should be vaccinated,
and we were nearly all done. Those who refused
to be done caught smallpox, with the exception
of my brother. We lost several of our company
with smallpox—one only a boy we brought from
Australia, Jimmy Downey, about 15 or 16 years
of age—and several peons.
We were joined in Salo Paulo by an American
as interpreter. He said we would have no more
trouble with the tradespeople trying to do us,
as he would see to that part of the business.
On the last couple of days there I took him with
me to settle our accounts, and to my astonish-
ment, when settling with the different people,
we paid less than what we had contracted for.
I remember him asking me at the end of the day
if he had not already saved his salary, and I
answered, “ Yes, four-fold.” I asked him how


he had done it, and what he had said to the
people to make them so lenient, but he said,
“ Never mind how I did it. I did it, and that
ought to be enough.” I found out afterwards
that he had told the people that we were going
to a town called Campinas, and after there we
were going to pay a return visit to Sao Paulo,
and that we would then pay them in full, besides
giving them our custom again. But from Campinas
we went to Bahia without playing either Sao
Paulo or Santos.
We intended to play Bahia in our tent, but
our new interpreter insisted that we play in the
theatre, and as we would not agree he gave orders
that our lamps, bale rings and iron pegs were
to be accidently lost overboard when unloading
from the steamer, so that we were compelled to
play in the theatre. My wife was unfortunate
enough to have her trunk, with all her dresses
and scores of pounds’ worth of satin in, on the
sling that went overboard. ■ The trunk floated
and was rescued, but the satin and dresses were
all spoilt by the salt water.
We went to Rio Janeiro, but did not play there.
We saw all the wonderful sights that make Rio
Janeiro’s harbour one of the most beautiful
harbours in the world.
I must say I was disappointed. I had heard
such wonderful things of Rio’s harbour, that, I
suppose, I expected too much ; but I preferred
our own beautiful Sydney harbour for beauty,
cleanliness and health.
At that time Rio was nearly as deadly as
Santos, but since then they have done something
to run off the foul waters that accumulated near
the shore, and I am told that it is now just as
healthy as our own Sydney.
We left Rio after staying there five days, and
arrived in Pernambuco, opening there on Novem-
ber i, in our tents on the sea front. Pernambuco is
built on three shores, as water runs between where
we played and the mainland. It seems as if there
were two fingers of land sticking out in the sea.
D 1


I am trying to explain the layout of this town
because of something that happened there on
the last night of our season. One had to use
great diplomacy with the Brazilians —they being
such sensitive, excitable people and needing
handling carefully. They were ever ready with
the dagger. Youths could be seen sparring with
daggers in the streets as our own youths are to
be seen sparring with their open hands, knocking
one another’s hats off. The Brazilian, however,
puts his coat round his left arm, and with the
dagger in his right, slashes, thrusts and cuts
at the other viciously ; but they are so clever
they very seldom get hurt.
Most peculiar customs or laws these Brazilians
had. For instance, I saw a man topple over and
fall to the sidewalk one very hot afternoon. I
ran over to him to give him assistance, but be-
fore I could touch him a friend of mine who also
saw the action, stopped me, saying that if I were
to touch him, I would be arrested by the police
as being the last man seen to touch him. Even
the police walked calmly past him without even
a look until the right people came and picked
him up and carried him away to the lazaretto.
This man had evidently been overcome by the
heat and prompt attention would probably have
saved his life, but there he lay for fully an hour,
and no one dared to go to him. Another night
while coming home from the show to our hotel,
my brother, Philip, stumbled over a dead man
in the street. He was about to stoop and turn
him over, when a friend with us stopped him,
and told him the same as I had been told, so we
left him alone.
One night, during the performance, a leading
man of the town who was sitting in a loge with
the British Consul watching the performers leaping
over horses, banners, etc., suddenly took it into
his head to have a flying shot at one of the leapers
with his revolver, and he took aim at my brother
Philip as he seemed to be able to fly the best of the
lot. Fortunately, the Consul’s wife hit his hand


up just as he fired, and the shot went through
the top of the tent. The man was very cross
and was for shooting anybody and everybody,
but was eventually calmed by his friends, who
took him to the bar —we always had a bar in the
tent in South America—and after a few drinks,
got him to go home.
It had been our intention to play Para after
Pernambuco, on our way to Mexico, and after
Mexico we thought of giving the United States
a turn. It was Mexico that we had left Africa
for, as we had heard that we would take barrels
of money there ; but we got news that black
fever had broken out in Para, and as we did not wish
to return through Brazil and the Argentine again,
the only other course open was to go to England.
I think our last day in Pernambuco was a
Sunday, as we had two performances that day,
and the night being a benefit for our two
selves, the English population promised to turn
up en masse. The matinee in the afternoon was
fairly patronised, but during the show some
of the rougher people proved objectionable
and very impudent. They would try to run in
through the back door without paying, and some
of the men forced their way into the ladies’
dressing room or tent, and I, with a few of our
people, tried to clear them out. While I was
roughly handling several of them, one pulled his
dagger and made a swipe at me. Then I pulled
my revolver and threatened them, and they
cleared away, only to bring a policeman to me
as I had no right to have a revolver. But the
Intendente of Police was very friendly towards
us all. In fact, he was one of our friends, and
when the policeman came to me and asked to
see my revolver, I told him I had only bluffed
them by showing them my bunch of keys and
pulling out my keys and holding the largest one
as you would a revolver, I demonstrated to their
satisfaction that they had all been bluffed.
That night the English residents turned up
to a man —yes, and to a woman. They were all
D 2


there and occupied the boxes or loges around the
ring. Just before the interval, word came that
the Brazilians were after the Englishmen’s scalps,
and that they had called at the English quarters,
or that part of the town where the English lived,
to find them absent, so after doing much damage
to their property, they were coming to the circus
with the intention of killing them all. I believe
it was all over the Trinidad question. The news
had got about that England had annexed the
island of Trinidad from Brazil, and there threat-
ened to be war. The English, being warned,
kept the news as secret as possible, and at the
interval quietly got up, and as if making for the
bar to have a drink, they went out of the back
door of the circus and down to the water edge,
and boarding yachts, boats and launches, escaped
to their quarters that way, instead of going by
tram across the two fingers of land as I described
previously. By going by water, they missed
the crowd that was coming round by land to
the circus. There would have been terrible
bloodshed had the}/ waited another few minutes,
and when I saw them (the English) go and leave
us to the mob, I felt frightened, and remon-
strated with them, asking them if they thought
it fair to leave us to the mob, whereas, if they
were to stay, their number, with ours, would
be able to put up some sort of fight. They
answered that we would be all right as we were
not English but Australiano. A few minutes
after the flight of the English, the crowd arrived,
and just before the end of the performance, Mrs.
Wirth and I were going out of the front door of
the tent when a gendarme put his naked sword
to my wife’s throat, and said, “ Andar Atras ”
(“ go back ”). I asked, “ Porque ?” {“ why ?”)
"we belong to Compagnia Australiano.” He said,
“Dispensar, Signor, passar” (“Pardon, sir, pass”),
so we passed on.
We were going aboard the steamer that night
with just our wardrobe and clothing, as we had
sold the tents, seats, poles, pegs, waggons, etc.


All the boss tentman had to do was to load our
boxes and personal effects into a lighter along with
the horses we were taking with us, and get towed
to the steamer. The lighter was lying alongside
where we were playing, so no trouble was antici-
pated there ; but after we had completed the
final business at the shipping office, Mrs. J. J.
Wirth suddenly remembered that she had left
her hat-box in the dressing tent and wanted to
go back for it. We tried to persuade her not
to, as the boss tentman would have it put on
board with all the other boxes ; but she was
obstinate. She said all her money was in it,
so I accompanied her. We had not got more
than two hundred yards along the street when
we came across a mob of young fellows. They
were over the road from us, and one came running
across and held me up, Mrs. J. J. Wirth walking
on. The fellow caught hold of me and called
out to the others, “ Esta's uno ” (“ this is one ”),
so they all came running over. I had my re-
volver in my coat pocket, and the man holding
me with one hand felt for what I had in my
pocket, and asked, “ Que es esta ?” (“ what is
this ?”). I was just on the point of pulling the
trigger and firing into his stomach, when I saw
the fellow hurled into the gutter. My brother
had come up with a few others just in time to
save a man's life, and to save me from imprison-
ment for heaven knows how long. Then there
was a rough and tumble fight with sticks against
knives and daggers ; but the arrival of a number
of police with the “ Intendente ” soon stopped
the fight. After the roughs had it explained to
them that we were the Australianos, and not
English, there was more begging of pardons and
patting of backs, but it gave me the scare of my
life. I had been on the verge of taking a man’s
life, and the queerest feeling came over me as
I was about to pull that trigger.
We were towed in three large boats behind a
tug across to the steamer “ Liguria.” We had
to carry two of our members on to the steamer.


and explained that they had been in a fight and
had nearly got killed. As a matter of fact, although
several of our members were slightly hurt through
the fight, these two were just recovering from
yellow and black fever respectively. They were
the brothers Clarence and John Cooke, who
the doctor in Pernambuco said had no possible
chance to live ; but with a week or two on the open
ocean they soon got better, and after a month
in England were riding again, although very
weak for a long time.
When we got on the English boat we went down
on our knees and thanked the Almighty for His
deliverance from such a country. And thus we
left Pernambuco, which word translated, means
" The Mouth of Hell.”
The steamer we were travelling by we re-
cognised as one of the mail boats that used to
ply between England and Australia. We remem-
bered the name “ Liguria,” as, some time before
we left Australia, there had been a robbery from
this boat of a couple of boxes of bullion whilst it
had been lying by the Station Pier, Williamstown.
It was a great mystery what had become of the
gold. Anyhow the steamer was taken off the
run and sent to the South American trade.
I wonder if the gold found in two boxes under
the Station Pier, at Williamstown, a few years ago
by a couple of boys who had been chasing a
rat, was the missing gold from the " Liguria.”
The boys had filled their pockets and proceeded
to have a good time, until their fathers got to
hear of it, and at once reported it to the police.
We made great friends of the chief steward
of this steamer. This, by the way, is what all
wise travellers should do. He was a Mr.
Chalmers, who promised to introduce us to some
influential people on our arrival at Birkenhead.
This he eventually did, amongst them being
Aid. Shaw, the Mayor—a white man of the first
water, whose help to us was unbounded.


CHAPTER XIV.
ENGLAND AT LAST.
“ Age of Chivalry ?” —Circus People Compared —-
Australian Standard Pre-eminent—Weekly Changes
of Programme for 21 months —Patronised by Royalty
—A Narrow Escape —Australia Calls.
We arrived in Birkenhead late in November
and opened in “ Joe ” Ohmy’s circus building on
December 1. We would have liked very much
to have opened in Hengler’s circus building in
Liverpool; but they were putting on Dick
Whittington Pantomime there, and so Albert
Hengler could not either let us have the build-
ing or engage us. We therefore arranged with
“ Joe ” Ohmy, who was playing in Birkenhead, to
let us have his place. We advertised the prices
as 2/-, 1/-, gd. and 6d. ; but Ohmy said we were
foolish to put the price to 6d. He only charged
3d. in the gallery, and told us we would not do
anything at the higher price, advising us to put
it down to 3d., with 2d. extra for early doors.
You can imagine how we felt playing to 3d.
when we were used to playing to 2/6 the
lowest in Africa —and that the Kaffir’s seats.
But we took their advice and charged 3d., with
2d. extra to the early doors, and the opening
night there was such a crush that several women
fainted, and one had her arm broken. I was
watching the sale of tickets in the gallery and
appealed to the men to go easy as there were
women in the crowd, but was answered with,
“ Oh, the women,” and a general laugh
followed. These were different Englishmen to
what I had been accustomed to. Here, at home,
they apparently had no prestige to uphold, and
their respect, or rather disrespect for women was
an eyeopener to me.
Our performance caught on, and it was pre-
dicted that we would do very well in England.
The building was full at every performance,
but at the prices there was no money for us.
Several circus proprietors approached us to


combine with them in a waggon show to tour the
Provinces. One, Fred Genette, offered us 50-50,
he to find waggons, horses and outside show,
and we to find the inside performance, but he
advised us that we had far too big and expensive
show for England. We must, he said, get rid
of the Cookes, the Moras, the Fernandes (flying
trapeze artists). In fact, he mentioned every-
body except our own family, and when we told
him that, he said that our family was all that
was required for a tenting show in England, as
the public wanted an outside show and not so
much inside.
He assured us that with just our own family
we would have a far better show than any other
circus in England. We played in Ohmy’s wood
and iron building until January 8, the stay being
the most pleasant and most profitable that we
had in England. The Mayor of Birkenhead
(Aid. F. Shaw) gave us a very Merry Christmas
and a Happy New Year party, and we looked
forward to having a very pleasant time during
our stay in the Motherland. Snowballing at
Christmas was a new experience to all of us,
and it was in this town that we found that our
own little country was very little known. Ours
was the first Australian circus to tour England.
In fact, it was the first to tour any foreign country.
We thought that our cricketers had well adver-
tised Australia in England, so what was our
surprise when we were asked very often what
language did we speak out in Australia. We also
thought things would be far cheaper in England,
and when Mrs. J. J. Wirth went into a butcher’s
shop to buy some mutton chops, and was asked
rod. a pound for them, she said, “ rod ?” How
dear. We buy them in Australia for 3d. a pound.”
The butcher asked, “ Are you from Australia ?”
and on her answering that she belonged to the
Australian Circus, she was then asked how long
she had been in England. When she said, “four
weeks,” the butcher said, “ My, you soon picked
up English.”


We opened in a theatre in Doncaster on Jan-
uary 10, 1897, after which we went to Dewsbury
in Croyst Circus Building, then on to Barrow-
in-Furness, in a circus building there ; but busi-
ness, although good enough, did not pay, so
we arranged with Joe Darby, champion jumper
of the world, who at that time was a great draw-
ing card in England, to tour the Provinces with
a tented circus, he (Darby) to find the tent,
horses, waggons and agent, and to receive 25%
of the gross, we receiving 75% and finding the
performance. Of course, he was to give his
exhibitions of jumping, as well as to find the
horses, etc. We had a splendid circus pro-
gramme ; but, oh, the outside appearance was
awful with his old crocks of horses hauling old
drays and spring carts of all descriptions. Of
course, our own horses looked well—we always
saw to that —and some of them pulled the band
waggon —an old Tally O’ coach, painted and
done up nicely.
We soon found that circus people in England
were looked down upon by the public, and we
also found out that it was generally the circus
people’s own fault in their treatment of the
public, whom they gulled by promising things
they never intended to perform.
It is a great pity that the English circus people
thus let the name of circus go down so low, as
it could be easily raised by keeping faith more
with the public. English circus folk are very
simple and retiring, not caring to mix or become
friendly with “ outsiders,” as they term the
public. They live entirely in a world of their
own, their tastes differ from the ordinary mortal’s,
and in clothes they are original, so much so,
that if they take a walk through a town, every-
one will stare at them with a half-curious grin,
picking them out at once as circus folk. Their
great aim in life is to become perfect in their
particular line of business, and although they
don’t endure the terrible hardships that are
credited them most of the public, they are


unremitting in practising to become per-
fect, for perfection means applause, and an
artist lives on going “big/’ This, of course,
applies to every calling in life, for no one can
succeed without effort, but reward comes sooner
to the circus man, for he is at his prime at 30,
whereas the ordinary individual scarcely ever
succeeds in business under the age of 40. There
is certainly no place in the world where the
physique can be so developed or the mind so
broadened as with a travelling circus, and this
is the reason their morals are so clean, as I con-
sider the circus people of any country comprise
the most moral communities in the whole world.
I think England ideal for travelling circuses,
and in good weather there is no more charming
life. The towns are close together and the
roads splendid. I bought a caravan or living
waggon —a huge affair that could not possibly
travel the roads of Australia. It contained a
kitchen, a living room and a bed room, and was
pulled by one horse. Of course, on any big hill
a leader would be required. The show moves
off from the previous day’s pitch about 6 a.m.,
en route for the next town to play. The windows
of your living cars are all open to the fresh air,
and one inhales the fresh, invigorating air whilst
listening to the singing of the birds in the hedges
and trees, the beating of the horses’ hoofs on the
hard road, and the muffled drumming of the
wheels of scores of waggons. The smell from
the horses’ bodies and the odour of the flowers
in the fields produce a variety of fine feelings, and
a glorious sense of freedom, and one remembers
the words in the old song, “ Where is the King
like a Romany Rye ?”
Of course there were some very good circuses
travelling in England at this time—Lord George
Sanger’s, Lord John Sanger’s, Claud Genette,
and one or two others. We had the misfortune
to be playing in between Lord John Sanger’s
and Claud Genette’s circuses, Genette’s being a
day or two ahead, and Sanger’s two or three


days behind us, so that between the two we were
getting a gruelling. They were afraid we were
going on to Scotland, so they hurried on to get
there first.
The Prince of Wales (afterwards King Edward
VII.) visited our circus on May 18, 1898, whilst
we were at Southport. He complimented us
on having such a fine show, and was particularly
pleased with our six Australian-trained brumby
horses. We showed in the Winter Garden,
Southport, for over a year and a half (21 months),
changing our programme every week, and it was
here that we had nearly all the circus artists
in England pass through our hands.
Barnum & Bailey’s Three-ring Circus and
Hippodrome from America played a day at
Southport during our stay there. Their show
was an eye-opener to the English, inasmuch as
these circus proprietors gave the public such a
lot for their money, as many as six and eight
acts going on at the one time. It was something
they were not used to, and in consequence the
show did well. This goes to prove what I have
always advocated —give the people the goods and
they will patronise you.
On June 22, 1897, we were in the town of
Consett, when, in connection with Queen Vic-
toria’s Diamond Jubilee, the townspeople gave
a procession. Our Roman riders and circus
horses, band-waggon and gaily attired artists
led the procession, making quite a fine show of
it. We were thanked by the Committee for our
help, and got quite friendly with a number of the
townspeople, who seemed to think we were
different circus people to the general run. They
seemed quite surprised to find that we educated
our children —we always carried a schoolmaster
—and that our womenfolk and children went
to church. Even the clergyman said he thought
all circus people were irreligious and ignorant.
It was in the township of Hebburn that we had
a blow down, and, to make matters worse, all
the tent hands left. One side of the tent blew
in, but the pole stayed upright, and the tent


blew right up against the king pole, and the
pulley-block got jammed, so the tent remained
up all night. In the early morning I woke our
boss tentman, Ted Murphy, and he and I tried
to lower the tent, but could not do so, so I climbed
up the tent, which ran parallel up the pole, to
the top —45 feet in the air—and there I tried to
free the pulley-block. While doing so my fingers
lost hold, and I fell straight down the 45 feet
to the bottom. I shall never forget the sensa-
tion in transit. My mind flew to thousands of
incidents and events which had occured to me
during rny life. I remember I thought, “ This is
my finish/’ so what was my astonishment when
I landed at the bottom to find myself un-
hurt. I was saved through the bellying of the
tent a foot from the ground acting as a sort of
tobboggan, sliding me off and skidding me sideways
from the pole. Although I was not hurt, it gave
me a fright, and I made for the hotel and had a
port wine and raw egg, after which I went back and
let down the pole with the tent attached, and,
getting some men from the town, packed it up,
and so on to the next town.
During the latter part of our stay at the South-
port Winter Garden, business was not too good.
In fact, it was rotten, and we longed for Africa
and Australia. About this time, Mr. Dan Fitz-
gerald had come to England to get artists
for his circus in Australia. He travelled with us
for a while in our living waggons, and now and
then would leave us to see some artist who had
written him for an engagement. But he would
come back to us, and at last he said, “ George,
I cannot see anything I want outside your circus.”
He said he would like Darby, or the Moras, or
the Fernandes (our flying troupe). I told him
he could have any of them in a few weeks’ time
as we would be letting these artists go, so he
approached them, but he told me afterwards
they wanted the earth. Philip then said to him,
“ Why not go to Germany and get some wild
animal acts that would be new to Australia ?”
He took this advice and engaged an elephant


rand lion act and also a tiger and horse act from
Hagenbeck of Hamburg. He returned from
Germany and told us of his purchases, and asked
if we ever thought of coming back to Australia.
We told him that as soon as we could get the
money to pay our passage out we would go.
After a while it was decided that I was to go
to Africa, and at the first opportunity to bring
the circus there. I took an engagement with
Frank Fillis as equestrian director, as they were
playing in Africa to big business. Their show
then was of immense proportions, giving panto-
mime with ballet girls, in addition to a first-class
circus performance. Then Fillis decided to take
a “ Savage South Africa ” show to England, and
as soon as he left, I made arrangements for our
circus to tour South Africa, cabling the money
from Durban to my brother for the passages
out. The show accordingly left England on
April 16, 1899, on ti l6 Braemar Castle.”
CHAPTER XV.
DODGING A WAR.
Preparations for Historic Conflict —“ Com ” Paul
Kruger —At Mafeking —Object Lessons to Army
Officers —Alarms at Kimberley—Boers want Circus
Horses —•“ You Win ” —Just in Time.
We re-opened in Capetown on May 16, 1899,
in Fillis’s iron amphitheatre. We were billed
to open on the 17th, but Philip wanted the
passengers on the steamer they came on to see
the circus, so we opened a da}’ earlier. The
Governor patronised the show on the second
night. We had a very fine show in the Marvel-
lous Bros. Howard (second sight seers), the
Saxon Trio of famous strong men (Arthur being
in those days the strongest man on earth),
the Padleys (boxing clowns), lona Genette
(equestrienne), Adele Libra (wire walker and
globe runner), Harry Dale (Queen’s jester), Carl
Wirth (our apprentice), Edith Wirth (our niece),
myself and brother.


After Capetown we went straight to Johannes-
burg, also in Fillis’s Amphitheatre, and while
here we noticed great preparations for war that
were being made by the Boers. They were busy
wheeling great guns around Johannesburg, and
a friend of ours —Carl Popper —came from Pre-
toria especially to warn us that there would be
war and not to come to Pretoria, as the Boers,
who used to dine at his hotel, had been heard by
him making their plans for a campaign, and saying
they were going to drive the Roinecks into the sea.
They were very confident of beating the British, and
said the only way the British could take Pretoria
would be by building a canal from the sea inland
and sending their fleet. Things were very un-
settled in Johannesburg, hundreds, yes, thousands,
clearing out to the Cape or Durban, leaving all
their belongings in their houses locked and nailed
up. Then there were the lawless gangs, pilfering
and assaulting, and not stopping even at murder.
I remember a young Australian reporter asking
me to come home with him to his brother’s
house which had been vacated by his brother
and wife, who had gone to Capetown away from
the strife. He seemed very lonely, and as my
wife was in Port Elizabeth at the time, I con-
sented. When we got to his place he lit the
fire and gas, and then showed me a letter he had re-
ceived from a gang of crooks whom he had des-
cribed in his paper. It had a skull and cross-
bones on it, and warned him that he would be
shot for his trouble on the first opportunity
they got to do it without danger to themselves.
He then handed me his brother’s revolver, and
asked me if I would watch for four hours, then
wake him and he would watch the remainder of
the night. His house was in a lonely spot, and
he said he had been followed home that night,
that if I had not been with him he was sure they
would have finished him there and then, that
he knew the crowd well, and they were afraid
he would have given them away to the authorities.
We experienced no trouble that night, and
the next day I advised him to come into the


hotel where I was staying. This he did, and the
very next day when we went to his house, we
found it had been broken into, the furniture
smashed up, and a number of things removed.
He reported the matter in his paper the next day,
and again gave a description of the Australian
crooks, which brought him another letter. I have
dwelt on this young reporter’s worries a little fully,
but I am trying to show the state Johannesburg
was in at the time of our visit. The authorities,
being Dutch, were taking no notice of the crooks
who molested the British.
When we went on to Pretoria, there was no
disguising the preparations for war. Drilling
was the order of the day. Dutch farmers would
be seen to ride or drive in to Pretoria in great
numbers, and commando after commando could
be seen trekking in different directions. The
Boers with their guns and cartridge belts and
slouch hats, patronised the circus freely every
night, and we had a personal interview with
President Kruger. We invited him to visit the
circus once more, but he shook his head sadly,
and said, “No, this is no time for such things.”
But his nephew, Tj chard Kruger, came and
came very often. He seemed a very nice young
fellow, and wanted us to remain in Pretoria
all through the war, saying we would be safer
there than anywhere else in Africa, and we could
amuse the Boers when they centred there, after
or before going into battle. Another young
officer was a grandson of the President, young
Eloff. He was a regular fire-eater, and most
impatient to get to-* business -with the Roinecks.
He was going to give them Majuba Hill over again
and was confident’that they would whip the English
inside twelve months. He also tried to persuade
us to remain in Pretoria during the struggle, but
we declined, and went down to Natal through
several Boer towns without playing them, as nearly
all the males were congregating in Pretoria, and
posting themselves ready in other parts of the fray.
We played Newcastle, Dundee and Lady-
smith, however, and these towns being British,


were all well garrisoned by British troops, all in
khaki, and with their wet canteens in their
camps. We were invited through the camps,
and were well patronised by the Tommies each
evening. Their principal topic of conversation
was how quickly they were going to lay Oom
Paul low, and bring back locks of his whiskers
as souvenirs for their sweethearts away in
Leicestershire.
In Petermariztburg and Durban we found no
sign of war, although the people were very appre-
hensive, especially in ’Maritzburg, where they
were afraid that the Boers would take Ladysmith
and then it would be an easy matter for them
to march on to 'Maritzburg, which lay in a hollow
in the mountains, and could have been smashed
to pieces from the mountain tops all round.
Durbanites were more confident, for were they
not under the protection of the British gunboats.
However, as there had not been any war up to
now, we went from Natal to East London —a
pretty little town on a very picturesque river—
then on to Port Elizabeth, where the people were
still trading extensively in their profitable export
of wool and ostrich feathers. The war! Oh,
if the Boers wanted war they would get it and in
three weeks the Transvaal would be British, and
there would be an end to all this friction between
the Outlander and the Boer that had been going
ever since Johannesburg had become a gold mine.
After playing all over the Eastern Province
we went to Kimberley. And now we saw the
English preparations were in earnest. They were
drilling the Outlander, and the De Beers mine
had powerful searchlights playing out on to the
veldt in all directions ; but we thought that all
these warlike preparations were only to impress
the Boers. There were also big guns and soldiers
from Capetown. As they had comparatively
only a handful of men, we thought the Boers
would not dare to fight, so on we went to Mafeking
and Bulawayo.
Mafeking was a most desolate-looking place,
surrounded by sand hills, with the buildings no


better than corrugated iron huts. There were
three hotels, and the market square was filled
with bags of wheat, forming a kind of fort. How
this place hung out for so long has always been
a mystery to me. We played there three nights,
the show being patronised by Colonel (as he was
then) Baden Powell and Lord Charles Bentinck
and other officers, as well as the rank and file.
The colonel thanked us for entertaining his men,
and he and several of the officers watched, and
were very interested in the way we struck tent
and packed it on the train. And this happened
in a blinding sand storm —a sort of thing for which
Mafeking was famous. From the time the band
played “ God Save the Queen ” until the train
was ready to start took exactly 55 minutes, and
Baden Powell, after witnessing it, said to his
officers, “ There’s an object lesson for you.
Why, it takes you that time to shave !”
He said very little about the war, but was
well prepared, and had a couple of railway en-
gines covered in armour. These were christened
the “ Mosquito” and “ Firefly,” and they were
the pride of Mafeking. All were confident that
they would blow the Boers to “ Billyo,” or some
other such place ; but as events turned out, they
proved veritable death traps for the British, for
instead of blowing the Boers to blazes, the Boers,
with one of the German guns, of which the British
were unaware, blew them over the first time
they went into action.
Bulawayo was three rail from Mafeking.
The rail had not been laid more than a few
months. In fact, they were still working on it
as we passed, so once again we were pioneers.
We passed through whole villages of natives —
big, beautifully proportioned men and women.
The men were working on the line absolutely
naked, while the women were very nearly so,
with just a few strings hanging from their waists
in front. The little piccaninnies were like ebony,
and ran around as naked as the day they were born,
Bulawayo rather surprised us by its size. It
had its theatre, skating rink and six or seven


nice hotels. In fact, one —The Grand—was very
up-to-date, and took up a whole block, and was
one of the finest hotels then in Africa. There
was a scarcity of water, and the first night of our
entertainment the audience was smothered in
fine red dust. The ladies in the best seats wore
their evening frocks ; but the gentlemen came
in shirts and trousers only, with a belt around
their waists filled with cartridges, a revolver,
huge knife and keys. The ladies had on very
beautiful and different coloured frocks at the
commencement of the performance ; but they
all looked alike at the termination. They were
all red. Next day we got the waste water from
the hotel and laid the dust with that. The town
was lighted by electricity, and the people pros-
perous, paying to/- and a guinea for a box seat.
Here again we found the English a splendid
people. They were mostly of the Chartered
Company—men who had fought the Matabele,
the Zulu and other tribes, and were now getting
ready for the Boer. They asked us if we would
stay in Bulawayo until the war was over. It
would only take at most seven or eight weeks,
they said, and they offered us £SOO a week to
stay there during the war. We asked when they
though the war would commence, and they re-
plied it would be as soon as England was ready
in a few weeks' time.
But we received urgent wires from our wives
who had remained behind in Kimberly, to come
at once, as the Boers were surrounding Kimberly,
and fighting would start at any moment. The
De Beers had sounded a false alarm the night
previous to see if the soldiers would fall in in
case the Boers approached. They threw power-
ful searchlights over the veldt, and when they
threw the light towards the Wesselton mines,
what was their surprise to see a full commando
of Boers marching on the town. The De Beers
immediately sounded the real alarm, and the night
was made hideous by the screaming of the
hooters. It was a cold, miserable night, and
all the troops had turned out in the park opposite


the hotel where my wife and my sister-in-law
were living. They were ordered to get up and
dress, and take as much clothes as they could
carry and make for the Town Hall.
All the women and children of the town were,
of course, ordered to do the same, and great
excitement and fear prevailed, the women
screaming hysterically, and the children crying.
Two women died of fright, and dozens fainted
and had to be carried to the laager. The Kaffirs,
who were digging and throwing up earthworks
around the town, joined in the pandemonium,
and when some shots were fired by the garrison,
the scare reached its highest point. At one
time, the Kaffirs appeared to be getting out of
hand, and they had to be herded up and driven
to the compound. The Boers, finding they had
been observed, dispersed in all directions, and
when morning came there was not a sign of them,
so the ladies and children returned to their homes.
Now they made proper preparations for a
seige, so my wife immediately wired us at Bula-
wayo to return at once, or we would be cut off.
We accordingly made arrangements with the
railway authorities to carry us direct to Cape
Colony. When we reached Mafeking, and while
the engine watered and a half hour was spent
there, Colonel Baden Powell and some officers
came on the platform and advised us to get along
as fast as we could, as at any moment fighting
would start. The Boers’ camp could plainly
be seen just outside the town.
At Vryburg—-a town on the border of the
Orange Free State —we were signalled to pull
up, and some Boer officers had our horses taken
from the train. We were told they were com-
mandeered, so we asked to be taken to the officer
in charge, and when they pointed to a man on
the platform, we recognised our Boer friend from
Pretoria, Tjchard Kruger. I went up to him
and asked if it were correct that they intended
to commandeer our horses. He said, “ Yes, we
want horses, and you will be paid for them after
the war.” I pointed out to him we were


Australians, that we had rather a lot of people we
were responsible for, that we were leaving
Africa as fast as we could, and if he were to take
our horses it would ruin us. Besides, though
our horses were valuable to us, they would be
worthless to them, for though they looked in good
condition, they were all old and would not stand
for war work more than a few days. He looked
into my eyes and said, “You win,” and gave
orders to put back the horses, and ordered the
guard to go for his life if he wanted to get to
Capetown before fighting commenced. Off we
went, he waving farewell to us as we went.
We arrived at Kimberley to find all in turmoil.
The stationmaster had received orders from the
traffic manager to send us through with all dis-
patch, and although they were running trains
all day and night, working their staff without rest,
or very little, we were sent off the same after-
noon. Our wives were glad to see us, and soon
were ready to accompany us. Just as we were
about to leave the station, I saw Mr. Charles
Pollard on the platform, so I thought it my duty
to tell him all I had seen, and advise him to send
his Lilliputian Opera Co. away from Kimberley.
He told me he had done so already, and that they
were in East London. I said, “ Well, what are
you doing here. Why not leave at once in our
train ?” He thanked me, but said he had a few
bills to settle, and that he would be leaving in
the passenger train a couple of hours later.
Well, there were no more trains out of Kim-
berley. Ours was absolutely the last, and we had
just got across the Modder River a few minutes
before the Boers blew the bridge up. We could
see the Boers not a great distance from the Modder
River. We also saw the one solitary Cape mounted
policeman who was keeping guard over the bridge.
We arrived at Beaufort West just a week after
we left Bulawayo, and in the early morning of
that day we nearly ran into two wrecked trains
that had left Bloomfontein filled with refugees.
It appears that the trains were following one
another, with just ten minutes between, and


the first train was taking water at a place called
the Three Sisters, when the second train, with
both engine driver and fireman asleep —they had
been working continuously for 48 hours without
sleep—crashed into the "first one with terrible
results. It was a sight I will never forget.
While we were arranging for a steamer to
take us anywhere out of the country, we played
Beaufort West, Langsberg and Paarl, but to very
poor business, for, although we were in English
territory, the population were Dutch, and in
sympathy with their brothers up country. We
saw regiment after regiment travelling by
special train to the front, all happy and confident
that they would have Christmas in Pretoria. At
one siding, where we were waiting for their train
to pass, it pulled up alongside ours, and a num-
ber of Tommies jumped off their train and,
rushing over to our cages, took a number of baboons
from us as mascots, they said. We willingly let
them have them. What a difference there was
between the troops going to the front and the
refugees coming from there, stripped of all valu-
ables and without home or money or any im-
mediate prospects. While we stayed in Cape-
town we did nothing until we were ready to sail
for Lorenzo Marques, where we played two weeks.
CHAPTER XVI.
IN THE ORIENT.
Work not Meant for White Men — Ceylon’s Spicy
Breezes —Beautiful Burma —Peculiar Customs —
Wonderful Pagodas.
We left Delagoa Bay for Colombo without
sending an agent ahead, and without publicity
arrangements of any kind, but on our arrival in
Colombo a number of Parsees came on board
ready to do business with us, and we straightway
sold the first night’s takings to one who paid for
full capacity at full prices. He made his profit
by charging extra for the tickets he sold. We
had Christmas and New Year there, and the second


week we played in the Parsee Theatre, whilst
we repaired our tent and put new sections in it.
It was here, while we were putting up the
tents before our opening, that I was asked by
a European not to work myself. I had always
superintended the putting up of our tents and
would think nothing of driving in the iron or
wooden stakes, pushing up the poles, etc. In
fact, I did it to keep myself fit. I loved swinging
the heavy sledge hammer. Together with other
performers, five or six of us would get round one
peg, and with our sledge hammers, it would go
down in a jiffy with each striking in turn, But
it seemed that if a white man worked in India
or Ceylon he would lose caste with the natives,
so I had to desist.
Tuticorin, in the south of India, was our next
move for one night, then on to Trichinopoly for
three nights and a matinee.
While we had been at Kimberly our band
had left us. They were all Germans, and we had
to play Mafeking and Bulawayo with a make-
shift band, viz. : —A cornet, piano, mandoline,
bass and drum, and we had no band except what
we could pick up in all the towns afterwards ;
but it was this town —Trichinopoly—that took
the cake for local music.
The only thing we could get in the way of
music was by three Indians who played on three
yellow clarionettes. Their overture was “ God
Save the Queen,” and they played for their
second attempt and our first act a few bars of
of “ Ta-ra-boom-de-ay.” They would keep on
repeating these few bars over and over. Then
for the next act they played “ God Save ” again,
and so on, until Philip, who was performing the
brumby horses to the tune of " God Save,”
stopped them, and told them to get out, to the
amusement of the English audience.
Ceylon is a beautiful place, different as chalk
from cheese from Africa. The heat is intense,
a sort of steamy heat, and a different atmosphere
prevails. The natives are puny compared with
the African native, and the first thing to strike


one is the difference in the size of things. Africa
is huge, and the natives are huge. For instance,
the “ Jinrickshaws” in Africa are built to carry
two persons, and are pulled by huge Zulus, with
all kinds of fantastic head dress. Some have
huge oxen horns on their heads, others have huge
wings ; but if they have heavy things on their
heads they dress light below, sometimes in only
a pair of short knee breeches. The last rickshaw
I rode in in Durban was drawn by a “boy” who
had nothing on but a cleanly washed white woman’s
chemise, and before he got down to the jetty
it was up about his neck. He enjoyed the joke
immensely. They are like big children. In
Colombo the rickshaw man is a miserable coolie,
weighing about eight stone and his rickshaw can
only hold one person. He takes life seriously
as he takes you to your destination, followed by
scores of fat little naked natives asking for money.
They run along after your conveyance, slapping
their fat, naked tummies, saying,Give me penny.
You my father, you my mother, me starving.”
In Africa, you see no begging.
But all the same, Ceylon is very interesting.
Besides its pagodas and its motley dressed popu-
lace, it has its thieving crows. These crows are
known to enter bedrooms and carry away jewellery
or any other small movable things. One woman
had a very valuable diamond ring stolen by one
of these birds, and despaired of ever seeing it
again, when one morning she saw a crow come
flying through her bedroom window, pick up
another piece of jewellery and fly up into a tree
not far away. Her husband got a coolie to climb
the tree, and there he found quite a quantity of
jewellery, amongst which was her valuable ring.
We had New Year of igoo here, and we put
in a very good time. The shops are very in-
teresting and the glittering jewels attract atten-
tion. Then there are the snake charmers and
fakirs, who bring trees out of the ground and
snakes from anywhere and everywhere. Colombo’s
white people are mostly Dutch. It once belonged to
Holland, and the Dutch atmosphere still prevails.


We played Madras two weeks and then shipped
to Rangoon. We had to put our horses on a
small dingey and row with them one at a time to
the steamer lying in the bay. Then they were
slung up on deck. We were afraid that one or
more would have been hurt, but they were all
loaded safely, and we sailed for Rangoon on
January 29, 1900, arriving there on Thursday,
February 1. Our agent had forgotten to bill
us and we arrived without any. notice of the
opening of the show ; but we opened on the 3rd
to a fair house, though we had better houses
later on. If we had difficulty in loading and
unloading our horses in Madras, we had it worse
here, for at Madras we did have a beach to walk
the horses on and then into the half-capsized
boat ; but here we had to get them out of a boat
on to a wet, slippery jetty. We had to make
them jump from the boat to the jetty, but after
an hour or so we had them all safely landed,
some with slight scars from their falls.
On the way to Rangoon we travelled through the
Bay of Bengal, and saw thousands of snakes floating
and swimming in the water. They had been wash-
ed down the rivers into the bay by flood waters.
I consider the Burmese women the most
beautiful of all the coloured races, and the most
graceful as well. We had a native circus play-
ing opposition to us just across the road. They
were two brothers also —one a tall man, the other
short, as are we two brothers. These two copied
us, for the very next night after our opening
which they had attended —they did exactly as we
did. It was our custom after the overture for
all our ring waiters to march into the ring two
two, then form up into a double line. Our
artists would walk through this line, bow to the
audience, and in turn form in line, then we two
brothers would walk through the lane formed
by our company, who would be clapping us.
We would then bow to the audience, and receive
their plaudits. My brother and I always wore
evening dress, with our medals pinned on our
breasts. These medals, I might mention, we


gained at different places throughout our travels,
and numbered a dozen or more. They were
presented to us by different societies whom we
had benefitted, and managers with whom we had
been associated. Our friends across the way did
exactly as we did, even to wearing their breasts
full of medals on their new evening suits. They
were soon copying our acts as well, but for all
this they were a very nice couple of gentlemen,
and all they wanted was to improve their show.
Burmah is a most interesting county with
its wonderful pagodas and people, but what was
most interesting to us were the elephants, who
worked like human beings. They were exceed-
ingly clever at stacking logs and drawing heavy
loads ; but what amused us more than anything
else was their knowledge of when to knock off
work and when to commence. A whistle would
blow for knock-off time, and no matter where
the beast was, or what it was doing, it would
immediately drop anything it had, and scamper
off for its feed. Then, when the signal was given
to commence it would reluctantly leave off feed-
ing and go to work again. Of course, their
keepers would have to make them knock off
feeding and go to work, but it was the way in
which they went about it that amused us.
Rangoon, as everybody knows, is built on
the Irrawaddy River. It is an ugly, muddy,
fiercely-running stream. Maybe when we saw
it, it was in flood, as it was racing madly to-
wards the Bay of Bengal, and I thought to my-
self, heaven help the poor fellow who had the
misfortune to fall into it. The banks are low-
lying and covered with tropical verdure, and
everywhere are to be seen small pagodas, with tiny,
tinkling bells that sound gently with each breeze,
and send out a weird, pleasant sound, making an at-
mosphere all its own. The reason there are so many
small pagodas, I am told, is because the Burman,
when he is rich enough, builds a pagoda as a peace
offering to his god, and this absolves him from the
consequences of any old sin he should choose.


The principal pagoda is known as the Shwi
Dagon Pagoda-—a most magnificent building,
standing on the top of a high hill. Its huge
gold-topped umbrella-shaped dome can be seen
for miles around. It is covered with solid gold
leaf, and studded with diamonds, rubies and
sapphires, which are hardly discernible by the
naked eye as the dome is so high. One enters
the pagoda from the street, then climbs up a
broad stairway through bazaars or booths where
all kinds of flowers, fruit and eatables can be
bought. Chief among the latter are the betels —
a damp green leaf is smeared with lime made from
burnt shells, powdered cinnamon, cloves, all-
spice and a pinch of tobacco, with a little crushed
betel nut added. The leaf is folded around this
concoction and put into the mouth, and then the
chewing begins. It makes the lips red and the
teeth black, and the natives expectorate a blood-
like fluid on to the side walk or any other con-
venient place. It seems a dirty habit, but I
believe it has a fascinating flavour, and is freely
indulged in by all the Hindu race, as is another
rather disgusting habit of theirs, i.e., searching
one another’s heads for vermin. Right through-
out India you will notice, sitting on their haunches
in the middle of the footpath, or alongside of their
fruit or other stalls, a couple of Indians of either
sex and of all ages, searching through one
another’s heads. It seems their favourite pastime.
The men and women in Burma dress very
much alike. A single piece of silk a yard wide
is wrapped around their middle and legs, and
their bodies are covered with a white jacket
pinned in front. The only difference is that the
men wear turbans around their heads, and the
women wear flowers. Of course, this dress does
not apply to the Indians of whom there are
many. The Indian women are wrapped from
head to foot in gorgeous-coloured silks, with
scores of bracelets on arms and ankles, rings on
fingers, and in ears and nose. The latter are
huge rings, six or seven inches in diameter, which
drag the skin of the nose well down over the


mouth. The women are nearly all undersized.
They marry very young and their big babies are
slung across their hips, and look as big as their
little mothers. These people dress in all kinds
•of colours, and passing up and down the great
steps of the temple they make a great showing.
It is a scene gorgeous in the extreme.
After a great climb, one reaches the great golden
pagoda, and a most magnificent spectacle is
obtained. The great shrine has a background
of gold and crimson lacquer, and embroidered
banners and peacock feathers. Doves fly
through the arches of the temple, and the thou-
sands of tiny bells tinkle musically in the breeze.
The one thing that astonished me throughout
India and Burma was the great respect the native
has for the tiger. Although these animals are
plentiful there, our trained tigers were the one
big star turn with the natives, and their trainer
was gazed at with awe and respect. I suppose
it is because there are so many natives killed by
these animals that they fear them, but you would
always see a great number of Indians or Burmese
gathered around our bills that were showing the
trained tiger turns.
The Burmese women seemed to be the business
heads of the race, while the men are an easy-
going, jolly lot. Their great game was a kind
of “ Shuttlecock and Battledore/’ only they use
the heels of their feet as a battledore. They stand
around in dozens and keep the shuttlecock up
in the air with great dexterity, laughing noisily
the while like a lot of children.
The custom of having one’s bath in the hotels
was strange to us. A huge jar or tank would be
filled with clean water each morning and the
bather was supposed to stand on the floor and
pour the water over himself with a dipper. But
I did not know this, and I would get right into
the big jar of icy cold water and soak in it, and
then get out and soap myself, and return into
the jar, which was quite an acrobatic feat. Of
course, I spoilt the whole jar of water, and I
was soon told about it by the hotel proprietor.


who was very sore that he had to have the jar
emptied and fresh water put in.
We went up to Mandalay after Rangoon and
soon found out that our servant boys were
thieves, and that we had to plant or lock our things
away from their sight. Of course, there were
honest boys as well, but we, being travellers, I
suppose we were good marks for them.
After Mandalay we went to Penang and Midan
Deli, and then to Singapore —a splendid city
with wonderful shops and good hotels.
CHAPTER XVII.
IN THE ORIENT (CONTINUED).
One Woman to Fifty Men —A Mistaken Idea —
Something Like a Meal —Java and the Javanese —
“ Boy ” —A Glorious Climate.
We arrived in Singapore about March 22,
1900, and opened there on the following Satur-
day, March 24, and continued playing there for
nearly two weeks to big business.
Singapore is a very interesting place, built on
an evergreen island in the middle of a sapphire
sea. Steamers from every part of the world
call there, and here one meets every nationality,
but the colours of the Orient predominate —•
Chinese, Cingalese, Japanese, Burmese, Javanese,
Indians and Malays. The climate is very hot
and the Englishmen there seem sallow and gaunt.
They dressed in pure white. The English ladies,
of course, dress as fashion demands, and they
are no different here from anywhere else, with
the exception that they are thought more of, and
made more a fuss of than anywhere else, for the
simple reason there are so few of them. Fifty
men to one woman ! No wonder they are sought
after, and their husbands’ lives made hell in try-
ing to keep “ the other fellow off.”
One young officer asked me why I did not
engage and travel twenty or thirty young good-
looking ballet dancers. I said I did not think
they would be an attraction to a circus. He


replied, " Maybe not, but they would do us a lot
of good, and you would have a bigger attendance
of fellows who would come after the girls.” I
got very indignant with him and told him he did
not want a circus, it was something not mentioned
in polite society he was after, and asked him what
he thought I was. He apologised, and explained
that there were really a lot of unscrupulous
travelling shows who made a business out of this
kind of thing.
The truth of this I found out afterwards.
Even as late as 1924 I saw an advertisement in
an Australian paper for young ladies willing to
travel India with a vaudeville show, “ ability not
essential,” but figure and good looks, yes. These
girls are taken there and taught some kind of
dance with the other girls, and their charms
exhibited to the white men, who make their own
terms with the unfortunate victims.
The Englishman here, as in other parts of the
world —but not England—tries his best to help
the stranger, and a really good time we had.
In fact, India spoils one, for he never does a hand’s
turn of work. Even his cigar or cigarette is lit
for him, and a coolie stands over him with a big
fan to keep the flies and mosquitoes off him ;
but as he can’t keep the mosquitoes off the ladies’
feet and ankles, a calico bag is supplied each lady
whilst dining, and these are slipped over the legs.
A word also for the good hotels in Singapore
--they are splendid.
From here we went to Batavia, Java, opening
on April 9, to good business.
On the steamer across from Singapore to Java
I was first introduced to the Java “ Muckan.”
I sat alongside the captain and was served with
a huge soup plate, as were all the other passengers.
The captain was first served by one steward
who carried a large vat of rice. The captain
filled his plate with rice. It then passed on to
me, and I took a spoonful. Another steward
followed with cold chicken, to which I helped
myself, then other stewards followed with pieces
of grilled steak, fried eggs, slices of hard-boiled


eggs, pieces of sausages, Bombay duck, fish,
shrimps, fruit chutney, fried bananas, cold beef,
etc., etc. These you mix up in the rice, then
another steward brings the curry which you pour
over the whole mixture until it is well saturated.
Then, with a large soup spoon, you fall to. It is
astonishing how soon you come to like it. At
first I felt rather sea-sick at the look of the huge
plate piled with all this mixture, but after a
spoonful or two, I got to like it, and soon had my
plate cleaned. This food is very fattening and
sustaining, for when I left Singapore I was in
ill health, and had lost weight considerably,
but I was not in Java more than a month than I
put on two stone, and regained my health.
Java is well watered. I stayed at an hotel
which had a canal running along in front, where
the natives of both sexes could be seen having
their bath and washing their sarongs, morning
and evening. The hotels are mostly of one
story and the rooms running away along veran-
dahs to the back of the grounds. I had a suite
of rooms consisting of a verandah, front room,
bedroom and conveniences. The verandah,
which is used for the afternoon siesta, has two
big easy chairs with extension arms, where one
rests his legs.
At first, one was shocked at the sight, across
the yard on the opposite verandah, where there
was a Dutchman and his wife stretched out on
their separate chairs with their legs on the arm
rests, well asleep. The man wore pyjamas, but
his fat frau had on only a sarong. No notice is
taken of these positions for everyone everywhere
was doing likewise. In fact, Java takes the
palm for free and easy dress and lounging. There
seems to be no privacy. The Javanese live and
love in the open streets. They mate where,
and with whom their fancy guides. I should say
they were more like monkeys than anything
else in the world.
Then there are the Dutchmen and their wives.
The men wear a white light jacket and loose trou-
sers and a topee and sandals, and the women wear


a light short jacket for the body, and a sarong
round their loins and legs, which shows every
curve in both.
“ Cassie Pike,” it is pronounced—l don’t know
how it is spelt —is a gin and bitters which is put
on the front verandah of the hotel, and is given
away to the boarders free of charge. This is to
give one an appetite for the gorge at tiffin, and
after tiffin, they all make for the verandahs, as
I have mentioned.
Another thing that struck me was the way
your own particular “boy” knew your voice.
The “boys” generally assembled in the middle
of the hotel yard, and after the show at night when
we would want our supper, we would call, “Boy,”
from our room, and our own “boy” would answer.
Although there were a hundred guests at the hotel
with a “boy” a-piece, they never made a mistake.
A splendid country is Java —in the right
months —May, June and July. But, oh, the
thieves there. They would steal our guy ropes
from off the tent as it stood or anything they
could lift. Our iron pegs were continually dis-
appearing, and one day we arrived in one of the
towns without an iron stake. They had pinched
the whole lot in the previous town.
We found in Java that we had to lose a day be-
fore playing a town. That is, we had to come to a
town and put up our tents and get all ready for
the opening the following night. We could not
arrive in a town to-day and open to-night, as
we do in Australia ; but had to wait a day and
open the next night.
The Dutch rule the Javanese with a rod of iron.
They must bow or bend the knee whenever they
pass a Dutch man or woman in the street, and
if they should neglect to do so, or even not see
them, they are reminded with a sharp crack of
a stick, or smack with the fist or hand. But
let a stranger illtreat these “boys” in any way,
and they are ordered off the islands. In one
town a score of Javanese “boys” were unloading
our paraphernalia from the railway trucks. The
railway line was up on an embankment, and the


“boys” were shooting our tents, poles and boxes
down off the trucks into the valley below. Not
satisfied with the damage this did, they were
harpooning our trunks with our iron pegs. Some
were very good shots, and when a peg went through
a trunk there would be a shout of glee. The
contracting carrier, who was talking to me on
the lot a couple of hundred yads away, said to
me, “ Those 'boys’ must be up to some devil-
ment. Come along and see.” I was mad with
them, and picking up a pole made a swipe at them
with it. They all cleared away and would not
come back to work ; but a Dutch policeman came
to me and threatened me with expulsion from
the island. The carrier, however, told the police-
man that I had not touched any of them, and
only did it to frighten them, and as the carrier
was an influential Dutchman his word went ; but
he warned me never to strike any native or I
would be sent off the island, as a circus man had
been sent a few months previously.
All their towns were well watered and their gutters
were water carriers, with water running under the
lavatories, yet for all this cleanliness, enteric
fever prevails, and in one town—Samarang —
every member of our company was laid up with
it excepting our own family. Philip, myself,
my sister Rill, niece Edith, and apprentice Carl,
gave the whole show one night, as the other mem-
bers of the company were too ill with this fever.
Strange to say our family escaped it all together.
Of course there is horse racing here as well as
in any other place on earth, but I doubt if in
any other place on earth it is half as ludicrous,
for they race on miniature ponies and the jockeys
seem six feet high or thereabouts-raw-boned
natives with their feet on the ground very often
to balance them. At other times, their legs
are entwined round the pony’s body, and the
manner in which they urge the ponies on is
excruciatingly funny, making us laugh until we
had pains.
Java’s inland towns are beautiful for climate,
Buitenzorg being the pick. One gets a lovely


breeze there. Funny little garrys, pulled by
miniature ponies, were the mode of transport,
when we were over there in igoo. Now, I sup-
pose, Henry Ford has poked his nose in ; but the
drives all through the island were splendid, and
were accomplished in a drag and four small ponies.
After Buitenzorg, where we played four nights,
we went to Sockaboemi, Bandoeng, Djorka, Solo.
Here we saw an elephant that was reputed to be
over 300 years old. He was nearly white, and
was sacred. Samarang was another nice town,
but hot, and after playing a dozen centres, the
show took the steamer “ Karrakatta ” for Fre-
mantle and Australia once more.
CHAPTER XVIII.
DICING WITH DEATH.
Keeping the Steamer Going —Back in Melbourne
—“ Do It Now ” —“ As Good as Fitz’s -
Adventurous Lady in Tigers Cage —Perilous
Predicament —More Afraid of a Cow than a Bear —
A Fight for Life.
My wife and I, however, had left the circus at
Samarang and travelled by train to Peckalonon,
whence we took the steamer “ Bucephalus ” for
Australia ahead of the show. It was a cattle
steamer, returning empty, and we had as fellow-
passengers cattlemen and stockmen, and jolly fine
fellows too; but the boat —well, it was a cattle boat,
and that is all there is to be said. The captain
made us as comfortable as possible, and we were to
sail direct to Melbourne, but we ran out of coal and
had to burn the horse stalls and other timber before
we could make Fremantle. When we did pull in,
there was a crowd of people on the wharf and among
them, several reporters, one of whom sent a press
telegram through to all the Australian and New
Zealand papers that the “ Bucephalus ” had to
call into Fremantle for coal, and that George Wirth
and his wife were on board.
Now, I did not want this to be known just then,
as I wanted to make our itinerary out and
E


secure grounds to play on before any opposition
circuses could get the grounds before us, but now
the fat was in the fire, so I wired to a friend of
mine in Melbourne to secure the Flinders street
ground for me for October and November as I
intended to play Melbourne for the Cup season.
The circus intended to enter Australia via
Queensland, and I was on my way to North
Queensland, so when I arrived in Melbourne I
immediately went to my friend’s place of business,
and asked him if he received my wire and secured
the ground. He replied that he was sorry, but
my wire came too late as Fitzgerald had wired
him some days previously and he had secured it
for them. So, after collecting the letters that
had been sent care of my friend, my wife and I
went to make arrangements for hotel accommoda-
tion, but just as we were leaving the office I
met another old friend in Harry Lyons. We
shook hands and I introduced him to my wife,
and asked him to step over to the Ballarat Star
Hotel and celebrate our return. On our way over
I asked him if he knew who owned the ground in
Flinders Street. He said that the previous year
Tom Fitzgerald had told him where to engage the
lot, and he would take me there when I was
ready. Right away, we jumped into a cab and
drove round to Griffiths’ Tea Warehouse, but
when we got there we were told the agent for the
land was in Swanston Street, so we drove round
there. I asked him if they had let the ground
in Flinders Street. They said they had not,
although they had had a phone message that
it would be required for a circus again this Cup.
I replied, “ Yes, that is right, you got the mess-
age from Mr. ,” whom I wired to secure it
for me. He said that was right, so I told him I
had come to pay the deposit on it. He accordingly
took the cash and gave me a receipt for Wirth
Bros, to play there Oct.-Nov., 1900. We had
hardly completed the deal when Mr. H of
my friend’s office, came in, and said he wished to
pay the deposit on the land. On being told that
I had already done so, he said, “ Oh, that is all


right then.” We left, the office together, and
Mr. H felt rather small, for it showed that he
had favoured our opposition rather than us,
and if I hadn’t acted promptly, we should have
lost the ground. He said, “You put one over
on us, this time, George.”
I have gone into detail over this as I think it
has a moral —“ Never take ‘No’ for an answer.”
If you want anything done, “ Do it yourself,” and
“ Never put off until to-morrow what should be
done-to-day.”
What struck me most when I returned to
Australia was seeing the white man work in the
streets. It seemed so strange after I had become
used to see the white man superintend work but
never to work himself. We soon got used to it,
however, and my wife was taken up with the shops,
and the pure fresh things to eat —fresh green
vegetables, tender steak that never was on ice,
fresh eggs and the fish freshly caught, cooked and
served. On our arrival at Adelaide, we saw scores
of people of both sexes fishing, each with three
hooks on a line, and hauling up three fish at a
time. I remarked, “ This is the way we catch
fish in Australia.” I knew, if my wife did not,
that this was only a flash in the pan, and it was
just a shoal of fish passing, and the opportunity
being grasped by the populace to get some fresh
fish cheaply.
My wife fell in love with Australia right away,
with its pure air, its healing atmosphere, its
bright, health-giving sun, and cool breezes—
Perth with its beautiful river and shops, Adelaide
with its cool mountains and beautiful streets
and shops, and Melbourne with more beautiful
shops and wonderfully-dressed women. Then on
to Sydney, where the beautiful harbour fairly
astounded her, although the noisy trams in the
principal streets bewildered her and made her
nervous. Brisbane also fascinated her ; but when
we got to Brisbane we had to alter our plans
of bringing the circus to Australia through Queens-
land, as Fitzgerald Bros’. Circus had jumped from
Auckland right up north, and we would have been


following them, which would not have been good
policy. Then again, the steamers, that went to
West Australia from Java, were easier to catch,
so we had to double back to Fremantle with a
horizontal bar performer (Vantel) I had engaged
in Perth, and whom I had brought to Brisbane
with us, as well as Harry Lyons as agent.
The circus arrived in Fremantle by the “Karra-
katta ” on August 8 or 9, 1900, and we opened there
on the nth to a very good house.
We went away from Australia to tour the
world for an advertisement. When we left, we
were the biggest Australian circus and our name
was well and favourably known from one end of
Australia to the other. Now we returned with a
wide-world reputation, and thinking the public
had remembered us, so our disappointment was
great to find that they had entirely forgotten us.
The big show now was Fitzgerald's, and after
seeing our opening we heard remarked, ” Why,
it's as good as Fitz’s !”
Our programme was a very strong one and
filled with novelties. We had the Boxing
Ponies, the Bucking Elephant Ghuni Sah, Riding
Tigers, Riding Bear, Riding and Somersaulting
Baboons, John Welby Cooke (jockey rider and
spring-board leaper), Fred Zobedie (dancing on
his hands —a wonderful balancer), the Six Aus-
tralian Brumby Horses, Moultan and Vantel
(horizontal bar experts), Wineherman (bear train-
er), Johnny Rougal (tiger trainer), the De Wynnes
(most graceful acrobats), “ Fly," (the wonderful
high-jumping greyhound), Miss Libra (wire walker
and globe trotter), Valazie (as dummy), the Al-
deens Clowns, and our family consisting of my
sister Marizles, niece Edith, brother Philip, myself
and our apprentice Carl, with Tommy Williams
as bandmaster and Alex. Middleton as advance
agent.
After playing the West we opened in Adelaide
on Saturday, September 29, and stayed there until
October 13, then on to Broken Hill and part of
South Australia and Victoria, opening in Mel-
bourne in opposition to Fitzgerald on Saturday,


November 3 (Derby night). Our stay in Mel-
bourne was short as we wanted to go to New
Zealand via Launceston and Hobart.
During our stay in Melbourne a young lady from
Foxalls’ Ballarat Star Hotel volunteered to enter
the tigers’ den. She drew us a good house and her-
self a great reputation, for she was the talk of
Melbourne for her temerity.
The “ Sydney Bulletin,” of December 1, 1900,
said :
“ Miss Graham, the barmaid, who recently
entered the tigers’ cage at Wirths' in Melbourne,
and drank a glass of champagne, while the keeper
kept the animals at bay, etc., etc., received the
following letter from a Semitic wag who hangs
on the skirts of the legal profession :—“Cemetery
Lane, off Tombstone St,, Kew, 12th Nov., 1900.
Miss Graham, Ballarat Star Hotel. Madam, —Re-
fering to enclosed advt., we take the liberty of
informing you that we can provide you (if re-
quired) with a first-class funeral—glass hearse
and plumes, and three mourning coaches—for
£7/10/-. We are prepared to embalm you in
the real ancient Egyptian style, including keep-
ing the body on ice for six days, to be viewed by
friends and relations for £l/12/-, or can do the
modern cheap style, merely stuffed with straw,
and guaranteed to keep fresh for three days if
under 90 degrees in the shade, for 16/6. Kindly
mention this letter to your friends, as should
our services be required, of course you will
not be attending to matters of business person-
ally. Should you be assimilated by one of the
tigers, of course, it will be difficult to separate
you. In that case we will bury the animal at
reduced rates. It is possible that you may
survive the experiment, but in the interests of
our trade we can only hope for the best. We
have the honour to be, Madam, yours ad-
miringly, W. E. Plantum & Co., Expert Funeral
Directors and Ancient Embalming Artists. P.S.
—Pardon the absence of our professional black-
edge stationery, it’s use at present would be
premature. —W.E.P. & Co., E.F.D. & A.E.A.’ ”


Other ladies and gentlemen have entered the
tigers’ den at different times and in different
towns, but one of the most sensational was
in Nelson, N.Z., when a local publican volun-
teered to drive the two ferocious tigers, Prince
and Pasha, in a chariot around the caged
arena. At the practice, all went well, but
at the night performance something went wrong,
for the tigers had just started with the chariot
when the hotel-keeper, to show how plucky he
was, cracked his whip, which hit Pasha and made
him give a mighty bound, upsetting the chariot,
and tigers, chariot, harness and men were all
mixed up. Pasha tried to get to the amateur
animal trainer and serious consequences would
have followed, had not the other tiger, Prince,
tackled Pasha, throwing him over on his back,
and holding him down until Johnny Rougal had
extricated the man from his perilous predicament
and got him safely out of the cage. Then the
tigers stopped fighting and let Rougal unharness
them and send them back to their retiring cage.
Another incident worth relating now Pm on the
subject was in Auckland. A Miss Purcell was
advertised to drive these tigers around the den
in the chariots, and a local paper sent its photo-
grapher up at the practice that morning to get
some snaps of the lady. She and the tigers posed
for several snaps, the photographer (Mr. Mann)
saying after each snap, “ Another for the last,”
and had taken five or six. After thanking the
lady for posing, he stepped back from his camera,
and suddenly fell to the ground and expired.
Frank M. Clark, who was there watching the pro-
ceedings, and I, hurriedly lifted him away from
the cage, and just in time, for Pasha bounded down
for him as soon as he saw him fall. The lady had a
great fright, but remarked that if anybody had
died of fright it should have been herself. And
to do the lady justice for her bravery, she went
into the den that evening and put them through
without any apparent fear.
Now a word of praise for Johnny Rougal. He
was the most fearless, and at the same time the


most careful trainer I have ever seen. An incident
happened at sea that I must relate in connection
with Rougal. It was in the gale that caused the
loss of the “ Port Patrick/’ The circus was en
voyage in a small steamer from Adelaide to
McDonnell Bay, Mt. Gambier. The accommoda-
tion was very limited, and when the gale was it
worst, a ferocious grizzly bear got loose, and
there was a terrible time on board, as it was feared
that the tigers, lions and other wild animals
might also break away.
The bear reached a pen in which were a cow
and a calf. He seized the calf in his paws, killed
it on the spot and marched off with it, along the
deck. M. Rougal, who was a very bad sailor,
was roused up, and, ill as he was, took charge of
the bear, and put him back into his cage. But
the experience that night in the gale when at
any moment one or more cages would be smashed
in and the animals loosened, was one I would not
care to go through again. I asked Rougal after-
wards if he were not frightened that the bear
would have turned on him. He said, “ No, but I
was afraid the cow would have bitten me, seeing
she had lost her calf.”
Talking of bears reminds me of a sensational
affair in Christchurch a few years ago. We had
an act in which six lions, two bears, and two
wolves performed altogether. I bought them from
Carl Hagenbeck in Hamburg, Germany, and the
original trainer had gone back to Germany, so
a New Zealander, Sid Rose, had been performing
them. One of the bears did not like Rose, and
he was always very careful of this one, excepting
this particular night, when he was careless, and
the bear took the opportunity she had been wait-
ing for for months. She seized him in her paws,
threw him to the ground and started mauling
him with mouth and paw. We, from the outside
of the cage tried with long forks to prod her off ;
but could not shift her. She seemed to be eating
into his stomach, and the man was groaning and
fighting for his very life. The audience were
panic-stricken, women fainting and men and


women running for their lives from the building.
I was at my wits’ end what to do. I looked
around for something heavy, but could not see
anything excepting a piece of 3 x 2 lightwood, so
I picked this up and, opening the door of the cage,
ran over to man and bear, with the one thought
uppermost in my mind —I must hit hard and
strong, knocking the bear insensible with the
one blow, otherwise it would tackle me. So,
with all the force I could command, I brought the
piece of timber crashing down on the bear’s
skull, with the only result that the wood rebounded
from the bear’s head to my forehead, cutting it
open. The bear just gave me one look and then
returned to the attack on Rose. On seeing me
in the cage, one of our men, picking up an iron
peg, 4 feet long by 2\ inches thick came to my
assistance, and he also brought the heavy iron
peg down with all his might. I expected to see
the bear’s skull split this time, but it had no more
effect than my piece of wood had. She lifted her
head again, and Herr Schmidt (the Polar bear
trainer) who had now come into the fray with a
fork, jabbed the fork into her mouth, and getting
hold of the chain that was round her neck, led
her over to her retiring cage, and put her in.
Just before the advent of Schmidt and the tent
hand, one of the wolves had left its pedestal, and,
seeing me attack the bear, also attacked it by
biting its hind leg and worrying it as a dog would,
but finding it made, no impression, left and got
on to its pedestal again. After we had got the
bear off the man and safely in its cage, and Sid
Rose was carried out, I remembered for the first
time where I was, for on looking round me there
were the six lions, the two wolves and the other
bear perched on their pedestals, blinking at me in
seeming wonderment. The thought flashed
through my mind as to what attitude they would
take when I tried to bring them off their pedestals
and get them back to their cages, for I had now to
go on with it, and get these beasts back to their
cages. As soon as the bear was in its cage, I
shoo-ed the other bear in with it and shut the


door. Then I opened the lions’ cage door and
drove them in. They obeyed like frightened chil-
dren, scampering as fast as they could and tumbl-
ing over one another to get into the cage first.
This was my first close experience with wild
animals, bul; the audience did not know that.
They thought it was quite natural that I should
command the beasts as I owned them ; but this
gave my dear wife a shock. She has always
been nervous after that in case I should again
endanger my life to save someone in danger.
CHAPTER XIX.
WINNING OUT.
Killed by Worry—lt Pays to Advertise, but to
Advertise Truthfully —Fates Against Opposition
Show Treat for Children - Wirths Practices
become Recognised Institutions.
To hark back to our re-appearance in Aus-
tralia. While we were playing Broken Hill in
1900, we heard from our advance agent, Alex
Middleton, that Morris —Fitzgerald’s agent —had
died. Middleton wired that he himself was very
ill and asked me to come over to Melbourne at
once. This 1 did, and on my arrival found
“ Middie ” in such a state of funk that it was
all I could do to bring him round. He sure
thought he was going to die. Because the other
agent had died through the worry of playing
opposition, he made up his mind to die, so I had
to do all the advance work, and as Fitzgerald was
to play in Melbourne opposition to us during the
Cup season, and as there was to be no undue
fighting, but we were to work amicably together,
it took a lot of diplomacy to gain any little ad-
vantage over our opponents. I remember that
a hotel in Swanston Street, near Bourke Street, had
been pulled down and a new one was to be erected
on the same site immediately ; but in the mean-
time there was showing a huge blank wall to
Bourke Street. I at once arranged with the
contractor to smother the wall with our large


bills, and I had this done in the dead of night,
so that the next day our bills were to be seen from
Bourke Street. It was a great piece of work and
a wonderful advertisement. In fact, better than
all the other billstands put together. Such a
flaring advertisement created great comment.
There were even letters to the papers, accusing
the city council of neglecting their duty, and all
this talk even bettered our advertisement. Clean
Sweep won the Cup this year, I remember it, as
it swept me clean at the course, but on my arrival
at the hotel I was told I had drawn Clean Sweep
in the sweep, so that put me right.
We had a lot of opposition for many years after
our return to Australia, our greatest opponents,
of course, being the Fitzgerald Bros. There were
others, both small and large, but we gradually beat
them all decisively—even English and American
circuses I attribute our success against these for-
midable shows to the faith in which we were held by
the public. We never over-advertised, but always
performed what we advertised, and advertised
what we would perform, whereas the English and
Americans painted the town red and boasted of
the wonderful things they were going to show,
making* the public imagine they were going to see
something extraordinary and what they had never
seen before, and when the public had witnessed
their shows, they knew they had seen better with
Wirths, and at once patronised us all the more.
Although I never over-did our advertising, I
never missed an opportunity of letting the public
know when we were coming. On one occasion,
I came to Sydney from New Zealand where the
circus had been playing opposition to Dan Fitz-
gerald. Dan and his agents had got to Sydney
before me by a couple of weeks. I came over
principally to secure the ground, i.e., Prince
Alfred Park, while Dan had engaged Belmore
Park —a much better stand than ours. I thought
they would have engaged all the billstands in
Sydney, thus keeping us from advertising on the
walls, as we were now fighting keen opposition,
but I found they had neglected Rolf's, and I at


once saw Roff’s manager, and although I had no
bills with me as our advance agent had them, I
arranged with the manager to have the stands
immediately, a full fortnight before our bills would
arrive, and I went to a painter and arranged with
him to paint in one foot letters, ” Watch this space
for Wirths’ Easter Attractions.” I then arranged
with the billposting firm to put up 100 30 feet x 10
feet stands of white paper with a red border,
and place the above lettering in the centre. A
good show it made all over Sydney and suburbs,
and poor old Dan Fitzgerald, who was ill at the
time, remarked to his agent, “ Here you two have
been here over two weeks, and not even put out a
handbill, and George Wirth has not been in
Sydney two days and he has the whole of Sydney
billed, and people talking about his show.” This
was the year we had Chevallo “ looping the loop ”
on a bicycle, —a very sensational act.
Fitzgerald was to have had eight elephants
and a new show to light us with, and with a much
better stand, everything pointed to their beating
us. But poor Dan, his elephants all died before
they left Melbourne, and his new artists failed
in their acts the first night, so the public, think-
ing they were being gulled, came to the show
who did not gull. But this was sheer luck—bad
luck for Fitz, and good luck for us. We had had
a man (Mr. Brickhill) in India for nearly 18
months, trying to get us some elephants and
other wild animals. He did have eight young
elephants, but they all died before he could get
them on the steamer, so we did save the passage
money, whereas Fitz lost passage money as well,
besides losing the confidence of the public, as he
had billed the eight elephants out of sight, and
had none to show.
At 6 o’clock on the morning of Good Friday,
1905, we instituted the free distribution of
hot cross buns to the poor children of Sydney.
It was in Prince Alfred Park that the circus was
playing at the time, and fully 4,000 women and
children turned up for the buns and ginger beer.
Griffiths Bros., tea merchants, supplied the half


pint pots free of charge, and do so to this day.
We were, and are, thankful for their help. The
children take the pots home with them as
souvenirs, and as they have Griffiths Bros’, name
on them, they have a standing advertisement,
whereas ours is only a memory, and, I hope, a
pleasant memory, for to see the little happy faces
eagerly clamouring for the feast, then to the free
circus entertainment, does one good, and brings
true the adage, “ It is far better to give than to
receive.” Further, it makes us happy in making
others happy.
In November of the same year we established
the custom of giving a gold-mounted whip to the
jockey of the winner of the Melbourne Cup. It
was first won by Frank Bullock on Blue Spec.
We had a little pony foal born on the same morn-
ing, and Frank Bullock christened it Blue Spec
for us at the same time as he received the whip.
The foal was so small that Frank remarked that
he thought it was a small greyhound dog. We
were playing down Alexandra Avenue on the river
bank, and Fitzgerald and Eroni’s circus were
playing in Fitzgerald’s building in opposition to us.
Whilst on the subject of establishing customs,
I would like to bring on record that in 1915 we
gave over a great portion of our Park in Mel-
bourne to the Red Cross Society for the purpose
of making a Rest Home for the returning soldiers.
A fine place was built, all by public subscription.
The Society pulled down the whole of the saucer
track and built fine sleeping dormitories, dining
rooms, billiard rooms, electric laundries, tennis
court, and other things to make the returned and
wounded soldiers comfortable. We were to get
the place back at the end of the war, or at least
six months after the war, but this we never did,
the site being given over to the Returned Soldiers’
League, or some such body. That is all the thanks
we got. It would have been different if there
were no other land available, but there was lots of
spare Government land in the immediate vicinity
doing nothing.


CHAPTER XX.
PROGRAMMES COMPARED.
Back in Gold Rush Days—A Mystery Giraffe —
Presentations of the Past—Typical Present-day
Offering.
As the history of how Wirths' Circus has consolid-
ated itself in the forefront of the Australasian amuse-
ment world during the past couple of decades is
known to all, may I draw the present volume of
reminiscences to a close by offering a comparison be-
tween the leading shows of the past 60 years, which
may be classed as the olden-day circus—the circus of
Australia's medieval days, and the present-day circus.
The first big show of the kind to arrive in Australia
was Cooke, Zoyara, and Wilson's Great World Circus.
Here is their opening programme given in Melbourne
on April 23, 1866 :
1. Grand Entree by four ladies and four gentlemen on horseback.
2. French Vaulting and Leaping by the company.
3. Highly-trained Horse, Othello, introduced by Mr. J. Wilson.
4. Grand Hurdle Act by Mr. James Leroy.
5. Somersault Act on Horseback by Mr. John Barry.
6. Royal Jester—Mr. James Cooke.
7. Two Comics and Vanishing Clown- Messrs. Ross and Carlo.
8. Horizontal Bar—Mons. Leon.
9. Double Act on Two Horses —Mr. G. Ross and Mdlle. Annereux.
10. La Perche —Messrs. Olraa and Witter.
11. Daring Flights of Balloons —Mdlle. Zoyara.
12. To conclude with the Educated Mules, ‘‘Pete” and “Barney.”
In their first advertisement boomed Mdlle. Ella
Zoyara as “ the great European sensation and wonder-
ful equestrienne'' ; Mdlle, Eloise, “the beautiful and
graceful lady rider" ; Mdlle. Gemma, “the youthful
equestrienne"; Mr. James Cooke, the royal jester who
had the honour of appearing thrice before Her Most
Gracious Majesty Queen Victoria ; Messrs. Ross and
Carlo, the undisputed champion acrobats of the
world ; Mr. John Barry, the marvel of both the Old
and the New World, in his somersault act on horse-
back ; Olma, “the octomiraculous or eighth wonder of
the world, no man on earth can equal him in elegance
and intrepidity"; Mr. James Leroy, the daring bare-
backed rider (“ A bare-back act by Leroy was a piece
of the finest riding ever witnessed in Australia." — vide


“ Sydney Herald,” March 6, 1866) ; Don Leon, the
youthful gymnast ; Master Ducrow, the infant wonder ;
and the celebrated trained horse, Othello.
Cooper and Bailey’s was the next big circus and be-
longed to the period which I have classed as “medieval.”
They arrived in 1876, and had a menagerie, which
included some very rare animals. They had three
elephants, one of which performed. Then they ad-
vertised a giraffe, but there was great controversy
over whether it was a real live one, or a dead one
worked mechanically, for it would move its head and
neck up and down. Someone must have given the
show away, for on the show’s return from Tasmania
to Sydney, its cage was in mourning, and the animal
still in its cage the same as I last saw it, standing,
staring away at nothing, so I came to the conclusion
that it was dead the first time I saw it. I therefore
claim that Wirth’s Circus was the first to exhibit a
real live giraffe in Australia, viz., in 1907-8.
Here is a copy of Cooper & Bailey’s programme
given on January 25, 1877 :
1. Grand Spectacular Pageant, introducing knights and ladies
mounted on richly-caparisoned steeds, banner-bearhig foot-
men, elephants, camels, beautiful horses, liliputian ponies,
and a variety of animals—the whole forming a scene of
splendour rarely if ever equalled.
2. The Trained Elephant, “ Titania,” introduced and performed
by Prof. Geo. W. Johnston.
3. The Magic Jar and Wonderful Posturing Act —Satsuma and
Little Alright.
4. Principal Somersault and Pirouette Act —Fred Barclay (Nat
Austin, Shakespearean Jester).
5. Single Trapeze—Signoretta Zenobia.
6. The Bounding Hurdle Rider —Wm. Gorman.
7. Les Deux Comiques —Walhalla Bros.
8. The Wonderful Riding Cynocephalus, introduced by Jas.
Robinson.
9. Feats of Strength and Dexterity, concluding with the firing
of a heavy cannon borne on the shoulders of the French
Female Samson—Mdme. D’Atallie (assisted by her pupils,
Addie and Eugene).
10. Principal Equestrian Act —Miss Pauline Lee. (Charles Seeley,
Grotesque Clown).
11. Athletic Sports in the Arena —The Company.
12. The Wild Commanche Rider, a true and remarkable represen-
tation of the wonderful, wild and reckless riding of the North
American Indian on his native plains—F. Barclay.
13. Gymnastic Exercises —Walhalla Bros.


14. Marvellous Act of Horsemanship by James Robinson, Champion
Rider of the World, who will ride upon the naked back of his
flying steed, leaping banners, throwing somersaults through
balloons, turning pirouette and carrying his son, Master
Eugene, upright upon his head without the aid of hands.
Mr. Robinson still holds the diamond-studded champion belt,
presented to him for a graceful and unequalled act of
equestrianism, and a challege of £2,000 is. offered to the
world that he can perform more and better acts upon the
bare back horse than any living equestrian.
15. The Entertainment will conclude with the introduction of a
Den of Savage Lions. Prof. G. W. Johnston will enter 1 lie
den, compel the animals to perform various feats in full viiw
of the public. He will discharge pistols while in the cage,
place his head in the lion’s mouth, and feed them with raw
meat from the naked hand.
(Two performances daily.—Afternoon and Evening).
It was" astonishing the number of foreign artists in
Australia ,at this time. I can call to mind, besides
the Japanese that Hiscox and Watkins brought out
and left in this country, comprising Bungaroo and
Itchie, Dicinoski and Uaha, Joe Taro, Como Kitchie,
Scho, and another. There were the Walhalla Bros,
(from Cooper & Bailey), Hayes and Benamo (brought
out from England by Mr. Burton, but because they
had such a lot of trunks and paraphernalia, Burton
could not carry it all on his waggons, and they refused
to leave any behind, so they started a circus on their
own, with Burton in opposition to them wherever
they went, and so both went broke) ; “ Jimmy ”
Reynolds, a wonderful clown from Cooper & Bailey’s);
George Wombell and Son (from Cooper & Bailey’s
second season) ; Robert E. Lee, Lavarta Lee, Bobby
Lee, and his little brother and sister, Frank and
Edina, and Hadjz Hammo (a marvellous side-tumbler
and leaper). I saw this man, who, I think was an
Arab, throw a side somersault over the heads of a ring
of people who were egging on their town bully to beat
up unmercifully a circus hand. He landed in the
circle, and, pulling out a murderous-looking dagger,
cleared the street and rescued the circus man.
Charini on his last visit also left behind several fine
performers in “ Cocky ” Sharman and his wife (clown
and lady equestrienne), Charley Perry (clown), Freddie
Garnet (first dummy clown and best), Horace Row-
land (rider), Bob Johnstone (clown), Pat Montgomery


(Dalbyite and jockey rider) and Joe Romano (horse
trainer). Then there were the Matthew Bros., fine
acrobats, imported by J. C. Williamson for one of his
pantomimes.
The next really big show to arrive in Australia was
W. W. Coles, in 1880, from America.
Then Sells Bros, brought a Two-ring Circus, also
from America. They brought two hippopotamus—
the first in Australia. I have not a programme of
either the above-mentioned shows, yet neither can
be compared with our October, 1924, programme in
Melbourne, when the menagerie had 12 elephants, a
warthog (being the only one ever seen in Australia
to date), zebras, lions, tigers, leopards, panthers, bears,
Tasmanian devils, etc. The programme ran : -
1. Grand Parade by the Company, horses and elephants.
2. Entree on Horseback by eight ladies and gentlemen.
3. Wirth Bros. Troupe of Performing Lions—Capt. Schmidt.
4. The Mighty Muldoon—A thrilling act falling from lofty tables.
5. Two Baby Elephants—Trained by Miss Eileen May.
6. Carmello Duo —Extraordinary Juggling.
7. Six Wonderfully Trained Arab Horses trained by J. W. Cooke,
introduced by Mr. Torrelli.
8. Riding Horse, Earl Dudley, trained by Mr. P. Wirth. intro-
duced by Mr. H. W. Cooke.
9. Two Continental Clowns—Palomar and Williams.
10. Prof. Betts’ Seals, Monkeys, Dogs and Rooster.
11. Paul De Boult —Death-defying Looping the Loop.
12. The Comedy Spanish Bull Fighters —Alfredo Egochago and
Palomar, and dogs.
13. Alfred Clarke, England’s Champion Rider, in Juggling and
Somersaulting on horse back.
14. Torrelli’s Miniature Circus, introducing bucking mule and
negroes, dogs, ponies and monkeys.
15. Miss Pearl Williams, Australian Equestrienne.
16. Huge Herd of Twelve Performing Elephants in Realistic
Battle Scene—Trained by Prof. H. Mooney.
17. Sydney and Spot, two marvellously trained ponies—H. W.
Cooke.
18. Prince Guiseppe Bigonghi, the Cleverest Midget Equestrian
in the World.
19. Musical Clowns—Alfred and Cammella.
20. Miss Williams on the Tight Wire.
21. Hughes Family of Trick Cyclists, Basket Ball Games on Bicycles
(5 people).
“ God Save the King.”
The End.
Wholly Set up and Printed in Australia by Teoedhi A Cooper Pty.
Bank Place, Melbourne.


POISONING
the SPRINGS
of HEAL TH!
One of the worlds greatest physicians has said—
u There is hardly an organ in the body that does not
suffer if the bowels become constipated. Not only
the brain, but the heart, liver, lungs, stomach and
kidneys have their functions impaired when the
bowels cease to do their duty ”
Your own doctor will tell
you that the very first es-
sential of good health is to
cultivate “Regularity of
Habit,”
Constipation poisons the
very springs of your health
and whilst it persists you
cannot possibly be fit and
well.
Constipation loads your
blood with poisons which
should have been expelled,
weakens your system and
renders you liable to more
serious ailments.
It is the frequent cause
of headaches, biliousness,
langour, impure blood, bad
breath, sallow skin, and
chronic ill-health.
During the past 50 years,
Mother Seigel’s Syrup has
freed countless thousands
from the thralldom of con-
stipation and its attendant
miseries.
You can banish your ill-
health in just the same sim-
ple way. Take MotherSei-
gel’s Syrup regularly, and
it will soon easily and gent-
ly establish natural bowel
movement.
This accomplished, your
daily headaches, bilious-
ness, flatulence, and other
distressing symptoms will
be but a nightmare of the
past, and you will again
enjoy that buoyant, vigo-
rous feeling of good health.
“For four years, I suffered torture after every meal,”
writes Mrs. M. A. Stokes, 39 Darebin st. Mile End, S.A.
“My tongue was heavily coated ; my head often ached
terribly and I was very costive. I took many medi-
cines but they did no perceptible good.
Then an old friend persuaded me to try Mother
Seigel’s Syrup. It acted admirably on me from the
very beginning and I was free from pain and distress
after I had taken the first bottle. As I kept on using
the Syrup I became stronger, better and brighter
each day.”
Mother-
Seigel’s Syrup
The Best Stomachic Tonic


LOT
DEATH
TO ALL INSECT
PESTS & GERMS
EVAPORATES
AND LEAVES
NO STAIN.
/
THE
&PRAV
of v
HEALTH
LOTOL
CO THROUGH THE HOME
WITH LOTOL’
INSTANTLY DESTROYS
EVERY FORM OF
INSECT PEST «. GERMS
PREVENTS THE
SPREAD OF DISEASE
MADE IN AUSTRALIA.
BY
MERCURY CHEMICALCJFTTC!
«VWWY. MELBOURNE..BRISBANE.
V.
SOLD AT ALL CHEMISTS.
GROCERS & STOREKEEPERS.
