

Round the Map
Edited by Sergt. A. J. BOYD, 20th Bn.
Illustrated by Pte. CYRIL SAMUELS, 60th Bn.
Slather and Whack Abroad
HlllllllllllttllllllllllllllllllillUllllllllltlllllillillllllllllllllllllliinillillllUHllllllllliUlllillllllllllllllfllHlllltlllllllllllllllllUllllHlllllrH


"\ c
I I I III } -, ;
I I Hi! W <[jgYDHEY G*ZETTZj>RESS'
r ERGUSON COLLECTION\|?
|f( Rational Library ||j


2
\ = V '
Q * C
f 2# ~"
(^c/r>^<zfi.* } O/mufW
?.S. , . .._____ _—..- .■ -.-/.
COUNTING THE DAYS.


I
I
i
!
? Mt0C3E
// _
— —
INTRODUCTION.
"Round the Map" has been published by kind
permission of the Commanding Officer, Major C. H.
Raitt, as a souvenir of our safe run home, and,
incidentally, to record a few humorous features of
life abroad.
We claim all possible licence for this publica-
tion, yet at the same time we trust nobody will
cf
J
have cause to consider his or her feelings wounded
by anything which appears in our columns.
In the event of a reader contemplating the issu-
ing of writs for libel, slander, defamation and so
forth, they will save the time of all concerned by
dealing direct with Costs and Chasem who, it will
be recalled, instructed Mr. Ned Kelly several years
ago in the cause celebre Rex v. Onkaparinga.
ROUND THE MAP
(From -our~ Special Correspondent.)
OLIVE GROVE, NOV. 20.
It was awfully jolly to see the Officers emerge
from the Saloon dressed like wedding cakes as
soon as the boat passed the cocoanut trees at Free-
town. Shortly after, the Sisters came into view.
Each was armed with a cane fan, a miniature
punka, and round her head was a bilious coloured
veil with which it was hoped to scare off mosquitos
and other vermin.
However, at the last moment the ladies learnt
that the sale at Sarah Malone's principal store
had terminated. Consequently they declared the
trip off, and, as there was nothing doing in the
parcel-carrying line, the Officers also decided to
forego their jaunt.
Fruit Fiend : Sir excuse me,, but may I have a
banana ?
Officer : Have you got a penny ?
Fruit Fiend : Yes, Sir,
Officer : What are you suffering from ?
Fruit Fiend : G.S.W. in left foot, Sir.
Officer : Ha, I'm afraid you can't have a banana.
Fruit Fiend : Why?
Officer : There is always danger of toemaine
poisoning setting in.
Capt. Aarons rode a good finish in the Free-
town Cup with the aid of' his spurs.
We were lucky to reach Sarah Mai one when we
did, for the M.L.O. confided to a friend of the
Stewardess that, in the height of summer—about
July—the fowls are issued with ice to prevent them
laying hard boiled eggs.
The sousing of the impetuous spirits who boarded
a Ship's boat one fine evening, all starred and fea-
thered, was altogether too humorous to be acci-
dental. Anyhow, when the " Ginger Beers" learnt
how well things were going they turned on the
water with added zest. The incident was really top-
hole.
How sad it was to disappoint the poor natives
of the place. We hear now that they had barri-
cades in the form of their grand pianos, barbed
wire entanglements, mangles and mattresses to pre-
clude the wild Australians from rushing their
banana patches, prickly pear allotments, porridge
quarries, treacle mines and so forth. Alas, all their
labours were in vain, and they were forced to
spend some of the quietest evenings on record,
listening to the weird recitations of Dvr. Mcintosh
and company, which floated across the still waters.
One young fellow wrote to his Uncle, who is a
General, and this is a passage taken from the
letter :
We had an awfully fine time here, and I must
not forget to say that I had a shot out of a
rifle. The thing jumps when it goes off.
By the way, please send out some clothing for
these poor niggers. I blushed fearfully on look-
ing into their little canoes.


THE ADJUTANT'S NIGHTMARE.
(Culled from the Ship's Log by kind permission
of Mr. MONRO.')
I was aboard the Berrima a night ahead of the
troops, and was just falling off to sleep when I
heard a Dreadnought steaming alongside our Port
bows. Of course, I got up. The following con-
versations followed :
Middie : Are you the Berrima?
Cabin Boy Green : Yus, not arf, we aint.
Middie: What about your cargo?
Green, C.B. : It aint come yut.
Middie : When do you hope to get it ?
Green, C.B. : We don't 'ope to get it.
Middie : What do you mean ?
Green, C.B. : We've got ter 'ave it; but it aint
choice on our part.
Middie : All right. You can carry on.
An hour later a. heavily-laden barge was pushed
towards us by a tug. Chains upstairs and the
one-ton winch began to rattle.
" Heave," sang out the Bo'sun. The winch
groaned, and a horse-box slowly ascended from the
barge. T peered through the eerie light at Devon-
port and watched the box descend towards the
hold. _A brain wave told me that Gay Crusader,
with Steve Donoghue as groom, were being sent
to Egypt for Trooper Bluegum. But I learnt
the truth on going down to the hold. The sides
of the box were lowered and out stepped Pioneer
Sgt. Gillen..
BILL JIM SEES LONDON.
(With apologies to Poets dead and alive.)
One day I left the War Chest
With Bradbury's to burn;
But I only got to Charing Cross
Before I lost the turn..
A taxi took me to St. Paul's
And, blew me, listen 'ere,
In a place as old and big as that
You couldn't buy a beer.
I didn't stay too long inside
Cathedral's things I hate;
Especially a joint like, that
Which isn't up to date.
Hyde Park's a. place that's not too bad
With its green grass, flowers and heathers;
Next time I come to London town
I mean to bring the weathers.
But, dinkum, give me Leicester Square,
Tabbies of all breeds are there;
I met one from Armentieres;
She smoked for hours and drank four beers.
That night I dined at the Hotel Ritz
On poultry, beef and fancy bits;
Got introduced to a real live Earl
Who made me happy and shook my girl.
I awoke next day at Brixton Hill
Feeling weak and very ill;
Forty Bradbury's gone astray,
I returned to France first boat next day.
GOIN' 'OME.
When the Old Crusaders stoushed the Turks and
all their Heathen Crew,
Then pushed their Galleys off across the foam,
They hadn't any easy time the same as me and you,
They had to work their passage goin' 'ome.
They couldn't play a game of 'Ouse, or ragtime
ditties sing,
And round about the top deck couldn't roam,
There was suits of mail to polish and galley oars
to swing,
No, they couldn't swing the lead when goin'-
Oh, they were days of chivalry when blokes went
out to fight,
Because some blooming Jane with hair of chrome,
Had handed 'em the frozen mit and so when
things were right,
They bucked into the Yacca goin' 'ome.
But in those days there was no guns or clouds of
stinking gas,
Or shells that burrow yards into the loam;
They never got no bombs at night or Hun attacks
in mass,
So, the hardest work of all was goin' 'ome.
And though it's many years ago since these blokes
did their bit,
To make the Old Dart's name outshine old
Rome ;
I'll take a shade of odds that if our blokes were
feeling fit,
They'd work as hard as they did goin' 'ome.
And just the same as they did, in those old days
long ago,
When our ship's finished pushin' through the
foam ;
We'll all forget our troubles, Troop Decks, Life
Belts and Provo,
And thank Gawd that we finished goin' 'ome.
y- o. A,


/■
i V
>0%*


CONFESSIONS OF AN ORDERLY
ROOM CLERK.
(An Average Perfect Day.)
Plymouth.
"Hi, Digger, is this the joint for Paybooks?"
" No, they are being collected by Troop Deck
Sergts."
"Can't I leave mine 'ere?"
"Yes, I'll hand it over to your Sergt."
"Right yer are. When's the stunt comin' orf ? "
" Thursday, I believe. Notice will appear in
Orders."
"'As a man to do without till Thursday?"
" I couldn't say. I don't know how much money
you've got."
"Bit rough ain't it?"
"Yes, terrible! Good morning."
"Can I see the O.C. about it?"
" Good morning."
"Who said so? I call it a
At this stage it became necessary to empty the
caller out of the Orderly Room.
(Another Average Day.)
Plymouth.
"My wife's living in Sutton Veney. Can I get
ashore to see her before we sail from Plimuf?"
"No hope. The Admiralty have a big enough
job to get you to A'lia. What with subs and
A.W.L."
"Any chance of getting my discharge in this
country ? "
" I should think so. Come back when we get to
Fremantle."
" Right, thanks. It will save me going through
the Bight. Any mail come aboard for me? "
" Not that you would notice. We don't ship
mail for men on board. We have some men
have written to A'lia."
" Well, look. I wrote one last week at Monte
and forgot to say what ship I was travelling in.
Can I get it and insert the name of the ship ? "
"Easy. Good morning.
[Same Day.
Enter Sergeant Over-Wate "the biggest thing
God ever made," snorting like a grampus, and
with a wicked light in his off-side eye.
"What about dungarees for my men. They're
ruining the only suit of khaki in which they can
meet their lady friends in A'lia. They are
Pioneers, and you know what their principal duties
are. They have to "
"Yes, I know. We have the suits ordered, and
they should be aboard this evening. As soon as
they arrive you will be notified."
"What size suits have you ordered?"
" Average-sized suits."
"But what about me?"
"You won't need a suit. You are a N.C.0."
"But I'm a man who gets right on to his job,
and want a suit.
" Oh, all right, we will have one built up. Per-
haps a sail can be let in the back. Set ? "
"My men are going dead crook, so please shake
them up."
"All right."
"When should they arrive?"
"Go away, old man, or I shall call the Provost-
Sergeant."
He departs and is followed by a man with curls
hanging over his eyes.
[To-morrow. At Sea.
" Hi, listen, any Red Cross stuff on tap, Sarg. ?'"
"Not yet. You will get it with your pay in
the morning."
Suppose a chap aint in for pay?"
You will be issued just the same."
Fair dinkum?"
What's a bloke get ? "
Wait and see."
Good day, Askwif."
[Later on.
The fourth was sadly embarrassed financially,
and arrived to float a loan.
" Mornin', Sarg.; 'Ow are yer olding?"
" I'm holding on to three meals a day and
nothing else."
" Like me. Can you put the hard word on the
Ajertunt ? "
" Impossible. What do you take him for—,
philanthropist ? "
" I don't know what he is. He may be a Presby-
terian, but if he comes to light with a quid let's
know."
"Right, good day."
Our last that day strolled up from "A" Deck
in a singlet, dungarees, canvas shoes and a wealth
of hair over his ears. He leaned against the side
of the Orderly Room door, and then looked round
to see whether there was anything he liked. The
appearance of the Adjt. seemed not to displease
him, whereupon he said: "Are you Adjutant?"
The Adjutant: "How much?"
I stepped in and asked the man to take a chair.
He seemed so tired.
He sat down without remark, and then began :
"Look! I reckon I've seen you somewhere. Were
you ever in Goulburn ? "
As the interview proceeded I could see the poor
chap was getting dry, so I asked him to have one
—at the same time handing him the Adjutant's
ginger ale. He drank the lot, but complained it
could have been colder.
In the Canteen queue I met him the same day,
but much later. I enquired whether the interview
was a success. "No," he said, "I was just
leading up to my real business when the Officers'
tucker gong went. However, I borrowed a dollar
off a mate."
A. J. BOYD.


'7
GEE WHIZ.
As a general rule it is not hard to give things
away in the A.1.F.; but the Alf. Scott and Alec.
McColl combination grew grey trying to give away
old paybooks in the after-well deck, four mornings
running.
A member of the Pigeon Carriers' Corps brought
a fair drop of issue rum aboard in his bottle.
After drinking it last Wed. he stood aft and gazed
at the full moon. The mast was wobbling all
round it, and he entirely broke up the moonlight
concert about 10 p.m. by exclaiming " Look at
the moon. It's boozed."
Hair-oil will figure largely as am item of expense
in the maintenance of an ex-Anzac. Two Sgts.
aboard have used three dozen bottles of Rowlands
" Perfume de la Reine" since embarkation.
Who is the George Washington aboard who told
a mob of men one night that he laid 1,000 to 2
against Silver Thread when it won at Randwick,
and then cleared £4,000 on the race. There were
three starters. We would like to read his account
of the Landing.
A sight for stiff punters is the arrival the fol-
lowing morning at the Orderly Room of the
" heads" with their ill-gotten gains.
* * * *
Talk about " House," they will be able to buy
them in rows in Aust.
Horses all over Victoria are elated this week,
for the Admiralty have wired Terlinga, informing
him that R. P. Smith, Vet., is aboard the Berrima.
W T hen he's ashore there are some fine boots knock-
ing about for horseflesh of all breeds. Down on
his Deck they think so much of him that they
see him instead of the S.M.O.
Who is the long, thoughtful-looking cove, dis-
guised in the tropics as a robin, who wears his
hair long ? Owner can have same on application
at the Orderly Room.
* * * *
Chidley, or Agnes (he is known by both names),
is one of the most abused men aboard. She carried
a Peggy bag, and in her mouth a combination
cigarette-pipe container.
* *
It has been noticed from Ship's Standing Orders
that the only game winked at on this boat is
House. This is deplored on account of the fact
that only those with raucous voices are allowed
to bawl out the numbers. The strain on one's
nerves at night, when trying to sleep, is consider-
able, and it is suggested that an inventive brain
should devise a silencer for use on "D" deck.
A certain Sapper (about as long as I can remem-
ber) jars the nerves of the lads on "D" Deck.
How he took a mob ot horses from Queensland to
the Cape has been related, retailed and reiterated
till we know the name of every one of them. He
is at home at 3 Mess on Monday, but be careful
when you call. No flowers by request.
ROBIX REDBREAST.


W—
f / *>
IV
" YOU'EE ADMONISHED ! "
JACK AND AUSSEY
1 met him on the gangway, he looked so young
and fair,
His hat was tilted backward, the sun glints kissed
his hair;
My heart it opened towards him, I bade him stay
awhile
That ruddy, chubby sailor lad, with cherubical
smile ;
" Come Jack, my lad, come here -to me, now sit
upon my knee,
"You unsophisticated youth, you're a tender lad
I see ;
" Now, Jack, my lad, just listen, for I am in
the know,
"Don't mix with those Australian chaps, on deck
or down below.
" They'll teach you how to smoke, lad, to chew,
to spit and swear;
" As like as not they'll tell you more things than,
well, I dare.
" They've a nasty knack of gambling, picked up
perhaps in France.
" They'll win your money from you; you won't
stand half a chance;
"Be careful where you put your things, when you
lie down at night
" They'll nick your little nightie, if it does'nt fit
you tight.
" The soldiers they are artful, too, they'll say
' We're feeling glum,
" ' Dopey and down-hearted, could you let us have
your rum ?'
"Now mind what I've said to you, 'Not arf,' he
murmured low,
" Then I think I heard him chuckle as he sang out
'Thanks, right oh.'"
I met him at the gangway, he looked so pale and
worn,
His hat and boots were missing, his clothing was
all torn,
His face was bruised and bleeding, his eyes were
black and blue.
He turned as if to move away when to his side 1
drew.
My heart it yearned towards him, I bade him stay
awhile,
He was just an Ausey soldier without a single
smile.
" I'm broke," he cried, " completely done, and I
thought I knew a bit,
"But that blanky, blanky sailor lad, knew more,
I will admit.
"He won my gold, and then my kit. I bet my
farm and lost,
"I raised a bluff, but I've had enough; he's the
toughest I have crossed."
On this I pondered deeply. No more advice I'll
give,
Things in this world adjust themselves, else
could a body live.
CORI'L. BERESFORD,
13th Batn.
"O" BOAT.
This evening the old " Berrima" did a one-
step and caused the majority of us to lose our
tea, a dejected man lay in the ship's scuppers
looking miserable. He would have sold out for
even the pay one gets aboar this ship.
An hour later I met him roaming about the
promenade deck. He looked the picture of fight,
but still forlorn.
"Why not lie down, Digger?" I suggested.
"Oh," he just managed to get out before run-
ning for the rail some more."
"You're on 'o,'" I said.
"Yes," he answered, "and I'm out for a piece
of the bloke who put me on 'o,' crook as I am."
He arrived back this time empty, and after I
put him to bed in his hammock, he said, " Here,
I want to tell you something. The bloke who
slings off about Monte and Weymouth in general
don't know what he's talking about. They're good
places."


WHY I WON A V.C.
Bint Wazza Piastre—a fortune teller, usually
to be found round the band-stand in Esbekieh
Gardens at the tea hour—was a particularly dusky
Egyptian, who shared a husband with ten other
girls.
One sunny evening she espied a soldier from the
Antipodes—Sgt. Howell, to wit, and implored him
to allow her to tell his fortune. Snowy just mur-
mured "Carry on, Bint."
She regarded his palm for a few minutes before
exclaiming, in broad Arabic, something about the
scarcity of fresh water in Egypt. Snowy was
about to go crook, but she squeezed his hand, and
he desisted.
"You are very brave," the Bint began, "and
I prophesy you will, ere this beastly war draws
to a close, participate in dozens of stunts. Your
name will appear with great prominence in the
' Egyptian Mail'."
" Save me from such a social disaster," Snowy
pleaded.
" I can see you have more hide than .Jessie, to
use an old Oriental phrase, and woe betide the
poor Germans when you get among them." The
Bint imparted other information to Snowy, but
that we are saving for the 828 men on the return
trip. Snowy, a trifle perplexed, repaired to the
Egyptian Cafe, as was his custom every evening,
bathed his lips, and forgot all about his strange
liaison.
However, one bright morning, a season later,
Snowy awoke in a Bullecourt shell hole, danger-
ously near the Huns. His gaze met a bomb bag,
which was too full for his liking; all his bando-
liers were filled with 50 rounds, and his sand bags,
etc., looked painfully new. Over the top of the
shell-hole were millions of men clad in grey.
Snowy felt a trifle .dopey, and then remembered
that he had been dreaming about Cairo, a Bint,
and the possibilities of a V.C.
Always a trifle superstitious, and not wishing to
disappoint the young lady, Snowy turned the
matter over in his mind. The Huns heard him
do this, and sent out sentries without avail.
Snowy watched them return to their own lines,
and decided to eat a tin of pork and beans before
despatching a dozen or more of them to a place
where cap-comforters and sheep-skins are not
much used.
It was an ideal morning for a murder, so Snowy
gathered around him all his lethal weapons and
over the top he went with the best of luck. As
he neared the Huns he saw things were not going
well for a Company of Austns. Machine guns,
bullets and bombs were flying all round them.
Snowy went forward at increased pace, and uttered
a wild yell. Hindenburg, who was standing on a
biscuit box, laying odds on the field, with Tirpitz
as clerk, dropped his book, sent up a howl, and
rushed Berlinwards. A dirty dog, however,
stopped and threw a dozen trench mortar bombs
at Snowy. He felt a rock and landed in his own
back area—clean alongside the field cookers.
A few days later Snowy awoke in hospital at
Norwich, the city of canaries and mustard. There
being no Fritze's about, he fell off to sleep again
and dreamed about a Bint and a V.C.
We are glad to relate that his dream came true.
HOW I SPENT MY DEFERRED
PAY.
(By a Naughty Soldier.)
All my wicked moments in the A.I.F. were de-
scribed on a sheet of paper, which the Clerk at
Victoria Barracks held in front of me when I
called for my deferred pay.
I caught a tram from the Barracks, went to the
"movies," bought a paper, had dinner and a walk
in the Botanic Gardens. On a seat I counted my
money. I had just two bob left.
FOR SOLDIERS ONLY.
A Sydney business firm is offering £l,OOO to
any returned soldier who can drink a pint of
vinegar every day.
The Ship's Adjutant is in a position to supply
further details to intending competitors.
EXTRACTS FROM " BERRIMA "
DICTIONARY.
C.O. Troops : A dapper gentleman who roars at
the men, and concludes with the words : "You will
do well to take this as a warning. Next time, etc."
Adjutant: A two-star artist very much down on
those who miss the Nominal Roll parades. Abso-
lutely a ball of energy.
S.S.Mjr. : A small cove inside a Sam Browne
belt. Wears " Mad Bogs" on right cuff. Interested
in everybody's business on the Ship and knows
how to mind it.
Orderly Room Sgt. : Buoyed up with hopes of
becoming an Adjt. in near future. Has declared
peace.
Mess Orderly : A much harassed individual—at
everybody's beck and call. Worth all he can eat.
Recognised by amount of jam and stew that adheres
to his nether garments.
Pioneer : Man who supplies the little drops of
water. We wish we had something to put into
them.
Third Officer (Mr. Haynes) : A most genial soul,
who does his best for the troops. Understands his
cargo, and thinks Australians easy to handle when
you know them.
Mess Deck Sergeant : Hard-worked chap, usually
to be found with his coat off in rough weather,
scrubbing floors and tables for the boys.
Provost Sergeant : Well versed in Bond Street
fashions. Smokes De Reskes in a tube and argues
about the sunset with the Naval men.
Sergeants' Mess : It is.
W. 0. ROBINSON.


"A LITTLE BIT OF HEAVEN FELL
FROM THE SKY ONE DAY."
Some kid! 511 Dvr. R, W. Woods, 3rd F.A.B.
Although he has only been in this wicked old world
i V
for 18 years, he has spent three of them out of
Aust. with the A. I.F. Incidentally, we may
f Vs
mention he has seen Cairo, Alex., Rouen, Amiens
\
and London. What an education for the lad! If
A
\
his hat always fits him he should get on.
* * * *
Seen on deck the other morning, a man with his
eye inside a Porterhouse. He asked Bill Turner
v
whether he was going back to find two Trench
V
Mortars lost at Armentieres.
\
A sniper raised his deadly gun,
?
I'm glad I didn't see him;
/
t m
For he fired so true that he sent me home,
(v
And that's the stuff to gee'um.
* * * *
KjmfrR A
Dates for those who contemplate telling the tale
—- -<Q
; IM \
when they get home are given below.
Always remember, gentlemen, that for 365 days
X/f
If/1 \ —
a year the other fellow has done the same.
' J
Landing, April 1st; Loan Pine, June 5; Evacua-
s/r A
tion, Xmas Day; Charges at Lemnos : Very high,
and kept up all year round; Fromelles, July 20;
Pozieres, August 2nd; Flers, Mud-summer Day;
Bapaume : Ask the Irish and the 8th Bde.; Bulle-
court, May.
After taking part in all the stunts set out
<v(
above, and a lot of minor affairs, we missed Mons
IV
and Polygon Wood. The dates are not to hand.
'f & /W W
1 ./f. fw fc/
BY CRIPES.
/■*>/
Wy \ n
He was a portly Fritz,
1 / \
Head waiter at the Ritz;
His waiting days are o'er,
He left the serviette for war,
-
And was blown to " leetle bitz."
THE PRIDE OF PARRAMATTA.
AU REVOIR LA FRANCE.
Farewell rifle, farewell pack,
Weight you now some other's back,
Farewell Frangais, parley-vous,
Take my " bong-jours," lads with you.
Farewell cobbers, lying low,
May your souls to " Ausy" go.
Farewell luxury and ease,
Slime and high explosive fleas.
Sad of spirit I depart,
Loath to leave, my sorrowing heart.
Farewell swearing, screaming shell,
Flash of bayonet, dying yell,
Frost and mud and bullet fell,
Machine guns murd'rous, rattling knell.
Gas alarms and barb wire bell,
Farewell Frangais, Ma'moiselle,
Farewell Flanders, good-bye Hell.
Pte. Botjsfield, 9th Batn.


FAIR DINKUM FURFIES
We have reason to believe that :
The young fellow who yells " £O, Top of the
Wazza," trains his voice on ship's coffee.
The Stewardess recently heard a heated argu-
ment outside her port hoie re the Baby Bonus in
Australia.
Mr. Taylor, Chief Steward, is the pride of his
regiment —the K.0.8.5.'s
One of the Sergts. was married at the Cape.
"Premier" Holman, of "D" Deck, will give
the Ship's throttle two extra turns as soon as we
sight the West.
All underclothing confiscated during raids oil
washing days is now in the hands of the Chef,
and will be used as overcoats for the Christmas
puddings.
Gnr. King is being returned to Sydney to ride
for Dan Seaton, the Bondi butcher, and pro-
prietor of Westcourt.
Pte. Potter would not speak to his mates for a
whole week after clipping the locks of the Com-
mander and the Adjutant.
We have more Officers aboard than the nominal
roll discloses, for we saw their " Two letters each"
bagged. It was some bag.
The Chief Steward once had a fine chest, but it
slipped when the "Berrima" was torpedoed.
An Officer bought a pair of gloves at the Cape
for a Sister.
The Food Controller will intervene when we
reach " Aussy," for Beans are being sold at 3d.
each in the Officers' Mess.
The famous novelist who lives on " !)•" Deck
is busy on an Eastern romance entitled " Wake
up, Hop Sing."
Pte. Brown, of Newcastle, will not feel his
rheumatism so acutely when he steps off the train
which conveys him there from Sydney.
Fritz must have hurled two of Krupps' foundries
at Capt. Parry-Okeden the day he came flat.
Thank Heaven it was not we but the Jacks who
hung over the gunwhale with eyes glued to the
mighty deep looking for stray telescopes.
W. 0. Robinson will decline his discharge with
thanks if offered him in Australia.
A portion of Australia is being railed off for
Sgts.
Monsieur Garbutt, formerly of Le Moulin Rouge,
Paris, does not hold a high opinion of French as
she is spoke by a certain Sergeant aboard, in spite
of the fact that he used to week-end at La Perouse.
Chidley has lost his Peggy Bag, has anybody
seen it ?
Pay was cut down to half a "Bradbury" last
time in order that we might escape Income Tax
worries.
Yern. Allen, the Q.M.S.'s " offsider," is to re-
ceive half a Cottage in Sydney as his "Cut."
Gertrude's Lieut, is a real live Knight of the
Darbies in peace time.
The person buying Regimental badges is doing so
in order to lead the gilded youths of the Hotel
Australia to believe they were showered on him by
the Imperial regiments who saw him splather a
" Gotha."
The soldier who said ''Good-bye" to "the only
girl in the world " at Weymouth is now yearning
to greet another in Australia just as affection-
ately.
The man who dispenses ragtime on the ivories
at night-time, wore long hair in civil life and made
travelling on the Sydney-Manly run unbearable.
We don't refer to Pte. Monteith.
A few hundred of the lads made a wild rush
to their burrows the night before we crossed the
Equator. One man actually woke up Q.M.S. Read
to draw an umbrella.
The blue kimona in which a certain person
promenades to the bath cost more than five rupees.
The identity of the man who built the " Bris-
bane" is in doubt. Judging by the discussions in
the Saloon several people did.
A certain Officer sometime misses dinner through
over-sleeping. His life must be more strenuous
than ours.
The Ship's cat is well bluffed every morning at
Orderly Room when the Sergeant-Major's "mad
dogs " loom on the horizon.
Pte. Kent is being returned as a debility case.
W. 0. Law is "fed up" with war.
Pte. Moss has mislaid his Crown and Anchor
board.
Andy Kerr should be shortly welcoming a few
hundred old clients.
Driver Mcintosh will open his summer season
with Oscar Asche and Fred Bluett.
The Prince of Monaco is going to purchase
shares in "D" Deck. Bob Sevier has already
approached the present lease-holders.
We came an abdominal crash when we took on
raffles in lieu of the harmless flag-days.
Sergt. Sambo Shelley has seen his last war, and
will shortly be saying "I will.""
Corpl. Jack O'Brien isn't so deaf as he thinks
The Naval Commander stirred things up when a
cold douch disturbed his slumbers.
Sgt. Tate was really the first "Aussy" taken
prisoner by the Germhuns.
One member of the A.I.F. did not claim owner-
ship of. a prickly-pear farm in Australia. He
actually had one.
A certain Horseferry Road-ite passed a pleasant
evening in a Canadian Officer's Uniform; but was it
worth while ?
Little Sammy Wood has shrunk considerably since
enlisting at the Towers.


B. S. M. McConnell's smile when Col. Ryan said
the magic word is being reproduced by " The Wide
World."
A certain Tasmanian Sergeant's "mo." will have
to be docked ; otherwise he will not be allowed to
land in Hobart.
"Air Raid" is the nick-name the lads have for
one of the Officers.
The Debating Society will include in their
syllabus "Do Barmaids Drink ?"
Privates will be permitted to surf around Sydney
and other places at the same time as Officers and
Sergeants.
The Officers' Mess boasts a member of the Tom
Tit Club.
Barbed wire entanglements (otherwise kisses)
should not be transmitted from ship to ship per
semaphore.
West, of .shell fame, had to come aboard the
Berrima to learn the mirror trick.
Two men did not lose their hammocks, hats or
identity discs between Blighty and our present
location.
Capt. Hogg, M.C., will be horribly shocked when
he hears the language used in Australia.
Staff-Sergt. Sandpaper has his Details well
bluffed. Good old Jock. We don't think.
Mr. Sandy's recovery was regarded downstairs
as the biggest boil-over of the trip.
"Spanner King" Banning and "Walrus"
Mitchell were probably reared in the Sahara or
on Nullabor Plain. Their fame is writ large in
water, and in the indignant recollections of the
Ship's great unwashed.
Alf Freeman was guilty of an oversight when
he decided it was not necessary to stock wedding
presents in the Canteen.
" Snowie " Shearsby would have sung at all the
concerts, but is suffering from mortaritis.
LANGUAGE OF THE SPORTS.
What one hears on "D" Deck.
Any old time.
Clickety Click, Kelly's Eye, Devil's Own, Top
of . the Wazza, Legs Eleven.
Who'll 'ave a bit on the old Sergeant-Major ?
What about the old Mud Hook'Ook or the
Spade, I 'ides 'em and you finds 'em. Never say
you can't get a jolly bet. 'Ere you are, the old
original game of Doodleum Buck, the more you
put down the less you pick up, Ousey, Ousey,
who'll 'ave a buckshee card ?
Red light, 'ere comes the narks
(The Censor intervened where dots appear).
OUR FAIR CARGO.
(We apologize humbly for these sloppy verses,
which were written at sea by one fond of Nurses.)
Twelve lovely Sisters, best that ever stood,
Matron she's a stunner, loyal, true and good;
Second little Sister, wears a pair of Stars,
Guess she'd look just ripping, sitting back in cars.
Third little Sister, never is a bore,
May resign her nursing and join the Flying Corps.
Fourth little Sister, has a wealth of golden hair,
Girls of her description, really are quite rare.
Fifth little Sister, would give a boy a race,
Always bright and jolly, known as " Happy Face."
Sixth little Sister, reserved and most sedate,
Always looking busy, wears glasses up-to-date.
Seventh little Sister, pal of number six,
Always very chummy, quite a box of tricks.
Eighth little Sister, walks with a stick,
Foot very painful, looks very chic.
Ninth little Sister, with glasses and smile,
Relates her life's story, if you wait a while.
Tenth little Sister, good as can be,
Goes in for study of astronomy.
Eleventh little Sister, generally with the Boys,
Very good idea, this, for it stops their bally noise.
Twelfth little Sister, plays quoits fine,
Entertaining Officers, is right in her line.
OUR MESS.
They tell me that a Soldiers' Mess upon a beastly
ship
is always up-to-date and very smart;
Well, drop down to our Mess Deck and see our
dug-outs there,
They will please the very innards of your .heart.
We start the day's rejoicing at 7.15 sharp,
That's if the Cook sends tucker up to time.
Porridge always starts the menu with particles
of meat,
And sometimes we get slices from the swine.
At breakfast time I must relate, lest I should
forget,
(And when reading this I pray you not to hurry)
That the Cook is over-zealous in the manufacture
The Berrima's anaemic-looking curry.
The morning tea of civil life is missing from this
ship,
But at twelve-fifteen our dinner time is due;
Then the waiters in the Messes give their muscles
exercise
By dishing out the same old blinking stew.
With taters in their jackets, cabbages and peas
And other vegetation from the land,
You can bet your bottom dollar we are getting
mighty fat,
For the tucker on the ship is simply grand.
This is followed up by pudding, consisting of
duff straight,
Which is just about as solid as can be;
To finish up the menu we have to wet the lot
With cups of cold water—never tea.
(No more, please.— EDlTOß.)
SAMBO.


FROM ARCADIA TO THE CLINK.
D " Deck, 12 p.m.
(The writer of this letter forwards two shillings
as conscience money for a charitable institution,
and explains that the confession which we publish
will perhaps lift a load off his mind.)
Sir, —Through the columns of your paper, to
which I am a regular subscriber, I desire to apolo-
gise to all parties concerned regarding an affair I
had with a young lady at a seaside resort on the
South Coast of England—Weymouth.
Among other things, I told the girl, who was
just a flapper from the suburbs—down, in Wey-
mouth to miss the air raids—that I was awfully
wealthy, and that I owned Tasmania.
I admit this is not strictly the truth, but then
who did tell the truth to the ladies of Blighty ?
They were so simple that it would have been a
waste of effort to do so. I met her in most
romantic circumstances. We were in a cigarette
shop at the time. She was buying Woodbines for
her boy in France. I got into conversation with
her on account of the " A's " I wore on my
colour patches. Of course, I was not on the
Peninsula, but that does not matter. I described
the landing as I saw it at the cinema in Hobart,
and had to dash ginger ale over her between faint-
ing fits. Next, she questioned me about the
plumes in my hat, and I told the sweet little thing
that they were grown by Dad's goannas. She
asked why the Infantry wore plumes, and I ex-
plained that they and the leggings were used for
camouflage purposes.
Again the girl fainted, and when she again
came to was just able to mutter " How brave you
Anzacs are." This was good enough for me, and
I then put in the heavy stuff. I told her that
Tasmania was mine, and would be hers if she
would only marry me. But I insisted that I
could not let her have Sydney harbour for keeps
as Uncle used it every other Sat. for yachting
purposes, and that now and then it was utilised
for the launching of ferry-boats.
She did not insist upon claiming " Our arbour,"
and at this I was greatly relieved. But she did
not seem to be absolutely convinced about Tas-
mania. "Where is this place?" she asked. I
put this down to her limited schooling, and took
her for a stroll on the promenade to improve her
education—from a geographical view point, at
any rate. Everything was in my favour. The
night was calm, my cigarette case was full, and
the waves were washing the base of the Clock
Tower as we strolled past to a neighbouring seat
in the shadows.
The perfume from the cigar of a Q.M.Sgt. who
passed with two flappers was wafted towards us
by the friendly breeze, and we settled down to a
quiet talk. We held a post-mortem on the Spec.'s
climate, the gipsy teas we would have, the fur-
nishing of the homestead and other domestic mat-
ters. " I have a vague idea evidently," she in-
terposed, "as to the exact position of Tasmania.
It must be near South America." I went into fur-
ther details and located the place for her. She
listened with her elbows on her knees, blowing
smoke through her nostrils all the time.
The clock struck ten. I had no late pass. An
M.P. loomed into view. She broke the silence.
" Don't you think I shall be a trifle lonely in
Tasmania ? lam used to trotting up to town every
month to see a few shows ?"
" Oh, I don't see why you should be," I told
her, "you see it will be quite an easy matter for
you to run over to Melbourne to do your shopping.
Pa has four lovely yachts."
The- next day I was in the Clink —losing five bob
a day at the same time. I never saw the girl
again.
EGGS ARE COOKED.
NEARING THE CAPE
Time : 1 a.m. Scene : The Canteen Door.
A Voice : Staff. Are you there ? Sorry to
trouble you.
Cpl. Ford (sleeping- near by) : What the do
you want ?
A Voice : Kee Wee. I want to clean my
leggings.
Cpl. Ford : Get to out of it.
A Voice : But I want to look smart ashore.
Cpl. Ford : You get ashore smart enough if I
get up.
Downstairs all sorts of odds and ends marched
about the floors making a darned nuisance of
themselves.
In other parts of the Ship men were cleaning
boots, shaving, rubbing hair oil round their heads,
and regarding themselves in the glass. One man\
had a bath and in his excitement forgot to turn off
the water. The deck was flooded, and a little
later Sgt. Gillen's language flooded the whole ship.
The S.M.O. (Major Douglas) turned up as
sprightly as usual on his morning parade, but
there was nothing in his line. The sick were
running races on deck, and the most miserable
man aboard seemed happy for once.
What a pity we don't visit a port or two every
week !
WHEN ONE IS BOARDED.
The Colonel : Why do you want to go home?
Fit Guy : Well, father, who is only 54 and feels
well, is at the front, and I want to return to look
after Mother.
Same Colonel : What's the debility, lad?
Shrewd Head : Vision gone wrong, Sir.
Colonel : In which direction ?
S.H. : Everything I look at seems to be very
small, but my mates tell me this isn't so..
Colonel : Well, I will walk to the other end of
this shed and try your vision.
S.H. : Thank you, I wish you would.
Colonel : Now, tell me what I have in my right
hand. (It was the lid of a new and bright dixie.)
S.H. : That, Sir. Well, I can't say for sure
whether it is a two-bob-piece or half-a-crown.
Colonel : You'll do, Australia.


SALOONITIS.
On board the " Berrima" A 35
There are some men very much alive;
Despite numerous wounds and scars all told,
Methinks on land they'd be hard to hold.
The O.C. —God bless him ! —a perfect delight, .
His task, not envious, means sleep lost at night;
To make up this loss we consider it right
To be good" little maidens though merry and
bright.
The 5.M.0., energetic and strong,
Will sure be promoted before very long;
He bandages limbs and crook knees galore,
His eye never misses a stain on the floor.
Major H., with hair golden and wavy,
Turns the girls' heads, and near sends them
crazy;
His smile is so winning and sincere I am sure
He is just the same man on sea or on shore.
The Adj.,.who hails from the Flying Corps,
May understand flying, but of this I am sure :
He knows how to come down, as deck chairs could
tell,
Perhaps not too wisely, but still very well.
Here comes our Captn., a relation of Moses,
A big, burly man—as comedian he poses;
His costumes, at times, are varied and gay,
With "slacks" and " shorts" —quite appalling,
they say.
Next on the list's our Imperial Doc.,
It is well worth your time to pause and take
stock ;
As nature hath blessed him with weight in the
scales,
So in his soul also goodness prevails.
'Our next M.O. —silent and gruff,
"Don't look at me or you'll get a rebuff";
Oh, wonder of wonders, a smile so sweet,
Swept over his face —I beat a retreat.
A thin stripling we have, but a man of great
sense,
Who plays poker well, and rakes in the pence;
His feats in the air are great, I am told,
But his talent for beauty I dare not unfold.
Capt. E., young in years, we must not forget,
Is worthy of mention, I'm -sure ;
Though he's all bones, and a mere stripling yet,
He's a wonderful wonder : Bon jour!
Two Padres on board—their duties perform,
One looks bored and t'other forlorn;
Good friends they are—denominations apart,
For what does that matter when good friends at
heart.
Visitors, too, we have on our ship,
Jolly Jack Tars who enliven our trip ;
A charming Commander—sparkling and gay,
He says he hates women—what do you say ?
The Doc. and the Officers—we'll miss them all,
too,
When at Capetown they leave us, and bid us
adieux.
2nd Dec., 'l7.
ON THE QUACK'S PARADE.
"Any more, for Littlemore? As you were, I
mean Sick Parade 1"
Yes, put me down, Corporal."
Me, too."
And me."
"Righto," growled Corporal Dennis, "give us
yer number, rank, name, religion, principal amuse-
ments, next of skin, etc. Two deep. Flying Corps
fall. in at the rear. Quick march to the Dis-
pensary."
The leading file is a Bohemian-looking character,
whose hair was long.
Corporal, in introducing him to the Doctor —a
genial cove not bad to look at quickly : " Some-
thing out of a duck gun, Sir. I find all the
cranks on this parade."
" I'll let you see them, Sir. Party, 'Shun. Quick
march, hair cut."
Capt. Hogg, M.C. : Well, what is wrong?
Patient : Run down, Sir.
Capt. Hogg : Who ran you down ?
Patient : 1 did, Sir.
Capt. Hogg: Self-inflicted debility?
Patient : Quite right, Sir, but unintentional.
Capt. Hogg : How do you make that out?
Patient : Well, it's like this. I'm editor of
"Round The Map>" and in order to improve my
circulation I took an over-dose of Sgt. Tate's
physical jerks.
Our reputation was so badly damaged at this
stage by contact with the Captain's shoe that we
appeared on his parade the next day in real earnest.
S.M.O. (this trip) : Yes, my man?
My man : I feel dead crook of a morning, Sir.
S.M.O. : When you first get out?
My man : Yes, Sir.
S.M.O. : And what do you feel like at, say,
11 o'clock ?
My man : Like a pint, Sir.
Doctor : Next man.
Next man: I can't do jerks, Sir; pair of real
crook feet.
Doctor: Need a spell, do they?
Next man : Yes, Sir. Nothing surer.
Doctor (to Corporal) : Rest him till disem-
barkation.
Corporal : Will he get off at the Cape?
Doctor : No chance. Hot roads will make them
Next man : If it's like that I'll pull on jerks.
AN APPRECIATION
We are rolling home across the seas,
To the land where we first saw light;
Old England's shore is far behind
Australia looms in sight.
But there are memories we cherish still
Of friendships strong and mighty;
Of girls we've learnt to love and miss
Those - V.A.D.'s in Blighty.


ADVTS.
For Advertising "Raitts" please see
us privately.
HAIRDRESSING SALOON.
Gentlemen, we draw your attention to the
luxurious Hairdressing Saloon aboard. It has been
erected in the after well deck at considerable ex-
pense, and no effort has been spared to bring it
up to the level of any other establishment on the
boat.
No doubt there are soldiers aboard who have had
narrow escapes from injury in London and on
other fronts; but they are nothing as compared
with the "close shaves" guaranteed by the pro-
prietors, Messrs. KNOWLES and JOHN— two men
expert in the handling of weapons -for reducing
the growth of hair. At the same time, all cus-
tomers are advised to take out an insurance policy
before entering.
INSURE AGAINST BARBERISM.
Messrs. Berrima, Deepsea and Duff, Unltd.,
undertake to insure one and all (black, white,
brown, .brindle and Austn.) against casualties that
may pccur at the joint boomed above.
Our prospectus shows that, in the event of a
man losing a head, he forfeits all claim to de-
ferred pay. The loss of his top lip means that
his cigarette issue will be cut out, and we take
no risk whatever regarding men who wilfully enter
the chiropodist's, or cold-footed department, and
leaves minus a toe or two.
Could he offer better terms?
AT THE FOUNTAIN, WEYMOUTH.
Time : 8.59 p.m.
Enter Bill Jim, very nicely filled on final flutter.
He scans the clock as best he can, and then looks
around the shelf of bottles for a fancy drink with
which to conclude a really wet evening.
Through an alcoholic mist he regards the little
girl in pink (the pretty twin) and then asks : Am
I in Weymouth ?
Pink Lady : Yes. This is Weymouth.
Bill Jim (his eyes glued on a particular bottle) :
Well, how far am I away from that place?
Pink Lady : Which place ?
Bill Jim (pointing to the bottle) : Vermouth.
Sgt. Burne (drilling his squad of Girl Guides) :
Shun. Heels together, toes turned out, chins
in, arms hanging loosely at the sides, thumbs
alongside the seams of your—"Ahem; as you
were."
"IF A HEN AND A HALF," Etc.
' Eggs are Cooked," who misled the Weymouth
maiden, reckons even a cleverer move was his feat
on the 24th ult., when he started Sol and his mates
on the egg and a half argument.
The Orderly Boom was besieged with people
anxious to have the lien's laying capabilities put
down in writing, but our knowledge of poultry
proved inadequate, and Sol had to consult the
Y.M.C.A. representative, Mr. Cameron, before
collecting the stake.
ALL CLASSES OF DETECTIVE WORK CARRIED OUT
AT MODERATE RATES.
MISS GERTRUDE RYAN
has a well trained staff of Male and Female
SLEUTHS
on Hand Night and Day.
ORGANISED BANKER BAIDS A SPECIALTY.
All classes of Divorce Evidence worked up at
shortest notice.
Apply GERTRUDE,
90, Top of the House, Monte Carlo.
We have much pleasure in tendering heartiest
congratulations to Sgt. Howell, V.C., Ist Bn. We
wish him long life, good health and happiness.
OBITUARY
We regret to announce the death of 1829
Pte. ALBERT WILLIAM HUMPHRIES,
2nd Machine Gun Company, which occurred
on the 15th Nov., 1917. He was buried at sea.




■#
I
I
I
I
I
!
I
i
»
*
»
»
»
»
»
*
»
*
»
*
»
!
<Uo
I From....
I e7&y ylddress is:
) No
Australian Expeditionary Force.
(
i
b
I
I
I


.
. ; J- 3 1508 01153380 '•'/'■J


