

Cycling Tour
OF
G. W .Burston and H .R. Stoke




ROUND ABOUT THE WORLD ON BICYCLES


J&f r i V
;#/ / J i r »*
* rf »// . r. J
*y&6£*Sl


ROUND ABOUT THE WORLD
ON BICYCLES
THE PLEASURE TOUR OF,
G. W. BURSTON AND H. R. STOKES
Melbourne Bicycle Club , Australia
FOR PRIVATE CIRCULATION ONLY
GEORGE ROBERTSON AND COMPANY
MELBOURNE, SYDNEY, AND ADELAIDE
1890




INTRODUCTION.
The usual custom in opening a book is for the author
to make various apologies in the Preface, which the
majority never attempt to read ; so, to get level with
my readers, I would ask them to remember the old
saying, “ Never look a gift horse in the mouth,” for
the accompanying pages are devoid of high-flown
passages or fancy flights into unknown regions, but
are simply a plain, unvarnished tale of the wanderings
of two members of the Melbourne Bicycle Club, who,
prompted by no mercenary motives whatever, were
under the impression that, by utilizing the wheels
they loved so well, they would have facilities for
visiting many places of interest not always within
the reach of tourists ; and, further, would be able to
wander round about the world at their own sweet
wills, without a worrying thought of time-tables or
other attendant ills.


The main reason that led to my publishing this
book was that it might come as a slight acknowledg-
ment of the many kindnesses received from large-
hearted people in various lands ; for the hospitality
of English-speaking people—whether in the burning
tropics or the snowy regions—was of the most lavish
kind, and made us weather-beaten wheelers feel
that, where Englishmen resided, we could never call
ourselves strangers in a strange land. And, further-
more, we thank God that, although living under
Australian skies, we can claim to be members of
the Grand Old Empire.
I am indebted to my fellow clubman, Mr. Geo. A.
Thorne, who prepared my notes for The Australasian
during our travels, and also for his assistance in
compiling this book.
G. W. BURSTON.


CHAPTER I.
Through Victoria and New South Wales -
PAGE
I
CHAPTER II.
From Sydney to Java -
12
CHAPTER III.
Java - -
- 25
CHAPTER IV.
Singapore, Penang, and Rangoon -
- 38
CHAPTER V.
India ------
- 54
CHAPTER VI.
Egypt ------
108
CHAPTER VII.
Palestine ------
- 122
CHAPTER VIII.
Asia Minor and Eastern Parts
- X43
CONTENTS.


CHAPTER IX.
Through Sicily and Italy
PAGE
- 169
CHAPTER X.
Across Europe -----
- 201
CHAPTER XI.
England, Scotland, and Ireland
- 228
CHAPTER XII.
Through America and Back to Australia
- 284


CHAPTER I.
THROUGH VICTORIA AND NEW SOUTH WALES. —
FROM MELBOURNE TO SYDNEY,
It was a beautiful early summer’s morning—the Ist
of November—when we rode up to the Melbourne
General Post-Office, mounted on new Australian-
made bicycles, all ready to start on a bicycle tour
round the world, which was to extend slightly over a
year. Although only 8 o’clock in the morning, a
crowd of kind friends, who had heard of our intended
start, were waiting to see us off. A few moments of
handshakings and good-byes, then springing into our
saddles, with the cheers of our friends ringing in our
ears we rode gaily away up Elizabeth-street, The
luggage which we carried was exceedingly light
consisting of a few necessaries wrapped up in water-
proof cloth and strapped along the handle bars.
Different equipments, however, for sea travelling,
were sent on ahead from place to place.
ROUND ABOUT THE WORLD ON
BICYCLES.


We followed the old Sydney-road, quietly pedalling
along over a somewhat dusty road to Kilmore, and
after dinner passed on through Tallarook to Seymour,
where we arrived at sundown, having covered 62
miles in the first day. Anticipating a hot day on the
morrow, we got breakfast packed overnight, con-
sisting of bread, butter, cheese, and a tin of salmon,
and at 5 o’clock in the morning, after bathing in the
Goulburn, we took to the saddle.
Progress was very slow, for the road was inches deep
in sand, and a north wind came along, carrying clouds
of dust off the parched country and blowing it into
our faces. Resting by a cool, shady creek, breakfast
was partaken of, and later on, at Monea, a second
was indulged in, for the work gave us big appetites.
That afternoon, when nearing Violet Town, a heavy
storm burst, and kept us prisoners for two hours
under a friendly verandah. The day’s ride was a
hard one, and only 45 miles to show for it. The
next day was worse than the preceding one.
Another 5 o’clock start was made, and, when Glen-
rowan was reached at midday, the thermometer
registered 108 deg. in the shade. Here, in the
famous “Kelly” country, we spent several hours
visiting the spot where the great fight took place
between the police and bushrangers a few years ago.
Traces of bullet marks still remain on the buildings.
In the afternoon, when we rode away, had the Kelly
scare still been on, we might perhaps have been


mistaken for a part of the famous gang. Our coats
were strapped on the handle bars of the machines,
while we rode in knee-breeches, Panama hats, and
flannel shirts with sleeves tucked up to the elbows.
In leather belts worn round the waist we had stuck
our revolvers, ammunition, and nickel-plated wrenches.
We are thus armed in case an emergency should
arise in out-of-the-way districts. A few miles from
Glenrowan we drew revolvers for the first time, when
an immense iguana was seen making a meal off a
dead sheep. On being disturbed the reptile made off
for a big tree, skedaddling up a straight stem for
nearly 100 ft., when two bullets put a stop to his
flight, and he fell with a great thud. He measured
5 ft. 9 in. long, and was as thick round as a man’s
leg. While having a swim in a creek a hive of
bees swarmed near the bushes under which we had
placed our clothes, but we managed to steal our
garments without a sting. At 5 o’clock that evening
Wangaratta was reached, making forty-five miles for
the day. Another start at sunrise was made on the
4th November, and that afternoon we rode across the
Murray Bridge into New South Wales, the day’s stage
being 50 miles. Next day we were off even earlier
than 5 o’clock, for we found this the best time of the
day for travelling, for then the dew is on the ground,
the air is scented and cool, and birds sing and flit
about the bush. Later on the sun’s heat is terrible,
the wind like a furnace blast, and not a sign of animal


life is visible save sheep and cattle, which appear to
be languishing from want of water and food ; for
creeks have all stopped running, and the grass is
withered up by the drought or burnt by bush fires.
The roads were smooth for twelve miles to Bowra,
and then as rough as ever to Germantown, where we
dined, and spent three of the hottest hours of the day,
finally reaching Little Billabong after a 6omile ride.
Here, at the only hotel in the district, we had rather
a rough time of it, for drunken shearers were knocking
down their cheques, and turning night into day.
Next morning, when some ten miles on the road,
while passing a wayside house, a lady called out,
“ Are you going to Sydney,” and on our saying “ Yes,”
she said, “ Remember me to Edward and Copland ”
(previous overland cyclists). We at once jumped off
and told her we were both friends of theirs, and that if
she knew them she ought also to know Burston and
Stokes. She gave us a hearty welcome, and also
breakfast. Mrs. Mackenzie, this good Samaritan, said
the present drought was a very serious one. For the
first time for 25 years she had to buy butter and jam,
for the grass was all gone, fruit trees withered up, and
as for water, they begrudged themselves a wash, it was
so precious. A few hours afterwards it was a real
pleasure to reach the ever-running Tarcutta, and swim
in the lovely stream, for during two days we had crossed
nearly 100 little bridges, that in ordinary seasons
had little streams running under them, but now all


were dry. That day five mobs of cattle were met
numbering in all 5,000 head ; also innumerable sheep.
The day’s ride of 56 miles was completed at Adelong
crossing.
On the 7th November we reached the prettily
situated township of Gundagai at breakfast-time,
after riding over the Murrumbidgee River by a bridge
1,600 yards long. As the heat was intense (112 deg.
in the shade), it was considered preferable to pass the
time fishing from a boat in the river till 3 o’clock,
when, on account of the impassable nature of the
road, 20 miles were travelled in a train. Riding
this distance was out of the question, with heat, wind,
and road against us ; and, furthermore, 10,000 head
of cattle were reported to be coming along from
Queensland. Cootamundra was reached at dusk,
and then we pushed on to Harden for the night,
making 65 miles. The following day we sped through
Murrumburrah before the people were ast’r, and,
favoured by a fair wind, made good progress, although
the country was all ups and downs. It seemed as
though some of the country people had never
bicycles before, so great was the astonishment of the
natives of Wombat when we rode through. Some 10
miles further on the road ended up abruptly, but hap-
pily a stockdriver arrived on the scene, dressed in the
usual breeches, big boots, shirt, and cabbage-tree hat.
He tells us to cut across the open bush for a mile, so
we take bearings by the compass and go through


thick scrub for a time, and then follow a scarcely
definable track for 10 miles, and were not sorry to
reach a slab hut with windows of perforated tin. We
were as hungry as lions and delighted with the fare
put before us, although it consisted of boiled eggs
and pudding (goodness only knows what kind) ; the
spoons were made of corrugated iron, rudely
fashioned ; but for all that a dinner at Gunsler’s
Cafe was nothing to it. Further on we came on a
big woolshed where shearing was in full swing, and
we were surprised alike at the docility of the animals
and the dexterity of the shearers. Bush fires were
raging all round the country ; the smoke became
blinding and stifling, and the wind blew showers of
burning leaves and scorching heat in our faces. For
six miles we rode with these fires licking up every-
thing on both sides of the road. Fortunately the
road happened to be good, and in half an hour the
worst was passed, and we rested to bathe our heated
brows with water from the little canvas water-bag we
carried. The wind dropped, and the dust was almost
unbearable, and so we rode on another four miles,
and put in the night at Lockeyear’s Hotel, after a day’s
record of 72 miles. Next day, Prince of Wales’
Birthday, between half-past 5 in the morning, and 8
o’clock at night, we travelled another 72 miles, passing
through Carcoar, and reaching Bathurst. All through
was a succession of steep, rough hills. The rise, on
leaving the pretty town of Carcoar, is 1,800 feet in


two miles. The last hour of the ride was exception-
ally fine, the lurid glare of bush fires on the moun-
tains being grand, almost reminding one of Dante’s
“ Inferno.” There had not been a cloud in the sky
for a week, but the smoke to-day dispelled the sun’s
glare, which was somewhat appreciable.
The 10th November was another scorching day.
Clouds of dust enveloped the city of Bathurst, so we
took it easy till 3 o’clock, then pushed quietly on
through much healthier country, with green farms on
every side. Nearing Oberon the district is even more
mountainous, some of the spurs being miles long, but
the views are excellent, and amply repay the muscular
exertion. Hares, wallabies, and kangaroos are seen
in great numbers, and we potted them, as we rode
along, with our revolvers.
Next morning we started off at 5 o’clock for
Jenolan. The whole country was covered with a
heavy hoar frost, and the thermometer stood at 45 deg.
This cold is severely felt, for it is just half the average
temperature that has prevailed. At Edith breakfast
was partaken of, and Cave Hill reached at half-past
9 a.m. Here the road drops 1,800 ft. in three miles,
falling 1 in 8 most of the way. The track has a
perfect surface, but of course altogether too steep for
bicyclists. It zig-zags right down the face of the
mountains, and in one place we counted five turns of
the road beneath us, and the Cave-house below them
all. We reached the bottom just in time to accom-


pany Voss Wyburd, one of the guides, to the Lucas
Cave. This has been discovered longer than any of
the other caves, and has many points of great beauty
and interest. We visited the Snowball Cavern, Jewel
Casket, Lurline and Cathedral Caves, also the under-
ground river, which flows along 800 ft. below the surface,
and has a depth of 16 ft., the water being as clear as
crystal, “a river of pure water also good to drink, with
slight limestone flavour. The stalactites and stalag-
mites being all shapes and sizes, the former hanging
from the roof, and the latter rising from the floor to
meet them. In the afternoon we wandered off to the
Imperial Cave, and followed the left branch for over
two miles. This cave is more like a tunnel, and is
very rich, with beautiful formations varying in colour
from white to dark red, all caused by water dripping
through limestone rock for centuries past; the growth
is so slow that the place must have been hundreds of
thousands of years in existence. Some of the spots
were simply beyond the power of any pen to adequately
describe, their beauty being simply enchanting, and
reminding one of those fairy lands which we read
about in childhood’s days. Surely Rider Haggard
must have visited this place before he penned “ King
Solomon’s Mines.” Towards dusk the Devil’s Coach-
house was visited, and there we amused ourselves
shooting rock wallabies till dark.
Next day the right branch of the Imperial cave
was visited, and this was thought to be the best of


all. The magnesium was kept going for a couple of
hours, for the guide took particular care to show all
the beauty spots in order that we might be able to
say, on our return, that the beauty of these caves
cannot be excelled in the world. The Elder Cave
was also visited, the main characteristic being vast-
ness, without that beautiful detail so enchanting in
the other caves.
Rising at dawn next day we made off with our
bicycles through the Grand Arch, hoping to ride to the
top of Mount George, six miles, a rise of I in 17 all
the way. Excuses, however, for dismounting kept
cropping up; now coats had to be strapped on handles,
then a wallaby must be shot at, or a fine bit of
scenery gazed upon, so that it occupied one hour and
a quarter to cover the six miles. A beautiful west
wind blew and helped us along famously ; still, bush
fires were raging, and the road from the caves charred
and blackened, and much of the beauty of the land-
scape marred. We visited Blackheath and gazed
down Govett’s Leap, 2,500 ft. deep. Here the waratah,
was blooming, and the great scarlet flowers were
intermixed with others of almost every shape and
hue. Fifty miles were ridden that day through some
beautiful country, the scenery being wild, rugged, and
expansive, especially between Hartley and Mount
Victoria.
On the following day, 14th November, a run down
to Explorers’ Tree was made. This was the farthest


point made by Lawson and Wentworth in their first
endeavours to cross the Blue Mountains in May,
1813. A wall and fence have been erected to
preserve it, but the usual idiots have cut their names
all over it. Such caddishness has marred many of
the beauty spots visited. After dinner, at Katoomba,
the coal mine is seen ; also Katoomba falls and
gorge. This is another of those extraordinary spots
that abound in these mountains. A rugged path is
followed through a natural stairs, down over 1,200 ft.
to the entrance to the mine, and down at this level
there is quite a large town, composed of miners’
houses and workshops. The coal is hoisted by an
endless wire rope to the railway siding. After tea
that night we strolled out to admire the magnificent
sight of the bush fires raging all around on the
mountains. The hills seemed to be a mass of fire,
no matter which way one looked, and it must be
years before the charred vegetation can be replenished.
Lawson was left behind at 5 a.m. on the 15th, and
breakfast obtained at Springwood, where the unfor-
tunate hotelkeeper is paying ss. a cask for water, and
not much good even at that. Reaching Penrith at
11 a.m., we hired a boat, laid in a stock of fruit, and
pulled up the Nepean River, which winds in among
the rugged mountains. We went over the champion
rowing course, and after spending five hours on the
water, pulled home in the cool of the evening—
-90 deg. in the shade—at 6 p.m. The moon rose,


showing blood red through the smoke, which literally
swept down off the mountains, causing the eyes to
smart. Next morning, 17th November, we rode into
Sydney at 11 o’clock, thus safely completing the first
stage of our tour—7oo miles. We spent a splendid
time in Sydney, and were entertained at dinner by
about 100 of the cyclists of Sydney. After five
days in Sydney, we left by train for Brisbane to
catch the mail steamer, which sailed on the 27th for
India.
Save that the tyres of our machines were rather
worn, nothing else went wrong with them, and we
were fortunate in meeting with no accidents. All
through New South Wales the country was in a
terrible state from drought, and the heat was very
severe. We did not, however, mind the latter so
much, as it would serve to salt us for the trip across
India.


CHAPTER II.
FROM SYDNEY TO JAVA.
We left Sydney for Brisbane by train, as we had
booked by the Queensland mail steamer Dacca ,
which was to sail in a few days from Brisbane. The
scenery for the first two hours was delightful. The
locomotive kept steaming through short tunnels and
rounding sharp curves, all the while keeping the crest
of the range, with extensive views in places, and pretty
glimpses here and there of the Hawkesbury River.
At Peat’s Ferry we embarked for half an hour on the
ferry-boat, an old-fashioned concern with a huge
paddle-wheel at the stern, and driven by a beam-
engine. This, however, made a very enjoyable break
in the journey, and the river scenes are here very fine ;
the hills are heavily timbered, and rise abruptly, like
most of the New South Wales coastal scenery. Off
by train again, we soon enter a tunnel over miles
long, and run round Brisbane Water to Gosford ; after
which we got into a different kind of country, passing
numbers of orange and banana groves, and seeing
the passion-fruit trailing along in several gardens.
On nearing Newcastle evidences of coal were fre-
quently met with ; even in the railway cutting seams
of the black diamonds were seen, ranging from I ft.


to 5 ft. in thickness. Four miles before reaching
Newcastle we passed a queer-looking mining township
—Adamstown. All the houses are built of brick,
and coloured jet-black with coal tar, the roofs being
of corrugated iron, giving a dark and funereal
appearance.
The Newcastle cyclists had heard of our coming,
and waited on the platform and took us up Shepherd’s
Hill, from which we obtained a general view of the
town, harbour, and surroundings. The harbour has
a great amount of shipping, the tonnage being roughly
estimated at 200,000; and even this does not include
the “ mosquito fleet”—viz., the small coasters. The
vessels, mostly sailers, are ranged several deep along
the wharves, and present quite a forest of spars and
ropes. We had a view of the many coal-mining
suburbs, and also the great A. A. Company’s property,
who have three distinct shafts several miles distant
from each other. This company, the “ Australian
Agricultural Company,” commonly called the A. A.
Company, is an English concern that originally
owned the whole of Newcastle and district, to the
extent of about 1,000,000 acres of land. In addition to
the coal, they have both a sheep and a cattle station.
The former, we are told, yields from 1,000 to 1,500
bales of wool annually; so the company is very
wealthy, and pays handsome dividends to its share-
holders.
Through the kindness of Mr. Ralph Turnbull, a


member of the Newcastle Bicycle Club, we were
shown through “C” pit of the A, A. Company.
The drives and tunnels run off the main shaft in all
directions, and form a perfect network. We expected
to find the place dirty, and were most agreeably
disappointed ; for, instead of having to walk along
in a stooping position, we had any amount of space.
Tramways run in all the drives, drawn by horses.
The seams in this pit are mostly 12 ft. in thickness,
but it is not pure coal right through, for the first 2 ft.
are usually composed of earth and coal mixed—this
is called “jerry;” then “penny seams,” or thin
layers of rock about an inch thick, run horizontally
every two or three feet, and finally, at the top, is
“ Morgan ; ” this is also thrown aside. These are the
three substances that led to the recent strike, for the
miners have to throw them out, and are not paid for
it—at least, not directly, for they work on piecework,
and are paid so much per skip or trollyful. There
is a small amount of water soakage into the mine,
for it is right on the sea coast, and in places
the drives extend far out to sea, but, of course, at
considerable depth. This requires pumping, and
they have the machinery for this underground, and
the fact of the hot air being below causes the air to
circulate, and by ingenious flues of canvas it is
conveyed through all the workings, and the mine is
thereby kept cool—about 62 deg. The winding
engine of this mine is the finest in the district,


working up to somewhere about 300 h.p. maximum ;
there is also a valuable patent at work here to
prevent over-winding at the poppet-head. In the
event of the cage being overwound it strikes a pro-
jection that works into the engine-room and releases a
steam brake, which instantly stops the machine.
The cages travel very fast—at least twice as rapidly
as the new Otis lifts now working in Melbourne.
The streets of Newcastle are similar in appearance
to those of Melbourne, for they are made of Victorian
metal, brought out as ballast by the coal ships.
We spent an afternoon boating on the Hunter
River, and left that night by the 11 p.m. train for
Brisbane, arriving in ample time to catch the Dacca ,
which was to convey us and our machines over the
ocean to Java. The voyage up the Queensland coast,
calling at the various northern towns, is highly
interesting, and the scenery round about the numerous
islands very picturesque.
The meals on boards are rather funny.' An Indian
stands behind each chair, the steward strikes a bell,
when they all file out and then in again, each bearing
a plate of soup ; so that all are served at the same
moment. This goes on at every course, the waiters
filing in and out like a piece of machinery.
At Rockhampton we take 200 Javanese aboard.
They had been for three years on a Queensland sugar
plantation, and, according to Government regulations,
were being returned to their homes, and a fresh supply


“ ■ ’ ' ■ : 1
A j B
I
6 5 4 321
will take their places. They were a curious and
motley crowd—men, women, and children—and
scarcely any difference in the dress of the different
sexes. They were put on the steerage part, in the
bows of the ship, and huddled together in a pro-
miscuous heap. Thus they will spend day and night
till Batavia is reached. Within half-an-hour of their
boarding they had started fan-tan, and gambled like
fun from daybreak till 10 p.m., when all the lights
have to be put out. They spread out a piece of cloth
like this :
The banker bets four to one that you cannot back
the correct number of the die, and, further, lays you
level money against the Aor B divisions. It is
merely a game of chance ; but, of course, the banker
has the extra chances in his favour. They keep on
staking from is. to £l, the latter amount being
frequently deposited. The youngsters are wound up in
a long piece of cloth, like mummies, and cannot move
anything except their heads, and, when in this strait,
are slung round the shoulders and carried by the
men, who appear to do all the nursing.
Our passengers are a jolly lot, although few in


number, and mix well together. When our ship calls
at a port or waits for mails we get out the jolly-boat
and pull off to an island and feed on oysters, or else
we fish and shoot sharks from the ship, as these
northern waters abound with the monsters.
7th December, on board s.s. Dacca. —The hottest
day we have yet experienced—9o deg. in the shade,
but more oppressive than 120 deg. in the sun at
Melbourne. We still pursue our way among innu-
merable islands, some very beautiful. We pass between
Albany Island and the mainland. This is a very
narrow passage, only a few hundred yards wide, and
the pilot dropped anchor for several hours, till day-
light, considering it too dangerous to go through in the
dark. It is called Albany Passage, and as we emerge
from it we see Cape York, the most northern, and, in
fact, the last point of Australia we are likely to set
eyes on for a some considerable time. To the east
a couple of miles lies a derelict of the sea in the
shape of a large sailing ship. She got on a sandbank
over two years ago, on a voyage to India with horses,
and all efforts at the time and since to get her off
have proved fruitless. The rigging and most of her
decks have been stripped, but the hull remains as
sound as possible. It served to show the dangers of
the route, for she lay only a short distance off our
track without a danger signal to warn her of her
impending doom.
The islands hereabout assume larger dimensions


and it is hard to think the mainland is really passed.
However, such is the case, for York, Tuesday, and
Wednesday Islands are on each side, and by midday
we are in sight of Thursday Island, with its little
township, and yet another pilot comes on board, and
Captain Hannah’s work has been well and faithfully
performed, his hours of sleep during the past week
having been few and far between.
Black boatmen, of various nationalities and lan-
guages, scramble aboard and wait to row us ashore,
and we make a bargain with a Cingalese who knows
some English, to take us ashore and back for 4s. a
head, money to be paid on the return trip. We find
the little village populated by about 20 races of
people, with the Hon. John Douglas almost a little
king ; and a venerable, fine-looking man he is.
At the jetty we see a schooner being unloaded of
her cargo of sea-slugs, which live on coral insects, and
beche-de-mer. This resembles the dried leather of
old boots, but for all this it is worth over .£lOO per
ton, being considered a great delicacy among the
Chinese. The little craft had about two tons on
board, which represented a month’s work, and cer_
tainly did not cost the owner more than ;£io to
collect, but those gathering it run great risks, and are
occasionally attacked by the blacks, who are cannibals
to their spinal marrow. Most of the surrounding
islands have pearl-fishing stations on them, and about
half of the people’s time is spent under water, and,


strange to say, the sharks leave the niggers alone. A
run through the town does not occupy much time ; it
consists of 6 hotels, 10 stores, and about 80 other
houses, built in a light and airy fashion, with cane
chairs and hammocks on all the verandahs, showing
where the inhabitants spend most of their spare time.
The island is about half a mile long and three-
quarters broad, and contains 2,000 inhabitants, 500
being Europeans and 1,500 blacks, so it is rather an
awkward place to be located in. The pioneers who
risk their lives well deserve the large profits they
certainly make. The übiquitous Burns, Philp and
Co, are here, as in all other northern ports ; they do
the great majority of the trade of Northern Australia,
and are a sort of East India Company in the south.
New Guinea natives seem to predominate, and they
present a curious appearance, for they have very
woolly heads and dye them a red-brick colour, which
contrasts strangely with their black bodies and
scarlet loin-cloths.
We purchased a large 9 in. shark-hook, and on
returning to the ship commenced angling over the
stern. In about an hour and a half a large shark
was espied swimming round looking at the bait, so
we began hauling it away, with the result that he
snapped at it and got fairly hooked. We jerked all
our weight on the rope to get the hook past the barb,
and off he went like a streak, running out 80 ft. of
line before one had time to turn round. Plenty of


willing hands soon commenced to haul on the line,
and then one of the quartermasters passed a bowline
down and got it fast round the fish, and then a block
and tackle soon hoisted the 9 ft. monster up on deck.
Our darkies helped with a will to haul him on board,
but two Cingalese stood aloof, and we afterwards
found it was against their religion to kill anything ;
and they carry their religious beliefs so practically
into everyday life that the Christians have a good
wholesome lesson to learn from their dark brethren.
The islands we have passed to-day abound with
large ant-hills, chocolate colour, and 3 ft. or 4 ft. high,
in shape something like the stump of a tree. Ants
in North Australia are a regular plague ; most of the
wooden buildings have inverted dishes on the piles
under the houses, to prevent the white ants from
getting into the wood, for if they once get a hold
they quickly reduce wood, however hard, to a mass
of powdered veins. Green ants are also found in
great abundance, but they differ from any others we
have seen in that they build in trees instead of
burrowing in the ground ; they make nests of leaves,
which they form into shape with a kind of well at
the extremity of the boughs, and if you hit one with a
stick it is always cram full. These ants are about three-
eighths of an inch long, but bite tenaciously, for our
third officer got several on him, and in pulling them
off, the body broke in half, leaving the head still fast
in his leg.


Bth December,—Anchor is weighed at daylight,
and after steaming close to Prince of Wales Island,
we stand right out to sea, and are fairly on the
billowy ocean, with naught to break the perfect
horizon of dark blue. The sun’s rays begin to
have great power, and pour down from a cloudless
sky. Night on deck is the best part of the twenty-
four hours, for we have a lot of music and singing,
and the quarter-moon gives promise of some glorious
nights during the coming week. We feel almost
suffocated on going to the cabin, for no air is stirring ;
so we sleep on deck. Next day, Sunday, everyone
complaining of oppressive heat of the night, and
vowing to share the deck with us in future. Our
ship still ploughing along the trackless ocean, “ tread-
ing the water like a thing of life,” with a rolling motion
decidedly pleasant, now that we have our sea legs.
At 10 a.m. fire practice is indulged in, and next
follows boat practice. On the call being sounded,
the men rush to their respective boats and lower
away. If in case of emergency they act as promptly
we shall have no cause to complain. The captain
assures us they do just as ordered without attempting
to think for themselves, and in that respect are better
than white sailors ; but we are hardly prepared to
believe that. Shortly before 11 the church bell starts
ringing, and a quartermaster is sent round to tell
all that service will be held on the quarter-deck. It
seems very strange, and yet so beautiful and impres-


sive, to be thus worshipping the God who, we are told,
“ holds the sea in the hollow of His hand.” Here we
are, a mere handful, and using the same prayers as
our friends ashore, and singing “ for those in peril on
the sea,” and that other grand hymn, “ Onward,
Christian Soldiers! ” We have no clergyman on
board, so that the captain reads the prayers, Mr. H. the
lessons, and Miss J. M., of Melbourne, is at the piano.
The service is heartily gone through. The reading
desk is covered with a Union Jack, and the whole affair
seems to fascinate one, for the sailors are drawn up
on each side, and the crowds of Javanese are straining
with open mouths to find out what it is all about, and
their naked bodies (for since the weather has become
hot they have divested themselves of all save loin-
cloths) add a charm to the whole surroundings. The
sea in these regions is simply swarming with fish—
porpoises by the hundred, and flying fish darting off
in every direction.
During the next few days the heat is very oppres-
sive, and almost all the passengers are sleeping on
deck. We pass Sumbawa Island, which abounds
with mountains ranging from 4,000 ft. to 5,000 ft., the
two highest being Mount Ugenge, 5,560 ft, and
Lautch, 5,413 ft. This island has a very large native
population, who, by the way, live on the native pro-
ducts of the island, and do very little in the way of
cultivation. The next island we sight is Lombok.
The captain assures us we are 100 miles from it. The


part we see is Mount Rindjam, which rears its head
12,460 ft. above the sea. Next morning we are just
past it, but have a grand view. The middle of the
mount is obscured with several strata of white
clouds, leaving the summit quite clear against the
morning sun, which rises with gorgeous splendour;
and both sunrise and sunset are exceedingly fine.
The temperature by day is 92 deg., and at night
90 deg., notwithstanding that a stiff cross wind
is blowing. Whilst we were looking at Mount
Rindjam, wondering why they don’t put some snow
on the top, a yell from some of the Javanese proclaims
their native isle has gladdened their eyes, and all is
jabber and excitement among them. True enough,
on the port bow we can see Java, and also Bali—the
latter being a small island with two big mountains,
Agong and Tahanang, 10,500 ft, and 7,875 ft
respectively. The breakfast bell makes us quit the
deck for a few minutes, and on returning we see
Banjoewangie, the telegraph station, in the distance,
whilst around us we count fifty old strange-looking
canoes, some with a sail up, and others being pro-
pelled with paddles. These were apparently fishing,
and, as we had halted for a pilot, they came around
us. They all seemed to have plenty of fish in their
crafts. They carry a big sail, and are prevented from
capsizing by a large bamboo outrigger. Their dress
consisted of a hat and a loin cloth. Our pilot, a
spluttering Dutchman, scrambles up the side, and


away we go through Bali Straits, close in to the
mainland of Java. Two very big hills rise close in
shore—namely, Mount Kaung, 10,926 ft, and Sedano,
4,200 ft. The latter is very precipitous and rugged,
with every appearance of an extinct volcano at its
summit. Both these hills rise close from Banjoe-
wangie, and the lower portions of them are terraced
with some kind of cultivation plots ; but the township
itself consists of merely a few houses and the telegraph
station, the latter being protected by a small fort.
In the distance we see a succession of hills, the
highest, Merapi, 11,150 ft., Jang and Arjuno, 10,125
ft., and 10,093 ft. The pilot boat brings a fresh
supply of eggs, bangoes, cane pears, and pumelos,
which are native fruits and very fine. The Mount
Sedano already mentioned used to run with pre-
cipitous sides on the east straight into the sea ; but
in 1821 a terrible eruption took place, and the lava
ran into the sea and made a long sloping shore —
apparently red soil, but in reality a mass of lava.
On 15th December we were steaming all day along
the coast, meeting many peculiar-looking crafts with
big lateen sails, and on the following morning we
reached Batavia at breakfast time.


CHAPTER III.
JAVA.
At 8 o’clock on a beautiful morning (16th December)
we sighted the port of Tandjong Priok, and an hour’s
steaming brought us to the entrance of the large and
peculiar-shaped breakwater, made of rocks. After
an hour’s delay we landed from a small steamer,
bicycles and all. At the wharf we opened our trunk
for official inspection, and got it passed and placed
on the train for Batavia, and then we trotted to our
machines, delighted with the prospect of riding
through, such lovely country ; but, to our chagrin, the
Customs could not be induced to pass them without a
payment of and even if we paid this amount
there would have been no chance of a rebate when
we left in a few days’ time. We tried various plans
in vain, and finally decided to leave the machines in
bond, although, of course, much against our wishes.
We then hired a cabman to drive us round for an
hour for a guilder (is. Bd.) The country was simply
lovely, but the atmosphere resembled a Turkish bath.
The whole place was a mass of tropical vegetation,
cocoanut palms rising above everything else—almost
every colour, even to bright scarlet, being represented,
and what struck us as remarkable was that not a vestige


of dead leaf or rubbish was visible ; even the tree-
ferns—whose underneath fronds are usually withered
—were all green. All efforts to get anything intel-
ligible out of our driver proving fruitless, we let him
drive away till we came to the seashore again, and
were surprised to find pumice-stone or lava strewn
everywhere, and continually coming ashore. This is
the result of the great eruption of Mount Krakatoa,
in 1883, when 40,000 Javanese lost their lives. The
action of the water rounds the pieces like potatoes,
and they are as light as feathers. After buying some
native fruit with an unpronounceable name, we re-
turned to port in time to catch the midday train to
Batavia, the capital.
The whole place seems overrun with vegetation,
scarcely a spot not two or three feet deep with thick
undergrowth and tall trees springing up through it.
The horses and vehicles are small, the former being
fiery little Timor ponies from one of the islands we
recently passed. The cabs seat three and a driver ;
in shape they represent the old fore-and-aft cabs we
used to have in Melbourne many years ago. The
Javanese are reckless drivers, and often go at full
gallop along the streets. The streets are straight,
but narrow, and there are no fences anywhere to
divide properties. In the main street most of the
houses lie back, and have beautiful trees in front,
while a steam tram careers along, d la Sydney, but
the cars are only one-story high. The whole place is


flat, and traversed by canals ; the main street has one
right up the centre, bridged over every quarter mile,
and in this water the women do their washing, and
both sexes bathe away all day long, but always keep
loin cloths on. Before we reach the Netherlands
Hotel rain falls steadily, and makes the atmosphere
worse than ever, but when lunch is over the rain
ceases, and we take a long ramble, and one of our
shipmates avers the place is far prettier than Colombo.
Although it was Sunday, general business was going
on as usual. The heavy stuff is all towed along the
canal. These canals are nicely walled up, and pro-
tected on one side by iron railing; the other is left
unfenced, and towers walk along a bricked path with
a rope round them hauling all kinds of barges ; the
water is some six feet below the street level. The
Javanese trot about all day with their heavy loads
across their shoulders on bamboos, but the Europeans
wait till about 6 p.m., and then sally forth, clad in
full evening dress; ladies with low bodices, and all
without hats. Carriages swarm out with coachmen
and footmen, the latter standing on a step at the
back. The carriages are mostly landaus, and, with
few exceptions, are very small. The Netherlands
Hotel is a good place, but no English is spoken, and
at meals you have to take what comes for fear it
may be the last, for they jumble up sweets and meats
in a most promiscuous way ; but the worst of it is
their awkward hours for meals. Only fancy waiting


from half-past 12 lunch till nearly 9 o’clock at night
for dinner, and we cyclists, too.
Hawkers of all kinds of wares swarm round an
unfortunate traveller immediately he shows his nose
outside. One of our party was relating how he had
beat a man down from 50 to 20 guilders for a richly
carved sword, but scarcely had he finished relating
his tale when another came in with a facsimile for
which he only parted with 10 guilders. These
natives simply have no consciences, and if they think
you don’t know the value they ask ten times more
than a thing is worth.
As the Customs refused to allow us to take .our
bicycles away without paying duty, we interviewed
the British Consul, Mr. M'Neil, a wealthy merchant
living in Oriental style. He treated us most court-
eously, and arranged for the Customs to permit us to
use our machines for five days and then take them
out of the country. As happy as kings, we mounted
our wheels and sailed up a lovely grove towards the
capital. We were soon stopped, however, and pass-
ports demanded ; but again the British Consul helped
us out of the difficulty by giving us “passports to
travel.”
After tiffin, although the heat was about 120 deg.,
we mounted to explore the suburbs of Batavia. This
city is divided into two parts, the old and the new,
and, taken together, reckons a population as big as
Melbourne. The surroundings are all very beautiful.


The main features of the street are the natives carry-
ing loads Chinaman fashion. They appear to take
almost everything that way, even to street watering
with huge watering-pots. We created great curiosity,
even among the younger fry, who crowded round
wherever we stopped, but happily all seemed afraid
to touch the bicycles. We have endeavoured to find
the road which leads to the mountains, but so far
have received very little information, so to-morrow we
will follow our noses and the compass. The place
is densely populated; roads branch off every few
hundred yards, all being apparently the same. The
side tracks are beautifully smooth, worn so by the
natives’ naked feet, for no boots are worn here.
Rather an amusing thing happened one afternoon.
While one of us was fixing up the camera for taking
a building, a lot of Dutch boys ran up to look at the
machines, but the camera caught their attention, and
they stood at a respectful distance till the lid of the
box was opened, when they rushed the camera, burst-
ing with curiosity to see the inside. That plate was
rather mixed.
Many of the streets are winding, and shaded by
palms, and the houses are built to suit the climate,
with fine wide marble verandahs and columns.
Batavia has been founded 280 years, and the canals
that run so thickly are for the most part artificially
made; they drain the country, and at the same time
produce an easy mode of carriage.


At 6 o’clock next morning we set out for the
interior, with a hazy notion of road, but knowing we
had to set a S.E. course. For the first 10 miles roads
kept branching off every half-mile, and we made a
good many turns to steer our course. The whole
country simply swarmed with people. Every road
was lined with natives en route for the city, laden with
fruits. This was rather annoying, for they occupied
all the pathway which was beaten smooth by their
naked feet. We had to keep to the metal road,
which was rather rough—about like Australian roads,
the difference being they were made with pebbles
instead of metal. The roads are 30 ft. wide, and all
lined with splendid trees 10 yards apart. These have
a dense foliage, and meet overhead, so that the sun’s
rays scarcely penetrate, but still we were melting hot,
and kept up a continual drip. When in Java, how-
ever, we do as the Javanese do, pulling off our shirts
and riding in silk coats, which was a considerable
improvement.
As far as we can find out, we are the first cyclists
to tour inland in Java, and the surprise of the natives
seemed to know no bounds. The younger portion
kept chasing us along ; as soon as one batch became
tired another crowd would take up the running, for
although we could not see 50 yards, and in many
places not five yards, off the road, on account of the
dense foliage, still the vt-hole place simply swarmed
with people, and we do not wonder at the immense


population, which numbers 22 millions of Javanese,
200 thousand Chinese, 30 thousand Europeans, and
only 40 Englishmen ; total population, 22,230,040.
The metrical system is in force here, the milometer
being about three-fifths of an English mile ; hence
we appeared to be flitting past the milestones like
ninepins, and when about 20 of them had been
passed we decided to halt at a little native shanty—
which we chose for its isolated position—and have
some breakfast, which consisted of bananas and
some kind of native tea, to enjoy which one must
acquire a taste.
In five minutes a big crowd of naked fellows
crowded round us and the bicycles, chattering av/ay
like monkeys. They appeared to be a good-natured,
happy race; but, for all that, every man carries a
weapon of some kind, usually a big sheath dagger or
a bent sword, stuck in their loin cloth, whilst the
native police are a regular picture of war, but look
rather comical with naked feet and a belt full of
weapons. We received no molestation of any kind,
and, without exception, everyone made way for us.
Strings of carts laden with fruits—of which, by
the way, the island produces over 100 eatable varieties
—were streaming along the road. The carts are
about 6 ft. long, 3 ft. wide, and 4 ft. deep, a kind of
box with the back half roofed with bamboos, gable
shape. These little concerns are each drawn by two
horses, one harnessed to the shafts and the other


hitched alongside, outrigger fashion. The little
ponies, although very spirited, were driven without
bridles, and took scarcely any notice of us, being, we
supposed, so used to comical sketches. About 11
o’clock it became frightfully warm. The road had
been rising slightly all the way, and we got into
quite a different country, consisting chiefly of rice or
paddy fields under what seems to be one of the most
perfect systems of irrigation. The island simply
abounds with rivers, and the one our road has been
following has cut its way to a depth of from 30 ft. to
50 ft. through a rich chocolate soil to a rocky bed.
Every mile or so of this stream was locked up, and
streams carried off to different fields. The rice-
fields are laid out in terraces, with a 2 ft. bank around
each, and the water flows from one to the other, so
that the same stream swamps perhaps a dozen of
these fields, which vary in size, but are usually
40 yds. by 25 yds. The whole place seemed to us to
be one continuous village, till at last we reached
Buitenzorg, the residence of the Governor-General and
most other big men. The place is right under the
mountains, and is a kind of sanatorium, but we found
it quite as hot as Batavia. The surroundings are
beautifully clean ; natives, by the dozen, with rush
brooms, keep sweeping the streets and burning the
rubbish by the roadside. The place looks superior to
Batavia ; there are none of those abominable “cholera
whiffs” that one continually sniffs in the capital.


“ Rooma machan ” is the Dutch for eating-house,
and, knowing this, we managed to find where our
shipmates had preceded us, and we joined them in
several excursions. They said we must first of all
see the Governor-General’s gardens; but we told
them the whole island appeared to be a garden, and
we did not desire to see anything better. We were,
however, persuaded to visit the gardens, and they
proved to be of surpassing beauty. The first thing
to make us open our eyes was a herd of 200 spotted
deer browsing on a beautiful lawn. There were
avenues of trees, with creeping vines that hung down
from the trees and branches, and flowers of all colours
were blooming everywhere. Enhancing the picture
was a beautiful lake, with Victoria Regia and other
lilies in blossom, and a huge building in the back-
ground completed a scene the like of which no
untravelled Australian can well imagine. The paths
were all laid with pebbles of equal size, and the
borders kept up with bigger ones, and not a twig
seemed out of place ; in fact, the perfect order of the
place seemed a marvel.
On the way back to the Hotel Belle Vue we came
across the Bazaar, where some 5,000 natives were
congregated, selling all manner of things, but mostly
native fruits. Next we entered the Horse Bazaar,
where many hundred ponies were being bought and
sold. Wherever we went we were besieged with
people who wanted us to buy things, and our ship-


mates are already loaded with Chinese hats, daggers,
&c., and in the majority of cases could, perhaps, buy
the same things in their own native city cheaper.
The Government have almost all the coffee and
spice gardens under their hands. The extent of
these may be gathered from the fact that a rise in
the price of coffee of only one cent, means an increase
to the Government returns of one million guilders a
year. We slipped into our saddles and rode about
two miles out of Buitenzorg, and came to a very large
coffee plantation, and found the head man having a
sleep ; but the sight of a guilder made one of the
attendants all civility, and he at once consented to
show us about, and a Dutchman interpreted for us.
This place was the more interesting because we
■could ask questions and find out things. The
Government here go to considerable expense in
getting all kinds of coffee, and thereby can supply
the various countries with any kind of coffee they
prefer. For instance, the Americans like the Padory
coffee, hence this is largely cultivated; they also
grow Woengoe Kodoc coffee, and Tjkelimcuk, the
native Java coffee; Menace, from Celebes ; Maritiana,
from Mauritius; Aden, from Arabia ; and Great
Mokka and Little Mokka, also from Arabia. In
addition to the above, they have growing here the
Sumatra and Ligurian (Africa) coffee. These
Government gardens are by no means confined to
coffee-growing, for we saw the pepper-tree twining


round tall trees planted for the purpose, also chocolate
and coco trees, the latter being the tree the American
Indians use by chewing the leaves on long fatiguing
journeys.
The Javanese are a most respectful lot. They call
the Governor the “ great mighty gentleman,” and in
three cases out of four doffed their hats to us.
Some of the views around Buitenzorg are perfectly
enchanting, especially one at the back of the hotel.
This embraces a river scene, lovely foliage, native
houses, and an extinct volcano for a background
7,000 ft. high. From here we rode on to Sokaborni,
Tjandjoer, and Bandong, about 100 miles from
Batavia, and then retraced our way via Tjitjalengka,
the scenery being of a more mountainous nature.
Everywhere one sees irrigation channels, and large
rivers were frequently crossed. An idea of the
quantity of water running through Java may be
gathered from the fact that before leaving the Dacca ,
when five miles off shore, we saw green water, which
was only brackish, and the outflow of three rivers
which empty into the sea close together. After
riding a long way we became very hungry, so halted
at a native house, and ate rice and salt fish ala
Javanese — i.e., with our fingers. This meal cost 3c.,
equal to 6d. The people appeared to take great
interest in us, for no Europeans had before graced
their shanty, which was simply a little place roofed
with palm leaves, and no walls. The Javanese


throw the rice straight into their mouths without
spilling a grain, and they were greatly amused
at our unsuccessful attempts to do likewise. The
only animal life we saw were a few doves, plenty
of hawks, and insects without end, of all sizes and
shapes. The air seems full of them, and at night
they make quite a noise. It is said we passed through
some country infested with tigers and leopards, and
also'monkeys, but we saw none of them.
The Dutch women are mostly stout, but have find
figures and white complexions, whilst’ their children
are as fair as lilies. Their dress is what we would
decidedly call undress, consisting of a single white
garment, which leaves the limbs bare. The women
also go about in a kind of pyjamas all day, and dress
for dinner at night.
A road of splendid surface, and shaded by mag-
nificent trees, runs out from Batavia' for nearly 300
miles. As to how this road was constructed, the
story, says that, some two hundred years ago, the
Governor-General went for a tour through the island
and found the roads dusty and rough. • He returned
to the capital and issued a mandate requiring every
man to make the road abutting on his property a
certain width, and to plant trees along each side some
yards apart, to be completed in twelve months on
pain of death. On the expiration of twelve months
the Governor started out and straightway hung all
those men who had not complied with the order. At


the present time each man - road Jn
front of his house, so that it costs the Government
nothing.
The history of the colony appears to be a scarlet
one. The Dutch rule the natives with an iron hand ;
they are all poor, and not a single native in a high
position. In the middle of'last century the Dutch
were afraid of a Chinese insurrection ; so one night the
sailors were landed and ordered to kill every China-
man they could lay hands on, and they did the work
so effectually that 10,000 Chinamen perished.
Every few metres along the road ( there are houses
for police, and the residents of each district have to
supply some of their number to keep guard through
the night. Even around the environs of Batavia,
every quarter-mile, as we drove round in a cab at 10
p.m., we were challenged, and the driver called out
something that signified visitors. These night-patrols
are armed with an ugly weapon —a huge pitchfork,
but instead of prongs there are two swords. This
weapon is used for catching the natives who “ run
a-muck.”
On the morning of 20th December we rode our
bicycles down from Batavia to the port, and took
passages by the Sindoro, bound for Singapore.
37
Cruelty of the Dmm^


CHAPTER IV.
SINGAPORE, PENANG, AND RANGOON.
The Sindoro steams away from the shores of Java,
and we look about to see what sort of fellow-voyagers
we have. We find they number 400, and are appa-
rently of all nationalities under the sun, even to the
religious Parsees, who pray and bow themselves to
the setting sun, quite oblivious of the fact that
hundreds are watching them bowing with their heads
right to the deck. Drifts of lava are floating around
us ; these have been tossing about these waters since
the Krakatoa eruption some years ago. On the
forward part of the ship are a crowd of prisoners
going to Riou. One amongst them has an iron ring
round his neck ; this denotes that he has been com-
mitted for murder, but has been reprieved, and this
collar has to be worn till his offence has been
expiated, possibly by 20 years’ servitude. Through
the streets of Batavia we saw crowds of prisoners
driven along by twenties, with a little clothes line
round the outside of the batch, in charge of an over-
seer with only a small cane, and yet the fellows
made no attempt to escape. The remnant of the
Harding Opera Company (Gracie Plaisted the prirna
donna ) is on board. They took small-pox and


cholera while playing in Java, and sent the invalided
ones home to Australia, and the remainder go on to
complete the tour through India.
We pass a number of islands and put in at Riou,
so we take advantage of a six-hours’ stoppage to go
ashore. It is a Dutch possession, but the population
appears to be about half Chinese and half Malays.
We paraded the main street and came on a Chinese
theatre, the play being in full swing. The Chinese
portion of the town is built on piles over the sea, the
houses being all huddled together, so that if a fire
took place it would end in total destruction. By
night we rowed back to our vessel, fire-flies flitting
round, and the splash of the oars causing bright
phosphorescent light on the water; this and some
good chorus songs sung by our party made the pull
a most enjoyable one.
Next morning we landed at Singapore, which being
a free port, we simply mounted our bicycles and rode,
up to the town to the Hotel d’Europe. The first
things that attracted our attention were the jinrikishas,
a small kind of tilbury, drawn by stalwart Chinamen,
who run along, drawing one or two people, at a good
trot for hours at a stretch. Their pay is equal here
to qd. per hour.
As at Java, the Sabbath is scarcely recognized by
the Asiatic races, who pursue their various trades
without hindrance. This in a British possession seems
somewhat peculiar. We were on the machines the


greater part of the day, and rode about 50 miles over
the most perfect roads we have ever wheeled on, com-
posed of red sandstone, quite smooth and hard—in
fact, superb ; and so our wheels glide along without
the slightest exertion. The city has beautiful streets
leading out in various ways, and all of them nicely
shaded with avenues, and then after about three miles
the whole country appears under cocoanut palms on
the north and eastern sides.
Feeling thirsty, we stopped at a wayside fruit-shop,
and a Malay, quickly understanding us, scuttled up a
palm like a monkey and brought down two' nuts, but
the milk of one was all we could manage. It must
have held a quart, and was beautifully cool and re-
freshing. We returned to Singapore at 4 o’clock,
and in the evening attended St. Andrew’s Cathedral.
Most of the congregation were dressed in white, and
32 punkahs were kept in motion throughout the
service ; these were pulled by Malays outside. The
church was crowded, but quite cool. This is the
place for cheap labour: white linen suits made to
measure in 12 hours for 9s. 3d. each suit. These
are made by Chinamen, who rattle away at sewing
machines, and, though it is Sunday, are bricklaying,
carpentering, blacksmithing, &c. As for bad smells
Singapore and Batavia may well go hand in hand,
for now and again the passer-by gets a whiff that
nearly knocks him down.
Next morning being beautifully sunshiny, we set


out for a long ride across the isle of Singapore, during
which we purposed calling on the Sultan of Ropore,
to look through his magnificent palace. We were,
however, doomed to disappointment, for, ten miles on
our way, a tropical shower burst upon us, and although
we took shelter under some trees, we were drenched
to the skin, and our beautiful white suits were spattered
from head to foot with mud. When the rain ceased,
and we pushed on, vapour rose in smoking clouds,
while the atmosphere was like that of a hotbed ; so,
being in such a dirty state, we decided not to call on
the Sultan that day.
We passed many native villages, at one of which
we got English stout and biscuits for 9d., and then
we ran right through to a landing place separating
Singapore from the mainland. This we reached just
as the Sultan in his proa, with a retinue of servants,
was landing to pay a visit to Sir C. C. Smith, the
Governor-General of Straits Settlement. After this
we made a very fast run home, cutting down the
jinrikisha men one after another till the fifteen miles
had been ridden in one hour.
Christmas does not appear to be very extensively
recognized in Singapore, for lots of the shops were
open, and the town presented its usual appearance.
We went to St. Andrew’s Cathedral in the forenoon,
and in the afternoon took a cab and drove round in
the rain through the suburbs, which are all beautifully
green, and water never seems scarce on the island.


The worst feature of the place seems to be too much
water and too flat a country. We called at a Chinese
spirit shop, duly licensed, and had three lemonades
and brandy, with biscuits, for the absurd sum of 6d.
This is a beautiful contrast to the Hotel d’Europe,
where drinks are about is. each, the Chinaman being
content with about 10 per cent, profit, the European
wanting 200 per cent.
In the evening five of us, who have been together
since leaving Brisbane, had a jolly Christmas dinner
—about fifteen courses. This was a kind of last
night, for on the morrow we scatter in all directions,
probably never to meet again “ on this side of Jordan.”
The party consisted of a Frenchman, an American,
an Englishman, and two Australians.
Next morning we rose early, as usual, and took
a 20-mile bicycle ride before breakfast. This makes
our mileage in Singapore at least 150 miles, and there
is scarcely anything worth seeing that has escaped
us. After breakfast we climbed the hill in the centre
of the town and inspected Fort Canning. We
ascended the look-out ; this was rather novel, for we
climbed up the inside of an iron mast for 100 ft., and
got a fine panorama of the country. The town is
laid out on the square, and all the roofs are of red
tiles. We next visited the museum, where there is a
splendid collection of tigers, serpents, and alligators.
All the heavy traffic in the town is done by
bullocks, natives of the peninsula. They have some-


thing of the buffalo about them—a hump on the back,
short in the legs, and docile in appearance. The
carts are all the same—two big wheels and a pole, to
which two oxen are yoked, and are driven by reins
attached to a ring in the nose. These animals looked
at us with a wondering stare, but did not attempt to
shy. In the afternoon we boarded the s.s. Khandalla ,
for India, There are only half-a-dozen passengers
this trip, including a Yankee, a German, and a priest
We all have meals on deck together, and make a
merry party.
Along the equator we have equal day and night.
At a quarter to 6 it is quite dark, and at 6 regular
day ; so it happens that the pilot coming on board
awakens us, although dark, and by the time we get
on deck it is bright daylight, and we are in full view
of Penang. This town is smaller than Singapore, but
has the same motley inhabitants. The native name
is Pulo Penang, signifying—pulo, island; Penang,
betel-nut—so called on account of the enormous
quantity of the betel grown here. This chewing of
the betel-nut appears to be one of the worst vices of
the natives of these parts. The women especially
seem to be for ever expectorating a red juice. The
nut itself is merely astringent—something like alum ;
but they prepare it in some manner and make it
palatable. We anchor within 200 yards of the shore,
and are surprised to find about twenty steamers lying
at anchor, with innumerable small craft, which literally


flock around us, in the hope of passengers for the
shore. We got our machines on to a Chinese sampan,
and were propelled to shore. We had some difficulty
in landing there, for the cockleshell of a craft kept
dancing a schottische on the waves, and at least a
thousand natives huddled round to see the strange
things, and as many as could get near the boat
waited to lift them on to the beach to earn a cent or
two. Once on the street we quickly mounted our
bicycles, and left the gaping, jabbering crowd of
semi-naked niggers astern. It was a very hot day—
a dry heat, which seems to suit us better than the
moist atmosphere recently experienced—and we
steered straight off for the Botanic Gardens, a ride of
five miles over a lovely road bounded by palms,
along which our steel steeds seemed simply to bound.
Here at the gardens Nature has aided art in forming
a beautiful spot. It is at the head of a gully that
seems almost impossible to climb out of, on account
of the precipitous mountains that hem it in. We
left our machines and followed a bridle track for half
a mile, and came to the far-famed waterfall. These
falls are in all over i ,000 ft., down which a fair-sized
stream comes careering, dashing, crashing, and leaping
along. The gorge through which this fall rushes very
closely resembles some of the Fernshaw (Victoria)
gullies, but instead of tree-ferns you must imagine
palms with bunches of cocoanuts hanging under the
fronds. The general appearance of this place reminds


us more of Australian scenery than anything we
have seen. We thought of ascending the hills some
3,000 ft. to the hotel or sanatorium, but the heat of
the day decided us, and we passed it, substituting a
long ride under shady groves of palms and delicious
breezes, laden with the perfumes of nutmegs and
spices. The nutmeg trees, like the oranges, have the
flower, the young and ripe fruit all growing on the
same tree at the same time. Between the outside
covering or fibre and the nut there grows the spice
we call mace, and this is also carefully preserved. We
skirted along through miles and miles of this kind of
country, all the while keeping to the flat land, and
occasionally crossing a clear little mountain stream
that tumbled down from the precipitous hills close by.
We avoided drinking water as far as possible, for
the milk of the cocoanut is far safer, and two cents
will procure one that quite satisfies our thirst, and
would afford a meal for three or four. They are not
like the hard chokey stuff we are used to in Victoria,
but have soft and juicy kernels.
After four hours in the saddle we followed our
wheel-tracks back to the city, but dismounted en route
to watch the natives extract oil from the betel-nut
and grind rice. Their process reminds one of the old
Biblical illustrations, and appears to be 1,000 years
behind the times. The rice was put into the hole on
top of a stump, and two oxen hitched to a beam
walked round. The upright inside the stump


ground the grain. The ponderous concern, being all
made of wood, without any lubricant, creaked fright-
fully, and when the rice was ground the thing had to
be unshipped and the flour baled out with a ladle.
This gives some idea of the primitive customs of
these islands.
The Chinese are a great deal in advance of the
native races ; they are hardworking, and a far finer
race than we are accustomed to see in Australia,
being tall and very muscular. The jinrikishas are all
drawn by Chinamen ; the other natives are not big
enough or strong enough for the work, and even if
they had these two qualities they would be too lazy.
Penang does not indulge in footpaths, for almost
all the people go barefooted ; we have not seen side-
walks since leaving Thursday Island. The streets
are narrow and shops huddled together, the main
street being a jumble of bullock carts, Chinese
bamboo-loads, jinrikishas, Chings, Malays, and an
occasional Englishman, who all stared curiously at us
as we slowly threaded our way amongst the throng.
Cigars up this way are both cheap and good ; at a
shop here we bought 50 for about gd., and, en passant,
may remark that pipes have been stowed till a cooler
climate is reached, for here cigars are preferable. Our
ride probably covered 50 miles. The roads were
composed of white quartz, worn smooth by naked
feet, and reminded us of the best of Ballarat roads.
We were informed that the island of Penang was the


dowry that a native Maharajah presented to his
daughter on her marriage with an English captain,
but that the British Government refused to allow him
to accept it, and, in lieu thereof, the Maharajah gave
the captain £IO,OOO a year. On the death of this
captain the British Government decided to take the
place and pay a rental of £IO,OOO per annum. Gold
circulation is almost unknown in these countries, for
the natives get hold of every sovereign they can, and
either convert them into jewellery or string them into
necklaces for some of the princesses.
Just after seeing the old year (1888) out, we came
to anchor off Rangoon to await the tide. The water
all round was dirty yellow, although no land was
visible, showing the immense quantity of water the
Irrawaddy pours into the bay. This river is several
miles wide, with flat banks and swamps extending
for several miles. Entering the river we pass
Elephant Point, and see the glittering dome of the
Great Pagoda 23 miles away. We spent most of
the afternoon inspecting this pagoda, which is the
finest in the world, but has at present a huge bamboo
scaffolding erected around the upper part to repair
damage done by recent earthquakes, which struck
down the cupola, a kind of umbrella that surmounted
the structure. This was studded with jewels of great
value—diamonds, sapphires, rubies, &c.—and made a
great scatter; but all were collected, and are being
restored, for the Buddhists are taught to believe that


stealing anything from a pagoda is a crime that will
be most severely punished.
Buddhism seems to be a really good religion, for
the people are taught that every good act will be
rewarded and every bad one punished in the next
world. They are Unitarians, believing in one God,
and their commandments are five in number—viz.,
must not kill, nor steal, nor commit adultery, nor tell
lies, nor drink intoxicants.
The earthquake that visited Rangoon only partially
destroyed the sacred places—viz., Buddhists’ pagoda,
Mahomet’s temple, and the English cathedral. These
three religious houses were treated alike, the spires
of each being damaged, and the rest of the town
buildings escaping.
To return to the Great Pagoda. This is situated in
the city, on a hill artificially made. The first entrance
is guarded by huge idols, some 40 ft. high. On
passing these we were somewhat astonished to see
several hundred pairs of boots in rows, and began to
think it was holy ground ; but seeing two Europeans
going ahead with feet covered we followed, and found
that Europeans were allowed in with boots on. We
mounted several flights of stairs, and walked along a
large hall, with pillars on each side, for about a furlong.
Each side was crowded with Burmese, selling wax
candles and toy gods ; and last, but by no, means
least, with beggars of all descriptions, mainly blind or
maimed.


On reaching the grand square from which the
pagoda rises—370 ft. to the top —we were fairly held
in wonder, for the whole concern was a mass of gold,
and, according to accounts, the gilding is very heavy,
and hundreds of thousands of pounds have been
expended on it. All round the base, which covers a
good few acres, are innumerable idols, images, gods,
&c.. with their attendant crowds of religious wor-
shippers all bowed to the ground in deep devotion,
and chanting some weird, drawling song. Many of
these pagodas are most beautifully carved and in
perfect repair; others apparently 1,000 years old,
and much in need of repair—these were erected by
Buddhists to worship in during their lifetime, and at
the death of the owner are allowed to fall into decay
and ruin. Many of them have large bells, all written
over with strange hieroglyphics in Burmese—one is
10 ft. high. The Great Pagoda is surrounded by a
wall and a moat. It was captured by the British in
1852, after a stubborn resistance, for the king of the
Burmese held the wives and children of his soldiers
in his possession as a guarantee that his troops
should fight heroically.
We spent next morning visiting the timber mills
of the Bombay-Burmah Trading Company, and a
Chinese firm of Tsee Shain Lone ; at the latter place
we were delighted to find elephants at work. They
are used to draw, roll, lift, and pull great heavy logs
about ; they have natives perched on their heads,


who direct them with a small cane; they work
steadily and move great logs two or three feet in
diameterjand 20 ft. or 30 ft. long, apparently with as
much ease as a man would handle a log of firewood ;
their main work appears to be hauling these logs to
the circular saw and then pushing them with their
tusks till the saw has traversed through. They use
their trunks and tusks, and if a log wants rolling
they just put their huge foot on it and give a shove,
which sends the log over several times. When logs
require pulling any distance a couple of chains are
fixed to them, and the elephants pull in the ordinary
way. These animals were the biggest we had seen,
being 11 ft. or 12 ft. high.
The markets of Rangoon took up most of the
afternoon. There we saw a mass of humanity buying,
selling, bartering, and wrangling over every kind of
article, but food and silks appear to be the most
dealt in. Roughly estimated, there were a thousand
stalls. Crows appear to be the natural scavengers of
the place, and flock round in myriads ; they are very
tame and most audacious in manners, flying down
and snatching the natives’ food when their backs
are turned. The Burmese go in most extensively for
tattooing themselves. The men have their legs as
low as the knees beautifully marked in imitation of
embroidery. This appears to be done with the
ordinary blue Indian ink, and on their bronze skins
just looks like a garment; the upper part of the


body is tattooed with red ink, so that altogether the
Burmese is a pretty boy. The red ink part has no
particular design, but, made up of separate figures,
gives the idea of <! transfers.” The Burmese woman
is exempt from this, but no male is considered a
man unless so tattooed. The Zoo here is not a very
large concern, but contains some fine monkeys and a
huge serpent in a cage, on which some wit had stuck
“No admittance.” This reptile was over 20 ft. long,
and lives on rats. As a rule, people do not hold
much sympathy towards these “ little varmints,” but
one cannot help feeling sorry to see half-a-dozen of
them huddled in a corner, knowing that, as soon
as the snake woke up, their time had come; you
could almost discern the abject terror in their faces.
The next item of interest was a white elephant, but
this was a regular fraud ; for, unless told it was a
white elephant we would not have known the differ-
ence. We expected to see a really white animal,
but found that there was no such thing, the white
elephant being very little different from the ordinary
mouse-coloured ones. The distinguishing marks are
pink round the eyes, pink toe-nails, and very light-
coloured ears.
Next day, at 6 a.m., Mr. Regan kindly showed us
over the jail. At that time 3,445 prisoners were
confined there, but often the number is over 4,000.
We believe this is one of the largest prisons in Her
Majesty’s dominions. The prisoners were working


at various trades, such as printing, carpentering,
bootmaking, and twenty other kinds of work. Per-
haps the most novel thing we saw was a huge
treadmill. This wheel supplied the power for the
establishment, and a long shaft, with pulleys and
lathes, was worked by this means. The wheel was
about 100 ft. wide and 8 ft. in diameter, and ninety
prisoners were walking up the side of it. They work
a quarter of an hour on and the same time off. We
were deeply impressed by this animated scene and
the continual clank of the chains, for all the prisoners
are ironed to prevent escape. After a term of good
behaviour the chains are knocked off and a ring
round the neck, with a ticket, substituted ; and also
one round the ankle. For misbehaviour they are
placed in solitary confinement and have to work for
their meals. This is a kind of grindstone, with an
indicator outside the cell, thus—
and no food is supplied unless the
work has been done. If hunger
does not bring them to their senses
the lash does. After breakfast
we went for a long ride past the
lakes in Dalhousie Park, where delightful serpentine
roads wind along the banks for about 10 miles in
all. We passed a great washing-ground where crowds
of natives were standing up to their knees in water
beating the clothes out on the rocks; they were
swinging them high about their heads and banging


them down hard enough to break every button to
atoms. Another interesting relic of bygone days
was the crucifixion trees. There were originally
seven, but only five remain, and at this spot many an
unfortunate has paid the penalty of his misdeeds;
persons of royal blood were clubbed, it being con-
sidered wrong to spill their blood. On New Year’s
Day we saw a dawar or levee at the Town Hall. The
road was lined by native troops for over a mile, and
then the regulars, headed by two bands, came along
like a piece of machinery, their red coats and perfect
marching showing up the native regiments. We saw
a large body of Madras infantry just returning from
Mandalay, where they had been fighting native
robbers or Dakoits. These soldiers were delighted to
get home, and the scene was a most animated one,
for several thousand natives dressed in bright loin
cloths and turbans lined the streets. The Irrawaddy
is a somewhat dangerous river, for the tide rises about
24 feet, and ebbs at the rate of 7 miles an hour. The
wharf was lighted up by electricity, which attracted
millions of insects—in fact, the air was thick with
them.
The rainfall of Rangoon averages 100 inches yearly,
and that of Moulmein 200 ; but, incredible as it may
seem, the largest rainfall of the world is recorded in
Siam, where no less than 50 feet, or 600 inches, has
fallen in the year.


CHAPTER V.
INDIA.
We are steaming up the Hooghly River, nearing
Calcutta. The pilots of the river are regular “ swells;”
they are, however, very efficient men. This river is
merely one of the mouths of the Ganges, but for all
that is several miles broad at the entrance. The
banks are studded with native houses and high
thatched roofs, and occasional groves of palm and
banyan trees. On passing Diamond Harbour the
stream narrows. The most dangerous place is
“James and Mary Sands;” these have proved fatal
to a number of steamers, and before reaching them
every officer and man is called to quarters in case of
emergency. Several forts are passed, and some large
jute and cotton mills. On entering the home stretch
—Garden Reach—the steamer is turned round, and
goes stern foremost for the last few miles, because in
this way she is more readily handled, for the river
simply swarms with steamers of all sizes, and large
four-masted sailing vessels ; whilst the native craft,
loaded with earthen pots, rice, grass, hay, timber, and
bricks, almost fill any remaining space.
We have no trouble with the Customs here; the
passengers are only required to sign a printed form


that they have no firearms, and then everything is
passed in globo.
On the wharf thousands of natives are trying to
get a job carrying luggage. We got ours away to
Spence’s Hotel, where we obtained “shake-downs”
only, for Calcutta is full up, owing to the winter
festivities. It was quite chilly at 6 o’clock next
morning, when we mounted our wheels and pedalled
around on the splendid roads of Calcutta.
We first rode through the Maiden, a large open
park surrounded by mansions, from which, no doubt,
Calcutta got the appellation of the “ City of Palaces.”
We scarcely think it deserves the title, for the greater
part of the city consists of native houses, and these
are dirty, squalid, and vile-smelling to a degree. We
got into one of the bazaars, and kept riding along
different streets for an hour and a half, and saw in
most of the places fires burning for breakfast cooking,
and the smoke just creeping out of the doors and
windows, for they do not aspire to chimneys. This
mingled with the foggy atmosphere ; and as the fires
are made of dried cow-droppings, one can form a
good idea of the perfumes in a crowded street not
more than 10 ft. or 12 ft. wide. Then, again, a large
number of anciently dug tanks exist, and these are
full of stagnant water, in which people wash clothes
and bathe. We spent some time at Fort William,
erected for the defence of Calcutta at a cost of two
millions sterling. This appears to be too close to the


town, for if the enemy got within range of the fort
the town also must suffer. There are 600 guns of
various sizes, but most of them are old-fashioned.
This fort can accommodate 10,000 soldiers; the moat
is 50 ft. wide by 30 ft. deep, and surrounds the whole
place. The Maiden, already alluded to, is nearly two
miles across, and intersected by wide paths and
shady avenues ornamented by a number of statues
showing good execution—in fact, one of the most
striking features of Calcutta is the large number of
statues one sees when riding round. The post-office,
near which the “ Black Hole” was situated, is a
magnificent building ; and, in fact, all the Govern-
ment buildings are. truly palatial. In the afternoon
we rode down Garden Reach, past the immense
palace of the King of Oudh. This monarch was
brought down from Oudh, on the quelling of the
mutiny, as a prisoner, and this palace was built for
himself, wives, attendants, and hangers-on, to the
number of about 1,000.
The buildings for the most part are dilapidated, for,
since the King died, two years ago, a great portion of
the place has fallen into disrepair, and although not
more than 30 years old, certainly appears nearer 100
years, for the bricks, and especially the mortar, used
in Calcutta are very poor in quality, and soon scale
off. We crossed the Hooghly in a native boat and
strolled round the Royal Botanical Gardens, where
300 natives are employed in keeping the extensive


grounds in order. We saw the large banyan tree.
This monster stood by itself, and from the placard
we learnt it was 100 years old. The trunk measured
42 ft. round and the crown of the tree 850 ft., whilst
the aerial roots were 232 in number. These roots
droop from the branches, and as soon as they touch
the ground strike root; and so the tree spreads, and
in time one tree becomes quite a grove.
Next day we visited the Howrah Jute Mills, and
were shown right through by Mr. Terrier, the manager.
These mills are about the largest here, and to Aus-
tralians will appear colossal. The inspection occupied
several hours. The total number of hands is 3,500,
almost wholly Bengalese—not more than 10 English
altogether. We saw the whole process, from the time
the jute reaches the mills till it is turned out in bags
of various qualities. At the time of our visit, orders
were in hand for Australian woolpacks and American,
Egyptian, Burmahan, and European cornsacks. The
main factory is 350 ft. broad by 1,000 ft. long. Five
hundred weaving-machines are at work in this room,
besides a lot of carding-machines, which are attended
to mostly by boys, who are as quick as thought—
in fact, the eye cannot follow the little hands when
taking off the full reels and replacing empty ones.
Perhaps the most complicated part of the process
is the machine over-hand sewing of the seams ; the
work these machines do is simply marvellous. The
whole of the process is done by machinery, which in


some cases seems almost human in its action. The
power is derived from three separate steam-engines,
the largest being 1,000-horse power. Surrounding
the factory are the workshops—for on the premises
all kinds of machine-making, carpentering, moulding,
&c., is done ; and in addition two of Tangye Brothers’
powerful steam-pumps always have steam up ready
in case of fire. The company, finding the steam-
power insufficient, have sent home for a 1,500-horse
power engine, which they hope to have erected soon.
The wages paid may be of interest. Weavers get
6s. Bd., ordinary workers 45., and women 2s. Bd. per
week. They work from daylight till dark all the year
round, and the machinery is in motion all day long,
each workman being allowed three hours for meals.
All the work-people appear to be well contented with
their lot, and are now earning twice as much as they
used to in their own way of living. This one com-
pany gives some slight idea of what English capital
has done for the natives. Only fancy 3,500 people,
each receiving 100 per cent, more than they used to,
and this the result of one firm only. The remainder
of the day was spent at the Zoo. The weather was
quite cool, with heavy fogs in the early morning, so
we looked forward to some pleasant rides.
Next morning we were up at daylight and ready
with our trusty steel horses to commence touring in
India. Calcutta was soon left behind as we bowled
along a good metal road to Barabet. We had


procured maps at the Government Survey Office, but
to our disgust found the roads were marked entirely
wrong. Although only 15 miles from the city, no
English was spoken, but we had primed ourselves
with at least twenty questions as to road, direction,
distance, . food, drink, &c. So on the advice of a
baboo, or educated native, we kept straight on at
Habra, and then found we had been misdirected, and
could only reach Ranagat by retracing our way, 16
miles,- or else going to Bongong and taking a branch
train, which latter course we decided on. We rode
47 miles in six hours, the last 20 miles being thick
with red dust. When we alighted from the train the
station-master kindly made us tea and pancakes, and
then we rode away with the whole village at our
back wheels. We crossed a river by a ferry-boat,
and this landed us on a good road, so the miles
began to fly behind us ; but again the map lied, and
we had to retrace our way and cut across huge sandy
stretches, but we kept going as fast as we could,
for the jungle was rather dense in places, and we
had no wish to make the acquaintance of ferocious
game thus early in our trip. Squirrels and monkeys
scuttled across the road in front of us as evening
drew in. Reaching Kishnaghur, we went to the house
of Mr. G. D. Graham, the district superintendent of
police, a most hospitable man, who treated us to a
splendid dinner, including a dainty little dish of
ortolan—a small bird, but quite a delicacy. We got


beds at the dak bungalow, and at 10 o’clock Mr.
Graham came across to see if we were comfortable.
We had ridden 64 miles that day, and slept like tops.
After chota hazree, or early breakfast, next morning
we ferried across the Jeelingheet River, and then for
20 miles had to plod and ride through nasty sandy
country. Four and a half hours brought us to
Debogram, where we got a couple of cocoanuts, and
having given the village something to talk about for
a week, we pushed on ; but the road began to diverge
in various tracks, and at last we found ourselves on
an unmarked river, so decided to follow the compass
in preference to the map. We crossed by a bamboo
raft, and at 2 o’clock found a little village, where
we dined off curds, milk, and native sweetmeats.
Having ridden 48 miles we reached a travellers’
bungalow, or rest-house. This differs from a dak
bungalow, for no food is supplied, but merely affords
shelter against jackals, tigers, and other wild animals.
We managed to buy two fowls, 12 eggs, and 3 lbs.
of rice, and made a substantial meal; but the customs
of the country are very funny, for we had to kill the
fowls ourselves, and then had three fellows to cook,
wait, and clear away. It seems to be against their
religious scruples to do almost anything, for the man
who prepares the food won’t bring it to table, and so
on. That night we asked the bungalow-keeper if he
had any wine or spirits. He had arrack from the
palm, and country wine from fermented rice. We


tried the latter, which tasted more like smoky gin
than anything else ; so we swallowed a nobbier each
as a nightcap, for we had no bedclothes. The effect
of the spirit was peculiar. We lay on our couches
by candle light, and talked of travellers’ yarns, of
cobras crawling along the bungalow rafters, and tigers
peering in at the door, till Stokes dropped off to sleep,
and reveries took me back to Australia. I was just
about to blow out the candle when Stokes suddenly
sprang from his bed to the floor, as though a mighty
cobra had touched him. The native wine had caused
a genuine case of “ snakes.” All day long we have
been much amused at the natives. Those on the
road who see us coming invariably start and rush off
to the nearest scrub, but others who are working in
the rice or mustard plots do quite the reverse. They
scramble over all intervening objects to get a nearer
view, and come quite close up, having apparently
seen it is only a “ ponka gharrie,” or foot-carriage.
Almost all the natives carry the hubble-bubble pipe.
This concern has a cup at the top of a one-foot stem
that is set into the shell of a cocoanut. This nut is
three-parts filled with water, and the smoke is drawn
through the water before entering the mouth. They
smoke a kind of native mixture of tobacco and bark,
and for the small sum of a pice—equal to }(d. —
enough is procured to last for thirty long smokes.
The concern is passed round the group, each in turn
gluing his mouth to the shell and sucking a few


whiffs, and then passing it on. The better class have
elaborate pipes of silver, with long stems.
We polished off the remainder of the chicken
next morning and started off along a bad road for
Berhampoor, which is the largest place met since
leaving Calcutta. We rode up and down the narrow,
crooked streets, in the hopes of seeing an Englishman
amongst the throng, but without success. Two miles
further on, however, we struck a dak bungalow, and
soon had the keeper scurrying round for food. Then
the postmaster came along to see us, and brought
whisky and cigars.
We came across a cannon in a peepal tree. This
remarkable concern appears to be very old and is
covered with Persian writing, and is supposed to
have come from Dacca. The gun is 17 ]/ 2 ft. long
and 5 ft. girth at the breech. It appears that the tree
has grown from a seedling, and lifted the gun as it
grew, till at the present time it hangs 5 ft. from the
ground, and the tree looks like a man with the gun
under his arm.
We then got along very nicely by a good red
gravel road, following the course of the river, and
leading through many little villages and dense jungle.
In one of these jungles we heard a great row, and on
dismounting found it was caused by an immense
crowd of baboons. These fellows jumped tremendous
distances from bough to bough and jabbered away
like mad. They were, however, comparatively tame,


and are worshipped by some of the natives ; and woe
betide the person who kills one, for he is a “ gone
coon,” for a whole tribe of natives has been known to
seek vengeance.
Along the road to Moorshedabad there are plenty of
tanks, built by some Rajah who wished his name per-
petuated, and we think he was a sensible man, for in
this hot land water is a boon. On entering the above-
mentioned town we met the Nawab’s string of ten
elephants out for an airing. These unwieldy monsters
were being paraded down the road, and as we came
along would persist in looking right at us, although
the riders wanted to turn them off. Their chief use
is for hunting tigers in the jungle, for the present
Nawab is an inveterate hunter. There is no such
thing as a nabob; it is nawab, and they are always
Mahommedans. Rajahs or marajahs are Hindoos.
Next we came to a gate guarded by some native
troops in gaudy uniform ; they seemed too surprised
to answer our broken Hindostanee; so, thinking it
belonged to some governor, we rode inside, and
found ourselves at the palace of the great Nawab
of Nazim. We rode right up and saw the Nawab’s
tutor, who gave us all the information we wanted
and kindly invited us to dinner. This we refused,
having quite recently dined, and we likewise had
to refuse his kind offer to show us through the
palace, for we had to go a long way, and the building
was so large it would have taken half a day to go over


it. The building occupied ten years to erect and cost
,£170,000. The main building is 425 ft. by 200 ft,
and 80 ft. high. The largest room is the banqueting
one, being 19 1 ft. by 55 ft.
The tutor sent a native to lead us through one of
the three guarded gates and direct us on our way.
Our wheels then bore us along a road winding round
the edge of a river to a large bazaar, where we were
ferried across the stream, and at 2 p.m. reached
Bhagwangolia, the last few miles having been
through indigo, mustard, and tobacco fields, with the
everlasting crowd of natives. The crowd cannot be
wondered at, for there are 900 natives to the square
mile, and not more than one European to the same
space. At this village the postmaster said the road
continued due north the other side of the river to
Bhyrub, and that the great Ganges was only six
miles off. On the strength of this we shouldered our
wheels and waded across the river, with the whole
population after us. On mounting on the other shore
the natives shook their heads when we asked about
the road, and we could not get anything out of them ;
and what was more, we could not find the road or
any semblance of it, for the whole country was
ploughed up. We wandered up and down for several
miles, and then struck across the fields, but all to no
purpose, for no road existed, and hundreds of urchins
were running after us wanting backsheesh. Two
hours of this sport was enough, so we re-forded the


river and once more faced the crowd, which was
larger than ever. The bungalow at this place had
the roof fallen in, and the night’s shelter looked blue ;
luckily, however, we heard that two sahibs lived a
mile away, so we made off, and found it was the
Messrs. Rose’s silk factory. We rode up to the
door and said we were two genteel beggars, desiring
food and shelter, which these gentlemen most good-
naturedly afforded, saying their place was never
closed to Englishmen. The accommodation was
rough-and-ready, but none the less acceptable. We
sat round and spun yarns about the wonderful
country we had left behind. At midnight we turned
in, and later on a great storm burst, and the thatched
roof failed to keep the rain out, and so we passed a
rather uneasy night, waiting for flashes of lightning
to light up the bungalow, so that we could see our
boots were in a dry spot. After the storm came a
calm, broken only by the disconsolate howl of the
jackals which prowled about the jungle close at hand.
In the morning Mr. Rose told us we had just about
come to the end of our tether, for since the railway
had been opened the natives had cultivated the roads,
or else the jungle had obliterated them.
Next morning we rode 10 miles to Akrigung, and
were ferried across the Bhyrub, and came on the
mansion of Mr. H. Pope. This good man’s reputation
for hospitality seemed to be a by-word round about
the district ; so we, trading on information received,


called and presented our cards. The good host out-
did himself, and his lady was equally kind, insisting
upon our spending the day, as they were expecting
the superintendent of police and his wife, Mr. and
Mrs. Meares. Mr. Pope owns two indigo factories, a
river frontage of 30 miles, with fishing rents.
In the afternoon we mounted horses of flesh and
blood, and rode over to inspect an indigo factory at
Marcha. Our mounts were big “ whalers,” with
splendid action. This term is always applied to
Australian horses in India.
After this, as there were no roads ahead, we
boarded the steamer, and steamed down the placid
Ganges, which our imagination had painted as
abounding with crocodiles and dead bodies ; but, like
most of the yarns one reads, and the stories told of
India, we were doomed to disappointment. The
Ganges is uninteresting to a degree, for the banks
are just on a level with the surrounding country, and
in many places were sparsely timbered. In some
places the river was too wide to see clearly to either
bank. At Damakdia we left our machines and pro-
ceeded by train to Siliguri, but the narrow gauge of
3 ft. 3 in. made the train rock too much to get any
sleep. We next took the Himalayan tramway, one
of the most extraordinary of its, kind in the world ;
the line is 2 ft. wide, with smooth rails, but the way
the 12-ton engine pulls up inclines of 1 in 19, round
curves and corkscrew bends, is a marvel. The rail-


way engineer cannot take much credit for the survey,
for he simply followed the course of the old road,
which is one of the best pieces of engineering we
have seen, for there are certainly more difficulties to
contend with than are to be found in the Blue Moun-
tains or Jenolan Caves, New South Wales. The
road rises all the way, and the grade at its steepest
is iin 19, but the average is about lin 28. From
Siliguri the line runs along among tea plantations,
and the rise is scarcely perceptible till Sukna is
reached, and then the little tiger of an engine begins
its work. A coolie sits on each side, dropping sand
on the line, and in case of frost they jump off and
rush ahead, scattering sand to make the wheels grip.
The first real eye-opener is at Agony Point, where
the line runs round a loop and crosses itself, the
diameter of the circle being about 60 yards. At this
point there is a clear drop of 1,000 ft., and the track
is laid on the very edge, to give as big a circle as
possible. As may be imagined, the scenery is grand.
Four hours’ travelling brings us to Kurseong, 30
miles, the train only averaging miles. Here
there is a large hotel, with some 16 acres of ground
attached, on which the hotel vegetables are grown.
We are now fairly in the tea district, and, look which
way you will, nothing but rows of the tea bush meet
the eye, the holdings varying in size from 50 to 1,000
acres, and the aim of the planter appearing to be
to get as much variety of altitude as possible. The


Lloyd’s Bank have a 1,000-acre plot here ; the altitude
ranges from 3,000 ft. to ft., the great benefit
being that the tea does not ripen at the same time,
and so a less number of pickers suffice.
Leaving Kurseong—altitude 5,000 ft.—we begin to
feel the cold pretty severely, for a nasty wind has
just started to blow that brings the clouds across the
mountains every few minutes, obscuring all the scene;
but they are only momentary, and the rugged
Himalayas seem to burst out all the grander for
being temporarily obscured. At Ghoon we reach
the highest elevation, 7,800 ft. This is probably the
highest point in the Eastern world where a loco-
motive has been taken; but on the Rockies, in
America, there are several stations over 10,000 ft.
above sea level. The views are simply magnificent.
There are the Kinchinjunga Mountains, 28,000 ft.
high, and Mount Everest’s snowy pinnacle towering
heavenward 29,002 ft, visible now and again through
rifts of cloud, and standing there in the heart of
sunny India, a pure white sentinel of undefinable
grandeur.
Having crossed the highest point, we fall gradually
down to Darjeeling, which signifies “ the holy spot,”
and truly there is an unmistakable charm about the
place. The town has many big buidings, and the
Governor-General of Bengal has his country seat
here.
At night we strolled round, admiring the glorious


landscape by the light of a full next
morning rose early to take photos. It was a fine
clear day, and as we journeyed along in the train we
gazed on the snow-clad Kinchinjunga Range shining
in the morning sun in spotless purity. It was 45
miles distant, but looked not more than 12 miles. As
the train toiled up the grade we looked down on the
impenetrable belt of mounts as far as the eye could
reach. At one station where we stopped, the native
children flocked round, calling out in a continuous
sing-song drawl, “ Salaam, sahib, backsheesh but it
is best to button up your breeches pocket, for if you
once give them anything you get no peace till the
train starts off. For instance, at Calcutta, we got a
few pice with change from some small purchase, and
scattered them among some dirty urchins, who
showed their gratitude by following us round till we
hailed a gharrie to get clear of them.
The hill natives, by the way, are a much finer race
than those of the plains. The former are of better
physique and have a more intelligent look, whilst
the women and children have a real healthy blush
spreading over their bronzed countenances ; although
the cast of their features is somewhat of the Japanese,
still they possess good looks, and that makes some of
them very pleasing. They jabber away in Bengalese
that upsets our recently acquired Hindostanee, al-
though some understand us, for the two languages
are much the same. At Kurseong we leave the train,
69 'V
Importunate


to pay a call on some friends and enjoy a ramble
among mountain paths, with miniature waterfalls
dashing down almost every gully. In the wet season
this must be a delightful place, for many of the
cascades would certainly have a good volume of water.
Next morning, as there was no train till the afternoon,
we strolled along the road. We had glorious views
of the snowy range, and then afterwards saw the
plains stretching away right down to Calcutta, 300
miles away. Of course we could only see about 100
miles, but from the altitude of 5,000 ft, on a clear
morning, the sight was beautiful, extending over moun-
tains and valleys, forests and plains, along which
numberless rivers coursed, glistening like snail tracks
in the morning sun. We .amused ourselves taking
photos, of the zig-zags, but the railway avoids them
to a great extent ; in fact, it is a marvel how the
engine manages to crawl round on a continual grade.
In one place the track takes two curves, travelling
round almost in a circle, the radius of the smaller
curve being 22 yards. It was a continual down
grade, and in eight hours we had covered 25 miles ;
the walk, however, being so much down hill, was an
easy one. We rested half an hour till the train came
and took us straight back to Calcutta, picking up our
machines en route.
On Sunday we attended St. Paul’s Cathedral
morning service. This is a splendid place of worship.
The floor is all marble, and the windows are stained


violet, casting a very pleasant subdued light. The
choir performed the high choral service splendidly.
After service we waited and had a good look at the
tablets and other records of great men “ gone before.”
This place, seems almost a Westminster Abbey for
India, on a small scale, for the walls are covered with
memorial stones—a good many relating to the mutiny.
An especially striking one was of black marble,
erected to the memory of - sixteen officers of the
Bengal Engineers killed in action: It was a work of
high order for the busts of the men were in bas-relief
on sixteen medallions, and raised views of some of
the more stirring episodes, such as blowing up one of
the gates, were also depicted. We spent the after-
noon at Intally, and devoted next day to shopping,
and in the evening we were entertained by a bachelor
club and spent a first-rate night.
Unlike other Englishmen in India, we have done
without a servant, for they are a nuisance ; and if
two able-bodied Australians cannot get on without a
darkey at their heels, there must be something wrong
somewhere. It is one of the stupid customs that
every visitor is supposed to at once engage a man,
and .wherever the master goes the man follows. If
the master dines out, the servant follows and waits
upon him. We would not let any native servant
pack our trunks, for they are notorious rogues, and
when we wanted anything we preferred to tip a hotel
waiter.


Next morning we mounted our wheels and set out
on the big ride across India. The Hooghly bridge of
boats was soon crossed. This peculiar bridge is built
on boats, with immense flaps at either bank, thus
allowing the centre to rise and fall with the tide. At
Howrah, a suburb on the opposite bank to Calcutta,
we found threading our way through the immense
conglomeration of native carts and masses of human
beings by no means easy, and, further, the road kept
dodging in and out round the bazaars in a fashion
that raised very serious doubts as to whether it was the
Grand Trunk road at all. In answer to inquiries, we
were told “ cedah,” which means straight; so we rode
along for fifteen miles, and found we had lost two
miles by keeping to the old road instead of the
new cut. We passed along through Chandernagore,
Hooghly, and some minor native towns without a
dismount for forty miles in four hours, when we
reached Khanyan Post-office. Here we sent a native
up a cocoanut tree for some nuts and then rode on
to the fifty-second mile-post, and halted at a beautiful
tank and had sandwiches. Mentally we patted each
other on the back, feeling that if the road lasted
good we would do something worthy of the “ sunny
south.”
A few months before,- two Calcutta cyclists had
ridden 500 miles along this road, averaging 50 miles
a day. They rode safety bicycles and carried a
tremendous lot of luggage—for instance, their wearing


apparel consisted of four pairs breeches, two pairs
trousers, four pairs stockings, two pairs socks, two
jerseys, two banians, two coats, two pairs slippers,
two pairs shoes, half a dozen handkerchiefs, one W.P.
sheet, a hold-all, and money belts. They appear to
have surprised a good many people by riding 50
miles a day, and we expected from their reports to
find inferior roads, for they anticipated that our big
machines could never do the distance. Under these
circumstances we felt somewhat on our mettle. At
midday we were on our wheels again, and on
approaching Burdwan saw the fine viaduct of 280
arches over which the rail passes, and we also rode
under a magnificent avenue of trees, finishing at
Kidner’s retiring rooms at quarter to 3. A bath and
a good brush removed most of the red dust that
had accumulated on our clothes ; then we rode to
the palace of the Maharajah of Burdwan, and were
accorded the privilege of being shown over the place.
It is a two-storied building, and at the four corners
are towers. The first things that raised our curiosity
on entering were two pleasure boats—these were
paddle-wheeled, worked by coolies bicycle-fashion.
The stairs of the palace were of pure white marble,
the floor of grey and white alternately, whilst the
walls were mostly hidden with long looking-glasses
and oil paintings ; amongst the latter, a huge one
depicted the installation of the late Rajah, and the
portraits in oils of each of our Royal family were


hung around the head of the stairs. There are
numerous smaller buildings around the palace, where
the different relations live. The estate consists of
an immense stretch of country, 73 miles long by 40
miles wide, and pays to the Government a rental of
over It was also from Burdwan that the
English factors received the lease of the ground on
which Calcutta is built.
We rode 80 miles that day. It was a delightful
run ; the road was a bit dusty, but very fine neverthe-
less, and in places took us through lovely avenues of
shady trees, and every few miles we passed splendid
tanks. We started by the light of the moon next
morning, for at this time of the year there is no
twilight whatever ; it becomes light almost suddenly
at 6 a.m. and speedily darkens at 6 p.m. At 8
o’clock we saw a long line of dust ahead, and soon
caught up with the Bth Bengal Infantry on the
march, with baggage-waggons. The line extended
over a couple of miles, and the buff uniforms were
heavily coated with red dust.
After keeping the saddle for three hours we halted
for breakfast, and then ran into Runijung and rested
for a couple of hours, and then off to Burrakur, the
road showing signs of slight undulations, which we
gladly welcomed. We met with a rougher road,
broken by coal transit, and on either side we saw
mines and long strings of bullock carts. The bullocks
have a hump on the back, and are evidently intended


for the work they do, as they require no harness, the
pole merely having only a bamboo crosspiece with two
pins through. This bamboo goes across the neck, and
the hump acts as a buffer to pull against. They are
guided by a man, who sits on the pole and twists the
tail in whatever direction he wants them to go. We
have been the innocent cause of many a poor beast
getting unmerciful twists, for on catching up to a
waggon we whistle and sing out “ Hut jao” (“ Look
out.”) This is quite sufficient ; they clear like mad
things.
We reached Burrakur at 5 p.m., after riding 82
miles in the day. The dak bungalow affords good
accommodation, and having ordered a meal, we take
a look round ; but the road is black, and so is the
air, for coal is everywhere, and the only things that
seem to stand out from the sombre surroundings are
the four Hindoo temples and the fine bridge of 13
spans that crosses the Burrakur River. As night
closes in, the fires, with their clusters of natives, give
a weird and unnatural aspect to the view. The
natives make a fire in a pot or basin ; on this they
cook rice, or huddle round to get warm, and they all
appear to feel the cold severely, their loin-cloths being
spread round their heads and bodies. Poor beggars,
theirs does seem a hard life. A heavy gale awoke us
at 3 a.m. next morning; so we started earlier to
escape an expected storm. The road was bad for
eight miles, and the north-west monsoon blew right


in our faces. However, we rode for twenty miles,
and then took shelter under a bridge, allowing the
tail of the storm to sweep over. This lasted an
hour, and then we gaily spun along, leaving the
inky clouds behind. By this time we had got fairly
amongst the hills, but they are not too steep to ride.
The highest peak is Mount Parasnanth, 4,480 ft., but
the road rises by easy grades. Black buck is very
plentiful about here. We rested two hours at
Doomrhi Bungalow, 55 miles, and while there got
struck for an exorbitant price for food—our dinner
costing us equal to 5s each. The chowkidar was
very near getting a thrashing for this extortion.
From Doomrhi we had 12 miles, all rising, to Bugod-
hur. Here the bungalow was surrounded by about
500 natives for an hour, during which time we were
the admired of all admirers. As the hills, the wind,
and rain were against us, our mileage for the day was
only 68. From red gravel the road had changed to
white quartz, which glittered in the sunshine, and a
very remarkable contrast was to be seen in the black
rocky hills. These rose quite close to the road, and
were covered with stunted timber and rugged rocks
as black as coal. Our map appears to be an excellent
one, although 70 miles to an inch ; but we know
enough of Hindostanee to get along.
Another daybreak start and we wheeled along
through a number of small villages, composed of
about 100 houses, mostly made of mud walls and


tiled roofs, huddled together, with only narrow alleys
to pass through. A 30-mile spin brought us to
Burhi, a good-sized town, and four miles further on
we crossed the Burrakur River for the second time,
dismounting for the first time that morning. The
road, so far, had been first-rate, though somewhat
hilly.
At Danuwa Pass, three miles of downhill was soon
left behind, and then the usual ten miles an hour was
kept up till the “sixties” were reached, and the
broken bridge at the Teelajan River necessitated a
quarter-mile walk—the first since leaving Calcutta.
There are many fine bridges in this part of the
country. Towards dusk we brought our revolvers
into play on some sneaking jackals, and a few
minutes afterwards rode into the village of Mudunpur,
a day’s ride of 90 miles.
At this place things looked ugly, for it was only a
little native village, with no bungalow ; so we made
for the local policeman’s, and asked to be allowed
food and shelter, for which we would gladly pay.
The postmaster also came up, and between these two
worthies we were well treated. They gave us beds
and supper, and would on no account accept pay,
stating they were “ ever our humble servants.”
It might be mentioned that, when we dismounted
at the police station, the native policeman was most
devoutly praying to the setting sun. We stood by
with uncovered heads till he had finished. Perhaps


this simple act had something to do with the treat-
ment we received.
We are invariably saluted by the natives, who
generally bow and say “ Salaam,” which we duly
recognize, but the native police all bring themselves
up to attention and salute a la military with great
precision. The helmets we wear happen to be just
the regulation pattern, so that it is quite possible we
are mistaken for officers.
Not wishing to trespass further than necessary on
the kindness of the good-natured Mudunpurites, we
sneaked off next morning while they slept, and rode
15 miles before breakfast to Arungabad, only to find
the men in charge of the bungalow had no food save
native roti (bread). This stuff is made from rice
flour, like large pancakes, one-eighth of an inch thick,
and hard as slate. We began to very seriously think
of broaching a tin of preserved meat that we kept as
a “ last shot in the locker,” when we were delighted
to find another Englishman in the place—a Mr.
C. A. White—on official business, travelling with the
luxuries of Oriental life, and he set a fine breakfast
before us and we fell on our feet again. An hour’s
stay, and our new friend sent us on our way rejoicing,
with a plump roast chicken in a hamper.
A couple of hours afterwards we met with a very
serious obstruction in the shape of a stone causeway
across the River Sone. This reached about three miles,
and had to be walked, waded, and some little way


ridden. The wading on slippery rocks was difficult,
for the slabs of stone measure about 6 ft. long by i ft.
6 in. wide, and present a smooth surface. Usually
this river can be crossed by a boat, but at present,
like the other streams, it is very low. We passed two
canals, and gained a view of the great "temple perched
on a hill at Sasseram. The morning had been frittered
away, for, notwithstanding the beautiful road, we had
ridden only 40 miles. At nearly I o’clock we struck
a bungalow, where the khansamah laid before us a
splendid dinner of biscuits, fish, ale, and coffee, and all
in the space of 10 minutes, so that by 2 o’clock we were
off again, this time at a swinging pace, bowling along
a smooth level road for 40 miles. It being a perfect
day, calm and cool, we decided to run through to
Benares, another 38 miles away. This we did, and
accomplished a ride of 118 miles by 9 p.m., 78 of
these miles being ridden between 1 o’clock and 9 p.m.
Thus our daily average for five days was 88 miles.
An amusing incident happened at the first dis-
mount after dinner ; we wanted a drink, and waylaid
a fellow with a huge pot of water just coming from
a well. He manifested great excitement lest we
should touch and contaminate his horrid old pot.
After some persuasion he poured some into our flask.
By this time a crowd of fat naked children had
collected. We were eating mixed biscuits, with lolly
on an occasional one, and of course threw some to
the kiddies, but to the elder minds this was unclean


food, and they scolded the youngsters severely, but
the poor little beggars didn’t know or care anything
about religion, and scrambled for the tit-bits eagerly.
There is a plentiful supply of water in India, either
by rivers, wells, or tanks. The wells are to us sour
grapes, for each man takes his own pitcher, draws
the water with a rope, and clears off, and would as
soon fly as think of a Christian touching it. Even
a local postmaster, whom we asked, kindly gave us
water in two earthen bowls, but he smashed them up
directly we had finished drinking. This man spoke
English fairly well, and was most polite, and it
surprised us that the old superstitions should cling
on. We only make about four dismounts in a day’s
ride, usually selecting a nice tank at which to halt.
Many of these tanks have little temples on the
banks, with ugly idols, and daubed with paint.
Altogether India is a most extraordinary place.
We never trust the chowkidars to waken us in
the morning, for we have, as a rule, to go and pull
them out of bed to make the tea while we dress.
They promise all kinds of things overnight, but
unless you actually see it done, you may take it for
granted they will neglect it. With so little daylight,
the loss of half an hour in the morning is a serious
matter, for directly the sun dips it is quite dark in
less than ten minutes, and then jackals, squirrels by
the thousand, monkeys, small foxes, and other minor
animals sneak out for their night’s prowl. In day-


light, only the squirrel is to be seen. These little
creatures are about the size of a rat, with a bushy
tail, prettily striped, and all day long they are
scurrying across the road and up trees on either
side.
Benares, or the Holy City of India, is a remarkable
place. The best view is gained from a boat on the
broad waters of the sacred River Ganges. To get
there we started at half-past 6 in the morning in a
gharrie, and then took a boat and rowed up and down
the river, watching the myriads of people standing
in the water praying, and throwing in flowers and
other little offerings. It was a wonderful sight. The
buildings are mostly of bluestone, and long rows of
stone steps run down to the water. Up and down
these steps a continuous stream of people were
passing to say their daily prayers, while in the back-
ground rose the towers and parapets and the pinnacles
of the city. It was a very chilly morning, and the
way aged and infirm people squatted about in the
water was quite enough to kill them.
The various rows of steps, numbering altogether
70, are called by different names, with ghat—meaning
wharf—tacked on to each ; they extend some very
considerable distance.
On the way back we visited the Golden Temple,
Monkey Temple, and Holy Well, and about a dozen
other sacred things, all huddled together in the
utmost filth, and full of disagreeable odours ; in fact,


the impression one gets of Benares is very far from
favourable, and directly the main streets are left,
a guide is absolutely necessary, for the alleys twist
and turn in all directions. These alleys are about
4 ft. wide, and packed with three or four-storied
houses. Through these paved alley-ways dogs,
cattle, and teeming crowds of human beings throng.
We left Benares at daylight next morning, and after
some difficulty struck the right road, for the environs
of the holy city are a regular network of beautiful
wide streets, all lined with avenues of trees, and the
surface of these roads is perfect. In these parts the
roads are made of a kind of stone called kunker.
This is found some few feet under the surface, and
makes a perfect road, which the natives know how to
keep in repair. For instance, when the wheel track
gets a little worn, the place is picked out in an oblong
patch about 2 in. deep, with sharp perpendiculur
sides, and then the kunker stone is rammed in, the
surface moistened, and the siftings beaten down on
top ; so that immediately the road is finished it is
fit to ride on. The men pick and ram the metal, and
the women carry the water on their heads in large
earthen pots. The 80-mile road to Allahabad is like
that above described, and is really perfect; in fact, it
is an ideal one, being level and shaded with trees
that meet overhead. We could not travel fast on
account of a continuous stream of people, all carrying
big jars, Chinese fashion, on their way to the mala, at


the junction of the Ganges and Jumna rivers. This
is a religious festival that occurs every year on a
small scale ; but every sixth and sixteenth year the
sanctity of the river is supposed to increase, and then
people flock there by the million. The legend attaching
to the Ganges is that a priest is, and has been for
ever, standing at its source, and that the water pours
straight from heaven on his head, and this constitutes
the sanctity of the stream. The mala is a most
extraordinary religious revival, when many people
make most absurd vows to Buddha, and torture
themselves almost to death, to atone for misdeeds.
For instance, some have placed their arms straight
over their head, clenched the hand, and vowed never
to take it down again. For about a week the agony
would be intense ; but after that, of course, the fellow
could not well take it down even if he wanted to.
Others torture themselves by lying on spikes and by
going through various other painful processes. They
are then supposed to be holy, and their countrymen
throw them pice and other small coins. This mala,
no doubt, accounts for the number of deformities we
have seen along the road soliciting alms. We had
to shout and whistle as we rode, for the swarm of
human beings continued all the way. We got over
the first forty miles inside four hours, and rested to
eat some sandwiches at a tank in which at least fifty
were bathing, but the water tasted all right. On
mounting again we found the splendid road continued,


and this enabled us to ride another 40 miles in four
hours, landing us at Laurie’s Hotel, Allahabad, a
distance of 80 miles, in eight hours, including
stoppage of one hour, and only one dismount in
80 miles. Just before reaching the city we crossed
the Ganges by a dilapidated old bridge of boats that
required some tramping. We had plenty of variety
along the road, for both camels and elephants stalked
along, carrying huge loads on their backs. The old
native part of Allahabad seems much the same as the
other cities we have seen, for the houses are crowded
closely together, and the streets are narrow and
crooked, except in the European part, however, where
the streets are wide, well kept, planted with avenues
of trees, and the buildings have large compounds
surrounding them. We ascended the high tower of
the Mayo Hall, and looked through the Town Hall and
gardens, not forgetting the fort situated at the junction
of the two rivers. In the early days an underground
passage is said to have connected Allahabad with
Benares (80 miles off). At present it has fallen in, but
still can be traced for a few hundred yards. We had a
big ride before us for the next day—l3l miles between
dawn and dark; so we got sandwiches ready over-
night, and at 6 a.m. we were off, but made two false
moves on the wrong road before we settled down to
steady riding. We had no desire to break records or
anything of that sort, but we knew we would have no
time to spare if we were to reach Cawnpore before


Left Allahabad ...
6 a.m.
Hrs. Min.
Miles.
Rode till
9-15,,
3
15 ..
40
Rest (breakfasting) 9.45 „
0
30
Rode till
12.15 p.m.
2
30 ..
• 30
Rest at Haswa
12.30 „
0
15
Rode till
245 ,,
2
15 ..
• 3o
Reached Cawnpore
5-3° „
2
45
• 3i
Total
... 11
30
131
dark, when the wild beasts commence to prowl
around, and there was no halting place before that
town. The surface of the road was splendid, but the
sun’s rays were pretty hot, and for long stretches there
were no avenues of trees to shade the way; neverthe-
less we accomplished the whole distance—l3l miles —
in eleven hours and a half. These are Bengal miles,
and by counting the number of revolutions of our
wheels between the milestones we found they were
considerably longer than the English ones. Our
record was as follows :
When we had ridden 67 miles we saw a large
village some miles to the left, and thinking it
was Futtlepur we turned off; but found on reaching
the station it was Haswa, where no food could be
procured, and all we managed to get was a mug of
buffalo milk and smoky water. We are, however,
always glad to get smoky water, for it is a sign
it has been boiled. The natives use the open-
mouthed brass pitchers, without cover, which of course
allows the water to become smoky. After riding 108
miles we reached a rest-house, but could procure


nothing but water, so we broached our tin of pre-
served meat which we had carried 600 miles in case
of emergency.
Entering Cawnpore, we kept too far south, and
found ourselves wandering about the old city,
crowded with bazaars and huddled-up houses. This
was somewhat annoying, as we had been directed on
our way by an Englishman. En passant , it may be
said that an Englishman never acknowledges ignor-
ance, and however vague his notions of direction are,
he invariably fires away as though he knew the
country by heart. Many an additional mile has
been forced on us in this way. Well, in due course
we find ourselves at Lee’s Hotel, Cawnpore. The
old man, now 63, took an active part in the mutiny,
and fights his battles over again on the least provoca-
tion, He is a man of the old school—and none the
worse for it—rough and ready, just the man for a
Boniface. Next morning we visited all the scenes of
the terrible massacre of Cawnpore, starting with
Wheeler’s entrenchments. The lines of these are all
marked off with posts. This was done on the
recommendation of the Prince of Wales on his visit
to India. These stone cubes are 3 ft. high, and have
“W. E. 1857” cut in them. Right in the centre of
these lines the memorial church is situated, built with
great taste and beauty of design, whilst the inside
is a work of art. The melancholy events are too
visibly brought back to mind by the great number of


tablets all round the church ; the back of the altar
is all filled in with white marble slabs bearing the
names of officers. Close by the church is the well
where several brave men lost their lives endeavouring
to obtain water for the women and children. Next
we visited the barracks, close by which a monument
is erected over a large number of slain, and then we
rode to the Memorial Gardens, where a small cross
marks the site of the bungalow where Nana Sahib
ordered the town butchers to go in and kill the
English prisoners, and hard by is the memorial
erected over the well where both the dead and dying
were cast. The marble sculptured figure of an angel
with two palm leaves stands right over the well, and
this is surrounded by a high stone parapet, beautifully
pierced and worked. Within a stone’s throw are
two cemeteries, also filled up with the bodies of
unfortunates. Next we go to Suttre Choura Ghat,
where the remnant of Wheeler’s force took to the
boats. The place is very dilapidated now, and the old
Hindoo temple at the steps is too unsafe to enter.
Lower down we saw the spot where the boats put off,
and when fairly out in the stream, at a given signal
the boatmen leaped overboard and swam ashore,
leaving the poor wretches to be shot down without
any chance of escape. In the afternoon we were
prisoners in the hotel, for a great downpour of rain
flooded the treets, and the wind had the strength of
a cyclone, for it broke limbs off the avenue trees,


and the drive in the Memorial Gardens was impass-
able till cleared. These cyclones account for the gaps
in the avenues we have noticed. At half-past 6 next
morning, the last day of January, we were in the
saddle, and off along a cross-road for Lucknow, 50
miles distant. Our first check was at the bridge over
the Ganges. Here the natives wanted to hold us
in bondage, for goodness knows how long, on the
off chance of a goods train coming. We objected
strongly, and, as they would not open the gates, we
lifted our bycicles over, and, in spite of six of them,
mounted and rode across the rough bridge, a mile
long. We saw a long line of hackeries there waiting,
but we rode five miles before the train put in an
appearance, and even had it caught us on the bridge
there was any amount of room to pass. The 50
miles took five hours, the roads being rough and
heavy. Just before entering Lucknow we saw the
walled enclosure, a quarter of a mile square, called
A’lam Bagh. This appears to be just in the state
the siege left it, for the old wall is crumbling away ;
the top has been roughly emblazoned, and the whole
place shows signs of a heavy siege, for round shot
have ploughed their way through the walls and
towers. This was Sir J. Outram’s position when, on
Campbell’s retreat, he was left to keep the rebels at
bay. Within these grounds lie the remains of the
great man Henry Havelock, under an obelisk about
30 ft. high, which has been erected by his wife. We


continue our ride to the Imperial Hotel, and engage
a barouche to do the place as well as possible in the
four hours we allow ourselves to stay.
Lucknow is the largest of the Indian inland cities,
and, as far as we have seen, undoubtedly the loveliest.
Of course the native quarters and the “ silver bazaar”
are crowded, but they don’t interest us. Our first
place to visit was the Residency, and we stayed
an hour, being shown all through and round by an
old soldier, “ who fought in it, sir.” The grounds
cover an area one mile and a quarter round, and are
laid out in great beauty, with flowers and shrubs
growing luxuriantly; but the great charm of the
place is that the buildings are left exactly as they
were, with the addition of a small marble tablet
inserted every here and there, with some simple
inscription, such as “ Germain’s post,” “ Anderson’s
Garrison,” “ Here Sir H. Lawrence died.” The
whole place is simply riddled by cannon and rifle
ball. In some places a round shot had passed through
two walls, each 3 ft. thick, and then spent itself in
the third. Just at the back of the Residency is the
beautiful white marble Lawrence Memorial Cross,
30 ft. high, on a small raised mound, and further
across the “Johannes House,” where the man of that
name, with unerring aim, killed a large number of
our men ; but he paid the penalty, for Captain
Fulton worked for a fortnight digging a mine under
him, and then up he went, with seventy companions.


The old cemetery within the compound was gone
quickly through. Here we saw the memorial stone
of Henry Lawrence, a flat slab of marble, raised only
a couple of feet above the ground, and there lay a
beautiful wreath of fresh flowers. The inscription is—
“ Here lies Henry Lawrence, who tried to do his duty.
May the Lord have mercy on his soul. 28/6/1806.
4/7/1857.”
After this we visited the Great Emambarah. The
entrance is through a facsimile of the great gate at
Constantinople. The place is grand in the extreme,
and has quite recently been repaired and re-decorated.
This is the place that yielded a great amount of
treasure when captured, the throne and many parts
being cased in gold and silver. The big room is
163 ft. long, 53 ft. broad, and 50 ft. high. The
roof is supposed to be one of the most beautiful
specimens of Indian architecture. There is also a
peculiar octagonal room, with a height of about 50 ft.
These rooms are lighted by huge chandeliers, which
rise from the ground in the shape of a pine tree.
The palace has been built over 100 years, and history
says it was a kind of relief work during the great
famine of 1784.
We saw several other buildings, including the
Martinere College. In the afternoon, at 3 o’clock,
we wandered off on our wheels against a heavy cross
wind ; but we don’t much mind, for we are in capital
condition and enjoy a little hard work now and again.


Thus we ran miles in hours, having only one
stoppage, at a little village called Oonao, where we
could not induce any Hindoo to get us food or
drink, they being so afraid of contamination with us
Christians, although they have no scruples about
gaining contamination from our money. We were
two hours riding the last 14 miles, owing to the swarm
of bullock hackeries on the road. These fellows
have not the slightest idea of keeping to one side of
the road, and although our lamps shone out brightly
and we were bawling out “ Gharrie,” we had to
make many hasty dismounts, and once or twice
narrowly escaped getting mixed up with bullocks’ or
buffaloes’ horns, for both kinds of cattle are driven in
the hackeries. Our day’s ride was 100 miles, when
we regained Cawnpore at night. Here we were
detained a day against our will, awaiting our trunks,
which have been five days coming 200 miles by rail.
At 5 a.m. next morning we were bowling along in
tjje dark, having started thus early in anticipation of
a north-west gale, and by 8 a.m. we had ridden 33
miles, so dismounted to discuss sandwiches. While
doing so the trees began to bend, all of a sudden a
howling head wind sprang up, and for the rest of the
day we were battling with our enemjr, At the 50th
mile we halted at a bungalow, but nothing either eat-
able or drinkable was to be got, so we pushed ahead,
and tried a native village, with no better result, the
only eatables being raw peas and beans mixed. This


fare not being to our liking,.we again faced the wind.
At Chahram a fair was in progress, the road swarming
with men, hackeries, and camels with huge panniers
of miscellaneous goods, and also drawing waggons.
Everybody seemed to have fancy ware for sale.
Thanks to two native police, who cleared a track for
us, we rode right through at a slow pace, the police
hitting everything out of the way in a most savage
manner, evidently seeing “backsheesh ” would follow.
As far as we could see there was nothing eatable for
sale. Shortly after this we saw a native in his little
shop baking “ roti ” (native bread). We dismounted to
buy some, but were refused point blank ; he would’nt
defile himself by having any transactions with us.
The situation was most exasperating, and if there had
not been 200 people following us there is no telling
how matters would have ended. As it was, we
tightened up our belts and moved on, hoping that
India would be the only country where a man with
money in his pocket could not buy food. At the 75th
mile we tried another bungalow with the same result,
and after riding 88 miles we halted for the day at a
bungalow called Mabigunj, the chowkidar promising
all kinds of food, but eventually “ roti ” and potatoes
fried in oil and chillies were all he could produce.
With the remnant of the “ roti ” in our pockets
we again faced the wind next morning, but seven
miles an hour was all we could manage, for the dust
was meeting us in clouds. We tried about six places


for food unsuccessfully, and at 2 p.m. got to a dak
bungalow at Etah, 50 miles. Here we had a regular
feast, including four plump chickens, and also carried
a good stock forward, although we had to wait three
hours while the repast was being cooked. Then we
rode on to a little bungalow, where two stretchers
and a bare table was all the accommodation, but a
good thick carpet transferred from the floor to the
bed made us snug, for the cold at night is consider-
able, and the weather taken right through is glorious
—not a bit too hot. The sun here has a way of its
own, for, being north of the equator, it rises in the
east and follows round the southern part of the sky,
instead of the northern, as we have been used to.
Our only trouble has been the monsoons, and they
appear to come right along the mighty steppes from
Peshawur, some 2,000 miles away.
Next morning, the wind was just as strong, and
seemed cold enough to have come straight from the
snowy Himalayas. We shoved our wheels hard for
four hours, and covered 32 miles, reaching Allyghur,
a large city, with roads leading in from all direc-
tions. The first object of interest was a beautiful
masonry tank, with temples round it, and some
large trees that simply swarmed with monkeys
and flying foxes. On two trees alone there must
have been at least 500 monkeys and 200 flying foxes.
The trees were almost covered, and the jabber
they made was astonishing. Here we renewed our


acquaintance with Killner, the railway caterer, with
satisfactory result, and after an hour’s rest pushed
on to the fair. This was attended by 50,000 natives,
although it was but 10 a.m. The fair was just out-
side the town, and covered about 50 acres. Here
streets of tents had been erected, and running-tracks
and horse-racing courses laid out, whilst thousands
of horses, cattle, mules, and camels were for sale.
Elephants are quite common on the road, but there
were none for sale.
The jugglery exhibited by the natives was mar-
vellous. We saw naked men swallowing knives, and
another one brought about 20 large glass marbles out
of his mouth. But the most astonishing of all was
the mangrove trick : a small pot was apparently filled
with loose earth, on which a little water was poured,
and to our surprise a small tree started up, and grew
before our eyes. Altogether the dexterity displayed
by these semi-naked natives was astonishing.
Leaving the fair we found the wind, if anything,
stronger than before, and so we took it in turns to
lead alternate miles, the back man thus getting
advantage of a break wind. In this manner we
persevered all day, passing through Chola, Sikun-
drabad, and Dadree. At the latter place we got
refreshments from a native shanty.
We had been 12 hours on the road, working hard,
with the poor result of 70 miles to our credit, and
ness just upon us. Luckily for us, however, as the sun


dropped the wind did likewise, and we determined to
go through the remaining 48 miles to Delhi and risk
for once night travelling.
We rattled away at a 12-mile-an-hour pace and kept
it up for four hours, running through the huge gates
and massive walls of the celebrated mutiny town at
10 p.m., making 118 miles, and for a genuine hard
day’s work that run will be long remembered. Some
idea of the trouble the wind causes cyclists may be
gathered from this, as we took 12 hours to cover 70
miles against the wind, and, immediately it ceased,
rode 48 miles in 4 hours, the latter part of the ride
being far the easier. To describe Delhi properly
would take far more space and time than are at our
disposal, for it teems with interesting memories and
associations. Amongst our rambles we saw the
Kashmir Gate, where, on the 14th September, ’57,
the storming columns passed through, the Bengal
Sappers having blown the gate down with bags of
powder. Lord Napier, of Magdala, has set a slab in
the wall giving the names of the brave fellows who
lost their lives at the taking of this gate. Passing on,
we went through the cemetery, Ludlow Castle, and
Queen’s Gardens, where the stone statue of an ele-
phant bore the following notice :
“ Of unknown antiquity, brought from Gwalior by Emperor
Shah Jahan ; afterwards broken into a thousand fragments by
Emperor Aurangzib, it remained buried and forgotten for a
century and a half till discovered and set up here in 1866.”


The formidable and frowning forts and walls of
Delhi, the great girder bridge over the Jumna, the
various bazaars, teeming with humanity, Ashoka’s
Pillar, dating back to 300 8.c., the Mutiny Memorial,
with the names of the officers and non-commissioned
officers who lost their lives in their country’s service,
must all be passed in a word.
Jani Masjid, the celebrated mosque, the largest in
India, built with a strange conglomeration of white
marble and red sandstone, took us an hour to see—
its minarets and domes, its magnificent gateways and
corridors, not forgetting the sacred relics, which of
course all travellers have to see. These consisted of
a part of the Koran written in Kufik, a print of the
Prophet’s foot on a marble slab, and a hair of his head,
&c. This building took six years to build, and gave
constant work during that time to 5,000 stonemasons.
The Black Mosque, the Pearl Mosque, and the
King’s Palace were visited in turn, each more beauti-
ful than the other, the latter especially being very
rich in mosaics and inlaying. The marks of the
bayonets are still to be seen in the walls, where the
soldiers, on the fall of the place, tried to pick out
the precious stones which adorn the walls in filagree
patterns.
On the 6th February we effected the usual daylight
start, running due south. It was a beautiful sight to
look back on the great city we were leaving, with
its thousands of minarets and domes, all glittering


white in the morning sun ; whilst on either hand
were to be seen the remnants of mighty buildings
many centuries old. A whole book could well be
written describing the scenes we passed to-day, for
Delhi is some thousands of years old, and the ruins
through which we are riding cover the immense
space of 45 square miles. There have been seven
distinct cities, each one built by a new king, and
now they are all in ruins ; but scattered broadcast
throughout the whole area are objects of the deepest
interest to any searcher after antiquity. The iron
column served to show that these ancients knew a
great deal about ironwork, and must have had
advanced appliances—for this great column, 6oft.
long, and containing 17 tons of iron, was cast in one
piece, and to this day remains as one of the most
curious monuments in India.
We would have liked to loiter among these sur-
roundings—perhaps coming from such a new country
this feeling was intensified, and every few miles we
would slip out of the saddles and wander through
some immense ruin, with not a living soul visible,
and an utter feeling of desolation pervading every-
thing. After getting past the ruins, we quickened
to make up for lost time, but had to slow down to
allow 1,000 of the 3rd Dragoon Guards to pass—it
was an imposing sight, more especially as they were
preceded by a string of 500 camels, all loaded with
provisions and camp materials.


The towns we passed through were of no import-
ance till, at 6 p.m., we reached Muttra, 96 miles.
This city extends for 1 miles along the banks of
the Jumna River, and has streets beautifully paved
with large flat stones; whilst the buildings are very
fine, and the numerous forts, mosques, and bazaars
were very interesting, for we had followed our usual
custom of procuring a guide and gharrie, and were
thereby enabled to see the various places of interest
without loss of time.
From Muttra we wheeled into Agra, passing the
famous Sikandarah, or Akbar’s Tomb. The gateway
is 60 ft. in height, composed of a reddish sandstone,
very rich in scroll-work and mosaics.
At Agra we saw the Pearl Mosque, the fort, and
many lovely marble buildings ; but far above every-
thing else, in point of beauty, stands the Taj. This
building, about which so much has been written, is
one of the few places that seemingly has no blemish.
All writers agree that its pure white marble, its
beautiful inlaying, and design of infinite beauty is
unsurpassed in any part of the world ; and yet the
whole of these writers combined fail entirely to
convey the beauty of the Taj to the reader’s mind.
It is one of those places that must be seen to be
understood ; the dazzling brightness of the sun on its
dome and tall minarets, the beauty of the fountains
and grounds, the great art displayed in the carved
marble, that is so perforated and worked that the


light is admitted through it in a subdued way ; and
the tombs, with their strings of inlaid lotus flowers—
the Indian emblem of life—are all the most beautiful
imaginable. The Taj took an army of men 17 years
to build, and looks to-day as fresh as it did 300 years
ago. It was built by Emperor Shah Jahan as a tomb
for his favourite wife, Mumtaz Mahall, which means
the chosen of the palace.
Leaving the Taj Mahall and the other beauties of
Agra behind us, we rode to Dholpur and presented
letters of introduction to the Rana, and were treated
in Oriental luxury and splendour, the day being
entirely set apart for our enjoyment. Continuing our
way early the next morning, we found the road rough
and hilly till forty miles brought us to Gwalior. This
is famous for its immense and almost impregnable
fort, that stands on a natural rock, with precipitous
sides, 300 ft. above the surrounding town. This rock
is 1 miles in length, varying in width from 300 to
900 yards.
Gwalior, from the hasty glimpse we got of it,
seemed a veritable hive of humanity. Its Hindoo
temples and other imposing buildings almost made
us wish to stay, but the crowd that surged around
the wheelers could be counted by the thousand,
and the curiosity they showed seemed to have no
bounds. We got a bit mixed up in the bazaars,
and were occasionally jostled by a gharrie, camels,
elephants, and people without number, till at last,


thankful enough, we passed the great wall, and, once
through the gate, we sped along to Chorepurra and
slept at the bungalow, after 90 miles in the saddle.
The next day we rode 109 miles, halting for the
night at Kumraj. During the day we had a great
race with a native prince. His two horses seemed to
fly. We had a strong wind behind, or should other-
wise have been badly beaten ; as it w r as, we rode 15
miles in an hour, with him close behind urging his
horses, but not allowing them to break from a trot.
This part of India is very interesting, and, being
independent territory, we keep meeting crowds of
native troops, many of them armed with flintlocks.
It is also heavily cultivated with poppies, jute, and
paddy, and the population is very thick, especially at
Shahjahanpur, Dewas, Indore, and Mhow, all of which
places we passed through, reaching Simrole the second
evening, with 196 miles to our credit for two days’
riding.
We left Simrole at half-past 6 a.m., and for 37
miles to Nerbudda River had a rough and hilly road.
Then we halted at a bungalow for five hours, and on
proceeding found the very worst road we had experi-
enced. The result was we walked and rode, making
slow progress, till 10 p.m., when we were glad to
reach Khandwa. Foxes were the chief animals seen,
and these being about we had no fear of leopards,
jackals, or tigers, for the cunning reynard keeps re-
ligiously out of their districts. Our day’s ride was


70 miles, and as it was a severe ride we decided to
pass the next —St. Valentine’s—day lounging round
Khandwa, for it is a large town, and what is most
satisfactory to us, a refreshment station.
Next morning the writer was laid up with a most
severe attack of dysentery, which in this country they
call by the ugly name of cholera, and our wheeling
came to an abrupt close a few days earlier than we
expected, for further exposure till quite recovered
would have been suicidal. In two days the writer
fell in weight from 12 st. 8 lbs. to 11 st. 6 lbs.
India is a lovely country for cycling, for the roads
are good, level, and shady. The main troubles we
came across were in obtaining food, for oftentimes
when the natives were selling eatables all round us
their caste prejudices forbade them dealing with
Christians. It is a grand country for game. We
have seen herds of deer and birds of all kinds, includ-
ing waterfowl, which, however, is seldom eaten, owing
to the over-plentiful supply.
Bombay was reached just in time to engage the
last two berths in the Bengal , bound for Egypt in five
days’ time. Bombay is a much larger place than
Calcutta, and seems more English; perhaps this may
be accounted for by its being the great Parsee centre.
The Parsees are the educated class, and all speak
English, Here the hotel waiters all know English,
whereas at Calcutta it was quite the reverse ; in fact,
there an Englishman seemed quite a foreigner. One


night we had a moonlight excursion round the har-
bour, which is some 15 miles in extent and five miles
wide, with from 10 to 12 fathoms all over, affording a
sheltered and magnificent anchorage. Thousands of
vessels—mainly dhows—lie at anchor, and present
quite a forest of masts. Extensive wharves line the
shore. These are called “ bunders,” and in addition,
there are a good many docks; the largest—the Prince’s
Dock—cost over a million Stirling, and covers 30
acres.
Bombay stands on a peninsula, though usually
called an island, and at present the population is
about 850,000, which ranks it in point of numbers as
the second city in the British Empire.
There are some very fine streets, lined with trees,
and splendid buildings of a substantial kind. There
is nothing very rectangular about the place, and
immediately the main street is left you find yourself
in crowded bazaars, where the houses run up from
three to six stories, and every story aspires to a
balcony, or series of little porticoes around each
window, that project and give the place a quaint
appearance, the effect being added to by the extra-
ordinary amount of colour daubed on, blue being the
prevailing tint. The ground floors of almost all these
places are shops, and the salesmen sit cross-legged
among their goods. A very annoying feature of
Bombay is the number of persistent beggars that
pester a stranger. A woman with a baby in arms, or


even before it gets that far, seems to consider she
has a perfect right to follow you, crying out for pice ;
but worse still are the deformed wretches, who, if you
stand anywhere for a minute or two, will crawl up
like snakes from goodness knows where. The streets
are crowded with a great variety of humanity, all
jabbering and chattering like parrots. The city boasts
of a good many temples, but not many mosques. On
Sunday morning we had a spin round the principal
parts of Bombay, where many fine buildings exist.
The park was crowded with young Parsees, who are
apparently being consumed with an intense desire to
become expert cricketers ; but a dozen of our boys
would certainly play thirty of the average we saw.
In the afternoon we paid the docks a visit, and went
from there by tram to a fire that had just started in
a big cotton-spinning mill. The way the fire engines
leisurely made their way down was most extra-
ordinary, and our tram actually passed three en route.
At the fire all was chaos ; the residents all round
were removing furniture into the street, and the
firemen, with provoking sang froid , quietly got
the hose coupled, and, of course, by the time they
had a stream on the burning building the fire
had such a hold that all they could do was to
check the spread ; and so the mill was gutted and
damaged to the extent of three lacs of rupees. We
went to St. Paul’s Cathedral in the evening—a
decidedly ugly building, built in 1718, and its out-


ward look would almost strike you that it had not
been cleaned since. The interior is, however, very
interesting, for a great number of tablets decorate the
walls right up to the domed ceiling, and, in addition,
most of the aisles are covered with slabs in memoriam.
A great many of these are the work of the most cele-
brated English and Continental sculptors, and bear
devices and bas-reliefs of incidents in the life of the
deceased. A very conspicuous one, and a beautiful
work, representing a naval encounter, is the “ Hardinge
Monument,” placed in St. Paul’s to consecrate the
memory of Captain G. W. Hardinge, R.N. This
extraordinary young officer, 28 years old, while in
command of the San Furenzo, 36 guns and 186 men,
chased and brought into action the enemy, La Pied-
montaise, 50 guns, 566 men, which was the terror of
the Indian seas. For three successive days he fought
till he captured the big ship, but fell mortally wounded
just as his brilliant conquest was achieved. Many
other tablets were equally interesting. Leaving the
cathedral we spent some time at the Victoria Ter-
minus. This is generally reputed to be the best railway
station in the Eastern Hemisphere. Of course in
England there are one or two larger, but nothing can
compare with it from an architectural point of view,
and it also covers a great deal of ground.
Next day we took a six-mile trip by sea to the
Elephanta Caves. The launch was a regular tub,
and as a good breeze was blowing it was a wet trip,


and she rolled so much that the funnel very nearly
rocked clean out of her. We were two hours steaming
the distance, and then the worst was we had to land
in a heavy sea in a veritable cockleshell of a dingy.
From the landing-place, which consists of a string
of stepping-stones of concrete, we mount a tedious
stone stairway, erected by one of the native princes
in 1854 ; this leads to the entrance to the central
hall, 90 ft. square, supported by 26 pillars. These
caves are merely a Hindu temple that has been hewn
out of the solid rock ; the supports must have been
gradually worked round, for they are the natural
rock and unjointed. The whole of these columns
are carefully chiselled, and noble but faded and
mutilated statues adorn the walls. These also are
chiselled out of the solid rock, and have never been
removed from their natural place.
There are three gigantic heads opposite the
entrance, representing Brahma, the creator ; Rudra,
the destroyer ; and Vishnu, the preserver. These
three figures appear to run through most of the
images, but the whole of them seem to be a wild
nightmare of the sculptor realized, for four, six, and
even eight arms are attached to some of the figures.
Several of them have the cobra looking into a
woman’s face, which suggests there is something of
the Eve about it. At the same time these caves are
haunted by the deadly cobra and other reptiles, and
hundreds are killed each year.


Amongst the chief places for a visitor to see at
Bombay are the Parsee “Towers of Silence.” This
is certainly one of the most extraordinary places we
have visited in India. It is a burial-ground, and is
beautifully situated on the top of Malabar Hill, which
overlooks the sea and also the city. These towers
are five in number; the largest is 276 ft. in circum-
ference and 25 ft. high. They are used for disposing
of the Parsee dead. Access is gained through a hole
in the wall near the top of the roofless tower. The
naked corpses are laid in rows. There are three
circles, each capable of holding 72 corpses—the first
for men, second for women, and third for children—
and the centre of the circle is occupied by a well.
The open sky is above, and immediately a body is
laid out, all the flesh is stripped off by vultures, which
hovered around in myriads ; then the sun bleaches the
bones, and they are cast down the central well, where
they are either subjected to some chemical, or perhaps
they find their way into the sea through some subter-
ranean passage, but of this we could not be certain.
About 100 burials a month take place here, and,
although it seems a revolting way, still the Parsees,
being fire-worshippers, cannot dispose of their dead,
like the Hindu, by cremation, and the vulture all
over India is held in great reverence. Still, it does
seem strange that the highest caste, or, at any rate,
one of the most highly educated castes in India,
should accept such a mode.


Most of the people in Bombay appear to live up
to their incomes, and although the actual necessaries
of life are cheap, still luxuries are alarmingly dear,
and servants are a nuisance, for their various castes
have to be studied ; for the man who sweeps your
rooms will not empty your bath-tub, and so on ; and
yet one of these fellows would have a bath and drink
the water afterwards, but for the life of him would
not touch a drop of your pure filtered water.
We did not miss the opportunity to visit Khandalla
—the highest point on the Western Ghauts, which
the people think a great deal of. The journey was
made by train, a distance of 78 miles by rail, but
only 40 miles as the crow flies. The grade rises
1 in 40, and bores a way though 25 tunnels, some
of considerable length ; the altitude from the plains
is about 2,000 ft., and two big Ghaut engines are
used for each train, and also four brake vans fitted
with powerful hand brakes ; they do not use con-
tinuous brakes. The bazaars in Bombay are the
largest and most crowded we have seen in India,
and the stench that occasionally greets the nose is
quite enough to breed fever, and goodness only
knows what it must be like in the hot season. Hotel
rates are reasonable, save for drinks, which are 5°
per cent, higher than Australian, and then every
native expects a tip, no matter how slight the service
rendered.


CHAPTER VI.
EGYPT.
We left India’s sunny shores in the R.M.S. Bengal,
and after five days of beautifully calm weather—just
a shade too warm—we saw the last of the Arabian
Sea, and caught sight of the coast of Arabia. The
shore is brown and barren and lined with a range of
serrated hills—an uninviting aspect.
We ran into Aden late at night and only stayed
three hours, and off again at full speed, for we have
the mails, and waste no time. It appears the
Governor has the right to detain the mail six hours
in case he has important despatches to reply to. He,
however, very rarely has. Six hours’ steam from
Aden brings us to the Straits of Bab-el-Mandeb, and
then we passed between Perim and the main land.
Perim is a British island, and has a, large fort com-
manding the southern entrance to the Red Sea. On
the opposite shore (Arabia) the French have erected
a fort. It has no command over the position, but, in
the event of hostilities, doubtless these two places
would have some fun on their own account. The
first day in the Red Sea was terribly hot, for the red
hills on either side appeared to affect the sun’s rays
and render that luminary stronger than ever. We


put our helmets on, for it seemed hardly safe to walk
under the awnings in a small hat. Abyssinia is on the
one hand and the city of Mocha on the other, famous
of course for its coffee. This city looked of con-
siderable size and densely housed, with exceedingly
tall minarets, where the faithfully inclined repair in
myriads every night and morning. The city is built
of white stone and contrasts strikingly with the dark
brown and barren shore, on which no vestige of green
appears.
Three days in the Red Sea and we have seen more
steamers than on all the other voyages put together,
and it certainly justifies its title of the “world’s
highway.” We have passed seven vessels, and are
congratulating the engineer, for it is usually a race
for the canal—first come, first in—and a day is often
lost by being in the wake of several ships.
Lolling on the forward deck at night is perfectly
delightful, watching the beautiful phosphorescent
waves. For miles around the sea seems lit up with
a pale peacock green, which varies to blue, and gives
the idea of an electric light under the water. One
cannot avoid iced drinks in the tropics, and even the
fruits, blanc-manges, creams, and puddings we have at
meals are iced, and this, together with continual pun-
kahs, makes the meals about the most enjoyable part
of the day. You can guess what the atmosphere is
like, for the heat affects the cold drinks to such an
extent that round each glass at meals the cloth is


sopping wet. We never noticed this in Victoria, no
matter how hot the day.
The passengers on board the Bengal organized a
sports meeting, which lasted over two days, and
proved to be a most entertaining and successful
affair. A collection of 200 rupees for prizes was
handed in, and as we managed to win two out of four
events on the first day, we were very well satisfied,,
especially as the fields contained over 50 competitors.
Our schoolday ideas of the Red Sea were that it
was merely a narrow channel, a hundred miles or so
long. These juvenile notions have been rudely dis-
pelled, but the little speck on the map hardly prepares
one for the fact that Aden to Suez is 1,100 miles, and
after the first day no land at all is to be seen, save an
occasional island, till we enter the Gulf of Suez, and
then the same barren hills on either side present
the most inhospitable shore imaginable.
Before entering the Suez Canal we get a glimpse of
Mount Sinai, 8,593 ft. high. The canal is 100 miles
long, and the width for the greater part is 108 yards.
There are three steamers in front of us and two
behind, making an imposing line. At Lake Tismah
the P. and O. launch meets the Bengal , and we leave
the good ship with our wheels, while the genial
passengers hang over the gunwale and give us a right
good English send-off. We safely landed at Ismailia,
a French town, with no English inhabitants.
After landing we mounted our bicycles and rode


around the streets, which, being composed of white
cement, run very nicely. The Khedive’s Palace, and
everything worth seeing, is disposed of in two hours.
We cannot travel far, owing to the boundless desert
of sand, which stretched away on every hand without
a track of any kind. In fact, even if a good road
were made, the first windy day would cover it a foot
deep in sand. We made ourselves comfortable at
the station till midnight, and then trained off to the
capital, Cairo.
Cairo is the largest city in Africa, containing about
400,000 people. The main drive and promenade—
the Shoubrah Avenue—is the “ Rotten Row ” of
Cairo, and each evening is thronged with carriages.
It has lines of sycamore and acacia trees, which keep
off the sun. Our first place to visit was the museum
of antiquities, which contains the finest collection of
mummied remains in the world, and also a wonderful
variety of ancient relics, dating back to Pharoah’s
time. Perhaps the most interesting of these is the
remains of Rameses the Great. The hair remains on
the skull, and the features of the face are still dis-
cernible, showing a fine Roman nose and good fore-
head. This is supposed to be 4,000 years old.
Rameses’ father also lies beside his celebrated son,
and there are dozens of other great men’s remains
lying around them. Richly carved marble cubes,
used by the ancients on which to slay goats when the
blood was required for sacrificial purposes, are also


here, having quite recently been unearthed at Memphis.
We spent some hours in the Museum, and many
people remain a whole week : there are so many
remarkable things to be seen.
The streets of Cairo being too bad to wheel over,
we get a carriage and a guide for the day. This
is almost a necessity, for the Arabs differ from
the Hindoos. The latter stood and looked at our
bicycles, but the Arab pulls, hauls, and mauls at
everything, and if he can detach a nut or anything,
you may bet he will. The day turned out almost
unendurable, for a strong wind enveloped the city
with blinding dust, so much so that objects at 200
yards distance were invisible. The sand affected the
eyes very badly, causing tears to flow copiously, so
much so that everyone showed furrows down the
cheeks where the sand had been washed down.
First we visited the citadel and mosque. This was
erected by Saladin in the twelfth century, and stands
on an elevated part of the Mokattam Hills. Cairo
swarms with mosques ; they number over 400. The
one within the citadel demands special mention for
its great size. It is composed wholly of alabaster.
From the outside it presents rather plain designs,
except the dome and minarets ; the latter are about
the finest in the city, being very lofty, and tapering
off to a point. At the entrance we have our feet
encased in huge slippers ; the guide and attendants
are barefooted, for ’tis “ holy ground.” The whole


area is of polished marble—it does not show the
slightest sign of wear, to be accounted for, perhaps,
from the fact of all going with naked or protected
feet. Turning from the quadrangle we enter the
great mosque, an immense domed place, richly
carpeted, with walls of alabaster elaborately carved
by chisel. The effect, however, is partially lost
through the many-coloured tapestries, which detract
from the natural splendour of good buildings. The
dome is about 140 ft. high, and from it are
suspended hundreds of globes that surround the
central chandelier, glittering with cut-glass pendants.
Passing on to other scenes, we find the dust unbear-
able, so direct our guide to drive us through the
bazaars in the hope of avoiding this sand fiend, which
had quite obscured the sun, and placed the whole city
in semi-darkness. It is no wonder that a great many
of the natives suffer from sore eyes. The bazaars
were all lit up as though it was night. This is
usually the case, for the streets are fearfully nar-
row, and the houses several stories high ; in some
instances they join together at the top, completely
shutting out the sky. We passed through eight
bazaars, where between five and ten thousand people
were bartering. The Attarin bazaar—the market for
spices—was perfumed with the otto of roses, and
delightful sniffs of Arabian herbs gladden the olfactory
senses. In the afternoon we visited the Khedive’s
Palace, a splendid building, with elaborate floors of


pure marble, beautifully inlaid. The walls of the
ladies’ bedrooms were padded with pale blue satin right
from the dado to the ceiling ; the furniture, of course,
matched it. Then we went over old Cairo and the
pleasure-grounds of the island of Roda, and saw the
place where the infant Moses was hid amongst the
bulrushes.
Next morning, at 7 o’clock, we set out for the
Pyramids, 10 miles distant. We crossed the Nile
river by the iron bridge, and proceeded by way of
Hassim Pasha’s residence, through whose gardens we
rode. Here there were groves of oranges, lemons,
citrons, and olives, heavily laden with fruit. Emerg-
ing from the palace grounds, we passed through a
gateway in the dilapidated wall that surrounds the
city, but has long since ceased to be a protection, for
it is falling down and shows great gaps at frequent
intervals. The little village of Ghizeh is soon passed,
and the road stretches right across the plains—lined
on either side with acacia trees —to the sandhills on
which are erected the Pyramids. We rode right up
to the base of the largest one, and were by no means
disappointed, for it is truly a mighty concern. After
a look round we arranged with the sheiks for Arabs,
and the ascent was begun ; two Arabs in advance to
pull you up, one on to each hand, and a third behind
to shove you up. Helped along thus the summit was
soon reached, after a few breathers, for the steps are
about three feet high. From the top we got a grand


view of the great Sahara Desert, the city, and the
Nile. Then we entered the Great Pyramid and saw
the wondrous tomb, which, by the way, compares
very strikingly against the Taj at Agra. They are
admitted by all to be the greatest and grandest tombs
in the world.
The Great Pyramid standing there, founded on the
rocky bed that, from the distance, looks nothing but
a vast sand range, yet defying the ravages of time to
efface. There is nothing but beautiful symmetry of
outline and huge rugged grandeur that might well
betoken the tomb of a man, whilst the Taj—a “poem
in marble,” so truly beautiful that scarcely an idea
can be formed without seeing it—seems to denote that
it was erected to commemorate the remembrance of
a beautiful and virtuous woman. The height of this
pyramid is 460 ft. and the base covers 13 acres.
Egypt is rather an expensive place to live in ; £2
a day for guides, traps and lionizing is about as low
as it can be done for. At Cairo we visited the tombs
of the Califs, and also the tombs of the Mamelukes.
These places are mixed up in some tortuous streets,
and would never be found without a guide. We also
entered several mosques, which abound in every
street. Our guide is a good sort of fellow and gives
the keepers about one piastre, and if they grumble he
fights it out and we go for the carriage. We started
from Cairo, with a guide, for the buried city of
Memphis, We had to take a trap across the Nile to


the railway station, and then 40 minutes after we
arrived at the Bedrashan Station and proceeded on
donkeys to the ruins. No road exists, and the sand
just resembles the soft seashore ; but our sturdy
little beasts pegged along very well. Each donkey has
a boy, who runs behind and whacks it and otherwise
encourages the animal to move on ; and each time the
boy strikes, the quadruped jumps, and oftentimes
leaves the rider on the sand. When we were fairly
out in the desert my donkeyman’s saddle slipped
round and his moke bolted. The whole party —
about twenty—immediately gave chase. My donkey
led, and just as the escaped donkey’s bridle was in
my grasp my saddle slipped round and left me on
the sand, with two donkeys bolting instead of one.
The indignity of falling off a donkey will take some
time to forget. We passed the colossal statue of
Rameses 11. and afterwards came on the ruined
Memphis, where the whole country has the appear-
ance of being dug up and turned over, and shows
that the Egyptians used the sun-dried bricks of Nile
mud very extensively in their buildings ; it was only
the tombs and palaces that were built of the ever-
lasting granite, which was all brought from some
200 miles up the Nile. We saw the tombs of the
Apis bulls, each bull being buried in a sarcophagus
of granite, beautifully polished, with a huge cover of
solid stone put on. These are so massive that no
idea can be formed of how they were placed in


position, and even now one has resisted all [ efforts- fo
shift it, although not cemented, but simply resting on
top of the tomb.
After an excursion lasting six hours we regained the
Nile, and crossed by a ferry-boat loaded with fourteen
Arabs, twelve women Arabs, eight mules and our-
selves. Heliopolis, or the City of the Sun, was the
last place we visited, and we were glad to get rid of
the mules and return to Cairo, for the saddles made
our legs very sore and stiff.
On arrival at Alexandria we booked passages for
Jaffa by the Russian steamer Lazar sailing in a
couple of days. We then went for a three-hours’
ride on our bicycles and caused quite a commotion.
In the centre of the town the streets are paved with
large flags, like some of the footpaths in Melbourne,
and, being much worn, are, after a shower of rain,
ten times more slippery and treacherous than wood
pavement. During our ride we were much annoyed
by the infernal little Arabs, who ran after us, and
actually several times tried to climb on the back
wheel as we rode along. One of them got his big
toe jammed, and we did not grieve, for the cheek of
these urchins is something a cyclist would scarcely
credit. As soon as you emerge from' the hotel the
car-drivers and donkey-boys swarm round you and
follow down the street, calling “ Him fine donkey,”
and so on, till all patience is exhausted, and finally
you strike at everyone with your stick to keep them
ii 7
Chased by Young .Arabs.-.


off. This appears to be the only way to make them
leave you alone.
This town is more Europeanized than any we
have seen lately, but the bazaars are quite Oriental.
Everyone smokes cigarettes, which are largely manu-
factured. Men, both black and white, masters and
servants, of both sexes, and white as well as native
women, appear to smoke all day. The people also
seem to be terrible gamblers ; at every second door
you will see a group playing, usually backgammon,
but sometimes cards. They pay far more attention
to their play than to their customers. We stay at
the Hotel du Suez, and are learning French on the
double, for no English is spoken.
Alexandria was founded by Alexander the Great,
B.C. 331, in memory of his Egyptian campaign, but it
looks a brand-new place, having been almost recon-
structed since the bombardment. The ruined forts
give a fine idea of what modern guns can do ; by
appearances, the place must have just fallen round
about their ears. The British used 200-lb. conical
shells or hollow shot, and these were lying about,
some in fragments and others whole. They are
about 2y 2 ft. long, and we could only just lift them,
so reckon they were 200-pounders.
We saw Pompey’s Column, a huge affair 100 ft.
high, composed of red granite brought down from
Assouan, and it would be a puzzler how to handle
such a mass now-a-days. Our fellow cabin voyagers


in the Lazaraff were about 12 in number, all French
and Greek except two ladies. We noticed at once the
difference in manners. For instance, the ladies did
not wait for introduction, but spoke right away, and
then the fun commenced, for their stock of English was
limited, and ours of French most decidedly so. The
pleasant intercourse was soon upset, for our boat being
a small one without much cargo, rolled and pitched
about in a manner quite uncalled for, as there was
only a slight swell on. We had a most peculiar lot
of passengers forward ; they numbered 400, and were
Russian pilgrims on their way to Jerusalem for
Easter. They were dressed like Icelanders, all
wearing fur caps and thick top boots, besides over-
coats ; and, further, they were the dirtiest set we had
ever seen. Talk about Javanese or Hindoos, why,
these people were filthy in their habits compared
with their black brethren. On reliable authority we
learned that they leave Moscow with scarcely any
spare clothing, and never change a shirt from the
time they leave till they return, and if you had seen
them searching for insects down each other’s backs
you would have quite believed it. The boat has a
funny cuisine —no breakfast, the first meal being at
noon, and the next at 7 p.m. After eighteen hours
pitching we reached Port Said. The town is built on
a sandbank, and has water on nearly every side. It
seemed very strange to see no wheeled vehicles. Here
you must either walk or ride a donkey, to which the


boys give a high-flown name ; for instance, we had
the option of Gladstone or the Prince of Wales. We
saw a number of drunken sailors mounted on donkeys,
and the spectacle was, to say the least of it, highly
amusing. P'or a small fee we were allowed the privilege
of climbing up 300 steps to the top of the lighthouse,
and got a fine idea of the lay of the country. English
is spoken here by most of the shopkeepers, who walk
out into the street to meet a stranger, and are annoy-
ingly persistent in their attentions. We sailed from
Port Said in the evening with a great crowd of pas-
sengers, and reached Jaffa at 7 a.m. The town is
built on a hill, presenting a mass of houses all huddled
together so thickly that no roads or streets are visible.
This is the worst place for passengers landing any-
where in the Mediterranean Sea, and when at all
rough passengers are carried on and returned by
following steamer from either Beyrout or Port Said.
The steamer that preceded us had to steam off to
Beyrout with a dozen passengers, and then send them
back free of charge by first boat.
We were fortunate in getting a fairly calm morning,
but for all that the boat rose and fell about 6 ft., ren-
dering transfer of bicycles a difficult matter. At the
Customs-shed all baggage was quickly passed save the
bicycles, and these we had to leave for the Governor
to see. This dignitary being asleep, no one dared to
disturb him, so we went to the Jerusalem Hotel and
had breakfast, and in three hours’ time the great man


put in an appearance, and immediately sat down
sedately and lighted his silver bubble pipe, with
pliable stem several feet long. In this he was not
alone, for most of the Customs officers who were
writing at their desks were giving about half their
time to the pipe and the remainder to business,
apparently against their will. Our turn came in due
course, and, with the aid of an interpreter, we ex-
plained who and what we were, and that we were only
honouring his country by a week’s stay, and craved
his good favour to pass our bicycles in free. This
reasonable request he point blank refused ; but the
interpreter earned his fee, for he argued the point,
and finally got the amount reduced, till by paying
about £i we received permission in Turkish to convey
them into all parts of the great Ottoman Empire.
This precious document being signed and sealed
about four times, we departed in hot haste to over-
take the carriages, that had two hours start of us.


CHAPTER VII.
PALESTINE.
Leaving Jaffa —a town on the coast of the Medi-
terranean Sea—we commence cycling through the
Holy Land. A telegraph line runs all the way to
Jerusalem; so we had no bother about finding the
road, which was beautifully made. The air was
simply laden, not in the ordinary sense of a mere
sniff, but really heavily charged, with orange and
lemon perfume, for the groves were on either side of
the road in full bloom. The scent was so delightful
that we seemed unable to swell our chests sufficiently
to take enough in. This road has been for ages
trodden by pilgrims, both Jews and Christians. The
Crusaders dashed many and many a time along here
with their glittering armour; and then, again, the
wood for Solomon’s temple was taken over the same
track, for we are told in the Bible that the King of
Tyre undertook to send the wood from the cedars
of Lebanon to Jaffa for its construction. I seems
strange to us to be travelling over the Holy Land on
bicycles, but, nevertheless, it is delightful ; and the
further we go the more infatuated do we become with
our mode of travel.
Wheeling on towards Jerusalem, we emerge on


to the open fields, which are green with Cape barley
and buckwheat. All around us are interesting relics
of ancient days, as described in that best of guide
books to Palestine—the Bible ; so that the descrip-
tion of this part of our ride must be regarded as
Sunday reading. We pass the traditional site of the
house where Peter raised Tabitha, and some distance
away to the left see the little village where Samson
tied the firebrands to the foxes’ tails and let them go
through the standing corn of the Philistines. We
now bowl along at a rattling pace, for the road across
the plains of Sharon is splendid, though we had made
up our minds, from the doleful accounts we had
heard everywhere, that at least 30 miles would have
to be walked. The surprise was so agreeable that we
congratulated one another as we sped along between
the thick cactus hedges and passed Ramleh, where
we came upon the carriages halting for lunch. This
town is supposed to be identical with Arimathea,
several times mentioned in the New Testament. It
has had a varied experience, having been occupied by
the Crusaders, and for two centuries was the scene of
their conflicts with the Moslems. It was under the
Cross and the Crescent alternately till A.D. 1266,
when it was taken finally by the Moslems. The
roads undulate slightly here, and in about three miles
anqther of the wild villages appears, and, still further,
the ruins of Tel-el-Gezer, on the borders of the tribe
of Ephraim. The city was burned by Pharoah, and


the land given with his daughter to Solomon as
a dowry. We here descend a steep hill, and pedal
across the wide valley of Ajalon, where “ the sun
stood still, the moon stayed, and there was not a day
like that before it or after it.” It is indeed difficult
to describe the wonderful feelings one experiences in
pedalling swiftly across such places as these. After
two and half hours in the saddle we reach Latroon
and have dinner at a travellers’ publichouse situated
right under a hill whose crest is crowned by an old
fortress. We make a good meal, for now our “collar
work” begins, as we ascend the mountains of Judea.
These are very fine, but rather too steep for after
dinner; so we stroll along on foot, and, when
six miles from the hotel, obtain a grand view
extending right across to the sea, over villages that
dot the intervening country. The country has quite
changed, for the fields have all been left behind, and
the hills are a mass of terraces of rocks, very regular
in appearance, and quite two-thirds of the surface has
no soil on it, which must have rendered the parable
of the seed and the sower very clear to the Jews of
that time. Even in this rocky country they have
little patches on the hillside which have remnants of
walls still standing, and possibly in the time of our
Saviour they were planted with vines, olives, and figs.
Of the latter we see some very old specimens, and
the trees that grow occasionally on the roadside are,
by their appearance, as old as the Bible. Perhaps


this is “ stretching it but, anyhow, their gnarled
and rugged stems stamp them as of great age.
Once on the summit we ride down in great style,
again encountering groves of lemons, and soon see
the village of Kirjath-Jearim. The main interest now
centres in the descendants of dauntless Aboo Gosh, a
highwayman of great courage, who, with six brothers
and a large following of descendants, used to plunder
and rob at will, till by a grand stroke the Governor,
on the principle of “ set a thief to catch a thief,”
subsidized these men on condition of their protecting
the road, and, strange to say, it answered splendidly,
and they gave up their lawless ways. The leader has
now been dead 30 years. On either hand villages
nestle in the hillside, and some crown the summit, but
they cannot be definitely connected with history now.
The traditional birthplace of St. John is somewhere
hereabouts, and the general surroundings are very
lovely, figs, vines, and olive trees being terraced up
big hills. After rising about a mile we again descend
a dangerous hill with about eight zig-zags in the
road ; the grade is so steep we do not attempt to
ride. At the bottom the village of Kolomeh is passed,
and a watercourse, dry, 50 ft. wide, and all bedded
with small, loose pebbles, is crossed. This is supposed
to be the very spot where King David picked out the
pebbles when he slew Goliath of Gath. We ascended
a terrible hill, with good road but unprotected sides,
for nearly two hours, passing several ruins, many of


which still have the arches alone standing. These are
all built on the church-door style. At the top of the
hill the great city comes in view, and with quickened
pulses we pedal along to the Zion of our song, and enter
the city of David—Jerusalem —by the Jaffa Gate,
Our ride, including dinner stoppage, took hours.
Three horsemen took 10 hours, and two carriages n
hours ; the latter had three horses for four passengers.
At Jerusalem the excitement consequent on our arrival
was tremendous, and the hotel had to be closed to
keep the crowd out; they rushed pell-mell after us,
and many got thrown down and trampled on.
Luckily, we rode right to the hotel door ; if we
had dismounted sooner we should not have been able
to force our way through, for the Arab is not par-
ticular how he jams his neighbour so long as he can
wedge his own nose in. We had ridden about 50
miles. Ancient Jerusalem covered a much greater
area than the present city, for now the walls are only
2 Yz miles in circumference. This wall, by the way, is
very massive, and a complete circuit of the city can
be made within its battlements, thus giving an excel-
lent idea of the position of celebrated places. The
wall has 34 towers and 7 gates. The Golden Gate
has been closed for many years, the superstitious Jews
believing that when this gate is opened it will be for
the triumphal entry of the Messiah. The lowest part
of the wall is 39 ft. high, and the masonry is in good
order.


We found the air very chilly in the morning, for
we were 2,600 ft. above the Mediterranean Sea, but
that was all the better, for after breakfast we got an
intelligent guide, and saw most of the sights in a few
hours before the sun gained power. First we gained
an insight into the various streets that, by the way,
are arched and vaulted in a muddled-up manner.
Sometimes you are in semi-darkness among crowded
bazaars, and an occasional camel or donkey comes
stalking along. These streets are roughly paved,
and many of them terraced with steps, for Jerusalem
is built right on the side of a hill. We passed with
reverential feelings the threshold of the Church of
the Holy Sepulchre. Constantine the Great with
perseverance sought the spot where Christ was
crucified, and fixed on this place, where his mother,
St. Helena, built a church of great splendour. Since
that time the good work has been desecrated,
damaged, added to, and rebuilt over and over again,
so that the places so intimately connected with our
Saviour must be taken cum grano salis ; but for all
that, a great “odour of sanctity” pervades the place,
and we felt quite awed by the beautiful chanting that
we heard, for hundreds of Russians were chanting
for the Czar of Russia, it being his birthday. There
are a number of chapels, and all are lighted by wax
candles, the effect being magnificent, for the work is
superbly done, and there are many paintings on the
walls.


The great faith of the pilgrims struck us, for they
were pouring out their prayers and tears at the same
time, and every stone of this wondrous place has been
bathed with tears and covered with the passionate
kisses of countless myriads, who are always coming
and going ; but, owing to Easter being at hand, the
crowd is even greater than usual. From this sacred
spot we emerged deeply impressed by the earnest ser-
vice we had witnessed, and then we wended our way
down Christian-street to St. Stephen’s Gate, where we
passed a Moslem cemetery, and the spot where the
martyr Stephen was stoned. Then we follow a rugged
road, and cross the brook Kedron, now dry. Close here
is the tomb of the Virgin Mary, and again, within a
stone’s throw, the Garden of Gethsemane, surrounded
by a high wall, on the inside of which are fourteen
tableaux representing the agony of our Saviour.
These are sculptured very delicately in miniature, and
are quite works of art. The Mount of Olives ascends
right up from here, and we scramble along, taking
rest half way to look back on the Holy City. At the
top we gain entree to a new church, and ascend the
spire, over 200 feet, and from the top we see the
whole country for many miles. The River Jordan
and the Dead Sea, 4,000 feet below, looked so nice
that we straightway resolved to go there. We also
look down on Jerusalem from this elevated place
getting a fine view of the city and surrounding wall.
The steep paths of the Mount of Olives and its olive


groves used to be a favourite resort of Jesus, and
being also the nearest road to Bethany, he must often
have passed this way going to visit Martha and Mary,
sisters of Lazarus. We regain the hotel in time for
dinner. The fact of our having seen so much in so
short a time will give a good idea of how closely the
different places are situated to each other.
After lunch we gained permission from the British
Consul to inspect the Mosque of Omar. This is by
far the best building in Jerusalem, from a sight-
seeing point of view, leaving associations out of the
question. This is the site of Solomon’s Temple and
Palace, and is called Mount Moriah, covering within
its walls nearly one quarter of the present area of the
whole city. We were accompanied by a guard from
the Consul, and also a Turkish soldier, the reason for
which we could not surmise. The present site has
no appearance of a mount, but, after so many
generations, it might easily have been filled up by
accumulations of debris drifting down from the city ;
for in one place where excavations are going on the
debris is 125 ft. thick, and under this old ruins are
found showing that the site of Jerusalem is undoubt-
edly the same. Having seen this place, it is not hard
to imagine that gorgeous temple, overlaid with plates
of gold and chased so beautifully. We saw the Holy
Rock, which is 57 ft. long by 43 ft. wide, and rises
6 ft. above the ground. The faithful Mahommedans
assert it hovers without support over a cavern that,


through a hole in the rock, received the blood of
innumerable sacrifices in all ages. Here Abraham
is reputed to have offered up Isaac. The Ark of the
Covenant is supposed to be buried below, and on
account of this, even if Jews were permitted to enter,
they would not cross the threshold of the Mosque of
Omar lest they should unwittingly profane the Holy
of Holies by their tread. On this rock was written
the unspeakable name of God, “ Shemfiamphorah.”
In front of one of the four interior gates to this
Holy Rock is a slab of jasper, and Mahomet has
driven nineteen gold nails into it, one of which is
reputed to have fallen out every epoch. At present,
only three and a half remain, and when they have
gone the end of the world will come, and Mahomet’s
followers believe the trumpet will sound from this
sacred spot. The sheik who was conducting us got
the guide to explain, as he knelt reverently by the
stone, that, if we covered the remaining nails with
money, we should be certain to go to heaven. The
ruse was too thin.
Right under the Mosque of El-aska are the
extraordinary excavations called Solomon’s Stables.
These do not resemble modern stables at all, but are
long colonnades of vaulted arches, very massively
built, and extending hundreds of yards. Next
morning we made up a party with two students to
visit the Dead Sea. The dragoman who was to
conduct us had everything ready at 8 a.m., and we


emerged from the Jaffa Gate a strange-looking band.
First the Arab guard, without which it is not safe to
travel, on account of the Bedouins. These fellows
are not exactly soldiers, but are taken from the hill
tribes, and so long as a party hire them they are safe,
otherwise the probability is they will get robbed.
They carry a long-barrelled flintlock gun, a huge
cavalry sword, and an occasional old-fashioned pistol.
With this wild looking leader we made a start.
Next came the dragoman, gaudily attired with
turban and top boots of ancient type ; then our-
selves, and next a servant with baggage and food, a
donkey laden with horse fodder bringing up the rear.
Single file was our mode of progression, for after
Bethlehem the roughness, steepness, and narrowness
of the track necessitated this method of moving
along. Our horses were Arab entires, full of life and
fire. First we cross the Valley of Hinnom and see
the long line of cottages built by the good old man,
Sir Moses Montefiore, for the poor Jews, and then a
neat-looking German temperance village on one
side, and the Hill of Evil Counsel on the other ;
passing these the road leads along the valley
of Rephaim, where David twice conquered the
Philistines, the signal for the second battle being
given by the sound in the mulberry trees that was to
betoken the presence of the Lord. Next we passed
the Valley of Giants mentioned by Joshua, and on top
of a hill a little further on reached the convent of Mar


Elias. Rachel’s tomb was then seen, and an hour’s
ride from this brought us to Solomon’s Pools. From
the pools we follow a rugged mountain path along
the course of the aqueduct, and pass the Cave of
Adullam, where David sought refuge—this is of small
size, like hundreds of others which exist in this
rock-bound country. About lunch-time we reached
Bethlehem, and on entering see David’s Well. Pass-
ing along the town our nostrils were assailed by the
vilest of smells. These dirty wretches use the main
street as a cesspool ; this most offensive matter being
thick on either side of the narrow street, which is not
more than 12 ft. wide, and crowded with houses. The
town, although right on the top of a hill, has no drain-
age system, and the streets are a fetid mass of decaying
filth that would breed fever in no time. We visited
the Church of the Nativity, and saw the manger, which
is of stone, 4 ft. 6 in. by 2 ft. 6 in. It is said to be in
the exact spot, and is situated right under the present
church. The Scriptural stories are much easier to
understand after seeing the Holy Land. Gleaning,
for instance, seems altogether too slow and tedious a
process to be entertained at all; but when you see
the fields no bigger than the room in a house, and the
great wall, two feet thick and four feet high, composed
of stones that have been picked out of the tiny piece
of ground, then you can understand how precious
every ear of corn was to the poor people. From
Bethlehem our rough riding begins, for we go up and


down rocky hills like the side of a house, and follow
ledges of the rock with a wall on one side and a
precipice on the other, and then again following the
bed of a watercourse. The country is the wildest
imaginable, but our splendid horses, all fire and friski-
ness on the level, sober down immediately the road is
dangerous. We trust to the horses implicitly. Some
of the places would make a nervous person sick to
look over, and an occasional pebble goes rolling down
hundreds of feet. At 5 o’clock in the evening we
reach the monastery of Mar Saba, were we are to
sleep. The entrance is gained by a long rocky stair,
down which we lead our horses. We had been seven
hours in the saddle, and scarcely moved out of a
walk, for in many places the track was so narrow that
prudence told us to walk ; but we had to keep on, for
there was no room for man and horse side by side,
and if one walked in front, the horse would most
likely step on him.
The monastery of Mar Saba —itself a remarkable
place—is situated in the most romantic and wildly
picturesque spot imaginable. The place was founded
in the fifth century, and has several times been
plundered. On one occasion a lot of monks were put
to death and all the treasure was carried off. In
one of the rooms we saw the skulls of the unfortunate
victims. The place is now strongly fortified, and a
watch is always kept from its towers. Saint Saba
spent nearly all his life here, and distinguished


himself in theology. The most interesting memorial
of him is a cave which he occupied. It is said that
one day, on his entering this cave, he found a lion
asleep; so he said his prayers and lay down. The
lion objected and dragged him out, but the saint
returned, and the pair then remained in joint occu-
pancy for some time.
After dinner we got our dragoman to take us
down the ravine. As it was luckily almost full moon,
we obtained the most weird and enchanting views
imaginable, for the monastery windows were lighted up
and presented the appearance of so many lights in the
hill, for the walls are built on projecting cliffs, and in
some places actually overhang, for, during the ages
the building has stood some of the rock has fallen
from under it, but still leaves a fairly thick strata to
uphold the building and its sixty-five pious monks,
who have so thoroughly renounced the pomps and
vanities and retired into seclusion.
The most delightful flowers bedecked the hillsides,
pretty scarlet poppies being especially abundant, and
dozens of other varieties bloomed in bright and
varied colours ; in fact, the grass of the field was
beautiful—it was all grass, no flowering shrubs at all;
but the queer part of it was they appeared to grow
where scarcely any soil existed, and yet the sun was
very hot.
Next morning we rose at 5 o’clock, had breakfast,
and continued the journey. There was plenty of


climbing for the first two hours, and then we got into
an old watercourse, and followed its sinuous course
for some time, till, on emerging from it, the Dead Sea
was in full view, but still an hour’s ride distant. It
was a pretty sight, for the water appeared quite an
indigo blue, and the great mounts of Moab rise
abruptly on its eastern shore, while the whole place
is clouded by a haze that never clears, caused no
doubt by the evaporation which the heat of the sun
is continually producing. We were travelling through
decidedly wild country, for the Bedouins were seen
in camp in several places ; also, on two occasions a
mysterious lump on the top of a hill was pointed
out as a man and horse lying down together, and
they disappeared almost in a twinkling. Our own
impression is they are not so desperate a lot as they
look, but they all carry arms for either offence or
defence ; there is no pretence of shooting game, for
we did not see more than half a dozen birds in three
days, and animals none.
As we descend from the hills the plains of Jericho
assume a salt-whitish appearance, and the scrubby
growth is also bitterly salt. On the banks of the
sea, which, by the way, are all pebbles of various
colours and not sand, we tether the horses and
indulge in a swim, for the heat of the sun was very
severe, and we had looked forward to a bath for
hours. This was perhaps the most peculiar bath we
shall ever have, for we could not sink ; the buoyancy


of the water was so great that we rolled about like
porpoises, and could hold both hands and feet clear
of the water at the same time without sinking.
The water was just like brine, and with a slight oily
appearance in it, and it seemed to taste like chloride
of potassium. It got in our eyes, and the pain was
very sharp for a while. We did not stay long in the
water, for the sun would very soon have peeled our
skin off had we done so.
Remounting, we made across the plains of Jericho,
that were the scenes of so many Biblical records, to
the Jordan River, where we lunched. Whilst on the
plains the sun beats down most unmercifully, but we
look about with great interest on the historical things
around us. For instance, there was Mount Nebo
rising to a peak, the place whence Moses was shown
all the Promised Land of the valley below, which
was supposed to be at that time irrigated, as old
conduits have been discovered that would render the
place a paradise.
We pursue our way from the scene of the destruc-
tion that overcame the cities of the plain, and have a
faint idea that the effects of the sulphur still remain
in the water, for our skin itches in rather an
unpleasant manner, and we are heartily glad to reach
the swift-running Jordan, and plunge into it to
remove any remaining effects of the Dead Sea bath,
for the saline matter had formed a kind of crustation
on us, and the taste remained all too pungent in our


mouths. On Jordan’s banks we lunched, then swam,
and rested till the heat was past, when our fiery
little steeds carried us off to Jericho, or the remnants
of this ancient city. We see the few remaining
stones that indicate where Rahab the harlot’s house
was, and then Elisha’s spring, named after some
tradition of the early pilgrims who visited the place.
Very little remains of what was once a mighty place
and is mentioned in the Bible as a walled city.
At Jericho we are 4,000 ft. below the level of
Jerusalem, and some 1,400 ft. under the open ocean,
and the sun appears to beat down as though it
focussed through a magnifying glass, and knowing
that we had such an uphill day before us, we told the
dragoman to call us as early as he liked, for it was
moonlight. We were not quite prepared, however,
to have our blissful slumbers rudely disturbed at
half-past 3 ; but such was the case, and an hour later
we stole silently, like spectres, straight for the moun-
tains, the highest of which is the reputed “ exceeding
high mountain” to which our Saviour was taken
when the devil tempted him. We soon crossed the
interesting plain, and then began to climb the mount
by a natural stairway, the ironshod hoofs ringing out
in the morning air, unbroken by any other sound.
Our nags are shod with a shoe of iron, which covers
the whole frog of the foot, and, being of uneven
surface, protects the foot and also holds well. Not a
morsel of soil exists for miles on this route ; the hills


are simply rock, and the stepping-places have been
partly chiselled, but mostly made by the horses’
hoofs, which in places have worn them a foot deep.
By sunrise we were far up the heights, and another
beautiful sight met our gaze, for the Mounts of Moab
presented a dark mass till the sun burst over them,
and then all was splendour, and the hills above us
were lighted up with rose tints, their bare and rugged
sides being all aglow for a few minutes.
At 9 a.m. we reached the Apostles’ Spring, named
apparently from the fact that, owing to its position,
the Apostles must often have refreshed themselves by
drinking its cooling waters. We stay at a little Arab
rest-house, and by 10 a.m. are again on the rocky
road, that hereabout is very rugged. We have
descended many hills, but for all that have gained an
elevation of close on 4,000 ft. above Jericho, our
previous night’s stopping place.
Jerusalem is now in full view, and Bethany just in
front of us. Here we halt, and descend some very
old and well-worn steps about 30 ft. down, and see the
tomb of Lazarus, whom Jesus raised from the dead ;
and then, close at hand, the remnants of the house of
Martha and Mary ; not more than three feet of the
walls are standing. All the show places are locked,
and backsheesh is required to see anything. We leave
that to the dragoman, who looks after our interests
very well. From Bethany two roads lead to Jerusalem,
one over the Mount of Olives and the other past


Gethsemane. We choose the latter. This is the same
road that our Saviour made His triumphal entry into
the city by, and is composed entirely of rock, and has
been worn down several feet with continual use. A
carriage-way is now being made from Jerusalem to
Jericho ; it will take two years to finish. We were glad
we were able to go by the original route. Just near
Jericho we had the site pointed out where a certain
man fell among thieves, and, strange to say, the same
country is even now reputed to be dangerous, and our
worthy guard here, and on several other occasions,
galloped on a piece to reconnoitre.
The “ grass of the field ” we saw in great abundance.
It is a prickly little bush, not more than one foot high.
This the people cut down and place in heaps, leaving
it till the following day, when it exudes a resinous
matter and burns freely. This explains the parable
about being one day growing and the following day
cast into the oven. We reached Jerusalem at noon,
having had a very fine trip, and owing to the steady
pace we travelled we did not feel a bit stiff.
We felt very sorry for the unfortunate donkey that
carried the food for the horses, for the driver would
persist in driving a big packing needle into his neck
every hundred yards or so. Remonstrances were
quite useless. All Arabs treat the donkeys most
brutally, though the animals are good-tempered and
willing. The same man treated the horses as though
they were human beings, washing them at night, and,


in fact, doting on them ; but for the poor mule he had
no compassion. This is an ordinary example of an
Arab, and a society for the protection of animals has
a big field to operate on, if so inclined.
Next morning, in order that we might avoid the
heat of noon, we rose at 3 a.m., had a light breakfast,
and started off for the coast in the bright moonlight.
As we pedalled our bicyles quietly along the road we
met muleteers and camel-drivers by the score. We
soon began to descend the big hills which we had
toiled up on foot a few days before; now we bowl
our wheels along with beautiful ease, keeping the
machines under control, as camels were frequently met
on sharp turns, loaded with miscellaneous articles that
often projected several feet. We sped along on the
lovely road in fine style, passed the half-way house at
6 a.m., and in five hours exactly we reached Jaffa.
This was a record which the people would not believe
without further proof. We were followed about by a
great throng. A bicycle is a great rarity, and the
people have not the slightest idea of the distance or
speed we can travel. Almost every mounted Arab
gave us a spin, but we kept up a ding-dong pace, and
though they dashed ahead for a while it did not last
long, and one by one gave it up.
On reaching Jaffa a gale sprang up and we were
forced prisoners, for no one could land or board the
Anglo-Austrian steamer that had just arrived. The
hotel is a full mile from the rocks, but the roar of the


water was plainly heard, and the sight of the spray
dashing 40 and 50 feet high was very fine.
At 6 a.m. on the morrow we were awakened by the
steamer Ceylon blowing her whistle as a signal for
embarkment. We then got our trunks shouldered
and wheeled our faithful steeds to the landing-place.
We had serious misgivings about starting, for the sea
was uncommonly rough, and several steamers at their
moorings rolled so heavily that every other minute
the whole of their decks were visible. After a lot of
bobbing up and down we got the machines fairly
stowed under the seats of a big surf boat, and 12
oarsmen and a steerer put off with the six original
passengers, the Earl of Galloway and valet, and our-
selves. We were inside the rocks for five minutes,
and then the boat was headed for the steamer. The
first three waves we encountered threw the bow of the
boat high into the air, and we thought we were going
to turn a somersault and be quickly drowned. The
waves were from 20 ft. to 30 ft. high, with a great
valley between each that completely hid the ship each
time. The sensation of that boat falling from under
us at each wave was frightful. The ladies clutched
the gentlemen, but behaved with great courage and
calmness. In half an hour we reached the ship, and
then the boatmen tried blackmail, wanting 10s. each,
which was double fare. We waited till we were on
board, and then gave them what was right. We got on
board in the most undignified manner possible. The


sea was too rough for a gangway to be lowered, so
each time the boat came up someone was thrown or
hauled aboard, and then the boat fell away 30 ft. In
this manner ladies and even bicycles came aboard,
and, marvellous to relate, all without accident.


CHAPTER VIII.
ASIA MINOR AND EASTERN PARTS.
After passing the old town of Caesarea, the ship
put into Coifa, where the captain wanted to recover
an anchor lost in a previous storm. This gave us an
excellent view of Mount Carmel, situated right above
us. The place where the 300 prophets of Baal were
slain was pointed out, also the place of Elijah’s
sacrifice. Next we passed Tyre, ahd towards night-
fall the sister town of Sidon, and at 3 a.m. anchored
at Beyrout. Next morning, on coming on deck early,
we were quite staggered, for the mountains of
Lebanon, which we had to cross, were covered with
snow. Many of their peaks rose 9,000 ft., but the
snow-line appeared to reach down to about 5,000 ft.
level.
Beyrout is a beautiful town, built after the style of
Jaffa, on a projecting headland, with a population of
nearly 100,000. The steam launch took over the
first batch of passengers and our trunks, and we
went over next trip. This proved fortunate, for we
had half a box of Indian cigars amongst our
luggage, and as the owner was not with them, the
Turkish Custom officers coolly broke the lock and
confiscated the cigars. Had we been there we would


have been heavily fined. The noble earl had his
silver cigar-case, containing 9 cigars, and also 14
cigarettes, confiscated, and was, in addition, fined 10
francs. Another passenger with an uncut plug of
tobacco had to give it up, and because he demurred
was fined 10 francs. We changed our clothes and
breakfasted at the Hotel de Orient, and then slipped
on to our bicycles and rode off through the town,
bound for Damascus, chased by a crowd of some
hundreds who had been waiting for us to come out.
The heat of the sun was pretty severe, so we divested
ourselves of coats and vests and commenced the
ascent of Mount Lebanon, which rises almost from
the shore; but the road was a fairly easy grade,
and we rode a good distance, and then walked and
rode where opportunity offered for four hours. Talk
about hills ! —why, all those Victorian rises, the Pent-
land, Black Spur and Heidelberg hills, could be rolled
into one and then would be lost here. We climbed
continually for thirty miles. After four hours of it we
felt somewhat limp, so rested at a wayside place for
refreshment, which consisted of Araby bread, native
arrack, raisins, and roast peas. This mixture the
mountain air caused us to relish, and then “ excelsior’'
once more. A few miles higher and we reached the
snow, which had towered above us all the day. The
heat of the sun kept melting it, and causing lovely
crystal cascades to rush down every ravine. At about
4,000 ft. we had passed a couple of clouds, and could


look right down on Beyrout, which appeared to be
getting nearer. The snow on the upper side of the road
and extending into the middle varied in depth from
i ft. to 3 ft. 6 in., according to the shadow that had
protected it ; but the whole country was white, and
painfully bright in the sunshine. After five hours
and a half we reached the highest point on the road,
and then descended something over 2,000 ft. and
reached a little French hotel at Shtora, the distance
being not more than 36 miles—six hours of good
exercise. A smoke—the panacea for most evils—and
a substantial dinner put us in a good frame of mind,
and we retired to rest ; but some five hours later about
fourteen other passengers of the Ceylon arrived,
bustled round as only Englishmen can, and put the
excitable little Frenchman in such a fluster that they
fared badly.
When we started away from Shtora after breakfast
at 5 a.m. the old moon was shedding a sickly pale
light on the huge circle of snow that literally
appeared to hem us in, for we were on an open plain
extending for about eight miles to the foot of Anti-
Lebanon, whose highest points are Abul Him and
Mount Herman. These attain an altitude of 8,330 ft.
and 8,700 ft. respectively, and are clothed with snow
all the year round. It is hardly necessary to say
that with such surroundings the morning was
extremely cold, and we felt it the more owing to the
continuous hot weather we had experienced for


some time past. On reaching the second range we
soon became warm, and the perspiration began to
trickle down our noses, whilst the pools of water
were all frozen at the roadside. We were told this
range was only a small one, but then that was by
comparison, for we rode part of the grade and then
walked for an hour before reaching the summit, a
distance of at least seven miles. The view was
magnificent, with the two gigantic snow-covered
mountains on either hand, whilst far away below we
could discern our road twisting and twining amongst
the hills like a flaxen rope thrown down at random.
Along the lovely decline we pedalled freely, start-
ing an occasional owl from the roadside or yelling
lustily for a sleepy muleteer or camel boy to give
us room to pass. An hour of this placed 12 miles
behind us ; then we halted at a toll-gate where refresh-
ments were sold, consisting of rings of bread that
appeared to have hung from the ceiling for months,
and some dried figs, very dirty. But we were hungry.
During our short stay here the Arabs had streamed
down the hillsides, leaving their figs, mulberries, and
oranges, or even ploughing, for our loud calls on the
down grade had apparently resounded through the
valley, and they had evidently been watching us
flying along, and now a chance of a closer in-
spection was just what they desired. Every moment
the throng increased, so we hastily finished our meal
and rode off. We passed some very rugged gorges


with a beautiful stream beside the road for some dis-
tance, and on emerging from the hills saw Damascus
right before us. Luckily the hotel was on the out-
skirts, but even so, a large crowd streamed into the
road and opened a track for us to pass through.
The bazaars differed from any we had seen, being
covered in, and looked like tunnels, being in semi-
darkness. The streets occupied by private houses are
all open to the sky, but are narrow and crooked,
with balconies projecting and buttresses built for the
most part of dried mud. Damascus is a large centre
for all the northern part of Syria, and the bazaars are
most extensive. We visited the gold, silver, brass,
harness, shoe, clothing, fruit, curios, sweetmeats,
antiques, silks, carpets, jewellery, and goodness knows
how many others ; each particular trade is in a separate
place. Here we had the chance of buying the real
Damascus swords and pistols, beautifully inlaid with
silver and gold. The blades that earned such a wide-
■world fame are no more manufactured, for the art is
said to be lost.
The whole city, which is classed as the second
oldest in existence, appears to be a mass of bazaars
intermixed with mosques.
Our guide was a first-rate fellow and showed us all
the places of interest. We went along the street
called Straight, which is mentioned in the Bible, and
is really the only straight one in the city ; all the rest
twist and turn every hundred yards. Then we visited


the house of Judas, and wended our way through the
Christian quarter and looked at the people weaving
silk by hand, then on to the house of Ananias. The
city is divided into a crowd of quarters—such as the
Syrian, Greek, Jewish, Christian, and others—but
most of them are foul, although a grand stream of
water runs right through the town, which could be
easily drained ; but the Turkish Government appear
to care nothing about sanitary matters.
Just outside the city wall we saw a caravan pre-
paring for a start to Bagdad. It consisted of some
fifty camels, with huge packs, already loaded. The
most frequented route takes two months, and has a
fair supply of water ; but this caravan is going straight
across the desert, where no water exists. This is a
25-days’ march, and our guide assured us that 15
gallons of water would carry a man and beast right
through; and, at a pinch, a camel can go four or five
days without any. Passing.this interesting group, we
visited the reputed spot where the Lord appeared to
Paul when he was en route to Damascus. We also
saw the place where St. Paul was lowered in a basket
from the wall, and the house of Naaman the leper.
We visited the houses of some wealthy Jews. We
turned into these off a narrow, filthy street, and found,
to our surprise, places which resemble palaces, having
large court-yards, with fountains, and citrons all laden
with fruit; whilst the interior of the houses presented a
mass of inlaid marble, ivory, and coloured stones, the


walls being decorated with mirrors and most elaborate
carvings in ivory of miniature palaces. When lighted
up, it would have a fairyland effect
More dogs are to be seen here than in any Eastern
town ; they lie about the streets, and men and beasts
step carefully over them ; they are of a mongrel breed,
and some very mangy.
Passports are a nuisance here; several of our
party were fined 25 francs for not having them, but
we squared the policeman and got off. The women
of Damascus are the best looking we have seen so
far, the majority being pretty, with very large jet
black eyes, and a complexion which, although
resembling a brunette, still shows a healthy blush
suffusing the cheeks.
We rode away from Damascus at 5 a.m., passed
the six-horse diligence that had an hour’s start of us,
and then we halted at a crystal brook for breakfast,
thus giving the coach another start. However, at the
20th mile we had reached the top of Anti-Lebanon
and pedalled down at a rattling pace, and overtook
the coach again, just starting with the third relay of
horses. With fresh animals the driver thought he
could leave us, but although he galloped the remaining
seven miles to Shtora he could not catch us.
After a rest we set off for Baalbek, 30 miles
distant. This road was fairly level, but in bad order,
being made and kept by the Turkish Government.
Our route lay between the two ranges of snowclad


mountains. At first they were about eight miles
apart, then widened out, and towards the close the
valley narrowed again. The whole trip was through
the fertile Lebanon valley, watered by rivulets from
the snowy mountains, and every inch cultivated with
grain crops. No shrubs of any kind, save a few
vines, are planted in the valley. Many miles before
reaching Baalbek the ruins for which the place is
famous were to be seen towering aloft, especially the
six great columns with capitals, being part of the
Temple of the Sun. Our 75 miles ride was finished
at 3 p.m.
Baalbek is one of the few places in the world that
has no history. The city was also called Heliopolis,
for the people were sun-worshippers, the same as the
ancient Egyptians. Phoenician, Roman, Syrian, and
Turk have all had a hand in the majestic ruins now
before us. The outside wall is still standing, and
here the huge stones used strike wonder into the
observer. The lower part of the wall is composed of
comparatively small blocks, but 30 ft. from the
ground are three tremendous stones, measuring 64,
63, and 62 ft. in length, being 14 ft. high and 14 ft.
through, the latter being the thickness of the wall.
These blocks were placed in position four or five
thousand years agp, and at that time were probably
much further from the ground than they are now.
Nine other stones we measured were each 35 ft. long.
These, colossal as they may seem, do not come up to


the one still remaining in the quarry. This monster
is 71 x 14 x 14 ft, and is computed to weigh 1,500
tons ; and how the ancients conveyed these from the
quarries and raised them into position will probably
remain a mystery for ever. The stone is of yellowish
colour, and appears to be of a limestone formation.
The temple was in good order till the twelfth century,
when an earthquake of great severity reduced it to
ruins, and tumbled immense columns, 60 ft. high and
7 ft. in diameter, into a confused heap, where they
still remain. This place we regard as far more
wonderful than the pyramids in Egypt, for the stones
are much larger; and although the whole concern is
so vast, still the design and execution in detail is
perfect. The cedars of Lebanon are almost a thing
of the past, for only a small grove remains. This is
a day’s journey from Baalbek, and comprises
about 160 tree's. A few of these are supposed
to be from 2,000 to 4,000 years old. Their height
is not great, but the trunks are about 60 ft.
in circumference. We spent a morning visiting
the interior ruins, and saw arches and cornices
splendidly chiselled. The design takes all forms—
sometimes angels, but for the most part wreaths of
fruits, acorns, and lotus. This place is full of wonders
in carved stone. We ascended a stairway the most
wonderful to imagine, for it was cut out of a solid
rock, of which the wall is composed, after the same
manner that a corkscrew is turned through a cork.


At the special request of the officer commanding
the Turkish troops, we rode in the afternoon to the
basins where the water supply of Baalbek emerges
right out of the mountain side. The place has a
population of 5,000 ; but it seemed to us that far
more people were present, yelling in Arabic like so
many lunatics, and we hesitated about fulfilling our
promise ; but as the troops were out in force we
decided on going. A place was cleared for us to
mount, but the road was so abominably rough we
could not get clear of the mob, who ran a mile or two
in the greatest confusion at our heels till our destina-
tion was reached. Here we rode round a beautiful
green sward, to the intense delight of the people, and
finished up by allowing a few of the Turkish nobility
to mount the machines, and then gave the backbone
a tip and sent them sprawling over the handles. The
crowd had become so dense that riding home was
quite out of the question. Every housetop was
crowded and the streets thronged, whilst the Turkish
ladies, in their excitement, threw up their veils to see
all they could as we passed. Afterwards, we visited
the British Syrian schools, Mrs. Mott, the matron,
being the only English person resident in Baalbek.
Here we found about 100 children assembled, their
ages varying from four to fourteen, and composed of
Arabs, Syrians, Greeks, and Jews. They sang for us
“Mothers of Salem” in English and Arabic; also a
couple of nursery rhymes, and repeated in globo the


23rd Psalm, “ The Lord is my Shepherd,” &c. The
peculiar accent of the little urchins was amusing. It’s
a good work, and tends to divert the youngsters’
minds from the everlasting backsheesh.
Next day we started at 5 a.m. Even at that early
hour a crowd was waiting in the dark to see us off,
and as we proceeded we found the inhabitants of no
less than four villages waiting on the roadside, they
having stationed a watchman to herald our approach.
In one place, at Zahleh, a town of 15,000 inhabitants,
a woman brought out a tray with little cups of coffee.
It was awfully kind, but the crowd was too great,
and would have hemmed us in had we dismounted,
so we pitched the good woman some backsheesh and
rode along to Shtora for breakfast. From Shtora
the road rises 2,000 ft. to the top of Mount Lebanon,
and then we had a grand run of about 30 miles,
during which we dropped 5,060 ft., the frozen snow
lying on the road in the same position as five days
before. At the highest point we drank “ Confusion
to our Enemies, the Turks in Particular,” with a
bottle of iced wine, then flew along round curves
and down declines and dangerous declivities with
unprotected sides. We reached Beyrout at 1 o’clock,
having ridden 66 miles in seven hours. We spent
two days at Beyrout, and during that time visited
several places of importance, such as the Jesuit,
American, and British schools. The two first-
mentioned bodies have large connections in school


work right through Syria, while the Jesuits have
splendid buildings. The Church of England seems
quite to take third place in this country. We
have heard and seen a lot about mission work,
and the general consensus of opinion amongst
travellers is that it is a waste of time and money, for
it must be borne in mind that these people have
religions of their own, and they are far more devout
than many of the so-called Christians, and it is
monstrous to believe they have all done wrong. A
missionary who was recently educated and sent out
by an American college was asked at the outset of
his work by some villagers the following puzzler:—
They said, “ Our forefathers for generations have be-
lieved and died in their faith. Do you say they have
gone to perdition?” If he answered in the affirma-
tive the end of his work there would be reached at
once, and if he said no, they would immediately
ask what he wanted to force a new religion on them
for. In this dilemma he wrote home to know what
answer to give, but his letter remained unanswered.
It was too much for even the professors.
We embarked on the Russian liner Nachimojf.] the
Customs searching baggage and demanding passports
for the sixth time. We simply slip a franc into the
hand of any official in the way and go straight ahead,
not appearing to understand anything, and, after all,
money is the best passport, and will always work the
oracle in this country. We touched at Tripoli for a


cargo of oranges, then on to Alexandrietta, after pass-
ing Antioch. We turned in early, and experienced a
most fearful night. The storm raged with hurricane
violence, and the ship laboured heavily and shipped
tons of water, which started the cases of oranges float-
ing on deck ; then, in addition, the cargo in the hold
got adrift, and made a terrible crashing and splinter-
ing noise, and loud above the din of thunder and
smashing of cases rose the piteous cries of 250 deck
passengers returning from a pilgrimage to Jerusalem.
The captain found things reaching a climax, and so
chose to adopt the dangerous proceeding of getting
the ship round and returning. This he did, but we
thought it was all up, for she fell into a trough of the
sea and the waves leapt clean over her, and in the
midst of it all a fearful roar of steam was heard,
which gave us a real start, for we thought the boilers
had burst, and our hearts almost stood still, but it
was only a steam-pipe that had burst. At Mersina
we landed for a few hours next day. The shore of
the Mediterranean Sea is very peculiar here, being
lined with a great variety of coloured pebbles. Shortly
after leaving Mersina, when we were two miles off
shore, our vessel smashed her propeller. There was
no wind for sailing, and we drifted on for hours, when
at 11 o’clock p.m., after firing minute rockets as a
signal of distress, we were picked up by a Turkish
steamer and towed backed to Alexandrietta for the
second time. We had had enough of the Russian


ship, so transferred into our rescuer, the Arslan ,
which was going about the same course. Another
rough night, and 20 pieces of crockery broken at tea
time. The wind on an average changed about four
times a day, and raised waves 20 to 30 feet high, so that
we, on our 1,000-ton boat, had a lively time of it.
We landed at Rhodes, near the reputed place
where the Colossus of Rhodes stood, “ one foot on
either shore.” The streets are particularly narrow,
and arched over at frequent intervals, and are
paved with pebbles, beautifully fitted in, making an
apparently everlasting roadway. We went all over
the place, and saw some interesting sights, but many
of the old landmarks are fast becoming things of the
past.
After leaving Rhodes we kept a westerly course,
and fairly entered the Archipelago at the southern
part of the Aegean Sea. The islands are of great
beauty on account of their rugged nature, and at
sunset and sunrise assume some wonderfully pretty
tints of light and shade, whilst they are so numerous
that our track seemed to resemble a huge landlocked
lake far more than a sea. We passed Samos, another
of those famous islands of ancient days. The ancient
town is of course in ruins, but still bears traces of its
greatness ; for the old walled fortifications, extending
for upwards of six miles, are yet to be traced. There
are also ruins of theatres, temples, and other build-
ings, but of the once magnificent temple of Juno only


a single column remains. We went ashore at Chios,
the island where in 1822 the terrible massacre of
25,000 Sciotes and capture of an additional 45,000 of
the inhabitants, who were dragged into slavery by the
Turks, caused utter desolation to reign ; for of the
remnant some 15,000 escaped to Greece in an utterly
destitute state. The town is nicely paved with flags,
giving a much cleaner aspect than most of the towns
in this part of the world can boast of, whilst in the
immediate background grow groves of olives, oranges,
and citrons, and then another range is thickly dotted
over with merchants’ villas, and surrounded by
gardens, but behind are the bare, barren, serrated
ranges forming the watershed of the island. Chios
claims that Homer was born there, and we trotted off
most religiously to see the ruins they designate as
“ Homer’s School.” These consist of rocks upon
which some novice has been sculpturing. They,
however, bear the impress of antiquity.
Smyrna, the largest town in Asia Minor, was only
70 miles distant, and afforded a most delightful trip,
for the mainland and islands seemed to enclose us all
the way. The water was as calm as a lake and in-
tensely blue. Smyrna presents a very commanding
appearance, as the buildings rise from the water’s edge
up the liillsides, and give an idea that the population
must be considerably more than 250,000, the present
number. We steamed in just before sunset, and
moored at the wharf end on, as accommodation is


very limited. The idea one gains of the town is that
it is decidedly Continental, for the main boulevard
that runs along the shipping has a great number of
casinos, restaurants, and saloons, where crowds of
people sit drinking and smoking nargilhis viz.,
hubble-bubble pipes with pliable stems many feet in
length. The back streets are narrow and composed
of large boulders, which put cycling entirely out of
the question. We went by rail, a distance
of 48 miles from Smyrna. We found the route most
interesting, for although, like all other parts of Asia
Minor, it was hilly, still the valleys were wider and
more fertile, vines being most extensively planted on
the flats, and on the hillsides grew ancient-looking
olives, walnuts, almonds, oranges, citrons, and lemons.
After some two hours we reached Ayasalouk station,
and leaving the train mounted horses to explore the
remains of one of the most interesting places con-
nected with the acts of the Apostles. The surround-
ing scenery is very wild and beautiful, and reminds
us of the description one sometimes reads about in
story books, for here are the waving corn and melon
fields of the flat, the wild fennel, blackberries, and
poppies, flocks of jackdaws hovering round the ruins,
and long-legged storks standing or sitting on the
rough nests of sticks perched on the top of the
ancient columns, all helping to make a picture that
novelists would take pages to describe.
There is, too, an awful stillness of death and


desolation hanging around this once populous city, but
now the ruins are buried many feet below the surface.
Many of these ruins have been excavated through the
energy of Mr. Wood, who laboured hard for years at
his own expense. He has discovered, at a depth of
io ft., the sacred road that led to the theatre where the
great uproar occurred on the occasion of St. Paul’s visit.
In our wanderings around Ephesus we followed
the ruined road which has been excavated by Mr.
Wood to the great Temple of Diana ; we also passed
the Grotto of the Seven Sleepers, This is a resort of
pilgrims, both Moslem' and Christian, and tradition
says that, in A.D. 300, seven young men took refuge
from the persecution of Diocletian and fell asleep in
this grotto, where they remained for 200 years. On
entering the town after their long sleep they found
the city all Christian and speaking a different
language. Continuing our way, we saw the remnants
of the Odeum, Temple of Jupiter, the great Gym-
nasium, the remains of which show that it must have
covered several acres. We also saw the great
theatre, which Murray says originally seated 60,000
persons; this estimate, however, is generally con-
sidered 50 per cent, too much. We saw many
wonderful ruins, and in the distance the island of
Samos, and others, in the yEgean Sea. We also
came upon the Temple of Diana, the largest and
most celebrated temple of ancient times; and the
greatest of Mr. Wood’s excavations. This remark-


able structure was built on a flat on account of the
prevalence of earthquakes, and the foundations were
formed by ramming charcoal down, and covering
that again with fleeces of wool. It is said that this
task took forty years to accomplish, and then it was
another sixty years before the temple was completed.
The building was burnt and destroyed eight times,
and it is said that Alexander the Great offered to
bear the whole cost of reconstruction, on condition
that his name should be inscribed on it. The
Ephesians, however, evaded this, and flatteringly
made answer that it was not right for a god to make
offerings to the gods. A keen wind sharpened
our appetites so much that we halted on the slopes of
Castlehill, beside a little stream. The stream seems
essential to lunch, but as a matter of fact it went
untasted, for our wine was both plentiful and good.
We remained looking out on the grand old aqueduct
that conveyed the water across the flats, its course
plainly marked for over half a mile, and many of the
huge masonry pillars still standing, at intervals, from
30 ft. to 40 ft. high, each being surmounted by a stork’s
nest. We talked about the doings of St. Paul, and
wondered where the position of the Jews’ synagogue
was, where he reasoned with them, till the guide
summoned us hurriedly to catch the train. It is a
great pity all these wonderful ruins and historical
places should be in the hands of the Turks.
We steamed away from Smyrna in the afternoon,


and at night anchored off the island of Lesbos in one
of the best harbours in the Aegean Sea. Next morn-
ing we steamed close along by the famous plains
of Troy, which appear marshy and covered with a
reedy kind of grass, through which the River Scam-
ander wends its way. These plains comprise one of
the few level places we have seen on the coast of
Asia Minor. We steamed past Cape Hellas, this being
the first land of Europe that we saw. Homer’s
immortalized Troy was soon astern as we moved along
the Straits of Dardenelles, with frowning batteries on
either hand. On the following morning we sighted
Constantinople—a charming scene, the city being far
and away larger than any we had seen, whilst its
towers, mosques, and minarets stood out against the
sky in great grandeur. We put up at the Hotel
Bellevue, and having cards to the Club de Constanti-
nople, we had a fine time of it. The Mosque of St.
Sophia is a magnificent building, and millions must
have been expended on it, for its columns are a
collection of marble, porphyry, and granite of most
extraordinary variety and beauty. Roughly, the
inside is 250 ft. square ; the huge dome is 180 ft. from
the floor. The building is dedicated to “ Eternal
Wisdom,” and we were shown three doors said to be
composed of wood from the Ark.
The bazaars are thronged by thousands of people,
and at present are regarded as the best markets in
Europe for carpets, china, armour, and similar goods’


In the evening we dined at Sir F. Smythe’s, and
amongst those present was His Excellency Rear-
Admiral Woods Pasha, whose wife has a sister in New
South Wales. Next day we went with His Excel-
lency in a carriage to witness the great weekly cere-
mony of Constantinople. This consists of the official
visit of the Sultan to prayer at the mosque, on which
occasion from 6,000 to 8,000 troops parade, and form
a four-deep line around the mosque enclosure. At
present the Sultan is bound to attend every Friday
(Turkish Sunday); if too ill to walk from the carriage,
he must be carried. We sat for about two hours
watching the troops march past ; also the pashas and
big officers, most gorgeously bedecked with medals,
till at last the Sultan came, in a rich gilded carriage,
attended by two old generals of Plevna distinction.
He remained in the mosque half an hour, and then
drove off in another carriage, a kind of Victoria, lined
with blue. He had no coachman, but sat alone, and
drove two magnificently caparisoned horses, whilst
all around his trap and in his wake surged a great
crowd of officers. Each regiment was headed by a
band, and between the band and the men came the
“ four pioneers,” with thick leather covering the
front of the body from throat to knees, and over
their shoulders they carried huge battle-axes. The
soldiers generally, looked big heavy fellows, the only
peculiarity being fez caps and knee-boots, while the
officers are perfect “ mashers.” Many of them carried


their medals, epaulettes, and stars in tin cases ; these,
being of such a frail material, would be spoilt by
wearing an overcoat continuously. Some of the
stars were nearly three inches in diameter, composed
of filagree work set with precious stones, but in all
the decorations the crescent moon and star formed
a conspicuous part. We saw the neat little spot
where many Crimean soldiers lay beneath the ground
on the shore of the Bosphorus, and the beautiful
monument erected to their memory by “ the Queen
and her people,” and then we went over to the
Asiatic side, to a suburb called Scutari, and having
paid the usual “ backsheesh,” passed on to see the
howling dervishes —quite a distinct kind of religious
ceremony. Their little mosque had the usual
“ Mecca niche ” facing the sacred city, in front of
which knelt the priest, and round behind him some
20 men, who chorused a kind of prayer, all the while
rocking their bodies about. This continued for 15
minutes, and then they appeared to get up steam
and howled away in a most noisy manner. The
priest is supposed to be endowed with special powers
to heal sickness, and several sick children were laid
on skins over which the priest walked, the congrega-
tion howling like madmen all the while. There were
at least 40 visitors, who paid one franc each, and we
began to doubt whether the whole concern wasn’t got
up for the “ gate ;” but it seems the affair is quite
genuine. At 4 o’clock Sir Fred, and Lady Smythe


drove us to the Sweet Waters; this is the name
given to the town at the head of the Golden Horn,
the waters being quite fresh. The Turkish ladies
swarm to this place on their Sundays, it being the
only time they are supposed to leave their houses.
The day was very fine, and the number of carriages
was extraordinary—there were at least 1,000, con-
taining veiled ladies, or those showing their eyes only.
These vehicles formed a continuous line for several
miles, and, in addition, possibly another 200 carriages
contained visitors —Persian and European residents—
who make this the regular rendezvous of the week.
The veiled beauties rarely leave their carriages, and,
taking their life altogether, it must be a most
miserably tame one. Some of the middle class
ladies go up to the Sweet Waters in boats, which ply
by hundreds. Next day we had a pleasant trip up
the Bosphorus and saw the Sea of Marmora and the
Black Sea. There are some beautiful places along
the shores, where the various ambassadors live like
kings ; the hills rise abruptly, and are terraced with
orchards and shrubs—the Judas tree, with its cloud
of pink flowers, forming the most conspicuous object.
We attended a performance of the dancing dervishes,
who keep twirling round on a polished floor like
teetotums at the rate of 50 to 60 revolutions per
minute, with an easy graceful motion, their flowing
robes extended like a funnel, to the strains of a band
of stringed instruments.


We spent five days in Constantinople, visiting a
great many places of interest, including the ruined
fortifications and the three walls which surround
the city and present many huge cracks and signs
of crumbling decay. We sailed for Athens in the
Vorwarts, the ship being loaded right down with
Russian wheat. But the quality did not come up to
our own ; it lacked the bright colour, although the
grain was fairly plump. On landing at the port a
five-mile drive took us to the city of Athens, where
we got good accommodation for 10 francs a day,
although at first 20 francs were wanted. But this is
a fair sample of the way hotels are conducted in the
East ; bargaining is always necessary. We had two
days at our disposal, so hired a carriage and guide in
order to do the place properly. The present town is
evenly laid out, and the houses are mostly two-
storied, and built of marble, freestone, and limestone,
the population being over 50,000 people. The town
is picturesquely situated on a flat at the foot of the
Acropolis, crowned with its grand old columns, that
stand out in striking contrast against the mountains
in the immediate background, for Athens is encircled
by them. There are also several sugarloaf peaks,
each being crowned by remnants of ancient Greece,
in the shape of tall lonic columns, some standing,
others falling in ruins, but all stamping the general
view with special interest and uniqueness. After
inspecting a beautiful structure of marble called the


Academy of Science, we drove of to the Stadion,
where the great games of the Greeks were played.
It is an immense place, formed in an artificial gully,
the sides of which have been terraced and lined with
60 tiers of marble seats, capable of seating 50,000
persons. The throne was at the southern end, and
up this point the victors used to go to claim the laurel
wreath, for which men in those days used to strive with
greater fervour than athletes do nowadays for pots of
gold. Further on the Arch of Hadrian stands like
a sentinel of ancient times surveying the modern
city at its feet. Standing on a rocky plateau, 200 ft.
above surrounding objects, was the great Parthenon,
a most magnificent building, of vast proportions, which,
although in ruins, will probably outlive all modern
Athens.
Within a hundred paces of the place just described
is the Hill of Mars, where St. Paul made his oration,
“Ye men of Athens.” A rough stairway, some 20 ft.
in length, hewn in the solid rock, leads from the road
to the top, and one can well imagine the bold orator
speaking from this natural pulpit, whence his voice
would travel on all sides uninterrupted.
We had the good fortune to gain admittance to
the King’s Palace. The first room we entered was
the ante-room to the Throne Hall. The floor was
composed of marble, the joints fitting perfectly,
whilst round the walls were paintings of Greeks and
Turks in war. In every picture the Turks were


being worsted, and in the four corners of the room
were hung various tattered flags, being colours of
Turkish regiments which had been defeated. The
throne was covered with rich ruby velvet, the walls of
white marble, and the floor inlaid with fancy woods.
The largest room was the ballroom, with chandeliers
for 2,000 lights, and magnificent decorations, which
at night would appear a mass of gold and glitter.
We saw a glorious sunset from Mount Lycabettus—
-900 ft. high. The sun dropped behind snow-clad
mountains, throwing a ruby tint over them, whilst
the last glints were reflected on the Acropolis and
city at our feet, beyond which lay the bay in colours
of bright purple. Instead of that “ Sweet Maid of
Athens” the poet sings of, the sunsets have stolen our
hearts. At night, in the Greek churches, where high
mass was being held, the atmosphere was stifling,
owing to the myriads of candles that were lighted.
These places were all thronged with people coming
and going, whilst the continued clank of “ Peter’s
pence” was heard as the coins dropped into the trays
that were being carried round. Easter is made a
great deal of here. The flags all over the city and
harbour are floating half-mast till Sunday, when they
will be hauled up to the masthead, and every Greek
family will then kill a lamb as a sacrifice. We left
on Good Friday, before the great demonstration,
when all the churchgoers parade in the great square,
carrying a bier representing the dead Christ. Busi-


ness is suspended, save by candle and incense sellers,
who have their stalls at most of the street corners,
selling candles varying in length from I ft. to 3 ft.
The greatest business, however, appears to be done
by sheep-owners, who were driving in their flocks
by the hundred, and it was amusing to watch the
Greeks bartering and bargaining as though their
lives depended on the transaction, and then finally
hoisting the hapless mutton on their shoulders and
bearing it off.
Athens was swarming with soldiers ; the dull, heavy
tread of thousands marching in step along the road
being heard at intervals all through the day. The
majority are stripling youths, lithe, active, and intelli-
gent looking, though hardly the kind of troops to
withstand fatigues. We sailed for Sicily in the
Marsala.


CHAPTER IX.
THROUGH SICILY AND ITALY.
We had a rough time of it in the Mediterranean Sea
after leaving Greece. A terrible gale beset our ship
for 3 6 hours ; plates where shaken out of the racks
in the galley and smashed, the cook could not prepare
or serve food, and scarcely one of the passengers
wanted to eat, so bad were they with sea-sickness.
When the storm abated an entire change came over
the scene, and so calm and clear was the atmosphere
that 70 miles from Sicily we actually saw the volcano
of Mount Etna, its snow-clad summit glittering in the
sun 10,875 feet above the level of the sea. We were
surprised at Catania, our first port in Sicily, for the
city contains 100,000 people, with beautiful streets,
all clean as the proverbial new pins, Domes and
cathedrals rise above the surrounding high build-
ings, and snowy-topped Etna, with a chimney-like
column of vapourish smoke, sets off the place to
advantage. The streets are fine for cycling, being
level and composed of lava from the volcano,
which is beautifully smooth and deadens the sound
of wheels. At night the city looks brilliant, for
each side of the streets is lined with lamps—l 2 in


a hundred yards. Then again the footpaths average
8 feet in width, and the roadway 30 feet, but none of
this is occupied by drainage, which is carried under-
ground, and the streets are free from trams. The
people are very proud of Bellini, the celebrated
composer of “Norma” and other operas, who was
born here, and a large garden has been named
after him, and also a splendid monument erected
to his memory. The little isle of Sicily is full
of villages, and altogether contains three millions
of people, who are industrious and hard-working.
From Catania we proceed along the shore to Messina,
a seaport situated on the straits of the same name,
dividing Sicily from the mainland of Italy. The
coast on either side is precipitous and rugged, and
yet almost every gully we pass has a little village
nestling in it with a crowd of inhabitants. No mis-
take about it, some corners of the earth teem with
people struggling for existence, and seeing this leads
us to think of Australia, with its thousands of broad
acres where white man has perhaps never trod.
Sicily is called the garden of Europe, and it is taxed
to its utmost capacity, exporting fruits of all kinds,
both raw and cured, to supply the demand of
European and American cities. The wines also are
justly celebrated, and are not allowed to leave the
vineyard till eight years old. The proprietor of the
Marsala vineyard, one of the most famous in the
island, is also the largest shareholder of the Rupertaio


line of ships, one of which, the s.s. Marsala , we are
now travelling on.
We rode our trusty bicycles some 40 miles round
about the beautiful island. The scenery is fine ;
steep hills rise from the water’s edge, all closely culti-
vated—in fact, no vacant land is visible. The hus-
bandman bestows great care on his crops. For
instance, the popping of guns was continually heard,
and after a while we found a war was waged against
sparrows and other birds of the tomtit order which
peck the fruit.
The opposite shore—ltaly—looked rugged and
hilly, a little snow lying on the highest ridges.
The women are very pretty, having an animated
style; their complexions are brunette, a mixture
of olive and ruby. Next morning we arrived at the
capital of the island, Palermo. The city is delight-
fully situated in a sheltered harbour, surrounded with
hills some 2,000 ft. high. We took a walk up to the
summit of Mount Pellegrino, following a twisting
road which rose at a gradient of one in seven, and
there were 15 zigzags in it. The view, however, was
simply lovely, for we had the harbour and city laid
out in a panorama at our feet, whilst the various
shades of light differed on every range and vale.
We had often thought some of the pictures showing
those extraordinary colours must have been some-
what overdrawn, but after the Grecian and Sicilian
landscapes, we are open to believe almost anything


in the way of colour. After breakfast we visited the
Church of San Joseph ; we were taken by the guide
in an unpretentious sort of way into a building, and
were quite unprepared for the beautiful place we
beheld. The mosaics were elaborate and charming,
whilst the ceilings and domes of the interior were a
mass of bas-reliefs of angels and children, inter-
mingled with paintings, and it was hard to see where
one ended and the other began. The columns were
also composed of marble in one piece, and altogether
the church was equal to anything we have seen, and
were it in Egypt or Syria would be trotted out as a
great lion, and several francs a head charged for
admission.
We saw the people in the cathedral at midday
prayers; there were about 1,000 present, and the
close reminded one of the curtain falling in a theatre,
for directly the cross was lowered the whole mass
started chattering and hurrying away.
The King’s Palace (Humbert I.) was our next point,
and we followed through some dozen or more rooms,
all rich with mosaics, tapestries, and paintings. The
chateau of the Comte Tasca, with its acres of lemon
trees in full fruit, and vast flower garden, interspersed
with grottoes and fountains, and also the British gar-
dens, some three miles in extent, well met our expecta-
tions ; and then the scene changed, for we went
below to the Catacombs, Here are long underground
chambers, in which the dead are placed at the present


time. It was a hideous spectacle, for there, stuck
against the walls, many deep, stood the skeletons of
people, the skulls in every case being bare, but the
bodies had clothes wrapped round them. Each bore a
ticket giving name, age, and date of death, and the
relatives have access at all times to see the remains
of their friends. Amongst others we saw the corpse
of a ballet-girl, celebrated for her great beauty.
What a change there is now ! In the evening we
boarded the Elettrice, a steamer styled the “ racehorse
of the Mediterranean,” and in n}4 hours—at daylight
—we were in the Bay of Naples, admiring the smoking
Vesuvius, with sad forebodings as to how we would
manage to square the Customs, and get our bicycles
ashore. It is never any good meeting trouble half-
way, however, for in this case we simply gave the
official the Melbourne Bicycle Club’s letter of introduc-
tion to read, carefully slipping a two-franc piece into a
certain gentleman’s palm, which he adroitly conveyed
to his pocket, took off his hat, and on we passed.
“See Naples and die,” is the rough translation of
an old saying. Well, we didn’t see anything so
startlingly beautiful in it. The harbour very much
resembles the Bay of Palermo ; but Naples is built
on steep hills, whereas Palermo is on fairly level
ground. Hence the effect is much better at Naples ;
and Vesuvius is always pouring out its heavy
volume of smoke, and, with an occasional grumbling
accompaniment, keeps a rather unpleasant watch


over the half-million inhabitants or more that con-
stitute the population.
The Museum of Naples is a huge building, con-
taining some of the most beautiful and rare sculptures
and works of art. Here we saw the originals of
statues we are quite familiar with. Here also are
vast galleries of paintings, with artists by the dozen
at work copying, and we couldn’t help feeling what a
pity it was to see so many grubbing along, getting a
living or barely so; for they offered us their handiwork
in oils at prices varying from lof. to loof. The latter
price represented a work 3 ft. by 4 ft., splendidly
executed, and having occupied 20 days’ hard work.
Only fancy this for a paltry £4. We spent an
hour inspecting the relics and curios that have
been, and are now being, dug up from the ruins of
Pompeii. These comprised a huge variety, and
show that there is very little new under the sun, for
there were the same workmen’s materials, the same
medical instruments and household utensils, that are
in everyday use at the present time. In the medical
division we saw several catheters and other delicate
instruments that show that they had advanced know-
ledge, medically speaking, 2,000 years ago. Many
old parchment, or rather “ papyrus paper,” writings
are also shown, whilst, incredible as it seems, there
are the various edibles that were being prepared, such
as wheat, oats, peas, walnuts, and loaves of bread in
galore. All these things were as black as coal. In


an adjoining room we also savKjjOTne of /Jt the most
abominably lewd and filthy things, Bbth~ paintings
and statuary. You could scarcely imagine that any
human beings could fall so low, and an old idea
certainly gained ground with us—that the destruction
of these cities was a visitation of Almighty wrath, for
surely the cities of the plain could never have reached
a lower ebb than the excavations of Pompeii and
Herculaneum have disclosed.
The streets of Naples are very narrow, and almost
all the houses rise four and even six stories, with
projecting windows and small balconies that shut out
the light. The streets are paved with lava, and are
steep and slippery, so that both man and beast have
to keep their wits about them ; horses especially
have a bad time of it.
The churches of Naples are in reality huge collec-
tions of fine arts ; beautiful statuary and paintings
we saw almost puts the Museum in the shade. P'or
instance, among others, were three figures of great
beauty. The first represented the Saviour, lying with
a kind of muslin over the body; the figure of Inno-
cence, similarly draped ; and the third a figure of a
man in a net. In each case the figures and their sur-
roundings were cut from one piece of stone. Really
one ought not to individualize these more than num-
bers of others in the same church, for there were other
clusters of figures—four or five persons—all cut from
one block, and without a blemish.
An\
175
A Visitation of Aim&htii Wrath.


Fourteen miles out of Naples we reached Pompeii.
We landed at the ruins, and 2f. gave us access and a
guide. The same feeling of utter desolation that we
. experienced at Ephesus came over us again, but in a
more marked degree, for we actually trod the exact
streets and stones these unfortunate beings walked
over. The excavations up to date have bared about
one-third of the buried cities; the remainder lies
about 20 or 30 ft. under the lava ashes that showered
down and smothered them. The town is about
seven miles from the crater, and the volume and
density of the eruption must have been appalling, for
the people were overtaken and killed at their work.
Many of the bodies are on view. These do not
appear like skeletons at all, but are, in fact, petrified,
and show the shape of the muscles. Several of the
bodies have the arms drawn over the face, as though
the poor wretches were trying to avoid suffocation.
The mummied remains of a dog have also been
found in a wonderful state of perfection. The streets
of the ancient city are cleared of all obstructions, and
show that they were flagged with lava from the
mount, and there are deep wheel-ruts. The shops
have been identified with various trades ; for instance,
in some are huge earthenware jars in which wine
was kept. The great Forum, the temples of Venus,
Jupiter, and Isis, are all laid bare. The roof, in
almost all cases, had fallen in, leaving the walls as
they stand at present, some 20 ft. in height. There


also, is the great Amphitheatre, with its tier upon
tier of stone seats. We wandered along the labyrinth
of streets where once the busy thousands thronged,
but now all is oppressively quiet, save for the globe-
trotters, who day by day keep up a continuous
stream.
The ancient lava from Vesuvius bears a striking
resemblance to Melbourne bluestone, for it is not
porous, and appears equally hard and durable. Two
hours in Pompeii, and then we mounted horses and
went for the big event —Vesuvius. By dint of con-
tinual flogging we managed to keep the horses going
fairly well, soon leaving vegetation behind, riding up
hills of black lava interspersed here and there with
streams of rock that had run down the side of the
mount for a few miles and then set. This ride lasted
for nearly two hours, and just as we dismounted to
proceed on foot a huge cloud swept across and hid
the view entirely, and worse still wetted us through,
for, although we brought waterproofs to the foot of
the hill, no clouds were seen, and we went without
them ; but in mountaineering you cannot go wrong
in having them. At this point quite a small colony
of fellows live, who carry people up in chairs or
pull them up by ropes. All these kindly offers of
help we refused, and told the guide to go ahead and
we would stick to him. He was evidently in league
with all the others ; but we put him on his mettle by
telling him we could go up quicker than he. Frankly


admitting he was beaten, we gave him a couple of
minutes and off again, reaching the crater in 45
minutes from the horses, whilst the return only took
10 minutes, for we came at a kind of run all the way
in the soft cinders and ashes. The mountain was
fearfully steep. The climb was the most trying we
have had, for the cinders varied in size, sometimes
being like black peas, at others like blasting powder
or black sand ; in every case quite loose, so that in
reality a step of two feet lost half by the sand
running back, and an occasional patch of lava rock
was welcomed as a treat. We were still enveloped
with cloud, but needed nothing more than our noses
to tell that the summit was about, for the sulphur
filled our nostrils and appeared to rise from under
our very feet, and the continuous booming was
getting unpleasantly close. In a few minutes the
mist cleared off to a great extent and we ventured
ahead, every now and again carefully avoiding
yellowish brimstone patches, where the heat issued
through fissures with sufficient intensity to boil any-
thing in a couple of minutes, till we got right within
15 ft. of the little crater, which poured out a con-
tinuous column of smoke. The big fellow was about
50 yards off and perhaps 100 ft. higher than this, and
was puffing away just like the exhaust of a mighty
engine. The throbs made the ground tremble and
seemed to be about 30 to the minute, whilst occa-
sionally huge masses of rock and lava were pitched


a hundred feet into the air and then fell back into
the crater, each time accompanied by an explosion.
We scuttled off after seeing one lot go up, and it is
not likely anyone would care to hang about long, for
verily the whole concern seemed mighty shaky.*
The railway that was opened some time ago to the
top of Vesuvius has been broken, so that accounted
for our taking horses. We have now seen Mounts
Etna, Stromboli, and Vesuvius, the three great
volcanoes.
People, as of old, build houses and live on the
slopes of this monster, and certainly risk their lives ;
for it is in a semi-active state now, and within the
past three months a stream of lava started down the
eastern slope, but did not proceed very far. The
reason of the people crowding so close is on account
of the soil, which is most prolific. The whole plain
between the mount and the range of the Apennines
is thickly dotted with houses, not to speak of the
three large towns that lie between Vesuvius and the
sea shore. The main industry appears to be the
making of macaroni, and every street had abundance
of it hung out to dry in the sun.
On the first day after leaving Naples we rode go
miles. Soon after quitting the city we lost our way
* Within three months from the time the above was written,
the cone up which we climbed disappeared into the fearful
abyss of the crater, but fortunately it happened during the
night, when no visitors were about.


in the tortuous paved streets, and went five miles
astray. We moved along over bad roads composed
of paved rough slimy stones, new metal, and heavy
mud in about equal parts ; of the three evils it was
hard to tell the' worst. Arriving at San Agata di
Sessa at 11 a.m. we had a nice lunch, consisting of
bread, fish, and wine. In six hours we travelled 45
miles ; but it was rough work, and as our road was
crossed by innumerable others, many inquiries in
Italian were necessary.
We occasioned the first bad accident of our trip
shortly after leaving Naples. This was the capsizing
of a cart containing three men. Two were thrown
into a ditch and the third pinned under the vehicle.
We dismounted in a flash, and held the horse down
and extricated the unfortunate, and after giving the
three groaning fellows a coin each, we thought the
safest thing was to clear out, as about fifty men with
guns over their shoulders had collected in ten minutes.
The accident was attributable solely to the idiotic
management of horses here. The carts have wheels
from six to seven feet in diameter, with narrow
bodies, and the horses are driven without a bit, in
lieu of which they have a kind of strap round the
nostrils, with a straight bar projecting three inches
on either side. Into the ends of this the reins are
buckled, consequently the driver has little or no
control over a restive animal, which sometimes gets
under the shafts, and then chaos results.


We proceeded across spurs of the Apennines, and
finished the day’s ride at Terracina, having covered
90 miles in 13 hours. The scenery partly com-
pensated for bad roads, for we rode through romantic
gorges with castles and walled towns stuck on craggy
sides, and then over flats cultivated with as great care
and neatness as the Chinamen’s gardens. Many
snow-clad mountains, too, were in sight, but luckily
our path led more through ravines. At Monte San
Andrea we found it very cold, being within a quarter
of a mile of snow, with a biting breeze in our faces.
Each peasant parades along in front of his plot of
garden with a gun, presumably to shoot birds, whilst
in the majority of cases the women do the work.
For about 20 miles we followed the seashore, and
obtained many fine views. Every town we passed
was walled and guarded by collectors. These collect
taxes on all produce that enters. Hay and feed grass
are the lowest on the list, but before a load is allowed
to pass the guard drives a long prodder through in
various places to see no grain or other dutiable matter
is concealed. We started at an early hour next
morning, and followed a good road leading across
level marshy country through several little villages,
and reached Cisterna in time for a nice lunch at the
Della Posta, and afterwards encountered some bad
road, all paved with small cubes and up hill, for 8
miles, to the large and imposing town of Velletri.
Through this, on account of up hill and cobbles,


we were obliged to walk, and about 500 boys
crowded round, and followed us outside the gates.
We were certainly among the first flight of wheel-
men along this way, for the people rushed out of their
houses, and stood in the road in groups looking after
us as we passed through the various villages ; and
when we stopped for refreshments a mob would at
once surround the machines. We had to climb the
Monte Artemiso several thousand feet before reaching
Geralzo and Albano ; the latter is noted for its pretty
scenery, the hills overlooking lakes formed by extinct
craters ; the banks are most beautifully green and
fertile, in most cases being thickly dotted with houses
of the wealthy Romans. From Albano we ran on
the down grade for several miles, and saw the
“ Eternal” City, as Rome is called, in the distance.
The intervening flat was broken by old ruins of the
Appian Way and aqueducts, whilst for many miles
previously every eminence was crowned with ruins of
great buildings that served to impress us with the
vast proportions of ancient Rome. Some seven
miles from the city we were surprised—for it was
Sunday—to see a race-meeting going on, attended
by thousands of people, and the adjoining fields
crowded with carriages, while the Appian Way was
lined on either side by wine-carts and orange vendors.
The last few miles of our ride was through vast
crowds of people, some in carriages and gigs, others
on horseback, and pedestrians four or five deep on


the side-walks. Just before entering the city gates
we were pulled off our bicycles by a lot of gaudily-
bedecked soldiers with glittering epaulettes and
plumed hats, who signified that we must walk. This
we did till inside the gates, when seeing a clear coast
we hopped on and directed a cabman to guide the
way to the Milano Hotel, for finding a certain house
in a city like Rome was otherwise a hopeless task.
We followed our guide over delightful streets for a
mile or so, when our ride was abruptly finished by
two or three gaudy gendarmes, who made us dis-
mount, and arrested us for riding bicycles within the
city. We could not understand what was up, and
appealed to the crowd to know if anyone spoke
English, and were delighted to find one who did, and
was very kind. The gendarmes would not let us go,
and marched us back to the police station, with the
ever-attendant crowd at our heels. We were detained
about two hours, while the officials took down our
pedigree ; and then our new-found friend went bail,
and we were liberated and allowed to wheel our
machines to the hotel. The gentleman who rendered
such timely service was one Galeo Dattari, an Italian,
who was for many years surveying on the Victorian
railways. Next day our case came on, and as we had
infringed the law through ignorance we were let off
with a caution. This little episode was by no means
a pleasant introduction to Rome after a 66-mile spin.
On interviewing the consul he granted us passports,


stating that we were subjects of Her Majesty the
Queen, and were to be allowed to pass without let or
hindrance through the Continent to England, and to
be afforded protection if necessary. It seems ridicu-
lous, on our part, to attempt to describe such an
immense city as Rome while on a flying visit. We
will only touch on a few points. The Coliseum,
Forum, and adjacent ruins occupied a morning. The
former building was supposed to seat 87,000 people ;
and, unlike the mighty ruins of theatres at Ephesus
and Athens, this is raised 156 feet above the ground,
and presents a much more imposing appearance.
It is the largest in the world, and its antiquity
dates back to A.D, 80. The opening of this im-
mense amphitheatre was perhaps the occasion of
the finest displays of games and gladiatorial combats
ever held, for the carnival was continued for 100
consecutive days, and during that time 5,0c0 wild
animals were slain. At present the building presents
a patched-up appearance, and, had it not been sup-
ported by brick buttresses, would long since have
fallen to the ground. None of the tiers of seats are
now to be seen, but the arches on which they rested
are fairly complete. It is elliptical in shape, the
outside measurement being 576 yards, the diameter
205 x 170, and arena 95 x 60 yards. It has often
been said that Rome has a church for every day of
the year. The majority have very little outward
show, but inside are beautiful specimens of statuary


and paintings ; and if, in going along any street, one
turns at random into a church, the chances are he
will he very much surprised at the great wealth of
beauty disclosed. We entered the church of Saint
Giovanni, in Laterano, which originally belonged to a
wealthy family named Laterani, and which has
passed through the usual earthquake and several
fires, but has been restored each time, and is very
spacious and beautiful. The ceiling was designed by
Michael Angelo, and several of his other works are
here also. In addition to many beautiful oil paint-
ings, there are statues and sculpturing by the best of
the old masters, and especially heroic-sized figures of
the Twelve Apostles in marble, these latter being
placed in huge niches on either side of the main
aisle. On the pavement, and in many parts of the
church, are pictures in mosaic. These precious stones
are so neatly fitted, and the colours blend so well, that
it is most difficult to believe you are not looking at
real paintings. At this church, also, we saw the
holy stairway that our Saviour once walked. It was
brought from Jerusalem by the Empress Helena, in
326, from the Palace of Pilate, and the marble is now
covered with boarding to take off the wear, for
thousands of people climb up and down the 28 steps
on their knees. At the foot of these stairs, which are
called “ Scala Santa,” are two splendid works repre-
senting Christ and Judas saluting him with a kiss. The
features are more life-like than almost any we have seen.


We spent two days visiting the Vatican Palace and
St. Peter’s. In the former we saw a vast collection
of valuable works and paintings by notable artists.
The building contains 11,000 rooms, and we will not
pretend to describe it. They say if all the other
books, sculpturing, and paintings of the world were
destroyed, the Vatican collection would go a great
way towards replacing them. St. Peter’s is another
place of surpassing grandeur and mighty dimensions.
We gained a fine panorama of Rome from the top,
and also looked inside the ball ; this appears to be a
foot in diameter from the piazza, but will easily hold
16 men. The bronze of St. Peter, with the big toe
all kissed away, was also seen. The grand Church
of St. Paul falls little short of St. Peter’s itself.
Tradition says St. Paul was buried on the spot where
this church now stands. It has double columns down
its entire length—viz., 130 yards—whilst the width
is 65 yards and height 75 ft. The floor is all of
polished marble.
The Catacombs are immense burial grounds,
covering 600 acres, and are like so many rabbit
warrens, being in places five passages deep. We
wandered along with an old monk as guide, but the
air was bad and damp, hence we did not take as
much interest as we should have in the distinguished
remains of martyred monks—by some of them are
remains of small phials of original blood.
Rome is a clean city, and the electric light plays a


prominent part; at night many of the shops, most of
the hotels, and fountains here and there, are lighted
up. The latter are especially fine, for the water jets
up some 40 ft, and powerful lamps have their rays
directed on them. The city is plentifully supplied
with fountains, always playing; whilst old Father
Tiber, swift in motion, but dirty in colour, takes all
the drainage away. Several cycle clubs exist here,
but they are hampered by absurd civic restrictions.
We rode away from Rome over very rough pitchers ;
afterwards we had 15 miles fairly good, but the next
10 to Montorisi were bad. Here we were unable to
obtain any food, so kept on to the next town, where
stale bread and curds, with the everlasting macaroni
and wine ad lib. formed an acceptable meal. The
town was, of course, guarded and walled, and we were
again followed by swarms of children, till by walking
and riding over good, bad, and indifferent roads,
we gradually attained an altitude of 3,000 ft, and
from this height looked down over the well-cultivated
country, which appeared like a patchwork quilt, with
its irregularly shaped little farms. Five miles before
reaching Viterno our machines seemed, for the first
time that day, to gain life, and we wheeled gaily down
toThe town, which appeared to be many hundreds of
years old—its walls and fortifications crumbling away
with age, and its streets all cut into grooves by the
wheels. The climbing for the day was not yet done,
for 8 miles of the 12 to Montefiascone were climbing,


the town being perched on top of a hill—a huge
domed church standing out against the sky for a long
distance, and the battlemented wall, some 40 ft. high,
broken only by four massive iron doors, looked
capable of holding its own against all comers.
Moving on to Lake Bolsena, and the town of the
same name, we had a delightful down-hill ride, wind-
ing around the lake, and at 4 o’clock finished up for
the day—66 miles—putting up at a scrubby-looking
place called Loconda Della Stella. We chose this
locality on account of its beauty and the fact of there
being no other stopping-place within 30 miles.
The town of Bolsena is very picturesque, situated
on the edge of the lake, and runs up a very precipitous
mountain of limestone, in which the poorer villagers
have excavated caves and live there with their
families. At a distance the hill looks at night time
like the abodes of a lot of fairies. Many old sayings
we are familiar with are being brought home with
force. One is, “ the Italians are born musicians.”
This has been illustrated many times already, for we
have heard ragged little fellows bringing delightful
music out of a flute made from a stick with the pith
cleaned out; and one to-day was performing on a
fiddle of the rudest possible construction. To supply
strings for this the family cat had probably become a
martyr. We were up next morning and away at
half-past 5, the road rising about 1,500 ft. to San
Lorenzo, then down again to Aquapendante, a most


delightful spot on the mountain side, three large
waterfalls within a quarter a mile of the road forming
a wild, rugged, and charming landscape. Then we
rose 3,000 ft. to Radicofani, a fearful climb, during
which the rain gave place to a snowstorm, not very
severe, but lasting long enough to mantle the
surrounding country one or two inches deep. At the
abovenamed place we got a meal at the loconda, a
sort of accommodation house where no hotels exist.
They are far from pleasing, for the ground floor is
always used as a stable for the cattle and goats, the
family and travellers being accommodated in the
second story, where the prevailing odours are most
unsavoury. We continued all day climbing mon-
strous hills and running down them again. This is
accounted for by the towns, with few exceptions,
being perched right on the summit, thus being more
easily walled and safer against banditti, that in days
gone by used to swarm all over the country. We
ended the day’s ride of 70 miles at Siena. This is a
large town, with stone buildings five stories high and
well-flagged streets.
Leaving at the usual early hour in the morning,
we passed on, our wheels earning us over a succes-
sion of ups and downs till we reached the lovely city
of Florence, situated right in the heart of the moun-
tains, and a little south of the Apennines, whose
snowy summits looked ominous for the morrow. We
could only knock up 54 miles in eight hours, and


fully 12 miles had to be walked. The afternoon was
spent wandering through the famous picture and
statue galleries, and the celebrated cathedral was also
visited. The outside is delightful, for it is a mass of
mosaics in coloured marble; but with such an
exterior one cannot help feeling disappointed with
the interior, for it has none of that elaborate sculptur-
ing or painting that forms such a pleasing part of all
the churches of Italy.
Up with the lark again next morning, and off on
the wheel for Bologna. For six miles and a half we
steadily rose, and then had a delightful run down a
winding gorge for an equal distance, the sad part of
it being we had quite lost the 2,000 ft. already gained,
and had to start climbing the Apennines again. The
task of crossing these mountains was very great, and
even more difficult to describe. They consist of many
ranges, with a width of over 50 miles. After 14 miles
we turned off, and our road led through Vogia and
other places, a distance of 12 miles, all up hill, and
two-thirds too steep to ride. The elevation reached
must have been something like 4,000 feet ; we could
not tell for certain, as our aneroid came to grief.
The mountains have no defined ridge, but consist of
innumerable mountains, all jumbled together, up and
down which we pedalled on excellent roads. Further
along we met some severe storms, with lightning and
thunder too close to be pleasant. The snow that we
feared remained at a respectful distance—half a mile


above us—but we ran amuck of a hailstorm of great
severity. The last 10 miles were down the mountains,
but owing to the rain we had to exercise great caution,
as the grade was often I in 12, with occasional short
dips of lin 8. The rain only fell on the mountains,
for as soon as we reached the flats the dust was quite
2 inches deep. We reached Bologna, the land of the
sasuages, at 6 p.m., having taken about 12 hours to
cross the mountains, the distance recorded being 60
miles.
We left Bologna behind, and all its beautiful scenery
and picturesque groups of maidens plaiting straw for
Leghorn hats. These mountain lasses looked real
pictures of health and beauty. Occasionally a bevy
of them would clamber up some steep hill, watching
the bicycles, and wanting us to ride. Well, Bologna,
at the foot of the mighty Apennines, with its 130,000
inhabitants and 130 churches, monasteries, and two
leaning towers, was quitted, and although so early
half-past 5 —the workmen were at their labours, and
the streets busy with the hum of life—for daylight to
dark, summer and winter, is the day’s labour here,
and then about ss. a day is the wage. We buzzed
along over the plains, and at Ferrara had lunch.
Here the fussy gendarmes compelled us to dismount
and walk a mile. Crossing the River Po, an immense,
fast-running, muddy stream some 600 yards wide, we
saw a most ingenious use made of the water-power.
Barges were moored along the banks and the space


between was occupied by a big paddle-wheel that the
stream drove, thereby supplying power for milling.
The plains were quite green, and we seem to have
followed spring right along, and here at present the
trees, that on the mountains were leafless, are all
putting forth their new clothing, and the grass stands
a foot high, but the colour is quite different to the
Australian green ; here it resembles a mixture of
light-green and yellow. The grape-vines are also
trained in a peculiar manner, for they are allowed to
run up tree supports for 4 ft. or 5 ft, and then spread
out to stakes and other trees, so that whole acres of
vineyards are spread out in mid-air, looking like
huge cobwebs, for the young shoots are barely starting
yet. We reached Pandora after 85 miles. The good-
natured gendarmes actually allowed us to ride in the
city, perhaps because it rained, for cycling is against
the law in all the towns of Italy ; but we usually rode
till ordered to dismount. Here we left our wheels,
and trained the few miles across the embankment to
Venice.
It was, indeed, a lovely sight going into the city,
possibly the liveliest of all we have seen, for as our
gondolier steered for the Hotel Bauer we had a good
chance of seeing the Grand Canal by lamplight, its
many boats flitting along noiselessly, and we were
almost sorry when the hotel was reached in the heart
of the city of Venice.
We spent two days in Venice, and, assisted by a


guide, saw most of what was to be seen. The gondola
is a most comfortable mode of travelling ; they, how-
ever, have a funereal appearance, for, in accordance
with a law passed several centuries ago, they are all
painted black.
We had to get new cycle suits made here, for we have
worked through two pairs of knickers each since starting.
The Palace of the Doges was first visited. This is
a great building, a thousand years old. It has been
destroyed five times, but greater splendour was dis-
played each time it was restored. The fa£ade is of
Gothic architecture, surrounded by two corridors, one
above the other. The capitals are relieved with
figures of men, animals, and trees. Above these, how-
ever, the wall is almost blank, and scarcely in keeping
with the first two stories. We entered the palace by
the Gigantic Stairs, so named on account of the two
statues of heroic size—Mars and Neptune—which
stand at the the top. We wended our way through
numerous rooms, all richly embellished with Venetian
art, the ceilings being a mass of gilding and oil
painting, and the walls simply clothed with most
beautiful works, mainly representing Biblical subjects.
Beneath these rooms were the dungeons where
criminals were confined, and then again below these
lay the damp cells where political prisoners, traitors,
and the like were kept till such time as the guillotine
ended their troubles. The guillotine is still there,
and the old door through which the body was


passed into a boat, and at dead of night taken
out to sea and sunk, for all these executions were
secret. Then, again, a good idea of the times could
be gathered from the small slits in the walls of the
place, which were for depositing secret information,
and doubtless many an innocent man has suffered
the penalty through making an enemy who in this
way offered false testimony against him.
Adjoining the palace is the cathedral, especially
rich in mosaics, and not a few of the main columns
have been brought from other celebrated churches,
for when the Venetians conquered a nation they were
not particular what kind of booty they took. We
scaled the cathedral clock—an easy matter, for
instead of steps we went up 37 inclined planes to the
top. A Venetian glass factory came under our
notice, where they were spinning glass so fine in
texture as to be hardly perceptible, and blowing
glass bubbles the shells of which were certainly no
thicker than gold leaf. There are very few parts of
Venice that cannot be reached by boat, but some of
the smaller canals have bad-smelling refuse thrown
into them, and the tide is scarcely sufficient to clear
it off. Then, again, instead of blue sea, the sur-
rounding water is broken by mud islands, and is very
shallow, so that boats have to keep to the proper
channels. Altogether Venice has 117 islands sur-
rounding it; many of them are highly cultivated,
and supply fruit and vegetables for the city.


In the evening the Grand Canal is especially
beautiful, for instead of strolling bands of singers
there are gaily decorated gondolas, Chinese lanterns
being hung round, and these boats often contain as
many as a dozen singers and musicians, whose soft
chanting and occasional boisterous chorusing seem to
sound specially sweet owing to the ripple of the
water being the only sound to catch the ear save the
music, for the rowers do not splash their oars, but
merely turn the hand and move the oar forward
through the water on its edge.
Next morning we woke, as usual, at 4 o’clock, and
rode away on our wheels at 5, following a good level
road to Barbano. Here we climbed a hill about
three miles long, while it rained hard till we reached
the little town of Le Torre. After running thirty
miles we breakfasted, and then continued over good
roads—for the rain had not reached so far—through
Montebello, San Bonifacio, San Martino, to Verona,
The latter is a large and busy town. This and
Vicenza were the original towns the Phoenicians
hailed from before founding Venice, Near Verona
we stumbled across one of the finest ruins we have
seen anywhere—an immense amphitheatre or arena,
with 43 tiers of stone seats, all perfect, elliptical in
form, the open central space measuring 270 ft. long
by 170 ft. wide; the outside wall originally rose at
least 40 ft. above the seats.
On reaching Rivoltella we got a magnificent view


of the Lago di Garda, the first of the Northern Italian
lakes. Our wheels bowled along a nice road close to
the shore for five miles, and the sight was charming ;
for to the north, within twenty miles, rose the moun-
tains of the Tyrol, all snow-clad ; others less high,
but rugged and precipitous, dropped right into the
lake, the surface of which was broken by small sails,
a ferry steamer, and a stray island or two, whilst our
shore shelved down to the water and was thickly
housed and timbered. At least twenty shades of
colour were plainly discernible, and these, reflected in
water as clear as crystal, made a picture delightful to
the eye. Pescheria, right on the lake, with its massive
walls, drawbridges, and moat, with 10 ft. of water like
glass running round it, was entered, but the officious
gendarmes objecting, we were obliged to walk our
bicycles through. After this, however, we had an
uninterrupted level run of over forty miles, with the
snowy mountains a little to our north, till at 6 p.m.
we pulled up at Brescia, another large and important
town. Our ride was the easiest we have had in Italy,
and yet we totalled 102 miles—our first century “on
the Contenong.”
The great feature of Italy so far has been the
immense number of beautiful churches, and of cruci-
fixes and images of the Virgin and our Saviour that we
passed on the roadside. Every few miles we saw a
little image placed in a niche in a wall, but more often
enclosed in a small brick building about 8 ft. high


and 2 ft. wide. Then, again, especially on the moun-
tains, two out of three country peasants stick up a
crucifix ; and as we rode along most passers-by paused
a moment and crossed themselves. At Brescia every
night the military band plays in the main street, from
which all save pedestrian traffic is stopped for an
hour, and the people swarm out in myriads, and sit
supping coffee or beer at the cafes , the streets being
half covered with chairs and small tables. One
would think the whole population of 50,000 turned
out. The gorgeous attire of the military is alarming,
but two simple cyclists in knickers attracted the
largest share of attention.
We were away next morning at half-past 5, and
had 22 miles of bad road to Coccaglio, which took
three hours. Passing on we rode through Gorgonzola
(partaking of a hearty lunch of the famous cheese of
the place) and half a dozen smaller villages, all
roughly paved. The whole way from Venice has
been simply a succession of small towns. The
pitchers in all the villages are very rough and trying
to the machines. It took till 2 o’clock to complete
65 miles, the last 10 being ridden in the rain, Milan
is the great centre of Northern Italy, having been
entirely rebuilt since its destruction in 1162, and now
has a beautiful appearance. It is the capital of
Lombardy, and almost without doubt is the richest
town of the country, producing various manufactures,
silk being the chief. The city slightly exceeds Mel-


bourne in population. The streets are wide, and
have a most extensive horse tram service—2o
centessimi (twopenny) rides in any direction being
an easy and effective way of seeing the city.
The Milan Cathedral is renowned the world over,
and considered by the Milanese to be the eighth
wonder. It is certainly a magnificent place, but the
outside appears to have had more time and money
devoted to it than the interior, for there are 98
Gothic turrets and no less than 2,000 statues in marble
adorning it. For a small fee we were enabled to go
to the roof, and here gained a good idea of the
grandeur of the place, which is all built of white
marble. From the top we also obtained an extended
view of the Swiss Alps. The general surrounding
country is level, but beautifully green, for we saw no
country save Java that had so much water run-
ning over it. Every 100 yards one crosses crystal
brooks, being conveyed along either for irrigation or
for turning a water wheel : thousands of the latter are
passed, supplying power for various industries, such
as milling, silk factories, saw-milling, and brick-
making.
Milan is blessed with somewhere near 100 churches,
so that the spiritual welfare of the population should
be well attended to. We had a rough ride next
morning, for, owing to the previous day’s rain, the road
was absolutely unrideable, being 6 in. deep with soft
mud, and cart-ruts as deep again. Luckily, however,


a narrow side track existed, and although none of the
best for riding, yet we followed it religiously through
30 miles to Como, save while passing through the six
intermediate towns, which were roughly paved and
some unrideable. Our route was a gradually rising
one for 25 miles, and then we had a delightful run
down to Como, for we got on a grand footpath and
went down and down till at last we came on the
beautiful town at the southern extremity of the Lake
Como. Thus, after a 30-mile spin in 4 y 2 hours, we
halted at the water’s edge for half an hour to admire
the scene.
Lake Como is a delightful spot, if ever there was
one. Snowy hills surround the whole, and many-
tinted trees —such as olives, figs, walnuts, chestnuts
and vines—clothe them right down to the water, and
beautiful houses adorn the shore; whilst almost
every eminence of importance has either castle ruin
or monastery built on its crest. Some of the moun-
tains rise to a height of 7,000 ft, their upper parts
being deeply mantled in snow.
We broke up our siesta to turn to the stern
realities of life, which, in this case, meant climbing
Mount Olimpino by a zig-zag road that made the
perspiration trickle, notwithstanding the cold sur-
roundings.
Down the other side we enjoyed a grand spin, but,
on nearing the bottom, espied two officials stretching
a massive chain across the road, and making signs to


us to stop. We did so, and found our Italian tour
had terminated and we were entering Switzerland.
The Customs, of course, objected to our going
through without paying deposits. We knew too well
what they wanted, but appeared to be ignorant of
anything but English, and pulled out our passports,
demanding to be allowed to proceed. It was a
comical scene, for the officials appeared to know a
smattering of several languages, and although their
request for 20 napoleons duty was quite understood,
we thought it policy to appear unable to understand
them. After five minutes’ hard talking on their part,
we complacently filled our pipes and sat down, event-
ually getting off without parting with our money.
This was also the first time a tip was refused.


CHAPTER X.
ACROSS EUROPE.
We bowled along merrily through the towns of
Balerna and Capolago, the latter right on the shore
of Lake Lugano ; thence riding along the shore past
Melano and Maroggia, we came to the long crossing
at Bissone, and had dinner, after which we crossed to
the opposite shore, and followed that round to
Lugano, and then struck up the mountain and kept
on the up grade for an hour and a half till we
reached the highest point of Mount Cenere, with
snow within half a mile of us on all sides, and
cascades and small waterfalls by the hundred
leaping and dancing down precipitous cliffs, many
lost in spray, others merely rapids. From the top
we looked down on the third of the lovely lakes—
Maggiore ; they are all inexpressibly beautiful. We
zig-zagged down Mount Cenere ; but before long a
blinding storm swept up the gorge we were in and
held us prisoners for an hour, while we were all the
while in sight of our halting-place, Bellinzona, and
we finished off a 68-mile ride at half-past 4. This is
a rarely beautiful town, rather more Italian than
Swiss in style ; still the old abbey church and three
ruined castles, all occupying commanding positions


are very effective ; for, look in whatever way you
turn, you see either the Gastello Grande, Gastello di
Mezzo, or the Gastello Corbario, with a background
of finely wooded hills and occasional small cascades,
and the great, dazzling white snow-clad mountain
framing everything. It was bitterly cold next
morning at half-past 4, when we left, but the rising
ground which we had to travel up soon made us
forget the sharpness of the weather. Then we
followed the valley of the Leventina right along for
40 miles. At first the bed of the gorge —for it was
nothing more—was about 400 yards wide, but it
gradually closed in after passing Biasca and Bodico
till not more than a quarter the width, and we began
to wonder what was to become of our road, and also
the railway line that had been close beside us, for in
front appeared a regular wall of rock. Both routes,
however, were equal to the occasion, the railroad
making a loop tunnel inside the mountain, and rising,
ala corkscrew. Our road then took a little dip
through a corner here and there, and two or three
zigzags brought us out high above Giornico, the road
in places being overhung by great masses of rock,
some 12 ft. of which had been hewn out to make a
road, but the covering of rock was left to protect it
from snowslips and the like. Between this and
Faido the scene was truly romantic, for the gorge
had narrowed to about 60 ft. in places, and the main
stream roared and dashed along below us in a


succession of falls and cascades. We had passed
more than 100 waterfalls in 30 miles, for the rain that
had troubled us lately caused all the tiny falls to
swell to torrents that jumped and tumbled down the
mountain’s precipitous wall-like sides, which rose on
both sides for upwards of 5,000 ft.
We had about seven hours to get from Bellinzona
to Airolo, the tunnel station, some 40 miles, and we
rode it with but five minutes to spare. We had risen
above the beautiful foliage of the preceding hills,
and now had nothing but mountain pine, with
branches bending down with snow, close beside us,
and the great banks of glittering white all around.
The St. Gothard Pass over the mountains had 20 ft.
of snow on it, and would not be open for two months,
so we stepped aboard a train at Airolo, and in 25
minutes were whisked through the earth and landed
at Goschenen, the opposite entrance of the tunnel.
Then, instead of continuing the down grade, we
followed up the St. Gothard road for three miles to
a famous spot, the Devil’s Bridge. Here the River
Russ jumps over the ledge and falls with showers of
snowy water and thunder almost deafening into a
seething whirlpool below, and continues a mad
career down the valley. The legend attaching to
this bridge relates that the designer and builder was
terribly puzzled as to how he could complete his task,
and while in deep study the devil appeared and told
him if he consented to give him the right to the first


that crossed, he would tell him how to make it. The
bargain was struck, but when the bridge was finished
the devil did not get his due, for the builder sent his
dog across instead. This so exasperated His Satanic
Majesty that the legend goes on to tell how he was
carrying a huge rock up the hill to smash the bridge
with when some women went behind him and made
the sign of the cross. This caused him to drop the
rock—some thousand tons—and flee. This is the
story as related by one of the Alpine guides, who
grew highly indignant because we were sceptical, and
offered to take us to the bridge and stone, which, in
his eyes, was proof positive.
We then got on to the machines and rode right
down the Russ Valley, about 27 miles. In riding
along we passed within 100 yards of two great
avalanches that within a few days had come crashing
down the mountain, carrying rocks and pine-trees
with them, messing up the road and forming a bridge
across the river firm enough to walk on. Great
patches of half-frozen snow encroached here and there
on the road, whilst many ravines close to us were
filled with it, and of course the whole mountain-tops—
wherever visible—were pure white. After a 67-mile
ride we reached Fluelen. The roads in Switzerland
were plentifully strewn with new metal, but the
grades are fine, as proved by the fact of riding all
save three miles between Bellinzona and Airolo, and
also right down the St. Gothard road. Switzerland,


instead of being a bad place for cycling, is the finest
place to wheel in imaginable ; the only thing abso-
lutely necessary is a cool head and firm hand and
foot, for the roads are narrow, the turns sharp, with
oftentimes an unprotected side many hundreds of feet
deep. We boarded a steamer at Fluelen for a steam
along Lake Lucerne to the town of Lucerne at 4
o’clock. On the trip we called at six towns, and
landed at Lucerne at 7 p.m. This is another delight-
ful situation, picturesquely placed on the edge of the
lake, which had beautifully deep and clear water, in
which are reflected villas, foliage, and snow-clad
mountains. Edwin and Angelina are here in pro-
fusion, honeymooning ; the steamer was full of them,
and also the hotels. Poor people ! if they could only
see themselves as others see them.
From Lucerne we took steamer for Vishnau, and
there boarded the Rigi railway. This is a cog-wheel
concern that goes up the mountain side, as steep as
the ordinary roof of a house, for 6,000 ft, to the
highest point of the celebrated Rigi. The line is a
broad-gauge, but the centre has a row of cogs, or
teeth rather, into which a wheel fits, and the train
moves along at a walking pace, taking one hour and
20 minutes to reach the top. We were fortunate in
getting a perfect day, although, owing to it being too
early in the season, it was bitterly cold, and for the last
half-mile the snow was as much as 10 ft. high, showing
the spade marks where the track had been cut weeks


before. The view was dazzlingly white, for in front of us
stretched the mighty chain of mountains, visible for 100
miles—that is, 50 either way from our vantage point,
and including, of course, St. Gothard, St. Bernard,
Mont Blanc, and Pilatus, besides a host of glaciers
and a multitude of peaks of lesser magnitude. Then
below the view was entirely different, though scarcely
less beautiful—22 lakes, about a dozen towns, many
rivers, with hill and dale all wonderfully clothed with
green, and occasional patches of fruit trees in blossom,
and at our feet the banks of snow-drifts, broken only
by the dark-foliaged pines, which appear to be the
only trees to withstand the cold. Just before our train
was to return a biting breeze swept off the glaciers,
and we were glad enough to start back. Yet many
visitors stay for days together up here, for there are
fine large hotels with every convenience.
We rode away from Lucerne at 5 a.m. next day,
and were soon scaling the Emmenbrucke hills, and
then ran around Lake Sempach to Sursee, after
which we again fell foul of hills, through several
towns to Aarburg and Olten, the last two towns
being of rare size and most picturesque. From Olten
our road began to rise in an unpleasant style; but,
as the railway was near us, we expected to find a
pass through the mounts which loomed in front of
us. This, however, was not to be, for the train
scuttled into a tunnel and we were left lamenting,
and had to zig-zag for an hour and a half to reach


the top. The view was magnificent, however ; but a
nasty wetting cloud came along and made the road
very sloppy. Shortly after passing through Sissoch
and Liestal we caught a first glimpse of the fast-
running, beautiful Rhine, some 200 yards in width.
We will follow this stream a good many hundred
miles. After dinner we set out for Germany,
crossing the frontier at Leopoldshoke while the
sleepy guards were at dinner. This was a good
move for us, as we fully expected being mulcted for
duty on the bicycles, for the Germans are very strict.
Although we were supposed to be following the Rhine
we merely crossed it, and then pulled up and down
hills for twenty miles without seeing it again. We
stabled our machines for the night at Schliengen at
5 p.m., after a run of 80 miles. We were off next
morning at 5 o’clock, bowling along an avenue of
cherry trees. We found more bother with German
than any other language, it being very difficult to
master the pronunciation ; and then, as a rule, the
majority of the people cannot read, so that there
was no use in showing them a map.
We found the road very rough for 23 miles to
Friburg, whose elaborate portals we were riding
through when a policeman, with a huge fireman’s
helmet adorned with the brass eagle, vehemently
objected, and so we walked along till, seeing a likely-
looking restaurant, we went in for breakfast, and then
passed through not less than 19 villages—some cobble-


stoned—till at 3 p.m. we finished another 80 miles at
the famous Strasburg, noted for the gallant defence
by the French in 1870.
Our loquacious landlord informed us that for 43
days the shells fell in the city at the rate of six a
minute, and the photos, he showed us representing the
city after the siege in a way bear out his statement.
Our first visit was to St. Thomas’s Church, to see the
celebrated tomb of the Marshal of Saxony, the
greatest of all French generals, and one who never
received a defeat. The monument is the work of
Pigalle, sculptor to Louis XIV., and is one of the
finest in Europe. It represents the Marshal in the
act of stepping into a sarcophagus, the lid of which
Death, with hour-glass in hand, is holding aside,
whilst between the two figures France —represented as
a beautiful woman—is endeavouring to keep the two
apart. On the Marshal’s left are some old battle-
tattered colours, and on his right the emblematical
Lion, Bear, and Eagle, representing England, Holland,
and Austria, over whom the Marshal triumphed in the
wars of Flanders.
From here we drove to the cathedral, and saw the
celebrated clock. The original was made in 1574,
and went for 15 years, after which it stopped till the
early part of this century, when the corporation of
Strasburg decided to repair it, and called in the
services of their most eminent mechanician, Dr.
Schwilgrie. This worthy in five years considerably


improved on the original design, and the clock has
gone ever since. The quarters are struck by Child-
hood, Youth, Manhood, and Old Age. We saw the
latter walk out in front of the figure of Death, strike
the bell four times, and then pass into a door at the
other side. The hours are struck by the figure of
Death. At noon the Twelve Apostles pass in rota-
tion in front of the Saviour, who is placed above
Death. Each Apostle pauses in front of the Lord
and bows, then passes on, and whilst this is pro-
ceeding a life-sized cock crows three times. The
clock combines astronomy as well, for the various
phases of the moon, the position of the planets, and
eclipses are all shown. The cathedral itself, according
to tradition, is built on hallowed ground, for long ere
Strasburg existed the original inhabitants of the
country, “the Celts,” had erected their “Dolmen”
here and offered sacrifices to Esus, their god of war,
sacrifices which were often human beings. The
exterior of the cathedral, like that of Milan, is much
superior to the interior, but the stained-glass windows
are very rich and beautiful. There are some quaint
old wooden buildings in the town, one of the oldest
dating back 600 years.
On leaving Strasburg next morning at half-past 5
we could not make our wheels move very fast, for the
roads were deep in mud after a night’s rain. When
we had travelled some distance, however, we got into
good and level country, and then made the machines


hum till we reached the great German sanitorium of
Baden Baden for breakfast—a distance of 35 miles in
four hours. Here, at the Hotel Bavarie, we had to
pay an exhorbitant price for breakfast, owing, doubt-
less, to the season being “ on.” Germany is, of course,
a great place for beer. It can be got every mile or so
for one penny a pint; and it is really splendid, and
not intoxicating.
Shaping our course for Rastadt we passed through
Oos and endless villages, thence across open country
under the most perfect system of cultivation, with all
kinds of crops, green and beautiful, and avenues of
chestnuts, walnuts, apples, cherry and pear trees, the
last three named in bloom. This is Alsace and Lor-
raine, and one would imagine they are the brightest
gems in the German eagle. No one could imagine a
country more prolific; and then villages are every-
where, for, no matter where you are, look across the
landscape and you will see the spire of some church
raising its graceful outline against the sky. Thirty-
seven miles of riding brought us to Carlsruhe, a large
city, with plenty of wretched cobble-paved roads.
We kept moving onwards all that afternoon, being
anxious to reach the famous Heidelberg in time to
have a look around, and we finished our day’s ride of
no miles at 6 o’clock in the evening.
Shortly after our arrival a landau with two sun-
burnt cyclists was under way for the celebrated
castle on the hill. This castle is half in ruins, the


result of French powder during the Thirty Years’
War in the 16th century. It is somewhere about 600
years old, but is systematically repaired and kept
from falling down. The garden is a wealth of rich
foliage and flowers. Heidelberg is a most delightful
spot. Somehow Nature appears occasionally to heap
her charms with lavish hand on one particular spot,
and certainly this is a favoured one. The town lies
between high and finely-wooded hills, a broad stream
rushing along the bottom, spanned by a romantic-
looking old bridge of six arches. This conveyed the
traffic for six centuries ; but recently a new one has
been erected, which the inhabitants are very proud
of; but it is a small thing compared to Prince’s
Bridge, Melbourne. The town has many fine modern
buildings, but there are a lot of the quaint old style,
such as the “ Ritter,” built in 1592 by the Huguenot
refugee, Charles Belier.
We found the road next day perfectly abominable,
and this lasted the whole day. Following the
Heidelberg River, we passed through three towns to
Mannheim, a large manfacturing place, the air being
filled with black smoke. We breakfasted 28 miles
out, and thence passed on to Alzey and Mayence,
till, at 6 p.m., we reached Bingen on the Rhine—Bo
miles of the worst roads we had experienced on the
Continent.
Our way then took us along the winding River
Rhine. At Bingen we were opposite the Niederwald,


famous for its wine, and more so on account of the
great “ Germania,” which rears its colossal figure
and gazes Franceward. It stands i,oooft. above the
river, and was set up to commemorate the war of
1870. The number of breweries in this part of the
country is marvellous. We passed 14 in less than 20
miles, all large concerns, whilst the surrounding
country is covered with hop-fields and poles. We
left Bingen at 5 a.m., and for 40 miles ran along a
good road on the edge of the Rhine. Both rail and
road follow close to the water on both sides of the
stream. Occasionally there is not room between the
cliffy mountains and the water for both tracks, and
so the railway tunnels through. The scenery is
beautiful, but there is too much sameness to describe
individually the 25 towns we passed through. The
worst things, as far as we were concerned, were
undoubtedly the pitchers, and we had to walk a good
distance on this account. Castles, fortresses, or
monasteries are seen on every hill, which rise from
800 ft. to nearly 2,000 ft. above the river. Some of
the ivy-smothered castles are very picturesque. The
steep hillsides are terraced wherever practicable and
vines planted ; but, although the “good Rhine
wine” is famed far and wide, the penny-a-pint
German ale is much more palatable to the thirsty
wheelman.
Boppart, with its delightful villa residences, its
ancient convent and castles, half-hidden in the


luxuriant foliage that clothes everything here, was left
behind, and Coblentz, with about 30,000 inhabitants,
exclusive of the standing garrison of 7,000, was reached.
New fortification works were going on, for the new
Emperor is a military enthusiast, and will most cer-
tainly maintain the army on a good footing, although
the taxes are already being complained of by the
farmers and country people. We rode another 40
miles over bad road, and were just thinking of another
meal when a gale of wind and rain came down in our
faces. The weather improving, we pushed on, but
had a muddy 15 miles past Bonn, the birthplace of
Beethoven, to Hersel, where we decided to halt, the
day’s record being 95 miles. In Germany there is
none of that “ barracking ” element that prevails in
other places. In the villages we passed, no boys ever
attempted to call out or run after us, but most politely
doffed their caps, saying “ Guten-tag” (Good day).
The Germans appear to utilize animal power largely,
for all day long we see small hand-carts and waggons
drawn by dogs harnessed like horses. Then, again,
women march many miles into the villages with milk.
They have about 30 gallons or more in a little
waggon; the strong, broad-set lassie has a strap
round her waist, and a dog is hitched beside her, and
away the pair go. Goodness knows what time they
start, for at 5 a.m. they are on their way home with
empty cans. Cows are also largely used for plough-
ing and other work. Only fancy the indignation of


the pious Hindoo if he could see his sacred animal
in the Rhinish Provinces !
At Hersel we were fairly in clover, for three good
German dames nearly killed us with kindness, giving
us twenty different things for dinner, and at 5 in the
morning hot coffee and a dozen varieties of food, all
beautifully cooked. We ploughed along through
heavy mud to Cologne, a town of 150,000 inhabitants,
besides garrison. The chief interest centres in
the Cathedral, with its two magnificent towers, the
highest in the whole of Europe. The edifice is a
wonderful Gothic structure, and as early mass was
being celebrated we went inside and had a good look
at the beautiful windows.
As in most of the Continental towns, the streets
here were badly pitched. We used to think Flinders-
street west, Melbourne, pretty bad ; but the cobbles
in that street are nothing compared to those in
these German towns. A great bicycle carnival was
being held in Cologne, and as we rode we met
hundreds of wheelmen all bound for the city. The
gaudiness of their dress and the array of silver
medals they wore on their coats rather amazed
us. They also carried small whips, probably to
tackle any small dogs which might annoy them.
After riding 30 miles we halted for breakfast. We
passed through Neuss, and shortly afterwards, Aus-
tralian like, got lost in the bush. We made pretty
nearly two circles, and yet we could not help it, for


we had a compass and knew our direction, but had
to follow the made road, which curved round and
crossed open fields in a most extraordinary manner.
Three times during the day a large main road sud-
denly ended, and we found ourselves with three
tracks in front, no finger board, and no one to
inquire of. That day we rode 80 miles, and slept
at Rheinberg.
Next day we commenced with 11 miles of beautiful
road, completely overshaded by an immense avenue
of horse-chestnuts, the sides of adjoining hills being
deeply clothed with walds or forests. These walds
were very plentiful around Baden Baden, and in
riding through them we were enveloped in semi-
darkness, owing to their density. Our first town was
Xanten, and here a mile of pitchers had to be
walked. When we reached Cleves (30 miles), our
last German town, we had a second breakfast.
Before entering Holland a heavy rain-shower caused
us to wait at a cafe in sight of the Custom House,
and as the officials seemed to make themselves scarce
on account of the rain, we mounted and silently
rolled into Holland unobserved. Once more we
found the compass useful in guiding us till we
reached the town of Osch, the main seat of butterine
factories that supply London. About 1,600 persons
are employed in the manufacture, and something like
200 trucks leave daily. In Holland the greater part
of the country lies some 20 ft. below sea level, and


watercourses, rivers, and the sea itself are dyked up
to prevent encroachments. Hence, we had to follow
the windings of these banks, for the roads run on the
top ; we took advantage of the twilight, and kept
going till 30 minutes past 8 p.m., when we stabled
our trusty iron horses at Gornichem, after a day’s
ride of 112 miles.
Thus, in seven consecutive days we had ridden 625
miles, or an average of nearly 90 miles daily. There
is no mistaking Dutch roads, for they are bricked in
a peculiar manner, not altogether satisfactory to the
wheelman.
We were in the saddle at 4 a.m. next day, bound
for Rotterdam, our last day’s Continental ride. It
was only 40 miles, and we rattled it off by 30 minutes
past 8 a.m., which left us three hours to see Rotter-
dam, a large city with numerous canals, trams, and
fine high buildings, and an occasional tall windmill.
Many of the canals are stagnant and vile-smelling,
but gardens and flowers thrive all over the place
most luxuriantly. The place swarms with shipping,
and, being a free port, commodities appear to be very
cheap. Many of the houses in the town seem to be
out of plumb ; this is especially noticeable in looking
down any long streets.
At midday we boarded the Batavia, and steamed
away for London direct, in order that we might be
present at the world-famed English Derby, which
was to be run in a few days. We will leave the


description of English scenes and travels till later on
in this book. Meanwhile we will bring our readers
back to the Continent, and pass through Paris and
other interesting cities.
Nine hours after leaving London we were in Paris.
We jumped on to a tram, for we were quite
unhampered with luggage, having gained wisdom
in this respect, and often amused ourselves at the
immense bother people give themselves over luggage,
for they simply cannot carry their own hand-bag : the
porters claim all baggage as their lawful right to
handle, and no porter will take two bags ; so the
annoyance some people are put to when they have
six packages to look after is not enviable, to say
nothing of the tips every time anything is moved.
We landed at the Consul Hotel, in the Rue de
Lille, at 6 p.m., where we had secured accommodation
through Cook and Sons. Our bicycles we had left
in London, for there would be no use for them in
Paris just now. In the evening we wandered round
the Exhibition and found that we have fallen on our
feet again, and arrived at a most opportune time, for
the Centenary of the French Republic is to be
celebrated in a few days, when the whole of Paris
will be decorated. Regarding the Exhibition, it is
the cheapest show on earth, for you only pay
40 cents (or 4d.) for admission. The original price
was 1 fr., and the authorities sold equal to 200,000
per day for the whole time the Exhibition lasted;


these were eagerly bought up by shopkeepers, who
imagined they would soon reach a premium. The
opposite has however resulted, for the attendances
have fallen much short of the anticipated
and hence the cheapening of the tickets, for as soon
as the show closes they will be worthless. We went
again next day and saw many novel and wonderful
things, amongst others Edison’s great electric exhibi-
tion, where we heard the phonograph. You can hear
either music, speeches, singing, or anything that is
going on in any part of the city it is connected with.
The Eiffel Tower is a wonderful construction, but we
do not for a moment think it could compare with the
Forth Bridge, In ascending the tower we reached
the first flat for 2 fr., and then really conceived the
size, for 100,000 people can be accommodated on this
platform. Another franc conveys us to the second
platform, 376 ft. from the ground, and for two more
francs the lift takes you to the top. Unless one is
strong-minded he had better be content with the
second stage, for the highest platform is just about
900 ft. high, and it extends beyond the tower, so that
in looking down you can see nothing of support
whatever, and the smoke drifting across makes you
feel for all the world as though the tower was sliding
through mid-air at the rate of thirty miles an hour.
We looked on complacently enough, and quite
enjoyed the optical illusion. The view was most
extensive, but in reality the height was too great for


Paris, and a thirty-miles radius looked no bigger
than a plan, the streets like small pieces of tape
stretched out; the Seine winding along looked a little
bigger, but the buildings were dwarfed into insig-
nificance, and figures of people looked like moving
ants. Our review was cut short by a scream, and on
turning we found one of our female passengers had
swooned, and a gentleman was vomiting very freely.
This cut our stay short, as we had to descend, while
the woman shouted out all the way down like a
raving lunatic.
This is rather a common thing. At least every
day someone faints, or else the fascination of look-
ing over seems too great, and some weak-minded
individual tries to throw himself over. The attend-
ants, however, are always on the alert, and so far
have prevented an accident. The people who have
endeavoured to jump over are not lunatics, but it
is an extraordinary, indescribable fascination that
appears to affect some people just at the moment,
and is irresistible, and yet they have no idea of
suicide. The four legs of this great Tower of Babel
enclose a space of two acres, and the tower altogether
has 6,500 tons of iron in its construction.
Paris is the finest city we have seen. Her boule-
vards are avenued with trees ; the houses, built with
taste, are regular, and average five and six stories for
miles at a stretch; and the streets, save in the old
part, are wide, straight, and tree-planted. The three


words Liberte, Equalite, Fraternite, stuck on almost
every public building, have an ugly ring about them,
especially when we remember the extraordinary
rabble and excitement of a French crowd. The
Parisian is not an ordinary mortal; his excitement
knows no bounds. For instance, the monument
erected to the lost provinces of Alsace and Lorraine
is a source of wild riot every year, for on the anni-
versary the statue is covered with mourning wreaths,
and a significant item is the inscription on the front
that tells the date of the loss—
Vive France.
1870 —18 . .
with two dots cut deep in the stone, leading one to
suppose it was intended to fill in the figures 90, and
they evidently meant to regain the provinces by that
date. Numerous small steamers ply up and down
the Seine, and we find it a quick mode of travel. The
river is walled in and has a fine stream of clear water,
crossed every furlong or so by substantial bridges,
chiefly built of stone. One evening we went to
Buffalo Bill’s Wild West Show, and it is about the
biggest thing in its line imaginable. The grounds
are just outside the walls of the city and enclose
many acres of land, where the company, numbering,
with attendants, about 500 people, perform. The
tents are neat and picturesque, and the whole is
brilliant with the electric light. The arena is splen-


did ; on four-fifths of its circuit rows of seats extend
many tiers high to accommodate the thousands who
flock to the two daily performances ; the balance of
the circle is filled up with sham rocks and mountains.
The performance commences with detachments of
cowboys, Mexicans, Sioux and Apache Indians.
These all come in full gallop, group by group, till
at least 200 horsemen occupy the arena, the size of
which may be gathered from the fact that this large
body of horsemen does not one quarter fill it. We
saw these wild men attacking a coach, also a caravan,
and then burning down a settler’s ranche. These
Mexicans and cowboys all used the lasso with won-
derful dexterity, dropping the noose over horses and
buffaloes, and even lassooing horses by the hind leg
while both the rider and his victim were going full
gallop. We were present at the centenary review
held on the great Longchamps racecourse, a few
miles from Paris, where the Grand Prix and other
events are decided. The course is very pretty,
though small. It is hemmed in by park lands,
clothing rising grounds which abound with chateaus
and private gardens, while a huge windmill on the
edge of the course lends a peculiar quaintness to the
view. For an hour we watched the soldiers pouring
in from the three entrances. It seemed as though
the streams would never stop, and we never saw
such an immense crowd before. The excitement was
intense as the President party galloped past ; the air


was filled with shouts of “ Vive la Carnot,” “ Vive la
Republique,” “ Vive la France,” as, escorted by a
bodyguard representing all nations, this interesting
display passed within 30 ft. of us. All the eminent
French generals were there, and as each one passed
the crowd cheered lustily, calling each by name. It
was, indeed, an exciting scene, enough to raise the
enthusiasm of a calmer race than Frenchmen ; still
the crowd was well behaved and treated everything
with good-humoured chaff. It is said one million
people saw this review.
Late at night, after the theatres were out, there
seemed to be more people about than during the day.
The whole width of the streets was devoted solely
to pedestrian traffic, and a perfect multitude of light-
hearted people did their best to be happy. Hundreds
of groups of dancers occupied the whole width of
the road ; wherever a street musician discoursed
music, there the giddy dancers at once commenced
on the asphalt roadway. It is said that 24,000 people
have been employed on the street decorations for the
past fortnight, and judging by the display no one
would doubt it, for miles of special gas jets blazed
out, and then the avenues of the Champs Elysees
and other boulevards were decorated with various
coloured Chinese lanterns. We did not see a drunken
man or woman, though everyone let themselves out
thoroughly, and good-humoured banter prevailed on
all sides. For instance, an occasional private carriage


was perhaps crossing a street corner, and the crowd
would call out, “ Vive la Republique, chapeau,” and
the driver had to doff his hat, or the mob closed
and forcibly stopped his progress. Then, again,
thousands carried coloured lanterns; others made
much noise with trumpets.
At i o’clock in the morning the streets were still
thronged with a surging mass, who kept calling out
“Vive la France!” or perhaps an American would
turn up and shout “Hurrah for Yankeeland!” and
now and again we would give out a peeling cooee,
and lustily shout “Vive I’Australie !” and thereby
rounded up quite a party of Australians who
happened to be in the Place du Concorde. The
whole crowd did simply what it pleased, the absence
of any gendarmes being most noticeable. The
guards of Paris were occasionally passed, in squads of
50, but these had nothing to do.
To describe the Exhibition would take months,
and to see it thoroughly an equal time. We, how-
ever, have walked miles and miles about it, and made
ourselves far more tired than in any of our cycling
trips. To-day the crowd was simply enormous; it
beats the review of yesterday, and yet there was no
crushing—the people being most orderly, and not a
tipsy person about. Hundreds are seen waiting for
trains and omnibuses at the various starting points,
but there is no crowding : it is all avoided by the
simple plan of issuing consecutive tickets to people


as they arrive; these cost nothing, but merely denote
your turn. This is an idea that might be copied
with profit nearer home. There is another admirable
plan in vogue which prevents crushing for tickets at
railway stations. As intending passengers arrive
they “ line up” to a ticket window, and each takes
his fair turn. We joined one of Cook’s tours to
Versailles. The number of visitors was something
extraordinary; Cook had 14 six-horse drags ; Gaze
had six drags; and the various cabs and private traps
brought the number of excursionists up to 600.
Cook’s crowd had two guides, and were led about
like a lot of sheep, and into the bargain had a real
scramble for food, and this after paying three francs
each. It was our first, and certainly will be our last,
experience of the kind. The trip occupied the whole
day and took us to Versailles, where many of the
chief events of French history during the present
century have taken place. We also pushed along
through green-avenued roads to Trianon. At the
old residence of the Kings of France are huge
picture galleries, the paintings in which, if spread out,
would cover three miles in length. Next day we
left gay Paris, with its millions of tri-coloured flags
fluttering in all directions, and started for Belgium.
The landscape was delightfully fresh and green, with
forest lands and cultivated paddocks. The peasants
utilize their holdings to the utmost ; many plots not
over 10 acres would have half-a-dozen kinds of crops—


a little patch of wheat, another of barley, then various
vegetables and poppies, the latter grown for opium.
Brussels is a fine city, full of grand old and new
buildings. The Cathedral of St. Michael is the
largest in the city and is 800 years old. The
grandest building of all, however, is the Palace of
Justice, which is now drawing towards completion,
and has cost the ratepayers 63,000,000 francs. It is
one of the finest buildings in the whole of Europe,
and covers a space of 530 x 500 ft. This huge
palace is right on the highest land within the city,
and proudly reaches its massive dome, surmounted
by the Royal Crown, 325 feet, high above all the
surrounding buildings. The Belgians look upon it as
a white elephant ; but, nevertheless, it is a splendid
structure, and its huge approach on one side of 170
steps, each about 60 ft. wide, is in keeping with the
huge columns and general surroundings of the
building. The field of the battle of Waterloo lies
some 10 miles to the south of Brussels, and formed
the subject of a visit next day. The season of the
year is the same as when the famous battle was
fought, and the cornfields wave with ripening grain
over the ground where so' many brave fellows fell.
The chief thing there was a lion placed on the top
of an earthen pyramid 200 ft. high, erected by the
Belgians in commemoration of the great battle.
This great monument can be scaled by an unbroken
line of 227 steps, and a fine view obtained.


We spent an afternoon at the Royal Lace Works,
where 500 women are employed. In one case we
saw a woman working 500 threads into a pattern.
An idea of investing in a pocket handkerchief or
shoulder collar was soon dispelled when they wanted
from £2 to £3 for one. Brussels is a very cheap
place to live in, and the price of clothing very low ;
for instance, apparently the best quality boxer hats
were 2s. 6d., and hand-made boots Bs. 6d.
From here we travelled on to Berlin—a totally
different town from Paris; in fact, no two towns
could be more unlike. In Berlin all the gayness and
frivolity of the French capital is missing, and a
visitor straight from Paris is struck at once by the
subservience of everyone. The average German
seems to look on life as a sad thing, and plods away
at his daily work as though he was in for a bad thing,
and knew it. Very probably, however, the stability
of Berlin is superior to that of Paris. In Berlin the
buildings average five stories, and there are hundreds
of streets lined with buildings of this height. It is
the third city of Europe, and has a population of
1,500,000.
The Central Hotel, where we stayed, is a tremendous
place, and claims to have accommodated 200,000
people last season. The hotel is in the form of a
square, the centre forming a court, where each
morning and evening a band discourses music during
meals, and 1,000 people can be seated in and around


this open-air eating-place, for both in Germany and
France many people, have their meals out-of-doors,
and at the cafes it is quite common to dine on the
footpath.


CHAPTER XL.
ENGLAND, SCOTLAND, AND IRELAND.
Although we have been a whole week on the move
in London, we scarcely know anything of the place,
and we just begin to recognize the immensity of the
city. We have been to Battersea, St. James’s, and
Hyde Parks ; at the latter we saw the meet of the
Four-in-hand Club, and every afternoon Rotten-row r
simply swarms with carriages. At St. Paul’s we heard
an organ recital, and we visited Westminster Abbey
twice, the second time to hear Canon Farrar preach
in the afternoon, having heard the Rev. C. H.
Spurgeon in the morning at the Tabernacle. Both
these preachers are wonderful men, and we gained
good seats by going an hour beforehand. Madame
Tussaud’s, South Kensington Royal Academy, Savoy
Theatre (where the “ Yeoman of the Guard ” has been
running for a year), and all the principal streets and
squares have been travelled.
The Tower of London, where various arms and
jewels are preserved, took half a day ; another day
being devoted to the Greenwich Hospital, where
many beautiful paintings of naval engagements are
preserved, and other relics, such as Nelson’s clothes
which he wore at the time of his death. From here


we went to Woolwich Rotunda, containing guns
captured and collected from all parts of the world ;
and, luckily getting an intelligent guide, we were
greatly interested and surprised to find that many
centuries ago the breech-loading gun was known and
used—in fact, the Krupp pattern is 300 years old ;
and the new arm for the British army is, like almost
all modern weapons, merely an improvement on old
designs we saw here. From this we walked to the
Royal Arsenal, orders to inspect which are only
issued to British subjects. This immense war factory
took an afternoon to walk around. We saw them
casting cannons and then boring them. Three steam
hammers were at work, the largest capable of
striking a blow from an ounce up to 977 tons. Its
full power is rarely used, but whilst striking 200 tons
it shook the whole building. No less than 14,000
men and boys are employed here. In the harness-
rooms is sufficient harness to equip 20,000 horses.
Three hours were spent in Barclay and Perkins’s
Brewery, which occupies 16 acres of land in the
heart of the city, and no one knows its actual value.
Amongst other businesses that this immense concern
has bought up and demolished to make way for
increasing business may be reckoned twenty distinct
trades ; but, in addition to all these, they have
actually bought out a church and graveyard, and
within the brewery walls lie thousands of bones. In
company with several gentlemen we adjourned to the


Gresham Club and had a sumptuous dinner. The
trooping of the colours on the Queen’s Birthday was
a great disappointment. We had expected to witness
an enthusiastic ceremony, but the crowd did not even
cheer the Prince of Wales nor remove hats at “ God
Save the Queen.” No shops were closed and very
few flags waved, save on public buildings.
On Derby day—“ Darby,” as everyone here calls
it—the weather was simply lovely, a warm sun, with
stiff north breeze, making everything radiant and
beautiful. We went by train from Victoria Station
to Epsom Downs, and walked a mile over to the
course. The Downs were verdant and thronged
with a thousand and one “little men” out to make
an honest penny, if possible ; but if the possibility
did not present itself, then they were quite prepared
to take the advice of the ancient parent and make it
otherwise. A race day in England differs materially
from one in Melbourne, for the approach is thronged
with professional tipsters, who sell their tips, which
they promise divulge fabulous wealth to anyone who
will back them. Then there are the usual “ Aunt
Sally” men, musicians, cigar and light vendors and
others, clothes-brush in hand, waiting to groom you
down.
On the course itself no Australian can help con-
trasting the scene with our Flemington. Why, we are
but fifty years old, but have an infinitely better course,
stand, and appointments generally. The stewards of


the Epsom course would be paralyzed if they could
see a Melbourne Cup day and its magnificent arrange-
ments for the comfort and convenience of visitors.
The grass on the track was from 4 in. to 6 in. long.
There is no lawn to walk about on ; and, worse still,
the grandstand is divided up into compartments con-
taining six in number, and a visitor cannot pass from
one to the other. The upper parts of these stands are
approached by a narrow stairs that our people would
condemn straight away, and the whole thing shows
a lamentable want of the management Bagot and
Moore have exercised at Flemington.
The fields of starters were by no means large ; but
the favourites won the only three races we stopped to
see. The greater fun was the stroll round the centre
of the course: the space was occupied by all kinds of
shows, rides of all kinds for one penny, such as horse-
back, about a quarter a mile, gravity merry-go-rounds,
rifle saloons, and aerial flights, which had the greatest
number of patrons. These were elevated wire ropes
with a slope—people, men and women, as thick as
bees, were running up the steps and taking their
flights for fifty yards. It was a simple pulley sus-
pended from the rope, and the travellers hung on by
their hands.
The crowd was estimated at 200,000. To give an
idea of the size of Epsom the whole of it could be
dropped inside the Flemington flat, and what would
appear a big crowd here would if spread around our


Melbourne course look very considerably less. Many
well-known Victorian faces were there, such as Glass-
cock, Longden, Joe and Barney Thompson, Hicks, and
Inglis, also travellers met in other lands, and whose
hearty grip of the hand and congratulations assured
us we were by no means strangers in a strange land.
Towards evening we went over to the Clapham
Common to see the multitude returning. The London
pennyworths that are daily sold in the Strand would
alone make an interesting collection, but these men had
gone afield to-day with specialities for the occasion.
The occupants of three out of four traps would be
armed with penny trumpets, which they blew while
wind lasted, in mimicry of the nobs ; the majority of
these people also wore huge noses, whiskers, and some
masks, so that no one could recognize them ; they
formed a happy crowd, and no bad temper was dis-
played, although, owing to squirts being in general
use, it was a wonder some tempers were not ruffled.
The most ludicrous of the many funny things were
the dressed horses ; many of them had pink stockings
from the hoofs to the knees, and above these
pantaloons fastened up to the collars. Roars of
laughter and good-humoured chaff met the dust-
covered travellers as they passed along Clapham
Common, for fully 50,000 people had assembled here
to witness the fun.
The road undoubtedly has the most patrons, for
the railway people, instead of running cheap trains,


go on quite another tack, and charge Bs. each for a
return trip, and then they do not guarantee any par-
ticular class. Epsom is but 18 miles, so you will see
the exorbitant rate. Trains do not drop you at the
course either, like they do with us, and unless you are
prepared to walk nearly a mile, you have to part
another shilling for a cab.
Next day we mounted our bicycles for a ride over
old England. It was 15 miles before we got fairly
out of the great city of London, and after passing
Staines green hedges began to appear. Here a little
stone house was pointed out as the place were King
John signed Magna Charter. Then we passed through
Eton, where hundreds of students were engaged at
physical education, playing cricket on beautiful
grounds surrounded with groves of verdant trees,
for it was early summer. Crossing the Thames we
reached Maidenhead, and a few miles further admired
Windsor Castle, with the Royal Standard fluttering
over the tower, which overlooks lovely country. After
lunch we passed Great Marlow, a great picnic and
camping resort, and next Henley, ever famous for
boating contests, and after this we reached Oxford—
the great seat of learning—and rested for the day,
having ridden 60 miles. We did not keep to the
direct route, as we took in several places of interest
off the route. Cyclists here are as thick as bees;
we met them at every turn, and often saw ladies on
tricycles.


Next day we hired a boat, and spent the morning
rowing on the Isis, and rambling around the colleges,
for Oxford boasts of no less than 21, many of them
fine old ivy-covered buildings. About mid-day we
pedalled off northwards to Woodstock—a pretty little
town centuries old. The manor used to be the
dwelling-place of some of the early kings. Edward
the Black Prince was born here in 1330 ; it was here
also that Henry 11. concealed his “fair Rosamond.”
Walter Scott also lit on this place to write his
“ Woodstock.” At present the place is the residence
of the Duke of Marlborough, having been presented
to the old Duke by a grateful nation in memory
of his many victories, and Parliament also voted
him half a million to build the present palace, which
by Act of Parliament is to belong to the heirs
for all time. A 30-mile ride took us to Burford.
Haymaking was in full swing all over the country, and
the perfume of so much new-mown hay was delightful.
We made one of our old early starts next day—s
a.m.—and made quick time through Lechdale and
over some beautiful hilly country to Swindon, roads
and railways running in all directions. We gained
an extensive view of the Great Western rail-works,
which constitute new Swindon. Over 220 trains pass
through here daily, and £l,OOO is daily paid in wages
to the workshop employes. Wootton Bassett, with its
picturesque old Abbey Church, half smothered with
ivy, was next passed and then we struck the main


road to Chippenham—the name meaning “to buy”—
and finished a most enjoyable ride of 50 miles in 5
hours at Bath.
In ancient times the Romans built a large swim-
ming bath here, into which they conveyed warm
water straight from the springs. This bath is 84 ft.
x4O ft, and from 3 ft. to 6 ft. deep. We tasted the
water, which is flavoured strongly with iron ; but,
altogether, no less than eleven minerals are found
by analysis in greater or lesser quantities. Almost
adjoining the baths is the old Abbey Church,
sometimes called the “ Lantern of England,” on
account of its huge windows ; many tablets and small
memorials adorn the walls, and the roof is formed
like the ribs of numerous fans and has a very pretty
effect.
We finished up the day at Bristol, after a 65-mile
ride. Leaving this old town at 10 a.m. we tunnelled
under the River Severn in the train, then rode
through hilly -but delightfully timbered country,
passing en route several old ruined abbeys, with
naught but walls thickly coated with ivy. Charming
places these old ancestral homes of England must
have been in their day, for even in their ruined
state they have a beauty no one can fail to admire.
Our road follows the Valley of the Wye, celebrated
for picturesqueness. Here is the Forest of Dean, a
large tract of 25,000 acres of Crown land, interspersed
with coal and iron mines ; but large tracts are wooded


so densely that the sun cannot penetrate through the
foliage.
We spent a couple of hours at Tintern Abbey, a
romantic old ruin lying close by the road. The
walls, about 6 ft. thick, are almost perfect, but the
roofing has long since disappeared. This place was
founded by some monks in 1131, and is considered an
uncommonly good specimen of the early period. Ivy
has crept and grown over most of the stone work.
Altogether the ruins cover a large area ; they are,
however, built in a meadow, surrounded by high
wooded hills, which, though adding to the beauty,
seem to detract from the grandeur of the place.
On remounting we fairly flew over the ground,
covering 15 miles within an hour ; this was owing to
a gentleman driving a fly calling out, when 50 yards
behind, in a peremptory manner, to give him room.
We said we would when he got near enough to pass,
and the result was a match between two cyclists and
a galloping horse, for the driver was so angry he
flogged the poor beast to a standstill. That day’s
ride of 65 miles was a delightful one, the scenery all
the way being charming. The country swarms with
cyclists ; the majority ride the small safety machines,
but we cannot see any advantage, and are quite
satisfied to stick to our ordinary machines. The
Cyclists’ Touring Club places danger-boards at the
top of hills that are considered dangerous for cyclists
to ride down. So far we have come across four of


these, and in each case we rode down without using
brakes. It seems stupid to place these danger-
boards where there is really no danger. We saw the
famous castle of Goodrich, where Wordsworth met
the little maid who said, “We are seven.” It is a
fine old ruin 600 years old.
All around Hereford we saw the cattle of the same
name, all of them marked exactly alike—red bodies
and white faces. The animals were grazing in luxu-
rious grass 2 ft. or 3 ft. high ; such a season as the
present has been unknown for 15 years. Our way
next day lay through Shrewsbury, another rare old
town on the Severn River, and full of life and
business. At 5 p.m. we had covered 85 miles, and
reached Chester, so we devoted the four hours of
twilight to roaming round. First we completed the
circuit of the town on top of the walls. We continued
our way, and passed the beautiful open flat where
the Chester races are held. Then we crossed the
Grosvenor Bridge—a large single stone span stretched
over the Dee—and then reached the old castle at
present used as a barracks to the great Dee Mills,
which for eight centuries have produced almost all the
flour used in Chester. This completed the round, and
we utilized the remaining daylight in walking the
streets. The architecture is of a quaint old style called
“rows.” These “rows” are a kind of colonnade,
under which the people walk, whilst the buildings are
built out over this walk, forming continuous arcades.


Next morning we started for Lancaster with four
safety-bicycle riders, who had been touring their
Whitsuntide in Wales, and were returning to their
homes. We allowed them to make the pace, which
was such a cracker that they soon ran themselves out,
and succeeded in having at least six falls in sand and
on wet pitchers. One broke the fork of his machine,
and two others cried enough, so only one out of the
quartette reached Lancaster with us.
Chester to Birkenhead took about two hours, and
then we went across to Liverpool, and had a view of
the docks and immense shipping of this, the first sea-
port of England. The usual cobble stones pave the
streets, which was the most objectionable feature of
the ride. At the next town—Garstang —we fared
even worse, and had to walk a short distance. The
scenery was very interesting to Lancaster, where we
arrived at 4 o’clock, and spent a couple of hours visit-
ing the old Cathedral Castle, and then took to the
saddle again for 22 miles to Kendal, where we re-
mained for the night, having ridden 100 miles that
day. The latter part of this ride was very fine, for
the country undulated the whole way, and was just
like a garden—in fact, Australians would count them-
selves lucky to possess such a variety of wealth and
beauty in their public gardens. Kendal is a delight-
ful old town, and is considered the entrance to the
finest scenery England possesses, viz., the lakes.
Pouring rain greeted us next morning, and, after wait-


ing and finding it still continued, we faced it and rode
to Windermere and Low Wood, where we housed
machines and took an excursion steamer for a four-
hours’ cruise around the largest lake that England lays
claim to. The views on Lake Windermere are very
pretty and homely, but have none of the wild and
rugged grandeur of the Italian or Swiss lakes ; still,
for all that, there is a peaceful quiet and abundance of
magnificent park lands running down to the water’s
edge, which is a pleasing and refreshing feature. We
voyaged to the southern extremity some ten miles,
and retraced our way, for the lake is long and narrow,
being often only half a mile wide, and nowhere more
than one mile across. On starting to ride again
we found hundreds of tourists on the same road, for
the astronomer’s report of the weather was favourable,
and people watch this item of intelligence more
closely than anything else. We passed Ambleside,
Rydal Water, the town of Rydal, and then Grassmere
Lake—the latter especially pretty, for the hills are
steeper and general surroundings more picturesque
than Windermere. We had a stiff 2-mile climb to
the “ steel fell ” after leaving Grassmere, where the
view was splendid, for we were about 1,500 ft, up, and
looked away over several lakes and numerous hills
and peaks, the highest apparently being Skiddaw.
Two miles down hill took us to Helvellyn, where we
struck Lake Thurlmere, and followed the water’s
edge for some distance, and then took to the hills to


Keswick, which is right among the mountains. The
beauty of the scenery hereabouts seems to have had
an inspiring effect on British poets, for Southey,
Shelley, and others at one.time or other resided here.
At 7 p.m. we left Ireby for Carlisle, 20 miles distant,
and reached there in two hours, making our wheeling
for the day 66 miles. The duration of the day is to
us extraordinary; it is broad daylight at 3 a.m., and
does not darken till 10 p.m. Next morning we
crossed an imaginary line, leaving England behind,
and entering on the land of cakes and whisky. The
road was simply delightful, and we did not dismount
till Langholm—27 miles—was reached, and then we
rode 24 miles further to Hawick without quitting the
saddle. This route led us over the Cheviot Hills by
easy rideable grades ; it also took us along the valley
of the Dee, and we saw anglers, clad in waterproof,
standing waist-deep, trying to tempt the unsuspecting
salmon and trout. Passing through Melrose, on the
banks of the Tweed, we visited the celebrated Melrose
Abbey, generally admitted to be the grandest of
Scottish ruins ; but, sad to relate, we did not think
much of it when compared with others we have seen.
We rode past Sir Water Scott’s house—Abbotsford—
which lies a short distance from the road, and then we
took the train for 20 miles to Edinburgh, in order to
witness the great meet of wheelmen in that city.
Thus our wheeling for the day was only 70 miles.
The sports were held at Powderhall Grounds and were


rather tame, the track being old-fashioned and some-
what dangerous. At present the Australian Bussts or
Elliotts could quite easily beat anything we have seen,
although, of course, the best amateurs have not been
competing. Edinburgh is beautifully situated, and
Scotchmen have good reason to be proud of it, for
there are few finer cities.
Amongst the numerous places we visited was
Arthur’s Seat, which is over 800 ft. in height, affording
a magnificent view. The Firth of Forth, with its
fleet of small craft, appeared to be close under us,
and also the city, which only numbers some 250,000
inhabitants. We saw, too, the great Forth Bridge,
and further round the bonnie highlands and the
undulating country to the Pentland Hills. By taking
rides in the various trams we pretty well saw the whole
of Edinburgh in a short space of time. The city has
few suburbs ; in fact, two miles out we were quite in
the country, and at eight miles reached the great bridge
over the Forth. This is an immense concern, one
mile and three quarters in length, the centre of the
stream being spanned by three cantilever arches, each
having a span of about 250 yards. It has been four
years and a half in progress, has already cost four
millions and a half of money, and is being jointly
constructed by four great railway companies. Hiring
a boat, we placed our bicycles in it, and rowed across,
obtaining an excellent view of the works. Landing
in Fifeshire, we wheeled along through Kelty, and


then around Lake Leven, a nice open stretch of water,
with an island and castle in the centre. Pushing on,
we indulged in a 15-mile-an-hour run down Glen
Farg—a bit of almost perfect scenery and then
crossed an open plain and rode up a range of hills,
from whence the Tay and large town of Perth were
seen below, and there we. settled for the night,
having run 50 miles in five hours over delightful
roads, with a bright sun, but not sufficiently hot
to make us perspire ; yet other wheelmen we
met were riding without coats and making great
work of it. Early next morning we started in a
genuine Scotch mist. Our road led across the Carse
of Gowrie, over fairly level country to Dundee, 22
miles, where the clatter of machinery used in the bag
factories was quite annoying, and rendered talking
while passing any of them quite out of the question.
Just before entering the town we saw the new Tay
Bridge, built on the same site as the ill-fated one that
wrecked a train and sacrificed so many lives ten years
ago. We did not stop in Dundee, but rode right
through, passing some minor towns till Arbroath was
reached, thus making 40 miles in 4 hours. After a
second breakfast we strolled round the abbey built by
■“ Wiliam the Lion,” in 1178, the architecture being of
the early English order. Taking to the saddle again
we bowled along to Montrose, crossing the South Esk
River by a very fine bridge. Further along we had a
lovely ride for 40 miles, following and in sight of the


shore, sometimes running around
hills that dipped down to the sea, and
road would lead by the inland side of some rugged
eminence. It was all up-and-down riding, but the
grades were very easy ones. Now and again we
would pass small fishing villages right at the water’s
edge, over which we looked on the broad expanse of
the North Sea, with the horizon continually clouded
by the smoke of passing steamers, and nearer in
shore fishing smacks lying becalmed. At 4 o'clock
in the afternoon we ran down a long decline, crossed
the River Dee, and were at Aberdeen, the fourth
city of Scotland, with 110,000 inhabitants—the larger
towns being Glasgow (750,000), Edinburgh, and
Dundee; the latter has about 140,000. Having
ridden over 100 miles we rested for the night.
Aberdeen is a splendid place, built almost entirely
of whitish granite, and the majority of buildings
show great architectural skill. It is a city that
will stand and remain in a good state of pre-
servation many centuries after other larger and more
important towns will have passed into oblivion. The
streets are wide, laid out on the square, and the
main ones, which are traversed by horse trams, are
set with granite cubes. A general air of cleanliness
and comfort appears to prevail; in this respect the
town differs greatly from Dundee and Arbroath,
where the children run about barefooted and in
rags. We left Aberdeen at 6 a.m., and after two


miles of rough pitchers got on a delightful road,
following closely to the River Dee. We passed
through various little towns, up and down hills, to
Banchory. Here, owing to numerous saw mills and
consequent traffic the road deteriorated ; but we
kept to our saddles till Aboyne, 30 miles, where we
took breakfast, and then fairly entered the Highlands.
At Ballanter, the terminus of the railway, we found
some of the hills rather stiff, but we pushed on till
Balmoral hove in sight, the Royal Standard flying,
and signifying the presence of the Queen. We had
a run round the castle, which occupies a charming
position in a bend of the Dee, with high hills thickly
clothed with pines all round. These hills mostly
have pyramids, monuments, or cairns on them,
which have been erected in memory of some of the
friends of the Royal Family, We pushed ahead
through the vast forest of Balmoral on one side and
the Prince of Wales’ shooting box on the other, till
we reached Braemar. Here, owing to the Grampian
Mountains barring the way, we turned off south, and
entered a treeless tract of Highland mountain
country, with a real Australian dusty road, over
which many sheep had recently been driven. The
country was a mass of thick grass, furze, and a
kind of miniature pine not more than a foot high.
From this innumerable springs of water trickled,
whilst pheasants and partridges rose on all sides
in scores ; the hen birds with their broods of young


did not attempt to fly, but clucked just like a hen
to call the chicks. The close season lasts two
months yet, but what a slaughter there will be
when it expires ! Mountains rose all around to
about 3,000 ft. ; the one our road crossed—Mount
Cairnwell—was above that height, and the way
was rough and dangerous, containing several bends
like the bottom of the letter V. The descent led
through the Glen of Beg for five miles to Spittal,
where at the little Glenshee Inn we lunched
very comfortably. Continuing the same hilly road
throughout the afternoon we halted at half-past 7 in
the evening at Pitlochry, having ridden 101 miles of
perhaps the worst roads of Scotland.
It is now drawing on towards the end of June, and
the English long summer days are to us marvellous.
At Thurso, 100 miles north of where we now are, for
the next two nights the sun will be visible at mid-
night; even as it is we have had no darkness at all
for the last two nights, merely twilight, for any print
can be read with ease out of doors all through the
night. The twilight is a good dull kind of daylight,
and clearer than the brightest Australian moonshine.
In order to keep an appointment at Inverness, we
gave the Scotch railways a trial. The train travelled
at the rate of 60 miles an hour, and the line passed
through some fine country, with a splendid road
running almost alongside. This line is a very bleak
one in winter, and the miles and miles of snow fences


gave a good idea of what a Scottish winter must be.
After tea we left Blair Athol on our machines, and
wheeled along at a high rate of speed till we reached
the Tummel River, across which we were ferried, and
then started to follow the River Tay up stream, and
consequently up hill, till we arrived at Kenmore, on
the edge of Loch Tay, having accomplished a 40-mile
run after tea.
The scenery round about beat anything we had
seen in Scotland ; the road was perfect, while fine
trees stood on either hand, the foliage sometimes
meeting overhead. In the river, beside us, dozens of
sportsmen were wading about, waist deep, salmon
fishing; and if they did not catch salmon, it looked
likely to us that they would catch rheumatism or
some kindred malady. Kenmore, too, is a charming
place, and when we reached it at 10 o’clock p.m. the
sun had scarcely set and the various pink and purple
tints hung around the mountain tops, these colours
being reflected in the placid waters and reminding us
of Italian scenes. We strolled around the water’s
edge for a couple of hours, for it was the longest day
of the year, and we wanted to see how many stars
were visible at midnight. About half a dozen
twinkled in a half-hearted sort of way, the only really
bright one being the evening star. We were moving
along at a little after 6 next morning ; and although
damp and foggy then, before our first hour of uphill
was passed the fog lifted and we were pleasingly sur-


prised, for a magnificent view opened out before
us. We had no idea the lakes of bonnie Scotland
were so pretty. This one is fully fifteen miles long
and quite narrow, so that the opposite shore never
seemed over half-a-mile distant, and trees and rich
undergrowth of ferns, lichens, and mosses abounded
everywhere, and at frequent intervals small mountain
torrents crossed the path. At nine miles we passed
Ben Lawers, a hill of 4,000 ft. ; but, owing to the
skilful manner in which the roads are surveyed, we
ascended gradually for perhaps 600 ft.—the highest
point of the road—without any trouble. At Killeen—
-15 miles—we reached the western end of Loch Tay,
and again followed a glen through which the road
undulated, passing one or two minor lakes; then,
between Ben More and Ben Deiceach—each over
3,000 ft. high—till we reached Crianbarich, a run of
30 miles. Then we had a delightful ride downhill
for an hour through Glen Falloch, with the ever-
attendant hills, with crevices full of snow near the
summit, and icy crystal streams flowing beside us.
We did not touch this snow-water, however, for
experience had taught us that drinking it provokes
thirst. At Ardlin we got our first view of Loch
Lomond, often considered the pick of Scotch scenery.
It really was most beautiful, and a splendid road
runs within a stone’s-throw of the water, and in places
dense foliage kept off the bright sun. Here and there
we saw large holly trees, some 20 ft. high, laden with


red berries. Along this enchanting road we wheeled,
then across hilly country to Helensburgh, where
“ Cairndhu,” the house of Lord Provost Ure, was
visited.
Anticipating our arrival, quite a little party was
waiting to welcome us; so we rested here, satisfied
with our day’s ride of 80 miles. Mr. W. P. Ure
married a real Scotch lassie, and both are enthusiastic
tricyclists. Before their marriage this young couple
used frequently to ride 40 miles on a Saturday after-
noon, and when they were married they went honey-
mooning on a sociable tricycle through the Scotch
lake country.
The house overlooks the Clyde, and is 30 miles
from Glasgow, and quite in the country. Next
morning, at Dumbarton, we found ourselves in the
midst of the Clyde ship-building works—in fact,
these line the river all the way to Glasgow. Before
reaching the big city we inspected Ure’s new mills,
which are the largest in Glasgow. The buildings
are most elaborate structures of stone, fire-proof
throughout, and fitted with interchangeable steam
and water power, the cost being about £IOO,OOO.
P'rom here we rode on through large wide streets full
of life and bustle, over the ever-attendant stone
pitchers and horse trams, to the heart of Glasgow
and St. George’s-square. The city has a
manufacturing look about it; yet, withal, has many
attractive edifices, such as the Glasgow University,


and the municipal buildings—whilst St. George’s-
square, the St. Enoch’s railway station, Argyle and
Union streets, are all places any city might well be
proud of. Being anxious not to lose time, we pushed
on next day (Sunday) early and rode through
Kilbride and on to Muirkirk, a distance of 30 miles.
Here stratagem had to be resorted to to get food,
so we coolly told the landlady the police had recom-
mended her house for breakfast, and were forthwith
supplied. Mounting once more we trundled on
through Crumnock to Sanquhar. On nearing the
latter place, hunger again began to assert itself,
but we were uncertain if any of the hotels would
be open. However, a red-nosed man was observed
coming towards us, so we inquired the most likely
place, and he told us the church was just out and
some of the elders were sure to be having a “ wee
drop” at the “ Queen’s.” This proved to be correct,
and we received a good dinner there. From this town
we ran down the valley of the River Nith, through
the Duke of Buccleuch’s land, for 20 miles, passing
close to the mansion, and reaching Dumfries in time
for tea. Afterwards we took a wrong road, making
six miles difference. We reached Annan at 9 p.m.,
having accomplished 105 miles on our bicycles that
day.
We turned a little way out of our road next
morning to see the celebrated little village of Gretna
Green. The town is insignificant, save in its associa-


tions, and no doubt the little church could tell a tale
or two. Returning to the main road, in about a mile
we came to the old toll-gate site. Within 20 yards is
the bridge over the rivulet that divides England from
Scotland ; close by, also, is the smithy of the man
who usually did the business for the runaways.
Pedalling along, we imagined we could picture
the hasty approach of some loving couple whose
hearts beat as one, and, to avoid unrelenting parents,
the little green across the bridge was sought, where
the ever-ready blacksmith was sure to be found. On
leaving Carlisle, shortly after breakfast, the first
accident which had happened to either of our
machines took place. The streets here have num-
bers of gratings in the centre of the road, and whilst
looking at an antiquated building one of our little
wheels dropped into one of these gratings, and a
broken rim was the result. Fortunately a repairer’s
shop was at hand, but it necessitated a delay of five
hours. We then had a rough and hilly road following
up the course of the Eden River to Appleby, a pretty
place; but then all Cumberland is too pretty from a
cyclist’s point of view, for level stretches are few and
far between, and at one place, near Brough, the road
rises up the spurs of the Pennine Mountains, and
most of them are too steep to cycle either up or
down.
We rode on till half-past 9 at night, making 61
miles. These long days are splendid for riding, as


after 8 o’clock p.m. the sun, still 30 deg. from the
horizon, has no power, and even when unclouded,
throws no shadow, and can be looked at without
blinking. It took us two hours to ride eight miles
next morning, the road crossing the southern end of
the Pennine range at an altitude of 1,400 ft, and for
three miles we were among the low clouds which
hung around the hills. We passed through Darling-
ton, a small town of 35,000 inhabitants, who claim to
be the originators of the passenger railway trains. It
appears the first line in Great Britain was opened here
in 1825, and the original engine is now placed here
as a memorial. During the afternoon we reached the
great North Road, along which so many crack English
wheelmen have made the famous records from John
o’ Groat’s to Land’s End, and well they might, for
the surface is like that of a billiard-table, and for our
own part we knocked off 24 miles in two hours easily.
At Ripon, the seat of the Marquis of Ripon—
Studley Park—was a great attraction. We were
much impressed with the quaint old style of houses,
whilst over the principal entrance, in early English,
was written, “ Except the Lord keep the city the
watchman walketh but in vain,” We were admitted
to the park on paying one shilling each. The noble
Marquis employs about twelve gardeners, but the
entrance-fee far more than recoups him, for visitors
flock there from all parts of England; and well they
may, for a more beautifully laid out or well-kept park


could nowhere be found. A small'river—the Shell—
courses through, and hills of considerable height rise
on both sides, while the flat is converted into lakes,
and the walks are shaded with avenues of sycamores,
beeches, elms, and oaks, and the undergrowth is quite
tropical in its profuseness. We strolled along a gravel
walk for a mile to a most beautiful arbour called
‘'Anne Boleyn’s Seat.” From there a circuitous walk
took us to Fountain Abbey, the best ruin we have
seen in England, It beats Tintern Abbey, and is
far and away finer than Melrose Abbey in Scotland.
Of course, nothing but the walls, arches, and tower
remain, all the roofing having long since disappeared.
The huge windows, the great cloister—3oo ft. in length
—and the various chapter-houses, remain, giving a
perfect idea of the great size of the structure, whilst
around are the remnants of other buildings and tombs.
Altogether this spot is one of the finest of the many
charming places in the English counties.
On the way back we passed Robin Hood’s well,
the spot where it is reputed one of the friars gave
the famous outlaw a real drubbing, and afterwards
pitched him into the river. Leaving Ripon behind,
the same charming country continued to Borough-
bridge. In the fields, all the way along the road,
haymaking was in full swing. On many of the gentle-
men’s estates young ladies with delicate hands were
at work with the rake, evidently more for the fun of
the thing than for anything else. Occasionally lady


tricyclists would flit by us, whilst other young ladies
quite unattended were seen, generally carrying a
shepherd’s crook—this being about five feet long, and
used as a staff; then other girls passed on horseback
with grooms following, and so on—variety without
end.
We had tea at Boroughbridge amongst a rather
noisy lot, for it was hiring day with them. It
appears that on certain days the labourers and
squires all meet, and engagements for hay-making
and other work are entered into. The rate is about
£6 per month, 12 hours a day. The road to York
was abominable, but we rode there all the same, thus
covering a distance of 102 miles in the day. The
hills, roads, and wind were all against us, but the
country was so beautiful and interesting that it well
repaid all the difficulties of the way.
York is a large city, with old walls nearly three
miles round, formidable-looking gates, and quaint
buildings with two feet of the second story over-
hanging many of the footpaths. The streets are
narrow and tortuous. Then there is the great
“York Minster,” the ancient cathedral, whose vast
proportions dwarf all surrounding buildings. This
old city seems to abound with old-fashioned churches,
and generally offers much food for a searcher into
antiquities.
According to our custom we sallied away at 6 a.m.
for Tadcaster ; the road was so bad we took to the


footpath, having found that a cyclist cannot be
arrested, but merely summoned, for riding on the
footpath in England. Tadcaster is celebrated for
beer production. En passant , it may be stated that
the draught ale you get in the country, as far as our
tastes are concerned, is a fraud, save in excep-
tional cases. The London stout, however, is really
unparalleled in Australia; even the bottled article
which reaches Melbourne cannot hold a rushlight to
the London draught stout. The road to Leeds was
not a pleasant one, being inches deep with black
coal-dust, for all the country now is smoking with
huge coal-mine chimney-shafts. At Leeds we found
ourselves in the midst of the weaving industry, with
the noisy clatter of loom and shuttle. The city has
a similar population to Melbourne, but the streets are
altogether inferior in Leeds. After visiting Hud-
dersfield we pushed along to Sheffield, when
suddenly a dense volume of smoke shot up from
a woollen factory 100 yards in front of us. We
at once dismounted, and found that whilst hundreds
of people were at work a fire had broken out.
Fire engines were kept on the premises, but within
two minutes the flames had a firm hold, and the
way in which they travelled along was simply
awful. The work-people were rushing about, mostly
too excited to act, whilst the women folk, seeing
the probability of the bread-winners being out of
work, wailed piteously. A fire which throws people


out of work is a vastly different thing in England
to what it would be in Australia. Before reaching
Sheffield we visited the little umbrella-manufacturing
town of Stowbridge, where the “paragon” patent
is made, and some 1,000 hands find employment.
Long before reaching Sheffield we saw what appeared
to be a huge black cloud, and so it turned out to
be, though a cloud of smoke and not vapour. It
hung over the city just like a huge pall, whilst
many thousands of chimneys belched up flame and
smoke from their dirty, black-roofed buildings, the
air being full of soot, smut, and smoke. Were it
not for this everlasting murky atmosphere Sheffield
would be a delightful place, for it stands amongst
high wooded hills with two small streams. Our day’s
ride was 72 miles. Nearing Chesterfield next morn-
ing we saw the crooked spire of the parish church, a
comical-looking structure. We were told by one
party it was designed on the corkscrew pattern, and
by another that the timbers had shrunk. The fact,
however, remains that the spire has a dog’s-hind-leg
appearance which is most comical and curious. It is
the only one of the kind to be found anywhere, so far
as we can learn.
At Derby we saw the Great Midland Railway
workshops, covering some 240 acres of ground ; also
many industries, such as pottery (Crown Derby), silk,
elastic, cotton, and some huge ironworks. The city
itself combines beauty with business enterprise. It is


connected with Birmingham and Bristol by canals,
along which one horse can comfortably draw a barge
holding 25 tons of merchandise. A few miles out of
Derby the country was delightful. We got on the
canal bank and followed it down over level country,
occupied by small farmers and gardeners, till we
crossed the Trent, and then for four miles had the
delightful aroma of brewing filling the air till
we reached Burton-on-Trent, where chimneys and
breweries rise on all sides, and stacks of casks 100
yards long and 20 yards high are by no means
uncommon. We looked in at Bass’s, but did not
attempt to go over it, for it covers with buildings no
less than 130 acres, and employs 2,000 hands.
Besides this colossal concern there were Allsop’s,
Worthington’s, Eadie’s, and others—all immense
buildings. The whole town is engaged in beer pro-
duction, and a teetotaller would have a bad time of
it there. From Burton we pushed along at a good
pace to Lichfield, where a kind of harvest thanks-
giving was just over, and the streets were lined with
hundreds of ladies and gentlemen in their Sunday
dress, who stared at us in a most persistent way,
probably owing to the fact that we rode without
coats and vests, the day being very warm and Aus-
tralian-like. This breach of etiquette is unknown in
England, and our brown complexions made it patent
to everyone that we were foreigners. Nearing Birming-
ham we stopped at an inn and had a clean-up. The


difference between an inn and an hotel is most marked
in England, for an inn simply supplies drink and
will not furnish food, whilst an hotel always has cold
meat, &c., ready for a passer-by. The air of Birming-
ham is filled with smoke, and everything is in a dirty
state from the same cause. After lunch we set out
for Coventry, and on the way halted at Stonebridge,
a half-way house, and a great resort of wheelmen.
For instance, on Saturdays and Sundays, for hours at a
stretch, as many as 200 machines may be counted in
front of the place, with some continually coming and
going, yet the number seems to keep about the same.
This will give some idea of the great hold cycling has
on the English public. Just about here we passed
through a little village called Meriden, that is said to
be the true centre of England. An old stone monu-
ment is erected on an open square ; it is hundreds of
years old, and all the lettering has long since dis-
appeared ; yet this is supposed to indicate the spot
England would balance on. It appears that quite
recently a gentleman went to the trouble of cutting
a map of England in tin, and by spinning this on the
point of a needle he found that the old monument
was in the correct spot.
Coventry, the hub of English cycling, with its tall
spires and huge cycle factories, was soon reached, and
a visit to Singer’s factory was made. Here there are
some 500 hands employed, and about an equal
number at the Coventry Machinist Company’s,


Rudge’s, and Humber’s. None of the English manu-
facturers make their own tubing, most of the bicycle
firms getting it from the Weldless Steel Tubing
Company, so that really the Victorian bicycle makers
are just as much manufacturers as the English.
Next morning we started early, and took an extra
turn to see the famous old schools of Rugby. Our
road then undulating to Northampton, but as we pro-
ceeded to the fen country it gradually got more open
and flat, Bedford, clean and pretty, also St. Neots,
were passed, and then in the afternoon we reached
an inn, the name of which was amusing. It was
“ The Man Loaded with Mischief,” the sign showing
a man carrying on his shoulders a woman. Cam-
bridge is a beautiful place ; the grounds of the colleges
are delightfully well kept, the walks are shaded with
avenues of limes, beeches, and sycamores, flowers
bloom profusely, and the shrubs are nicely trimmed—
in fact, the whole landscape is as perfect as possible.
During the last 21 days we cycled 1,493 miles, and
had a most enjoyable time of it in this lovely country,
having made speed entirely subservient to pleasure.
Getting back into London we journeyed down to
Southampton, and spent three days at Mr. Carton’s
mansion, “ Roseland,” where all the luxuries of life
have been gathered together. Here there is a large
artificial cavern containing grottoes and miniature
waterfalls, and amongst these beautiful fruit and
flower gardens and hothouses were situated the


music-room and ballroom, with its large “ band,”
played by water-power. In genial company we spent
a very fine day, visiting the Isle of Wight. At the
first pier we landed at, a charge of id. or 2d. is
made on everyone who uses the pier; this, like
many others, being built by private enterprise.
These pennies and innumerable trifles which the
visitor has to find amount to a considerable item
in the long run. The island is only 12 by 22
miles, but the scenery and wealth of the place are
astonishing. Ventnor, for instance, was a sample.
The little town is built on Ventnor Cove, the houses
rising from the sands to the top of Undercliff, 800 ft.
above the sea, and every one is built with an eye to
beauty, flowers and foliage surrounding and forming
a feature of most of the houses.
At the Crystal Palace, London, we witnessed the
great amateur cycle race meeting of the Brixton,
London, and Lewisham Clubs, where we met all the
leading lights of the London cycling world. The
event of the day was for a £SO Challenge Cup (in
reality valued at £67 10s.) This was won for the
third time by F. J. Osmond. After the sports we
dined with some 60 wheelmen at the grand cafe in
the Palace, and later on saw an elaborate display of
fireworks—the best of the season; for the Prince of
Wales and Princess, accompanied by six other mem-
bers of the Royal family, and the Shah of Persia and
his retinue, occupied the special box, and we had the


pleasure of sitting some 50 ft. away. The attendance
was enormous. An open-air ballet, under a powerful
limelight, attracted large numbers ; but the prettiest
sight of all was the illumination of the grounds,
buildings, and lakes with innumerable coloured
lamps.
Next day we procured a boat from Salter, the
boatbuilder, and started away for a 90-mile row down
the River Thames, which is supposed by everyone
to be the finest thing to do in England. On this
voyage we passed about 30 locks, an average of one
in every three miles. These locks vary in height
from 3 ft. 6 in. to 6 ft. ; but although the fall of the
river is so great, still the stream appears sluggish, and
our craft took a good deal of propelling to average
three and a half miles an hour. We rowed 21 miles
the first day and 26 miles, to Henley, next day, where
we arrived shortly after the great aquatic carnival,
and saw remnants of the gay time in the way of
floating “deadheads”— i.e., fizz bottles. Mr. D. R.
Stewart, an old Melbourne cyclist, was with us on
this trip. At Henley We were charged pretty stiff —
three beds, 95.; three cold meat teas, 7s. 6d. ; and
attendance, 4s. 6d. This latter item was downright
robbery, for it is clear profit to the landlord, who
pockets it all, the guileless traveller being expected
to tip the waiter as well. All through the country
this absurd custom prevails, and in this respect
England is worse than many of the Continental cities.


On the third day we paddled along past several
towns till we sighted Windsor Castle, which loomed
up grandly, for the river here presents a beautiful
variety of views and for several miles the banks arc
covered with noble oaks, elms, sycamores, and pines.
We passed under the two bridges—Victoria and
Albert—and put up for the night, after rowing 27
miles, at the Anglers’ Rest Inn, at Runnymead, a
nice, clean, moderate hotel, where we received every
attention..
Our fourth and final day on the Thames led us
into bad weather, for we pulled along through a heavy
downpour of rain, till we reached Kingston, where we
took to the land, once more fully satisfied with a
92-mile trip in the boat.
Our next move was to Paris, where we spent several
weeks, and then hurried back to old England, in
order to be present at the great annual outing
of English wheelmen—the cyclists’ camp held at
Harrogate, in the north of England.
On the first day our wheels carried us 83 miles
from London to Harborough. This we considered a
good day’s ride, as we had not crossed the saddle for
a month. After a 72-miles ride next day we reached
Lincoln, and then a day and a half more on the
wheel and we reached the Harrogate camp and
received a hearty reception. Here we found 200
wheelmen spending their holidays under canvas,
there being about 70 bell tents, each of which bore


such euphonious titles as “Pilgrim’s Rest,” “Arcadia,”
“ Pigs in Clover,” &c. The camp was pitched a mile
and a half from the town of Harrogate, on an upland
commanding an extensive view, and the campers
spared no expense in decorating their canvas abodes*
On Sunday morning the camp was swarmed with
visitors, and all kinds of devices were resorted to by
the wheelmen to extort money for the charities.
One of the shows was the great Persian cat (a small
toy) which the showman outside of the tent by a
wonderful flow of language induced hundreds of
people to witness for the sum of one penny a head.
In the afternoon a special service was held by the
Rev. Rawdon Briggs, the celebrated cycling parson.
On Monday there were a procession of cyclists 400
strong, a race meeting, and a dinner, at which all
the leading cyclists of England were present. The
attendance on each of the three days the camp was
open was enormous, for visitors flocked in from the
surrounding country. At 9 p.m. each night the bugle
sounded for the camp to be cleared, and then the
cyclists joined hands right across the ground, and
gradually advancing all strangers had to depart.
We left the camp next day early, shaping our course
for Wales, and riding through wind and rain, our
waterproof capes protecting the body against the
latter. We stopped at Colne that afternoon, very
wet, after a 40-mile ride. Early in the morning we
slipped into our saddles and passed some beautiful


spots and antiquated places before reaching Man-
chester, and at dusk reached Knutsford, 64 miles.
Northwich is a quaint old town, and centre of the
salt mines. The old style of engraving texts and
mottoes on the house-fronts seems to have been
popular here. One of these mottoes was particularly
striking ;it ran—“ Preserve thine honour and extend
thy fame.” We bowl along down the rich and fertile
valley of the Dee, and see the fine old town of
Chester in the distance. We then branched off
westerly to visit Hawarden, the residence of the
“ Grand Old Man,” but we did not see him.
Wheeling along we saw some grand and wild
scenery, for the road goes near the coast of Wales.
Sometimes we rose hundreds of feet, and then travelled
down corresponding declines. At some of the steep
hills numbers of urchins ran after us wanting to push
our machines up for a copper, and we began to
imagine that their services were often called into
requisition by cyclists.
The road was good, and every now and again some
old mansion loomed up till we reached Conway,
and, crossing the huge suspension bridge, entered the
ruins of the old castle walls, within which the present
town of Conway lies. This place is a great resort of
artists on account of its beauty, for here rugged head-
lands, old ruins dating back centuries, rough wooded
valleys, and every variety of scenery an artist could
wish for lie all around. The Welsh language is really


the worst we have yet experienced ; no country
people understand our inquiries, nor can we make out
anything that is said to us. It is raining most of the
days of the year at Conway, and as we journeyed
along we were alternately seeking shelter from heavy
showers under hedges, shops, or private houses. At
Bangor we crossed the celebrated Menai Straits
Bridge from Wales to Anglesey. It was a splendid
25 miles ride across the island to Holyhead, and
shortly afterwards we boarded the s.s. Shamrock with
our trusty steeds, and a good passage of five hours
landed us at Dublin. It rained from morn till night
the first day we spent in Ireland. Next day we
started northwards at daylight, bent on making a
fortnight’s tour and completely circling the Emerald
Isle. Talk about Irish mud ! Why, there was fully
six inches of it all over the road, and big boulders
cropping up through it; and then the Irish miles being
equal to one and a quarter English miles, they seemed
interminable. The country, however, was pretty —a
good sea-view, backed up by the Mourne Mountains.
Early in the afternoon we reached Dundalk, and
there being no Cyclists’ Touring Club Hotel in the
town, we dined at the Imperial Hotel, where the old
wizened landlord charged us an exorbitant price,
and threatened to call in the police because we
objected. Seventy-two miles that day led us up and
down the Mourne Mountains and into the town of
1
Newry, where we passed the night. We rode 45


miles to Belfast before dinner next day, through
pretty country affording glimpses of loughs, while
hills lined the road all the way. The valleys in many
cases were converted into bog-pits, from which the
turf was being cut for peat. Mud is largely used in
the construction of all the country cottages, which
show signs of great poverty. We often take the
opportunity of getting a cup of buttermilk to see the
Irish peasant as he is. The half-naked children
grasp our odd pennies eagerly. The appearance of
the men is generally about the same—ragged as
they can be, with the ever-attendant short clay tin-
covered pipe constantly in their mouths. They never
appear to be working, but are always full of their
landlord’s persecutions. The houses are filthy, and
the yard usually converted into a liquid-manure pit,
with attendant stench. At a little shop we were
mistaken for Americans, and when we explained who
we were the good woman called her husband, and he
asked if we knew Timothy Doolan. It appeared
that Timothy was his brother, who went out to
Australia 30 years ago, and had never been heard of
since. Questions similiar to this have been asked
almost every day since we have been in Great Britain.
At Belfast we stayed five hours, and then, taking
advantage of a nice evening, we hoisted sail and
made Larne, after the hilly but pretty ride of 21
miles, making 66 for the day. This town is right on
the coast, and next day for 26 miles we rode along


the sea road, which in two places dives through
short tunnels, follows round many rocky headlands,
chalk pits, lime quarries, and through several towns.
At Ballycastle we spent some time strolling through
a real Irish fair, where almost every imaginable article
of use either for dress or eating was being disposed
of Dutch-auction-wise. Then our road led westward
on to a high tableland, which took us to the celebrated
Giant’s Causeway—6o miles. Here we went the
orthodox way about things, getting a guide and boat
for 95., which is almost unnecessary, as the caves into
which they row you are nothing special, being just
large caverns of black basaltic rock, devoid of
stalactites, though showing various colours, denoting
sulphur, iron, antimony, red ochre, and the rocks
below high-water mark are prettily tinged with red,
evidently from the iron ore. The whole place covers
some acres, and the formation is a most extraordinary
one. There are hundreds of visitors here from all
parts. As usual, it was raining hard next morning,
but we jumped on our machines and rode through
thickly-farmed lands to Coleraine, and then faced
severe hills towards Londonderry. For some three
miles we were amongst the drizzling clouds, although
our elevation was only 1,000 ft. We only covered
40 miles that day, and it was a severe task battling
against wind, rain, and mud.
Londonderry is a famous old place, renowned
for its defence 200 years ago. The anniversary


took place two days ago, amidst general rejoicings.
The old walls are still intact and afford a good walk,
being from 20 ft. to 30 ft. wide. From this town our
route lay through pleasant country, besides the River
Foyle. Rich, ripe raspberries and blackberries
abounded in the hedges, and gave us plenty of
refreshment, and numerous brooks cross our way.
At Lifford we find it is “ Our Lady Day” and a
general holiday. All the Catholic churches were filled
to overflowing, and as many as 100 people were
kneeling and praying outside. From our experiences,
they all appeared to go to church, and then get
drunk afterwards, as we got into several scrapes
through the peasants trying to drive into us, on account
of their superabundance of spirits (Mitchell’s). It was
a rough and heavy road to Ballyfoley, with some tall
climbing to the gap between Mounts Bellshade and
Barnesmore, where the scenery is choice, enlivened
by many waterfalls, which, by the way, like almost
all the streams in these parts, are darkened by the
bog land to a whisky colour, though no unpleasant
taste is perceptible. Passing Donegal, we pushed on
to Ballyshannon, beautifully situated in the lower
part of Donegal Bay, where the famous salmon
fishing is conducted. The whole of the daily catch
is forwarded to London, so that the inhabitants of the
Irish town see nothing of their own fish. Notwith-
standing that we changed our course on the morrow
we still had to bear the brunt of a heavy head wind


and also a long downpour of rain. There is no
mistake about the Irish scenery being hue, and it
was especially so winding along Lough Erne and
round under precipitous cliffs. For 16 long Irish
miles our road led close along the water’s edge, the
large lough being broken by thickly wooded islets.
We were much amused at one old fellow, who,
standing at the front of his house, with his barefooted
wife beside him, wanted to know “ How the devil
did you get up there, and why don’t you fall off
when you’re on ?” We dismounted and got on again,
much to his delight.
Passing Enniskillen, we skirted the broken shores
of Lough Erne, but before we reached Swanlimber
we were drenched by a passing shower. Next
morning, under a smiling sun, we were off a-wheel.
The road led over a dreary stretch of bog land, from
which acres and acres of turf were being cut in brick-
shaped blocks for peat. It was market day when we
entered Longford, and the main street was converted
into a mass of bartering humanity, and hundreds of
cattle, goats, sheep, farm produce, old hats, clothes,
and anything else likely to find a buyer, were being
offered for sale. The costermongers kept interlarding
their business talk with witty interjections hurled at
some of the lookers-on, and by this means kept a
crowd round their stalls. We spent the night at
Keenagh, after a 50-mile ride.
Next day we crossed the largest of British rivers—


the Shannon—and later on visited Doon Castle, a
fine old ivy-clad ruin. From here the road led
through a great avenue, for on either hand elms and
oaks rose to a stately size, and their branches spread
across the road and formed a complete covering,
whilst the stems and trunks of the trees were clad
for upwards of 20 ft. with ivy.
At Ballina we crossed the Shannon to Killaloe.
Here we get a glimpse of Ireland’s noble river.
“ The green banks of Shannon” show to advantage at
this point, and the high background of the Silvermine
Mountains, with Keeper’s Hill (2,276 ft.) topping the
range, are seen to good effect. Killaloe has been
brought into far greater prominence through the
Gaiety Company’s song than the place deserves, for,
with the exception of being an antiquated little old
village with good salmon fishing, there’s little else to
be said of it. During that afternoon, when we had
run some 50 miles, we came across a good bicycle
repairing shop at Limerick, and took the opportunity
to get new tyres put on our back wheels. This
makes four little tyres each since leaving Melbourne.
Adare is a truly pretty spot, and perhaps the finest
we have seen in Ireland, for here are remnants of old
abbeys, castles, and churches, 600 years old, all clad
with heavy dark garments of ivy. Passing on we
rode a tremendous hill, 10 miles long, and then cut
across other hills of uncommon height, covered with
the Scottish heather in purple bloom, whilst the


hedges were thickly covered with blackberries, many
quite ripe and delicious to eat, though leaving their
tell-tale mark on the fingers. Once on the top of the
range we gained a fine view of M'Gillicuddy’s Reeks,
and the delightful lake of Killarney at the foot, down
to which we ran on a very good road, making 70 miles,
and a good solid day’s riding into the bargain. We
felt really heart-sick to see the havoc the rain had
made. Many fields under water, some 3 ft.
deep, out of which mowing machines, horse rakes,
and cocks of hay were standing. Prayers were being
offered in the churches for fine weather. Starvation
looked many families in the face. Near Muckross
Abbey we left our bicycles, and went up a winding
track to the cascade, which was a thundering
waterfall, 70 ft. high. Continuing up Mount Tore
we were rewarded by a magnificent view, overlooking
all Killarney’s beauties. There we picked and pressed
“ the dear little shamrock,” eat blackberries, and
admired the hillsides in their covering of rich majenta
bloom. There are hundreds of beautiful scenes
round about, and we passed spots often depicted on
painters’ canvas, and now familiar all over the world.
We passed right over the mountains on our wheels, and
then spun down over the five miles to Kenmare at such
a rate that the mud flew up our backs ; but we cared
not for appearances, for the road was good, the wind
fair, and at Kenmare a good meal was by no means
the least of the good things we had that day. During


the next ten miles the road, every now and again,
kept cutting off corners by tunnelling through the
solid rock. The longest was right at the summit ;
and here, instead of the ordinary mode, the road was
tunnelled through over 250 yards of rock. The
peculiarity of wheeling through a semi-dark tunnel
was something novel, and although we had seen
them in various places previously, still they were all
short. Emerging into the open the view was majestic,
for Bantry Bay, likened by many to a Norwegian
fiord, lay 2,000 ft. below, and our road reached the
water’s edge in five miles, making a charming ride,
broken only by a few dismounts at more than
ordinarily pretty corners, till we reached the Bay of
Glengary, and then followed the coast round to
Bantry. We were glad to get away from this town
next day, owing to the filth, dirt, and smells which
had been left behind by a pig fair held the previous
day. The 65 miles to Cork was an easy and pleasant
spin, for the wind was behind us, and what with
grand ripe blackberries all along the road, and
Guinness’s prime stout at 2d. a bottle, we certainly
enjoyed ourselves immensely.
The general appearance of the parts of Ireland
we had passed through during the past few days
reminded us very strongly of Palestine; for the moun-
tains are bare, and mostly composed of solid rock,
though of course the great amount of water in Ireland
and the cold weather are two extremes the Holy Land


is unacquainted with. Left Cork at 7 o’clock in the
morning and bowled along a charming road, winding
close by the water’s edge, the Queenstown Harbour
resembling that of Sydney, the high wooded hills
being fully occupied by fine mansions. We rode for
miles on the footpaths, and often got a scratch from
overhanging hollies or similar prickly trees. The
good-nature of the people was plainly brought out,
for they stepped off into the mud and never com-
plained, but made some cheery remark, such as “Shure
’tis myself as doesn’t begrudge yer honour the path,
shure the road is too muddy, intoirely so whereas
the Englishman would say, “ Take your proper place,
d you and the Scotchman might give way,
but would also give a piece of his mind. Just as we
got in sight of Middleton a tremendous storm came
on, so we made for the first house. The good woman
told us to be welcome, and we accordingly shared
the front room with the following companions—a
hen and ten chickens, four goats and one kid, seven
ducks, and four geese ; and she would as soon think
of turning out a child as one of these. Leaving
Waterford behind we made for New Ross, crossing
the river, and winding up and down long hills, and
following round the inlet, which runs 30 miles up
from the sea. It was a delightful ride, with
bright sun, good road, and crystal streams which
went under wooded dells where semi-darkness reigned.
The town of Arklow is right on the sea, and here


we had tea ; but, being so near the famous Vale
of Avoca, we decided to spend the night amid
its beauties, so at a little before 6 slipped into
the saddles again. Of all roads for a delightful run
we are inclined to put this very near the first place.
We followed the Avoca River, at times being quite
close to its banks. Shelton Abbey and the lovely
grounds of Glenart Castle were passed, and the road
plunged beneath the shade of huge park-like trees,
the steep bank on the one hand being densely clad with
a mass of vegetation, scarcely possible to penetrate on
account of its prickly nature and density ; for here the
holly seemed to run wild and the common Australian
fern abounded, and the ivy lent its charm, clinging
everywhere. In the lovely valleys' the heavy woods
are showing their autumnal tints with a picturesque-
ness unknown in Australia. The leaves are all
colours, from fine deep green to white, yellow, and
reddish brown, and the mists hanging about the hill-
tops as the sun sank behind the long series of ranges
gave striking effects. We put up at Rathdrum—Bs
miles —for the day. Not far from here we visited St.
Kelvin’s bed. To reach this we had to scramble around
a very dangerous path on the edge of a cliff. The
good old saint must have had a mighty rough time of
it in the damp recess, besides the chance of falling into
the water 20 ft. below. It did not appear to shorten his
life, for tradition reports him as living to 120 years.
The usual visitors are conveyed a quarter of a mile


across the lake in a boat, the boatmen resorting to
the mean trick of tarring the rocks to prevent tourists
cheating them of their plunder. We hate such mean
tricks, so chagrined the boatmen by getting round
without their aid. Passing through Roundwood and
Enniskerry we shortly after reached Dublin, having
thus finished a complete circle of Ireland. We did
not forget to go over Guinness’s Brewery, where there
are always—at certain hours—two guides ready to
show visitors round. Everything is done on a gigantic
scale, and in one place we saw 1,000,000 gals, of stout
and a storehouse capable of holding a million bushels
of malt. In the afternoon we got our machines and
rode round the magnificent Phoenix Park, then
boarding the steamer a rough passage landed us once
more into Wales. We worked down south over fresh
roads and new scenes, among the celebrated mountain
scenery of Snowdon, the enchanting valleys that
surround Bettyscoed and Corwen, thence passing
Llangollen, Oswestry, Welshpool, Llanidloe, and over
the Kerry Hills, 2,000 ft. high, following small roads,
through numerous gateways, reaching Knighton, 74
miles.
Here, in the rocky bed of the dashing River Teme,
there were scores of ardent salmon-fishers wading
about in watertight leggings, but hardly ever catching
anything. We continued our way through most
mountainous country, passing the towns of Presticon,
Radnor, Builth ; and then our ride led for twelve


miles beside the river and its exquisite landscape
scenery till we again faced the severe hills of South
Wales. Presumably New South Wales is named
after these, for they greatly resemble a distant view of
the Blue Mountains. We stayed awhile at the pretty
town of Brecon, where the Eisteddfod was proceeding.
This is a great Welsh institution for the advancement
and encouragement of art, mainly in its vocal branches.
It is held in different cities of Wales, and large
amounts are offered in prizes ; for instance, at the
one we saw, ,£I,OOO was given away in prizes for
elocution, singing, and instrumental music. The
affair is held in a marquee, capable of holding 10,000
people, who crowd to hear the competitors at work,
for the famous artists of Wales are all there, and even
Madame Patti sang the day before we arrived.
Brecon was full of people, so we, failing to get
accommodation, laid in a stock of fruit and wheeled
away up a staggering hill, nine miles long, called the
Brecknock Range. After riding six miles we dis-
mounted for a blow, and then remounted and kept
the saddle to the top. This road was splendidly
engineered, leading right up the steep hill, and yet
no part was too steep to cycle. Down the other side
we had a magnificent spin, winding along the side of
a narrow valley, the everlasting water coursing along,
while masses of bracken and fern covered the slopes,
save on the cultivated patches here and there. We
took tea at a small mining town with a terrible


Welsh name, and then pedalled away, along a road
lighted by the mighty glare of huge smelting works,
to Merthyr-Tydvil, a town which has a lovely situa-
tion ; but the great Bessemer steel industry has
converted the lovely valley into a mass of blast
furnaces that shoot out their flaring coloured flames
all the livelong day and far into the night, giving a
quaint and wild aspect, reminding us of the Indian
town of Burrackar. Through the vale of Neath
next morning we had a lovely ride, blurred only by
vile smoke from the furnaces. For the black demon
was wafted along the valley, and hung like a pall in
front of the most beautiful crags, waterfalls, and
rural scenery imaginable ; for now the horse-chestnut
trees are turning amber and brown, giving most
beautiful tints to the foliage, especially when the sun
glints on the leaves. At Neath we came face to
face with the great smelting works of iron, tin, and
copper, which are brought here in immense quantities
for smelting, on account of the cheapness of coal.
From here on to Swansea we had to ride a vile road
lined on either side by great furnaces polluting the
air and surrounding country by their dense volumes
of smoke and fumes from melting minerals. At
Swansea we found ourselves in the chief centre of the
copper-smelting industry in the world. The mineral
is not found in Wales, but is brought from Cornwall
and foreign countries. The town of Swansea con-
tains 100,000 people, and is most remarkably dirty


and smoky, so that we began to wonder why the
place was such a holiday resort. On proceeding
to Mumbles, however, we found all altered, for the
white sands stretched out seawards, with visitors
strolling by dozens, and the place wholly given to
holiday-making. The road for five miles followed
close to the beach, and was charming. From Swan-
sea we worked round by a somewhat less hilly road
to Cardiff, getting on one side fine glimpses of the
Bristol Channel, and on the other the grand moun-
tains of South Wales. At Cardiff we had ridden
76 miles and slipped into the train, passing through
the Severn Tunnel and reaching Bristol at 7 p.m.
After spending a day in Bristol we wheeled off at 8
o’clock in the morning up the Mendip Hills, and from
thence along good undulating roads to Cheddar, of
cheese-making fame, where there are many fine
pastoral valleys and the cliffs rising close beside.
Passing along to Wells we bowled over hill and vale
and stopped at the great cathedral, which the people
think much of. The ecclesiastical buildings here are
bunched up in a mass and have been occupied by
religious sects of one kind and another since the
eighth century, when the Saxons were supposed to have
first made secular use of this particular spot. Many
people write this down as the finest cathedral in
England, but we are not inclined to rank it in the
first rate, though its surroundings are very complete,
and, as usual, the carvings show that great expense


has been incurred in working them ; but age has of
course laid its heavy hand on the stonework, which
is here and there crumbling away. The next town
was Taunton, with its beautiful Church of St Mary
Magdalene, and old castle said to date back some
twelve centuries. Further on we. climbed up the
Blackdown Hills, and passed Wellington, a small
town, from which the old Duke took his title; his
great monument also crowns one of the adjacent hills,
and shows for many miles around.
From Tiverton we rode on to Exeter, put up at
the Bude Hotel, and attended the afternoon service
at the cathedral, which, although a very fine one,
shows great signs of wear and tear. The inside, how-
ever, is splendid ; the long fan-marked roof extends
over 400 ft., and is supported by numerous columns,
and walls inlaid with tablets and memorial stones.
The whole town shows signs of antiquity. The gabled
windows and narrow streets, together with the strong
accent of the people, made us imagine we were in a
foreign town.
Crossing the hills, we passed through Crockernwell
and arrived at Okehampton at 8 p.m. The hills in
this part of England are severe, for, although not
very long, they are uncommonly steep, and the towns
in almost every case are in the hollows. We skirted
along the side of the Dartmoor forest range. This
forest is a large stretch of country, 25 x 12 miles,
densely wooded, and mainly at an elevation of


1,500 ft above the sea-level. Our wheels rolled along
by some beautiful gullies, under the shade of forest
trees, every now and again keeping beside little
watercourses ; the chestnut trees, too, looked lovely
in their many colours. Lidford and Tavistock were
passed ; the latter is a charming spot. At Plymouth,
as our time was flying on so fast, we ran across to
New Quay by train, and thus saved a day. Here
there are fine cliffs and sandy beaches ; the latter
make a splendid promenade for two miles, the
surface being so firm that carriages can go along and
hardly leave an impression. Lawn tennis is also
extensively played when the tide is out. We rode
on to Redruth through open country, with large
mines here and there lending an air of life and
activity to the scene. Our road all day lay between
deep hedges, but timber was scarce, and the immense
apple orchards of Devon were also a thing of the
past. Blackberries lined the hedges in tempting
abundance, save near the villages, where, of course,
children with baskets and jugs were gathering
them for the pie, A pleasant run took us to Hayle,
and then after ascending a long hill we gained a
good view of both oceans, and in an hour bowled
into Penzance. Here the Logan Stone and Land’s
End claimed attention. The former is a large rock-
ing stone, which an officer—Lieutenant Goldsmith,
nephew of the poet—with the aid of a boat’s crew,
tilted over. This escapade cost him ,£2,000, for the


Admiralty ordered him to replace it, and, of course,
he had to comply. At Sennen, some two miles from
the extreme end, the little inn hangs out the sign,
“ The first and last hotel in England.” This used to
be correct; but recently an hotel has been built right
at the extremity of the land, amid wild and rocky
scenery. Again we stole a march to save time, for*
taking the evening train, we journeyed back to Ply-
mouth. We trained through a beautiful country ; for
Cornwall, perhaps, is as pretty as Derby or York.
There aie a succession of fine hills and valleys, the
train every now and then either plunging into a
tunnel or skimming along a viaduct. We were sur-
prised at the great throng of people who walk the
streets of Plymouth far into the night. A motley
crowd of soldiers, sailors, and lasses strolled along
Union-street, past our hotel, till near midnight.
Slipping into our saddles next morning we rode on
through Plympton to Totnes, and dined at the Castle
Hotel. The town itself is built on a steep hillside,
and has many strange, old-fashioned, gabled build-
ings jutting out over the footpath, so low that one
cannot walk along uprightly while wearing a high
hat.
Torquay, our next town, has a perfectly charming
situation on the edge of the sea, with pretty houses
running far up the hillsides. This watering-place
tries to cut out Brighton, but the latter is the queen
of all the English seaside resorts. We passed right


through and got a wrong direction, which, instead of
leading us along the coast, took us to Newton, by
a fine wooded valley ; then we followed an inlet to
Tynemouth, a town which devotes itself almost
entirely to entertaining visitors, for scarcely a house
is to be seen without “Apartments” stuck in the
window. Leaving here we had a cruel hill over a
mile long, and then a succession of smaller ones to
Dawlish, another of the favourite watering-places of
southern England. We spent that night at Exmouth,
having ridden 55 miles during the day. One of the
features of this ride was the abundance of the apples,
w r hich were being collected in heaps as they fell from
the trees, and thus they remain for several weeks till
the cider is made. Next morning, starting early, we
reached Budleigh, a little seaport, from which we
toiled up a tremendous hill, with a Cyclists’ Touring
Club danger board on the summit, pointing both
ways, this being the only similar one we have met
with. This hill certainly deserves a danger signal,
for it both rose and fell at a grade varying one in ten
and one in six. This drop brought us to the small
village of Sidmouth. The town lies right on the sea
shore, and is between two of the most dangerous hills
a cyclist could venture on. The one we ascended
after passing through the town was worse than a step-
ladder, and it seemed almost an impossibility for a
single horse to pull up an empty cart, as for a whole
mile the rise was so steep that we could hardly push the


wheels up. After dining at Bridport, we were walk-
ing down a steep decline when we saw a gentleman
whom we at once stopped, knowing we had seen him
somewhere. It turned out to be Dr. Robertson, who
had kindly carried our camera from Damascus to
Beyrout. We reached Dorchester after 55 miles
of the hardest riding we can remember. The
hills of Devon were a caution, and we were not
sorry to leave them behind and launch out into
Dorset, where the whole surrounding country was
made up of gentle undulations, cut up into mince-
meat, for the holdings seem to average less than
ten acres each, and the thick hedges had the
effect of making them appear even smaller. We
slipped off at the seaside village of Poole for a
mouthful of bread and cheese and ale, resuming
the ride to Bournemouth. This place has made a
remarkable growth in the past five years, nearly
doubling itself, and is certainly the most aristocratic
of the seaside resorts we have passed through. It
seems to us, too, to be the most modern town in the
whole country, for the streets are wide, straight, and
of splendid surface, and the general details all point
to modern ideas and improvement. There are
splendid sea promenades, and also two fine piers, the
second being at Boscombe, a suburb about a mile
away. These piers are the property of private
companies, and a charge of one penny each is made
for walking thereon.


We mount the trusty wheels once more which have
carried us without mishap over so many thousand
miles, and- we leave Bournemouth behind, bowling
along through the New Forest. The English trees
have a beauty of symmetry rarely seen in Australian
trees, but of course as regards height or girth the
English timber is nowhere, and when we tell people
our forests contain hundreds of trees over 400 ft.
high, they shrug their shoulders as much as to say,
“ We ain’t flats,”
After three and a half hours’ riding we had covered
30 miles and reached Southampton, where we spent
three most pleasant hours wandering round a friend’s
splendid gardens and hothouses. Then we pushed
on to Gosport and ferried over to Portsmouth, the
great naval seaport of England ; thence we passed
along to Chichester, a cathedral city with a very large
church, the nave being 410 ft. long.
After a ten-mile ride next morning we passed
through Arundel, where the Duke of Norfolk’s
splendid residence, Arundel Castle is situated.
Wheeling along by the sea, we followed the coast-
road through Shoreham to Brighton. We were
much surprised at this town, for it simply swarmed
with visitors, and its nominal 170,000 inhabitants
were swelled by 100,000, and not a bed was available.
After dinner we watched the crowds promenading
along the fine sea-walks and piers, then pedalled
away through Lewes and Pevensey, the latter place


being noted as the landing-place of William the
Conqueror. Towards evening we dismounted at
Hastings, after a 75-mile ride. Here all the world
and his wife appeared to be holiday-making. The
electric light of the piers and promenade made the
place look bright as day, and the crowds of happy
people strolling gaily along could not have been less
than 15,000 strong.
From Hastings we had to push up some steep hills
on the way to Winchelsea. This was once a famous
watering-place, and had a good commercial standing,
but, to show how changes tend to ruin men and places,
it may be mentioned that the sea receded from the
town to a distance of three miles. The town was
left on the cliff sure enough, but desolation now
seems to reign over the plain which was once the sea"
bed. We now reach Kent, “ the garden of England.”
The hop season is a good one, and thousands of
pickers are at work ; added to which the numerous
kilns are engaged, and the aroma that was wafted
across the country from the curing process was
almost equal to the perfume of the Jaffa orange
groves. At Ashford we had covered 30 miles, and
after lunch set out on our pilgrimage to Canterbury,
perhaps the most famous of English cathedral cities.
At the grand old cathedral we saw one of the
original Bibles chained to the wall, as it was in the
time of the Reformation. Canterbury, like York,
seems almost overshadowed by the immense cathedral,


which is 514 ft. long. The houses project over the
roadway, and the streets, though narrow, are interest-
ing. Jogging pleasantly along, after 55 miles we
came to Faversham, which is in the heart of the hop-
growing district. On the way to Maidstone we saw
in many fields from two to four hundred people at
work—men, women, and children—mostly very poor
Londoners, and the animated scenes often led to our
dismounting to watch them. The women and children
make up more than two-thirds of the whole number,
for they are more nimble with their fingers than the
men. The latter usually cut down the plants and carry
them to the bins, around which from four to six
pickers chatter and work.
There are plenty of ups and downs in this country
—in fact, after leaving Sittingbourne we had a long
rise of five miles, but it ended suddenly, and a
danger board made us proceed carefully down a
beautiful steep road, avenued with beeches, oaks, and
chestnuts right down to Maidstone, where we dined
at “Ye Anciente Bell,” 200 years old. We finished
up 60 miles that day at Westerham.
The morrow is our last day awheel. Will our
machines have an accident ? Will we have a fall ?
Not if we can help it. Yet such thoughts present
themselves at breakfast, for we have now ridden
6,000 miles, since landing at Naples, without accident,
which is certainly marvellous, considering the many
precipitous edges we have ridden along and the steep


mountains we have descended, not to mention the
rough roads of all countries we have ridden.
We soon cross into Surrey, and ride down Red-
hill, through Reigate, and on to Dorking, another
quaint old town, set down amongst foliage in a
beautiful valley near the end of the chalk mountains,
which we have followed all the way from Canterbury.
Dorking fowls are famous, and we see lots of poultry
farms hereabouts. Next we pass through Guildford,
pretty in the sense of quiet rustic beauty, and then we
hum along the Portsmouth and London road, and
very shortly reach the Mecca of all English wheel-
men—viz., Ripley. Here we dined, and then the
road is for the rest of the way lively with wheels.
Old men on tricycles—occasionally a father and
daughter—then ladies on single tricycles and some
on tandems. Young men, too, out for the Saturday
afternoon, are pacing along at great speed, all bound
for the same place—Ripley. We wend our way over
about ten miles of paving ; but we know London
well enough now to keep off the pitcher stones, and
at 4 o’clock in the afternoon we finished up our
tremendous bicycle tour, having just reached 10,000
miles, ridden on our wheels. All this has been done,
as well as many thousands of miles of ocean
voyaging, in the ten months and a half which have
elapsed since we left our homes in Melbourne. After
finishing up we stepped on to the scales and found our
respective weights to be 11 st. 12 lbs. and lost. 12 lbs.


The championship of the world sculling match—
Searle v. O’Connor—was to take place next day, and
we considered this of sufficient importance to take
train 200 miles to see, so, availing ourselves of the
express, we reached the trysting ground in good time.
It was a grand sight ; the Thames was covered with
thousands of boats of all kinds, and presently the
police boat came rushing along to clear a course,
followed by a dozen eight-oared boats, which
apparently had no business there, and then about
100 yards astern were two specks that denoted Searle
and O’Connor. All doubt as to the result of the
race was soon at rest, for through our glasses we saw
the fair-haired Australian sitting up and pulling a
fine easy stroke, whilst O’Connor’s black hair was
lost to view at every reach, for he was pumped out
and his head seemed to sink into his chest. The
great race over, we caught the express back and got
to Bournemouth at sunset the same day.


CHAPTER XII.
THROUGH AMERICA AND BACK TO AUSTRALIA.
With blinding rain-showers and a north-west wind
raging, the prospects of a start for the Atlantic Ocean
were not by any means bright, and as the morning
wore on the weather grew blacker than ever. Arrived
at Prince’s Dock, we got amongst a jabbering lot of
porters, all hurry and skurry. The steam tenders were
bobbing up and down upon the angry waters of the
Mersey, whose usually placid dirty surface was
lashed into streaks of foam and white-crested waves
of no mean size. Shortly after noon the last adieus
were waved, the anchor weighed, and as we slowly
forged ahead the Etruria , with her immense freight
of humanity, was in the Irish Sea, with all appear-
ances of an abominable passage before her. All told,
we had close on 1,000 people aboard. In the saloon
there were over 450 passengers, and to seat this
number there were three sittings for each meal.
Towards night the ship rolled about more than one
would imagine an 8,000-ton vessel could, and there
were many vacant seats at the tea tables; but before
morning we anchored in the Queenstown Harbour.
The duration of the passage is only reckoned between
Queenstown and New York, and as the Etruria is


one of the latest and fastest of the Cunard line, with
a speed power of something over 20 knots an hour,
it was not unlikely a record might be made. The
grand ship bowled along over the billowy ocean in
splendid style, striving against a rough wind and
dense fogs, covering over 450 miles a day. In the
Gulf Stream—the heat of which generally produces
fogs—there was some danger, for all along the
“ banks,” some 200 miles in extent, numerous fishing
craft lay anchored, and our whistle was kept con-
tinually on the go to warn them to look after them-
selves. Objects 100 yards distant were quite obscured,
and yet we seemed to move along at scarcely reduced
speed. On the last day out fine weather prevailed.
We picked up our pilot 500 miles off shore. This
give one an idea of the way business is pushed here.
Only fancy a pilot cruising about the mid-Atlantic
on the look-out for a job ! In the evening a concert
came off with great eclat, after which a collection
was taken up for the Ancient Mariners’ Fund, netting
Next morning, when all was bustle and excite-
ment, Long Island was sighted, and at 1 o’clock p.m.
we were off Sandy Hook, making the run across
exactly six days, even time ; or, watch time, 6 days 5
hours. This, although not a record trip, counts in
the first ten quickest passages. The mooring of such
a mighty vessel takes time ; so we got a good oppor-
tunity to view the city, the Brooklyn Bridge, and the
statue of Liberty from the vessel. The Customs


officers were more troublesome at New York than
at any other place we visited. Everyone had to
sign a written declaration setting out that they
had nothing dutiable, and then submit to the strictest
search.
On our first night in New York we went to see the
“ Old Homestead ” play at the leading theatre. This
piece has been running two years, and is actually
taken from real life. The characters are just trans-
planted from their native state to New York, and
have delighted immense audiences ever since. It
appears some ’cute Yankee was staying at this country
house, and saw the very thing in real life with his
own eyes ; and, knowing what a success it would be,
overcame all difficulties and transferred the whole
show to New York. Sunday we spent roaming
around, first admiring the Brooklyn Bridge, which in
its way is equal to the Forth Bridge, and is a much
greater work than the Eiffel Tower. Then we crossed
the harbour to the great towering bronze statue pre-
sented by France—the Bartholdi statue of Liberty—
which appeared to swell out to colossal proportions
as we approached it. On climbing up the interior we
gained a good idea of the size, for the uplifted arm
that holds the flaming torch on high has actually a
stairway running circularly up the centre, and quite a
small crowd can stand in the hand. Reckoning from
the base of the granite pedestal to the top of the
figure, it is over 305 ft. The figure itself is all ham-


mered out of sheet copper, and from foot to torch
measures 151 ft.
At the Stock Exchange, next day, we saw the most
excited crowd of English-speaking people we had yet
come across. Men were simply yelling themselves
hoarse, like bookmakers on a Flemington racecourse
Cup day. The building was immense, and at least
1,500 brokers were buying and selling in hammer and
tongs style.
At the Produce Exchange we were accommodated
in the visitors’ gallery. The public are not admitted,
and the grain sales are conducted after the same
manner as stocks and shares. The excitement the
buyers worked up was astonishing, and the babel of
shouting men contrasted strangely with what usually
occurs in Melbourne.
The Central Park is an extensive place, with
museums, rockeries, lakes, and delightful asphalted
walks. The most interest centred in the carriage
drives, where pedestrians are not allowed. Here the
elite of the land were brushing along with the best
collection of trotters to be seen in any part of the
world. The traps were all of the sulky type, as light
as feathers.
The outskirts of New York are magnificent. It is a
city anyone might be justly proud of, for the houses
are good and substantial, and altogether it strikes a
stranger as being far in advance of most other cities
for push, bustle, and business ; the streets, however,


are of the most vile description. We know of no
place in the wide world—save Turkey—where the
roads are worse. Scarcely a wheelman was to be
seen anywhere, and cabs and other vehicles lurch and
skid along in a shocking manner when trying to
cross the tram lines. Then, again, the clatter of
trams, both overhead and on the streets, and the
noise of moving carts, all help to make the din
almost unbearable, for all the streets are stone-
pitched, and present a most uneven surface. We
sped away from New York by rail, in order to
witness the great spectacle of the triennial gathering
of the Knight Templars of the United States. The
train took us across the Delaware River, at Trenton,
and followed close to the famous river to Philadelphia,
then over the Susquehanna by an iron bridge a mile
long. The scenery was very pretty all the way
along; the autumn tints are just charming, presenting
a variety of colour even more beautiful than that of
the English trees, for the season is further advanced,
and this fact was forcibly brought home to us by the
cold, for the air was sharp, though the weather was
beautifully fine. Just before entering Baltimore the
train ran straight on to a steam ferry, and thus we
crossed the water without leaving the cars ; then we
pushed on for Washington, gaining a magnificent
view of the Capitol on entering. The entire city
seemed to be en fete , holiday-making in honour of
the Knight Templars’ triennial gathering. The


gaudy dress of these gentry was most elaborate,
eclipsing the gendarmes altogether, for their uniforms
consisted of black frock suits with silver braid and
belts, also most gorgeous scabbards, and medals hung
all about their breasts, the finishing touch being
given by a long white feather in a cocked hat.
These brave knights had assembled from all parts
of America, to the number of ten thousand. This in-
teresting gathering we saw on parade, and it was
truly a fine sight, for all their uniforms were without
spot or blemish, the general appearance resembling a
huge body of military officers in full dress. Each
lodge was headed by a band, which in many cases
had been hired, and being dressed in their own uni-
forms improved the effect. It was computed that
300,000 persons witnessed the spectacle. We hurried
away from the show in order to secure beds, which we
did after some considerable trouble, for fully 50,000
visitors, besides the 10,000 knights, were staying in
the city.
In the evening we attended the lantern parade of
cyclists, a procession of close on 1,000 wheelmen,
whose machines were decorated in every conceivable
style; some carried Chinese lanterns, others had
coloured papers wound round the spokes, while not a
few carried crosses of various designs in honour of the
knights.
The styles of wheel included almost everything
that has been invented, safety bicycles predominating ;


the Star safety, with the little wheel in front, came
next in point of numbers. There were a number of
lady cyclists riding safety bicyles, and, by the way, it
is quite a common thing to see them about the streets
at all hours of the day. Numbers of riders would tip
the little wheel off the ground, a la Maltby, and others
rode simply' on the single big wheel of an ordinary
bicycle. One youth rode the recently invented uni-
cycle.
This display of cycling quite bewildered us, and
the perfect control over the wheels that the riders dis-
played led us to the conclusion that in Melbourne we
are far behind our American cousins.
Washington, the capital of the States, is a fine city.
Its streets are composed of asphalt, and are the finest
we have anywhere seen ; in fact, they are perfect, and
this accounts for the extraordinary large number of
wheelmen we saw. Trees are planted in most of the
streets, which are wide and have horse trams running
down the centre. The ordinary buildings are com-
posed, in a great measure, of red brick, but are all
substantial and modern in appearance. Many of the
public buildings are palatial structures of white
marble. The Capitol is a huge building situated on
a 90-feet eminence, its total height above water level
being 377 ft., and its breadth 75 1 ft., covering more
than acres. In general appearance it somewhat
resembles the Palace of Justice at Brussels, having
the same kind of dome, though perhaps hardly so


massive, and certainly not so fine in sculptures, for
the Yankees believe in fostering their native talent,
both in painting and otherwise decorating their
buildings ; but it does not require an artist to dis-
cover some of the glaring faults, especially noticeable
in the carved work. The Washington Monument,
which, prior to the building of the Eiffel Tower, was
the highest building in the world, well repaid a visit.
This remarkable structure is 60 ft. each side at the
base and 555 ft. high, not including 100 ft. of stone-
work under the ground. The walls are 15 ft. thick
at the base, but gradually narrow in till at the top
—which is shaped off like the apex of Cleopatra’s
needle—they are but 7 ft. thick. Walking towards
the town we saw some holes near the top that looked
like bricks knocked out; but when we climbed up to
them we found the openings were big enough for six
men to look out at the same time.
The Americans do not like to be eclipsed by
France, for, in 1892, they are talking of building a
tower at the Chicago World’s Fair higher than the
Eiffel. In that year they will celebrate the 300 th
anniversary of the discovery of America by Columbus.
We were greatly interested in the gay manner of the
decorations and the wealth of bunting displayed ; also
with the enormous crowds, about a quarter of which
were negroes, some dressed like “ mashers ” and others
attired in the most grotesque style imaginable. This
is generally admitted to be the paradise of the


nigger, and he struts about with a big cigar in a
pompous manner that is simply laughable. Their
language, too, is all on the “massa” type; but it
seems strange to us to hear blacks talking English,
for we have been accustomed to hear such gibberish
languages from coloured people.
Our next move by rail was to Philadelphia, a
colossal city that has 900 miles of streets closely
built on. This immense city occupies a space over
20 miles long by eight miles wide, and has both cable
and horse trams, the latter in great numbers. The sur-
face of the streets is simply vile, and cycling well-nigh
impracticable. The public buildings at the crossing
of Market and Broad-streets are of a most extensive
order. They are quite new, being only just out of the
builder’s hands ; the measurements are 487 ft. x 470 ft.,
four stories high, with a total of 560 rooms, and a
ground space of acres, exclusive of a courtyard
200 yards square in the centre. This structure is
almost wholly composed of white marble, richly
sculptured ; but again the poorness of execution is
quite noticeable. The Girard College is another fine
white marble building of Grecian appearance, and
having many Corinthian columns.
Fairmont Park is just outside the business part of
the city, and extends along the banks of two small
rivers for a total distance of 14 miles. Although
rather narrow, this park has many natural pretensions
to beauty.


Many of the insurance companies, banks, and
hotels have magnificent edifices of the most elaborate
and durable style. America is the most expensive
country to live in that we have visited, the dollar
going about as far as our shilling.
From Philadelphia we returned to New York, where
we saw Karl Kron, whose book, “ Ten Thousand
Miles on a Bicycle,” is familiar to wheelmen all the
world over.
Our trip up the Hudson River is well worth men-
tioning, for Americans are very proud of this river,
and declare that it excels any river in the world, not
excepting the famous Rhine. The steamers of the New
York and Hudson River Steamboat Company have
been noted for their speed for close on a quarter of a
century. The old Mary Powell ', which we met just
after starting, has travelled 24 miles an hour, but now
runs at 20 miles, as her framework is not considered
sufficiently strong for faster work. The Albany,
which we travelled by, was no sluggard, for she
steamed the 143 miles at the rate of 21 miles an hour.
All these fast boats are paddle steamers, and mostly
three-deckers.
Half an hour after starting the morning cleared up,
a frosty atmosphere prevailing, which showed up the
long line of cliffs known as the “ Palisades ” with
great clearness. This particular formation of per-
pendicular rock has a uniform height of 300 ft, and
extends for 10 miles on the west shore, while the


eastern side is studded with beautiful villas half-
hidden by foliage that exhibits unending autumnal
shades and tints of glowing colours. After going some
distance we opened out on the Tappan Zee, where
the hills gave some very fine views and villa residences
abound, for, during the hot weather the New Yorkers
spend much of their time away from the heat of the
big city. In another hour we reached the high lands,
and we were charmed, for, looking any way, behind,
before, or on either side, the views were enchanting,
more especially as we steamed past Anthony’s Nose,
Sugarloaf Mount, and the Buttermilk Falls. Then at
Poughkeepsie we found a fine city picturesquely built
on an elevation 200 ft, above the water.
Albany has over 100,000 inhabitants, and possesses
many fine buildings, notably the new Capitol, which
we inspected, together with the other leading
buildings. At 9 o’clock that night we took sleeping
berths on the train, and woke up next morning at
Boston, and then transferred to the old colony
railway, and soon found ourselves at Plymouth,
where the Pilgrim Fathers first set foot on American
soil on 22nd December, 1620. Here we saw the rock
on which the Pilgrims stepped to gain the shore—
this is preserved under a canopy, with “ 1620”
simply cut deep in the stone, and no other inscription.
Next we visited the Museum, which contains relics
of the Pilgrims, such as tools, weapons, spinning-
wheels, and heaps of minor things. Afterwards we


went to see Cole’s Hill, where the first winter was
spent, and was so severe that almost half of them
died and were buried in this spot. Lastly, we saw
the national monument to the Pilgrims, a huge
50-ft. statue of Faith, mounted on a high pedestal.
We paid a most instructive visit to Mr. Quimby’s
nut, bolt, and nail factory, near Kingston. Many
people would have given to have seen what we
saw, as the machinery was unique and superior to
any of its kind. We were also shown over a cordage
manufactory, where 1,500 men were employed, and
nearly all of these workmen were Germans, Italians,
or Frenchmen, and it appears the Continental work-
man is shoving the Yankee working man out. At
the invitation of our good friend of the nail factory,
whom we first met in the Holy Land, we drove out
to his estate, called “Tadmor in the Wilderness,”
and spent a most pleasant time, shooting and boating
with him and his friends. On returning to Plymouth
we trained up to Boston, where we gained a general
idea of the town in a very short space of time,
by mounting sundry trams and riding in many
directions. That night we slept on board the train,
and at daylight we were landed at Niagara. First
the great whirlpool attracted our attention. To give
an idea of the mighty force and volume of the water,
it may be mentioned the stream is banked up 30 ft.
higher in the centre than either side, and at the place
where Captain Webb and others have lost their lives,


the water seethed round in a 60-acre lake, like a
caldron of boiling water, and logs of wood gravitated
to the centre and were drawn down, not to be seen
again. All around the scenery was enchanting, for
the foliage was mainly crimson in colour, which,
heightened by bright sunlight, looked simply mag-
nificent. Retracing our way, we reached the bridge
leading to Goat Island. We got a fine view of the
rapids that fall 50 ft. in a mile. In looking at this
huge volume of water tumbling along, it reminds one
of an angry sea lashing the shore, for the fall in the
river made it appear as though the water rose up like
the sea towards the horizon. From Goat Island we
crossed a small footway on the edge of the fall to
Luna Island, where we obtained a view of the
American fall. In oilskin suits we descended to the
back of these falls, where the mighty thunder of the
falling water caused a great rush of wind from all
quarters, creating no little excitement. This “ Cave
of the Wind” has been aptly named. Crossing Goat
Island we came to the Great Horseshoe fall, where
the bulk of the stream rolls over the cliff 158 ft., with
a total width of 2,200 ft. Some years ago an old
hulk, drawing 20 ft. of water, was allowed to drift
over the falls, in doing this it never touched the
bottom, but floated over, showing that there is at
least that depth of water going over. It has been
calculated that fifteen million cubic feet of water
pass over every hour.


The new suspension bridge which we crossed is
a light and airy iron structure, 1,268 feet from tower
to tower and 190 feet from water level. From the
Canadian shore we got a fine view; having thus worked
up from the lesser to the greater scenes, we enjoyed
everything we saw, for this is the proper way to
appreciate scenes. From Niagara the train once more
whisked us off through Detroit and on to Chicago, a
town of colossal buildings, which run up to fourteen
stories high. The population of this marvellous city
—which has risen phoenix-like since the ravaging fire
of 1871 —now stands at one million one hundred
thousand. Amongst the places we went through
were the Elgin watch factory, the Armour Packing
Company, the Pullman Car town and works, the
Rock Island elevators, the Auditorium, a large chemi-
cal warehouse, and other important manufactories. At
the chemical warehouse some 3, cOO clerks and work-
men were employed, the majority belonging to the
first-mentioned class, and this great army of scribblers
were equally divided between the wholesale and re-
tail premises, which for solidity of structure—to say
nothing of the handsome style of architecture—
equalled the leading Melbourne wool warehouses.
Girls are employed extensively in all business places
as shorthand and type writers ; thus the head of nearly
every department is assisted by one of these ladies,
and as correspondence is opened the answers are
taken down in shorthand and afterwards printed by


the type-writing machines. In this manner we saw
one of our friends dispose of ten letters in as many
minutes.
The Auditorium is a huge theatre built on the
fireproof system, capable of accommodating 8,000
people. Mr. Martin Reyerson, one of the directors,
took us over. The building was unfinished, but in
its completed state will be a marvel of forethought
and machinery. The huge stage fittings are all
worked by machinery ; a heavy electric plant will
also be used, and various engines for the lifts. The
building also comprises a great number of shops, a
huge hotel of 500 rooms, including kitchens and
spacious dining-rooms ten flights up. This elevated
position, however, of the diningrooms does not much
matter, for there are at least half-a-dozen rapid lifts
for taking people up and down.
The Elgin watch factory, situated in the town of
Elgin, must be added to the long list of American
wonders. In visiting these great manufactories, it
has been forcibly brought before us that the machinery
of to-day is superseding the use of human hands in
doing the most complicated work in a truly astound-
ing manner. We were told that, in this factory alone,
2,700 men and women are employed, earning monthly
wages of something like 135,000 dollars ; 1,700 watches
are turned out daily. The 160 h.p. engines drive no
less than miles of shafting, which carry 50,000 ft.
of leather belting. To give an idea of the vast


amount of work required over watchmaking, it may
be mentioned that each hand goes through twenty
different machines before it is finished ; and this
again is totally eclipsed by the balance-wheel. This
little object, the size of a sixpence, actually has to
be operated upon 85 times before it is completed.
Travelling back to Chicago, and then some ten miles
on the other side, we reached Pullman City, where
the great Pullman Car factory is situated. Besides
the factory, with its 2,400 h.p. beam engine, there
are connected with the concern long streets of houses,
all well and neatly built of brick, mostly two stories
high ; then there is a large hotel, a theatre, two
arcades, and every other convenience of a modern
town. This industry is one of the great evidences of
American push and enterprise.
We could not leave Chicago without inspecting
the gigantic pig-sticking business—one which is
unparalleled in the world—carried on by Armour
and Co. First we went to the Union Stockyards and
spent half an hour watching the cow-boys rounding
up and yarding cattle ; if one became at all boisterous
they heaved a lasso with unerring aim over the
animal’s head, then suddenly twitched the end round
the high pummel in front of the saddle, and swerved
the horse, which, knowing what to expect, leant over
to counteract the shock, which usually brings the
the bullock on to his side. After going a full mile
through yards of bullocks, we reached the pig-sticking,


curing, and packing house of Armour and Co., where
a man was placed at our service to conduct us through
the works. Here steam power is not much used, the
hanging rail with a slant doing away with the necessity
for shoving. The pig is swung by its hind legs and
utters a piercing squeal, but in a moment his troubles
are over, for a perfect butcher runs a knife in the
animal’s neck and in an extraordinary short time
vitality ceases. From this the carcases are run into a
vat of boiling water, then a machine, after the style
of a barrel elevator, throws them out one at a time
on to a platform, from which they pass to a steam
scraper that removes almost all the hair ; from this
they fall on another platform where men quickly
remove the few remaining bristles, then they are
moved away on a traveller, getting dismembered in
passing one man, cut in half by another, thence running
200 yards to a room where men with huge cleavers
cut the sides into three pieces with two strokes, thus
making hams, middles, and forequarters ; quick as
thought these are “shot ” down slides to the packing-
room below.
Bullocks are brought in one by one, and a man
with a sledge hammer knocks them down stunned ;
immediately afterwards they are hoisted by the hind
legs and run off, having their throats cut, then skinned
and quartered in almost less time than it takes to
describe. Armour employs 5,000 men, and kills 4,000
to 5,000 pigs daily, also 1,500 bullocks per day.


Scarcely any part of these animals is wasted, bones,
sinews, fat, and hair all having their marketable
value.
Although to the ordinary observer this spectacle of
beast-slaying has a most sickening aspect, still one
cannot help admiring the perfect system under which
the gigantic industry is carried on.
At Lake Michigan we were much surprised to see
the large breakers that were dashing ashore. A strong
wind had been blowing all day, and this great inland
sea was as much agitated as though it were the open
ocean, and ships and steam launches were pitching
and tossing about, suggestive of mal-de-mer. That
night we boarded a western train and comfortably
ensconced ourselves in sleeping cars, merely waking up
to look at the great Mississippi, which we crossed at
Fort Madison by a long iron bridge. The whole
country was as flat as a pancake and composed of
sandy soil. In the morning we reached Kansas city,
and passed 3 hours waiting for another train in travel-
ling along in the overhead steam tram, and also in
cable trams, which run all over the city. Electricity
is undoubtedly the light of the future; at night
Kansas city is as light as day, electricity being laid
on everywhere, private houses included. The com-
panies also supply power for running trams and for
factory use, and pay handsome dividends. Owing to
the thermometer being down at freezing point we
were not sorry to get back to the train, which, being


heated throughout, was comfortable to a degree.
Nearly the whole night through we followed the
Arkansas River,the line rising 4,000 ft., reaching Pueblo
at breakfast time the next' morning. At this station
there is a relic in the shape of a section of a tree that
had many interesting associations. At one time it
was growing in the town and was called the
“ Monarch.” A placard on the section stated it was
380 years old and that 36 whites were massacred
under its branches by Indians, and further, that 14 of
the aforesaid Indians were lynched from its branches.
The old tree was well known to all early travellers,
many of whom had camped under it, including such
worthies as Wild Bill, Buffalo Bill, Kit Carson, and
others. At Pueblo we inspected the Bessemer steel
works, where 800 hands are employed. From Pueblo
the train began to climb very rapidly, and after pass-
ing two or three little petroleum oil towns, we reached
Canon city, where an uncovered observation car was
attached to the rear of the train, and without extra
charge from this vantage point our minds were just
held in wonder, not so much at the engineering
skill, as at the grand rugged and wild mountain
gorge which we continued to climb for three hours.
This is called the Grand Canon and certainly
deserves the name. After quitting the Canon city
the bright yellow foliage of the cottonwoods
was soon left behind, and we came upon a sterile-
looking country, showing on all sides great masses


of rock backed up by the snowy summits of the
Rockies in the distance. Ere long all vegetation
—save that of a few dull green and scraggy pine
trees—ceased. Our track was hewn out of solid rock,
following, the Arkansas river, and for the three hours
our engine toiled up an average grade of 1 in 30,
never quitting the vicinity of the stream, simply because
the river kept the narrow bed of the canon, and a
ledge had been hewn for the train, so water and rail
wound and twined, both confined to a space never
more than 50 yards, or more often not half that dis-
tance across, whilst the rocks rose in varying heights
from 500 ft. to 2,300 ft., sometimes resembling pre-
cipitous hills, then again like sheer walls, or even over-
hanging the cars. These rocks, which vary in colour
from grey, black, and red, to a reddish yellow, are
soft in nature, and all scathed, scarred and cracked
about in a most extraordinary manner. Huge
boulders that had probably crashed down the
canon’s side, rested in the bed of the rushing stream.
The whole surroundings appeared unsafe, and it
seemed far from improbable that some of the enormous
tottering masses might come down on a passing
train. The line, however, is splendidly laid, and
the company most careful, for men are kept con-
stantly walking along the track, and two engines
accompany each train—one to assist the other up
inclines, then to be uncoupled and travel on half a
mile ahead as a pilot.


At Solida we reached an altitude of 7,050 ft, at 6
o’clock in the evening; and, as darkness was closing
upon us, we left the train, in order that such scenes as
these might not be lost in night travelling. Next
morning the weather was intensely cold ; the ther-
mometer on the station was at 28°. Shortly after the
train had started the line parted company with the
river, and then the engineering feats were apparent, for
we rose by a great series of curves, without a single
zig-zag or tunnel, right up above the snow, where the
only trees visible were snow-laden pines. Up and
up we went, right to the top of Marshall Pass—
-10,800 ft. At this point our spare engine uncoupled.
The thermometer registered 15 0 below zero. As the
train had moved up from the snow-line we had felt
the gradual changes, and we were not sorry when the
conductor told us to leave the open observation car
for a carriage, as the snowsheds were just ahead.
The scenery somewhat moderated in ruggedness,
but extended, giving many views of great valleys
hemmed in by snow-clad mountains. A few years
back this was the home of the grizzly bear and the
red man. Of the latter we saw very few, and those
certainly failed to raise the once noble redskin in our
estimation.
At Gunnison another observation car was attached
and we descended through the Black Canon, another
of those mighty chasms in the mountains where river
and rail join hands and run together. The track is


well laid, but the ponderous overhanging rocks and
huge apparently crumbling walls strike a feeling of
insecurity into the mind of the passer-by. In the
evening we reached the grand junction and passed
the night at the place where the little collection of
houses boasts of electricity and sheds a blaze of light
over the gloom. The saloons drive a roaring trade,
for numbers of riotous cowboys are knocking down
their cheques in the same manner the old and lucky
diggers of Victoria were wont to do in the good old
days.
Next day we breakfasted at Green Creek, and
afterwards, while the engines were toiling up Castle
Gate gorge, one of them burst its boiler and filled
the canon with steam. Luckily, no one was hurt,
and a goods train coming along shortly afterwards
helped us on to Salt Lake city. After breakfast
next morning we climbed up a range of mountains
about 1,000 ft. high and obtained a grand view, for
all the surrounding hills were covered with snow,
while the city, with its broad streets, lay on the great
plain below, and, some twenty miles beyond the
town, spread out the deep blue waters of the Salt
Lake. The whole scene was strikingly beautiful,
the general surroundings reminding us of the Dead
Sea of Palestine. One of the main features of Salt
Lake city is the Tabernacle. This we visited, and
while there heard the usual pin drop, which we had
often read about but had never believed. Our doubts


on the point were set at rest ; for, as we stood there,
the custodian dropped a pin into a straw hat from a
few inches above, and the sound was distinctly heard
200 ft. away.
The streets of the city are 124 ft. wide and owing
to heavy rain were in many parts a foot deep in mud.
A fine electric tram has been in operation about two
months and appears to answer very well. The Mor-
mons seem to be a very pushing people. The train
for Ogden was four hours late in starting, and when
we reached that town, half an hour after midnight, all
the hotels were full. A dozen people were in the
same plight as ourselves and were hiring cars to drive
them round in search of accommodation, the arrange-
ment being 25 cents each house tried till they got
beds. We did not see the wisdom of such an arrange-
ment, for it was evident the cabmen would go to all
the unlikely places first, and probably drive their
passengers about all through the night. We found
a common boarding-house, which was better than
nothing, and with revolvers under our pillows we felt
pretty safe. In the morning, after breakfast, we
climbed the mountain and enjoyed a magnificent
view, similar to that which we had witnessed from
Salt Lake Hill. The train then bore us away, speed-
ing up many grades to a height of 7,017 feet, which,
being high above the snow-line, everything was
heavily clad with snow, and a gentle snow-storm
completed an effect which, in our eyes, was perfect.


Cape Horn was rounded and the great Sacramento
valley lay spread out beneath us in all the beauty of
cultivation, which continued till we reached San Fran-
cisco, the capital of the West, and crossed the Oat-
lands ferry to the Palace Hotel.
Our next move was towards the Yosemite, which
we were anxious to reach before the winter snows
blocked the way. We took train to Berinda, where
we were turned out of our sleeping-car at 3 o’clock in
the morning, and forced to wait about on a cold,
cheerless station for two hours for the Raymond train.
The passengers on the stage coach for Yosemite
numbered nine, and very good company too.
The road was vile and dangerous, being merely a
track nicked out of the mountain side ; there was no
attempt at metalling, and the wheel ruts were often
axle deep, causing a continual bumping and jolting.
After driving along from 8 a.m. till 6 p.m., we
reached Wawona, reckoned to be 45 miles, but
seeming to us only 40 miles.
A few days previous to this trip inches of rain
fell throughout the district, and consequently the
waterfalls are appearing at their best, and are
very grand. All day long we were climbing and
descending mountain ranges. One hill was especially
long and steep, so, to help the horses, we walked
nearly six miles to an altitude of 5,500 ft, when we
waited till the coach caught up. On the way up we
passed the various stages of oak, mountain ash, and


pines, and at one place got wet through whilst rising
through a heavy cloud, but when we emerged from
this the sun shone with such dazzling brightness as
to pain the eye. It was certainly not the sort of
road for a nervous person to travel, and one or two
lady passengers who accompanied the expedition
would have paid dearly to have been safely back in
Frisco. The following day was a delightful one,
with a light cloudless sky, and the immense moun-
tains which surrounded us on all sides were densely
clothed with pines. The highest point we reached
in the coach was appropriately named Summit—
-7,500 ft.—and after passing this point we gradually
descended towards the entrance of Yosemite Valley.
The first glimpse of this wonderful place was
obtained at Inspiration Point. Here such a view
bursts on the expectant tourist that all he has
pictured dwindles into insignificance beside the
reality. For at his feet—though four miles off—the
whole valley is displayed ; it is six miles long and
two miles wide, and is hemmed in by a mighty range
of perpendicular snow-topped cliffs 4,000 ft. high.
Down these mighty cliffs some half a dozen splendid
waterfalls hurl themselves into the valley and there
join the Mershed River. These magnificent falls are
of varying height, from three, four, five, eight, and
even fifteen hundred feet in the clear drop, but there
is one little spray, called the “Sentinel Fall,” which
starts its great leap 3,270 ft. above the valley, and is


lost in mist before it reaches the bottom. The next
scene, from an artist’s point of view, is superior, being
two miles closer. We gradually descend the rocky
road, which for 70 miles is totally unprotected, and a
slight swerve by the horses would mean total annihila-
tion, but the drivers and horses know their work, and
one does not recognize any danger unless he be of a
nervous temperament. An hour after midday we
reached our destination —Howard’s Hotel—situated
midway up the vale. We had passed the Bridal Fall.
This is a clear leap of 860 ft.; a heavy volume of water
was falling over and when it reached two-thirds of
the way down, the wind caught it up and twisted it
into fantastic shapes, the beautiful effect being simply
indescribable. The Indian name for this fall, Po-ho-
no, signifies the spirit of the evil wind. The Yose-
mite Fall, which tumbles over the cliff from 2,550 ft, is
situated a short distance from the hotel, and is divided
into three falls, the top 1,500 ft, middle 560 ft., and
lower 490 ft. This is another grand piece of Nature’s
handiwork. The Glacier Point is admitted by all who
have visited it to be the finest view imaginable. We
left the coach and struck out along the trail which led
to this elevated point, which stood out against the sky
3,200 ft. above us and 7,200 ft. above the level of
the sea. The climb was miles up a rough and
heavy way, for recent storms had washed the surface
away. After plodding away for 3 miles we struck
the snow line, and then got our first real snow


christening. We easily found the track, for a couple
had ascended two days previously and left their
marks. For the last mile the snow was 2 ft. deep,
and it seemed to be the longest mile we ever
tramped, as, owing to a slight thaw having occurred,
every second step we would sink and get our boots
filled with snow that melted at once. The point
loomed out above us and we meant to get there, and
at last succeeded, and amused ourselves firing bullets
into the pole, thus leaving our mark behind. As
may be readily imagined, the view from this exalted
position was simply awe-striking, and baffles descrip-
tion. The atmosphere was so intensely cold we cut
our stay short, and sped down the mountain in half
the time we had expended over the climb. It was
terribly cold when we got on to the coach next
morning at 6 o’clock, the thermometer being several
points below zero and the road frozen as hard as iron.
At the head of the valley we alighted and walked up
the long hill, about seven miles, to circulate the blood.
After dinner, at Wawona we set off for the big trees,
nine miles distant, and uphill nearly all the way.
En route we passed a fine pine forest, every tree
being as straight as an arrow, and averaging in
height 20 ft. and diameter 2 ft. These were all various
species of white pine. Further on we came to a
forest of redwood trees, which evidently belong to an
ancient period, for they are much larger in diameter,
though not more than 300 ft. high. The “ Grizzly


Giant” is 33 ft. and the “ Wawona” 28 ft. in diameter.
We drove the four-horse coach right through the
latter, with plenty of room to spare. These pine
trees number several hundred. The rough bark is
from 12 in. to 20 in. thick, and the wood very
resinous, and consequently susceptible to fire. In
fact, it is quite exceptional to find a tree that is not
charred or with a hollow trunk. If Australian forests
were composed of similar trees, our great bush-fires
would sweep them off in their infant stages. Speak-
ing candidly, the Mariposa Grove does not equal
the Black Spur in Victoria or the trees of the forests
of Gippsland. Four of us passengers walked off
before the coach next morning, leaving it to overtake
us. Taking a wrong turn, however, the coach passed
us and we did not know it, the result being a walk of
16 miles, in hours, before we caught up at dinner
time. Soon after we took train for San Francisco.
We spent two days pleasantly in the town, and then
hurried away by rail on a trip to the Geysers. The
train steamed along through the finest stretch of
agricultural land we saw in the States, passing
through many villages, the largest of which was
Sante Rosa.
From Cloverdale an 18-mile coach journey took
us to the Geysers. It was a rough and dangerous
road, so much so that we vowed it would be our last
experience of the sort in California. We had been
over many dangerous tracks, but this was the worst


of all, for two or three times the light conveyance
was on the verge of capsizing over a yawning
precipice. The scenery was certainly very imposing.
The road followed a continual up grade above the
rushing Sulphur Creek ; all down the valley and up
its precipitous sides trees of all sorts and sizes
flourished—the oak, ash, maple, and other trees and
shapely shrubs in endless variety, including the
buckeye, and that most peculiar bush the Poison
Oak, which often imparts measles and similar
complaints to anyone who has the misfortune to
touch it.
On arriving at the Geysers we indulged in a
warm sulphur bath. “ Hell’s Acre” was one of the
strangest places we visited throughout our tour round
the world. In the cold morning the air in the gorge
was all steam and vapour as we picked our way
carefully over the few acres, tapping here and there
with long sticks, to test the stability of the ground
we stood upon. It appeared to us that we were on
the verge of the nether regions, for no less than 10
distinct mineral springs were passed ; these were in
various stages of warmth, from lukewarm to boiling,
yet all close to each other. There were also vent
holes, through which steam was blowing off with a
noise resembling that made by an escape from an
overcharged steam engine. The rocks seemed to be
eaten away by sulphur, the soil altogether unstable,
and hollow in places, so that we felt our way most


carefully, for the trail had been rendered very
indistinct through the late rains. It was a curious
experience, for occasionally a little jet of steam
would blow up a trouser leg, making one skip in a
nimble way.
Our last night in America was devoted to an
inspection of China Town, San Francisco. We
formed two of a party of twelve, which, led by a
guide, visited many of the Chinese dens, where the
opium fiend reigns, and drags the human wretches
down to the lowest level it is possible to imagine.
The sights and smells of this plague spot were most
sickening, and we felt rather more sorry than other-
wise that we had passed through.
At noon on the following day we boarded the
s.s. Australia for the homeward voyage. On arriving
at the Sandwich Islands we put up at the grand
Hawaiian Hotel and spent a most enjoyable week in
the paradise of the Pacific. Altogether there are seven
islands, with a population of 80,000 ; the largest of
these is Hawaii, 4,210 square miles in extent and
2,500 inhabitants. This island has the largest extinct
crater known, for the circumference measures 36
miles. Many of the mountains rise to a great height,
several being over 14,000 ft, but they present a brown
and burnt aspect on account of the lava.
The Kilauia lake of fire we failed to see. It is, we
are told, a marvellous place, consisting of a pit inside
a large crater measuring 250 x 150 ft. It resembles


a huge cauldron into which lava bubbles and spits,
flowing in from three openings and going out by one
large one; the surface ever changing and occasionally
jutting up like a geyser to the height of hundreds of
feet. The best time to see this is at night.
Honolulu is a nicely built town with streets lined
with tropical trees, their shade being much appreciated
with the sun’s heat at ioo°. Good modern buildings
go to make up a respectable town, and two rival
telephone companies have succeeded in taking a
telephone into almost every house.
We visited the Pearl River on the first train that
ever carried passengers on any of the islands. The
line was a private one, and extended for about seven
miles, to some sugar plantations.
One day we took a 15-mile walk to Pali Pass. The
natural surroundings of the place are of most
extraordinary beauty. The road is lined with man-
groves, bananas, palms, dates, and delightful flowering
shrubs that seemed to enjoy the steaming atmosphere
much better than we did. From the crest of the hill
the view was simply enchanting, for a large area of
tropical country lay spread out before us, and the
snow-white breakers rolled in upon the coral reef,
while the deep blue ocean lay passive beyond.
On the way back we stopped to admire the ruins
of the palace of one of the ancient kings, for Hawaii
was some centuries ago of much greater importance
than now.


The few remaining days slipped past all too quickly,
and then we boarded the Mariposa —our last voyage—
making the twenty-second ocean-going ship we have
been passengers by during the last fourteen months.
The Pacific Ocean was on its best behaviour, and our
good ship bowled along in fine style. An old friend,
in the Southern Cross, appeared a few nights after
leaving Honolulu, and was of course duly toasted.
At Auckland we got time to climb Mount Eden and
get a good idea of the town ; after which five days’
steaming took us to “ our harbour,” the beauty of
which seemed just as rich as ever. Many hearty
welcomes were accorded us there by Sydney friends ;
but at Melbourne, the day following, we were
boisterously received, and the hearty cheers of the
cyclists and other friends bade us “Welcome home”
to the land of our birth—one second to few for the
enterprise of her people, and second to none for the
freedom it allows of thought and action—a country
where, after all our roving, we are quite content to
remain.
FINIS.






