

ROUTES TO THE EAST.
A LETTER
TO THE
HON. LORE) VISCOUNT PALMERSTON, K.O.
ETC. ETC. ETC.
SHOWING THE IMPORTANCE OF OPENING THE
SUEZ CANAL,
THE FUTILITY OF THE
EUPHRATES RAILWAY,
THE PROPRIETY OF CONNECTING THE EUROPEAN AND
INDIAN RAILWAY SYSTEMS BY
A DIRECT JUNCTION LINE RUNNING FROM
CONSTANTINOPLE TO LAHORE.
AN OLD INDIAN.
K|
-\ s «f • .-aN
wmm '
LONDON:
PRINTED BY SPOTTISWOODE AND CO.
NEW-STKEET SQUARE.
1857.


Printed by Shottiswoodk & Co.


L E T T E E,
My Lord,
The present state of affairs in India gives to
the question of our means of communicating with the
East a prominent interest and importance. At all
times it must be regarded as a matter of high concern
to this country that our communications with India
should be rapid, effective, and secure; but at a
moment when British power in the East is shaken by
wide-spread revolt, and when it is necessary to bring
the enormous resources of Britain to bear upon any
particular point of India with rapidity and effect, the
nature of the communications which are the sole
impediment to this achievement may be expected to
attract the most lively attention. Accordingly, it has
been found that, both in Parliament and out-of-doors,
discussions have been raised as to the most effective
modes of communicating with the East, and also as to


the most effective modes of communicating between
the sea-coast of India and the interior; and various
projects, professing to accomplish improvement in
these particulars, have been pressed upon the atten-
tion of the Government as proper objects of Govern-
ment support and of national pecuniary assistance.
Acquiescing as I do in the views which have been
promulgated as to the great importance of establishing
such improved means of communication between Great
Britain and India, as will enable our vast resources to
be made available in that country on any emergency
without doubt or delay, or, contrariwise, to enable
the vast resources of India to be made available for
the service of this country in the event of any Euro-
pean complication,—l am at the same time satisfied
that some of the schemes which have been so perse-
veringly extolled as calculated to accomplish this im-
portant end are altogether futile and unsound; so
that if we rested our expectations of any important
amelioration being realised by their instrumentality,
we should not merely incur the loss and disappoint-
ment consequent upon the dissolution of such baseless
visions, but should lose the time and effort which
might have been usefully employed in the accomplish-
ment of improvements of substantial practical value.
In a moment of pressure, men sometimes make con-
cessions to clamour which reason and cool reflection
cannot justify; and persons at such times will also often
support projects of professed improvement, not from
any solid conviction of their reasonableness or efficacy,


but because they feel that something should be done,
and because it happens that no other thing than that
which they support has yet been submitted to their
consideration. It is not the less a mistake and mis-
fortune, however, that support or concession should
be extended to a public enterprise on such inadequate
grounds; and the mischiefs of such indiscretion will,
in the end, be made apparent by the consequences
which are entailed. It is not either by persistent
iteration of a dogmatic fallacy, or by an elaborate
system of noisy agitation, that the intrinsic qualities
of a scheme are made either better or worse. No
doubt any merit which really exists, however minute
it may be, will thus be made manifest; but it is
a conclusive argument against the value of such a
scheme if, in spite of the most liberal use of these
suspicious resources, no real evidence of merit or
efficiency can nevertheless be exhibited. Whatever
be the advantages of the Euphrates Valley Railway
scheme, it certainly cannot be said that those advantages
have been inadequately set forth ; nevertheless, it will
not be difficult, I believe, to show that its pretensions
are altogether hollow and preposterous. But before
proceeding to consider the merits of this particular
project, it will be pi’oper to recapitulate the leading
features of the various projects which have been pro-
pounded at different times for improving our commu-
nications with the East, after which we shall be in
a better position to discuss their relative eligibility.
Previous to the establishment of the communication


by the Red Sea in 1840, many objections had been
raised to the eligibility of that route, of which some
were physical and some political. It was doubted by
some persons whether the Red Sea could be navigated
in an efficient manner at all; while others maintained
that if the proposed scheme of navigation were carried
out, it would lead to the declension of England and
to the recovery of the maritime ascendancy of Venice
or other cities in the Mediterranean. Venice, it was
stated, had declined after the discovery of the route
to India by the Cape of Good Hope, while we had
risen to unwonted prosperity; and the navigation of
the Red Sea by steam would, it was maintained,
reverse again our mutual positions. It is needless
to say that this prophecy with others equally frivo-
lous which were then directed against the scheme
have not been in the smallest degree fulfilled;
and the arguments which have since been used
against the piercing of the Isthmus of Suez appear
to be very much of the same fanciful and unsubstan-
tial character. lam aware that some of these argu-
ments derive a species of sanction from your Lord-
ship’s adoption of them. I understand your Lordship
to have stated in Parliament, that you did not con-
sider it would be for the interest of this country to
have the Isthmus of Suez cut through, inasmuch as
other nations situated on the Mediterranean would
have the start of us in communicating with India,
and, in the event of hostile operations arising, much
injury from this cause might occur. Now I think


the argument will present itself to most minds, that,
if England has the command of the sea , it is quite
immaterial to us whether other countries are some-
what nearer to India than we are or not, inasmuch
as any hostile expedition to India we could on such
a supposition easily intercept; and if England has
not the command of the sea, then the fact of the
Isthmus of Suez not being pierced can give no
security to our Indian empire, or enable us to retain
it longer than a more powerful nation permits us to
do so. Your Lordship further asserts that there is
no chance of a canal through the Isthmus of Suez
being a profitable work; and in this view Mr. Robert
Stephenson, the engineer of the railway across the
Isthmus, appears to coincide. This, however, is a
distinct question. There appears to be less proba-
bility of a railway across the Isthmus paying than of
a ship-canal paying; nevertheless the railway has been
for the most part made. If ships will not go to
Egypt to sail through the canal without the necessity
of being unloaded, still less will they go there to
unload their cargoes at Alexandria, which, after being
carried by railway to Suez, must be there loaded
again into other vessels to be conveyed to the
East. The charge proposed to be made by M.
deLesseps of 10s. per ton on vessels passing through
the canal, is much too great not to be a very serious
hindrance to vessels proceeding to India by that
route. But such a charge, heavy as it is, would
not reimburse a railway; added to which, by em-


ploying the railway, the delays, damage, and pecu-
lation consequent upon transhipment must still be
incurred. The railway will no doubt facilitate to
some extent the transmission of mails and passengers
across the Isthmus; but the amount of benefit from
this cause cannot be very great, while a very large
expense is incurred in the execution of a work which
is not required for local wants, and which cannot be
rendered remunerative by the occasional requirements
of the mail vessels communicating with the East. I
confess I acquiesce in your Lordship’s view as to the
returns of a ship-canal across Suez, so far as to have
serious doubts whether it would be a profitable un-
dertaking ; but I have no doubt whatever that it
would be a much less unprofitable work than the
railway at present in course of construction in this
situation, inasmuch as, while satisfying equally well
any local wants which may exist, it would certainly,
if the charges were not very excessive, acquire some
through traffic; and, excepting what is afforded by the
mail vessels, this is more than the railway can ever
hope to do.
With respect to the further objection that a canal
through Suez would have the effect of separating
Egypt from Turkey, it is difficult to see how it could
do this more than a railway or any other work. No
doubt it may be supposed that if the canal were very
successful, and developed a large traffic, it would add
to the importance of Egypt, and thus diminish by
comparison the importance of the rest of Turkey or of


Constantinople. This argument, however, goes at
once to the root of the previous argument that the
canal would prove a failure; and is it to be maintained
that one part of the Turkish empire is to be purposely
hindered in its prosperity and development in order
that it may not too much outstrip other parts less
favourably circumstanced for progression? There
may indeed be some ulterior design in M. de Lesseps’
particular arrangements of which the public is not
aware. If so, such design should be resisted and
exposed. I confess also that some of the provisions of
the firman granted to M. de Lesseps appear to me
open to objection. But any ground of opposition
upon this head is not to be confounded with an oppo-
sition to the scheme itself on the ground of its own
intrinsic deficiencies; and if such deficiencies do exist,
they ought to be clearly specified. I venture to
assert that there has been no argument yet adduced
in opposition to the project of a canal through Suez
which will be considered by the public as of the least
weight. The prejudice against the measure which
has marked the proceedings of the British Govern-
ment is supposed to have originated with Lord Strat-
ford de Redcliffe at Constantinople; and there can
be no doubt that any objection raised by a man of
such incorruptible integrity, and possessing so perfect
a knowledge of Turkey and of the atmosphere of in-
trigue which surrounds her, is entitled to deference
and grave consideration. Nevertheless the interest
of this country in facilitating communication by sea


with all parts of the world is so obvious and so urgent,
and the interest, too, of great colonies like Australia
being brought into more intimate communion with
the mother country is so clear and so clamant, that
none other than the most cogent, plain, and ingenuous
reasons, in opposition to the prevailing sentiment, can
satisfy the public intelligence, or hinder successfully
such measures as the penetration of the Suez Isthmus
from being practically carried out. It is not by such
feeble and worn-out devices as that of keeping doors
locked to prevent others in common with ourselves
from entering, that the position of Britain is to be
maintained in the arena of the world. Such safe-
guards are merely shackles, which, like the other suc-
cedanea of protection, weaken what they profess to
defend. The dangers to India from the side of the
Mediterranean are indefinite, remote, and, so long as
we have the command of that sea by our fleets, alto-
gether visionary. We have Gibraltar, the lonian
Islands, Malta, and in the Red Sea we have Aden, at
all of which places our fleets could rendezvous, and
intercept hostile communication. On the shores of
the Pacific, however, California and other American
states are advancing with rapid strides to wealth and
power ; and if from those remote regions Filibustering
expeditions were to be despatched at critical periods
to any part of our empire in the East, disasters far
greater than those consequent on the hostile move-
ment of any European state may fairly be appre-
hended. Is it wise, in the face of such a contingency,


to initiate or acquiesce in any policy which renders
communication between England and her Eastern
possessions less free and more costly ? or is it not
obvious that, if such events should occur, the power of
proceeding to the East both by the Isthmus of Suez
and by the Isthmus of Panama would to us be of the
most eminent advantage ? No doubt the Americans
might, in such a case, seize upon Panama, but they
could not seize upon Suez, so that we should have
one door open even if the other were closed. It is
more important to this country than to any other
that both the Isthmus of Panama and the Isthmus
of Suez should be cut through at the earliest possible
period ; and the arguments heretofore adduced against
the execution of those works must be much stronger
to hinder the accomplishment of improvements which
are generally believed to be fraught with important
benefits, not to this country merely, but to the com-
mon interests of mankind.
The formation of a ship-canal through the Isthmus
of Suez, however, is but one of the measures for
establishing improved communication with the East
which has of late been brought forward. There are,
besides this, two projects for improving the commu-
nication by the establishment of railways, of which
the first was proposed about seven years ago by Sir
Macdonald Stephenson ; and the other, which is known
as the Euphrates Valley Scheme, has within the last
year or two been advocated by Mr. W. P. Andrew.
The Euphrates Valley Line was also investigated by


Sir Macdonald Stephenson in 1850; but the alter-
native line mentioned by him as proceeding from
Constantinople by way of Trebizond, Teheran, and
Herat on to India, appears to be a far more eligible
line in every respect than the line by the Euphrates.
Mr. Andrew, who is the chairman of a railway which
is proposed to be carried from Kurrachee, in Scinde,
to Kotree or to Hyderabad upon the Indus, and who
is also chairman of another projected railway in the
Punjaub which proposes to connect Moultan and
Lahore, is the chairman and most active promoter of
the Euphrates Valley Railway ; and he says that he
hopes to see the Euphrates Railway, the Scinde
Railway, and the Punjaub Railway all being con-
structed simultaneously being the three links of the
grand chain which would connect Central Asia with
Europe. In a pamphlet published during the present
year, entitled “ London to Lahore,” a map is given of
the proposed route between these two places ; and
nothing can more clearly show the imperial pitch to
which absurdity may be carried, than the map in
question. It is of course indispensable to the effi-
ciency of any scheme of communication between two
such distant places, that there shall be few tran-
shipments and interruptions. If vessels proceeding
to Bombay will sail round the Cape of Good Hope,
though requiring thus to pursue a track little less than
16,000 miles in length, instead of proceeding to
Alexandria and there disembarking their cargoes to
be carried by railway to Suez, and thence by ship to


Bombay, though by the latter route the distance is
little over 6000 miles, it is clear that transhipment
must occasion a very heavy loss and inconvenience to
compensate for this great disparity in the length of
the routes. Merchandise intended for the Western
Coast of South America almost invariably passes round
Cape Horn, though it must thus make a great detour ,
although a railway connecting the two oceans has for
a considerable time existed at Panama; and all expe-
rience shows that, in the case of those articles which
constitute the bulk of commerce, it is preferable to
carry them through a much longer distance by sea
than to incur the expense, delay, and damage which
transhipment inevitably creates. In the case of pas-
sengers and light articles of merchandise, the detri-
ment is not so great as in the case just recited; but
in all cases the delay, inconvenience, and increased
expense consequent upon transhipment are a consi-
derable discouragement to traffic; added to which,
when a long line of communication is broken up into
a number of short lines, it is impossible to time the
whole of the arrivals and departures so as to work
together smoothly, and the least delay or derange-
ment in one of the links of the chain throws all the
others into confusion. If any given steam-vessel, in
performing a distant voyage, has to call at many ports
for coals or for other objects, so many causes of delay
occur beyond those incident to the absolute detention
in harbour, that it is impossible with such interrup-
tions to maintain a good average speed, even though


the vessel may be of the most efficient character.
Sometimes the harbour is made at night when it is
not safe to enter, or fogs occur, or a pilot cannot be
found without some delay; and upon the whole so
much time is consumed beyond what would be thought
necessary by those sanguine persons who overlook
such sources of detention, that the vessel will be
unable to accomplish a good average rate of pro-
gression, or to keep her time with any degree of cer-
tainty. If, however, another vessel or a railway
train has at the end of the voyage to meet her with
other passengers and merchandise, it will constantly
happen that the one instrument of conveyance has to
be waiting for the other. Stormy weather, bad coals,
and many other causes will produce delays, in spite of
the most perfect efficiency in the vessels themselves
and the most sustained activity on the part of the
commanders. Now it is very well known to every
one of the least experience in steam communication,
that so curious a system of joiner-work as is here
supposed to be dove-tailed together will not answer
at all. It has often been tried, and has always failed;
and it is obvious that wherever it exists to any con-
siderable extent it will be impossible to maintain a
satisfactory average speed, or any moderate amount
of regularity, while the discomfort, damage, and
expense are very largely increased. Although, how-
ever, the universality of this law is quite well known,
Mr. Andrew commends to public approbation a
scheme which subjects goods and passengers to eight


transhipments in conveying them from London to
Lahore, besides conveying them through a circuit to
Kurrachee in order that he may have the satisfaction
of subsequently carrying them over the Scinde and
Punjaub Railways. That it may add to the revenue
of the Scinde and Punjaub Railways to have goods
and passengers from Europe needlessly carried over
them is probable enough. But that it is necessary to
the efficiency of an improved communication with
the East that such a detour should be made, is a
hypothesis of just about as reasonable a character as
some of the others which Mr. Andrew has the
ingenuity to maintain.
According to the map of this inarticulate route,
passengers from London are first to be carried to
Ostend, from whence they are to be conveyed to
Trieste by railway. Here they are to be embarked
in a steam-vessel, in which they are to be taken to a
port on the Orontes at the head of the Mediterranean
which has yet to be built. From this point they are
to be carried by a railway 800 or 900 miles long to
Bussora at the top of the Persian Gulf. At Bussora
they arc again to be embarked in a steam-vessel, in
which they are to be carried to Kurrachee in Scinde.
At Kurrachee they are to be transferred to the Scinde
Railway, on which they are to be carried to Kotree on
the Indus. At Kotree they are to be again em-
barked in a steamer, in which they are to be carried
to Moultan. At Moultan they are to be again placed
upon a railway, by which, finally, they are to be


conveyed to Lahore. It needs little else than to reca-
pitulate the several links of this rickety chain to
show of what a visionarv and dilettanti character the-
whole scheme is. It could only have had its origin
in a quarter which was completely destitute of all
practical acquaintance with the powers, exigencies,
and laws of steam communication; for every one
possessing such information knows how hopeless it is
that the different fragments of so disintegrated a line
can be made to join one another with such nicety and
accord as to constitute a continuous communication
or to work in effective harmony; and even if this
could be accomplished, they know that the delays and
inconveniences of transhipment have still to be in-
curred. If the steamer on the Indus should stick in
the river, is the departure of the vessel from Kurra-
chee to be therefore delayed ? If so, how can regular
time be kept ? If not, how can the communication
be said to be continuous ?
Mr. Andrew says that by the construction of the
Euphrates Railway we shall save in the voyage to
India about 1000 miles in distance and about 14
days in time. As regards the time, it is quite certain
there could not be a saving of 14 days, and it is
doubtful indeed if there would be any saving by the
plan he proposes. The distance from Trieste to
Suez is about the same as the distance from Trieste
to the mouth of the Orontes. The distance of
Bombay from Bussora at the head of the Persian
Gulf is as nearly as possible the same as the distance
of Bombay from Aden, namely, 1664 geographical


miles. The only difference in the distance, therefore,
is the difference between the length of the railway
connecting Bussora and the Mediterranean, and the
distance between Aden and Suez. The precise
length of the railway cannot yet be said to be accu-
rately ascertained; but, taking it at 800 geographical
miles, the difference between this length and 1808,
the distance in geographical miles between Aden and
Suez, will be the difference in the distance between
any point in England and Bombay by the two routes
of the Red Sea and the Euphrates. This difference is
precisely 508 miles. If Kurrachee be taken as the
Indian terminus instead of Bombay, the difference
will be about 300 miles more in favour of the Persian
Gulf, or about 800 geographical miles in all, which
does not differ very widely from Mr. Andrew’s esti-
mate. This is less than one-sixth of the distance of
Bombay from England; and it is hard to understand
how we can save half the time in saving one-sixth of
the distance, especially as, by the swifter route, only
one-sixth of the whole distance in railway transport
is proposed to be substituted for an equal length of
water transport. In point of distance the difference
between the two routes is quite immaterial. No
doubt, in so far as railway transport can be safely
substituted for sea transport, there will be a saving
in the time even with the same distance; but this
difference may be reduced as effectually by accele-
rating the speed of the steam-vessels as by the more
extended adoption of railway conveyance. If by the


Euphrates route 800 miles in absolute distance are
saved to Kurrachee, and 800 miles more are performed
at twice the speed that would be accomplished by
steam-vessels on the sea, we have a saving in time
equivalent to a saving in distance of 1200 miles at
sea, or say about five days. Now the question pre-
sented for consideration is, whether a saving of five
days in our communications with India is of such
vital importance as Mr. Andrew represents. On the
most favourable supposition the Euphrates line could
not save more than this, unless Mr. Andrew supposes
his mails and passengers to go by Trieste and the
others by way of Gibraltar, which, however, there is
no need that they should do more in the one case
than in the other. As compared with the route by
Trieste and Suez to Kurrachee, the utmost saving
in time that could be accomplished by the Euphrates
line in proceeding to Kurrachee is jive days; and if
Bombay were made the terminus the saving would be
less.
Now, seeing that the construction of the Euphrates
line would cost many millions sterling to accomplish,
it is reasonable to inquire, whether an equal amount
of acceleration could not be accomplished at less
expense, by placing on the Alexandria and Suez
line steam-vessels of greater speed and power. The
distance from Southampton to Alexandria is 2951
nautical miles, which is much the same as the distance
from Liverpool to New York, and this last voyage is
performed habitually in ten days or less. The distance


of Bombay from Suez is 2972 nautical miles ; and,
allowing one day for crossing the Isthmus by the aid
of the railway, and ten days for the accomplishment of
the sea voyage at either end, the time of the whole
voyage from Southampton to Bombay would be re-
duced to 21 days, supposing vessels of the same effi-
ciency as the “ Persia ” to be employed on each side
of the Isthmus. With larger and more powerful
vessels, however, higher speeds than this may be
attained. The “ Great Eastern ” steamer, it appears
pretty certain, will realise a speed, under steam alone,
of 25 statute miles or 22 nautical miles per hour,
which is equivalent to 528 nautical miles per day.
The “ Great Eastern ” steamer is about 22,000 tons
burden; and with steamers of about 30,000 tons
burden, and somewhat greater power than the
“ Great Eastern,” a speed of about 30 statute miles
or 26 nautical miles per hour would be obtained.
It would be quite safe to reckon such vessels as
capable of performing an average distance of 500
nautical miles per day; so that in performing the
6000 miles of sea voyaging lying between Southampton
and Bombay only 12 days would be consumed, and,
allowing a day for crossing the Isthmus by railway,
about 13 days would be occupied in reaching Bombay
from Southampton.
One day, however, would be quite insufficient,
even with the aid of the railway and with the best
arrangements, for disembarking troops and stores
from a vessel and embarking them again. Such an


operation is necessarily attended with trouble and
delay; and it would be greatly preferable if the vessel,
after having been loaded in England, was enabled to
pass through a canal at Suez without any tranship-
ment being required. But, allowing two days for the
delays caused by the transhipment at Suez, it would
be possible to transmit troops and stores direct from
England to Bombay in a period of 14 days, by
employing vessels similar to the “ Great Eastern ”
in size and power; and this is the utmost that Mr.
Andrew professes to accomplish by the formation of
the Euphrates Valley Railway, even after taking
such troops and stores through Austria to Trieste,
which he could not always do without risks of delay
from imperfect accommodation, and also without
making any proper deductions for the delays conse-
quent upon numerous transhipments, which delays
in practice would certainly occur. If a tele-
graphic cable were to be laid down immediately
between Suez and Bombay, so that a steam-vessel
resembling the “ Great Eastern ” plying in the Medi-
terranean, and another similar vessel in the Red
Sea, could be worked in correspondence, it would be
possible at any moment to transmit 10,000 men with
their stores and ammunition from England to Bom-
bay in a period of 14 days, without subjecting them
to needless fatigue, and without involving the neces-
sity of any transhipment except that at Suez; and
even that obstruction the formation of the proposed
canal would remove. Two vessels of this character,


which would certainly accomplish the end in view,
would cost about a million sterling. The short piece
of railway, about one-tenth of the whole, which Mr.
Andrew wishes to construct as a commencement of
the Euphrates scheme, would, according to his esti-
mate, cost 1,400,000/., and the real cost might be
much greater. Such an expenditure, moreover, would
do nothing whatever to bring India nearer to England,
and the whole line must be made before this object
could be in any degree subserved. The whole line,
if made at the same proportionate cost as the frag-
ment is estimated at, would require an expenditure
of twelve or fourteen millions sterling, and the Go-
vernment is asked to give a guarantee upon the
capital necessary for the undertaking, on the ground
of its eminent national importance. In a letter to
your Lordship, published in the “ Times” of July 18th,
Mr, Andrew sets forth specifically the grounds upon
which he makes this very unusual demand ; and I
shall here recapitulate the main arguments he uses,
and which appear to me to be as destitute of force as
his facts are of accuracy. I quite acquiesce in the
doctrine that it is incumbent upon the Government,
uponconclusive evidence being afforded of the great
national importance of any undertaking which is not
likely to be carried out by private enterprise, to extend
to such undertaking whatever measure of encourage-
ment may be necessary for its prompt accomplishment.
But to warrant such an intervention on the part of
the Government, there must be no reasonable doubt.


and no intelligent difference of opinion, as to the
reality and value of the benefits such enterprise will
confer. How far the pretensions can be supported
upon which Mr. Andrew rests his claim to a Govern-
ment concession, will presently appear. But I think
every one will agree in this, that if those pretensions
are found to be in any considerable degree hollow
and untenable, the whole case breaks down, and that
it would be improper in the Government to stretch
its power in order to afford encouragement to so
questionable a project.
In order that I may the more correctly convey
Mr. Andrew’s meaning, in examining his various
statements, I shall here give citations verbatim from
the letter he has addressed to your Lordship upon
this subject, and in which his views are set forth.
I give these extracts in Italics, and I shall make a
brief comment upon each.
“ The establishment of a railway from the Mediter-
ranean to the Persian Gulf would have the effect of
reducing the distance between this country and India
by upwards of 1000 miles , and the time to about 14
days , or about half the time now occupied .”
I have already shown that the reduction of the
distance by 1000 miles cannot answer to a reduction
in the time of 14 days. If in the one case Mr.
Andrew supposes the voyage to be performed by
Gibraltar, and in the other by Trieste, the only effect
of the comparison is to mislead the unwary reader;


for the acceleration due to the Trieste route is as open
to the line by Suez as to the line by the Euphrates.
The saving in time could not exceed five days, and,
merely by employing swifter steamers, a greater
amount of acceleration than this could be easily
obtained by the existing route.
“It [ the railway ] would he the means of consolidating
the 'power of the Sultan in his Asiatic dominions
This is matter of opinion. The contentions with
the unruly Arab tribes on the line of the Euphrates,
which the attempt to protect the railway might cause,
would perhaps be a source of expense and weakness
to the Sultan, instead of a source of strength. Be*
sides, if we are to acknowledge it as an obligation
devolving upon us to make railways in Turkey to
consolidate the power of the Sultan, what is to be
the limit of our benevolence ? and why are we to
confine it to the case of railways ?
u By means of this railway , taken in conjunction with
the system of steam transit now being established along
the valley of the Indus from Lahore to the sea at Kur-
rachee, the large force stationed in the Punjaub would be
rendered of incalculable importance by steamers uniting
the line of the Indus with that of the Euphrates , for in
that case any hostile force advancing towards the Indus
would not only be met on the line of that river , but would
be threatened along the seaboard of the Persian Gulf
and the line of the Euphrates in flank and rear."


I suppose this means that if there were a railway
on the banks of the Euphrates, troops from the Indus
might be moved along it. But it is as easy at present
as it would be then, to move troops up the Euphrates.
The Indus and Euphrates are both navigable by steam-
vessels, and the steamers of the East India Company
have long plied upon both rivers. Even if a railway
existed on the banks of the Euphrates, it is probably
by steam-vessels that troops would be carried up.
“ The Indus and the Euphrates thus united , the dan-
gerous isolation of Persia would he at an end , and a
Russian invasion of India would cease even to he
speculated upon.”
This is mere moonshine. Steamers between the
mouth of the Euphrates and the mouth of the Indus
may be useful or not; and if useful, there is nothing
to prevent their employment at the present moment.
But certainly the existence of steamers in that situa-
tion could give neither Persia nor India any assurance
against invasion from Russia, since the invasion would
not be from that quarter at all.
“ The resources of England being made promptly
available on any emergency in the East , Chatham and
Southampton would become the basis of operations
instead of Kurrachee or Bombay , and would enable
this country to anticipate or repel , whether in Europe or
Asia , any attack with the rapidity and advantages of an
irresistible force I


This object could not be promoted by the Euphrates
Railway, or by any complicated mode of communi-
cating with the East, even though it occupied a
shorter time than Mr. Andrew expects to be possible by
his plan. It was not found practicable, when intelli-
gence arrived of the present outbreak, to send troops by
the Red Sea, as the necessary arrangements could not
be made in this country without previous concert and
organisation on the other side of Suez, for conduct-
ing the traffic throughout. Had the Isthmus of Suez
been cut through, this would have been otherwise,
and Chatham and Southampton might have become
the base of operations in such a case. Or even had
a telegraphic cable been carried through the Red Sea
to India, some approach to rendering England jtJie
base of operations in the East might have been made.
But it is idle to expect that this can be done if the
line of communication has to pass through the Con-
tinent, and afterwards through the wilds of Mesopo-
tamia, as, in the case of the Euphrates scheme, it
would have to do ; and, in fact, any complicated line
of communication would be fatal to such a design.
“On an emergency in India , troops (from England)
could he landed at Kurrachee in three weeks , and in
another week at Lahore , hy steam transit .”
They could be landed in quite as short a time, and
with less fatigue, by placing superior vessels on the
Suez line. Moreover, it is possible, under other


arrangements, to pass from London to Lahore in one
week, which is surely better than in four.
“ The Euphrates Valley Railway , in addition to its
political advantages , would powerfully promote the com-
merce and civilisation of the world at large; and that
the commercial and manufacturing communities concur
in these sentiments has been shown by the addresses
lately submitted to your Lordship. They are quite alive
to the importance of obtaining cotton , wool, sugar , indigo ,
and other products from India and Mesopotamia , and
the production , being effected by free labour , would of
necessity tend to the extinction of slavery
The countries through which the line would pass
are desert, and have little other population than
marauding tribes of Arabs, over which the Porte
has no effectual control. As to the notion of cotton,
wool, sugar, and other such articles being brought by
the Euphrates Railway from India, the doctrine is too
preposterous to need refutation; and it is certainly
rather a far-fetched assertion, to maintain that the
cotton of Mesopotamia will tend to extinguish slavery.
If there is any useful thing grown, or that can be
grown, on the banks of the Euphrates, that might be
an argument for the construction of a canal of a
cheap character between the Euphrates and the Medi-
terranean. But in no case could it be necessary or
advisable, with the view of promoting the success of
such cultivation, to construct a railway along the
river banks, since the experience of America'and of


all other countries in the world, shows beyond dis-
pute, that rivers can carry commodities more cheaply
than railways.
“ The pecuniary support of Government is on the
present occasion sought not on industrial or commercial
considerations , hut on account of the political importance
of the railway to the empire at large; and it is to he
remembered that whatever assistance the Government
may render to the Euphrates Valley Railway can never
he quoted as a precedent for the furtherance of any
similar undertaking , for no similar undertaking can
possibly he brought forward , as the route proposed is at
once the shortest and the easiest between England and
India. The whole length of the valley of the Euphrates is
so free from impediment that it would seem as if Provi-
dence had specially ordained it to he the great highway
of nations between the East and the West.”
It is quite idle to maintain that no other project
for connecting India and Europe by railway except
the Euphrates Valley Line, ever has been or can be
brought forward, since a far superior project was
several years ago suggested by Sir Macdonald Ste-
phenson, and there can be no doubt whatever that
the construction of this line would be a public benefit,
while, as a speculation, it appears probable that it
would return its expenses, which certainly the Eu-
phrates line would not do. This line which, proceed-
ing from Constantinople, passes through or near
Sinope, Trebizond, Erzeroom, Tabreez, and Teheran,


skirts the south of the Caspian on its way on to Herat,
and passing through the Bolan pass, joins the system
of Indian railways at Lahore. This line was pressed
upon Sir Macdonald Stephenson’s attention by Sir
Justin Shiel, then ambassador in Persia, as being
preferable to the route by the Euphrates. In a letter
to Sir Macdonald Stephenson, quoted in a pamphlet
termed “ The World’s Highway,” Sir Justin Shiel
says: “ Commerce, both internal and foreign, and
consequently intercourse among the people, would
seem to claim a preference for the selection of more
northern parts of Persia for the course of the rail-
way. From Erzeroom in Turkish Armenia to Meshed,
and thence to Herat and Candahar, the road is a con-
tinued line of valleys of varying breadth. In general
language it may be called level,” and although occa-
sional exceptions to this character might be found,
there is no reason to doubt that this route, which is
the existing route of commerce, would be found quite
practicable for a railway without heavy expenditure,
while it passes through the principal centres of popu-
lation and most fertile and tranquil districts of Persia,
and what appears to me to be a most important poli-
tical object it affords facility of communication with
the Caspian Sea. It is upon this sea that, in any ma-
chinations against India, Russia can be most effectually
met. By the Volga, and other great rivers it affords
the means of penetrating to Moscow and other parts
in the heart of the Russian empire, and here a Russian
force advancing against India might have its commu-


nications at any moment cut off. Gun-boats could
be quite easily carried by railway from Constanti-
nople, and launched upon the Caspian, and it is only
by the construction of the railway in this situation,
that this important capability would be secured.
With regard to the disposition of Persia in aiding
the accomplishment of such a project, Sir Justin Shiel
says, in the letter already referred to, “The Govern-
ment of Persia would, I consider, contribute by every
other means than pecuniary aid to the success of the
project. The people in general too would rejoice in
the establishment of a powerful instrument of which
they have heard so much and such wonders, particu-
larly when they found themselves partaking in the
advantages attending a large outlay of capital.” I
believe that for ten or twelve millions sterling,’ it
would be possible to carry a single line of railway of
substantial construction by this route from Constanti-
nople to Lahore, and when the line through Hungary
has been carried to Constantinople it would be possible
to proceed from England to India, by the aid of this
junction railway, in a week.
While therefore it appears to .me proper to improve
the communications with India by the Red Sea as
much as possible, and, with that view, to cut through
the Isthmus of Suez, I think that a railway should be
simultaneously conducted from Constantinople to the
heart of India by the straightest possible course; and
this indication, as well as the nature of the ground,
and the existing course of traffic and population, all


concur in pointing out the line running past the
south of the Caspian as the track which should be pur-
sued. It is highly important, moreover, not merely for
the sake of expedition, but for various causes already
recounted, that the line of communication, whether
by sea or by railway, which connects England with
the East should, as far as possible, be continuous and
unbroken, and the proposed junction line, which con-
nects the European system of railways with the
Indian system, completely fulfils this indication. No
doubt the Euphrates Valley Line might be carried up
to Constantinople at the one end, and through Beloo-
chistan to Kurrachee at the other; and Mr. Andrew,
in anticipation, probably, of theobjections which would
be brought against such a dislocated and inadequate
scheme as the Euphrates line supplemented by
steamers must be admitted to be, has, in the map
already referred to, dotted in continuations of the line
to Kurrachee and Constantinople, with the view of
making the communication continuous. But in accom-
plishing such continuations, he would at the one end
have to encounter the difficulties presented by Mount
Taurus and its circumadjacent mountains, and at the
other end he would have to surmount the enormous
difficulties presented by the wild and lawless character
of Beloochistan. Of this route Colonel Hennell, whom
Sir Justin Shiel refers to as the most competent
authority, speaks as follows;—“ In respect to Beloo-
chistan, even were the mountainous ranges in that
country practicable for railways, I fear that the


absence of any established form of Government, com-
bined with the hostile and lawless character of the
different tribes occupying it, would alone form in-
superable obstacles to the formation of a line to the
Indus by that route.” He adds that, “in the vicinity
of the Euphrates, and from Lingah to Minow, on the
Persian coast, the climate at certain seasons is de-
cidedly insalubrious.”
“From Cape Jask to Pusseena, along the sea-board
of Mekran, great difficulties in the construction of a
railway would be found to arise from the turbulent
character and lawless habits of the Mekranees. The
small towns and forts which lie between the places
above referred to mostly acknowledge the rule of the
Imam of Muscat. But beyond the walls of the forts
his highness does not possess the slightest authority,
all the power being in the hands of different petty
and independent chiefs.” Much more could be cited
if necessary, to the same effect, all showing the diffi-
culties of the country, the absence of local traffic, and
the lawless character of the thin and scattered popu-
lation. Add to this, that the proposed railway, even
if carried down the banks of the Euphrates, and
through Beloochistan, would, if any‘local traffic were
to be supposed possible of cultivation, have the dis-
advantage of competing water-carriage to contend
with through its whole course, and it will at once be
seen how vain must be the expectation that such a
railway could ever become remunerative even if it
could be made and preserved. Of the probabilities of


molestation from the Arabs on the upper part of the
Euphrates, even General Chesney, the principal apostle
of the Euphrates scheme, speaks doubtfully. In a
report on the Euphrates Railway, published during
the present year, General Chesney speaks of the Arabs
in the following terms: “ The Sultan’s authority is
at present somewhat restricted in the country, but it
will ere long be strengthened and consolidated in that
part of the world. As Khalif he is the acknowledged
head of their religion, but as Sultan his power is
questioned, and sometimes even resisted by the wan-
dering tribes, though not so by the sedentary in-
habitants, who are more or less obedient to the laws
of the empire. In the first part of the proposed un-
dertaking, that of the connexion of the Mediterranean
with the Euphrates, there is no danger whatever.
* * * Beyond Jaber it may be otherwise, although I
hope not to any serious extent.” Now certainly this
is less confident language than that of Mr. Andrew,
who personally knows nothing of the locality, but
who finds it convenient to maintain that the Arabs
are a bugbear. So little was this General Chesney’s
opinion when he first pressed upon public attention the
advantages of the Euphrates route to India, that he
thought it necessary to make the boats shot-proof with
which the navigation of the river was to be carried on,
and, although many years have since elapsed, his confi-
dence does not appear to have yet risen to any high pitch
of elasticity. It is too serious a matter that a doubt
of the safety of the railway or the power of working


it, if made, should exist, not to constitute a grave
ground of objection, even if no other argument ex-
isted against the proposed scheme. But when it is seen
that the railway in question is a mere isolated frag-
ment, which could not without enormous difficulties,
be carried into unbroken communication with the
European and Indian systems,—that all the advan-
tages it professes to accomplish are attainable by the
far simpler and cheaper expedient of introducing
faster steamers on the Suez route, — and that a shorter
and more direct line between London and Lahore can
be established, which line moreover would be far
more profitable in itself, and would confer more
eminent political advantages ; —it is difficult to see
what one of all the exuberant pretensions of the
Euphrates Valley scheme remains undemolished, or
what ground remains on which an application to the
Government of so exceptional a character as the
concession of a guarantee upon a railway running
through a foreign country can be supported.
Mr, Andrew insinuates that if the English Govern-
ment declines to support this scheme, some foreign
power will do so. It is to be hoped that no foreign
power is so destitute of sense as to do anything of
the kind; but at all events if money is to be squan-
dered in an Arabian night’s entertainment of this
kind, it is better that the folly should be committed
by some foreign power than by us. A direct line,
however, between Constantinople and Lahore is an
undertaking well deserving of encouragement, not


merely on national grounds, but as a means of ame-
liorating the condition of the countries it passes
through. Such a line would be useful and profitable
with reference to the local traffic alone, and each
portion of it would pay, so that it would not be
wholly or mainly dependent for its success upon the
through traffic between Europe and the East, which
there is little chance would rise to such an amount
for many years as to remunerate a railway from that
exclusive source.
I have the honour to be,
My Lord,
Your Lordship’s most obedient humble servant,
AN OLD INDIAN.
London:
• rimed by Spottiswoode & Co.
New-street Square.
