

PART I.]
[PRICE, 6d.
The Civilized Barbarities of the
Nineteenth Century.
rjof%
MHiimimiiimiHiimiHimimi
Royalty
Albert Dawson.
Dedicated to the Church of England Clergy.
gwjbtmj:
PRINTED BY HECTOR ROSS, 545 KENT STREET SOUTH.
PUBLISHED BY R. BEAR, BOOKSELLER, 109 CASTLEREAGH STREET.
1887.




PART I.]
[PRICE, 6(1.
The Civilized Barbarities of the
Nineteenth Century.
Royalty
Albert Dawson.
Dedicated to the Church of England Clergy.
gwjlnmj;
PRINTED BY HECTOR ROSS, 545 KENT STREET SOUTH.
PUBLISHED BY R. BEAR, BOOKSELLER, 109 CASTLEREAGH STREET.




PREFACE.
The liberty to criticise any constitutional factor bas long
been recognised by Englishmen, and to this liberty we owe
many improvements in the constitution. Englishmen are
the rulers of the English nation, and Royalty stands at
the head of the Civil service, as the most important and
responsible servant of the people. Within range of the
liberties which the people allow to each other, the sub-
stance of the following pages will be found ; the people
have a right to consider the value and utility of their
servants in private, social, and political life.
Our present Queen has been above the average as
regards her value as a British monarch; and this amongst
Royalists has led to increased enthusiasm for Royalty,
giving greater facilities towards the introduction of a
Royalty less congenial to the temper and the moral re
quirements of the people. The outlook in this matter is
not encouraging, but rather serious, and the entire sub-
ject is worthy of a full reconsideration.
A widespread discontent is evident amongst the
masses, far more strong and bitter than is apparent upon
the surface. This fact, bearing as it does on material
progress, claims the attention of all thoughtful people ;
and perhaps some reason for it may be found in the
following pages.
A. D.
3 i 55/r




LOYALTY.
THE FOUNDATION WB BUILD UPON.
Like produces like : imitation is the sincerest kind of
flattery: imitation is a faculty largely developed in man.
A. gentleman throws down the end of his cigar, and the
urchin picks it up and smokes away with conscious pride,
though much discomfort. A boy hears his elders swear,
and, as a habit of his superiors, he copies the utterances
with manly bravado 1 for the edification of his mates.
Imitation works with greater force in the cultivation of
evil than it does in the propagation of the good: it is
apparently more easy and natural to follow evil. When
a youth imitates a younger youth than he, it is the mimicry
of sarcasm, when he imitates an older youth, it is the
flattery of an approbative follower. And even so with his
elders in social life, they do not regulate their deportment
by observing the behaviour of their social inferiors, but
look upwards to the grades above them, and examine with
curious eagerness any sample of the higher spheres, which
may for a time circle under their own observation. Those
very superior dignitaries who lead the fashion, adopt a
particular mode of attire, and the frivolous followers of
fashion do likewise, even though they may not add to
their appearance; and some will starve their stomachs
rather than not have fashion on their backs. The first
gentleman in the land is flattered by the imitation of the


lesser beings in bis bigb social circle; the members of the
next lower social circle keep as close as their surroundings
and their purses will admit, to the habits and even failings
of their leaders; and so on down to the footman and
nursemaid. The habits, manners, and even failings of
any grade in society is as close a copy as circumstances
will permit of the grade above them, and the character of
the whole is mainly a reflex of the characters of the
original leaders. There are individual exceptions, but
they only prove the general truth. If you cannot admit
the truth of the foregoing propositions, please dear reader
put this pamphlet down, and get about some other work;
let me proceed with mine.
* * ■» * * #
Popular fallacies are numerous to those who care to
search for them, but the majority of people do not care to
search; and numerous are the class who cannot see a
fallacy even when pointed out, for it requires a mind some-
what trained to the purpose.
Send your townsman with an old bushman into the
bush, each with a gun for shooting such game as each
may discover; the bushman will see, will shoot, and bring
•down game, whilst the townsman will not see anything to
shoot at. Exactly so with men and with fallacies. ■
Looking through a defective window-pane does not give
the eye a true image of the objects you look at, they are
drawn out of shape by the wavy glass: and thus it is with
mental vision, preconceived notions and inherent prejudices,
ever obstruct the view, and it requires some mental effort
to dispel them. One of the most misleading beliefs of the
present age when looking through the defective glass of
popular prejudice is, that the leading nations of the world
are civilized; the truth is that they are only slowly pro-
gressing towards civilization. Every age receding back to
primitive man, has laboured under the false idea that it


was civilized, and that preceding ages were barbarous.
The fact still obtrudes that even in our own times, the
careful searcher may see in various directions certain
civilized barbarities, and the particular one to which we
would draw your attention in this pamphlet is the institu-
tion of Hereditary Royalty and its appendages. We may
at some future time draw your attention to other civilized
barbarities, for the present we will confine our attention to
Royalty as it at present exists; earnestly soliciting the
reader to divest his mind as far as he can from all precon-
ceived notions on the subject, to allow no popular prejudice
to influence his judgment, and to allow his reason to deter-
mine without the sway of the partialities of his fancies,
whether or not the institution of Hereditary Royalty is
suited to the present conditions of our times, more especi-
ally to the present character and requirements of the
British nation,
THE ADVANTAGES OF ROYALTY.
Hush ! Step softly, speak lowly. Grim death is in the
house. By that bedside stands a grief stricken widow ;
she has just given a last kiss to her only son who lies
before her, shot dead by his own remorseful hand. He
had been a promising youth of generous and dutiful habits,
but unfortunately falling under the influence of a clique of
dissipated roues, he became a victim to the demoralizing
vice of gambling. Having lost the ample patrimony that
should have kept himself and his mother in affluence,
and unable to bear the stings of his remorseful conscience,
as he witnessed the privation which he had brought his
loving mother to suffer; he committed the fatal act of
suicide. Do not judge him harshly, kind reader, as you
think of the unutterable anguish of that poor mother’s


heart—think of the dead lad kindly—think of the power-
ful influence of a Royal example; for in gambling the lad
did but follow the lead of the first gentleman in the land.
But Royalty has an advantage over ordinary mortals who
ruin themselves at the table, for as long as the ever
recuperating purse of the toiling nation is open to it, it
cannot gamble itself into poverty, for the dignity of
Royalty must be maintained by the state; and in our
churches every Sunday the clergy pray that Grod will bless
Albert Edward, Prince of Wales.
Hurrah! Hurrah! The favourite wins. ’Tis Derby day.
As the favourite comes in first, impelled by the vicious lash
of it’s rider’s whip, and the cruel tear of his spurs; and as a
horse a few lengths behind drops dead on the spot, urged
poor brute beyond its strength, a loud cheer from the
fortunate winners rends the air, and sickly despair rests
upon the faces of some of the most unfortunate losers.
’Tis a noble sport. Royalty is there. See that burly
looking farmer stalking away with his hands deep in his
pockets, heedless apparently of everything around him.
He has left the money which should have paid his debts
in the hands of a bookmaker on the racecourse, and the
only course open to him now is the Bankruptcy Court.
Do not judge him harshly, he sinned in good company,
the first gentleman in the land was there, betting as freely
as he pleased. It is one of the advantages of Royalty that
its traits of questionable morality will be smiled upon
indulgently, as long as our ministers pray every Sunday
for its welfare.
A quiet country village lies before you. ’Tis eventide;
a calm, restful, quiet pervades the scene. In that humble
cottage on the hillside, an aged couple are seated on each


side of a flickering fire, whose fitful gleams light up their
careworn faces. ’Twas much sorrow surely wrought those
deep sad lines. Even so —A few years ago, their only
daughter, whose bright fondness and helpful kindness
made sunshine in their lives and home, was tempted
beyond her strength, and unable to bear her shame in the
presence of home and kindred, she fled, knowing not,
caring not, whither she went. Her stricken parents,
unable to do anything but suffer and weep, live on hoping
till weary, but still hoping that their daughter will some
day return to cheer with her presence their path to the
grave. Grod in His mercy bids them hope ; in His mercy
He hides from them the truth. The poor girl, unable to
influence her aristocratic destroyer to the extent of saving
her from the too ready verdict of the world —maddened
first by his deceit, then by her , pitiful condition, took the
readiest way of ending her earthly troubles, and “found
drowned, name unknown ” is the only part of her history
made known to the public. What shall be said of the
heartless profligate who would inflict endless sorrow,
misery and death upon innocent people for the sake of
gratifying a momentary passion ? Torture—death at the
stake would be a fitting punishment.
But stay, not so fast, gentle reader ; reflect, profligacy
has been an attribute of Royal Courts since history began.
Court society is a reflex of personal actions of Royalty,
hence the historical immorality of Royal Courts, and the
low morality in high places up to the present day, of
which we get but a glimpse through the medium of the
press. It is one of the advantages of Royalty, that in the
face of all this, clergymen ascend the pulpit every Sunday
and pray for the welfare of Royalty, and yet to profess to
teach the holy life of Christ! !
* * * « * #


See that old man walking along there with the help
of a stick ; mark his lean, cadaverous features, the hungry
gleam of his cold grey eyes, his lean and poorly-clad form.
“ Poor old man,” you utter compassionately. Nay, not
so, my friend; that old man is rich, very rich. See that
still more miserable beggar woman with a babe in her
arms appeals timidly to him for charity. He roughly
pushes her aside.
Hush! my good friend, speak not thus of the old man.
A hoarding of gold is a Royal habit; and a Bill was
passed through the House of Commons and the House of
Lords to prevent the public from becoming acquainted with
the amount of our noble Queen’s vast wealth, when at the
same time there existed at the Queen’s back door in
Windsor poverty-stricken dens of fever, squalor and misery.
This is not wrong; it is one of the unwritten laws of the
British Constitution that Royalty can do no wrong.
* * * *
A blaze of light. Music and mirth fill the crowded theatre.
Enchanting scenes of beauty appear anon upon the stage,
and the personal charms of the actresses are freely exposed
to the gaze of an admiring audience. Our ministers of the
Church are almost unanimous in warning their flocks
against the evil influences of such indecent places. A few
yards further along the street a stately palace —wealth and
splendour. A royal Queen receives her guests, smiles upon
them approvingly and graciously. In the street outside,
as a noble lady drives up to pay her homage to Royalty,
the vulgar (?) crowd hiss and hoot the noble (?) lady for
the manner in which she exposes her nakedness, and
gentlemen note with sorrow the shameless disregard of
decency. Yet our ministers pray every Sunday for the
welfare of Royalty, and teach poor children in their schools
to reverence it.


A wealthy lady, owner of a vast estate, which yields an
immense revenue, desired a couple of gamekeepers to fill
two vacancies. Although many poor lads were walking
about the village doing nothing, who were able and eager
to obtain the billets; the lady’s steward, strangely enough,
offered them to the lady’s two sons, thinking, maybe, the
work would be good for them. These two sons, who were
in receipt of princely allowances derived from the estate,
accepted the positions, and, of course, left the work to be
done by somebody else. Now, most reasonable people
would imagine that these two sons would not trouble
themselves about the gamekeeper’s wages, seeing that they
were in a manner attending to their own interests. But,
alas! the depth of meanness to which some people will
descend. Though each son receives a princely allowance
from the estate, they likewise take without a blush the
gamekeeper’s paltry wages, which are wrung from their
poor tenants by levy! And their mother and her steward
look on approvingly, and the well-fed parish priest, whom
the tenants are obliged to keep in luxury, prays for' the
preservation of the charitable and noble family.
-Sfe Jfe Ji, -V; -V- -V-
-'/V W W TV* -TV"
Royalty furnishes us with something similar, except, of
course, that the advantages of Royalty precludes the pos-
sibility of meanness being attached to it. The Prince of
Wales, although receiving about £2OOO per week from the
people of Great Britain, accepts the position of Colonel of
the 10th Hussars, and quietly pockets £1350 per annum
for serving his own interests. The Duke of Edinburgh
receives £25,000 per annum from the country’s purse, and
by accepting command of the Mediterranean Fleet he
actually robs those officers who were entitled to promotion
of the sum of £3102 per annum, which the noble Duke
unblushingly pockets as payment for his services. And


our gracious Queen looks on with Christian approval, and
hurriedly recalls her boy if war is imminent. Many other
lucrative posts in the army and navy are occupied by
members of the Royal Family, who have been promoted to
these posts by Royal influence in a manner most unfair and
unjust to many older and more deserving officers, who
were entitled by the laws of the service to promotion.
Can we wonder at political dodgery, and the placing of
incompetent men in responsible Government offices to the
detriment of the service, and injury to the public, when
Royalty sets such an unworthy example ? Yet prayers are
offered every Sunday for the welfare of the Royal Family.
It is one of the advantages of Royalty that its good little
deeds are magnified a hundred-fold, and with the utmost
possible publicity, whilst its sins of omission and com-
mission are put out of sight as quickly and quietly as
possible. Her Majesty the Queen, out of an enormous
income of about £2OOO per day, spends a few pounds yearly
on charitable work spread out thin in the form of pinches
of tea and drops of wine, and sometimes a few flannel
petticoats to some poor old women! The Prince of Wales
stoops and kisses the child of his favourite jockey , and the
newspapers and the telegraph wires, with frantic energy,
send the glorious news of the Royal charity and the Royal
benevolence from one end of the world to the other.
Twelve years ago, when our noble Queen sent the Prince
of Wales to India, and the British taxpayer had to furnish
over £IOO,OOO for expenses, the newspapers and the tele-
graph wires did not send the glorious news all over the
world that the Prince of Wales, notwithstanding his £2OOO
per week income, was, as a result of pigeon shooting?
horse-racing, gambling, and wine, in a position which,
occupied by another man, would be known as bankrupt.


It was necessary fo do something to get him out of the
scrape and uphold the dignity of Royalty, so he was given
£60,000 pocket money, and his expenses paid for a trip to
India. It may often have happened that at the same
moment of time could have been seen in one place a Royal
Prince with his companions at cards and wine, in another
place a congregation on their knees, and a clergyman in the
pulpit praying for the welfare of the Royal Family. It is
as though the Church would have us believe that the
nation owed its every advantage—religious, social, scien-
tific, and political—to the institution of Royalty, and that
on its preservation depended the welfare of the nation. A
greater delusion can scarce be imagined. It is one of the
advantages of Royalty that such a delusion, absurd though
it may be, is inculcated by the Church, for the clergy pray
every Sunday for the welfare of Royalty.
Another monstrous advantage of Royalty is found in the
fact that the children in our schools are taught to regard it
with holy reverence, and this of course before their minds
are matured sufficiently to enable them to judge for them-
selves what Royalty is really worth, and they grow up with
“ Grod save the King,” or “ Cod save the Queen,” branded
deep into the superstitious side of their characters as part
of their religion ; and in order to make Royalty appear to
simple children, worthy of devotion, it is untruthfully
accredited with honesty, charity, morality, wisdom, and all
manner of noble traits that the mind may conceive.
It is impossible to get at the real truth respecting the
exact condition of Royalty, for only such things as may be
expedient in its own interests are made known to the
public, but stray facts crop out occasionally, which to those
who are able to fill in the gaps, give a good general
impression of the quality of the real article. The wisdom


of our present Royal Family is such, that it is generally
acknowledged that if dependant solely upon their wits, not
a single member of this wise Family would he able to do
more than keep himself from starving. Disraeli stated
publicly in an unguarded moment that Queen Victoria was
“morally and physically incapable of Government.” Is
morality attendant at our Court drawing rooms ? Has our
charitable Queen ever given a penny of her own private
wealth to the poor ? The nation hands over to her every
year the sum of £14,590 to distribute in Charities, but
this paltry item is never mentioned by our truth loving
clergy when they talk of the charity of our noble Queen.
She receives yearly £172,500 to pay her tradesmen’s bills,
it is well known that not one fourth of this amount is
spent by the Queen, and the balance which should by act of
Parliament revert to the Treasury, has always been kept
by the Queen in defiance of the law. Other heavy votes
are similarly treated.
Thus by yearly acts of fraudulent retention of public
monies our honest Queen has amassed an almost incredible
amount of wealth. No wonder indeed that she caused
a bill to be passed through Parliament to prevent the
contents of her will being made known in the ordinary
manner to the public; this one fact evincing as it does
cunning, and secrecy, where true nobility would shew
frankness and openness, is quite sufficient without
additional evidence to guide us to the true character of our
nolle Queen.
One of the advantages of Royalty is represented by the
amount of influence it can bring to bear in its favour from
the accumulated vested interests of ages. The most power-
ful supporters of Royalty may be found amongst those
aristocratic families who owe their origin to the frailty and
vices of ancestors who pandered to the lust of Royalty.


Hie effect of titles and badges of honour distributed all
over the empire is strong in tbe cause of Royalty, although
at times we hear of sensible men refusing such question-
able honour. During the late Jubilee we read that the list
of honours conferred by the Queen filled five columns in
the London Times. It is simply, to use a homely phrase,
throwing sprats to catch mackerels. Her Majesty well
understands human weakness, and pushes the interests of
Royalty where it tells with most effect without encroaching
upon her purse. Another advantage which Royalty pos*
sesses is the influence of enormous wealth and high posi-
tion. A fair percentage of humanity are of a disposition
to worship wealth and position, in godly or ungodly guise,
wherever it may be found, and who are always stretching
their necks to lick the heels of every person above them on
the social ladder.
Our Bible teaches us humility, and tells us to pray in secret
to God, who sees in secret.
Our noble Queen informs her subjects that, at a
certain time on a certain day, she will proceed to a sacred
edifice (mentioned), and there offer prayers to God. The
sacred edifice is forthwith transformed into something like
a theatre; raised seats are fixed about the building, not
with the intention of lifting the occupants nearer heaven,
but for the purpose of allowing them to gaze their fill upon
Royalty—to worship Royalty, whilst Royalty performs the
(ei emony of prayer. The streets to be traversed are deco-
rated with lavish hands, thousands of pounds are expended,
our noble Queen and her adherents well aware that within
a stone’s throw of those very streets thousands of poverty-
stricken poor are weak and faint for want of food. The
Queen proceeds on her way to the house of God, attended
by all the pomp and vanity Royalty can command, for the


purpose of enticing weak multitudes to crowd together to
witness its magnificence.
Along the route ambulance stretchers are freely dis-
tributed to receive the results—the immediate results of the
Queen going to pray. Forty or fifty persons are carried
away to the hospitals to live or die as fate may determine
—victims to this horrible modern Juggernaut. And little
children in our schools are taught that the Queen went to
PEAY! ! ! What a libel on prayer! What a perversion
of true Christianity! And men consider that we live in a
civilized age, where freedom of thought and speech are
tolerated; yet let anyone dare to question the value of
Eoyalty, and the Church does her best to place that man
under a social ban, and names —such as larrikin, gaol-bird,
scum of the earth, infidel—are quite good enough to fling
at him, although he may be truly loyal in the best sense
of the word, and a true and earnest Christian at the same
time. This is one of the advantages of Eoyalty. The
vast sums of money which the State pours annually into
the lap of the Church bleaches into perfect whiteness the
shady actions of Eoyalty, and the Church frowns upon
those who dare to analyse the process. Another advantage
which Eoyalty reaps is the unfair manner in which Eoyal-
ists use the term “ disloyal.” The anti-Eoyalists are
striving for the good of the whole human race, the Eoyal-
ists are but striving to gild a rotten core; and to reverse
the terms, and call Eoyalists disloyal, and anti-Eoyalists
the most loyal of men, would be a mode of expression
giving a more just conception of the truth. For the term
“loyal” does not mean simply devotion to Eoyalty —it
means devotion to duty, truth, principle, and justice; and
I for one shall always recognise the terms “ Eoyalist ” and
“ Loyalist ” as representing two opposing sections of the
community.
* * * * *


CIVILIZED BARBARITY.
Another advantage of Loyalty lies in the influence of the
power of Standing Armies. When danger threatens the
honour or liberties of the nation, imagination pictures
Royalty surrounded by the nation’s brave defenders in
various attitudes of defence and defiance. This is not
exactly as it should be, for Royalty does not represent
either honour or liberty. This phrase of our nineteenth
century civilization, has developed itself from the ancient
hordes and clans, led on by petty chiefs to plunder and
murder. To day people speak with great respect of the
well fed, well clothed bodies of men called armies—not
hordes, we are more civilized now —who are paid to commit
murder at the word of command, led on not by petty chiefs
but by Royalty, as may be instanced in the late Franco-
German War, which fanned into fiercer flame the national
hatred and jealousy between these two nations, and which
culminated in a phrase of war tactics which would be
laughable were it not so deplorably sad. For we learn
from the press that the French military authorities have
trained numbers of doves —emblems of love and peace—
to do duty as messengers in time of war; and to check-
mate this move the Germans are training hawks to kill
the doves. England with the approbation of our Christian
Queen, gives fortune and honour to the inventor of any
new murdering machine, that will kill with greater
certainty, a larger number of human beings than any
other murdering machine made. Such things may be
necessary, but the most remarkable aspect of the case is
the self complacency with which nations dub themselves
civilized.
The world, however, is gradually showing a greater
intolerance and repugnance to war, and if Royalty with its
ambition was swept off the face of Europe, we should


sooner see the last of that “ cruel windpipe slitting art ” as
Byron termed it. Outside of the Royalty infested, ambi-
tionally jealous nationalities of Europe, the civilization of
our young and growing nations is too advanced and
cosmopolitan to easily admit the possibility of war.
Although a large sum of money is wasted annually in New
South Wales, in constructing and maintaining certain
schemes for defence; we need not be afraid. It is most
improbable that any nation will ever attack Australia; it
is just as likely that the Chinese will attack and capture
the United States of America.
This colonial defence force absurdity is only another
phrase of barbarism born of the Royalty craze infecting
the tradition befogged intellects of its institutors. The
Australasian Colonies would show an example to the world
worthy of record in history if they would but renounce
all attempts at developing those relics of barbarism called
standing armies, which are a disgrace to our so-called
civilization. Every nation in Europe is more or less inter-
ested in the welfare of these Colonies, and for what reason
can we anticipate aggression from any nation ? Surely no
nation in the world is mad enough to think it could obtain
and retain possession of the Australian Colonies, and this
too in opposition to the sympathy and assistance of perhaps
every other nation.
Why should we keep up a perpetual bantam cock crowing
in the constant speaking challenge of puny standing defence
forces ? Undefended Australia would perhaps be safer than
defended Australia, for her peaceable attitude would obtain
an universal moral support of more service in the cause of
peace than the inadequate defence forces we are, patching
up.
Would the half million able-bodied men in Australasia
remain quietly at home if a nation attacked any part of
the Australian Colonies?


Think you we should want for a Washington or a
Garibaldi if occasion should arise ?
An armed force attacking any part of Australasia would
instantly complete a stronger bond of federation than will
ever be achieved by talk and parchment. But the possi-
bility of invasion is so remote that it can scarce be accounted
a risk, and every day makes that possibility more remote.
The older nations of Europe will feel secure from the
curse of war when time shall have won away the national
hatred, antipathy, and jealousy, which was ever fostered
and encouraged by ambitious Eoyalty.
* * * * *
DISADVANTAGES.
An ordinary young man with average acquirements and
tastes, generally comes in contact with scores of young
women before he meets with one who suits his ideas, and
with whom he may feel disposed to link his fate by the
sacred tie of marriage; but civilized Eoyalty has no such
choice. Court etiquette points out perhaps half a dozen
princesses, one of whom the Eoyal heir may marry, or by
marrying any other, degrade and disgrace the Court.
The result is marriages without love, and the most sacred
bond which makes pure social life possible, is grossly
prostituted. Even African savages do not descend so low
as this, for an African Chief may take any daughter of
the tribe who suits his fancy, and his humble follower may
purchase the sable beauty who touches his heart, if he
has the price in cows or goats; here we find fondness and
affection on one side at least, and this cannot be said of
all Eoyal marriages. The result is deplorable. Human
passions especially such as have been developed by un-
bridled Eoyal sires—must have a vent: the result is
immorality and a tendency to inferior progeny.
* * * « * *


Every step the British nation has made towards the
liberties she now enjoys marks a struggle —ofttimes a
bloody one —against the conservatism of Eoyal privileges.
Can we then ascribe our liberties to the benign influence of
Eoyalty ?
Can we point to the king or queen who has added a
fact to science, or who have done as much for humanity as
Galileo, or Eranklin, or Newton, or Faraday, or Watt, or
Darwin, or dozens of others who have by their works,
made their names beacon lights of progress? Were our
giants in science our patriot statesmen reared upon the
pabulum of Eoyal pomp and inanity ? No, decidedly No.
England has progressed against the influence of Eoyalty,
and her position results from the labours of the heroes of
progress, not from the demoralizing influence of Eoyal
Courts.
I press this point as infatuated Eoyalists seem blind
in this direction. The grand effects resulting from
discoveries in various branches of scientific research acting
upon the superior national character of Englishmen, and
not the preachings of a divided Christianity—not the glitter
and tinsel of Eoyal Courts —has done most service in
elevating the nation to her present proud position.
* « *- * *
Our national law says that the taking of human life
is a crime punishable by death; the Holy Bible says, thou
shalt not kill; and our ministers teach us to obey the law
and the Bible. Yet ambitious Eoyalty is responsible for
the greater part of the murderous slaughter called war,
which blurs the pages of history. Eoyalty counts its
murdered victims by millions, and still our clergy pray
every Sunday for its welfare, and at the same time tell us
they are messengers of love and peace. Our own noble
Queen recently brought England to the verge of an


European War by unnecessary interference in Bulgarian
affairs, and the danger was with difficulty avoided by the
exertions of our good statesmen to preserve peace.
* * * *
’Tis sinful to gamble to risk your money upon tbe cbance
fall of tbe dice, or tbe accidental colour of a card, it is an
immoral and debasing vice. Our ministers teacb us so
from tbe pulpit. But alas for tbe beam in tbeir own eyes ;
tbe Cburcb is willing to gamble away tbe peace and
prosperity of a nation upon tbe cbance disposition of a
Eoyal beir, for ber ministers pray every Sunday for tbe
welfare of Royalty, and they know not bow soon that
Royalty will give to tbe nation tbe curse of an immortal
profligate, or a quarrelsome, ambitious King, whose
accession to tbe tbrone will shatter tbe peace of tbe nation.
******
CULTIVATING HYPOCRISY.
I remember reading a strong protest from tbe pen of a
celebrated art critic, a lover of tbe beautiful and true,
against tbe plastering of brick structures, tbe gilding of
inferior metals, and such like processes. If we build a
brick building, why should we be ashamed of it, and try
to make people believe it is stone by plastering it, and
reveal for ages a monument inculcating deception? If
you cannot afford to wear gold ornaments, why foster fraud
and hypocrisy by wearing gilded brass ? There is wisdom
in this art critic s sentiments, although slightly in advance
of tbe age ; for will anyone deny that tbe consciousness of
tbe truth, solidity, and purity of a man’s possessions, tends
to a greater love for tbe true, and a stronger aversion to
tbe false. Note tbe pride with which a man wills say
“That’s solid gold, my boy, no Brummagum about that,”
or “ that is a genuine Turner, no false daub of a copy.”


There is wisdom also in the demand of all loyal men who
ask that the head of the British nation shall he of the solid
gold, of sterling moral and intellectual wealth, and not a
base metal, gilded over with the pomp and glitter of
Royalty —a hotbed breeding hypocrisy and immorality.
There is reason in the demand of the thoughtful, truth-
loving loyalist, who asks that the head of the nation shall
be of such a character as may be honestly respected, and
faithfully loved, without the aid of the questionable
influence of foolish tradition and regal wealth. There is
truth in the assertion of loyal men, who say that a man
who has led a disreputable life, figured largely on race-
courses, and in gambling dens, cannot exert an influence
for good, even when plastered over with Royal pomp and
set upon the Throne to be worshipped like a demigod.
Hypocrites, whose mean lives are one continued struggle
for place and honour, may bow down and worship, whilst
good men, true and loyal, turn sick at the sight, and
wonder where on earth is our boasted civilization, and what
may be the meaning of religion, as they listen to the
prayers from the pulpit for the welfare of Royalty.
* H- « ■»
FORCE OF EXAMPLE.
The actions and behaviour of an errand boy have their
quota of influence for good or evil upon the persons with
whom he comes in contact. The daily life of a moral,
honest, truth-loving mechanic, exerts an influence for
good which will benefit mankind as long as the human
race exists. Can we, then, admire that constitutional law
which places at the head of a State, as a symbol and
example of law, order, and morality to the people, a
person who boldly breaks those laws, a person whom
honest folk cannot respect, and whose previous life has


already exerted a baneful influence upon the morality of
society ? The evil attendant upon a conspicuous bad
example, especially when that example is weighted by
Royalty, cannot easily be exaggerated. The shameful
revelations which may at times be heard in our divorce
courts—the ruin of many a kind and honest girl—the lax
morality of thousands of English men and women might be
traced back from their present evident and immediate
cause to the influence of Royalty ages ago. Observe the
general condition of society everywhere, from the very
lowest to the highest grade. Ought we not to expect a
better result than the present low social morality, after
nearly two thousand years of incessant moral teaching by
the churches ? Certainly we ought. And the most direct
deterrent influence which has kept Englishmen from rising
to a higher moral standard than they have at present
attained, may be found in the history of immoral Royalty
down even to the present year, for the doings of the Prince
of Wales in continental gambling dens are not kept
entirely from the public.
■» n-
Will anyone deny the force of example ? Does not the
old maxim say “ example is better than precept.” Let us
go back a few years, and try to discover what benefit the
nation derived from the example shown by the monarchs
immediately preceding our present Queen ?
George I. imprisoned his wife in a dungeon for thirty-
two years for a suspected intrigue with Count Konigsmark,
who was brutally murdered by order of the King. This
would not seem so bad did not Chesterfield inform us that
of the King himself ‘ ‘ no woman came amiss to him if she
were only very willing and very fat.” Of George 11.
Macauly says ‘ ‘ not one magnanimous or humane action is
recorded to him,” the immorality of his Court was indes-


cribable; bis Queen Caroline not only allowed him
concubines, but sometimes actually assisted to procure them.
Sbe said of ber son, tbe father of George 111., be is “ tbe
greatest ass, and tbe greatest bar, and tbe greatest canaille,
and tbe greatest beast in tbe whole world, and I heartily
wish be were out of it.” On ber death-bed sbe said to tbe
King, “you should marry again.” “No, I will have
mistresses,” replied tbe King; and mistresses, amongst
whom are mentioned Ladies Walmoden and Yarmouth, be
did have to tbe last.
\
George 111. is described by Pbillimore as an ignorant,
dishonest, obstinate, narrow-minded boy, tbe tool of an
adulteress and ber paramour. He married in 1759 Hannah
Ligbtfoot, and in 1761 be married Princess Charlotte, bis
first wife being still alive and hearty. George 111. was
therefore a bigamist, and there is no doubt of tbe illegiti-
macy of George IY. George 111. was mentally unfit to
govern, but insisted upon dictating tbe national policy,
raised tbe national debt about £700,000,000, and went mad
occasionally.
George IY. was a king who, according to Thackeray,
“ owed everything to bis tailor.” This king also committed
bigamy. When be married tbe second time to Caroline of
Brunswick be was too drunk to stand. When tbe news
.reached him in Ireland of Queen Caroline’s death, be was
in tbe last stage of intoxication, and tbe only effect of tbe
news was to ebcit tbe remark, “this is one of tbe happiest
days of my life.” Two wives were not enough for this
Eoyal beast, for many titled ladies assisted to assuage tbe
Eoyal appetite.
William IY. was never accused of being a gentleman ;
be was a mixture of blackguard, buffoon, and madman.
His method of paying borrowed money by sending bis
creditors to Prance, and causing them to be guillotined,


was kingly in its simple rascality, and ids treatment of
Mrs. Jordan, by wbom be bad nine children, was most
inhuman.
Coming from such noble stock, can we wonder at the
Prince of Wales being mentioned in connection with crim
con eases which have been adjusted in British Courts, and
can we listen without a blush of shame to the prayers
from the pulpit for the preservation of Royalty ?
■» * ■» * * *
One of the first elements necessary to successful advance in
individual or in national life, is a high ideal, and is it
anything but folly to lift any disreputable man before the
people to be honoured as the first gentleman in the land ?
Can any minister of the Gospel lay his hand upon his Bible
and solemnly assert that Albert Edward, Prince of Wales,
is a fit and proper person to be held up as an example to
British youth ? or can he with equal solemnity assure us
that his eldest son, a surly, brainless dude, who is widely
known as “collars and cuffs,” and who was recently
“ ordered off ” on account of the marked attention he was
paying to a married woman, is a suitable character to
succeed as the upholder of the dignity of the British nation ?
No minister of the Gospel can make these assertions, and
keep to the honest truth, but you may hear them from the
pulpit every Sunday praying for the welfare of royalty—
it is one of the advantages of royalty. The baneful effects
upon a nation of the influence of the character of a king,
whose vices are admitted even by his supporters can scarcely
be estimated ; yet this important factor in moral progress
is not recognised by the Church, the evil influence spreads
silently and broadly, leaving no very definite tracks, and
such as do point to the throne are carefully hid by Royalty
worshippers, and wiped out by the prayers of the Church.
* * it-


Why should we not place at the head of a nation a man at
whose door his very enemies (if he have any) can lay no
charge of vice or immorality, a man whose life has heen a
tribute of devotion to the welfare of his country, a man
who is what the head of every nation ought to he —one of
NATURE’S NOBLEMEN. Are not such to he found in
every country? Place such a man at the head of the
people, not for three years, or five years, hut for the term
of his natural life; and you will find that the want of a
people in national life —for someone to rally round, to love
and reverence as a leader, a man who deserves the respect
of all men, and through whom they speak to the world—
will he fully filled ; the moral tone of the nation will rise,
a keener appreciation of the good and true will he fostered,
the low morality in high places would get uncomfortable
and out of place, and the whole nation would he more
united, contented, and happy, than when reluctantly
reverencing gilded unworthiness. A leader should perforce
he superior to his followers, or their direction will not he
the best attainable; and the objection to royalty is hut the
natural protest of reason, for it cannot hut he that the low
moral influence of a degenerate head will affect the
following to its disadvantage ; reason rebels against leaving
the value of an important constitutional factor to chance,
when by controlling the creation of that factor we may
increase its value; and it is strange that England, standing
at the head of nations, should yet he content to exhibit to
the world a monarch and a leader, who may be an honest
fool, a clever knave, an abominable rake, a vicious tyrant,
or a nobleman, just as the chance of birth may happen.
« ■» ■» ■» ■»
FEAR OF CHANGE SHOULD NOT HINDER
PROGRESS.
The determined Royalist may yet remark, “Look at


France and America with their Republics, we are better off
than they are ; will a revolution, will creating a national
disturbance, do us any good ?” Change always causes
more or less disturbance. Christ came into the world to
preach love and peace to men. Should he not have done
so simply because he created a disturbance in attempting
to improve a people who were quite as satisfied with their
condition and civilization as are the people of the nineteenth
century ? Copernicus and Galileo taught that the world
revolves around the sun, and the people of their times were
too enlightened and civilized to accept such a foolish
theory. Should the fact have been withheld, simply
because it upset the popular theological tradition, and
created a disturbance ? Harvey discovered the circulation
of the blood, and the wise surgeons of his day, with the-
accumulated knowledge of centuries of study and research,
thought themselves too clever to admit such a foolish fancy,
and poor Harvey suffered professional persecution. Should
he have withheld his knowledge simply because it created
a disturbance ? Should the inventor of the locomotive-
engine have withheld his labours because the hills would
have to be tied together by bridges ; mountains have their
hearts pierced, and death sometimes await the hurrying
traveller? Shall our faith in the possibility of nobler
results from a different form of Government remain silent
and inactive from a weak dread of change, or because this
civilised age with foolish conceit, like every other age
receding back to primitive man, believes it has attained the
limit of advancement ? Shall the useless and unsatisfac-
tory institution of hereditary Royalty remain for ever an
incubus upon the moral advancement of a nation, through
shirking the responsibility of a disturbance ?
# -Y-
As to a Revolution with the sword, my loyal friends and


patriots are not able for it, and never will be willing, they
are too humane and civilized for that, it would be following
the footsteps of Royalty too closely, to attempt to convince
people they are wrong by murdering them. The sword of
reason permeating the advancing standards of knowledge
amongst the people is the weapon which will bring down
Royalty, and most probably without shedding blood.
A victory such as we mean to achieve, if won by brute
force, and well developed murdering machines, would be
no credit to our manhood or humanity, and success would
probably turn to defeat in reaction, leaving no good
results; but a victory won by force of reason will stand
good as long as reason reigns. It must be better for
a nation, from every point of view, when the people of
a nation are sufficiently advanced to know what is for their
own good; to allow them to choose a leader of known
reliable character, and not to leave the choice blindly to
accident of birth. Would you make a man who is ignorant
of law a judge, because his father was a judge? Would
you clothe a rascal in the robes of a bishop for the sole
reason of his being the son of a bishop ? Would you
trust the superintendence of a daring engineering project
to a man because his father was a clever engineer ? Would
you risk the life of your sick wife or child in the hands of
a man and trust to the fame achieved by his father in the
hospitals ? Following such courses would lead your friends
to conclude you were insane. If in the ordinary affairs of
life sufficient care is taken that men are fit for the positions
they occupy, why take no care at all in an extraordinary
case of extreme importance ? In spite of the fact that we
have had insane Kings, drunken Kings, filthily sensual
Kings, and other equally objectionable types, traditional
usage still leads the people to give the most honorable,
important, and vital post the nation has at command to


a person whose entire claim to the position often rests on
the fact that he was born of his parents ! Surely we are
not civilized yet!
* # # A- Af
SUNDRY ARGUMENTS.
France, with its republic, is often held up by Royalists as
an example of the failure of Republican Government to
show a good result. But when we consider the result of
any form of government, we must also consider the
national character of the people it governs. Frenchmen
are proverbially volatile and excitable, and until the French
people as a class are elevated by knowledge and reason,
sufficiently to enable them to subdue these failings in the
national character, France will always remain in more or
less of political or revolutionary trouble, whether under
Monarchal or Republican form of Government. Under the
same form of government Englishmen would succeed better
than Frenchmen. The English character is more solid,
and thinks deeper before it acts. Whatever the form of
government, national character determines its value, and
this perhaps may be shown in the marked contrast between
the French and United States Republics in their present
conditions. We may with much reason assert, that the
proud position which England holds to-day at the head of
nations, has been reached, not as a result of Monarchy, as
some Royalists would have us believe, but in opposition
to its influence. If the actions and conditions of Royalty
will not bear the light and truth of reason and the search-
ing probe of analysis, it is not suited to the broadening
intelligence of the people, and ought therefore to be
abolished. Shall the fact of England being ahead be an
excuse for sitting idly down, and not attempting to progress
further in all directions ? Surely not! Let not the fear of


change deter us from advancing. Englishmen are brave,
and if a higher standard may be reached, neither tradi-
tional foolery nor cowardly fear should be allowed to
obstruct the way.
■» X X ■» X
Many advantages are held out in the condition of existing
Republics, which England or her Colonies may grasp, to
assist them in the construction of a new constitution;
existing failings may be avoided and better lines drawn.
The one great weakness in the United States Constitution
is the short length of time a President holds office, it is not
sufficient to allow him to impress his individuality upon
the history of the States, however devoted a patriot he
may be. The opposers to his election are enticed into
retaining their objective attitude until they get another
chance of putting in their own man; the result is con-
tinuous hostility no matter who may be elected, and what
should be a most noble and exalted office, is shorn of its
dignity and influence by the shortness of its tenure The
change of state officers is sufficiently frequent to cause a
continuous demoralizing, wire-pulling, and scrambling
after position, which retards civil progress, and this evil is
not confined solely to Republics. As soon as an officer of
State has grasped a full idea of the duties of his position,
and become efficient in serviceable administration, his
'term of office expires, and another man is put in his place
to repeat the process. Nor is this the only evil, for short
tenure is a premium to corruption. Proceedings of a
questionable character are often brought to light that
cannot be traced home to any particular officer, the successor
blames his predecessor, and the predecessor blames his
successor. With sophisms and truths that do not embrace
the whole truth, the fault is thrown about from one office
to another, and finds no resting place; the public are


wronged and have no means of redress. A low political
morality is thus fostered which we should attempt hy
every possible means to avoid in the formation of a new
■Constitution.
* a- %
The requirements of the age are vastly different now than
when Bourke wrote “ the people need to he frightened into
obedience by some bugbear or other, and what we call the
Crown answers the purpose as well as any other,” at that
time a man among the working classes was thought
a wonderful scholar if he could write his own name and
labour through a page of printed matter ; now, thanks to
our liberal educational system all men may read and learn
what is best for their welfare, and need no bugbear to
frighten them into obedience, they behave and act now for
their own good, and for the love of the right; and do not
rush madly into actions to bring about results of which
they are ignorant. Those who have given thought to this
subject deem it an insult to their sense and manhood to be
expected to honour and reverence a king whom they
cannot even respect, and who owes his position to mere
accident; it is simply gambling with the welfare of a nation.
Loyal and liberal men will sustain that which is good,
abolish that which is useless or bad, and keep pace with
the light of knowledge as it illuminates the path towards
the future. Royalists would sustain worn-out institutions
because their fathers did; traditional usage is their
strength and argument, the pomp and vanity of Eoyal
Courts their heaven on earth, and they worship their
Eoyal demi-god with sentiments, closely allied to the
superstitious ideality of heathen idolatry. All friends of
true moral progress will be pleased to have observed the
formation of a Eepublican Union in Sydney. AVe hope
the Union will grow in strength, and as its influence


spreads, true light on the subject of Royalty
will be spread abroad, and counteract to some extent the
influence in its favour which the Church of England
exerts —for reasons which perhaps affect the purse of the
Church. The masses are gradually acquiring a keener
thirst for knowledge, and will not much longer submit to
the barbarity of hereditary monarchy.
These few pages were written with earnest conviction
which impelled the writing, and although they may be
weak and imperfect, although popular prejudice may
accord our labour no credit, yet we are satisfied in looking
forward to that not far distant future, when our civilized
descendants will scan the pages of history, and examine
Kings and Queens with their concurrent evils, murderous
wars, as relics of past and barbarous ages.
Aristocracies of brute force first governed the world, then
followed Aristocracies of birth assisted by brute force.
In our own times we witness the gradual supplanting of
Aristocracies of Birth by an Aristocracy of Wealth.
What can come next, unless it be an aristocracy of sound,
rational, practical science ? If it be strong enough, and it
is growing stronger every day all over the civilized world,
on it will the future of the world mainly depend.
Aristocracies of birth, the power of brute force, an un-
scrupulous priesthood, have led the nation a cruelly
torturous course through sloughs of immoral mire and
fraternal blood to our present times, now let us take the
proffered hands of reason and science to guide our path
along a safer and brighter course towards the end.
FINIS.
Hbctob Boss, Steam Printer, 545 Kent Street South, Sydney.




The Civilized Barbarities of the
Nineteenth Century.
“ QUALIFIED MEDICAL PRACTICE,”
By the same Author,
WILL BE PUBLISHED SHORTLY.
