

1845
1940




1845-1940




IN COMMEMORATION
of the OPENING of the
ROYAL INSURANCE BUILDINGS
414-418 COLLINS STREET
MELBOURNE
on the
EIGHTEENTH DAY OF MARCH
1940




1845
1940
qu?
O Ohen the Royal Insurance Company
Limited was founded in Liverpool in the year 1845, the prospectus
contained a statement to the effect that the establishment of the
Company would be readily understood and appreciated by the public
without comment, especially at the "present time.” And so we have


to cast our eyes back to that "present time” in the history of the great
northern city in order that we may visualise the conditions which induced
the founders of the "Royal” to embark on their enterprise. In our
review of these conditions we find that Liverpool had entered upon a
period of unprecedented activity and prosperity. Packets and traders
were plying to and from the port in increasing numbers. Merchandise
of every description was coming into the town in immense quantities
for despatch to the ends of the earth and the first link in the gigantic
chain of Liverpool-American trade had been forged by the departure of
the pioneer steamship "Britannia.” As a consequence of all this com-
mercial development the city itself grew apace; the docks were improved,
new municipal and private buildings were being erected on all sides
while, on the other side of the Mersey, the thriving town of Birkenhead
was rapidly progressing towards its future greatness. Such, then, was
the atmosphere of progress which surrounded the "Royal” when it was
provisionally registered on the eleventh day of March, 1845.
The prospectus, be it said, was a very unpretentious affair and, like
so many modest documents of that kind, it gave no indication of the
"great oak” which was to grow from the "little acorn.” The investors
of those days, however, must have had a shrewd idea of the tremendous
potentialities of such an enterprise for we find that the original
applications for shares greatly exceeded the capital of the Company—an
eloquent tribute to the honesty and integrity of the provisional Com-
mittee which brought the Company into being. The registration was
completed on the 13th June, 1845, and on the 16th of the same month
the Directors announced that they were prepared to receive proposals
for Fire and Life insurance.
Slowly and cautiously the Company extended the field of its
operations. Among the earliest agencies established were those at
Douglas (Isle of Man), Rochdale, Ormskirk, Chester, Norwich, Bury
and Cork. The close of the first year, 1845, saw the commencement of


foreign business, agents having been appointed at Calcutta and in the
Brazils. In the following year agencies were authorised in Chili and
Peru, and in 1848 at Barbados, Gothenburg and Sourabaya.
The year 1848 (only three years after
the formation of the Company) marked
the inauguration of the Company’s
business in Australia, when an agency
was established in Adelaide. In the
following year, 1849, business com-
menced in Melbourne, in the heart of
which city the "Royal” Australian head-
quarters now stand. One year later a
Sydney agency came into being. In 18 51
operations were extended to the United
States and Canada, some time after the
Company’s establishment in Australia.
We come to
Australia
EDWARD WHITBY
First Agent of the Company in
Melbourne, 1849
For twenty-four years the business was carried on in Melbourne through
Agencies, the first Agent being Mr. Edward Whitby, who was later
succeeded by Messrs. Bright Brothers.
The progress made during these early years, sound and gradual as it
was, laid the solid foundation for the far-reaching developments which
characterised the Company’s later activities. An important feature of
these developments was the acquisition, from time to time, of the business
of other Companies. No amalgamation, however, was effected until the
Fire Premium income of the "Royal” had reached One Million Sterling
per annum, and the first acquisition was the taking over of the National
Fire Insurance Corporation in 1888. This was followed a year later by
the purchase of the Brighton and Sussex Union Fire Insurance Company.
Two years later a merger was negotiated and completed with the Queen
From
Strength
to
Strength


Insurance Company, which was at that time operating in Australia.
Many of its officials came across to the "Royal” with the absorption of
the Company’s business and served for many years with the parent
Company. Since that time several other Companies have been acquired
in Britain and abroad, all adding materially to that strength and stability
which have made the name of the "Royal” a household word in every
country to which its business has been extended.
The business has grown steadily in Australia and the fact that the
average number of claims received and settled in the course of its business
amounts to over 1,000 per month gives some idea of the extent to which
the Company is serving the Australian community.
Enter
Mr. Salter
MANAGEMENT IN AUSTRALIA
The Company’s first Manager in
Australia was Mr. Charles Salter, who
was a Blue Coat boy, and was sent out
to reorganise the business at the early age
of 32 years. He arrived in this country
in 1873 and became Superintendent for
Australasia, controlling general agencies
in Australia and New Zealand. He it
was who laid the solid foundations for
the present organisation throughout these
lands. For the long period of nearly forty
years Mr. Salter continued in his high
executive position and when he retired
C HAS. SALTER
Manager for Australasia 1873-1912
it could be truly said of him that "he looked back upon his yesterdays”
with the satisfaction of one who had builded truly and well.


Mr. Salter was succeeded in 1912
by Mr. George H. Turton, who had
occupied the position of Sub-Manager
for Australasia since 1900. He was a
Lancashire lad, educated at the Liverpool
Institute, and served his apprenticeship
with the "Royal” at Liverpool. To
Mr. Turton fell the hard task of
managing the business of the Company
during those trying years of 1914-1918
when war cast its grim shadow over the
land. In 1915 while on a visit to England
to consult with the Directors, he was
crossing the Atlantic in the ill-fated
Mr. Turton
Takes Over
GEO. H. TURTON
Manager for Australasia 1912-1927
"Lusitania” which was torpedoed by a German submarine. After many
hours of privation in an open boat he eventually reached his destination.
Safely through that epoch of unprecedented stress, the Company
made wonderful progress during the post-war development period, and
this in spite of competition which had become an ever-increasing force.
Mr. Turton retired at the end of
February, 1927, when the Australian and
New Zealand control became separate
units. He was succeeded, as Manager
for Australia, by Mr. W. K. Fethers, the
first Australian-born member of the staff
to occupy the position. Mr. Fethers
joined the service of the "British &
Foreign” in 1901 and was transferred to
the "Royal” in 1907. When the Great
War (1914-1918) broke out he went
abroad on active service and, on return-
ing to civil life in 1918, was appointed
Assistant Secretary at the Australian
Head Office in Melbourne.
And nou>
Mr. Tethers
W. K. FETHERS
Present Manager


Empire Buildings, Erected 1888
Purchased by Royal 1899. Demolished 1938


Mr. Fethers has served on important Insurance Committees and has
occupied the position of President of the Fire & Accident Council of
Underwriters, President of the Insurance Institute of Victoria, whilst,
in addition to other activities, he is now a member of the Board of the
Metropolitan Fire Brigade of Melbourne.
As already mentioned in this brief historical survey, the "Royal”
extended its organisation to Australia in 1848 when it commenced
operations in Adelaide. For twenty-four years the business was carried
on through agencies, but in 1874 the Company established olfices on its
own account at No. 74 Collins Street West, adjoining the London
Chartered Bank of Australasia. In the short space of four years,
however, increased accommodation became necessary and this was
found at No. 3 5 Queen Street, on the site adjoining the Bank of
Australasia. Again in 1887, for the same reason another move had
to be made, this time to No. 9 Queen Street, where the offices
remained until the need for still greater accommodation indicated
that the time had arrived for the Company to obtain a building
of its own. Accordingly, in 1899, the Empire Buildings, 414-418
Collins Street, were acquired, and here, after extensive alterations had
been carried out, the Company found a permanent home. The handsome
six-storey building was a noble example of Gothic architecture, a
particularly striking feature being its front face of New Zealand Oamaru
stone. However, as the building aged, many defects developed and in
1938, when it had been standing for fifty years, it was demolished to
make way for the imposing ten-storey modern structure, which is now
the Company’s Australian headquarters.


In the planning and general layout of the new premises, it may be
said that whilst efficiency was the key note, the aesthetic side was not
overlooked. Hence this Melbourne home of the "Royal,” besides being
a pattern of economic utility, is truly a "thing of beauty.”
The plain front of the building is relieved by a balcony at the 3rd
floor level and a smaller one at the base of the tower, whilst on the tower
itself is a carving in stone of the coat of arms of the Company, showing
a lion and unicorn supporting the familiar "Royal” shield.
Bronze treatment is a feature of the front between the ground and
second floors, and the Arms of the Cities of Liverpool and London,
which appear on the Company’s policies, have been incorporated in the
decorative treatment.
The Liverpool crest depicts a liver (legendary bird) holding a branch
of seaweed in its beak, whilst the first City in the Empire is represented
by an illustration of a sword, being the badge of St. Paul, the patron
saint of London, in the first quarter of a shield of St. George.
The red granite trim around the main entrance provides an imposing
setting for the entrance doors to the lobby and the insurance chamber.
Of the main chamber it can be claimed that it is one of the most
attractive insurance offices in the Commonwealth, whilst the accommo-
dation and facilities provided for the administrative, executive and
general personnel are complete in every detail necessary for the efficient
and harmonious conduct of business. Outstanding on the decorative
side are the mural panels executed by the master craftsman, Napier
Waller. In these fine pieces of work, illustrated herewith, the develop-
ment of Australia is powerfully depicted in symbolic fashion. The
painting is vigorous and colourful, yet absorbed into the walls and
surroundings, achieving a sense of complete harmony with the chamber
itself.


The New Building. Completed 1940


"TUTUM TE SISTAM”
When the founders of the "Royal” adopted as the Company’s motto
the phrase "Tutum Te Sistam,” they chose wisely because its literal
meaning—"l will place thee in safety”—was at once a challenge to their
singleness of purpose and an inspiration to their zeal and determination
to build wisely and well an organisation which should set a standard to
the insurance world. Just as in Virgil’s "Aeneid” (from which the
motto is taken) Aeneas’s rescue of Anchises at the sack of Troy has
always been regarded as a model of filial devotion, so it may fairly be
claimed for the "Royal” that the administration of its affairs and the
conduct of its business have fashioned a pattern of devotion to an ideal—
the ideal of maximum service to all its clients, large and small. That the
present administration is faithfully following out the policy laid down
by their predecessors is amply proved by the present position and
resources of the Company.
It only needs to be added that the constantly varying requirements
of the public consequent upon the ever-changing conditions of a
progressive time and people will continue to be a stimulus to the Manage-
ment in carrying on the work of the Company and further developing
its business. Today the "Royal” occupies a place of high honour in the
insurance world. It has reached that place by virtue of the vision and
integrity of the men who have guided its course throughout the long
period of ninety-five years. It takes this opportunity of acknowledging
with pride and gratitude the splendid services rendered during that time
by a long line of loyal executives, general staff and agents, and finally,
with its deepest appreciation of the trust reposed in it by its clients and
all with whom it has had business relations, it sets out with fullest
confidence upon the untrodden ways of tomorrow.


Mr. F. J. WILLIAMS
Mr. J. DYER SIMPSON
Joint General Managers
Head Office: 1 North John Street, Liverpool
England
Melbourne Local Board of Directors:
MESSRS.
RAYNES W. S. DICKSON, Chairir.an
T. S. NETTLEFOLD, o.b.e.
REUBEN HALLENSTEIN
ANDREW McHARG
G. L. McHENRY
THEODORE FINK
R. G. RUSSELL
A. T. JONES
Manager for Australia
W. K. FETHERS
★
June 1940


<Lyippreciation^
THE "ROYAL”
now housed in the new buildings, tenders its
acknowledgments to the designing Architect
CEDRIC H. BALLANTYNE, f.r.i.b.a., f.r.v.i.a.,
and to his professional advisers:
CLIVE S. STEELE
Constructional Engineer
LINCOLNE & DEMAINE
Consulting Engineers
W. E. BASSETT
Ventilation Engineer
★
To the Contractors
MESSRS. SWANSON BROS. PTY. LTD.
the Company extends its thanks, and also
to the undermentioned Sub-Contractors:
WAYGOOD OTIS PTY. LTD.
Lift Contractors
W. TOLSON & CO. PTY. LTD.
Electrical Contractors
ATHERTON & SONS PTY. LTD.
Ventilation Contractors
GARDNER & NAYLOR PTY. LTD.
Panel Heating Contractors


A
PHOTOGRAPHIC TOUR
of the
NEW BUILDING


Lower Section of the Facate


The Main Doorway


The Foyer


The Lift Lobby


Historical Plaque in the Lift Lobby,
executed by the Sculptor Wallace Anderson


The Main Chamber


c JJoe Royal Insurance Murals
This panel is devoted to the portrayal of Australian exploration, constructional work
and secondary industry. In the first section Mr. Waller has executed a strongly drawn
figure of Alexander Hamilton Hume, the Australian born explorer who, along with
William Hovell in 18 24, carved out a route from Lake George to Corio Bay. The Hume
Reservoir depicted at the top of the design indicates the point at which the explorers
crossed the Murray River. A later expedition is recalled by a portait of Major Mitchell,
whose journeyings along the Lachlan, Murrumbidgee and the Murray brought him in
contact with the Henty settlement at Portland.
The central figure in the next section is that of Francis Howard Greenway, civil
architect to the Government of New South Wales in 1816. Much could be written
about the many fine projects which Greenway attempted to carry out for the benefit
of the State and which were abandoned by reason of the persistent interference of the
officialdom of his day; but in spite of "red tape” he was able to complete a few notable
works, and for these he will always be gratefully remembered. A portrait of Governor
Macquarie, who was always a staunch supporter of Greenway, is shown in the panel.
A highlight of modern constructional work is strikingly suggested by the muscular
wielder of a pneumatic drill.
Finally, set against a background of smoking chimneys and shipping and transport
scenes, we see the modern business man in a typical attitude—sitting at his desk and
directing by telephone the various activities under his control. To complete the picture
the artist presents us with a figure of an engineer, symbolising the power which turns
the wheels of our great secondary industries.


‘Tainted by Mr. Napier Waller
In this panel Mr. Waller takes us along the path of Australia’s progress in her pastoral,
agricultural and mining industries. Here we see the sturdy figure of John Macarthur,
pioneer breeder of sheep. He is examining a sample of wool and, to judge by his
expression, is making a shrewd calculation of its value. Above him is a steelyard and
fleece, and further into the background an old colonial homestead is faithfully depicted.
The two medals awarded to Macarthur in 1822 by the Society of Arts, London, are also
shown; and a happy thought has led the artist to include a representation of the stencil
used in the branding of the Macarthur wool bales.
The modern contrast to this picture of the early pastoral days is strikingly shown
in the figure of a present-day shearer at work with his power-driven "comb and cutter.”
A finely painted head of a Merino ram symbolises the advance in breeding which has
placed Australia’s wmol in the envied position which it holds to-day in the markets of
the world.
The centre subject of the panel show's a wheat breeder in the act of pollenating an
ear of wheat. This immediately brings to mind the monumental work of William James
Farrer, whose researches in the latter part of the nineteenth century revolutionised the
wheat-growing industry throughout Australia. A portrait of Farrer is seen at the bottom
of this section of the panel along with a head of his celebrated "Federation” wheat.
Another prominent figure portrayed is that of Edward Henty, the best known
member of the Sussex family which did notable pioneering work in Victoria and other
parts of our Continent.
The mining section completes this panel, and is graphically conveyed by a repre-
sentation of the Ballarat Goldfield in the momentous days of the eighteen-fifties.


Entrance to Australian Head Office


Board Room and Manager's Office


Heating Equipment in the Basement


The Tower




DESIGNED AND PRINTED BY
Stuart Taylor Pty. Ltd., Fine Printers
MELBOURNE . AUSTRALIA
