

GEORGII IV. REGIS.
GEORGE THE FOURTH , by the Grace of God, of
The United Kingdom of Great Britain and Ireland,
King, Defender of the Faith, Bsc. Bsc. Bsc.
TO ALL TO WHOM THESE PRESENTS SHALL COME,
GREETING:—
WHEREAS We have taken into Our Royal Consideration the Necessity of
making* Provision for the Maintenance of Religion, and the Education of
Youth in Our Colony of New South Wales ; and for that Purpose have thought
Proper to erect into one Body Politic and Corporate, such Persons as are herein-
after mentioned; and to vest in them and their Successors, such Lands and Tene-
ments as will be sufficient to make a Provision for that Purpose as aforesaid. NOW
KNOW YE, that We have, of Our especial Grace, mere Motion, and certain
Knowledge, granted, and do hereby declare and grant, that Our Trusty and
Well-beloved Lieutenant General Ralph Darling, Our Commander-in-Chief, in
and over Our said Colony of New South Wales and its Dependencies; or Our
Governor or Acting Governor for the Time-being, of Our said Colony; Our
Trusty and Well-beloved Francis Forbes, Esquire, Our Chief Justice of Our
Supreme Court of New South Wales, or Our Chief Justice of Our said Court for
the Time-being; the several Members of our Legislative Council in and for Our
said Colony for the Time-being; the Reverend and Venerable Thomas Hobbes
Scott, the Archdeacon of New South Wales, or the Archdeacon of New South
Wales for the Time-being; Alexander M £ Leay, Esquire, the Secretary of Our
said Colony, or the Secretary for the Time-being of the said Colony; Saxe
Bannister, Esquire, Our Attorney General in and for Our said Colony, or Our
Attorney General thereof, for the Time-being; John Stephen, Esquire, Our
Solicitor General in and for our said Colony, or Our Solicitor General thereof,
for the Time-being; and the Nine Senior Chaplains, or Assistant Chaplains ap-
pointed, or to be appointed, by Us, Our Heirs and Successors, to officiate and
perform Divine Service, according to the Rites and Ceremonies of the Church oi
England, in the said Colony; and their Successors; shall be, and they are hereby
united into a Company, and declared to be a Body Politic and Corporate with
perpetual Succession, by the Name of the Trustees of the Clergy and School
Lands in the Colony of New South Wales; and by that Name shall and maybe
sued, plead and be impleaded; and shall by that Name be Authorised and em-
powered to purchase, take, acquire, hold, and alienate Lands and Hereditaments
within the said Colony.
The Governor arid
others appointed a
Corporation, under
the name of the
Trustees of the
Clergy and School
Lands in the Colony
of NewSouthWales
and empowered to
acquire and hold
Lands in the Co-
lony,


The corporation
Seah with powerto
change it.
The appointment
of President, and*
Vice-President.
Members to hold
appointments dur-
General courts to
be held Quarterly
after advertisement
Special General
Courts may be con-
vened by Adver-
tisement.
General Courts
era powered tomake
Bye-Laws;
pugnanttotheLaws
of the colony;
and to be sub ect
toTppeai. 6 5U Jec
General courts
empowered to ad-
journ.
11. And We do hereby give and grant to the said Company, Power to
have a common Seal, and such Seal, from Time to Time, to break, change, and
alter, as there may be Occasion.
111. And We do further declare and ordain, that the Governor, or
Acting Governor for the Time-being, of the said Colony, shall at all Times, by
Virtue of such Office, be the President of the said Corporation - and that the
Archdeacon, for the Time-being, of New South Wales, or in his Absence, the
Senior Chaplain of the said Colony, shall, by Virtue of such their respective
Offices, be the Vice-President of the said Corporation.
IV. Provided also, and we do further declare, that the several Mem-
bers of the said Corporation shall hold such their Appointments during Our
Pleasure, and shall be liable to be suspended therefrom by the Governor, or Act
ing Governor for the Time-being, of the said Colony, until Our Pleasure be
known, or to be permanently removed and displaced from being Members of
such Corporation by Us, as the Case may require.
V. And We do further will and declare, that the said Corporation
shall, on the first Tuesday which shall be in each of the several Months of
March, June, September, and December, in each and every Year, hold a Gen-
eral Court, or Meeting of the Members of the said Corporation, at such Place
within the said Colony, as the Governor or Acting Governor, for the Time-
being, of the said Colony, shall for that Purpose direct; of which General Court
or Meeting Notice shall be given by Public Advertisement, to be published in
two successive Gazettes or Newspapers, printed and circulated in the said
Colony.
VI. And We do further will -and declare, that it shall be lawful for
the Governor, or Acting Governor, for the Time-being of the said Colony, to
convene Special General Courts of the said Corporation, so often, and at such
Times and Places as occasion may require, provided, that no such Special Gen-
eral Court be held, unlpss Notice thereof be first publicly given in two Public
Gazettes or Newspapers, published in Two successive Weeks as aforesaid.
VII. And We do further will and direct, that at any of such General
or Special General Courts of such Corporation as aforesaid, the said Corporation
shall, and they are hereby authorised and empowered to make such Rules,
Orders, Bye-laws, and Regulations, from Time to Time, as to them shall seem
meet and proper for the good Government of the said Corporation; and for re-
gulating the proceedings thereof; and for the proper Conduct and Management
of the affairs and Business thereof, in all Respects whatsoever, such Rules, Or-
ders, Bye-laws, and Regulations or any of them, from Time to Time, to alter
or repeal, and to make new or other Bye-laws; and all Rules, Orders, Bye-laws,
and Regulations, so made as aforesaid, shall be laid before the Governor, or Act
ing Governor of the said Colony, for his approbation, and being by him approv-
ed, shall be binding upon all the Members of the said Corporation, their Servants,
Workmen, and Agents: provided, nevertheless, that such Rules, Orders, and Bye-
laws, be not repugnant to the Laws of the said Colony, or to any Thing herein
contained; and reserving always to Us, Our Heirs and Successors, the Power at
all Times, to allow any such Rules, Orders, or Bye-laws, although the same may
have been disallowed by the said Governor, or Acting Governor, or to disallow
the same, or any of them, notwithstanding the Approbation or Allowance thereof
by him.
VIII. And We do further will and declare, that it shall and may be
lawful for the said Corporation, to adjourn any such General or Special Court, as
aforesaid, to some future Day, so nevertheless that no such adjourned Court be
held more than three Days after the Time of such adjournment, and that no
such General or Special General Court be continued by Adjournment more than
twice in the whole.


IX. And We do further will and ordain, that it shall he lawful for
the said Corporation, at any such General or Special General Court as aforesaid,
to appoint one or more Committee or Committees of their Number, for the Des-
patch of such Business, as may be specially referred to any such Committee: Pro-
vided that no such Committee shall be appointed for more than three Calendar
Months, nor consist of less than five, nor more than nine Members of the said
Corporation.
X. And We further will and declare, that no General or Special Gen-
eral Court of the said Corporation shall be competent to proceed to the Despatch
of Business, unless seven Members at least be present during the Whole of such
Meeting. And that no such Committee as aforesaid shall be competent to pro-
ceed to the Despatch of Business, unless three Members, at the least, of such
Committee be present during the Whole of the Meeting thereof, nor until such
Committee shall have made choice of a Chairman to preside at the said Meeting.
XI. AND r We do further will and declare, that all Questions, Matters,
and Things, which 'shall be discussed or considered at any General or Special
General Court of the said Corporation, or of any Meeting of any such Committee
as aforesaid, shall be decided and determined by the Majority in Number of
Members present; and the. President of the said Corporation being present at
any such General or Special General Court, shall be entitled to vote thereat, and
in Case of an equal Number of Votes, shall have an additional or casting Vote,
which casting Vote shall, in the Absence of the President, in any such Case as
aforesaid, be given by the Vice-President of the said Corporation: but no Reso
lution shall be 'passed or adopted at any Meeting of any such Committee as
aforesaid, without the Concurrence and Approbation of an actual Majority in
Number of the Persons then and there present. ,
XII. And We do further declare, that it shall be lawful for the said
Corporation, at any General or Special General Court, to be held in Pursuance
hereof, to nominate and appoint, under the common Seal of the said Corporation,
such Clerks and Agents as may be Necessary for conducting the Affairs of the
said Company; and such Appointments, from Time to Time, to revoke and renew
as Occasion may require.
XIII. And We do further declare, that the public Treasurer, for the
Time-being, of the Colony of New South Wales, shall be, and he is hereby ap-
pointed to be, the sole Treasurer of the said Corporation, and that it shall not be
lawful for the said Corporation to appoint any other Person to act as their
Treasurer.
XIV. And We do further declare and direct, that all Bye-laws, Rules,
and Regulations, Orders and Proceedings of the said Corporation, shall be enter-
ed in a Book or Books, to be kept for that purpose; and shall be signed by the
President, or Vice-President, for the Time-being, and that such Book or Books
shall be carefully preserved and kept at the Office of the said Company. And
We do further direct, that the said Corporation shall keep a public Office in some
convenient Place, within the said Colony; and that such Office shall not be re-
moved from the Place in which it may be originally established, except by Vir-
tue of an Order to be made for that Purpose at some General Court of the said
Corporation.
XV. And We do hereby ordain and direct, that the said Corporation
shall, by all such lawful Ways and Means as may appear best adapted for that
Purpose, provide for the Management, Cultivation, and Improvement of all
such Lands as shall be granted to them by Us, Our Heirs and Successors, within
the said Colony; and shall, for that Purpose, hire and employ Farmers, Bailiffs,
Stewards, Agents, Servants, and Workmen, as Occasion may require, and shall
take orders for the Erection of all necessary Farm-houses, and other Buildings, for
the Purposes of Husbandry, upon the said Lands; And We do hereby declare,
that it shall and may be lawful for the said Corporation to sell and convey, un-
der the common Seal, in Pursuance of any Resolution entered into for that Pur-
General courts,
may appoint com-
mittees.
Seven Members
to be present at a
general court, and
three in a commit-
tee, and a chairman
chosen.
Questions to be
decided by majority
General, or spe«
cial general courts,
to appoint clerks &
agents.
Colonial Treasur-
er, to be Treasurer
to the corporation.
Books tobe kept
at a fixed office.
Corporation may
cultivate lands;
and employ stew-
ards, workmen&c.
and erect buildings
&c.
and sell one-third
of the lands in each
county


Treasurer’s re-
ceipt, to l>e sole
discharge for pur-
chase money.
Corporation may
also lease lands.
Rent to be paid
to the treasurer, or
person appointed
by him.
Treasurer to open
an account with the
corporation.
Corporation may
borrow money;
and mortgage one
third of their land
for not more than
50 years.
Charter'to be for-
feited, if an action
for debt is brought
against the corpo-
ration.
pose at any General Court, any Part of the Lands which may be granted to them
as aforesaid, within the said Colony; provided, that in each and every County
erected, or to be erected, within the said Colony, the said Corporation shall re-
tain two equal third Parts, at least, in Quantity and Value of the Whole of the
Lands granted, or to be granted, to them, in every such County.
XVI. Provided also, and We do further declare and direct, that the
Receipts of the Public Treasurer of the said Colony shall be the only good and
effectual Discharge to any Purchaser of any Lands sold by the said Corporation,
for the Purchase-money by him contracted or agreed to be given or paid for, or
in Consideration of any such Lands; and that the whole Amount of all such
Purchase-monies shall be actually paid into the Hands of such Public Treasurer,
to be by him applied to the Use of the said Corporation, and accounted for to Us,
Our Heirs and Successors, in such Manner as We or they shall appoint.
XVII. And We do further ordain and direct, that it shall and may be
lawful for the said Corporation to grant Leases of any of the Lands so granted, or
to be granted to them as aforesaid, for any Term of Years, not exceeding thirty-
two Years, or the Duration of two Lives in being at the Time of any such Demise
in the Whole: Provided always, and We do hereby direct, that the said Cor-
poration shall not in and by any such Leases or otherwise covenant for the Ex-
tension or Renewal of any Term of Years thereby granted, and shall not take or
receive any Fine for or in consideration of, any such Demise, but all and
every the Lands included in any such Demise shall truly and honajide be demis-
ed and let in Consideration of the Rent reserved, and of the Covenants entered
into by the Lessees or Lessee, to whom any such Demise may be so made.
XVIII. And We do further direct and ordain, that the Rent reserved
in and by any such Leases as aforesaid, or which may be rendered and paid by
any Person or Persons for, or in Respect of, any Lands to be holden of the said Cor-
poration, shall be paid and made payable to the said Public Treasurer, for the
Time-being, of the said Colony, as the Treasurer of the said Corporation, or to
Persons to be by him lawfully appointed for that Purpose.
XIX. And We do further ordain, that the said Public Treasurer shall
open and keep a distinct and separate Account with the said Corporation, and
shall carry to their Credit, all and every the Sum and Sums of Money which
maybe by him received, as and for the Proceeds of the Sale of any Part of the
Lands so to be sold and disposed of as aforesaid, or arising from the Rents of
any of the Lands which may be demised or let by the said Corporation; And the
said Public Treasurer shall issue the Money to be received by him, in Pursuance
of such Orders, in Writing, as may be made for that Purpose by the said Cor-
poration, such Orders being always signed by three Members, at least, of the said
Corporation, and by the President, or Vice-President thereof for the Time-being.
XX. And We do further give and grant to the said Corporation, Pow-
er to borrow and take up at Interest, by Way of Mortgage, such Sums of Mo-
ney as may be necessary for the Cultivation and Improvement of the Lands, to
be granted to them by Us, Our Heirs and Successsors: Provided that not more
than One-third of the Whole of the Lands actually granted to the said Corpora-
tion, at the Time of executing any such Mortgage, be included or comprised
therein; it being Our Will and Intention, that two equal third Parts, at least,
of the Whole of the Lands comprised in any such Grant, shall at all Times be
free and exempt from any Mortgage, Charge, or Incumbrance, created by the said
Corporation: Provided also, and We do further declare, that the said Corpora-
tion shall, not be competent to effect any such Mortgage as aforesaid, except for
a Term of Years, not exceeding fifty Years in the Whole, without any Covenant
or Condition for the Renewal or further Extension of any such Term.
XXL And We do further will, ordain, and declare, that the said Corpo-
ration shall not contract any Debt whereby, or by Means or Reason whereof, the
Lands by Us, Our Heirs and Successors, granted to them, or any Part of such
Lands shall or may be seized, levied upon, sold nr taken in Execution, but that if


the Corporation shall ever contract any Debts other than such Mortgage Debts as
aforesaid, which shall remain in Arrear and unpaid six Calendar Months next after
the same shall become due and payable; and if such Debts shall at any one Time
amount to the Sum of One Thousand Pounds Sterling, British Money, in the
Whole; and if any Suit or Suits, Action or Actions, shall be commenced for the
Recovery thereof, then, and from, and immediately after the Time of such Actions
being brought, this present Charter of Incorporation shall be and become forfeit-
ed to Us, Our Heirs and Successors, and shall be resumed and resumable by Us
and them.
XXII. And We do further ordain and declare, that the said Corporation
shall in the first Place apply the Monies-to be by them received, whether the
same shall arise from the Sale of any such Lands as aforesaid, or from the Rents
and Profits of any such Lands, or otherwise from Use and Occupation of such
Lands in and towards the Payment of the Expences of and Attendant upon the
Execution of the several Trusts hereby in them reposed; and especially in paying
the Rent and Hire of their public Office, and such moderate and reasonable
Salaries and Allowances as may by the said Corporation be granted to any
Agents, Bailiffs, Clerks, Servants, or Workmen employed by them, and in defray-
ing all other the necessary Costs, Charges, and Expences, which may be incurred
in and about the Management of the said Estates.
XXIII. And We do further direct and ordain, that the Treasurer of
the said Corporation shall, at the General Court of the said Corporation, on the
first Tuesday in the Month of February in each Year, lay before the said Corpo-
ration an Account, in Writing, of all the Sums of Money received, paid, laid out,
and expended by him, or by his Order, as such Treasurer as aforesaid; such Ac-
count being made out from the first day of January up to the thirty-first Day of
December, both inclusive, in the Year next preceding; and the said Corporation
shall thereupon appoint a Committee for auditing the said Account; before
which Committee the said Treasurer shall produce all his Books, Papers, Re-
ceipts and Vouchers, relating to the said Account; and the said Committee shall
report to the next General Court of the said Corporation upon the said Trea-
surer’s Accounts, when the same shall either be approved, or otherwise, as the
Case may require.
XXIV. And We do further will and ordain, that the Nett Bal-
lance which may appear by any such Account as aforesaid, to be remaining in
the bauds of the said Treasurer on the thirty-first Day of December, in each Year,
after defraying such several Salaries, Allowances, Costs, Charges, and Expences
as aforesaid, shall by the said Treasurer be divided and apportioned into two
equal Parts, for which Purpose the said Treasurer shall open and keep two separ-
ate and distinct Accounts, with the said Corporation; one of which Accounts
shall be called and known by the Name of “ The Improvement and Building Ac-
count;” and the other of which Accounts shall be called and known by the Name
of the “ Clergy and School Account” and one of the two equal Parts into which
such Nett Balance as aforesaid is in each Year to be Divided as aforesaid, shall by
the said Treasurer, be carried to the Credit of each of the two Accounts before
mentioned.
XXV. And We do further will and ordain, that the Money from Time to
Time remaining to the Credit of the said Corporation upon the said Account,
called the “ Improvement and Building Account” shall by the said Corporation
be applied and expended in and towards the making of Roads, Drains, or Fences;
the Erection and Repair of Churches, Parsonages, and School houses; in the
Erection and Repair of Farm-houses, or other Buildings, for the Purpose of Agri-
culture; or otherwise in and towards the permanent Clearing, Settling, and Im-
provement of the said Estates, in such Manner as may be deemed most Expe-
dient in that behalf.
XXVI. And We do further will, ordain, and direct, that the Money
from Time to Time remaining to the Credit of the said Corporation upon the said
Account, to be called “ The Clergy and School Account,” shall by the said Cor-
Application of
monies to payment
of clerks. &c.
Accounts to be
rendered in Febru-
ary, and audited by
a committee.
Balance to be di-
vided into two e~
qual parts.
Application of
“Improvement and
building account
—and of “Clergy
and School ac-
count,”


Stipends of Dig-
nitaries ;
—and of Clergy
—and support of
schools and school
masters.
Application of
surplus.
Clergyman to su-
perintend schools.
Archdeacon to he
visitor.
—and appoint:
—and remove
school-masters,
subject to appeal.
poration be applied and expended in and towards the Maintenance and Support
of the Clergy of the Established Church of England, in the said Colony; and the
Maintenance and Support of Schools and School-Masters, according’ to the Rules,
and Subject to the Conditions, hereinafter in that Behalf prescribed.
XXVII. And We do furtheqordain, that that Part of the Monies which
hereinbefore is directed to be applied to the Maintenance and Support of the Cler-
gy of the said Colony, shall be so applied in 'Manner following, that is to say.
First—ln the Payment of such Stipend or Stipends as may by Us, Our Heirs and
Successors, be granted for the Support of any Bishop or Bishops, Archdeacon or
Archdeacons, within the said Colony; such Bishops or Archdeacons being be-
tween themselves entitled to receive such their Stipends, from and out of the
said Fund, according to their Precedence in Rank, so that no Person of inferior
Rank shall receive any Part of his Stipend out of such Fund, until the Whole of
the Stipend or Stipends of his Superior or Superiors in Rank shall have been paid
in full. Secondly—The said Fund shall be applied in payment of such Stipends
as may by Us, Our Heirs and Successors, be granted to the Chaplains or Clergy
of the said Colony; the Seniors of such Chaplains or Clergy being always entitled
to receive such their Stipends out of the said Fund in full, before any Part thereof
is applied in and towards the Payment of the Stipends of any other of the said
Chaplains or Clergy, who may have been subsequently nominated and appointed
to any such Office.
XXVIII. And We do further will and ordain, that that Part of the
Monies aforesaid, which herein before is directed to be applied in and towards the
support and Maintenance of Schools and School-masters, shall be so applied in
Manner following, that is to say, in and towards the Maintenance and Support
of Schools and School-masters, in any Parish in the said Colony, in Connection
with the Established Church, and under and subject to the Visitation and Controul
of the Bishop, or in his absence,'the Archdeacon for the Time being, of the said
Colony, it being Our Will that, until Provision shall be effectually made for the
Support of Schools and the Education of Youth in Our said Colony, the Balance
of the Funds standing in, to the Credit of the said Account, called “The Clergy
and School Account,” shall be applied, as to two equal seventh Parts, for the Sup-
port of Schools and School-masters; and as to the remaining five equal seventh
Parts, to the Support and Maintenance of the Clergy in Manner aforesaid,
XXIX. And We do further will and direct, that if either of the two
distinct and separate Funds aforesaid shall, at any Time, be more than sufficient
to answer the Purposes to which the same are respectively hereinbefore appro-
printed, the said Corporation shall and may apply the Excess, at their discretion,
to any of the other Purposes before mentioned: Provided always, that the said two
distinct Funds be as far as may be kept distinct and apart, and be severally ap-
plied to the several and particular Uses and Purposes aforesaid.
XXX. And We do further direct and ordain, that the Schools so to be
established as aforesaid shall be subject to the Order, Direction, and Superinten-
dence, and Controul of the Clergyman or Minister of the Church of England, for
the Time being, officiating in the Church of, and belonging to the Parish in which
any such School may be established; and that the Bishop, or in his Absence, the
Archdeacon, for the Time being, of the said Colony, shall be, and he is hereby
constituted and appointed the Visitor of all the said Schools throughout the said
Colony.
XXXI. And We do further declare and ordain, that the Bishop, or in
his Absence, the Archdeacon for the Time being, of the said Colony, shall nom-
inate and appoint the School-masters, who are to teach and instruct the Children
in the Schools so to be established as aforesaid, and such School-masters shall, for
misconduct or other reasonable and sufficient Cause, be liable to be removed from
their Offices by such Bishop, or Archdeacon, as aforesaid, saving nevertheless and
reserving to Us, Our Heirs and Successors, the Right of confirming or disallow-
ing any such appointment or Removal from Office as aforesaid.


XXXII. And it is Our will, and We do further declare, that all and
every the Lands and Tenements within Our said Colony, heretofore appropriated
and set apart by the former Governors of Our said Colony, or any of them, for the
Maintenance and Education of Male or Female Orphans ; and all such Paits of
Our Revenues arising within Our said Colony, as hath by any such Governor been
appropriated and set apart for the Education of Youth theiein; shall be, and the
same are hereby vested in, and placed under the Management, Care and Super-
intendence of the said Corporation, to be by them applied and disposed of in aid
of the Funds aforesaid, in and towards the Education of Youth in the said Colo-
ny, in the Principles of the Established Church.
XXXIII. And We do further grant and declare, that all the Lands
heretofore set. apart within the said Colony, for the Support of the Clergy of the
Established Church, and known by the Name of the Glebe Lands, or by whatever
other Name the same may be known, shall from and immediately after the
Death, Resignation, Removal or other Avoidance of the Chaplain or Clergyman
now in the Occupation and Enjoyment thereof, respectively pass to, and become
vested in, the said Corporation, upon, and under, and subject to the Trusts, and
to and for the Intents and Purposes, herein before declared, respecting the other
Estates of the said Corporation.
XXXIV. And We do hereby give and grant to the said Corporation
full Power and Authority to appropriate any Pieces or Parcels of Land for the
Erection of any Church or Building, or for a Burying Ground, or as the Site of
any School-house or Parsonage, or for the personal Use or Occupation of any
School-master or Clergyman of the Church of England, so as that no such Piece or
Parcel of Land as aforesaid, shall exceed Twenty Acres.
XXXV. And We do further ordain and direct, that the said Corpora-
tion shall once, at the least, in every two Years, transmit to Us, Our Heirs and
Successors, through the Governor, or Acting Governor for the Time-being, of the
Colony, under their common Seal, a written Report, stating and exhibiting a full,
true, and perfect Account of the State and Condition of the Lands, which may,
up to that Time, have been granted to them by Us, Our Heirs and Successors;
and especially setting forth an Account of the Numbers of Acres of Land in each
County, brought by them into Cultivation, with the Mode and Nature of such
Cultivation ; and specifying what Sums of Money have been laid out and expend-
ed in the clearing, or other Improvements of such Lands during the Period to
which every such Report may refer, and the Number and Description of Buildings
erected thereupon; together with an exact Account of the Churches, Parsonage
Houses, School-houses, and other edifices of a public Nature, erected, or in the
Course of Erection, by the said Corporation; with a full and particular Statement
of the Income of the said Corporation, during the Period aforesaid, and of the
Manner in w T hich, and of the Purposes for or towards which, such Income and
every Part thereof hath been applied.
XXXVI. And We do further will and ordain, that it shall be lawful for
Us, Our Heirs and Successors, by any Order to be issued by Us for that Purpose,
with the advice of Our or Their Privy Council, to dissolve and put an End to the
said Corporation, in Case it shall appear to Us, Our Heirs and Successors, with
the Advice aforesaid, expedient so to do; and thereupon all the Lands which may
by Us, Our Heirs and Successors, be granted to the said Corporation, shall revert
and become absolutely vested in Us, or Them, subject to all Mortgages and Con-
tracts for the Sale thereof, lawfully made by the said Corporation, to be held, ap-
plied, and disposed of in such Manner, as to Us, Our Heirs and Successors, shall
appear most conducive to the Maintenance and Promotion of Religion and the
Education of Youth in the said Colony.
XXXVII. And We do further will and ordain, that it shall be lawful
for Us, Our Lleirs and Successors, from Time to Time as occasion may require to
revoke, alter, or vary any of the Provisions, Declarations, and Conditions, or Re-
gulations, herein contained, and in their Place and Stead to establish, institute,
and ordain, -such other further Rules, Orders, and Provisions, for the better Con-
Lands set apart
for Orphans, and
Revenues for Edu-
cation, to vest in
the corporation.
Glebe lands on
death, or Removal,
of present occupant-
to vest iu the cor •
poration,
Corporation may
appropriate land
for the erection of
churches, &c.
Reports to be
transmitted to the
King once “at
least” in two years.
The King may
dissolve the corpo-
ration
—and alter Regu-
lations by Letters
Patent.


—and direct the
appropriation of
surplus lauds.
duct of the Affairs of the said Corporation, or for the better Regulating the Con-
stitution thereof, or otherwise in Respect to the Matters aforesaid, or any of them,
as to Us, Our Heirs and Successors, may seem meet: Provided nevertheless, that
no such Revocation, Alteration, or Variation as aforesaid, and that no such new
Rules, Orders, or Provisions as aforesaid, shall be made or established, except by
Letters Patent, to be issued under the Great Seal of Our said Colony, by the Gov-
ernor, or Acting Governor thereof, for the Time-being, in Pursuance of an Instru-
ment to be to him for that purpose issued by Us, Our Heirs and Successors, under
Our, or Their Royal Sign Manual.
XXXVIII. And We do further will and ordain, that when and so
soon as the several Purposes and Objects aforesaid, shall have been fully and effec-
tually performed and carried into Execution, and when Provision shall have been
made for the religious Instruction and Education in the Principles of the Church
of England, of the Whole of the Inhabitants of the said Colony, it shall and may
be lawful for Us, Our Heirs and Successors, to direct and provide for the Man-
ner in which the several Uses and Purposes upon or towards which such Part of
the Lands so to be granted to the said Corporation as aforesaid, shall be held and
applied, as may not be wanting to carry into Effect the several Purposes before-
mentioned.
WITNESS, Our trusty and well-beloved Lieutenant General Ralph Darling,
Our Captain General and G over nor-in- Chief of Our said Colony of New South
Wales and its Dependencies, and Vice-Admiral of the same, this Ninth Day
of March, in the Seventh Year of Our Reign, and in the Year of Our Lord
One thousand eight hundred and twenty-six.
“ RALPH DARLING,
Governor in Chief.”
By His Excellency’s Command,
ALEXANDER MTEAY.
SYDNEY, PRINTED AT THE “MONITOR” PRESS BY
HILL AND CO.
