

RUGBY
FOOTBALL
IN
NEW ZEALAND.
Its Development from Small Beginnings.
BY W. W. ROBINSON.
With an Introduction by Hamish Stuart.
Reprinted from the “Pall Mall Gazette."
PRICE ONE PENNY.
LONDON
THE "PALL MALL” PRESS, NEWTON STREET, HOLBORN.




RUGBY FOOTBALL
IN
NEW ZEALAND.
ITS DEVELOPMENT FROM SMALL BEGINNINGS.
BY W. W. ROBINSON.
With an Introduction by Hashish Stuart.
Reprinted from the “ Pall Mall Gazette.''
PRICE ONE PENNY.
London:
THE “PALL MALL” PRESS, NEWTON STREET, HOLBORN,




PREFATORY NOTE.
The remarkable achievements of the New Zealand Football Team since
they landed in England last September have created an interest so widespread
that the story of the way in which the game was in roduced into the Colony
and of its evolution /torn the crudest of forms to its present perfected stale
is one that must appeal to all who concern themselves with the handling
cede. Mr. W. IV. Robinson , who has written the narra ive given in the
following page;, spent many of the best years of his life in New Zealand , where
he ua > intimately associated with sport genet ally. In preparing his brief
history , which appeared in the first instance in the columns of the “ Pall Mall
Guzede," he has been aided not only by a retentive memory, but also by a very
complete set of records which he preserved, and there is probably no other
authority who could have written so full and so vivid an account of the
development of football in New Zealand.
“ Pall Mall Gazette ” Office, November, 1905.




SECRET OF THE “ALL BLACKS’” SUCCESS.
BY HAMISH STUART.
Methods have so completely altered, and the standard of comparison
has suffered such a change, that it is impossible, personal predilection apart,
to place in order of merit the great sides, that have made history under both
codes. It is safe to say, however, that no side has made history, or ensured
a permanent place in the annals of the game, with the same dramatic sud-
denness as the New Zealand team now delighting the whole football com-
munity of the Mother Country with their splendidly vigorous, yet highly
scientific, methods of “ playing Rugby.” Their skill, speed, and stamina
were a revelation; they played such a dashing, open, and attrac-
tive game that the sporting heart of England was at once won,
and, as victory followed victory, the long-hoped-for revival
became an accomplished fact, while a revolution in methods seemed
a probable, a new standard of excellence a certain, result of the
tour. It would be easy, of course, to name teams under both codes
whose play and methods have altered the course of football history.
Vassall’s famous Oxford fifteen, Graham’s great Newport side, and the
celebrated Preston North End team of the late eighties are instances in
point; yet none of these teams took the football world by storm as the New
Zealanders have done. Each of the three, it is true, made history. North
End were the pioneers of the great professional movement which has revo-
lutionised the'Soccer world; Vassall’s fifteen and Graham’s Newport side
were the first to introduce those methods of play which completely altered
the whole character of Rugby football. In each case, however, the
changes were slowly accomplished, while it is impossible to say how far
the amelioration in general methods was due to the inevitable law of evo-
lution, how far to the ingenuity of the men who led and the players who
composed these great teams. In any case, the circumstances were not the
same. Preston North End had practically a virgin world to win ; the New
Zealanders had to conquer a world already wedded to the Soccer code—a
world that was not merely enamoured of that game as played by profes-
sional teams, but was prejudiced against the Rugby game. Yet within a
month the world was won, and “ the doings of the New Zealanders ”
took pride of place in public interest and on the “ sporting page ” of all
papers.
Why this wondrous change ? It is not merely due to the fact that the
side are the New Zealanders ; the Canadians are equally dear to us Im-
perially, yet they made no stir, and vyere merely honoured and welcome


guests. Nor is the change to be attributed solely to the sequence of suc-
cesses and the wonderful point-record standing to the credit of the Colonials
at the expense of English club and county sides. The bitter experience of
the past six or seven seasons has, unhappily, so accustomed England to the
defeat of English sides that the New Zealand victories could not in them-
selves account for the intense interest which the tour has aroused through-
out the whole football world. The cause of the change is, nevertheless,
not far to seek. It is to be found in the play of the New Zealanders, who
have made the fullest use of their unique opportunity of proving to the
football community that the possibilities of the Rugby game are not to be
measured by the style of play into which England has sunk during the
past decade; that the game can 'be made as fast, interesting, and attractive
to, and almost as simple to understand by, the average spectator as the
other code; and that the “ Welsh game,” in which the science of Rugby
football was generally believed to have culminated, was not the only system
which ensured open play, and so calculated to gain converts from the
rival code. It is true that one could name International sides (for example,
the Scottish team of 1901 and the Welsh fifteen against Ireland in 1903),
who might have rendered the same splendid missionary service, if circum-
stances had admitted of their undertaking the task; but such sides would
have lacked the name “ New Zealand ” to conjure with. Moreover, they
might not have made the same effort to reach sustained success, or have
taught the same great lesson as to the value of untiring energy as the New
Zealanders have done.
A National Pastime.
What sort of a game, then, do these welcome revolutionaries play?
What is the secret of their success alike in winning matches by big margins
and converts by the thousand? In the first place, it must be pointed out
that Rugby football is essentially the national pastime—the phrase is used
advisedly—of New Zealand. The story of how it became the national
pastime is told in the succeeding pages. Here one merely states the fact,
because it is sufficient in itself to account for the high standard of excellence
which New Zealand players have attained, for when a people adopt a
vigorous, manly game like football as their national pastime, they must be
poorly equipped, mentally and physically, if they do not succeed in playing
the game well and with all their might, especially if their environment
necessitates, or justifies, the concentration of their energy upon this par-
ticular pastime. An historical parallel for the success of New Zealand at
Rugby football is furnished by the story of the Soccer game in Scotland,
Reference is made to the Scottish village teams (Renton, Dumbarton, Vale
of Leven, and others), whose splendid football was so far in advance of
the general standard of the period as to afford the most conclusive evidence
that when the youth of a country adopt football as the national pastime
to the practical exclusion, at least in the rural districts, of all other forms
bf athletic exercise of the communal variety they rapidly acquire a collective
and individual skill and aptitude for the game which, in process of time
would become a racial and hereditary characteristic. Now, the supremacy
of these Scottish village clubs in the old days, when the playing of Associa-
tion football was a pastime and had yet to become a profession, was entirely


due to the fact that football was the national game <rf Scotland, and was
played all the year round. The success of the sides was due to constant
practice, to studying the game, to the fitness which comes of a healthy
life, to keenness, neighbourly rivalry, and the concentration of physical and
mental powers on the proper playing of the game for the sheer pleasure
which the players derived from excelling at their only sport.
Rugby is played with the same exclusive persistence and enthusiasm
in New Zealand as Soccer was in the Scottish villages, while the excellence
of New Zealand football is due to the same causes that made the Scottish
village clubs superior to all others before professionalism put an end to
their supremacy, and, in some cases, to their existence. Nor does the re-
semblance end here. Taking a broad view of the New Zealanders as a side,
their play, mutatis mutandis, recalls the Scottish village clubs. There is
the same earnestness of purpose, the same suggestion that football is
“ their game,” that they are masters of these methods which they have
elected to adopt, and their whole scheme of play, down to the most trivial
detail, is the result of long practice and the most careful study, not merely
of the game as a game, but of their own personal aptitudes—a study under-
taken from sheer love of the pastime and not as a task.
Individualism Dwarfed.
It may be that, as the sons of a pioneer people, for whom “ each dire
inclemency ” is recent knowledge, they may have greater powers of per-
ception and a superior physique than even the pick of our players can
boast; in any case, the first feature that strikes the observer as the New
Zealanders enter the field is the wiry, muscular, “ hard-bitten ” appearance
which they present. They seem framed for football, and one knows in-
tuitively from a single glance at their faces and figures that they play the
game well. A match is not long in progress before one discovers that their
intelligent grasp of its principles has quite as much to do with their success
as have their more obvious physical powers, while the energy which each
man puts into his play is so eloquent of his love of the game that before ten
minutes have elapsed one ceases to marvel at the sustained success which
has crowned their efforts and at the long array of goals and tries scored
against English club and county sides. Curiously enough, the eye is not
arrested by the different “ placing ” of the backs; nor does one notice their
method of forming the scrum, different as both are from the home prac-
tice. Even the wing forward catches only the critical eye, while a brilliant
effort by Wallace or MacGregor, the fast and clever wing three-quarters,
fails to arouse the same enthusiastic tendency towards hero-worship
which a similar effort by an English player would excite. And the reason ?
Once you grasp it you have solved the secret of the success of the New
Zealanders, for the feature of their play that arrests the eye and compels
admiration is the thoroughness with which they play the game as a side.
This thoroughness dwarfs the individual, and, however great he may be
in himself, makes him appear merely a part of a greater whole. There is
no slackness, individual or collective, no pausing to watch a movement
develop—that fatal habit of English forwards and halves; each man on the
side is always doing something that will aid or hinder a movement,
according to circumstances.


“ Backing up ” in the fullest sense is the secret of the success of the
New Zealanders, so far as method is concerned ; it was the secret of the
success of the Scottish team of 1901 and of the Merchiston School team of
the same year—a side who were just as good in their own small way as
the New Zealanders, for they won all their matches without a single point
of any kind being scored against them. To play this sort of game well
a side must, of course, have speed and stamina. The New Zealanders are
so richly endowed with both that they would play any game well. Little
wonder, then, that they play their own game to perfection, and with such
telling effect against sides of mongrel methods, inferior pace, and less
individual excellence.


RUGBY FOOTBALL IN NEW ZEALAND.
A LUDICROUS BEGINNING.
The sensational performances of the New Zealand Rugby Football Team,
which have been recorded week by week since they reached this country,
have led to a desire on the part of the public to learn something of the
history of the game in the Colony which has produced these wonderful
players. As I practically introduced Rugby football into the Province of
Auckland, in 1871, and have ever since been in close touch with the game
out there, I have been asked to give the British public the benefit of my
knowledge and experience. The game was first played in some of the
other New Zealand provinces about the same time, but not earlier—at
least, I never heard of it.
To introduce myself, I may say I learnt my early football at an English
school, where they played Rugby both in “ big-side ” form and in games
with twenty a.side, which was the usual number at that time. That was
when hacking was allowed, and previous to the formation of the English
Rugby Union. Before this was effected I had sailed to Auckland, New
Zealand, little thinking I should ever play Rugby football out there. My
earliest recollection of football in the colony was in 1868, when one day I
went to the Auckland Domain, a public recreation ground, where there was
a Sunday-school feast or something of the sort going on, and I remember
seeing a small black football punted about by a crowd of all sorts, sexes,
and sizes. I have no doubt the schoolboys, and possibly the soldiers, played,
but I never saw them. In 1869 H.M.S. Rosario was lying in Auckland
Harbour, and the late Mr. F. Whitaker, an old Westminster boy, arranged
a match with, I think, Captain Moore. The rules under which this match
was played were of the nondescript sort, no offside, no picking up, no hold-
ing, but shoving over anywhere, anyone, and anyhow. The sailors brought
the goal-posts and the ball from the ship. It ooured with rain, and I was.
never able to find out which side won.
The Emergency Man.
After this game a club was formed, a round ball got from Melbourne,
a return match played with the Rosarios, and the fair city of Auckland had
advanced one step higher, having won her first football match. W. L.
Rees, a cousin of W. G. Grace, was captain, and assisted by the Whitakers,
G. Dunnett, the Hendersons, J. Marshall, J. Coates, and others, formed
the team and played a sort of Association game mixed with Melbourne
rules., As there was a shortness of players in the above match, the man
who acted as coachman and handed round the soup at one of the houses
of a leading citizen was coerced into playing by his young masters, so the
good lady of the house lost her drive and there was no one to wait at table.
When reprimanded, the Irish serving man replied, “ Sure, the young jintle-
min said they wud rather go widout their dinner than be bate by the
Rosarios.” This substitute afterwards turned out a good mile runner,
and the keenness of all showed promise of future success. At this time
the Thames Goldfield was turning out a lot of gold, and the Coromandel


miners, most of them Irishmen, were anxious for a match, so sent a
challenge to play for £2OO. The}' wanted one hundred players on each side,
and to kick from one goldfield to the other. I need only add this match did
not come off.
A Bough-and-Tumble Game.
In 1870 a game was arranged between Auckland and the Thames Gold-
fields, where I was then living, and this was the first match I actually
played in out there. The game in question was a rough-and-tumble one,
and to quote from an Auckland paper, “ The ball was tossed about in the
air from hand to hand amidst a dense cluster of players. A dispute arose
which nearly degenerated into a series of personal combats, because someone
was carrying the ball,” probably an embryo Rugby player. This is how I
came to play in the match. “ I say, can you play football?” said a friend
to me one Saturday morning. “ Well,” I replied, “ I used to play Rugby
in England, and I have played the dribbling game, but I have hardly seen
a football since; besides, I have no football dress and am out of practice.”
I was at the time pretty useful at cricket from a goldfields standard, so my
friend said, “ Oh, vou are keen enough on short runs at cricket, so I
expect you to be out at Tararu at three o’clock.” “ All right,” I said, and
proceeded forthwith to look up a pair of old cricketing trousers, the thickest
jersey I possessed, bought a cloth cap at the nearest hat store, strolled out
to the ground, and there lazily took stock of the players. Most of our side
had been chosen from the stockbrokers in the township. The majority
wore white linen shirts with gold studs, collars, some even waistcoats,
watchchains, and light boots, without a vestige of bar or button. “ What
a licking we shall get,” I muttered to myself; “ these fellows can never
have seen a football.” We were four or five men short, so I was asked lo
walk round among the onlookers and fill up the vacancies. I got two
Irishmen, a Cornishman, a policeman off duty, and a bushman in a ;carlet
shirt and a slouch hat. These “ emergencies ” looked as hard as nails, and so
thev proved. We then went to the captain of the other side to inquire what
rules they played under, and found that they kicked between flags unuer-
neath a tape; there was no offside, but you could run with the ball five
yards and then bounce it and catch it again. This was a Melbourne rule.
I asked our captain where I was to play. “Oh, anywhere about here,” said
he, indicating a sort of three-quarter position, which put me in mind of the
up-country captain in Australia, who, in setting his cricket field, said, “Now,
scatter round, boys.” In front of our goal was a mound, and as we never
changed ends we found it very useful. The game was drawn. Several
times we nearly had a free fight; the Irishmen would trip and hack, and
when remonstrated with, replied, “ Sure it was a nate thrip entoirely.”
Doctors Wanted.
After this match I suggested the adoption of the Rugby code, but no
one seemed keen. Others wanted the Melbourne rules. The next year a
match was played between Auckland and the Goldfields with something
like Association rules. This was a very rough game indeed, but the rules,
such as they were, appeared to be better understood. The match was
drawn, but the casualties were very numerous, e.g. : W. Cussin, knocked
insensible; Bull, two ribs broken ; another player had his teeth knocked
out, and Dunlevy kicked in the groin and taken to the hospital.
Shortly after this I went on a visit to Auckland, and with George
Dunnett, the Whitaker brothers, and others, drafted Rugby rules from
memory; these were supplemented by an old Lilly white’s Guide, which I
have by me now (1865). There were only 33 rules. Some were interpreted
in funny ways by the budding Rugbeian. I had begun to coach my club-
mates, after teaching them to form a scrum, in a room at night, but the
players were few. In 1872 Auckland and the Thames Goldfield met in their


first match under Rugby rules. Only ten a side played. Auckland scored
a try, but as only goals counted this match was drawn. I did not p'ay,
being unable to get away.
THE INTRODUCTION OF WING FORWARDS.
The Rugby game now began to go ahead, and matches were played
every Saturday ip the season at three grounds in Auckland and suburbs.
The schoolboys took to it kindly. A year passed, and I heard of Rugby
being played in the south in most of the large towns, also among the con-
stabulary of Wellington, the farmers of Taranaki, the Scotchmen of Otaga,
while in Canterbury were many old 'English public school boys teaching the
way to drop-kick and scrummage.
In 1874 a full team from Auckland again visited the Thames, and a
good game resulted, as the standard of play had improved. Goals only
counted. I dropped a poster. No tries were scored, and the match was
drawn. In 1873 Auckland had sent a cricket team round the island, and
had won all their matches against the other provinces, which had brought
the northern province into notice very much. I had the honour of being
captain of this team. Many of the leading Rugby players were anxious to
follow in the footsteps of the lovers of the kindred sport, so in 1875 it was
proposed to invade the Southern provinces. This tour was badly arranged.
Many found they could not go, and though I was asked to captain the team
I was obliged to decline; but these players of the days gone by set the ball
rolling, and though they were not successful in winning a single match,
they instituted the exchange of matches between the provinces that' has
continued ever since. The great mistake of the trip was that they played
five matches in a fortnight with only fifteen men, who, when not playing,
were travelling in little steamers, in rough weather, all along the coast.
During this tour the following scoring by points was adopted : A goal 6
points, a try 2 points, a touch-down (called a force down), half a point. So
thus early New Zealand had begun to make alterations. It was found that
with only goals to count games were nearly always drawn.
“ Wingers ” Score Tries.
The year 1876 was a red-letter year in Auckland football. Canterbury
sent a good team up, to be beaten by 7 points to 3, viz., two tries and two
touch-downs to 6 touch-downs. The country members of the Auckland
team arrived overnight, and I was elected captain. I well remember going
round the room and asking the men whom I did not know where they were
in the habit of playing. After a while I found a pair of good halves who
were clubmates, J. Wood and E. Cox, the former having learned his football
at Blackheath. These two players came from the Waikato district. I
played three-quarter back. Among my clubmates was an old Clifton boy,
S. St._ Paul, and at that time the centre forward had to put the ball
down in a scrum if up in time. As very few of this team understood scrum
work I appointed the old Cliftonian to always be up, put the ball down,
and keep the scrum together. I had a fast team, I found, so depended
more on fast dribbling, with running and a little passing, than on solid
scrumwork, as I knew our opponents had a fine forward team, having
been brought up north by the late W. F. Neilson, an old Rugby boy. So,
partly on this account, I played two wing forwards, one an old Association
player, who had played either in or for Surrey, named C. Dacre, and the
other the then amateur hurdle champion of Auckland, J. Nolan. I had
noticed in my school days that wingers were most useful with a fast team
when a side did not want to keep the ball close. Canterbury did not play
wing forwards. My Association winger got a try from my kick-off, and


the hurdle winder got a try in the second spell. Strange to say, vve had
four spells of thirty minutes. The report says it was a fine open game
and very fast. About this time C. B. Mercer, a Wellington College (Eng-
land) boy, appeared. He was a beautiful drop-kick with either foot in
any position, and many a youngster modelled his style on Mercer’s.
Schoolboys Helped the Came Along.
Otago sent a team north in 1877, and won, I think, all their matches
coming up. Reports of their clever passing and fine forward play reached
Auckland, and I feared, as before, there would be no combination on our
side; but by this time I did know most of the men, though they had not
played together as a team. Again I played two wing forwards (J. Nolan
and W- Ring)! seven in the scrum, two halves, three three-quarters, and
one whole back. There had been a great deal of rain, and the ground was
very heavy. The Otago forwards were a fine lot, and pushed our loose
“ scrummers ” all over the place, coming through with the ball at toe
continually, Jimmy Wood and myself getting our hands badly kicked at
half in trying to get the ball out to our backs. Our tackling was very
sure, so we kept them from scoring. In those days each side had an
umpire. T passed a ball through my legs, on being tackled, to our fast
wing man (W. Ring), who ran round and got a try. The umpires could
not agree, one saying the ball had touched the ground, so I gave in to the
other side. Touch-downs did not count in this game. Among the players
were old boys from several English schools—Rugby, Marlborough, Welling-
ton, Clifton, and Epsom. Joe Warbrick, the captain of the native team
that came to England in 1889, made his debut as a provincial player in this
match. Otago did not play wing forwards. The various public school-
boys were helping Rugby along, and the boys at the native schools were
showing they were born players, fine kicks, quick to seize an opening, get-
ting off the mark like a Hutchens or a Duffy, with the swerve of a snipe
and the wriggle of an eel.
A damper was thrown on Rugby about this time owing to the death
of Fred Pilling, who had a habit of running with his head down. In
doing so he came in contact with another player and it resulted in concus-
sion of the spine. In one of the magazines for November there is a capital
article on the present New Zealand team, but the writer makes one mis-
take when he credits the late Tom Ellison with being the originator of the
wing forward game. I knew Ellison, and though a fine wing player, he
did not play on the wing till about ten years after 1876. On referring to an
Auckland football annual of 1887 I find I refereed in a match in which Tom
Ellison was playing for Wellington, the wing players being Jack King
and J. E. Smith. It was after tbis that Ellison elaborated the wing game,
as many other fine players have done since, up to the advent of Gallagher,
the brilliant performer with the present team.
A Visit to England.
In 1880 I had occasion to come to England, and I saw Rugby football
when opportunity offered; but I was not greatly impressed. The best
match I saw was North v. South, I think, at the Oval. There I saw that
fine three-quarter, L. Stokes, A.' N. Hornby, and others, but elsewhere I
often saw the bullocking half-back, and the fat heavy forward, who had
come into fashion with the close packed scrum, apparently to stay, as he
fell down in the scrummage or lay on the ball to get his wind back. He
was the sort of man who could not run a fifty yards’ sprint after a little
pushing, and as I contrasted him with the big wiry fast forward we were
cultivating “down under,” I felt that opinions differed very much as to
how Rugby should be played. Scotland, Ireland, and Wales had not
asserted themselves in those days, and I think the best football was found
n the South, though several of the northern counties had fine playehs.


While I was in England Wellington sent a team up to Auckland, and won
by a dropped goal. Wellington played eight forwards without wings, two
quarter-backs, two half-backs, one three-quarters, and two full-backs. Auck-
land, it seems, copied this formation, with an unsatisfactory result, as the
combined passing of the brothers Berry nonplussed the Northern team,
though both Ring and Arneil had the bad luck to be tripped when tries
appeared certain. Had Auckland played her v’mg forwards I think tiiey
would have upset the quarter back combination. A goal from a try
counted 5, a goal from the field 4, and a try 3, so that in 1880, twenty-five
years ago, New Zealand had arrived where we are now in scoring.
ORIGIN OF THE “FIVE-EIGHTS.”
On my return from England in 1881 I found there was a great difficulty
about obtaining a suitable football ground in Auckland. In the South they
were better off, for there was more flat country available. For a time we
had to play on the Domain cricket ground, but, owing to the top dressing
and gate-money restrictions, of Rugby football had to look
elsewhere. No matches of importance took place in the North, but those
old antagonists, Otago and Canterbury, met, and so did Wellington and
Nelson. Inter-club games were played, and matches with the Thames,
Waikato, and other country districts all helped to improve the general play
and open up new ideas. One or two clubs found that they possessed
runners and try-getters of such exceptional ability that a formation was
required specially to suit them. These players included Billy Ring, Bob
Whiteside, Madigan, and Harry Davy. We began by having two scrum
halves to feed the centre, but this plan did not work satisfactorily, because
the “ terror ” was marked; so we evolved the idea of a scrum half and
two fly-halves. Ten years later the setting was much the same, but the
fly-halves were called five-eights. This formation created plavers of the
Stead, Hunter, and Mynott class, who, instead of always placing ping-
pong, “ cut in ” and go alone, when opportunity offers.
Tha Developm ant of Wing Forwards.
The wing forwards again appeared, and Jack Arneil, who came out as
a three-quarter, became the best wing forward of those early days. He
was an excellent dribbler, with a fine knowledge of the game. He had
many imitators as time went on, and did much to develop wing forward
play at Auckland. The consequence was that all the clubs in the Northern
Province played a fast, open forward game. And so they do to this day,
nearly all playing two wing forwards. In other provinces the “ wing ”
plays in various places. Otago, for instance, uses the winger as a pusher
in the back row, and he breaks away. Wellington’s winger plays where
D. Gallagher does with the present team, no doubt following the lines laid
down by the late Tom Ellison, who played for this Province.
In Otago, the home of the Scotchmen, the fine, heavy scrummager
was in evidence; I don’t mean the fat man, who lay on the ball, but the
man who came through with the ball at his toes, and, with others, dribbled
it in the open—the one to please a Gurdon, Budd, Woods, or Evershed.
Braddon, one of the finest full backs in the colony, guarded the citadel,
having in front of him halves and three-quarters in keeping. In Canter-
bury, the potter at goal and the quick punting half showed how they had
learned their football from the English public school boy who had made his
home in the city of the plains. The neighbourhood of Christchurch was
full of the best kind of sportsmen, who jealously kept their athletics and
games as pure as the best traditions of old England ordained, and the


names of Corfe, Ollivier, Reeves, Wilson, Stevens, Condell, Million, Cot-
terill, and others spoke for themselves. In Wellington the forwards were
of the dashing order; their three-quarters were very fast, and their wing-
forwards after some little time came up to best New Zealand form, while
their scrum halves were perhaps the best in the colony. The list of them
includes H. Roberts, Davy Gage, and last, but not least, F. Roberts, who
is with the present team. In the Wairarapa and Wanganui, players were
much after the Wellington style.
A Cosmopolitan Team.
Taranaki, the land of fine butter, produced players of grand physique,
many of them being sons of large farmers. They were always fit. Their
halves were, and are, noted to this day. From this province came the
flying Jack Hempton, Good, “ Lou ” Allen, that wonderful three-quarter
Alf Bailey, and little Humphries, one of the best scrum halves of his
time. In Auckland there was a mixture of the Britisher, and I think
the amalgamation of English, Irish, Scotch, Welsh, and Continental people
caused ideas to be more cosmopolitan and less conservative. This is the
reason why the northern seaport town departed more from the beaten path
of Rugby in the early days than the other Provinces. Southland has pro-
duced a Jenkins, the Galbraiths, and Stead, who is with the present team,
so is not likely to be forgotten by the future recorders of New Zealand
football. In Hawkes Bay were many Maori and half-caste players quite
in the first class.
In 1882 New South Wales sent over her first team to New Zealand, to
be beaten, but not badly. They lost four and won three matches. The New
South Welshmen played two matches in Auckland. I refereed in both. The
placing of their team was peculiar—six forwards, three quarter-backs, two
halves, one three-quarter, and one full-back. Auckland played seven for-
wards in the scrum, two wing forwards (Arneil and Biggs), three half-
backs, one three-quarter, and two full-backs. The New South Wales setting
rather bothered the Aucklanders in the first half, but in the second the for-
wards scored a goal and a try, and so won by 7 points to 0. A goal from a try
counted 5, a field goal 4, and a try 2. The New South Wales team then
travelled south and played five matches, winning two and losing three. A
month after they returned to Auckland, and, evidently thinking there was
nothing like a change, set their players as follows : ten forwards, one
quarter-back, three halves, and one full-back. Auckland played her usual
seven forwards with two wings, three halves, two three-quarters, and one
full-back. This game was more disastrous than ever to New South Wales,
for it resulted in Auckland winning by 18 to 4 (a dropped goal).
Training.
I had a good deal to do with athletics generally, and in getting our
teams fit for outside matches it was found that long runs and long walks
only made men slow; so we depended more on short sprints, fast passing
with a low, quick two-handed pass, and dribbling rushes in the open. A
long drill-shed was acquired for training at night, and many a possible
representative found how hard it was to kick the ball many times on the
asphalt floor before it got to the other end of the shed. “ Probables ” and
“ Possibles ” played against each other every Saturday for weeks, under
supervision of the management, and would be ordered to play a certain kind
of game and told what to do. The orders would be sometimes reversed,
and the team that won in the first half would find itself beaten in the
second through a change of tactics. For instance, there would be dribbling
v. passing, heeling v. screwing. The weather, the state of the ground,
the peculiarities of opposing teams were all carefully considered.
In 1883 a Rugby Union was formed in Auckland, consisting of only


five clubs, but others soon joined. This Union did good by immediately
sending a team down to the Southern Provinces to beat Canterbury by a
goal and a try to a try. In this match Canterbury played one full-back, three
three-quarters, and two halves, while Auckland played two full-backs, one
three-quarter, three halves, their usual seven in the pack, and two wing
forwards. The Auckland v. Otago match was drawn after a fine game.
Auckland played three three-quarters and one full-back in this match. The
collaring of the Northerners was much admired, but many considered the
forwards used the heeling-out tactics more than was necessary. The Auck-
land v. Wellington match resulted in a dropped goal to each side.
In 1884, more clubs joined the Union, and forty-four matches were
arranged, giving three each Saturday. Unions had been formed in some
of the other Provinces previously, so inter-club matches were played in each.
A team was sent to New South Wales and did not lose a match. The
fine kicking of Ryan and Warbrick quite astonished the New South Welsh-
men. The late W. Million was captain of this team, which contained many
fine players from the various Provinces. In 1886, at a final club game,
about 1,500 people would put in an appearance, while 8,000 would patronise
an inter-provincial contest.
Visit of the Second New South Wales Team,
During this year a second New South Wales team played the various
Provinces, and though not so successful as the first, showed good football
as to form. But Rugby had improved all over New Zealand, and New South
Wales, as a team, were not in the same class as the best fifteens of Maori-
land. Auckland played the usual wing forwards, three halves, two three-
quarters and one full-back. New South Wales played two wings, two
halves, three three-quarters, and a full-back. A very fine match was played
between Auckland and Wellington, the former winning by 4to 2. Welling-
ton played one full back, three three-quarters, two halves, seven in the
scrum, and two wing forwards. Auckland, as usual, played two three-
quarters, three halves, and two wing forwards. Appealing was done away
with in this match, in which I was the referee.
There had been a lot of mismanagement in the Auckland Rugby Union,
but matters were shortly put right by Mr. Dixon, who became secretary
about this time, and, with other enthusiasts, procured a ground in a capital
position. The manager of the present team in England did good work
in those early days that will not be forgotten in a hurry by his contempo-
raries, or be unfelt by those who come after.
In 1887, Taranaki, with a good team, sprang a surprise on Auckland,
and beat them by a try, Jack Hempton, who came to England to run in
sprint events, being the scorer. Taranaki played one full, three three-
quarters, one quarter, two wings, and eight in the pack. Auckland played
their usual formation. At this time Canterbury was affiliated to the
English R.U., who scored differently to Auckland, so, out of deference,
the latter agreed to score as Canterbury wished. The result was a draw.
Canterbury played without wing forwards. Auckland’s fast backs scored
three tries, Canterbury dropped a goal. Otago followed on, and, after
a good match, Auckland won by a goal and two tries to nil. Several good
players appeared this year.
The English and the Native Teams.
In 1888 a powerful British team was brought out by Lillywhite and
Shrewsbury. They won most of their matches, Auckland and Taranaki
alone beating them. Other _ Provinces drew with them, and they
beat Auckland twice. This was a fine, solid combination, and
contained several British internationals, A. E. Stoddart being the
most brilliant. This year a native team went to Australia, and
England, after playing through New Zealand. Their record was a solendid


one, but very uneven. They beat first-class teams and then were beaten
by inferior ones. Their tour lasted twelve months. It was intended that
this should be a Maori team, but it was found that there was a shortness
of backs, and to make matters worse the late Joe Warbrick broke his leg
in the first match against Auckland Province, and, I think, played very
little in England. As he was the captain, this was an unfortunate start.
Four of the best available white players were added, so the team consisted
of twenty-six players—six Maoris, fifteen half-castes, and five whites of
colonial birth. During this tour these natives played one hundred and
eight matches, and only lost twenty-three of them. Ireland was beaten
by 4 goals and a try to a goal and a try, Blackheath by 2 goals and 3 tries
to 1 goal, Somerset by 4 goals and 5 tries to a goal and a try, Dewsbury by
2 goals to nil, Northampton by 2 goals and 4 tries to nil, Midland Counties
by 3 goals and 1 try to nil, Newcastle and District by 4 goals and 2 tries
to nil, Carlisle by 2 goals and 7 tries to nil, Cumberland by 3 goals and 3
tries to nil, Liverpool by 1 goal and 6 tries to nil, and so on. As far as 1
can remember, they lost to England, Scotland, and Wales, and they were
beaten by the strongest Provinces in New Zealand, both before and after
their tour. The late Tom Ellison, a member of this team, on his return
to New Zealand, developed the roving wing-forward very much. He was
a great theorist as well as a fine practitioner, playing a game something
after the style of D. Gallagher, his bumping, shielding, fending, tackling,
and line-out work being very fine. He understood scrum work from lock
to wing, and from hookers to back row. He also wrote a very useful
book on Rugby football, which is, I fancy, rather scarce now.
I have endeavoured to show how the wing-forward game has been deve-
loped by certain players and districts, while others have preferred to follow
other methods. It was practically the same with the three half-backs,
or five-eights and scrum half, while other Provinces preferred the two
halves and three three-quarters. The four three-quarter game has never
“ caught on,” though I sent out the theory of it years ago. The two five-
eights and three three-quarters comprise all I have seen in the four three-
quarters game and a bit more; but perhaps there may be a further develop-
ment of the latter when the “ All Blacks ” get to Wales. We shall see.
SCRUM FORMATION.
In 1890 I came to England to live, and naturally, as a lover of the game,
saw Rugby football played whenever possible, but I have always felt that
if a good New Zealand team could be landed here fit and well, they would
hold their own. I have been looking forward to the arrival of the “ All
Blacks ” for fifteen years, feeling sure they would play Rugby of the kind
that people love to see.
Many provinces had their Unions. Some became affiliated to the English
Union, and I had the honour of representing the Auckland Union as a
delegate until the New Zealand Union was formed, when Mr. Palliser
relieved all other New Zealand delegates of their office. In the early days,
on several occasions I had written to England to get rules made more plain
to the beginner, and to make suggestions, many of which have since been
adopted. It was the custom to have two umpires and a referee. I often
acted in the latter capacity, and frequently found the umpires a great
bother. But as we were loyal to the English Rugby Union we tried to
do as they ruled, though we occasionally read a rule differently. The
present ten yards’ law was one of them. Many young players could not
understand it; they failed to grasp the obstruction part. I went to referee
in a match between Newton v. Alberts, in which Mr. Dixon, the manager


of the present team, was playing. He, of course, knew the rules well,
having learned his football in Yorkshire. It happened on this occasion that
Grafton and Gordon were playing a semi-final and could not agree about
the referee or umpires, so I was sent for. lat once suggested that I should
act alone. This was before the Union appointed the referee. Both agreed,
and everything went well in a fast game, Grafton leading by a try fill
within a few seconds of time, when the ball went into touch. I stood with
watch in hand, whistle in mouth. The seconds fled amid the yells of the
partisans. The second hand clocked the time, my whistle spoke, the ball
left the hand of the thrower-in from touch just too late, was caught by an
unmarked forward at the end of the line, who passed it to a three-quarter,
who dropped a goal. Cheers and counter-yells rang out. I was sur-
rounded by an excited crowd. This matter took some explaining, but the
wing forward who caught the ball was a sportsman and admittedmy whistle
had just beaten the ball. There was much heart-burning over this, and
I think I was never forgiven by the lady supporters of the black and gold;
but such is life.
About 1892 in Auckland one or two of the strongest clubs were getting
all the best young players, and spoilt the club matches. This was not
conducive to the improvement of the game. It was, therefore, decided to
formulate a district scheme, players to represent the district
in which they lived. This acted splendidly. It has been
the means of producing numbers of fine players and keen
competitions. A peculiarity in parts of New Zealand is that many of the
provinces, and even clubs, have banners with their victories worked on
them, often made by the lady supporters of the various clubs. These
banners on a match day are placed near the goal, of course outside the field
of play.
The Two-Three-Two Formation.
When the rule came in force that the referee should put the ball in the
scrum, it was found that the centre man in the front rank was not really
wanted, as without him there were four in the row, counting the two wings,
who sometimes pushed and broke away. So the formation became two-
three-two, with two wings ; but with the exception of the two front-rankers,
afterwards termed “ hookers,” the others locked in where they could. There
were certain men who always tried for the outside of the scrum, while
others “ grafted ” hard in the heart of the pack. As time went on selec-
tors of teams began to realise that it was as important to choose men for
certain places in the scrum as in the back division, so men like “ Buff ”
Caradus, Tom Ellison, Jack Arneil, and Swindley, thought out the possi-
bilities of the formation which has been handed on to the present team, as
shown by Cunningham, Tyler, and others. It was found that a powerful
centre scrummager was needed in the middle row, now called “ the lock,”
to strengthen the body. This is feasible enough. Just watch a three-two-
three scrum. Where does it wobble and bend? In the centre. Then
watch a two-three-two scrum. It may be pushed back, but it will go
bodily or not at all; it won’t bend like a steel rod in the middle. Besides,
two good forwards (the hookers) can manipulate the ball, when fairly put
in, better than three, whether they are to go through, heel out, pass to
wings, screw, or slide off with the ball. Hookers are matched like horses.
I have heard a good hooker remark, “ So-and-so is a fine front-ranker, but
somehow we don’t match, but So-and-so,” speaking of another
“fits me like a glove.” Then there is the powerful “lock,”
whose long strong arms keep the outsiders taut fill the
exact moment when they break away to spoil the opposing fly-half or three-
quarter, or join in a passing rush of their own back division. The two
pushers behind are after them, and many an opposing half or three-quarter


is brought to grass by these perfect tacklers before he reaches the opposing
three-quarter line, while the line-out work of the pusher is very fine, and
their long punts, if necessary, find touch with the accuracy of a full-back.
Between 1890 and 1905 matches were played by the different provinces
with varied fortunes. Auckland had a most successful run for some years
during this period. They owed a great deal to J. Arneil, who was sole
selector for seven years, and during that time never chose a beaten inter-
provincial team. Otago came up in 1896 with a light team and beat
Auckland. Jimmy Duncan, with the present team, was captain, and
played a very clever game. Teams went to New South Wales, who ex-
changed visits occasionally. The New South Welshmen have won a game
or two, but the balance is very largely in favour of Maoriland. Many fine
players have appeared during the last fifteen years. It is needless to men-
tion the members of the present team, who are known to most Rugbeians in
England.
A Maori Greeting.
In junior football it was found the forwards were, as a rule, very light,
so an open heeling-out game became the fashion, with halves close up, who
fed their five-eights and three-quarters. This, of course, made the
wingers more useful than ever as spoilers, but it did away with good
kicking, and really they developed into teams of the fast light class, many
of whom, when tried, were useless as kickers and tacklers in senior foot-
ball. “ Buff ” Caradus and others altered this by a clever scrum formation.
In some of the provinces the habit of playing two wing-forwards was
not considered good, as the ball was frequently put out at the side of the
scrum, and the two opposite wing-forwards were simply spoiling each
other, while the two on the other side of the scrum had nothing to do. The
same thing happened if the ball was heeled out to the scrum half; either
a winger was offside, or the other was pulled up for obstruction, and in-
stead of making the game open it made it slower, so gradually the roving
commissioned wing-forward developed, and became the agile, brainy p’ayer
he must be to succeed. Formations in the various provinces changed at
different times. In Wellington, the Poneke Club has always been noted for
its players and its original ideas. “ Kill danger ” Wallace, I believe, be-
longs to this team. In Otago, until last season, the referee always put the
ball in the scrum. Southland, I fancy, has played very much in the same
way, though their scrum formation often troubled the larger province, which
is next door. Auckland still uses the two-wing formation, without finding
it tend, to slowness.
Letters have been written by New Zealanders and others describing the
present combination as not the best possible. It was picked by the accepted
selectors from the various provinces, and I have had letters from good judges
of the game in the Colony, who all say that it is representative in every
way. That there are scores of good footballers in New Zealand goes with-
out saying, but many good men have been left for reasons unknown to the
outsider. New South Wales has just sent a team to New Zealand which
has not met with much success in the thickly-populated provinces, though
some of the best players are in England. This only shows there is plenty
of talent left behind in New Zealand.
Let me close with the following Maori greeting to the New Zealand
team
“AU AROHA AKARANA. PANGO KIA KAHA! ”
the interpretation of which is :“ I love Auckland. Blacks, be strong! ”


RESULTS OF MATCHES.
Pts. Pts.
.... New Zealand (9g 4t).... 55 .. Devonshire (1 dg) 4
.... New Zealand (4g 7t).... 41 .. Cornwall 0
.... New Zealand (7g 2t).... 41 .. Bristol 0
.... New Zealand (4g 4t).... 32 .. Northampton . 0
.... New Zealand (5g It) 28 .. Leicester 0
.... New Zealand (5g 3t).... 34 .. Middlesex 0
.... New Zealand (2g 2t).... 16 .. Durham (It) 3
.... New Zealand (9g 6t).... 63 .. Hartlepool 0
New Zealand (2g 7t).... 31 .. Northumberland 0
.... New Zealand (7g 3t).... 44 ~ Gloucester 0
. New Zealand (3g 3t) 23 .. Somerset 0
.... New Zealand (3g 2t) 21 .. Devonport Albion (1 pg).... 3
New Zealand (3g 2t) 21 .. Midland Counties (Ig) 5
.... New Zealand (Ig 2t).... 11 .. Surrey 0
.... New Zealand (4g Ipg 3t) 32 .. Blackheath 0
New Zealand (4g 9t) 47 .. Oxford University 0
New Zealand (Ig 3t) 14 .. Cambridge University 0
Nov. 11 .... New Zealand Richmond
„15 .... New Zealand Bedford
„ 18 .... New Zealand Scotland
„ 22 .... New Zealand .. West of Scotland
„ 25 .... New Zealand .. Ireland
„ 29 .... New Zealand .. Munster
Dec. 2 New Zealand England .
„ 6 .... New Zealand .. Cheltenham
„ 9 .... New Zealand Cheshire
„ 13 .... New Zealand Yorkshire .'
„ 16 .... New Zealand .. Wales .
„ 20 or 21 New Zealand Glamorgan
„ 23 .... New Zealand Newport
~ 26 New Zealand Cardiff ;
„ 30 .... New Zealand ; Swansea


Do you know him?
SEE THE
PALL MALL MAGAZINE
£
/
FOR STORIES OF
COMMANDER McTURK
The New CAPTAIN KETTLE.
SIXPENCE MONTHLY.
