



RULES AND ORDERS
TO BE OBSERVED BY THE MEMBERS
OF THE
MOLONG
BENEFIT SOCIETY.
Aalburst:
PRINTED FOR THE SOCIETY BY E. G. WILTON.
1861.
COMMENCED 5TH AUGUST, 1859.


MOLONG BENEFIT SOCIETY.
ARTICLES.
Tin; Members of this Society, which ,is established lor the
purpose of making tv provision for the support of the sick
members thereof, aildTor providing for the funerals of Members,
do agree to conform 'to and abide byhhe following Rules and
Orders ;
I.—That this Society shall meet on the first Saturday in
every month: the horn's of meeting to be from seven to nine
o'clock in the evening, from September to April , ami from -ov
o'clock to eight, from May to August.
ll—That no person be admitted into this Society who is
not believed to be in perfect health, and free from bodily
infirmity at the time of his'applying for admission ; ami should
it be afterwards proved that any member was constitutionally
unhealthy at the time of his entrance, he shall be excluded.
111. That no person be admitted a Member of this Society
unless proposed at a Monthly Meeting by a Tree Member, win
believes him to be a suitable person for admission; and the
person so proposed shall not. he present at the time of In-
nomination. ,If no objection is, made, his admission or rejivtimi
.shall he decided by ballot.
IV. —No member under ten years of age shall he allowed m
vote.


V. —No member shall be eligible for the office of Chairman
or Steward before he is twenty years of age.
VI. —That every person becoming a member, who shall be
under forty-five years of age shall pay an Entrance Fee of six
shillings, and receive a copy of the Rules; and each member
shall afterwards pay one shilling per month. No person shall
be admitted who is above forty-five years of age.
VII. —That no member be entitled to the benefits of this
Society until he shall have paid to the Box eighteen months from
the time of his admission, together with all fines and forfeitures
that he may have incurred since his entrance.
VIII. —Any person entering this Society as a member, and
giving in a false statement of his age, if found out after he has
become a member, shall be dismissed the Society.
IX. —That any Free Member of this Society, rendered in-
capable of working by sickness, lameness, or any infirmity,
(except it be occasioned by his own indiscretion,) shall send a
note to the Chairman, in the following form : —“ I, A. B. of
do hereby declare, that I am afflicted with the (naming
the complaint ), and do hereby claim the benefit in such cases
allowed by the Society, of which lam a Free Member. Dated
the day of 18 .” The Chairman shall forthwith
send a note to the senior Steward, that the person may he
visited, if in the neighbourhood and ft be thought necessary
If the Chairman neglect to send a note, he shall forfeit one
shilling for each day’s delay.
X. —That the allowance of a Free Member entitled to receive
benefit from the Society shall be ten shillings per week, to be
paid at the monthly meeting, commencing from the date of the
note ; and when the afflicted member, is sufficiently recovered to
pursue his usual occupation, he shall send a note to the Chair-
man as follows:— “T,A.B., of do hereby declare off
the fund of this Society, from which I have been receiving
relief. Dated the day of 18 .”
XI. —That members shall be appointed by the Stewards, if
requisite, to visit the sick at any time they or any member
consulting them may think necessary. The Steward, or


Stewards, to give notice to such members as are in the imme-
diate neighbourhood of the sick member to visit him at any
reasonable time. The Stewards neglecting to give proper notice to
members so appointed shall forfeit one shilling for each offence.
The members not visiting according to appointment shall forfeit
one shilling for each neglect of duty.
XII. —That should a visiting member suspect a member
receiving relief to be imposing on the Society, he shall be
allowed (with the consent of the Chairman and Stewards) to pay
a physician or surgeon, as the case may require, for his opinion,
which shall be given in writing; but if the member refuse to be
examined as to the nature and state of his disorder, he shall be
discharged from off the fund; and should it appear evident to
the medical person employed that such member had attempted
to impose on the Society, he shall be excluded.
XIII. —That in order to give every free member an oppor-
tunity of enjoying the benefits allowed in sickness, if any
member shall have received twenty-six weeks’ full pay during
any one affliction, he shall be reduced to half-pay during the
remainder of such affliction; and in order to prevent any abuse
of this article by a member declaring off the fund to avoid com-
pleting twenty-six weeks, with a view to receive full pay again
for a longer period, it is agreed that if any member shall declare
on the Funds again, with the same disorder, within three
months after his declaring off, he shall receive full pay only for
such as will complete the twenty-six weeks, and then be reduced
to half-pay ; nor sliall such member he allowed full pay again,
untill he has been entirely off the fund six months.
XIV. —That if any member reflect on another member for
receiving the benefit of the funds, he shall forfeit five shillings,
or he excluded ; and if any member while receiving relief from
the funds be found intoxicated, performing manual labour, or
doing anything likely to retard his cure, he shall forfeit five
shillings, and his pay be immediately discontinued.
XY.—That any member receiving benefit from the box, and
being a master of servants, he may direct them, but if he do
any laborious work himself during his indisposition, he shall be
fined ten shillings.


XVI. —That if any residing at a distance ..from
Molong he rendered incapable of following his usual employment
by atlliction, he shall send, a notice to the Chairman, in the
form prescribed in article,lX, signed by the medical person who
attends him, when he shall receive the same benefit as at
Molong; provided, his monthly contributions, &c., be regularly
paid, and the aforesaid declarations renewed monthly.
XVII. —That if any member swear,, give the lie, propose to
wager or gamble, use abusive language,- promote a quarrel,
come into the Club iioom intoxicated, or behave in any way
disorderly during the hours of meeting, he' shall forfeit sixpence
for each offence; and if a anember introduce any person not a
member during Club-hours, without the Chairman ami Stewards'"
consent, he shall forfeit sixpence. If an absent member send ii)
his contribution, it must be .brought JL>y another member.
XVIII. —That upon the death of a Free Member, his widow,
if he leave one, otherwise his heir or nominee, shall receive six
pounds on the day of funeral. The friends of the deceased
member to inform the Chairman or Stewards therewith withhi
twelve hours.
XIX. —That every member shall pay one shilling to the box
on a member’s death. Every .member within' three miles of the
residence of a member at his death, shall attend his funeral
with the colours of the Society on his breast; not attending,
he shall he lined five shillings.
XX. —lf any member of this Society shall die before lie be a
Free Member, if lie lias been in the Society nine months,
three pounds shall be allowed to bury him on demand.
XXL—If the Chairman or Stewards call silence three times,
he that refuses to obey shall forfeit sixpence to the box; and
every member refusing to keep his seat during Club-hours shall
forfeit sixpence, unless a proper reason be assigned.
XXII.—Any member objecting to pay the fines inflicted on
him by tiie rules of the Society, and iris subscription money
within the space of twelve months, shall be excluded the
Society.


-.X-Xlir-—ThU Society shall not be dissolved as long as. three
members 1 oppose it.
XXIY.—The Chairman shall hold one hey of the box of the
Society-,- atkl the two Stewards, one key each,
XXV. —When the money in the box amounts to ten pounds,
ft jOktH be forwarded to one of the colonial auks, and deposited
in the nattte-of tli'e Society. ‘ All money drawn from theiunds
wlteVi lodgdll'in the flank, shall be drawn by acheque signed hy
the Chairman and -the two Stewards, which cheque shall be
shoyn at one of the. monthly meetings for the approval of the
members.
XXVI. sfo drink whatever-shall be allowed in the. room
where the Society meets .(except water) during Club-hours.
XXVII. —The annual procession and dinner of this' Society,
shall takff place on the Tuesday in Edster~week. Each member
at the procession shall wear a bow of red and blue riband on
the breast of his coat. Each member shall pay into tiie box two
shillings and sixpence before-eleven o’clock a.m. on the clay of
the procession, to defray the expemtes-of the dinner; any surplus to
go to the benefit of the Society.
XXVIII. —On the first Saturday in August, in each year, the
meetings of this Society shall be removed to any other
house by decision of a majority of the members.
XXIX. —Any free member not paying his subscription-money
fin- six months, at the expiration ot that period, should he le
afflicted, he shall receive fto-benefit- from the Society during such
attack of sickness.
XXX —Any member, being Chairman, absenting himself
from any of the meetings of this Society, without a just came
and due notice given to the Stewards, shall be fined ten
shillings.
XXXI.—Any of the Stewards absenting themselves from any
of the meetings of this Society, without just cause and due
notice given to thfi Chairman,, shall he fined ten shillings.
MOLO.VG lIE-SEHT SOGlßTi’'.


XXXIJ. —Any member absenting himself from any of the
Quarterly Meetings of this Society, without just cause, shall be
fined one shilling.
XXXIII. Any member drunk on the day of the procession of
this Society before dinner, shall be fined five shillings.
XXXIV. —Any member not paying his subscription money
for three months shall be fined one shilling; six months, three
shillings and sixpence; nine months, seven shillings; twelve
months, twelve shillings: or be excluded the Society.
XXXV. —Any member objecting to become Chairman or
Steward, in his rotation, shall be fined two shillings and six*
pence. All fines shall go to the benefit of the Society.
XXXVI. —None but members shall be allowed to enter the
chib-room during the hours of meeting; and at the dinner of this
Society none but members shall be allowed to sit at table.
JOHN C. TAYLOR, Chairman.
JOSEPH PARSLOW, 1
LEWIS RYMER, | Stevvakds -
K. (3. WILTON, PRINTER, BATHURST.
