

A/^327
m w
® ■ ■ <f
® RULES i
%
OP THE
Association for tjjc HcJicf
| ® iOolns anO (Dipbans of ministers ||
OF THE
fflnsbntcrait Chuvtjj of Jltto South Males.




RW7
RULES
OF THE
Association for % Hclicf
®ii)otos antr ©rpljans of |flinistns
OF THE
Ijresbgtmarc €\mxch of |leto South Males.
AS AMENDED, MAT gth, 1898.
$ ajdHStj :
S. E. Lees, Printer and Stationer, 81 Clarence Street.


Association for i\n |lelief
OF
Mihotos aitb #rpjraits of Utiiusfers
OF
f rcsWman (Ehmh of g. S. Males.
£)ireeters:
Rev. R. S. PATERSON. Mr. JOHN CAMERON.
„ G. MacINNES, B.D. „ ALEX. MARTIN.
„ r. McKinnon.
„ T. HILL.
„ D. ELPHINSTONE.
„ w. G. CRANE.
treasurer:
Mr. JAMES LITTLE,
76 Pitt Street,
Sydney.


RULE S
THE ASSOCIATION FOR THE RELIEF
WIDOWS AND ORPHANS OF MINISTERS
OF THE
Presbyterian Church of New South Wales.
As Amended, May 9th, 1898.
1. This Association shall be entitled “ The Title.
Association for the Relief of Widows and Orphans
of Ministers of the Presbyterian Church of New
South Wales.”
prescribed.
2. The Association shall consist of all Ministers Membership,
of the said Church who shall join the same and
continue members thereof in manner hereinafter
3. Every intrant into the Ministry of this Entrance ° f
Church, if he apply within one year after his
induction and is under forty years of age, shall
(subject to Rule 21) be eligible to become a
member of this Association (but any Minister
may be entitled to become a me'mber (subject to
Rule 21) who is over forty years of age, provided |?emiumfor
he pays a Special premium of £5 for every year over age.
or part of a year he is over forty years); and
shall be entitled to all the privileges thereof on


Ordinary his paying at the rate of tive pounds per annum
premium. from the date of his settlement to the thirtieth
day of September next ensuing, and thereafter
an annual rate (payable in advance) of tive
Rates due from pounds. Any Minister joining the Association
induction. a t an y time subsequent to the first year aforesaid
shall pay all rates due from the date of his in-
Presbyteries to duction. Presbyteries are enjoined to give due
give notice, no ti C e 0 f this Rule to every such intrant.
Premiums due, 4. All annual Rates shall be payable by the
members on or before the first day of October in
Fines. each year. And for every month or part of a
month, from that date, wherein such payment is
not made by any member there shall be paid a
Forfeiture of fine of one shilling; and in the event of any
Defaulters. 7 member to pay his annual Rate for a
period of three years, such defaulter shall then
cease to be a member of the Association, and
shall forfeit all right and title to any interest
therein, and shall have no claim to the moneys
or any portion thereof already paid by him.
Terms for Such defaulter may rejoin the Association on
Rejoining. payment of all such arrears of rates and fines
from the date of his default, subject to the con-
sent of the Association specially given in each
case (subject to Rule 21).
Audits. 5. The Treasurer’s accounts shall be duly
audited by two Auditors, appointed for the pur-
Quinquenniai pose by the General Assembly, and there shall
Investigation. be a S p ec i a l investigation into the state of the
fund every five years, at the instance of the
Provision for General Assembly. At every quinquennial in-
Aiteration of yestigation the annuities of the widows and
children shall be increased if the state of the


fund shall warrant it, or be reduced if the safety
of the fund shall render such reduction necessary.
6. The entire amount derived from donations Reserve Fumi.
and bequests shall go to form a reserve fund, to p hc . a] not
be invested at interest. The principal shall in t
no case be infringed upon. upon ‘
7. All moneys arising from the annual rates of
Revenue and
members shall be immediately available for Expenditure,
appropriation, if required, to the ordinary pur-
poses of the fund.
8. The entire amount of Capital and Reserved investments.
Fund shall be invested by the Board in Govern-
ment Debentures, in Mortgages over freehold
property, or in Fixed Deposits with such bank
or public company as the Board may approve of,
in the names of Trustees for the fund, to be
elected by the Board from time to time, subject
to confirmation by the next General Assembly,
such Trustees to be also removable at any time
by the Board, which shall have power to elect Trustees,
new Trustees in room of such as shall have been
removed, or shall have died, subject to con-
firmation by the next General Assembly. All °®^ atloU of
Trustees on their election shall execute a declara-
tion of Trust.
9. The revenue of the fund from the sources directors and
hereinbefore detailed shall alone be liable for Trustees,
claims against the fund. The members of the
Board of Management and the Trustees shall be
exempt from personal liability in regard to such
claims, and in regard to all other matters what-
soever connected with the fund, so long as they
administer the affairs thereof bona fide, and to
the best of their judgment,


Annuity to 10. And any Minister, having interest in the
w i<iow. fund, dying and leaving a widow, there shall be
payable to his widow, should the state of the
fund permit, an annual allowance of not less
Allowance to than thirty pounds, and in the event of his
Children. leaving a child or children under seventeen
years of age, there shall be payable to her an
additional annual allowance of not less than ten
pounds, the latter allowance, however, to cease
on the only or youngest child arriving at that
re age. The annual amount in both cases shall be
Payments. payable in equal quarterly instalments, reckoning
from the first of each of the four following
months: January, April, July, and October.
Provided always that twelve annual rates have
been received from the deceased member. When
this is not the case, the widow shall only be
entitled to a 'three-fourths annuity until the
amount of twelve yearly rates shall be paid up
by the deduction of one-fourth of the regular
annual allowance. But if instead of this annual
deduction the balance due shall be paid in order
to make up the twelve annual rates, the widow
shall from the time of payment be entitled to
full annuity.
Deith of 11. If any member shall die, leaving no widow,
CRiidren! eavillg or if his widow shall decease, any orphan child
or children remaining, being under seventeen
years of age, should there be such, they shall, so
long as they are under that age, but no longer, be
entitled to the same allowance as would have been
payable to the mother on her own and their
for account had she survived; such allowance to be
chosen by 1 paid to such parties for behoof of the children as
Board ' may be chosen by the Board, and the receipt of


the parties so chosen shall be held as a full and
sufficient discharge of the same.
12. In the event of a widow marrying again, of
all claim by her upon the fund shall cease from
the date of such marriage, but the allowance to
which she and her children were entitled before
her marriage shall be paid on behalf of the t 0
children of the deceased member so long as they behaifof
are under the age of seventeen years.
13. A Minister leaving the Colony, or being
deprived of his charge by the Courts of the or deprivedot
Church, notwithstanding, he shall continue to
retain interest.
retain his interest in the Association, and be en-
titled as before, on continuing to make the pay-
ment of the annual rates hereinbefore prescribed,
and otherwise complying with the regulations of
the Association. But such Minister may, at the to re-
discretion of the Board, receive two-thirds of all tirmg
the rates paid by him on giving up all claims to
the benefits of the Society.
14. The affairs of the Association shall be Rectors, and
managed by a Board of eight Directors, four of Election,
whom shall be Ministers, to be elected by
members of the Association from their own
number, and four shall be elders of the Church,
to be elected by the General Assembly. Three Quorum,
members of the Board to form a quorum. Two
of the Directors, one a Minister the other an
Elder, shall retire annually, but shall be eligible Retirement,
for re-election. But in the event of a Director
retiring or dying, the Board may elect another
in the room of such Director to hold office till
the first meeting of the next General Assembly.


ciwfrman anrt° f Th e Board shall appoint its own Chairman and
Treasurer. Clerk, also a Treasurer, who need not necessarily
be a member of the Board; and the Treasurer
Salary of shall be entitled to receive an annual salary of
Treasurer. . ~ , , n i
not more than twenty-five pounds.
Duties of 15. The duties of the Board shall be to order
and see that all rates, subscriptions, collections,
donations, and bequests, or moneys received from
any other source, shall be paid as soon as received
Moneys to be to the credit of the fund, into such Bank as may
Banked. g e determined by the Board, and to direct and
give authority for all disbursements from the
same.
Payments to be No payment shall be made out of the funds,
nia. e ,y c ieqi,e except by cheque, signed by two Directors, and
countersigned'by the Treasurer.
Board Meetings ]g. The Board shall fix the time of its
Time to be held ~ ..
ordinary meetings as it sees fit, but a meeting
shall be held within every three months, and a
special meeting shall take place not less than
two weeks before each annual sitting of the
General Assembly, for the purpose of preparing
a report and financial statement.
Annual Meeting 17. An annual meeting of the members of the
of Members. Association s hall be held on the first Monday
following the day fixed for the meeting of the
General Assembly every year, for the purpose of
receiving the Report of the Board, and transact-
Hid°before be ing other necessary business. The Report, when
General approved, shall be laid before the General
Assembly. A x r ,
Assembly.


18. All differences or disputes which may arise Disputes to be
betwixt the Board of Trustees on the one hand, arbitration,
or any person acting under them, and anyone
claiming to be a participant in the benefits of
the fund on the other, or any person acting for
such, shall be referred to arbitrators appointed
by the General Assembly, such arbitrators to be
persons not beneficially interested. Five indi-
viduals shall be chosen by the General Assembly Appointment
to act in the capacity of arbitrators, three of by
whom shall form a quorum, and in every case of
dispute, whatever award shall be made by the
same, or a majority of them, shall be binding and Award to be
conclusive on all parties, and subject to no appeal bmdmg '
to any Court of Law whatsoever.
19. These rules cannot be changed or amended, ( f f , " e l ’ i 'i d " ients
except with the consent of two-thirds of the
members present at the annual meeting of the
Association, and also with the consent of the
General Assembly. Notice of any proposed
change or amendment must be given to the Clerk
of the Board at least one month before such
annual meeting.
20. If the wife of a member of the Association Re-marriage of
die, and he marry again, such member shall pay gdSimium
to the funds of the Association a premium of one payable,
pound for every year that his own age exceeds
that of his wife, and shall be bound within three
Notice to be
months of his marriage to give the Board of glven -
Directors notice of his marriage in writing, and
of its date, and also the date of his own birth and
that of his wife.
21. Every applicant for membership shall JJgcai exam-
undergo an examination by the Board’s Medical


Adviser, upon whose report the Board may
decline to admit such applicant to membership.
Sanctioned by the General Assembly on Ma,y
9th, 1898.
R. S. PATERSON,
Chairman.
»aml. E. Lees, Printer and Stationer. 81 Clarence-st., Sydney.


ACTUARIAL REPORT.
To the Directors of the Association for the Relief of
Widows and Orphans of Ministers of the Presby-
terian Church of New South Wales :
•Gentlemen, —
I have now the honour to report the result of my
investigation into the assets and liabilities of your
Association as at 31st December last, a period of five years
having elapsed since the date of my last report.
On the present occasion I find that the total number of
contributing members is 66, as against 77 at the date of the
former investigation. There is thus actually a considerable
decrease in the number of contributors, although the total
number of settled Ministers in the Church must be larger
now than it was five years ago. It is, in my opinion, much
to be regretted that so few of those who are newly inducted
to Charges in the Church see fit to become members of a
Fund which offers such manifest advantages to all who join
it, and it is sincerely to be hoped that this state of things
may be remedied in the future. As a matter of fact, less
than half the settled Ministers are members of the Fund.
Of the 66 members, 60 were married, five were bachelors,
and one a widower ; while in 36 cases there were one or
more children alive under the age of seventeen. The
average age of the members was 52, that of the married
ones being 52£, and of their wives 45.
At the date in question there were also 16 widows
drawing annuities from the Fund, as well as one family of
orphan children. This number is twice as large as it was
five years ago. so that the Fund has, during the quin-
quennium, had to bear a much increased strain upon its
resources.
On the last occasion I deemed it advisable, in view of
the falling rates of interest on investments, to assume a
rate of only 4 per cent, in the valuation of the liabilities.
On this occasion I propose to use the same rate, although
the rates actually realised during the past quinquennium
show a decided improvement on those experienced for the
former period. As a matter of fact, the average rate
realised has been £5 11s. per cent, (as against £5 Os. 3d.
at last investigation), or £4 19s. after making allowance


results :
ASSETS.
To Amount of Funds £ s. d.
as per printed
Balance Sheet... 12,016 4 11
[ „ Arrears Due as
per last Annual
Eeport 110 0 0
£12.129 4 11
LIABILITIES.
Widows & Children
cf present M emb’rs
less Value of Con-
Respectfully submitted by
Yours faithfully,
Pitt Street, Sydney, 6th May, 1898.
for the expenses which have been incurred in managing
the Fund. In view of the extent to which the return from
all kinds of investments has fallen off during the last few
years, this result cannot fail to be looked on as highly
satisfactory, and its attainment says a great deal for the
care and skill with which the Fund has been managed.
On the basis above stated I have arrived at the following
By value of Annuities £ s. d.
to presentWidovvs
and Orphans ... 6092 10 O'
„ Value of Prospec-
tive Provision for
tributions payable 4566 14 O'
„ Surplus 1470 0 11
£12.129 4 11
There is, therefore, an apparent surplus of £1470 as at
31st December last,'a result which must be considered as
eminently gratifying, although it is to be noted that it is
about £450 less than that brought out at the last valuation
five years ago. In view, therefore, of the fact that, though
a considerable surplus exists, it seems to be diminishing in
amount, it would be unwise at present to do anything in
the way of increasing the present scale of benefits, and for
the same reason it would, in my opinion, be inadvisable to
decrease the present rate of contributions, or to make them
cease at any given age, unless perhaps it might be provided
that members, after coming on the Aged and Infirm
Ministers’ Fund, should be exempt from further payments.
Nor do I think it practicable to vary the annual rate
to the age of the Minister at the time of entrance,
\3 S Tfinta'S possibly by fixing an additional sum by way of
k’ance fee,” to be paid by such as are over a given age
a either 40 or 45—at date of joining the Fund.
D. GARMENT, F.1.A., F.F.A.




TMy
El 6UO
