

RULES FOR THE GUIDANCE OF RED CROSS
SOCIETY BRANCH COMMITTEES
Issued by Red Cross Headquarters,
N.S. W. Division (Inc.),
Australian Red Cross Society,
39 Pitt Street, Sydney.
Jammy, 1931.




RULES FOR THE GUIDANCE OF
RED CROSS SOCIETY BRANCH
COMMITTEES.
1. A Branch for its establishment requires
a President, Hon. Secretary, Hon. Treasurer,
and not less than six members (this number
may be varied if necessary, with permission of
the Superintendent). Vice Presidents may be
elected by the duly constituted committee.
2. On the formation of a Branch the name
should be submitted to the Superintendent at
Headquarters for approval and registration.
The names and addresses of the office bearers
should be furnished at the same time.
3. The correct designation of a Branch is as
follows; —“ ” Branch,
N.S.W. Division (Inc.), Australian Bed Cross
Society (8.R.C.5.).
4. The emblem of the Bed Cross Society
consists of a Bed Cross of five equal parts on a
white background.
The Society has undertaken to assist the
military authorities in preventing the unautho-
rised use of the emblem of the Bed Cross, and
to this end Branches are requested to notify
the Bed Cross Headquarters of any mis-use of
the emblem which may come under their notice,
OFFICE-BEARERS
AND COMMITTEE.
FORMATION.
TITLE.
EMBLEM.


5. The organization of a Branch should be
directly in charge of a Committee actively
interested in the work of the Red Cross Society,
a non-sectarian, non-political organization, and
broadly representative of the community. The
work of the Red Cross Society is sufficiently
important and extensive to demand the volun-
tary service of the ablest men and women in
the community, and every effort should be made
to enrol new members.
6. A meeting of the Committee should, if
possible, be held monthly, or at stated periods
to he fixed by resolution at the first meeting of
the committee after its establishment.
7. The Hon. Secretary shall keep a Minute
Book and record proceedings of all meetings.
8. Following is the Graduated Scale of
Membership adopted at the Red Cross Con-
ference held in Sydney, 6th to Bth April, 1927 :
ANNUAL MEMBERS Minimum of I/- p.a.
CONTRIBUTING MEMBERS 5/- „
„ „ 10/- „
~ ~ £l/1/- „
ASSISTING „ £2/2/- „
SUSTAINING „ £5/ /- „
SUPPORTING ~ £lO/-/- ~
SPECIAL MEMBERSHIP £25/-/- ~
*LIFE MEMBERSHIP £lOO and over
(NOTE.—With the exception of that marked *, the
other forms of membership are valid for one year only.
No one grade of membership takes precedence over
another —all are accorded equal status in the Society).
Junior Red Cross memberships are distinct
from and should not be confused with the above.


9. Each member of the Branch should
receive a Membership Certificate signed by the
Hon. Secretary. All other receipts shall be
signed by the Hon. Treasurer. In addition the
Hon. Treasurer should issue a receipt to the
Hon. Secretary from time to time for member-
ship fees. These receipts will be retained by
the Hon. Secretary for the purposes of audit at
the end of the year.
10. The Hon. Secretary shall pay all monies
received to the Hon. Treasurer, and an account
shall be opened with the local bank into which
all monies should be paid.
11. The accounts of each Branch shall be
kept in such a manner as to show readily at all
times the exact financial condition of the
Branch, the source of all receipts, and the pur-
poses of disbursements.
12. Where possible arrangements should be
made for cheques to be signed by at least two
office bearers of the Branch,
13. A Badge will be issued to the President,
Hon. Secretary, and Hon. Treasurer. Eor these,
the Branch pays Headquarters 3/9. (1/3 each.)
The Badges then become the property of the
Branch. When the Office Bearer relinquishes
the position the badge is handed in and reissued
to the incoming officer.
14. Enamel Badges may be obtained for
members from Headquarters. They are sold at
cost price—Lady’s 1/3, Gentlemen’s 1/6. No
profit accrues to the Society.


15. The “Annual” membership fee (mini-
mum 1/-) may be retained by the Branch to
meet incidental expenses, including stationery,
postages, etc.
16. In the larger Branches it is preferable
to have printed letter headings, but in the
smaller ones a rubber stamp will suffice. Red
Cross Headquarters will lend a block for print-
ing purposes, or have suitable rubber stamps
made at a cost of approximately 3/9 to the
Branch.
Following is a sample of the correct heading
for stationery ;
The Stamp or
letter headings
should be in red
type.
N.S.W.DIVISION
(INCORPOEARED)
CUMBERLAND BRANCH
Headquarters will be pleased to have stationery
specially printed for Branches at a cost of approx-
imately 14/6 for 100 Envelopes and 100 Letterheads
with blue duplicate.
17. The President, Eton. Secretary and
Hon. Treasurer, should make themselves
acquainted with the Constitution of the
Australian Red Cross Society (8.R.C.5.), and


the Constitution of the R.S.W. Division of the
Australian Red Cross Society (8.R.C.5.), (copies
of which will be supplied from Headquarter s),
and care should be taken to conduct the business
of the Branch within the prescribed limits of
these Constitutions.
18. If the Executive of the Rew South
Wales Division finds that a Branch is violating
the provisions of the charter of the Red Cross
Society, or fails or refuses to follow the regu-
lations of the Executive, or has become entirely
inactive, the official recognition of such Branch
may be withdrawn upon the authority of the
Chairman. Whenever a Branch is dissolved,
either voluntarily or by action of the Central
Executive, all of its funds and property, its
books and records shall be forthwith transferred
and delivered to the Superintendent of the
Society. In no circumstances are any such
funds to be transferred or given to any other
institution or activity.
19. Funds given to the Red Cross Society
are trust funds to be expended for the purposes
within the Constitution of the Rew South Wales
Division, Australian Red Cross Society, and in
accordance with the regulations and policies
prescribed by the Central Executive. Branches
are not authorised to devote their funds to other
organizations or to the erection of buildings,
monuments, or similar projects. It is not
expected that Branches will have a large
permanent surplus of funds, inasmuch as con-


tributions are for the carrying on of current
Red Cross activities.
Nothing in these rules is intended in any way
to prevent members of a Branch, individually
or collectively, from assisting to raise funds for
any other institution or object, but such
assistance should be given (if given) by members
in their individual capacities and not as a Red
Cross Branch or members thereof.
20. Any points on which the committee has
doubt regarding the proper course to pursue to
maintain the policy of the Society or abide by
its Constitution, should be referred to the
Superintendent.
21. Any alteration of the address to which
Branch communications are sent from Head-
quarters should be promptly reported.
22. The financial year commences on the
Ist July and ends 30th June next ensuing.
23. The Annual Meeting of the Branch
should be held between the 30th June and 31st
July or as soon as possible after that date, when
an Annual report and Balance Sheet (duly
audited by the Branch’s Hon. Auditor) should
be submitted for adoption, and the office bearers
for the ensuing year elected.
24. Immediately after the Annual Meeting
the Annual Report and Balance Sheet are to be
forwarded to Headquarters for inclusion in the
Annual Report of the N.S.W. Division. Special
forms are issued from Headquarters each year
for this purpose.


25. Notice of the Annual Meeting of each
Branch shall be published at least 10 days prior
to the date of the Meeting in a newspaper of
general circulation, or if newspaper publication
is not feasible the notice shall be given in some
other effective manner.
26. Upon the formation of a Branch, a
Quota, of which it will be duly advised, will be
allotted. This Quota is merely suggested as an
objective but the Branch will contribute more
or less entirely at its goodwill.
27. In no circumstances should entertain-
ments be given in the name of the Red Cross
in which the Red Cross shares the benefit with
the person or organization providing the enter-
tainment.^
28. An Honour Certificate will be issued
each year to those Branches which contribute
their Quota ; any excess will also be noted on
the Honour Certificate. The Quota is made up
of the following contributions ;
(a) Funds sent to Headquarters towards
the Red Cross Appeal.
(b) Funds raised by the Branch and ex-
pended (per medium of the Branch
Hon. Treasurer) on Red Cross Activi-
ties approved by the Central Executive.
The fund contributing to the Quota are those
raised by the Branch from the Ist July to the
30th of June ensuing.


29. Effective publicity often determines the
success of a Red Cross programme. Each
Branch should arrange to keep the public
currently and regularly informed of all local and
national Red Cross activities. News and human
interest stories are readily accepted by local
newspapers. Information may be given through
public meetings, motion pictures, exhibits, fetes,
publications and through the wide circulation
of The Red Cross Record.
30. Red Cross Headquarters will supply
Ranners, Window Cards, Pamphlets, Post Caids
for calling meetings, Cinema Slides, Collection
Boxes and Red Cross Badges without charge to
any Branch requiring them.
31. Duty stamps are not required on Red
Cross receipts and no exchange is charged on
country cheques.


RED CROSS BRANCH YOUNGER SETS.
The 1930 Red Cross Conference have agreed that it is desir-
able, where practicable, to form Red Cross Younger Sets in
conjunction with Red Cross Branches in the Suburbs and Country,
the following rules have been drawn up (at the request of the Con-
ference), for the guidance of Red Cross Branch Committees
Ihe objects of the Red Cross Younger Set
shall be to assist the Red Cross Rranch in
raising its quota, or in any other way as the
Branch may desire.
The membership fee shall be a minimum of
1/-, the Members of the Red Cross Younger
Sets to automatically become Members of the
Society.
There will be a separate membership badge
for members of Red Cross Younger Sets, which
may be had by the Branch on application to the
Superintendent. The Red Cross Younger Sets
will requisition the Branch for badge require-
ments.
Boys or girls are eligible for membership
after leaving school.
Younger sets shall have control of their funds
until such time as they are called upon by the
Branch to pay them to the Branch for trans-
mission to Headquarters. All funds raised by
Red Cross Younger Sets shall be credited
to the Branch quota. The Branch shall, as soon
as practicable after receipt of funds from the
Red Cross Younger Set transmit them to the
MEMBERSHIP FEE.


Superintendent at the same time notifying the
Superintendent that such moneys have been
contributed by the Red Cross Younger Set.
There shall be a President, Hon. Secretary
and Hon. Treasurer of each Red Cross Younger
Set, and such other officers as the Red Cross
Younger Set may from time to time appoint.
The Branch Hon. Auditor shall he the Hon.
Auditor of the Red Cross Younger Set, and the
accounts of the Red Cross Younger Set shall be
audited not less than once each year.
Care must be exercised that in all matters of
publicity the title “Red Cross Younger Set” be
used.
The Branch shall, on the recommendation of
the Younger Set, appoint not less than one, nor
more than two members of the Red Cross
Younger Set as members of the Branch Conn
mittee. All correspondence relative to Red
Cross Younger Sets to be conducted with the
Branch.
The Bed Cross “Younger Set” shall submit
an Annual Report and Financial Statement to
the Branch after the 30th June each year,
and in time for the Annual Meeting of the
Branch.


Appendix A.
LIST OF OBJECTIVES FOR RED
CROSS BRANCHES.
1. To raise funds for the general purposes of
the N.S.W. Division of the Australian Red
Cross Society.
2. To assist, where necessary, local sick and
disabled ex-soldiers, sailors and nurses.
3. To supplement equipment, food and
clothing at Red Cross Hospitals. Such articles,
for instance, as Pillow Slips, Sheets, Towels,
Pyjamas, etc., are always acceptable at Red
Cross Headquarters.
4. To provide for the Aftercare De-
partments :
Aftercare Department (Women and Children).
New, and good, clean, used clothing of every
description for women, boys, girls and in-
fants. Warm things for tubercular cases—
dressing gowns, woollen stockings, under-
vests and nightdresses, fresh eggs, em-
ulsions, etc., also books and magazines.
Nursing mothers need groats, cocoa, etc.,
and nourishing foods.
Aftercare Department (Men).
New, and good, clean, used clothing of every
description. Fresh eggs or any nourishing
foods for tubercular ex-soldiers or sailors
not able to purchase same.
Note. —All parcels sent by rail and marked
“ Used Clothing ” are carried on rail at quarter
parcel rates, but this concession will only be
granted where the freight is prepaid.


APPENDIX B.
SOME METHODS SUGGESTED FOR
RAISING RED CROSS FUNDS.
The Central Executive commends the
“ Envelope ” system of house to house collections
adopted at the 1928 Red Cross Conference.
In order to assist Branches, Red Cross Head-
quarters will supply full instructions as to
conducting this method of appeal, together with
specially printed envelopes and pamphlets,
without charge to Red Cross Branches.
Other methods which will probably be found
useful are:—
Dances
Bridge Drives, etc.
Motor Car Tours
Picture Palaces
Carnivals
Concerts
Sale of Red Cross Appeal Badges.
Flower Stalls
Collection by Boxes
Golf Tournaments
Tennis Tournaments
Swimming Carnivals
Gymkanas
Launch Excursions
Cabarets
Queen Competitions
Jumble Sales
Produce Market Days
