

RULES
OF THE
NEW SOUTH WALES
VOLUNTEER ARTILLERY.
BY Authority
SYDNEY:
PRINTED BY WILLIAM HANSON, GOVERNMENT PRINTER,
HYDE PARK.
1856.


NEW SOUTH WALES
VOLUNTEER ARTILLERY
The following Rules were passed by a majority of the
Members present, at a General Meeting of the Corps :
1. —That the Corps shall be styled, “ The New South
“ Wales Volunteer Artillery.”
2. —That every Member shall, on joining, register
at the Orderly Room, his residence and place of business
(if any), and shall notify at the same place any change
thereof, not later than three days from the date of such
change.
In every breach of this Rule a fine not exceeding Ten
shillings shall be imposed.
3. That every Member not on leave of absence, or on
the Sick List, shall attend all Monthly Musters, Parades,
and General Inspections.
In every breach of this Rule a fine not exceeding
Five shillings shall be imposed, unless the cause of
absence be previously shewn, to the satisfaction of the
Commandant, or the Senior Officer in command of the
Corps for the time being.


4. That no Member shall absent himself, without
leave, from three consecutive drills.
In every breach of this Rule a fine of One shilling
shall be imposed ; and to this fine a fine of One shilling
shall be added for every drill thereafter from which
such Member may remain absent without leave.
5. —That every Member desiring leave of absence
shall apply for the same, in writing, to the Commandant,
or the Senior Officer in command of the Corps for
the time being.
6. —That leave of absence shall, in every instance, be
considered to cease in the event of any emergency
occurring, or of the issue of any special order for the
assembly of the Corps.
In such events, every Member on leave, so soon as
he becomes cognizant of such emergency or order,
shall use the utmost dispatch to rejoin the Corps.
7. —That every Member shall appear at Drill, or on
Parade, in the Uniform ordered for the occasion.
Members failing to comply with this Rule will not
be considered as present.
8. —That the Non-Commissioned Officers and Gunners
of the Corps shall give the Military salute to all Com-
missioned Officers, when both are in Uniform.
2


9. —That every Member shall appear at Drill, or on
Parade, with his Uniform, Arms, and Accoutrements,
clean and in good order.
In every breach of this Rule a fine not exceeding
Two shillings and sixpence shall be imposed.
10. —That every Member intending to resign shall
give twenty-eight days’ notice, in writing, to the Com-
mandant, or the Senior Officer in. command of the
Corps for the time being, of his intention to do so; and
within seven days after the expiration of that time, shall
return to the Commandant, or Senior Officer, the arms
and accoutrements with which he may have been fur-
nished, at the cost of'Her Majesty’s Government, clean
and in good order.
11. —That the Commandant, or the Senior Officer in
command of the Corps for the time being only, shall
have power to impose fines, in accordance with the
preceding Rules.
Any other Officer, Commissioned or Non-Commis-
sioned, in charge of a Drill or Parade, shall report,
in writing, any breach of the Rules which may occur
during such Drill or Parade, on the day following, to
the Commandant or the Senior Officer, who will then
impose such fine or fines as are authorized by these
Rules.
3


12. —That all fines shall be demanded within seven
days from the day on which the offence occurs for which
they are imposed.
13. —That the Commandant, or the Senior Officer
for the time being in command of the Corps, shall
have full power to reduce or remit all fines which may
be imposed, for the breach of any of the preceding
Rules.
14. —That all fines shall be vested in the Comman-
dant as Trustee for the Corps, and shall be appropriated
from time to time, in such manner as may be directed
by the Members of the Corps, at any General Meeting.
GOTHER K. MANN,
Captain and Commandant.
IQth January, 1856.
Approved and Confirmed—
Government House,
Sydney, 7th February, 1856.
W. DENISON.
