

RULES AND BY-LAWS
OF THE
SYDNEY
Mechanics School of Arts
ESTABLISHED - - MARCH 22, 1833.
Sydney:
F. CUNNINGHAME & Co., GENERAL PRINTERS,
186 PITT STREET.
1871.


0
fik.
\}o2. v
s
r-«- trf'T/‘f s 1
to. +‘*
(s/I'+aA* $) *


RULES AND ET-LAWS
OF THE
SYDNEY
MECHANICS’ SCHOOL OF ARTS.
ESTABLISHED - - - MARCH 1833,
SYDNEY:
F. CUNNINGHAME & Co., STEAM MACHINE PRINTERS,
186 PITT STREET.
1871.




NOTE.
These Rules and By-Laws were revised by the Committee of the
Institution for 1871, and subsequently adopted at a Special
-reneral Meeting of Members held on the 14th September, 1871.
N. D. STENHOUSE,
President.
ERRATA.
. Llbrar J By-Law, sec. 3, fifth line, substitute the figure “ 9 ”
for the figure “ 12.”
Add to sec. 10 the following-" and all books must be returned
to the Library on or before the first mentioned date, or be subject
to the fine as being overdue.”


SYDNEY MECHANICS’
SCHOOL OF ARTS.
RULES.
SECTION I.
PRELIMINARY
Name
1. The Institution shall be called “ The Sydney Mechanics’
School of Arts.”
Objects.
2. The Objects of the Institution shall be the intellectual
improvement of its Members, and the cultivation of literature,
science, and art.
Means.
3. These Objects shall be promoted by the maintenance of a
Library and a Reading Room; the delivery of lectures; the
formation of classes; the encouragement of societies for mutual
improvement and intellectual recreation; the holding of
industrial and fine arts exhibitions ; and by such other means, as
the Committee of Management may, from time to time, deem
advisable.
In whom Property vested.
4: All the property and effects of the Institution shall belong
to and be vested, for the use and benefit of the Members, in the
President, Senior Vice-President, and Treasurer, for the time


being; and no Member shall, as such, have any right of property
whatever therein. Provided that no portion of such property or
effects, (save as hereinafter provided,) shall be alienated or disposed
of, without the consent of two general meetings of Members.
SECTION II.
MEMBERS.
Members.
1. The Institution shall consist of all persons who have been
or shall hereafter be duly admitted as Members, and who
comply with the Rules for the time being of the Institution.
Admission.
2. Any person, desirous of becoming a Member, shall be ad-
mitted, upon payment of the requisite subscription to the
Secretary; subject, hoWever, to the right of subsequent confirma-
tion or disallowance, by the Committee of Management
Subscriptions.
3. The Subscription payable by each Member shall be as
follows, namely,
Life Membership ... ... ••• 0 0
Yearly ~ ... ••• ••• 12 2
Half-Yearly „ *} 10 0
Quarterly „ 05U
How Payable.
4. All Subscriptions shall be payable in advance, and any
Member failing to pay his subscription, within fourteen days after
the same shall°become due, shall thereby forfeit his Membership.
Subscriptions shall be payable on the first of January, April,
July, and October respectively in each year j Membership may,
however, commence at any time.
Cards of Membership.
5. Every Member, on paying his subscription, shall receive a
Card of Membership, which shall not be transferable. The
Secretary or any Member of Committee may require the produc-
tion of such Card, and any person failing to comply with such
request may be excluded from the Institution.


Honorary Members.
6. Any person, who has rendered valuable services to the Insti-
tution, or who is eminent for his attainments in Literature,
Science, or Art, may, upon the recommendation of the Committee,
be elected as an Honorary Member by any general meeting of the
Members, and shall on election be entitled to receive a diploma to
that effect.
Complaints against Members.
7. Upon receipt of a complaint in writing, signed by any
three Members of the Institution, the conduct of any Member as
such, shall be taken cognizance of by the Committee, who shall
investigate and decide upon the same, and, if necessary, award such
punishment by fine, suspension, or expulsion, as they see fit;
subject, however, to such Member’s right of appeal to a general
meeting.
SECTION III.
OFFICERS.
Committee.
1. The management of the Institution, shall he vested in a
Committee, to be elected annually, consisting of a President, four
Yice-Presidents, a Treasurer, and twelve Committeemen.
Auditors
2. There shall also be three Auditors of the Institution, to be
elected annually.
Eligibility for Election.
3. All Members of the Institution, of at least six months stand-
ing, who shall not be subject to the disqualification mentioned in
the next clause, shall be eligible as Members of Committee and
Auditors.
Disqualification
4. Any person deriving pecuniary advantages or emolument
from the Institution shall be disqualified from acting as a
member of committee.
Election how Conducted.
5. The election of the Committee of Management and Auditors
shall be by ballot, and shall be conducted in the following
manner.


An Alphabetical Roll of all the Members eligible for election,
(distinguishing those in office,) shall be prepared by the Secretary,
and placed in the Reading-Room or Vestibule of the Institution,
at least fourteen days prior to the Annual Meeting
Any Member may nominate any other Member, whose name is
entered on such roll, as a Candidate for election, by giving notice
thereof in writing to the Secretary at least seven days prior to the
Annual Meeting: and only those Members whose names appear on
such roll shall be entitled to vote at any such election.
The Secretary shall prepare a list, setting forth the names of
Candidates and their proposers, together with the offices for which
they are nominated ; and such list, when complete, shall be exposed
in the Vestibule, and the names of the Candidates shall also be
advertised on the day of the ballot in two Sydney newspapers.
The ballot shall take place on the day of the Annual Meeting,
under the direction of the Committee, and shall commence, at
4 p.m., and close at 8 p.m.
At the Annual Meeting, three Scrutineers, not being Candi-
dates for election, shall be chosen from the Members present,
and their report showing the number of votes recorded for each
candidate shall be preserved amongst the records of the Institution
until the next Annual Meeting.
The result of the election shall be announced at the Annual
Meeting, or at an adjournment thereof.
Insufficient Nominations.
6. In the event of there not being sufficient nominations, in
accordance with the last Rule, the Committee shall, prior to the
Annual Meeting, supply the omissions: and if there be only
sufficient candidates for any office no ballot will be held with
respect to such office.
Vacancies to be Supplied.
7. In the event of any vacancy occurring during the year in the
offices of President, Vice-Presidents, Treasurer, or Auditors, the
same may be filled up by the Committee, from amongst their
number, until the next Annual Meeting. Other vacancies
in the Committee shall be filled up by them from the Scrutineers’
report, in the order of majority of votes recorded.
SECTION IV.
COMMITTEE OF MANAGEMENT
Monthly Meetings.
1. The Committee shall meet at least once in every month for the
transaction of business Five Members shall form a quorum, the
Chairman being entitled to a casting but not a deliberative vote.


Special Meetings.
2. It shall be competent for the President, for two Vice-
Presidents, or for any three Members of Committee to call a
Special Meeting of the Committee, provided twenty-four hours
previous notice of such meeting be given by the Secretary to
overy Member of Committee.
Annual Report.
3. The Committee shall, prior to each Annual Meeting, prepare
a report for the preceding year; which report shall be exhibited
ror inspection, in the Reading-Room or Vestibule, at least ten days
prior to such Annual General Meeting.
Contents of Report.
4. The report shall amongst other particulars contain :
Ist. The number of Members, who have joined the Institution
during the year.
2nd. The number of Members on the roll, during each quarter
of the year, as compared with the corresponding quarters
of the previous year,
3rd. A statement of the funds of the Institution, with the
items of receipt and expenditure.
4th. A record of the number of Committee Meetings, attended
by each Member of the Committee, during the year.
sth. A statement of the average number of pupils attending
the several classes during the year.
Powers of Committee.
5. The Committee shall have the power to make By-Laws • to
fine, suspend or expel any Member (subject to the right of appeal
to a General Meeting) ; to receive, expend ant) manage the funds ;
to let any part of the Institution; to provide for the
admission of persons who are not Members; to engage and dismiss
all paid Officers; to dispose of any of the old, damaged, or worn out,
books, papers, apparatus or other effects belonging to the Institu-
tion ; to initiate, conduct and defend legal proceedings; and to
transact, generally, all the business of the Institution.
Offices in Committee may be Forfeited.
6. If any Member of the Committee shall resign, or absent him-
self from the meetings thereof, for three consecutive months with-
out sufficient cause, or become otherwise disqualified, his seat shall
be declared vacant, at the next meeting of the Committee.


SECTION V.
TREASURER AND AUDITORS.
Banking Account.
1. The Banking Account of the Institution shall he kept at
such hank as may from time to time he approved of by the Com-
mittee j and all cheques shall he signed by the Treasurer, and
countersigned by the Secretary. ' •
Moneys Received.
2. All moneys received by the Treasurer, Secretary, or any
other person, on behalf of the Institution, shall be forthwith paid
into such Banking Account.
Payments to he Passed by Committee.
3. No payment shall be made on behalf of the Institution,
until authorised by the Committee.
Treasurer's Report.
4. The Treasurer shall, fifteen days at least before the Annual
General Meeting, balance the accounts for the preceding year,
and submit them, with all vouchers, to the Auditors; and the
Auditors, or any two of them, shall thereupon audit the same, and
report the result to the Committee.
Books and Records.
5. The Books of the Treasurer shall be produced, with all
entries duly made, at every Monthly Meeting of the Committee
and all Books and Records shall be open at all times, for inspec-
tion by any two Members of the Institution, who shall give to the
Secretary twenty-four hours’ notice, in writing, stating their wish
for such inspection.
SECTION VI.
GENERAL MEETINGS
Annual Meeting.
1. A General Meeting of the Members shall he held annually r
on the first Tuesday in February, commencing at 8 p.m., for the
transaction of the general business of the Institution, and at this
meeting, the Report for the preceding year shall he presented for
adoption.


Special General Meetings.
2. A Special General Meeting of the Members may, at any
time, be called by a majority of the Committee, or by fifty
Members of the Institution, on a requisition in writing to the
Secretary; and notice of such meeting, stating its objects, shall
be published in two daily newspapers in Sydney, at least ten days
prior to the day of meeting.
Matters to be entertained at Meetings.
3. No motion for winding up the Institution, or for altering,
adding to, or amending any of its rules, or for any other purpose
except motions of course, shall be proposed at any General
Meeting, unless seven days’ previous notice thereof in writing
be given to the Secretary, and a duplicate of such notice be at
the same time posted in the Vestibule of the Institution.
Chairman.
. At every General Meeting, the President, or, in his absence,
one of the Vice-Presidents shall preside ; and in the absence of
the President, and all the Vice-Presidents, the chairman shall
be elected from the members of Committee present.
Voting.
5. At every General Meeting, the voting, except as otherwise
provided in the rules, shall be by show of hands, in the first
instance; but it shall be competent for the chairman, or any six
members, to require a division.


LIBRARY BY-LAWS.
1. The Library shall be open daily from 10 a.m. till 1 p.m., and
from 2 till 8 p.m., Sundays and Public Holidays excepted.
2. Members shall not be entitled to receive any book from the
Library, except upon application, either personally, or by the
production of their cards of membership, to the Librarian or his
assistant.
3. No member shall take from the Library at the same time
more than one complete work, or more than three volumes of the
same Work, except such plans, maps, and references as are bound
separately, and are connected with the contents of the work
(By-Law No. 12 excepted) ; and members shall not be entitled to
more than two issues of books in one week : Provided that any
gentleman preparing Lectures for the benefit of the Institution
may take from the Library, for a given time, such books as he
may require for that purpose.
4. The periods allowed for keeping books shall be as follow :
For ordinary works ... ... ... 7 days
~ periodicals, bound ... ... ... 14 ~
~ ditto, in parts ... ... ... 3 „
„ works labelled as “ New ” ... ... 4 „
If any member detain a work longer than the above periods,
he shall incur a fine at the rate of Id. per day during such
detention, and shall not be entitled to any further issue of books
until such fine be paid.
5. If any member lose, mutilate, or deface any book, he shall
either replace it, or pay the value thereof; such value to be
determined by the Secretary.
6. Any member taking a book from the Institution, except in
the ordinary course of issue, shall be liable to be expelled, and
may be proceeded against as the Committee may determine.
7. None but members of Committee and other officers of the
Institution shall be admitted behind the counter of the Library.
8. Any member may propose books for addition to the Library
on entering the titles, price, and other particulars in a book to be
kept in the Library for that purpose.
9. Life or yearly subscribers shall have the privilege of receiv-
ing one volume or number of any periodical (except works of
reference) in addition to the ordinary issue of books.
10. The Library shall be closed annually from the 15th to the
30tli November inclusive.
By order of the Committe,
N. D STENHOUSE,
Chairman.
NOTE.
For the purpose of facilitating the business of the Library, the Committee
request the Members to furnish the Librarian with a list of books required
by them, together with their Library folio.


READING-ROOM REGULATIONS.
1.
The Reading-room shall be opened at half-past 8 a.m. during
the summer months, and at 9 a.m. during the winter months, and
shall remain open till 10 p.m. every day, except Sundays and
Public Holidays: Provided that it shall be open from 7 p.m. till
10 pm. on all Public Holidays, except Christmas Day and
Grood Friday.
2.
No member shall be entitled to use the Reading-room without
producing his current card of membership if requested.
3.
The monthly and quarterly periodicals shall lie on the Tables
of the Reading-room until the arrival of the succeeding numbers.
Files of the newspapers for the current month shall also be kept
on the Tables. Members attending the Reading-room are expected
to return each newspaper and book, after perusal, to the file or
shelf from which it was taken.
4.
Newspapers shall not be detained more than a quarter of an
hour, nor periodicals more than half an hour, if required by
another member.
5.
No newspaper, periodical, or book shall be taken from the
Reading-room, except by the Librarian or his assistants.
6.
If any member mutilate or deface any newspaper, periodical, or
book, or take the same from the Reading-room, he may be
expelled from the Institution, or otherwise proceeded against as
the Committee may determine.
7. g
No conversation or other conduct tending to disturb the order
of the Reading-room will be permitted Any member offending
against this rule may M forthwith expelled by any officer of the
Institution






