

Fc,zi S'
Australasian CoiiJjqqtfL
RULES
OF THE
AUSTRALASIAN FEDERATION LEAGUE.
Distributed for Information.
The subjoined are the Rules of the Austra-
lasian Federation League (headquarters at
Sydney), and are distributed for information.




RULES
OF THE
AUSTRALASIAN FEDERATION LEAGUE.
i. The name of the League is “The Australasian Feder-
ation League,” and every resident adult citizen of New South
Wales is eligible for membership.
2. The subscription shall be 2s. per annum, without entrance
fee, but donations in aid of the funds may be received in addition
to or apart from subscriptions. The first year’s subscription
shall be due and payable as soon as office-bearers shall have
been eleCled, and thereafter on every first day of July ; and
on non-payment extending over six months from the due date
a person shall cease to be a member.
3. The object of the League shall be to advance the cause of
Australian Federation by an organization of citizens owning no
class distinction or party influence, and using its best energies
to assist Parliamentary aCtion, from whatever source proceeding,
calculated to further the common aim of Australian Patriotism ;
rtb.e_advocatin.ee prom ot in gLaml'after jUTTotTum 1 ei l defending
the Federal Union of Australasia on such lines as may be con-
stitutionally approved by all the Colonies concerned after further
■deliberation and report ny assembled representatives ot each.
4. It shall be among the duties of the League in carrying
out its objeCts to co-operate fully and earnestly with all similar
bodies having the same objeCt; to promote the formation of such
associations throughout the several Colonies ; and to take steps
in due course to unite all such bodies throughout the Colonies
under one organisation with one plan of operations.
5. The Chairman of any meeting of the League, or of any
of its committees, shall, subjeCl to an appeal to the meeting,
decide, if so requested, whether any matter brought up for dis-
cussion is within the scope of the operations of the League.
6. The Mayor of Sydney for the time being shall be President of
the League, unless he declines or ceases to hold the office, and in
any such event the President shall be elected by the Leage at
the Annual General Meeting, or at a Special General Meeting
convened for that purpose either singly or in conjunction with
other purposes.
7. There shall be four Vice-Presidents, two joint Hon. Secre-
taries and Treasurers, a General Council of ninety members,
and an Executive Committee of twelve members to be chosen
out of the General Council.


8. The offices mentioned in the last preceding Rule shall
tenable for a year, or for any unexpired part thereof. They
shall be filled by election, and if a ballot be demanded by ten
members, then by ballot, at the Annual General Meeting; and
if any vacancy occurs between two Annual Meetings, it shall.be
filled by the Executive Committee, who shall appoint a member
of the League to act in the requisite capacity until the then
next Annual General Meeting.
9. The President, Vice-Presidents, and joint Hon. Secretaries
and Treasurers shall be ex'oficio members of the General
Council and of the Executive Committee.
10. No more than two-fifths of the members of the General
Council shall be members of either House of Parliament, and a
member of either House shall not be eligible as a member of
the Executive Committee.
11. The general administration of the League shall be carried
out by the joint Hon. Secretaries and Treasurers, under the
direction of the Executive Committee,
12. The General Council shall be summoned only by order of
the Executive Committee, and only in cases in which the
Executive Committee deems it necessary or highly expedient
to consult with the General Council. The meeting shall be
summoned by circular notifying the business, and any business
not so notified or not consequential on some business so notified
shall not be entertained.
13. The Annual General Meeting of the League shall be held
in the month of July in each year, at a date, hour, and place to
be fixed by the then existing Executive Committee. And at each
such meeting there shall be presented a report of the operations
of this League, and of events of interest in connection with the
Federal movement during the year under review, and also a
balance-sheet showing the financial position of the League.
14. It shall be competent for the Executive Committee at
any time to summon a Special General Meeting of the League.
A Special General Meeting may also be summoned by the
President of his own motion ; and shall be summoned by the
President, or, in his absence, by any Vice-President, on the
written requisition of at least a quorum of members, setting
forth the purpose for which the meeting is required. In every
case the business of a Special General Meeting shall be notified
by advertisement in at least one daily Sydney newspaper.
15. At a meeting of the League thirty members, at a meeting
of the General Council ten members, and at a meeting of the
Executive Committee five members, shall be a quorum. At
every meeting the President, if present, shall take the chair; in
his absence, the senior Vice-President present ; if no Vice-
President be present, then the meeting shall eledt a Chairman..


, i£. If a quorum be not present within half an hour of the
time notified for commencement of any meeting, the senior office-
bearer present shall declare the meeting adjourned to such time
and place as shall seem fit ; and among office-bearers the joint
Hon, Secretaries and Treasurers shall rank after the Vice-
Presidents ; and the General Council and Executive Committee
shall for the purposes of this Rule only not be deemed office-
bearers.
17. The Chairman of any meeting shall be the sole inter-
preter of the Rules and the judge of order at the meeting, and,
except as specified in Rule 5, no appeal from his decision on a
question of order shall be entertained.
18. So far as is practicable, and so far as the Rules and By-
laws of the League do not make express provision, the
Chairman of a meeting shall in deciding questions of order apply
the practice of the Legislative Assembly and the Committees
thereof.
ig. The property of the League, of whatever nature or kind,
shall be vested in the President and Vice-Presidents from time
to time, and they shall be the Trustees thereof. No person shall
retain any interest in or claim to any of the property of the
League after ceasing to be a member thereof.
20. On the application of any Federation League not formed
or having its headquarters in the city of Sydney, such body may
be admitted and affiliated by resolution of the Executive Com-
mittee as a branch of this League ; and thereupon members of
either body shall have all the privileges of membership of the
other of them, and shall be admitted to all meetings to which
members of the same are admissible, on production of the card
of membership.
21. It shall be competent for the Executive Committee to ar-
range with Branch Leagues or other similar bodies for meetings
or conferences in any part of any colony in which any body with
similar objects has been constituted, or is to be constituted at
such meeting or conference; and the Executive Committee may,
if they think fit, nominate any member or members of this
League to represent it at any such meeting or conference, and may
also act on behalf of this League in making any arrangements
for or in connection with the same.
22. Questions of Politics other than that of Federation shall,
to the best of the ability of the Chairman and the members
present, be excluded from discussion at all meetings of the
League ; and at all meetings in which members of this League
are invited to take part, and do participate as such members,
they shall act in the spirit of this Rule. Wilful disregard of
this Rule, or of any part thereof, shall be deemed to be conduct
detrimental to the objects of the League.


■37 f P
'f (jP ' 7 23. A person shall cease to be a member of the League--
(a) Under the circumstances stated in Rule 2 ; (b) By resigna-
tion addressed to the joint Hon. Secretaries and Treasurers ;
(c) By permanently residing outside the limits of Australia,
I asmania and New Zealand ; (d) Upon a resolution passed by
two-thirds of the members present at a Special General Meeting
at which the consideration of his conduct shall be the business;
or part of the business, for which such meeting has been sum-
moned, declaring him to be guilty of any conduct detrimental to
the objects of the League or unworthy of a member of the
League. But the member whose conduct is in question shall
have at least seven days’ notice of the business of the meeting
so far as his conduct is to be in question thereat, and shall, if
present, be allowed to be heard in explanation or defence, before
any such resolution shall be put. And such resolution shall be
open to amendment, by way of excluding the accused member
from meetings of the League, or of members thereof, for any
specified time, or by deprivation of office, or partly in one way
and partly in the other. And if so amended, the resolution
shall not affect the member except so far as it purports to do so.
In case of any cessation of membership (except that specified in
sub-section (d) hereof) the person who has ceased to be a mem-
ber may again qualify for and obtain membership.
. 24. Any meeting may be adjourned by resolution, and no
business not notified for a Special General Meeting (shall be
entertained upon any motion for adjournment thereof. A meet-
may also be adjourned by the Chairman when he is of opinion
that the interests of the League require him to take that step.
25. The Executive Committee may make By-laws in further-
ance of the objects of the League, or of any Rule thereof, or for
the order and regulation of meetings and business. But no
By-law shall have force until it has been printed with the Rules,
26. Copies of the Rules, together with any By-laws, shall at
all reasonable times, and at a price not exceeding cost, be
obtainable by members at the office of the League.
27. These Rules, or any alterations thereof, may be altered
at a Special General Meeting of this League, of which fourteen
days’ notice shall be given.
Adopted by Central League, Sydney,
15th January, 1894.
W. P. MANNING, President.
EDWARD DOWLING, ) Hon.
A. P. CANAWAY, j Secretaries.


FUld
Australasian federation feanue.
Office of Central League :
Xo. 4, Young’s Chambers,
Pitt and Park Streets,
Sydney, Gtii July, 1894.
Dear Sir,
At a meeting of the Executive Committee it was resolved,
in view of the expense attending the publication of the Manifesto
and Test Questions of the League for the forthcoming General
Election, and the proposed printing in pamphlet form of the views
of the heads of the leading religious denominations and other pro-
minent citizens, to invite the members of the Executive Committee
and General Council to contribute the sum of One Guinea each as
their Subscription for the second year of the League, which com-
menced on the Ist instant. If you agree with this proposal, I will
feel obliged by your kindly paying that amount as your Annual
Subsciiption to the Collector, or forwarding it to me at the above
address.
I remain, yours faithfully, v
EDWARD DOWLING ,
Hon. Secretary.


PRINCIPAL RULES.
1. The name of the League is “The Australasian Federation
League,” and every resident adult citizen of New South Wales is
eligible for membership.
2. The subscription shall he 2s. per annum, without entrance fee,
hut donations in aid of the funds may be received in addition to or
apart from subscriptions. The first year’s subscription shall he due
and payable as soon as office-bearers shall have been elected, and
thereafter on every first day of July ; and on non-payment extending
over six months from the due date a person shall cease to he a
member.
3, The objects of the League shall be to advance the cause of
Australian Federation by an organization of citizens owning no class
distinction or party influence, and using its best energies to assist
Parliamentary action, from whatever source proceeding, calculated to
further the common aim of Australian Patriotism ; the advocating,
promoting, and, after its attainment, defending the Federal Union
of Australasia on such lines as may be constitutionally approved by
all the Colonies concerned after further deliberation and report by
assembled representatives of each.
4. It shall be among the duties of the League in carrying out its
objects to co-operate fully and earnestly with all similar bodies having
the same object ; to promote the formation of such associations
throughout the several Colonies ; and to take steps in due course to
unite all such bodies throughout the Colonies under one organization
with one plan of operations.


ftj ) <f L_ I O
r b* I«
PROPOSALS.
That a Bill be introduced in each of the Australian Legislatures
providing for all tire consecutive stages of the following complete
process :
(1.) The people of each Colony to elect, under their popular
Parliamentary suffrage, and without plural voting, a
separate State Convention, to formulate that Colony’s
views of a judicious plan of Federation.
(2.) Each of the Legislatures to elect members to form a
Federal Convention, which shall consider the resolu-
tions of the State Conventions, and shall proceed to
frame a Federal Constitution, in which the views of
the several Colonies shall, as far as practicable, he
harmonised.
(8.) The Constitution to he submitted, by means of
referendum, to the people of each Colony.
(4.) The Constitution, if accepted by a sufficient number
of Colonies, to be forwarded to the Imperial Govern-
ment to be passed into law for the Federation of the
Colonies then or afterwards accepting it.
P.S.—Copies of the Rules and Proposals of the League, and
other • information, may be had on application to Mr. Edward
Dowling, Hon. Secretary, 4 Young’s Chambers, Pitt and Park
Streets, Sydney. Donations are invited towards the expenses attend-
ing the publication of a Monthly Journal and the holding of Public
Meetings to promote the early union of the Australasian Colonies.


Halt
Australasian Jfkration league
( 4^'y,c/'rie-y-,
n 1 ,
d4C- '/& Cl'/'/e44€^
<%,. •
/& de &'M ...
ci o c^-c^.
BUSINESS.
Secretary.


Australasian Jeberatiuu league
c/we-y..
/ay
<2-4* 'dey-Ct-ed/tt/ /# <t//e42t/
&, ~.
/& /se 0-rt
€2'/.. O C4s-C-/£;
BUSINESS.
Secretary.


Australasian Federation League.
To the Hon. Secretaries and Treasurers (Edward Dowling and A. P. Canaway).
Office: No. 4 Young's Chambers,
Pitt and Park Streets, Sydney.
ENROL MY NAME FOR MEMBERSHIP OF THE CENTRAL LEAGUE.
Name
A ddr ess
Subscription enclosed herewith, £
