

RULES & REGULATIONS
ESTABLISHED FOR THE
MANAGEMENT
OF THE
Male Orphan Institution;
COMMENCING FROM ITS
ESTABLISHMENT AT SYDNEY,
ON THE
FIRST OF JANUARY, 181».
SYDNEY:
PRINTED BY G. HOWE, GOVERNMENT PRINTER.
MDCCCXIX.




Rules and Regulations.
Constitution Ist. 'T’HAT this INSTITUTION
and Objects, A shall be denominated and
styled “ The Male Orphan Institution op Ne\T
South Wales.”
2d. That the Objects of the Institution shall be
to relieve, protect, and provide with Lodging, Cloth-
ing, Food, and a suitable Degree of plain Lducation
and Instruction in some Mechanic Art, poor unpro-
tected Male Orphan Children, according to the Scale
and Regulations hereinafter specified.
3d. That the Management of this Institution shall
be entrusted to a Patron, Patroness, and a Com-
mittee of eight Members; consisting of the Lieu-
tenant Governor, the Judge Advocate, theJuDGE
of the Supreme Court, the Secretary to Govern
ment, the Principal Chaplain, the Senior As-
sistant Chaplain of the Colony for the Time being,
John Palmer, Esq. Assistant Commissary General,
and Hannibal M‘Arthur, Esq. (the Gentlemen
forming the present Committee of the Female Orphan
Institution ; and who have agreed in the most liberal
Manner to act in the same Capacity for the new Insti-
tution now established); the Principal Chaplain act-
ing as Treasurer; and the Secretary to Government as
Secretary to the Institution; any three of the Mem


bers of the said Committee forming a Quorum, being
officially assembled with the Knowledge of the other
Members; the Governor being considered the Pa-
tron, and his Lady the Patroness of the Institution.
4th. That the Committee shall meet once every
Quarter, at the School-house at Sydney ; namely, on
the second Wednesday in the Months f of January ,
April, July, and October , of each Year, for the Exa-
mination and Inspection of the Orphans ; the Exami-
nation and Auditing of the Quarterly Accounts; the
Receiving and Examining of Applications for Admis-
sion ; and for the general Interests and Concerns of the
Institution entrusted to their Management; making
always a Quarterly written Report of their Examina-
tion and Proceedings to His Excellency the Go-
vernor, as Patron ; as also submitting to him, at the
same Time, a List of the Names, Ages, &c. of the
Applicants for Admission, for his final Approval;
which Approval must be signified to the Treasurer of
the Institution in Writing previous to any of the Ap-
plicants being received into it. —The Expences of
this Institution are to be defrayed from the same
Monies now paid from the Colonial Revenue for the
Support of the Female Orphan Institution; and
which Fund is henceforth to be styled and denomi-
nated “ The Male and female Orphan Institution
Fund .”
sth. That a Record Book shall be kept by the
.Secretary of the Institution, and carefully deposited
in the Committee Room, in Charge of the Master of
the School, for the Purpose of entering therein the
JRules and Regulations of the Institution now framed


and approved by the Governor, as Patron ; as also
the Names and Ages of the Orphans now admitted,
or that may hereafter be admitted into the Institution;
adding thereto the Names, Designations, and Places
of Residence of the surviving Parents, or Guardians
of the Children ; and carefully noting down the Date
of Admission, Apprenticeship, Discharge, or Death
of each Orphan so admitted ; the Minutes of the
Proceedings of the Committee; and also the Quar-
terly Accounts of the Expences of the Institution,
are all to be entered in the Record Book,
. . 6th. That the whole Number of Chil-
Admission. to be admitted into the Institution,
for the present, shall be limited to Fifty,
7th. That no Child, under seven nor exceeding
Ten Years of Age, shall be eligible for the Institu-
tion, nor be kept there after attaining the Age of fif-
teen Years ; at which Time they are to be appren-
ticed out to properly qualified sober industrious Me-
chanics, to be instructed in some useful mechanic Art,
or as Servants to Farmers and Settlers of good respec-
table Character, at the Discretion and by the Appoint-
ment of the Committee, and not by the partial Selec-
tion of any Applicant.
Bth. That no Child shall be received into the In-
stitution who has both his Parents alive, or even one
Parent capable of maintaining him ; but, if it can be
made perfectly clear to the Satisfaction of the Com-
mittee that such surviving Parent does not possess the
Means of maintaining his or her Child, it shall be con-
sidered as eligible for Admission; and in particular


Cases of Male Children being entirely forsaken and
left destitute by their unnatural Parents, even when
both may be alive, such Children shall be considered
as eligible for and be admitted into the Institution*
but not without positive Proof that such Children
have been left destitute and forsaken by both Parents.
As it may so happen occasionally, that young Male
Children may be left destitute by their unnatural Pa-
rents, under seven Years of Age, such Children are
also to be taken under the Protection of the Institu-
tion, and be supported and maintained from the Funds
thereof, and put out to IN urse, if too young to be taken
into the Institution itself,
9th. When any Person having Charge of a Male Or-
phan, for whose Maintenance no Provision has been
made by the Parents or Parent, considers such Orphan
eligible for Admission into the Institution, he or she
must make Application by Petition to the Committee,
through the Secretary or any other Member, stating
the Grounds on which such Indulgence is solicited,
specifying in the said Petition the Name and Age of
the Child, and the Names of the Parents, together
with the Name and Place of Residence of the Person
who has then Charge of such Orphan; which Petition
is to be submitted to the Committee at its first Quar-
terly Meeting ; and, excepting on very urgent and
pressing Occasions, no Application for Admission
shall be made at any other Time than at the Quarterly
Meeting of the Committee, as herein specified.—lt is,
however, to be clearly understood, as a positive Rule
of this institution, that when a Child is once admitted
into it, the Parents or Guardians of such Orphan are
to have no Controul whatever over him, nor be at Li


berty to remove him from thence, nor from his Ap-
prenticeship, until after he has attained his twenty-
first Year.
10th. That in Cases where a Child to be admitted*'
into this Institution shall have a Parent living, or
Guardian, who would (by the Law of England) be
entitled at any Time to reclaim the Body of the said
Child, the said Parent or Guardian shall, before the
Admission of the said Child, become bound to the se-
veral Individuals of the Committee of the Institution,
their Executors and Administrators, in the Sum of
One Hundred Pounds, that he, she, or they will not
exercise the said Right, but leave the Child to the en-
tire Disposition of the Committee for the Time-being,
according to the express Meaning and charitable Ob-
ject of this Institution, until he shall have attained his
twenty-first Year, or be married, with the Con-
sent of the said Committee.
11th. That the Children of this In-
shall, at the Age of fifteen
Years (or sooner in Case their Growth and Strength
should admit thereof) be bound Apprentices to
pectable Mechanics, or as Servants to Settlers, at the
Discretion of the Committee, for the Term of five,
six, or seven Years, as may be deemed necessary,
according to the Nature of the Trade or Employment
to which they may be apprenticed, or until they shall
be married with the Consent of the said Committee
and that in their Indentures of Apprenticeship shall
be contained a Proviso for determining the Appren-
ticeship upon the Death of the Master or Mistress, or
at the Pleasure of the Committee, to be signified tr


him or her in Writing; in which Cases the Committee
shall apprentice the Child to a new Master or Mistress,
for the Remainder of the Terms of five, six, or se-
ven Years, as the Case may be, or until such Mar-
riage as aforesaid. ' / ■
That on the Children leaving the Institution, each
shall be furnished with a Bible and a Prayer Book.
That in Cases of exemplary good Conduct during
their Apprenticeship, and that the same is made mani-
fest to the Committee, the Boys belonging to this In-
stitution shall each receive a Gift of a Cow , on being
married, as a Marriage Portion, providing the said
Marriage be approved of by the Committee.
jj. 12th. The Diet of the Children admitted'
into this Institution shall be plentiful, but
only plain, wholesome Food, and no Waste therein:
each Child’s daily Ration shall be one Pint of Milk
in the Morning, and one Pint of Milk (or Tea) in the
Evening; one Pound of Bread, and Half a Pound of
Meat, with Vegetables; or, instead of Meat, Rice or
Flour Pudding one or two Days in the Week. —This
Scale of Rations, however, is to be modified, altered,
or increased, according to Circumstances, at the Dis-
cretion of the Committee, on Consultation with the
Master of the Institution.
l3th. The Clothing and Dress
Clothing and Dress. o( , the Children o f tins Institution
is to be suitable to their Condition in Life, econo-
mical, plain, and uniform ; consisting.ot a Blue Cloth
Jacket made to button, and a Pair of Blue Cloth
'Browsers to reach down to the Shoe, for the cold
Season; and Blue Jacket andTrowsers made of light
1 - ' - > * j ‘ a * vi -


Cotton Stuff for the hot Season, with a Cotton Shirt,
Stockings, Shoes, and a Straw Hat for each Boy.
The Clothing thus ordered for the cold Weather is to
be made of Colonial made Cloth , if it can be procured,
in order to encourage that useful Branch of Colonial
Manufacture.
The Straw Hat for such Boys to have a Black
Band round it, as well to strengthen as to make it
look neat. —The Shoes are to have uniform Clasps
instead of Strings to tie them.
• The Number "of Shirts and Pairs of Stockings or
Socks to be furnished to each Boy are to be provided
at the Discretion and by Order of the Committee;
and also the Quantity and Description of Bed Clothes
with which each Boy is to be furnished on his admis-
sion into the Institution.
Education and 14th. The Children of this Institution
instruction, are to be educated only in View to
their present Condition in Life, and future Destina-
tion ; namely, as Mechanics, Farmers, Servants, and
Labourers. They are therefore only to be taught
Reading, Writing, and Arithmetic, so as to be able to
read and understand the Holy Scriptures, and keep
Accounts according to their respective Vocations. —
But they are to be well instructed in making up their
own Clothes, Shoes, and Hats ; for which Purpose a
Taylor, a Shoemaker, and a Straw-hat-maker, are to
be placed permanently at the Institution, to instruct
the Boys in the foregoing useful Branches. —They are
to be well instructed in Baking, Cooking, and all
Species of Household Work belonging to their Sex.
They are also to be worked occasionally in the Gar-
den, and in digging the Ground, as a useful and whole-
some Exercise, and to lit them for Farmers,


Every Morning and Evening the Children shall be
called together to attend in an orderly Manner the
Reading of a Portion of the Holy Scriptures, and a
short Prayer; and, according to their Ages and Ca-
pacities, they shall be taught the Principles of Chris-
tianity according to the Doctrines of the Church of
England.
The School Hours for Reading, Writing, and
Arithmetic, shall be from Nine dCtock in the Morn-
iuo- till Twelve o'Clock at Noon; and from Two to
Five o’Clock in the Afternoon shall be devoted to the
other Branches of Instruction herein already spe-
cified.
On Sundays the Whole of the Children of the In-
stitution shall regularly attend Public Worship at the
Church, clean, and uniformly dressed.
„ 15th. The Members of the Committee
i isce aneous. are requested individually to visit the
Institution, each taking his Duty Month about, in
regular Rotation, for the Purpose of seeing and exa-
mining the Children as to their Health, Comfort, and
Instruction, and ascertaining whether the Rules and
Regulations of the Institution are strictly enforced \
and pointing out to the Master any Neglect or Defect
there may appear to them to exist in the Feeding,
Clothing, and Instruction of the Children, or in the
general Management of the Institution.
16. That the First Day of January in every Year,
being the Anniversary of the Foundation of the In-
stitution by Governor Macquarie, the Members
and Friends of the Institution shall assemble at the
Church of St. Philip, in the Town of Sydney, to
hear Divine Service, and an occasional Sermon


from the Reverend Chaplains and Assistant Chap-
lains of the Colony in Rotation, to he appointed by
the Governor ; after which the Children of the
School shall be publicly examined in the Church Ca-
techism and the New Testament by the Preacher ;
when the Committee shall award one or more Silver
Medals to the best Reader, Writer, and Arithme-
tician, to be presented by the Hand of the Patron or
Patroness, and to be worn by the Child during the
Ypar.
After the Examination is over and the Medals
delivered, the Children are to walk in Procession
from the Church through the principal Streets ot the
Town, headed by the Master and Usher, and accom-
panied by such Persons as have been educated at
this Institution, and who choose to form Part of the
Procession.
17th. The Children of the Institution are fre-
quently to be taken out to Walk in the Cool of the
Evening, with the View to their Health and whole-
some Exercise, but always to be attended by the
Master or Usher. . c
The Children are also to be bathed in the Sea at
least twice every Week throughout the Year; namely,
on Wednesdays and Saturdays, at such Hours as the
Master shall think proper to direct; himself or the
Usher attending to see the Children bathed, and to
conduct them out and Home.
18th. That as the Committee cannot conveniently
be assembled on the Hay herein prescribed for the
current Quarter, on Account of the Absence of some
of the Members on public Duty, it is to meet on


atty other Day in the ensuing Month , most convenient
for the Members themselves, for taking into Conside-
ration the Concerns of the Institution, and for fram-
ing such internal Regulations for its Management as
they may deem expedient.
19th. The following are the Names of the Patron,
Patroness, and Committee appointed for the present
Management of the Male Orphan Institution ;
namely,
Patron—Governor Macquarie;
Patroness—Mrs. Macquarie.
committee.
His Honor Lieutenant Governor Erskine ;
The Honorable Mr. Judge Advocate Wylde ;
The Honorable Mr. Justice Field ;
J. T. Campbell, Esq. Secretary to Government;
The Rev. Samuel Marsden, Principal Chaplain ;
The Rev. Wm. Cowper, Senior Assistant Chaplain ;
John Palmer, Esq. Assistant Commisary General •
Hannibal MSArthur, Esq. J. P,
John Thomas Campbell, Esq. to be Secretary; and
the Rev. Samuel Marsden to be Treasurer, of th 6
Institution.
20tb, The foregoing Rules and Regulations are
to be printed, and the Patron, Patroness, and each of


the Members of the Committee, are to be furnished
with a printed Copy of them, for their Information
and Guidance.
Given under my Hand, at Government House ,
Sydney, this Ist Day of January, 1819.
“ Lachlan Macquarie.”
By Command of His Excellency the Governor,
, John Thomas Campbell, Secretary.
Sydney: Printed by G. Howe,
Government Printer .




[Macquarie’s] Rules & Regulations Established for the
Management of the Male Orphan Institution; Commencing
from its Establishment at Sydney on the First of January,
1819, title and eleven pages, sin, Bvo, unbound (portion
of blank margin of one leaf cut away), Sydney: printed
by G. Howe, Government Printer, 1819.
Inscribed on the title is the following;- "For the Revd.
Richd. Hill, Asst. Chaplain", while on page 11 is a
manuscript list of "New Members added". There are eleven
names in all, eight being dated September 18th 1820, one
Ifoay 6th 1820 and the other two March l?th 1821, Among
these names are the Rev. Richard Hill, John Piper,
John Oxley the explorer, and F. Goulbum,
The Institution was formed by Govenor Lachlan Macquarie,
with himself as Patron, Mrs, Macquarie as Patroness and a
Committee of eight of which the Rev. Samuel Marsden, the
principal chaplain, was the first Treasurer.
These "Rules” be ng intended for the use of the
Committee only, few copies will have been printed and
Ferguson (No. 760) records only two copies, one in the
Mitchell Library in Sydney, the other in the Public Records
Office in London,


