

>
>
a OF THE
COURTS AND CONGREGATIONS )
I PRESBYTERIAN CHURCH OE VICTORIA, )
> )
) )
i| ADOPTED BY THE GENERAL ASSEMBLY OF THE
) PRESBYTERIAN CHURCH OF VICTORIA,
<
MELBOURNE:
PRINTED BY WALKER, MAY & CO., 99 BOURKE STREET WEST. )
MDCCCLXIT. |||^
P 5 PRICE ONE SHILLING.
pR I c E ON E SHILLING.




EULES AND POEMS
PEOCEDUEE
IN THE
COURTS AND CONGREGATIONS
OF THE
PRESBYTERIAN CHURCH OF VICTORIA,
ADOPTED BY THE GENERAL ASSEMBLY OP THE
PRESBYTERIAN CHURCH OF VICTORIA,
MAY, 1862.
MELBOUENE:
PRINTED BY WALKER, MAY & CO., 99 BOURKE STREET WEST.
MPCCCLXII,


EXTRACT FROM THE MINUTES OF THE GENERAL ASSEMBLY
OF THE PRESBYTERIAN CHURCH OF VICTORIA,
Bth MAY, 1862.
“ Reports were read from the Presbyteries of Melbourne, Geelong,
Castlemaine, Kilnoorat, and Portland, on the remit of the last General
Assembly on the Rules and Forms of Procedure. The portion remitted,
comprising the First Seven Chapters, and the Tenth Chapter, was again
considered. Various emendations recommended by the Presbyteries were
made upon it, after which it was adopted, as of full authority, as the Law
of this Church. The draft of a further portion—Chapters VIII., IX., and
the Appendix, was submitted by the Convener of the Committee on Rules
and Forms of Procedure, and read and considered. Various emendations
were made upon it also, after which it was passed as of interim authority,
and remitted to the Presbyteries for consideration, with instructions to
report upon it to a future Assembly.”
Extracted by
IRVING HETHERINGTON,
Clerk of the General Assembly.


9~ *'7 a 7
CONTENTS.
Chap. I.—On the Constitution, Powers, and Duties of the several
Church Courts.
Sec. I.—Sessions
1
4
8
2.—Presbyteries
3.—General Assembly ..
ll.—On the formation of Congregations, the Rights of
Adherents and Members, and Management of Congre-
gational Affairs.
Sec. I.—Formation of Congregations
2. Rights of Adherents and Members
3. Management of Congregational Affairs
111. —On procedure in Moderations, and in the Admission and
Ordination of Ministers.
Sec. 1. —Procedure in Moderations ..
2.—Procedure in Admission and Ordination of
Ministers
iy._On procedure in the Election, Ordination, and Admission
of Elders
Y.—On Petitions, Overtures, References, Dissents, Com-
plaints, and Appeals
Vl.—On Church Discipline.
Sec. I—Procedure in exercising Discipline .
2.—Church Censures
VII.—On the Licensing of Candidates for the Ministry
VIII.—On the employment of Missionaries
IX. —On the Admission of Ministers from other Denomina-
X.—On the Widows and Orphans’ Fund
M IZ'SS f F v 73<w6)


APPENDIX.
I.—Commission of Ruling Elder .. .. .. .. .. 47
2.—Bond to be signed by Trustees .. .. .. .. .. 47
3. —Call to the Charge of a Vacant Congregation .. .. ..47
4.—Edict for the Ordination or Admission of a Minister .. ..48
6.—Questions at the Ordination or Admission of Ministers .. 48
6.—Formula to be Signed by Ministers and Elders on their Ordina-
tion or Admission, and by Probationers on receiving License 50
7. —Edict for Ordination of Elders .. .. .. .. .. 51
B.—Questions at the Ordination or Admission of Elders .. .. 51
9.—Forms of Libel.. .. .. .. .. .. .. 52
10.—Order of the Presbytery on the Libel .. .. .. .. 54
11.—Citation of Party or of Witness .. .. ... .. 54
12.—Certificate of Service of Libel .. ~ .. .. .. 54
13.—Sentence of Deposition ~ .. " .. ~ 54
14.—Questions at the Licensing of Probationers .. .. 55
15.—Questions at the appointment of Missionaries .. .. ..55
16.—Form of Declaration by a Minister connecting himself with the
Widows and Orphans’Fund ~ ~ ..55


RULES AND FORMS
PROCEDURE.
CHAPTER I.
ON THE CONSTITUTION, POWERS, AND DUTIES OF
THE SEVERAL CHURCH COURTS.
Section I. — Sessions.
1. A Session is the lowest judicatory of the Church,
and is composed of the Minister or Ministers and Elders
of a congregation.
2. It belongs to the Session to superintend and promote
the religious concerns of the congregation in regard to
both discipline and worship—to appoint special days for
the worship of God—to settle the times for dispensing the
ordinances of religion —to admit members—to receive and
grant certificates of membership—to exercise discipline by
admonition, rebuke, suspension or exclusion—to restore
suspended members—to call meetings of the congregation
—to examine and judge of the qualifications of persons
elected to the eldership—to receive and judge on petitions
from members—and to transmit papers to the Presbytery.
3. The Minister is Moderator of Session, When there
are two Ministers they preside alternately, or otherwise,
as may be settled between them. The one who is not
presiding sits as an ordinary member.
4. The Moderator has power to convene the Session
whenever he may judge requisite, and he is bound to do
so when required by one-third of the Elders. The Session
is bound also to convene when directed so to do by the
Presbytery, These meetings may be summoned either by


intimation from the pulpit, or by due notice to the
members on the authority of the Moderator.
5. The meeting- of Session is constituted and concluded
by prayer, and both these acts are to be entered on the
minutes, otherwise, ex Jacie, the meeting 1 has not been
reg'ulariy held.
6. It belongs to the« Moderator to constitute and con-
clude each meeting with prayer —to preserve order—to
take the votes of the members —to announce their
decisions—and to see them carried into effect. He may
deliver his sentiments from the chair, but he has only a
casting vote.
7. The Session appoints its own Clerk.
8. The Moderator and two Elders form a quorum. In
case of vacancy, the suspension of the Minister, or his
inability to attend, the Presbytery may appoint another
of its Ministers to preside.
9. When there is no Session, the Presbytery appoints a
Session from its members.
10. After a meeting of Session is constituted, the names
of the members present are taken down, and the minutes
of the last ordinary meeting, and of any occasional meet-
ings which have intervened, are read, and when found
correct, are signed by the Moderator.
11. No complaint can he entered against the Moderator
of Sessidh in the Session over which he presides. Any
complaint against the Moderator must be brought before
the Presbytery, previous notice of the intention to com-
plain being always given to the Session.
12. Persons applying for admission to the fellowship of
the Clinch confer with the Minister or with the Minister
and the Elder of the district in which they reside, who
report to the Session; and the Session admits on being
satisfied of their religious knowledge and character, and


of their submission to the discipline of this Church. ~ J
Members of other evangelical churches may be admitted
to occasional communion.
13. The Session may not admit to membership any
person from another congregation of this church, without \
a certificate from the Session of the cong’regation to which
such person had formerly belonged ; nor may any Minister
baptize the child of a member of another cong'regation,
without the consent of the Session of that congregation.
14. The Session keeps a roll of the members of the
congregation, which is purged from time to time as cir-
cumstances require.
15. Each Elder has in ordinary cases a district assigned
to him, of the members and adherents in which he ought
to keep a list; and it is his duty to cultivate acquaintance
with them, by visiting them, especially in affliction, and
to counsel and encourage them in every good work.
16. Sessions have the right of bringing any matter
before the Presbytery by reference or petition, and through
the Presbytery to the General Assembly. They may also
originate overtures to the Presbytery or the General
Assembly. These petitions or overtures are in writing 1 ,
and if addressed to the General Assembly, are presented
to the Presbytery for transmission.
1?. It is the right and duty of every Session to appoint
one of its Elders to sit as its representative in Presbyfery
General Assembly. The commission for this purpose
is if or not more than one year. An extract of the com-
mission is produced to the Presbytery, and the roll of the
Presbytery certified by the Clerk is evidence of the Elder’s
authority to sit in the superior court, or the commission
may be submitted at once to the Assembly.*
18. Sessions are required to make arrangements at least
a month before the annual meeting of the General
Assembly, to secure the attendance thereat of their re-
* Appendix, No. I.


preservative Elders. In any case where an Elder ap-
pointed is unable to attend, his commission may be trans-
ferred to another Elder of the same Session by whom the
duty can be overtaken, who may be appointed in his room.
19. Session Records are laid on the table of the Presby-
tery for revision at its annual meeting'.
Sec. II- — Presbyteries.
1. A Presbytery consists of the Ministers of the
several congregations within the bounds fixed by the
General Assembly, with an Elder from each of the Sessions
—and of Professors of Theology under the Jurisdiction of
the Assembly, being Ministers resident within these
bounds —and of other Ministers, also resident, to whom
the right of membership has been given by the Assembly.
2. It belongs to the Presbytery to receive and judge in
petitions from the Sessions of the congregations within
its bounds, in complaints or appeals against their sen-
tences, or in references from them —to transmit petitions
or overtures addressed to the Assembly—to superintend
the education of the young —to grant supplies of sermon
on the application of persons within the bounds, or to
congregations within the bounds, either during a
vacancy, or in the event of the illness or absence of the
Minister—to erect new congregations —to superintend
the secular affairs of congregations—to admit to the
Theological Hall —to superintend the education of
Students of Theology —to try candidates for license *to
preach the Gospel—to license those who, after examina-
tion and the required course of study, are found qualified
—to grant moderations to congregations for the election
of a Minister—to receive and sustain, or reject calls—to
try the qualifications cf candidates for the ministry, and
ordain them to the pastoral office—to receive and judge of
complaints against Ministers or Preachers—to inquire
into reports affecting their character—to admonish, re-
buke, suspend, depose, or excommunicate offenders—to


receive demissions and loose Ministers from their charges
—to examine, approve, or censure the records of Sessions,
and generally to superintend the congregations and
Sessions within their hounds.
3. When any congregation has two Ministers, both
are members of Presbytery in full standing.
4. A new Presbytery is formed by the General Assem-
bly ; and at its formation its bounds are fixed, and the
•time and place of its first Meeting are appointed.
5. The Presbytery holds its meetings at stated intervals,
at least once every quarter, and at other times as fre-
quently as it finds necessary. Before dismission, the time
and place of next meeting are fixed and recorded; and if
this is omitted, or if a meeting is not held at the time
appointed, the Moderator has power to convene the Presby-
tery for the resumption of business, and is bound to do so
when required by one third of the members.
6. Three members, two of whom at least must be
Ministers, form a quorum of Presbytery.
7. The Presbytery elects its own Moderator, who holds
office for six or twelve months, as the Presbytery may
determine.
8. The meetings of the Presbytery are constituted and
concluded by prayer, both which acts must be entered on
the minutes, - otherwise the meetings ex facie have not
been regularly held.
9. It belongs to the Moderator to constitute and con-
clude each meeting with prayer —to preserve order—to
take the votes of the members —to announce the decisions
—to see that they are properly recorded —and to see
them carried into effect. He has no deliberative vote;
but in cases of equality he has a casting vote. He is
entitled to deliver his sentiments on any subject before
the Presbytery; but when he wishes to do so, or is a
party concerned, he leaves the chair.


10. In the absence of the Moderator, or in the case of
his leaving- the chair, his predecessor in office takes it ibr
the time, failing- him, the last Moderator present, and
failing- him, the oldest Minister, it being- always in the
power of the Presbytery, after being constituted, to ap-
point any other as it pleases.
11. The Presbytery appoints a Clerk, whose duty it is
to keep the record of its proceedings—to preserve its
papers —and to give out and certify extracts of its de-
cisions when instructed by the Presbytery. •
12. The Presbytery appoints a Treasurer, to take
charge of its funds—who is bound to submit a statement
of accounts once every half-year.
13. After a meeting of Presbytery is constituted, the
roll is called, and alterations are made on it when ren-
dered necessary by the death, removal, or admission of
Ministers, or by the appointment by Sessions of new re-
presentative Elders. The sederunt is then taken down,
and the minutes of last meeting are read; and, if found
correctly recorded, are signed by the Moderator in pre-
sence of the Court.
14. The Presbytery, besides its ordinary meetings, holds
meetings for transacting special business, denominated
in hunc effectum, at which no other business than that for
which the meetings are appointed can be entered upon.
16. If a case of emergency, requiring the immediate
interference of the Presbytery, occur during the interval
between its ordinary meetings, the Moderator for the
time being has the power of calling a meeting, either on
his own authority or in consequence of a requisition from
some of the members. This is denominated a pro re nata
meeting. Such meetings are intimated by the Moderator
himself, or by the Clerk upon his authority, to all the
members of the Presbytery, both Ministers and represen-
tative Elders. The notice specifies the time and place of
meeting, together with the business to be entered on, and
should he delivered, or put into the post-office, at least


ten free days before the time fixed. No other business,
except what is specified in the notice, can be entered on.
For the manner in which the Moderator exercises this
power, or for his refusal to exercise it when required, he"
is responsible to the Presbytery.
16. In cases of Special Collections appointed by the
General Assembly, each Presbytery, at its first meeting
after the day appointed, takes due measures to ascertain
that the collection ordered has been made by the several
-congregations and stations within its bounds; the sums
collected in each case are recorded, and a list of all the
collections made by the Presbytery is transmitted to the
Assembly’s Treasurer immediately after: and the reasons
of non-contribution, if any cases of the kind occur, are
also ascertained and recorded by the Presbytery, and the
non-contributers reported to the next meeting of the
Assembly. In order that the list may be completed and
transmitted in due time, congregations finding it incon-
venient to collect on the day appointed, make their collec-
tions, if possible, on one of the Sabbaths preceding; and all
congregations, on their collections being made, report
without delay to the Presbytery Clerk, who presents a
statement of the collections to the Presbytery when it
meets, and inserts those which may then be reported.
17. An annual meeting of each Presbytery is held in
the month of August or September, for the inspection of
papers. At that meeting the Session Records, Communion
Rolls,- and the Minutes of the Boards of Management of
all the congregations within the bounds, together with
abstracts of their financial affairs, are submitted and ex-
amined.
18. A Presbytery is entitled, when circumstances require
it, to order a Presbyterial visitation of any of the congre-
gations within its bounds—to call Sessions before it —to
examine their minutes, and to interpose in any matters
which may arise, or which may seem to call for such
interposition.
19. At the meeting of the Presbytery preceding the


meeting- of the General Assembly, the roll is adjusted, so
as to exhibit the names of the Ruling- Elders holding com-
missions for Sessions for the time, and a copy certified by
* the Clerk is transmitted to the Assembly’s Clerk, at latest,
eig-ht days before the meeting of the Assembly, to enable
him to make up the roll of the Assembly.
20. The Records of Presbyteries are submitted an-
nually to the General Assembly for examination.
21. The whole members of a Presbytery being supposed,
to be present at every meeting of a General Assembly, it
is competent for any of the Presbyteries to hold a special
meeting under the authority of the Assembly, intimation
being always publicly made of the time and the place of
meeting at one of the sederunts of the Assembly.
22. The Assembly has the power of authorising members
of one Presbytery to sit and vote as constituent members
of another, on any particular business, or at any particular
time.
23. When a member of one Presbytery is present at a
meeting of another, he may be invited to take his seat as a
corresponding member, and is then entitled to give his
opinion or advice in any matter which may be under
discussion, but he has no vote.
Sec. 111. —The General Assembly.
1. The General Assembly is the Supreme Court of
the Church, and is composed of all the Ministers of the
several Presbyteries, with a representative Elder from each
of the Sessions.
2. It belongs to the General Assembly to exercise au-
thority over Presbyteries—to examine their records—to
divide or unite them, or to erect new Presbyteries as cir-
cumstances may require—to consider references from Pres-
byteries—to give advice or instructions when required—to
judge of complaints or appeals against their sentences —to
affirm, reverse, or vary them—to stir up, exhort, advise, or


rebuke Presbyteries when necessary—to dispose of over-
tures —to consider matters of common concern to all the
Church, whether respecting her doctrine, worship, dis-
cipline, or government —to superintend the education of
the young —to appoint days of fasting or thanksgiving for
the whole Church—to issue pastoral addresses — to emit
testimonies in favour of truth, or against prevailing errors
—to maintain correspondence with Sister Churches —to
make regulations regarding the Theological Hall, and
superintend its operations —to make rules for conducting
its own proceedings, and the proceedings of inferior Courts
—to superintend the Missionary operations of the Church,
and to devise means for still further disseminating the
Gospel at home or abroad —and, in general, to attend to
all matters relating to the interests of the Church as a
whole, or to any part thereof.
3. The General Assembly elects its own Moderator,
who holds office until the next annual meeting.
4. The General Assembly elects its own Clerk, wffio
keeps the roll of its members, records its proceedings,
preserves its papers, and writes out and attests extracts
of its resolutions or decisions when ordered by the Court.
5. The General Assembly elects its own Treasurer who
has charge of its funds.
6. The Meetings of the General Assembly are held
annually on the first Thursday of November, at 7 o’clock
p.m. * ,
7. Any nine members constitute a quorum of the
General Assembly, provided there are in said quorum
members of at least two Presbyteries.
8. Previous to the meeting of the General Assembly
the Clerk makes up a roll of its members from the certified
lists transmitted to him by the Presbytery Clerks.
9. At the commencement of each meeting of the
General Assembly a sermon is preached by the Moderator
of the preceding Assembly, and immediately thereafter the


Assembly is constituted by him by prayer ; reports are
then made by the various Presbyteries of the ordina-
tions, inductions, deaths, demissions and depositions
of Ministers which have taken place within their bounds
since last meeting. These reports are recorded, and the
roll is called, and, with the names of those present marked
upon it, is laid on the table.
10. After this is done, a new Moderator is chosen
from among the members present, and the person elected
immediately takes the chair.
11. It belongs to the Moderator to preside at the meet-
ings of the General Assembly, to preserve order, take the
votes, announce the decisions, administer censure, and
open and close each sederunt with prayer. He has a
casting vote in all cases of equality, but no deliberative
vote. He is not entitled to speak on any subject before
the Court, or to make any motion, unless he leaves the
chair, which he can only do by permission of the
Assembly, and in this case, or in the event of his
absence, the chair is taken by the latest Moderator of the
Assembly present. In any case in which the Moderator
is interested as a party, he must leave the chair, wdiich is
filled as above mentioned.
12. The first business of each sederunt is to read, and, if
necessary, correct the minutes of the preceding sederunt.
At the second sederunt the Assembly engages in praise
and by the Moderator and two Ministers
called ujlbn or previously appointed for that purpose.
13. A Committee, entituled u The Committee on Bills
and Overtures,” is appointed by the Assembly to arrange
the business of the meeting: three members forma quorum.
All papers proposed to be submitted to the General As-
sembly must, in the first instance, be laid before this
Committee. The Committee meets at the close of the
first sederunt, and at this meeting parties having
causes have a right to attend for their interests. The
Committee has also the power of meeting and reporting


from time to time during the meeting of the Assembly,
as it may find to be necessary or be directed; all such
meeting’s being announced from the chair.
14. It is tlie duty of this Committee to see that all
papers forwarded to its Convener, and laid before it,
have been duly transmitted, and are in all respects regular
and proper to be laid before the Assembly ere it decides
on transmission ; and to fix and determine the order of
business for the Assembly. Before refusing to transmit
any papers, the Committee gives the parties forwarding
them notice of the objections to transmission and liberty
to amend their papers, or otherwise obviate the objections
if practicable. The Committee’s resolutions for or against
transmission, may be brought under review of the Assem-
bly by appeal.
15. So soon as practicable after the Assembly is con-
stituted, the Committee reports the causes transmitted,
and the arrangement made j and this arrangement, when
sanctioned by the Assembly, is not departed from in any
case except with the consent of the Assembly.
16. Special Committees are also appointed by the
General Assembly for the transaction of special business.
Every such Committee has a Convener, who is nomi-
nated by itself, if not appointed by the General As-
sembly. " Committees cannot meet during the hours of
the General Assembly’s sittings, without leave from the
Court, and their reports to the General Assembly are
made in writing. Committees keep regular minutes of
their meetings. When the report of a Committee has
been made and received, its functions terminate and it is
discharged.
17. Standing Committees are also appointed by the
General Assembly, for the transaction of the business of
departments. These also have respectively their Con-
vener, appointed by the General Assembly. Their mi-
nutes are laid on the table of the General Assembly along
with their reports. Che members of said Committees are
elected annually.


18. The Moderator has authority to interrupt and call
to order any member of the Court, or party at the bar,
who departs from the subject, or infringes the rules of
procedure. Any member of Court has a right to call to
order, and immediately on his doing so, the speaker stops
until the question of order is determined; the member
calling to order is then allowed briefly to state the
grounds on which the call has been made; but no other
member is entitled to speak to the point of order, unless
with the permission or request of the Moderator, with
whom the decision of the point entirely rests; and members
calling to order unnecessarily, are liable to the censure of
the Court.
19. When a motion is submitted to the Court, it must
be seconded before it can be discussed; and every motion
requiring formal discussion must be committed to
writing, and announced by the Moderator before receiving
that discussion. When more motions than one are
proposed on the same subject, whether stated as amend-
ments on the first, or as substantive motions, the first
motion and the subsequent motions or amendments (after
receiving such discussion as- may seem necessary) are
voted upon ; and in disposing of them, the following rules
are observed:—
First. —When there are only two motions, the question
put to the Court is, “ Motion or amendment ?”
Secondly. —When there are more than two motions,
the last proposed is first put against the motion imme-
diately preceding it; then the motion preferred by this
vote is put against the next preceding; and so on until
only two remains, when the question is put as above.
20. Members of the General Assembly who have been
absent without a sustained excuse, during the considera-
tion and decision of a case, have no right afterwards to
re-introduce it, or to dissent from the decision.
21. No Member of the General Assembly is permitted
to speak more than once on any one subject, unless in


explanation, and by special permission of tbe Court; but
the proposer of a motion is allowed to be heard in reply,
when the other members of the Court have delivered their
sentiments.
22. The General Assembly, for the greater freedom of
discussion, has the power of resolving 1 itself into a com-
mittee of the whole house, in which case the Moderator
leaves the chair, and a Chairman is appointed. A separate
minute is taken of the proceedings of the committee.
When the Assembly resumes, the Moderator takes the
chair, and the minutes of the committee are read. The
resolution or resolutions formed by it are then, without
further discussion, approved of and sanctioned as the
determination of the Assembly, any member dissatisfied
with them having, at this stage, the privilege of dissent.
23. General Assemblies, as well as Presbyteries, are
open Courts, but they have a right to deliberate with shut
doors when the matters under discussion appear to require
privacy.
24. The General Assembly, being the Supreme Court
of the Church, its decisions are final, and cannot be
protested against or appealed from, nor can they be
reviewed by any other Court.
25. A Commission of the General Assembly meets on
the first Tuesday of May at noon, for the transaction of
interim, business, which may not be safely postponed till
the annual meeting. Seven Members form a quorum,
provided there are in said quorum members of at least
two Presbyteries. The Committee of Bills and
Overtures, appointed by the previous Assembly, meets a
fortnight before the meeting of the Commission, and
arranges the business to be transacted. Of this business
the Convener of the Committee immediately issues a
circular notice to all the members of the Assembly. No
business but what is specified in the Convener’s circular
may be taken up by the Commission.
26. On any emergency, when business has occurred


which seems to demand immediate attention, the
Moderator has the power, on requisition from seven
members of the Court, to call a meeting- pro re nata to
dispose of it. For the exercise of this power he is
amenable to the Court. No business is to be discussed
except the particular business for which the meeting is
convened. Such meetings are called by circular letters
sig-ned by the Moderator, or by the Clerk on his written
authority, and addressed to every member of the
Assembly. The circulars must be despatched at least
three weeks before the time of meeting.
27. Within two months after each annual meeting of
the General Assembly the minutes of its proceedings,
and of any previous pro re nata meeting which may
have been held, are printed under the superintendence of
a committee appointed by the General Assembly, and a
copy sent to each Minister and Session.
28. The General Assembly, in the exercise of its
nohile officium , may suspend its own standing orders, as
also the other rules for the administration of the affairs of
the Church; and no procedure of the Assembly is
unconstitutional or illegal, though not in accordance with
these orders and rules.


CHAP. 11.
ON THE FORMATION OF CONGREGATIONS, THE RIGHTS
OF CHURCH ADHERENTS AND MEMBERS, AND MAN-
AGEMENT OF CONGREGATIONAL AFFAIRS.
Sec. I.—Formation of Congregations.
1. Any number of persons who have been connected
with the Presbyterian Church, or are desirous of becom-
ingl so, and are willing* to submit to the principles and
authority of this Church, may apply to the Presbytery of
the bounds to be formed into a congregation.
2. When such application is made the Presbytery ap-
points one or more of its number to preach in the place
from which the application is made. The deputation so
appointed holds a meeting with the people, and reports to
the Presbytery at its next meeting concerning the re-
ligious necessities and prospects of the locality. If after
hearing the petition and the report of the deputation as
to the circumstances of the case, and also any objections
that may be offered, the Presbytery deems the request
proper, it may at once declare them to be a congrega-
tion, and grant them a supply of religious ordinances.
Sec. II. —Fights of Adherents and Members.
1. The adherents of* a congregation are the persons,
male and female, who profess connection with it, partake
statedly in its worship, and contribute to its support.
2. The members of a congregation are the adherents,
male and female, who are in full communion with the
Church.


3. Persons are admitted into full communion with the
Church by the Session of the congregation to which they
apply, on the Session being satisfied as to their moral
and religious character.
4. When thus admitted they have a rig’ht to the full
enjoyment of Church privileges, unless charges are made,
or reports are in circulation of irregularities of conduct
which may induce the Session to withhold these, until
inquiry is made, and satisfaction obtained according to the
rules of the Church.
5. Adherents of the congregation have a right to vote
at congregational meetings in the election of the first
Minister, and always in the direction of the secular affairs
of the congregation. After the election of the first
Minister, members in full possession of their privileges,
and they alone have a right to vote in matters of an ex-
clusively spiritual character, such as the election of
ministers or elders.
6. Members of the Church have direct access to the
Session with complaints against fellow-members of the
congregation, or in matters connected with the doctrine,
discipline, and government of the congregation with
which they are more immediately connected, or of the
whole Church.
7. Members have access to the Presbytery and General
Assembly by petition, or appeal. These are transmitted
through their respective Sessions.
8. A Member wishing to leave a congregation and
to connect himself with another, is entitled to receive a
certificate of disjunction from the Session on applying for
the same, unless there are matters connected with his
conduct as a member of the Church which seem to the
Session to call for inquiry, in which case he has a right
to insist that inquiry be immediately entered upon and
brought to a conclusion without unnecessary delay. Ses-
sions, in granting certificates in the case of members who
have withdrawn in an irregular manner from the con-


gregation, may not merely attest the fact that up to a
certain period they were in full communion, but also state
what they know or have reason to believe, of their
character and deportment till the time when certificates
of disjunction are granted.
9. A person claiming the status of membership and
applying for admission into a congregation, must produce
a certificate of disjunction, from the Session of the con-
gregation with which he was connected, or otherwise give
satisfactory proof that he is a member of the Church.
10. A member absenting himself from three successive
Communions, may be removed from the roll of the con-
gregation, and must satisfy the Session in regard to his
absence before he can be restored.
*
Sec. lll.—Management of Congregational Affairs.
1. All Congregational meetings must be duly intimated.
In the case of meetings with a view to apply for a modera-
tion, or for the election of a Minister or Elders, the notice
must be made to the congregation on two successive
Sabbaths immediately preceding the day of election. In
the case of meetings connected with the management of
the congregation’s secular affairs, the notice is sufficient
if made on one Sabbath immediately preceding the day
of meeting. All meetings of the congregation are called
by or with the sanction of the Session.
2. At all Congregational meetings the Minister, or in
his absence, an Elder presides, and opens and closes the
meetings with prayer.
3. The Precentor may be chosen by the congregation,
or by or on the report of a committee of its number
chosen for the purpose; but he must be a person in full
communion with the Church or fitted by his character for
becoming so, and in the mode of conducting the
psalmody, as well as in other matters connected with his
situation, he is subject to the control and bound to obey


the orders of the Session. Should he be suspended or
excluded from Church privileges, he is also thereby sus-
pended or removed from his office.
4. The real property of the congregation is vested in
Trustees, whose powers and duties are defined in the
model trust deed.
5. The number of Trustees for any congregation is not
less than three, nor more than five. They are nominated
in the first instance by the congregation, who, at a
meeting duly called for the purpose, select for the office
double the number of persons required, and transmit the
list to the Presbytery of the bounds, who finally appoint
from it. The parties nominated must all be adherents of
the Presbyterian Church of Victoria, and free from church
scandal.
6, Trustees on their appointment are required to sub-
scribe a Bond acknowledging in their official capacity the
jurisdiction of the Presbyterian Church of Victoria, and
engaging to render all due obedience to the decisions and
orders of its Church Courts.* This Bond on being sub-
scribed by them, is forwarded by the Presbytery to the
Clerk of the General Assembly, by whom it is deposited
with the other documents of the Church
7. The secular affairs of the congregation are adminis-
tered by a Board of Management, consisting of Managers,
and the members of the Session, who are ex officia mem-
bers of the Board.
8. The Managers are elected by the members and
adherents of the congregation, from among the members
and adherents.
9. The number of Managers, exclusive of the Session,
may not be less than three nor more than fifteen.
10. One half the Managers retire annually by rotation,
but are eligible for re-election.
* Appendix, No. 11.


11, The election of the Managers is made once a-year,
under the direction of the Session, at such time as may
be most convenient. The votes are taken in writing —
each voter depositing at the Church door, on the Sabbath
appointed for the election, a list of the adherents or
members of the congregation accounted by him most
eligible for the office, subscribed with his name. The lists
so deposited are thereafter examined by the Session, and
the majority of votes is ascertained.
12. The Board of Management elect their own Clerk
and Treasurer. The congregation appoint two of their
number as Auditors of Accounts.
13. Should any Manager be suspended or cut off from
privileges by the Session, or leave the congregation, he
ceases to be entitled to act as a member of the Board.
14. The Board meets at least once every quarter. Its
meetings are called by intimation from the pulpit on the
Sabbath preceding, or by personal notice to the individual
members. The Minister is bound to convene a meeting
whenever required by one-third of the members.
15. Three members of the Board form a quorum.
16. At all meetings of the Board the Minister of the
congregation presides, unless where he expresses a desire
that another member of the Board should preside.
17. The Clerk keeps a regular Minute-book,. acces-
sible to the members of the Board at all times, wherein
all the minutes of meetings of the Board, and of the con-
gregation are entered: and these are signed by the Chair-
man for the time.
18. The Treasurer keeps a regular book of Debit and
Credit, and produces the same with the vouchers, at the
annual meeting, audited and docqueted by the Auditors.
19. The congregation holds an annual meeting, of
which due notice is given by the officiating Minister


from the pulpit, before the congregation is dismissed,
on the Sabbath immediately preceding.
20. All adherents of the congregation are entitled to
attend this meeting, and to vote in all matters relating
to secular affairs.
21. At each annual meeting of the congregation, the
Board reports its whole proceedings and management
during the year, and lays before the congregation an ab-
stract of the Receipts and Expenditure during the year,
with a statement of the pecuniary affairs as they then
stand. The election of Managers for the year is declared
and confirmed.
22. The Board shall have no power to contract debt on
the security of the property, without the special authority
of the congregation, given at a meeting called for the
purpose, and the consent of the Presbytery of the bounds.
They shall not make any repairs or alterations in one
year exceeding the value of £5O, nor shall they alter the
seat rents, or the stipend of the Minister without the
authority of the congregat.on.
23. The constitutional right of the Session to watch
over all the interests of the congregation, and to interpose
whenever, in their opinion, its welfare calls on them to
do so, by convening meetings of the congregation for any
purpose connected with its affairs, or in any other com-
petent manner is expressly reserved to them.
24. In general it is the duty of the minority of a
congregation to submit to the majority,- but if it is
apprehended that the voice of the majority has not been
fairly ascertained ; or, if any objection lie to the regularity
of the meeting or the competency of the resolutions whicli
have been passed, a protest may be taken to another Con-
gregational meeting, to be specially called for the purpose
of reviewing them, and application is in this case made to
the Session (whose judgment is subject to review by the


SEC, lII.] MANAGEMENT OF CONGREGATIONAL AFFAIRS. 91
Presbytery) to call another meeting for reconsideration of
the subject. Or the parties dissatisfied may at once appeal
to the Presbytery, and crave extracts ; in which case the
majority supporting the resolutions complained of, appoint
Commissioners to appear before the Presbytery, to answer
the appeal; and the appeal itself, with reasons, is lodged
by the appellants with the Session at its first meeting, for
transmission to the Presbytery. On the case being heard,
the Presbytery may either proceed to judge in the matter,
or may appoint a committee to meet with the parties, and to
endeavour to bring them to a right understanding.
25. All arrangements for the supply of vacant congre-
gations are made through the Moderator of the Session
and the Presbytery Clerk.
26. Congregations receiving supply are required to
pay for each Sabbath’s Service at the rate of £|J, if by a 3
Preacher, and £2, if by a Student or a Missionary of this
Church.
27. Before a congregation apply for a moderation with
the view to the call of a Minister, they agree what
provision they are able to make for his Support. In
making the application, the amount of the provision
undertaken by them is reported to the Presbytery. The
minimum stipend allowed is £3OO with a free house.
Presbyteries are enjoined not to grant moderations to
congregations who do not offer an adequate stipend, or
to congregations who have not paid their arrears of stipend
to their previous Minister.
28. The Minister’s stipend is a first charge on the
funds contributed in the congregation for the support of
of religious ordinances, and is to be paid at least
quarterly.
29. Should the congregation feel unable to raise the
sum which, on receiving a moderation, they resolved to
provide for their Minister, or which they had afterwards
undertaken, they are not entitled of themselves to reduce


99 MANAGEMENT OF CONGREGATIONAL AFFAIRS. [CHAP, 11.
the amount, but should as soon as the deficiency becomes
apparent, communicate the same to the Presbytery with
a statement of the circumstances which have caused it.
The Presbytery then institutes the necessary inquiry, and
takes such steps as it thinks proper, either in the way of
stimulating 1 the congregation to a discharge of their duty,
or of modifying the amount of the stipend, or of recom-
mending the removal of the Minister to another sphere of
labour.
30. Congregations are bound to give information, and
to make returns respecting their affairs when required to
do so by the superior Church Courts.


CHAP. 111.
PROCEDURE IN MODERATIONS, AND IN THE ADMISSION
AND ORDINATION OF MINISTERS.
Sec. I. — Procedure in Moderations.
1. On a vacancy occurring 1 in a congregation, the
Presbytery appoint one of their Ministers to preside in the
Session, and in all Congregational Meetings of the con-
gregation. The Communion roll of the congregation is
required to be produced to the Presbytery for examination,
and is attested when correct.
2. When a vacant congregation wish to ascertain if
they are prepared to proceed to the election of a Minister,
they hold a meeting for the purpose, which is presided
over by the Minister authorised to moderate in the
Session for the time; and if prepared, they apply, by
petition, to the Presbytery, for the appointment of a
member of Presbytery to moderate in a call; and, at the
same time, they appoint Commissioners to appear before
the Presbytery and give such information as may he re-
quired. This petition is transmitted through the Session
to the Presbytery. The same order is observed where a
second Minister is required, the Minister of the Congre-
gation presiding.
3. Before granting the moderation, the Presbytery,
after hearing the petition, inquire into the unanimity of
the congregation, their ability to support the ordinances of
the Gospel,—the amount of stipend they propose to give
to their Minister, —whether a manse is provided for him
or not, —and if any arrears of stipend are due by them to,
their former Minister. The information given on these


subjects is inserted in the minutes of the Presbytery. If
the Presbytery resolve to grant the moderation, they
appoint one of their number to moderate in a call on a day
which is then fixed, and intimation of this appointment is
made from the pulpit to the Congregation on two Sabbaths
before it takes place.
4, On the day thus fixed, the Minister appointed by the
Presbytery meets with the congregation, and after sermon
intimates the object of the meeting, narrates the steps
previously taken, reads the form of a call,* and invites
the congregation to name as candidate any Minister
or Preacher of the Presbyterian Church of whose
qualifications they have had opportunity of judging.
After all the candidates put in nomination are proposed
and seconded, the Moderator engages in prayer. If
only one candidate is named, the choice of the "congre-
gation is signified by holding up the right hand; if two
candidates are nominated the votes are taken by calling
the roll.
5. After the Moderator has announced the result of the
vote, he declares the individual on whom the election
has fallen to be duly elected, inserts his name in the call,
reads it over as thus filled up, and invites the members
and adherents of the congregation to come forward and
affix their names to it, and thereafter attests their signa-
tures. Commissioners are then appointed to take charge
of the call, and to present it at the first meeting of the
Presbytery. Meanwhile, members and adherents of the
congregation who have not had an opportunity of
subscribing the call on the day of moderation may
subscribe it —their subscription being attested by the
Commissioners.
6. At the next meeting of the Presbytery, the call is
laid upon the table, and the Minister who had moderated
gives an account of his proceedings. If there is an
appeal from members or adherents of the congregation
* Appendix, No. 111.


against the proceedings, or a petition against the
sustaining of the call, the appellants or petitioners are
heard, and then the Commissioners in reply, before
a decision is given. When it is clearly ascertained that
the call has been regularly conducted, and is given by a
fair majority of the congregation, it is sustained.
7. It is unlawful for a Minister or Preacher, by him-
self or others, to use any canvassing for election, or to
make any private arrangements with any member or
members of a congregation, to procure a call from them. If
it be made evident to the Presbytery that undue methods
have been employed by any Minister or Preacher to
procure a call, the call is not sustained, but is declared
null.
Sec. ll.—Procedure in the Admission and
Ordination of Ministers.
1. When a call has been sustained, the Clerk of Pres-
bytery sends official notice to the person called, who is
bound to intimate to the Presbytery his acceptance or
non-acceptance of it, within one month after receiving
such notice.
2. In cases of translation, if the person called be a
member of the Presbytery, he is cited apud acta, or by
letter if absent, to appear at next meeting, at which the
Presbytery shall consider the question of his translation.
A member of Presbytery is at the same time appointed
to preach to his congregation, give notice of the election
which has taken place, and summon them to appear for
their interest in their Minister, with certification that if
they fail to do so they shall be held as consenting to his
translation.
3. At the next meeting of Presbytery parties are heard
in the following order:—First, the Commissioners of the
vacant congregation; Second, the Commissioners of the
congregation whose Minister is called ; Third, the


Minister called. If the Minister decline acceptance of
the call, the whole matter takes end. If he express
himself in favour of acceptance, and if his congre-
gation offer no opposition, the Presbytery dissolve the
relation between him and his congregation, appoint one
of their number to preach in his church, and declare it
vacant. The day of his admission to his new charge is
also fixed, and his edict is appointed to he served. If, on
the other hand, the congregation of the Minister called
oppose the translation, the Presbytery judge of the
comparative claims of the two congregations, concurring
in the decision of the Minister himself, unless they see
strong cause to the contrary.
4. If the person called he a member of another Pres-
bytery, the Presbytery within whose hounds the vacant
congregation is situated commission a deputation of their
number to repair to the Presbytery of which he is a
member, and lay the call before them, requesting them to
take the necessary steps for his removal. If his Presby-
tery consent after hearing parties, as indicated in rule
three of this section, the relation between the Minister and
his congregation is dissolved, his church is declared
vacant, and he is instructed to repair for induction to the
Presbytery to whose bounds he has been called.
5. In cases where the person called is a Preacher not
already ordained, when his call is sustained the Presby-
tery prescribe to him subjects for his trial discourses,
viz:—a lecture on a passage of scripture, a homily, a
sermon, and an exegesis. He is also examined on Theo-
logy, Church History, Greek and Hebrew.
6. After the trials have been gone through and
sustained a day for the ordination is fixed, and some of
the Ministers of the Presbytery are appointed to conduct
the several services. It is also appointed that the edict
of ordination be publicly read in the congregation two
Sabbaths before the day of ordination*
* Appendix, No. IV.


7. On the day fixed the Presbytery meet at the
appointed time and place and are constituted; objections
to the settlement are called for, and, if none is offered, the
Presbytery proceed with the service. If objections are
made the objector must give reasons and substantiate his
objections on the spot, the Presbytery judging of their
validity. When no objections are made, or when objections
offered are judged frivolous, the Presbytery proceed; a
sermon is preached as previously arranged, and a brief
narration is given of the various steps of procedure
regarding the call. The members of the congregation
are then requested to stand, and the question in the
formula, as to their adherence to the call is asked.* Their
assent to it is signified by holding up the right hand.
The Minister elect next stands up, and in presence of
the congregation answers the questions of the formula.
Thereafter one of the Ministers, surrounded by the other
brethren of the Presbytery, engages in prayer, during
which the person called kneels, and towards the con-
clusion of the prayer all the brethren of the Presbytery,
by the imposition of hands, ordain him to the office of
the holy ministry, and to the pastoral charge of the con-
gregation by which he has been called. After the
ordination is thus completed, the brethren present give
to the newly ordained pastor the right hand of fellowship,
and addresses are delivered to minister and people appro-
priate to their several duties. Thereafter, the congrega-
tion give their new Minister the right hand of welcome.
The Presbytery then resume, the newly inducted Minister
signs the formula,! and his name is added to the roll.'
8. In admitting to the pastoral charge of a congrega-
tion a Minister previously ordained, no trials are
prescribed, nor is the act of ordination repeated. In
other respects the procedure is as above.
9. After being admitted Pastor of a congregation, a
Minister can resign his charge only to the Presbytery.
When a resignation is tendered, the Presbytery inquire
* Appendix, No. V.
+ Appendix, No. VI.


into the circumstances, and give the congregation an
opportunity of being heard before the case is decided.
10. Presbyteries, with consent of the General Assembly,
may ordain Missionaries without reference to the exercise
of their office in any particular charge. Missionaries when
ordained are ordained as above, with the necessary altera-
tions arising from the circumstances.


CHAP. IV.
PROCEDURE IN THE ELECTION, ORDINATION, AND
ADMISSION OF ELDERS.
I. The right of electing Elders is vested solely in the
members of the Congregation, male and female.
2. The number of Elders to be chosen is fixed by the
Session, if there is one, or if there is none, by the Pres-
bytery.
3. The election of Elders is conducted by the Session,
if there is one, or if there is none, by the Minister, and
two or more assessors appointed by the Presbytery.
4. The votes of the members are taken in writing —
each voter depositing at the church door, on the Sabbath
appointed for the election, a list of members of the con-
gregation accounted by him most eligible for the office,
subscribed with his name. The lists so deposited are
thereafter examined by the Session, or the Minister and
the assessors, and the majority of votes is ascertained.
5. After the election the call of the congregation is
intimated to the Elders-elect. A declaration of their
willingness to accept of the office is asked, and the
Session deal with them privately as to the propriety of
accepting it. Their willingness to accept being expressed,
the Session, at a meeting appointed for the purpose,
proceed to satisfy themselves in regard to their religious
knowledge, piety, and prudence, and their knowledge of
the government and discipline of the Church, and the
duties of this office. And on the Session being satisfied
on these points an edict is appointed to be publicly read
to the congregation.*
* Appendix, No. VII.


6. At the time mentioned in the edict—which must be
read to the congregation on two Sabbaths, the Session
meets, and being constituted, if no objections are offered,
the ordination is fixed for as early a day as possible. If
objections are made, the Session proceeds to inquire into
the grounds of them, and decides on them, after hearing
evidence if necessary.
7. On the day of ordination, which may either be a
Sabbath, or week day, after sermon the Session is con-
stituted, and the Moderator gives a short narrative of the
previous proceedings ; he then calls on the Elders-elect to
stand forward, and puts to them the questions of the
formula.* Satisfactory answers having been given to
the questions, the Moderator proceeds to ordain or set
them apart by prayer to the office. Afterwards the right
hand of fellowship is given to them by the Moderator and
the other Elders present, and the whole is followed by
suitable exhortations to them and to the people.
8. At the first meeting of Session the newly ordained
Elders sign the formula,! and have their names added to
the Session-roll.
9. Elders coming from other congregations cannot
be admitted into the Session unless regularly elected.
When they are so elected, being already invested with
the office of the Eldership, the act of ordination is not
repeated, but in other respects the rules of procedure are
the same ; and they publicly answer the questions in the
formula before being inducted into the office.
10. Elders retain their office for life, or until deposi-
tion. They may resign their seat in the particular
Session to which they belong, but their resignation must
be accepted and recorded. Should they cease for a period
of twelve months to be connected with the Congregation,
the Session may find that they are no longer of their
number, and remove their names from the Session-roll.
This finding must be communicated to them by letter.
* Appendix, No. VIII.
+ Appendix, No. VI.


CHAP. Y.
PETITIONS, OVERTURES, REFERENCES, DISSENTS, COM-
PLAINTS, AND APPEALS.
1. Petitions. —Every member of the Church has access
to its Courts by petition or memorial, —to the Session
directly, and to the Presbytery and Assembly through the
Session. If a Session refuse to grant the prayer of a
petition, the petitioner may appeal.
2. Overtures. —Members of the inferior Courts have a
right to move the Courts of which they are members to
overture the Assembly on any matter of general import-
ance. An overture from a Session must pass through the
Presbytery of the bounds. An overture, proposing to
alter the law of the Church on any subject, is remitted to-
Presbyteries for consideration before it is permanently
adopted. It may, however, be acted on ad interim, till
next meeting of Assembly.
3. References. —A Session may refer a case for
advice or judgment to the Presbytery, and the Presbytery
may in like manner make a reference to the Assembly.
A reference brings up all parties interested; notice is
given to parties not present. The, Members of the Court
making the reference are not prevented from deliberat-
ing and voting on the case in the superior Court.
When the reference is taken up, it is first stated by some
member of the Court from which it came. If it be found
informal or unnecessary it is dismissed, if not it is sus-
tained, parties are heard and judgment is given.
4. Dissents. —When a Member of a Court who has
voted in a cause is dissatisfied with any decision, he has
a right to have his dissent recorded if he so require.
Reasons of dissent may be given in writing, in the Assem-


bly at the time, and in the inferior Courts, before next
meeting, and they are kept in retentis.
5. Complaints and Appeals. —When a member of an
inferior Court wishes to bring any proceedings of his
Court under review, he complains, and his complaint is
tendered when the proceeding complained of is adopted.
When a party to a case feels aggrieved by the judgment
of an inferior Court he has a right of appeal, which is
made when the judgment is intimated. Reasons of com-
plaint and appeal are lodged with the Clerk of Court
within ten days. Complaints and appeals sist the inferior
Court, and all parties interested, at the bar of the superior
Court, and prevent the members of the inferior Court
from voting in the case. Complaints and appeals do not
stop procedure in a case, but they stay execution of
judgment. Frivolous complaints and appeals may be dis-
regarded, but complainants and appellants may petition
when their complaints and appeals are not recorded. In
judging of complaints and appeals they are either sus-
tained or dismissed, as there may appear occasion.


CHAP. VI.
CHURCH DISCIPLINE.
Sec. I.—Procedure in exercising Discipline.
1. It is the duty of the Courts of the Church to exercise
discipline over such of its members as are living 1 in
known sin. No scandal is to be inquired into after five years
have elapsed since the offence is said to have been com-
mitted. Members refusing to appear before the Church
Courts when required, either as parties or witnesses, are
guilty of contumacy.
2. Witnesses in case of discipline are required, before
examination, to declare that they hear no malice against
the accused —that they have no personal interest in the
case—that no one has told them what to say, or has given,
or promised to give them anything for what they shall
say, and are reminded that the evidence they shall give is
to he regarded by them as if upon oath. Evidence on
which any judgment is founded is recorded, it is heard
and taken down in presence of parties, and is signed by
the witnesses and the Moderator of the Court. When the
accused is found innocent, the proceedings are all deleted
from the record, with the exception of the accusation and
finding of the Court.
3. It is the duty of a Session to inquire into the truth
of any grave allegation against the character of a member
of the Congregation which it superintends, and to suspend
from sealing ordinances when occasion may require. If
the accused member be an Elder, the Session may also
suspend him from office. The Presbytery alone, in the
case of an Elder, has the power of deposition.
4. It is the duty of Sessions to absolve persons under


discipline, and to reinstate them in the enjoyment of Church
privileges when brought to repentance, and the ends of
discipline are served.
5. Accusations against the character of Ministers are to
be investigated by the Presbytery of the bounds. The
Presbytery in the first place inquires into the grounds of
the accusation by precognition : it is not necessary that
the accused party be present at this preliminary inquiry.
When the offence charged seems only to require admoni-
tion or rebuke, the Presbytery may at once proceed to
administer the same. But when it appears to be a grave
case and to require further investigation, the Presbytery
proceeds by libel, and in the meanwhile suspends the ac-
cused from the exercise of his office till the proceedings
terminate.
6. When a Presbytery proceeds against a Minister h} r
libel, a small committee is appointed to prepare the libel
and to prosecute the case. The libel is a statement of the
nature of the crime, and of the facts attending it, with
the time when, and the place where, it is alleged to have
been committed.* When adopted by the Presbytery, a
copy of the libel is delivered to the party accused, with a
list of the names of the witnesses to be examined, and a
notice of the place where, and the time when, the Presby-
tery is to hear proof.f If the accused do not appear after
being duly summoned, he is held to be guilty. If appear-
ance is made the question of relevancy is considered.
When the charge is such, that if found true, it be-
comes a subject for the higher censures of the Church
—it is declared to be relevant. If found irrelevant the
libel is fallen from. When found relevant the case pro-
ceeds, and if the accused do not confess, evidence is heard.
When the whole evidence on both sides is concluded
the accused is heard, the Court deliberates, and judgment
is pronounced. If the accused is found guilty either in
whole or in part of the counts libelled, the Presbytery
* Appendix, No. IX.
t Appendix, Nos. X., XI., XII.


proceeds to administer the censures of the Church in pro-
portion to the guilt proved. Cases which infer deposition
are referred to the General Assembly, hy which alone the
sentence of deposition is pronounced.
7. When a Minister is accused of heresy he is bound to
deliver up any manuscript of his which may be required,
or he may be examined as to his views, or he may be
required to commit his views to writing. The Presbytery
proceeds otherwise as above.
8. When disputes arise between a Minister and his
Session or congregation, or a part thereof, the Presbytery
inquires into the same, and endeavours to promote peace.
But when the Presbytery finds that a Minister’s usefulness
is through any means lost, the circumstances are reported
to next meeting of Assembly, which may dissolve the
pastoral tie.
9. It is the General Assembly only which can restore a
Minister to office, and not unless it appear for public edifi-
cation.
Sec. II. — Church Censures.
1. Admonition. —This is an exhortation to circumspec-
tion, and no record need be made of it in the minutes.
It is usually the censure inflicted on account of an error
of judgment.
2. Rebuke. —This is a higher form of censure, and it
implies that the erring party has been ■ guilty of sin.
Rebuke is administered after prayer, and the offending
brother stands up in his place while the Moderator ad-
dresses him.
3. Suspension from privileges. —This censure is inflicted
on a member whose life brings scandal on the Church, or
who neglects ordinances. It may be inflicted for a limited
time, or sine die.
4, Suspension from office. —This is a censure pronounced


when it is found that the continued exercise of office by
an office-bearer is injurious to religion.
5. Deposition. —This censure is inflicted on account of
immorality or heresy. It is pronounced after prayer, in
the name of the Lord Jesus Christ, and divests the offender
of all office in the Church, and of every right he enjoys
as an office-bearer.*
6. Excommunication. —This censure is inflicted on ac-
count of heinous and hardened sin, and on account of
contumacy to Church Courts. It implies expulsion from
the denomination, and places the offender beyond the pale
of the Church, in respect of both rights and privileges.
* Appendix, No. XIII.


CHAP. YII.
ON THE LICENSING OF CANDIDATES FOR THE MINISTRY.
1. A Board of Examination is appointed by the
General Assembly to examine all candidates for the
ministry in respect to their qualifications and attainments.
2. All applications to be taken on examination by
the Board are made through the respective Presbyteries
within whose bounds the applicants reside, whose duty
it is to ascertain and certify to their moral and religious
character.
3. Before an applicant is admitted to the study of
Theology, he is examined by the Board on the following
subjects, the examination being conducted partly in
writing:—
Latin. —Caesar’s Gallic War, and Virgil’s iEneid, Ist and
2nd Books.
Greek, —New Testament, Gospel of John and Epistle to
the Ephesians.
Logic.—Whately’s Logic.
Mental Philosophy.—Abercromby’s Intellectual Powers.
Moral Philosophy.—Wardlaw’s Ethics.
Mathematics. —Euclid, Ist and 2nd Books.
Natural Philosophy.—Chambers’ Course.
History.—British History.
Scriptural Knowledge,
4. Applicants are received to the study of Theology
under the direction of their Presbyteries, on the certifi-
cate of the Board in respect to these preliminary studies.
The study of Theology is divided into four courses: —
Ist Course.
Natural Theology.—Text Books—Butler and Buchanan.
Church History.—Mosheim or Milner—first three cen-
turies.


Hebrew.—Gesenius’ Grammar, Bible—lst chap. Genesis.
Scriptural Knowledge.—Greek New Testament—the
Gospels.
To write one homily, and five short essays on the
subjects of study'.
2nd Course.
Evidences of Christianity.—Paley, Alexander.
Church History.—Mosheim—to the tenth century.
Hebrew.—Bible—l Samuel, first ten chapters.
Scriptural Knowledge.—Greek New Testament —the
Epistles of Paul.
To write one lecture, and five short essays on the
subjects of study.
3rd Course
Systematic Divinity.—Hill.
Church History.—Mosheim —remaining centuries.
Biblical Criticism.— Ernesti—first portion.
Scriptural Knowledge.—Greek New Testament —the
minor Epistles and Revelations.
To write two critical exercises on passages in the
Greek New Testament, and four short essays on
the subjects of study.
4th Course.
Pastoral Theology.—Yinet’s Homiletics, Bridges’ Christ-
ian Ministry.
Hermeneutics. —Ernesti—second portion.
Scriptural Knowledge.—Greek New Testament.
Hebrew.—lsaiah—to the eleventh chapter.
To write one sermon, and four short essays on the
subjects of study.
5. These courses extend over a term of four years.
6. At the close of each course applicants are examined
by their respective Presbyteries; and previous to license
they must submit to examination by the Examining
Board, and receive their certificate of approval.


CHAP. VII.] LICENSING OF CANDIDATES.
7. It is competent for a Presbytery to refer to the
General Assembly, in any case where they see cause, and
recommend that the term of study, instead of running
over four years, be abridged.
8. Presbyteries, on the final certificate of the Board,
report applicants to the General Assembly, and with the
sanction of the Assembly take them on trial for license.
The following are the trials: —
1. Catechetical trials in Divinity and in Church
History.
3. A Homily, or Essay on a doctrine of Theology.
3. A Critical Exposition of a portion of Scripture.
4. A Lecture.
5. A Sermon.
9. The trials being finished, the Presbytery takes a
conjunct view of the whole, and records its opinion. If
the finding be unfavourable, the licensing is deferred,
and the Presbytery acts in the matter as appears for
edification; if favourable, it proceeds to license the
applicant in the following manner; —
1. The questions of the formula are put to him, to
which he is required to give his assent.*
2. He is required to subscribe the formula contain-
ing the substance of these questions.]-
3. The Moderator gives him a suitable address,
and, after prayer, licenses him in the name of
the Lord Jesus Christ, and by the authority of
the Presbytery, to preach the Gospel, and he
and the brethren give him the right hand of
fellowship, and wish him all success in the
Lord.
10. No applicant shall be licensed until he has com-
pleted the twenty-first year of his age.
* Appendix, No. XIV.
t Appendix, No. VI.


CHAP. VIII.
ON THE EMPLOYMENT OF MISSIONARIES.
1. Missionaries are agents of the Church, employed
to labour in localities not under the charge of a settled
Ministry.
9. All applications for employment as Missionaries
are made to the Presbyteries within whose bounds the
applicants reside. On the recommendation of their
respective Presbyteries, applicants are examined by the
Assembly’s Board of Examination on their knowledge
of the Scriptures, and of the Standards of this Church,
their literary attainments, personal religion, and general
fitness for Missionary work.
3. The Board, having certified the qualifications of ap-
plicants, the Presbytery puts to them the questions pre-
scribed in the formula,* and having received satisfactory
answers, formally commissions them as Missionaries, and
places them for employment under the direction of the
Home Mission Committee.
4. A congregation or district requiring the service of
a Missionary communicates with the Presbytery of the
bounds, —the Presbytery applies to the Home Mission
Committee, —and the Committee appoints a Missionary
as required.
5. The Missionary, during the term of his appoint-
ment, is subject to the authority of the Presbytery of the
bounds.
6. The duties of the Missionary are to hold meetings
for Divine Service, to pay pastoral visits, and otherwise
* Appendix, No. XV.


to promote as opportunity is given the cause of religion
in the district committed to his charge.
7. The Missionary is required to report his operations
to the Presbytery of the bounds, at least once in three
months.
8. The Missionary is supported by the district in which
he labours. His minimum allowance is at the rate of
three pounds a-week, with residence and travelling
expenses to his sphere of labour. All payments are made
to him through the Home Mission Committee. It is
the duty of the Presbytery of the bounds to make the
local arrangements necessary for the collection and
transmission of the required contributions.


CHAP. IX.
ON THE ADMISSION OP MINISTERS PROM OTHER
DENOMINATIONS.
1. Ministers of other denominations are admitted to
the office of the Ministry in the Presbyterian Church of
Victoria, by the General Assembly alone, and require to
be recommended for admission by some Presbytery of
the Church. The recommendation must set forth the
grounds on which it is made.
9. Presbyteries before recommending any applicant,
are carefully to inquire as to his previous history, personal
godliness, prudence, attainments, and probable useful-
ness in this Church. They are also to ascertain that he
holds the doctrines of the Holy Scriptures in the sense
in which they are defined in the standards of this Church,
and that his views of church government are intelli-
gently Presbyterian.
3. Presbyteries shall not recommend any applicant
who has not substantially the same amount of theological
learning and literary acquirements as is demanded of
ordinary candidates for the Ministry.
4, An applicant with whom a Presbytery may be
satisfied except in respect to his literary acquirements,
may be employed with the sanction of the Assembly as an
ordained Missionary, with permission to exercise the full
duties of the Ministry, but shall be incapable of receiv-
ing a call except by a special resolution of the Assembly,
and with the sanction of the Examining Board.
5. An applicant, on being admitted by the Assembly,
shall remain on probation for twelve months before he
can accept a call from any vacant congregation of this
Church.


CHAP. X.
WIDOWS AND ORPHANS’ FUND.
The Presbyterian Church of Victoria has a Widows
and Orphans’ Fund for the benefit of the families of its
deceased ministers. This Fund is in the charge of a
standing committee of the General Assembly, by whom
it is administered under the following regulations :
1. Presbyteries are enjoined before inducting a
Minister into a charge, to require that he subscribe
a declaration connecting him with the Fund.*
3. Every Minister having charge of a congregation has
to pay an annual rate of £5 towards the Fund. ; This
rate is payable to the Assembly’s Treasurer, on the first,
day of October of each year.
3, A Minister ceasing, during his lifetime, to hold a
charge in this church, has the privilege of continuing
his interest in the Fund by paying an annual rate of
£lO.
4. A Minister, who is not a rate-payer, has no interest
in the Fund ; any Minister who fails for the three years
from the date of his induction to become a rate-payer, is
precluded thereafter from admission to an interest in the
Fund; any Minister who allows his rates to fall into
arrears for three years, thereafter ceases to have any
interest in the Fund.
5. Interest at the rate of ten per cent, per annum is
charged on all arrears of rates.
6. The Assembly orders a special annual collection
♦ Appendix, No. XVI.


to be made not later than in the month of April, on be-
half of the Fund, in all the congregations of the church.
7. The Widows and Orphans’ Fund committee are
instructed to report to the Assembly every instance of a
Minister not giving his congregation an opportunity of
making the annual collection.
8. The capital of the Fund is invested by the com-
mittee in the names of three trustees who are appointed
by the Assembly.
9. The widow of a minister who had complied with
the regulations of the Fund, receives an annuity of
£3O, payable half-yearly on the Ist day of January
and of July of each year, with £1 additional for every
full year up to 90 years during which her deceased
husband had had a charge in the Church, or had paid
an annual rate of £lO into the Fund. The minimum
annuity is thus £3O, and the maximum annuity £5O.
10. The annuity ceases to be paid at the re-marriage
of the annuitant.
11. All Ministers who entered with charges into the
Presbyterian Church of Victoria, at the date of the
Union, have the years during which they were Ministers
of the Synods which formed the Union reckoned in
their favour.
19. The orphans of those deceased ministers who had
not ceased during their lifetime to have an interest in
the Fund, receive severally an annuity of £lO, to be in-
creased to £9O in the event of the death of both parents,
and to cease on the annuitant reaching the age of 16
years ; such annuity to be paid to the surviving parent
or guardian of the orphan or orphans, and to be ex-
pended on their maintenance and education ; and the
committee are instructed to withhold payment when
they are not satisfied on that head.


13. It is the revenue of the Fund from collections,
-*ates, and interest on investments only which is respon-
sible for the annuities, and the Fund is not liable any
one year for more than such revenue of the year.
14. Annuitants have no claim against the officials of
the Assembly personally, nor against the rate-payers, nor
against the members of the committee who have charge
of the Fund, nor against the trustees either individually
or collectively, nor is there any personal liability incurred
in administering the Fund.
15. The General Assembly retains to itself the power
of making alterations on the amount of rates payable to
the Fund, and of annuities payable from the Fund, as
well as any other change on the regulations, which it
may think fit.




APPENDIX.
Commission of Exiling Elder.
(Place and Date).
The Session met and was constituted ; sederunt, &c., inter alia
(if there has been any other business before the Session), the Session
elected Mr. A. 8., one of their Members, to represent them in the
Presbytery of C., and General Assembly of the Presbyterian
Church of Victoria, during the current half-year (or other term).
Closed with prayer.
Extracted from the minutes of the Session of D,, by E. T.,
Session Clerk.
Bond to be Signed by Trustees on their Appointment.
1., A, 8., a duly appointed Trustee for the Congregation of C.,
in the Presbytery of D., do hereby acknowledge and declare, that,
all properties of every kind which are vested in me as such
Trustee, for the benefit of the said Congregation, or which at any
future time shall be acquired by them, and become so vested in me,
are and shall be held by me for their use, subject to the authority
and jurisdiction of the Presbyterian Church of Victoria; and I
engage that as a Trustee, and while continued in such office, I
shall on all occasions, and in every respect, faithfully, unhesitatingly,
and to the utmost of my power, obey, execute, and carry into
effect, the decisions and orders of the Courts of the said Church.
In witness whereof, I have set my hand to these presents,
at C., on the day of , 18—.
A. B.
Call to the Charge of a Vacant Congregation,
We, the undersigned,— (if a first call, residents in the district of
A., or, — if from a formed congregation, Members and adherents of the


Congregation at 8., in connection with the Presbytenan Church of
Victoria) —desirous of promoting the glory of God, and the good of
the Church, being destitute of a fixed Pastor, and being most as-
sured by good information, and our own experience of the minis-
terial abilities, piety, literature, and prudence, as also of the
suitableness to our capacities of the gifts of you C. D., preacher of
the gospel, have agreed to invite, call, and entreat, as we, by
these presents, do heartily invite, call, and entreat you to under-
take the office of Pastor among us, and the charge of our souls ,
and further, upon your accepting this our call, promise you all
dutiful respect, encouragement, and obedience in the Lord, and
to contribute to your suitable maintenance, as God may prosper
us In witness whereof we have subscribed these presents, this
Edict for the Ordination or Admission of a Minister.
The Presbytery of A., in connection with the Presbyterian
Church of Victoria, having resolved to proceed to the ordination
for induction) of the Eev. B. C., directed an edict to be issued in
common form; and they did, and hereby do issue this edict, giving
notice to all persons concerned, that if any of them have anything
to object to the life and doctrine of the said Eev. B. C., they
repair to the Presbytery, which is appointed to meet in this place,
on t h e day of ,at o’clock, and state the same;
with certification that if no one offer any relevant objection, and
unless relevant objections be proved forthwith the Presbytery
shall then proceed to the ordination (or induction) of the said Eev.
B. C. to the office of the Holy Ministry, and admit him to the pas-
toral charge of this Congregation.
Attested by D. 8., Presbytery Cleric.
Questions at the Ordination or Admission of Ministers.
Question for the Congregation.
Do you, the members of this congregation, testify your
adherence to the call which you have given to the Eev. A. B. to
be your minister, and do you cordially receive him and promise
to provide for him suitable maintenance, and to give him all due
respect, subjection, and encouragement in the Lord ?
Questions for the Minister.
1 Do you believe the Scriptures of the Old and New Testament
to be the Word of God, and the only rule of faith and practice ?


2. Do you acknowledge and approve of the Articles of Union
adopted by this Church, on the 9th of April, 1859, as the basis of
its constitution, and do you declare your cordial acceptance of the
same ?—these articles being as follow:
1. “That the Westminster Confession of Faith, the Larger and
Shorter Catechism, the Form of Presbyterial Church
Government, the Directory for Public Worship, and the
Second Book of Discipline, be the standards and for-
mularies of this Church.
2. “ That inasmuch as there is a difference of opinion in regard
to the doctrines contained in these standards, relative to the
power and duty of the civil magistrate in matters of
religion, the office-bearers of this Church, in subscribing
these standards and formularies, are not to be held as
countenancing any persecuting or intolerant principles, or
as professing any views in reference to the power and duty
of the civil magistrate, inconsistent with the liberty of
personal conscience, or the right of private judgment.
3. “That this church asserts for itself a separate and inde-
pendent character and position as a church, possesses
supreme jurisdiction over its subordinate judicatories, con-
gregations, and people, and will receive all ministers, and
preachers from other Presbyterian churches, applying for
admission, on an equal footing, who shall thereupon become
subject to its jurisdiction alone.”
3. Do you own and believe the whole doctrine contained in the
Standards of this Church, as enumerated and defined in its Articles
of Union, as an exhibition of the sense in which you understand
the Holy Scriptures ; and do you engage firmly and constantly to
adhere thereto, and to the utmost of your power assert, maintain,
and defend the same, and the purity of worship as presently
practised in this church ?
4. Are you persuaded that the Presbyterian Government and
discipline of this church are founded on the Word of God, and
agreeable thereto; and do you promise to submit to the said
government and discipline, and to concur with the same, and
never to endeavour, directly or indirectly, the prejudice or
subversion thereof, but to the utmost of your power, in your
station, to maintain, support, and defend the said discipline, and
Presbyterian Government by sessions, presbyteries, and general
assemblies, during all the days of your life ?
5. Do you promise to submit yourself willingly and humbly, in
the spirit of meekness, unto the admonitions of the brethren of
this presbytery, and be subject to them, and all other presbyteries,
and superior judicatories of this church, where God in His
providence shall cast your lot; and that according to your power,
you shall maintain the unity and peace of this church against


error and schism, notwithstanding of whatever trouble or per-
secution may arise, and that you will follow 110 divisive courses
from the present established doctrine, worship, discipline, and
government of this church ?
6. Are zeal for the glory of God, love to the Lord Jesus Christ,
and a desire to save souls, and not worldly interests or expecta-
tions, so far as you know your own heart, your great motives and
chief inducements to seek the office of the holy ministry ?
7. Have you used any undue methods, either by yourself or
others, in procuring this call ?
8. Do you accept of, and close with this call, and promise
through grace to perform all the duties of a faithful minister of
the gospel among this people ?
9. Do you promise to give conscientious attendance on the
courts of the church, to be subject to them in the Lord, to take a
due interest in their proceedings, and to study the things which
make for peace ?
10. Do you engage in the strength of divine grace, to live a holy
and circumspect life, to rule well your own house, and faithfully,
diligently, and cheerfully to discharge all the parts of the minis-
terial work, to the edifying of the body of Christ ?
11. And all these things you profess and promise, through grace,
as you shall be answerable at the coming of the Lord Jesus
Christ ?
Formula to be Signed by Ministers and Elders at their
Ordination or Admission, and by Probationers on Ke-
ceiving License.
I A. 8., do hereby declare that I acknowledge and approve
of the Articles of Union adopted by this Church on the 9th April,
1859, as the basis of its constitution, and that I do cordially
accept of the same —these articles being as follow :
1. “That the Westminster Confession of Faith, the Larger and
Shorter Catechism, the Form of Presbyterial Church Government,
the Directory for Public Worship, and the Second Book of
Discipline, be the Standards and Formularies of this Church.
2. “ That inasmuch as there is a difference of opinion in regard
to the doctrines contained in these standards relative to the
power and duty of the civil magistrate in matters of religion, t e
office bearers of this Church, in subscribing these standards and
formularies, are not to be held as any persecuting
or intolerant principles, or as professing any views in reference
to the power and duty of the civil magistrate, inconsistent with
the liberty of personal conscience, or the right of private judg-
ment.


3. “That this Church asserts for itself a separate and inde-
pendent character and position as a Church, possesses supreme
jurisdiction over its subordinate judicatories, congregations, and
people, and will receive all ministers and preachers from other
Presbyterian Churches, applying for admission, on an equal
footing, who shall thereupon become subject to its jurisdiction
alone.”
I own and believe the whole doctrine contained in the standards
of this Church, as enumerated and defined in its Articles of Union,
as an exhibition of the sense in which I understand the Holy
Scriptures, and acknowledge it as a confession of my faith; as
likewise I own the purity of worship presently practised in this
Church, and the Presbyterian government thereof; which doctrine,
worship, and government, I am persuaded are founded on the
Word of God, and agreeable thereto; and I promise that, through
the grace of God, I shall firmly and constantly adhere to the
same, and to the utmost of my power shall, in my station, assert,
maintain, and defend the said doctrine, worship, discipline and
government of this Church, by Sessions, Presbyteries, and General
Assemblies; and that I shall, in my practice, conform myself
to the said worship and submit to the said discipline and
government, and never endeavour, directly nor indirectly, the
prejudice or subversion of the same; and I promise that I shall
follow no divisive course from the doctrine, worship, discipline
or government of this Church ; renouncing all doctrines, tenets,
and opinions whatsoever contrary to, or inconsistent with, the
said doctrine, worship, discipline, or government of the same.
Edict fob the Ordination op Elders.
Whereas A. B. and C. D., Members of this Congregation, and
lately elected to be Ruling Elders in the same, have declared
their acceptance of said call, and been judged by the Session
qualified for the office, notice is hereby given that if any person or
persons have objections why the said A. B. and C. D., or any
of them should not be ordained to the office of Ruling Elders, they
repair to the Meeting of Session, appointed to be held in E.,
on , the day of ,at o’clock, to state the same;
with certification that if no valid objection be then made, the
Session will proceed to the ordination without delay.
By order of Session, F. G., Clerk.
VIII.
Questions at the Ordination or Admission of Elders.
1. Do you believe the Scriptures of the Old and New Testa-


ment to be the Word of God, and the only rule of faith and
practice ?
2. Do you acknowledge and approve of the Articles of Union
adopted by this Church on the 9th April, 1859, as the basis of its
constitution, and do you declare your cordial acceptance of the
same ?
3. Do you own and believe the whole doctrine contained in the
Standards of this Church, as enumerated and defined in its
Articles of Union, as an exhibition of the sense in which you
understand the Holy Scriptures; and do you engage firmly and
constantly to adhere thereto, and to the utmost of your power
assert, maintain, and defend the same, and the purity of worship
as presently practised in this church ?
4, Do you believe the Presbyterian form of Church Government
to be founded on and agreeable to the Word of God ; and do you
promise to adhere to and support it, and to yield submission in
the Lord to the courts of this church ?
5. Do you adhere to your acceptance of the call of this con-
gregation, to exercise among them the office of ruling elder ?
6. Do you engage through divine grace to discharge with
diligence and faithfulness the various duties of the office, watching
over the flock, shewing yourself a pattern of good works, and
giving a conscientious attendance on the Meetings of Session, Pres-
bytery, and Assembly, when duly called so to do ?
7. All these things you profess and promise, through grace, as
you shall be answerable at the coming of the Lord Jesus Christ?
Forms of Libel.
No 1. —Form of Libel for Immorality.
Unto the Rev. the Moderator and other Members of the
Presbytery of A., in connection with the Presbyterian
Church of Victoria.
The complaint of B. C., andD. E., a Committee appointed to pro-
secute the matter after-mentioned,
Sheweth,
That the Rev. F. G., Minister of the Congregation ofH., has
been guilty of the sin of . In so far as upon the day of
, 18 —, or about that time, and within the house of I. J.
situated in K., he, the said F. G., did ( describe the circumstances
attending the offence charged, specifying aggravations if any) to the
great scandal of religion and disgrace of his sacred profession.
May it therefore please your reverend Court to appoint
service of this libel to be made on the said Rev. F, G.,


and him to appear before you to answer to the same ;
and on his admitting the charge, or on the same being
proved against him, to visit him with such censure as
the Word of God and the rules and discipline of
this Church in such cases prescribe, in order that he
and all others may be deterred from committing the
like offences in all time coming; or to do otherwise
in the premises as to you may appear expedient and
proper.
According to justice, &c.
(To be signed by complainers.')
List of Witnesses and Documents to be adduced in proving the
foregoing Libel.
1. — Name, Designation, and Address of Witness.
2 « « “
3. —Title and Nature of the Documents.
No. 2, —Form of Libel for Heresy.
Unto the Rev. the Moderator, &c. (as in the preceding form).
Sheweth
That to’hold and teach (state the doctrine ascribed to the party),
is contrary to the Word of God and the Standards of the Fresh}-
terian Church of Victoria.
That the Rev. F. G., Minister of the Congregation of H.,
holds and has taught the erroneous doctrine above stated. In so
far as he has stated (if in a book or pamphlet written or published
by him, describe the publication and quote the passage in question; or
if in a sermon or discourse preached by him , describe where and when
preached, and quote the language complained of, with such argument
or deductions as may appear necessary to prove that it amounts to the
error alleged).
May it therefore please, &c., (as in the preceding example
stopping at “ that he and all others,” and substituting
that the pure doctrine of God’s Holy Word, as held by
this Church, may be vindicated and maintained ; or to
do otherwise in the premises, &c.
According to justice, &c.
(To be signed by complainers.)
List of Documents and Witnesses to be produced in proving the
foregoing Libel.
1. — Title, and Nature oj Documents.
2. — Name, Designation, and Address of Witness.
3. — „ » »


Order of the Presbytery on the Libel.
At A., the day of , 18—. The Presbytery of A,, in
connection with the Presbyterian Church of Victoria, appoint a
Copy of the foregoing Libel, List of Witnesses and Documents,
and this Deliverance, to be served by their Officer, M. N., on
the said Eev. F. G., and him to appear before the Presbytery
within their usual place of meeting, at A., on the day
of , 18—, to answer to said Libel; said Service being always
made at least ten days prior to the day of appearance, and grant
Warrant for citing Witnesses for both Parties.
P. C., Presbytery Clerk,
Citation of Party or of Witness.
To (naming the person.) Take Notice, that you are hereby
summoned to appear before the Reverend the Presbytery of A., in
connection with the Presbyterian Church of Victoria, at , on
the' day of , 18 —, to answer to the Libel, a Copy of
which is prefixed, (or to give Evidence in the Charge against the
Rev. F. G., Minister of H., now pending before said Presbytery.)
Served this day of , 18—, before these Witnesses O. P,,
and S. T., both residents in H.
M. N., Officer.
Certificate op Service to be Written by the Officer
on the Principal Libel.
A Copy of the within Libel, List of Witnesses and Documents,
and Deliverance, with Notice of Appearance in Terms of Deliver-
ance were served on the within designed Rev. F. G., by deliverance
of the same to him personally (or by leaving the same within his
dwelling), on the day of •, 18 —.
M, N., Officer.
g ‘ | Witnesses
XIII.
Sentence of Deposition.
In the Name of the Lord Jesus Christ, the sole King and Head
of this Church, and by virtue of the power and authority committed


by him to it, I do now solemnly depose you, F. G., Minister of the
Congregation of H., from the office of the Holy Ministry, prohibit-
ing and discharging you from exercising the same or any part
thereof, in all time coming; and Ido declare the Church of H.
vacant from and after the day and date of this sentence.
XIV.
Questions at the Licensing of Probationers.
(For the Ist, 2nd, 3rd, and4th Questions to Probationers, see the Ist
2nd, 3rd, and 4th Questions to Elders at their Ordination).
5. Are zeal for the glory of God, love to the Lord Jesus Christ,
and a desire to save souls, so far as you know your own heart,
your great motives and chief inducements to seek the office of
the holy ministry ?
6. Do you engage in the strength of divine grace, to live a
holy and circumspect life, and faithfully, diligently, and cheerfully
to discharge all the parts of the work of a Probationer for the
Ministry in connection with this Church ?
7. All these things you profess and promise, through grace,
as you shall be answerable at the coming of the Lord Jesus
Christ ?
Questions at the Appointment of Missionaries.
(For the Ist, 2nd, 3rd, and 4th Questions to Home Missionaries, see
the 1 st, 2nd, 3rd, and 4th Questions to Elders at their Ordination).
5. Do you adhere to your application for service as a Mis-
sionary under the direction of this Church; and do you engage
in the strength of divine grace, to live a holy and circumspect life,
and faithfully, diligently, and cheerfully to discharge all the duties
of the office ?
6. All these things you profess and promise, through grace,
as you shall be answerable at the coming of the Lord Jesus
Christ ?
Form of Declaration by a Minister Connecting Himself
with the Widows and Orphans’ Fund.
I, A. 8., being about to be admitted to the Pastoral Charge of
the’Congregation of C., in connection with the Presbyterian Church
of Victoria, and recognising the obligation of that Church to make


provision for the families of itfe Deceased Ministers, do hereby
engage statedly to pay the rate imposed by the General Assembly
on behalf of its Widows and Orphans’ Fund, and otherwise to
comply with the regulations according to which the Fund is
administered.
As witness at C., on this day of , 18 —,
A. B.
Attested by D. E., Presbytery Clerk.
mu o
WALKER, MAT AND CO., PRINTERS, 99 BOUKKE STREET WEST-




