

SYDWEY ;
PRINTED fuk the use of the members of the institute.
M 1 J ilJi/ i: UU 1. V./X X u * ' ‘avu ■ /■ ■ ■




RULES
OF THE
LAW INSTITUTE
NEW SOUTH WALES.
SATZDTsTIEI'Sr :
PRINTED FOR THE USE OF THE MEMBERS OF THE INSTITUTE.




RULES
OF THE
Jfoui Institute of |leiu Mules
I. This Society shall be called “ The Law Institute of New Title.
11. —All Attorneys admitted in the Colony shall be eligible as fo^iHmSev? 0
Members of the Institute. n ,. ,
111. This Institute is established to represent generally the t e itute °
views and wishes of the Members —to afford greater opportunities
for the acquirement and diffusion of legal knowledge, by bringing
questions of interest before its Members monthly, for lecture,
debate, or otherwise —to preserve the integrity of their branch of
the legal profession —to watch proposed changes, and aid amend-
raents°and reforms likely to be beneficial in the law—to suppress
any illegal or dishonorable practice—to promote good feeling,
and encourage proper conduct amongst the members of the pro-
fession —to afford means of reference for the amicable settlement
of professional differences- —and to consider and determine upon
all matters affecting the interests of the profession generally. _ be
IV. All Members of the Institute shall be elected by being ectodby c ou , lcU
proposed, seconded, and carried at any Meeting of Council, and
shall consist of Members paying an Annual Subscription of iwo
Guineas who only shall be entitled to hold office, end ordinary
Members paying an Annual Subscription of One Guinea; but
any ordinary Member may, at any time, by letter to the
Secretary, have his name placed on the list of Members enclosing
the additional amount of subscription; and any Member-may,
in like manner, have his name placed on the list of ordinary
Members—provided always that any person who shall have been
rejected by the Council may become a Member upon being pro-
posed, seconded, and carried at any General Meeting.
V. -The Institute shall be supported by Donations, Bequests, &c Members,
and Subscriptions, in the following manner :
Every person elected a Member during the first halt of any
year, shall, within fourteen days after his election, pay to
the Treasurer the Annual Subscription in advance. And
every person elected after the first half of the year sha ,
within fourteen days after his election, pay to the Ireasurei


one-half of the Annual Subscription in advance. And in
default of any such payment being made, the Council may
declare the election void.
Subscriptions Yl.—All Subscriptions shall be deemed due on the first day of
January of every year, in advance. And if, after notice in
writing from the Secretary, any Member shall not, within seven
days, pay to the Treasurer the amount of his Subscription, such
Default in pay- default shall, at the next Meeting of the Council, be entered in
ment ‘ the minutes of their proceedings, and from thenceforth, unless
such non-payment be accounted for to the satisfaction of the
Council, the defaulter may be declared by the Council to have
ceased to be a Member, and lorfeit all his interest in the property
of the Institute.
Members to sign yn.— No person shall be entitled to the privileges of Member-
Euies. ship until he shall have signed an undertaking, at the foot of a
copy of the Eules in the Secretary’s hands, that he will conform
thereto, and to all other Rules of the Institute, to be from time
to time made. Provided always, that the signature of country
Members may be affixed by any Solicitor duly authorised in
writing, upon the authority being delivered up to the Secretary.
Register of Mem- YIII. —Immediately on the election of every Member his name
bers ‘ shall be entered in alphabetical oj-der, in a book to be kept by
the Secretary for that purpose, to be called the “Register of
Members,” together with the date of his election, and his pro-
fessional and private address —the letter 0 being placed after
ordinary members ; and no name shall be erased from such
Register except by order of the Council duly entered on the
Minutes.
Register of Mem- jx.—The “Register of Members” shall, for all the purposes
dence to be evl ’ of the Society, be considered as containing a correct list of the
Members and of their respective addresses, and it shall be incum-
bent on each Member to ascertain that his name and address are
correctly entered therein.
Letters by Post. x. —Every letter, relating to any matter concerning the
Society, which shall be sent by the Secretary, or by the Council,
or otherwise, pursuant to the bye-laws, to a Member by the post,
addressed to him by his name and address as entered in the
“Register of Members,” shall be considered to have reached
him, and he shall be deemed to have sufficient notice of the con-
tents of such letter, and shall be bound and concluded thereby.
Officers of the Xl.—After the year 1871, the affairs of the Institute shall be
institute. uu( ier the control of a Council of Nine Members, including a
President and a Vice President, to be from time to time elected
in the manner hereinafter provided; but no vacancies shall be
filled up in the Council for 1871, unless the number shall fall
below a President, Vice President, and Seven Members of
Council, and then only to keep up such number.
Notice of persons Xll.—The name of every person intended to be proposed by
President a or any Member as President or Vice President of the Society, or as
Vice President.


a Member of the Council, shall be transmitted in writing to the
Secretary, three days at least before the day of election, and a
list of the persons so proposed, together with the name of the
Member proposing each such person shall be exhibited in the
Library of the Institute two days before the Meeting; and no
person shall be capable of being elected President or Vice
President of the Society, or a Member of the Council, whose
name shall not have been so transmitted. #
XIII.—In the month of December in each year, a Meeting °f^J General
the Members of the Institute shall be convened, and the then re-
tiring Council shall report their proceedings during the past year,
and shall produce their accounts, duly audited ; and the Presi-
dent, Vice President, and other Members of the Council for the Section of Coun-
ensuing year shall be elected by Balloting lists, or at a Special
Meeting of Members to be thereafter Tionvened, who shall hold
office until the election of their Successors. And all retiring
Officers shall at all times be eligible for re-election. At the same
time, two Auditors shall be elected from the Members of the Auditors.
Institute, not being Members of the Council, who shall audit the
Accounts preparatory to the next Annual General Meeting. .
XIY.— The Council shall have the sole management of the Powers
affairs of the Institute, and of the income and property thereof,
for the purposes of the Society, and shall have the exclusive light
of appointing an Honorary Treasurer and an Honorary Secretary
(from amongst their own body, or from amongst the othei Mem-
bers of the Institute, not being ordinary Members, and who shall
if not Members of Council become ex-officio Members thereof),
and one or more Assistant Secretaries, a Librarian, and such
other Officers, Clerks, Attendants and Servants, and at such
Salaries as they may deem necessary, and of them if
they think fit, and shall prescribe their respective duties; and
such Council shall at all times consider all affecting,
either directly or indirectly, the interests of the profession, and if
they think fit so to do, shall bring the same under the notice of
the Members of the Institute at anv General or Special Meeting;
and shall, if the Funds of the Institute justify the same, have To provide room
power to procure or rent a Koom or Building for the use of the
Members, as a Hall, Library, Club, or otherwise; from time to And Library,
time to lay out such portion of the Funds of the Institute as they
may deem expedient in the purchase of Law and other Books
and Publications, including Newspapers, for the Library; to
make such Bye-laws as may be desirable for the efficient Make Bye-laws,
management of the affairs, and the promotion of the objects of
the Institute, provided the same are not at variance with these
Rules, and are confirmed at any General or Special Meeting of
the Members of the Institute; to appoint Sub-Committees
any purpose or purposes; and generally to perform such acts as
may be requisite to carry out the objects of the Institute.


vest XV.—All the Property of the Institute shall be held by the
Vic/presldent President and Vice President, for the time being, as Trustees for
the Members, and be disposed of from time to time as the
Council shall determine.
Cound P ° f XVl.—The Council shall meet in their Offices, or in some con-
venient place in Sydney, during the first week of each month,
and it shall he competent for any Three Members of the Council
by writing, stating the object of the Meeting to request the
Secretary to convene a Special Meeting of the Council, which
Meeting phall be forthwith called by the Secretary, who shall
also of his own motion on having urgent business to lay before
the Council call such Meeting, by giving one days’ notice in
writing of such Meeting, and naming the subject to be then con-
Quorum. sidered. Three Members shall form a quorum at all Meetings
of the Council.
chairman at XVII. —At all General Meetings of the Members, and Meetings
Meetings. 0 £ Council, the President shall take the Chair, and in his
absence the Vice President, and in the absence of the President
and Vice President, one of the Members of the Institute, or of
the Council, as the case may require, to be chosen by the
Members then present.
Adjourned Meet- XVIII.—Any Meeting of Members or of the Council may be
ngs ’ adjourned, and in case of such adjournment, the business to be
transacted at such Adjourned Meeting shall be specified pre-
viously to the adjournment taking place, and shall be entered on
the Minutes, and no business shall be transacted at the Adjourned
Meeting which shall not have been so specified and entered,
chairman to XIX • —The presiding Chairman at every Meeting of the
vote! castmg Council shall have one vote, and, in case of an equality of votes,
he shall also have a casting vote.
Minutes ° f Pro- XX.—Minutes shall be made in Books, to be kept for the pur-
pose, of all the proceedings at the General and Special Meetings
of the Members, and Minutes shall also be made of the proceed-
ings of the Council at their General and Special Meetings, and of
the names of the Members attending the same.
Suspension of XXl.—The Council may, ex mere motu , or on the complaint in
Council? 3 writing of any person, suspend any Member of the Institute from
his privileges as Member, or may suspend any of their own body
from acting as Member of the Council, for conduct derogatory to
the profession, or for refusing to conform to the Pules of the
Institute, provided Four Members of the Council at least be
present at the Meeting at which such suspension shall be resolved
upon, of whom Three at the least consent thereto; and provided
also, that each Member of the Council shall have had previous
notice that the question of such suspension was to be considered
at such Meeting, and that in case of a Member of the Institute,
such Member shall also have had due notice that the question of
bis suspension would be considered at such Meeting of the


Council, and thereupon such Member shall he entitled to attend
before the Council, for the purpose of hearing and answering any
charge which may have been preferred against him, and of ques-
tioning the evidence in support thereof, or disproving the same,
or giving an explanation, or making any statement he may think
fit, and he shall thereupon retire; and the Council shall make
such Eules or Bye-laws for carrying out this Eule as they may
think proper.
XXII. —Whenever the Council may have suspended any
Member of the Institute, or of their o\\ n body, they shall, with power thereon,
all convenient speed, convene a Special Meeting of the Members
of the Institute (unless the usual Annual Meeting be about to
lake place within one month from the day of such suspension),
for the purpose of considering the same ; and upon a report
being made to such Meeting, the Members present shall have
power to expel or remove from office, as the case may be, such
Member so suspended, or to reinstate him in his former position
wholly discharged from such suspension.
XXIII. —ln case any Member of the Society shall, in conse- b f” a p“i e
quence of the order of the Supreme Court, be rendered incapable of practising by
by reason of malpractice, or other professional misconduct
practising in the said Court, such person shall forthwith cease to cease to be Mem-
be a Member of the Society.
XXIV- —In case any Member of the Council shall die, or not t \ c Eo f f BTlii '
duly attend at three consecutive Meetings of such Council, Members’of
General or Special, unless excused attendance by the Council, or CounciL
shall by notice in writing to the Secretary resign Office, the re-
maining Members of the Council may, unless such non-attendance be su p*
be caused by sickness, or temporary absence from Sydney, of
which the Member shall have given notice, appoint some other
Member of the Institute to be a Member of such Council in the
place ot the Member so dying, absenting himself, or resigning,
XXY. —All Subscriptions and other Moneys payable to the r °“ I s^P^ ld t 0
Institute shall be paid to the Treasurer, who shall forthwith
place the same in a Bank, to be named by the Council, to the Bank-
credit of the Institute; and no sum shall be paid on account of E^ s ent ofac ‘
the Institute until ordered by the Council, and such order be
duly entered in the Book of the Proceedings of the Council, and
all cheques shall be signed by the Treasurer as such. Cheques signed.
XXYI.—Upon receiving a Eequisition, signed by six or more ® e JJ. eral
Members of the Institute, or upon a Eesolution of the Council, Members,
the Secretary shall convene a Special Meeting of the Members to
be held after Ten, and within Fifteen days from the receipt by
him of such Eequisition or Eesolution; provided always that
such Eequisition and Eesolution, and the notices thereunder-
convening the Meeting, shall distinctly specify the subject to be
considered, and that subject only shall bo discussed at such
Meeting.


Notices of Gtne- XXVII.—The Secretary shall give Three days’ notice in
i.ii Meetings,. to each Member of the Institute, of every General
Meeting, whether Annual or Special, by duly posting such
notice.
Business at XXVIII.—After the ordinary business of any General Meet-
ings. eral Meet " ing shall have been disposed of, any business which the Council
think proper to introduce, shall then be entered upon and
discussed.
After 8° U Mem XXlX.—After the business introduced by the Council shall
bewmaymake’ have been disposed of, it shall be competent for any Member of
propositions and i ns titute to make any proposition in connection with the
give notices. . -r , r ti • . ■ i
operations of the Institute, and to give any notice he may think
fit of such proposition to be considered at a future Meeting.
Mode of conduct- XXX.—In case any debate shall arise upon any subject, no
Member shall (unless the Meeting be in Committee) be per-
mitted to speak more than once upon the same question, except
for the purpose of explanation; but a Member merely seconding
a motion shall not be considered to have spoken thereto.
Voting hy Proxy XXXI. —At all General Meetings, votes may be given (except
as hereinafter mentioned) by Proxy, such Proxy to be a Member,
and appointed according to the form given in the Schedule, and
the votes of such Proxy shall effectual as if given by the
Member in person ; but no Member shall at any Meeting be
Proxy for more than two persons, and every such appointment
shall only continue in force for the particular Meeting for which
it was given, and for every Adjourned Meeting which may take
place in consequence of such Meeting: Provided that no Member
shall be allowed to vote by Proxy in the cases of the election or
expulsion of Members, or on any question personally affecting
any Member of the Institute.
As to irregular!- XXXII. — In case any irregularity shall occur in the convening
ties m Meetings. holding of any General Meeting, or in any election or other
proceedings at any such Meeting, and the same shall not be pub-
licly noticed and objected to at such Meeting, all proceedings of
such Meeting shall be of the same force and validity as if no
such irregularity had occurred but if any irregularity shall be
publicly noticed and objected to, the Meeting shall decide
thereon, and such decision shall be final and conclusive.
Hours of Library XXXIII.—The Library shall be open to the Members at such
hours as the Council shall from time to time determine, but no
Member shall on any account be permitted to remove any Book,
Periodical, or Newspaper from the room, for any purpose.
Admission of XXXIV. —Articled Clerks may become ordinary Members, as
Artie c er s Clerks in the Supreme Court or other Law Offices, and
recognised Managing Clerks who shall have been so in one office
for the preceding three years to their application.
mittef CrS ad " XXXV. —Every Member of the Institute shall have the privi-
lege of introducing to the Rooms or Library of the Institute any


friend (being an Attorney, articled or Managing Clerk) who may
be on a visit to this Colony; but no other persons shaU have
access to the Library or Rooms except Members; and if any£r ytoßo ° ’
iniury be don© to .any of tho Books, Periodicals, or Furniture,
the person causing the injury shall forthwith either purchase a
new copy of such Book or Periodical, or a new and similar article
of Furniture, or pay the value thereof T .... Corresponding
XXXYI. With a view to extend the benefits ot tne institute, Mem b er s.
communication shall be opened by the Council as speedily as
possible with similar Societies, and with Members of the pro-
fession in other Countries, for the purpose of obtaining and com-
municating information on all matters connected with legal and
other proceedings of a character likely to prove beneficial or
interesting; and such Members shall, so long as they continue in
correspondence with the Council, be Honorary Members of the
In XXXyiL—lt shall be lawful for the Council to adopt such Act^fjncorpo-
proceedings as they may deem advisable for obtaining an Act to tained.
incorporate the Members of the Institute, together with such
other Acts as may be expedient, for regulating the admission
and practice of Attorneys in the Colony, and suppressing the
practice of the profession by persons not legally qualified
* XXXYIII. —No alteration in or addition to these Rules shall
be made without the consent of a majority of two-thirds of the
Members attending a General Meeting of the Institute, specially
convened for that purpose, and the notice convening such
Meeting shall state the exact nature of such proposed alteration
or addition.


SCHEDULE.
FORM OF PEOXY.
I do hereby appoint
of my proxy, to vote for me,
and in ray name, at a Meeting of the Members of the Law
Institute of New South Wales, to be holden on the
day of 18 , and at any adjournment
or adjournments of such Meeting.
Dated this day of 18
(Name)
(Residence)
F. Cunninghame and Co., Printers, 18C Pitt-street.


T^f
Buuo
F (147
M C&&
■^V
» T> . m l **'


