

CENSORSI
Revised
Issued by the authority of the
Deputy Chief Censor (Australia)


I <i KD «/E V G AZ£ rrE JP||*#«^
l^^l


STRICTLY CONFIDENTIAL
NOT FOR PUBLICATION.
RULES
FOR THE
CENSORSHIP OF THE PRESS
Revised to 31st January, 1917
Issued by the authority of the
Deputy Chief Censor (Australia)


INDEX
Paragraph Page
1. General Principles of Censorship 3
2. Submission of Doubtful Matter 5
3. Reference to Censorship Operations 5
4. Submission of Headlines 5
5. Cartoons and Pictures 5
G. Re-submission in Case of Delayed Publication .... 6
7. Approval not Inferable from Publication 6
8. Unofficial, Sensational or Exaggerated Reports .... 6
9. Official Notifications 6
10. Prejudicial Criticism and Complaints 7
11. Statements likely to cause disaffection or alarm or to
prejudice His Majesty’s Forces or Foreign Relations 7
12. Naval Information and Shipping News 8
13. Revelation of Means of Defence in British or Allied
Territory 10
14. Recruiting and Enlistment 10
15. Organisation, Equipment and Movements of the Aus-
tralian Imperial Expeditionary Force ]]
16. Health and Conduct of Troops 12
17. Casualties, Obituary Notices, &e 13
18. Gallipoli Campaign 13
19. Operations in the Pacific 14
20. Treatment of Aliens 14
21. Trading with the Enemy 14
22. Export of Contraband 15
23. Gold Reserve 15
24. Enemy Raids 15
25. Espionage 15


RULES
FOR THE
Censorship of the Press
All officers of the Press to whom these instruc-
tions are communicated are to regard them as
strictly confidential. They are to he communi-
cated only to those officers whose duty it is to
ensure their observance, and such officers are
not to convey to any other person the infor-
mation contained in them.
i. GENERAL PRINCIPLES OF CENSORSHIP.
The primary object of Censorship is to prevent assistance
being given or naval or military information being trans-
mitted to the enemy. The enemy is assisted by reports or
statements which cause disaffection to His Majesty, which
excite public alarm, which prejudice the recruiting, training,
discipline, or administration of any of His Majesty’s Forces,
or which adversely affect His Majesty’s relations with foreign
Powers.
These principles are safeguarded chiefly by the following
regulations:—
(i)War Precautions Regulation 19:—-
(l)No person shall without lawful authority collect, record,
publish, communicate, or attempt to elicit—
(a)any information with respect to —
(i)the movement, numbers, description, condition, or
disposition of any of the Forces, ships, or war
materials of His Majesty, or any of His
Majesty’s allies; or


(ii)the plans or conduct, or supposed plans or con-
duct, of any naval or military operations by any
such Forces or ships; or
(iii)any works or measures undertaken for or con-
nected with or intended for the fortification or
defence of any place; or
(6)any information intended to be communicated to the
enemy, or of such a nature as is calculated to be or
might directly or indirectly be useful to the enemy.
(2)lf any person contravenes the provisions of this Regu-
lation, or without lawful authority or excuse has in his
possession any document containing any such informa-
tion as aforesaid, he shall be guilty of an offence against
the Act.
(ii)War Precautions Regulation 28(1): —
No person shall, by word of mouth, or in writing, or in any
newspaper, periodical, book, circular, or other printed
publication—
(a)spread false reports, or make false statements or
reports, or statements likely to cause disaffection to His
Majesty, or public alarm, or to interfere with the suc-
cess of His Majesty’s Forces by land or sea, or to pre-
judice His Majesty’s relations with foreign powers; or
(b)spread reports or make statements likely to prejudice
the recruiting, training, discipline, or administration of
any of His Majesty’s Forces.
(iii)War Precautions Regulation 28C: —
The printer or publisher of any newspaper, periodical, or
other publication, shall not, without the permission of an
officer of the Censorship Staff —
(1) Print or publish any statement to the effect or from
which it can be inferred, that any alteration, addition,
or omission has been made by the Censorship in any
matter; or
(2)Print any matter in such a way as to show or suggest
that any alteration, addition, or omission has been made
by the Censorship; or
(3)Print or publish any statement to the effect that publi-
cation of any matter has been forbidden.


2. SUBMISSION OF DOUBTFUL MATTER.
The following Rules are issued to the Press as a guide to the
classes of matter, the publication of which is permitted or
prohibited. In cases of doubt galley proofs in duplicate
should be submitted to the Censor.
Items of news which appear to contravene the Censorship
Rules may nevertheless be freely submitted for scrutiny.
Cases arise in which the formal objection may be waived. The
observance of the general principle underlying the Censorship
is, however, imperative, and it is hoped that only such matter
as is not radically inconsistent with the general principle will
ordinarily be submitted.
3. REFERENCE TO CENSORSHIP OPERATIONS.
Particularised statements with reference to the exercise of the
Censorship are not to be made. To call the attention of the
public to the fact that a particular item, name or locality has
been suppressed, is to defeat the object of suppressing that
particular.
4. SUBMISSION OF HEADLINES.
Articles submitted for censorship must contain the heading
or headings under which it is proposed to publish them, and
such articles are not to be published with headlines that have
not been passed by the Censorship.
5. CARTOONS AND PICTURES.
The principles of the Censorship are applicable to cartoons
and pictures as well as to letterpress.
It is, for example, not permissible to publish—
(a)pictures of any work of defence, arsenal, camp, depot, tele-
graph or signal station, war material, dockyard or any
object intended to facilitate navigation in or into a
harbour;
(h)pictures of any transport, aircraft, or warship belonging to
Great Britain or to an Allied Power, except in the circum-
stances defined in paragraph 12(i) of these Rules.


(c)cartoons likely to discourage recruiting;
(d) cartoons likely to offend Allied or Neutral Nations;
(e) illustrations of gruesome effects of warfare.
6. RE-SUBMISSION IN CASE OF DELAYED PUB-
LICATION.
Matter submitted to the Censor, and passed for publication,
but not published within one month must be re-submitted
before it is published.
7. APPROVAL NOT INFERABLE FROM PUBLI-
CATION.
The fact that matter which contravenes the Censorship Rules
has been improperly published in a newspaper does not justify
its publication in any other newspaper.
8. UNOFFICIAL, SENSATIONAL OR EXAGGER-
ATED REPORTS.
The Press is requested to avoid misrepresenting the military
situation by publishing—
(a)rumours and unconfirmed or unauthorised reports of vic-
tories or defeats on land or sea;
(b) headlines exaggerating successes or failures of any kind.
9. OFFICIAL NOTIFICATIONS.
Official notifications to the Press arc those issued by Com-
monwealth Ministers, the members of the Naval and Military
Boards, and also statements by District Commandants if offi-
cially issued for publication on matters pertaining to their
districts.
Such official notifications may be published without reference
to the Censor; but the Press will be held responsible for the
publication of unauthorised statements.
The source of the information must be mentioned in the
announcement, e.g., “The Minister for Defence states, etc.,”
“The Naval Board announces, etc.”


io. PREJUDICIAL CRITICISM & COMPLAINTS.
(i) While legitimate criticism will not be suppressed, the publica- criticism of
tiou of statements likely to prejudice the recruiting, training, Ad, " ,, "»tration.
discipline, or administration of any of His Majesty’s Forces is
prohibited.
As disparaging criticism is often of an exaggerated character
and tends to weaken discipline or discourage recruiting, com-
plaints will at once be made the subject of enquiry. For this
purpose such complaints should be submitted to the Censor
before publication or referred to the Commandant or Depart-
ment concerned. If necessary, further reference can be
made to the Minister or the War Committee.
(ii) Statements of soldiers alleging bad treatment either in Aus- soldiers’
tralia or elsewhere should be submitted before publication. Complaints,
Most of these are ex parte, and many are false or exaggerated
and prejudicial to recruiting. Such statements will be for-
warded to the proper authorities for investigation.
ii. STATEMENTS LIKELY TO CAUSE DISAFFEC-
TION OR ALARM, OR TO PREJUDICE HIS
MAJESTY’S FORCES OR FOREIGN RELA-
TIONS.
(i)The Press shall not publish statements —
(a)evincing disloyalty, or likely to encourage disloyalty;
(6J likely to discourage enlistment;
(c)likely to prejudice the training, discipline, or administra-
tion of any of His Majesty’s Forces;
(d) likely to cause public alarm;
(e)likely to prejudice *His Majesty’s relations with foreign
Powers.
(ii) The “Peace Society” has issued certain circulars which may |)pi ( So( . j( . tv
prejudice recruiting. The Press is requested not to give pub- Publications,
licity to such circulars.
(iii) Disparaging statements about America and American goods Anierj( . a
for the purpose of advertising local products must be
suppressed. America being a Neutral Country, its methods
and goods are not to be referred to in the Press or in adver-
tisements in any hostile manner.


(iv)The Press is requested to refrain from publishing any matter
likely to reflect on the loyalty of our Irish fellow-subjects, or
to incite adverse criticism of their actions, or to impair the
essential unity of the people of the British Empire.
Japan and
(v)The Press is requested to abstain from the publication
Coloured Labour of ail y ma tter which may prejudice the relations of the
Japanese and the Australian Governments. Particular care
should be taken to avoid at present all allusions to the ques-
tion of coloured labour.
12. NAVAL INFORMATION & SHIPPING NEWS.
(i)No information concerning the movements, names, numbers,
description, or condition of ships of the British Fleet or of the
Fleet of any Ally or contingent Ally is to be published until
released by the Censorship. Such reference to the whereabouts
of officers as would indicate the position of a ship is included
in this prohibition.
Picture postcards, photographs, silhouettes, and drawings of
any ship of His Majesty’s Navy, or of the Navy of any Ally,
are not to be published without submission to the Censor.
(ii)The fact that H.M.A.S. ‘‘Australia” is in English waters may
be published, but any other statements concerning this ship
and other vessels of the Royal Australian Navy should be
submitted for censorship before publication.
(iii)Any reference to the nature of any armament carried by
armed merchantmen is prohibited.
(iv)No reference must be made in the Press to the requisitioning
of ships as transports or to the use of transports for. any
purpose.
(v)The publication of articles on the methods adopted by the
Allies in dealing with enemy submarines is prohibited, unless
such articles (a) have been passed by the Censor, or ( b ) are
reprints from neutral papers and are published as such with
the name and date of the periodical from which they are taken.
No reports of encounters between merchant vessels and enemy
submarines are to be published unless they have been passed by
the Censor.


(vi)The Press is permitted to announce the fact that a disembar-
kation of returning sick and wounded soldiers will take place
on the following day; but it must not mention the word
“transport” or the name of the vessel.
(vii)The publication of statements such as “A Hospital Ship
arrived at yesterday” is prohibited. There are
only two Hospital Ships chartered by the Australian Govern-
rnent, viz., s.s. “Karoola,” and s.s. “Kanowna,” and the names
and movements of these two ships may be published.
(viii) Reports of interviews with naval officers and articles or
letters written by naval officers or men are not to be published
without the permission of the Censor.
(ix)lt is forbidden to publish any reference to official “sailing
directions” or “orders referring to trade routes” issued by
authority of the Admiralty.
(x)lt is not permissible to publish any shipping intelligence what-
soever relative to vessels whose voyage does not both begin and
end in the following countries, viz., Australia, Tasmania, New
Zealand, and islands in the Pacific Ocean South of the
Equator and West of 135 degrees West longitude.
The announcements that are prohibited by this rule include:—
(«)any direct or indirect reference to the arrival, departure, or
other movement of such vessels;
(b)any direct or indirect reference to the date of the despatch
or arrival of mails carried by such vessels other than the
announcements defined hereafter;
(c)any such direct or indirect reference to officers, crew, pas-
sengers, or cargo as would indicate the actual or probable
whereabouts of any such vessel;
(d)any mention of the names of such vessels;
(e)any direct or indirect indication of the routes followed by
such vessels.
This rule does not prohibit the publication of:—
(a)reports of total losses of such vessels;
(6)the hour and date of the closure of mails carried by such
vessels, provided that the announcement does not contain
the name of the vessel by which the mail is despatched or
any indication of the route over which it is carried;


(c)the date on which a mail carried by such a vessel is due to
arrive, provided that the announcement is not made more
than two days in advance and does not contain the name of
the vessel or any indication of the route;
(d) consignees’ notices in which the name of the vessel is not
mentioned.
13. REVELATION OF MEANS OF DEFENCE IN
BRITISH OR ALLIED TERRITORY.
Garrisons. (i)The numbers of men assembled or units on duty at Australian
defended ports are not to be indicated, nor may reference be
made to military and naval changes or movements at such
ports.
(ii)No reference is to be made to the posting of guards or sentries
at factories or other places, #
Port (iii) No reference to examination services at any Australian port
Examination. is to be published.
(iv)Reports of searches made by the Department of Defence or
by any other Department are not to be published, unless they
have been passed by the Censor.
Conditions of ( v) Information as to the operation and condition of the means
Commuidcation. of telegraphic communication is not to be published.
14. RECRUITING AND ENLISTMENT.
Enlistment (i)All statements relating to enlistments, including statements of
figures purporting to be official, must be submitted for censor-
ship unless they have been expressly authorised by the Minis-
ter for Defence or the Secretary of the Department of
Defence, or, in the case of statements concerning a particular
district, by the District Commandant.
Enlistment (ii)No publication is permitted of numbers of refusals to enlist
Cards - or of conditional refusals; the actual number of those agreeing
to enlist may be published but percentages must not be stated.


15- ORGANISATION, EQUIPMENT AND MOVE-
MENTS OF THE AUSTRALIAN IMPERIAL
EXPEDITIONARY FORCE.
(i) Whilst precise information relating to the organisation, num-
bers, destination, movements, efficiency or equipment of the
Australian Imperial Expeditionary Force may be of value to
the enemy and therefore must be suppressed, it is allowable to
publish such general information of this kind as may serve to
maintain public interest and enthusiasm in Australia.
(ii)The names of officers alleged to have received commands in the
Australian Imperial Expeditionary Force are not to be pub-
lished until the appointments have passed the Executive
Council.
(iii) Matter relative to the Tropical Force or the situation in the
Pacific Islands occupied by the Australian Forces is not to be
published unless it has been passed by the Censor.
(iv)The publication is prohibited of all information as to tbe
objects and work of any technical unit of the Australian
Imperial Expeditionary Force.
(v) Articles referring to the number of Medical Officers required
for active service, or to the number available, are not to be
published.
(vi) References to an alleged shortage of riHes issued or in store
and to an alleged shortage in the output at the Government
Small Arms Factory are only permitted on condition that they
do not imply that military operations are hampered by the
alleged shortage.
(vii)ln accounts of reviews or route marches of the Australian
Imperial Expeditionary Force the names and numbers of par-
ticular units are not to be mentioned.
(viii) Route marches or other celebrations preceding the departure
of troops are to be referred to only as jmrades of troops, and
are not to be connected, explicitly or implicitly, with embarka-
tion.
The publication is prohibited—
(a)of any allusion to the imminent, actual, or recent embar
kation of troops, and
(b) of any matter from which an inference regarding such
embarkation might be drawn.


Such accounts of embarkations as do not contravene any other
censorship rule may be published ten weeks after the trans-
ports have left the last port of call in Australia. Proofs of all
accounts of embarkation and of route marches or other cele-
brations, possibly connected with embarkation, are to be sub-
mitted before publication.
(ix) All reports of interviews with returned soldiers should be
submitted for censorship before publication.
No letters or pictures from soldiers or other persons with our
troops in transit or at the front are to be published without
previous submission to the Censorship. This does not apply
to the Official Commonwealth Press Correspondents’ letters,
but it applies to all other letters whether addressed to the
Press or to private individuals.
Such statements concerning the treatment of enemy prisoners
or combatants as may tend to prejudice the reputation of our
troops are not to be published.
Gruesome details of wounds or mutilations which would dis-
turb the public or cause pain to relatives of the wounded or
killed are not to be published.
It is not permissible to publish in private correspondence any-
thing that may indicate the actual position of any unit at the
front unless the same matter has already been published in
official reports.
(x)ln letters from officers of the Australian Imperial Expedition-
ary Force at the front, the rank, unit, and, save in the case of
chaplains, the name of such officers must not be published.
In letters from soldiers, no mention of an officer may be pub-
lished which is of a disparaging or unduly laudatory nature, or
is in any way calculated to be subversive of military discipline.
16. HEALTH AND CONDUCT OF TROOPS.
(i)No discussion is permitted in the Press on the subject of the
inoculation of soldiers against smallpox, typhoid, meningitis,
and other infectious diseases.
(ii)The Press is requested to avoid details likely to inspire
unnecessary alarm or likely to give currency to exaggerated
ideas on the subject of venereal disease among the members of
the Australian Imperial Expeditionary Force.


(iii)Reports of any riot or disturbance in which soldiers partici- Riots and street
pate or of any conflict between soldiers and the military police ls ian(e>
should be moderate in tone. Sensational headlines and details
are to be avoided as tending to inflame the minds of other
soldiers and the public, and to produce further disturbances.
Accounts of such incidents should be submitted for censorship
before publication.
(iv) Paragraphs relating to the refusal of soldiers to pay railway Refusal to Pay
or tramway fares must be submitted before publication.
(v) Press references to riots in which members of the Australian Riots Abroad
Imperial Expeditionary Force take part abroad are strictly
prohibited until such information is authoritatively released.
(vi)All references to indiscipline or misbehaviour on the part of Misbehaviour
bodies of cadets must be submitted for censorship before pub-
lication.
(vii)ln reports of legal proceedings against discharged or returned Reports of civil
soldiers for other than military offences, the Press is requested lo ee< '" bS
not to direct attention to the former military status of the
accused.
17. CASUALTIES, OBITUARY NOTICES, &c.
No casualty occurring in the Australian Imperial Expedition-
ary Force is to be announced in the Press before it is released
for publication in the official casualty list, unless such
announcement is authorised in writing by the next-of-kin.
Notifications of casualties must not specify, either by number
or name, the unit or the battalion in which the soldier was
serving or the locality where the casualty occurred. This
instruction applies also to all obituary notices.
Summaries of casualties for particular units or dates are not
to be published.
This prohibition does not apply to such official lists of
wounded soldiers returning to Australia as are issued by Dis-
trict Commandants.
18. GALLIPOLI CAMPAIGN.
It is of the greatest importance that the enemy should receive withdrawal,
no hint of the method of the successful withdrawal of the


troops from Anzac, Suvla, or Cape Helles. No statement
should be published showing the actual number of the troops
or the designation of the units withdrawn.
No information about the withdrawal or the ruses adopted to
outwit the enemy on that occasion is to be published without
the permission of the Censor.
19. OPERATIONS IN THE PACIFIC.
Statements referring to the alleged activity of Germans in
Java, New Guinea, or the vicinity of the New Guinea area, are
not to be published until officially released.
No reference is permitted in the Press to rumours concerning
the appearance of strange ships in any part of the Western
Pacific.
20. TREATMENT OF ALIENS.
(i)lnformation relating to the arrest, detention, or other military
dealing with foreigners in Australian territory is not to be
published. All references to foreigners, who are the subjects
of military control, whether on parole or actually interned, are
therefore to be avoided, except where they form part of the
proceedings of the Commonwealth Parliament, or of a state-
ment by a Federal Minister.
(ii) Reasonable criticism of the general policy with regard to the
treatment of subjects of enemy nationality is permissible, but
such matter should be submitted fat censorship.
(iii)No mention whatever is to be made in the Press of the intern-
ment of Germans or other aliens.
(iv)All matter relating to or in any way connected with Concen-
tration Camps in Australia is to be submitted for censorship
before publication.
Reports of inquests and other court proceedings are not
exempted.
21. TRADING WITH THE ENEMY.
Advertisements or paragraphs in favour of goods of enemy
manufacture are prohibited.


22. EXPORT OF CONTRABAND.
(i) No reference is permitted in the Press to any contract with
Australian Arms for the supply of metals to the French
Government.
(ii) The Press must not discuss directly or indirectly the pro-
hibition or regulation of the export of coal.
No reference is permitted in the Press to the arrangements
made by the Transport Department for the shipment of
coal from Newcastle.
(iii) The publication of all oversea quotations for wool is pro-
hibited.
23. GOLD RESERVE.
Comment on the amount of gold reserve held against the
Commonwealth note issue is prohibited. The actual figures
officially announced at any time may be published, but pre-
vious statements are not to be subjoined.
24. ENEMY RAIDS.
All accounts of raids on the United Kingdom by enemy air-
craft or of bombardment by enemy warships must be passed
by the Censor before publication.
25. ESPIONAGE.
No reference may be made in the Press to the alleged presence
of enemy spies in Australia or in the Australian Imperial
Expeditionary Force.


\V. A. PEPPERDAY ANT) CO.,
GEN KRAI. PRINTERS,
ll9a PITT STREET, SYDNEY.
