





RULES AND BYE-LAWS
OF THE
Stock Exchange
OF MELBOURNE.
Revised May, 1889.
MELBOURNE: McCARRON, BIRD & CO., PRINTERS,
Record Chambers, 479 Collins Street.
1889.




Chairman : Win. Noall.
Committer:
Goodall, J.
Noall, W.
Somerton, 0. F.
Howard, F. W.
Slade, W.
Wallen, R. E.
Leonard, W.
Smythe, S. W.
Jtlrmbrrs :
Were, F. W.
Bennetts, T.
Griffiths, G. S.
Pym, M. C. L.
Bevis, Geo.
Ham, David
Quick, W. H.
Biccard, L. T.
Hartley, E. J.
Quilliam, J.
Boyes, C.
Hickling, E. R.
Ramsay, A.
B.ainbridge, W. H.
Hood, J.
Rippin, J. R.
Brown, G. G.
Horn, P. A.
Reid, John S.
Bruford, A. B.
Howard, F. W.
Rolls, B.
Calder, A.
Howden, A. McA.
Russell, M.
Call, F. D.
Jack, J.
Severs, B.
Chapman, C. W.
Jacobs, Sydney M.
Saunders, A.
Chapman, T.
Jones, W. T.
Simmons, J. B.
Charsley, E. N.
Johnston, T. K.
Smellie, J.
Clarke, A. E.
Keenan, J.
Slade, W.
Clarke, C. E.
Knox, Wm.
Somerton, C. F.
Clarke, R. H.
Knight, F.
Somerville, J. F.
Clark, W.
Kosky, A.
Sprague, A. E.
Clegg, W. H.
Lowenstein, A.
Sprague, E.
Coburn, W. J.
Lilley, A.
Stoddart, T.
Cohen, B. S.
Collins, H.
Lansell, Geo.
Smythe, S. W.
Luxton, Thomas
Strange, Y. W.
Cropper, E. R.
Leonard, W.
Taylor, J.
Dean, A. F,
Long, C. W.
Thomas, J.
Ditchburn, J.
Mai pas, W. J.
Thonemann, F.
Dix, W. F.
Meadows, A. J. H.
Thomson, J.
Dobson, J. E.
Millard, E.
Thomson, D.
Derham, F., Jun.
Moore, H. Byron
Thomson, T. W.
Donaldson, Jas.
MacDonald, C. L.
Turner, R. M.
Dunne, W. S.
Moore, W. R. F.
Tolhurst, A.
England, M. H.
Moore, R. S.
Vickery, J. S.
Evered, H. G.
Morison, P. A.
Vow ell, G. S.
Fink, B. J.
Morey, A. J. E,
Wakley, E. S.
Firebrace, E. B.
MacLeod, M.
Wallen, Robert
Fisher, C. M.
MacVean, D.
Watson, J.
Fitzgerald. R. J.
Me Lister, H.
Were, A. B.
Fleming, F. J.
Noall, W.
Were, F. W.
Card, J. E.
Noble, E.
Willder, Derbin
Gilchrist, D. J.
O’Connor, S.
Wilkes, B. F.
Goodall, J.
Nash, C. R. T.
Wilson, Herbert
Grant, David
Oswald, J. D.
Wolfe, H.
Greenway, D.
Park, R.
Woodforde, Geo.
cS errrtarj): M. J. Keane.
The Stock Exchange of Melbourne.


RULES
1. This Association shall consist of the undersigned Stock
and Share Brokers, and of such other persons as may be
hereafter elected in accordance with Buies 18 and 19, and
shall be called “ The Stock Exchange of Melbourne.”
2. The objects and purposes of the Association are the
exchange of quotations, the facilitating of purchases and
sales, and the maintenance of honourable dealings amongst
its Members.
3. A leading principle of the Association is freedom of
quotation in the newspaper press or otherwise, by indi-
vidual Members or firms; and this rule shall not be at
any time altered without the express concurrence and assent
of every Member of the Association.
4. The management of the Association shall be vested in
a Committee of nine Members, and such Committee shall
have the direction and control of the affairs of the Associa-
tion. The quorum of the Committee shall be five.
5. Members of Committee shall be elected by a majority
of the Members of the Association assembled at the Annual
Meeting, to be held during the month of October in each
year. Nomination of candidates to be lodged with the
Secretary seven clear days previous to annual or special
meeting.
6. Three Members of Committee shall retire annually,
but shall be eligible for re-election. Should any question of
rotation of retirement arise, it shall be decided by lot. In
the event of more than the requisite number of candidates
being nominated for any vacancy or vacancies a ballot may
be demanded by not less than seven Members present.
Any vacancy occurring during the year shall be filled by


the Members at a special meeting of the Association
convened for that purpose,
7. One of the Members of the Committee shall be
annually elected Chairman of the Association by a majority
of the votes of the Members of the Committee at a meeting
convened for that purpose immediately after each annual
election. Any vacancy occurring during the year shall be
filled up by the Committee at a special meeting convened for
that purpose. The Chairman, or any Member presiding in his
absence, shall, in the event of an equality of votes, have a
second or casting vote. In conducting the ordinary daily
meetings the decision of the Chairman or such member shall
be final in all cases, and for the orderly conduct of the
business he shall have the power to inflict fines up to £5.
8. A Secretary shall be elected by the vote of a majority
of the Members, and shall hold office during their pleasure.
The Secretary shall be under the control of and may be
suspended from office by the Committee.
9. The Committee shall have charge of the funds of the
Association, and all payments shall be made by cheques
bearing the signatures of the Chairman and Secretary and
one Member of Committee.
10. The Association shall hold its daily meetings at such
times and place as may be agreed upon.
11. The list of quotations of prices and of purchases and
sales effected at the meetings of the Association, and there
recorded, shall be the Official List of “ The Stock Exchange
of Melbourne,” and the Association shall not issue (nor be
responsible for the issue by any of its Members) of any other
“List of Sales,” “Prices Current,” or “Trade Circular,” nor
be chargeable with the cost thereof.
12. Any Member whose published quotation is challenged
may be called upon to verify the same to the satisfaction of
the Committee. Failing verification, a penalty may be
inflicted by the Committee, or the case may be referred by
the Committee to the Members of the Association to be dealt
with by them under Pule 17.
13. The Members of the Association shall have power to
make new rules, and to make bye-laws, and to alter the same
from time to time; but no new rule or bye-law shall be


passed unless concurred in by a majority of at least three-
fourths of the Members of the Association ; it shall not, how-
ever, be competent for the Members to make any rule or
bye-law inconsistent with the letter or the spirit of Rules 1,
2, 3, 13 or 27, except by consent of every Member of
the Association.
14. Notice of any proposed New Rule or Bye-law,
alteration of, or addition to' the Rules or Bye-laws,
shall be given in writing at a meeting of the Associa-
tion, and shall be considered and determined (if the neces-
sary majority is obtained) on a day (appointed by the
Committee) not less than seven nor more than fourteen days
thereafter. In the event of any new Rule or Bye-law, or
any proposed alteration of or addition to the Rules, being
carried at a meeting held on such day by a majority of the
members present, but such majority does not amount to three-
fourths as required by Rule 13, then the Committee shall
send to the last known address in the Australasian Colonies
of each member absent from the meeting a circular contain-
ing the proposed new Rule, Bye-law, or alteration of or
addition to the Rules or Bye-laws, and forms of concurrence
in and dissent from the same, with a request to sign and
return such concurrence or dissent within one calendar
month from date of the circular. In the event of three-
fourths of the members of the Association concurring in the
proposed new Rule, Bye-law, or alteration of or addition to
the Rules or Bye-laws, it shall be considered passed, and
shall be as valid as if the members signing such concurrence
had been present at the meeting at which the proposed new
Rule, Bye-law, or alteration of or addition to the Rules or
Bye-laws was considered, and the same shall be entered in
the minute book. If, however, at the end of one calendar
month from the date of such circular, the necessary majority
has not been obtained, then the proposed new Rule, Bye-law,
or alteration of or addition to the Rules or Bye-laws shall
be deemed not to have passed.
15. In any dispute arising between Members in their
dealings with each other, the matter shall be referred to and
be investigated by the Committee, whose decision shall be
final. Any Member who shall refuse to carry out or to
abide by such decision may be suspended by the Committee
from all privileges of membership for any period not
exceeding three months, and he shall be forthwith reported
to the Association as under suspension ; and after expiry of
the term of suspension, if the Member shall still not have


conformed to the Committee’s decision, the Members shall be
convened by notice, not shorter than one week, to consider
and determine whether he shall or shall not be finally dis-
qualified from membership,
16. It shall not be incumbent upon the Committee
to entertain any complaint submitted to them by any one
not a Member of the Association, against a Member of it,
unless such Member shall have been employed by the
complainant in the capacity of broker ; and in that or any
other case in which a non-Member desires the intervention
of the Committee, he shall, previously to the case being
heard, pay five guineas to the Secretary, and shall under-
take in writing to abide by, and forthwith to carry out the
decision of the Committee in the same manner as if he were
a Member of the Association, the Committee to have the
power to repay the whole or part of the five guineas to the
complainant.
17. The Members shall have the power to fine, suspend,
or expel any Member who may be considered guilty of
dishonourable or disgraceful conduct; but no expulsion or
suspension shall take place except at a meeting of the
Members summoned for the express object of considering
such measure. The concurrence of three-fourths at least of
the Members of the Association shall be necessary to pass
any resolution involving the infliction of fines, suspension,
or expulsion (except as to fines and suspensions authorised to
be inflicted by the Committee or the Chairman), and in case
the majority of those present at such meeting shall vote for
such resolution, and if such majority shall not amount to
three-fourths of the Members of the Association, then the
like procedure shall be followed as directed by Rule 14, with
respect to obtaining the concurrence or dissent of Members,
and the circular shall contain a copy of the resolution, and if
three-fourths of the Members concur in such resolution it
shall be deemed passed. The Members of “ The Stock
Exchange of Melbourne” hereby undertake that they shall
not, in any case arising out of this Rule, raise any action in
Equity or at Law with reference to the grounds or effects of
any decision of the Members, notwithstanding any irregu-
larity or informality in its proceedings,
18. The Members shall admit, by ballot, such persons as
they deem eligible, at such rates of Entrance Fee as may be
decided, and subject to Subscription Fees fixed by Rule 25.
A notice of each application shall be exhibited in the Stock


Exchange during at least seven days before the applicant
can be balloted for. Every applicant for admission must
address and sign a letter in the following form :
To the Chairman of “ The Stock Exchange of Melbourne,”
Sir, —I am desirous of becoming a Member of “The Stock
Exchange of Melbourne,” under its Rules and Regulations;
and I hereby agree to pay my Entrance Fee on election, and
Annual Subscription, or other contributions, when required;
that I will at once, if called upon by the Committee, execute
the lease of the premises rented from the Stock Exchange of
Melbourne Company Limited or any indemnity, signature
of which shall be required by the Committee in respect of
such lease; and I also agree, in case my conduct shall at any
time be considered disgraceful or dishonourable, by the
Members of the Exchange, under Rule 17, or contumacious
under Rule 15, that I will not, in the event of my being
suspended, disqualified from Membership, or expelled, raise
any action in Equity or at Law against any Member or
Members of the Exchange. I am, Sir, &c.
19. In balloting for Members, one black ball in five shall
exclude.
20. If an applicant for admission or re-election should, on
ballot, be rejected, such rejection shall be conclusive for one
month.
21. All Members shall, immediately after election and
before attending any meeting of the Association, sign a
copy of the Rules and Bye-laws, and shall thereafter be
held to be bound thereby, and by any addition to, or altera-
tion thereof, and shall also sign the Association’s lease from
the Stock Exchange of Melbourne Company Limited or any
indemnity, signature of which shall be required by the Com-
mittee in respect of such lease.
22. It shall be competent for the Committee to grant the
clerk of a Member permission to attend the daily meetings
of the Association for the making of quotations and trans-
actions on behalf of his employer. But the Member shall
first undertake by writing, addressed to the Committee, that
he will be responsible for the sales and purchases effected by
such authorised clerk, and he shall pay in advance £5 ss. per
annum for the privilege. The sanction of the Committee may
be at any time withdrawn. Such authorised clerk shall
have no vote, nor any voice in the management or adminis-


tration of the Association. The attendance of Clerks shall
only be permitted in the case of a Member’s illness, absence
from town, service on a jury, or other emergency, and such
condition must be shown to the satisfaction of the Chairman.
23. A Member resigning, or becoming disqualified from
membership, or ceasing to be a member, or having been
expelled, shall cease to have any claim whatever on the
property or funds of the Association.
24. A Member who becomes insolvent, or who fails in
his engagements with his creditors, shall, on proof thereof
to the Committee, cease to be a Member’, although he may
not be at the same time a defaulter on the Stock Exchange.
25. The entrance fee payable by a candidate for member-
ship who has been elected shall be from time to time fixed
by the Members. The annual subscription shall be fixed
from time to time by the Committee so that the amount
may fully cover the current expenditure. Subscriptions to
be payable half-yearly in advance.
26. A statement of accounts duly audited shall be sub-
mitted by the Committee of the Association to the
Members at the Annual Meeting once in each year. The
statement to be as at 30th September in each year.
27. All accumulation of funds after the discharge of
current expenses shall be for the development of the useful-
ness of “The Stock Exchange of Melbourne,” for the
acquirement of freehold or leasehold premises or for some
cognate purpose, or for charitable objects; and such funds
shall not be available for the individual benefit or profit
of Members, except in the case of the dissolution of the
Association, and such dissolution shall not take place so long
as five Members do not vote for a resolution to dissolve.
28. The Committee is empowered to invest the funds of
the Stock Exchange (inter alia) in the shares of the Stock
Exchange of Melbourne Company Limited, in such manner
and on such terms as the Committee may deem expedient.
Sums thus invested to be placed in the names of five
Trustees to be selected by the Committee from among their
number. The investment of such funds may be varied from
time to time, as the Committee may deem most desirable for
the interests of the Association.


29. In all contracts between Members they shall be held
to be principals to each other.'
30. Three clear days shall be allowed for delivery of
documents by the seller, and failing delivery thereof during
that period, the buyer having on the third day given twenty-
four hours’ written notice to the seller, may either cancel
the purchase or buy at the risk of the seller, through any
Member of the Exchange,
31. Purchasers shall not be required to take delivery of
and pay for documents tendered after eleven o’clock on
Saturdays, and one o’clock on other days.
32. Sellers shall have the right to require the purchase-
money to be paid in cash or marked cheque at the time and
place of delivery of documents. In case of failure of
payment by the buyer, the vendor may within one day of
default of settlement, or on any future day, either cancel the
transaction or sell at the buyer’s risk, through some Member
of the Exchange, the securities involved ; and the defaulting
Member shall forthwith pay to the vendor any difference
between the original purchase-money and the nett proceeds
of the securities resold.
33. When a vendor shall tender delivery of documents
more than six weeks after date of sale, it shall not be incum-
bent upon the buyer to accept delivery of documents tinless
some special arrangement for the delay has been mutually
agreed upon previously, and such arrangement be in writing,
34. When a buyer shall claim delivery of scrip more than
six weeks after date of purchase, it shall not be incumbent
upon the seller to deliver unless some special arrangement
for the delay has been mutually agreed upon previously, and
such arrangement be in writing.
35. In offering to buy or sell at the meetings of the
Exchange, the minimum amount shall be £SO or 100 shares,
unless the value or number is specially stated. In the case
of Debentures or shares other than Mining, the seller may
be called upon to state, through the Chairman of the meeting,
the quantity he offers,
36. Any Member against whom there is no valid com-
plaint under the rules, may resign his Membership by giving
a written notice to the Chairman, and he may concurrently


therewith nominate a Candidate for Membership in his stead;
but such Candidate shall not become a Member unless he be
duly elected by ballot according to Buie 18, and shall have
paid to the Stock Exchange the amount fixed for the time
being, and, in the event of such nominee being rejected at the
ballot, the retiring Member may nominate some other person
or persons until a Candidate nominated by him be accepted,
and until the election of a successor, he may attend Meetings
of the Stock Exchange and conduct his business. The sum
to be paid to the Stock Exchange, until otherwise determined,
shall be ten (10) per cent, of the gross sum received by the
retiring Member, but in no case shall the amount be less
than one hundred pounds (£100), and such sum must be
paid to the Secretary before the nominee of the retiring
Member is eligible for election.
37. On the death of a Member, the Committee of the Stock
Exchange shall exercise the privilege of nomination for the
benefit of his widow or children or next-of-kin (subject to
deductions of his liabilities to the Association and to any
Member thereof), to whom the proceeds of the sale of the
vacant seat (less five per cent, as an entrance fee for the
successor of the deceased) shall be paid. No money to be
paid until some person or persons are in a position to give a
legal discharge. The estate of a deceased Member shall have
no legal claim whatever on the property or funds of the
Association.
38. The brokerage chargeable for selling Government
Stock, Debentures, Shares, &c., other than Mining shall be
as follows :
On Victoria Four per Cent. Inscribed Stock—
-1 per cent, by Selling Broker, 4- per cent, by Buying
Broker.
On Debentures of every description ... per Cent.
On Shares other than Mining—
Sold up to Is. inclusive ... ... Id. per Share.
~ Over Is. and up to ss.inclusive ... l-|d. ~
~ Over os. and up to 15s. inclusive ... 3d. ~
„ Over 15s. and up to 255. inclusive 4d. „
~ Over 255. and up to 455. inclusive 6d. „
„ Over 455. and up to £5 inclusive Is. ~
~ Over £5 ... ... ... ... 1 per Cent.
Brokerage divisible equally between Selling and Buying
Brokers.


On Mining Shares the Brokerage for Buying or Selling
shall not exceed the following rates :
Sold up to 10s. per share inclusive ... 3d. per Share.
„ Over 10s, and up to 30s. inclusive 6d. ~
~ Over 30s. and up to 40s. inclusive Is. „
„ Over 40s per Cent.
A minimum charge of 10s. may be made on any transaction.
On the Floating of Loans or any Public Companies brokerage
as per arrangement.
Bye-Laws.
Priority of Seller,
1. The member who at ordinary Stock Exchange
meetings offers to sell any debentures, stocks, or shares at
the lowest declared price shall have priority over all other
members in supplying at such price so much of such de-
bentures, stocks, and shares as he may be willing to sell. But
having made a sale he must, to maintain his priority,
immediately declare himself as still a seller.
Priority of Buyer.
2. The member who at ordinary Stock Exchange
meetings offers the best price for any debentures, stocks, or
shares shall have priority over all other members at such
declared price for as much of such debentures, stock, or shares
as he may be willing to take. But having made a purchase
he must, to retain his priority, immediately declare himself
as still a buyer.
Payments and Deliveries When Member has no Office
in the City.
3. Members who have not an office in the city must
notify to the Secretary a place within reasonable distance of
the Exchange at which delivery of scrip may be made and


payment required, failing which and any special arrange-
ment made by such Member or Members, vendors and pur-
chasers may, on or after the 3rd day from sale by or to such
Member, exercise the powers provided in Rules 30 and 32.
Penalty for Member or Members Joining any Other
Exchange in Melbourne.
4. The privilege of buying and selling at meetings of the
Stock Exchange shall be withdrawn from any Member during
such period as he, his partners, or his clerk shall be a
member of any other Stock Exchange within the City of
Melbourne,
Interpretation of Rule No. 30,
5. That a seller of shares on Saturday has (Sunday
being a dies non) until 3 o’clock p.m. on” Wednesday to
deliver them. Railing delivery on that day the purchaser
could give written notice that he requires delivery during
next business day, viz., by 3 p.m. on Thursday. Delivery
not being made on Thursday as demanded, the buyer may
then at his option either cancel the contract or buy at the
vendor’s risk.
Placing of Stocks upon Official List.
6. Companies applying to have their names placed upon
the official list must furnish full particulars to the satisfac-
tion of the members. They must give assurance of due
formation and that the scrip has been issued and is available
lor transfer, and undertake to supply to the Secretary of
the Stock Exchange of Melbourne from time to time (with-
out his applying for same) prompt notification of all calls,
dividends, alteration of capital, or other material informa-
tion regarding the Company while on the official list. The
Committee shall have power to remove any Company from the
list if they see cause to do so. The application must remain
upon the Exchange notice board for two (2) days, after which
the Members will decide by a majority of tlxose present
whether the company shall or shall not be admitted to the
list. The fee payable upon application of the Company shall
be fixed from time to time by the Members, the present
fees being Ten Guineas for investment companies and Five
Guineas for mining companies.


Stock and Share Broking Companies.
7. No company carrying on the business of stock and
share brokers shall be placed upon the official call list of the
Stock Exchange of Melbourne.
Member Selling Responsible for Validity of
Documents.
8. Any member selling shall be responsible for the
validity at time of delivery of all documents delivered, and
for the shares being free from all liability then past due.
Adopted at Melbourne this thirteenth day of May, 1889.
WM. NOALL, Chairman.






