

DARLINGTON
Projectionist
Labor League
RULES and PLATFORM
FOUNDED 1805.




DARLINGTON
Projectionist
Labor League.
RULE S # PL A T F 0 R M
FOUNDED IVT 1896
Sydney :
F. Clark & Co., Printers, 1 Rowe St., and 82 Wilson St., Redfern. 1895


RULES
OF THE
DARLINGTON
Projectionist Labour League
1. —There shall be established a persons willing to join
the same, which shall be called the Darlington Protectionist Labor
League.
2. —=The objects of the League shall be: —
(a) To protect, promote, foster and encourage all forms of Native
and Local Production and Industry including Pastoral, Agri-
cultural, Mining, and Manufacturing.
(b) To protect the workman as well as his work, not only against the
products of foreign and alien labor, but against the incursion
into New South Wales of all Asiatics and other alien laborers
whose presence is undesirable in this country.
(c) To promote and support every species of legislation which makes
in the direction of a true and.,pure democracy, i.e., government
of the people, by the people, and for the people.
(d) To secure that all the protection and benefit of the legislation
contemplated bv the previous articles shall apply (with such
differentiation as circumstances may render imperative) to
female workers equally with the males.
3. —The League shall consist of an unlimited number of persons
who shall be qualified for membership.
4. —The qualifications necessary for membership shall be :
(a) The holding of a proper qualification as an Elector of Parlia-
mentary Electorate of Darlington.
(b) A profession of faith in the objects of the League and adherence
to the platforms put forward by the League.
(c) The regular payment of a Subscription of not less than One
Penny per week,


o.—Every person desirous of joining- the League shall be pro-
posed and seconded in open meeting- by two financial members of the
League* Except in cases of urgency, such proposition shall not be
dealt with until the next following meeting of the League, when it
shall be decided by a vote of the members present. Each member on
joining shall be furnished with a Pence Card and a copy of these
Rides, for which he shall pay Sixpence unless unable to do so.
b. —Any member owing more than twelve weeks subscription shall
be deemed to be unfinancial, and shall take no part in the business ol'
the League until the amount owing shall be paid up. Provided that
the Executive Committee may by resolution order any such arrears to
be paid from any donations received by the League.
7.—Every financial member shall have one vote on all business of
the League, if personally present at the meeting thereof, where such
business is transacted, and otherwise in certain cases hereinafter pro-
vided for.
S.—Any person not being an elector of the Parliamentary
Electorate of Darlington, may become a Honorary Member : of the
League, by a profession of faith in the objects of the League, and
adherence to the platform put forward by the League, and the payment
of an Annual Subscription of not less than Ten Shillings to the
Funds of the League.
.1 *.« I*7 C. j pc |>>/ I * ; ! • . .. y r
9-—Honorary members may speak on any business of the League
at any of its meetings, but shall have no vote on any such business.
10.—-The Officers of the League shall be-:—a President, two
Vice-Presidents, Treasurer, and one or more Secretaries. ..
IL—The President shall preside at all meetings of the League gt
which he is present. In Ids absence either of the Vice-Presidents
present shall be called to the chair by resolution of the members
present; and if at the time appointed for opening any meeting of the
League, neither President nor Vice-President is in attendance, the
members then present shall elect a Chairman from among themselves.
12.—The Secretary shall keep the books, documents, and corres-
pondence of the League in such manner and under such conditions as
may be from time to time fixed by any regular or properly convened
special meeting of the League. The Secretary shall receive all con-
tributions, donations, and other monies from collectors, members, and
other persons, and shall, before the close of each meeting- of tin
League, declare the amount of money received by him since the pre-
vious meeting, and shall hand the .same, over at the close of the
meeting to the Treasurer, or in the Treasurer’s, absence, to the-Chair-


man of the meeting, and shall take that gentleman’s receipt for the
same. He shall affix the League stamp to all correspondence and
official documents.
13. The hooks of the League shall he open to the inspection of
any officer or member of the Executive Committee at all reasonable
hours, and to other members at the discretion of the Executive Com-
mittee or on the order of a general meeting of the League.
14. The Treasurer shall receive from the Secretary and any other
person, all monies intended for the use of the League, and shall faith-
fully take care of and fully account for the same. His book of account
and financial arrangements shall be kept in such manner as a regular
or properly convened special meeting of the League, may from time to
time decide. All books and other documents relating to his office,
shall be open to the inspection of any officer or member of the Execu-
tive Committee at all reasonable hours, and to other members at the
discretion of the Executive Committee, or on the order of a general
meeting of the League.
15. —All monies received shall be paid into a bank to the credit of
the League, and no monies shall be paid on account of the League,
except on an order of a meeting thereof, and thereafter by a cheque
signed by the President, Treasurer, and Secretary of the League.
16. The funds of the League shall be used only for the purpose
of organisation and of effective political or municipal woik as set
forth in these rules.
17. There shall be an Executive Committee, consisting of ten
members, who shall be elected semi-annually, together A\ith the
President and Secretary of the League who shall be members thereof
ex-officio.
18. The Executive Committee shall, subject to the decisions and
orders of general meetings of the League, and in the interim tlieieof,
have the full control and management of all the affairs of the League,
and shall have power and authority to decide all matters which in
their opinion should not be made public in general meeting; or such
as are of so urgent a character as to render it inadvisible to wait till a
general meeting ; or such as may be confided to their discretion by any
general meeting. They shall also have power and authority to repair
any omission of any general meeting or to complete any transaction
th<‘ -oof, in which further delay would be prejudicial to the interests of
the l eague. The Executive Committee shall keep separate minutes ot
their own proceedings, and shall not be compellable to divulge any
portion of the same, except such as they may consider advisable. They
shall hoM their meetings not less than once a fortnight, at the League
rooms.


19. —All officers, and members of the Executive Committee shall
be elected in the months of January and July in each year, and shall
hold office for six months therefrom, subject to their death, resignation,
or removal from office by a vote of the League.
20. —Every regular and every properly convened special meeting
of the League shall have power to fill up any vacancy in any office of
the League.
21. —Every regular and every properly convened special meeting
of the League, shall have power to remove any officer or member of
the Executive Committee by resolution of such meeting ; provided
always that no such removal shall take place except a notice of motion
to that effect has been given at a previous meeting, and that both the
officer whose removal is proposed, and the members of the League
have been notified of such notice of motion. Nevertheless, the Execu-
tive Committee shall have full power and authority by resolution
thereof to suspend any officer or member from the exercise of his office
and to remove from his custody all and any property of the League or
of the Executive Committee; but all such cases shall bo reported to
the League as early as possible thereafter and the League, after due
notice, shall finally decide all such matters.
22. —Any officer, or member of the Executive Committee who shall
absent himself, without satisfactory apology, from three consecutive
meetings either of the League or of the Executive Committee, shall be
deemed to have thereby vacated his position.
23. —The books of account of the League shall be properly made
up and balanced at the last day of June and December in each year;
and two or more Auditors shall be elected at each, half-yearly meeting
when other officers are elected, who shall properly audit all such
accounts, and shall report thereon and present a signed balance sheet
of the same to the January and July meetings of the League re-
spectively.
24. —The regular meetings of the League shall be held on the first
Thursday in each month, at such place as the League may from time
to time determine. Every such meeting shall commence at eight o’clock
p.ni., and twenty members shall be a quorum.
25. —The order of business at all regular meetings shall be :
(a) Reading and adoption of minutes of the last regular and an’
subsequent special meetings of the League.
(b) Business arising out of the Minutes.
(c) Accounts.


(n) Report of the Executive Committee, and business arising out of
the same.
(k) Correspondence.
(f) Motions of which due notice has been given.
(o) Questions and notices of motion for future meetings,
(u) General business.
26.—N0 motion, except such as are strictly incidental to the
business before any meeting, shall be moved without previous notice.
Provided always that any meeting may, on the recommendation of the
Executive Committee, declare any business “ urgent,” and thereafter
deal Avith it, notwithstanding any want of notice.
27-—A special general meeting may be held at any time on the
order of any regular meeting of the League. The Executive Com-
mittee shall also have power to summon a special meeting of the
League at any time they may deem it necessary; and they shall do so
on the written requisition of not less than twenty members. Every
such requisition shall state the business which it is desired may be
transacted. Every notice of a special meeting shall briefly state the
business to be transacted thereat, and no business shall be transacted
at any special meeting excepting that for which the meetimr was
called. &
28.—The League in general meeting shall adopt and may from
time to time amend in their discretion, a set of standing Orders for the
orderly conduct of its business.
29.—When any business of importance is to be transacted such as
the alteration of the Rules or Platform, the selection of a candidate
for Parliamentary or Municipal office, the League may by previous
resolution, order, that at any meeting where such business is to be
voted on, any member of the League entitled to vote thereat, and
unable to be personally present, may send a written vote on such
matter to the Chairman of such meeting; and such vote shall be
counted together with the votes of members personally present, in
deciding upon any of such matters; but no proxy voting shall be
allowed on any matter whatsoever.
30. Except as aforesaid, the method of voting on all matters shall
be by show of hands, provided always that important questions shall
be submitted to a secret ballot on the demand of any seven or more
members:
31. The League shall publish a Municipal as well as a .Parlia-
mentary Platform, and shall use'every endeavor to secure the election


of Aldermen for Darlington and the Golden Grove Ward of Red fern
Municipalities, as well as the member of the Legislative Assembly for
the Darlington Electorate, of such persons as are in accord with the
platforms put forward by the League, and who may therefor be
selected by the League as Candidates. •/
32.—Where the occupant of any such office, or the person whose
occupancy thereof has just previously expired, lias been recognised as
the candidate of the League, lie shall have first claim in any selection
made by the League, provided of course that he has been faithful to
its platforms. In the event of an entirely fresh selection having to be
made for any such office, all candidates offering themselves for
selection shall not only pledge themselves to adhere to the platforms of
the League, but shall in addition, give an undertaking not to stand
for such office if not selected bv the League.
33.—These Rules and Platforms shall not he altered, anieiided.
or abrogated except by a general meeting of the League, specially
summoned for the purpose, and then only after not less than fourteen
days’ notice shall have been given to all members of the League of
the tenor of all and every of such proposed alterations or amendments,
nor unless such amendments or alterations are carried by a majority
of the votes east on any such question.


PARLIAMENTARY PLATFORM
OF THE
DARLINGTON PROTECTIONIST LABOR LEAGUE.
1. Legislation designed to protect, foster and encourage all existing
industries of New South Wales, and to promote the establishment
of new ones. Also all measures to secure to the wage earner an
equitable return for his or her labor.
2. Reform of the Legislative Council, with a view to its ultimate
abolition, and the substitution of the Referendum and popular
Initiative.
3. Exclusion of all Asiatics and other colored or undesirable immi-
grants.
4. Direct Taxation—Land Tax and Income Tax.
5. Local Self-government and Municipal Reform.
6. No further alienation of Public Lands. Speedy resumption of
land held for Speculative purposes. Legislation tending to the
Nationalisation of land.
7. A National Bank of Issue. Abolition of the Foreign Loan
System. Minting in Sydney of all coins from native metals.
8. Compulsory Eight Hours’ Law, where practicable.
9. Federation of the Australian colonies on a National and Demo-
cratic basis as opposed to Imperial Federation.
10. Workshops and Factories Act—Prohibition of Sweating—Super-
vision of Land Boilers and Machinery, with competent working-
men inspectors. Extension of Employers’ Liability Act to all
citizens (onus of proof to lie on employer).
1 1 . Mining on Private Property —State Royalty on all minerals.
12. Encouragement of Voluntary Co-operative effort, Village and
Co-operative Settlements; Co-operative Contracts, all Co-operative
Enterprise, Productive and Distributive.
13. Repeal of the Conspiracy Laws. Unabridged right of combination.
14. Repeal of the Agreements Validating Act; Masters’ and Servants’
Act; and all other laws out of harmony with modern sentiment,
15. Maintainance of the principle of Payment of Members.




