

fQ, 2^7
“STRENGTH UNITED IS STRONGER.”
RULES
OF THE
Australasian Labour Federation,
' QUEENSLAND PROVINCE.
ESTABLISHED JUN E, 1889.
REVISED AND ADOPTED, JANUARY, 1898. /
BRISBANE:
Printed at “Worker” Oppioe, Trades Hall, Tdebot Street.
MDCCCXCVIII.




IR. ULES
OF THE
Australasian Labour Federation,
QUEENSLAND PROVINCE.
Name and Office.
1. The name shall be “The Australasian
Labour Federation (Queensland Province), and the
Office shall be at the Trades Hall, Turbot Street,
Brisbane.
Constitution.
2. This Province of the Federation shall consist
of labour unions consolidated for mutual assistance
and the furtherance of the cause of Labour generally,
and shall be governed as hereinafter provided.
Objects.
8. The following shall be the objects :
(a) To improve the condition and protect the interests of all
classes of labour.
(b) To discuss, consider, and put in force, when approved,
any scheme for the better guidance and extension of
labour organisation.


(c) To devise means for the settlement of any differences
occurring between any members of the affiliations
and their employers, and, by an aggregation of power,
to enforce legitimate and necessary claims wnere a
single union would find the task beyond its individual
strength.
(d) To take steps to preserve Australia for the white race.
(e) To assist members in securing a fair wage and reasonable
conditions of labour; to establish a minimum wage
for all men and women; and to secure the direct
representation of Labour in Parliament.
(/) To maintain and control the newspaper established by
the Federation for the advocacy of the foregoing
objects.
Payments.
4. Each District Council or directly affiliated
union shall pay to the Provincial Council the sum
of one shilling per member per annum for manage-
ment and organisation purposes, and to the Board of
Trustees of the Journal of the Federation such sum
as may be decided upon from time to time by a
majority of the affiliated unions towards its main-
tenance, which payment shall entitle each member
of an affiliated union to one copy of each issue of
the journal.
Organisation.
5. For the purpose of facilitating the working
of the Federation, unions may affiliate direct with
the Provincial Council, or, in centres where two or
more unions of the Federation are in existence, the
Provincial Council may, with the consent of such
unions, group them into districts to be governed by
District Councils.


Districts.
6. Districts shall be organised as may seem
advisable to the Provincial Council. Payments to
the District Councils by the unions affiliated shall be
on a basis of not less than sd. per financial member
per month. The basis of representation on District
Councils shall be as follows : One delegate from each
union having fifty financial members or under, with
one additional delegate for every fifty, or part of fifty,
provided that part is not less than ten ; but no union
having less than ten financial members shall be
entitled to send a delegate. Every representative
shall be a duly accredited member of his union.
No union shall be entitled to claim assistance
under section 4 of clause 28 until it has been affiliated
for six months; but should it appear expedient for
the District Council to render assistance at any time,
it may do so by a vote of three-fourths of the
delegates present at a special meeting of the District
Council called for that purpose.
Duties of District Officers.
PRESIDENT.
7. The duties of the President shall be to preside
at ordinary and special meetings of the Council, to
preserve order and decorum, exercise authority in
conducting the business, and sign all money-orders
and vouchers. He shall have a casting vote in
addition to his vote as delegate.


VICE-PRESIDENTS.
8. The Vice-Presidents shall assist in maintain-
ing order and attention. In the absence of the
president, one of the vice-presidents (according to
seniority) shall take the chair, invested with full
power and authority as presiding officer.
SECRETARY.
9. The District Secretary shall prepare an
abstract of the general business for consideration at
each meeting of the District Council and place it
before the president ; take minutes of proceedings ;
receive appeals and correspondence ; answer enquiries
and communications; summon special and committee
meetings ; inform the Provincial Council promptly
and fully of all matters likely to affect the Federation;
and perform such other duties as may be directed.
He shall be an ex-officio member of all committees ;
he shall receive all moneys due to his District,
furnishing receipts for same, and pay such moneys
over to the treasurer ; he shall prepare a balance-
sheet of income and expenditure half-yearly and
submit the same to the auditors. In remuneration
for his services he shall be paid such sum as may be
ordered by his District Council.
TREASURER.
10. The Treasurer shall receive from the secretary
all moneys due to the District Council, giving receipts
for same ; furnish the auditors with a correct account


of all moneys passing through his hands, and produce
all bank vouchers and documents relating to monetary
affairs for their perusal. He shall deposit the moneys
in a bank named by his District Council in the name
of such District Council. He shall, if required,
provide a bond for £2O.
TRUSTEES.
11. There shall be elected annually two Trustees,
one of whom shall sign all cheques in conjunction
Avith the treasurer and secretary.
AUDITORS.
12. Two Auditors shall be appointed every six
months to examine the books of the District C ouncil
and see that a proper statement of income and
expenditure for the information of the affiliated
unions has been prepared. They shall receive as
remuneration such sum as may be ordered by their
District Council.
EXECUTIVE.
18. The government of each District Council shall
he entrusted to certain officers, comprising a president,
tAvo vice-presidents, treasurer, secretary, and a com-
mittee of three, Avho shall be elected half-yearly.
FiA r e to form a quorum.
RECOGNITION OF REPRESENTATIVES.
14. Representatives appointed to the District
Council shall present their credentials hearing the
signatures of the president and secretary of the union


to be represented. They shall then be received as
delegates, their names and addresses being enrolled
on the books of the district. Any representative
absent from two consecutive meetings of his Council
without a written apology or leave of absence shall be
reported by the secretary to the union he represents.
REMOVAL OF OFFICERS.
15. Any officer of the District Council shall resign
his office when called upon to do so by a vote of two-
thirds of his Council assembled at a special meeting-
called for that purpose. The same meeting shall be
competent to elect his successor for such term as may
be deemed necessary.
PROVINCIAL COUNCIL.
18. In order to reduce expenses the Provincial
Council shall be composed of one representative from
each District Council, or from each union directly
affiliated, who may claim voting power according to
the number of financial members he represents.
Annual meetings shall be held at places determined
upon by the Provincial Council. The Provincial
Council shall have power to amend, rescind, or make
rules for its government; to remove any of its officers
except the Provincial Secretary ; to elect the officers
of the Provincial Council (excepting the Provincial
Secretary, who shall be elected by a plebiscite vote of


the Federation); to control the general fund ; to
decide all appeals against the decision of the
Executive or against the action of any District
Council. It shall institute legal proceedings on
behalf of the members or of the Federation, and
direct the trustees to take legal proceedings against
any officer of the Federation who misappropriates
any part of its funds. It shall have authority to
interpret doubtful rules, and shall determine any
matter on which the rules are silent. It shall see to
the carrying out of the objects of the Federation in
accordance with the general rules. The expenses of
representatives to Provincial Council meetings shall
be defrayed by their respective Districts or affiliations,
except in cases provided for in rule 23.
THE EXECUTIVE.
17. The general management of the Federation
shall be entrusted to the president, vice-presidents,
secretary, and treasurer of the Provincial Council,
together with the editor of the Journal of the Federa-
tion. These officers shall constitute the Executive.
Three Executive officers shall form a quorum. The
Executive shall meet at such times as may be ab-
solutely necessary. The powers of the Executive
shall be limited to the management and super-
intendence of the Federation in the interim between
the annual meetings of the Provincial Council. It
shall take every means to secure the due observance


of the rules of the Federation, to further the objects
and protect the funds. It shall direct the action of
the trustees and be responsible for the rightful
administration of the general fund in accordance
with the instructions of the Provincial Council. It
shall also have power to suspend the Provincial
Secretary or any other officer for wilful violation of
any of these rules.
Duties of Provincial Council Officers.
PRESIDENT.
18. The President of the Provincial Council of
the Federation shall preside at all genera], special
and Executive meetings, sign all papers and docu-
ments, and see that the rules are in no case violated.
In cases of necessity he shall, in conjunction with
the Secretary, appoint a time for holding special
meetings of the Provincial Council, and report
thereon to the next regular meeting.
VICE -PRE SIDE NTS,
19. The Vice-presidents shall act in the absence
of the president.
TREASURER.
20. The Treasurer shall attend each annual or
special meeting of the Provincial Council. He shall
take charge of the Federation’s bank book and shall
at any time bank or remit the whole or any portion
of the funds of the Federation as the Provincial


Council may order. He shall at any time on receipt
of a written notice signed by the president and one
trustee of the Provincial Council deliver up to the
said trustee within seven days of the time when the
said notice has been served on him, all books, moneys,
cheques, and other property of the Federation which
he may hold in his possession.
PROVINCIAL SECRETARY.
21. The Provincial Secretary should have a full
knowledge of the principles of Federation and of
labour organisation generally. He shall remain in
office during the will and pleasure of a majority of the
members (except as provided in rule 17) who shall
through the Provincial Council have power to call on
him to resign. Each District Council or directly
affiliated union shall have power to nominate a
candidate for the office of Provincial Secretary. No
candidate shall be eligible unless he is a bona tide
member of the Federation. The secretary shall obey
the orders and be under the control of the Provincial
Council and Executive. He shall have the right to
speak at all meetings of the Federation and its
affiliations. He shall receive all moneys due to the
Provincial Council and within three days pay all such
moneys into the account of the Federation in such
bank as may be determined upon by the Provincial
Council, and forward deposit slips on to the treasurer
within three days after making the deposit. He shall


prepare annually a return of income and statement of
receipts and expenditure and have same audited in
time for each annual Council meeting. During the
currency of his term of office he shall not contest a
seat for Parliament.
PERMANENT ORGANISERS.
22. Permanent organisers shall be ex officio
members of the Provincial Council and shall have the
right to speak but not to vote. They shall not during
the currency of their term of office contest a seat for
Parliament.
Special Summoned Meeting.
28. Any District Council or two or more directly
affiliated unions may, by a three-fourths majority,
request the Secretary to summons a full meeting of
the Provincial Council for the consideration of special
business, the nature of which it shall fully state.
Such a meeting shall be held as speedily as possible
after the receipt of the summons by the Secretary,
who shall, in convening the meeting, inform each
district or affiliated union of the special business to
be transacted. Should the Provincial Council, how-
ever, deem the business or object of the meeting
frivolous the expenses of such special meeting shall
be defrayed by the district or unions at whose instance
it was summoned.


Inspection of Books.
24. Any person having an interest in the funds of
the Federation may inspect the books and documents
relating thereto at convenient hours.
Dissolution.
25, No District Council shall be dissolved so long
as two unions remain affiliated. In the event of the
dissolution of any District Council the balance in
hand after all expenses have been met shall be handed
over to the Provincial Council. The Provincial
Council as a whole shall not be dissolved so long as
one district, or one directly affiliated union, is pre-
pared to maintain its principles.
Disposal of Funds.
26. In the event of a dissolution of the Federation
the funds shall be placed in a bank to be determined
upon in the name of trustees appointed, and shall be
devoted only to the purposes of labour organisation.
Alteration of Rules.
27. Any affiliated union desirous of altering,
amending, or rescinding any of these rules, or of
making any new rules, shall give two months’ notice
in writing to its District Council, or to the Provincial
Council if a direct affiliation, which may consider the
question at a special meeting; and therefrom refer
the proposed alterations to the next regular meeting
of the Provincial Council. It shall be within the


power of any District Council, or direct affiliation, by
a unanimous vote of its members, and with the con-
sent of the Executive, to suspend any mile of the
Federation, so far as its particular district, or direct
affiliation, is concerned, pending the annual meeting
of the Provincial Council.
Action on Disturbances.
28, In the event of disturbance arising from any
cause whatsoever, threatening an affiliated union,
such union shall:—
(1.) Endeavour to settle the dispute peaceably, failing
which it shall submit its case to its District Council,
when a committee shall be appointed to act in
conjunction with a committee of the union involved.
The joint committee shall endeavour to settle the
dispute in a peaceful and friendly manner; failing
this it shall take steps to bring the matter before the
affiliated unions.
(2.) In the event of emergency or trifling dispute, the
District Council may decide, by a three-fourths
majority, to take action in defence of the principles
of the Federation without previously consulting the
affiliated unions, but it shall submit its action to
them with such despatch as the urgency of the case
mav require. Under ordinary circumstances, before
taking’ action, the District Council shall place
questions involving serious disputes before the
affiliated unions and shall be governed in its subse-
quent course by their decision. (See section 3of this
clause.)


In voting on questions of disturbance, each affiliated
union shall be considered to vote in a body according
to the ruling of a majority of its members. A
majority composing two-thirds of the membership
of the district shall be necessary before the council
shall pledge its assistance to any disturbed union
(excepting in the cases provided for by section 2 of
this clause.) Should the threatened disturbance
show a likelihood of affec'ing any other district the
joint consideration of the District Councils in-
terested shall be given it, and none shall act without
the consent of the others affected. In case of great
emergency or internal dispute, a meeting of the
Provincial Council shall be called as provided for in
clause 23.
When it has been decided to financially support an
affiliated union the District Council shall make
arrangements for financial support for each financial
member, such assistance to be distributed as the
union in question may think fit. Provided that in
no case shall such assistance be given during the
first week of any disturbance.
While extreme measures are to be deeply regretted
and carefully guarded against, yet when they are
unavoidable it must be remembered that the exis-
tence of the Federation depends upon its ability to
win the industrial disputes in which its unions
become involved. Therefore, any decision of a
District Council involving action shall endow that
council with the following powers :
It shall be empowered to strengthen the disturbed
union or unions by requesting in the name of the
Federation the active co-operation of the other
unions in other districts, and to take any other
steps for securing the united action of workers
which the urgency of the case may require.


B. These powers shall cease with the termination of the
dispute endorsed by the Federation ; they shall be
exercised only upon a two-thirds majority decision
of a District Council or directly affiliated union,
which shall assume control of all disturbances in
conjunction with the strike committee of the union
or unions involved.
c. The Federation reserves to itself the right of withhold-
ing assistance from any affiliated body entering upon
a strike without having received the sanction of its
District Council, or, in case of a directly affiliated
union, the sanction of the Provincial Council.
Miscellaneous.
yg. No District Council or union shall issue any
circular or address affecting the Federation in general
without first having obtained the sanction of the
Executive of the Provincial Council.
30. Any union that joins the Federation shall not
act contrary to the rules, but shall as far as possible
do all in its power to promote the interests of Labour
organisation.
31. The Provincial Executive shall have power to
make such by-laws from time to time as it may deem
necessary and expedient, provided always that such
by-laws shall not be contrary to the spirit or meaning
of these rules.
32. All provincial officers’ salaries shall be fixed
at Provincial Council meetings.


JOURNAL OF THE FEDERATION.
BOARD OF TRUSTEES.
1. The Executive of this Provincial Council
shall be responsible for the business management of
the Journal of the Federation, of which, as a Board
of Trustees, it has control. It may claim one page
of any issue for the insertion of any statement
emanating from the Executive and bearing upon the
conduct of the journal, which page shall be for the
occasion exempt from the control of the editor, and
shall be filled as the Executive may direct.
EDITOR OF PAPER.
2. That a temporary editor may be appointed or
removed by a majority of the Provincial Executive.
Such editor shall not be considered permanently
appointed until after three months’ trial, when his
appointment permanently must be confirmed by a
vote of societies representing two-thirds of the
Federation membership.
DISMISSAL BY EXECUTIVE.
8. That a permanently-appointed editor shall
not be dismissed or suspended by the Executive, nor
by the Provincial Council (except for persistent
neglect or gross incapacity) until he has had the op-
portunity to appeal for a vote of confidence to a ple-
biscite of the Federation, and if such plebiscite result
in confidence being expressed in him by two-thirds of
the total vote cast, his services shall be retained.


DISMISSAL BY PLEBISCITE,
9. That any District, or directly affiliated union,
feeling dissatisfied with the editorial management of
the journal, may apply to the Executive for a similar
plebiscite, and should the editor not secure a vote of
confidence by a similar majority of two-thirds of the
total vote cast his services shall be dispensed with.
POSITION OF EDITOR.
10. The permanent editor shall be a member of
the Executive of the Federation and an ex-officio
member of the Provincial Council. He shall have
full charge of the literary work of the Journal of the
Federation, and shall be personally responsible for all
editorial comments made in the journal. During
the currency of his term of office he shall not as a
candidate contest an election for Parliamentary or
Municipal honours.
16




