

II »iAIA>A<A>A>A>At/ g
0 RULES 0
g Of the g|
® Jamberoo ®
( aßHfc m
' mjEif S&jp
j ||| School of Arts. g|
I S mvwNMvm J


RULES
OF THE .
Jamheroo School of Arts
I.—NAME.
This Institution shall be called the “Jambeeoo School
of Aets.”
IL-OBJECTS.
The objects of the Institution shall be the intellectual
improvement of its members, and the cultivation of
literature and science.
lII.—TEUSTEES.
The property of the Institution shall be vested, for the
use and benefit of the members, in three Trustees, who


shall be nominated by the members in general meeting
assembled. Any vacancy occurring in the office of
Trustee shall be filled up at a special general meeting, to
be called for that purpose by the President.
IY.—MEMBERS.
The Institution shall consist of all persons who have
been, or shall hereafter be, duly admitted as members,
and who comply with the rules for the time being of the
Institution.
Y.—ADMISSION.
Any person desirous of becoming a member shall he
admitted upon payment of the requisite subscription to
the Secretary.
VI. -SUBSCRIPTIONS.
The subsciiptions payable by each member shall be as
follows, namely : Life Membership, £lO ; Yearly Mem-
bership, 4s.
VII. —PRIVILEGES OF MEMBERS.
Only life members and members paying at the rate of
4s per annum shall be eligible to hold office in any
capacity, or entiled to vote at a general meeting.
VIII.—PAYMENT OP SUBSCRIPTIONS.
All subscriptions to be payable in advance. Member-
ship shall cease upon any member failing to pay his or


her subscription within twenty-eight days after the same
shall have become due, and after due intimation from the
Secretary that fees are overdue. Subscriptions shall be
payable on the Ist days of January, April, July, and
October respectively in each year; membership may,
however, commence at any time.
IX. —RECEIPTS.
Every member, on paying his subscription, shall receive
a receipt from the Secretary, the block of such receipt to
be initialled by the Treasurer.
X.—COMPLAINTS AGAINST MEMBERS.
Upon a receipt of a complaint, in writing, signed by
any three members of the Institution, the conduct of any
member as such shall be taken cognizance of by the com-
mittee, who shall investigate and decide upon the same,
and if necessary, award such punishment by fine, suspen-
sion or expulsion as they see fit, subject, however, to such
member’s right of appeal to a general meeting.
XI.—OFFICERS.
The management of the Institution shall be vested in a
Committee, to be elected annually at the annual general
meeting, consisting of a President, two Vice-Presidents, a
Treasurer, an Honorary Secretary, and a Committee of
seven.
The three Trustees shall be members ex officio of the
Committee of Management. At any meeting of said


Committee seven members of it shall form a quorum, and
an} r member being absent for three consecutive meetings
shall thereby forfeit his seat, unless satisfactory explana-
tion be offered.
XII.—AUDITORS
There shall be two Auditors of the Institution, to be
elected annually.
XIII.—ELIGIBILITY FOE ELECTION
All members of the Institution of at least six months’
standing, always excepting paid officers of the Institution,
shall be eligible as members of Committee and Auditors.
XIV-.—METHOD OF ELECTION.
All elections shall be by ballot, and the successful
candidate must have a majority of the votes present at
the meeting.
XV.—VACANCIES TO BE SUPPLIED.
In the event of any vacancy occurring during the year
in the offices of President, Vice-Presidents, Treasurer,
Honorary Secretary or Auditors, the same shall be filled
by a special general meeting of members called for that
purpose.
XVI.—VACANCIES IN COMMITTEE.
Any vacancy occurring in the committee shall be filled


by the candidate next in order on the ballot at the pre-
vious election, and failing which the committee shall
elect a member by resolution.
XVII.—MEETINGS OF COMMITTEE.
The Committee shall meet at least once in every month
for the transaction of business. Seven members shall
form a quorum, the Chairman being entitled to a casting
vote only
XVIII.—SPECIAL MEETINGS OF COMMITTEE.
Special meetings of Committee may be summoned at
any time by the Honorary Secretary at the request of
three of their number. A notice of such meeting shall
be posted at the Heading Boom and Post Office for at
least twenty-four hours previous.
XIX.-POWEBS OF COMMITTEE,
The Committee shall have the power to make by-laws,
to fine or suspend any member (subject to the light of
appeal to a general meeting), to receive, expend, and
manage funds ; to let any part of the Institution premises ;
to provide for the admission of persons who are not mem-
bers ; to engage and dismiss all paid officers ; to dispose
of any old. damaged or worn-out books, papers, apparatus
or ether effects belonging to the Institution ; to initiate,
conduct and defend legal proceedings, and to transact
generally all the business of the Institution.


XX.—TREASURER AND AUDITORS.
The Banking Account of the Institution shall be kept
at such bank as may from time to time be approved of by
the Committee, and all cheques shall be signed by the
Treasurer and countersigned by the Secretary. All
moneys received by the Treasurer, Secretary or any other
person on behalf of the Institution, shall be forthwith
paid into such banking account by the Treasurer.
XXI.-lION. SECRETARY.
The Hon. Secretary shall attend all meetings of the
Institution and take minutes of the business transacted,
supervise the correspondence, direct the convenience of
all mel tings of Committee and Mcmbeis, and be respon-
sible for the duo preparation for elections.
XXII. -PASSING OF PAYMENTS.
No payments shall be made on behalf of the Institu-
tion until authorised by the Committee.
XXIII.—TREASURER’S REPORT.
The Treasurer shall, fifteen days at least before the
Annual Meeting, balance the accounts for the preceding
year and submit them, with all vouchers, to the Auditors,
and the Auditors shall thereupon audit the same, and
report the result to the Committee.
XXIY.—BOOKS AND RECORDS.
The books of the Treasurer shall be produced with all


entries duly made at every monthly meeting of the
Committee.
XXV.—ANNUAL MEETING.
A General Meeting of the Members shall be held
annually, before the first of August in each year, for the
transaction of the general business of the institution, and
the election of officers for the ensuing year. At this
meeting the report for the preceding year and the balance-
sheet of the Treasurer shall be presented for adoption.
XXVI.—SPECIAL MEETINGS OP MEMBEES.
Special meetings of members may be summoned at any
time by the President at the written request of two mem-
bers. or in his absence by one of the Vice-Presidents, or
by three members of the Committee, provided 14 days’
notice be given by advertisement at Post Office and
Eeading Eoom. At such meetings 10 to form a quorum.
XXVII. —CHAIEMAN,
At every General Meeting the President, or in his
absence one of the Vice-Presidents, shall preside; and in
the absence of the President and both the Vice-Presidents
the Chairman shall be elected from the members present.
XXVIII.—VOTING.
At every General and Committee Meeting the voting,
except as otherwise provided for in the rules, shall be by


show of hands in the first instance, hut it shall he com-
petent for the Chairman or any three members present to
require a division.
XXIX.—NEW RULES.
New Rules for the Institution, or proposals to alter
existing ones, shall be taken into consideration at the
Yearly Meeting, or at a Special Meeting called for the
purpose. Notice of such proposals or alterations are to
he made in writing, and must he lodged with the Hon.
Sec. at least twenty-one days prior to the meeting, and
such proposed new rules or alterations of existing ones
are to be on the table of the Reading Room for seven
days prior to such meeting.
XXX. -ALIENATING THi-1 PROPERTY.
No resolution for breaking up the Institution, or alien-
ating any part of its property other than the books that
may be condemned bv the Committee, shall be passed,
unless it lie consented to at a special meeting called for
the purpose by a majority of two-thirds of the members
of the Institution to be present in person or by proxy.
Printed at the “Independent” Office, Kiama.
FEBRUARY, 1901.
