

RULES
OF THE
LAW INSTITUTE
NEW SOUTH WALES.
ADOPTED, 19th MARCH, 1862.
CONFIRMED, 31st MARCH, 1862.
,
&gtjn t g : I
j FEINTED FOE THE USE OF THE MEMBEES OF THE INSTITUTE, j
1862.
'Mf




RULES
OF TEB
LAW INSTITUTE
NEW SOUTH WALES.
ADOPTED, 19th MARCH, 18G2.
CONFIRMED, 31st MARCH, 1862.
Sglincg:
PRINTED FOR THE USE OF THE MEMBERS OF THE INSTITI TE.




R ULES
OJ? THE
LAW INSTITUTE OF NEW SOUTH WALES
115$h //4 to
1. This Society shall be called “ The Law Institute of jSTew Tlt,e -
South Wales.”
11. All Attorneys, Solicitors and Proctors admitted in the Persons eligible
Colony shall be eligible as Members of the Institute.
111. This Institute is established to represent generally the views Hie
and wishes of the members —to afford greater opportunities for
the acquirement and diffusion of legal knowledge —to preserve
the integrity of their branch of the legal profession —to watch
proposed changes, and aid amendments and reforms likely to be
beneficial in the law —to suppress any illegal or dishonorable
practice—to promote good feeling, and encourage proper conduct
amongst the members of the profession —to afford means of refer-
ence for the amicable settlement of professional differences —and
to consider and determine upon all matters affecting the interests
of the Profession generally.
IV. All Members of the Institute shall be elected by Ballot, Members to be
and one Black Ball in every five balls shall exclude the Candidate elected by h* llo *'
from Election.
Y. The Institute shall be supported Ly Donations and Bequests, Subscriptions&c.
and by Entrance Fees and Subscriptions, in the following manner : by Members -
Every person elected a Member during the first quarter of any Sydney Members
year, shall, within fourteen days after his election, pay to the
Treasurer an Entrance Fee of Five G-uineas, and if he be
practising in Sydney, an Annual Subscription of Three
Guineas in advance ; and if in the Country, at a greater country Mem-
distance than seven miles from Sydney, an Annual Subscrip- bers.
tion of One Guinea, in advance. And every person elected at
any other quarter of the year, shall, within fourteen days after
his election, pay to the Treasurer a similar Entrance Fee,
and a proportionate part of the Annual Subscription in ad-
vance, at the rates before mentioned, for the then remaining Dtfault in p
portion of the year. And in default of any such payment m ent! m * 7 '
being made, the Council may declare the election void.


Subscriptions VI. All Subscriptions shall be deemed due on the first day of
January of every year, in advance, and if any Member shall fail to
pay his Subscription to the Treasurer within fourteen days after
Penalty. the same is due, he shall be liable to pay a penalty of £ 1 Is to the
funds of the Institute. And if, after notice in writing from the
Secretary, any Subscriber shall not, within seven days, pay to the
Treasurer the amount of his Subscription, together with the pen-
Defauit in Pay- alty to which he may be liable, such default shall, at the next
nient - Meeting of the Council, be entered in the minutes of their pro-
ceedings, and from thenceforth, unless such non-payment be ac-
counted for to the satisfaction of the Council, the defaulter shall
cease to be a member, and forfeit all his interest in the property
of the Institute.
First election of VII. The first election of Members shall take place on the 31st
Members. day of March, 1862, and every person then proposing himself.
or being proposed as a Candidate, shall be balloted for by the
other Attorneys present, who have proposed themselves, or have
been proposed as Members no person having been once bal-
loted for, shall vote in a subsequent ballot at such Meetings, unless
he has been elected a member,
second election VIII. Every person desiring to become a Member of the Insti-
of Members. tute after the 31st March, 1862, up to and inclusive of the 80th day
of April, 1862, shall make application to the Provisional Secretary,
and all such persons shall be balloted for at a Meeting of Members
to be held on that day, at half-past 3 o’clock p.m, at the Public
Chambers. And each such person, if elected, shall pay the same
Entrance Eee and Subscription as the first Members, and within
the same time after election as mentioned in Rule V.
Subsequent IX. After the 30th April, 1862, persons desiring to become
Members how Members may be proposed by Two Members by sending a propo-
sal in writing, signed by them, to the Secretary, or by writing
such prorosal in a Book to be kept for that purpose, in the Secre-
tary’s Office or the Library, if any ; and the names of all persons
so proposed shall afterwards be put up on an open board in the
office or Library of the Institute for Fourteen days at the least,
preceding the then next Quarterly or Annual Meeting, and the
election of Candidates shall take place at the first Quarterly or
Annual Meeting of the Members after the expiration of such
Eourteen days, and such proposed election shall be mentioned in
the Notice to each member respecting such intended Meeting.
Members to sign X. No person shall be entitled to the privileges of Membership
Rules ° (except such as are by these Rules appointed to be exercised be-
fore the Rules can be Printed) until he shall have signed an un-
dertaking, at the foot of a copy of the Rules in the Secretary’s
hands, that he will conform thereto, and to all other Rules of the
Institute, to be from time to time made. Provided always, that
the signature of Country Members may be affixed by any Solicitor
duly authorized in writing, upon the authority being delivered up
to the Secretary.


XI. Immediately on the election of every member histname K.gfci.r.fMem-
shall be entered in alphabetical order in a book to be kept by the
Secretary for that purpose, to be called the “ Register of Mem-
bers ” together with the date of his election, and his professional
and private address; and no name shall be erased from such Reg-
iste/except by order of the Council duly entered on the Minutes.
XII Any member who shall at any time change his pro-change of resi-
fessional or private address, shall immediately give notice thereof, dence-
in writing to the Secretary. . _
XIII The “Register of Members” shall, for all the purposes to be evi-
the Society, be considered as containing a correct list of the mem- deuce,
hers and of their respective addresses, and it shall be incumbent
on each Member to ascertain that his name and address are cor-
rectly entered therein.
XIV Every letter, relating to any matter concerning the Letters by Post.
Society,* which shall be sent by the Secretary, or by the Council,
or otherwise, pursuant to the bye-laws, to a member by the post,
addressed to him by his name and address as entered m the
« Register of Members,” shall be considered to have reached him,
and he shall be deemed to have sufficient notice of the contents of
such letter, and shall be bound and concluded thereby.
XV The affairs of the Institute shall be under the control of officer of the
n Council of Thirteen Members, including a President and Iwo
Vice Presidents, to be from time to time elected in the manner
hereinafter provided. ......
XVI. No member of the Society shall be capable of being a Qualification o
member of the Council unless he shall be at the tune of such
Section a practitioner in the colony of at least five years standing.
XVII On Wednesday, the 30th day of April, 1862, at 3 p.m.,
the first Quarterly Meeting of Members ah all I>e held, of
Meeting the Provisional Secretary shall give ien clear days
notice, by advertisement and circular, and a President, Two 1 ice
Presidents, and the other Members of the Council for the year
1802 shall be duly elected at such meeting by Balloting Lists,
antPthey shall respectively continue in Office until the elect.on of
their successors.
XVIII. The name of every person intended to be proposed by aS
i _ President or Vice-President of the Society, or as president or
any member as presiaenu . , ■, • -i.-j. n t-pp Vice-Presidents,
a member of the Council, shall be transmitted m writing to the
seven days at least before the day of election and a list
of the nersons so proposed, together with the name of the member
prltstag each sSch person shall be exhibited in the Library
S the Institute five days before the meeting; and no person
shall 1 be capable of being elected President or Vice-President of
KsST. Vof Council, whose name shall not
have been so transmitted.


Annust General XIX. In the mouth of December next, and every subsequent
Meeting. Meetino- of the Members of the Institute shall be con-
vened! and the°then retiring Council shall report their proceed-
ings during the past year, and shall produce accounts,
duly audited ; and the President, Vice Presidents and other Me -
Election of Coun- hers of the Council for the ensuing .yearshall
cil. i, U! . lists, who shall hold office until the Election of their Successor..
And all retiring Officers shall at all times be eligible tor re-
election.
Auditors. XX. At each Quarterly Meeting in October, two Auditors shall
be elected by Ballot from the members of the Institute, not being
Members of the Council, who shall audit the Accounts preparatory
to the next Annual General Meeting.
Duties & Powers XXL The Council shall have the sole management of the
of Council. affairs of the Institute, and ot the income and property thereof,
for the purposes of the Society, and shall have the exclusive right
of appointing an Honorary Treasurer and an Honorary Secretary
(from amongst their own body, or from amongst the other ilem-
bers of the Institute), and one or more Assistant Secretaries, a
Librarian, and such other Officers, Clerks, Attendants and Ser-
vants, and at such Salaries as they may deem necessary, and ot
removing them if they think fit, and shall prescribe their respec-
tive duties ; and such Council shall at all tunes consider all mat-
ters affecting, either directly or indirectly, the interests ol the
Profession, and if they think fit so to do, shall bring the same un-
der the notice of the Members of the Institute at any General or
Special Meeting ; and shall, if the Funds of the Institute justify
To provide room, the same, have power to procure or rent a Boom ' or Emldmg or
the use of the Members, as a Hall, Library, Club, or otherwise,
And Library. from time to time to lay out such portion of the Tunds of the In-
stitute as they may deem expedient in the purchase ol Law and
other Books and Publications, including Newspapers, for the Li-
Make Bye-Laws, brary; to make such Bye-Laws as may be desirable for e e -
cient management of the affairs, and the promotion ol the objects
of the Institute, provided the same are not at variance with these
Rules, and are confirmed at any General or Special Meeting ol the
Appoint. s„b- Members of the Institute; to appoint Sub-Committees lor any
Committee. purpose or purposes; and generally to perform such acts as may
be requisite to carry out the objects of the Institute,
Property to vest XXII. All the Property of the Institute shall be held by the
dentl 2ePl ' eßi ' Two Vice-Presidents, for the time being, as Trustees for the Mem-
bers, and be disposed of from time to time as the Council shall
determine.
Meetings Of XXIII. The Council shall meet in their Offices, or in some
council. convenient place in Sydney, during the first week ol each month,
and it shall be competent for any Three Members of the Council
by writing, stating the object of the meeting to request the Secre-


tarv to convene a Special Meeting ot the Council, which Meeting
shall be forthwith called by the Secretary, by his giving ihree
clear days’ notice in writing of such Meeting, and naming the
subject to be then considered. Five Members shall form a
quorum at all Meetings ol the Council.
XXIV. At all General Meetings of the Members, and Meetings ChaUman at
of the Council, tbe President shall take the Chair, and in his
absence one of the Vice-Presidents, in order of seniority of admis-
sion, and in the absence of the President and Vice-Presidents,
then one of the Members of the Institute, or of the Council, as
the case may require, to be chosen by the Members then present.
XXV. Any Meeting of Members or of the Council may be Adjourned Meet-
adjourned, and in case of such adjournment, the business to be u,g '
transacted at such Adjourned Meeting shall be specified previously
to the adjournment taking place, and shall be entered on the
Minutes, and no business shall be transacted at the Adjourned
Meeting which shall not have been so specified and entered.
XXVI. The presiding Chairman at every Meeting of the
Council shall have one vote, and, in case of an equality of votes, vote-
he shall also have a casting vote ; and in the event of the Honorary
Secretary and Treasurer not being Members of the Council, they
shall be" entitled to be present and speak, but not vote, at all
meetings of the Council.
XXVII. Minutes shall be made in Books, to be kept for the of Pro-
purpose, of all the proceedings at the General and Special Meet-
ings of the Members and Minutes shall also be made of the pro-
ceedings of the Council at their General and Special Meetings, and
of the names of the Members attending the same.
XXVIII. The Council may, ex mero motu, or on the complaint |j u e 8 P^ 0 " y of
in writing of any person, suspend any Member of the Institute council,
from his privileges as Member, or may sus]i end any of their own
body from acting as Member of the Council, for conduct deroga-
tory to the Profession, or for refusing to conform to the Pules of
the Institute, provided Nine Members of the Council at least be
present at the Meeting at which such suspension shall be resolved
upon of whom Seven at the least consent thereto; and provided
also, that each Member of the Council shall have had previous
notice that the question of such suspension was to be considered
at such Meeting, and that in case of a Member of the Institute,
such Member shall also have had duo notice that the question
of his suspension would he considered at such Meeting o t m
Council, and thereupon such Member shall be entitled to attend
before the Council, for the purpose of hearing and answering any
charge which may have been preferred against him, and of qnes
turning tbe evidence in support thereof, or disproving the same,
or giving an explanation, c r making any statement he may t nn


fit, and he shall thereupon retire; and the Council shall make
such Rules or Bye-Laws for carrying out this Rule as they may
think proper.
Report to Gene- XXIX. Whenever the Council may have suspended any Mem-
Pow^r e thereon nd her of the Institute, or of their own body, they shall, with all
convenient speed, convene a Special Meeting of the Members of
the Institute, (unless the usual Quarterly or Annual Meeting be
about to take place within one month from the day of such sus-
pension), for the purpose of considering the same, and upon a
report being made to such Meeting, the Members present shall
have power to expel or remove from office, as the case may be,
such Member so suspended, or to reinstate him in his former position
wholly discharged from such suspension.
Members ren- XXX. In case any member of the Society shall, in consequence
of practising by of the order of the Supreme Court be rendered incapable by reason
orders of Su- of malpractice, or other professional misconduct, of practising in the
be*Mem- said Court, such person shall forthwith cease to be a member of the
preme Court to
eease to be Mem-
bers.
Society.
Death Resigna- XXXI. In case any Member of the Council shall die or not
Members o/ duly attend at three consecutive Meetings of such Council, whether
Council. General or Special, or shall by notice in writing to the Secretary
resign Office, the remaining Membc’S of the Council may, unless
How to be sup- such non-attendance be caused by sickness, or temporary absence
piled, from Sydney, appoint some other Member of the Institute to he a
Member of such Council in the place of the Member so dying,
absenting himself, or resigning.
Monies paid to XXXII. All subscriptions and other Moneys payable to the
Treasurer. Institute shall be paid to the Treasurer, who shall forthwith place
Bank. the same in a Bank, to be named by the Council, to the credit of
Pa mentof the Institute; and no sum shall be paid on account of the Institute
accounts. until ordered by the Council, and such order be duly entered in the
Cheques signed Book of the Proceedings of the Council, and all cheques shall be
signed by the Treasurer as such, and he countersigned by the
Secretary.
GeneralQuar- XXXIII. A General Meeting of tin Members of the Institute
teriy Meetings. g i, a ]] be held in the month of April, July, and Octo’ er, in every
year, at each of which Meetings the Council shall report Tie trans-
actions during the preceding three months, and an election shall
take place of New Members from the persons who shall have given
duo notice of being Candidates for e'cction, and have been duly
proposed and seconded.
special General XXXIV. Upon receiving a Requisition, signed by six or
Meetings of more Members of the Institute, or upon a resolution ot the
Council, the Secretary shall convene a Special Meeting of the
Members to be held after Ten, and within Fifteen days from the
receipt by him of such Requisition or Bcsolutiun ; provided always


that such Requisition and Resolution, and the notices thereunder-
convening the Meeting, shall distinctly specify the subject to be
considered, and that subject only shall he discussed at such Meet-
ing
XXXV. The Secretary shall give seven days’ notice in writing, r N^ t j“ e ° t f i J s ne ‘
at the least, to each Member of the Institute, of every General
Meeting, whether Annual, Quarterly or Special
XXXYI. After the ordinary business of any General Meeting, G«-
(Annual or Quarterly), shall have been disposed of, any business
which the Council think proper to introduce, shall then be entered
upon and discussed.
XXXYII. After the business introduced by the Council shall
have been disposed of, it shall be competent for any Member of the bers may make
Institute to make any proposition in connection with the operations
of the Institute, and to give any notice he may think fit of such
proposition to be considered at a future Meeting.
XXXYIII. In case any Debate shall arise upon any subject, no Mode ofcondiid-
Member shall (unßss the Meeting be in Committee) be permitted u '°
to speak more than once upon the same question, except for the
purpose of explanation, but a Member merely seconding a motion,
shall not be considered to have spoken thereto.
XXXIX. At all General Meetings, votes may ho given (except Voting by
as hereinafter mentioned), by Proxy, such Proxy to be a Member, J
and appointed according to the form given in the Schedule and the
votes of such Proxy shall be as effectual as if given by the Member
in person ; but no Member shall at any Meeting be Proxy for more
than two persons, and every such appointment shall only continue
in force for the particular Meeting for which it was given, and for
every Adjourned Meeting which may take place in consequence of
such Meeting.
XL Every such Proxy Paper shall be delivered to the Cliair- Proxy Papers to
man of the Meeting at which the same is used, immediately upon t 0
his taking the Chair, and shall be by him thereupon announced to
the Meeting; provided that no member shall be allowed to vote
by Proxy in the cases of the Election or expulsion of Members, or
on any question personally affecting any Member of the Institute.
XLI. In case any irregularity shall occur in the convening or As to irreguiari-
holding of any general meefng, or in any election or other pro- tles in Meeting *'
ceedings at any such meeting, and the same shall not be publicly
noticed’ and objected to at such meeting, all proceedings of such
meeting shall be of the same force and validity, as if no such
irregularity had occurred ; but if any irregularity shall be publicly
noticed and objected to, the meeting shall decide thereon and such
decision shall be final and conclusive.


Hours of Library XLIT. The Lib: ary shall be open to the Mem 1 ers at such hours
os the Council shall from time to time determine, but no Member
shall on any account be permitted to remove any Book, Periodical
or newspaper from the room, for any purpose.
Admission of XLIIL Articled Clerks of Members shall have the privilege of
tfiAbrar lerkS attending the Library as Subscribers, at the discretion of the
Council, upon the payment of an Annual Subscription of One
Guinea each in advance
Strangers ad- XLIY. Every Member of the Institute shall have the privilege
nutted. 0 f introducing to the Rooms or Library of the Institute any friend
(being an Attorney, Solicitor or Proctor) who may be on a visit to
this Colony ; but no other persons shall have access to the Library
Injury to Books or Rooms except Members and Subscribers; and if any injury be
&c. done to any of the Books, Periodicals or Furniture, the person
causing the injury shall forthwith either purchase a new copy of
such Book or Periodical, or a new and similar article of Furniture,
or pay the value thereof.
Corresponding XLY. With a view to extend the benefits of the Institute, com-
Members. munication shall be opened by the Council as speedily as possible
with similar Societies, and with Members of the Profession in pther
Countries, for the purpose of'obtaining and communicating infor-
mation on all matters connected with Legal and other proceedings
of a character likely to prove beneficial or interesting ; and such
Members shall, so long as they continue in correspondence with
the Council, be Honorary Members of the Institute.
Act Of Ineorpo- XLYI. As soon as ; racticable after the election of the First
ration to bo Council it shall be lawful for the Council to adopt such proceed-
obtained. * , , • * . j •
ings as they may deem advisable for obtaining an Act to incorpo-
rate the Members of the Institute, together with such o-her Acts
as may be expedient, for regulating the admission and practice of
Attorneys, Solicitors and Proctors in the Colony, and suppressing
the practice of the Profession by persons not legally qualified.
miles not to be XLVII. No alteration in or addition to these Rules shall be
altered, &c. m ade without the consent of a majority of two thirds of the Mem-
bers attending a General Meeting of the Institute, specially con-
vened for that purpose, and the notice convening such Meeting
shall state the exact natute of such proposed alteration or addition.


SCHEDULE.
FORM OF PROXY.
I • do hereby appoint
of my proxy, to vote for me,
and in my name, at a meeting of the Members of the Law
Institute of New South Wales, to be holden on the
day i f 18 , and at any adjournment
or adjournments of such Meetings.






