

RULES
OF THE
EMPLOYERS’ MUTUAL DEFENCE
ASSOCIATION
ITEW SOUTH WALES.
W. E. SMITH, PRINTER AND STATIONER,
Sydney and London.




RULES
OF THE
EMPLOYERS’ MUTUAL DEFENCE
ASSOCIATION
ITEW SOUTH WALES.
W. E. SMITH, PRINTER AND STATIONER,
Sydney and London.




EXILES
OF THE
||mirlagHjs’ lijutiuil
NEW SOUTH WALES.
1. Objects.
The objects of the Association shall be :
a. The protection of the interests of employers of all
classes in their dealings with their employees by the establish-
ment of a fund for this purpose, to be vested in Trustees, and
used by them for providing, at their discretion, compensation for
losses sustained by employers through strikes, locking-out,
boycotting, or intimidation.
b. Co-operation with similar Associations throughout the
Australasian colonies.
c. The support of. any organisation devised for the
registration of free employees, and of any benefit society in-
stituted for providing sick pay and other benefits for such
employees who may from time to time be employed by
members.
d. The doing all or any things incidental or conducive to
the attainment of the above objects.


2, Subscriptions and Membership.
Any member of the following bodies, namely :
The Employers’ Union of New South Wales,
The Steamship Owners’ Association of Australasia,
The Pastoralists’ Union of New South Wales,
The Associated Northern Collieries
The Southern Coal Owners’ Association,
The Sydney Chamber of Commerce,
or of other associations of employers which may from time to
time be added to this list by the Trustees hereinafter mentioned )
may become a subscriber to the Association, or, the said Trustees
may arrange to admit to the privileges of membership any of the
Associations, or any members thereof, on such terms as may
seem to the Trustees equitable, having regard to the number
of members and the extent of their trade or business.
The members of the Association shall consist of subscribers of
£\ is. each per annum, hereinafter called “ honorary members ”
(who shall have no right to vote at any meetings of subscribers),
and of subscribers of not less than (in addition to / 1 is.
per annum subscription), hereinafter referred to as “ members,”
who may vote at any meetings of subscribers, as hereinafter
provided, and who shall be entitled to receive such compen-
sation as the Trustees may think fit to give for losses sustained
through strikes, locking-out, boycotting, or intimidation.
Every member must pay his subscription either all in
cash, or partly in cash and the balance by undertaking, in the
form in the Schedule to these rules, or in some other form
to be approved by the said Trustees, but in no case shall the
cash subscription be less than/ 10, or than one-tenth of the
total amount of the subscription, if such subscription shall
exceed £lOO.
The annual subscription shall be due on the Ist of January
in each year. »


The word “member” shall include a firm or other asso-
ciation of persons, and, for the purpose of voting at meetings or
any other purpose under these rules, any such firm or association
may, by writing, at any time or from time to time, appoint a
nominee to represent it and exercise on its behalf the rights and
privileges conferred on members by these rules.
3. Appointment of Trustees.
There shall be five Trustees, who shall in future be elected
from the members and honorary members, and who shall hold
office for three years, subject to the disqualifications enumerated
in Rule 5. The election of the Trustees shall vest in the
following persons, vi z. :
The President of the Sydney Chamber of Commerce.
The President of the Employers’ Union of New South
Wales.
The Chairman of the Steamship Owners’ Association of
Australasia.
The President of the Pastoralists’ Union of New South
Wales.
The Chairman of the Associated Northern Collieries.
The Chairman of the Southern Coal Owners’ Association.
And the Chairman or President of any other Associa-
tion which may, under the preceding rule, be added
to the list there given, or in the duly accredited
representatives of the Associations referred to in
this rule.
Each such person shall have one vote, and shall vote for
the number of Trustees to be elected.
The office of Trustee shall be an honorary one.


The first Trustees have already been elected, and shall hold
office for three years as from the first day of January, 1891.
All future elections of Trustees, whether to fill a vacancy or
otherwise, shall be conducted in such manner as may from
time to time be determined by the electors mentioned in Rule 3.
A retiring Trustee shall be eligible for re-election.
4. Duties and Powers of Trustees.
The duties and powers of Trustees shall comprise:—
a. The control, investment, and disbursement of the
funds of the Association.
b. The general management of the Association, includ-
ing power to call up any subscriptions promised but
not paid.
c. The appointment of an Organising Secretary and
any other official.
d. The Trustees shall keep a Minute Book of the
proceedings of their meetings, at which three
Trustees shall constitute a quorum ; the Chairman
to have a casting as well as a deliberative vote in
the event of an equality of votes at the Board.
5. Disqualification of Trustees.
The position of Trustee shall be vacated—
a. By death.
b. By bankruptcy, liquidation by arrangement, compo-
sition or assignment.
c. By a written request to a Trustee signed by a majority
of the electors mentioned in Rule 3 calling upon
him to resign.
d. By resignation.


All vacancies shall be filled by the electors under the pro-
visions of Rule 3, and any Trustee appointed to fill any vacancy
shall hold office only for such term as the Trustee in whose place
he shall be appointed would have held office had he not ceased
to be a Trustee.
The Trustees for the time being holding office, shall, within
ten days after any vacancy shall occur in the office of Trustee,
call a meeting of the electors for the purpose of electing a
Trustee to fill such vacancy. Seven days’ notice, at the least,
of every such meeting, shall be given to each elector.
Non-liability of the Trustees.
The Trustees, and each of them, shall be free from all
personal liability in regard to their administration of the funds, or
any matter or thing arising in connection with the Association, or
these rules, or the conduct or decision of the Trustees. And the
members of the Association shall at all times indemnify the said
Trustees, and each of them, their, and each of their, estate and
effects from and against all actions, suits, claims, or demands,
which may at any time be brought, or had, against the said
Trustees, or any one or more of them in connection therewith.
No member shall have any right to demand from the said
Trustees any information as to the disposal of the funds of the
Association other than that provided for in these Rules.
The said Trustees shall, immediately on having notice of
any claim against them, other than by members, inform the
electors mentioned in Rule 3 thereof.
7. Reports.
The Trustees shall issue to the members at the end of each
year a report of their proceedings for such period, and, at
the end of three years from the official inauguration of the
Association, and triennially thereafter, the Trustees shall submit
to the members a summarised statement of receipts and disburse-
ments, with a report


8. Meetings
The Trustees may at any time, and they shall, on a
requisition in writing signed by at least three of the electors
mentioned in Rule 3, summon a special meeting of members to
consider such matters as maybe submitted to it by the Trustees
or as shall be stated in such requisition, as the case may be.
The Trustees shall give not less than seven days’ notice of
the time and place at which the meeting is to be held by
notice served personally or by post on each member.
At any meeting of members, unless a poll is demanded
by at least ten members present personally entitled in
the aggregate to not less than fifty votes either before
or immediately after a show of hands as to any question coming
under the consideration of the meeting and unless a specified
proportion of the votes of the members is required by the rules
or regulations for the time being of the Association for the
determination of any question, the same shall be decided by a
majority of the members personally present on a show of hands,
each member being considered for that purpose to have the
number of votes to which he is entitled under this Rule, and
a declaration by the Chairman that a resolution has been carried
and an entry to that effect in the minute book of the Association
shall be sufficient evidence of the fact.
If a poll is demanded by ten or more members
present, entitled in the aggregate to not less than fifty
votes, or a specified proportion of the votes of the members is
required for the determination of any question, a poll shall be
taken either before the conclusion of the meeting or at any other
time within seven days after the conclusion of the meeting in
such manner as the Chairman may then direct, and the result of
such poll shall be deemed to be the resolution of the Association.
Every member shall have a vote for every subscribed
or agreed to be subscribed by him.


9. Aid to Employers.
The Trustees shall have full powers as to the disbursement
the funds, subject to the following general instructions :
a. The Trustees may, if they think fit, grant support in a
dispute occurring in some particular trade or busi-
ness or between one employer and his employees.
b. Unless it be decided to make any employer’s business
the subject of a test case, the amount to be ex-
pended in the support of any individual member
shall not exceed ten times the amount of his con-
tribution.
c. Where the interest threatened is some branch of a
special trade or business, the Trustees shall, at their
discretion, decide the amount of aid, if any, to be
given from the cash in hand, and after this sum has
been expended, if further help is needed, and the
Trustees determine to grant this, it shall be
provided by calling up in the first place the
balances of subscriptions from those members
concerned in the trade or business affected.
d. Any employer seeking aid must have been a member for
three months prior to the date of his application.
e. Any employer whose interests are threatened by his
employees, or by any labour organisation or com-
bination and who wishes to obtain the assistance
of the Trustees, will be expected to submit to the
Trustees a written statement of the grounds of
difference and to consult them thereon before
taking any action by way of locking out or
otherwise.
/. In the event of any Trustee seeking aid from the Asso-
ciation, he shall not be entitled to vote regarding his
application nor in connection with the appoint-
ment of any Committee uf Advice that may be
appointed in pursuance of Rule 10 in connection
with such application.


10. Committee of Advice.
Should the Trustees at any time wish to be assisted by a
Committee of Advice, they can elect such a Committee (not
exceeding three in number) from the members and honorary
members. The Committee are to report to the Trustees, but
are not to possess the right of voting.
11. Privacy.
Privacy shall be observed in regard to the operations of the
Association.
12. Amendment of Rules.
These rules may, from time to time, be amended or added
to by a meeting composed of the Trustees and the electors
mentioned in Rule 3, such meeting to be convened by the
Trustees ; a majority in number of trustees and electors com-
bined shall be a quorum, and the votes of the majority present
shall decide any question submitted at such meeting, the Chair-
man elected by the meeting having a casting vote.
13. Investment of Funds.
The Trustees shall invest their funds in Bank deposits.
14. Organising Secretary.
The Trustees shall appoint an Organising Secretary, and
shall determine his duties and emoluments.
15. Donations to the Association.
The Trustees may accept donations towards the Fund from
firms or persons who are not members. In the event of a
dissolution of the Association, donors shall be entitled to a pro-
portionate share of the available assets, and may at any time
become members, if they so wish, as provided in Rule 2.


16. Return of Subscriptions
In the event of the death, insolvency or resignation of a
member, he or his representative shall be entitled to have his
undertaking cancelled and returned, provided it has not been
negotiated or assigned.
17. Forfeiture of interest in Association.
In the event of any member neglecting or refusing to pay
any sum which he has undertaken to subscribe, or dishonoring
any undertaking he may have given to the Trustees, his interest
in the Association shall, ipso facto, be determined, and all
payments made by him to the Association shall be forfeited to
the Association.
18. Winding-up of the Association.
At the end of each third year the Trustees shall, if so required
in accordance with the rules, take a ballot of members
to decide whether the Association shall be dissolved
or continued. In the event of a two thirds majority in number
of votes being in favor of a dissolution, the Trustees shall
thereupon become the liquidators, and shall distribute the assets
among the donors and members in the manner appearing to
them equitable.
19. Retirement of Members.
Should any member-desire to retire from the Association at
the end of the third year, or at the end of any subsequent
triennial period, he shall be at liberty to do so, and shall there-
upon be given such sum as the Trustees shall consider his fair
proportion of the assets of the Association ; but nothing con-
tained in these rules shall oblige the Trustees to recognise
any legal proprietorship vesting in members.


20. Negativing Partnership.
Nothing herein contained shall be construed to create a
partnership between the members of the Association or any of
them.
21. Signing of Rules.
All members shall, on becoming subscribers to the
Association, agree in writing to be bound by the rules for the
time being of the Association.
SCHEDULE.
Form of Undertaking
In consideration of your continuing to act as Trustees for
the Employers’ Mutual Defence Association of New South Wales
for the term of one week from this date I (or we) hereby undertake
to pay you the sum of £ being the unpaid balance
of my (or our) subscription of £ by such instalments
and at such times as you or the Trustees for the time being of
the said Association may from time to time require, in accord-
ance with the rules for the time being of the said Association.
W. E. Smith, Sydney and London.




