

AT a MEETING of Merchants, Shipowners, and others interested in the Trade with the
Colonies of NEW SOUTH WALES AND VAN DIEMEN’S LAND, held THIS DAY,
pursuant to public advertisement, at the Jerusalem Coffee House, Cornhill:
Upon the motion of John Gore, Esq. seconded by RICHARD ASPINALL, Esq.
JOHN WILLIAM BUCKLE, Esq. was called to the Chair.
The Chairman having explained that this Meeting had been convened by a number of Gentlemen
who, impressed “ with the growing importance of the Trade between this country and the Colonies of
New South Wales and Van Diemen’s Land, were of opinion that a time had arrived at which it was
desirable that an Association of Merchants, Shipowners, and others engaged therein, should be formed,
as much with the view of establishing an official medium of communication with the Home Go-
vernment on all matters connected with the Trade, as well as of watching generally over their own
common interests, and the Commercial interest of these Colonies,” and who had formed themselves into
a Provisional Committee for that purpose
It was proposed by Stewart Donaldson, Esq. seconded by Jacob Montefiore, Esq. and resolved
unanimously,
That an Association of Merchants, Shipowners, and others interested in the trade with the Colonies
of New South Wales and Van Diemen’s Land be formed, to be called the “ New South Wales and
Van Dieman’s Land Commercial Association.”
Proposed by Robert Brooks, Esq. seconded by J. T. Walker, Esq. and resolved unanimously,
That the Rules and Regulations recommended by the Provisional Committee be adopted for the
government of such Association.
Proposed by H. H. Mortimer, Esq. seconded by Walter Buchanan, Esq. and resolved unanimously,
That the following Gentlemen do form the Committee of Management for the present year; —
RICHARD ASPINALL, Esq.
JOHN S. BROWNRIGG, Esq. M. P.
ROBERT BROOKS, Esq.
J. W. BUCKLE, Esq.
STEWART DONALDSON, Esq.
DUNCAN DUNBAR, Esq.
JOHN GORE, Esq.
JACOB MONTEFIORE, Esq.
WILLIAM WALKER, Esq.
ARTHUR WILLIS, Esq.
Proposed by Robert Brooks, Esq. seconded by John Gore, Esq. and resolved unanimously,
That all Gentlemen enrolling themselves Members of this Association before the 30th of June next,
shall be considered original members thereof.
Proposed by Stewart Donaldson, Esq. seconded by J. P. Gordon, Esq. and resolved unanimously,
That the proceedings of this day be published.
Proposed by Walter Buchanan, Esq. seconded by John Masson, Esq. and resolved unanimously,
That the best thanks of this meeting be given to John William Buckle, Esq. for bis conduct in
the chair this day.
HENRY BUCKLE, Hon. Sec.




RULES AND REGULATIONS
FOR THE GOVERNMENT OF THE
NEW SOUTH WALES & VAN DIEMEN’S LAND
Commercial Association.
RECOMMENDED BY THE PROVISIONAL CoImmITTEE, AND APPROVED BY THE FOREGOING RESOLUTIONS.
I. That the NEW SOUTH WALES AND VAN DIEMEN’S LAND COMMERCIAL AS-
SOCIATION is formed of Merchants, Shipowners, and others, for the promotion and protection of
the general interests of the Trade with those Colonies, for collecting and classifying information,
obtaining the removal of grievances and injurious imposts, and for communicating with the Public
Authorities on all subjects affecting the common good in reference to the objects above specified,
11. —That Subscriptions be received in the names of Firms or Individuals.
Individuals subscribing £2. 2s. annually being entitled to one vote, and Lirms or Individuals
subscribing £4. 4s. annually, or upwards, to two votes at all bhllots.
lII That in case of new Members wishing to join the Association, notice must be given to the Com-
mittee by the proposer, at least one month previously to any General Meeting of the Association,
at which meeting the admission of such Candidate being moved and seconded, he shall be
ballotted for forthwith —One fifth dissentients to exclude.
IV— a General Meeting be held annually on the first Wednesday in February on the business
of the Association.
V _That a Committee of Ten members be elected by ballot to conduct the affairs and manage the
funds of the Association, five.of whom ■ shall form a Quorum; that the> Committee do meet once
in each month, at least, or more frequently if it be deemed necessary; and that such Committee
do annually elect a Chairman, who shall also preside at all General Meetings.
VI. —That at all ensuing annual General Meetings, the two members of the Committee who have the
least frequently attended during the preceding year, do go out, and shall not be eligible for re-election
until after the lapse of one year. Should vacancies occur in the Committee, by resignation or other-
wise, in the interval between two annual General Meetings, such vacancies to be filled up by the
Committee from the members of the Association, until the next annual General Meeting, when
all vacancies in the Committee shall be filled up by ballot.
VII. That as it is desirable that the Committee should be regular in their attendance to the business
of the Association, any member not being present at the time fixed upon for their Meetings, to be
fined five shillings, unless such member be absent from Illness or out of Town, such fine to be
added to the General Fund.
VIII. That all questions before the Committee be decided by a majority; should the votes be equal,
the Chairman to have an additional or casting vote.
IX. —That the Committee shall have the power to appoint a Secretary, and through him to call
extraordinary General Meetings of the Association, at such times as they may think desirable; and
that they shall also call an extraordinary General Meeting at any time, upon the written requisition
of ten members of the Association, who shall specify the object of such measure.
X. —That the Committee shall render a Report of their proceedings at the Annual General Meeting,
as also an Account of the receipts and disbursements of the Funds of the Association.
XI. —That these Rules and Regulations may be altered, and additions made to them at any General
Meeting of the Association, fourteen days notice to be given to the Committee by the member
intending to propose such alteration or addition.
XII. —That any member of Parliament being a member of this Committee shall be exempted Irom
Rules No. 6 & 7.
By order of the Committee,
JOSEPH MOORE, Secretary.
Langbourn Chambers, Fenchurch Street.


RULES
AND
REGULATIONS
OF THE
MEW SOUTH WALES
AND
VAN DIEMEN’S LAND
fltotmncrcial association.


