

EULES
FOR THE MANAGEMENT OF THE
Mjesl*gan IJUtljobbi
SUNDAY SCHOOLS,
As adopted hy the Conference of 1872. (See Minutes, page 120. J
I. Each School shall be conducted in distinct and
avowed connection with the Wesleyan Methodist
Church; and shall be worked in harmony with its
arrangements, and with a view to its increase and
benefit.
11. Its main object shall be to instruct and train
Scholars in the doctrines, privileges, and duties of the
Christian religion, as believed and taught by the
Wesleyan Methodist Church.
111. The general management of each School shall be
entrusted to a Committee, except in cases provided for
in Rule XXIV.
The Committee shall consist of—
1. All the Ministers of the Circuit.
2. Of the Treasurer, the General Secretary, Super-
intendents and Secretaries of the School, to he
appointed as hereinafter mentioned.
3. Of eight or more persons to he chosen as follows:
One quarter being Members of the Wesleyan Metho-
dist Church, by the Leaders’ Meeting. One quarter
from Members of the Congregation or Subscribers
to the School, who, if not Members of the Church,
are nevertheless believed to be cordially attached to
the principles and polity of Wesleyan Methodism,
by the Leaders’ Meeting. One half being Teachers
or Officers, who are also Members of the Wesleyan
Methodist Church, by a Teachers’ Meeting to be
held the month before the Anniversary of the
School.


IV. An Annual Public Meeting shall be held at any
time of the year most convenient, to receive the General
and Financial Report, the lists of persons chosen in the
manner above described to be members of the Com-
mittee for the ensuing year, and also to promote the
interests of the School. When it is deemed necessary,
in addition to the Annual Meeting, a Public Meeting,
to promote the interests of the School and of Christian
education generally, may be held at any time of the
year most convenient.
V. The general duties of the Committee are, to devise
means for raising the necessary supplies; to disburse
the funds according to the requirements of the School;
to hear and determine appeals from the Teachers’
Meeting; and to exercise a vigorous control over all the
affairs of the institution in accordance with its estab-
lished rules.
VI. The Committee shall meet at least once a
quarter, and oftener if required, with the concurrence
of the Superintendent of the Circuit, and five shall form
a quorum for the transaction of business.
VII. The Superintendent Minister of the Circuit
shall preside in all meetings of the Committee, and of
the Teachers at which he is present; in his absence,
his place shall be supplied by one of the other
Ministers : and if no Minister be present, by one of the
Officers of the institution, to be appointed by the
Meeting, except that in the Teachers’ Meetings one of
the Superintendents of the School shall preside.
VIII. The Officers of the School shall be as fol-
lows :
1. One or more Superintendents, who shall be annually
appointed by the Committee, having been recom-
mended by the Teachers’ Meeting.
2. One or more Secretaries, one or more Canvassers,
and a Librarian, to be annually chosen by the
Teachers’ Meeting subject to the approval of the
Committee.


3. A Treasurer, and General Secretary to be annually
appointed by the Committee.
IST.B. All the Officers shall be selected, where
practicable, exclusively from the Members of the
Wesleyan Methodist Church, and shall be chosen at
the first meeting of the Committee.
IX. The duties of the Officers shall be as fol-
1. The Treasurer shall receive and pay all money on
account of the School, under the direction of the
Committee.
2. The General Secretary shall convene and attend
all Meetings of the Committee, take minutes of the
proceedings, and prepare a written report for the
Annual Meeting.
3. The Superintendents shall be responsible for the
punctual opening and closing of the School with
singing and prayer, for the admission of Scholars,
and the arrangement of Classes and Teachers, and
for the internal management of the School.
4. The School Secretaries shall take charge of the
School Registers and Journal, give due notice of
Teachers’ Meetings to the Superintendent Minister
and his Colleagues, and to the other Members of the
Meeting, take minutes of the Meetings, and furnish
periodical reports of the condition and requirements
of the School to the Committee.
5. The Canvassers shall attend the School once on
each Sabbath, receive from the Secretary the list of
absent Scholars, visit their homes to ascertain the
cause of their absence, and endeavour to promote
the interests of the School by obtaining additional
Scholars.
6. The Librarian shall take charge of the Library,
make a complete Catalogue of the books, keep them
in good order, and enter in a proper book the issue
and return of every volume lent, with the period
during which they are kept; he shall also furnish to
the Committee a quarterly report of the state of the
Library, and the number of books issued therefrom.
X. The qualifications, appointment, and duties of
Teachers.
1, The Teachers, wherever practicable, shall be Mem-
bers of the Wesleyan Methodist Church; but if not,
they must at least be regular attendants at our
Church, of good moral character, attached to the
doctrines and discipline of Methodism, and willing
to observe the rules of the School.


2. They shall be received on trial by the Superin-
tendent of the School ; and after a probation of three
months, shall be nominated by him at a regular
Teachers’ Meeting, and elected by the Meeting,
subject, however, to the approval of the Committee.
(Fully accredited Teachers from other Wesleyan
Schools shall be received as such, if their services
are required.)
3. Teachers must be regular and punctual in their
attendance at the School, and shall endeavour to
preserve among the children of their classes, order
and general good conduct. No Officer or Teacher
shall on any account strike a Scholar. If a Scholar
misbehave, the Teacher shall endeavour by advice
and persuasion to set him right, but if he fail, he
shall report the case to the Superintendent, who
shall administer such correction as he may deem
proper; but the Superintendent shall not expel any
Scholar, .until he has laid the case before the
Teachers’ Meeting. The Teachers shall accompany
the Scholars to the House of God, and do all in
their power, both by teaching and example, to
promote the great end of Sunday-schools the
religious instruction and salvation of the Scholars.
4. A Teacher when prevented from attending the
School must either provide a proper substitute, or
give the Superintendent timely notice of his
intended absence.
5. In case any Teacher be aggrieved by the conduct
of any Officer or fellow Teacher, he shall be at
liberty to lay the matter before the Teachers’
Meeting, and if dissatisfied with its decision, he
shall have the right of appeal to the Committee.
XI. There shall be a monthly Teachers’ Meeting,
consisting of the Ministers of the Circuit, the Super-
intendents and Secretaries of the School, the Librarian,
the Canvassers, and all the Teachers, at which, after
the minutes of the previous Meeting have been
confirmed, the following inquiries shall be made:—
1. Have the resolutions of the previous Meeting been
duly carried out ?
2. Are there any objections to any of the Officers or
Teachers ?
(The names to be gone over seriatim.)
3. What Teachers have been admitted on trial?
4. Are there any to be admitted in full?
5. What is the number of Teachers in the School?


6. What is the number of Scholars on the Eoll?
7. What is the average attendance ?
8. How many children have been received into the
School during the last month ?
9. How many have left, and for what cause ?
10. Are any sick F If so, has the Superintendent been
informed therof ?
11. Do the children make any visible improvement in
Divine knowledge ?
12. Is it known that any have been converted?
13. Are any School books or other requisites needed F
14. Are any books recommended to be added to the
Library ?
(The proposer of any book must state at the
timd of proposal, the general character and
price of the book.)
15. What more cau be done to promote the general
welfare of the School ?
XII. A united Meeting of the Committee and
Teachers shall be held once in every six months, or
oftener if need be, on some suitable week-day evening,
expressly for the recognition of newly appointed
Teachers, at which Meeting the Chairman shall present
the Rules, and give appropriate advice and encourage-
ment to the Teachers thus recognised.
XIII. In the selection of Teachers for the elder
classes, special attention shall be paid to their Christian
experience ; and those only shall be so employed who
are able to teach the Scholars clearly and fully, what
they must do to be saved.
XIV. No person shall be continued as an Officer or
Teacher, who shall at any time be declared by the
Committee, or Leaders’ Meeting, unfit, in respect of
general character or of religious opinions, for the office
he sustains, or for taking part in the Christian educa-
tion of the young; but any complaint against such
person shall be submitted to the Committee prior to its
being laid before the Leaders’ Meeting.
XV. The elementary books employed in teaching
even the younger children, shall be such as contain
the largest portion of Scriptural instruction, and the
Holy Scriptures shall be regularly used by the elder
Scholars,


XVI. Catechetical exercises shall form a constant
part of the system of the School, and the Catechisms
used shall be those published under the sanction of the
Wesleyan Methodist Conference.
XVII. No branch of merely secular knowledge shall
be taught on the Lord’s Day.
XVIII. Every School shall, if possible, have a
Library, which, with the School furniture, shall be the
property of the Committee. No books shall be in-
troduced without the approval of the Committee ; and
wherever practicable, the distribution of books shall
take place on some week-day evening, so as not to
occasion, either to the Librarian or to the readers, an
unnecessary and injurious diversion of any portion of
the Lord’s Day from employments directly spiritual.
XIX. No sales of books or of other articles used in
the School shall be allowed on the Sabbath, but
suitable facilities for the supply of the Scholars shall
be provided on week-days.
XX. The Meetings of the Committee for ordinary
business shall not be held on the Lord’s Day; and
Teachers’ Meetings, if unavoidably so held, shall be
fixed for such hours as will not interfere with at-
tendance at Public Worship, Society Meetings, or the
Lord’s Supper.
XXL Children coming from Schools of other denomi-
nations shall be admitted on the application of their
parents or guardians.
XXII. All the Scholars shall be trained to regular
attendance on Public Worship at the House of God, on
the morning of the Lord’s Day. The elder Scholars
shall be encouraged to attend the Evening Service also.
XXIII. Wherever it is practicable, a select Class or
Classes of those Scholars who are seriously disposed,
shall be formed for special religious instruction and
prayer, and be met by suitable Teachers in separate
class-rooms towards the close of the Sunday afternoon,
or on some convenient time.


XXIV. Where it is deemed desirable, two or more
Schools in a Circuit may be entrusted to the manage
ment of one Committee.
1. The Committee shall consist of:—
(1) All the Ministers of the Circuit.
(2) The Treasurer, General Secretary, and General
Visitors.
(3) The Superintendents and Secretaries of the
Schools.
(4) Eight or more persons, to be chosen as Mloavs:
—One half being Teachers, Librarians, or Can-
vassers who are also Members of the Wesleyan
Methodist Church, by a Teachers’ Meeting, in
the ratio of two for every School of 200 chil-
dren or under, and four for every School con-
taining a greater number; one-fourth being
Members of the Wesleyan Methodist Church;
and one-fourth being Members of the Con-
gregation, who, if not Members of our Church,
are nevertheless believed to be cordially attached
to the principles and polity of Wesleyan Me-
thodism, by the Leaders’ Meetings" of the
Societies with which the Schools are connected,
in the ratio above-named as to Teachers.
2. The Committee shall have power to appoint a
General Visitor, whose duties shall be to visit the
various Schools under the direction of the Com-
mittee, to asertain from the Secretary of each
School the number of Teachers and Scholars, with
the average attendance of both; the number of
Teachers and of Scholars who are Members of the
Church; the number of Scholars in select classes;
whether the Scholars regularly attend Public Wor-
ship on the Sabbath; to what extent the Con-
ference Catechisms and Scripture Lessons are
used; and the state of the Library; and he shall
prepare a report to be presented to the Committee
once a quarter.
3. This Committee shall exercise all the powers vested
in the Committee for a single School.
XXV. Where it is deemed desirable, there shall be
an Annual Meeting of the Sunday School Committees,
with all the Teachers and Officers in each Circuit.


The objects of this Meeting shall be—
1. To establish mutual intercourse amongst the
Officers and Teachers of the Schools in town and
conn' ry.
2. To promote the opening of new, and the extension
and improvement of existing Schools.
8. To circulate information relative to the organisa-
tion and discipline of Schools, and the best methods
of instruction.
i To stimulate and encourage those who are engaged
in the religious education of the young in the
Circuit, to seek greater spiritual results of their
labours.
Hi feuo
r^ib
NATIONAL
LIBRARY OF AUSTRALIA
Fei’gusson and Moore, Printers, Melbourne,
