





I'Sbt'l
RULES AND REGULATIONS
or THE
ADELAIDE
CHORAL SOCIETY.
Sfitelatto:
PRINTED BY T. STRODE; GAWLER-PLACE.




LIST OF OFFICERS.
Patron:
HIS EXCELLENCY THE LIEUT-GOVERNOR.
prmifeut:
HR. KENT.
DR. WYATT.
treasurer:
MR. ALLEN.
iLtbrarians:
MR. R. BRENTON AND MR. M. SHARP.
s?on. J^a-etanj:
MONS. E. PARIS.
luUttorg:
MR. F. H. PAULDING AND MR. T. REYNOLDS
Committee:
CHAIRMAN MR. ADDISON.
MESSRS. DALTON MESSRS. RODEMAN
MITCHELL
W. BRENTON
BANCROFT CLISBY
BOSTOCK DANIEL.




RULES, ETC.
OBJECTS OF THE SOCIETY.
1. This Society has been established for the purpose
of cultivating the study and practice of Music.
MEANS OF OBTAINING THE OBJECT.
11. The Adelaide Choral Society shall be supported
by Annual Subscriptions and by Voluntary Contri-
butions.
SOCIETY HOW CONSTITUTED.
111. The Society shall consist of those who are now
on the Society’s Boohs as Members, and of those who
may hereafter be admitted agreeably to the Rules and
Regulations thereof.
OFFICERS OF THE SOCIETY.
IY. That the Officers of the Society shall consist of
the Patron, the President, the Vice-President, a Trea-
surer, Librarians, Secretary, two Auditors, and nine
Committee-men, all of whom must be Members of the
Society, and are to be elected annually.


Y. The Committee of Management shall consist of
the before-mentioned Officers, to whom the government
of the Society shall be confided.
ADMISSION OF MEMBERS, CONTRIBUTIONS,
ETC.
VI. Every Subscriber must contribute One Pound
annually to the Funds of the Society —payment to be
made in advance. The Subscription to commence in
Jaunary in each year.* A Donation of the value of
Ten Pounds in Music, Instruments, or Money, shall
constitute the Donor a Member for life. Persons becoming
Members of the Orchestra, to pay an Admission Fee of
Ten Shillings; Five Shillings thereof to be paid at the
time of proposing, and Five Shillings at the period of
admission.
yil. Candidates for Admission are to be nominated
by two Members of Committee, and at their nest
Meeting the propriety of his or her admission will be
decided by a majority of the Committee then present.
No new Member to enjoy any of the privileges of the
Society until his Subscription be paid.
yill. On a Member paying his Subscription, the
Secretary shall give him a Card, which will entitle him
to every privilege of the Society during the period for
which he has subscribed, and the admission of himself
and a lady to the performances of the Society.
IX. No person will be admitted to the Society’s
Meetings unless he produces his Card, which is not
transferable. Ladies are eligible as Members.
RECEIPTS AND EXPENDITURE.
X. All Moneys received on account of the Society
shall be handed to the Committee, and by them to the
* Any person joining the Society after the 24th June, to be liable for the
payment of Ten Shillings only as his Subscription for that year.


Treasurer. All Moneys received by tbe Treasurer on
account of the Society shall, when the same shall
amount to £lO, be paid into the -Bank of Australasia
to the credit of the Society.
XI. No Money shall be paid out of the Funds of the
Society but by order of the Committee of Management,
such order to be made in writing, signed by the Chair-
man, and countersigned by the Secretary.
GENERAL ANNUAL MEETINGS.
XII. That a General Meeting of the Society shall be
held annually, in January, on such day as the Com-
mittee may appoint, on which occasion the Chair shall
be taken by the superior Officer who may then be
present, when the Annual Report of the Committee of
Management shall be read, together with the Treasurer’s
audited Account for the current year, and the Officers
for the ensuing year shall be elected.
XIII. That the Chairman shall have a deliberative
and also (on an equality arising) a casting vote. No
paid Officer of the Society shall be allowed to vote.
XIY. That the Meeting shall also take into consi-
deration and decide upon all matters referred by the
Committee of Management for direction and advice,
including the propriety of altering any existing Rules,
or of adding to them, and the making of others, or of
so remodelling the Society as to secure Regulations
suitable to the then condition thereof.
SPECIAL GENERAL MEETINGS.
XY. That on a requisition in writing from any three
Members of Committee or ten Members of the Society
to the Secretary, stating distinctly therein the occasion
thereof, a Special Meeting of the Members at large shall
be convened, when the same mode of procuring a Chair-
man, and of Yoting, shall be observed as on the occa-


sion of a General Annual Meeting being held ; but no
other business shall be submitted for consideration than
that for which the Special Meeting may have been ap-
pointed or called; and when called under a requisition,
a copy thereof shall be inserted in an Advertisement, or
forwarded to every Member at least two clear days
before such Special Meeting is to be holden.
COMMITTEE OF MANAGEMENT.
XYI. The Committee of Management shall have the
care, superintendence, and control of the Society.
XYII. No business shall be transacted in the Com-
mittee unless five of the Committee-men be present.
XYIII. The Committee shall meet regularly on the
first Monday in each month, at half-past seven o’clock
in the evening.
XIX. All questions in the Committee shall be de-
cided by a show of hands, unless a ballot be demanded
by two Members. The Chairman in all cases to have a
deliberative as well as a casting vote.
XX. The President and Yice-Presidents, or three of
the Committee, may at any time, by a requisition signed
with their names and addressed to the Secretary, call a
Special Meeting of the Committee —the requisition to
state the occasion of the Meeting.
XXI. No Special Meeting of the Committee shall be
legal unless each Member be summoned in writing, by
the Secretary, at least one clear day previous to the
Meeting of such Special Committee.
XXII. The Committee shall have the power of di-
viding themselves into Sub-Committees for the despatch
of business; but no such business shall be considered
finally settled until reported on and approved by the


Managing Committee. And every Sub-Committee shall
keep minutes of their transactions in the order in which
they are brought before them.
XXIII. The Committee shall cause to be kept a
Book, in which shall be entered fair and accurate mi-
nutes of their transactions, and of all receipts and pay-
ments on account of the Society.
XXIV. At all Meetings of the Committee the mi-
nutes of the preceding Meeting shall be read for con-
firmation.
XXV. The Committee shall cause the Accounts of
the Society to be made up to the twenty-fifth day of
December in each year, and shall lay them, together
with the Minute Book, Books of Account, and all
Orders, Bills, Receipts, and every Document and
Voucher relating thereto, before the Auditors, so as to
enable them thoroughly to investigate and state the
Accounts.
XXVI. The Committee shall apply so much of the
Income or Revenue of the Society as may be necessary
in payment of Rent, Salaries, Current and Incidental
Expenses, and in the purchase of Music, Books, Instru-
ments, and whatever else may be required for the use of
the Society.
XXVII. The Committee of Management have
power to expel any Member who may misconduct him-
self, but the person so expelled shall have a right of
appeal to the first General Meeting of the Society fol-
lowing.
XXVIII. That if any Member of the Committee shall
be absent for three months, the vacancy shall, in such
case, be supplied by an appointment at the next Meet-
ing for the residue of the current year.


XXIX. Any Member of the Orchestra who shall
absent bimself from the Practice Meetings for six con-
secutive nights, shall be held as having resigned, and
shall not be permitted to perform as a Member of this
Society, unless he can show such cause for absence as
shall be satisfactory to the Committee.
XXX. That the Committee shall have power to
frame and establish such By-Laws (not abrogating or
repugnant to any general or fundamental rule or prin-
ciple of the Society) as they may think necessary for
its regulation or advancement ; such By-Laws and Rules
to be laid before the next General Meeting for sanction
and confirmation, and which, when so sanctioned and
confirmed, shall become part of, and be incorporated
with, the General Rules of the Society.
XXXI. The Committee to have power to change
the Nights for Practice, Rehearsal, &c., due notice of
such changes being given to all the Members.
SECRETARY.
XXXII. This Officer shall personally attend every
Meeting, as well of the Members generally, as of the
Committee of Management, and the Sub-Committees
thereof, and also the Annual Audit; and on such occa-
sions take correct minutes of the proceedings, fairly
entering the same forthwith in the Minute Book, and
producing such Book, with all correspondence, bills,
accounts, and memoranda at the subsequent Meetings
respectively; and entering in suitable Books the Name
and Residence of every Member of the Society, with
the Amount of Subscription or Donation • and also
carefully preserve the Treasurer’s audited and current
accounts, with the above-mentioned books, together with
every other minute or account book, original list, paper,
voucher, and memorandum belonging to, or connected
with, the Society, or the concerns thereof; and, when
requested, exhibit the same to the Patrons, President,
Yice-Presidents, Members of the Committee of Manage-


ment, Trustees, Treasurer, and Auditors respectively;
and shall likewise duly convene all Meetings in such a
manner as may be best calculated to ensure an attend-
ance.
LEADER.
XXXIII. The Leader shall see that the Instruments
are correctly in tune, and shall give such general in-
structions to the Performers as he may consider neces-
sary to give effect to the Music. His opinion, also, in
conjunction with that of the Committee, shall be taken
as to the fitness of any person desirous of joining the
Orchestra.
LIBRARIANS.
XXXIY. The Librarians shall have the immediate
and responsible charge of the Music and Chattel Pro-
perty of the Society, of which they will keep an in-
ventory. Performers requiring any Book for private
practice must apply to these Officers, stating the nature,
and by what name the said Book is called; and they
are not on any account to grant such loan unless satisfied
that the same will be duly returned on the next Prac-
tice Night by seven o’clock. They will, for this pur-
pose, enter in a Book, kept for the purpose, the name
of the party borrowing, and the description of the pro-
perty borrowed, with the date, and, on its return, duly
give the party credit for the same; without which the
borrower, in case of loss, will be charged the full value.
And the Librarians neglecting to enforce this Rule
shall become answerable for the amount of the property
missing.
AUDITORS.
XXXY. The Auditors shall, through the Secretary
be in communication with the Treasurer, so as to pro-
cure a Meeting between themselves and that Officer,
attended by the Secretary, who, having severally pro-
duced to the Auditors their Books, Accounts, and
Youchers, and afforded all other requisite information,
and the Auditors having satisfactorily ascertained the
true state of the receipts and payments, the Secretary
11


tJTvff
&16U0 22
shall make out a regular account, debtor and creditor,
between the Treasurer and the Society, showing the
balance thereof to the twenty-fifth day of December in
each year, which account shall be signed by the Trea-
surer and Auditors, and countersigned by, and left with,
the Secretary, for presentation by him to the Chair-
man of the General Annual Meeting.
PRACTICE MEETINGS.
XXXVI. The Practice Meetings will take place
every Thursday evening, to commence at half-past seven
o’clock precisely, when none but Members and persons
introduced by them, will be admitted.
ADELAIDE J
PRIBTED BY f. STRODE, OAWIER-PLACE.




