

RULES AND REGULATIONS
OF THE
SOUTH AUSTRALIAN
TYPOGRAPHICAL SOCIETY.
BRANCH 3, AUSTRALASIAN TYPOGRAPHICAL UNION.
REVISED AND ADOPTED BY A SPECIAL GENERAL MEETING
ASSEMBLED IN ADELAIDE, ON JUNE 24 AND
JULY 1, 1882.
Registered witder "The Tirades Union Act , 1876."
ESTABLISHED NOVEMBER, 1874.
ADELAIDE:
W. K. THOMAS & CO., GRENFELL STREET.
1882.




RULES AND REGULATIONS
OF THE
SOUTH AUSTRALIAN
TYPOGRAPHICAL SOCIETY.
BRANCH 3, AUSTRALASIAN TYPOGRAPHICAL UNION.
REVISED AND ADOPTED BY A SPECIAL GENERAL MEETING
ASSEMBLED IN ADELAIDE, ON JUNE 24 AND
JULY I, 1882.
Registered under “ The Trades Union Act, 1876.
ESTABLISHED KOVEMBEH, 1874.
ADELAIDE :
W. K. Thomas & Co., Grenfell Street.
1882.




CONTENTS.
Page.
1. Name and Objects ... ... ••• ••• ••• ®
2. Place of Business ”
3. Admission and Subscriptions
4. Entrance Fee ••• *• ••• 1
5. Arrears
• • 7
6. Readmission
7. Government of the Society ... ••• •••
8. President S
9. Vice-Presidents ... ®
10. Trustees ®
11. Secretary ®
12. Treasurer ... •••
13. Auditors
14. Board of Management H
15. Meetings ••
16. Admission to Meetings ... ••• ••• * 2
17. Conduct of Meetings 12
18. Questions Adjudicated upon not to be reopened
within six or twelve months ... ••• ••• 1“
19. Application of Funds
20. Trade Card
21. Title of Membership
22. Gaining Admission by False Representations ... 14
23. Members leaving the Business ...
• 1 %
24. Apprentices
1 K
25. Turnovers
26. Rate of Wages, &c 15


27. Smooting 16
28. Farming 16
29. Borrowing and Lending Matter ... 16
30. Encroachments ... ... ... ... ... 16
31. Disputes in Offices ... 17
32. Closed Offices ... ... ... ... ... 17
33. Power of Executive Officers to Summon Members 17
34. Unfounded Charges 17
35. Appeals 17
36. Duties of Chapels ... ... ... 18
37. Belief to Members , ... ... ... ... 18
38. Mortality Fund 19
39. Books open to Inspection by Members 21
40. Alteration of Buies ... .. ... ... 21
41. Dissolution of the Society ... ... ... ... 21


RULES AND REGULATIONS.
I. —Name and Objects.
1. That the name of this Association be the “South
Australian Typographical Society,” and that it shall
be constituted of Journeyman Compositors, Machinists,
and Pressmen who can produce an Indenture of five
years up to December 31, 1882, that is to say, ap-
prentices bound prior to December, 1882, (after which
date a seven years’ Indenture), or otherwise satisfy
the Board of Management; and of Apprentices in their
last year. Employers and Overseers may be admitted
as Honorary Members of the Society on payment of an
annual subscription of 10s.
2. The objects of the Society are—To amicably
settle by conference or by arbitration a uniform scale
of charges for newspaper work,ratesof wages, jobbing and
establishment hours; to limit the number of apprentices
in jobbing offices and on weekly newspapers; to watch
over and protect the individual welfare of its members;
to^ afford relief to the widows or nominees of deceased
members (according to the terms of the Mortality
Fund); and to uphold the privileges and customs of
the printing profession in South Australia, upon the
following principles :
i. That employers and employed bind themselves
to abide by the decisions of Tin Arbitration
Committee.
u. That an Arbitration Committee of employers
and employed be appointed, to consist of three


or more representatives from each interest;
the Committee to elect a Chairman, who shall,
if the votes on any question be equal, decide
the same by his casting vote.
hi. That in the event of a dispute occurring in the
trade regarding charges, &c., the London scale
shall be adopted as the basis of settlement.
iv. That when the London scale prove inapplicable,
ascertained established usages shall be taken
as the basis, of action by the Committee ; but
when trade practices are found to be so varied
as not to constitute custom, the decision shall
be based upon analogy and equity.
ll.— Place of Business.
That the place of business of the Society shall be
the Labour League Hall, Hindley Street (or any other
place which may be determined upon by the Board or
members in meeting assembled), where the Secretary
will be in attendance from 1 to 2 o’clock each Saturday
to receive subscriptions, &c., and where all communica-
tions are to be addressed.
lll.— Admission and Subscriptions.
1. That every Compositor, Machinist, and Pressman
of fair character now working as a journeyman, or who
may hereafter prove his right to work as a journeyman,
either by indenture or clear card of membership from
a recognised Society, shall be eligible as a member, and
shall pay weekly, or at most every fourth week, the
sum of 6d. per week; but should occasion arise a levy
may be made by a General Meeting.
2. Any member shall be exempt from payment for
any week in which by reason of sickness or through
want of employment he does not earn 255. Any
member claiming exemption on account of the above


reasons, shall give notice to the Collector or Secretary
thereof, or failing which he shall be liable to the full
charge. *
IY.—Entrance Fee.
1. That every journeyman on becoming a member
shall pay the sum of ss. as an entrance fee.
2. That any journeyman within the jurisdiction of
this Society, or from any place beyond the colony
where there is a Society, who cannot produce a clear
card from such Society, may, on giving satisfactory
proofs to the Board that he has not been guilty of any
act detrimental to the interests of the trade, and
is entitled to its rights and privileges, be admitted on
payment of an entrance fee of not less than 20s.
3. Apprentices in the last year of their time may
enter the Society without entry fee, but will be
subject to the conditions of Rule TIL, clause 1, as to
subscriptions, &c., and be eligible for all benefits as
provided by the Rules generally.
V. —Arrears.
1. In case the payment of subscriptions be neglected
in any office for more than one month, the Secretary
shall write to the Father or the member notifying such
to be the case, and request his immediate attention
to the matter. All members three months in arrear
shall have their names published in the Australasian
Typographical Journal , or other trade Journal, and
they shall also be liable to expulsion from the Society.
YI. — Readmission.
That any member excluded for non-payment of
arrears may be readmitted by paying up all arrears
due at the time of his expulsion, together with all
subscriptions that would have been due from the time
of his expulsion to his readmission had he remained a
member and a fine of 30s.


VII. — Government of the Society.
1. The business of the Society shall be conducted
by a Board of Management consisting of a President,
two Vice-Presidents, a Treasurer, a Secretary, two
Auditors, five TrusteesTaScTa Committee; and at the
Annual Meeting in July the following Office-bearers
shall be elected, viz.—President, Vice-Presidents, and
Auditors.
2. All officers of the Society (except paid officers,
who shall be elected by ballot) shall be proposed,
seconded, and elected by show of hands, or otherwise
as the meeting may deem fit. Seven days’ notice of
an Annual or General Meeting shall be given by
circular and advertisement.
VIII. —President.
The President (who shall have a casting vote only)
shall preside at all meetings, either general, special, or
of the Board of Management. He shall preserve order
at all meetings, so that business may be conducted in
due form and with propriety, and upon the minutes
being confirmed shall sign the minute-book in presence
of the meeting. He shall give orders to the Secretary
to call Special Meetings of the Society; in the absence
of the Secretary, sign all orders on the Treasurer for
relief or otherwise. Should he be absent from four con-
secutive meetings without explanation, the office shall
be declared vacant.
IX.— Vice-Presidents.
The Senior Vice-President shall preside in the
absence of the President (with full power of Presi-
dent), and in the event of the resignation or other-
wise of the latter, he shall fill the office of President
till the next General Meeting.
X. —Trustees.
The Trustees (who shall be elected at a General
Meeting) shall deposit in the Bank to their credit, in


trust for the Society, all surplus funds ordered by the
Board of Management to be deposited ; and, in like
manner, draw such sums from the Bank as the Board
of Management shall order, the signatures of three ot the
Trustees to be sufficient warrant for the Bank to pay
over such moneys. A General or Special Meeting of
the Society shall have power to remove or appoint any
Trustee or Trustees, and a declaration of such removal
or appointment made by the Executive Officers for the
time being, shall be a sufficient warrant or order to
such Bank to pay over such sum or sums to the
persons so appointed. A Trustee or the Trustees shall
give one month’s notice in writing of his or their
resignation of office.
Xl.— Secretary.
The Secretary shall be elected at a General Meeting.
His duty shall be to attend all meetings of the Society;
to receive all moneys on behalfof the Society, and to
pay over the same to tkh Treasurer within seven days
of receiving same; to keep a debit and credit account
between every member and the Society ; to produce,
answer, and copy into a book all correspondence that
may take place with or by order of a General Meeting
or the Board of Management; to make minutes of
every resolution passed and meetings held by a Board
or General Meeting; to summon all members to Special
and General Meetings; to facilitate without favour the
employment of disengaged members; and he shall
submit all books, documents, &c., in his custody to the
Auditors for inspection, attend such audit and draw up a
report and balance-sheet to be submitted to the General
Meetings of the Society held in January and July. He
shall not have the power of voting at any Board or
General Meeting. He shall be available for at least one
hour on two days in each week to members who may wish
to consult him on matters connected with the trade or
Society, and the time and place where he can be so
e * * t c 6&6u +£c % YjTi v ■
yay..— /;} ,**r


seen shall be posted at the Society’s place of business
from time to time. He shall likewise immediately
submit to the President any information he may
officially receive, who, with the Vice-Presidents, or one
of them, and the Secretary, shall decide on the course
to be pursued until the meeting of the Board of
Management or General Society Meeting. The Secre-
tary shall make appointments with the members of
the various offices to collect all subscriptions, &c., on
behalf of the Society, and for his services he shall
receive such remuneration as may be decided upon at
the General Meeting held in July of each year. Three
months’ notice shall be given on either side in case of
withdrawal, unless there be any charge or serious mis-
conduct proved against the Secretary, who shall be
suspended by the Board of Management at a Special
Board Meeting, called for that purpose, pending the
decision of a Special General Meeting of the members,
to be convened as early as possible.
XII. —Treasurer.
The Treasurer’s business shall be to attend meetings
of the Society or Board ; receive and be responsible for
all dues, fines, &c., paid to him on behalf of the
Society; and discharge all legitimate demands. To
pay amounts above £2 he must have written authority
from the President or Vice-Presidents. All moneys
exceeding £5 to be placed in the Savings Bank, in the
name of the five Trustees, who shall be appointed by
the Society, for which service he shall be allowed such
remuneration as the General Meeting in July shall
determine.
XIII. —Auditors.
The accounts of this Society shall be audited every
six months by two Auditors appointed for that purpose
at the Annual General Meeting. The report of said
Auditors to be submitted along with the balance-sheet


to the Half-yearly Meetings. The Auditors shall be
allowed such sum as the General Meeting in July shall
determine.
XIY. —Board of Management.
1. The Board of Management shall be composed as
follows: —The Executive Officers of the Society, and
a Committee of one representative for each office where
there are ten journeymen (or under) employed, and
one for every additional ten, and two members to be
elected by the annual meeting held in July. Each
chapel or office to elect its own representatives.
2. The Board of Management shall meet on the last
Saturday in each month, and at such other times as
the President and Secretary may think requisite. The
duties of the Board shall be to take into consideration
and decide upon all matters relative to the trade which
may happen during the time intervening between the
General Meetings of the Society; but if the matter in-
volve any material consequence, they shall have power
to call a Special General Meeting. The Board shall
have power to make such By-laws for the government
of their own meetings as they shall think fit; provided
that no such By-laws shall be at variance with or
contrary to a general rule or resolution of the Society.
They shall have power to make temporary appoint-
ments to vacancies caused by the death, removal, or
resignation of any office-bearer; such appointment to
be ratified or annulled by the next General Meeting.
The Board shall also have power to inflict fines for
breaches of the rules in all cases where fines are not
specially provided for by rule, such fine or fines not to
exceed £5 in any one case. The Board of Management
shall elect all new members ; seven to form a quorum.
XV. —Meetings.
The Quarterly General Meetings shall take place on
the last Saturdays in the months of January, April,
July, and October; twenty-five to form a quorum.


XVI. — Admission to Meetings.
Admission to General Meetings shall be by each
member presenting to the doorkeeper his trade card for
the current year.
XVII. — Conduct of Meetings.
The following shall be the order of discussion at the
Society’s Meetings :—All motions and amendments
shall be presented in writing (if demanded), and delivered
to the Secretary immediately on being seconded. When
a proposition is duly moved and seconded, no other
motion shall be in order, except to adjourn, to post-
pone, to refer to a committee, to divide the question,
■or to amend ; and these motions shall have precedence
in the above order. The motion to adjourn shall be
decided without debate. Whenever amendments are
made on original propositions, no further amendment
shall be taken into consideration until the first be
disposed of. If the first amendment be carried, the
amended motion becomes the question, and any
further amendment may be moved ; if the amendment
be negatived, then another may be moved. All ques-
tions shall be put to the meeting first in the affirma-
tive, then in the negative, except when various sums,
times, or names are placed in competition. The mover
of an original proposition, but of no amendment,
shall have a right of reply ; but no other member shall
be allowed to speak more than once on the same
motion, unless to call attention to a point of order, or
permission be given to explain ; but every amendment
renews the right of each member to explain. Ques-
tions of order shall be decided by the Chairman ; but
in case of an appeal from his decision, duly seconded,
the party appealing and the Chairman shall each be
allowed three minutes to explain, after which the
Chairman shall put the question in this form, “ All in
favour of sustaining the decision of the Chair; ” “ All
opposed to that decision.” In filling up blanks, the


largest sum and the longest time shall be put first.
All cases not herein provided for shall be decided
according to rules in common use.
XVIII. Questions Adjudicated upon not to be
Reopened within Six or Twelve Months.
That all questions settled by a General Meeting
shall not be reopened within six months, and in the
case of a ballot of the members not within twelve
months, from the date of such decision.
XIX. — Application of Funds.
1. The funds of the Society shall be applicable for
defraying any expenses that may be incurred in up-
holding the interests of the profession, for giving assis-
tance to members in search of employment, or for any
purpose which the Society may determine ) but the
Board or General Meeting shall have no power to grant
money out of the funds (except for purposes imme-
diately connected with the Society), or finally decide
any matter involving a regular charge upon the income
or an extension of any of the usual benefits of the
Society, without a ballot of the members of the trade.
2. The interest derived from the General Funds of
the Society shall be handed over to the Trustees of the
Mortality Fund, until that fund shall have reached
£SOO, when the paying over of such interest shall cease.
XX.— -Trade Gard.
v In the month of January of each year a Trade Card
shall be issued to all members clear on the books up
the 31st of December of the preceding year.
XXl.— Title of Membership.
No person shall receive his card or certificate of
membership, together with copy of rules, until he has
paid his entrance fee. The Secretary shall have power
to grant permits to applicants for admission whose
applications may be postponed or under consideration.


XXII. — Gaining Admission by False
Representations.
Should any person gain admission into the Society
by false representations, on the same being proved,
he shall be fined not more than £5 or expelled, and if
expelled he shall forfeit all claim to any moneys he
may have paid into the funds, subject to his right of
appeal to a General Meeting.
XXIII. — Members Leaving the Business.
Any member leaving the business or falling sick
shall send immediate notice to the Secretary, or be
rated in arrears and excluded, as provided by Rules
111. and Y. But should any member become in-
capacitated for further work by failing health or old
age, he shall have the right of continuing his name on
the Society’s books on payment of Id. (one penny) per
week, such payment keeping him good on the books,
and his widow, nominee, or other representative shall,
at his decease, receive the amount due from the Society
according to the terms of the Mortality Fund. Mem-
bers leaving the business may continue their full
membership on payment of Gd. (sixpence) per week;
or, provided they send notice to that effect within one
month to the Secretary, shall retain the privilege of
membership (as regards the Mortality Fund) on the
payment of 3d. (threepence) per week; but any claim
made on account of the death of such member shall
be limited to the amount liable to be claimed at the
time of his leaving the business; and should any such
person rejoin the Society as a full member, his length
of membership shall be added to the previous term in
calculating the amount payable at such member’s
death. Members giving notice of leaving the business
will, on their return, be admitted free; but the date of
their entrance will only appear from the time of their
re-entry. Members leaving the business without
giving notice, and remaining away from it for a longer


period than thirteen weeks, will, on their return, be
admitted on payment of the usual entrance fee of 5s
(five shillings), but the date of their entrance will
only appear from the time of their re-entry.
XXIV. —Apprentices.
That, with an endeavour to adjust the balance ol
supply and demand, and maintain a fair remuneration
for labour, the ratio of Apprentices allowed in any
recognized office shall be—One for the house and one for
every four journeymen permanently employed, but not
more than apprentices allowed in any one depart-
ment, and they must be legally and properly bound
for a term of seven years after the year 188-,. No
apprentice shall be allowed to work upon daily papers
(either morning or evening), under any pretence what-
ever.
XXV. —Turnovers.
1 No Apprentice shall be allowed to change from
one office to another, except upon the occasion of the
death, failure, or retirement from business of his
employer, or through the removal of his parents
from the neighbourhood of such office.
2. That all persons known by the name of l u ' n '
overs” shall be rebound to an employer by means of a
legal or written witnessed agreement within a period
of one month from entering an office; and unless this
agreement be produced at the completion of their
term they ehall not be admitted to this Society,
without the sanction of the Board.
XXVI. —Rate of Wages, &c.
The established rate of wages for members engaged
upon piece-work on daily papers shall be not less than
Is Id. per thousand; on weekly papers not less than Is.
per thousand (for extra charges see scale); and the stab
wage upon book, jobbing, or weekly newspaper workto be


not less than £2 15s. per week, for which wage they shall
not attend any number of hours exceeding 48 J in each
week. Members employed for a less time than one
week to be paid at the rate of Is. 2d. per hour, but not
less than a day td be charged.
XXVll.— Smooting.
That no member of this Society shall be permitted
to work for any other employer than the one by whom
he is engaged (if any member out of employment can
be obtained) except in .case of accident, when it shall
be lawful to render assistance if requested to do so.
Any member persisting in an infringement of this rule
shall be expelled.
XXVlll.— Farming.
No person can retain membership in this Society
who “farms” or contracts for any newspaper, periodical,
or job, or indenture to himself an apprentice, or
initiates anyone in the art of printing other than as
provided for in these rules.
XXlX. —Borrowing and Lending Matter.
No matter shall be borrowed from or lent to an
unfair office under any circumstances whatever.
XXX.— Encroachments.
Any member working in an office where there is an
encroachment made, or about to be made, on the
privileges of the profession, shall immediately inform
the Secretary, and give such information respecting
the cause of such encroachment as he knows, or be
fined ss. for such neglect; and should any unfair
character be introduced into any office by a member
of this Society, he shall be fined a sum of not less than
£1 or more than £5, at the discretion of the Board of
Management.


XXXI. — Disputes in Offices.
That should a dispute occur in any establishment,
no member shall apply for, or accept a situation there-,
in without previously consulting the Secretary.
XXXII. — Closed Offices.
Should any office be closed by this Society, any
member applying for or working in such office, until
it is again declared a Society office, shall be expelled,
and shall not be readmitted a member of, this Society
under a less penalty than £lO (ten pounds).
XXXIII. — Power of Executive Officers to Summon
Members.
That should any trade dispute or other matter
requiring investigation arise in any office or chapel,
the Executive Officers shall have power to summon
any member or members to attend upon them and
explain; and any member so summoned failing to
attend .shall be fined not less than 10s.
XXXIV. — Unfounded Charges.
Any member making a formal charge against
another, such as working under price, inducing others
to do so, or in any way injuring his character in the
trade, without being able to prove or substantiate it
when brought before the Board, shall be fined not less
than £l.
XXXV. — Appeals.
Any member feeling aggrieved at a decision of the
Board of Management may appeal to a General
Meeting. If urgent, he shall send to the President a
requisition signed by 20 members, accompanied by a
deposit of £l, to be returned if such decision is
disapproved ; whereupon the President shall order the
Secretary to summon a Special Meeting for that pur-
pose. And any member making an appeal which a
General or Special Meeting shall resolve to be frivolous


and vexatious, shall forfeit his deposit. Appeals against
fines shall not be entertained, unless such fines shall
have previously been paid.
XXXVl.— Duties of Chapels.
It shall be the duty of each Chapel to take a care-
ful supervision of the interests of the trade in the
office with which it is connected, and immediately
report to the Secretary any breach of its regulations
or encroachments upon its rights. They shall elect
members to represent them on the Board of Manage-
ment as per Buie XIV. It shall also be the duty °of
each Chapel to appoint one of their members as
a Collector to gather the subscriptions from every
journeyman or member employed in the office or
Chapel, which he must pay to the Secretary of the
Society monthly, and the Chapel shall afford the
Collector every assistance in getting in arrears and
subscriptions. The Collector shall give to the Secretary
a list containing the name of each member in alpha-
betical order when practicable, appending under the
lespective dates the amount of the weekly subscriptions,
acccording to Rule 111, receiving in return at the time
of payment a receipt signed by the Secretary. Fathers
of Chapels shall also send in to the Secretary the
names of the members elected to serve on the Board
of Management. No question affecting the general
interests of the trade shall be decided by any Chapel,
member or members without consulting the Board of
Management.
XXXVll. —Relief to Members.
Any member who has paid twelve months’ full sub-
scription (continuous or otherwise) and clear on the
books, shall be granted, on his leaving the colony in
search of employment, the sum of 30s. ; if two years’
subscription, £2 10s.; and 10s. for each additional year’s
subscription until the sum reaches £5. But should he


return to the colony within §ix months the money to
be returned at the rate of 2s. Gd. for every £1
earned as w T ages per week. Relief also shall be
extended to all members of the trade on production of
the clearance card, to the amount of ss. once in six
months \ and the holders of cards of membership from
kindred Societies, bearing date not more than six
months, be also entitled to the same privilege. This
Rule only applies to members who are out of work,
and cannot obtain it in the colony, and are therefore
compelled to leave in search of employment.
XXXVIII. — Mortality Fund.
The Mortality Fund shall be a separate and distinct
fund from the General Fund, and shall not be applied
to any other purpose than the undermentioned, except
by a vote of a majority of three-fourths of the whole of
the members of the Society, such vote to be taken by
ballot. It shall be invested in the names of two
Trustees to be appointed by the members, such Trustee-
ship to be distinct from the Trusteeship of the General
Fund.
On the death of a member of at least twelve months’
standing and not more than three months in arrears,
his widow or nominee shall be entitled to receive, as
funeral allowance, £1 for every year’s membership up
to twelve years, the maximum sum being £l2. The
member’s current liabilities shall be deducted fiom the
above sum.
There shall also be a levy of One Shilling made
upon every member of this Society on the occasion of
the death of any one of its members, which shall be
handed over to the widow or nominee of the deceased
member.
To avoid, as far as may be, involving the Society in
litigation with the friends or relatives of deceased


members, it is of great importance that each member
should appoint a nominee, to whom may be paid the
amount due at such member’s death j for which pur-
pose the Secretary shall keep a book, in which
members may nominate in writing the person to whom
the funeral money shall be paid on their decease. Any
member may revoke such nomination by a written
notice to that effect, signed by himself, and it shall be
the duty of the Board to see the nomination erased ;
the member to pay Is. to the funds of the mortality
fund for each revocation, of nomination.
Notice of the death of any free member must be
sent to the Secretary as soon as possible after his
decease, and whatever sum is due to such member’s
nominee, shall be paid to the same—or, in default of
nomination, to the wife or next of kin—within one
calendar month after the claim is made, on producing
satisfactory evidence of his, her, or their claim to the
benefit of the Society ; and such claimant must pro-
duce the certificate of the Registrar of Births, Deaths,
Ac., for the district where the death took place. If
the nominee of any deceased member should be dead,
or cannot be found, or if no nomination has been made’
and there are no relations to be found, then the
deceased shall be decently interred by the Society
under the superintendence of the Board, or some person
appointed, by them, and the surplus money (if any),
unless claimed within twelve months from the time of
death, shall become the property of this fund, the
signature of the party receiving the money in all cases
to be deemed a valid discharge for the same.
The Secretary, on behalf of the Society, may be-
come responsible to an hospital, or any similar
institution, for the interment of any member of six
years membership and upwards who may, at the time
of his death, be an inmate of the same.


XXXIX. — Books open to Inspection by Members.
The books of the Society shall be open to the
inspection of members at all reasonable hours.
XL. — Alteration of Rules.
None of these laws shall be altered, amended, or
rescinded, unless one month’s notice in writing of the
intention to do so shall have been given to the Secre-
tary previous to a General Meeting.
XLl,— Dissolution of the Society.
That so long as ten members remain clear on the
books of the Society, it shall not be dissolved, or
its funds appropriated to any purpose other than those
set forth in the foregoing rules and regulations. This
rule not to be rescinded or amended unless twelve
months’ notice has been given to that effect at a
general meeting of members.
Joseph Carr, President.
Edward Hy. Clark, Secretary.
The foregoing Rules were revised and adopted by a
Special General Meeting, called for that purpose, on
the 24th June and Ist July, 1882, and will, on and
after September 26th, 1882, be the governing rules of
the South Australian Typographical Society.


I, James George Russell, Registrar under “The
Trades Union Act, 1876” do hereby certify that
“The South Australian Typographical Society” was,
on the twenty-sixth day of September instant, re-
gistered as a Trade Union under the said Act.
J. G. RUSSELL,
Registrar.
Dated this 26th day of September, 1882.








