

H *
1 ! ''i <
OF THE ' |
| M|almtl Hciittti I
I |
S NORTHERN TASMANIA. B




RULES
Adopted at a Meeting held at the Mechanics' Institute,
Launceston, on Tuesday, 22nd July, iBgo,
at Eight p.m.
fcmaiOT t
PRINTED AT THE “LAUNCESTON EXAMINER” OFFICE.
MDCCCXC.


■ ' 1 , 1 , ,■ •


RULES
OF THE
jate si |c iec es 4 o da tltta o t Joi a g ni: an i a
—o-
PBJECTS.
tHE association is formed for the cultivation, promotion,
and study of the natural sciences.
pONSTITUTION.
The Association shall consist of Members, Associates,
and Corresponding Members. Members shall be elected
as hereinafter provided, and shall alone be entitled to a
voice in the conduct or management of the Association.
Associates shall consist of ladies, and also of youths under
the age of twenty-one years : they shall be elected as here-
inafter provided, and shall be entitled to all the privileges of
the Association, except that of having a voice in its conduct
or management. Ladies or gentlemen, not residing in
Launceston, who shall have contributed valuable information
or specimens to the Association, shall be eligible for appoint-
ment as Corresponding Members at the discretion of the
Committee.
M^5 s FI3O
4j *~i _—i ~


P FFI CEI^S,
The officers of the Association shall consist of a President,
two Vice-Presidents, a Secretary, and a Treasurer.
Management,
The affairs of the Association shall be conducted by a
Committee, which, in addition to the Office-bearers, shall
consist of nine Members, and shall meet at such times as
shall be found necessary by the Secretary or Treasurer, or
be required by any three members of the Committee.
jSLECTION OF pFFICERS.
The Officers and the Committee shall be elected each year
at the Annual General Meeting.
jS EC RET ARY.
The Secretary shall keep a list of all members and a
record of all correspondence, transactions, and proceedings
of the Association; shall summon meetings of the Committee
when required to do so, and general meetings, in accordance
with the rules.
yREASUI\ER.
The Treasurer shall receive all payments made to the
Association, and disburse all sums payable by the Association,
out of the funds in his hands. He shall furnish the
Association at each annual meeting with an account of all
such receipts and disbursements. He shall demand all
arrears of subscriptions, after such shall have been due
three months. No payments shall be made by the Treasurer
without the sanction of the Committee.


j 3 ALLOT.
Candidates for admission as Members or Associates shall
be proposed and seconded by Members at an ordinary
meeting, and shall be balloted for by the Members present
at the next ordinary meeting. Two-thirds of the Members
balloting shall elect.
Subscriptions,
The annual subscription for Members shall be one guinea
and for Associates five shillings, and shall be payable on the
first day of August in every year.
y^RREARS-
No Member or Associate, whose subscription shall be three
months in arrear, shall participate in the advantages offered
by the Association. No Member shall be eligible for any
office, or entitled to vote at any meeting, until his subscription
for the current year shall have been paid.
Yisitoers.
At ordinary meetings of the Association any Member present
shall have the privilege of introducing two visitors, who, with
the permission of the Chairman, shall be allowed to take
part in the proceedings.
Prdinary
The Ordinary Meetings shall be held each month, at such
time and place as the Committee shall appoint; It shall
also be within the power of the Committee to call Special


Ordinary Meetings at such times and places, and for such
special purposes, as may seem desirable.
The order of business at the monthly meetings shall be
as follows :
i. Names of visitors shall be read aloud by the
Chairman,
2. The minutes of the last meeting shall be read
and confirmed.
3. Candidates for admission shall be proposed, and
those proposed at the previous meeting shall be balloted
for. The result of a ballot shall be communicated to
the candidate by the Committee after the meeting.
4. Papers and written communications shall be read
and discussion thereon invited, which may be limited
by the Chairman.
5. The meeting shall conclude with the examination
of such specimens, etc., as may then be exhibited.
jP APEgS.
Authors of papers must notify their intention of reading
same, together with the subject thereof, to the Secretary seven
days before the next ordinary meeting.
jSpECIAL pENEgAL
Upon the requisition, in writing, of any ten Members,
presented to the Secretary, a Special General Meeting shall
be convened, and any proposition to be submitted to such
meeting shall be stated at length in the notice to Members,
and not less than seven days’ notice of such meeting shall
be given.


EETINGS.
The Annual General Meetings shall be held in August, the
time and place of meeting to be fixed by the Committee.
The objects of the meeting shall be to choose the Officers
and Committee for the ensuing year, and to hear the annual
report on the general concerns of the Association.
JSpECIAL jR.ULE-
It shall be within the power of the Committee to make
arrangements for the Association to undertake the charge of
the new Museum in Launceston, and to assist in the
establishment of a School of Mines and of classes for
imparting instruction in any branch of natural science.
Provided always, that the funds of the Association shall not
be applied to such purposes without the consent of a majority
of the Members present at a general meeting, or at a
meeting specially called to consider the matter.
Printed at the Launceston Examiner Office.


