

apa' ja ■ »a' fvv i»g
'5
b n
lit. n,hi, *’ s
fy * «•>*
s ?
•T)
a y
§ 4
S LITERARY AND DEBATING
T)
5 y
f) y
•| y
s -4
| |
*
John Litton, Printer, 316, Oastlereagh-street.




liXJX.ES
LITERARY AND DEBATING SOCIETY
President.
The Rev. Principal KINROSS, B.A.
IJtee-Presttimts.
H. E. BARFE, Esq. B.A.
A. S. BOWMAN, Esq.
Committee.
Mr. Arthur BOWMAN,
„ W. H. LINSLEY
„ W. L. MOORE.
Secretary.
Me. John J. COHEN.
Son. Crcasttrer.
Mr. W. J ohn G. MANN.
I bO




RULES,
Name.
The Society shall be called “St. Andrew’s
Colrege Literary and Debating Society.”
Members.
1. The Society shall consist of Honorary and
Ordinary members. Honorary members shall be
the Principal and Lecturers of the College. All
students and ex-students of the College shall be
eligible for ordinary membership.
2. Candidates for ordinary membership shall
be admitted to the Society on giving in writing
their names and addresses to the Secretary or
Treasurer and paying their subscription.
*’■ The subscription to the Society shall be two
shillings and sixpence per term, payable in ad-
vance.
4. No member shall be held to have resigned
his membership unless he shall have handed in
his resignation in writing to the Secretary.


Management,
1. The officers of the Society shall be a Pres-
ident, two Vice-Presidents, a Committee of
three, a Secretary, and a Treasurer, the Secre-
tary and Treasurer to be ex-officio members of
the committee. Such officers shall be elected
at the annual general meeting of the Society,
and shall regulate the general business of the
Society.
2. Any vacancy occurring in the offices of the
Society shall be filled up by an election at any
meeting of the Society after a week’s previous
notice.
Business.
1. The objects of the Society shall be the
promotion of the mental culture of its ordinary
members by means of Debates, and Beadings,
and Becitations.
2. The conduct of Debates shall be vested in
a responsible committee of three (3) members,
and it shall be the duty of such responsible
committee, on the conclusion of one debate, to
state the next debate they intend to open, and
intimate which side of the question they intend
to take. If the responsible committee suffer a
defeat upon any question introduced by them
for discussion, or if a vote of want of confidence
be carried against them, they shall be held to


3. No member shall be allowed in any read'
ing, recitation, or speech, directly or indirectly
to impugn the authority of the Scripture, or
anything therein contained.
Meetings.
1. The meetings of the Society shall be held
weekly on every Thursday at 8 p.m. in the
Lecture Hall of St. Andrew’s College.
2. A General Meeting of the members shall
be held annually in the latter part of the month
of June, at which the report of the committee
for the past year and the treasurer’s account
shall be read, and the officers of the Society be
elected, such elections to be by ballot.
3. Any member sball be allowed to introduce
any ladies or gentlemen as visitors to any of the
meetings of the Society, and any gentleman
visitor shall on the invitation of the chairman
be allowed to speak but not to vote.


4. At any meeting 9 members shall form a
quorum.
5. The President shall take the chair at all
meetings of the Society, and in his absence one
of the Vice-Presidents, or in their absence a
chairman shall be elected from the members
present.
6. The decision of the chairman upon all
questions of order, and his interpretation of the
rules and regulations shall in all cases be final.
P.S. Provided that he think fit he may put the
question to the meeting, when it shall be de-
cided without discussion.
7. It shall not be open to any member of the
Society to make a motion, altering, adding to,
or repealing the rules or regulations, unless two
weeks’ notice of such motion shall have been
given at an ordinary meeting of the Society.
Procedure.
The chair to be taken.
The minutes of the preceding meeting to be
read.
The confirmation of the minutes.
Miscellaneous Questions.
Debate, or Readings and Recitations.
VII.
Regulations.
1. No member shall be allowed to speak upon
subject under discussion for more than 15


minutes, or upon a motion for more than 5
minutes. The opener on each side, however,
shall be allowed 20 minutes, but his reply shall
not exceed 15 minutes.
2. No member shall be allowed to speak twice
upon any question, except the opener of each
side, or the mover as the case may be.
3, The chairman may address himself to any
subject before the meeting, but before doing so
fie shall vacate the chair.
4. No discussion shall take place upon a
point of order, which must be stated by the
objector in as few words as possible, and de-
cided from the chair without discussion.
o. The chairman shall allow any member to
make a personal explanation, when he claims
that his words have been misquoted, but such
explanation shall be offered only at the conclu-
sion of the speech which calls therefor, and
must be strictly confined to the statement of
such misquotation.
6. After the debate a show of hands shall be
taken, and the result made known by the chair-
man. A division may then be demanded by
any member, in which case the ayes shall pass
to the right and the noes to the left of the
chairman, and it shall be the duty of the secre-
tary to record the number of votes on each side
of the question.
7. A debate must be finished the evening on
which it is commenced.


8. The chairman shall immediately call to
order any member of the Society who shall use
disorderly language, or shall impute improper
motives to any other member, or shall criti-
cize the manner or substance of a member’s
remarks in a personally offensive manner, and
if any member, called to order by the chair- *
man, do not withdraw any such language or
imputation, or apologise for any such offensive
expression, it shall be the duty of the chairman
to report the member so offending to the Society
at its next meeting, and it shall be the duty of
such meeting at once to take up the report, and
if it find the member guilty of the conduct so
reported, to declare the member so found guilty
no longer a member of the Society.
9. It shall be competent at any meeting of
the Society duly convened to suspend the regu-
lations or any of them, upon a motion winch
may be made without notice, and which shall
be put to the meeting without discussion, pro-
vided that such motion be carried by at least
two-thirds of the members present.
10. No motion except a motion for the sus-
pension of regulations, or for the previous ques-
tion, shall be made without a week’s previous
notice.
11. On the tirst Thursday in every month
Readings and Recitations shall be given instead
of a debate.
•John Lutton, Printer, 316, Castlereagh-street.


- rmr


