

RULES AND REGULATIONS
OF THE
SOUTH AUSTRALIAN
Typographical Society,
(BRANCH NO. 16, S.A. LABOUR LEAGUE).
ESTABLISHED NOVEMBER, 1874.
REVISED AND AMENDED JULY, 1879.
ADELAIDE :
PRINTED BY WEBB, VARDON, AND PRITCHARD, GRESHAM-
STREET.
1879.




RULES AND REGULATIONS
OF THE
SOUTH AUSTRALIAN
(Branch No. 16, S.A. Labour League).
EST ABLISHED NOVEMBER, 1874.
REVISED .A-IVIIEItTDIED J-U-LY, 1879-
ADELAIDE :
PRINTED BY WEBB, VARDON, AND PRITCHARD, PRINTERS,
GRESHAM-STREET.
1 8 7 9.




CONTENTS.
Page.
1. Name and Objects .. 5
2. Admission and Subscription .. .. .. .. 6
3. Entrance Fee .. .. .. .. .. .. 6
4. Be-Admission .. .. .. .. .. .. 7
5. Arrears .. .. 7
6. Government of the Society . .. 7
7. President 8
8. Vice-President .. 8
9. Trustees 8
10. Auditors .. .. .. .. .. .. .. 9
11. Secretary and Treasurer .. 9
12. Committee .. .. ..10
13. Board of Management .. .. .. .. 10
14. Meetings.. .. .. .. .. .. ..11
15. Duties of Chapels .. .. .. .. .. 11
16. Application of Funds .. .. .. .. .. 12
17. Title of Membership .. .. .. .. .. 12
18. Violation of Society’s Kules .. .. .. .. 12
19. Gaining Admission by False Eepresentations .. 13
20. Encroachments .. .. .. .. .. 13
21. Disputes in Offices .. 13
22. Unfounded Charges
23. Belief to Members .. .. .. .. .. 14
24. Appeals .. .. .. .. .. .. ..14
25. Dissolution of the Society .. .. .. .14
26. Alteration of Eules
27. Mortality Fund .. .. 16


South australian Typographical Society,
(ESTABLISHED NOVEMBER, 1874).
CERTIFICATE OF MEMBERSHIP.
No.Jcjt.
Cjjis is to Cert if]) that
/ 7 /tc
tea# admitted a member of the Society , the
of - z<s / / 7 /
President.
Sec. and Treas.
NOTE. Members are particularly requested, when leaving an office,
or out of employment, to forward their Names and Addresses to the
Secretary, in order to facilitate their procuring employment.


RULES AND REGULATIONS.
I. —Name and Objects.
1. That the name of this Association be the “ South
Australian Typographical Society,” and that it shall
be constituted of Journeyman Compositors, Machinists,
and Pressman, who can produce an Indenture of five
years up to* (after which date a seven
years’ Indenture), or otherwise satisfy thV' Board of
Management; and of Apprentices in their last year.
Employers, Overseers, and others, may be admitted as
Honorary Members of the Society on payment of an
annual subscription of 10s.
2. The objects of the Society are—To amicably
settle, by conference or by arbitration, a uniform scale
of charges for newspapers, jobbing, and establishment
hours ; to limit the number of apprentices in jobbing
offices and on weekly newspapers ; to watch over and
protect the individual welfare of its members ; and to
uphold the privileges and customs of the printing pro-
fession in South . Australia, upon the following
principles: —
i. That employers and employed bind themselves to
abide by the decisions of an Arbitration Com-
mittee.
ii. That an Arbitration Committee of employers and
employed be appointed, to consist of three or
more representatives from each interest; the
Committee to elect a Chairman, who shall, if
the votes on any question be equal, decide the
same by his casting vote.
* The old rule remains in force until the new one has been sanctioned.
It will then be printed together with the “Scales” as an “Addenda”
to the Rules.


hi. That in the event of a dispute occurring in the
trade regarding charges, &c., the London scale
shall be adopted as the basis of settlement.
iv. That when the London scales prove inapplicable,
ascertained established usages shall be taken as
the basis of action by the Committee ; but when
trade practices are found to be so varied as not to
constitute custom, the decision shall be based
upon equity and analogy.
ll. —Admission and Subscription.
1. That every Compositor, Machinist, and Pressman
of fair character now working as a journeyman,
or who may hereafter prove his right to work
as a journeyman, either by indenture or dear-
card of membership from a recognised Society, shall
be eligible as a member, and shall pay weekly, or
at most every fourth week, the sum of 6d. per
week.
2. Members to be exempt from payment for any
week in which they do not earn 255. on account of sick-
ness, or want of employment. Members claiming
exemption on account of the above reasons to give
notice to the Collector or Secretary of such exemp-
tion, or failing which he shall be liable to the full
charge.
3. Apprentices admitted during the last year of their
servitude to pay 3d. per week.
4. Members working in offices where there is no
Delegate or Collector, or where the subscriptions are
not collected, must pay to the Secretary their liabilities
at least every four weeks.
5. Any member thirteen weeks in arrears shall be
excluded.
lll. —Entrance Fee.
1. That every journeyman on becoming a member
shall pay the sum of 2s. 6d. as an entrance-fee.


2. That any journeyman from any place beyond the
colony where there is a Society who cannot produce
a clear-card from such Society, may, on giving satis-
factoi'y proofs to the Board that he has not been
guilty of any act detrimental to the interests of the
trade, and is entitled to its rights and privileges, be
admitted on payment of 20s.
IV.— Re-Admission.
1. That any member excluded for non-payment of
arrears may be re-admitted by paying up all arrears
due at the time of his expulsion, together with all
subscriptions that would have been due from the time
of his expulsion to his re-admission had he remained a
member, or on such terms as the Board may think fit.
2. Any member excluded for non-payment of arrears
and re-admitted to be considered a new member.
V. — Arrears.
Any person neglecting to pay his subscriptions
to a Collector, Chapel Clerk, or other person
appointed to receive the same, or to the Secretary
of the Society once in one calendar month, shall tor such
default be fined the sum of 6d., two months Is., and
three months 2s. In case the payment of subscriptions
be neglected in any office for one month, the Secretary
shall write to the Father or some other member
notifying such to be the case, and requesting the
attention of the Chapel to the mattei.
VI. Government of the Society.
1 The business of the Society shall be conducted
by a Board of Management consisting of a President,
Vice-President, Treasurer and Secretary, two Auditors,
two Trustees, and a Committee, and at the Annual
Meeting in July the following Office-bearers shall be
elected, viz.—President, Vice-President, and two
Auditors.


2. All officers of the Society (except paid officers)
shall be proposed, seconded, and elected by show
of hands, or otherwise as the meeting may deem fit.
Fourteen days’ notice of an Annual or General Meeting
shall be given by circular and advertisement.
Vll.— President.
The President (who shall have a casting vote
only) shall preside at all meetings, either general,
special, or of the Board of Management. He shall
preserve order at all meetings, so that business may be
conducted in due form, and with propriety, and upon
the minutes being confirmed shall sign the minute
book in presence of the meeting. He shall give orders
to the Secretary to call Special Meetings of the Society ;
in the absence of the Secretary, sign all orders on the
Treasurer for relief or otherwise. Should he be absent
four consecutive meetings without explanation, the
office shall be declared vacant.
VIII.— V ice- President.
The Vice-President shall preside in the absence
of the President (with full power of President), and in
the event of the resignation or otherwise of the latter
he shall fill the office of President till the next General
Meeting.
IX.— Trustees.
The Trustees (who shall be elected at a General
Meeting), shall deposit in the Bank to their credit, in
trust for the Society, all surplus funds ordered by the
Board of Management to be deposited ; and, in like
manner, draw such sums from the Bank as the Board
of Management shall order. A General or Special
Meeting of the Society shall have power to remove or
appoint any Trustee or Trustees, and that a declaration
of such removal or appointment made by the President
and two members of the Board of Management, for the
time being, shall be a sufficient warrant or order to


such Bank to pay over such sum or sums to the
persons so appointed. A Trustee or the Trustees shall
give one month’s notice in writing of his or their
resignation of office.
X.— Auditors.
The accounts of this Society shall be audited
every six months by two Auditors appointed for that
purpose at the Annual General Meeting. The report of
said Auditors to be submitted along with the balance-
sheet to the Half-yearly Meetings. The Auditors to be
allowed iJOs. per annum.
XI. —Secretary and Treasurer.
The Secretary shall be elected at a General
Meeting. His duty shall be to attend all meetings
of the Society; keep a debit and credit account between
every member and the Society; produce, answer, and
enter into a book all correspondence that may take
place with or by order of a General Meeting or
the Board of Management; make minutes of every
resolution passed and meetings held by a Board or
General Meeting; keep a fair account with the
Bank ; summon all members to Special and General
Meetings; facilitate without favor the employment of
disengaged members; and shall submit all books,
documents, &c., in his custody to the Auditors for
inspection, and draw up a report and balance-sheet to
be submitted to the Half-yearly Meetings of the
Society. He shall not have the power of voting at any
Board or General Meeting. He shall be available for
at least one hour on two days in each week, to members
w r ho may wish to consult him on matters connected with
the trade or Society. He shall likewise immediately
submit to the President any information he may
officially receive, who, with the Vice-President and
Secretary, shall decide on the course to be pursued
until the meeting of the Board of Management or General


Society Meeting. The Secretary shall make appoint-
ments with the members of the various offices to collect
all subscriptions, &c., on behalf of the Society. For
his services he shall receive the sum of £l2 per year,
to be paid quarterly, by the Trustees out of the Society’s
funds. Three months’ notice shall be given on either
side in case of withdrawal, unless there be any charge
or serious misconduct proved against the Secretary,
who shall be suspended by the Board of Management at
a Special Board Meeting, called for the purpose,
pending the decision of a Special General Meeting of
the members, to be convened as early as possible.
The Treasurer’s business shall be to attend
meetings of the Society or Board; receive and be
responsible for all dues, fines, &c., paid to him on
behalf of the Society ; and discharge all legitimate
demands. To pay amounts above £1 he must have
written authority from the President or Vice-President.
All moneys exceeding £5 to be placed in the Savings
Bank, in the name of two Trustees, who shall be
appointed by the Society.
XII.— Committee.
The Committee shall be composed as follows:
One representative for each office where there are
ten journeymen, or under, employed ; and one for every
additional ten. Each chapel or office to elect its own
representatives.
Xlll. —Board of Management.
The Board of Management shall meet on the
last Saturdays in the months of March, June, Septem-
ber, and December, and at such other times as the
President and Secretary may think requisite. The duties
of the Board shall be to take into consideration and decide
upon all matters relative to the trade which may happen
during the time intervening between the General
Meetings of the Society ; but if the matter involve any


material consequence, they shall have power to call a
Special General Meeting. The Board shall have power
to make such By-laws for the government of their own
meetings as they shall think fit; provided that no such
By-laws shall be at variance with or contrary to a
general rule or resolution of the Society. They shall
also have power to make temporary appointments to
vacancies caused by the death, removal, or resignation
of any office-bearer; such appointment to be ratified or
annulled by the next General Meeting. The Board of
Management shall also have power to elect new mem-
bers, subject to the approval or otherwise of the next
ensuing General Meeting. Seven to form a quorum.
XlY.— Meetings.
The Half-yearly Meetings shall take place on
the last Saturdays in the months of January and July.
XY. —Duties of Chapels.
It shall be the duty of each Chapel to take a
careful supervision of the interests of the trade in the
office with which it is connected, and immediately
report to the Secretary any breach of its regulations or
encroachments upon its rights, or the conduct of any
individual member who may act in such a manner as to
give the employer cause of complaint against the
Society or its office-bearers. They shall elect members
to represent them on the Board of Management as per
Rule XII. It shall also be the duty of each Chapel to
appoint one of their members as a Collector to gather
the subscriptions from every journeyman or member
employed in the office or Chapel, which he must pay to
the Secretary of the Society weekly, fortnightly, or
monthly, according to the decision of the Chapel; and
the Chapel shall afford the Collector every assistance in
getting in arrears and subscriptions. The Collector
shall give to the Secretary a list containing the name of
each member in alphabetical order when practicable,


appending under the respective dates the amount of the
weekly subscriptions, according to Rule 11., receiving
in return at the time of payment a receipt signed
by the Secretary. Fathers of Chapels shall also send
in to the Secretary the names of the members elected
to serve on the Board of Management. No question
affecting the general interests of the trade shall be
decided by any Chapel, members, or member without
consulting the Board of Management.
XYl. —Application of Funds.
The funds of the Society shall be applicable
for defraying any expenses that may be incurred in
upholding the interests of the profession, affording
assistance to members in search of employment, or any
purpose which the Society may determine.
XVll. —Title of Membership.
No person to receive his certificate of member-
ship, together with copy of rules, until he has paid his
entrance-fee. The officers of the Society or the Board
to have power to grant permits to applicants for admis-
sion whose applications may be postponed or under
consideration.
XVIII.— Violation of the Society's Rules.
1. Any member of the Society who has been guilty
ot a breach of the rules of the trade, upon the same
being proved shall be subjected to a fine not exceeding
£5, at the discretion of the Board of Management.
2. Any applicants seeking admission into the Society
who have violated any of its rules, and are at present
working, or may hereafter accept a situation, in any
office closed by order of a Board or General Meeting,
or who have knowingly accepted work at less prices
than those warranted by the scales or customs of the
trade, shall only be admissible on the payment of such
an entrance-fee as the Board may determine. Any


applicant wishing for admission under any of the
foregoing circumstances must deposit the sum of ten
shillings with the Secretary previously to applying to
the Board for admission as a member. Should his
application be granted, the deposit shall be an instal-
ment of the entrance-fee ; but if rejected, it will be
returned.
XlX.— Gaining Admission by False Representations.
That should any person gain admission into the
Society by false representations, on the same being
proved to the Board he shall be expelled, and forfeit all
claim to any moneys he may have paid into the funds,
subject to his right of appeal to a General Meeting.
XX.— Encroachments.
Any member working in an office where there
is an encroachment made, or about to be made, on the
privileges of the profession, shall immediately inform
the Secretary, and give such information respecting the
cause of such encroachment as he knows, or be fined
ss. for such neglect ; and should any unfair character
be introduced into any office by a member of this
Society, such case shall be dealt with at the discretion
of the Board of Management or a Special or General
Meeting.
XXI. —Disputes in Offices.
That should a dispute occur in an establishment, no
member shall apply for a situation therein without
previously consulting the Secretary.
XXII. Unfounded Charges.
Any member making a formal charge against
another, such as working under price, inducing others
to do so, or in any way injuring his character in the
trade, without being able to prove or substantiate it
when brought before the Board, shall be fined not less
than 10s.


XXlll. —Relief to Members.
Any member who has paid twelve months’ full
subscription, and clear on the Books, shall be granted
on his leaving the district in search of employment, the
sum ol £1 ; if two years’ subscription, £2. But should
he return to the district within six months the money to
be returned at the rate of ss. per week while in em-
ployment Relief also shall be extended to all members
ot the trade on production of the clearance card, to the
amount of ss. once in six months; and the holders of
cards of membership from kindred Societies, bearing
date not more than six months, be also entitled to
tne same privileges.
Noxn.-Thls Rule only applies to members who are out of
work, and cannot obtain it in the district, and are therefore
compelled to leave in search of employment.
XXlY.— Appeals.
* eeling grieved at a decision
of the Board of Management may appeal to a General
Meeting; if urgent, he shall send to the President a
requisition signed by five other members, accompanied
by a deposit of£l, to be returned if such decision is
disapproved, whereupon the President shall order the
Secretary to summon a Special Meeting for that
purpose ; and any member making an appeal which a
General or Special Meeting shall resolve to be frivolous
and vexatious, shall be fined not less than 10s. 6d.
Appeals against fines shall not be entertained, unless
such fines shall have previously been paid.
XXV. Dissolution of the Society.
That so long as ten members remain clear on
the books of the Society, it shall not be dissolved, or
its funds appropriated to any purpose other than those
set forth in the foregoing rules and regulations. This
rule not to be rescinded or amended unless twelve
months notice has been given to that effect at a general
meeting of members.


XXYl. —Alteration of Rules.
That these laws be not altered, amended, or
rescinded, unless one month’s notice of the intention
to do so shall have been given to the Secretary previous
to a General Meeting.
JOHN S. KNOX, President.
JOHN B. POW, Treas. and Sec.


MORTALITY FUND.
ESTABLISHED JANUARY, 1879.
On the death of a member not more than three
months in arrears at the time of his decease, his widow
or nominee shall be entitled to receive funeral allowance
according to the following scale :
If one year a member, the sum of four pounds (£4)
shall be voted from the Fund, and a levy of sixpence
(6d.) from each member be added to the same.
If three years a member, the sum of six pounds (£6)
shall be voted, and a levy of sixpence (6d.) from each
member shall be made.
If a member for six years or over, the sum of seven
pounds (£7) shall be voted, and a levy of one
shilling (Is.) shall be made.
The member’s current liabilities to be deducted from
the above allowance. The levy of the members to be
paid within one month after the deceased member’s
death, or a fine of one shilling (Is.) in addition will be
imposed.
PRITCHARD, PRINTERS, ADELAIDE.






MEMBER'S CARD
South Australian Typographical Society
, ** J 79
-/#<93
dLzez-j’jzvide
j,M, she wring ico Secretary ,


