

BOURKESTREET
CONGREGATIONAL
jSIJNDAY JScHOOL.
If II I®
Samuel E. Lees, Printer, 174 Pitt-st
1873.




BOURKE STREET
CONGREGATIONAL
jSIJNDAY jScHOOL.
Samuel E. Lees, Peintee, 174 Pitt-steeet.




RULES.
I.—This School shall he called the Bourke-
street Congregational Sunday School.
2.—lts object shall be the religious instruc-
tion.of the young.
3—School shall begin in the morning at halt-
past nine, and close at half-past ten o’clock, and
in the afternoon at half-past two, and close at
half-past three o’clock.
4. At the close of the morning school the
elementary and infant classes shall retire to a
separate service in the upper school-room, those
children whose parents or guardians attend the
Church to their own seats, and the remainder
under the care of teachers appointed for the
service, to seats reserved for them. No children
to leave the premises until the close of Divine


Service, without the permission of their Super-
intendent.
s.—The school shall be under the manage-
ment of a President, two Superintendents, a
Secretary, Treasurer, Librarian, and the
Teachers. The Pastor of the Church to be the
President.
6.—The Officers shall be elected annually, by
ballot, from among the Teachers, at the first
business meeting in the new year, former officers
being eligible for re-election. Any vacancy
occurring during the year to be filled in like
manner.
7.—The teachers shall meet for business on
the Monday after the first Sunday in each
month. All business brought before the meet-
ing shall be subject to the approval of the Pre-
sident and Superintendents, and shall be initiated
by the Chairman of the meeting. No new
business shall be introduced except by the Chair-
man, unless notice thereof shall have been
given at a previous meeting.


f B.—A special meeting for a specified purpose
may be called by a Superintendent, at the
request, in writing, of any five of the Teachers ;
notice thereof to be given in the school the Sun-
day previous.
9.—Anniversary Services and a Public Tea
Meeting shall be held in the month of October
of each year.
10—The Teachers shall meet for prayer on
the second Sunday in every month, at the close
of afternoon school, such meeting to be con-
ducted by the male Teachers in rotation.
11. —The Superintendents shall be empowered
to arrange the classes, appoint Teachers to the
same, and conduct the general business of the
school.
12.—The Secretary shall attend all meetings,
take minutes, conduct the necessary correspon-
dence, keep the school books, &c. The Treasurer
shall receive and disburse all moneys, keep all
accounts, and present an abstract of the same at
each monthly meeting. The Librarian shall


have charge of the books in the Library, issuing
them to the scholars in accordance with the
Library rules.
13. —Each teacher is expected to be in attend-
ance prior to the opening of the school, or
when compelled to be absent to give notice to
the Superintendent, and, if possible, to provide
a substitute. Also, to assist the Superintendent
in keeping order, and as far as practicable to
visit during the week the scholars of his or her
class.
14. —Any Teacher absent from his or her class
four successive Sundays, shall be written to or
visited by a Superintendent or Secretary, and if
no sufficient reason be assigned for such absence,
he or she shall be considered to have resigned.
15. —Any members of the Church or congrega-
tion desirous of becoming teachers in this
school, shall, if a Superintendent deem them fit,
be nominated by the President or a Superinten-
dent at a monthly meeting, and by a vote of a


majority received for two months, at the expira-
tion thereof to be fully admitted by a majority
of votes of Teachers present. Provided, that
should the applicants have been previously
engaged in Sunday School teaching, they shall
be proposed in like manner at one monthly
meeting, and received at the next.
16.—Visitors shall be elected by the Teachers ;
their duty will be to visit absentees, keeping a
record of the causes of their absence, and as far
as time will allow to canvass for fresh scholars.
17, —No scholar shall be expelled from the
school without the concurrence of a majority of
the Teachers present at a regular monthly meet-
ing.
18. —If any Teacher knows anything against
the moral character of another, such Teacher
shall report to the Officers of the School, who
shall deal with the case according to their dis-
cretion ; but public and scandalous offences
shall be at once brought before a meeting of
the Teachers.


19,—N0 alteration shall be made in the above
rules unless by a vote of two-thirds of the
teachers present at a monthly meeting, and
after notice of the proposed alteration has been
given at the meeting held three months pre-
viously. Additions to these rules shall require
only one month’s notice.
20. —Bach Teacher shall be furnished with a
copy of these rules
Adopted at a Meeting held 3rd February,
1873.
THOS. JOHNSON, President.
?'j S S B VLIER OTT,: 1 Superintendents.
A. A. WILLS, Secretary.


LIBRARY RULES.
1. —The use of the Library will be allowed to
such scholars only as shall be recommended by
their Teachers for general good conduct.
2.—No books will be issued to, nor received
from, the scholars, except through the Teachers
of their respective classes.
3.—Every scholar using the Library will be
furnished with a card, which must always be
produced when a book is required. If a card be
lost a new one may be had on payment of one
penny.
4,—Books are exchanged every alternate Sun-
day. They must be kept clean, and in no case
be transferred between the scholars.
s.—Any scholar losing or damaging a book
will be expected to replace it or pay its value.


■ 6.—Any scholar infringing any of the rules
of the School and Library, will be deprived of
the privileges of the Library as the Superinten-
tendent of either School and the Librarian may
think proper.
7. —The Library will be closed, and the books
called in for examination in December of each
year.
Adopted at a Meeting held 22nd April, 1873.
THOS. JOHNSON, President.
T J B ' S° TT ' } Su P erintendents -
A. A. WILLS, Secretary.
S. E. Lees, Printer, 174 Pitt-street.




