

RULES & REGULATIONS
FOR
LETTER-CARRIERS.




RULES AND INSTRUCTIONS
FOR THE
CONDUCT AND GUIDANCE
OF
LETTER-CARRIERS.
1890.
VICTORIA.
POST OFFICE AND TELEGRAPH DEPARTMENT.
Approved by the Governor in Council, 27th October, 1890.
MELBOURNE:
BY AUTHORITY : ROBT. S. BRAIN, GOVERNMENT PRINTER.
4008.




RULES AND INSTRUCTIONS FOR THE
CONDUCT AND GUIDANCE OF
LETTER-CARRIERS.
To whom Applicable.
1. The following Rules and Instructions shall
apply to all persons who may now or hereafter
he employed in the work of delivering letters,
whether ‘Letter-carriers, Assistant Letter-car-
riers, Telegraph Messengers, permanently or
temporarily employed, or persons engaged by
a Postmaster or Postmistress or other person
who has contracted with the Postmaster-General
for the delivery of letters, and also, so fai as
they can be made to apply, to all persons who
may now or hereafter be employed in the collec-
tion of letters from the letter-receiving pillars or
boxes.
Interpretation.
2. The word “Letter-carrier” shall in these
Rules and Instructions mean any of the persons
mentioned in the preceding Rule; and the word
“ letters ” shall mean letters, packets, news-
papers, parcels, and all articles posted or ten-
dered for posting, and the singular shall, where
applicable, include the plural and the plural
mean the singular.
The words “ superior officer ” or “ officer in
charge” or “officer” shall mean any Postmaster,
Postmistress, officer, or person for the time being
in charge of a Post Office, or any officer super-
vising Letter-carriers’ duties.
A 2


Place of Residence.
3. Immediately upon commencing duty after
appointment or transfer to an office, a Letter-
carrier must enter Lis address or place of resi-
dence in a book to be kept for the purpose by
the superior officer. In the event of an intended
change of address, the fact must be previously
notified to such officer, and the Letter-carrier
must enter in such book the altered address. In
the event of absence from residence while on
leave, or from any other cause, the officer must
be informed where the absentee may be found,
so that, should his attendance at the office be
necessary, he may be recalled.
No Letter-carrier may reside at a public-
house without special permission being obtained
from the Permanent Head of the Post and Tele-
graph Department.
Uniform and Appliances.
4. All uniform, clothing, bags, pouches, lan-
terns, and other appliances supplied by the Depart-
ment are the property of the Government and
al ways remain so, and when worn out or replaced,
or a Letter-carrier is promoted or transferred to
other duties, must be given up to the officer in
charge. Uniform coats, or caps, must not be
worn when off duty.
The uniform clothing and other articles men-
tioned must be kept neat and clean and in good
condition, any damage thereto save fair wear
must be made good, or other uniform and articles
vvill be furnished by the Department at the
expense of the Letter-carrier to whom they were
supplied, who may also be fined or otherwise
punished for neglect of this rule.


Should any Letter-carrier come to the office
in a negligent or slovenly condition either as
regards his personal appearance or attire, or
should his coat or hat be marked or branded
with" ink or paint, he will be liable to be sent on
duty and fined or made to pay the cost of pro-
viding a substitute or both.
Production of Supplies.
5. Whenever called upon to do so, a Letter-
carrier must immediately submit to the officer
in charge for inspection his uniform and bags,
pillar keys, labels, and watch (if supplied), and
all other articles and appliances with which he
has been furnished by the Department.
Attendance.
6. Strict punctuality in attendance at the
appointed hours is enjoined. Upon entering an
office for duty a Letter-carrier must at once write
his name, with the exact time of arrival, in the
Attendance Book, and on leaving the time of
departure must also be entered therein before
quitting the building. No Letter-carrier is to
leave the premises during his hours of duty or
before all his work for the day is finished, with-
out the permission of the officer in charge.
Duties.
7. All Letter-carriers are expected to perform
any duties that may be assigned to them cheer-
fully, without demur, and to the best of their
abilities. In the event of any one believing that
he is put to duties which he should not perform,
the duties must be faithfully carried out, but an
application on the subject, addressed to the


Deputy Postmaster-General, should be given
to the officer in charge, who will forward it,
with any remarks he may have to offer on the
subject.
In order that proper discipline may be kept
in the offices, and the 'work performed promptly
and efficiently, every order given by the officer
in charge must be at once obeyed, and time is
not to be wasted in gossip or anything unconnected
with the official duties.
Dealing with Letters in an Office.
8. Unless duly authorized by the officer in
charge, no Letter-carrier in the General Post
Office is to touch, or in any way interfere with,
letters which have to be delivered by any other
Letter-carrier. If, through mis-sorting, a Letter-
carrier should receive a letter for a walk other
than his own, he must give it to the officer in
charge or the Sorting Officer. In other offices
Letter-carriers are expected to generally assist
in sorting, making up mails, or in such other
work of the offices as they may be instructed to
perform by their superior officers.
Should a Letter-carrier receive in the office
to which he is attached a letter addressed to
himself, he is not to open it or put it in his
pocket without first showing it to the officer in
charge, and then dealing with it in his presence.
If any Letter-carrier acts in a contrary manner
he lays himself open to suspicion of improperly
treating or stealing a letter, and is liable to search,
and possible suspension and punishment.
Preparation and Delivery of Letters.
9. Letter-carriers in Melbourne, the suburbs
thereof, and the larger country offices, such
as Ballarat, Sandhurst, and Geelong, when


placed permanently on a walk, must copy care-
fully, legibly, and correctly the names of the
streets and the order in which letters for the
occupants of the different houses therein are
delivered. .
All Letter-carriers are required to make them-
selves acquainted with the changes of addresses of
different persons whose correspondence is directed
to places on their respective walks, to enter such
changes in the proper book, and to promptly re-
direct any letters to which such changes apply.
The letters for delivery must be all properly
arranged in the order of distribution by the time
appointed for leaving the office, but the Post
Office is not to be left until the letters are so
arranged, tied in bundles, and placed in the bag.
Every letter must be carefully examined, with
the view of ascertaining whether the envelope
be torn or the postage stamps removed and in-
sufficiently prepaid, and if it be found that such
ig the case, such letter must be given to the
officer in charge for indorsement or taxation;
if a letter be delivered in a torn or damaged
condition, or minus the postage stamps or evi-
dently insufficiently paid, and bearing no in-
dorsement or taxation as aforesaid, the Letter-
carrier who delivers such letter will be held
responsible for such damage or loss of the stamps
or insufficient postage.
In no case are letters, except those for imme-
diate delivery, to be carried loose in the hand nor
must they be placed in the pocket. A breach of
this rule may involve most serious consequences to
and punishment of the Letter-carrier concerned.
Letter-carriers must proceed with, all expedi-
tion to the places where their respective deliveries
commence, must not loiter or gossip on the way,


must not enter a public-house to obtain refresh-
ments, nor any place to transact private business,
or do anything unconnected with their work of
delivering letters.
Every exertion must be made to complete
delivery as expeditiously as possible.
Letters must in all cases be delivered at the
addresses, and not handed to any addressees who
may be met in the streets.
A reasonable time must be waited for an
answer to a knock or a ring.
It is recommended that all Letter-carriers use
what is known as the “ Postman’s knock ” (two
knocks in quick succession), or to give two
quickly-following rings; this practice will insure
prompt attendance. Letter-carriers should,
when opportunity offers, endeavour to impress
on the persons on their walks the necessity for
having letter-boxes attached to their doors,
gates, or fences.
No letter is to be put under a door, even if
the addressee makes a request to that effect.
When there are several offices in one building,
letters must not be deposited in a box affixed to
the door (unless the door be closed), but deli-
vered to the caretaker, or to the respective
offices to which the letters are addressed, or the
boxes provided by the addressees for their cor-
respondence.
Care must be taken to carry out any special
instructions with regard to the delivery of cor-
respondence, as there is no knowing what serious
consequences, inconvenience, trouble, or misery
may arise from the delay or wrong delivery of a
single letter.
When letters are delivered in a letter-box at
any house, shop, &c., care must be taken to see


that the persons to whom the letters are. directed
transact business or reside on the premises, and
also that the letters do not stick in the aperture,
and a knock or a ring must always be given
when any articles are so delivered.
Should the premises of any person on a walk
be over 100 feet from the footpath, a report of
the fact must be made to the officer in charge, in
order that the owner or occupier may be communi-
cated with and requested to erect a letter-box in
a suitable position for the reception of his
correspondence.
Letter-carriers are cautioned that at all times
they must conduct themselves in a decent and
seemly manner, more especially when they are
on duty and in uniform.
Letters addressed to a person deceased, to the
care of another person, are to be endorsed and
handed to the officer in charge.
Letters directed to persons at hotels, coffee
palaces, public institutions, or registered board-
ing-houses may be delivered to the manager or
clerk appointed to receive letters at such hotels,
&c., and the signatures of those persons may be
accepted for the delivery of registered letters.
Very great care must be exercised by the Letter-
carrier to prevent the wrongful delivery of letters
at such places. When opportunity offers, the
letters awaiting delivery to the addressee should
be inspected, and the manager asked to return
all letters, &c., over two months old.
No Letter-carrier is allowed to deliver, under
any circumstances whatsoever, any letters which
have not been regularly posted and date stamped.
When a Letter-carrier returns from his round
he must sign the delivery-book, and enter the
time of his return.


Unpaid, Insufficiently Paid, and Taxed
Letters.
10. Before leaving the office, every Letter-
carrier must see that the amount charged on
taxed letters has been properly debited to him,
otherwise, even if he is overcharged, he will be
responsible for the full amount placed to his
debit by the officer in charge. If credit be
given for the amount on a “More to pay”
letter, the delivering Carrier is responsible for
the amount, and must pay it before ’he leaves
the office, otherwise it is the duty of the officer
in charge to report him as a defaulter to the
Deputy Postmaster-General.
A Letter-carrier is not bound to provide him-
self with change, but when a coin of higher
value than the charge is offered if he can give
change he should do so. He should bear in
mind that it is to his own interest, as well as
to the satisfactory working of the Department
with the public, to be obliging, polite, and
courteous in his official relations with the
public.
Before a taxed letter is delivered the amount
of the tax must be collected. If the receiver
objects to the charge, disputing the weight or
the correctness of the tax, he must be advised
to take the letter unopened to an official, at the
office whence it was taken for delivery, who
will examine and weigh it, and report to the
Deputy Postmaster-General if the charge be
incorrect, or if he be doubtful on the subject
forward it to head office for a decision. If
a person open a taxed letter and state it is
not his, he must be informed that he must send
the letter to the Deputy Postmaster-General


asking for a remission of the tax. In case of a
letter having been “ officially registered,” if the
addressee open the letter in the presence of the
Letter-carrier, and the latter is convinced that.
it contains nothing of intrinsic value, the Carrier
may refund the tax upon getting possession of
the envelope, which he must give, with a report,
to the officer in charge, who will send both to
head office.
Should any Letter-carrier improperly tax a
letter “More to pay,” or charge a higher
amount than marked on a letter, and retain the
amount or amounts for his own use, he will be
liable to prosecution for embezzlement, and to
be dismissed the service.
If any letter taken out for delivery is thought
to be underpaid or not registered, when it should
have been taxed or registered, such letter must
be taken back to the office and brought under
notice of the officer in charge.
Unobliterated Stamps.
11. Care must be observed that no letter with
the stamps unobliterated or imperfectly oblite-
rated is delivered. Any Letter-carrier deliver-
ing a letter bearing such stamps will be held
responsible for committing an irregularity, and
be dealt with accordingly.
Stamps, etc., Found.
12. All postage or other stamps, whether
obliterated or not, or any money or other pro-
perty, found in any office must be at once
handed to the officer in charge. Any Letter-
carrier found in possession of such stamps, which
he is not able to account for satisfactorily, or


any such money or ‘other property, renders
himself liable to suspension and a charge of
larceny.
Registered Letters.
13. The greatest possible care must be taken
in dealing with registered letters. A receipt
must be obtained for all such letters. No regis-
tered letter is to be sent into a house to he
signed for. The receipt for a registered letter
must be in ink, and be made in the Letter-carrier’s
receipt book in his presence, and the signature
witnessed by the Letter-carrier.
Should a Letter-carrier not be able to deliver
a registered letter, he must, on his return to the
office, immediately hand it back to the officer in
charge (having previously marked on it the
reason for non-delivery), who will initial for it,
and if the Letter-carrier has to take it out
again, he must give another receipt for it. This
course must be followed until the letter is finally
disposed of by the Letter-carrier.
A registered letter must be taken to the house
or premises to which it is addressed, notwith-
standing the fact that such house or premises
may be over 100 feet from the footpath.
If a Letter-carrier have a registered letter,
which, owing to the absence of the addressee,
he cannot deliver, after taking it to the address
three times, he must leave at the house a card
stating that such a letter is at the Post Office,
and should be applied for there.
Letters taken in Error.
14. Should a Letter-carrier take from an office
by mistake a letter addressed to any person not
on his walk, immediately on returning from his


delivery lie must report the circumstance to the
officer in charge, and, if so directed, must, when
he would be otherwise ofi duty, deliver such
letter to the person addressed, with a respectful
explanation of and apology for the error.
Unauthorized Work.
15. Under no circumstances is a Letter-
carrier to undertake to perform any portion of
another man’s work, or arrange with another
man to do any portion of his work, without the
sanction of the officer in charge.
Information to the Public.
16. Every possible information should be
supplied to the public with regard to the times
of delivery, arrival of mails, postage, and such
like matters, but no person must be informed, of
the address of any other person, or be supplied
with information regarding correspondence di-
rected to any one else. Nor is any infor-
mation regarding the office, or anything that
may come under notice of a Letter-carrier in
his official capacity, to be mentioned to any one
not in the Department, or be communicated,
either directly or indirectly, to the press.
Re-Direction.
17. No Letter-carrier is authorized to re-
direct any letter unless he has a re-address for
correspondence directed similarly to such letter.
It must be borne in mind that it is the duty
of every Post Office official to make every
endeavour to secure the prompt delivery of
correspondence to the persons for whom it is
intended; therefore should a Letter-carrier have
a letter addressed to his walk which he cannot


deliver, he must make inquiries with the view
of ascertaining the proper address of the person
to whom it is directed, and must also search the
Directory to see whether he can ascertain where
the person addressed can be found. Should he
gain any information on this point, he must
hand the letter to the officer in charge, for him
to send it to the new address on trial.
Returned Letters.
18. Should an opened letter be offered to a
Letter-carrier, he is not to accept it unless it
bears an indorsement to the effect that it was
opened, and the reason for its return, signed by
the person who opened it. This indorsement
must be signed also by the Letter-carrier
accepting the returned letter. As the Depart-
ment only undertakes to deliver letters as
addressed, and does not accept any further re-
sponsibility, the Letter-carrier is only permitted
to take back for re-delivery any letter which has
not been properly delivered. In cases of re-
moval of addressees, see preceding rules.
Misdirected Letters.
19. Should a letter be received directed to a
well-known firm, but bearing an incorrect
address, it may be delivered to such firm, but
the Letter-carrier who delivers such letter must
point out the discrepancy in the direction, and
have the letter opened in his presence, so that
he may be assured that it has reached the
owner.
Should a letter be received addressed to a
person at a number different to that at which a
person of the same name, well known to the
Letter-carrier, resides or has his offices, such


letter must first be presented at the number
given, as the person for whom the letter is in-
tended may be there, or may elect to have some
of his correspondence directed there. If refused
at the number, the letter must be tried at the
address of the person known.
In any case of doubt with regard to the
delivery of correspondence, the advice of the
officer in charge must be asked for, and his
ruling obeyed.
Undelivered Letters.
20. On return to the office after completing a
delivery, every undelivered letter must be in-
dorsed with the reason for non-delivery, thus :
—“Gone away, no address,” “Not known,”
“No attendance,” “Refused,” “Deceased,”
as the case may be, and all such indorsements
must bear the signature of the Letter-carrier
and the date of making the indorsement.
When this is done, the letters must be handed
to the officer in charge. All leather pouches
must be carefully examined, and canvas bags
turned inside out (and left so until required for
use), before the Letter-carrier leaves the office.
“Try” Letters.
21. Letters marked “Try” are not to be
delivered in the ordinary course, but are to be
handed to the person named in the address and
opened in the presence of the Letter-carrier.
If it be not for the person who opened it., he
must be requested to indorse it “ Opened by,
but not for me,” and sign his name. This in-
dorsement must be countersigned by the Letter-
carrier who presented the letter, and on his
return to the office the letter must be handed to
the officer in charge.


Letters, etc., not to be taken Home.
22. On no account and under no circum-
stances is a Letter-carrier to take his bag, pouch,
or any letter not addressed to himself, to his
residence, nor is he permitted to enter his or
any other house while on duty.
Collections from Pillars or Boxes.
23. No collection of letters is to be made on
any pretence before the appointed time. Great
care must he exercised to insure the proper
locking of all pillars and boxes after clearance.
Pillar keys are not be taken home, nor must
they be lent or given to any person except by
direction of the officer in charge.
Any stamps, or any thing irregularly posted,
found in a pillar or box must be at once given
to the officer in charge.
Should a key be lost, a pillar or box be dirty,
out of repair, the locks be defective, or the times
of clearance be wrong or obliterated, a report of
the fact must be at once given to the officer in
charge.
Collection op Letters from the Public.
24. Letter-carriers are to receive all duly
stamped letters that may be handed to them for
the purpose of being posted at the Post Office
to which they may be attached, or of being de-
posited in the nearest letter-pillar or letter-box
on their rounds ; provided that Letter-carriers
shall not in any case be required to accept such
letters within a radius of half-a-mile from the
local Post Office, nor within a quarter of a mile
from the nearest letter-pillar or letter-box.


Letters received as above must be dropped
into the nearest pillar or receiving box, or taken
to the Post Office (which ever course will effect
the speedier transmission of the correspondence).
Wilful Detention of Letters.
25. Wilful detention of letters renders the
official at fault liable to prosecution for misde-
meanour.
Absence.
26. In case of inability from any cause to
come on duty, a written notice of the fact, ad-
dressed to the officer in charge, must be delivered
in the office to which the Letter-carrier con-
cerned is attached before the time he should be
on duty, so that provision may be made for
supplying his place. Should the absence be
caused by illness, and be for more than twenty-
four hours, a medical certificate, stating the
nature of the illness and its probable duration,
together with an application for leave for the
time named in the certificate, must be sent to the
officer in charge. Should the sick person be
convalescent before the time mentioned in his
application, he must resume duty. In any'case
before resuming duty, he should give at least
one day’s notice to the officer in charge of his
intention so to do.
Smoking.
27. Letter-carriers are forbidden to smoke
or use tobacco while in uniform or on duty.
New Streets, etc.
28. Whenever new streets are made, new
terraces or houses built, the Letter-carrier on
whose walk the alteration occurs must at once
inform the officer in charge. It must be always
B


remembered that it is the duty of every official
to communicate any intelligence that will assist
in the prompt delivery of correspondence to the
persons to whom it is addressed.
New Occupants of Offices, etc.
29. When any person moves into an office,
house, or premises, the Letter-carrier, on whose
walk such office, &c., is situated, must ask the
name of the new occupant, and advise him to
forward an application for the re-direction of
his correspondence. The Letter-carrier must
also record the name and address in his Direc-
tory, and report the facts of the case to the
officer in charge.
Public Service Regulations and
Postal Law.
30. These Rules and Instructions are not to
supersede the Public Service Regulations, which
must also be obeyed. Every Letter-carrier must
likewise make himself acquainted with the pro-
visions of the Post Office Acts and Regulations,
which can at any time be obtained for perusal
upon application to the officer in charge.
Receipt for Rules, etc.
31. Every Letter-carrier will be supplied with
a copy of these Rules and Instructions, for
which he must give a receipt, acknowledging
that he has received, read, and will obey
them. ■
By Authority : Kobt. S. Printe^rtrooume.




