

RULES
OF THE
QUEENSLAND ARTICLED CLERKS
SOCIETY.
SIR JAMES COCKLE, Knight, Chief Justice; and
His Honor Mr. Justice LUTWYCHE.
CHARLES LILLEY', Esq., Q.C.
J. MACKENZIE SHAW, Esq., Registrar, Supreme
Court; and
PETER MACPHERSON, Esq., Solicitor.
Committee:
(Elected anmr ’ly.)
F. W. P. THOMPSON,
Hon. Secretary and Treasure •
Brisbane : Chas. Mills, Printer, Queen Street.


RULES
OP THE
(Ijuwlmut Articled Society.
I.—This Society shall be called the “Queensland Articled
Clerks Society.”
ll.—The Officers of the Society shall consist of a Presi-
dent, two Vice-Presidents, and Secretary (who shall also act as
Treasurer). The Committee shall consist of seven members,
to be elected annually—three of whom shall form a quorum.
Ill—All Articled Clerks, on payment of the subscription
hereinafter mentioned, shall be eligible as Members of this
Society.
IV. —The object of the Society i« to furnish greater oppor-
tunities for the acquirement and diffusion of legal knowledge,
to afford the Members opportunities of practising elocution,
and to consider and determine upon all matters affecting the
interests of the Society generally.
V. —This Society shall be composed of Articled Clerks,
including those who have served their time (not being ad-
mitted attorneys), and be open for admission to Clerks in the
Legal Profession only, who may at any meeting of the Society
be proposed and seconded by Members, and the candidate so
proposed shall be ballotted for at the next meeting after such
proposal, at which meeting one black ball in five shall
exclude the proposed candidate.
VI. —The Society shall be supported by donations and
subscriptions as hereinafter mentioned.
VII. All Members shall pay an annual subscription of ten
shillings and sixpence, payable half-yearly in advance. The
above subscription shall be deemed due on the Ist of January
and the Ist July in every year, and any Member making de-
fault in payment of such subscription for fourteen days after
the same shall become due, shall be liable to a fine of 25 per
cent, on the amount of the subscription, and shall not be
entitled to any of the advantages ot the Society until such
subscription and fine shall have been paid.


VIII. —The Committee shall cause a Register of Members to
be kept by the Secretary, containing names, addresses, and
date of admission of Members.
IX. —The co-operation of the Barristers and Solicitors of
Queensland shall be invited, and the Committee shall direct
the Secretary to call upon each of those gentlemen in turn
who shall have consented to give this Society their assistance,
and request him to propose a subject or question for dis-
cussion at any general meeting of the Members of the Society,
and to preside at such meeting. The general meetings for
such discussions shall be held every alternate Monday, at
eight o’clock in the evening, the first of such meetings to take
place on the 30th day of January, 1871.
X. —At any such meeting as aforesaid, the presiding
Barrister or Solicitor shall be at liberty to call upon any
Members present to take notes of the arguments adduced on
each side, which shall be fairly copied by such members into a
book to be kept for that purpose, and such presiding Barrister
or Solicitor snail enter in such book his decision and the
grounds thereof.
XI. —The Committee shall have power to procure or rent a
room for the use of the Members if the funds of the Society
justify the same; and to lay out such portion of the funds
of the Society as they may deem expedient, in the purchase
of law books and publications for the use of the Society, and
to make bye-laws for the conduct of the meetings and the
promotion of the objects of the Society, provided the same are
not at variance with these Rules, and are confirmed at any
general or special meeting of the Members of the Society,
XII. —The Committee shall hold a meeting on the first
Monday in every month, or more frequently, upon such days
as they may deem expedient. And the Secretary shall, upon
the request in writing of any three members of the Committee,
call a meeting thereof within three days after being so re-
quested, giving the remaining Members of the Committee
notice of the subject for consideration and the time of such
meeting.
XIII. —The Hon. Secretary shall, on the request in writing of
not less than five Members, convene a special general meeting
of the Society, not less than two or more than four days from
the date of such requisition.
XIV. —A Chairman shall be appointed at each meeting of the
Committee and Society, convened for the purpose of transact-
ing business, by the Members then present ; such Chairman
shall have a vote, and, in case of equality of votes, a casting
vote.


XV. —Minutes shall he kept by the Secretary, or his deputy,
of the proceedings at all business Meetings of the Society,
and of the Committee.
XVI.— I The Committee may, at their own instance, or on
written complaint—such complaint being previously investi-
gated by them—suspend any Member of the Society from his
privileges as such Member, or any of their own body, from
acting as a Member of the Committee, according to their dis-
cretion, provided four Members of the Committee shall at
least be present at the meeting at which such suspension
shall be resolved upon, of whom three at least shall consent
thereto; piovided, also, that notice that such suspension shall
be considered at such meeting shall be given to such Member,
and he shall be at liberty to attend and answer the complaint
against him, and the Committee shall decide upon the evidence
adduced before them.
XVII.—The Committee shall report any such suspension to
the Members of the Society, at a meeting to be held within a
fortnight from the date thereof; and the Members present
shall have power to confirm or reverse such suspension by a
majority of the votes of those actually present at such meeting,
the Chairman thereof to have the usual casting vote.
XVIII. Any Members ot the Committee who shall have neg-
lected—without good cause assigned—to attend at two con-
secutive meetings of the Committee, shall be deemed to have
abandoned his office; and the Members of the Committee shall
thereupon nominate a Member to fill the vacancy so created.
XIX. After the ordinary business of any general meeting
shall have been concluded, any business which the Committee
think proper to introduce shall then be entered upon, and dis-
cussed. After the completion of any business so introduced
by the Committee, any Member may make any proposition in
connection with the operation of the Society, and may give
any notice he may think fit of such proposition, to be consi-
dered at a future meeting.
XX. —Xo irregularity in summoning Members, or transacting
business at any meeting, shall in any way etfect the validity
of anything done at such meeting, unless publicly noticed at
such meeting.
XXL—No alteration or addition to these rules shall be
made without the consent of a majority of the Members of
the Society attending a general meeting specially convened
for that purpose.
-OO
