

Rules and Regulations
OF THE
AUSTRALASIAN
Trained Nurses
ASSOCIATION
SSnbntg:
WEBBDALE, SHOOSJIITH LTD., PRINTERS,
117 Clarence Street
19g0,


Rules and Regulations
OF THE
AUSTRALASIAN
Trained Nurses
ASSOCIATION
Ssfcneg :
Websdale, Shoosmith Ltd., Printers,
117 Clarence Street
1920




The Australasian Trained Nurses Association
Objects.
The Association was founded in the year 1899, and its objects
were briefly set forth as follows: —
1. To promote the interests of Trained Nurses —male and
female —in all matters affecting their work as a class.
2. To establish a system of registration for Trained Nurses.
3. To afford opportunities for discussing subjects bearing on the
work of Nursing.
4. To initiate and control schemes that will afford to Nurses a
means of providing an allowance during incapacity for
work caused by sickness, accident, age, or other necessitous
circumstances.
Rules.
Constitution and Management.
(i.) The governing body of the Association shall be a Council,
which shall consist of the President, the Vice-President,
Hon. Treasurer, two Hon. Secretaries, and twenty Mem-
bers (of whom five shall be duly qualified Medical Prac-
titioners, five Matrons and Superintendents of Nurses,
five Sisters and Nurses, three Representatives of the Mid-
wifery Branch, and two may be Honorary Members), who
shall be elected as hereinafter directed, and of whom five
shall form a quorum.
(ii.) The management of the Association shall be entrusted to the
governing body, who will have power to appoint such
Committees as may from time to time be deemed neces-
sary in order to carry out the objects of the Association.
Election of Officers.
(iii.) The election of a President, Vice-President, Hon. Treasurer,
and Hon. Secretaries and Members of Council shall be
vested in the general body of Members of the Association,
and, except as hereinafter mentioned, shall be made in
the Annual Meeting or at a Special Meeting of the Mem-
bers then present.


(iv.) Until the first Annual Meeting shall be held, the following
shall form a Council: —Dr. Manning, President; Dr.
Goode, Vice-President; Mr. J. Oswald Fairfax, Honorary
Treasurer; Dr. Mills, Miss MeGahey, Honorary Secre-
taries; Dr. Clubbe, Dr. Piaschi, Dr. Timing, Dr. James
Graham; Miss Spencer, Miss Creal, Miss McMaster, Miss
Venables, Miss Gould, Mrs. Joseph Graham, Matrons; Miss
Ryrie, Private Hospital; Miss Sanders, Miss Johnston,
Sisters; Miss Davies, Miss Wilson, Miss Godson, Nurses’
Homes; Mre. J. T. Wilson, Honorary Member.
(v.) The Council shall have power to temporarily fill any vacancy
if they think it indispensable to do so.
General Management.
(vi.) The Association shall meet annually, or oftener, as occasion
may require, on such day and -at such hour as the Council
may appoint, with power to adjourn from time to time,
ten (10) to form a quorum,
(vii.) The President, or in his absence the Vice-President, shall
preside at all meetings, and, in case of their absence, the
majority of those present shall appoint a chairman.
(viii.) All the Honorary Officers and Members of Council shall
retire annually, and shall be eligible for re-election.
(ix.) The Council shall have the general management of the affairs
of the Association, and have power to frame by-laws,
subject to the control and assent of the General Meeting of
Members. They shall also carry into effect the directions
of the General Meeting, and attend to matters affecting
the interests of the Association, They shall also fix the
time and place for holding the Annual Meeting, and may
also at any time call a Special Meeting.
(x.) Should ten (10) or more members request the President, through
the Secretaries, in writing, to convene a Special Meeting
of the Association at any time, he shall do so by giving at
least six (6) days’ notice, and stating the subject to be
dealt with at the Meeting. At all such Meetings ten (10)
shall form a quorum.
(xi.) Every question shall be decided by a majority of the members
present; the Chairman having a vote in his own right and
also a casting vote; but the Council shall be empowered to
receive the vote of any member by proxy on such questions
and at such times when it may be deemed desirable in the
interests of the Association to obtain the opinion of all
the Members, provided always that reasonable notice of
such question be supplied to each Member and the form in
which such proxy vote is recorded be approved of by the
Council.
(xii.) No Rules shall be made or altered, nor shall any motion be
considered by the Association which involves an important
change in any by-law, unless a written notice of the pro


position shall have been sent to all Members at least
fourteen days before the Meeting of the Association at
which it is to be dealt with.
Qualifications and Privileges of Members.
(xiii.) The Association shall consist of Members and Honorary
Members,
(xiv.) Members shall be—
(а) Nurses on the Register or Roll of the Association; or
(б) Duly qualified Medical Practitioners elected by the
Council,
who in each case have paid for the current year the
annual subscription fixed by the Council.
(xv.) Honorary Members shall be elected from those who have
identified themselves with the work of public Hospitals
and kindred institutions.
(xvi.) Honorary Members shall have no voice in the management of
the Association, except when elected as Members of the
Council under the provisions of Rule i.
(xvii.) Every Member shall pay to the Association an annual sub-
scription of such amount as shall be from time to time
determined by the Council.
(xviii.) Candidates for registration must produce proof that they
have been trained by a Matron or Nurse who holds a certi-
ficate from a Training School for Nurses recognised by the
Council of this Association, and who, if the Hospital be
situate in States in which the training of Nurses is con-
trolled by the Association, is a Member of the Australasian
Trained Nurses Association; and
(a) That they have been engaged for three years in a
general Hospital recognised by the Council, and
having an average of not less than 40 beds occu-
pied daily; or
(h) That they have been engaged for four years in a
country, district, or suburban Hospital recognised
by the Council, and having an average of not less
than 20 beds occupied daily; or
(c) That they have been engaged for five years in a
private, country, district, or suburban Hospital
recognised by the Council, and having an average
of not less than 10 beds occupied daily.
( d ) That they have obtained their certificate as Mental
Nurses and have been registered as such by this
Association under Rule 1 (a) (2) and have subse-
quently been engaged for two years in a General
Hospital recognised by the Council having an
average of not less than 40 beds daily occupied,
or for a proportional period in a four or five
years’ training school.


Furthermore, all candidates must give references as to
their moral character, produce certificates of com-
petency from the Hospitals in which they have
been engaged, and account for any interval of time
in their nursing career when not engaged in Hospi-
tals or Nursing Associations.
All N urses applying for registration shall be required
to pass the examination for membership of
the Association, except in the case of can-
didates presenting certificates from those
other States or countries with which the
Australasian Trained Nurses Association
has a reciprocal agreement.
(xix.) (Obsolete) Any Nurse who has been trained for a period
of two years at a Training School for Nurses deemed
worthy of recognition by the Council, and has obtained
her certificate as a Nurse from that Training School prior
to March 31st, 1900, shall be eligible for registration.
(xx.) (Obsolete) Any Nurse who has been trained in a private
Hospital, containing not less than 10 beds, for a period of
five years, and who has been trained at that Hospital
under a Matron who bolds a certificate from a Training
School for Nurses, and who can produce certificates of
competency from two reputable Medical Practitioners, shall
be eligible for registration up to 31st March, 1900, subject
to the approval of the Council of the Association.
(xxi.) (Obsolete) Any Nurse who can show to the satisfaction of
the Council that she has been engaged for not less than
three years in the bona fide work of medical and surgical
nursing, either in Hospitals or in private nursing, and can
produce certificates of competency and good conduct satis-
factory to the Council from at least three reputable Medical
Practitioners as to her attainments and repute, shall be
eligible for registration up to March 31st, 1900, subject
to the approval of the Council. Provided always that the
Council shall have power in any case to direct that any
candidate under this Rule may be examined in practical
nursing by three examiners appointed by the Council, and,
provided further, that in the case of Nurses registered
under this Rule the qualification in the Register shall
stand as “Admitted by the Council under the provisions
of Rule xxi.”
(xxiA.) (Obsolete) In the case of any Nurse who, prior to March
31st, 1900, has been engaged for a period of three years in
nursing in a Hospital or Hospitals recognised by, or
deemed worthy of recognition by, the Council of the Aus-
tralasian Trained Nurses Association, and who can produce
satisfactory evidence to that effect, together with certifi-
cates of competency from three reputable Medical Prac-
titioners, the Council shall have power to consider the


claims of such Nurse to membership, and may if they con-
sider them adequate, admit her as a Member, either after
examination or not, as they see fit. Such decision must be
ratified at the next succeeding Council Meeting, and Mem-
bers so admitted are to be entered in the Register as
admitted under Rule xxiA.
[All cases of Nurses under concessional clauses applying to
qualify for Matronships must be individually considered
by the Central Council, and they should have received a
training in a Hospital deemed worthy of recognition by
the Council, and present certificates of Invalid Cookery.]
(xxii.) The Council shall cause to be kept a Register in which shall
be entered the names, addresses, qualifications, training,
&c., of all Nurses who have been approved of by the
Council, and who have paid the prescribed fee.
(xxiii.) The Council shall have power to remove from the Register
the name of any Nurse who, after full inquiry, may prove
herself hereafter to be unworthy of trust. Provided always
that before any name be so removed due notice of the
Council’s intention shall be given to the Nurse, who shall
have the opportunity of making any personal explanation
that she may deem desirable.
(xxiiiA.) No General Nurse, unless trained in Midwifery, shall under-
take the care of obstetric cases. A Nurse who has been
proved to the satisfaction of the Council to have violated
this rule shall be liable to have her name removed from the
Register.
(The Council may exercise its discretionary power to relax
this rule in the case of General Nurses in country districts
where no Midwifery Nurse is at the time available.)
(xxiv.) The Council shall also have the right to restore any name
removed from the Register on satisfactory proof being given
that the causes which led to the removal no longer exist.
Honorary Treasurer.
(xxv.) The Honorary Treasurer shall be elected at the Annual
Meeting, and shall keep regular accounts of all moneys
received and disbursed; he shall also place all moneys so
received in such one or more of the Sydney banks as the
Council may appoint, in the name of “Australasian Trained
Nurses Association.” All payments ordered by the Council
shall, as far as possible, be made by cheque, and all cheques
shall be signed by Treasurer and Secretary, or in their
absence, by the President and one other member of the
Council.
(xxva) Auditors shall be appointed each year at the Annual Meet-
ing of the Association.


Honorary Secretaries.
(xxvi.) The Honorary Secretaries shall be elected at the Annual
General Meeting. They shall supervise the Business
Papers of the meetings, and shall see that the Minute Books
and other records are carefully kept, and the instructions
and directions of the Council are properly carried out.
They shall form the official medium of communication be-
tween the Council and the Association, and shall consult
with the President in any case of emergency that may arise
between the meetings of the Council.
Funds.
(xxvii.) The expenses connected with the general management of the
Association shall be defrayed, as much as possible, from
the annual subscriptions and donations, but all legacies and
donations of over £5O, unless specially directed, shall be
invested in the names of the Honorary Treasurer and
Honorary Secretaries as trustees upon investments
authorised and approved of by the Council, which shall
also have control of the funds of the Association.
Branches.
(xxviii.) The Council shall have power to establish Branches of the
Association in the other States of the Commonwealth, and
to draw up the necessary regulations for the government
of such Branches.


REGULATIONS
To Govern the Establishment and Working of
STATE BRANCHES.
1. Branches of the Australasian Trained Nurses Association shall
be governed by the rules of the Association.
2. The governing body of each Branch shall be a Council consisting
of a President, Vice-President, Hon. Secretary, Hon. Treasurer, and
Members, or whom shall form a
quorum; of these Members shall be duly qualified
medical men, shall be Matrons dr Superintendents of
Nurses, shall be Nurses or Sisters, and one Doctor
and one Nurse representing the Midwifery Nurses. All Members of
the Council shall retire annually, and shall be eligible for re-eleclion
3. Members shall be (a) Nurses on the Register of the Branch;
or ( b ) duly qualified Medical Practitioners elected by the Council of the
Branch, who in each case have paid for the current year the annual
subscription fixed for all Members of the Association.
4. Nurses residing in a State where a Branch of the Association
exists shall apply for registration to such Branch; and any member of
the Association shall on removal from that State have her name
transferred from the Register of one Branch to that of another with-
out additional payment.
5. The fees for membership of the Branch shall be the same
as for the Association, but shall be paid direct to the Local Hon.
Treasurer.
6. The Branch Council shall have control over the funds of the
Branch, but shall pay half the subscriptions to the Treasurer of the
parent Association towards the expenses of publishing the Annual
Register and the Journal of the Association, issuing Certificates, and
such other expenses as may arise in connection with administering the
affairs of the Branch.
7. The officers of the Local Council shall be ex-officio members of
the Council of the Association, and shall have power to attend its
meetings
8. The Branch Council shall have full power to register any Nurse
resident in its own State, provided that such registration be strictly in
accordance with the rules of the Association, and provided that any
doubtful case or any application under a concessional clause shall be
referred before registration to the Council of the Association, which
shall have power to refuse such application.


9. (a) (Obsolete) As regards Queensland Nurses, Rule XXI.
of the Association shall be altered to read “to March
31st, 1905,” instead of “March 31st, 1900,” and in line
4 after the word “Nursing” shall be inserted “in Queens-
land.” Also Rule XXIa shall be altered to read “prior to
March 31st, 1905, has been engaged for a period of three years in
nursing in a hospital or hospitals recognised by or deemed worthy of
recognition by the Council of the Australasian Trained Nurses Associa-
tion, and who has resided in Queensland since March 31st, 1900, and
who can produce,” &c.
('b) (Obsolete) As regards South Australian Nurses, Rule
XXI. shall read “to June 30th, 1906,” instead of “March
31st, 1900,” and in line 4 after the word “Nursing”
shall be inserted “in South Australia.” Also Rule XXIa.
shall be altered to read “prior to June 30th, 1906, has been
engaged for a period of three years in nursing in a Hospital or
Hospitals recognised by or deemed worthy of recognition by the Council
of the Australasian Trained Nurses Association, and who has resided in
South Australia since March 31st, 1900, and yho can produce,” &c.
(c) (Obsolete) As regards Tasmanian Nurses, Rule XXI.
shall read “to December 31st, 1909,” instead of “March
31st, 1900,” and in line 4 after the word “Nursing”
shall be inserted “in Tasmania.” Also Rule XXIa. shall
be altered to read “prior to December 31st, 1909, has been
engaged for a period of three years in Nursing in a Hospital or Hospitals
recognised by or deemed worthy of recognition by the Council of the
Australasian Trained Nurses Association, and who has resided in
Tasmania since March 31st, 1900, and who can produce,” &e.
(d) (Obsolete) As regards West Australian Nurses, Rule
XXI. shall read “to December 31st, 1908,” instead of
“March 31st, 1900” and in line 4 after the word
“Nursing” shall be inserted “in Western Australia” (reopened
October, 1915, to June 30th, 1916, for Matrons of Govern-
ment Hospitals in Western Australia). Also Rule XXIa. shall be
altered to read “prior to December 31st, 1908, has been engaged for
a period of three years in nursing in a Hospital or Hospitals recog-
nised by or deemed worthy of recognition by the Council of the Aus-
tralasian Trained Nurses Association, and who has resided in Western
Australia since December 31st, 1905, and who can produce,” &c.
(e) Concessions regulating non-eontinuous training in West
Australian Government Hospitals:—
(1) The medical department of the Government shall be required
lo furnish a regular report on the individual Hospitals under
Government control, specifying the average number of occu-
pied beds, medical and surgical.
(2) The medical department shall furnish a guarantee that in
each Hospital there shall be provided training, both
theoretical and practical, on the lines laid down by the
Australasian Trained Nurses Association, and that such
Hospital has an average daily occupation of not less than
ten beds.


(3) The Certificates issued by the Government medical depart-
ment shall specify all the Hospitals in which the Nurse
trains and the number of months which she has spent in each.
(4) The training when not continuous shall be of not less than
four years’ duration.
10. Names of Nurses registered by the Branch Council shall be
forwarded together with particulars of qualifications to the Secretary
of the Association, who shall cause to be issued Certificates of member-
ship signed by the President of the Association and the President and
Secretaries of the Branch.
11. The Council of the Branch shall have power to arrange for
meetings of Members of the Branch and for lectures as it may see fit.
12. Members of a Branch shall have all the privileges of Members
of the Association, and shall be entitled to the badge of the Association,
and may participate in the Benevolent Fund.
13. The State Hospitals already recognised as Training Schools
shall be recognised by the Council of the Branch, but all future
recognitions of Hospitals shall be by the Branch Councils subject to the
rules of the Association, and all local recognised Hospitals shall be
subject to and shall report annually to the local Council. Withdrawal
or suspension of the recognition of any Hospital shall be subject to
confu-raation by the Council of the Association.
A list of the Hospitals and Nurses’ Homes recognised by the
Branch shall be forwarded after each meeting to the Secretary of the
parent Association.


BASIS OF RECIPROCITY
BETWEEN
The Australasian Trained Nurses Association
AND
The Victorian Trained Nurses Association.
By authority and on behalf of the Australasian Trained Nurses
Association, and the Victorian Trained Nurses Association, we hereby
make and agree to the following as the basis of our reciprocal
relations:—
General.
1. The constitution and management of each Association in regard
to the General Rules and Election of Officers and Council, the disposal
of the General and Benevolent Funds, &c., shall remain quite distinct
and be in no way subject to interference by the otter; but all proposed
alteration of rules, or formation of new rules, by either Association
shall be submitted for consideration with a view to objection, if neces-
sary, by the other before being passed.
Nurses.
2. Members on the General Register of each Association may, on
application, and on payment of the prescribed fee, be admitted as
Members of the other Association on submitting their certificates of
registration, ancT shall then be admitted to all the privileges of such
membership; but all Members removed for any breach of discipline or
other cause from the Register of one Association shall cease to be
Members of the other. (Obsolete, see page 13.)
3. Neither Association shall register any Nurse who has been
refused registration by the other; and it shall be the duty of the
Honorary Secretary of each Association to immediately report to the
Honorary 7 Secretary of the other Association all rejections.
4. The Victorian Association shall not register under its Rule xxi,
any Nurse unless she has been engaged for not less than three years in
bona fide nursing, as therein described, in the State of Victoria.
5. The Secretary of each Association shall, as soon as possible,
furnish to the Secretary of the other —
(a) A complete list, showing names and qualifications of th»
Members already registered.
( b ) A list of Members registered at each Council Meeting,
with their qualifications.
(c) The names of any Members who have resigned, or whose
names have been removed from the Register, with the
reasons for removal.


Hospitals.
6. All Hospitals already recognised as Training Schools for Nurses
by the Australasian Association, outside the State of Victoria, shall be
recognised by the Victorian Association; but, in future, steps for the
recognition of all Hospitals in Victoria will be taken by the Victorian
Association, and for the recognition of all Hospitals in the other
Australasian States and Colonies by the Australasian Trained Nurses
Association, and all Hospitals recognised by one Association shall be
recognised by the other.
7. All steps for withdrawing recognition as Training Schools shall
be taken, so far as Victorian Hospitals are concerned, by the Victorian
Association; and so far as all Hospitals in the other Australasian
States and Colonies are concerned, by the Australasian Trained Nurses
Association.
8. The recognition and withdrawal of recognition of all Hospitals
in Victoria by the Victorian Association will be accepted by the
Australasian Trained Nurses Association, and the recognition and
withdrawal of recognition of all Hospitals in the other States and
Colonies by the Australasian Trained Nurses Association will be
accepted by the Victorian Association.
9. The Secretary of each Association shall, as soon as possible,
supply to the Secretary of the other—
(a) Lists of all Hospitals already recognised.
(b) The names of all Hospitals recognised in future, in accord-
ance with Article 6 above.
(c) The names of all Hospitals from which recognition has
been withdrawn, in accordance with Article 7 above,
together with reasons for withdrawal.
(Signed) On behalf of the Australasian Trained Nurses
Association,
F. NORTON MANNING, M.D.,
President.
(Signed) On behalf of the Victorian Trained Nurses’
Association,
J. W. SPRINGTHORPE, M.D.,
March, 1902. President.
Revised Agreement.
By authority of and on behalf of the Australasian Trained Nurses
Association and the Royal Victorian Trained Nurses Association we
hereby agree to omit from the basis of our reciprocal relations agreed
upon in March, 1902, Clause 2 dealing with Nurses, and to substitute
the following clause: —
Nurses.
2. Members on the General Register of either Association shall be
admitted as members of the other and be entitled to all the privileges
of membership, upon personal or written application, payment of the


prescribed lee, aud submitting their Certificate of Registration; subject
to the following conditions: —
(а) Prior to registration by the Royal Victorian Trained
Nurses Association nurses trained in private hospitals
recognised by the Australasian Trained Nurses Associa-
tion shall produce satisfactory evidence that during the
whole of their training they have fulfilled the following
requirements:—
(1) The number of daily occupied beds has not been
less than 30.
(2) Not less than one-third of the cases have been
medical.
(3) The courses of instruction by matron, medical and
surgical lecturers have been approved by the
A.T.N.A., and
(4) Not more than one-third of the nursing staff have
been probationers.
(б) Prior to registration by the Australasian Trained Nurses
Association, nurses who have subsequently to June,
1906, commenced training in Victorian recognised
General Hospitals with a daily average of between 10
and 40 occupied beds, shall produce satisfactory evidence
that they have conformed in their training to the
extended curriculum required from nurses training in
Similar hospitals under the supervision of the Austral-
asian Trained Nurses Association, viz:—a four years’
curriculum in the ease of hospitals with a daily average
of between 20 and 40 occupied beds, and a five years’
curriculum in the case of hospitals with a daily average
of between 10 and 20 occupied beds; or that they have
otherwise compensated for the shorter curriculum in a
manner approved by the Council of the Australasian
Trained Nurses Assoeiaticn.
(c) So long as similar training outside Victoria is not recog-
nised by the Australasian Trained Nurses Association,
nurses trained in Victorian recognised General Hospitals
with less than a daily average of ten occupied beds shall
not be eligible for registration by the Australasian
Trained Nurses Association unless and until they have
fulfilled such extra requirements as may' hereafter be
approved by the Council of the Australasian Trained
Nurses Association (see page 15).
All members removed from either Association for any breach of
discipline or other cause shall cease to be members of the other
Association.
(Signed) On behalf of the Australasian Trained Nurses
Association,
THOMAS FI AS CHI,
President
(Signed) On behalf of the Royal Victorian Trained Nurses
Association
J. W. SPRINGTHORPE.
November 5, 1909. President


Training* Necessary for Members of the R.V*T.N.A. Trained
in Victorian Hospitals to Render them Eligible
for Registration by the A/T.N.A.
1. Nurses trained in hospitals of 40 or more daily occupied beds
are eligible on presentation of their certificate of membership of the
R.Y.T.N.A.
2. Nurses trained in hospitals with from 20 to 40 daily occupied
beds must, in addition to the three years in their training school, have had
continuous training of —
(a) One year in a recognised private hospital of at least 20
daily occupied beds; or
(b) Six months’ gynaecological and six months’ infectious
diseases training; or
(c) An extra year in their training school.
3. Nurses trained in hospitals of from 10 to 20 daily occupied beds
must, in addition to the three years in their training school, have had
continuous training of—
(a) Two years in a recognised private hospital of at least 10
daily occupied beds; or
(h) One year in a recognised private hospital and six months’
gynaecological and six months’ infectious diseases train-
ing; or
(c) An extra two years in their training school.
Gynaecological and infectious diseases training must be obtained in
hospitals recognised by the R.V.T.N.A. as special training schools.
October, 1914.


Recognition and Registration of Training Schools
for Nurses.
UNDER RULE 18.
Any General Hospital having a daily average of not less than ten
occupied beds shall be eligible for recognition and registra-
tion as a Training School for Nurses under the Australasian Trained
Nurses Association, provided it fulfils the following requirements to
the satisfaction of the Council of the Association: —
1. The Matron or Superintendent of Nurses of the Hospital shall
hold a certificate from a Training School for Nurses recog-
nised by the Council of this Association, and, if the Hospital
be situate in States in which the training of Nurses is con-
trolled by the Association, shall be a Member of the Austra-
lasian Trained Nurses Association.
2. The curriculum of study shall be of not less than three years’
duration.
3. The Nurses shall receive practical instruction in the Wards of
the Hospital from a trained and registered Matron or Sister.
4. There shall he systematic courses of Lectures by duly qualified
and registered medical men.
5. The curriculum of Instruction and Lectures • shall be at least
equal to that contained in the accompanying Schedule of Study.
C. The Hospital Authorities shall yearly report to the Council of.
the Association, on forms supplied for the purpose —
(«) The daily average number of occupied beds during the last
year.
(6) The names of the Teaching Staff.
(c) The subjects of Lecture, and the number of Lectures delivered
in each course.
( d ) The names of the Nurses attending Lectures; the dates of
entering upon their studies, and evidence as per Roll Book
that they have attended at least three-fourths of the Lectures
delivered in each subject.
7. All Nurses under Instruction shall be examined at the end of
each yeaily course of Lectures and Demonstrations in the sub-
jects taught; and at the close of the curriculum a final examina-
tion in General Nursing shall be held by the Lecturers or other
Examiners specially appointed by the Committee of the Hospi-
tal ; and those Nurses who pass shall receive a certificate which
shall give the particulars set forth in the appended form.


8. The attention of Training Schools is drawn to the following
definition of the duties of a Matron, drawn up at the suggestion
of the Board of Health, and approved by the Council:—
“The MATRON shall have sole charge of the Nursing,
Housekeeping and Domestic Staffs, and shall be responsible to
the Hospital Board of Directors or Committee, through the
Medical Superintendent, for the due and efficient performance
of their duties. Where there is no Medical Superintendent
the Matron shall he responsible for the general superintendence
of the whole Institution. The Matron shall select the candi-
dates for admission to the Hospital Staff as pupil nurses, and
shall submit their names to the Board, or Committee, for
approval. She shall see that the pupil nurses regularly attend
the lectures arranged by the Medical Staff, and shall herself
instruct them in the theory and practice of nursing.”
The Council of the Association reserves to itself the right of
pointing out any matter in which the foregoing requirements seem to
it to be insufficiently met, and of withholding, suspending or with-
drawing recognition and registration in any ease which remains unsatis-
factory.
Information to be Supplied by Hospitals Desiring- Recognition
as Training- Schools by the A.T.N.A.
1. Daily average of beds occupied for each of the last two years.
2. Name and qualifications of Matron.
3. Names of the Medical Staff.
4. Statement that the consent of the Medical Staff to deliver
Lectures in accordance with the schedule has been obtained.
5. Have any systematic courses of Lectures been delivered? If
so, in what subjects, and for how many years?
6. Number of Probationers and Trained Nurses in Hospital at
present time.
7. Number of operations performed in the Hospital during the
past year.
8. Roughly, the proportion of medical and surgical cases.
9. Statement that the rules and regulations regarding Training
Schools and training and examination of Nurses have been received
and read, and that the Board is prepared to accept them as the basis
of the agreemenat between the Hospital and the Association.
Regulations Dealing with Examination for Membership of
the A.T.N.A.
1. No Nurse trained at a Training School for General Nurses,
under the control of the A.T.N.A., shall be admitted to membership
of the A.T.N.A. until she has pagsed the final examination of the
Association, except in the case of candidates presenting certificates
from those other States or countries with which the Australasian
Trained Nurses Association has a reciprocal agreement.


2. The final examination shall be held bi-annually, shall take place
simultaneously in appointed centres in each State, and shall be con-
ducted by Boards of Examiners appointed by the Council from time to
time.
3. The examination shall be both written and practical.
4. For admission to the General Register, candidates will be examined
in General Nursing, Medical Nursing, Surgical Nursing, Hygiene, and
Invalid Cookery (except where proof is produced of having already
passed a satisfactory examination in this subject).
5. No Nurse shall be eligible for the final examination until she
has completed the required course of training. But in the event of the
end of her period of training falling between two examinations, she
may present herself at the earlier one, but must complete her term of
training before receiving her certificate.
6. Candidates must produce certificates (a) of attendance at
lectures as provided in the schedule of study; (6) of having passed a
satisfactory examination in Anatomy and Physiology at a recognised
Training School; (c) of good conduct, signed by the Matron and a
Member of the Medical Staff of the Hospital at which she trained.
7. Candidates who can produce certificates of having attended a
course of instruction and passed a satisfactory examination in Invalid
Cookery conducted by a qualified teacher approved by the Council will
not be required to pass a final examination in this subject.
8. Candidates who have passed the final examination and have
otherwise complied with the conditions laid down in the Rules of the
Association shall receive a certificate to that effect, signed by the
President of the Association and the President and Secretary of the
Branch and a representative of the Examining Board.
9. A Board of Examiners shall be appointed annually for each
Branch by the Council of the Branch. All examination papers shall
be set and examined conjointly by the examining Boards. The
practical examinations shall be held at centres to be decided on from
time to time by the Branch Councils. When a Branch Council is
located in any such centre, the practical examination shall be conducted
by the local Board of Examiners. In all other centres the practical
examination shall be conducted by a Matron and Medical Member
appointed by the corresponding Branch Council from the Matrons and
medical teaching staff of the Training Schools sending candidates to
such centre, assisted by a third Member, who shall be a representative
of the Council.
10. Examinations shall take place in June and December of each
year. The first such examination shall be held in June, 1906.
11. An entrance fee of one guinea shall be charged for examina-
tion; such fee, in the event of candidate passing, to entitle her to full
membership of the Association free for the first year. In the event of a
candidate failing to satisfy the examiners, she may present herself at
three successive examinations without extra fee.


12. Candidates must notify the Secretary of their intention to
present themselves for examination not later than the first day of the
preceding May in the case of the June examinations, and the first day
of November in the case of the December examinations. The necessary
certiflcates must be enclosed, with an intimation of the centre at which
the candidate proposes to present herself.
13. The Examining Boards shall have power to appoint from time
to time such centres for examination as they may deem desirable.
14. Candidates will be required to produce a certificate of having
passed a satisfactory examination in Invalid Cookery, conducted by a,
teacher approved by the Council. Such examination may be passed
at any recognised school of instruction in cookery with a properly
qualified teacher. Candidates must, before admission to the final
examination, produce a certificate of their Training School of having
passed a satisfactory examination in Anatomy and Physiology.
• 15. The subjects in which Nurses will be examined at the final
examinations are —(1) General Nursing; (2) Medical Nursing; (3)
Surgical Nursing; (4) Hygiene.*
16. The examination will be theoretical and practical.
17. It is probable that three papers only will he set, nominally
in the three first-named subjects—General Nursing, Medical Nursing,
and Surgical Nursing; but one or more questions in Hygiene will be
liable to be asked in any one of the three.
18. The papers will be set and examined by the Examining Boards,
being sent sealed to the various centres, where at the appointed time
the seals will be broken in the presence of the candidates and the papers
given out. After the examination the papers will be forwarded to the
Examining Boards.
19. The practical examination will be conducted at each centre by
a local Board of Examiners, appointed as explained in the regulations.
As the object of this part of the examination is that the Examiner shall
be satisfied that the candidates possess a sound knowledge of practical
nursing, special attention will be given to such points as the following,
in each of which a practical demonstration may be asked for: —Bed-
making; the moving of helpless patients; the sponging of patients;
the administration of baths of various kinds, local and general, including
hot air baths; packs; enemata, purgative and nutrient; hypodermic
injections; the cleansing of the various cavities of the body, including
the nose and ears.; bathing the eyes; catheterisation of the bladder; the
application of poultices, foments, blisters, mustard plasters, and leeches;
the preparation of the patient and the apparatus required for various
minor surgical procedures, such as cupping, drainage of the pleural
and peritoneal cavities, lumbar puncture, drainage of subcutaneous
tissues, aspiration, catheterisation, sounding and washing of the bladder,
dilatation of the urethra, administration of subcutaneous saline injec-
* It has been decided that the subject “ Housekeeping’,” referred to in the schedule published
in the Nurses’ Registerfor 1905, shall not be included among the subjects for the final examination.
The Council would, however, recommend that all Training Schools should give instruction in
Housekeeping to at least the extent recommended in the schedule, and when a satisfactory exami-
nation has been passed,’ should endorse this on the Hospital certificate.


tions, lavage of the stomach, &c. They will also be required to make
the necessary preparations and personally carry out the dressing of one
or more surgical eases in the presence of the examiners, and to display
a practical knowledge of bandaging, and of the splints, instruments,
and surgical appliances in common use. Questions will be asked the
candidates with a view to showing that they understand the reasons for
the various procedures they carry out, the incidental risks where there
are any, and the part the Nurse should play in dealing with each.
Method op Allotment op Numbers.
20. One Member of the Examining Board in each State shall allot
to each candidate a distinguishing number for purposes of examination,
and shall place a card containing this number in a sealed envelope with
the candidate’s name on the outside. The sealed envelopes shall be
sent to the various centres and distributed among the candidates
immediately before the distribution of the examination papers.
Method op Setting Papers.
21. Three Members of the Examining Board in each of
the five States (New South Wales, Queensland, South Aus-
tralia, Western Australia, and Tasmania) shall be appointed to
set papers, one in General Nursing, one in Surgical Nursing,
and the third in Medical Nursing. These papers, consisting
each of five questions, shall then be forwarded under seal
to one Member of the Examining Board in Sydney, chosen for each
examination by the Members of the Board, and not one of the three
above-mentioned who have already set papers. It shall be the duty
of this examiner to select five from the twenty-five questions before him
in each subject, and this final paper shall be known to him alone. He
shall himself forward it to the printer, correct the proofs, and have
the final copies returned to himself, and shall keep them under seal.
He shall forward under seal to a representative in each local centre the
number of papers required.
At the time fixed by the Central Council the seals shall be broken
in the presence of the candidates and the papers distributed. At the
close of the examination in each subject, the papers shall be collected
by the supervising examiner and forwarded under seal to the Secretary
of the State Examining Board. The examiners appointed in each
subject shall then examine and mark the papers submitted to them and
then return them to the Secretary.
At a meeting of the whole Examining Board in each State the
marks obtained at the theoretical, as well as at the practical examination,
shall be discussed, and a list of those who have passed the examination
shall be drawn up and forwarded to the Secretary of the Association in
Sydney.
Method of Conducting the Practical Examination.
22. The practical examination shall commence on the afternoon of
the day on which the third paper is completed, and shall be conducted in
accordance with No. 9 of the regulations dealing with examinations for


membership of the A.T.N.A. On completion of the examination the
examiners shall forward to the State Examining Board the marks
obtained by each candidate. For convenience of comparison it is
suggested that the maximum possible number of marks shall be taken as
a hundred for the practical examination in medical and surgical work.
In conducting this examination it is also suggested that the exami-
ners should write on separate slips of paper, equal to the number of
candidates, a number of practical (a) surgical and (6) medical pro-
cedures, e.g., dressing a wound, preparing to aspirate a chest, sponge a
typhoid, &c., &e. (See page 19.) These slips should be distributed by
lot to the candidates, who could conveniently work to the number of
not more than six at a time, under the supervision of the examiners.
On the completion of the allotted tests, each Nurse shall be subjected
to a viva voce examination on practical nursing, lasting not more than
15 minutes.
Instructions to Candidates.
23. The sealed envelope containing the examination papers will be
opened in your presence in the examination room, and a paper then
given you.
1. You are allowed three hours in which to answer the paper.
2. Write on one side of your sheet only, avoiding the ruled margin.
Begin each question on a new sheet.
3. Place each sheet as it is finished under the others.
4. When done, place your answers in the order of the questions.
5. Stop writing immediately the time is up.
6. Place your number in the right-hand top corner of each page,
number the questions in the margin, and the sheets at the foot. Pin
the sheets together with the fastener provided, and fold them length-
wise once.
7. Write your number only in words and figures, together with
the subject of the examination, on the outside. Your name must not
appear.
8. Any candidate copying or assisting another shall be disqualified
24. Instructions to the Officer in Charge.
1. Have the proper number of seats, desks, and materials ready
beforehand, and place a copy of Instructions to Candidates on each
desk.
2. Place candidates (who have already received their numbers) so
that unnoticed overlooking and copying are practically impossible.
3. Open the sealed envelope containing the papers for the exami-
nation in the presence of the candidates and give each a copy.
4. Remain in the room the whole time, and keep close watch against
copying or other assistance.


5. Allow no one out for half an hour, and allow no candidate in
after that time. Any candidate who subsequently leaves the room
temporarily must be kept under supervision.
6. If any candidate copy from, or in any way assist another, notify
your discovery immediately to the offenders, and make a memo, of the
exact facts of the case for transmission to the Board of Examiners.
7. Ten minutes before the expiration of time, give warning to all
that only ten minutes remain. See that at the expiration of time all
cease writing.
8. Collect the examination papers, see that each has the number
and subject legibly written on the outside, place the whole in an enve-
lope, initial the same, and forward to the Hon. Secretary of the Board
of Examiners, B.M.A. Buildings, Elizabeth Street, Sydney, or, in the
ease of Queensland, South Australia, Western Australia, and Tasmania,
to the local examination authorities.
25. Form of Application for Examination.
I, of Hospital, desire to present myself for
examination for membership of the Australasian Trained Nurses Association
to be held on . I propose presenting myself at centre, and
enclose herewith fee of one guinea and the requisite certificates on the
annexed form.
(Signed)
Date.
Hospital Certificate.
This is to certify that , a Pupil Nurse in the
Hospital, has attended the prescribed course of lectures in anatomy and
physiology, general nursing, medical nursing, surgical nursing, hygiene, and
cookery, and has passed a satisfactory examination in anatomy and physi-
ology* . She will have completed years of training
on ; her conduct and work have been satisfactory.
(Signed)
Matron.
Member of Medical Staff.
Signature of candidate.
[These forms may be obtained from the Secretaries in Sydney, Brisbane,
Adelaide, Perth, and Hobart, to whom they must be returned on or before
May Ist (for June examination) and November Ist (December exami-
nation) ,]
26. Certificate of Membership of the Australasian Trained
Nurses Association.
This is to certify that , who completed her prescribed course of
training at Hospital, has, after examination, been admitted to
membership of the Australasian Trained Nurses Association.
(Signed)
President.
President of Branch.
Examiner.
Signature of Nurse.
Date.
♦Where a certificate in invalid cookery, in accordance with Rule 7 of the Regulations dealing
with examination of candidates, has been obtained, the words “ and invalid cookery ” should be
inserted here, and a copy of the certificate forwarded.


27. Regulations dealing with Applicants for Admission to
Training Schools recognised by the A.T.N.A.
3. Applicants for admission as probationers into any hospital
recognised as a training school by the A.T.N.A. should apply in the first
instance to the Matron of such hospital (such application being in the
handwriting of the candidate in each case), and should produce: (a)
three approved personal references; (6) a certificate of sound bodily
health from a legally qualified medical practitioner.
2. On and after June Ist, 1906, the Matron shall forward all
approved applications to the Educational Committee of the Association
for each State, consisting of three members (not necessarily of the
Association), elected annually by the Local Council of the Association,
who shall decide as to the educational fitness of each applicant. The
Matron shall send with each application a letter stating whether a
personal interview with the applicant has taken place, and, if it has, her
impression of the applicant’s personal and physical fitness.
3. Upon satisfactory proof that the applicant so referred holds any
of the following education certificates, viz.:—
(1) A certificate of having passed the primary or higher exami-
nation in the University of the State in which the candidate
proposes, training;
(2) A certificate of having satisfactorily completed the fifth
standard of a primary school;
(3) Any education certificate recognised as equivalent to the
above,
the applicant is entitled to be admitted as a probationer in a registered
training school without further educational test.
4. Where the applicant is not in the possession of any of the fore-
going certificates, the Education Committee shall require her to pass,
before commencing her training, an examination in general education.
Such examination shall include English composition and precis writing,
and arithmetic (including the first four rules, simple and compound,
easy questions in vulgar fractions, non-recurring decimals and simple
proportion).
5. All Nurses must satisfy the Educational Committee within
the first year of training. After the completion of the first year,
no period of training will be counted until this rule is complied
with.
6. Pursuant to these qualifications, applicants shall,- as vacancies
occur, enter upon a three months’ probation, at the end of which they
shall obtain —
(a) A satisfactory certificate from the Medical Superintendent
or Medical Officer as to their general health; and
( h ) A satisfactory certificate from the Matron as to their general
fitness to continue their training, as a necessary antecedent
to the continuance of their training.


7. The Matron of each training school recognised by the A.T.N.A.
shall annually forward to the Secretary of the Association the names
of all probationers in training, stating in each case —
(1) The date at which the probation commenced;
(2) Particulars of any period, if any, during which, apart from
ordinary leave or holidays, any probationer shall unavoid-
ably (from illness or other sufficient cause) have been absent
from her duties;,
(3) The number of lectures in each prescribed course of study
attended during the year;
a record of which shall be entered in a book kept at the office of the
Association for the purpose.


Schedule of Study Recommended by the A.T.N.A.
LECTURES ON GENERAL NURSING AND PRACTICAL INSTRUC-
TION TO BE GIVEN BY MATRON.
MEDICAL AND SURGICAL LECTURES BY RESIDENT AND
HONORARY STAFF.
SUGGESTED ATTENDANCE.
First Tear.
12 Anatomy and Physiology. 12 General Nursing.
Second Tear.
12 Medical Nursing 12 Surgical Nuraing.
Third Tear.
6 Invalid Cookery, practical. Urine Testing. 6 Hygiene.
This is to be accepted as a Minimum Course, but all teachers are urged
to make such course as complete as they can, and, wherever possible to give
a course of instruction in housekeeping to at least the extent laid down below,
* GENERAL NURSING—I 2 LECTURES.
Qualifications of a Nurse.
•Distinction between the Doctor’s work and that of the Nurse. Hospital
etiquette.
The Nurse’s general work —
(а) Bedmaking, management of helpless patients.
(б) Hygiene of the sick room. Ventilation, lighting, temperature, &e.
(o) Baths (different kinds), sponging.
( d ) Cleansing and padding splints.
(e) Prevention of Infection.
Use of clinical thermometer.
The pulse, its variations and method of record.
Respiration, its method of record.
External applications. Preparation of fomentations and poultices, local
application of heat and cold, cold and hot packs, hot-air bath, counter irrita-
tion, leeches, blisters.
Various methods of administering drugs, enemata, subcutaneous injec-
tions (hypodermic), saline, &c.
Lotions in common use, preparation of in varying strengths.
Hypnotics, doses and actions of more commonly used, and methods of
administration.
Poison, dosage and effects. Symptoms of poisoning by morphia, strych-
nine, arsenic, belladonna, alcohol, chloroform, mercury, iodoform, carbolic
acid, &c.
What to use in case of poisoning.
Drug rashes.
Methods.of observing symptoms, and manner of reporting same to doctor.
Dressings and their preparation.
Operation case —Preparation of patient and room.
Instruments —Their care and use.
Disinfectants and antiseptics.
Administration of foods.
* Subject for final examination.


* MEDICAL NURSING—I 2 LECTURES.
General symptoms in disease —Value of close observation.
Temperature, rigors, pain, dyspnoea, expectoration.
Haemoptysis, state of pulse, collapse, cyanosis, sweating, vomiting.
Haematemesis, diarrhoea, malaena, abdominal distension.
Delirium, oedema, tenderness.
Specific fevers, characteristics—lncubation, infection, contagion, disin-
fection.
Emergencies—Poisoning, Drowning, Painting. Pits —epileptic, apoplec-
tic, hysterical. Coma. Paralytic cases—special care of. Prevention of
bedsores.
Urine testing.
Nursing of special cases—Bright’s Disease —Urine, pyuria, haematuria.
Cardiac, pulmonary—Pneumonia, phthisis, bronchitis, &c. Nervous cases—
Cerebral haemorrhage, neuritis, epilepsy, mania, sciatica, meningitis, &c.
Rheumatic fever. Chorea. Alcoholism. Dropsy. Gastric ulcer. Skin
disease. Nursing and feeding of sick children, &c.
* HYGIENE—6 LECTURES.
Air—Composition, impurities. Ventilation, amount required, natural
and artificial ventilation.
Food —Classification of foods —dietaries.
Elements of sanitary engineering—Traps on drains, ventilation of
drains, flushing. Sanitary fittings. Dampness of dwellings.
Infectious diseases—lncubation period. Quarantine.
Disinfection —Deodorants, antiseptics, disinfectants. Disinfection of
person, clothes, rooms, and contents. Treatment of discharges.
Personal hygiene. Clothing, exercise, bathing.
The law relating to the notification of infectious diseases.
* SURGICAL NURSING—I 2 LECTURES, WITH DEMONSTRATIONS.
Inflammation, suppuration, ulceration, gangrene, and septicaemia.
Healing and dressing of wounds, burns, and scalds.
Haemorrhage and its arrest.
Bedsores —prevention and treatment.
Fractures and splints.
Bandaging.
Operation cases—preparation of patient in general' and for special
operations.
Disinfection and antiseptics.
Nursing of special oases—Tracheotomy. Jaw operations. Amputations,
resections. Empysema. Tapping abdomen or chest. Operations on nose,
head, tongue, throat, neck, eye, pelvic organs. Hare lip. Cleft palate.
Caries of spine. Tubercular joints, &c. Management of abdominal opera-
tions. Catheterisation. Preparation of salines.
INVALID COOKERY—6 PRACTICAL LESSONS.
Instruction should be given in the preparation of invalid drinks, the
cooking of beef tea, broths, poultry, fish, meats, eggs, light puddings, jellies,
vegetables, and fruits.
Invalid drinks —Barley water, toast water, lemonaae, apple water, gruel,
white wine, whey, &c.
Beef juice.
Beef tea —Various methods.
Broths —Chicken, mutton, &c.
Fish —Filleting. Various methods of cooking.
Poultry —Method of baking and boiling.
Chops and steak —Various methods of cooking.
Brains and sweetbreads —Various methods of cooking.
Custards and light puddings —Baked and boiled custard, baked rice, ric«
custard, tapioca pudding, &c.
Jellies—Wine and lemon.
*Subjects for final examinations.


} ANATOMY AND PHYSIOLOGY—I 2 LECTURES TO BE GIVEN.
The structural composition of the human body —bone, ligament, muscles,
arteries, veins, nerves, glands, lymphatics, organs of assimilation, of secretion
and excretion.
The skeleton, names and functions of various bones—joints, nature of,
chief varieties, functions, ball and socket, hinge, &e.
Muscles, anatomical description of, action of, names of most important,
physiology of muscle.
Arteries and veins—structure and functions, names of, position of chief
arteries and veins.
Nervous system —brief sketch of: —Brain —structure and functions;
spinal cord, structure and functions; motor nerves, structure and functions.
The heart, structure and functions, its position.
The circulation.
The blood, its constitution and use.
The lungs, structure, position, functions. Respiration.
The larynx—speech.
Animal heat.
Digestion and absorption.
Mastication—the teeth.
Saliva, and salivary glands.
The stomach, its position, structure, and functions.
The small intestine, position, structure, and functions.
The colon, position, structure, and functions.
Defoeeation.
The liver, position, structure, and functions.
The pancreas, position, structure, and functions.
The kidneys, position, structure, and functions.
Secretion of urine. The ureters.
The bladder, its position and functions. Excretion.
The urine, its composition and quantity.
The spleen, its position and functions.
The thyroid, supra-renals.
The skin, its structure and functions. The sweat.
The organs of special sense. The eye, nose, ear, taste.
§ HOUSEKEEPING.
Instructions should be given in keeping house for patients, nursing staff,
men employed, &c.; in the superintendence of the work of the servants; in
the price and relative values of all food stuff, household requisites, linen,
&c.; in keeping accounts of moneys received in connection with housekeeping.
Where possible, pupils should, for a time, personally carry out the repairs
of linen, receive stores as they are bought or issued and give them out day by
day as required, and be responsible for their preservation in good order.
Instructions should also be given in the drawing up of official reports
for the Committee relating to any of the above matters.
} Not included in subjects for final examination, but certificate from training school
must be produced.
§ Not included in subjects for final examination.


FORM OF CERTIFICATE.
this is to certify that has regularly
attended the prescribed course of Lectures at this Hospital, and completed
her years of training. She has passed her examinations and
her practical work has been
Signed
Medical Supt. or Signed
Hon. Sec.
Signed
Examiners.
Matron.
Date
Signature of Nurse.
FORM OF CERTIFICATE.
For Nurses trained in more than one Hospital.
this is to certify that was a Probationer
in the Hospital from to , and
attended the Lectures delivered dining that time. Her conduct and work
were satisfactory.
I President Hospital.
Signed -[ Medical Officer.
[ Matron-
Date
Chat by permission of the Council of the A.T.N.A.,
completed her training and attended lectures at the
Hospital from to
Her conduct and work were satisfactory.
f President Hospital.
Signed -J Medical Officer.
[ Matron.
Date


Text Books Suggested.
PHYSIOLOGY; Furneaux ’ Human Physiology
or
Barclay’s Anatomy and Physiology.
GENERAL NURSING: Maxwell & Pope’s Practical Nursing
or
Stewart & Cuff’s Practical Nursing
or
Luckes’ General Nursing.
MEDICAL NURSING: Cuff’s Lectures on Medicine to Nurs6s.
SURGICAL NURSING: Surgical Nursing, by Russell Howard.
Operative Nursing and Technique, by Childe.
Surgical Instruments and Appliances used in
Operations, by Harold Burrows.
GYNAECOLOGICAL NURSING: Practical Gymecology for Nurses, by
Stewart & Young,
EYE, EAR AND THROAT NURSING, by Davis & Douglas.
HYGIENE: Mclsaac’s Hygiene for Nurses.


Registration of Nurses’ Homes.
Rules.
1. The names and addresses of recognised Homes shall be published
in the Register.
2. Such Homes shall receive only Nurses who are on the Register
of General Nurses, or on the Register of Midwifery Nurses, or the
Register of Mental Nurses of the Association,
3. Such Homes shall submit a fixed scale of fees to be approved by
the Association.
4. Such Homes shall be at all times open to inspection by the
Officers of the Association, or by any person appointed for the purpose
by the Council of the Association.
5. When such Homes include on their list Nurses who live else-
where, the Matron of the Home shall be held responsible for these outside
Nurses exactly in the same way that she is responsible for her resident
staff.
6. In N.S.W. such Homes shall not receive patients in the Home
or undertake the work of a private hospital.
7. The fee for registration shall be Ten Shillings and Sixpence a
year.
8. The Matron of a registered Home shall send to the Honorary
Secretary every half-year a list of Nurses employed.
scale of Fees for General Nurses in New South
wales.
As decided by a Referendum of Nurses on the 18th February, ,1920.
For 24 hours . . .. .. ..£llO
For 48 hours .. . . . . . . 2 2 0
For 72 hours . . . . .. .. 3 3 0
Over 72 hours . . . . . . .. 4 4 0
Maximum Fee for One Week (exclus-
ive of Travelling Expenses) . . 4 4 0


Scale of Fees for General Nurses in Queensland.
Adopted at a Special Meeting’ of the Council of the Queensland
Branch of the Australasian Trained Nurses Association, on Friday,
28th February, 1914.
£ s. d.
General, Infectious, and Mental Cases per Aveek .. 3 3 0
Fee for Major Operation—if only one Nurse engaged 110
Fee for Major Operation—if two Nurses are engaged 10 6
Fee for Minor Operation . . . . . . . . 10 6
Fee for one day or one night (tAvelve hours) . . . . 10 6
Fee for tAA’enty-four hours . . . . . . ..110
Fee for less than seven days must not exceed . . ..330
TraA 7 elling expenses by train or steamer or any unusual travelling
expenses to be paid by patient.
A Nurse to have eight hours’ rest, and two hours at least daily for
exercise, Avhen patient can be conveniently left.
Nurses are responsible for their own laundry expenses, except in
the nursing of infectious cases. Laundry, for infectious cases only,
Avhen not done in house, ss. per Aveek allowed.
Nurses may reduce their fees when desirable.
Subscription.
The annual subscription to the Association is 10s. 6d. This
includes a copy of the Annual Register and of the Monthly Journal of
the Association. The fee for life membership is £6 65., inclusive of
subscriptions already paid; but after the twelfth year of membership
the Journal is not sent free, but may be obtained on payment of the
sum of 3s. per annum. The annual subscription for members of
the R.Y.T.N.A., who submit proof of being financial, is ss. 3d. The
life membership fee for medical members is £2 2s.
Badge.
The Badge of the Association may be obtained from the Secretary,
A.T.N.A., B.M.A. Buildings, Sydney, price 10s. Members Avriting
for Badges to be posted to them should add 6d. for postage.


The Australasian Trained Nurses Association.
OBSTETRIC NURSES.
In view of the great importance to the general public, that Obstetric
Nurses called on to minister to the necessities of Lying-in Patients
should be so trained as to carry out their duties in a satisfactory manner,
the Council of this Association has drawn up a Schedule showing the
subjects on which instruction is necessary for the training of Obstetric
Nurses, and this Schedule is hereto attached.
It is proposed that the instruction should be given by lectures and
demonstrations, extending over at least six months, in such order as may
seem best to the Medical Officers and Matron, in whose hands the teach-
ing will rest; and it is essential that at the end of the Curriculum a
formal certificate be granted to those found competent; such certificates
should bear on their face the period of study and the fact that the
examination had been duly passed.
The Council is aware that in some Hospitals the Curriculum of
study is more extensive and complete than that herein set forth, and
regards the Schedule herewith as a minimum, which should be adopted
and carried out in Hospitals which are recognised by this Association
under the rules for the Registration of Obstetric Nurses.
Rules.
1. Candidates for registration must produce proof—
(a) (a) That they have received a twelve months’ course
of practical and systematic training at one of the
Maternity Hospitals in Australia, recognised by the
Council, and have passed the final examination of
the Association for Obstetric Nurses; or (■&) that,
being registered as general Nurses, they have subsequently
received a six months’ course of practical and systematic
training at one of the Maternity Hospitals in Australia,
and have passed the examination of the Association for
Obstetric Nurses,
(&) That they possess certificates of training and efficiency from
a European or American Maternity Hospital, in which, in
the opinion of the Council, the course of training is equiva-
lent to the standard required of Obstetric Nurses trained
in Australasia, 'and that they have passed the final examina-
tion of the Association for Obstetric Nurses, or have pre-
sented certificates from other States or countries with which
the A.T.N.A. has a reciprocal agreement.
[All oversea Nurses who hold a general certificate entitling them
to registration by this Association must have completed a
six months’ training in an Obstetric Hospital recognised by
this Association, and have passed the examination of the
Association for Obstetric Nurses, before being entitled to
membership of the Obstetric Section.


(c) (Obsolete) In the case of any Nurse who has been
trained previous to December, 1904, in a Midwifery
Hospital now 7 recognised as a Training School by
the Australasian Trained Nurses Association, but
which at the time -of training was not so recog-
nised, such Nurse may be registered under a special
rule to be called “Rule I. (c) ” provided that the Nurse can
produce evidence satisfactory to the Council of such training,
together with certificates of competency from three regis-
tered Medical Practitioners, and provided further that the
Council shall adjudge the claims of such Nurse to registra-
tion as adequate. Such decision must be ratified at the next
Council Meeting, and Members so admitted are to be entered
in the Register as “Admitted under Ride I. (c).”
(d) (Obsolete) In the case of Nurses in South Australia on
the General Register who can produce proof of having
attended, under medical supervision, twenty cases of
labour, and who shall have passed an examination to be
conducted by Examiners approved by the Branch Coun-
cil, such Nurses shall be eligible for the Obstetric Register
up to the 30th June, 1906. Nurses so registered shall be
entered on the Register as ‘‘Admitted under Rule I. {d). ,,
(Obsolete) In the ease of Nurses in Western Australia on the
General Register who can produce proof of having
attended, under medical supervision, twenty cases of
labour, and who shall have passed an examination to
be conducted by Examiners approved by the Branch
Council, such Nurses shall be eligible for the Obstetric
Register up to 30th June, 1912. Nurses so registered
shall be entered on the Register as “Admitted under
Rule I. ( d).”
(Obsolete) In the case of Nurses in Tasmania on the General
Register who can produce proof of having attended, under
medical supervision, twenty eases of labour, and who shall
have passed an examination to be conducted by Examiners
approved by the Branch Council, such Nurses shall be
eligible for the Obstetric Register up to 31st December,
1909. Nurses so registered shall be entered on the Register
as “Admitted under Rule I. {d). , '‘
Furthermore, all candidates must give references as to their
moral character, and produce Certificates of Competency
from the Hospitals in which they have been engaged, and
account for any interval of time in their nursing career when
not engaged in Hospital work.
2. In matters referring to the section of Obstetric Nurses, the
decision of the Council shall be final, without reference to the general
body of the Association.
3. The admission and subscription fees for Obstetric Members shall
be the same as for General Members.


4. Obstetric Members shall participate on equal terms in any benefit
fund.
5. Members on the Register of Obstetric Nurses shall have the
right of attending the Annual Meeting of the Australasian Trained
Nurses Association, and may elect thereat not more than three Members
to represent them on the General Council of the Association. They
shall also have the right of attending all lectures delivered to Members
of the Australasian Trained Nurses Association.
6. Their right to vote at the Annual Meeting or any adjourned
meeting thereof shall be confined to the election of their representatives
as aforesaid, and they shall not, in virtue of their Membership, be en-
titled to any of the other privileges of a Member of the Australasian
Trained Nurses Association, except such as may be determined from
time to time by the Council of the Association.
7. No Obstetric Nurse shall undertake the care of a Medical or
Surgical case unless registered as a Genei’al Nurse. A Nurse who has
been proved to the satisfaction of the Council to have violated this rule
shall be liable to have her name removed from the Register.
{The Council may exercise its discretionary power to relax this rule
tn the case of Obstetric Nurses in country districts where no General
Nurse is at the time available.)
8. In the case of Nurses trained and certified by the large Metro-
politan General Hospitals who have attended a systematic course of
lectures in Midwifery, have attended a recognised Lying-in Hospital for
three months, and have personally conducted not less than twenty
labours, such Nurses, on passing a satisfactory examination, shall receive
a certificate to that effect, and shall be eligible for registration in a
Special Register, to be called the Register for Trained Nurses who also
possess a certificate in Obstetric Nursing. Such certificate shall be
issued by the General Hospital to which the Nurse belongs, and shall
be countersigned by the Obstetric Examiners. (Obsolete after Decem-
ber 31st, 1906.)
RECIPROCAL AGREEMENT BETWEEN THE AUSTRALASIAN
TRAINED NURSES ASSOCIATION AND THE ROYAL
VICTORIAN TRAINED NURSES ASSOCIATION.
Obstetric Section.
By authority of and on behalf of the Australasian Trained Nurses
Association and the Royal Victorian Trained Nurses Association, we
hereby agree to the following: —
1. Members on the Obstetric Register of either Association shall be
admitted as members of the other, and be entitled to all the privileges
of such membership, upon personal or written application, payment of
prescribed fee, and submitting their certificate of registration.
Provided that any obstetric nurses with overseas certificates
which the Council of the A.T.N.A. does not see fit to recog-
nise directly, shall not, after having been admitted to the
R.Y.T.N.A., be registered under the reciprocal agreement.


2. The recognition and withdrawal of recognition of Obstetric
Hospitals in Victoria by the R.V.T.N.A. will be accepted by the
A.T.N.A., and the recognition and withdrawal of recognition of all
Obstetric Hospitals in the other States and Colonies by the A.T.N.A.
will be accepted by the R.V.T.N.A.
(Sgd.) E. GLOVER, President, R.V.T.N.A.
St. J. W. DANSEY, President, A.T.N.A.
October, 1914.
GOVERNMENT OF THE OBSTETRIC SECTION OF THE
ASSOCIATION.
Sydney Centre.
The Obstetric Section shall be governed (subject to the Council
of the A.T.N.A.) by a Committee of sixteen Members, who shall meet
at such times as may be required, of whom five shall form a quorum,
and who shall discuss matters of special concern for the Branch, and
make recommendations to the Council of the Association. The Com-
mittee shall be composed as follows: —
The three representatives of the Obstetric Nurses on the Council
of the Association.
The Hon. Secretary of the A.T.N.A. for the time being.
Four Members to represent the Midwifery Training Schools in New
South Wales, one nominated by each of the Schools.
Eight Members elected annually by the Nurses on the Obstetric
Register.
No resolution of the Obstetric Committee shall have force until
approved by the Council of the A.T.N.A.
The registration of Obstetric Nurses shall be effected only by the
General Council, but applications for registration may be submitted
first to the Obstetric Committee or a sub-committee of the same, who
may make recommendations to the Council.
OBSTETRIC COMMITTEES IN AFFILIATED STATES.
The Branches shall have power to form similar Committees if
desired. Meanwhile the government of the Obstetric Sections in these
States shall be entirely vested in the General Councils, which shall con-
tain one or more Members elected exclusively by the Nurses on the
Obstetric Register.
REGULATIONS FOR THE RECOGNITION OF TRAINING
SCHOOLS FOR OBSTETRIC NURSES.
Any Midwifery Hospital shall be eligible for recognition and regis-
tration as a Training School for Obstetric Nurses under the A.T.N.A.,
provided it fulfils the following requirements to the satisfaction of the
Council of the Association; —
1. The Matron or Superintendent of Nurses of the Hospital shall
hold a certificate in Midwifery from a Training School recognised by
the Council of this Association, and, if the Hospital be situate in States


in which the training of Nurses is controlled by the Association, shall
be a Member of the A.T.N.A.
2. The Hospital shall contain a daily average of not less than five
(5) occupied beds, and shall have not less than one hundred (100) cases,
indoor and outdoor, in the year.
. 3. The Curriculum of Study shall be of not less than one (1) year,
except in the ease of Nurses holding the certificate of the Association
for General Nursing, for whom the time of study shall be not less than
six (6) months.
4. On and after January Ist, 1907, the Matron of a Training School
shall refer all applications for training to the Educational Committee
of the Association, who shall decide as to the educational fitness of each
applicant.
5. The Nurses shall receive practical instruction in the wards of
the Hospitals from a trained and registered Matron or Superintendent
of Nurses.
6. There shall be systematic courses of lectures by duly qualified
and registered medical men.
7. The Curriculum of instruction and lectures shall be at least equal
to that contained in the accompanying Schedule of Study.
8. The Hospital authorities shall yearly report to the Council of
the Association on forms supplied for the purpose —
(а) The daily average of beds for the past year.
(б) The names of Teaching Staff.
(c) The subjects of lectures and number of lectures delivered in
each course.
( d ) The names of Nurses attending lectures; the date of entering
upon their studies and evidence as per Roll Book that they
have attended at least three-fourths of the lectures delivered
in each subject; and evidence of having personally conducted
not less than twenty cases of confinement.
9. All Nurses, before being admitted as Members of the Associa-
tion, shall be examined by the Examining Board appointed by the
Association, as is laid down in rules governing uniform examinations
(page 40).
The Council of the Association reserves to itself the right of point-
ing out any matter in which the foregoing requirements seem to it to be
insufficiently ihet, and of withholding, suspending, or withdrawing recog-
nition and registration in any case which remains unsatisfactory.


Schedule of Study.
Lectures by duly qualified Medical Practitioners.
Lectures on General Nursing to be given by the Matron or Superin-
tendent of Nursing.
20 Midwifery. 3 Outlines of General Anatomy and
6 Infant Feeding. Physiology
6 Invalid Cookery, Practical. 12 General Nursing.
MIDWIFERY—2O LECTURES.
1. Anatomy of the pelvis.
2. Female organs of generation.
3. Fertilisation —development. Symptoms of pregnancy.
4. Diseases and complications of pregnancy.
5. Management of pregnancy.
6. Abdominal pregnancy—malpositions of pregnant uterus —extra
uterine pregnancy, &c.
7. Abortions —symptoms —diagnosis—treatment.
8. Mechanism of labour —vertex presentations.
9. Mechanism of labour —face and breech presentations.
10. Phenomena of labour.
11. Mafiagement of normal labour.
12. Management of abnormal labour.
13. The normal puerperium and its management.
14. Complications of the puerperium.
15. Complicated labour —eclampsia—rupture of the uterus, &c.
16. Haemorrhages.
17. Management of the infant —bottle feeding.
18. Asepsis—antiseptics and their uses.
19. Abnormalities of child and pelvis.
20. Description of certain methods and appliances.
INFANT FEEDING—6 LECTURES.
1. Maternal nursing.
2. Maternal nursing.
3. Composition of human and cow’s milk.
4. Artificial feeding with cow’s milk mixture.
5. Proprietary infant foods and their deficiencies.
6. Care and feeding of premature infants.
INVALID COOKERY—6 PRACTICAL LESSONS.
Instruction should be given in the preparation of invalid drinks, the
cooking of beef tea, broths, poultry, fish, meats, eggs, light puddings, jellies,
vegetables, and fruits.
Invalid drinks —barley water, toast water, lemonade, apple water, white
wine. whey. &c.
Beef juice. Beef tea —Various methods. Broths —Chicken, mutton, &c.
Fish—Filleting. Various methods of cooking.
Poultry—Method of baking and boiling.
Chops and steak —Various methods of cooking.
Brains and sweetbreads—Various methods of cooking.
Custard's and light puddings—Baked and boiled custard, baked rice, rice
■custard and tapioca pudding, &c.
Eggs—Various methods of cooking.
Jellies —Wine and lemon.


GENEEAL NUESING—I2 LECTUEES.
Qualifications of a Midwifery Nurse.
Distinction between the Doctor ’s work and that of the Nurse.
Bedmaking. Management of helpless patients.
Hygiene of confinement room—Ventilation, lighting, temperature, &c.
Baths—Sponging, &c.
Prevention of infection.
Use of clinical thermometer.
The pulse—lts variations and method of record.
Eespiration—lts method of record.
■ External applications—Preparation of poultices, fomentations, cold and
hot packs, hot air baths.
Counter irritation. Leeches, blisters.
Various methods of administering drugs, onemata, subcutaneous injec-
tions (hypodermic, saline, &c.).
Lotions in common use —Strengths.
Eashes —Due to drugs, &c.
Methods of observing symptoms and manner of reporting to the Doctor.
Preparation for instrumental delivery. Washing out uterus and curet-
tage.
Instruments —Their care and use.
Administration of food 1 .
Bandaging —Breast and leg.
Urine testing.
Preparation of skin for section.
Catheter —Use of.
Asepsis (sterilisation of dressings, &c.).
TEXT BOOKS SUGGESTED.
Jellett’s “Short Practice of Midwifery for Nurses.”
Berkeley’s “Handbook for Midwives and Maternity Nurses.”
OBSTETRIC NURSES’ FEES, N.S.W. AND QUEENSLAND.
The weekly fee for Obstetric Nurses having- been raised by the
vote of the Obstetric Members to £3 35., the Council and the
Obstetric Committee have approved of the following scale: —
£ s. d.
Obstetric Cases .. .. .. ..3 3 0 a week
Waiting fee, from date of engagement,
for first week .. .. .. .. 111 6
Waiting fee, after first week . . ..330
When through any accident, such as miscarriage, etc., the Nurse’s
engagement terminates suddenly, the Nurse or Matron of the Nurses’
Home should be advised at once, so that time can be filled in if pos


sible, otherwise the patient is responsible for full fee from date of
engagement.
£ s. d.
Fee for attending confinement only . . ..110
Fee for one day or one night (12 hours only) .. 10 6
Fee for twenty-four hours only .. .. ..110
Fee for less than seven days must not exceed .. 3 3 0
A Nurse must not charge a waiting fee if she is receiving fees
for another case.
Travelling expenses by rail or steamer, or any unusual travelling
expenses, to be paid by patient.
A Nurse to have eight hours’ rest, and two hours at least daily
for exercise, when patient can be conveniently left.
Nurses are responsible for their own laundry expenses, except
in the nursing of infectious cases. Laundry for infectious cases
only, when not done in the house, ss. a week.
Nurses may reduce their fees when they think desirable.
The fee for Visiting Nurses is £2/12/6 for ten days, and Nurses
undertaking work of this kind are advised that they should pay a
morning and an evening visit for the first three days. (For N.S.W.
only).


REGULATIONS DEALING WITH EXAMINATION FOR
MEMBERSHIP OF THE A.T.N.A.
1. No Nurse trained at a Training- School for Obstetric Nurses
shall be admitted to membership of the A.T.N.A. until she has passed
the final examination of the Association, except in the case of those
candidates presenting certificates from other States or countries with
which the A.T.N.A. has a reciprocal agreement. '
2. The final examination shall be held bi-annually, shall take place
simultaneously in appointed centres in each State, and shall be conducted
by Boards of Examination appointed by the Council from time to time.
3. The examination shall be both written and practical.
4. For admission to the Obstetric Register candidates will be
examined in Midwifery, in General Nursing as applied to midwifery
(see Schedule of Study), Infant Feeding, and Invalid Cookery (except
where proof is produced of having already passed a satisfactory exami-
nation in this subject).
5. No Nurse shall be eligible to sit for the examination for member-
ship of the Association until she has completed the required course of
training. But in the event of the end of her period of training falling
between two examinations, she may present herself at the earlier one,
provided that she has completed at least nine months of her training,
but must complete her term of training before receiving her certificate.
6. Candidates must produce certificates (a) of attendance at
lectures as provided in the Schedule of Study; (6) of having passed a
satisfactory examination in Anatomy and Physiology, signed by the
lecturer in the subject at the school in which she has been trained; (c)
of good conduct, signed by the Matron and a member of the medical
staff of the Hospital at which she trained.
7. Candidates who can produce certificates of having attended a
course of instruction and passed a satisfactory examination in Invalid
Cookery, conducted by a qualified teacher approved by the Council, will
not be required to pass an examination in this subject.
8 Candidates who have passed the examination of the Association
and have otherwise complied with the conditions laid down in the rules
of the Association, shall receive a certificate to that effect, signed by
the President of the Association (and, in the case of a Branch, the
President of the Branch) and a representative of the Examining Board.
9. A Board of Examiners shall be appointed annually for each
Branch by the Council of the Branch. All examination papers shall
be set conjointly by the Examining Boards, and examined and marked
by the local Boards. The practical examinations shall be held at centres
to be decided on from time to time by the Councils. When a Council
is - located in any such centre, the practical examination shall be con-
ducted by the local Board of Examiners. In all other centres the
practical examination shall be conducted by a Matron and Medical
Member appointed by the local Council from the Matrons and medical
teaching staffs of the Training Schools sending candidates to such centre,
assisted by a third Member, who shall be a representative of the
Council.


10. Examinations shall take place in June and December of each
year.
11. An entrance fee of one guinea shall be charged for the final
examination; such fee, in the event of the candidate passing, to entitle
her to full membership of the Association free for the first year. In
the event of a candidate failing to satisfy the Examiners, she may
present herself at three successive examinations without extra fee.
12. Candidates must notify the Secretary of their intention to pre-
sent themselves for examination not later than the first day of the
preceding May in the case of the June examinations, and the first day
of November in the case of the December examinations. The necessary
certificate (forms for which may be obtained from the Secretaries of
the A.T.N.A, in Sydney, Brisbane, Adelaide, Perth, and Hobart) must
be enclosed.
Regulations Dealing with Applicants for Admission to Training
Schools Recognised by the A.T.N.A.
1. Applicants for admission as probationers into any Hospital
recognised as a training school by the A.T.N.A. should apply in the first
instance to the Matron of such Hospital (such application being in the
handwriting of the candidate in each case), and should produce:
(a) Three approved personal references.
(&) A certificate of sound bodily health from a legally qualified
medical practitioner.
2. On and after January Ist, 1907, the Matron shall forward all
approved applications to the educational committee of the Association
for each State, consisting of three members (not necessarily of the
Association), elected annually by the local council of the Association,
who shall decide as to the educational fitness of each applicant. The
Matron shall send with each application a letter stating whether a
personal interview with the applicant has taken place, and, if it has, her
impression of the applicant’s personal and physical fitness.
3. Upon satisfactory proof that the applicant holds any of the
following education certificates, viz.:—
(1) A certificate of having passed the primary or higher exami-
nations in any approved University.
(2) A certificate of having satisfactorily completed the fifth
standard of a primary school.
(3) Any educational test equivalent to the above,
the applicant is qualified to be admitted as a probationer in a registered
training school without further educational test.
4. Where the applicant is not in the possession of any of the fore-
going certificates, the education committee shall require her to pass,
before commencing her training, an examination in general education.
Such examination shall include English composition and precis writing,
and arithmetic (including the first four rules, simple and compound,
easy questions in vulgar fractions, non-recurring decimals, and simple
proportion).


5. Pursuant to these qualifications, applicants shall, as vacancies
occur, enter upon one month’s probation, at the end of which they
shall obtain —
(a) A satisfactory certificate from the Medical Superintendent
or Medical Officer as to their general health; and
(b) A satisfactory certificate from the Matron as to their general
fitness to continue their training, as a necessary antecedent
to the continuance of their training.
6. The Matron of each Training School recognised by the A.T.N.A.
shall annually forward to the Secretary of the Association the names of
all probationers in training, stating in each case —
(1) The date at which the probation commenced;
(2) Particulars of any period, if any, during which, apart from
ordinary leave or holidays, any probationer shall unavoidably
(from illness or other sufficient cause) have been absent from
her duties;
(3) The number of lectures in each prescribed course of study
attended during the year;
a record of which shall be entered in a book kept at the office of the
Association for the purpose.


The Australasian Trained Nurses Association
MENTAL NURSES.
In view of the great importance to the general public that Mental
Nurses called on to minister to the necessities of Insane Patients should
be so trained as to carry out their duties in a satisfactory manner, the
Council of this Association has drawn up a schedule showing the sub-
jects in which instruction is necessary for the training of Mental Nurses,
and this schedule is hereto attached.
It is proposed that the instruction should be given in Government
Mental Hospitals by means of lectures and demonstrations extending
over a period of three years, or in the case of a Nurse already registered
as a General Nurse, over a period of two years, and that at the end of
the curriculum a certificate should be granted by the Hospital, setting
out that the lectures and demonstrations have been attended and all
necessary examinations passed.
Rules.
1. Candidates for registration must produce proof;—
(o) (1) That prior to December 31st, 1904, they have under-
gone a two years’ course of practical and systematic training
at one of the Government Mental Hospitals in Australia
recognised by the Council, and obtained their certificate of
training and have passed the final examination of the Asso-
ciation for Mental Nurses; or
(2) That subsequent to December 31st, 1904, they have received
a three years’ course of practical and systematic training at
one of the Government Mental Hospitals in Australia recog-
nised by the Council, and obtained their certificate of train-
ing, and have passed the final examination of the Associa-
tion for Mental Nurses; or
(3) That being registered as General Nurses, they have subse-
quently undergone a two years’ course of practical and
systematic training at one of the Government Mental Hos-
pitals in Australia recognised by the Council, and obtained
their certificate of training, and have passed the final exami-
nation of the Association for Mental Nurses.


(6) That they possess certificates of training and efficiency from
a European or American Mental Hospital, in which, in the
opinion of the Council, the course of training is equivalent
to the standard required of Mental Nurses trained in Aus-
tralasia, and that they have passed the final examination of
the Association for Mental Nurses, or have presented cer-
tificates from other States or Countries with which the
A.T.N.A. has a reciprocal agreement.
(c) Any Nurse who can show to the satisfaction of the Council
that she has been engaged for not less than three years in
the bona fide work of mental nursing, and can produce cer-
tificates of competency and good conduct from at least three
reputable Medical Practitioners as to her attainments and
repute, shall be eligible for registration up to June 30th,
1912, subject to the approval of the Council. Provided
always that the Council shall have power in any case to
direct that any candidate under this rule may be examined
in Mental Nursing by three examiners appointed by the
Council, and provided further that in the case of Nurses
registered under this rule the qualification in the Register
shall stand as “Admitted under Rule 1 (c).” (Obsolete.)
2. All Nurses, excepting those registered under Rule 1 (c), before
being registered as Mental Nurses shall be examined by the Examining
Board appointed by the Association, as is laid down in the rules gov-
erning uniform examinations, and shall submit to the Educational Com-
mittee of the Association such evidence as to their educational fitness as
is required by the rules of the Association.
3. In matters referring to the Section of Mental Nurses, the deci-
sion of the Council shall be final, without reference to the general body
of the Association.
4. The admission and subscription fees for mental members shall
be the same as for general members.
5. Mental members shall participate on equal terms with general
members in any Benefit Fund.
6. Members on the Register of Mental Nurses shall have the right
of attending the Annual Meeting of the Australasian Trained Nurses
Association, and may elect thereat not more than three members of the
Association to represent them on the General Council of the Associa-
tion. They shall also have the right of attending all lectures delivered
to members of the Australasian Trained Nurses Association.
7. Their right to vote at the Annual Meeting or any adjourned
meeting thereof shall be confined to the election of their representatives
as aforesaid, and they shall not, by virtue of their membership, be
entitled to any of the other privileges of a member of the Australasian
Trained Nurses Association, excepting those set forth in the next two
preceding rules or such as may be determined from time to time by the
Council of the Association.


8. No Mental Nurse shall undertake the care of a Medical, Sur-
gical, or Obstetric case unless registered as a General or an Obstetric
Nurse respectively. A Nurse who has been proved to the satisfaction
of the Council to have violated this rule shall be liable to have his or
her name removed from the Register,
(The Council may exercise its discretionary power to relax this
rule in the ease of Mental Nurses in country-districts where
no General or Obstetric Nurse is at the time available.)
REGULATIONS FOR THE RECOGNITION OF TRAINING SCHOOLS
FOR MENTAL NURSES.
Any Government Mental Hospital shall be eligible for recognition
and registration as a Training School for Mental Nurses under the
A.T.N.A., provided it fulfils the following requirements to the satis-
faction of the Council of the Association; —
1. The Matron or Chief Attendant of the Hospital shall hold a
certificate recognised by the Council of this Association.
2. The Hospital shall contain a daily average of not less than 100
occupied beds.
3. The curriculum of study shall be of not less than three years,
except in the case of Nurses holding the certificate of the
Association for General Nursing, for whom the time of study
shall be not less than two years.
4. The Nurses shall receive practical instruction in the wards of
the Hospitals from a Matron or Chief Attendant holding
a certificate recognised by the Council of this Association.
5. The Nurses shall attend systematic courses of lectures by duly
qualified and registered medical practitioners.
6. The curriculum of instruction and lectures shall be at least
equal to that contained in the accompanying Schedule of
Study.
7. The Inspector-General of the Insane shall yearly report to
the Council of the Association on forms supplied for the
purpose:
(o) The daily average of beds in each Mental Hospital for
the past year.
(6) The names of teaching staff.
(c) The subjects of lectures and number of lectures delivered
in each course.
( d) The names of Nurses attending lectures, the date of enter-
ing upon their studies, and evidence as per Roll-book that
they have attended at least three-fourths of the lectures
delivered in each subject.
The Council of the Association reserves to itself the right of point-
ing out any matter in which the foregoing requirements seem to it to
be insufficiently met, and of withholding, suspending, or withdrawing
recognition and registration in any case which remains unsatisfactory.


SUBJECTS OF LECTURES.
First Year.
Anatomy and Physiology.
Elements of Medical Nursing.
Elements of Surgical Nursing.
First Aid.
Second Year.
Descriptions of the Nervous System and of the Mind.
Forms of Insanity.
Management of Wards.
Nursing of Mental Diseases.
Nursing of Patients seriously ill from bodily disease.
Third Year.
Diseases and their management.
Contagious and infectious diseases.
Hygiene.—Ventilation, heating, water supply, disposal of refuse and
excreta. Food. Personal hygiene.
Fire.
Ethics of Nursing,
Nursing of Patients in private houses.
Lectures on diseases on Pelvic organs.
Cooking.—lnvalid cookery.
Text Books.
Syllabus «f Lectures. —W. A. Gullick, Government Printer, Sydney,
N.S.W.
Handbook for Attendants on the Insane.—Bailliere, Tindal and Cox.
GOVERNMENT OF THE MENTAL SECTION OF THE ASSOCIATION.
Sydney Centre.
The Mental Section shall be governed (subject to the Council of
the A.T.N.A.) a Committee of eleven members, who must be mem-
bers of the Association, of whom four shall form a quorum, who shall
meet at such times as may be required to discuss matters of special con-
cern to the Section, and make recommendations to the Council of the
Association. The Committee shall be composed as follows: —
The three members representing the Mental Nurses on the Coun-
cil of the Association.
The Hon. Secretary of the A.T.N.A. for the time being.
The Inspector-General of the Insane.
Two members on the medical staff of the Government Mental
Hospitals in New South Wales representing them.
Four members of the Association elected annually by the Nurses
on the Mental Register,


No resolution of the Mental Committee shall have force until ap-
proved by the Council of the A.T.N.A.
The registration of Mental Nurses shall be effected only by the
General Council, but applications for registration shall first be sub-
mitted to the Mental Committee or a sub-committee of the same, who
may make such recommendations to the Council as they deem proper.
Mental Committees in Affiliated States.
The Branches shall have power to form similar Committees if
desired. Meanwhile the government of the Mental Sections in these
States shall be entirely vested in the General Councils, which shall con-
tain one or more members elected exclusively by the Nurses on the
Mental Register.
EXAMINATION FOR MEMBERSHIP.
The membership examination will be held in June and December
in each year at such time and place or places as shall be fixed by the
Board of Examiners.
The examination shall be both written and practical.
The written examination will consist of questions covering the work
of the three years’ course, in the practical and viva voce examination
attention will be given to such points as the following;—Bandaging,
poultices, fomentations, stupes, enemata, bedmaking (in health and in
sickness), use of thermometer, administration of medicines, wet-pack,
sponging and special baths, steaming and inhalation, dressing of wounds,
sterilisation of instruments, stretcher carrying, artificial respiration, use
of splints (padding), management of epileptic fits, preparation of saline
injections.
An entrance fee of one guinea shall be charged for the membership
examination (except in the case of Nurses already on the Register of
the Association as general or obstetric Nurses, when the fee will be half
a guinea); such fee of one guinea, in the event of the candidate passing,
shall entitle her to membership of the Association for one year from
the date of her becoming eligible for registration. In the event of a
candidate failing to satisfy the examiners she may present herself at
two succeeding examinations without extra fee.
Candidates must notify the Secretary of their intention to present
themselves for examination not later than the first day of the preceding
May in the case of the June examinations, and the first day of November
in the ease of the December examinations. Forms of application may
be obtained from the Secretary, A.T.N.A., 32 Elizabeth Street, Sydney,
or Brisbane Hospital, Brisbane, Queensland.
EDUCATIONAL REGULATIONS.
All applicants for registration as Mental Nurses must have pre-
viously satisfied the Educational Committee of the Association as .to


their educational fitness, by passing the preliminary educational exami-
nation of the Association in English and arithmetic, or by submitting
satisfactory education certificates, such as: —
1. A certificate of having passed the primary or higher examina-
tions in any approved University.
2. A certificate of having satisfactorily completed the fifth stan-
dard of a primary school.
3. Any educational test equivalent to the above.
Educational examinations are held every three months in such
centres as may be fixed from time to time.
GENERAL TRAINING FOR MENTAL NURSES.
Registered Mental Nurses, holding a three years’ certificate from a
recognised Government Mental Hospital, who may wish subsequently to
train as general Nurses, receive, under the following new Rule, a con-
cession in time: —
Rule 18 (d) That they have obtained their certificate as Mental
Nurses and have been registered as such by this Association
under rule 1 (o) (2) and have subsequently been engaged
for two years in a General Hospital recognised by the
Council having an average of not less than 40 beds daily
occupied, or for a proportional period in a four or a five
years’ training school.
6C ijt i L 4 ~~
g —•-—
