

lliiles antr Eeguktbns
FOR
ST. PHILIP'S TOWER RINGERS,
PASSED AT A SPECIAL MEETING OF THE MINISTER
AND‘RINGERS, 3rd. FEBRUARY, 1873.
George Loxton & Co., Printers, 42, New Pitt Street.




7-1
RULES AND REGULATIONS
The number of Members to form the
Society shall not be less than eight, who
shall be persons of good moral character,
to be approved in the first place by the
Clergyman and Churchwardens, and after
such approval the names of such persons
shall he entered in a book, to be kept for
the use of the Society, The members shall
elect their own conductor who shall be
responsible to the Clergyman and Church-
wardens for the due observance of the
following Buies and Begulations.
The duplicate keys of the Tower shall
be kept by the conductor who shall have
charge of the Bells and the Bingers during


the time he remains in office, and who
shall have access to the Tower and Bells
on all occasions for practice and ringing
between the hours of Jive in the morning,
and ten in the evening, except during the
hours appointed for the performance of
Divine service; subject, nevertheless, to
the control of the Clergyman and Church-
wardens. He shall preside at all meetings
of the Society.
After the formation of the Society any
person desiring to become a member shall
apply to the conductor, who shall submit
his name for the approval of the Clergyman
and Churchwardens, and after such approval,
shall call a meeting of the members; and
the nomination shall be decided unani-
mously, his name shall then be recorded
and he shall become a member of the
Society.
No beer, spirits, or other intoxicating
liquors shall at any time he permitted


within the Tower, or brought on the church
premises ; and any person whether a
member or visitor, in any way misconduct-
ing himself shall be desired by the con-
ductor at once to leave the Tower.
Any member absenting himself for more
than three consecutive practice nights
without giving a satisfactory reason for so
doing, shall be served with a notice to
attend the next meeting ; and if he should
then fail to be present his name shall be
erased from the list, and he shall then cease
to be a member of the Society.
'That the Clergymen and members of the
Society may from time to time make such
Bye-laws as may be considered necessary.
The above rules have been examined
and approved of by the Clergyman and
Churchwardens of St. Philip’s Parish.


names of members.
NAMES OF MEMBERS ENROLLED.
Joseph Matthew Anthony. (Conductor)
Joseph Davis.
Robert G. Fletcher.
William Blue.
John W. Davison.
Albert Gawler.
Sydney H. Judson.




