

? I 1 X ~ ' I ■k'yVbo^
j hm^ a
i-n
U L E S_^
OB 1 THE
POLlTieat LABOR LEAGUE.
AS REVISED AT CONFERENCE, 1898.
NAME.
1. The name o£ the organization shall be the
Political Labor League.
MEMBERSHIP.
2. The League shall consist of—
[a) Members of the Unions affiliated with
the Eastern Provincial Council of the
A.L.E. which contribute to the funds of
the P.L.L.
(i) Members of other Unions, not so
affiliated, with which special arrange-
ments shall have been made by the
local District Assembly or unattached
Electorate Branch.
(c) Other adults resident in the colony who
shall have subscribed to the Platform
and Constitution of the organization.
3. The annual subscription for any member
shall not exceed 4s. per annum. Contributions
for affiliated Unions shall not be less than Is. per
member per annum, which must be paid to the
Branch in which the Union claims for its mem-
bers the right of membership half-yearly in ad-
vance.
4. Members of an affiliated Union claiming to
vote in any Branch of the League must—
(a) Have resided for one month in the
electorate in which the Branch is
situated;
(i) Produce proof of their membeiship of
an affiliated Union.
But all members of affiliated Unions shall,
whether they reside in the electorate or not,
have the right to vote on all general matters.
6. All Branches must, 14 days before the
Annual Conference, forward to the General Secre-
tary a duly audited Balance-sheet, showing—
(«) The number of members financial on
the 31st December previous ;
(i) The average membership for the year ;
(«) The income and expi nditure for the year
from all sources ; assets and liabilities
(if any); and funds in hand or in
bank on the 31st day of December
previous, together with a report of
the work done by the Branch during
the year, and a brief statement of the
political outlook in their own elec-
torates.
ORGANIZATION.
6. At least one week’s notice of an initia-
tory Branch Meeting shall be given by advertise-
ment.
7. Branch Leagues may be established in each
Electorate. No Branch shall be recognized until
a declaration accepting the platform and consti-
tution of the League, signed by the Officers of
the Branch, is forwarded to the Executive Com-
mittee.
8. No Branch shall be entitled to representation
at Conference, nor to select a candidate to con-
test a constituency, until it has at least 25
bona fide financial members on the roll.
9. If a League Secretary, after receiving a re-
quisition duly signed by at least twelve financial
members, refuses for four days following such
notice to call the meeting asked for, those signing
the requisition shall have power to convene it and
act within the Constitution.
FUNDS.
10. The funds of the League shall be applied to
the expenses of political and municipal work
only.
11. Electorate Branches must contribute to the
Executive Committee a sum of not less than 6s.
3d. per annum, and not more than 12s, 6d.
12. The following scale shall be the basis on
which all dues to the Executive by Electorate
Leagues mus be paid:—For the first 25 mem- the A.L.P., shall have the right to take part in
bers or fractional part thereof, IJd. per member the business of all Conferences, but shall have no
per annum; for the second 50 or part thereof, vote as such.
id. per member per annum ; for each additional PARLIAMENTARY
50 or part thereof, id. per member per annum, „ , ;
until the maximum of 12s. 6d. has been reached. , ft- Electorates shall select _their own oandi-
dates, who shall have previously signed the
RICT ASSEMBLIES. pledge adopted by the League, and forward a
13. Where found advisable, two or more signed copy to the General Secretary. In the
Branch Leagues may group together into Dis- event of mere than two candidates being nomi-
trict Assemblies for the purpose of better orga- nated, an exhaustive ballot shall be taken where
nization, and may frame rules for their own practicable.
guidance, so long as such rules do not conflict 25. Candidates’nominations must be in writing
w ith the principles and general rules of the and signed by not less than six bona fide mem-
Political Labor League. bers in the electorate. No member shall sign a
14. Disputes arising from any cause may be nomination paper of more than one candidate,
submitted for settlement to District Assemblies by 26. No person shall nominate or be nomi-
Electorate Branches affiliated therewith, sub- nated as a candidate who has not been a member
jeot to appeal to the Executive Committee, of some Branch of the League for at least three
whose decision shall be binding, unless over- months previously.
ruled by Conference. _ .... ~ 27. Any candidate personally canvassing for
15. Members of the Executive shall have the votes shall be disqualified for selection.
right to attend all meetings of Branches and 28 _ Nq member the League shall have the
District Assemblies, and take part in the same, ht Tote in the selection £ « a oandidate unless
but shall not be entitled to vote as such. he s hag resided in electorate for a period of
EXECUTIVE. one month prior to selection, or holds an elec-
-16. The Executive Committee shall consist of tor’s right for the electorate ; but each District
a President, General Secretary, and seven mem- 1 Assembly may make such additional provisions as
bers elected by the Annual Conference, together they consider necessary.
with two Delegates from the Eastern Provincial 29. Members elected to Parliament under the
Council of the A, L.F., and allthe members of the auspices of the P.L.L. shall form a distinc f
Parliamentary Labor Party, the voting power of party.
the latter being limited to five votes. The 30. In electorates represented by members of
Executive shall have power to fill vacancies in I the Labor Party, the sitting member shall be
its membership, giving preference to those mem- regarded as the selected candidate of the League
bers who follow next in order to those successful for such electorate, unless the League shall decide
at the Conference. Any member of the Execu- that local selection is specially necessary, in
tive ab ent from three consecutive meetings which case the same method of selection as in
without satisfactory apology shall forfeit his seat. r other electorates shall be adopted.
17. The Executive Committee shall summon I■_ Each Electorate League shall select a
the Annual Conference and any Special Con- candidate at least three months before the ex-
ference which it may consider necessary, or pinion by effluxion of time of a Parliament
which shall have been demanded by twenty or after which the endorsement of a candidate shall
more electorates rest the Executive. No selection shall hold
18. The Executive Committee shall have the S o °* more t , hail twelve months.
power to recommend to the District Assembly or 32 ' , membBr of . * he Labor ? art / sha ” J 0 1“
Branch the withdrawal of any candidate whose Ministry not mainly composed of members of
past career proves him unworthy of confidence, 8 r own 0
provided that such candidate has first had an ALTERATION OF RULES, &0., & c.
opportunity of defending himself. The Execu- 33. All proposals to add to or take from Plat-
tive shall have no power to otherwise interfere form, Pledge, or Constitution shall be in the
in the selection of candidates except in cases of bands of the Executive Committee at least two
fraud. months prior to the Annual Conference, and shall
19. The Executive Committee shall submit a once be forwarded to Branches. Proposed
report and audited balance sheet, together with a alterations carried by a two-thirds majority of
statement of the general position of the League, whole Conference shall at once come into
OtatCiiiCUli ui me uuomuu put- uucig up, . , . , , .
to the Annual Conference. foroe > but m the event of an 7 proposals being
„ carried by less than a two-thirds majority they
CONr ERENCE. shall be submitted by the Executive to the
20. A Conference shall be held each year on a Branches for their final decision by a majority
date to be fixed by the preceding Conference. vote of the electorates.
Each electorate Branch shall be entitled to one -p r
Eacn electorate nranen snail oe entiueu to one FDGE
representative at Conferences, but any two or ’
more Branches may select the same representa- Candidates for selection must sign, prior to
tive, who shall be entitled to one vote for each nomination, the following pledge :
electorate he represents, provided always that no “I hereby pledge myself not to oppose the
Delegate shall be entitled to more than four votes. | selected candidate of this or any other Branch of
Leagues may give credentials for an alternate | the Political Labor League. I also pledge my-
delegate to act in the absence of their delegate, | self, if returned to Parliament, on all occasions
but a delegate shall not have power to transfer to do my utmost to ensure the carrying out of
his authority. the principles embodied in the Labor Platform,
21. Delegates to a Special Conference shall be and on all such questions, and especially on ques-
elected on the same ecale as to the Annual Con- tions affecting the fate of a Government, to vote
ference. us a majority of the Labor Party may decide at
22. The names of all Delegates to Annual a duly constituted caucus meeting.”
Conference must be in the hands of the General SAM. SMITH, Peesident.
Secretary at least seven days prior to Conference ’
meeting. G. A. JONES, General Seobetaby.
23. All members of the Executive Committee, Jan. 26, 1898.
including the Parliamentary Party, and the two
Delegates of the Eastern Provincial Council of
Worker Co-operative Print, 2z7 Castlereagh-st,, Sydney.
