













CONVICT DEPARTMENT,
TASMANIA.
Rules and Regulations
FOR THE
COXSWAINS AND MARINE,
TASMAN’S PENINSULA.




RULES AND REGULATIONS,
&c.
Convict Department,
Tasman’s Peninsula, July 1868.
The following revised Regulations, sub-
mitted by the Comptroller-General of Con-
victs, having been approved by His Excel-
lency Governor Colonel Thomas Gore
Browne, C. 8., are to be enforced with strict
impartiality, and all former Regulations
cancelled :
Coxswains and Marine.
175. —The number of Coxswains will be
regulated trom time to time by the Comp-
troller-General on the recommendation of
the Commandant and as circumstances may
require.
176. —The Senior Coxswain will have
charge of the schooner “Harriet;” the
Second Coxswain of the boats at the Settle-


ment, and the Juniors will be in command
of the guard-boats at Woody and Slopen
Islands.
177. —In the performance of their duties
the Coxswains will be guided by the instruc-
tions of the Commandant.
178. —The Senior Coxsw r ain, when the
Schooner is at Hobart Town, will take his
orders from the Assistant Commissary-
General.
179. —The Coxswains will be responsible
for the vessel, launches, and boats under
their respective charge, taking care that
such are maintained in effective condition,
and that the crews are properly trained
and conduct themselves satisfactorily.
180.—Whenever a boat is manned by a
prisoner-crew, an armed Constable must ac-
company it and the Coxswain carry a
revolver.
181. —The Coxswain at the Settlement,
and those at Woody and Slopen Islands,
will see that the whole of the boats at their
respective Stations are secured every even-
ing at dusk, and that all oars and sails are


deposited in such places of safety as the
Commandant may direct.
182.—Whenever any absconders may be
at large, and at such other times as the
Commandant may direct, the guard-boats
will keep a close watch over the weakest
parts of their respective divisions in order
to prevent the escape of prisoners.
183.—Immediately on the arrival of a
vessel at the Settlement, the Master will
report himself to the Commandant, under
whose orders he is to consider himself while
his vessel remains in harbour.
184.—N0 luggage or goods of any kind
shall be landed, nor is any boat to be
permitted to go alongside the vessel, without
the express orders of the Commandant; if
necessary a Constable will be sent on board,
and continue while the vessel remains.
185.—Every package, whether public or
private property, which is landed, shall be
examined by the Wharfinger or some other
Officer appointed by the Commandant, and
this Officer will seize and detain every article
not included in the invoice forwarded to the
Commandant by the Commissariat or other
Department, as the case may be.


186.—N0 spirits or other intoxicating
liquors are to be landed from any vessel
without a written authority from the Com-
mandant.
187. —When a vessel has discharged her
cargo the Commandant will make a point of
seeing that the Master loses no time in re-
loading and proceeding to sea: and the
Commandant will report to the Comptroller-
General any unnecessary delay which may
take place, and any irregularity or neglect
of orders which may come under his obser-
vation.
188. —The vessel is to be discharged and
reloaded by her own crew, and not by con-
victs, except in cases allowed by the Com-
mandant ; and all communication between
the convicts and the crew is to be prevented
as much as possible. The crews are not
allowed to land except on duty, or with the
Commandant’s permission, and on no ac-
count is any person belonging to the vessel
to remain on shore after sunset without the
Commandant’s authority. A strict night-
watch is to be kept on board, and the bell
struck every quarter of an hour if the
vessel is at the wharf, but when anchored in
the Bay every half-hour.


189. —Whenever any strange vessel is in
harbour, an additional constable will be
stationed at the wharf-barrier during the
day.
190. —No passenger, package, or other
article, is to be received aboard any vessel
without the written sanction of the Com-
mandant.
191. —All boats belonging to vessels in
harbour must be hoisted up before dusk.
192. —No private boats will be permitted
to be kept at the Settlement or any other
part of the Peninsula, except that required
by the lessee of the Coal Mines; and all
boats employed at or about, or visiting the
Peninsula, will be under the orders of the
Commandant, and subject to his regulations.
193. —The boats at Woody and Slopen
Islands will keep guard all night whenever
directed to do so by the Commandant, or
the District Constable at Eagle Hawk Neck,
and also whenever a signal-fire may he made
after dusk at Signal Hill or on Mount Com-
munication ; this duty will not be required
in stormy weather.
194. —The crews of the guard-boats at
Woody and Slopen Islands will grow the


potatoes and other vegetables required by
them respectively, and must promptly
comply with all lawful orders given by their
Coxswains, whether in the boat or on shore.
195.—The Coxswains will overhaul any
vessel or boat found to be hovering about
their respective districts, within three miles
of the coast of Tasman's Peninsula ; and if
the persons sailing therein cannot give a
satisfactory account of themselves, they are
to be arrested, their boats detained, and an
immediate report made to the Commandant.
196.—A copy of these rules to be de-
livered to the Master of each vessel on his
arrival and returned by him before sailing.




