

AUSTRALIAN FEDERATION.
RULES AND PROPOSALS
OF THE
AUSTRALASIAN FEDERATION LEAGUE
SYDNEY, 1894.
SYDNEY : CHARLES POTTER, GOVERNMENT PRINTER.
1894.
12d 2—94




AUSTRALIAN FEDERATION.
RULES AND PROPOSALS
OF THE
AUSTRALASIAN FEDERATION LEAGUE
SYDNEY, 1894.
3Uithoritii
SYDNEY : CHARLES POTTER, GOVERNMENT PRINTER.
1894.
12 d 2—94




CONTENTS.
PAGE.
T. List of Officers of Central League 1
11. Bules of Central League .
111. Proposals of Bendigo Branch for Framing
Federal Constitution 12
IV. Keport of Select Committee on Draft Bill ... 24
V. Branch Leagues in Border Districts ... ... 33




AUSTRALASIAN FEDERATION LEAGUE.
[Established 22 nd June, 1893.]
CENTRAL LEAGUE,
Office : No. 4, Young’s Chambers, Pitt and Park Streets, Sydney.
©fffors: —
President :— Sir W. P. MANNING, K.C.M.G., M.P. (Mayor of Sydney).
Vice-Presidents: — Sir J. P. ABBOTT, Knt., M.P. (Speaker of the
Legislative Assembly).
EDMUND BARTON, M.A., Q.C., M.P.
W. P. CULLEN, M.A., LL.D., M.P.
WILLIAM McMILLAN, M.P.
Hon. Secretaries and Treasurers: —EDWAßD DOWLING.
A. P. CANA WAY, B.A.
Executive Committee :—
REGINALD J. BLACK, J.P.
W. S. BUZACOTT, J.P.
F. B. FREEHILL, M.A,
MARK HAMMOND, J.P.
Alderman J. F. HENNESSY, J.P. (Burwood).
JOHN GARLAND, M.A., LL.D,
R. R. G ARRAN, B.A.
F. D. KENT, M.A.
Alderman EDWARD SCHOLES (Burwood),
P. W. STREET, B.A.
j. . rt . oiiVJJUij xj. xx.
Alderman JOHN WILLIAMSON, J.P. (Woollahra).
Alderman JOHN YOUNG, J.P. (Mayor of Annandale).


General Council.
Alderman 0 OHN AHEARN (Mayor of Burwood).
ALFRED ALLEN, M.P.
Alderman EDWARD ATKINS, jun. (Ryde).
H. E. BARFF, M.A. (Sydney University).
THOMAS BAYISTER, M.P.
0. C. BEALE.
G. H. BLANCH, M.A. (Sydney Grammar School).
Rev. F. B. BOYCE, M.A.
FREDERIC BEYILL.
Alderman THOMAS COLLIER (Waterloo).
ARCHIBALD CAMPBELL, M.P.
U. W. CARPENTER, J.P.
J. H. CARRUTHERS, M.A., M.P.
J. M. CHANTER, M.P.
H. S. CHIPMAN.
WILLIAM COPE.
HENRY COPELAND, M.P. (Minister for Lands).
Alderman R. B. CROPLEY (Leichhardt).
J. A. DICK, 8.A., M.D.
L. F. De SALIS, M.L.C.
THOMAS DIXON, M. 8., Ch.M.
Alderman H. E. FARMER (Mayor of Manly).
ARCHIBALD FORSYTH, J.P.
w: J. GREEN.
EDWARD GREYILLE, M.L.C,
Dr. R. HODGSON.
JOHN HASLAM.
JAMES HAYES, M.P.
WILLIAM HENDERSON.
J. HORBURY HUNT.
Alderman WALTER HIBBLE (Ryde)
T. J. HOUGHTON, M.P.
Sir PATRICK JENNINGS, K.C.M.G., LL.D., M.L.C.
E. LLOYD JONES.
RICHARD JONES.
TRAVER JONES.
Alderman N. A. JOUBERT (Hunter’s Hill).
Alderman H. G. KILBY (Hunter’s Hill).
JOHN KIDD, M.P. (Postmaster-General).
ALEXANDER KETHEL.
2


Alderman S. BINDLEY (Burwood).
GEORGE LITTLEJOHN.
W. J. LYNE, M.P. (Minister for Works).
H. SANDERSON LLOYD.
CHARLES LOVELY, J.P.
E. J. LOXTOIST, M. A.
Alderman ROBERT MACKAY (Sydney).
A. J. MACKENZIE.
Alderman C. C. MARSHALL (Leichhardt).
JAMES MARTIN, M.P.
Alderman BERNARD M‘BRIDE (Planter’s Hill),
A. W. MEEKS.
A. NEWHAM, B.A.
B. B. NICOLL, M.P.
Alderman J. G. NORTH (Ryde).
R. E. O’CONNOR, M.A., M.L.C.
E. W. O’SULLIVAN, M.P.
JAMES PLUMMER,
Alderman W. T. POOLE (Redfern).
R. A. PRICE.
C. A. RICHARDSON.
G. E. RICH, M. A.
F. E. ROGERS, M.A., LL.B., Q.C.
JOHN SEE, M.P. (Colonial Treasurer).
NORMAN SELFE, C.E.
Alderman A. H. SCOULLER (Marrickville).
Professor WALTER SCOTT, M.A. (Sydney University).
E. K. SATCHELL.
JOHN SHORTER.
A. H. SIMPSON, M.A.
J. B. SPENCER.
BRUCE SMITPI, M.P.
JOHN SULMAN.
Alderman WILLIAM TAYLOR (Rockdale).
Alderman JOHN THORPE (Parramatta).
JOHN T. TOOHEY, M.L.C.
Rev. S. S. TOVEY, B.A.
J. E. WEST.
JOHN WADE.
3


“Then none was for a party,
Then all were for the State.”
Macaulay's Lays of Ancient Rome.


RULES
OF THE
AUSTRALASIAN FEDERATION LEAGUE.
1. The name of the League is “ The Australasian
Federation League,” and every resident adult citizen
of New South Wales is eligible for membership.
2. The subscription shall he 2s. per annum, with-
out entrance fee, hut donations in aid of the funds
may he received in addition to or apart from sub-
scriptions. The first year’s subscription shall he
due and payable as soon as office-bearers shall have
been elected, and thereafter on every first day of
July; and on non-payment extending over six
months from the due date a person shall cease to
be a member.
3. The object of the League shall be to advance
the cause of Australian Federation by an organiza-
tion of citizens owning no class distinction or party
influence, and using its best energies to assist
Parliamentary action, from whatever source pro-
ceeding, calculated to further the common aim of
Australian Patriotism; the advocating, promoting,
and, after its attainment, defending the Federal
Union of Australasia on such lines as may be con-
stitutionally approved by all the Colonies concerned
after further deliberation and report by assembled
representatives of each.


4. It shall he among the duties of the League in
carrying out its objects to co-operate fully and
earnestly with all similar bodies having the same
object; to promote the formation of such associa-
tions throughout the several Colonies ; and to take
steps in due course to unite all such bodies through-
out the Colonies under one organisation with one
plan of operations.
5. The Chairman of any meeting of the League,
or of any of its committees, shall, subject to an
appeal to the meeting, decide, if so requested,
whether any matter brought up for discussion is
within the scope of the operations of the League.
6. The Mayor of Sydney for the time being shall
be President of the League, unless he declines or
ceases to hold the office, and in any such event the
President shall he elected by the League at the
Annual General Meeting, or at a Special General
Meeting convened for that purpose either singly or
in conjunction with other purposes.
7. There shall be four Vice-Presidents, two joint
Lion. Secretaries and Treasurers, a General Council
of ninety members, and an Executive Committee
of twelve members to be chosen out of the General
Council.
8. The offices mentioned in the last preceding
Pule shall be tenable for a year, or for any un-
expired part thereof. They shall be filled by election,
and if a ballot be demanded by ten members, then
by ballot, at the Annual General Meeting; and if
any vacancy occurs between two Annual Meetings,
it shall be filled by the Executive Committee, who
shall appoint a member of the League to act in
the requisite capacity until the then next Annual
General Meeting.


9. The President, Vice-Presidents, and joint Hon.
Secretaries and Treasurers shall he ex officio mem-
bers of the General Council and of the Executive
Committee.
10. No more than two-fifths of the members of
the General Council shall be members of either
House of Parliament, and a member of either House
shall not be eligible as a member of the Executive
Committee.
11. The general administration of the League
shall be carried out by the joint Hon. Secretaries
and Treasurers, under the direction of the Executive
Committee.
12. The General Council shall be summoned only
by order of the Executive Committee, and only in
cases in which the Executive Committee deems it
necessary or highly expedient to consult with
the General Council. The meeting shall be sum-
moned by circular notifying the business, and any
business not so notified or not consequential on some
business so notified shall not be entertained.
13. The Annual General Meeting of the League
shall be held in the month of July in each year, at a
date, hour, and place to be fixed by the then exist-
ing Executive Committee. And at each such meet-
ing there shall be presented a report of the operations
of this League, and of events of interest in connection
with the Eederal movement during the year under
review, and also a balance-sheet showing the finan-
cial position of the League.
14. It shall be competent for the Executive Com-
mittee at any time to summon a Special General
Meeting of the League. A Special General Meeting
may also be summoned by the President of his own


motion; and shall be summoned by tbe President,
or, in bis absence, by any Vice-President, on tbe
written requisition of at least a quorum of members,
setting forth tbe purpose for which tbe meeting is
required. In every case the business of a Special
General Meeting shall be notified by advertisement
in at least one daily Sydney newspaper.
15. At a meeting of the League thirty members,
at a meeting of the General Council ten members,
and at a meeting of the Executive Committee five
members, shall be a quorum. At every meeting the
President, if present, shall take the chair; in his
absence, the senior Vice-President present; if no
Vice-President be present, then the meeting shall
elect a Chairman.
16. If a quorum be not present within half an
hour of the time notified for commencement of any
meeting, the senior office-bearer present shall declare
the meeting adjourned to such time and place as
shall seem fit; and among office-bearers the joint
Hon. Secretaries and Treasurers shall rank after
the Vice-Presidents ; and the General Council and
Executive Committee shall for the purposes of this
Pule only not be deemed officer-bearers.
17. The Chairman of any meeting shall be the
sole interpreter of the Pules and the judge of order
at the meeting, and, except as specified in Pule 5,
no appeal from his decision on a question of order
shall be entertained.
18. So far as is practicable, and so far as the
Pules and By-laws of the League do not make
express provision, the Chairman of a meeting shall
in deciding questions of order apply the practice
of the Legislative xlssembly and the Committees
thereof.


19. The property of the League, of whatever
nature or kind, shall he vested in the President and
Vice-Presidents from time to time, and they shall
he the Trustees thereof. No person shall retain
any interest in or claim to any of the property of
the League after ceasing to he a member thereof.
20. On the application of any Pederation League
not formed or having its headquarters in the city of
Sydney, such body may he admitted and affiliated
by resolution of the Executive Committee as a
branch of this League ; and thereupon members of
either body shall have all the privileges of member-
ship of the other of them, and shall be admitted to
all meetings to which members of the same are
admissible, on production of the card of membership.
21. It shall be competent for the Executive Com-
mittee to arrange with Branch Leagues or other
similar bodies for meetings or conferences in any
part of any colony in which any body with similar
objects has been constituted, or is to be constituted
at such meeting or conference; and the Executive
Committee may, if they think fit, nominate any
member or members of this League to represent it
at any such meeting or conference, and may also
act on behalf of this League in making any arrange-
ments for or in connection with the same.
22. Questions of Politics other than that of
Pederation shall, to the best of the ability of the
Chairman and the members present, be excluded
from discussion at all meetings of the League; and
at all meetings in which members of this League
are invited to take part, and do participate as such
members, they shall act in the spirit of this Pule.
Wilful disregard of this Pule, or of any part thereof,
shall be deemed to be conduct detrimental to the
objects of the League.


23. A person shall cease to be a member of the
League — {a) Under the circumstances stated in
Rule 2 ; (6) By resignation addressed to the joint
Hon. Secretaries and Treasurers; (c) By perma-
nently residing outside the limits of Australia,
Tasmania and New Zealand ; (d) Upon a resolution
passed by two-thirds of the members present at a
Special General Meeting at which the consideration
of his conduct shall be the business, or part of the
business, for which such meeting has been sum-
moned, declaring him to be guilty of any conduct
detrimental to the objects of the League or un-
worthy of a member of the League. But the
member whose conduct is in question shall have at
least seven days’ notice of the business of the
meeting so far as his conduct is to be in question
thereat, and shall, if present, be allowed to be
heard in explanation or defence, before any such
resolution shall be put. And such resolution
shall be open to amendment, by way of exclud-
ing the accused member from meetings of the
League, or of members thereof, for any specified
time, or by deprivation of office, or partly in one
way and partly in the other. And if so amended,
the resolution shall not affect the member except
so far as it purports to do so. In case of any
cessation of membership (except that specified in
sub-section (d) hereof) the person who has ceased
to be a member may again qualify for and obtain
membership.
24. Any meeting may be adjourned by resolution,
and no business not notified for a Special General
Meeting shall be entertained upon any motion for
adjournment thereof. A meeting may also be
adjourned by the Chairman when he is of opinion
that the interests of the League require him to take
that step.


25. The Executive Committee may make By-laws
in furtherance of the objects of the League, or of
any Buie thereof, or for the order and regulation of
meetings and business. But no By-law shall have
force until it has been printed with the Buies.
26. Copies of the Buies, together with any By-
laws, shall at all reasonable times, and at a price
not exceeding cost, be obtainable by members at
the office of the League.
27. These Buies, or any alterations thereof, may
be altered at a Special General Meeting of this
League, of which fourteen days’ notice shall be
given.
Adopted by Central League, Sydney,
15th January, 1894.
W. P. MANNING, President.
EDM'ABB DOWLING, \ ITon.
A. P. CAN AWAY, j Secretaries.
11


BENDIGO BRANCH.
Bear Sir, Bendigo, 1 January, 1891.
By direction of the Bendigo Brandi of the
Australasian Federation League, we herewith for-
ward a copy of a draft Bill intituled “ The Austral-
asian Federal Congress Act, 1894,” the object of
which is to provide for the representation of the
Colonies at a duly constituted Congress or Conven-
tion legally authorised to frame a constitution for
the Federation of the Colonies of Australasia, and
further to provide for such constitution when framed
to he submitted to the vote of the electors of each
province for ratification or rejection.
This Bill is founded on a resolution passed at the
Federation Conference held at Corowa, N.S.W., on
2nd August, 1893, and it is now placed before the
public for consideration and discussion, and if
thought desirable amendment, preparatory to in-
troduction into the Parliaments of the various
Colonies. The Bendigo Branch recommends the
scheme embodied in this Bill to the earnest attention
of all friends of Federation in Australasia. It is
drawn on recognised democratic lines, and cc broad
based upon the people’s will.”
We need not draw attention to the advantages
that would accrue to the whole of Australasia
by a Federation such as is herein contemplated.
Bather would we sound a warning note of the


dangers that beset the future with the quasi-inde-
pendent Colonies of this continent, still severed and
sundered, each developing a local history and a
national life distinct from and perhaps in antagonism
with the others. Under these circumstances, we
earnestly appeal to our kinsmen in this fair land of
ours—the splendid inheritance bequeathed to us by
the British nation —to form branch leagues in every
important town, to advocate the passage of a Bill
such as the one we herewith send on its career, and
generally to do their best to help on the Federal
movement.
Yours truly,
JOHN QUICK, LL.U., President.
ALP. S. BAILES, M.L.A., Vice-President.
J. H. CUBNOW, Hon. Secretary.
To the Hon. Secretary, Australasian Federation
League, Sydney.


PROPOSALS OF BENDIGO BRANCH.
{Draft Dill.']
A BILL to provide for the representation of
Victoria at an Australasian Congress legally
created to frame a Constitution for the [Feder-
ation of the Australasian Colonies, and further
to provide for the reference of such Constitution
when framed to the vote of the people.
Be it enacted by the Queen’s Most Excellent Majesty, by and
with the advice and consent of the Legislative Council and
Legislative Assembly, &c., &c., &c.
Division 1.
Title and Commencement of Act.
1. This Act shall be known and cited as the “ Australasian
Eederal Congress Act, 1894.”
2. When and so soon as the Parliaments of not less than two
other Colonies of Australasia shall have passed Acts containing
provisions substantially the same as, and corresponding in scope
and intent with, this Act, the Governor of this Colony shall give
the royal assent to this Act, and by proclamation published in
the Government Gazette declare this Act to be in operation, but
not before.
Division 2.
Federal Districts and Representatives.
3. Eor the purposes of providing for the election of repre-
sentatives to attend an Australasian Eederal Congress, and take
part in the framing of a Constitution for the federation of the
Australasian Colonies, Victoria shall be divided into ten (10)
Eederal Electoral Districts, the boundaries and divisions whereof
shall be and be taken to be those set forth in the first schedule
to this x\ct.
4. The Eederal Electoral Districts shall return to the
Australasian Eederal Congress the number of representatives
assigned to them respectively in the first schedule hereto, not
exceeding ten (10) representatives in all.


Division 3.
Qualification of Federal Representatives.
5. Any male person qualified to be elected and to serve as a
Member of the Legislative Assembly shall be qualified to be
elected and to serve as a Representative of a Federal Electoral
District in the Australasian Federal Congress.
6. Upon any duly elected Federal Representative incurring
any disability, or doing any act which would forfeit his seat if he
were a duly elected Member of the Legislative Assembly, he
shall for such disability or act forfeit his right to sit and vote in
the Australasian Federal Congress, and his seat shall thereupon
become vacant.
Division 4.
Qualification of Federal Electors.
7. Every person qualified to vote at the Election of Members
of the Legislative Assembly shall be qualified to vote under this
Act at the Election of Representatives to serve in the Australasian
Federal Congress.
8. No such, person shall be entitled to vote at an Election
under this Act of Federal Representatives unless such person’s
name be duly enrolled according to the Electoral Law regulating
the enrolment of Electors for the Legislative Assembly.
9. No person shall be entitled to vote at the Election of
Federal Representatives under this Act at more than one polling
booth in one division of one Federal Electoral District, or in
more than one Federal Electoral District on the occasion of on©
Election, and any person violating this law shall be guilty of a
misdemeanour and shall be liable to a fine not exceeding fifty
pounds, or a term of imprisonment not exceeding six mouths for
each offence.
Division 5.
Preparation of Polls for Federal Electoral Districts.
10. Upon the proclamation of this Act the Chief Secretary
shall direct the Electoral Registrars appointed for the Legislative
Assembly to prepare (a) a roll of rate-paying Electors qualified
and entitled to vote for each division of each Federal Electoral
District and (n) a general roll of Electors qualified and entitled
to vote as the holders of Electors’ Rights for each division of
each Federal Electoral District.
11. The rolls directed to be prepared under the last preceding
section shall be compiled from the rolls already in existence and


such as would be used in such divisions of districts if an Election
for the Legislative Assembly took place at the time of an Election
under this Act.
12. Such rolls, when duly compiled, shall be submitted to the
nearest Revision Courts for confirmation or amendment in the
same manner and subject to the same law as rolls of Electors of
the Legislative Assembly are submitted to such Courts.
13. The Governor-in-Council may make and proclaim all such
regulations as may be necessary for the guidance of Electoral
Registrars, to provide for the due preparation and revision of the
said rolls, for the appointment and holding of the Revision
Courts, for the printing and final correction and authentication
of the said rolls, and generally for all purposes incidental to the
operation of this Act.
Division G.
Arrangements preliminary to Federal Flections.
14. The Governor-in-Council shall appoint a Returning Officer
for each and every Federal Electoral District, and such Returning
Officers shall perform the same duties, exercise the same powers,
and have the same rights as Returning Officers for Electoral
Districts of the Legislative Assembly.
15. As soon as possible after the proclamation of this Act, the
Premier shall place himself in communication with the Govern-
ments of the Colonies whose Parliaments have passed Acts con-
taining provisions substantially the same and corresponding in
scope and intent with this Act, and he shall endeavour to arrange
with them to fix (1) a common day for the issue of writs for the
Election of Representatives to attend and serve in the Australasian
Federal Congress, and (2) a common day for the holding of the
Elections in and throughout the several colonies, so that the
proceedings from the inception may appear to be founded on
Federal action.
Division 7.
Issue of Writs.
16. L T pon a day to be agreed upon, in concert with the Govern-
ments of other colonies concurring, writs shall be issued under
the hand of the Governor, addressed to the Returning Officers of
the Federal Electoral Districts, directing them to proceed to hold
an Election under this Act upon a day to be named therein, and
to do all things necessary according to law, but the Elections
shall take place in all the said districts upon one and the same
day.


17. Thereupon the lieturning Officers for the said districts
shall proceed to hold the Elections in accordance with the direc-
tions in the said writs.
18. All the provisions of Parts IY and Y of the Constitution
Act Amendment Act, 1890, relating to the nomination of candi-
dates, and the conduct and regulation of Elections for the Legis-
lative Assembly shall apply to Elections under this Act, and such
provisions shall he deemed to be incorporated in and be read with
this Act mutatis mutandis so far as they may be applicable, pro-
vided that the polling shall in all the Eederal Electoral Districts
commence at 8 a.m. and terminate at 8 p.m. on the day of
Election.
Division 8.
Heturn of Writs.
19. As soon as convenient after the Elections have been held
under this Act the Returning Officers shall make return of their
writs in accordance with directions therein.
20. The Chief Secretary shall thereupon make out credentials
of election under the seal of the Colony certifying the due election
of those Representatives whose names are returned in the writs.
21. Each Representative shall receive a credential of his
election, which shall be the only evidence required to entitle him
to take his seat in the Australasian Eederal Congress.
Division 9.
Election Appeals.
22. Any defeated candidate or any Elector of a Eederal
Electoral District desirous of testing the legality of any Election
of a Representative returned as duly elected may appeal by
petition to a Judge of the Supreme Court within fourteen days
after the holding of the Election.
23. Such a petition shall be in the same form and subject to
the same conditions, rights, duties, and liabilities as a similar
petition to the Elections and Qualifications Committee of the
Legislative Assembly.
24. Such Judge shall exercise all the powers and jurisdiction
of the said Elections and Qualifications Committee in every
respect whatsoever.
25. Should such Judge declare the petitioner to be dulv
elected he shall be entitled to receive the credential of.election
provided in section 20 of this Act, and any such credential
previously granted to a Representative who has been deprived of
his seat shall thereupon become null and void.


2fi. Should such Judge declare the Election void, a new writ
shall be issued by the Governor in the same manner as a new
writ would be issued in like circumstances upon a similar
declaration by the Elections and Qualifications Committee.
27. Upon the presentation of such a petition it shall be the
duty of the said Judge to hear and determine the same as soon
as possible, and to refuse to permit any dilatory proceeding on
the part either of the petitioner or the respondent.
Division 10.
Reimbursement of Expenses of Representatives.
28. Each Representative duly elected to serve in the Austra-
lasian Federal Congress shall be entitled to be paid out of the
Consolidated Revenue (1) the sum of one guinea per diem from
the time of his election to the date of his ceasing to hold office,
(2) the sum of one guinea for every sitting of the Congress which
he attends, and which attendance shall be duly recorded by his
own signature in an attendance book, and (3) first-class railway
fare for every journey not exceeding one journey per week which
he shall actually travel, and for which he shall pay between his
district and the place of the sitting of the Congress.
29. No Representative shall be permitted to ask for or receive
or use a free railway pass from any Government or private
railway during his term of office, but this prohibition shall not
apply to Representatives who happen to be also Members of an} r
Australasian Legislature or to those holding free railway passes
conferred upon them for past political services.
Division 11.
Arrangements preliminary to Sitting of Congress.
30. As «oon as convenient after the return of the writs the
Premier shall communicate with the Governments of the other
colonies in which similar Elections shall have taken place, and
shall enter into negotiations with the said other Governments
as to a suitable time and place for the holding of the Congress.
31. Such time and place shall, if possible, be mutually agreed
upon by the Premiers of the said colonies, but if not mutually
agreed upon then such time and place shall be fixed by a
majority thereof, and if the voting number be equal then the
Premier of the senior colony shall fix the same.
82. As soon as such time and place have been either mutually
agreed to or fixed by a majority or fixed by the Premier of the
senior Colony as aforesaid, a proclamation shall be published in


the Government Gazette under the hand of the Governor
requiring the duly elected Federal Eepresentatives to give their
attendance at such time and place, and then and there to
proceed to the despatch of business.
Division 12.
The Congress.
33. The Federal Eepresentatives of this Colony shall give their
attendance at the time and place pursuant to proclamation.
34. The Congress shall be opened by an officer appointed by
commission under the hand of the Governor of the Colony in
which it shall be appointed to meet.
35. Each Eepresentative shall present his credential of election,
and upon taking the oath of office shall sign his name in the roll
of members.
_ 36. The oath of office to be taken by the Federal Eepresenta-
tives of this Colony shall be the same as that subscribed to by
Members of the Legislature of this Colony before taking their
seats.
37. After the swearing in and enrolment of Eepresentatives
in attendance, the Congress shall proceed to the election of a
President, who shall be appointed by the votes or voices of the
majority present.
38. The Congress shall next appoint a Clerk at the table, and
at a suitable time a Chairman of Committees of the whole.
39. The Congress shall make such arrangements as it thinks
fit for the publication of its debates and for the adoption of
standing orders regulating its proceedings.
40. IJpon the completion of all necessary and preliminary
arrangements for dispatch of business, the Congress shall proceed
to the consideration of the principles, details, and form of a con-
stitution for the Federation of the Australasian Colonies.
41. The sittings of the Congress shall be continued from time
to time according to the convenience of Eepresentatives, and shall
proceed until a Constitution for the Federation of the Austral-
asian Colonies shall have been adopted.
42. The rules of procedure shall be such as are usually
observed by deli berative assemblies framed on the model of the
House of Commons, except so far as those rules may be modified
by the standing orders adopted by the Congress.
43. On every question submitted to the Congress the vote of
the majority present shall prevail.


44. No sitting of the Congress shall commence or continue
unless a quorum of Representatives be in attendance.
45. A quorum of the Congress shall consist of an absolute
majority of Representatives.
4G. As soon as theßederal Constitution shall have been drawn
in the form of a Parliamentary bill, and duly approved and
passed by the Congress, the President shall declare the Congress
to be dissolved.
47. The term of office of each Representative shall be deemed
to expire at the end of fourteen days from the dissolution of the
Congress.
48. Within the said fourteen days the Pederal Representatives
of this Colony shall present a true copy of the Pederal Constitu-
tion Bill to the Governor thereof.
Division 13.
Expenses of the Congress.
49. The Federal Representatives of this Colony shall concur in
making provision for payment of all expenses incidental to the
meetings of the Congress, clerical work, printing and publication
of debates and A r otes and proceedings on the basis that each
Colony shall contribute an equal share towards the said expense.
50. The Treasurer of the Colony shall pay or cause to be paid
out of the Consolidated Revenue such money as he shall ascertain
to be due under the last preceding section.
51. The Treasurer of the Colony shall pay or cause to be paid
out of the Consolidated Revenue to Pederal Representatives the
expenses ascertained to be due to such Representatives under
section 28 of this Act, such payment to be made from month to
month.
Division 14.
Vacancies in the Congress.
52. Should the seat of any Pederal Representative of this
Colony in the said Congress become vacant before the dissolution
thereof through death or through resignation tendered to and
accepted by the G-overnor, or any disability or forfeiture as
hereinbefore provided, a writ shall be forthwith issued by the
Governor for the Election of a Representative to the vacant seat
in the same manner and under the same law and subject to the
same conditions that a writ would in like circumstances be issued
for the Election of a Member of the Legislative Assembly.


Division 15.
The Federal Constitution Bill.
53. Dp on the presentation to the Governor of a true copy of
the Federal Constitution Bill, the Premier shall communicate
with the Governments of the Colonies reprcsentedin the Congress,
and shall with them arrange a convenient date when and upon
which the said Bill shall be referred to the Federal Electors of
each concurring Colony for their final determination ; and
arrangements shall be made so that the said Bill shall be so
referred to the said Electors in each Colony on one and the
same day.
54. The said Bill shall bo printed and a copy thereof shall be
delivered by post to each Federal Elector whose name appears
on the Federal Electoral 801 l at the address appearing m the
said Roll.
55. A condensed report of the debates in the Congress con-
cerning the said Bill shall be printed, and a copy thereof shall be
delivered by post to each Federal Elector on application to the
Government Printer.
Division IG.
The Referendum .
SG. As soon as a common day shall have been agreed to as
provided in section 53, the Returning Officer of each Federal
Electoral District shall be instructed by the Chief Secretary to
make the necessary arrangements for the referendum of the said
Bill to the said Electors.
57. The Chief Secretary shall cause ballot-papers to be pre-
pared and printed in the form of the second schedule to this
Act, and shall cause to be forwarded to each Returning Officer a
sufficient number of ballot-papers, so as to provide one for each
Elector whose name is on the Federal Electoral Roll.
58. The Returning Officer of each Federal Electoral District
shall thereupon give public notice of the day appointed for the
holding of the referendum, and he shall name the polling booths
at which the votes shall be taken and the hours within which fhe
said votes may be recorded and giving also full directions as to
the method of voting for or against the said Bill.
59. The Returning Officer may appoint by the said notice as
many polling booths within the Federal Electoral District as may
be necessary and convenient, but the Federal Electors shall only
record their votes in the division or one of the divisions for
which their names are duly enrolled.


60. No Federal Elector shall record his vote at more than one
polling booth in one division of any Federal Electoral District,
and no such Elector shall record his vote in more than one
district on the occasion of such referendum, and any person
violating this law shall be guilty of a misdemeanor and shall be
liable to a fine of not exceeding £5O, or to a term of imprison-
ment not exceeding six months for each offence.
61. The provision of Parts IY and Y of the Constitution Act
Amendment Act, 1890, relating to the preliminary arrangements
for and the conduct and regulation of the proceedings at Elec-
tions for the Legislative Assembly shall so far as applicable be
deemed to be incorporated in this division of this Act.
62. The polling shall commence at the hour of 8 a.m. and shall
close at the hour of 8 p.m. on the day appointed.
68. Each Federal Elector upon entering the polling booth shall
be presented with a copy of the ballot-paper printed in the form
of the second schedule to this Act, which shall require him to
erase the word “No” if he wishes to vote in favour of the said
Bill, and to erase the word “Tes” if he wishes to vote against
the said Bill.
64. The Returning Officer or his deputy may explain to any
Elector making inquiries the manner in which he may exercise
his vote, but shall not in any way whatever induce or persuade
him how to vote.
65. No Elector shall receive more than one ballot-paper under
any circumstances whatsoever.
66. Upon the Elector erasing the word “ Yes” or “ No” on the
ballot-paper he shall deposit the same in the ballot-box.
67. After the expiration of the time appointed for the taking
of the poll, the Returning Officer or his deputy shall proceed to
open the ballot-box and examine the ballot-papers and ascertain
the result by counting the number of votes for and against the
said Bill.
68. The Returning Officer shall, as soon as convenient, advertise
the result of the polling, and shall forward to the Chief Secretary
a return under his hand certifying the number of votes recorded
in his district for and against the said Bill.
69. The Chief Secretary shall, upon receiving the returns from
all the Federal Electoral Districts, proceed to ascertain the total
number of votes recorded in all the Electoral Districts for the
said Bill and the total number of votes recorded in all the
Electoral Districts against the said Bill.
70. If the total number of votes recorded in all the said dis-
tricts in favour of the said Bill be found to be greater than the


total number of votes recorded in all the said districts against the
said Bill then the said Bill shall be deemed to be adopted, ratified,
and approved by the Federal Electors of the Colony.
71. If the total nnmber of votes recorded in all the said dis-
tricts against the said Bill be found to be greater than the total
number of votes recorded in all the said districts in favour of the
said Bill, then the said Bill shall be deemed to be lost.
72. If the said Bill be adopted, ratified, and approved by the
Federal Electors of this Colony and also by the Federal Electors
of one or more of the Colonies represented in the said Congress,
the Governor shall forthwith transmit a true copy of the said
Bill to the Secretary of State for the Colonies, requesting that
Her Majesty’s Imperial Ministers shall forthwith take steps to
introduce the same into the Imperial Parliament with a view to
its being passed into law.
FIRST SCHEDULE.
Note —Let the G-overnment Statist consider the Electoral
Districts for the Legislative Assembly and form them into
Federal Electoral Districts with convenient divisions according
to population, retaining the boundaries of existing divisions as
far as possible. But not more than ten (10) representatives
must be returned by all the districts.
SECOND SCHEDULE.
The Australasian Federal Constitution Bill.
EEFERENDUM BALLOT-PAPEE.
I Vote—
YES
DIRECTION. CAUTION.
If you are in favour of the Bill erase the above word NO.
If you are against the Bill erase the above word YES.


PROPOSALS FOR FRAMING FEDERAL
CONSTITUTION.
Eeport of the Select Committee appointed to
consider and report upon the proposals con-
tained in a Draft Bill intituled “ The Austral-
asian Federal Congress Act of 1894.”
Your Committee have held several meetings,
and have fully discussed the Draft submitted by
the Bendigo Branch, at the instance of its author,
the President, Dr. Quick.
The two main proposals are, (i) that the initiative
of the Pederation Bill or resolutions should he the
election of representatives expressly charged with
the duty of considering and arriving at a just plan
of Pederation, every such representative to he chosen
according to the franchise for elections to the House
of Assembly in his Colony; (ii) that the Federal
Constitution so prepared should he submitted for
acceptance or rejection to a general vote of the
people of each Colony, the Parliamentary franchise
being again the voting basis.
With these main ideas the Committee agree. The
goodwill and confidence of the people of each
Colony are indispensable to success in achieving
and maintaining Pederation. That the initiative
and the final decision should alike be in the hands
of the people themselves would be a security for
the attainment of these essentials.


In speaking of the “initiation” of a Federal
Constitution, your Committee must not he taken to
ignore the Draft Commonwealth Bill prepared by
the Parliamentary Convention of 1891, That
instrument is beyond all denial a valuable contribu-
tion to the settlement of the question. The debates
and labours of the body which framed it were
intellectual and instructive ; and it is certain that
they have materially promoted an understanding of
the principles of a true Federation. Your Com-
mittee believe that the majority of the provisions
of that Bill will be found in the Federal Consti-
tution which will be ultimately adopted, and that
the bodies now proposed to be called into existence
will find the apt arrangement of its clauses a most
convenient framework in which to place in their
order the provisions of any new measure. But any
reluctance evinced in accepting the proposals
hitherto put forward has, in your Committee’s
opinion, been in great part due to the absence of a
popular initiative. Such an initiative they hold that
it would be both just and politic now to provide.
What then should be the form and scope of the
proposed popular conventions ? Dr. Quick’s view
is that they should take the form of a “ Federal
Congress,” a conjoint body of representatives from
the several Colonies meeting together for the
preparation of a Bill to be submitted to the final
vote of the people of each Colony. It is at this
point first that your Committee would suggest a
modification in form of Dr. Quick’s plan. They
admire its spirit and aim, but they cannot help
perceiving that the deliberations of such a body
might have results which would fail to command
the approval of the separate Colonies at a subsequent
referendum. It must be remembered that the
proposal is, that the constitution to be framed by


the Federal Congress shall he final. No revision or
adjustment is held in view. The one further act
contemplated is a vote of the people of each Colony,
who must either take the scheme “ with all its
imperfections on its head,” or stand aloof from the
Federation.
It will be seen, then, that if the representatives
of one or more of the Colonies were overborne at
the Federal Congress on questions which their
electors deemed of essential importance, nothing
could save the whole scheme from destruction in
the referendum, at the hands of the people of the
Colony or Colonies affected. In view of a result so
probable, a danger so imminent, it will scarcely he
prudent to expend the time and labour involved,
unless some process he provided which will sensibly
diminish the peril of final disagreement. It is not
pretended that any process can he suggested which
will he quite free from dangers of this kind. But,
as they cannot he removed, it is the more incumbent
to attempt everything in reason to reduce them.
In what way, then, can the views of the various
Colonies he best ascertained and brought into agree-
ment ? If that question can he solved and that
security gained (without sacrificing the people’s
initiative or their final electoral decision), we shall
have promise of the greatest wisdom in the framing
of the Constitution, and the greatest probability of
its final adoption. Your Committee believe that
the best way of ascertaining the opinions of the
several Colonies will he the election by each Colony,
under the Parliamentary suffrage, hut without a
plural vote in any case, of a “ State Convention,”
to formulate that Colony’s ideas of a judicious plan
of Federation. Any citizen qualified to vote at an
election to the Legislative Assembly would he
entitled to vote at the election of this Convention.


Any citizen qualified to be elected to the Legislative
Assembly, whether he be a member of that body or
not, should be qualified to sit if chosen as a member
of the Convention. When the several State Con-
ventions have concluded their labours, and the
Australian public have been made aware of the
formulated opinions of the Colonies, separately
arrived at, your Committee suggest that a Parlia-
mentary Convention—a Federal, not a Provincial
body —should be appointed to bring into harmony
the opinions so formulated, and evolve from them
a Federal Constitution just to all concerned. Such
a body would begin with a great advantage over the
Convention of 1891. It would have before it an
intelligible statement of every divergence of opinion,
at any rate in matters of principle; its members
would withal be representative each of his Colony;
thus each of them would act under the definite
sense of responsibility to the appointing Colony,
while all nevertheless be controlled by the
charge and duty of harmonising differences of
opinion. As this charge would be the very reason
of their existence as a federative body, the necessity
of arriving at an agreement would be the governing
consideration, while the responsibility of each to his
Colony would impel him to see to it that such an
agreement was just.
How, then, should the Federal Convention, to
follow the popular State Conventions, be composed
and appointed ? The answer to this question is not
difficult when we consider the duty to be done. We
have already described that duty. Is it not clear
that Parliamentary knowledge and experience are
the best qualifications for its performance ? If we
admit that the best laws are those which do justice
between conflicting interests, and represent a due
discrimination between contending opinions, we


recognise that the best of the men trained to the
making of laws are likely to he the fittest for the
work of bringing, as nearly as possible, into agree-
ment the views formulated by the State Conventions.
In our judgment, then, the Federal Convention
should be composed of men selected from the several
Legislatures. And inasmuch as those who oftenest
see them at work, and are able to observe them
most closely, are likely to make the best choice, we
believe that the members of this body should not
only be members of, but should be chosen by, the
Parliaments. We have arrived at this view after
very patient consideration. We think its adoption
affords the best promise of an adjustment of the
opinions of the Colonies, ascertained through their
popular Conventions. We believe that such an
adjustment would be arrived at under full responsi-
bility, and therefore with perfect loyalty to the
political tendencies of those opinions, as well as due
regard to their quality of local concernment.
Under all the safeguards to local interests and all
the responsibility to popular opinions secured by
these processes, a Constitution would be arrived at
which could be submitted with hope and confidence
to the final judgment of the people of each Colony,
voting “aye” or “no.” If the Constitution is found
generous enough and democratic enough for us of
New South Wales, it will not become less liberal if
it is also adopted by neighbours of ours, whatever
their franchise. With the widest suffrage of each
Colony for its initiative, with the best political intel-
lects of all the Colonies working together for con-
ciliation and just agreement, and with a second
reference to the popular vote for its final approval,
there can be little fear for the breadth of its prin-
ciples, its justice to provincial rights, or its claim
to the consequent favour of the people.


To recapitulate, tlie scheme which your Com-
mittee recommend as a modification of 3)r. Quick’s
proposals may he shortly summarised as follows :
That a Bill he introduced in each of the Australian
Legislatures, providing for all the consecutive
stages of the following complete process —■
(1.) The people of each Colony to elect, under
their popular Parliamentary suffrage, and
without plural voting, a separate State
Convention, to formulate that Colony’s
views of a judicious plan of Pederation.
(2.) Each of the Legislatures to elect members
to form a Eederal Convention, which shall
consider the resolutions of the State Con-
ventions, and shall proceed to frame a
Eederal Constitution, in which the views
of the several Colonies shall, as far as
practicable, be harmonised.
(8.) The Constitution to he submitted, by
means of a referendum , to the people of
each Colony.
(4.) The Constitution, if accepted by a sufficient
number of Colonies, to be forwarded to
the Imperial Government to be passed into
law for the Eederation of the Colonies then
or afterwards accepting it.
One signal advantage can he claimed in common
for Dr. Quick’s proposals and for those of this Beport.
Whichever may he adopted and receive statutory
authority, there will be no further occasion to burden
the local Parliaments with the consideration of a
Constitution Bill in detail. That function will he
performed by bodies working outside the actual
sphere of Parliament, hut equally responsible to
the people. Yet the Legislature, if our proposals
he carried into effect, will have its share of the


responsibility by electing its members to the Federal
Convention, and its share of the pride in good work
done when the Constitution is ultimately approved.
Eut the gain to the cause of Federation will be that
its progress will be no longer hampered and delayed
by precedence given to urgent domestic legislation.
On the other hand, those who protest that the all-
important question has in the past been forced into
consideration, to the detriment of provincial projects
which they have espoused, ought at least to welcome
a proposal, the adoption of which will leave the
field of Parliament clear for ordinary legislation.
There are many matters connected with the sub-
ject of tins Report on which your Committee have
deemed it wise not to make any special recom-
mendation. Eut if the League so far approves of
the present proposals as to invite the opinion of the
various branches upon them, these other matters
might be profitably discussed at the same time. In
this connection a suggestion has been made by one
of your Committee*, which is commended to the
favourable consideration of the League. It is, that
a Conference of delegates from all branches, whether
established in this Colony or not, should be called
at an early and convenient date to discuss Er. Quick’s
proposals and this Report, together with such other
matters relative to the subject as require an expres-
sion of the opinions of the whole organisation.
Among these questions would be the following; —
( a ) What should be the number of represen-
tatives at a State Convention ?
( b ) Should a Colony, for the purpose of electing
a State Convention, be divided into large
Electoral Districts, or treated as one con-
stituency ?
* Mr. John Young.


(<?) Should each Elector he required to vote for
as many Candidates as there are to he
representatives elected ?
(' d ) Should the members of a State Convention
he reimbursed for loss of time and travel-
ling expenses ?
(c) The like as to a Eederal Convention ?
( f) If the proposals of the several State Con-
ventions are to be submitted to a Eederal
Convention to be chosen by the several
Parliaments, should the two Houses of
each Parliament sit and vote together, or
separately, for the purpose ofsuch Election?
[g) Should a Colony, not having held a State
Convention, be debarred from sending
delegates to a subsequent Eederal Conven-
tion ?
Such questions, and many others, would form
subjects of interesting and practical debate in the
event of a representative Conference being held.
It must not be forgotten, that any adopted proposals
for the concurrent dealing with the question of
Federation by the Colonies concerned would require
to be carried into effect by the passage of an
enabling Bill through each Legislature ; and on
the several subjects just stated, such a Bill ought
to make definite provision.
Your Committee cannot conclude this Beport
without expressing their grateful sense of the ser-
vices rendered by Hr. Quick, and the League of
which he is the President, in preparing and sub-
mitting the Bill, the main features of which have
been discussed in this Beport. Dr. Quick has
advocated his proposals, before your League and
elsewhere, with an earnestness, and in a spirit of
fair concession, which entitle him to the goodwill


and the thanks of every advocate of Federation.
While your Committee regret that they cannot agree
with him in every point, they feel satisfaction at the
extent to which agreement in principle has pro-
ceeded. They now leave the matter to the considera-
tion of your League, confident that the materials at
hand can be made the basis of a plan of action
which would leave the early consummation of the
Union no longer a subject of doubt.
EDMUND BALTON.
A. P. CANA WAY.
Mb P. CULLEN.
EDWABD DOWLING.
A. EOBSYTH
E. B. EBEEHILL
B. B. GABBAN.
L E. HENNESSY.
W. P. MANNING,
Mayor of Sydney.
W. SCOTT.
JOHN YOUNG.
Adopted by Central League,
15th March, 1891.


AUSTRALASIAN FEDERATION LEAGUE.
Sydney : Charles Potter, Government Printer.—lB94.
33


■
*&■


FEDERATION CONVENTION.
TO THE
ELECTORS
OF NEW
SOUTH
WALES.
After much hesitation, and with a full Don, would be to set up the machinery by and services it is proposed to hand over to
sense of the responsibility devolving upon which the interests of the whole common~ the Federal Government unless assured (1)
those who may be chosen as your delegates, wealth might be subordinated to those of a that the amount (less the share of federal
I venture to offer myself as a Candidate in section. This is exactly what happens now, expenses) is refunded to them; or (2) the
connection with the forthcoming Federal and if it is desired to perpetuate such a sys- Federal Government also takes over obliga-
Convention. tem federation is out of plac-. It is to give tions of an equivalent amount. As it is de-
Convention. tem federation is out of plac-*. It is to give
The absence ot an open, avowed anti* to the smaller States, in addition to their sirable that the State and Federal Govern-
federal party and the very general expres- proportional representation in the one bouse ments should not come into contact more
_ i i • • ..t . _ n in flirt rtt-hrtM mrtMrt rtrtm nl rtfrt fKnn vo oKonlnfalw nooooDortr anti oKnna oil
sion of favourable opinion warrant the as- a power of veto in the other, more complete than is absolutely necessary, and, above all,
sumption that there is practical agreement and illogical than any exercised outside of an that the finances of the former should not
as to the desirableness of federation, and absolute monarchy. Under a true federation, be dependent upon the fluctuating amounts
relieve me of the necessity of saying more on the central Government has no connection which it would receive from the latter if the
this point than that lam an earnest advocate with, and need have no knowledge of, the first plan were adopted, it is clearly prefer-
of Australian union, and hold that its at- States as separate entities. Its business is able to adhere to the second, and to charge
tainment is possible upon conditions imme- simply with the individual citizens who the Federal Government with obligations
diately satisfactory to you, and permanently stand before it upon terms of perfect equal- proportional with the revenues handed over
beneficial to the whole of the participants in ity. That equality is violated, however, if to it. This would prevent any complica-
that larger national life which, if tuccessful, certain groups of citizens are given an undue tions between the central and provincial
the coming Convention will usher into exist- share in the government of the whole, especi- governments, and would fend to ensure
ence ally if, as provided in the Commonwealth economy in the domain of federal finance.
The purpose of federation is to secure to Hill, that share may amount to an absolute Tnis equalisation could be largely secured
the federated States the advantages of cb- veto. While it may ultimately be found by banding over the State debts to the
operation in matters of common interest, necessary to make some concessions upon Federal Government, a proiedure that offers
while leaving untouched their individual- this point, in order to secure the inclusion of the additional advantage that as loans now
existence, and unimpaired their right of the smaller States, holding these opinions, I current fall due it would, in providing for
individual action in purely State matters, can only regard it as imperative that the their renewal, be possible to effect their con-
It is a device for securing the strength of representatives of this colony should endea- solidation at a lower interest rate than
union, while retaining the freedom of inde- vour to frame the constitution with as near might otherwise be the case.
pendence. In aiming at its accomplishment an approach as is possible to proportional I strong y oppose the separate account
federationists have at all times been con- representation. If, however, it is deemed proposal, which its support mainly
fronted with the difficulty of reconciling the desirable for purposes of adequate expression from the inequalities existing in the revenue
sovereign rights of the State as separate to allot the States equal represention, then and expendimre of the several colonies
entities with the sovereign rights of the the powers of the Senate should be limited under their widely different and antagonis-
people as a nation; of determining whether to those of revision, and of insuring recon- tic policies and methods of managements
the basis of representation in the Federal sidetation of measures with which it dis- Under uniform federal control and policy.
Parliament should be per State or per citizen, agrees. This could conveniently and safely these inequalities would be smoothed out to
On the one hand it has been, and is, u"ged be secured by ordaining that a measure the point of practical disappearance. But
that the federation is a union of equal States, rejected by the Senate should become law if with regard to certain services, and to the
and that each State ought therefore to be subs-qi ently re-affirmed by the House of State debts proposed to be transferred to the
accorded an equal voice in the determination Representatives by a specified majority. Federal Government inequalities exist which
of federal affairs. On the other hand, it is I dissent from the Draft Bill provisions for would require adjustment. Ought this
contended that the federation is a union of the election of senators by the S'ate Legisla- adjustment to be an annual one, subject to
equal citizens, and that representation ought tures, advocating, instead, election by the all the influences of unforeseen contin-
. .■* > . * i • v •• i i * vtrt/vnlrt fTnri rtino qtv ii m rtorfn iTI Grin n nr# nlamnn 4-
therefore to be proportional with population, people. gencies, an uncertain and disturbing element
K ‘ . 1 1 T 1 .1 5 __.sA.l_ *.l 1 » . ll X. 5 U..4.U V .1 1 J Cfs-nlrt 1. J.
The former is alleged to be necessary to se» I also disagree with the proposal in that in both F. deral and State finance, or ought
cure the “rights” of the separate States, bill to adopt as the franchise of the federal it to be a definite and final adjustment, made
and to prevent the smaller ones being com electors that existing, or which may be at the commencement of the Federal part*
dll LI I KJ Ul D* tuti Ili v> siunuvi vuv/o - or v i.LI 1
pletely absorbed and overshadowed by *heir I adopted, in the several States. In addition nership / I advocate the latter, on a plan
larger neighbours. Against this it is con Jto the inequalities which this would estab- approximately that adopted by the Canadian
tended that if equal representation be ac" | Ush, it is an incongruity to deny to the federation. Each State would thus enter
corded it would be possible for the larger ; federal electors the right through their re- into the union with a fixed annual obliga-
number of smaller States, containing a presentatives to determine the franchi-e for tion between it and the Federation—which
minority of population, by acting in concert, themselves. It is said that for the Federal could even be determined before union—
to override the smaller number of large Parliament to fix the franchise would be an outside of which the finances would be
States, containing a majority of the people, interference with matters internal to a absolutely independent of federal finances
The question is—ought the representation to f Stare. It would be if it were proposed to and federal policy ; while the Federal Gov-
be equal for each State, or proportional with empower the Federal Parliament to fix the eminent would be under the obligation of
the number of citizens? This question is franchise for the e eetors of the State raising the revenue it desired to spend, in-
equally present with a single-chamber Par- Legislature. But as the State Legislature stead of being in a position to expend money
liament, as with a bi-cameral one. The would be at liberty to fix the franchise of propeily belonging to the States, and upon
framers of the American Constitution arrived State electors, so ought the Federal Legis- which the State Governments might be de-
at an agreement by the adoption of the latureto fix tha; of the Federal electors, pending,
“ Connecticut compromise,” which provided At the Bathurst Convention I submitted an The federalisation of the railways I hold
for two Houses of Parliament, with proper- amendment which, while adopting the to be necessary to ensure a cessation of the
tional representation of the people in one— existing franchises for the first election, war of differential rates. Unless this be
the House of Representative*—and equal made it ooligatory upon the Federal Parlia- accomplished, there is no prospect of that
representation of the States in the other— meut to subsequently frame an uniform free flow of trade and commerce rightly
the Senate. This plan has been followed in federal franchise. I regarded as one of the highest advantages
the Draft Commonwealth Bill. After a full I favor one adult one vote, but regard its of union. 'lhe provisions submitted in the
consideration of the subject, and of the high incorporation iu the constitution at present j previous paragraph would shield New
authorities supporting this compromise, I as impossible ; while to stipulate that any South Wales from any loss to her resulting
autuunvivo , [ » i. •/ t , - _
am unable to regard it as other than a means less liberal franchise should he inserted in from the unification of her more profitable
whereby a minority is enabled to predomin- the constitution would be to shut out the lines with the less profitable ones of neigh-*
ate over a majority. If there should occur a opportunity of obtaining (without an amend- bouring colonies.
die ''vet a uioju* . xa • ito.v ouvmxv* j ~ o ' cue • J i • ~ . _
conflict between the larger and smaller ment of the constitution) that broader one, oo far as time and my limited means will
States, it is more reasonable that the will of 1 the attainment of which I regard as only a permit, I shall endeavour to speak at the
the majority of the people should prevail question of time. Secured lull liberty to larger centres of population In further ex-
over that of the minority, than that the determine the franchise for themselves, the plauation of my views.
minority should prevail over the majority, people are not likely to be less vigilant in Ido not think that lin any way under-
It is contended that equal representation is th** protection of their political rights than, rate'the magnitude and importance, or the
necessary in order to safeguard “state iu their separate States, they have been complex difficulties, surrounding the work
ucccoofM jr viviva ~ r > J , * , , T , 11
rights. The answer is that these rights can active in securing them. pf lt is a work call'*
be protected by the constitution, which will In providing for the adjustment of fin* mg for and requiring the highest patriotism,
* % .i. • • a i • 1 x xl lit _.3 A 5 1t U mix] flirt n Kloof o ttV ifla (if fn AQQ nAn Ai-nxi i«r tf Vi
secure to each State inviolable protection ances between the Federation and the States, and the ablest efforts of those honored with
oebure iu v.t»vu wimv'* j,. ” » » ,
against federal interference in purely State certain leading factors must be kept clearly your confidence.
concerns. But the mere fact of transferring in view. The revenues to be handed over to ( As an earnest student of the principles of
certain matters to the federal authority is an the Federal Government will necessarily be ( federation, who has taken, I trust, a not
admission that the questions involved are such as to leave a considerable surplus over i altogether profitless p*rt in the recent dis-
not of merely State, but are of federal im- the purely federal expenditure. A surplus • cussion on this great subject, I venture to
portance. and ought to be regulated with a in the hands of a Government is at all times ) present my views for your consideration,
view to the interests of the whole common- a temptation to extravagant expenditure, i E. D, Milusn.
wealth. Yet, to grant equal representation Further, the States cannot afford to give up { Legislative Assembly,
to the States, irrespective of their popula- the revenue in connection with the taxation . January 23, 1897.


THE FEDERATION CONVENTION.
TO THE ELECTORS OF NEW SOUTH WALES
(REPRINTED FROM THE SYDNEY
“ DAILY TELEGRAPH.”)
In announcing myself as a candidate for
the forthcoming Federation Convention, it
would be idle for me to discuss the ques-
tion as to whether a union of the Australian
colonies is desirable. The passage through
Parliament of the Federation Enabling Act,
of which in my place in the Legislative
Assembly I was a warm supporter, may
fairly be regarded as a proof that the,
people of New South Wales are in favor of
the principle of Australian union. Ic is for
the same people to say at a later stage
whether the draft agreement, which I hope
will be the outcome of the labors of the
coming Convention, affords to their interests
as and to the interests of Aus-
tralian people generally, those safeguards
the absence of which would render our last
state worse than our first.
The passage of the “ Federation” Enabling
Act does more than affirm the principle of
Australian union. It pronounces in favor of
the principle of “Federation” as distin-
guished from “unification.” It does not
commission the delegates of the various
colonies to engage upon the work of framing
a Constitution under which all existing
Australian Governments will merge into one
big consolidated Government, and each
existing colony be converted into a mere
municipality ; but to devise a scheme
whereby a large measure of national unity
will be secured by means of a delegation to
the Federal Parliament of certain powers,
in the exercise of which all Australians may
be considered to have a common interest,
while the individuality of each separate State
is preserved to the extent that it will continue
to exercise powers just as sovereign os those
it now possesses in respect of all matters
not expressly transferred by the Constitution
Act of the Federation to the domain of the
Federal Parliament. The Convention dele-
gates, in short, will be charged with the
duty of shaping the foundations of a
“ Federation” —which has been defined as
“ a political contrivance intended to recon-
cile national unity and power with the
maintenance of State Rights.” The form
of Federal Government, wherever it exists,
has, generally speaking, been the outcome
of a desire on the part of communities
politically independent of one another to
unite for certain purposes of common in-
terest, while retaining full independence in
regard to all other matters. A potent con-
tributory cause of the adoption of the
Federal form of Government has been the
aversion felt by small States to complete
absorption by larger ones, with whom they
have some things, but not all things, in
common. The Federations of the world, in this
sense, therefore represent a compromise be 1
tween larger and smaller States; and the final
shape of a Federal Constitution depends large-
ly upon the extent to which the several con-
tracting States are desirous of preserving
their independence, and upon how far the
people of one State are prepared to trust
the. peoples of the others.
Each of the world’s Federations have re-
cognised two methods of giving effect to the
principle of State Rights. One is, as I have
already remarked, by limiting the range of
subjects with which it is competent for the
Federal Legislature to deal. The Constitu-
tions of the United States and Switzerland
specify the subjects upon which the
Federal Parliament may legislate, the
States having the power to deal with all
other matters. In Canada the position is
reversed, and the Federal Parliament has
the power to legislate upon all subjectsexcept
those expressly retained by the States. But
in each case the different domains of Federal
and State Parliaments are strictly defined.
The other way chosen for giving effect to
the principle of State rights is by recognis-
ing in the Constitution of the Federal Par-
liament two distinct units of representation;
- -Ist. The citizen of the Federation. 2nd.
The State. It is in fixing the relative
powers of these two units that the real crux
of the Federation problem lies. The Com-
monwealth Bill framed by the Convention
of 1891 provides tha* the Federal Parliament
shall consist of two Chambers —the House of
Representatives and the Senate. “The
House,” it is provided, shall be elected by
the voters of the various States, every 30,000
people being entitled to one representative.
The Senate, the Bill provides, shall be
be composed of eight representatives of each
State, irrespee ive of its population. It shall
have powers similar to those possessed by
the Legislative Council of New South Wales
—co-equil in all respects with those of the
House, except that it may not originate or
increase taxation, and may not amend a
money bill. The seriousness of such a pro-
posal as this is obvious. Assuming the
Federation at the outset to consist of New
South Wales, Victoria, South Australia,
Tasmania, and Western Australia, the two
first-named States, representing 2J millions
of people, would have sixteen members in
the Senate, whilst the three last-named,
representing 700,000 people, would be repre-
sented by twenty-four Senators, By such
an arrangement as this, the representatives
of less than a quarter of the whole popula-
tion of the nation could keep, on some large
national question, the rest of the people at
bay for ever. I hooe that I view the ques-
tion of Federation in all its aspects from a
standpoint purely Australian. I certainly
do not feel in the slightest degree concerned
as to what effect the union of the colonies
would have up >n the relative positions of
the integral parts of the Commonwealth,
but it is impossible for me to view with
complacency a constitutional provision which
would deliver not two large States into the
hands of three small States —for, to me, as
I believe, to the great mass of the people,
the “State entity,” when divorced from the
entity of flesh and blood, is a mere political
figment—hut more than three millions of
people into the keeping of seven hundred
thousand people ! As an Australian, I can-
not admit that necessity exists for such a
full recognition of State Rights in the
Federal Parliament as the Commonwealth
Bill proposes. What inspires most men
with their enthusiasm for Federation is that,
being brothers, Australians should form one
nation. But could we regard ourselves as
really a nation, if in the constitution of our
Federal Parliament the elements of that
disunion which we profess to desire to leave
behind us were to rank as at least as im-
portant as the principle of union ?
The argument for the principle of State
Rights in the csmposition of the Senate is
based on the plea that the small States
should not be placed in a position where
they might be ridden over rough-shod by
the large States. It may be a serious thing
for a minority of people to have to bow to a
majority, but how much more serious - from
the point of view of one who desires to see
the Federation of Australia endure for all
time—is the possibility of a minority placing
a majority in fetters ! I repeat that I can-
not see why the principle of localism shoidd
be so sacredly enshrined in the Constitution
of the Federal Senate. The State Parlia-
ments will deal with all local questions.
What, will the Federal Parliament legislate
upon ? Upon all subjects in which the.
people of Australia have a common interest.
Why should the spirit of localism be domin-
ant in the Upper Chamber of a Parliament
created to perform work which the people
of Australia deliberately say is of a
purely national character ? Bryce says
that the chief aim in framing a Federal
Constitution should be conformity to no
rigid law, but “ adaptation to the circum-
stances of the people ” Jne can under-
stand why in Switzerland, where the people
of the federated Cantons speak with the
tongues of Germans, French, and Italians,
there existed an objection to the principle of
absolu'e unity in the Federal Parl’ament. In
Canada, too, where there were practically
two races, one could readi'v understand the
desire for State rights ; although the prin-
ciple has been so imperfectly recognised in
the Constitution, that one might easily fancy
it had been entirely ignored Nor is it hard
to conceive why the American States were
anxious to let go only as a little of their
sovereignty as it was absolutely necessary to
relinquish. The War of Independence left
them a number of perfectly independent
States—some of them separated by a jour-
ney of more than a month from one another ;
they had widely diverse commercial, social,
and industrial interests (one of which—
slavery—ultimately led to the war of seces-
sion) ; whilst the first incentive to federate
was doubtless a sense of mihtary and naval
weakness, and a fear of foreign invasion—
which, while a factor in Australian federal
feeling, is certainly not nearly so important
as the pure national sentiment in which the
Australian people share. Having regard to
these considerations, and the spirit of the
age which witnessed the birth of the United
States’ Constitution, there can be little
wonder that there existed a strong de-
sire to maintain the complete sovereignty of
the State. But, in Australia, where there
is an absolute identity of sentiment, cus-
toms, and aspirations, there should not be
that desire, and a full recognition of State
rights will merely tend to keep alive and en-
large those minor divisions, which an Aus-
tralian people say should be obliterated
Notwithstanding all that I have said, if
the federation is to include the smaller
colonies of the group, it will probably be
found necessary to make some concession of
State rights. My attitude in regard to the
question will be to make that concession as
small as it is possible to make it, leaving it
for the people of each State to pronounce an
opinion as to whether they are satisfied with
the relative strengths of the ingredients
which constitute the blend.
I hold the opinion that the Senators should
receive their warrant direct from the people,
and not to be elected by the State Parlia-
ments ; and, although it does not appear to
rest on any solid principle, I approve of the
suggestion made by Mr. R. E. O’Connor at
Bathurst, viz., that in cases of deadlock the
two Houses should meet and vote as one—
an arrangement which would have the effect
of diminishing the power of the representa-
tives of a of people in the
Senate.
I am in favor of the electoral qualification
of voters for the Lower House of the State
Legislature standing as the franchise in each
State for the House of Representatives, until
such time as a uniform franchise is framed
by the Federal Parliament. My reason for
not desiring the federal franchise embodied
in the Constitution Act is that I am of
opinion that the Convention would not agree
to a broader franchise than manhood suf-
frage, which .vould shut out the women of
South Australia from federal politics, and
render an amendment of the Constitution
necessary before any women could be en-
dowed with voting power.
Neither the provisions of the Common-
wealth Bill relating to finance, nor the
recommendation of the Bathurst Convention
are regarded by me as satisfactory. Sir
Samuel Griffith’s indictment of the proposals
of the Commonwealth Bill appear to me to
apply almost entirely to the period between
the consummation of federation, and the
framing of a Federal tariff. When a uniform
tariff is in operation, I can see no objection
to refunds of surplus revenue being made to
the States on the basis of population, after
deducting the expenses of administration
and Federal Government. I strongly object
to the “ separate account” system, as being
antagonistic to the spirit of union ; fraught
with all the dangers which enter into a
system where one man spends without re-
striction, and another man has to provide the
cash ; and, as calculated generally to bring
about most anomalous results in practice.
In regard to the finances of the interim
period, it is cßar that the provisions of the
Commonwealth Bill are entirely defective.
My suggestion in regard to that period has,
at least, the merit of simplicity ; and, I
think, may be regarded as satisfactory.
Each colony should be credited with the
actual amount of revenue contributed by its
citizens, and be debited (on the basis of the
cost of the year prior to the union) with the
expenses of administering the departments
of which it has been relieved, plus its pro-
portion ton a pooulation basis) of the cost
of the Federal Government. If centralised
control should effect any saving—perhaps
so small a matter that it need hardly be
taken into account, unless the interim period
should, unhappily, turn out to be a
long one—the amount would belong (on a
population basis) to the respective States ;
whilst, if proved excessively costly, it
should b« charged to the States (on a
population basis), as one of the costs of
union.
The federalisation of the railways is one of
these questions which fhas two sides ; but
after careful thought—and aided by a toler-
ably intimate knowledge of what takes place
through the operation of cut-throat railway
policies—l have come to the conclusion that
unless the Federal Pa’Lament not only has
the power to veto railway regulations, but
also to construct railways required by the
people near the boundary of a large State,
to enable them to get to the seaboard of an
adjoining State, the absolute freedom of
“ trade and intercourse throughout the
Commonwealth” will continue to fee but a
dream.
I am in favor of the Federal Parlia-
ment having the power to deal wdth the
debts of the various States, for consolidation
purposes.
I am generally in accord wdth the pro-
visions of the Commonwealth Bill in respect
of the Federal Judicature.
The Constitution should, in my opinion,
make provision for payment of members of
both Houses of Legislature, until such time
as the people, through Parliament,otherwise
determine.
The Federation for which the Convention
is commissioned to frame a Constitution
being “ under the Crown,” I regard any
proposal to “ elect” the Governor-General
(the representative of the Crown) as illogical
and unsound.
I will not be able to incur the expense of
publishing this statement of my views in
more than two or three papers, and it will
be, of course, physically impossible for me
to visit every centre in the colony. I will,
however, do as much as possible to more
fully acquaint you with my views on the
great question at stake.
I regard the task of framing a Constitu-
tion, under which a nation must live and
grow, as the most sacred with which men
can be trusted, and it is with a full sense of
responsibility that I place myself at your
disposal. If you honor me by choosing me
as one of your delegates, you may rest
assured that all my strength and powers
will be applied to assisting in the perform-
ance of the great which it is proposed
to place in the hands of the Convention,
I am, your obedient servant,
JAS. ASHTON.
Hay, 20th Jan., 1897.
