

The Brighton Society
for the
Re-adaplation of Soldiers.
RULES.
MIDDLE BRIGHTON:
PRINTED BY R. A. DACEY,
109 CHURCH STREET.






Office-Bearers:
1916-17.
President —Cr. J. B. Grout ( Mayor ).
Chairman— Mr. J. M. Coane.
Vice-Chairmen —
Mr. T. W. Haynes
Dr. Macansh
Mr. D. McLeish
Mr J. H. Taylor
Committee —
Cr. G. H. Alford
Mr. EL. A. Connolly
Mr. W. Groom
Mr. 5. H. Nash
Cr. H. Nathan
Hon. Solicitor—Cr. 5. Dutton Green.
Hon. Treasurer —Mr. P. J. Aylwin.
Hon. Auditor —Mr. G. Lyell Marquand
Hon. Medical Officers —
Dr. Wm. McClelland
Dr. Gerald Weigall
Hon. Organising Secretary—
Mr. H. J. Thoms.
Joint Hon. Secretaries—
Mr. A. L. Brown
Mr. N. L. Orford


Rules of the Brighton Society for the
Re-adaptation of Soldiers.
NAME.
1. The name of the Society shall be the “Brighton
Society for the Re-adaptation of Soldiers.”
HEADQUARTERS.
2. The headquarters of the Society shall be in
Brighton, Victoria, Australia.
OBJECTS.
3. The objects of the Society are to assist men of
the Australian Military and Naval Forces belonging
to Brighton (or if thought fit by the Committee any
other district) who may be suffering from physical or
mental disability arising out of the present war
more particularly :
(a) In facilitating apprenticeship to qualifica-
tion for employment in an occupation
compatible with their infirmity.
(b) In helping them to seek and obtain em-
ployment.
(c) In procuring for them apparatus appropri-
ate to their mutilation and their present or
prospective occupation and instructing
them in the use thereof.


(d) In giving financial aid where considered
necessary to men who are being thus
assisted, and to do anything incidental to
the above.
POWER TO AFFILIATE, &c.
4. The Society shall have power to affiliate with,
take over or become amalgamated with or absorbed
in any other Society or Association with the like
objects on such terms as the members may think fit.
MEMBERSHIP QUALIFICATION.
5. Qualification as a member of the Society shall
be by payment annually of the sum of 10/-, or in
particular cases by special services to the Society
undertaken by the proposing member, but there
shall not be more than ten members of the latter
class at any one time. Any person may become a
Life Member by the payment of £5. The Commit-
tee shall have power to refuse to accept any person
as a member without giving any reasons therefor.
MEMBERSHIP TERMINATION.
6. Membership may be terminated by resignation
or by striking off for grave reasons announced by
the Committee of Management after the Member
shall have been heard or by failure to pay the
annual subscription within one month after receiving
notice from the Committee that the same is due or
to perform the special services as the case may be.


COMMITTEE.
7. Phe affairs of the Society shall be administered
by an Honorary Committee composed of :
1 President
1 Chairman
4 Vice-Chairmen
2 Medical Officers
1 Treasurer {
2 Secretaries
1 Organising Secretary J
1 Solicitor
Ex-officio
Members.
and 5 members elected at a General Meeting.
Any casual vacancy on the Committee may be filled
by the Committee.
The whole of the Committee, with the exception
of the President, shall retire each year but shall be
eligible for re-election. The President shall be the
Mayor of Brighton for the time being. At all
meetings of the Committee the Chairman, if present,
shall preside. The Committee shall meet as often
as may be necessary. Five members shall form a
quorum. The Committee shall have full power to
appoint sub-committees.
MEMBERS NOT TO BE PAID.
8. No member of the Committee riiay receive any
payment on account of his services. Members, of
the Society may receive payment only when they
are employees recognised to be necessary as pro-
vided in the next rule.
5


POWERS OF COMMITTEE.
9. The Committee shall have the most extended
powers foi the control, administration, development,
and defence of the affairs and interest of the Society.
It shall decide especially and without the enumera-
tion limiting its powers all measures for advancing
and all means for assuring the working and progress
of the Society by subscriptions, assessments, collec-
tions and the like ; it shall have power to accept all
gifts and donations ; it shall authorise all expendi-
ture and pass all accounts for payment ; it shall fix
the salaries, if any, to be paid to all employees that
it recognises as necessary for proper working of the
Society ; it shall authorise all contracts or bargains
entered into ; all acquisitions of real or personal
property; all leases, agreements and investments of
funds ; it shall prepare the Annual Report and
Accounts and submit them for the approval of the
General Meeting. It shall also have power to with-
draw assistance from any person who may in its
opinion be undeserving of or not requiring further
aid.
DUTIES OF OFFICE-BEARERS.
10. The duties of the Treasurer, Secretaries, and
Organising Secretary shall be the usual duties of
persons in those positions or as may be decided by
the Committee from time to time.


TRUSTEES.
11. The property of the Society (other than cash
in hand and at current account) shall be vested in
two Trustees. They shall be appointed at a General
Meeting of the Society, and shall hold office till death
resignation, removal by a General Meeting, or on
ceasing to be members. All vacancies occur’rino- by
removal, resignation, or death, shall be filled up at
the same or the next General Meeting. All securi-
ties shall be taken, stock purchased, and investments
made in their names ; the property, the subject
matter of the Trust, shall nevertheless- be subject to
the disposition of the Committee, and the orders in
writing of a quorum of the Committee assembled at
a meeting and signed by the Chairman of the day
and attested by the Treasurer shall be obligatory
upon and justification to the Trustees as to any such
purchase, sale, investment, or disposal. The first
Trustees shall be James Bates Grout and James
Howard Taylor.
MEETINGS OF THE SOCIETY.
12-. Except in the year 1916 the Annual General
Meeting shall be held in the month of October in
each year, and Extraordinary General Meetings
whenever convened by the Committee or at the re=
quest in writing of one fourth of the members of the
Society. The financial year shall terminate on
doth beptember in each year.


PROCEDURE AT MEETINGS.
13. The Annual General Meeting shall deal with
any business which may be properly brought
forward. The Annual Report and Balance Sheet shall
be submitted for its approval. It shall elect mem-
bers and office-bearers for the ensuing year. Ordi-
nary resolutions shall be carried by the majority of
the members present. The Chairman of the meeting
shall have both a deliberative and a casting vote. A
quorum at the Annual or an Extraordinary Meeting
shall be ten members. No person who at the time
of any meeting is in arrear with any moneys due to
the Society shall be allowed to vote or take part in
the proceedings at the meeting.
ALTERATION OF RULES.
14. The Rules can be altered only by a resolution
at the Annual or an Extraordinary General Meeting.
The meeting in this case must be composed of at
least fifteen members, and if this number be not
present the meeting shall be convened afresh, but
after an interval of at least a fortnight, and then its
deliberations shall be valid whatever may be the
number of those present. In every case the Rules
can be altered only by a majority of two-thirds of
the members present and voting. The same forms
and numbers are to be observed for General Meet-
ings called to decide on the dissolution of the Society
in the case provided for by the next following rule.


DISSOLUTION.
15. The Society shall be dissolved from the
day when it shall, in the opinion of the mem-
bers assembled in General Meeting have
attained the object for which it has been con=
stituted, or otherwise at the will of the mem-
bers expressed in General Meeting. The
General Meeting which shall have decided on
the dissolution shall name one or more Liqui-
dators charged with the liquidation of the
assets then remaining available. It shall
decide on the disposal of this residue to one or
more public funds or establishments recognised
to be of public utility, preference being given
to Institutions designed to help soldiers and
sailors or their dependents, but nothing must
be divided among members of the Society.
NOTICES.
16. Reasonable notice of the Annual or
Extraordinary Meetings shall be sent to each
member of the Society, but the non-receipt of
a notice by any member or members shall not
invalidate or affect the proceedings at such
Meetings. All notices shall set out generally,
or, if there be special business, specifically, the
business of the meeting.


To the Honorary Secretary,
Brighton Society for the Re-adaptation of Soldiers.
Life Member
Please enrol me as a of the above Society.
Member
I enclose. for £ I I
Name...
Address
Date...
Appli cation for Membership
