

RDLES AND BY-LAWS
OF THE
QUEENSLAND
t' and feasts’
ASSOCIATION.
Hrislmtie:
Printed by Pole, Outridge & Co., Petrie’s Bight.
MDCCCXCII.




ROLES AND BY-LAWS
OF THE
QUEENSLAND
ASSOCIATION.
Ifnebatu:
Printed by Pole, Outridge & Co., Petrie’s Bight.
mdcccxcii.




BULBS
OF THE
ftyueti|s(iti|il ami #|a*im’
ASSOCIATION.
Name.
The name of the Association shall be the “ Queensland
Stock-bkeedees’ and Gkazieks’ Association.”
Object.
The object of the Association shall be to promote the
improvement of the live stock of the colony.
For this purpose it is proposed :
1. To occupy offices in Brisbane, where the general
business of the Association shall be carried on, and
at which its members may register the number and
condition of their surplus stock, their views, wishes,
suggestions, necessities, and experiences relating to
stock, station, and farm, and from which advice and
information shall be circulated as desired.
2. To watch, discuss, and promote the interests of its
members generally, industrially, commercially,
socially, and otherwise.
8. To encourage the breeding and exhibition of improved
stock of all kinds by offering prizes in money,
cups, &c.
4. To encourage in the same way the growing of plants,
roots, grasses, &c., &c., that are or may be used for
feeding or fattening stock.


5. To consider the question of a tax on stallions, the
procuration and conservation of water for irrigation
and for other purposes. To test various breeds of
stock in different localities possessing distinct con
ditions in regard to climate, food, &c. To assist
young or other beginners with advice and information.
To institute a technical museum where knowledge
could be gained in wools, &c., &c., and for the
exhibition of skeletons of pure-bred stock, and
their portraits and pedigrees; also, implements
used in the working of stock, and other educational
objects.
6. To collect all reliable data relating to the breeding of
stock of any kind, for the purposes of compiling
future history, and herd, stable, and flock pedigree
books.
7. To collect and disseminate amongst its members
the latest news of interest to them, by telegraph, or
letter, and through its own or the general press.
8. To discuss all matters bearing on their business;
diseases and their remedies, rents _on.runs, assess-
mentff, land laws, buying and v seThngstock and the
regulatioh“of prices, terms between sellers and buyers,
markets, stock routes, railway extensions, conveni-
ences and freights, meat export by rail and ship,
cold storage at home and abroad, opening up fresh
markets.
9. To cause lectures to be delivered on stock matters, and
papers of technical import and of general interest to
stock-breeders (previously approved by the Council)
to be read, and discussions thereon.
10. To urge the establishment of a Stock Institute in
Queensland.
11. To establish relations with any kindred society or any
institution whose objects have any bearing on the
welfare of stock in this and the sister colonies, in
Europe, America, and elsewhere.
12. To establish a library of works of reference on subjects
connected with the objects of the Association.
18. To purchase, take on lease or in exchange, or other-
wise acquire, lands and hereditaments of any tenure,
and for any estate or interest, and to lay out and
prepare for building purposes any lands belonging to,
or in which the Association is interested.


14. To manage, improve, develop, lease, mortgage, dispose
of, or otherwise deal with, any part of the property
of the Association.
15. To raise and borrow money in such manner as the
Association shall deem fit; and, in particular, by the
issue of debentures, charged on all or any of the
Association’s properties, both present and future.
16. To invest the moneys of the Association not immediately
required in such securities as may from time to time
be determined.
17. To establish agencies for the collection of information
in this or in any other colony or country, and to do
all other things that shall be deemed necessary to
the furtherance of the interests of the Association.
Constitution.
I. —The Queensland Stock-breeders’ and Graziers’ Associa-
tion shall consist of a President and Vice-Presidents, Honorary
Scientific, Non-Scientific, Corresponding, and ordinary Members. .
) t 3
11. —Members shall consist of one class only. Members / r r
shall pay not more than two guineas annually. Youths under iLo)
the age of eighteen may be admitted to all the privileges of “
membership, except that of voting at meetings of the Association, L
upon the payment of half the annual subscription.
r
Constitution of Council.
lll.—The Council shall consist of the President, two Vice-
Presidents, elected from the members, and twelve members
elected from the general body of the members. The President
shall retire annually, and shall not be eligible for election for
two years in succession. The two Vice-Presidents and four senior
members of Council shall retire annually by rotation, but shall
be eligible for re-election.
Branches.
IV.—The Council may establish branches when and where
they may deem it necessary within the colony.


Ex-officio Members of Council.
V. —Any kindred society recognised by the Association may
nominate one of its members to be approved of by the Council as
an ex-officio member of such Council; such nomination shall be
made annually, and shall be submitted for the approval of the
Council at the first meeting of such Council held after the receipt
of the nomination.
Sub-Committees.
Vl.—The Council shall have power to make By-Laws and
Rules for the conduct of its business, and the business of the
Association generally ; and to appoint Committees and Sub-
Committees of any members of the Association, and their powers
may be limited according to the instructions of the Council.
Mode of Election of Office-Bearers.
VII.—All elections of Office-bearers shall take place by ballot.
Paid Officials.
VIII.—It shall be the duty of the Council to appoint and
remove all paid officers, to define their duties, and to fix their
salaries.
Meetings.
IX.—The Council shall fix the dates for holding all meetings
of the Association.
Financial Year.
X.—The financial year of the Association and the year of
membership shall terminate on the 31st day of December in
each year.
Arrears.
XL—Every member whose subscription has been paid for
the preceding year shall be eligible to vote at and take part in
the business of the annual meeting.
Council Meetings and Quorum.
Xll.—The Council shall meet at such times as they shall
determine for the despatch of business; three to form a quorum.
Minutes of Proceedings.
XIII.—The minutes of all meetings of the Council, Com-
mittees and Sub-Committees, including all motions and the


names of proposers and seconders, shall be entered by the
Secretary in a book to be kept for the purpose; they shall be
read by the Secretary at the next meeting, and if confirmed
thereat, shall be signed by the Chairman; and such minutes
shall be considered the authenticated orders and proceedings of
the Council.
Finance Committee.
XIY. —The members of the Council shall, at their first
meeting in each year, elect from among themselves an Honorary
Treasurer and three members, who shall have the control, as a
Finance Committee, of the ordinary current expenditure of the
Association.
Annual General Meeting—Appointment of Auditors,
and Balance Sheet.
XV.—An Annual General Meeting of Members shall be held
on the first Monday in March of each year, at which the Trea-
surer’s balance sheet, duly audited, and the yearly accounts shall
be produced, and at which the election of President, two Vice-
Presidents, four members of Council, and two Auditors shall
take place. The Auditors may be members of the Association,
but not of the Council, nor of any Committee thereof. They
shall hold office until their successors are appointed, and jointly
and severally shall have access at any time to all books, papers,
accounts, and other documents relating to the affairs of the
Association. The Auditors shall retire annually, and one only
of whom shall be eligible for re-election.
Special General Meeting and Quorum.
XVI. —On the receipt of a requisition, signed by ten duly
qualified members of the Association, and addressed to the Sec-
retary, stating the object for which the meeting is required, the
Secretary shall call, by advertisement or circular, a Special
General Meeting of the Association, of which a least one month’s
notice shall be given, and at which no business except that for
which the meeting is called shall be discussed. The Quorum at
the Annual General Meeting or at any Special General Meeting
shall be ten.
Political Questions.
XVII. —No question of party politics shall be discussed at
any meeting of the Association,


Alteration of Rules and By-Laws.
XYIII.—No Rule shall be altered unless notice of the
proposed alteration shall have been given one month previous to
a general meeting ; and no By-Law shall be altered unless after
notice given at a meeting of the Council and confirmed at two
subsequent sittings.
Notice of Business.
XIX.—No business of which notice has not been duly given
shall be finally decided on at any meeting of the Council, but
such business shall be placed on the agenda paper for the next
meeting of Council for confirmation or otherwise.
Vacancies,
XX.—The Secretary shall notify on the agenda day to the
Council any vacancy which may have occurred from any cause
in the list of Vice-Presidents, members of Council, or Auditors, at
the meeting of the Council next after the occurrence thereof; and
such vacancies shall be filled at the following meeting of the
Council. Officers so appointed shall only hold office for the term
for which their predecessors had been elected; but their appoint-
ment shall be subject to confirmation at the next annual meeting.
Voting on Questions.
XXI. —At all meetings of the Association, its Council and
Committees, questions shall be decided by a show of hands,
unless a ballot be demanded by five members then present.
(See By-Law No, 3).
Posting Rules, &c.
XXII.—The Rules and By-Laws shall be kept duly posted
in the office of the Association ; and every new member shall be
entitled to a copy thereof on payment of his subscription.
List of Office-Bearers.
XXIII.—A list, distinguishing the Office-Bearers and mem-
bers, with their respective addresses, shall be always kept in the
offices of the Association, and shall be published from time to
time as the Council may direct.
Seal of the Association.
XXIV.—The Association shall have a Seal, which shall be
in the charge of the Honorary Treasurer, and shall not be affixed
to any document except by order of the Council,


Nomination and Selection of Judges.
XXV. —Any member of the Association may propose the
name of any person as Judge. The selection of Judges shall be
made by the Council.
Appointment of Judges.
XXVI.—The Council shall appoint Judges for any specific
purpose, but shall have full power to appoint, at any time,
competent substitutes for such of the duly-appointed Judges as
may be unable or unwilling to act.
Powers of Council.
XXVII.—The management of the affairs and the control of
the Association shall be vested in the Council, who, in addition to
the powers and authorities by these Rules expressly conferred
upon them, may exercise all such powers and do all such acts and
things as may be exercised or done by the Association, and are
not by the foregoing Rules expressly directed or required to be
exercised or done by the Association in general meeting, but
subject, nevertheless, to any regulations from time to time made
by the Association in general meeting ; provided that no regula-
tion shall invalidate any prior act of the Council, which would
have been valid if such regulation had not been made.
XXVlll.—Without prejudice to the general powers conferred
by the last preceding Rule, and of the other powers conferred by
these Rules, it is hereby expressly declared that the Council shall
have the following powers :
(a) They may borrow money, and secure the money
borrowed, and future advances, over all or any part
of the Association’s property, real and personal, by
mortgage, lien, debenture, or other security, in any
form they may think fit.
(b) They may give any security as aforesaid for the purpose
of securing the unpaid purchase-money of any property
bought by the Association.
( c ) They may appoint any person or persons to accept and
hold on trust for the Association any property belong-
ing to the Association, or in which it is interested,
and may execute and do all such deeds and things as
may be requisite to vest the same in such person or
persons.


(d) They may institute, conduct, defend, compound, or
abandon any legal proceedings by or against the
Association or its officers, or otherwise concerning the
affairs of the Association ; and also compound and
allow time for payment or satisfaction of any debts
due and of any claims or demands by or against the
Association.
( e ) They may refer any claims or demands by or against
the Association to arbitration, and observe and per-
form the awards.
(/) They may appoint, suspend, or remove agents, clerks,
and servants of the Association, and may determine
their several duties and labours.
[y) They may invest any of the moneys of the Association
not immediately required for the purposes thereof
upon such securities and in such manner as they may
think fit, and they may from time to time vary or
realise such investments.
(/») They may enter into all such negotiations and contracts,
and rescind and vary all such contracts, and execute
and do all such acts, deeds, and things, in the name
and on behalf of the Association, as they may consider
expedient for or in relation to any of the matters afore-
said, or otherwise for the purposes of the Association.
(i) Provided that the powers conferred under sub-sections
(rt), ( b ), and (c) shall not be exercised without the
approval of the general meeting of the members of
the Association, unless by-a meeting of the Council
at which not less than ten are present.


BY-LAWS.
President and Vice-Presidents.
1. The President shall take precedence of all Vice-Presidents
and members, and when present he shall preside at all meetings of
Council, Committees, or Sub-Committees. In the absence ot the
President one of the Vice-Presidents shall be elected to preside,
and in the absence of a Vice-President, or on his declining to take
the chair, the members then present shall elect a Chairman, who
for the time being shall at such meeting perform all the duties
capable of being performed by the President or a Vice-President.
Council Meetings.
2. The Council shall have power to fix days of ordinary
meetings, and to adjourn at their discretion. A special meeting
may at any time be summoned by order ot the President, or by
any five members of Council, three days’ notice of the business to
be transacted at such special meeting shall be given, and no
business except that for which the said meeting is called shall be
discussed, and any business then decided upon shall not remain
permanently valid unless confirmed at the next meeting of the
Council, or unless at least ten members of the Council shall have
been present at such special meeting.
Casting Vote of Chairman.
3. At all meetings the Chairman shall be entitled to one
vote, and in the case of an equality of votes to a casting vote.
Order of Council Business.
4. At all Council meetings the minutes of previous meetings
shall first be read, and business arising therefrom discussed, after
which reports from various Committees, and correspondence, then
orders of the day and new motions. Provided that the Council
may by majority at any time postpone axiy business or orders of
the day until after the consideration of any new urgent business.


Notice of Council Meetings.
6. Three days’ notice shall be given either by circular or
advertisement of all Council meetings.
Nomination of Members of Council.
6. All names of persons proposed to till vacancies in the
Council must be submitted in writing, and received by the
Secretary at least fourteen days prior to the time ot the Annual
or Council meeting. In the event of nominations exceeding in
number the members to be elected, ballot papers containing the
names of all the candidates shall be prepared by the Secretary,
and a copy of the list shall be issued to each member present at
the Annual or Council meeting, who, after erasing such names as
he may desire, shall personally place his voting paper in the ballot
box. Any voting paper containing more or fewer names than
the number to be elected shall be rejected as informal. Imme-
diately on the Chairman announcing that a ballot is necessary,
two scrutineers shall be chosen by the meeting, and the ballot
shall remain open for thirty minutes.
Mode of Voting when Members reside upwards of
thirty miles from Brisbane.
7. At all elections of officers at annual meetings, but not
otherwise, a member residing at a distance of more than thirty
miles from Brisbane may vote for election of officers by causing to
be delivered or forwarded by post to the Secretary a sealed
written list signed by him and endorsed “ Voting paper,” con-
taining a list of names of those candidates for whom he wishes
to vote, and all such voting papers shall be handed to the
Scrutineers unopened by the Secretary, but any such list con-
taining more or fewer names than the number to be elected shall
be rejected as informal.






Address :
“BOOREELA,” HAMILTON.
THE
Proposed by Me. John Stevenson, M.L.A., seconded by Mr. James Ceombie, M.L.A., and
carried unanimously:—l. “ That the Association now be declared formed, and that the present
committee be deputed to draft rules and by-laws to carry out the work of extending its member-
ship, and to cQ.ll a general meeting of members and others interested about three months hence
for the purpose of reporting progress and electing a council for the ensuing year.”
Proposed by Mr. William Kellett, seconded by Mr. Herbert Hunter, and carried
unanimously :—2. “ That the members of the meeting pledge themselves to use their influence in
furthering the interests of the Association in every way.”
I remain, Sir,
Yours obediently,
By order of the Committee.
“ Booreela,” Hamilton,
Brisbane, December 3rd, 1892
©ueensland and Association.
Brisbane, - 189
At a numerously attended public meeting of Stock-breeders, called by advertisement
and held at the Exhibition Building, on the nth August, the Hon. John Donaldson in the chair, the
following Resolutions were moved :
The Rules and By-laws of the Association are now printed, and your Committee consider that
whatever means they may adopt with the view of extending the membership, yet their success must
greatly depend upon the active co-operation of present members, each of whom is earnestly requested to
exert his influence to that end.
Though the principal part of the work of the Association will be performed for a time by hon-
orary officers, it will, nevertheless, be impossible to continue without funds, as an office will be required
and valuable information must be collected and distributed if members wish to receive the full benefit of
combination. It is therefore requested that each member who has not paid his guinea towards his
annual subscription will forward the same at his earliest convenience. At a late meeting your Committee
resolved that all subscriptions, whether those paid or now due, shall date from the end of the present year.
Your Committee, deeming that the large and ever increasing stock interests of this colony now
demand the engagement of a skilled bacteriologist, formed a deputation of members of this Association
who waited on the Chief Secretary on the 2nd instant, for the purpose of requesting the Government to
secure the services of Dr. A. Loir, Mons. Pasteur’s representative, in the establishment of a Stock
Institute on a moderate scale in .Queensland. The Chief Secretary was entirely in accord with the
objects of the deputation, and promised to carry them out, provided that no insuperable obstacles exist
as between the Governments of this and the neighbouring colonies. The Central Stock Institute scheme
having been abandoned by the several colonies, we can now see no bar to our having one of our own.
F. A. BLACKMAN, Hon. Sec. and Treas.


