

DRAFT.
RULES
OF THE
AUSTRALASIAN FEDERATION LEAGUE,
Laid before a General Meeting of the League on Monday ,
17th July , 1893.
1. The name of the League is “The Australasian Federation
League,” and every resident adult citizen of New South Wales is
eligible for membership, and may demand the same.
2. The subscription shall be 2s. per annum, without entrance
fee, but donations in aid of the funds may be received in addition
to or apart from subscriptions. The first year’s subscription shall
be due and payable as soon as office-bearers shall have been
elected, and thereafter on every first day of July ; and on non-
payment extending over two months from the due date a person
shall cease to be a member.
3. The object of the League shall be to advance the cause of
Australian Federation by an organization of citizens owning no
class distinction or party influence, and using its best energies to
assist Parliamentary action from whatever source proceeding cal-
culated to further the common aim of Australian Patriotism ; the
advocating, promoting, and, after its attainment, defending the
Federal Union of Australasia on such lines as may be constitu-
tionally approved by all the Colonies concerned after further
deliberation and report by assembled representatives of each.
4. It shall be among the duties of the League in carrying out
its objects to co-operate fully and earnestly with all similar bodies
not influenced by the aims and interests of the parties contending
on matters of domestic policy ; to promote the formation of such
associations throughout the several Colonies; and to take steps in
due course to unite all such bodies throughout the Colonies under
one organisation with one plan of operations.
5. The last preceding Rule shall be deemed enabling and
not restrictive, and the Chairman of any meeting of the League,
or of any of its Committee, shall, subject to an appeal to the
meeting, decide if so requested whether any matter brought
up for discussion is within the scope of the operations of the
League.
6. The Mayor of Sydney for the time being shall be President
of the League, unless he declines or ceases to hold the office, and
in any such event the President shall be elected by the League at
an Annual General Meeting, or at a Special General Meeting


convened for that purpose either singly or in conjunction with
other purposes.
7. There shall be four Vice-Presidents, two joint Hon. Sec-
retaries and Treasurers, a General Council of thirty members, and
an Executive Committee of 12 members.
8. The offices mentioned in the last preceding Rule shall be
tenable for a year, or for any unexpired part thereof. They shall
be filled by election, and if a ballot be demanded by 10 members,
then by ballot, at the Annual General Meeting; and if any
vacancy occurs between two Annual Meetings, it shall be filled
by the Executive Committee, who shall appoint a member of the
League to act in the requisite capacity until the then next Annual
General Meeting.
9. The President, Vice-Presidents, and joint Hon. Secretaries
and Treasurers shall be ex officio members of the General Council,
and of the Executive Committee.
10. No more than two-fifths of the members of the General
Council shall be members of either House of Parliament, and a
member of either House shall not be eligible as a member of the
Executive Committee.
11. The general administration of the League shall be carried
out by the joint Hon. Secretaries and Treasurers, under the
direction of the Executive Committee.
12. The General Council shall be summoned only by order
of the Executive Committee, and only in cases in which the
Executive Committee deems it necessary or highly expedient to
consult with the General Council. The meeting shall be sum-
moned by circular notifying the business, and any business not so
notified or not consequential on some business so notified, shall
not be entertained In such a meeting the two bodies shall sit
together, and decide by resolution in the ordinary manner.
13. The Annual General Meeting of the League shall be held
in the month of July in each year, at a date, hour, and place to
be fixed by the then existing Executive Committee. And at each
such meeting there shall be presented a Report of the operations
of this League, and of events of interest in connection with the
Federal movement during the year under review, and also a
balance sheet showing the financial position of the League.
14. It shall be competent for the Executive Committee at
any time to summon a Special General Meeting of the League.
A Special General Meeting may also be summoned by the Presi-
dent of his own motion, and shall be summoned by the President,
or in his absence by any Vice-President, on the written requisi-
tion of at least a quorum of members, setting forth the purpose
for which the meeting is required. In every case the business of
a Special General Meeting shall be notified by advertisement in
at least one daily Sydney newspaper a fortnight at least before
the day of meeting, and again on the morning of the day of
meeting.


15. At a meeting of the League, 30 members; at a joint
meeting of the General Council and the Executive Committee, 15
members; and at a meeting of the Executive Committee, 5
members, shall be a quorum. At every meeting the President, if
present, shall take the chair ; in his absence, the senior Vice-
President present ; if no Vice-President be present, then the
meeting shall elect a chairman.
. 16. If a quorum be not present within half-an-hour of the
time notified for commencement of any meeting, the senior office-
bearer present shall declare the meeting adjourned to such other
time and place as shall seem fit; and among office-bearers the
joint Hon. Secretaries and Treasurers shall rank after the Vice-
Presidents ; and the General Council and Executive Committee
shall for the purposes of this Rule only not be deemed office-
bearers.
17. The Chairman of any meeting shall be the sole inter-
preter of the Rules and the judge of order at the meeting and,
except as specified in Rule 5, no appeal from his decision on a
question of order shall be entertained.
18. So far as is practicable, and f-o far as the Rules and
By-laws of the League do not make express provision, the Chair-
man of a meeting shall in deciding questions of order apply the
practice of the Legislative Assembly and the Committees thereof.
19. The property of the League, of whatever nature or kind,
shall be vested in the President and Vice-Presidents from time to
time, and they shall be the Trustees thereof. No person shall
retain any interest in or claim to any of the property of the
League after ceasing to be a member thereof.
20. On the application of any Federation League not formed
or having its headquarters in the city of Sydney, such body may
be admitted and affiliated by resolution of the Executive Com-
mittee as a Branch of this League; and thereupon members of
either body shall have all the pidvileges of membership of the
other of them, and shall be admitted to all meetings to which
members of the same are admissible, on production of the card of
membership.
21. It shall be competent for the Executive Committee to
arrange witli Branch Leagues or other similar bodies for meetings
or conferences in any part of any colony in which any body with
similar objects has been constituted, or is to be constituted at
such meeting or conference ; and the Executive Committee may,
if they think fit, nominate any member or members of this
League to represent it at any such meeting or conference, and
may also act on behalf this League in making any arrangements
for or in connection with the same.
22. Questions of Politics other than that of Federation shall,
to the best of the ability of the Chairman and the members
present, be excluded from discussion at all meetings of the League
or of any members thereof in connection with the League; and


at all meetings in which members of this League are invited to
take part, and do participate as such members, they shall act in
the spirit of this Rule. Wilful disregard of this Rule, or of any
part thereof, shall be deemed to be conduct detrimental to the
objects of the League.
23. A person shall cease to be a member of the League—
(a) Under the circumstances t-tated in Rule 2 • (b) By resigna-
tion addressed to the joint Hon. Secretaries and Treasurers;
(c) By residing outside the limits of Australia, Tasmania, and
New Zealand for a period of twelve months or more at one time;
(d) Upon a resolution passed by two-thirds of the membeis
present at a Special General Meeting at which the consideration
of his conduct shall be the business, or part of the business, for
which such meeting has been summoned, declaring him to be
guilty of any conduct detrimental to the objects of the League or
unworthy of a member of the League. But the member whose
conduct is in question shall have at least seven days’ notice of
the business of the meeting so far as his conduct is to be in
question thereat, and shall, if present, be allowed to be heard in
explanation or defence, before any such resolution shall be put.
And such resolution shall be open to amendment, by way of ex-
cluding the accused member from meetings of the League, or
of members thereof, for any specified time, or by deprivation of
office, or partly in one way and partly in the other. And if so
amended, the resolution shall not affect the member except so far
as it purports to do so. In case of any cessation of membership
(except that specified in sub-section (d) hereof) the person who
has ceased to be a member may again qualify for and obtain
membership.
24. Any meeting may be adjourned by resolution, and no
business not notified for a Special General Meeting shall be enter-
tained at any adjournment thereof. A meeting may also be
adjourned by the Chairman when he is of opinion that the
interests of the League require him to take that step.
25. The Executive Committee may make By-laws in further-
ance of the objects of the League, or of any Rule thereof, or for
the order and regulation of meetings and business. But no By-
law shall have force until it has been printed with the Rules.
26. Copies of the Rules, together with any By-laws, shall at
all reasonable times, and at a price not exceeding cost, be obtain-
able by members at the office of the League.
27. That these Rules, or any alterations thereof, may be
altered at a Special General Meeting of this League.
S. E. Lees, Printer and Stationer, 83 York Street, Syd.nev.
