

RULES
FOR THE
CENSORSHIP of the PRESS
Revised to 30th June, 1918.
STRICTLYCONFIDENTIAL
and
NOT FOR PUBLICATION.
This pamphlet is of a strictly confidential character and intended
for the personal information of Australian Pressmen, who are
responsible for what appears in their respective publications. It
is important that it should be carefully guarded and not allowed
to get into hands of persons for whom it is not intended. The
recipient will be held responsible for the safekeeping of this
pamphlet and for its production when requested by an Officer of
the Censorship Staff.
Issued by the authority of the Deputy Chief Censor
(Australia).
By Authority:
H. J. GREEN, ACTING GOVERNMENT PRINTER, MELBOURNE.
C.10794.


RULES
FOR THE
CENSORSHIP of the PRESS
Revised to 30th June, 1918.
STRICTLY CONFIDENTIAL
and
NOT FOR PUBLICATION.
Issued by the authority of the Deputy Chief Censor
{Australia).
$8 Qxtthonts:
S. J. GREEN, ACTING GOVERNMENT PRINTER, MELBOURNE.




Preface.
In issuing this consolidation of the Rules for the Censorship of
the Press, it is desirable that a reference be made to the Conference
of Editors from all the States of Australia held in Melbourne
recently. This Conference, which is unique in the history of the
Press in Australia, was convened at the instance of the Hon. G.F.
Pearce, Minister for Defence, and was attended by the following: —
Newspaper. Representative.
Brisbane Courier . . .. Mr. J. J. Knight, Editor-in-
Chief.
Brisbane Worker .. .. Mr. J. S. Hanlon, Editor.
Brisbane Telegraph .. Dr. E. W. Ward, Editor.
Brisbane Daily Standard .. Mr. J. Y. MacDonald, Editor.
Brisbane Daily Mail .. Mr. White.
Sydney Bulletin .. . . Mr. S. E. Prior, Editor.
Sydney Sun .. .. Mr. H. Campbell Jones,
Managing Editor.
Sydney Morning Herald .. Mr. Thomas Heney, Editor.
Sydney Evening News .. Mr. Walter Jeffrey, Managing
Editor.
Sydney Daily Telegraph .. Mr. Braham, Editor.
Sydney Sunday Times .. Mr. B. F. Toy, Editor.
Melbourne Argus .. .. Dr. Cunningham, Editor.
Melbourne Age .. . . Mr. G. F. H. Schuler, Editor.
Melbourne Herald.. .. Mr. J. E. Davidson, Editor-
in-Chief.
Adelaide Register ~ .. Mr. W. J. Sowden, Editor,
part proprietor.
Adelaide Mail .. .. Mr. Syme, Editor
Adelaide Advertiser .. Mr. Lavington Bonython.
Adelaide Herald .. .. Mr. H. Kneebone, Editor.
Perth Sunday Times .. Mr. J. M. Smith, Editor.
Perth Daily News . . Mr. Lovekin, Editor.
Perth West Australian .. Mr. A. Dangler, Editor.
Perth Kalgoorlie Miner .. Mr. S. E. Hocking, Editor.
Westralian Worker .. Mr. J. Curtin, Editor.
Launceston Daily Telegraph Mr. John Gunning, Editor.
Launceston Examiner .. Mr. F. J. Prichard, Editor.
Hobart Mercury .. .. Mr. W. H. Simmonds.


1
Among the most noteworthy features of the Conference was
the evident devotion of the Press of Australia to the public
interest, and an unswerving loyalty to the cause of the Allies
unexcelled in any other part of the world.
Certain matters naturally were freely criticised, but always
from the stand-point of the public interest, and such criticism will
always be welcomed by the Censorship. Editors are urgently
requested not to refrain from informing the D.C.C. or the Censor
in their particular Military District of any injustice to which they
may think themselves subjected, as it is always the desire of the
Censorship to work harmoniously with the Press, and especially
to secure equality of treatment to all.
In the same way, uniformity in regard to Censorship is of
paramount importance, and Pressmen are cautioned against
being misled into regarding errors committed by others as
an indication that there has been any relaxation of the
Censorship in regard to the particular matter published.
Such information will be treated as strictly confidential, as it is
recognised that such mistakes must sometimes occur (and it is
impossible for the Censorship to be cognisant of them all), but it
has always been found that, when the attention of the Editors has
been drawn to errors, they have invariably received such hints
with gratitude and with a desire to co-operate patriotically with
the Censorship.
It is, perhaps, not out of place to remind Editors of the need
for extreme caution to be exercised at all times in order to defeat
the pernicious enemy propaganda which is undoubtedly at work
in Australia, and in this regard it is impossible to overestimate
the powerful influence of our Press, which can be relied on to be
used ceaselessly to stamp out the evil.
Editors will, no doubt, often receive some of this pernicious
matter, and, having regard to the public welfare, reject it, and
probably consign it to its appropriate resting-place—the waste-
paper basket; but it is pointed out that a more useful service may
be performed if such matter were brought to the notice of the
Censorship, as it will undoubtedly in some instances be of value
to the secret service in detecting enemy agents. Editors should
therefore be ever on the alert to detect the machinations of enemy
propaganda, and, having done so, to remember that “time is the
essence of the contract,” and report without delay. Likewise,
it must always be borne in mind that the enemy Intelligence is
also on the alert, and it is one of the main objects of the Censor-
ship, with the aid of the Press, to befog him and frustrate, or at
least render as difficult as possible, his efforts not only to obtain
information first hand through the papers, but, through the same
source, to obtain confirmation of the reports of spies. It will thus


be observed bow very important may be the information which the
enemy Intelligence may be given through the medium of our own
Press, and which, quite apart from its own intrinsic worth, may
be most valuable to the enemy in enabling him to estimate the
degree of reliability to be reposed in a particular spy or other
source of information —that is to Say, the publication of certain
news in the Press may be tantamount to an official confirmation
of a rumour which, without confirmation, may be the only value
to be placed on the spy’s communications.
One of the most favoured devices in the enemy’s propagandist
strategy is the creation of a feeling of distrust and alarm among
the people, and nothing is better calculated to assist such a
device than repeated references to the working of the Censorship.
Editors will therefore realize the wisdom of not reminding the
public of the existence of the Censorship, whose work is much
more effectively performed when carried out silently.
At the request of the Conference the appointment of a Censor-
ship Advisory Board has been approved by the Government,
consisting of —
Dr. E. S. Cunningham,
Mr. G. E. H. Schuler,
Mr. J. E. Davidson,
Mr. J. M. Mackay.
Meetings of the Board take place whenever there are questions
for consultation and advice, and a member of the Censorship
staff attends.
Questions which the Press desire considered by the Board may
be sent direct to the Deputy Chief Censor at Victoria Barracks,
Melbourne, or to any members of the Advisory Board,


Index.
Section. Page
I. General Principles of Censorship .. ... .. 1
11. Submission of Doubtful Matter .. .. .. 3
111. Reference to Censorship Operations .. .. .. 4
4
IV. Submission of Headlines .. .. .. . • 4
V. Cartoons and Pictures .. .. .. .. 4
VI. Re-submission in Case of Delayed Publication .. 4
VII. Approval not Inferable from Publication .. .. 4
VIII. Unofficial, Sensational, or Exaggerated Reports .. .. 6
IX. Official Notifications .. .. .. - .. .. 5
X. Prejudicial Criticism and Complaints .. *.. .. 5
XI. Statements likely to cause disaffection or alarm or to prejudice
His Majesty’s Forces or Foreign Relations .. ~ 6
XII. Naval Information and Shipping News ~ .. .. 7
XIII. Revelation of Means of Defence in British or Allied Territory 12
XIV. Organization, Equipment, and Movements of the Australian
Imperial Expeditionary Force .. .. 12
XV. Health and Conduct of Troops .. .. 13
XVI. Casualties, Obituary Notices, &c, .. 14
XVII. Gallipoli Campaign .. .. . . .. .. 14
XVIII. Operations in the Pacific .. .. .. .. 16
XIX. Treatment of Aliens .. .. .. .. .. 15
XX. Trading with the Enemy .. .. .. .. 15
XXL Export of Contraband., .. .. .. ..15
XXII. Gold Statistics .. .. .. .. ..16
XXIIL Enemy Raids .. .. .. .. .. 16
XXIV. Espionage .. .. .. .. .. .. 16
XXV, Inventions ~ ~ * , * ■ • • .. 16


Rules for the Censorship of
the Press.
All officers of the Press to whom these instructions are com-
municated are to regard them as strictly confidential. They are
to he communicated only to those officers whose duty it is to
insure their observance, and such officers are not to convey to any
other person the information contained in them.
♦
I. —GENERAL PRINCIPLES OF CENSORSHIP.
The primary object of Censorship is to prevent assistance being
given or naval or military information being transmitted to the
enemy. The enemy is assisted by reports or statements which
cause disaffection to His Majesty, which excite public alarm,
which prejudice the recruiting, training, discipline, or adminis-
tration of any of His Majesty’s Forces, or which adversely affect
His Majesty’s relations with foreign Powers.
These principles are safeguarded chiefly by the following
regulations: —
(i) War Precautions Regulation 19 :
(1) No person shall without lawful authority collect,
record, publish, communicate, or attempt to elicit—
(a) any information with respect to —
(i) the movement, numbers, description, con-
dition, or disposition of any of the
Forces, ships, or war materials of His
Majesty, or any of His Majesty’s allies ;
• or
(ii) the plans or conduct, or supposed plans or
conduct, of any naval or military opera-
tions by any such Forces or ships ; or
(hi) any works or measures undertaken for or
connected with or intended for the
fortification or defence of any place ; or
( h) any information intended to be communicated
to the enemy, or of such a nature as is calcu-
lated to be or might directly or indirectly
be useful to the enemy.
0.10794.—2


(2) If any person contravenes the provisions of this
Regulation, or without lawful authority or excuse has
in his possession any document containing any such
information as aforesaid, he shall be guilty of an offence
against the Act.
(ii) War Precautions Regulation 27a :
Any person who by word of mouth or in writing or by
any act or deed —
(а) advocates, incites, or encourages disloyalty or
hostility to the British Empire, or to the
cause of the British Empire in the present
war ; or
(б) advocates the dismemberment of the British
Empire,
or who says or does anything calculated to incite,
encourage, or assist such disloyalty or hostility, shall be
guilty of an offence against the Act.
(iii) War Precautions Regulation 28 (1): —
No person shall, by word of mouth, or in writing, or in
any newspaper, periodical, book, circular, or other
printed publication —
{a) spread false reports, or make false statements or
reports, or statements likely to cause dis-
affection to His Majesty, or public alarm, or
to interfere with the success of His Majesty’s
Forces by land or sea, or to prejudice His
Majesty’s relations with foreign powers ; or
(6) spread reports or make statements likely to
prejudice the recruiting, training, discipline,
or administration of any of His Majesty’s
Forces.
(iv) War Precautions Regulation 28ac ;
(1) The Commandant of any Military District, or any
person authorized by him, or the Deputy Chief Censor,
or any person authorized by him,
[a) may enter, if need be by force, and search any
premises in which he suspects there may be
any copies of any publication containing in-
jurious matter or any type or other plant
which has been or is being used, or is in a
condition adapted for use, in the printing or
publication of any such publication ; and
(b) may seize any such type or other plant, and any
copies of any publication containing injurious
matter.


(2) Anything seized under the powers given by this
Regulation may be destroyed or otherwise disposed of
as the Minister directs.
(3) In this Regulation—
“ Injurious matter ” means any matter the publica-
tion of which is likely to be injurious to the
public safety or welfare, or the publication of
which would be contrary to any Regulation or
to any Order given by or under the authority
of the Deputy Chief Censor.
(v) War Precautions Regulation 28ad :
Any person who prints (otherwise than for submission
to the Censorship), publishes, sells, or distributes any
matter, the printing, publication, or distribution of which
has been forbidden by an officer of the Censorship Staff,
shall be guilty of an offence against the Act.
(vi) War Precautions Regulation 28c :
The printer or publisher of any newspaper, periodical,
or other publication, shall not, without the permission of
an officer of the Censorship Staff —
(1) Print or publish any statement to the effect or
from which it can be inferred, that any
alteration, addition, or omission has been
made by the Censorship in any matter; or
(2) print any matter in such a way as to show or
suggest that any alteration, addition, or
omission has been made by the Censorship ;
or
(3) print or publish any statement to the effect that
publication of any matter has been forbidden.
<
lI.—SUBMISSION OF DOUBTFUL MATTER.
The following Rules are issued to the Press as a guide to the
classes of matter, the publication of which is permitted or pro-
hibited. In cases of doubt galley proofs in duplicate should be
submitted to the Censor.
Items of news which appear to contravene the Censorship
Rules may nevertheless be freely submitted for scrutiny. Cases
arise in which the formal objection may be waived. The
observance of the general principle underlying the Censorship is,
however, imperative, and it is hoped that only such matter as is
not radically inconsistent with the general principle will ordinarily
be submitted,


lII.—REFERENCE TO CENSORSHIP OPERATIONS.
Particularized statements with, reference to the exercise of the
Censorship are prohibited. To call the attention of the public
to the fact that a particular item, name, or locality has been
suppressed, is to defeat the object of suppressing that particular.
IV.—SUBMISSION OF HEADLINES.
Articles submitted for censorship must contain the heading
or headings under which it is proposed to publish them, and the
publication of such articles with headlines that have not been
passed by the Censorship is prohibited.
V.—CARTOONS AND PICTURES.
The principles of the Censorship are applicable to cartoons
and pictures as well as to letterpress.
The publication of the following matter, for example, is pro-
hibited :
[a) pictures of any work of defence, arsenal, camp, depot,
telegraph or signal station, war material, dockyard,
or any object intended to facilitate navigation in or
into a harbor ;
( h) pictures of any transport, aircraft, or warship belonging
to Great Britain, except in the circumstances defined
in Section XII., 2, of these Rules;
(c) cartoons likely to discourage recruiting ;
{d) cartoons likely to offend Allied or Neutral Nations ;
(e) illustrations of gruesome effects of warfare.
VI. —RE-SUBMISSION IN CASE OF DELAYED
PUBLICATION.
The publication of matter submitted to the Censor, and passed
for publication, but not published within one month, is prohibited.
Such matter must be re-submitted before it is published.
VIL—APPROVAL NOT INFERABLE FROM PUBLICATION.
The fact that matter which contravenes the Censorship Rules
has been improperly published does not justify its re-publication
without submission for Censorship.


VIII.—UNOFFICIAL, SENSATIONAL, OR EXAGGERATED
REPORTS.
The Press is requested to avoid misrepresenting the military
situation by publishing —
(a) rumours and unconfirmed or unauthorized reports of
victories or defeats on land or sea ;
( h) headlines exaggerating successes or failures of any kind.
IX.—OFFICIAL NOTIFICATIONS.
Official notifications to the Press are those issued by Common-
wealth Ministers, the members of the Naval and Military Boards,
and also statements by District Commandants if officially issued
for publication on matters pertaining to their districts.
Such official notifications may be published without reference
to the Censor; but the Press will be held responsible for the
publication of unauthorized statements.
The source of the information must be mentioned in the
announcement, e.g., “ The Minister for Defence states, &c.”,
“ The Naval Board announces, &
X.—PREJUDICIAL CRITICISM AND COMPLAINTS.
1. While legitimate criticism will not be suppressed, the publi-
cation of statements likely to prejudice the recruiting, training,
discipline, or administration of any of His Majesty’s Forces is
prohibited.
As disparaging criticism is often of an exaggerated character
and tends to weaken discipline or discourage recruiting, com-
plaints will at once be made the subject of inquiry. For this
purpose such complaints should be submitted to the Censor before
publication. or referred to the Commandant or Department
concerned. If necessary, further reference can be made to the
Minister.
2, Statements of soldiers alleging bad treatment either in
Australia or elsewhere should be submitted before publication.
Most of these are ex parte, and many are false or exaggerated
and prejudicial to recruiting. Such statements will be forwarded
to the proper authorities for investigation.


XL—STATEMENTS LIKELY TO CAUSE DISAFFECTION
OR ALARM, OR TO PREJUDICE HIS MAJESTY’S
FORCES OR FOREIGN RELATIONS.
1. The Press shall not publish statements —
(a) evincing disloyalty, or likely to encourage disloyalty ;
( b ) likely to discourage enlistment;
(c) likely to prejudice the training, discipline, or administra-
tion of any of His Majesty’s Forces ;
(d) likely to cause public alarm ;
(e) likely to prejudice His Majesty’s relations with foreign
Powers.
2. The imputation of hostile or unneutral acts to the subjects
of a neutral Power is prohibited.
3. The publication of the following matter relative to the
Government’s action with regard to alien seamen and wharf
workers is prohibited—
(i) matter suggesting that subjects of named neutral countries
engaged as seamen or waterside workers are subjected
to special scrutiny or refused permission to carry on
their occupations ;
(ii) matter suggesting that subjects of unnamed neutral
countries engaged as seamen or waterside workers are
subjected to special scrutiny or refused permission to
carry on their occupations, if the matter serves to
identify the particular neutral country or countries
concerned ;
(iii) matter which indicates or from which it might be inferred
that subjects of named or unnamed neutral countries
were or are concerned in the perpetration of enemy
acts ;
(iv) matter relative to the alleged refusal of the Government
to employ aliens on vessels.
References to the fact that aliens generally are not allowed
to work on wharfs without a licence is permitted.
4. The publication of any matter derogatory to or intended in
any way, directly or indirectly, to minimize or weaken the terms
of peace laid down by the Prime Minister of Great Britain and the
President of the United States of America is prohibited, unless
such matter has been passed for publication by an officer of the
Censorship Staff.


• >
This prohibition applies to matter commending the Bolshevik
peace terms in so far as they are inconsistent with the terms of
peace set forth by Mr. Lloyd George and President Wilson.
5. The publication of any manifesto, appeal, or statement of
the Bolshevik party in Russia which has not been specifically
passed for publication is prohibited.
6. The publication of any reference to the deportation from
Australia of members of unlawful associations or others is
prohibited.
7. The Press is requested to refrain from publishing any matter
likely to reflect on the loyalty of our Irish felloW-subjects, or to
incite adverse criticism of their actions, or to impair the essential
unity of the people of the British Empire.
*
8. The publication of any matter which may prejudice the
relations of the Japanese and the Australian Governments is
prohibited.
«
This prohibition disallows —
(а) allusions to the question of coloured labour ; and
(б) direct or indirect reference to the alleged connexion of
Japan with the Australian Tariff.
XII.—NAVAL INFORMATION AND SHIPPING NEWS.
1. No information concerning the movements, names, numbers,
description, condition, or construction of —
(а) ships of the British Fleet (including ships of the Royal
Australian Navy) or of the Fleet of any Ally, and
(б) hospital ships of Great Britain or of any Ally,
is to be published until released by the Censorship. Such reference
to the whereabouts of officers as would indicate the position of a
ship is included in this prohibition.
2. It is permissible to publish—
(i) pictures of any British warship launched before August,
1914, provided—
(а) that the picture does not show the present
position or work of the ship ; and
(б) that the name is not mentioned if the ship is
still afloat.


(ii) Pictures of any British warship launched since August,
1914, provided—
(а) that the picture does not tend to identify the
ship ;
(б) that the picture does not show the present
position or work of the ship ;
(c) that the name is not mentioned if the ship is
still afloat.
The publication of pictures of British warships not authorized
by this rule is prohibited. The Press is urgently advised not to
publish without submission any picture of a British warship
launched since- August, 1914, as a grave offence would be
committed if the picture tended to identify the vessel.
3. The publication of any reference to any vessel employed by
the Naval Board for any purpose connected with the war
( e.g ., examination services, patrol duties, and mine-sweeping) is
prohibited.
4. Any reference to the nature of any armament carried by
armed merchantmen is prohibited.
5. Reference to the requisitioning of ships by the Imperial or
the Commonwealth Government is prohibited.
9
6. Reference to ships employed in carrying troops'is prohibited.
7. The publication of articles on the methods adopted by the
Allies in dealing with enemy submarines is prohibited, unless such
articles (a) have been passed by the Censor, or (6) are reprints
from neutral papers, and are published as such with the name and
date of the periodical from which they are taken.
8. No reports of encounters between merchant vessels and
enemy submarines or raidejs are to be published unless they have
been passed by the Censor.
9. The Press is permitted to announce the fact that a disem-
barkation of returning sick and wounded soldiers will take place
on the first or second day after the date of the announcement;
but it must not refer to the ship’s movements in any other way,
and must not mention the word “ transport ” or the name of the
vessel.
10. The publication of reports of interviews with naval officers
and of articles or letters written by naval officers or men is
prohibited.
11. It is forbidden to publish any reference to official “ sailing
directions ” or “ orders referring to trade routes ” issued by
authority of the Admiralty.


12. The publication of pictures of British vessels showing
traces of camouflage is prohibited whether the vessels are still
afloat or have been sunk.
13. The publication of any reference to the intention or alleged
intention of the Government with regard to the present routes
of Commonwealth-owned steamers or their diversion to routes
which are not within the submarine zone is prohibited.
14. (i) With the consent and at the discretion of the owners
or Australian agents of the vessels, it is permissible to publish (in
advertisements, news items and mail notices) the following
particulars relative to vessels (other than troopships) sailing
between ports in the area bounded on the east by the Pacific
shores of the American continent and on the west by the coastline
of Asia, the Dutch East Indies and the northern and eastern
coasts of Australia :
(a) the names of the vessels (hereinafter called “ transpacific
vessels ”);
(b) the names of ports of call within the defined area ;
(c) the precise date of sailing from a port in the Common-
wealth to a port outside the Commonwealth, but
within the defined area ;
(i d) the date of the arrival of a transpacific vessel at any port
in the Commonwealth, provided that this date is not
published more than 48 hours before the arrival of the
ship at the first Commonwealth port;
(e) the date of the departure of a transpacific vessel from one
Commonwealth port for another Commonwealth port,
provided that this date is not published more than
48 hours before the ship arrives at the first port of call
in the Commonwealth ; ,
(/) the date at which an outward-hound transpacific
vessel has reached or passed any place outside the
Commonwealth, but within the defined area ;
( g ) the date at which an inward-hound transpacific vessel
reached or left any place outside the Commonwealth
but within the defined area, provided that the vessel
is in Commonwealth waters at the time of publication.
(ii) The publication of the following particulars relative to
transpacific vessels is 'prohibited :
(a) the precise or approximate date at which any inward-
hound transpacific vessel arrives at or departs from
any port outside the Commonwealth, unless the ship
is in Commonwealth waters at the time of publication ;


(b) any reference to the sighting of one (outward-bound or
inward-bound) vessel by another ;
(c) any reference to any vessel employed in carrying troops ;
( d ) any reference to the fact that the passengers by any
outward-bound vessel include military or naval
officers ;
( e ) any reference to the fact that the passengers by any
inward-bound vessel include military or naval officers
(saving personal references to individual officers who
have already arrived in the Commonwealth) ;
(/) any reference to any matter {e.g., the sighting of raiders or
floating mines) not expressly permitted in paragraph
1 ;
(g) any information indicating that the voyage of any
transpacific vessel began or will be continued outside
* the defined area, e.g., a sailing “ via Panama.”
15. Save as hereinafter permitted, the publication of information
relative to vessels whose voyage extends to a port outside the
Commonwealth and which traverse any part of the Indian Ocean
or waters west of Singapore in the north and Melbourne or Hobart
in the south, is prohibited.
The announcements prohibited by this rule include :
(a) any direct or indirect reference to the arrival, departure,
or other movements of such vessels, including coastal
movements;
(h) any direct or indirect reference to the date of the despatch
or arrival of mails carried by such vessels other than
the announcements defined in sub-section 16 ;
(c) any such direct or indirect reference to officers, crew,
passengers, or cargo as would indicate the actual or
probable whereabouts of any such vessel;
( d ) any mention of the names of such vessels.
This rule does not prohibit the publication of—
(a) advertisements indicating the route followed by the
vessels of any line and the intervals at which sailings
take place or containing the words “ a steamer will be
despatched at an early date ” ;
(b) consignees’ notices in which the name of the vessel is not
mentioned.


16. The publication of references to (a) the arrival or despatch of
oversea mails, or ( b) the despatch of mails for Victoria, South
Australia, or Western Australia, is prohibited save in the form of
announcements made by the Department of the Postmaster-
General which satisfy the following conditions :
(i) Any incoming mail from oversea may be announced,
provided that the announcement is not published more
than two days before the mail is due to arrive.
(ii) The despatch of a mail to Great Britain or Egypt (or
South Africa) may be announced, provided that—
(a) the announcement is not published more than
■five days before the date of despatch ( e.g .,
a mail closing on a Wednesday must not be
announced before the preceding Friday);
and
(b) the port of call is not mentioned.
(iii) The despatch of a mail to India may be announced,
provided that- —
(a) the announcement is not published more than
five days before the date of despatch,
(b) the" mail is not carried by a steamer which also
carries a mail for Egypt; and
(c) the port of call in India {e.g., Colombo) is not
mentioned.
(iv) The despatch of any mail to Victoria, South Australia,
and Western Australia may be announced, provided
that the announcement does not show whether the
mail is carried overland or by sea.
(v) The despatch of any mail to the continent of America,
Japan, China, the Dutch East Indies, and any place
in the Pacific area defined in sub-section 14 of Section
XII. may be announced, provided that the announce-
ment does not show that the voyage of the vessel
carrying the mail will be extended beyond Vhe* Pacific
area.
17. The publication of reports of the alleged total loss of vessels,
any part of whose voyage extends to a port outside the Common-
wealth, is prohibited unless the report has been passed for
publication.
18. The publication of any reference to any proposal for the
purchase of ships from America or elsewhere is prohibited.


XIII. —REVELATION OF MEANS OF DEFENCE IN
r
BRITISH OR ALLIED TERRITORY.
1. The numbers of men assembled or units on duty at Australian
defended ports or other stations are not to be indicated, nor may
reference be made to military and naval changes or movements
at such ports.
2. No reference is to be made to the posting of guards or sentries
at factories or other places.
This rule does not prohibit reference to naval guards at wharfs
or on ships adjacent to wharfs.
3. No reference to examination services at any Australian port
is to be published.
4. The publication of any reference to signal or radio stations is
prohibited.
5. Information as to the operation and condition of the means
.of telegraphic communication is not to'be published.
6. Reports of searches made by the Department of Defence or
by any other Department are not to be published, unless they
have been passed by the Censor.
7. Reference to the movements of aircraft within the Common-
wealth is prohibited.
8. The publication of photographs of battleplanes presented to
the Imperial Government is prohibited.
XIV. —ORGANIZATION, EQUIPMENT, AND MOVEMENTS
OF THE AUSTRALIAN IMPERIAL EXPEDITIONARY
FORCE.
1. Whilst precise information relating to the organization,
numbers, destination, movements, efficiency, or equipment of the
Australian Imperial Expeditionary Force may be of value to the
enemy and therefore must be suppressed, it is allowable to publish
such general information of this kind as may serve to maintain
public interest and enthusiasm in Australia.
2. The names of officers alleged to have received commands in
the Australian Imperial Expeditionary Force are not to be pub-
lished until the appointments have passed the Executive Council.
3. Matter relative to the Tropical Force or the situation in the
Pacific Islands occupied by the Australian Forces is not to be
published unless it has been passed by the Censor.
4. The publication is prohibited of all information as to the
objects and work of any technical unit of the Australian Imperial
Expeditionary Force, unless it has been passed by the Censor.
5. In accounts of reviews or route marches of the Australian
Imperial Expeditionary Force the names and numbers of
particular units are not to be mentioned.


6. .Reports of route marches or other celebrations preceding
the departure of troops must not indicate :
(а) the exact date of embarkation or departure ;
(б) the wharf, quay, or dock at which the troops forthwith
embark ;
(c) the name of the ship employed in carrying the troops ;
(■ d) the route to be followed by the ship.
7. All reports of interviews with returned soldiers should be
submitted for censorship before publication.
No letters or pictures from soldiers or other persons with our
troops in transit or at the front are to be published without
previous submission to the Censorship. This does not apply to
the Official Commonwealth Press Correspondents’ letters, but it
applies to all other letters whether addressed to the Press or to
private individuals.
Such statements concerning the treatment of enemy prisoners
or combatants as may tend to prejudice the reputation of our
troops are not to be published.
Gruesome details of wounds or mutilations which would disturb
the public or cause pain to relatives of the wounded or killed
are not to be published.
It is not permissible to publish in private correspondence any-
thing that may indicate the actual position of any unit at the
front, unless the same matter has already been published in
official reports.
8. In letters from officers of the Australian Imperial Expedi-
tionary Force at the Front, the rank, unit, and, save in the case
of chaplains, the name of such officers must not be published.
In letters from soldiers, no mention of an officer may be published
which is of a disparaging or unduly laudatory nature, or is in
any way calculated to be subversive of military discipline.
9. The mention of battalion colours in such a way as to identify
them with any particular unit is prohibited.
XV.—HEALTH AND CONDUCT OF TROOPS.
»
1. No discussion is permitted in the Press on the subject of the
inoculation of soldiers against small-pox, typhoid, meningitis,
and other infectious diseases.
2. The Press is requested to avoid details likely to inspire
unnecessary alarm or likely to give currency to exaggerated ideas
on the subject of venereal disease among the members of the
Australian Imperial Expeditionary Force.


3. 'Reports of any riot or disturbance in wbiclTsoldiers partici-
pate or of any conflict between soldiers and the military police
should be moderate in tone. Sensational headlines and details
are to be avoided as tending to inflame the minds of other soldiers
and the public, and to produce further disturbances.
$
Accounts of such incidents should be submitted for censorship
before publication.
4. Paragraphs relating to the refusal of soldiers to pay railway
or tramway fares must be submitted before publication.
5. Press references to riots in which members of the Australian
Imperial Expeditionary Force take part abroad are strictly
prohibited until such information is authoritatively released.
6. All references to indiscipline or misbehaviour on the part of
bodies of cadets must be submitted for censorship before
publication.
7. In reports of legal proceedings against discharged or returned
soldiers for other than military offences, the Press is requested
not to direct attention to the former military status of the accused.
XVI.—CASUALTIES, OBITUARY NOTICES, ETC.
No casualty occurring in the Australian Imperial Expeditionary
Force is to be announced in the Press before it is released for
publication in the official casualty list, unless such announcement
is authorized in writing by the next-of-kin.
Notifications of casualties must not specify, either by number
or name, the unit or the battalion in which the soldier was serving
or the locality where the casualty occurred. This instruction
does not apply to obituary notices, or to such official lists of
wounded soldiers returning to Australia as are issued by District
Commandants.
Summaries of casualties for particular units or dates are not
to be published.
XVII.—GALLIPOLI CAMPAIGN.
It is of the greatest importance that the enemy should receive
no hint of the method of the successful withdrawal of the troops
from Anzac, Suvla, or Cape Heiles. No statement should be
published showing the actual number o f the troops or the
designation of the units withdrawn.
No information about the withdrawal or the ruses adopted to
outwit the enemy on that occasion is to be published without the
permission of the Censor.


XVIII.—OPERATIONS IN THE PACIFIC.
Statements referring to the alleged activity of Germans in
Java, New Guinea, or the vicinity of the New Guinea area, are
not to be published until officially released.
No reference is permitted in the Press to rumours concerning
the appearance of raiders or strange ships in any part of the
Western Pacific.
t
XIX.—TREATMENT OF ALIENS.
1. Information relating to the arrest, detention, or other
military dealing with foreigners in Australian territory is not to
be published. All references to foreigners, who are the subjects
of military control, whether on parole or actually interned, are
therefore to be submitted for censorship.
2. Reasonable criticism of the general policy with regard to the
treatment of subjects of enemy nationality is permissible, but
such matter must be submitted for censorship.
3. No mention whatever is to be made in the Press of the
internment of Germans or other persons.
I. All matter relating to or in any way connected with Concen-
tration Camps in Australia is to be submitted for censorship
before publication.
Reports of inquests and other court proceedings are not
exempted.
5. The publication of matter relative to the repatriation of
Italian reservists and conscripts from Australia is prohibited
unless such matter is specifically submitted and passed for
publication.
XX. TRADING WITH THE ENEMY.
Advertisements or paragraphs in favour of—
[a) goods of enemy manufacture,
{b) goods bearing enemy trade marks, or
(c) firms declared “ enemy,”
are prohibited.
XXI. EXPORT OF CONTRABAND.
1. No reference is permitted in the Press to any contract with
Australian firms for the supply of metals to the French
Government.
2. The Press must not discuss directly or indirectly the
prohibition or regulation of the export of coal.


No reference is permitted in the Press to the arrangements
made by the Transport Department for the shipment of coal
from Newcastle. //■ ',<
I /
3. The publication of oversea quotations for wool and bf
prices obtained for wool shipped oversea is prohibited.
4. The publication of particulars of ,the sale of zinc concentrates
to the British Government is prohibited.
5. The publication of statements showing any quantities of
foodstuffs and goods of military value (metals, ores, wool, hides,
&c.) exported recently or to be exported in the immediate future
from Australia is prohibited except when such statements —
(а) show quantities only for stated destinations other than
the United Kingdom, or
(б) are statements for a complete year (in which case all
destinations may be specified).
XXII.—GOLD STATISTICS.
1. Statistics of imports and exports of gold specie and bullion
into and from the British Empire are prohibited publication
during the currency of the war.
2. Comment on the amount of gold reserve held against the
Commonwealth note issue is prohibited. The actual figures
officially announced at any time may be published, but previous
statements are not to be subjoined.
XXIII.—ENEMY EAIDS.
All accounts of raids on the United Kingdom by enemy air-
craft or of bombardment by enemy warships must be passed by
the Censor before publication,
XXIV. ESPIONAGE.
No reference may be made in the Press to the alleged presence
of enemy spies in Australia or in the Australian Imperial
Expeditionary Force.
XXV. INVENTIONS.
No description of, or reference to, any novel kind of fighting
machine for use on land or sea or in the air, or other inventions
for use in warfare, is to be published without submission to the
Censor.
By Authority; H. J. Green, Acting Government Printer, Melbourne.




