

Public Graves.
S.
I).
A single grave in open ground
0
12
6
Ditto, for children under five years
0
7
()
Ditto, for a still-born child ...
0
0
Private Graves.
Land for graves (selected) 8 ft. by 4 ft.
1
0
0
Ditto ditto 8 ft. bv 8 ft.
2
0
0
Ditto ditto 8 ft. by 12 ft.
2
15
0
Ditto ditto 8 ft. bv 16 ft.
4
0
0
Ditto ditto 8 ft. by 20 ft.
5
5
0
Interment fee, including cost of sinking each grave at least 6 feet
0
10
0
For each additional foot as follows :—
For the first additional foot
0
5
0
For the second additional foot
0
7
6
For the third additional foot ...
0
10
0
And every additional foot
0
10
0
Ee-opening a grave or vault ...
0
15
0
(iNo grave will be allowed to be re-opened till five years have elapsed
after date of burial.)
For permission to erect headstones, tombs, or half tombs, upright pedestal.
or monument
0
7
a
For copy of register
0
2
6
For inspecting plan of register
0
2
&
qWlt
RULES AND REGULATIONS
Lor the management of the
(ifrman Station stvxitttv.
T
1. The fees and charges set forth iii Schedule A shall be paid
at the time the order is given for the preparation of a grave, or when
the permission of the trustees is obtained for the erection of any
vault, monument, of tombstone Within the said cemetery.
2. The trustees Shall allot the size and position of all graves or
vaults to be sunk in the cemetery. No catacombs will be allowed.
3. All graves made in the cemetery shall be sunk at least six feet;
and no person shall be allowed to prepare a grave within the cemetery
except the sexton appointed by the trustees, or his assistants.
4. The undertaker or person ordering a grave shall furnish to
the sexton a memorandum in the form of schedule D at the time that
the trustees’ permission is handed to him.
5. The sexton shall have power to refuse to break the ground for
the purpose of digging a grave, or to allow the ground to be broken
by any person for the purpose of erecting any vault, monument, tomb-
stone, tablet, railing, or other erection, until a receipt is produced to
him, signed by one or more of the trustees, for the amount of the fees
or charges to be paid under schedule A.
6. In accordance with the provisions of the 19th section of the
Cemetery Act any person digging or making a vault, or erecting and
placing a monument, or a tombstone, in the cemetery, by and with the
permission of the trustees, under these rules, and upon the payment
of the charges herein mentioned, shall be entitled to have, maintain,
and keep up, such vault, monument, or tombstone, according to the
terms of such permission, to and for the sole and separate use of such
person or persons, and his, or her, and their heirs and near relations
for ever.
7. Application for permission to have a grave prepared, a vault
constructed, or a monument, tombstone, or tablet erected, must be
made to the trustees, or to the person or persons authorised by them
whereupon, if approved of, a permission in the form set forth in
schedule B (if required) will be granted to the party applying, on
payment of the charges set forth in schedule A.
8. All charges will he remitted on the burial of any poor person
in the said cemetery (except in the ease of burials by Government
contractors), upon its being proved to the satisfaction of the trustees
that such person was a pauper, or that the relations and friends of the
deceased are unable to pay the cost and charges of such burial.
Where paupers are buried by (Government contractors, tbe charge
will be in accordance with the scale set forth in schedule A.
9. Parties requiring brick graves or vaults; to be made in the
cemetery, will be required to submit plans of the same for the
ajojsroval of the trustees, and to construct the same under the direction
of tne surveyor appointed by the trustees ; and every coffin placed in
a vault or brick grave must be bricked in, cemented, and covered with
a slab of stone, slate, or iron, and every such coffin must have on the
lid a lead or copper plate with the name of the deceased stamped
thereon.
10. A plan or drawing of every monument, tombstone, or tablet
proposed to be erected, and a copy of every epitaph or inscription to
be engraven thereon, must be submitted to the trustees for approval,
and the trustees shall have power to withhold their permission, and
prevent the erection of any monument, &c., which shall appear to
them inappropriate or unbecoming. In the erection of tablets, copper
cramps must be used.
11. At the time orders for interment are given, or an application
fs made to the trustees to have a grave prepared, the name, age, late
place of residence, and the probable cause of death of the deceased,
together with the rest of the particulars required to fill up the form’
schedule C, must be given by the party who makes the applications.
12. The sexton must be informed of the time fixed for the funeral,
’which must be understood to mean the hour at which the procession
is to be at the cemetery. The hour fixed must in all cases be
punctually observed.
13. The sexton, or other persons employed by the trustees, are
not allowed to receive any gratuity for the performance of their duties,
except special permission is granted by the trustees, upon application
made to them by the interested. Any infringement of this rule
by the employees will lead to their immediate dismissal.
14. A plan of the cemetery, a register of all special grants, and
the position of all graves in the cemetery, is kept by the trustees, and
is open to the inspection of parties interested upon payment of the
charges mentioned in schedule A.
15. All monuments, vaults, graves, and gravestones, must be kept
in repair and proper condition by or at the expense of the owners.
16. The cemetery will be open daily to the public from sunrise to
sunset.
17. The sexton has orders to turn out, or take into custody
(as the ease may require), any person who shall behave indecorously,
or commit any trespass or injury to the trees, flowers, or erections, or
otherwise infringe any of the provisions of the Act relating to the
management of cemeteries in Queensland, or the regulations framed
under the authority thereof, and any such person shall be proceeded
against according to the provisions of the aforesaid Aet.
18. No funeral will be allowed to take place (except under
circumstances of the most urgent nature) without a certificate of the
registration of the death, signed by the Deputy Registrar-General, or
a certificate of a coroner or magistrate holding an inquest or inquiry,
such certificate to be delivered to the sexton before the funeral enters
the gate of the cemetery.
19. The trustees reserve to themselves power to make fresh rules,
or to alter and modify any of the above regulations, or the schedule of
fees, from time to time, should they deem it expedient to do so.
A. RODE,
JOHN M'MASTER, Trustees
JOHN LEOPOLD ZILLMAN, V „ .
German Station
FREDERICK PFOHLKES SWAN WICK, Cemetery.
W. J. F. COOKSLET.
German Station, July, 1877.
SCHEDULE A.
Charges.
SCHEDULE B.
(No. 1.)
The trustees of the German Station Cemetery hereby grant permission to
to erect a tombstone in the said cemetery to the memory of
, the monument and epitaph having been approved of
A, RODE,
Chairman.
(No. 2.)
No - 18
has on behalf of paid all necessary
dues for a grave in tin's cemetery ; thechmeiisjons being ft, by
ft-, and the No. of the grave being No,
A. RODE,
Chairman.
" s ‘ , Sexton,
SCHEDULE 0.
Application is hereby made to the trustees of the German Station Cemetery by
the undersigned for a grave ft. by ft.
1. Name of deceased ::
2. Age :
3. Late place of residence
4. Probable cause of deafcl
5. Day of funeral :
6. Hour of funeral:
7. No. of grave :
8. Public or private ;
9. Width in either case t
10. Depth of grave :
Date t IB
SCHEDULE D.
Memorandum foe Sexton.
Undertaker’s name;
Name of deceased :
Length of coffin :
Greatest width of coffin :
Day of funeral:
Hour of funeral;
Date: 18
N.B.—This form, duly filled up, must be in the sexton’s hands at least twenty-four
hours before the time of interment. J
|! SCHEDULE E.
Eoem of Certificate op Right op Burial in the German Station, General
Cemetery.
On the application of and upon payment of the sum of
which is hereby acknowledged to have been received, we, the majority of the trustees
I ot t!le German Station Cemetery, in pursuance, of the Act 29 Victoria, No. 15, have
agreed to grant, and hereby grant, unto, the said permission’to dig
or make a grave or vault on that piece of ground feet long by
feet broad, lying within, the. portion of the said cemetery described as
and marked No. on the map, or plan of the said cemetery, kept by the said
trustees, and to. erect and place on the said piece of ground a monument or
tombstone, on payment of such charges as may from time to time be established.
And it is hereby declared that the said shall be entitled to have,’
maintain, and keep up, such vault monument, or toinbstene, according to, the terms"
jj of this permission, to and for the sole and. separate use of the said
and Ins (or their) representatives for ever. Provided always, and it, is, hereby
declared, that this grant is made subject to the terms and conditions fpjjo.winv, that
is. to say:—First, that the said piece of ground shall be kept and used by the saifl
and his (or their) representatives, solely as a burying place, and, that
up other use shall be made thereof. Second, that no, enclosing wall, fence, building,
monument, or tombstone, shah he erected or placed on the said piece of ground until
a, plan, thereof shall have been exhibited to the said trustees, and, their authority
given for the erection thereof. Third, that the said grave or vault;, and such wall,
fence, building, monument, or tombstone, if any, shall be maintained and kept up by
the said and his (or their) representatives in proper repair, to the
|| satisfaction of the said trustees. Fourth, that th,e said, , and his (or
j! their) representatives shall, in the use of the said, piece, of ground, and access thereto,
be subject in every respect to such rules and regulations as the trustees of the said
j cemetery may from time to time make.; apd shall po.t be entitled to exercise the
I right to bury or inter therein, except on payment of such charges as shall from time
to time be established, by the said trustees.
Given under our hands and, seals at Brisbane, in the Colony of Queeensland,
this day of a.d. 187
[L.3.]
Trustees of the German Station General Cemetery.
Signed by the above Trustees,
in the presence of
Register No.
BRISBANE: FEINTED BY THOENE & GEEENWELL, EDWAED STEEET.
