

VICTORIA
FREEHOLD LAND SOCIETY.
ENROLLED
PURSUANT TO 11 VICT. e. 10.
No. 384.385.386 Class B.
MR. Therdore And Whiphecm
Monthly Subscript ions payahle on Mondays, Jan. 16, Feb. 13,
March 13, April 10, May 8, June 5, July 3 and 31, August 28,
September 25, October 23, November 20, and, December 18,
1854 between 10 and 4 o'clock, at 38 Cellins Street, East.


%
/v*
Vt£-)L
,I**'
a. o*2”
faJUst
/ 2 • /tr ' p
ii. *
/£>/• __ ...- -•






RULES AND REGULATIONS
OF THE
VICTORIA FREEHOLD LAND
SOCIETY.
ESTABLISHED IN MELBOURNE,
SEPTEMBER, 1853.
Enrolled pursuant to Act of Council, 11. Victoria.
No. 10.
MELBOURNE:
PRINTED BY HUGH M’COLL,
LA TROBE-STREET, EAST.
1853.


VICTORIA FREEHOLD LAND SOCIETY.
OFFICES, 38, COLLINS STREET, EAST, MELBOURNE.
TRUSTEES.
THOS. FULTON, ESQ. LAUCHLAN MACKINNON, ESQ
FRED. J. SARGOOD, ESQ., M. L. C.
treasurer. eanksrs.
HENRY MILLER, ESQ., M. L. C. THE BANK OF VICTORIA
ARBITRATORS.
MESSRS. JAMES BARWICK. MESSRS. R. KERR.
” £• ight * henry langlands.
~ B. COCKER, ~ JOHN MACKENZIE.
DIRECTORS.
MR. W. K. BULL, Elizabeth Street, Melbourne,
~ HENRY COOKE, Flinders Street, Melbourne.
„ B. COWDEROY, Church street, Richmond.
DR. EADES, Bourke Street, East, Melbourne.
MR. R. ELLIS, Russell Street, Melbourne.
„ J. KING, Flinders Street, Melbourne.
„ ROBERT KNOX, Victoria Parade, Collingwood.
~ G. A. MOURITZ, King Street, Melbourne.
„ WALTER POWELL,CoIIins and S wanston-st.. Melbourne.
~ W. SCHULTZ, Little George Street, Collingwood.
„ HENRY WALSH, Swanston Street, Melbourne.
~ G. WILLIAMS, Brunswick Street, Co lingwood.
~ G. E. WHITE, Collins Street, Melbourne.
MANAGING DIRECTOR.
MR. B. COWDEROY, Melbourne and Richmond.
SOLICITOR.
S. M. SOUTH, ESQ., Chancery Lane, Melbourne.
SURVEYORS.
MESSRS. WYLIE & 81ER5,29, Bourke Street, East, Melbourne.
SECRETARY.
tIR. ADOLPHUS HALLER, 181, Little Collins Street, East, Melbourne


RULES AND REGULATIONS
OF THE
VICTORIA FREEHOLD LAND SOCIETY.
I.— Object.
Tiie object of the Victoria Freehold Land Society
is, to enable the industrial classes of the Colony to
become proprietors in their own right of freehold land,
either for building purposes or cultivation. By the
application of the co-operative principle, it proposes to
secure to its members two great advantages, beside*
collateral benefits, viz. : Ist. The obtainment of small
portions of freehold land at the same rateable price as
that paid by the capitalist for large quantities —in other
words, the allotment of land in retail quantities at
vjholcsale prices ; and 2d. The payment of such whole-
sale prices by easy weekly or monthly instalments.
11.— Wakagemekt.
The Society shall be under the management of not
less than eight Directors (including a Managing Direc-
tor,) three Trustees, a Treasurer, Solicitor, Surveyor,
and Secretary.
lll.—Trustees.
That Thomas Fulton, Esq., Lauclilan Mackinnon,
Esq., and Frederick James Sargood, Esq., all of Mel


bourne, shall be and continue the Trustees of the
Society.
That in case the said Trustees, or any or either of
them, or any future trustee or trustees to he appointed
as hereinafter mentioned shall die, be desirous of resign-
ing, or become incapable to act in the trusts in him or
them reposed by these rules, or remove from Melbourne
to a distance of more than twenty miles, or become
bankrupt or insolvent, the Managing Director for the
time being, shall, on receiving notice of such death,
desire, incapacity, removal, bankruptcy or insolvency,
direct the Secretary to convene a special meeting of the
Directors, and the Directors shall hear and determine
the subject matter of such notice, and may thereupon
accept the resignation of such retiring trustee, or
remove any such trustee or trustees from office. That
the Directors shall thereupon as soon as may he, appoint
a new trustee in the place of each trustee so dying,
resigning, or being removed ; and the appointment of
every such new trustee shall he signed by three
Dmectors (one of whom shall he the Managing Director),
die newly appointed trustee and the Secretary, where-
upon the trustee so resigning, removing or becoming
incapacitated, shall cease to be a trustee, and the con-
tinuing trustees or trustee for the time he ng, and
such newly appointed trustee shall have the same
power and he vested with the same trusts as by virtue
of these rules devolve or become vested in the trustees
above named.
That during the interval between the death, retire-
ment, or removal of any trustee and the appointment of
a new trustee, the remaining trustee or trustees shall
have the same power, and be competent to act in the
execution of the trusts hereby reposed in them as fully
as though no such death, retirement, or removal had
taken place.
That the removal from office of a trustee shall not
operate to his prejudice as a member of the Society.
That in case it shall be necessary to bring or defend


&ny legal proceedings on behalf of this Society, the
same shall he brought or defended in tlio name of the
Trustees for the time being, who shall be indemnified
for any loss or damage which they may sustain in refer-
ence thereto, hut no proceedings shall he entered upon
or defended without the sanction of the Directors, to be
specially summoned for that purpose, nor shall any such
proceedings he stayed or compromised without a similar
sanction.
All property purchased by the Society shall be vested
in the Trustees for the time being, for the use and
benefit of the Society and the members thereof, and
upon the division and allotment of such property from
time to time amongst the members, the said Trustees
shall convey to each member the land or property to
which he shall become entitled, or which shall have
been apportioned to him under the operation and in
accordance with the rules of the Society.
IV. —Directors.
That Messrs. W. K. Bull, Hy. Cooke, B. Cowderoy.
R,. Eades, M.D., R. Ellis, J. King, R. Knox, J. Mac-
gregor, G. A. Mouritz, W. Schultz, 11. W alsh, G,
Williams, and G. E. White, shall be the first Directors
of the Society, and that Mr. Benjamin Cowderoy shall
be the Managing Director, but all future elections of
Directors shall be by the members at the half-yearly
general meetings of the Society. The Directors shall
elect from among themselves a Chairman at their first
meeting after each half-yearly general meeting. One
half of the Directors (not including the Managing
Director,) shall go out of office at each half-yearly meet-
ing, but they shall be eligible for re-election by ballot
at such meeting—the Directors who are to go out at the
first meeting to be decided by lot amongst themselves,
and duly announced to the members.
The Directors shall have full power to superintend,
direct, manage, and conduct the business of the Society


according to the rules and regulations made or which
shall be made, from time to time, for the government
thereof. They shall admit members, receive money,
order payments, decide upon the claims of members and
the selection and allotment of land to he purchased,
appoint committees, dismiss, if necessary, any officer
appointed by the Directors, fill up vacancies amongst
themselves till the half-yearly meeting, and call special
general meetings of the Society as they shall think fit.
They shall choose the Solicitor, Surveyor, Secretary,
and any other officers they may think necessary to appoint,
and shall have power to make regulations for the guid-
ance of its officers in carrying the rules into execution.
In the event of a vacancy in the office of Managing
Director the same shall be filled up by the Directors
until the next following general meeting of members, tire
permanent appointment to be then made by the members
present, and the votes to be taken by ballot; a majority
of the members presen 1 , shall decide the appointment;
and, in the event of an equality of votes for any two
candidates, the Chairman shall give a casting vote.
The Trustees shall be entitled to attend all meetings
of the Directors, and express their opinions, but not to
vote.
The Directors shall meet for business monthly, or
ofteuer, if the circumstances of the Society shall require.
Each Director shall be entitled to receive 10s. for
every attendance, and shall pay a fine of ss. for every
non-attendance, unless he shall have sent to the Chairman
or Managing Director such reason for his absence as
the Directors present may consider satisfactory.
Four Directors shall constitute a quorum.
All questions coming before them shall be decided by
a majority present, and, if the votes be equal, the Chair-
man shall give a casting vote. All proceedings shall be
entered in a minute book kept for that purpose, and the
correctness of the entry having been confirmed at the
next meeting of the Directors, the minute shall be signed
by the Chairman.


Tlie Managing Director shall search out and select
land suitable for the purposes of the shareholders, attend
sales or negotiate for the purchase of land at such price
or prices as may have been sanctioned by the Directors,
and, on land being purchased, shall assist the Surveyor
in dividing it into portions and affixing a value to each
lot, such value, however, to be subject to the approval
of the Committee. lie shall use all diligence to obtain
grants and conveyances to the Trustees, and see to the
preparation by the Solicitor of all sub-conveyances to
Shareholders after apportionment, and that the descrip-
tions of the lots aro accurately entered in such deeds.
He shall attend weekly on the receipt of contributions
from the members, unless prevented by sickness or some
unavoidable cause, in which case he shall obtain the at-
tendance of some other Director as his substitute, and
shall see to the payment of all money so received into
the hands or to the account of the Treasurer within one
day after receipt thereof (Sundays not to be counted)
under a penalty of £1 per day for default, and shall
assist generally in managing the affairs of the society,
lie shall be remunerated by a pro rata payment to be
fixed by the Directors.
V. —Treasurer.
The Treasurer shall pay into the credit of the soci-
ety, at their Bankers, such sums of money as may from
time to time be paid into his hands by the Secretary or
Manager or any other person on account of the society.
All payments which the Directors may order shall be
made by cheques upon the Bankers, to be signed by the
Treasurer and Managing Director, and countersigned
by the Secretary.
VI. —Solicitor.
The Solicitor appointed by the Directors shall conduct
all legal business on behalf of the society, and shall in


all cases furnish a report in writing of tlie character of
any title submitted to him, for which duties lie shall be
fairly remunerated. He shall also prepare all convey-
ances required by members of land allotted to them at
not more than 30s. for each conveyance, and mortgages
of any such allotments by members to the trustees°of
the Society at not more than 40s. for each such mort-
gage deed, exclusive of registration charges (1Z each.)
VII.— Surveyor.
Hie Surveyor to be appointed by the Directors shall
examine or survey all land proposed to be purchased by
the society, and furnish the Directors with such infor-
mation as they may require respecting the same. He
shall also survey and allot, as he may be directed, all
land purchased, and prepare plans and descriptions of
the same, for which he shall receive such sum as the
Directors may think reasonable. If at any time from
illness or from any other unavoidable cause, the Surveyor
shall be unable to make his survey at the time required,
he shall provide a substitute to be approved by the Board
or by the Managing Director, or in the event of any
neglect on the part of such Surveyor or substitute, or
any disagreement with the Directors, they may appoint
a Surveyor to act in the matter required.
Vlll.— Secretary.
That a Secretary be appointed at a salary to be de-
termined by the Directors.
He shall attend every meeting of the society and Di-
rectors, and enter minutes of all resolutions, transactions,
and business of the Society, and keep the accounts there-
of in books provided for that purpose, which books, and
also the Banker s book, he shall produce at each monthly
meeting of the Directors, and at any time when required.
He shall assist the Managing Director in the receipt of
subscriptions and other business, and shall send the


circulars and notices which may from time to time he
necessary, and generally act under the instruction of the
Directors.
IX.— Arbitrators.
Any disputes arising between the Society and any
member or persons claiming on account of any member
shall he settled by arbitration. Six arbitrators shall he
named and elected by the Directors at the first meeting
of the Society or General Committee thereof, that shall
he held after the enrolment of these Rules, none of such
arbitrators being directly or indirectly beneficially inter-
ested in the funds of the Society. Should any of the
arbitrators refuse or neglect to act or leave the neigh-
bourhood of Melbourne, or he removed by death, their
places shall be filled up at the next general meeting of
the Society. On arbitration being called for, the name
of each arbitrator shall he written on a separate piece
of paper and put into a box. The box shall he shaken,
the disputant, or some person on his behalf, shall draw
from it three of such papers, one by one, and the persons
so drawn shall he the arbitrators, who shall meet and
decide on the matter or matters so brought before them.
Should any of the persons so drawn •refuse or neglect to
act, the disputant shall again draw one or more papers
from the box, as the case may he, until there shall be
three persons to attend as arbitrators, and the award of
such arbitrators, or the major part of them, shall be
binding and conclusive on all parties against all further
dispute or litigation whatsoever.
Any member requiring a matter to be submitted to
arbitration shall deposit £l 10s. with the Secretary,
which shall he returned to him if the arbitrators decide
that the expenses of the arbitration shall he paid by the
Society.
The Managing Director, with the Secretary, shall he
present at all arbitrations to give evidence and informa-,
tion. A reasonable sum shall he allowed for the e.v


penses of the arbitrators, which shall be paid either by
the person claiming the arbitration, or by the Society
or otherwise, as the arbitrators shall determine.
X. —Members, Subscriptions, <fcc.
Any person shall be entitled to become a member ol
the Society on payment of the entrance fee of £1 per
share, subscription, and other payments prescribed by
these rules, or by the Directors under the authority
thereof, and on conforming to these rules.
' The subscription to the Society shall he £1 per week,
or £4 per month four weeks,) for each share, to bo
in advance, the days and place of payment to be
fixed by the directors, and duly published. The mem
hers shall elect to pay either by the week or the month
and having so elected, any member neglecting to pay
ms contiibution on tho day appointed, shall be charged
Is. in the pound for each such default. If the arrears
exceed two months, lie shall from the expiration of the
second mouth, pay 2s. in the pound for each such de-
fault. If the arrears exceed four months, he shall pay
a fine equal to one-fifth of the arrears then due. If
all arrears of fines and contributions bo not paid at or
before the end of the sixth month, such member
shall forfeit all claim to the benefits of the Society,
as well as all money previously paid ; but lie may at
any time within three months of such forfeiture, apply
for re-admission, and the Directors may, if they think
fit, reinstate such member on his paying a fine, to be
levied by the Directors, such fine not to exceed tho
whole amount of contributions in arrear, and upon the
same being paid, together with the contributions due,
the rights of such member shall he resumed, and lie be
again entitled to all the benefits for which he had origi-
nally subscribed.
All entrance fees, fines, and interest, shall he carried
to the credit of a general expense account, at the debit
of which shall be placed all salaries, rent, printing,


surveying, and other expenses incurred on behalf of the
Society, and on the allotment and subdivision of any
land purchased, the Directors shall add to the original
purchase money such proportionate sum n 3 may be re-
quisite for meeting any deficiency in such expense
account, the Directors being at liberty in the mean-
time to draw from the general funds such sums as may
be requisite to meet the current expenses of the
society.
Any member shall be at liberty to transfer his share
or shares, or any portion of them, to any other member,
or to any person, on giving previous notice to the
Secretary. Ten shillings for each share transferred
shall he paid as a bonus to the Society, and when such
transfer shall have been made and duly registered, the
purchaser shall occupy the same position, and be en-
titled to the same benefits, and subject to the same
liabilities as the original holder of such share or
shares.
In case of the death of a member, his widow or legal
representative shall have the option of continuing the
share or shares held by the deceased member, and shall
be subject to the same rules as he would have been if
still living, or of transferring such share or shares as
provided by the foregoing clause, or of withdrawing
the money subscribed by such deceased member, less
the shareholders’equitable proportion of the expenses of
the Society (to be fixed by the Directors,) and any
outstanding fines.
Any person under 21 years of age may be allowed
to become a member of the Society, provided his parent,
master, or guardian, shall testify his consent thereto
in writing, and such parent, master, or guardian, shall
be entered on the books of the Society as the trustee for
such minor. The minor, nevertheless, may pay sub-
scriptions and fines, attend meetings, and vote as other
members, and if he shall have attained the full age of
21 years, on the partition of any land to an allotment
of which he may become entitled under these rules the


conveyance of such land, shall be made and executed
to such member ; but if he shall not have attained that
age, then such conveyance shall be executed to the
trustee, as a trustee for such member, on his conforming
to all the legal requirements arising out of such trust.
But in such cases, the trustee or member shall pay 10s.
for such conveyance over and above the amount stipu-
lated to be paid by the other members for the prepara-
tion of their conveyances by the Solicitor of the
Society.
Females may become members of the Society, and be
subject to the same rules as other members, but may
not vote at any of its meetings.
If any member shall be guilty of disorderly conduct,
or use abusive language at any meeting, or towards any
officer of the Society, or shall interrupt the business of
the Society, he shall be liable to a fine of l()s., to bo
levied by the Directors on a report thereof being made
to them.
Xl.— Purchase and Allotment of Land, Ac.
The Directors shall be at liberty from time to time to
purchase land at their discretion in such localities as
they may consider desirable for the interests of the
members. Upon the purchase of land the Managing
Director and Surveyor, together with such of the Direct
tors as may be willing to accompany them, shall proceed
to lay out and divide the same into suitable lots, with
such roads or streets (if any) as may bo considered cal-
culated to improve the same, and the Surveyor shall
prepare a plan and full report of the quality of the land
and the relative value (according to his estimate) of each
lot, and the Directors shall determine on the price to be
affixed to each such lot according to its quality and
relative position. The Directors shall, on the number
of allotments being fixed, determine on a number equal,
as near as may be, to one half to be offered in the first
instance to members who may be willing to pay up the


remainder of their shares on receiving their conveyance,
and the other half (more or less) shall be allotted to
members not able or willing to pay up the remainder of
their shares, and such allotments shall be made in the
manner following : —The Secretary shall, upon the pur-
chase of land, and on the number of lots on subdivision
being fixed by the Directors, address a circular to the
members in rotation as they are recorded on the Society’s
hooks, informing them of the locality of the land pur-
chased, and requesting a declaration in writing of their
desire or otherwise to receive an allotment or allotments
(not exceeding three) therein, and also whether they are
prepared to pay the remainder of the purchase money
on conveyance or not. He shall thus proceed down the
list of members in the order of their numbers on the
hooks, until he shall receive declarations from the re-
quisite number of members assenting to the allotment to
them of the whole of the land so purchased ; but in case
there shall not be a sufficient number of members pre-
pared, and desirous to pay the remaining purchase money
ioi the whole of the lots apportioned by the Directors
for such purpose, they may alter the proportions of such
division^ and increase the number of lots to he apportioned
to members not desirous of paying the remainder of the
purchase money ; and, in case after going through the
whole list of members then in the Society, there shall
not he a sufficient number of declarations of assent to
take the whole of the lots, the Directors shall be at liberty
to sell any of such lots, so as to reduce the number to
that required for the assenting members, for such sums
aa they may deem advisable, not being less than the
fair proportion of the purchase money for the whole, with
the addition of such fair proportion of the sum to he
charged on such purchase for the working expenses of the
Society as they may deem right, and such sale of surplus
lots may he made to any person or persons whomsoever,
and the Trustees shall convey.the same to the purchasers
thereof accordingly, but the conveyances of such lots
shall be prepared in the usual way by the purchasers’


Solicitor, and at his or their expense : or the Directors
may, if they shall think fit, require the members, who
may have declined to accept allotments in such land, to
take the same by ballot ; but no member in such case
shall be compelled to take more than one lot, although he
may hold a plurality of shares.
No member, whose subscription shall be more than
one month in arrear, shall be entitled to an allotment
unless he shall, on receiving notice from the Secretary,
pay such arrears within one week.
When the Directors shall have determined on the
prices to be affixed to each lot (the aggregate of such
prices not to exceed the original purchase money and
such proportionate part of the working expenses of the
Society as the Directors shall have decided on,) and
shall have caused the land to be properly staked out,
and the lots delineated and numbered on a plan to be
prepared by the Surveyor, with such references and ex-
planatory information as may be requisite, they shall
convene a meeting of all the members who have elected
or become entitled under the foregoing clauses to an
allotment or allotments of the same, and the lots shall
be drawn for in the following manner. The names of
the members entitled to allotments shall be placed in a
box, and the Secretary or Managing Director shall call,
one by one, the numbers of the lots as marked on the
plan in numerical order. At the same time a youth shall
draw from the box the name of a member, and such
member shall take the lot so simultaneously named.
When the name of a member shall be drawm who shall
he entitled to more than one allotment, the next follow-
ing lot or lots shall also be allotted to him to the extent
of his number, and so on until all the land shall have
been thus apportioned.
From the result of the drawing, as so provided, the
Solicitor shall be instructed to prepare tho conveyances
to the members respectively. Each member who does
not pay the remainder of his share or shares shall execute
to the Trustees of the Society a mortgage of his allot


meut or allotments, to bear interest at eight pounds
per centum per annum on the amount from time to
time unpaid, credit being given him half yearly for all
payments made, such mortgage to be prepared by the
Solicitor, and the title deeds and documents relating to
such allotment or allotments shall be retained by the
Society until the remainder of the purchase money shall
be paid according to these rules ; such mortgage to con-
tain a power of sale in case of default in payment, and
the members, on receiving their conveyances and pay-
ment of the remainder of their purchase money, or
on the execution of such mortgages, as the case may
be, shall be put into possession of their respective allot-
ments.
All subscriptions of members in respect of their
several shares shall cease to he payable when and so soon
as such subscriptions shall extend to the value of the
land allotted to them, exclusive of all fines, interest,
and other payments to which they may become liable in
pursuance of the rules of the Society.
In case of members wishing to exchange or transfer
any lots to other members who have drawn portions of
the same estate, and giving notice thereof to the Secre-
tary or Managing Director within one week after tire
allotment of the land, they shall he at liberty to do so on
payment of 20s. for each lot so to be exchanged or trans-
ferred as a bonus to the Society, and the Managing
Director shall, upon the transferror signing a declaration
to be filed at the office, cause the conveyance in such
case to he made direct from the trustees to the transferee,
and an entry to he made in the books of the Society
accordingly.
In the event of the funds being at any time insufficient
to pay for any estate which the Directors may consider
eligible to purchase for the Society, they shall empower
and require the Trustees to borrow the deficiency from
the Bankers, or any other source, upon such terms as
they may deem reasonable, 'and for any sum of money
so borrowed, the funds, from time to time, payable by


the members of the Society, and all the property for the
time being vested in the Trustees, shall be a security to
them for the money so borrowed.
Any property mortgaged to the Society by a member,
as hereinbefore provided, may at any time be redeemed
on payment of the amount then remaining due from such
member for the same, with any arrears of fines or other
payment to which he may he liable.
Should any Release or other instrument he required
to be executed by the Trustees of the Society, after the
redemption of the property, other than an indorsement
or other acknowledgment of the payment of all sums
due to the Society under such mortgage deed, the same
shall be prepared by or at the expense of the party re-
quiring the same.
XII.— Gr.NEii.AL Meetings.
Meetings of the members shall he held half yearly
some time in the month of September and March in each
year, in the city of Melbourne, to receive a report of the
half year s proceedings, and a statement of the accounts
up to the end of the preceding month, to choose the
officers to he elected in accordance wfith the rules, and
to transact the general business' of the Society. The
accounts for the half year shall specify all and every
sums of money whatsoever received and expended during
that period, and shall he attested by two members as
Auditors of the accounts : such Auditors to he chosen
by ballot from amongst all the members of the Society
holding three shares or upwards, such ballot to he taken
by the Directors at the monthly meeting next before
each half-yearly general meetings of members. That
all books and papers belonging to the society, shall be
produced to such Auditors, and such report, when
adopted by the Board of Directors, with the accounts as
verified by the Auditors, shall be open for inspection by
the members at the office of the society for one month
following such meeting, and any member may take copies
or extracts from the same.


Xlll. —Alteration and Construction of Rules.
No rule herein contained, or any rule hereafter to he
made, shall he altered, rescinded, or repealed, except at
a general meeting of the society duly convened by pub-
lic advertisement, stating the objects of the meeting,and
in pursuance of a requisition addressed to the Managing-
Director by at least ten members of the society ; and
no such alteration or repeal shall be made unless con-
curred in by three-fourths of the members present at such
general meeting. The Directors may, however, make
By-Laws for the guidance of the officers or members, and
for giving fuller effect to these rules.
In construing all or any of the society’s rules now-
made, or which shall hereafter be made, every word im-
porting the singular number only shall be understood to
apply to several persons or things as well as one person
or thing, and every word importing the plural number
shall extend to and be applied to one person or thing as
well as several persons or things ; and every word im-
porting the masculine gender only, shall extend and be
applied to a female as well as a male, unless a different
c instruction shall be provided, or the construction be
repugnant to the subject matter or context.
F. J, SARGOOD,
B. OOWDBROY,
GEO. EDWD. WHITE,
Members of the above Society.
ADOLPHUS lIALLER,
Secretary,
I hereby certify that the foregoing rules are in con-
formity to law, and to the provisions of the Act of the
Governor and Legislative Council of the colony of New
South Wales, intituled an Act for the Regulation of
Benefit Building Societies.
WILLIAM F. STAWELL,
Attorney General for the colony of Victoria.
Melbourne, 12th November, 1853,


FORMS.
TRANSFER OF SHARE OR SHARES.
I f one of the
members of the Victoria Freehold Land Society, in con-
sideration of paid
to me by and also
in consideration of
paid by the said
to tlie funds of the Society, being a bonus payable
thereto, according to the rules of the said Society, do
hereby assign and transfer to the said
his executors, administrators, and
assigns, the share or shares No. subject to
the payments and regulations prescribed by the rules
aforesaid. And I the said
do hereby agree to accept the said
share [or shares] subject
to the same payments, rules, and regulations.
As witness our hands this day
of 185
RECEIPT OR ACKNOWLEDGMENT, TO BE ENDORSED
ON MORTGAGES.
We, the undersigned, being Trustees of the Victoria
v Freehold Land Society, do hereby acknowledge to hare
received of and from the within-named mortgagor all
moneys intended to be secured by the within deed.
Dated this day of
185 .


APPENDIX.
At a special general meeting of the members of this
Society, convened by public advertisement, in pur-
suance of a requisition, addressed to the managing
director, by more than ten members of the
in accordance with No. 13 of the rules, and held in
the Hall of the Mechanics’ Institute, on the 10th
January, 1854, W. K. Bull, Esq., in the chair, it
was proposed by Mr. B. Cowderoy, seconded by
Mr. T. Reed, and carried unanimously :
“ That Rule 10 be altered as follows, the second
clause to read thus—* The members shall be divided
into two classes, viz., class A and class B. The sub-
scriptions to the Society shall he, for class A, one pound
per week, or four pounds per month of four weeks ; and
for class B ten shillings per week, or two pounds per
month, of four weeks for each share,’ and so on to the
end of that clause.
That the third clause shall be altered to read as
follows— ‘ Separate accounts shall be kept of the sub-
scription funds of the respective classes, and the same
shall be appropriated separately and distinctly, from
time to time in the purchase of land, in pursuance of
these rules, the members of one class having no direct
beneficial interest in the subscription fund of the other
class, or in the lands purchased therewith; hut all
entrance fees, fines, and interest of both classes shall
be carried to the credit of one general expense account,
at the debit of which shall he placed all salaries, rent'
printing, surveying, and other expenses incurred in be-
half of the Society, and on the allotments and subdivi


sions of any land purchased on behalf of either
class, the directors shall add to the original purchase
money ;’ and so on to the end of the clause as now.
existing.
“That Rule 11 shall be altered, as follows—Page
13, line 5 and following lines shall read thus— * The
secretary shall, upon the purchase of land for either
class, and on the number or lots or subdivisions being
fixed by the directors, address a circular to the mem-
bers of the class for which such purchase is made in
rotation;’ and so on to the 26th line, wherein, after
the words ‘ the whole list of members’ shall be inserted
the words, ‘ belonging to the class in question. ’
“ That after the fourth clause of Rule 11, at page
15 shall be inserted the following clause, viz., ‘ Any
member who may have elected to take an allotment
or allotments, and to pay the remainder of the pur-
chase money and expenses apportioned for the same,
as before-mentioned, neglecting or refusing to pay such
balance of purchase-money and expenses with any fines
or other payments due to the Society at the time
appointed by the directors for the payment of the same,
or within fourteen days thereafter (notice of such ap-
pointed time having been previously sent to him, or left
at his usual or last known place of residence or busi-
ness, or advertised twice at least in one of the daily
papers published in Melbourne), shall be liable to pay a
fine to the Society of ten pounds per centum on the value
of the allotment or allotments in question, and to forfeit
all claim to such allotment or allotments, and the di-
rectors may, if they shall think fit, after such default
either reallot such allotment or allotments to such mem-
bers of the Society as would have become entitled to the
same, or to a similar number of allotments in the event
of such defaulter having declined or not become so en-
titled, or the directors may sell such allotment or al-
lotments to any other person or persons for such sum or
sums and in such manner as they shall think fit, and


the proceeds of such sale shall be paid into the subscrip-
tion fund of the class to which such defaulter belonged,
and such defaulter shall, after such forfeiture, occupy the
same position in relation to the Society as he would
have occupied if he had made no sueli election and for-
feiture save and except in regard to such fine.
“ That after clause of Rule 11 as now existing,
the following clause he inserted, viz.:— ‘ If any member
of either class who shall have had land conveyed to him
or her in respect of his or her shares, and shall have
mortgaged the same to the Trustees of the Society, shad
be desirous of selling the property mortgaged, it shall be
lawful for such member to alienate and for the purchaser
to purchase the property and the equity of redemption
subsisting thereon subject to such mortgage, and such
purchaser shall thenceforth become answerable for tne
payment of all subscriptions and fines then due or thei e-
after to become due on account of and on his
signing the usual transfer of such share or shades, and an
acknowledgment of the sums then to be paid thereon,
provided the sanction of the directors shall have been
given to such transfer, such purchaser shall be deemed to
occupy the same relation to the Society as the original
mortgager, and the Trustees may at the request and
costs°of the member so transferring his interest in the
mortgage thereupon, release him from all future respon-
sibilities in respect of such transferred pi opei ty.
W. K. BULL, Chairman.”
Mechanics’ Hall,
January 10th, 1854. /




ji.
ot^x7/
Subscriptions* Fines.
£/ & * * " '
"fiM & 6* «
~// 4' ■ . . _■ I .
...r..,' -'v X- - I
y * c 3 /4t . , />
— :
'-'■' '*y 4? /? /%.. ... .•- . -—as* b
1
! •
I j__ _J






