

[?]
RULES
OF THE
SMEATON
MECHANIGS’ INSTITUTE
AND
FREE LIBRARY.
CRESWICK:
PRINTED AT “THE ADVERTISER” OFFICE, ALBERT STREET.
1902.
[?]


f;
Committee Will ‘Cost’ Repairs
To Smeaton Hall
The bigg*. Ml 'Tt S
eral years was the respons advisability of renovating the
s nsssfc J -
necessary repa\r work.
It was an enthusiastic mee.-
ing at which people agreed
they should do something to
keep the 'Smeaton hall in good
condition for the sake of the
children now growing up in tne
district.
Mr Tom Evans, MLA, told
the meeting how to go about
getting a government grant.
i-Hg. said the money was avail-
able if they wanted it.
Messrs F. W. Redman
dent), A. T. Evans. A. C May.Tg
G. C. Toose and A. J. Redma.i
were appointed to the cost find-
ing committee.
They will seek the co-opera-
tion of a master builder to ex-
amine the building and see
what repairs are needed
When it comes to painting,
the meeting felt, the building
could be painted inside and ou„
i bv working bees.
' Whatever comes or g<|P», 1
they thought the meeti. g j
rooms, kitchen and supper room
should be made , more comfort-
able and attractive.
Everyone realised that nal ..
in the country are not used a
1 great deal these days hut they
are a centre for local county
life—if there were no such
centre, young folk would drift
away from the district.
As one man put. it, “We will
not achieve much in. the way ot
progress if we achieve such a
nice bowling club and then le.
our hall go—one would cancel
the other out.”
Creswick Field K
epi ; ‘-i.T
sk : : : x:
' vStfT
■
r m3: r '
? --
si . v ■£: . v .*.
**■ . V.-?„
&&&& i
: s
mMmm
a&z
WS&t
/ '‘ >T-
Si-" '■ ~ tv-
■
'om
. ‘ -V-fw;
# ,


RULES
OF THE
SMEATON
MECHANICS’ INSTITUTE
AND
FREE LIBRARY.
ORES WICK :
PRINTED AT “THE ADVERTISER” OFFICE, ALBERT STREET.
1902.


RULES
OF THE
Smeaton Mechanics’ Institute
AND
FREE LIBRARY.
I—The name of the Institute shall be The Smeaton
Mechanics’ Institute and Free Library.
2 -The objects for which the Institute is established are the
diffusion of literary, scientific and other useful knowledge, an 1 the
supply of rational in-door recreation for the members
3 The Institute shall consist of an unlimited number of
ordinary members, each paying an annual subscription of 10s.,
payable in advance, yearly, half-yearly, or quarterly.
4 Subscriptions from all members are payable in advance, at
any period, and otherwise if not paid when becoming due, the party
in default shill ceise to be a member, but may at any time resume
his standing on payment of ail arrears.
5 Every member, on payment of his subscription, may
receive from the Secretary a copy of these rules on payment of one
shilling, and shall be entitled to all the privileges and advantages of
the Institution during the period for which he has subscribed, but
no person who lias not been a member for a period of at least three
months immediately preceding the date of meeting, or whose
subscription shall be in arrears, shall be eligible to serve in any
office or to vote at general meetings.
6 No person shall bo eligible for the office of President,
Vice-President, or Treasurer, unless he shall have served as Member
of Committee throughout the previous year ; and no person shall be
eligible forthe office of Member of Committee unless he shallhave been
a Member of the Institute for a least six months immediately preced-
ing the day of nomination ; and no person shall be eligible for any
office unless ho shall have been nominated in writing, and such
nomination paper lodged with the Secretary three clear days before
the General Meeting at which the election is to take place.
7 The Institute shall be governed by a committee consisting
of a President, Vice-President, Treasurer, three permanent
Trustees, and nine ordinary members, to bo elected in the manner
hereinafter mentioned ; five members of such committee to form a
quorum for the transaction of business.


8— The President, Vice-President, and Treasurer shall be
elected at the annual general meeting, by ballot, in January in each
year. Any vacancy among the Trustees, caused either by death,
resignation or otherwise, shall be supplied by ballot at the annual
meetings of the subscribers or at any special meeting convened for
that purpose.
9 The remainder of the committee shall be elected by the
general body ot the members by ballot, and shall retire yearly in
January, and an election be held to supply their places ; the retiring
members being, however, if otherwise qualified, eligible for re-
election.
10— There shall also be elected by the annual general meeting
two Auditors of the accounts of the Institute.
11— That in the event of there being an equality of votes in
the election of any office-bearers or member of committee, the
Chairman presiding shall decide the election by his casting vote in
favor of one or other of the candidates. At no election shall the
Chairman exercise other than a casting vote.
12— There shall be a general meeting of the members of
the Institute in the month of January in every year, notice of which
shall be advertised in the Creswick newspaper, and exhibited in the
Reading Room for a period of fourteen days prior to the day of
meeting.
13— It shall be competent for the committee, or for any five
members of the Institute, to direct the Secretary, at any time, to
call a special general meeting by advertisement, stating the object
for which the same is to be held, and published in the Creswick
newspaper fourteen days, at least, prior to the day of meeting ; but
no business other than that stated in the advertisement shall be
transacted at such meeting.
14— At every general meeting of the Institute the business
shall commence at eight o’clock in the evening, and, unless then
disposed of, the meeting may adjourn to the next or any subsequent
evening at the same hour ; but no new business shall be entered
upon at any such adjourned meeting of which notice has not been
given prior to the adjournment.
15— The Committee shall meet once at least in every month,
on such day as they may from time to time appoint ; but extra-
ordinary meetings for special purposes may be called by the
President, or any three members of Committee, at any time ; a
circular, stating the object of the meeting, being sent to each
member by the Secretary, one clear day at least prior to the date
of holding the same.
16 — The President, or in his absence the Vice-President, shall
take the chair at each general or committee meeting, but in the
event of neither being present, the meeting shall appoint a chair-
man for the occasion.


17 — The first business at any general or committee meeting
shall be the reading of the minutes of any previous meeting not
already confirmed, in order to their being certified by the
chairman.
18— All questions brought under discussion at any general or
committee meetings shall be decided by the majority of the mem-
bers present by a show of hands, the chairman having, in case of an
equality, a casting vote ; but in the event of the chairman, or any
three members, being doubtful on which side the majority may be,
he or they may demand a division; the chairman’s declaration of
the result thereof shall be final.
19 —Any motion made at a general or committee meeting shall,
if demanded by the chairman or two members, be reduced to
writing by the proposer, and seconded by some other member, before
being taken into consideration.
20— One amendment only upon any motion shall be discussed
at the same time, but if such amendment be lost, another may bo
moved before the original motion is put to the vote ; but upon an
amendment being carried, it shall be held to have quashed the
original motion.
21— At all special meetings either of the subscribers or the
committee no business shall be entertained except that mentioned in
the notice convening such meeting, but at the ordinary annual
meeting of subscribers, or ordinary monthly meetings of the
committee, any business affecting the Institute may be dealt with,
providing such business shall not virtually rescind some previous
resolution or infringe the rules of the Institute, in the first of which
cases one month’s notice must be given to the Secretary before con-
sidering the resolution which shall be stated in the notice paper
convening the meeting, and in the second case compliance with the
64th rule of the Institute is compulsory.
22 — No proposition, the effect of which, if carried, would be
to contravene any previous decision of the committee, shall be
entertained, unless notice thereof shall have been given in writing
to the Secretary one month prior to the meeting at which the
same is to be considered ; and the Secretary shall include every such
notice in the circular convening the meeting.
23 No appropriation of any sum from the funds of the
Institute shall be acted upon until the same has been assented to by
resolution of the committee.
24 Any member of the committee who shall fail to attend
three consecutive ordinary meetings shall, unless reasonable cause
to the satisfaction of the committee be assigned for his absence, be
held to have vacated his seat. Notice to that effect to bo given.
25 —The committee shall have the custody of the property of
the Institute, and the care and superintendence of the same, as
regards the appointment and dismissal of all salaried officers, the
due receipt and administration of its funds, the procuring of
lectures, and the arrangement of classes.


26 —The committee shall have the power of expelling any member
for misconduct, the person so expelled having a right of appeal to a
general meeting of the Institute on giving fourteen days 5 previous
notice in writing to the Secretary.
27 The committee may appoint sub-committees of their
number for particular purposes, but no decision of any such sub-
committee shall be final or binding until approved and confirmed by
the general committee.
28— No members interested, either directly or indirectly, in
any tender for work or supplies submitted to the committee shall
be present at the consideration of the same; nor shall a member vote
on any question in which he may be pecuniarily interested.
29 Should any casual vacancy occur in the committee either
by resignation or otherwise, it shall be competent for the remaining
members temporarily to supply the same by electing by ballot
thereto some qualified subscriber to the Institute, but such
subscriber so elected shall only hold office until the next ordinary
annual meeting, being then eligible for re-election, however, if
otherwise qualified.
30— The committee shall lay before the annual general meeting
in January a full and particular report of the proceedings of the
Institute during the past year, and of its then present state and
prospects; and upon such report being adopted by the meeting the
same shall, if so directed, be printed, and a copy thereof furnished
to each of the members, free of charge.
31— The Secretary shall furnish a receipt for ordinary income,
and keep a receipt book, the same to be open (in common with all
other books, etc.) to members of committee, for inspection at any
time.
32 The Secretary shall produce at the ordinary meetings of
the committee, held in February, May, August, and November, a
list of all the members of the Institute for the time being, and the
latest of such lists shall be always exhibited in the reading room
for information and reference. No person whose subscription is
unpaid shall be included in any such list.
33 All moneys received on account of the Institute shall be
paid into the bank approved of by the committee, and all moneys
received by the Secretary on account of the Institute shall be paid
into the bank approved of by the committee at least twice in every
month, and as often as the sum in hand shall amount to Five
Pounds.
34 No payment shall be made on account of the Institute
except by cheque drawn by the President or Treasurer, and counter-
signed by the Secretary ; but in no case shall any cheque be issued
until the account in respect of which the same is drawn has been
submitted to and approved by the committee, such approval to be
certified on the face of the account by the chairman then presid-
ing.
35 - The Treasurer or Secretary shall make up the accounts


in every year, namely, the 31st of December, and shall immediately
lay the same, together with all vouchers relating thereto, before the
Auditors for their examination and report.
36 The property of the Institute shall be vested for the use
and benefit of the members, in three trustees, appointed in manner
hereinbefore provided, who are required to take sulticient security
from all officers through whoso hands the same may pass, if the
committee shall so direct.
37 — The reading room shall he opened daily from nine a.m. to
five p.m., with the exception of Chr stmas Day, Good Friday,
Sunday, and such other days as the committee, under special cir-
cumstances, may determine.
38— The newspapers, periodicals, and works of reference shall
be arranged in fixed places, and replaced after perusal.
39 — Newspapers shall not be detained more than fifteen
minutes, if required by any member.
40 — Periodicals shall remain in the reading room for one
month after receipt, during which time they shall on. no account he
removed or lent out.
41— Newspapers, periodicals, or books of reference shall not
be removed from the reading room without the knowledge of the
librarian, and shall not be cut or defaced in any manner whatsoever.
42 No dogs shall be allowed in the Reading Room.
43 -No person shall smoke, talk aloud, or continue any
practice to the annoyance of other members.
44 If any member shall remove from the Reading Room any
newspaper, periodical, or book, or cut or deface the same, contrary
to these rules, he whall be liable to such fine, not exceding double
the value of the work, as the committee may determine, or to
expulsion on a repetition of the offence.
45_Xhc Library shall consist of two branches, viz., a Library
for reference and a Library for circulation. The committee may
determine to which branch any particular book should belong.
46—The Library shall be open for the Exchange of Books, on
Tuesdays from 2 p.m. to 5 p.m., and on Wednesdays and
Saturdays from 7 p.m. to 10 p.m.
47 —Each member shall take out only two books at a time,
and also, if required, one periodical. No book to be detained
longer than fourteen days.
4B—Periodicals, after remaining in the Reading Room the
prescribed time may thereafter be lent out singly for one week.
49 —Members neglecting to return a book or periodical within
the specified time, shall be subject to a penalty of one penny for each
day of such neglect. All books, periodicals. &c., are renewable on
their being returned to the Librarian, provided that they arc not
wanted by others.


50— Any member not returning a book or periodical within
one month of its issue to him, shall be held to have lost the same,
and shall pay the cost of such book or periodical.
51 — Members incurring any of the aforesaid penalties, and
neglecting or refusing to pay the same, shall be deprived of all
privilege of membership until the amounts be paid in full.
52 Any member writing upon or otherwise wilfully defacing
or injuring any work or paper, the property of the Institute, shall,
over and above the value of the book or paper so injured, pay a fine
of ten shillings, or be liable to expulsion on a repetition of the
offence, at the option of the committee.
53 Any member lending a book, the property of the Institute,
to any person not a member of his own house, shall pay a fine of five
shillings.
54 If a book be written on or otherwise damaged, the
member in whose hands the book was at the time shall replace or
pay the value of the same, at the discretion of the committee.
55 —For the purpose of enabling the committee to ascertain
the state of the library, the circulation of books shall cease from the
Ist to the Bth of January in every year; all books to be returned
into the library before the first of these days under a penalty of one
shilling for every day any volume is detained.
56 — Proper register shall be kept by the Librarian of all books
taken out of and returned to the library, such register to be laid
before the committee at each committee meeting if required; and in
the event of its appearing that the Librarian has failed to take the
steps prescribed by the rules for the enforcement of any fines
which have accrued, he shall be held personally responsible for the
amount.
57 — A book shall be kept by the Secretary in the reading room
in which any member may enter, for the consideration of the
committee any suggestion which he may consider proper to make
relative to the purchase of books, papers, or apparatus, or the
management of any department of the Institute, every such entry
to be signed by the member making the same, and laid before the
committee by the Secretary at their next regular meeting.
58 — The committee shall exhibit in the Reading room a list of
such publications as are wanted for completing any course of study,
in order that persons who are desirous of presenting works to the
Institute may be acquainted with those which are most urgently
required.
59 — The committee shall be empowered to sell or exchange
duplicate and other works which they may consider unnecessary
to bo retained in the library or reading room, the proceeds to be
paid over to the Treasurer, in aid of the funds of the Institute.


60— The committee shall have the power of framing rules for
the better regulation and management of the reading room and
library, and of altering or modifying any of these rules, as the
interests of the Institute may from time to time require, especially
as to the circulation of books among the members, and fines conse-
quent on the infringement of the regulations so prescribed; provided
that one month’s notice of any such rule be posted in the reading
room and library for the information of the members before the
same comes into effect.
61— The committee shall have power to make such regulations,
not- inconsistent with these rules, as they may think fit, for the
delivery of lectures and holding of classes connected with the
Institute, every member having the right of attending any such
lecture or class on conforming to the general regulations in force
for the time being with respect to the same; provided that each
class shall keep minutes and make a full and particular report of
their proceedings to the committee in the first week of the months
of January and July in every year.
62 — Any class formed in connection with the Institute shall
consist of the members of the Institute only, and shall be regulated
by rules framed by such class and sanctioned by the committee.
63 In event of any doubt or difficulty arising as to the
meaning of these rules, the committee shall have the power to
finally decide the same.
64 The rules of the Institute, except as hereinbefore provided,
shall not be altered or amended unless with the concurrence of
two-thirds of the members present at a general meeting, and after
specific notice in writing of the proposed alteration, signed by at
least ten members, has been exhibited in the reading room for one
month prior to the meeting when the same is to be considered.
65 No resolution for dissolving the Institute or alienating
any of the freehold property thereof shall be effective until it has
been consented to by at least nine-tenths of the members present at
two consecutive special general meetings duty convened for such
purpose.
