

Hustcalaslan liberation.
RULES
OF THE
AUSTRALASIAN FEDERATION LEAGUE
VICTORIA.
price-threepence
/l&elbourne, 1894.
G. Phioe, Printer, 427 Little Collins Street.


#V• ; ’ '
, ' ./
■


[Established July 2nd, 1894.]
Office :—No. 63 Queen Street, Melbourne.
Officers
President: —His Honor Sir JOHN MADDEN, K.C.M.G. (Chief Justice of Victoria).
Vice-Presidents :■ —His Honor JUDGE CASEY.
Hon. ALFRED DEAKIN, M.P.
His Honor Mr. JUSTICE HOLROYD.
Councillor SNOWDEN (Mayor of Melbourne).
The PRESIDENT of the LEGISLATIVE COUNCIL.
The SPEAKER of the LEGISLATIVE ASSEMBLY.
Sir GRAHAM BERRY, K.C.M.G.
Sir ANTHONY BROWNLESS. K.C.M.G. (Chancellor of
the University).
Sir WILLIAM J. CLARKE, Bart.
Sir JAMES B. PATTERSON, K.C.M.G. (Premier of
Victoria).
His Honor Sir HARTLEY WILLIAMS, K.C.M.G.
Sir HENRY J. WRIXON, K.C.M.G.
Hon. Dr. DOBSON, Q.C., M.P.
Hon. S, FRASER, M.P.
His Honor Mr. JUSTICE HODGES.
His Honor JUDGE MOLESWORTH.
Flon. D. MELVILLE, M.P.
J. MURRAY. Esq., M.P.
Hon. A. J, PEACOCK. M.P
J. L. PURVES, Esq., Q.C.
Hon. W. SHIELS, M.P.
Hon. A. O. SACHSE, M.P.
Hon. R. MURRAY SMITH, C.M.G.
Hon. G. TURNER, M.P.
Hon. A. L. TUCKER, M.P.
Hon. A. WYNNE, M.P.
Hon. J. A. WALLACE, M.P.
R. CAPPER, Esq.
His Worship the MAYOR OF' MELBOURNE.


Vice-Presidents —Continued :
PRESIDENT AUSTRALIAN NATIVES’ ASSOCIATION
CHAMBER OF COMMERCE
MANUFACTURES.
EMPLOYERS’ UNION.
INSTITUTE OF JOURNALISTS.
ASSOCIATED CHAMBERS OF AGRI
CULTURE, HORTICULTURE & VITICULTURE
Hon. Secretary : —RICHARD F. TOUTCHER
Hon. Treasurer : — RANDAL J. ALCOCK, Esq
■eral Council : —
Councillor J. ANDERSON.
H. O. ALLEN, Esq.
G. H. BENNETT, Esq., M.P.
W. D. BEASLEY, Esq., M.P.
M. A, BRENNAN, Esq., LL.B.
W. J. BRAY, Esq.
S. BARKER, Esq.
C. BISHOP, Esq.
R. T. BARBOUR, Esq
J. F. BRADLEY, Esq.
A. J. BAIN, Esq.
J. E. BURNISTON, Esq.
D. BANNERMAN, Esq.
W. T. CARTER, Esq., M.P,
W. CROOKE, Esq.
W. R. CHURCH. Esq
J. HUME COOK, Esq
J. CORBETT, Esq.
G. D. CULLEN, Esq.
T, CROSBIE, Esq.
F. H. G. CORNWALL, Esq.
C. CUDDEN, Esq,
E. J. DIXON, Esq., M.P.
CLEMENT H. DAVIES, Esq.
P. J. DINLEY, Esq.
C. DRAKE, Esq,
W. DAVIDSON, Esq.
Mrs. DEVENPORT.
C. EDGERTON, Esq.
R. FRAYNE, Esq.
J. FABRI, Esq.
G. FITSIMMONS, Esq.
W. FITZPATRICK, Esq.
F. C. GRAY, Esq.
H. C. GEOGHEGAN, Esq
J. GARDINER, Esq.
J. GRAHAM, Esq.
H. W, GULLIVER, Esq.
MAX HIRSCH, Esq.
J. HANCOCK, Esq.
T. W. HEIDE, Esq.
R. W. E. HOOKE, Esq.
H. A. HARWOOD, Esq
J. F. HEGGIE, Esq.
R. HOUSTON, Esq.
Miss HINDLEY.
W. lEVERS, Esq., M.P
H. T. JORDAN. Esq.
E. JOSKE, Esq., LL.B.
R. G. KENT, Esq.
G. A, KNIPE, Esq.
J. F. KELLY, Esq.
T. W. KNOX. Esq.
R. O. KEFFORD. Esq.
Hon. N. LEVI, M.P.
E. H. LENNE, Esq.
W. J. LORMER, Esq,, J.P.
Mrs. LANGDALE.
Dr. MALONEY, M.P.
J. McMAHON, Esq.
S. MAUGER, Esq.
H. W. McLEOD, Esq.
c. McDowell, esq.
a. c. McDonald, esq.
M. J. N. MOLLOY, Esq.
W. C. MILLER, Esq.
A. M. MARTIN, Esq.
G. MAUGER, Esq.
Mrs. MULCHER.
Mrs. McRAE.
Miss McKENZIE.
A. C. NICHOLS, Esq,
W. H. O’CONNOR, Esq.
J. L. PLOUGPI, Esq.
J. H. P. POLGLASE, Esq.
E. H, POULTER, Esq.


General Council—Continued ;
J. W. POUNDS, Esq.
A. E. PIZZEY, Esq.
S. P. REYNOLDS, Esq., M.P,
H. R. REID, Esq.
J. H. REID, Esq.
M. A, RAPKEN, Esq.
J. W. RYAN, Esq.
R. RUSSELL, Esq.
G. W. RUSDEN, Esq.
H. RICHARDSON, Esq,
G. ROBINSON, Esq.
E. E. ROBERTS, Esq.
W. L. ROBERTSON, Esq.
C. SERGEANT, Esq., M.P.
Dr. C. SALMON, M.P.
Rev. Dr. STRONG
S. D, SCOTT, Esq.
A. H. SHAW, Esq.
F. J. SINCOCK, Esq.
E. SHAW, Esq.
B. D. SMITH, Esq.
F. SNOWBALL, Esq.
G. SANGSTER, Esq.
Mrs. SMYTHE.
E. W. THOMPSON, Esq.
Mrs. TRESTRAIL.
Hon. J. DENNISTOUN WOOD.
Dr. A. WHEELER, J.P.
J. WINTER, Esq., M.P.
J. S. WHITE, Esq., M.P,
S. V. WINTER, Esq.
R. S, WALPOLE, Esq.
J. A. WEIR, Esq.
F. C. WAIN WRIGHT, Esq.
Executive
President .—'His Honor Sir JOHN MADDEN, K.C.M.G. (Chief Justice of Victoria)
Vice-Presidents : — His Honor JUDGE CASEY.
Hon. ALFRED DEAKIN, M.P.
His Honor Mr. JUSTICE HOLROYD.
Councillor SNOWDEN (Mayor of Melbourne).
Executive Committee:
Members,:— Hon. ALFRED DEAKIN, M.P., Chairman.
Rev. Dr, BEVAN.
R. W. BEST, Esq., M.P.
Professor GOSMAN.
B. HOARE, Esq.
Hon, I. A. ISAACS, M.P.
G. M. PRENDERGAST, Esq.
W. T. REAY, Esq.
W. A, TRENWITH, Esq., M.P.
J. WINTER, Esq., M.P.
H. WILLOUGHBY, Esq
W. A. WATT, Esq
E. L. ZOX, Esq,, M.P.
Hon. Treasurer: —RANDAL J, ALCOCK, EsQ.
Hon Secretary .-—RICHARD F. TOUTCHER.
Office 2nd Floor,
63 Queen Street,
Melbourne.
3


AUSTRALASIAN FEDERATION LEAGUE
OF VICTORIA.
Name.
Objects.
Co-operation
with Kindred
Bodies.
Other Duties.
PLATFORM.
i. The name of the League is “ The Australasian Federation
League of Victoria.” Every adult person resident in Victoria
shall be eligible for membership.
2. The objects of the League shall be:—
(a) To secure, irrespective of class or political party, a
general organisation of citizens who wish to advance
Australasian Federation ;
(b) To assist with energy all Parliamentary adtion from
whatever source proceeding, designed to further the
Federal cause ;
(c) To urge all the Colonies to favour in the future such
measures of legislation and administration as will tend
to lessen the difficulties in the way of the commercial,
political, and social union of Australasia ;
(d) To advocate, and to promote practically, a Federal
Union of Australasia on such lines as may be consti-
tutionally approved by the Colonies concerned, after
further deliberation and report by assembled repre-
sentatives of each; and
(e) To defend the Union when established.
3. It shall be among the duties of the League to co-operate
fully and earnestly with all kindred bodies having the same
objedts ; to promote the formation of such associations through-
out the several colonies ; and to take steps in due course to
unite all such bodies throughout the Colonies under one organ-
isation, with one plan of operations.
4. It shall also be among the duties of the League to ascertain
what are the chief obstacles to a Federal Union of the Colonies,
and frankly to recognise and endeavour to overcome them ; to
devise measures of compromise between parties and interests
whose antagonisms tend to retard Federation ; and to promote
4


Basis of Con-
vention.
Metropolitan
Section and
Branches.
Subscriptions
and Donations.
Council and
Officers of the
League.
Ex officio Mem-
bers of Council
and Committee.
Limit of Mem-
bers of Parlia-
ment on Council
and Executive
Committee.
First General
Meeting and
Annual General
Meetings.
the growth of the Federal spirit in intercolonial relations —com-
mercial, political, and social.
5. The League holds that in the event of a Convention being
eledted to formulate a Federal Constitution the Victorian
delegates thereto shall be elected on the principle of one man one
vote.
CONSTITUTION.
1. The League in Victoria shall consist of a Metropolitan
Section, embracing Melbourne and its Suburbs, with branches
to be established in such districts in the Colony of Victoria as
may from time to time be organized.
2. The Subscription shall be one shilling per annum, without
entrance fee, but donations in aid of the funds may be received
in addition to or apart from subscriptions. The first year’s sub-
scription shall be due payable as soon as the first Office-bearers
shall have been elected, and thereafter on every first day of July.
3. There shall be a President, Vice-Presidents, a Secretary, and a
Treasurer, a General Council of one hundred and twenty-three
elective members, and an Executive Committee of twelve elective
members to be chosen out of the General Council in addition in
each case to the ex officio members hereinafter mentioned.
4. The President, four Vice-Presidents (to be elected by
the League), and the Treasurer and Secretary (if Flonorary) shall
be ex officio members of the General Council and of the Executive
Committee.
5. Not more than two-fifths of the members of the General
Council or of the Executive Committee shall be members of
either Flouse of Parliament.
Meetings of the league
6. The first General Meeting of the League shall be held on
Friday the 20th day of July 1894 at 8 o’clock p.m. at the Town
Hall Melbourne and thereafter an Annual General Meeting of the
League shall be held in the month of July in each year, on
a day and at an hour and place to be fixed by the Executive
Committee.
5


Report to he
presented at
Annual General
Meeting.
Special General
Meetings.
Notice of Gen-
eral Meetings.
Quorum at Gen-
eral Meetings.
Chairman.
A djourninent
when quorum
present.
Adjournment of
General Meet-
ings when quo-
rum not present
within time.
7. At each such Annual General Meeting the Executive Com-
mittee shall present a report of the operations of the League and
of events of interest in connection with the Federal movement
during the past year, and also a balance-sheet showing the
financial position of the League.
8. The President of the League or the Executive Committee
may at any time summon a Special General Meeting of the
League. A Special General Meeting shall be summoned by the
Executive Committee on the written requisition of at least a
quorum of members of the Committee or of the General Council
setting forth the purpose for which the meeting is required.
g. Fourteen days’ notice at the least and not more than twenty-
one days’ notice of every General Meeting except the first
specifying the place the day and the hour of meeting and in case
of a Special General Meeting the general nature of the business
to be transacted thereat, shall be given by advertisement to be
published once at least in not less than two daily newspapers
published in Melbourne,
10. Atany General Meetingthirty members shall form aquorum.
At every meeting the President, if present, shall take the chair,
and in his absence the senior Vice-President present, or if there
be no Vice-President present a Chairman to be elected by the
meeting. Any General Meeting at which a quorum is present
may adjourn from time to time and from place to place as it
thinks fit.
11. If a quorum is not present within half an hour after the time
notified for the commencement of any General Meeting, the
senior office-bearer present shall declare the meeting adjourned
to such time and place as to him shall seem fit and for this pur-
jSLpose the Honorary Secretary and Honorary Treasurer shall
rank as office-bearers in succession after the V ice- Presidents, and
the other members of the Executive Committee and General
Council shall not be deemed office-bearers.
Regulation of 12. Except as hereinafter mentioned the Chairman of any
proceedings at G enera l Meeting shall be the sole interpreter of the Rules and
Cr EHEVCLL A 7 P.P.\t-
ingS the sole judge of order at the meeting, but if the question arises
whether any matter brought up for discussion is within the
scope of operations of the League the Chairman’s decision shall
be subject to an appeal to the meeting.
6


Practice of 13. So far as is practicable, and so far as the Rules make no
Legislative As- express provision, the Chairman of a General Meeting shall in
sernoly to he ap- , . . r , .
plied in questions decidln S questions of order apply the practice of the Legislative
of order. Assembly.
Mode of Elect- 14. At any General Meeting the election of officers, or
ion at General 0 £ members of the General Council to be then
IVICCtiTIQS
elected shall, if a ballot be demanded by ten or more members
Election of Pre-
sident and Vice-
Presidents.
Period of office
of Presidents and
Vice-Presidents.
Any such officer
retiring at An-
nual Meeting to
he capable of re-
election.
Casual vacancy
in office of Pre-
sident or a Vice-
President, how
to he filled.
Election of
Members of the
General Council.
Period of office.
of the League present at the meeting, be by ballot, but other-
wise by show of hands.
PRESIDENT AND VICE-PRESIDENTS.
15. The first President and Vice-Presidents shall be elected
by the League at its first General Meeting, and thereafter a
President and Vice-Presidents shall be elected at each Annual
General Meeting of the League.
16. The President and the several Vice-Presidents shall hold
office until the next Annual General Meeting alter their election,
or until they respectively resign, or become incapacitated, or are
removed by the League, if any such event happens in the mean-
time, and any such offhcer retiring at an Annual General
Meeting shall be re-eligible.
17. If any casual vacancy occurs in the office of President or of
any Vice-President between two Annual General Meetings, the
Executive Committee may appoint a member of the League to
fill the vacancy until the next Annual General Meeting, or until
another member is elected to fill it at any Special General
Meeting convened for that purpose either alone or with other
purposes; but any member so eledled at any Special General
Meeting shall hold office only until the next Annual General
Meeting.
THE GENERAL COUNCIL.
18. The first and future members of the General Council shall
be eledted and may be removed by the League in General
Meeting; and any member so eledled shall hold office for the
period for which he shall be eledled, or, if no such period be
fixed, then until he resigns or becomes incapacitated or is re-
moved.
7


Meetings of the
Council.
Notice of Meet-
ings.
Quorum.
Proceedings at
Meetings of Gen-
eral Council.
Powers of Gen-
eral Council.
Election of first
Members of
Executive Com-
mittee.
19. The first Meeting of the General Council shall be held on
the thirtieth day of July 1894 at eight o’clock p.m. at the
Town Hall Melbourne and thereafter a Meeting of this
General Council shall be held once at least in every three
months provided that one of such Meetings to be called the
Annual Meeting of the Council shall always be held on
the same day on which the Annual General Meeting of the
League is held and that a Meeting of the General Council may
be at any time summoned by the Executive Committee.
20. Seven days notice at the least and not more then fourteen
days notice in writing of every Meeting of the General Council,
except the first, specifying the place, the day, and the hour of
meeting, and any question or questions upon which the advice
or direction of the Council is solicited by the Executive Com-
mittee, shall be given to each member of the Council, and such
notice may either be served personally upon any member, or
may be transmitted to such member through the Post in a pre-
paid letter addressed to him at his address as entered in
the Register to be kept by the Secretary ; but the want of any
such notice shall not invalidate the proceedings at any meeting
of the Council.
21. At any Meeting of the General Council twenty members
shall form a quorum.
22. The Rules as to adjournment when a quorum is present
and as to adjournment for want of a quorum at General
Meetings of the League, as to the Chairman thereat,
and as to the conduct of business and maintenance of order shall
apply mutatis mutandis to proceedings of the General Council.
23, The General Council at any Meeting may discuss any
matter affedting the objects or interests of the League and sub-
ject to the Rules and to the resolutions of General Meetings of
the League may advise or diredt the Executive Committee upon
any question which the Council may deem of sufficient importance
to require such advice or direction or upon which such advice or
direction may be solicited by the Executive Committee.
24. The General Council at its first Meeting shall elect the
first members of the Executive Committee other than the
ex officio members.
8


One-half to ye- 25. At the Annual Meeting of the General Council to be held in
tire after first thg month G f July 1895 one-half of the members of the
y ea f' Executive Committee other than the ex officio members shall
retire from office and the one half then to retire shall, unless
they agree among themselves, be determined by lot.
Order of retire- 26. At every subsequent Annual Meeting of the Council
ment in subse- the one-halfof the elective members of the Executive Committee
quent years. wVinhaMP hppn Inncrpcf in nfhrp c;hnll rplirp.
who have been longest in office shall retire.
Retiring Mem- 27. A rtiringe member of the Executive Committee shall be
her re-eligible. re-eligible for election.
General Coun- 2 g_ The General Council at each Annual Meeting shall fill up
ext i/0 S’ti'p'piy ' <
places of retiring the offices vacated by the retiring members of the Executive
members of Ex- Committee by electing a like number of members.
ecutive Com-
mittee.
29. If at any Meeting of the General Council at which an election
Election where of members of the Executive Committee ought to take place or
vacancies not , .. , f j rc
filled up at an Y adjournment thereof the vacated offices are not
Annual Meet- filled up the Secretary shall convene a Meeting of
ing of Council. the Council for the purpose of filling up the vacancies and the
retiring members shall continue to act until their successors
are elected.
Resignation &c 3°- An Y mem ber of the Executive Committee who resigns his
disqualification. office or becomes incapacitated or is removed by the League
or absents himself without leave of the Committee during three
consecutive months from meetings of the Committee shall
cease to be a member.
Casual vacancies 3 1 ■ An Y casual vacancy occurring amongst the members of the
Executive Committee may be filled up by the Committee, but
any person so chosen shall retain his office only until a successor
shall be elected by the General Council at its Annual Meeting.
EXECUTIVE COMMITTEE.
Subject to Rules, 3 2, SubjecT to the Rules of the League to the resolutions of
S*c, the affairs of General Meetings and to the advice or direction of the General
the League to be Council
as hereinbefore mentioned the affairs of the League shall
managed by , . , , . . . , r .
Executive Com- mana gcd by or under the superintendence of the Executive
mittee. Committee.


Assistant Sec-
retaries and Col-
lectors may be
appointed by Ex-
ecutive Com-
mittee.
Meetings of the
Executive Com-
mittee and pro-
ceeedings thereat.
Chairman at
Meetings of
Executive Com-
mittee.
Vice-Chairman
Vacancies in
office of Chair-
man or Vice-
Chairman --how
filled.
Votes at Meet-
ings of Com-
mittee.
Casting vote oj
Chairman.
Conferences
with other
Leagues or
Branch Leagues.
33. The Executive Committee may in addition to the Secretary
and Treasurer to be appointed as hereinafter mentioned appoint
from time to time such assistant Secretary or Secretaries, and
such Collector or Collectors (if any) as they may deem necessary,
and may determine the duties and the salaries (if any) of all such
officers, and may at any time suspend or dismiss any such officer.
34 The Executive Committee may meet together for the despatch
of business, adjourn, and otherwise regulate their meetings as
they think fit, and determine the quorum necessary for the
transaction of business, provided that a meeting of the Execu-
tive Committee shall be held at least once in each month, and
that the Chairman or anjf five members of the Executive
Committee may at any time summon a meeting of the
Committee.
35. The Executive Committee shall elect a Chairman who shall
hold office for one year from the period of his election, but if
at any meeting the Chairman is not present at the time ap-
pointed for holding the same the members present shall choose
some one of their number to be Chairman of the meeting.
36. The Executive Committee may if they think fit also elect a
Vice-Chairman, who shall hold office for one year from the
period of his election, and if any such Vice-Chairman is elecTed
then during his tenure of. office he shall in the event of the
absence of the Chairman from any meeting of the Committee
be deemed the Chairman, and the regulations concerning the
Chairman at any such meeting shall apply to him.
37. Any vacancy occurring from time to time in the office of
Chairman or Vice-Chairman may be filled up by the Commit-
tee, and any retiring Chairman or Vice-Chairman shall be
re-eligible.
38. Questions arising at any meeting of the Committee shall be
decided by a majority of votes. Each member present shall
have one vote, and in case of an equality of votes the Chair-
man shall have a second or casting vote.
39. The Executive Committee may arrange with other Leagues,
Branch Leagues, or similar bodies having objects similar to
those of this League, for meetings or conferences in any part
of any colony in which any such body has been constituted or
is to be constituted at such meeting or conference ; and may
10


Bye-Laws.
Duties of Sec-
retary.
Appointment &=
period of office of
Secretary.
Casual vacan-
cies in office of
Secretary.
Substitute for
Secretary during
temporary
absence.
Duties of
Treasurer.
nominate any member or members of this League to represent
it at any such meeting or conference, and may also act on
behalf of this League in making any arrangements for or in
connection with the same.
40. The Executive Committee may make Bye-laws in further-
ance of the objects of the League or of any Rule thereof;
but no Bye-law shall have any force until it has been sanctioned
by the General Council.
SECRETARY.
41. The Secretary shall attend all meetings of the League, of the
Council, and of the Executive Committee, and shall take mi-
nutes of the proceedings thereat. He shall also keep a register
of the names and addresses of all members of the General
Council and of the Executive Committee for the time being.
He shall under the direction of the Executive Committee con-
duct all the correspondence of the League, and he shall perform
such other duties as may be imposed upon him from time to
time by the Executive Committee.
42. ihe Secretary shall be appointed and may be removed by the
League in General Meeting, and he shall hold office for the pe-
riod for which he may be appointed ; or if no such period be
fixed, then until he resigns or becomes incapacitated for the per-
formance of his duties or is removed.
43. Any casual vacancy in the office of Secretary may be filled up
by the Executive Committee, and the person so appointed shall
hold office until a successor is appointed by the League.
44. During the temporary absence of the Secretary through ill-
ness or from any other cause the Executive Committee may
appoint a substitute to perform his duties, but such substitute
shall not be ex officio a member of the Executive Committee.
TREASURER.
45. The 1 reasurer shall receive all subscriptions and donations
to the League, whether of members or other persons, and when-
ever the monies of the League in his hands shall exceed
he shall pay the same into such Bank in Melbourne as the Exe-
cutive Committee may from time to time appoint, to an ac-
count to be intituled “ The Account of the Australasian Fede-
ration League.”


A ccounts and
Balance-Sheet.
Appointment &=c
removal, tenure,
casual vacancies,
substitute.
Cheques.
Petty Expenses.
A filiation.
Questions of
Politics.
Copies pf Rules.
46. The Treasurer shall keep proper accounts of the receipts and
disbursements of the League, and shall lay a balance-sheet of
the same before the Executive Committee annually, or oftener,
and at such time or times as the Executive Committee may appoint.
47. The rules relating to the appointment and removal of the
Secretary, to his tenure of office, to casual vacancies in his
office, and to the appointment of a substitute in case of his tem-
porary absence, shall apply to the Treasurer, substituting the
word Treasurer for Secretary throughout.
48. Subjedt to the provisions hereinafter contained all
payments on account of the League shall be made
by cheque, signed by such members of the Executive
Committee other than the Secretary or Treasurer as the
Executive Committee may from time to time appoint,
and countersigned by the Secretary and Treasurer. Provided
that the Executive Committee may from time to time diredt
payment of such sum or sums as they may think necessary to
the Treasurer or Secretary for petty expenses.
MISCELLANEOUS.
49. On the application of any Federation League, or similar body
with thelike objects not formed or having its head quarters within
the Metropolitan Section, such body may be admitted and affil-
liated by resolution of the Executive Committee as a branch of
this League ; and thereupon members of either body shall have
all the privileges of membership of the other of them, and shall
be admitted to all meetings to which members of the other are
admissible on production of a card of membership.
50. Questions of Politics, except in so far as connected with
Federation, shall, to the best of the ability of the Chairman and
the members present, be excluded from discussion at all meet-
ings of the League : and at all meetings in which members of
this League are invited to take part, and do participate as such
members, they shall act in the spirit of this Rule. Wilful disre-
gard of this rule, or of any part thereof, shall be deemed to be
conduct detrimental to the objects of the League.
51. Copies of the Rules together with any Bye-laws shall at all
reasonable times, and at a price not exceeding cost, be obtain-
able by members at the office of the League.
CL lx.?




■ , /' , - *
■ ■ , • . .1
■■ ■ * :.: '' ' ■ - * ■ j ' v' ' ■ ; , v ' ;
■
. ■ ' **' •' . ' : * - . , ** _ ■ „ - ' • • ■ V .. ’ - . . ■ • * • r ,
/ ■' ' > / ' _
.
h\ N ’ ■ 'S - r - ' .■ '
■ "■ • I
' v. ‘ . . ' . , ■' ■ •
-' '■ ;■ ‘‘‘ . v ■' ;’V ■ \V..Y' :
- «■ ' S } " f v } .
Y. .v .,Y
i ... : • ‘ * - V
- ■ ■ -• ■ ; • '• ■ ‘ -
•
, -. 5 4 v Y: ; >
* v 5 ' ‘ ' * - ** '
* A . • “ ' ■ ■ • ■ t ;■ :■ ' ' - '
)
