

FOR
TOURISTS.
RUSHWORTH
Good Climate.
Natural Scenery.
Further Particulars from
J. H. WOOTTON, Rushworth.


High-stree t, looking North


RUSHWORTH
UUSHWOUTIf is an old mining; town situated 105
miles from, and due north of Melbourne, and 1 ,‘i miles
to the west of the main Melbourne to Shepparton rail-
way line.
It is built in the midst of a number of low hills,
mostly forest and crown lands, which give it a character
quite distinct from the adjacent Goulburn Valley towns.
To the south east, south and south west it is bound-
ed by the Moormbool Forest, the largest and best of
the ironbark and grey box forests in the State. This
forest in the Spring of the year particularly, has a dis-
tinct beauty of its own, the numerous hills being clothed
with many varieties of wild-flowers, many of the rarest
orchids having been found here. In bird life also this
forest is very prolific, and the naturalist will always be
able to spend many interesting hours investigating its
beauties.
To the north east of the town and close 1 up to it is
found the Waranga Basin, the large irrigation storage
basin which has played such a large part in the pros-
perity of our State during the last few years. The water
stored here, besides serving the Soldier Settlement at
Stanhope and other settlements to the north of the town,
is taken as far west as the Malice where it has made the
settler in that dry area Independent of the scanty rain-
fall, and taken away his old bugbear, the periodical wa-
ter carting for his stock.
This Waranga Basin is well stocked with fish such
as Murray Cod, Golden -Perch, Macquarie Perch and Trout,
and is visited by hundreds of anglers yearly.
To the west of the town is the Colbinabbin range of
hills, possibly one of the richest and most fertile belts
of country in Australia.
To the geologist these hills possess a peculiar value,
in so far as they belong to the oldest rock formation op
(jur Coittiu^pt,




At the foot of these hills is Lake Cooper, anti awajt
from this is a chain of swamps which are the home of
wildfowl of all kinds. These swamps are visited by
hundreds of sportsmen.
Rushworth has a good dry, healthy climate, and
visitors in Winter will find plenty of sunshine and a clean
town, even in wet weather. In Spring it has few equals
in the State for those wishing to spend a quiet holiday
away from the bustle of city life to a life such as Nature
has endowed it.
Rushworth is lit by electricity and has an abundant
supply of water which comes from the Goulburn River.
It has a first-class Lending Library, with Billiard
Room attached, also Bowling Green, Croquet Lawn, As-
phalt Tennis Courts, all of which admit visitors at a very
nominal fee. It has also a fine Sports Oval, prettily si-
tuated in tiie Public Park. It has a fine Higher Elemen-
tary and State School.
HOW TO GET THERE.
Prom Melbourne daily at 7.35 a.m. on Mondays,
Tuesdays, Fridays and Saturdays, and 6.30 a.m. on Wed-
nesdays 'and Thursdays, from Spencer-strect, changing
trains at Murchison East. This train returns daily at
5.20 p.m. Motors also meet the 4 p.m. Melbourne train
at Murchison East and return in the early morning to
catch the train to Melbourne.
Motorists travel via Sydney road to Seymour, then
Nagambie, Murchison, Rushworth. Most of this road is
in good order and passable at all seasons.
Motorists will find in the town two well equipped
garages, where all requirements can be filled.
ACCOMODATION.
Four Hotels supply ample accomodation for visitors,
tariff from 8/6 per day.
Motor trips to the Basin, Goulburn Weir, through
the irrigation settlement, etc., can be arranged through
thq hotels or garages,


ROYAL HOTEL,
Rushworth.
The Oldest Established House
Brought Right Up-to-Date.
Good Glean Accommodation.
Best Meals Obtainable.
The Ideal Home for Tourists.
TARIFF FROM «/« PER PAY, OB £3/3/- FEB WEEK.
Proprietor—P. BRICE.
'Phono No. 4.
' ■" ■ -HiaHQHH 1 .^a=r—


Cricketers* - Inn
RUSHWORTH.
UNDER NEW MANAGEMENT.
Recently Renovated and Brought Up to Date
The Real Family House
Tourist Traffic Catered for
Best of Liquors kept.
—
i MOTTO —Civility and Attention.
R. W C. SMITH,
PHONE 20
PROPRIETOR


fiAVE-AN
Up-to-date Garage.
o —m-
ROOMY CARS FOR MIRK DAY AM) MGHT.
CONTRACTORS FOR AEE STATE GOVERNMENT
HIKE WORK.
.SKIEEKI) MECHANICS KECT.
H. HILDER, Proprietor,
Model Garage,
1,10,10 7 “ Rush worth.
- ■■») ■» —■
AH Motor ami General Repair Works Faithfully Execut-
ed by Skilled Mechanics.
Tyres, I'ftrol, Oils ami Acecssoiies Always in Stock.
Jlowscr ou Kerb. “Shell” ami “I’liuiie,”
Agents for iluick, Uklsmobile and Chevrolet Cars and
Trucks.
Also Automobile Club ami Insurance Company.


The Outlet, Waranga Basin.


Selected C.T.A House.
[?]
Billiard and Sample Rooms.
Good Accommodation.
Phone 33 Rushworth.
CRITERION HOTEL, RUSHWORTH
