

Smoke Signals
100
YEARS
S.T.LEIGH & CO. PTY. LTD.
CENTENARY
1852-1952
VOL 2 No. 7
APRIL-MAY, 1952
SYDNEY ABOUT 1852


LET those who complain that it was all on paper
remember that only on paper has humanity yet
achieved glory, beauty, truth, knowledge, virtue and
abiding love.
George Bernard Shaw.


100
YEARS
1852
1952
Ladies and gentlemen,
We crave your kind indulgence.
S. T. Leigh & Co. are taking the lion’s share of the matter in this
issue of Smoke Signals, but we trust that you will forgive us for, after
all, this is somewhat of an Occasion.
It is our Centenary.
One hundred years ago a small printing firm commenced business
in Flinders Lane, Melbourne, and a year or two later opened a branch
in Sydney. It was a truly modest beginning. The Firm occupied
a portion of a building at 324 George Street, Sydney, which consisted
of two storeys over two shops. Fellow-tenants were one Edward
Porter, a Chemist; Richard Harnett, a broker; J. Simmons, an
auctioneer; and a photographer, of name unknown.
So we look back on the spectacle of two or three artists in the
attic and three or four pressmen in the front bedroom and an engraver
or two in the kitchen—some score or so all told with half-a-dozen
hand presses. And the work? A few coloured meat labels or a handful
of cheque forms or a dozen surveyor’s plans, printed direct litho, from
stones. To-day we see a vast change. The score of employees has
grown to 800; the half-dozen machines to a plant worth a quarter of a
million pounds. As for the range of work done, there is no firm South
of the Line, and perhaps no firm in the world, which handles such a
wide variety. Composing, paper ruling, letterpress printing, photo-
lithography, lithographic and offset printing, carton making, box mak-
ing, silk screen work, roller making, sheet metal printing, canister work,
collapsible tube extrusion and printing, cigarette paper making,
engineering, and all present their complex problems of raw materials,
production and supply. With a deep pride in our tradition of pro-
gressive craftsmanship and with a sure confidence in our future
development we show you, our guests, some tiny glimpses of our story.
Ring up the curtain!


The History
of Printing
«F all the crafts Printing is one of
the oldest, for mention is made of
it as early as 593 A.D. In that
century the Chinese, whose ideo-
graphic language was most suitable
for the purpose, cut wooden blocks from which they
took impressions by means of ink on paper made from
mulberry leaves. From such crude and humble begin-
nings a mighty industry has been evolved.
Progress, however, was not very rapid. The Chinese
attempted various experiments, and in 868 A.D. hit
upon the idea of using clay as type-making material.
Clay, being soft and plastic, was easily moulded to the
shape required and then baked. The discovery of this
process much facilitated the method of reproducing the
Chinese ideograms. The first use of printed paper-
money dates from about a century later.
From China the knowledge of the art gradually
radiated till, in the year 1392, we note a decided ad-
vance, for in that year a native of Korea invented a
method of casting type in bronze. This resulted in a
great improvement in the quality of the work produced.
The beginnings of printing in the western world still
provide matter for discussion. Whether, as seems likely,
the knowledge of moveable type had gradually moved
there from China, or whether the invention was entirely
an original idea, is still shrouded in mystery. Which-
ever theory be correct, we know that prior to 1450
Johannes Gutenberg, of Mainz, in Germany, was at
work, his first authentic book, "Fragment of the World
Judgment,” being attributed to the year 1445. It is
the earliest example of his printing in existence. Guten-
berg’s priority, however, is disputed by certain scholars,
who claim that Lourens Janszoon Coster was at work
in Holland with wood types as early as 1426, and with
metal types some ten years later.
The honour of being the first English printer belongs
rightly to William Caxton (1412-1491), who in 1471
completed his translation from the French of Raoul Le
Fevre’s "Receuil of the Historye of Troye,” which he
published at Cologne the same year. This was the first
book in the English language to come from the press.
Three years later Caxton issued his "Game and Playe of
Chesse,” published at Westminster, 1474, the first
volume ever to have been printed in England.
The gradual extension of education, and particularly
the need for reproduction of the monastic missals and
other books of religious instruction, were the direct
incentives that encouraged the craft in Europe, just as
the Buddhistic classics had a similar influence in the
East. At this stage of development the lower-case type
was printed on the hand-press, the capitals, and particu-
larly the initial letters, which often took a very elaborate
and colourful form, being drawn in by hand. There
are examples in the Mitchell Library, Sydney. The
printing presses, usually made of wood, were very crude
in construction, and bear little resemblance to the beau-
tifully balanced, complicated and swiftly-running
machines of modern days. For nearly three hundred
years these wooden presses were the only machines in
operation. Then in 1798, the Earl of Stanhope developed
and used the first all-iron press.
From this date onwards development was accelerated,
for, from the beginning of the nineteenth century, the
rapid expansion of manufacturing resulting from the
Industrial Revolution, with its stress on the use of
machinery, supplied a new impetus, since there is no
industry which is not dependent on printing for its
smooth and efficient working. Consequently, the de-
mands on the craft were great and ever-increasing.
Many improvements and inventions soon followed. In
1836, De Niepce discovered a method of engraving on
metal by photographic means. Thus Photo-Engraving
became a practical process to be developed in later years
as a method of producing colour-printing plates for
multi-coloured work. The theory that all visible colours
can be reproduced by mixing, in various proportions,
the three primary colours of white light was first shown
by Clerk Maxwell in 1860. These primary colours are
green, orange-red, and blue-violet. In Maxwell’s experi-
ment a coloured object was photographed through red,
green and blue liquid filters using collodion plates, and
positives resulting from these negatives were projected
on to a screen in register, each positive being illumin-
ated with coloured light, the colour of which was that
of the taking filter.
Photography in colours became a practical process,
but to a limited degree, in 1861, and in 1869 Du
Hauron first applied photography to printing when he
superimposed yellow, red, and blue, correctly spoken
of as minus blue, minus green, and minus red, respec-
tively, to obtain a print of the spectrum.
The suggestion by Fox Talbot in 1852 that the tones
of a photograph could be broken up into dots by means
of a ruled screen paved the way for further develop-


ments by Berchtold, Barnett, Lgloflfstein, Swan and
the Jaffe brothers. The first ruled screen on glass was
patented by Meisenbach in 1882. Ives and Levy later
perfected the cross-line screen, which remains essentially
the same to-day.
In the succeeding years fresh discoveries have been
made, technique improved, and new and refined materials
made available, so that now we see on every hand
faithful and beautiful reproductions of pictures or
designs, which are indistinguishable from the original
unless examined by the eye of an expert.
Side by side with Letterpress Printing there has grown
up the sister art of Lithography. Here an entirely dif-
ferent process is used, the achievement of results being
dependent more on chemistry than on mechanics. The
story of its discovery dates back to the closing years
of the 18th century. Alois Senefelder had a desire to
follow the career of his father, who was an actor. That
gentleman, however, had other views, and sent his son
to the University to study law. The father’s death
having cut short his career, Senefelder was compelled
to seek an immediate method of earning his living. So
he turned to his original predilection, the stage, but
after a chequered career was compelled to admit failure.
He then endeavored to retrieve his fortune by writing
plays rather than by acting them. The expenses of
printing, however, were too heavy, so he tried his hand
at doing his own printing.
His first efforts were directed toward etching copper
plates. The expense of these, however, was too great, so
Senefelder then experimented with the use of a species of
limestone found in his district. He met with many
difficulties and disappointments. In the course of his
experiment, however, he had made a compound to
cover his plates and protect them from the etching acid
except in such places as he desired. The story goes that
his mother came to him one day and asked him to
write down a list of washing for which the laundry
had just called. No ink or paper being available, he
wrote on the face of the limestone with his "stopping-
off” mixture. Some days later, when about to clean
off the stone, the idea came to him that it might be
etched. Building a dam of acid-proof material round
the edge, he flooded the stone with aquafortis, and in
a few minutes found that the writing had been left
untouched by the acid, but that the rest of the stone
was etched down to an appreciable degree. He covered
the lettering with ink, pressed a piece of paper on it,
and found a clean and sharp reproduction of the writing
transferred to the paper. A friend of his, who desired
to publish some music, became interested in the process,
and persuaded the Elector of Bavaria to finance the
printing. An old press was obtained and the music duly
printed.
In 1817 Lithography was introduced into England.
It was then a short step forward to the introduction of
colour work. From this period onwards until early in
the present century the chromo-litho-artist held sway.
Examples of the skill developed by these artists can be
found in the many beautiful examples of multi-colour
lithographs still in existence. Reproductions by this
process were entirely manual. In the early years of
Lithography each colour was drawn by the artist in
greasy crayon, or ink, on the polished surface of a
lithographic stone. Later grained metal plates super-
seded the stones. Later still the camera was utilised.
Many contradictory statements have been made regard-
ing the development of photographic methods for litho-
graphic use, but it seems certain that the first really
important work was done by Poitevin in 1855, when he
sensitised litho-stone surfaces with bichromated albu-
men. The albumen process of to-day is essentially the
same as that of the inventor. Four years later (1859),
James produced the first photo-litho transfer. The
modern art of Photo-Lithography is now able to produce
some of the most beautiful examples of the printer’s
art.
About 1879, Karl Klietsch is said to have produced
in England the first workable intaglio or gravure-print-
ing plates. These were formed of copper, with a carbon-
ised gelatin film, and etched with weak acids. In 1894
he originated the rotary method of printing from etched
copper cylinders, and a year afterwards the first com-
mercial intaglio plant was organised in England under
his supervision. Ten years later the intaglio principle
of printing was established in U.S.A., and in 1912 a
leading newspaper in New York adopted this method
of printing a rotogravure supplement.
In Ancient Rome
In ancient Rome, it appears that publishers often
produced entire book editions in a single day! These
books were hand written, by slaves, from dictation . . .
then revised, corrected, rolled up, bound, titled and
decorated within 10 hoursl


In recent years many refinements of the original basic
process have been developed, with the result that now-
a-days gravure printing is a highly-perfected process
from which has emerged a range of amazingly beautiful
products possessing highly-pleasing qualities peculiar to
this process of printing.
The Mesh Stencil Printing Process is a modern evolu-
tionary development of the ancient but simple method
of open stencilling. The Chinese and Egyptians prac-
tised the open stencil method in the production of their
ornamental embellishments.
The exact origin of the present Mesh Stencil or Silk
Screen Process is somewhat obscure, but examples of
printing by this method have been traced to a date as
early as 1905. However, it was not until about 1913
that a pronounced forward movement was noticeable
in this division of the Printing Industry, since when
considerable expansion and development have occurred
throughout the world.
From these humble beginnings have sprung the im-
mense industry which now produces our daily papers,
periodicals, books, and all the thousand and one items
of printed matter which are essential for our every-day
needs.
Tophats and parasols and crinolines. The one
point of resemblance to the present seems to lie
in the fact that the Sydney traffic of those days
had apparently the same airy disregard for the
rules of the road as it has now.
PRINTING
in Australia and New Zealand
Turning to the history of our own land, we find
that printing has been closely associated with it from
its earliest days.
Although a small printing plant was brought out with
Governor Phillip, in 1788, it lay unused for seven years
for lack of a trained printer. Then, to quote Collins’
"Account of the English Colony of N.S.W.”: "A small
printing press . . . was found very useful, a very decent
young man, one George Hughes, of some ability in the
printing line, having been found equal to conducting
the whole business of the press.” To him, therefore,
must be accorded the honour of being the first Australian
printer. The earliest known example of Australian
printing done by Hughes is a broadside, dated 1796,
entitled "Instructions for Constables of the Country
Districts.”
Some years later, Governor Hunter found that
George Howe, a Creole, from the West Indies, who had
been a Compositor on the "London Times,” had a
thorough knowledge of printing, so he was entrusted
with the running of the plant. Although not the first
Sydney printer, Howe is considered to be the father of
Australian printing. History informs us that his modest
establishment was situated near Bridge Street and the
Tank Stream. Howe received a salary of £6O per year,
which was well earned, for his difficulties and trials were
many and various. Ink was bad, type faulty, and the
paper was of all sizes and colours. In his "Encyclopaedia
of Literary and Typographical Anecdote,” Timperly
writes: "His press, his letters, his ink, his paper, and all
the appurtenances thereto belonging were ever and anon
in woeful need of being recruited.” The first book
printed by George Howe was the "New South Wales
General Standing Orders,” dated 1802.
Governor King, who realised the value of the printed
word, in 1803 wrote to Lord Hobart, Secretary of
State for the Home Department, as follows:
"It being desirable that the settlers and inhabitants
at large should be benefited by useful information being
distributed amongst them, I considered that a weekly
publication would facilitate that design, for which
purpose I gave permission to an ingenious man, who
manages the Government printing press, to collect
materials weekly, which, being inspected by an officer,
are published in the form of a weekly newspaper, copies
of which, so far as they have been published, I have
the honour to enclose. And, as the motive that has
guided me in granting this indulgence to the inhabitants
has been for bettering their conditions, I promise myself
your Lordship’s approbation. To the list of wants I
have added a new font of letters, which may be pro-
cured for eight or ten pounds, sufficient for our purpose,
if approved of.”
This, Australia’s earliest newspaper, entitled "The
Sydney Gazette and New South Wales Advertiser,” first
appeared on sth March, 1803, and lasted till 20th
October, 1842. The old wooden press used by Howe
unfortunately no longer exists, but its work was in-
valuable in those early days.
Lithography in Australia dates from about the year
1821, for, on or shortly after his arrival in Sydney in
that year, Sir Thomas Brisbane, Governor Macquarie’s
successor, set up two lithographic presses at the Parra-
matta Observatory for the use of Mr. Rumker, the
Government Astronomer. They are described as the
invention of Mr. Morrison and “of an improved con-
struction.”


After Governor Brisbane’s departure in 1825 one of
these presses was transferred in 1828 to the care of the
Surveyor-General, Sir Thomas Mitchell, who probably
used it for the printing of his maps. The other press
was given by the Governor to a Mr. Dunlop, a member
of the Observatory Staff at Parramatta, who in turn
sold it to the distingished artist, Mr. Augustus Earle,
who in 1826, prior to his departure for New Zealand,
printed on it a series of three fine-coloured lithographs,
entitled "Views of Australia,” which are much sought
after to-day.
The next Lithographer in Australia of whom we
have a definite record is J. G. Austin, whose business
address is given as Bridge Street, Sydney. There, from
1834 onwards, he printed a large series of lithographed
drawings, including Rodius’s "Portraits of Aborigines”
(1834), Rodius’s "Landsdowne Bridge” (1836), and
Fernyhough’s "Profiles of the Aborigines” (1836).
Next came William Baker, an Englishman, who
arrived in Sydney in 1835 and began printing at 101
King Street. He advertised in "The Australian” of
that year that he would "execute any commands for
lithographic and copperplate printing.” Amongst the
specimens of his work which have survived are many
coloured maps and an atlas.
In 183 8, Raphael Clint, of George Street, a surveyor
and engraver, had assigned to him a convict lithographer,
so he, too, must be included amongst the earliest of our
colour printers. Next came Prout and Co., who issued
their "Views of Sydney” in 1842 and in 1847 their
"Views of Melbourne.”
S. T. Gill and J. G. Ham were producing lithographed
work in Adelaide as early as 1840. It is also of interest
to note that most of the early sheet music, often with
a pictorial cover, printed in Australia, was reproduced
by the lithographic process.
For many years the work, which was done on hand
presses, was a very laborious process. Gradually the
hand-work gave way to power machines, and now Aus-
tralian lithographic reproduction will bear comparison
with any in the world.
When Lieutenant-Governor David Collins arrived in
1803 at Sorrento, Victoria, then called Port Phillip, he
had with him a small hand-press, which he set up under
a gum-tree on the beach. In this "office” on 16th
October was printed the first government order, a series
of general and garrison orders succeeding it from time to
time. Though there were three printer-convicts in
Collins’s party, the name of only one, Robert Walsh,
has survived. The first newspaper, the "Melbourne
Advertiser,” was issued by John Fawkner in March,
183 8, numbers 1 to 9 being hand-written, number 10
printed.
When Lieutenant-Governor Collins transferred the
settlement from Port Phillip to Hobart, Tasmania, he
took with him his small hand-printing set, and on 20th
February, 1804, issued a single printed sheet—"a general
order” —fixing the price of pork and other comestibles.
This is the first record of the craft in Tasmania. In
1810 Andrew Bent, the most famous of Tasmanian
printers, issued the "Derwent Star,” earliest of Hobart
newspapers.
The first printing press introduced into Western Aus-
tralia (a "Ruthven”) was imported by a printer named
Weavell in 1831. This little hand-press was set up at
Fremantle, and hired by C. Macfaull and W. K. Shenton,
who, on 25th April, 1831, published the first issue
of the earliest West Australian newspaper, "The Fre-
mantle Observer, Perth Gazette, and Western Australian
Journal.” The old press may still be seen at the Perth
Museum.
The history of Printing in South Australia dates from
the proclamation of the province in 1836. The first
press, a demy Stanhope of antiquated type, was brought
from England by Robert Thomas and George Stevenson.
At Glenelg, in a rush hut, on 11th January, 1837, was
printed Governor Hindmarsh’s Proclamation founding
the new colony (the first sheet of printing struck off
in South Australia). Robert Thomas issued the first
newspaper, the "Adelaide Register,” on 3rd June, 1837.
In Queensland, the first printing press was erected
in June, 1846, Arthur Sydney Lyon and James Swan on
the 20th of that month using a small press to print the
"Moreton Bay Courier,” a newspaper which still exists
as the well-known daily, "The Brisbane Courier-Mail.”
Printing in our sister Dominion of New Zealand had
its origin, like that of so many of the Pacific Islands, in
the missionary press. Of the first book published, the
Catechism in Maori, by the Rev. W. Yate, only two
copies survive. It was printed at Kerikeri, a tiny
brochure of six pages, numbered in small roman, the
first two pages being unnumbered and blank. The date
was August, 1830. The most important of the early
New Zealand printers, however, was William Colenso,
who, on 17th February, 183 5, pulled the proofs of what
he thought was the first, but what was really the second,
book printed in New Zealand—part of the Rev. W.
Williams’s translation of the New Testament in Maori.
The first New Zealand newspaper was the "New Zealand
Gazette and Britannia Spectator,” printed on the beach
of Petone, 18th April, 1840.
In the 18th Century
The job of planing down too-high woodcuts
until they were exactly type high was handled
by the joiner, in the 18th Century print shop.


They shall grow not old, as we that are left
grow old,
Age shall not weary them, nor the years
condemn;
At the going down of the sun and in the
morning
We will remember them.”


Tradition
TRADITION can be a tremendous force for good—a magnificent inspiration to
progress.
In every era of mankind’s history and in every field of its endeavour, the years
and the need have brought forth outstanding men. These men have solved their
contemporary problems or, by inspiring leadership, have steered their fellows through
impending crises. Their names became household words and they were frequently,
though not always perhaps, the subjects of a widespread hero worship.
History, with a better perspective, usually allocates them to their true position.
But whether their metier was politics, science or war, they added something to tradition.
Just as they so often drew strength from examples of a bygone age, so, in turn, they
add their quota to the reservoir from which future generations might derive benefit.
Names like Drake, Raleigh, or Nelson still bring a glow of pride to every officer
and rating in the Royal Navy, who would die at their posts —and have done so on
innumerable occasions—rather than dim the imperishable lustre of that high tradition
of bravery and devotion to duty.
Wellington, Clive, Montgomery are names to conjure with in Army life; and
young as it is, the Royal Air Force has already built a tradition of glorious courage
and matchless skill that shines as a lambent flame.
Science, Art and Industry all have their page of outstanding figures who have
founded a tradition of the highest service in their particular sphere.
It is given not only to individuals but to large Bodies of people to found a good,
or a bad, tradition. Towns and nations play their part. Can anything, for example,
mar or dim the story of the splendid morale of the British people under that ceaseless
rain of fire from German planes? Will that not become a tradition of unselfishness, of
team work, of heroism, from which all nations may receive an incentive to better
things?
Yes, tradition, rightly used, can be a living force for good.
Yet it is a powerful stimulant and, as such, must be used sparingly and only at
need or grave results must follow. An over-emphasis on tradition can be very reactionary
and a brake on the wheels of real progress. The past, with all its glories, was fair from
perfect, yet sometimes the unthinking clothe it with the false enchantment of distance.
It is really but a stage in man’s journey upward and onward, a foothold or handhold
to help him climb. To become too steeped in tradition is to become drugged, for an
overdose of stimulant may enervate.
The older countries of the world sometimes pay too much attention to tradition;
the new ones, our own amongst them, do not pay enough. Indeed, the latter are
inclined to sneer and treat it as a thing of no worth. Its real value comes along the line
of a just mean between these two attitudes, and happy is the man, the organisation, or
the nation, that can preserve that nice balance.
The Firm has its own traditions, too. Individual or collective examples from its
past history teach many lessons to the present. But, grandly as they did their job, we
must go on beyond. We too must set our mark for the future. We too must firtnly
place our stepping stone that others may go forward. We too must feel the sting
of that "divine discontent” which seeks always the unattainable perfection, yet builds
a high tradition in the very seeking.


Section of Artists Department where drawings and original photographic negatives
are prepared ready to make machine plates for Lithographic printing.
A corner of the Lithographic Printing Department with a Mann "Fast Five” in the foreground.
These magnificent machines are capable of printing two colours at very high speeds.


The Composing and Stereo Departments where type is set and plates made for letterpress
printing. In addition, knives are made up for cutting and scoring cartons.
ARTISTS, COMPOSING ROOM,
LITHOGRAPHIC & LETTERPRESS
Portion of the Letterpress Department showing a couple of two-colour Miehle machines in operation.


In the foreground is an Armoury press used to cut and score certain types of cartons and showcards. In
the background are Shell machines processing the outside part of 10s and 20s cigarette packets.
Another view in the Carton Department with a battery of machines engaged in cutting and scoring cartons.
The Binding Department, where the finishing operations are applied to many
jobs in sheet form and where some of the packing and labelling is done.


These powerful guillotines are used to cut paper and board to size. They are capable of shearing through 4" of paper.
CARTON, BINDING, GUILLOTINE
CUTTING AND ENGINEERING
In the Engineering Department, not only are repairs and maintenance under-
taken, but many new special purpose machines are designed and built.


This photo shows slabs of lead being rolled to thickness and stamped into circular "slugs” for the manufacture of collapsible tubes. The girl on
the left is trimming the extruded tube and threading the neck before printing.
This unit stamps and forms the Snap-Vac lids, applies the rubber gasket in liquid form and then bakes it until dry.
A battery of eight presses forming tinplate into various shapes. Behind them the cutters are slitting the sheets ready for the presses.


A section of the Making Up Department showing light machines doing a variety of operations on a printed slip lid tin.
CANISTER
AND TUBE MAKING
Rotary offset machines printing sheets of light gauge metal. The vertical pipes mark the entry to the ovens through which the printed sheets pass
to be dried after each colour is printed.


The Pouch-Pak Department is completely equipped with automatic
machines designed and constructed in our own engineering department.
In the Cigarette Paper Department fully automatic machines of very compact design
lend themselves to a geometrical lay-out that is very economical of floor space.
POUCHPAK, CIGARETTE
PAPER AND OFFICE
A view of the General Office.


Reminiscences
J-JERE is a bunch of yarns from four men who have been inseparably
associated with the Firm’s history and who spent their whole life in its
service. George Mackaness, whose youthful hands helped to rock, as it were,
the very cradle of the firm; Alf. Dickenson, also closely associated with the
lithographic side of the business and who was the trainer, at work and at
college, of many of the journeymen in the trade to-day; Jim Fowle, with his
wide knowledge of paper and the various workings of the Binding Department;
R. A. Butterfeld, compositor, linotype operator and reader, who was still hale
and hearty on his 80th birthday a few months ago.
They make a grand quartet of real Old Timers.” There is evidently
something healthy about printer’s ink—if absorbed in sufficient quantity.


George Mackaness
THESE extracts from the reminiscences of the late Mr. George
Mackaness are of intense interest, illuminating as they do, the earliest
days of S. T. Leigh’s existence in Hunter St. Mr. Mackaness continued
his work for some years at Raleigh Park before retiring after serving the
firm continuously for a period of 57 years.
MY first recollection is that in passing along Hunter
Street one day I noticed on a window "A Boy
Wanted.” I went in and was engaged, conditionally that
a written character from the parson and the schoolmaster
was procured. Being a good boy this was speedily done,
so my career began. I was engaged to sweep up and run
errands, but before a fortnight had passed my first
trouble started. I was in trouble for what? Why, sweep-
ing the footpath after eight o’clock in the morning.
The building occupied by the firm was one of what
had been originally a terrace of private dwellings, with
about 25 feet frontage each. The front room comprised
Mr. Leigh’s office, a few show cases, a counter, and the
Binding Dept., consisting of one man, one woman, a
cutter, and an apprentice, with a cutting machine
thrown in. An addition was attached at the back of two
floors, the first being occupied by the artists, of whom
there were two, and an apprentice, and the same number
of engravers. The upper floor was taken up by the
foreman printer and four apprentices; there was also a
ruling machine and a copperplate press in a sort of con-
necting room between the two buildings. In what had
probably been at one time the best bedroom four
journeymen did their work. In another room two more
men found employment, and in another higher up two
other pressmen followed their daily task in a room
that was once the maid’s room. The man who did the
embossing of envelopes and notepaper had a room all
to himself. These, with a clerk, shopman, stone grinder,
message boy, and perhaps two or three more, comprised
the staff and equipment of S. T. Leigh and Co. There
was no power machine of any kind. An ordinary
packing case, emptied twice a week by the City Council,
was sufficient for the removal of all waste material and
rubbish.
Many of the apprentices in those days had to pay a
premium of from £4O to £6O, my own contribution
being £4O, for the privilege of being indentured to S.
T. Leigh and Co. The chief artist, the late H. H. Glover,
paid £SO each for his two sons —one as an artist (who
turned out first class), the other an engraver. I remem-
ber one apprentice to the engraving who had an affliction
of the eyes, and when he attempted parallel lines these
were more like triangles. His money was returned, and
he got a job in Macquarie Street. The apprentices were
generally well treated by Mr. Leigh, who was a kindly-
natured man, otherwise we lads had to work hard, being
placed with a journeyman for about twelve months.
As it was all piece work there was not much time wasted
by the men, who, although they often came to work
in top hats and frock coats, did not scruple to take their
shirts off when at work.
In those early days the work of the lithographic printer
was very different from that of to-day, everything being
done by hand. Every colour had to be ground and
made by the printer himself. As there was very keen
rivalry amongst the men as to the quality and excellence
of their work, a good deal depended on the proper
grinding (which was done with a hand muller on a
stone slab) and mixing of the various pigments used,
Chinese and Prussian blue, burnt umber and burnt
sienna being about the hardest to convert into good
lithographic printing ink. Vermilion and the chromes
were comparatively easy. No payment was allowed the
men for the making of inks, so the apprentice fell in
for a fair amount of it as soon as he was capable and
understood the necessity of its being done properly.
To illustrate the difference between some of the
methods now and then, I will mention my first actual
piece of work on the press, which was a good order for
2,000 jam labels, about a quarter the size of a 1 lb. jam
label of to-day. These were printed in two colours—
gold bronze and dusted blue, concerning which many
modern printers have never even heard, and would not
know how to manipulate. There were many things with
which to contend when printing dusted colours; the
first was to prevent the dust from tinting all over the
board or paper used, and the second was to make it
hold where it was wanted without rubbing off. In
using a dusted emerald green it was necessary to block


the nose and ears with cotton wool, also to cover the
mouth, or the effects would soon become serious to those
using it.
Another process lost in the limbo of things forgotten,
and the hardest work of all, was the printing of a job in
Dutch metal, an imitation of gold leaf, got up in books
the same way, and laid on all over the printed sheet,
leaf at a time, and then run through the press again.
When dry, and the superfluous leaf rubbed off, this
looked very well when good metal was used and the
job well done—much superior to bronze.
There were many secrets in lithography; in fact, it
was almost a mystery to most people, for every work-
man had some knowledge gained either by experience,
experiment, or a study of the principles of the art, as
it was then called: secrets of method and manipulation
that he kept absolutely to himself, and never by any
chance gave away. To illustrate how far this was
carried, I will relate an incident that once occurred in
which I was interested. A man working beside me was
having some trouble to get the effect that the artist
desired. The artist, being an Englishman, probably had
more knowledge of colours than we had, and desired
to help the printer, but I was in the road, so he carefully
wrote the wrinkle on a piece of paper. After the printer
had read and mentally noted this the paper was torn up
in small pieces, and carelessly thrown on the floor. When
both men had left the room I seized the opportunity,
and collected every scrap I could find, took them home
and pieced them together, and smiled to myself—the
secret was mine. I have often put into practical use
what I found on those scraps of paper. The general
term for any of these private possessions was P.Q.
Every man made his own transfer ink. Transfer
paper was made with locked doors or somewhere in
private. Many a £5 note has been offered and refused
for a reliable recipe, especially for copperplate transfer
paper.
The artist also had to depend on his hand work alto-
gether, as there were no mechanical aids such as are
largely used to-day. The work done by those old-time
artists on grained stones will certainly never be sur-
passed by mechanical aids. The illustrations done by S.
T. Leigh and Co.’s artists for the Royal Society
possessed an artistic merit all their own, and for excel-
lence of detail and fidelity to nature can never be
excelled.
It seems to me a great pity that, owing to modern
mechanical processes and machinery, these individual
finds in creative lithographic work are no longer a
feature of our craft.
One of the many classes of work done was that of
cutout labels, printed in four, perhaps six, colours, or
even more. These were cut out with steel dies in an old
copying press. If you entered an hotel almost every
label in sight had been produced by S. T. Leigh and Co.
The contents of the bottles may have come from abroad,
but the labels were certainly colonial. During the
land boom double demy sale plans were often executed,
and were drawn on French transfer paper, the order
generally being from 200 to 500 —seldom more. Com-
mercial work of every description was done, from visit-
ing cards to bank notes. I remember bank notes being
done for the Mercantile Rank in which there were two
printings from stone (one on the back and one on the
front) and the note itself from a steel-plate engraving,
at about the rate of 250 per day. In the course of
working upon one occasion one piece of notepaper was
missing and every conceivable and likely place was
searched without avail. As a last resort the Moore Park
tip was given attention to, and there the missing un-
printed note was found adhering to the piece of wrapper
that had been used to keep the paper moist. As the
value of the notes ranged from one to twenty pounds,
Mr. Leigh had to go bond for twenty pounds until it
was found. The paper on which bank notes were printed
in those days was, of course, hand made, and was made
Johann Fust
T EGEND has it that Johann supposed to be
the original Dr. in Paris about 1464
with a number of Bibles printed by the German firm of Fust
and Schoffer.
Printing was yet unknown in Paris, so Fust created a
sensation by selling printed Bibles at prices one-third those
for hand written Bibles.
Investigation disclosed a large number of Bibles in Fust’s
lodging and he was accused of magic, chiefly on account of
the uniformity of the printed copies, compared with the hand
written ones known in France.


the size of two notes, with rough edges all round, so
that when cut in halves each note had three rough edges
and one smooth. Any note without those edges was con-
sidered a forgery. Notes of the same nature as those
used by the banks were also used by some manufacturers
for payment of wages, and universally accepted by the
storekeepers and tradespeople in the districts where
these people operated. The cheques of the Australian
Joint Stock Bank, English and Scottish Bank, Bank of
New Zealand, and the City Bank were all produced
on hand presses, and formed a source of considerable
employment. A man would be told to go on printing
cheques until told to stop. To make good wages it
meant rather harder work than that done to-day.
Fifty pulls an hour for eight hours a day was a good
day’s work, and took some doing. After 5,000 pulls a
new stone was allowed and paid for. The calendars of
the Insurance Companies were a large order towards
the end of the year. The Victorian, Liverpool, London
and Globe, and the Mercantile would run, if I recollect
rightly, 5,000 each half royal in five or six printings.
These would be done two up on a royal board, and when
once started would be worked day and night until
finished. After that would come a slack time for a week
or two. Before and after Christmas there would be
little or nothing to do —certainly not enough to keep
the men fully employed.
Besides a standing order for cheques there was another
of some magnitude. This was for meat labels, printed
in red and black, on a sheet of demy. The whole of
Starkey’s cordial labels were done by us, 12 up on half
royal, in four colours. Comparisons were always made
between each man’s work, and this friendly spirit of
rivalry was always kept up during the hand work days,
and greatly contributed to good work. Try to imagine
the whole of Tooth’s and Toohey’s beer labels being
printed on hand presses and cut out on an old blocking
press. How would the prices obtained and the cost
Nothing but the best was good enough. Copper-
plate printing and a delightful touch of old
time courtesy.
of production compare with those of to-day? Mr. Leigh
got more pounds then than shillings are got now.
The best paying job I ever had was the plans and
diagrams for the use of railway construction tenderers.
An order would come in for 40 or 60 sheets, doubfle
demy, and transfers supplied. These had to be trans-
ferred, proof sent, and 13 copies printed, and then
cleaned off. I also printed the plans for the tramway
system of Sydney on the longway press, and had the
aid of two strong men to pull the press. We had no
stones large enough for the work, so had to borrow two
from the Lands Office. One weighed 12 cwt. and the
other 8 cwt. Each sheet of paper cost 12/6, so it meant
something to spoil even one. I did not spoil any.
The "Sydney Mail” supplements were something to
look forward to, and taxed the energies and stamina of
the men to the limit. To turn out 15,000 or 20,000 of
these—of course, only one printing—with less than
a week to do it in, by four or five men, meant excessively
hard work. Eventually it became beyond the possibility
of production by those slow methods. The proprietors
of the "Mail” installed a machine with the intention of
turning out their own, but it was a failure, for what
reason I do not know. The machine was then purchased
by Mr. Leigh for a very small sum. Then began the
great change in lithographic printing in this State.
The men were in a panic. Their occupation would be
gone, and all sorts of dire happenings were prophesied.
We have seen the result, and how little cause there was
to worry. It was while we were removing from Hunter
Street to Pitt Street that I had my only connection
with the "Mail” supplements. The machine being taken
to pieces for removal, the work had to be done by hand.
The subject was a map of the Thames course, when
Tricket won the championship of the world from Sadler.
I was in the last year of my time, and had half journey-
man’s rates in addition to my weekly wage of 15/-. We
started on Tuesday morning, and how many hours or
when I worked I have now no recollection. I do know
that I went home on Saturday at dinnertime and slept
until Monday morning.
If I remember rightly, the first effort on the machine
was a picture for the "Sydney Mail,” in four printings,
called "The Digger’s Return,” a most atrocious affair.
The motive power to drive the machine was a 1} h.p.
steam engine.
Some great and wonderful changes have taken place
since the first machine was installed.
I will leave some abler pen than mine to carry on the
tale of later developments and perhaps interest you
more than I have been able to do. If I have failed it is
because of my inability with the pen, not with my
desire to please. Whoever follows me in this rather
desultory account of the past, I hope they will not fail
in their respect, veneration, and pride to those old
pioneers of lithography, who did so much when the
craft was in its infancy, and paved the way for its
present day’s success, and without whose indomitable
pluck and perseverance it would have been kept back
many years.


Alfred Dickenson
"TAURING the early years S. T. Leigh & Co. were solely
' Lithographic Printers and Account Book Binders.
The method of production was largely on the Fland Press
and excellent artistic work was produced from stone by
the lithographic pressmen of that day.
The association of Mr. A. Lawson with the firm goes
back many years, well into the latter part of the last
century. He was one of the lithographic apprentices,
later becoming Overseer of the department and finally
Manager of the firm. Much of the success and develop-
ment of Lithographic Printing in the firm was due in a
large measure to his brilliancy of intellect and analytical
reasoning powers.
It was necessary at that time to make transfer papers,
both copperplate and litho press. Printing inks were
also prepared from the colour pigments, which to-day
are manufactured by Ink Manufacturing firms. Mr.
Lawson devoted much time to personally experimenting
in the use of materials essential to Lithographic Print-
ing. The first line blocks etched in zinc were the out-
come of his efforts.
The firm of S. T. Leigh was largely responsible for
the establishment of a Lithographic Printing class at
the Sydney Technical College. The present technical
education in this branch of printing has been a
development from the appointment of Mr. Lawson as
a teacher to the College. Other Lithographic Printers
from S. T. Leigh have also occupied vital positions as
instructors and examiners in the Technical College,
among them being Mr. A. Andrews, instructor and
teacher, and myself, for many years examiner in Litho-
graphy.
In 1886, S. T. Leigh & Co. produced maps and plans
from zinc plates on the hand press at 28 O’Connell
Street, Sydney, on Whatman’s hand-made drawing
paper. It was necessary to print the paper damp, as
the method of printing was direct from the plate and
could not be printed dry. Because of the hard surface
of the paper, this was a slow and laborious process.
The first Direct Rotary Machine was installed at
Castlereagh Street, but prior to this installation, all
litho work was produced direct from litho stones on
Flat Bed Litho Machines running at about 600 impres-
sions per hour.
The business of S. T. Leigh, still expanding in 28
O’Connell Street, found it necessary to occupy the
premises adjoining and it was here that Letterpress
Printing was included in the firm’s operations. The
inclusion of Composing and Letterpress Printing was a
contribution to increased business operations and
expansion.
The firm at this period inaugurated the Litho Print-
ing of Australian Xmas Pictorial Calendars. Prior to
this event these were imported from abroad and few, if
any, were litho printed in Australia. Difficulties
abounded on every hand, but they were overcome ulti-
mately, with marked success, so much so that the high
quality and standard of the production was noted by
the Daily Newspaper Press.
As the business continued to expand in all directions,
still larger and more suitable premises became urgently
necessary. The Phelps Stephan Photo-Litho Printing
Co. building, 155 Clarence Street, Sydney, becoming
vacant, S. T. Leigh & Co. Ltd. moved into its new
An Old Custom
Earliest plate engravers, it seems, were the
working goldsmiths who followed an old
custom of running off impressions of their
work with smoke gathered from lamp
chimneys. These engravers usually used
plates of pewter, iron or brass.


home, purchasing new plant and equipment at the
same time. With the removal to 155 Clarence Street,
the Carton Department and Cardboard Box Making
Department came into active operation in a short space
of time. The development was so rapid that it became
necessary to make additions and alterations to the build-
ing at 155 Clarence Street and another storey was
added. This afforded some temporary relief so far as
room was concerned. In the additional floor the Com-
posing Department was located and also the Varnishing
Department and part of the Carton Department.
The next move was to occupy another building in
addition to 155 Clarence Street and the whole of the
Cardboard Box Making Department was accommodated
at 261 Clarence Street, thus leaving more space for the
Carton Department, which needed it so urgently.
It was at 155 Clarence Street that S. T. Leigh intro-
duced tinplate printing. The first effort in this direction
was the printing of the design on to Litho Transfer
Paper, which, when complete, was transferred on to a
sheet of varnished tinplate. The job was then im-
mersed in a cask of water to soak off the paper backing.
This naturally, was a very slow and expensive method
and not altogether generally satisfactory. Other ways
and means had to be found of making tin printing less
hazardous and more economic. Not having a tin print-
ing machine at our disposal, we had to improvise with
our Direct Paper Printing Machine until one arrived
from England. In the interim, the idea was evolved of
printing tinplate on a Direct Paper Litho Printing
Machine. Now, as tinplate printing is on the offset
principle this was something unheard of and according
to critics could not be done. Well, S. T. Leigh accom-
plished the apparently impossible quite successfully.
Many difficulties were encountered here and there, of
course, but the method was more satisfactory than
printing on transfer paper.
With the advent of proper tinplate printing machines,
decorative printing showed such a phenomenal develop-
ment that the creation of a Canister department fol-
lowed, together with a special tinplate engineering
section to cope with its requirements.
Decorative tinplate showcards were the firm’s specialty,
and many excellent designs were produced. Owing to
the rapid growth, particularly in the Tinplate Printing
and Canister Department, still larger premises again
became necessary. A new building was erected in Goul-
burn Street extending from Castlereagh to Elizabeth
Street, specially constructed for the printing plant of
S. T. Leigh & Co.
Still further development of the Canister Department
in Castlereagh Street placed space again at a premium
and a factory was built at Raleigh Park, Kensington,
and the whole of the tinplate printing, the Making Up
machinery and Engineering was moved to this building
with the addition of new plant.
The decision of the State Government to proceed
with the long delayed scheme of the extension of the
railway transport underground to the City meant the
resumption of the area occupied by the premises of S. T.
Leigh & Co. in Castlereagh Street. New premises were
constructed at Raleigh Park, Kensington, to accommo-
date the Castlereagh Street Head Office and departments,
viz., Paper Printing, Artists, Carton, Box Making, Com-
posing, Letterpress Printing and Paper Varnishing. New
machinery, both litho offset, carton, letterpress and box-
making were added, being urgently required in order
to meet the increased demands. In the Canister Depart-
ment, the Tube Making Department also came into
being at about this stage of the firm’s history.
The swift years drew on to my retirement. In retro-
spect it seemed a far cry from the 50-run-an-hour days
to the new techniques and the modern machines which
have revolutionised Lithographic printing. But one
thing stood unchanging—the craftsman spirit which
imbued the old timer equally with his modern proto-
type. There is something in the printing game which
fosters this spirit from early years and I believe with
Carlyle "As a man thinketh so is he and as he thinketh
so he becomes.”
Another interesting link with the past. What a
little shrub the Tree was in those days.


James Fowle
FIFTY-FOUR years is a long time to remember any
one particular occurrence. It would certainly have to
be of some importance to leave on one’s mind such a
long-lasting impression. Nevertheless, I clearly remember
the day I made my first contact with S. T. Leigh &
Co., then situated at 155 Clarence Street, Sydney.
It was intended that I should become a Lithographer,
but as there were no vacancies for apprentices in that
section, I was offered a job in the Binding Department,
which was accepted and I was duly signed on at 7/ 6d.
per week.
My duties were to keep the department clean and
do the messages, which were numerous and varied. The
firm, at that time, was the printer of the "Sydney Wool
and Stock Journal” published weekly. The sheets were
printed in the basement of the building; the Binding
Department was on the fifth floor where the sheets were
folded in the folding machine. It was my job to keep
that machine supplied throughout the day, which en-
tailed many journeys up and down stairs. I was always
glad when "Journal” day was over.
In due course, I was put to work on the bench
assisting in the binding of Receipt, Delivery and Cheque
Books, and similar work. After a fairly lengthy period
on this class of work, I was of opinion that a little
of the better class of binding should be coming my way.
I therefore approached the foreman and mentioned the
matter to him. He was quite sympathetic and promised
to allocate certain work to me by writing my name
on the order sheet. There certainly was an improvement
for a while, but the idea seemed to languish due to
neglect or oversight by the responsible person. I at
times found it necessary to inscribe my signature on
certain order sheets that appealed to my fancy! The
idea was successful.
Then I began the more difficult work of account
bookbinding. The edges of these books had to be
coloured by the process known as "marbling.” At that
time this process was the work of one man who main-
tained that he held the secret of the process. As I was
anxious to become acquainted with the "secret,” I asked
him if he would show me how it was done. He said
he would for a monetary consideration. The amount
being beyond the means of my slender purse, I sought
other means to gain my objective. I purchased a text
book on the subject and practised at night after he
had gone home, and was soon successful in my efforts
without his knowledge of the fact. (Trade secrets
were jealously guarded in those days.)
During my term at 155 Clarence Street, it had been
found necessary, owing to the expansion of business, to
extend the premises by the addition of another storey.
But so rapid was the expansion that larger premises
were found necessary, so that in 1905 thf* business was
removed to 326 Castlereagh Street—a spacious build-
ing of 142,000 sq. ft. of floor space.
It was soon after the occupation of these premises
that I was given charge of the Bookbinding Department.
I was not long in discovering that the position was no
sinecure and many difficult problems had to be over-
come. I well remember one that proved a source of
worry. The occasion arose with the introduction of
the printing of cigarette cards on satin. The satin had
to be lined on the back with a heavy grade paper, the
adhesive used being starch. When mounted, the sheets
were placed between boards to keep them flat, but it was
found that, during the process of drying, a large number
of the sheets were spoilt by mildew. The trouble was
eventually overcome by the addition of a chemical pre-
ventative mixed with the starch. Many such problems
seem to arise in the printing industry.
After many years’ association with the Binding De-
partment, I was given charge of the Paper Department,
which at that time was a comparatively small branch
of the business, but was showing signs of developing into
one of greater importance.
My knowledge of paper was rather restricted, being
confined mostly to those used in making of account
books, such as Azure Laids and Hand-made. I found
that I had a lot to learn before I became fully acquainted
Printing Craftsmen
To save on paper, pioneer printing craftsmen
of the 15th Century learned how to make a Bible
page hold 42 lines instead of the 40 lines origin-
ally used. They accomplished this by filing off
the top and bottom of their type bodies so that less
space was used between the lines.


with the many varieties required in the printing in-
dustry. However, I became interested in my new sphere
of activity inasmuch that I spent a deal of time in the
Public Library reading books on the subject of paper.
I think the time was well spent, as I was able to impart
some little of the knowledge so gained to my fellow
employees in a lecture on paper-making given at a
meeting of the Efficiency Club.
This Club was formed with the idea of giving all
employees some knowledge of all branches of the in-
dustry. Meetings were held fortnightly. This Club
eventually resolved itself into a Welfare Club, which
embraced many Social and Sporting activities. I was
particularly interested in the formation of the orchestra,
which proved a marked success under the able con-
ductorship of Mr. Bert Wright; with Miss Ruby Uhr
as pianist, Mr. Alf Dickenson (flute), Mr. Charles
Foskett and Yours Truly (cornets) and several others.
Periodical performances were given during the lunch
hour which were much appreciated by the employees
(I hope!). Also outside concerts were organised for
various purposes, with successful results. During 1923,
the Head Office was transferred to Raleigh Park, Ken-
sington (the Tin Canister Department having been
already established there since 1916) .
The Welfare Club was soon organising competitive
sporting fixtures with the various Tobacco Companies’
houses. One very popular social fixture was the Assoc.
Tob. Co. Horticulture Club Flower Shows. They proved
to be most successful and competitors from S.T.L. re-
ceived their fair share of the prizes.
The last few years prior to my retirement I was
associated with the office staff as assistant in the Supply
Department, a position which during the war period
had its many problems. During my long term of
service, I have been privileged to see the great advance-
ment achieved by the company in the industry of
printing and its associated trades.
In spite of the many headaches and heartaches en-
countered during that lengthy journey, the many bright
spots, like friendships gained and appreciation received,
stood out and helped one to further efforts.
R. Butter field
MEMORIES crowd in thick and fast when I look
back over the years. In particular I remember
when the Company was occupying a six-storeyed building
in Clarence Street and my job there was in the Compos-
ing Department. The principal job in the office at
that time was the "Wool and Stock Journal,” and it
took priority over all jobs that came to the Company
in those days. The paper was published for the Wool-
brokers Association of N.S.W. and was the official
intimation to them of the price their wool and stock
had brought at the auctions in Sydney during that
week. Under contract, it had to be in the post by noon
on Friday. This necessitated working very long hours
on the Thursday night, as the copy for the sales that
had been held on the Thursday did not come in till
after 6 o’clock. The copy of the Homebush sales
came later still. A word or two about the copy as
supplied to the compositor. The printed catalogue,
as supplied to the Brokers and auctioneers at the auction,
was sent in as copy. It was very intricate indeed, as
the compositor had to read it from the foolscap printed
catalogue. The name of the brand was in the centre,
the station on the extreme left, number of bales and
quality of same on the right, and the price it brought
also on the right. On Thursday the Staff started at
8 a.m. and went right on until the job was finished,
which was about 4 a.m. to 5 a.m. on the Friday morning
in the summer, and 1 to 2 a.m. in the winter. After
tea on the Thursday the Staff started at 6 p.m. and all
went full speed, knowing that the sooner they got
through the copy that was in front of them, the
sooner they would be going home. It was a 4 8-hour week
in those days, but most of us with the Company made
it a 60-hour week. Of course we were all paid overtime
for the extra time worked.
Whilst we were at Clarence Street the old style of
hand-setting of type was discarded for the machine
setting. Our first machine was the Monoline type. A
small machine, and not, to my mind, built of sufficient
size or strength for the work it was asked to do. After a
while they were superseded by the Linotype, a much
more modern machine.
The Company sold one of the Monolines and the
writer went with it to Taree on the Manning River.
The buyers were Boyce Bros, who printed the Manning
River Times at Taree. I went with the machine on
the S.S. "Rosedale,” which afterwards foundered. We
were met at the wharf by some of the employees from
Taree who helped to put the machine on to a lorry.
All had to give a hand to lift it. They had prepared a
house for it at the works, all brand new, but we arrived
a few days before the engine that was to drive it.
Eventually this arrived and the local blacksmith was
given the job of putting up the shafting and pulleys. This
took some days. At last everything was fixed up, and
the day arrived for a trial run. When the engine was
started it shook both the building and the machine
itself. Smaller pulleys were put in and four holes cut
in the flooring and piles driven in to carry the four
legs of the machine. This successfully stopped the


vibration. At this time an election was in progress and
the paper was backing a Liberal candidate by the name
of Mr. Price (the then sitting member) who owned
and ran a tailor’s shop in King Street, City. They
could not spare a man for me to instruct and it was
pointed out to them they would be in trouble when
I left, but they were prepared to accept that. I was
just hanging around and being paid for it, but it
got monotonous and I wired the Company to recall
me. This was done and I returned on the "Rosedale.”
During the return trip we were bar bound for three
days when we got to Harrington Heads (the mouth of
the Manning River). I saw more fish in an afternoon,
going out with the tide, than I am likely to see again
in my lifetime. There was no North Coast Railway at
this time and nearly all travelling was done by boat.
The move to Elizabeth, Castlereagh and Goulburn
Streets was a big job and indeed the new premises did
look a mammoth building. It was not long however
before we were looking for space again for we grew and
grew. After some years we were chased out of that
fine new building to make room for the underground
railway, and were planted in that lovely location at
Raleigh Park where we are now situated, and it has
become one of the largest, if not the largest, com-
mercial printing establishments in the Commonwealth
of Australia. An example of the work done by this
Company can be seen at the Technological Museum in
Harris Street, Sydney, where a large exhibit gives details
of the technical side of printing and includes a Linotype
and old hand presses and finished examples of the
printer’s art. The whole embraces nearly all branches
of the industry and is, indeed, an exhibit worth seeing
and a gift by the Company to that institution.
Canister Works
by Geo. O. Ingledew
AFTER listening to the deep bass voices of the old
timers, one feels diffident about interpolating the
childish prattle of a mere 39 years of service. However,
here goes!
The use of the tinplate canister for the packing
of tobacco commenced in a very modest way. Speak-
ing just recently to an old hand from Wills Tobacco
Branch, I was told that his job as a boy was to go,
once a day, to a certain firm in town and bring down
the day’s supply of tins in a sugar bag! The out-
standing advantages of tinplate as a pack soon created
a larger demand and S. T. Leigh’s canister works came
into being. Within thirty years we were turning out
a hundred million tins per annum.
My introduction to canister works took place in
the Castlereagh Street factory. There, much of the
heavy machinery was concentrated in a dark, dusty
and rather depressing basement; the light equipment
was scattered over five different floors, so rapid had
been the expansion.
The printing section had advanced somewhat from
the methods which Alf. Dickinson mentions, but was
still slow and laborious. Flatbed offset machines using
hand-transferred stones and later zinc plates were churn-
ing out some 300 runs per hour, and the sheets were
stacked in racks and air dried, usually only the varnish
being stoved. Nevertheless, gradually a very high
standard was achieved. A multiplicity of colours was
then necessary to obtain a really artistic and lovely
reproduction and it was not uncommon in good-class
showcard work to print sixteen colours. One particular
job comes to mind wherein the eye of a female figure
had some eight colours in it. The eye measured about
jfy of an inch. The problems of register were some-
thing the layman can’t conceive but printers still wake
up at night screaming at the memory of them.
One sometimes wondered whether these jobs were
not too good for the function they fulfilled. For pur-
pose of illustration, I quote the case of a particularly
fine showcard, advertising a certain cigarette. Through
travail of blood and tears, the litho. foreman finally
achieved something as near perfection as was humanly
possible. The job was delivered and everybody con-
cerned went round with a three inch chest expansion.
The following week happened to be the time for the
said foreman’s cranial crop and he duly walked into
the barber’s shop and found that worthy sweeping the
floor —and using one of the new showcards as a dust
pan. Deflation!
Photo-lithography has reduced the number of colours
required and rotary machines and tunnel ovens have
cut down the time on a job, but it would be a brave
man who would claim, from a purely aesthetic angle,
that the work is better than the old hard days.
Shortly after joining the firm, as it had been decided
to build a new factory at Raleigh Park, I found myself
involved in a multiplicity of plans and layouts. Finally,
one was evolved which appeared to fill the bill—then
—and the new building housed the whole plant on one
floor. This was, naturally, a marked improvement.
The move was accomplished in very quick time, but
there is no truth in the fable that the stamping presses
were turning out tins whilst on the horsedrawn lorry
between Castlereagh Street and Kensington.
Constant changes in demand, the fluctuation of
different tins and the addition of new plant have caused
so many changes in the layout that little remains of the
original at the present day.
The plain, hermetically sealed tins were supplemented
by an increasing demand for decorated hinged lid tins.
It was amazing to watch the nimble fingers of the
dozen girls engaged on the various operations required


to make up the latter. As they became more proficient
the output increased and 2 8,000 to 30,000 was a com-
mon day’s run. As the demand grew, new and improved
machines and methods were evolved until in 1940 an
almost completely automatic line was turning out
100,000 tins per day.
From 1940 the restriction on the use of tinplate,
together with an influx of defence orders, resulted in
more alteration to layout and the use of new techniques,
and frequently completely different materials. The
new problems of those days widened the technical
knowledge of the staff and gave them a wealth of fresh
experiences.
Sometime about 1920 it was decided to undertake the
manufacture of collapsible tubes. Machinery came
from overseas and was duly installed —and then the
fun began. Everyone was in a state of the most com-
plete and blissful ignorance of the subject, which both
in forming and printing was completely different from
box making. The search for suitable steels for the
extrusion dies was long and painful. It was no un-
common thing for an engineer to spend hours fabricat-
ing a tool to a high polish and accuracy and on the
first blow of the press to find it disintegrate into dust
with a soul-shattering report. However, time and
patience overcame these obstacles and many thousands
of gross of tubes have been produced in that depart-
ment.
Soon after the establishment of canister works at
Kensington, the unpopular Saturday morning work was
abolished. This, with a variety of other amenities which
were introduced, gradually created quite a competition
for employment there.
The open surroundings seemed to inspire the early
pioneers with a desire to fill the lunch hour with sporting
activities. Concrete cricket pitches took care of the
summer months and "soccer” posts made their appear-
ance in the winter. Even the girls developed enthusiasm
and Ladies v. Gentlemen’s matches made an amusing
break in the inter-departmental games. I vividly recall
the performance of one left-handed lady, who is still
with us incidentally. When she batted at the Moore
Park end, each delivery was met with the same majestic
sweep of the bat. Four times out of five she connected
and the ball usually finished up about half way along
canister works roof.
Swimming at Coogee was also popular and the An-
nual Carnival at which one of the N.S.W. champion-
ships was always decided, became one of the events of
the Sydney swimming season.
Picnics, dances, tennis matches all claimed their
adherents.
We worked hard, played hard and knocked out a
lot of fun.
Good days, those!
Maso Finiquerm
TN FLORENCE, 483 years ago, goldsmiths lived hard by
*■ the River Arno in houses that leaned so closely together
that their roofs almost shut out the sky and made dark the
narrow street even in the glare of noon. Within one of these
houses, amid the litter of cuttings from the metal he worked sat
Messer Maso Finiguerra examining a gold tablet. No ordinary
object was this, but a “Pax” executed at the order of Nicolas
V-, Pontiff and patron of the arts . . . planner o f St. Peter’s . . .
builder of the Vatican . . . founder of its library. Therefore,
Messer Finiguerra hesitated. Fie must not fail! Fie must be
sure the engrailings incised on the metal formed a perfect
design before he applied the finishing enamel.
As he pondered, an idea came to him. Mixing lamp black
with oil, he smeared it over the design and took its impression
on paper. That impression hangs to-day in the print room of
the Paris Library: a witness to the craftsmanship of a
Renaissance artisan and more ... a memorial to the founding
of a technique which gave the world intaglio
r-*printing.


Cigarette Paper Department
by A. G. Bannerman & E. H. Hughes
MANUFACTURE of Cigarette Papers was com-
menced in May, 1932, when a very modest plant
was installed on portion of the first floor of "A”
Factory. The initial staff consisted of 3 men and 41
girls and the first brand manufactured was Repeater.
Naturally, considerable difficulty was experienced in
the early days, particularly as all concerned were un-
familiar with the vagaries of the flimsy paper and its
peculiar and marked reactions to such things as atmos-
pheric conditions and static electricity. The passing
months, however, gradually built up a fund of experi-
ence to apply to each new problem as it arose.
Early in 1933 new plant was added but the insertion
of the papers into the booklet covers was still done by
hand. An average girl could do six booklets per
minute. The number of employees had now grown
to 6 men and 90 girls.
About this time New Zealand sent out an "5.0.5.”
for papers and the factory got busy on the production
of the Repeater brand for export. Three other brands
were also started later in the year including the now
famous "Tally Ho.”
In October, 193 5, the department, having outgrown
the space occupied in "A” Store, was moved to new
quarters in Wills No. 2 Factory, where in the same
year, further new plant was installed. The department
remained in this building until 1946 when it was
moved back to its original location in "A” Store, but
on its return, required considerably more space than in
1935.
193 5 also saw the development of the "cut corner”
paper which has proved so popular on the Australian
market; better rolling and the ease in locating the
gummed edge are the main reasons for its popularity.
This year also saw the installation of the first insert-
ing or assembling machines which considerably reduced
the labour required by the old hand method. Year by
year improvements have been made until to-day the
modern machine with 2 girls can do the work of 16
hand packers.
During the war the department continued to main-
tain output under difficult conditions. With most of
the young men in the Services some of the girls of
necessity became mechanics and good ones, too, keeping
the machines running in a most efficient manner.
After the war, with the demand for Cigarette Papers
constantly growing and not sufficient female labour
available in Sydney to man all machines, thought was
given to the establishment of a factory annexe in a
suitable area where female labour was plentiful.
Following consideration of several sites that were
available the present site at Rutherford was selected.
This site formed portion of the old Rutherford Army
Training Camp. Many readers will, no doubt, have
fond memories of this camp during the war years. The
portion acquired by the Company comprised an army
storage building approximately 10 O' x 50', two cottages
and an area of 5j acres surrounding these buildings.
The Company selected certain staff from the Sydney
factory for the new project and on the transfer of
these employees and the completion of alterations to
the storage building to conform with factory standards,
the first influx of local applicants for positions was
sieved out. More girls were available than we could
possibly use at that time. The first two girls started in
June, 1946, one of whom to-day is the forewoman.
After installing the machines and setting out materials,
which had been brought up by road from the Sydney
factory, the plant was ready to start operations.
Only the folding and packing processes were to be
carried out at Rutherford factory and all raw materials
ready for these uses were to be supplied from Sydney.
This arrangement still stands.
The first unit of plant consisted of six folding
machines and one packing machine, but considerable
additions have since been made.
After the usual teething troubles, manufacture got
under way and the first despatch of manufactured
goods was made to Sydney on Bth July, 1946. This
consignment numbered five cases and represented some
few weeks’ work. Rate of production soon increased,
however, and the quality of work turned out by the
country girls was quite satisfactory and was improving
to such an extent that it seemed that the factory’s future
success was assured.
During the following year new plant was continually
being added and alterations to flooring and machine
layouts were always on the schedule.
Like Gracie Field’s "marrow” the factory "kept on
getting bigger all the time” until to-day the employees
number sixty-five girls and fourteen men.
The keenness of the girls can be gauged from the
fact that in this area, many of them have to travel
from ten to twenty miles to reach the factory. Even
in times of flood, of which we have had two major
and three minor ones in the past three years, they still
get through. With a great deal of work behind us
we are now looking forward to an even busier future
for "Tally Ho” Park, Rutherford.
Meantime, of course, the Sydney factory has not
been standing still. With an improvement in the labour
position and the need to keep pace with the increasing
demands of the Rutherford factory, manufacturing
activities have been expanded necessitating the installa-
tion of more machines and the employment of more
labour until, to-day, from a very humble beginning, the
manufacture of Cigarette Papers is a most important
phase of the Company’s activities.


1910 ..
1911...
1915 ....
Back Row: W. Conley, B. Coleman, C. Evans, M. Lynch, B. Martin, H. Gleeson.
Second Row: R. Butterfield, H. Drake, P. Griffiths, D. Williams, H. O’Brien, F. Livermore,
W. Lowry, G. Wilmot, W. McGuire, R. McGinley, J. Shepherd, L. Neate, W. Partridge.
Bottom Row: J. McNamarra, F. Strachan, A. Vaughan, F. Kirkwood, H. Dickinson,
H. Patmore.
Sitting: C. Nicholls, G. Strachan.
Back Row: C. Evans, W. Lowry, R. Butterfield,-,-, F. Strachan,
L. McDonald,-.
Second Row: L. Bruist, F. Kirkwood, F. Vaughan, W. Conley, B. Coleman, L. Neate,
J. Williams, S. Evans. W. Witnall.
Front Row: H. Gleeson, C. Vaughan, H. O’Brien, H. D. Marr, W. Partridge,
W. McEwan,-.
Back Row:-, G. O. Ingledew, E. Rundle, W. Robinson (Gen. Manager), A. E. Spencer,
A. Frankland, R. Forrest.
Front Row: F. Morgan (B.A.T. Umpire), H. D. Marr, I. Dunn, W. Hansford,
K. O. Anderson, B. Waite, C. G. Terrey, W. Calloway (S.T.L. Umpire).
Drag Picnic from Castlereagh St. Factory
to Cronulla, 9th April, 1910.
As a pleasant change from printers at work,
here we show you printers at play (1910 version).
Note the double-breasted waistcoats and the sublime
dignity of the "handle bars.” Note, too, the
debonair grace with which the "hard hitters” and
"biscuits” have been donned. Let not your mind be
overmuch disturbed, for it is only stone ginger after
all. We would particularly draw attention to the
svelte figure of Bruce Coleman and the truly awe
inspiring spread of our old friend, "Butt’s”
moustache.
In due course hats and collars were cast aside
and after the immemorial custom of British men
a lot of violent exercise was taken in the midday
sun. Cricket and running were the main attrac-
tions.
We could a tale unfold of the doings and the
return trip, but what place have such scurrilous
stories in these classic pages?
Cricket Club.
S. T. Leigh has always been a cricketing firm.
When we couldn’t get up a match with someone
else we would arrange a private brawl amongst our-
selves. Here is the memento of a happy day at
Sandringham somewhere about the year 1911.
An historic picture of the S. T. Leigh team which
played the first match against combined Tobacco
Cos. at the Sydney Cricket Ground (circa 1915).
S.T.L. won an exciting game in the last few minutes
of play.
Some of the side have left the Firm and some
have been given "Out” by the Great Umpire. C.
G. Terrey and G. O. Ingledew are the only
survivors still batting for the Company.
With their retirement this year—the innings will
close.


PANORAMA 1852-1952
1852. The cradle of the firm,
George St.
1880. Premises at 21 Hunter
Street.
1912. The building housing Printing and Canister Works in
Castlereagh, Goulburn and Elizabeth Sts.
1923. View of Canister Works as it appeared at this date.
1952. Western facade of Printing Factory at Kensington.


EDITORIAL
J N the foregoing pages you have been given a sketch
of the birth and growth of one of our subsidiary
companies—S. T. Leigh & Co. Pty. Ltd.—but it is only
a sketch.
It must be obvious that the full story of a hundred
years of progress could not be contained in half a dozen
issues of this journal. We have only skimmed the
surface and been, perforce, content to show you a few
of the more intimate and human sides of the picture.
Technical problems have not been dealt with nor has
the story of Management been discussed. But with the
ship so far on her long voyage it is but fitting that
mention here be made of the men who held the helm.
Mr. S. T. Leigh was the founder and general manager
for many years before selling the business to Mr. A. J.
Scott. He, in turn, managed the firm until, in the early
years of the present century, he sold to the B.A.T. Co.
They engaged, in England, Mr. W. Rohinson, who was
general manager for about seven years. He was followed
by Mr. A. J. Rohinson, who started as an apprentice in
the composing room and passed through successive
ranks to reach the top. On his retirement, Mr. I. H. Davis
took over, hut later relinquished the position to go to
the parent Tobacco Co. in England. Mr. A. L. Stack,
his co-director and the present general manager,
succeeded him.
These were men of varied personality and point of
view, but they all had outstanding administrative ability,
knowledge and vision. Above all, they had in common
the quality of leadership, and gathered around them a
loyal and enthusiastic staff of highly trained technicians.
With such a crew and with such men at the wheel, it
is little wonder that the voyage has been so successful.
Present Employees who have served the Company 25 or more years.
Name. Years
Served.
Coleman, B. G 49
Hellings, Miss I. M 43
Hansen, Miss P. A. 0 42
Thompson, E 42
Stack, A. L 41
Terrey, C. G 40
Arnold, W 40
Killiby, T. W. W 39
Ingledew, G. 0 39
Cudlipp, N 39
Rawlings, G. C 39
Bryant, P. W 3 9
Holbeach, C. F 3 9
Dowd, J 38
Scott, N. G 37
Richardson, Miss L. M 3 7
Hicks, F. W. J 37
Sergeant, T 37
Gillespie, N 36
Grice, W. J 36
Dabinett, F. R 36
Nicol, D «> , 36
Sayers, S. H 36
Roberts, E. J 36
Thompson, Miss 1 36
Brumfield, R. J 36
McGregor, T. C 3 6
Vallack, R. G 36
Chesworth, W. F 35
Robinson, R 3 5
Borg, V 35
Myers, Miss V. R 3 5
Raisin, C. E 35
Shuttle worth, Miss C. J 3 5
Goodman, L. C 3 5
Hinton, J. A 35
Rowe, H. F 3 5
Baines, W. G. T 35
Bisby, L. J 34
Power, W. C 34
Campbell, Miss M. A. S 34
Case, J. A 34
Name Years
Served.
Napier, C. B 34
Connor, P. S 34
White, Miss B 34
Falzon, S 34
Burnicle, A. J 34
Henry, A. E 3 3
Berry, E. N 33
Lithgow, W 33
Deane, N. M 33
O’Sullivan, Miss E. A 3 3
Harris, S 32
Henson, G. H 32
Down, S. H. F 32
Mulrine, Miss I. M 32
Fazakerley, A 32
Bannerman, A. G 32
Timmins, Miss D. L 32
Matthews, C 32
Bray, A 32
Donnellan, Miss F. A 32
Hammond, Mrs. R. L 31
Foskett, C. W 31
Upton, K. A. K 31
Williams. A. R. J 31
Collins, W. G 31
Henson, S. J. H 30
Davison, Miss J. B 30
Nicholson, F. H 30
Blake, Miss A 30
Blake, J. N 30
Chandler, G. C. S 30
Smith, E. O. J 30
Healy, M 30
Housden, Miss L 30
Sugden, A 29
Desreaux, A. E 29
Watson, Miss L 29
Russell, G 29
Hamwell, L. G 29
Sym, J 29
Horsfall, F. C. W 29
Nottle, E. J 29
Name Years
Served.
Smith, N. G 29
Dutton, A. E 28
Davis, H. R 28
Riddell, J 28
Christie, G. H 28
Charteris, J 28
Hampel, Miss V. H 28
Wales, Miss V. E rv . . 28
Tritton, J. A 28
Simpson. Miss J. R 28
Smith, R. C 28
Gott, E. M 28
Hennessy, Miss A 28
Frendo, G 28
Stack, W. G 28
Hicks, B. S 28
Stuart, E. R 27
Gurney, Miss Q. M 27
Childs, E. E 27
Mascord, H. S 27
Thomas, Miss V. E 27
Castles, M 27
Cathie, Miss H. A 27
Howe, H. W 27
Middleton, Miss D. M 27
Williams, H. C. 27
Schuback, R. A. C 27
Hurst, A. J 26
Denning, C. H 26
Standen, D 26
Dean, R. V 26
Howe, L. St. J 26
Strong, T. P 26
Wickham. F. J 26
Hewitt, D. W 25
Pring, F. A 25
Crow, A. E 2 5
Beckman, T. M 25
Riddell, H. C. V 2 5
Wilson, Miss V. M 25
Wad ley. R. B 25


Gossip from the branches
8.A.T., MELBOURNE
9 Basketball.
The Basketball season is upon us and
we are fielding four teams —two from
the Stemmery and two from the Packing
Room. This year, the Packing Room is
fortunate in having Jean Marriner as
the coach. Jean has had considerable
experience both as coach and player, and
should spur the girls on to victory. Pat
McCaskill is again coaching the Stem-
mery teams —Pat has given yeoman ser-
vice in the past and is continuing the
good work. Unfortunately, the matches
will be held on open air courts this
season because the Exhibition Building
is unavailable, owing to the possibility
of a Royal Visit.
9 General Sport.
Ossie Harper (Office) is to play off in
the final of the President’s Trophy at the
Blackburn Bowling Club against Norm
Rae’s (Stock Records) brother. Ossie is
out of action with an attack of shingles.
We wish him a speedy recovery.
Norm Rae played in the semi-final of
the Eastern Suburban Churches Cricket
Association. Also in the team were
Norm’s son and two nephews. Quite a
family gathering.
Colin Mooney, Office, represented his
district, Heidelberg, in the recent Metro-
politan Tennis Week-end at Kooyong.
Colin’s team acquitted itself creditably
and enjoyed some very good tennis.
9 Pleasant Evening.
On the 19th February the Staff girls
enjoyed one of their occasional outings.
The locale chosen for the night of
revelry was the musical comedy, "Kiss
me, Kate,” at His Majesty’s Theatre.
Afterwards, the party of fifteen adjourned
to the Oriental for supper. To add to
the enjoyment, each girl was given a
box of chocolates. The girls put in 1/r
a week all the year to raise money for
these functions. Special thanks to Hilda
Rodgers (Medical Clinic), who organises
everything so efficiently.
© Long Service Leave.
Mrs. Evans (Office) is spending several
weeks of her leave at Rosebud and will
then journey to Queensland.
Len Langford (Engineers) will also
spend part of his long service leave in
sunny Queensland.
9 Sewing and Millinery Classes.
The above classes are now in full swing
again after the Christmas break.
We have three sewing classes, and
two millinery classes, which are held in
a special room made available by the
Company.
Most of the girls find these classes not
only instructive, but an interesting
pastime.
JACK GINIVAN, B.A.T., Melbourne.
MAT. SCHADE, B.A.T., Melbourne.
9 Retirements.
Jack Ginivan, Dining Room Manager,
who is due to retire on 2nd June, 1952,
left us on the 6th February, 1952, as he
is taking his long service leave prior to
his retirement. He was presented with a
travelling rug from the British Tobacco
Staff Social Club. Jack was the very
first cook in the Dining Room and was
with the Company for 42 years.
Mat. Schade, who has been with the
Company for 30 years, retired on the
27th March. Mat. was in charge of
Aust. Leaf for many years, and, on his
retirement, was moisture testing. In his
youth, Mat. was an extremely good
cricketer, and played for North Mel-
bourne and represented Victoria in inter-
state matches.
9 Picnic.
The British Tobacco Staff Social Club
has made tentative arrangements for its
annual picnic to be held on the 27th
April at Warrandyte. More about it in
the next issue.
Havelock Cricket Club
Since the last edition of "Smoke Sig-
nals,” the first round of matches have
been completed and after a hectic struggle
Havelocks were one of the final four
teams. The four were as follows:
BERGER GROUP 30; EXPLOSIVES
29; YORKSHIRE BREWERY 29;
HAVELOCK 28.
As this report goes to press, the semi-
finals are in progress. Havelock are
playing Explosives, and at the end of the
first day’s play, Explosives were gaining
the upper hand.
Explosives won the toss and decided
to send Havelocks to bat. The innings
was opened in fine style by Neil Crees
and Arthur (Chicko) Marks; both looked
like getting a lot of runs when Neil was
bowled after a lively 18 runs. Kevin
Sevior was next batsman, but unfor-
tunately for the Havelock side, could not
settle down, and was out without scoring.
Ron Shapcott followed and started
cautiously. Then Arthur Marks was
bowled, and three were out for 41.
Things were not too good. Next bats-
man was the Havelock run-getting
machine, Les Halfpenny, so we were not
unduly worried. Runs started to come
freely now, but suddenly the unexpected
happened, and Les was caught in slips
for a bright 24 runs; just when he
looked like going after another of his
frequent centuries! Graham Cassidy was
next. He was batting nicely, but was too
venturesome, and was stumped when a
spinner got past him. Alan Taylor fol-
lowed and started from the word "go,”
hitting hard and often, but he, too, was
stumped when he left his crease and
missed the ball. We were in trouble now
with the score 6 for 97.
Next batsman, Bob Beedles, did not
stay long—he was out L.B.W. Then
Bob Tuttleby came to the wickets to
accompany Ron Shapcott who was still
holding one end up—but unfortunately
Ron’s was the next wicket to fall when
he was stumped after scoring a most
useful and attractive 31 runs. The end
seemed very close when Bob Tuttleby
was bowled, leaving our two last men,
Bob Hall and Arthur Pickering, but
these two held on grimly, and gathered
a nice 18 runs for the last wicket partner-
ship. The side was all out for 123.
(Continued on Page 34)


Club President, Jim Craig, presents a prize to a future Stawell Gift hope.
A portion of the crowd who had a very enjoyable day.


... Melbourne's Picnic
An enjoyable time was NOT had by all-until the ice cream was
handed out.
One at a time please! The Merry-go-Round was very popular.
THE British Tobacco Company’s Ex-Serviceman’s Association played host to Members’ children, their
families and friends at a picnic at Mentone, Melbourne, on Sunday, 2nd March. There were races for the
young and not so young, lots of lemonade and ice cream, a magician, a Punch and Judy Show and a merry-
go-round. Everyone had a wonderful day out joining in the fun and picnicking on the lawn.
Now you see it—now you don’t. "Sylvesto” baffles all ages.


Explosives then commenced their in-
nings, and attacked the bowling right
from the start. Thirty-three runs were
on the board before they lost their first
wicket, and at the end of the first day’s
play, they had scored 104 runs for the
loss of 4 wickets, putting them in a very
sound position. However, we still have
our nose in front, and are not beaten
yet. We hope to report in next issue o.f
"Smoke Signals” that we pulled the game
out of the fire.
© Sydney Visit.
The Havelock side is now getting very
keen about the trip to Sydney, as time
draws near for them to fly over and pit
their skill against that of the Sydney-
siders. All we ask is that Sydney can
live up to its boast that it has better
weather than Melbourne, and give us a
fine day for the match.
© Obituary.
We deeply regret having to report the
death of Ernest (Neddy) Dummett, who
was with the Company for forty-eight
years.
His two sons, Ron and Ern, are with
8.A.T., and we extend to them, and the
rest of the family, our deepest sympathy.
® Norm Marks.
Our sympathy also goes out to the
family of Norm Marks, Watchman, who
died early in January.
British Tobacco Ex-Servicemen’s
Social Club
© Annual Picnic.
Despite a somewhat overcast morning
the Annual Picnic held at the Mentone
Recreation Ground was thoroughly en-
joyed by all those present.
We were particularly happy to see
quite a number of visitors from Car-
reras—for the first time.
This, our Picnic Day, is devoted to
the entertainment of the ladies and
children and it is to the credit of our
members that no demand is too great or
too small when the call goes out from
the President and Committee for assist-
ance.
It is but natural to expect that quite
a lot of work is done by the "Back-room
Boys.” Without naming them individu-
ally, we ask them to accept our thanks
for their efforts. To those who were pre-
sent at Mentone there was very tangible
evidence of a tremendous amount of
hard work prior to the Picnic Day.
As was the case at previous functions,
the Merry-go-Round again proved No. 1
attraction, Punch and Judy delighted
young and old as No. 2 attraction.
"Sylvesto” the Magician produced all
manner of things from the hat and box
to entertain us, being No. 3 attraction.
The usual distribution of toys, lollies,
ice-cream and drinks was made to the
Children. Those who were entrusted with
the dispensing of the drinks and cakes
were amazed at the capacity of our young
guests. It is, however, pleasing to note
that we were able to wear down even the
best of them.
The Sports programme was again in
the capable hands of Messrs. J. Craig,
W. Betton, E. Wake, H. Knight, J.
Coall, T. Henry, J. Ryan, R. Orford,
H. Hetherton, F. Dean, R. Shapcott, F.
Dean, J. Thorpe and A. Parry.
The main prize winners were:—
T. Henry, Club Handicap; Miss Smith,
Single Ladies; F. Dean, Club Handi-
cap 40/50 years; Mrs. Henry, Married
Ladies; Mrs. Rodgers, "Throwing the
Rolling Pin”; Mrs. Hicks, "Stepping the
Chain.”
We are very grateful to the Town
Clerk of Mordialloc, the Caretaker and
the Secretary of the Recreation Reserve
Trust for their courtesy and help.
This report would not be complete
without reference and thanks to Clive
Purchase who is always willing to assist
in every possible way.
We are indeed indebted to our Direc-
tors for the very practical assistance given
and ask them to accept our sincere
thanks.
Dispensing and distribution of the
drinks, lollies, ice-cream, hot water and
milk was in the very capable hands of
Jack O’Halloran, Jack Ginivan, Ron
Shapcott and Jack Tinsley, not forgetting
our ladies, Mesdames Tinsley and
Cousins.
At the conclusion of the Sports pro-
gramme, Mr. R. S. Mathews presented
the trophies to the winners, thus bring-
ing to a close a very enjoyable day.
Opportunity was taken by Jim Craig,
our President, to make a presentation
to our Secretary, Arthur Collier, for his
very valuable services to the Club.
Arthur suitably responded.
© Marriages.
Sheila McDermott (Packing Room)
was married on the 9th February. Her
next-door neighbour on the bench, Joy
Dunn, was matron-of-honour.
Nancy Buckley (also of the Packing
Room) was married early in February.
Nancy is to have her honeymoon later
in the year when she and her husband
will go to Brisbane.
Alice Harrowfield and Val Clarke
(both of the Stemmery) were married
on the 22nd and 29th March respec-
tively.
Also, best of luck to Phyllis Thomson
who came over from Tobacco Branch,
Sydney, to B.A.T. Stemmery in Febru-
ary. Phyllis was married on 10th March.
Jim Hilliard and Alan Taylor, two
of our most eligible bachelors from the
Office, were married on the 2nd April,
and Easter Saturday respectively.
Hudson Quinert (Drawing Office)
was married on the Bth March.
® Engagements.
Rita McPhee and Kath O’Meara, both
of the Packing Room, have announced
their engagements. There must be some-
thing in the Packing Room air!
THE STATES TOBACCO CO.
PTY. LTD., MELBOURNE
® Engagement.
Best wishes to Heather Anderson of
the Machine Room, and Kevin Williams,
who have announced their engagement.
© Ron Cole.
Ron Cole recently retired for health
reasons. He was with us for 31 years as
a cigar maker. He is now living in Tas-
mania.
© Resignation.
Freddie Porter, who has been with
States for 35 years, resigned in January
because of ill health.
His doctor advises an out-of-doors
job, and we wish him luck in his new
position.
® Long Service Leave.
Jack Gardner certainly means to do
some travelling while on leave. He will
visit both Sydney and Adelaide and then
fly to Tasmania to adjudicate at a bird
show.
Ted Clack, who has not been enjoy-
ing the best of health lately, is spending
his holiday at Rosebud. We hope he
will return fit and well again.
Harry Wells, Bill Riley and Frank
Smith returned to work looking very fit
after their 3 months’ leave.
Harry spent a few weeks having a
most enjoyable time at Healesville and
then came home and painted his house.
Not to be outdone as a handyman,
Bill Riley set to and laid concrete paths
at his house, after having spent a couple
of weeks touring Tasmania. They say
Bill was flat-out on the last day of his
leave trying to get the paths finished.
Frank Smith made his way to Denili-
quin to do a spot of "shootin’ ” and
"fishin’,” which has made him the
"Smokies’ Whisper” for the next Queen’s
Prize!
SALES BRANCH, MELBOURNE
® Births.
Congratulations to Mr. and Mrs. Doug.
McDonough on the arrival of a son—
Geoffrey James —on 23rd February.
Our congratulations also to Mr. and
Mrs. Armour Kirk—a daughter—Janice.
® Long Service Leave.
Mr. Harry Purchase is at present on
long service leave and we send him our
good wishes for a happy holiday.
© Illness.
Mr. Bert Downes, of the Service De-
partment, who has been away ill for
about 5 weeks, has, we are glad to re-
port, recovered and will resume duties
shortly.
© Wedding Bells.
On Bth February we farewelled Miss
Lois Williamson, who had been with us


for 8 years and left us to be married
to Mr. Bruce Robinson, also of our office
staff. A presentation of cutlery was made
to the happy couple.
The marriage took place at Gardiner
Presbyterian Church.
9 William Walker.
It is with deep regret that we record
the death of William Walker, affection-
ately known to us all as "Mac” who died
on the 17th February at the age of 61
after a long illness.
"Mac” was in the employ of the Com-
pany for a period of 45 years and he
was extremely popular with everyone he
came in contact with. To his grown up
family of 4 children, we extend our
deepest sympathy. Mrs. Walker pre-
deceased him some years ago.
9 Transfer.
Mr. Norman Martin, who came to us
from Brisbane Branch on Ist July, 1951,
has now been transferred to Sales Branch,
Sydney, and all his friends here extend
to him their very best wishes for the
future.
CARRERAS LIMITED
9 Football.
Grant McDonald and Ken Jones are
looking very fit these days, and enquiries
disclose that it is due to their strenuous
training activities now that they are
members of the Havelock Football Club.
9 Basketball.
Endeavours are being made to form
a Girls’ Basketball Club and we would
like to take this opportunity of express-
ing appreciation to Jean Marriner in
the B.A.T. Packing Room and Pat
McCaskill in B.A.T. Stemmery for their
valuable assistance and advice in this
connection.
9 Wedding Bells.
From the Machine Packing Dept.:—
Joan Low married Richard Cope on
4th February. Richard sailed for Eng-
land next day and Joan hopes to join
him there at the end of the year.
A Torquay honeymoon was enjoyed
by Betty Hoskin and Jim Terry after
their wedding at Oakleigh on Saturday,
Bth March. Elvie Gledhill, one of
Betty’s mates in the Machine Room, made
a charming bridesmaid.
9 Engagements.
Gal Beech returned to the Packing
Room from Tasmania with the happy
news that she is now engaged to Albert
McCartin.
Best wishes to Linda McGowan from
her Stemmery friends following her en-
gagement to Frank Lovett. Congratula-
tions, Frank!
® Sick List.
Gwen Gillespie’s friends in the Pack-
ing Dept, were delighted to hear that
she has left Hospital. She has been ill
for more than a year. It is indeed pleas-
ing to hear that she has now fully re-
covered.
Lauris Williams, who worked in the
Stemmery, has been more than six months
in hospital, but she is now showing
steady improvement, and all her friends
throughout the factory hope that her
progress will continue.
Elsie Trescowthick underwent a major
operation in the Alfred Hospital, and
although her convalescence is taking
longer than was expected she should
soon be back in the Packing Room.
Rita Lively from the Machine Room
was taken ill suddenly and admitted to
Fairfield Hospital, but we hope that her
stay there will not be of long duration.
9 Social.
Arrangements were made for a Theatre
Party to the "Tivoli” on 14th February,
and this was much enjoyed by all who
attended.
"Kiss Me, Kate” at "His Majesty’s
Theatre” was also appreciated on 28th
February.
Two of our talented artists from the
Stemmery featured in radio productions
during January, when Winnie Smee sang
"You are my Heart’s Delight” on
Christie’s Radio Auditions, and Roma
Byrnes rendered "Because of You” on
Australia’s Amateur Hour.
We have quite a number of Grand
Opera Fans, and The National Theatre
presentations of "Tosca” and "Cavalleria
Rusticana” were well attended.
9 Cricket.
Congratulations to: —
Johnny Finch, who made a dashing
75 for Loyal Canterbury on Ist March.
Kevin Robinson on following up his
first century by a 78 for East Prahran
to win against Albert Park. A splendid
day’s batting.
CIGARETTE BRANCH,
SYDNEY
9 Marriages.
Molly Webster (Machine) to Barry
Matthews on 1/3/52 at St. Stephen’s
Presbyterian Church.
Faye Knight (Packing) to Kevin
Wright on 1/3/52 at St. Stephen’s C.
of E., Camperdown. Also from the same
Department, Lorna Edgar and Marjorie
Cope were bridesmaids.
Clare Potter (Packing) to Clem An-
drews on 1/3/52, at St. Bernard’s, Mas-
cot. Her friend, Pat Ryan (Packing)
was bridesmaid.
Joyce Shortland (Packing) to Bernie
Hendriksen on 1/3/52 at St. Paul’s, Red-
fern. Shirley Lalor, who was formerly
on Cig. Pkg. Floor, was bridesmaid.
Beryl Jones (Packing) to Harry Con-
well on 28/3/52 at Maroubra Bay
Methodist Church. Irene Sinclair and
Josie Hughes (Packing) were brides-
maids.
Coral Givney (Machine) to Robert
McLaughlan on 5/4/52 at St. David’s,
Arncliffe. Alice McCall (better known
at Raleigh Park as Alice Taylor) was
her bridesmaid.
Joan Manson (Machine) to Mervyn
Singh, on 12/4/52, at St. John’s C. of E.,
Campsie. Gwen Manson, Joan’s sister
from the same department, was brides-
maid.
Berice Smitham (Laboratory) to Roy
Dudley on 22/3/52 at St. Mary’s C. of
E., Waverley.
9 Engagements.
Margaret Hodgen (Packing) to James
McKennon on 15/2/52.
Frederick Jabour (Blending) to Doris
May on 23/2/52.
Laeline McFarlane (Packing) to
Johny Saunders (8.A.T.) on 21/2/52.
Edna Wells (Packing) to John
Cavanagh on Ist March, 1952.
Nola Morgan (Packing) to Clarrie
Sargant on 14/2/52.
Mollie Hodges (Packing) to Trevor
Christie on 24/12/51.
Fay Noon (Packing) to Alan Chaun-
cey on 23/2/52.
Agnes Bonnice (Machine) to Tom
Herman on 8/3/52.
Madeline Hill (Machine) to Robin
Cook, on 8/3/52.
9 "Get Well” Greetings.
Cigarette Branch send their good
wishes for a speedy recovery to Nellie
Edgington. Nellie is particularly missed
by the Shipping Floor, where, for some
years, she has "mothered” the Depart-
ment.
Various friends have been visiting
Jack Kirkbride and all are glad to hear
he hopes to be back with us soon. In
his latest letters, he tells of "discussions”
with other patients, so we rather guess
he is rapidly returning to form. To him
and to Alf. Robbie and Ernie Hum-
phreys, we send our regards and hope
to see them back soon.
SALES BRANCH, ADELAIDE
9 Bon Voyage.
The climax of many months of patient
waiting came when a group of friends
from all sections of the warehouse waved
bon voyage to the "Stratheden” and Kath
Castine. Kath is spending six months’
leave in England and the past weeks
have been a busy time of preparation.
Kath takes with her the good wishes
of us all for a happy holiday and a
safe return.
Hostess at a pre-sailing party for Kath
was Rhonda Jenner.
# Fire Brigade Demonstration.
An enjoyable evening was provided
by firemen from the Headquarters Fire
Brigade in a demonstration exhibition
arranged by them at city headquarters.
A large representation from Wills’
saw this demonstration —staged to raise
funds for the widow of a fireman killed
on duty—a fund incidentally, of which
Perce Earle, an ex-employee of our firm,
was organising secretary.
Highlights of a top-rate programme
were the little boy who ran off-stage
with the weight lifter’s "heavy” weights
after he had given a breath taking per-
formance, and the impromptu entertain-
ment offered by Fay Mawbey, who
scorned the stairs and slid down the fire-
man’s pole as of the manner born and
bred.


More Gossip
from the Branches
# A Taste for Schnapper.
Back from a successful holiday on
Kangaroo Island is Colin White.
Colin is a keen movie-maker, but
showed that his interest in reels is not
confined to celluloid by the large haul
of schnapper he made.
Perhaps most fortunate was Cynthia
Cooper, also on holidays, who met
Colin on the Island and was able to
share most agreeably in his success.
# Barbara Hutchinson.
Barbara Hutchinson was bidden a re-
gretful farewell by her many friends
and admirers at Wills’. Barb has left
to take up nursing, and everyone wishes
her well. Our big hope is that if we do
take ill then we may be fortunate
enough to have Barb for our nurse.
# Married.
Another to exchange vows recently
was Colin Naulty. Colin and his wife
Peggy were married in February and
spent their honeymoon motoring through
Victoria.
# Engaged.
Wearing a big blush recently but minus
the ring was Dave Angus. Dave has an-
nounced his engagement to Judy James.
A very special party was recently held
at which the guest of honour was Nellie
McCulloch. Nell had just announced
her engagement to Bruce Leaker and in
addition now doesn’t have to ask Dad
what time she must come home for she
has a shiny new key to the front door
herself. Congratulations on both counts,
Nell, for your 21st and for your en-
gagement.
% Cricket.
The Annual Cricket Match was again
played at Weigall Oval between the Out-
side Staff (Sales and Advertising) and
Inside Staff (Store and Office). Weather
conditions were near perfect when
skippers Dave Angus (Outside) and
Ron Howling (Inside) walked out to
toss before quite a crowd of spectators.
Winning the toss for the Outside team,
Dave Angus elected to bat. Each side
batted 13 men but fielded only the regu-
lation 11.
A slight breeze helped the opening
bowlers move the ball, but steady batting
by Max Linn (24) and Bruce Scroop
(48) saw their side away to a sound
start. Dave Angus with an attractive
knock for 30 was the best of the later
batsmen. The innings closed at 161.
Best bowling performance for the In-
side team was by Geoff Anesbury with
2 wickets for 14 runs off 5 overs. Others
to bowl well were Clem Temby (2 for 6)
and Peter Hardy (2 for 9).
In their first innings the Inside team
collapsed sensationally, Ron Howling
with a solid captain’s knock for 16 being
the only player to reach double figures.
Inspired bowling by Dave Angus was
mainly responsible for Inside team being
all dismissed for 40. Dave finished with
the astonishing figures of 6 wickets for
9 runs. Mr. Rickards completed the
debacle by taking 3 wickets for 1.
Trailing by 121 runs, Inside staff were
sent in to bat again. A sound innings
by Terry Bond for 48 runs stiffened the
resistance of the whole side, and ably
supported by D. Russell (25), Geoff
Anesbury (24), and Clem Temby (20)
the second innings yielded 163.
Bowling honours were more widely
shared, although Dave Angus with 3 for
30 was again the most successful with
the ball. Reg Fisk proved the "flapper”
bowler of the match, his 2 wickets for
2 runs off 2 overs being just "too-too.”
With only 43 runs needed for an out-
right win, the match ended in rather a
picnic atmosphere as Max Linn cavalierly
despatched the ball to the boundary with
shots all round the wicket.
And so the Outside staff scored their
second successive win in this competition
—this year by 11 wickets.
Presentations were made at the end
of the game to Terry Bond (batting) and
to Dave Angus (bowling).
Highlights of the game were of course
the bowling of Dave Angus in the first
innings and the number of wickets taken
by our Manager—as one of his victims
succinctly put it, "we’ll get on.” Fielding
generally was of a high standard.
Noticed for his efforts in this depart-
ment was Harry Martin whose fielding
brought much comment. Some catches
will remain in mind till next season’s
game —Peter Sanderson’s remarkable run-
ning catch on the boundary; Don Lar-
kin’s juggling of the ball in slips for
some 10 seconds before finally catching
the ball in a sitting position; and the
anticipation shown by Max Linn and
Max Allert in some lightning slip
catches.
The wicket keeping of Bruce Scroop
must call for comment. Driven almost
into the ground at times by rather wild
swings from golfing type cricketers, Bruce
yet contrived to field the ball cleanly.
His eyes must be double jointed to watch
ball and bat at the one time.
A tribute is due also to our umpires—
Roy Townley and Gordon Jeffries —who
carried out their duties without fear or
favour and earned much praise with their
decisions.
So effective was our score board—
Adelaide Oval style—that our scorers at
various intervals were able to correct
their score book by it.
During the pre-lunch session, several
of our female younger set were among
the onlookers. The afternoon session
was almost a family show, the spectators
consisting mainly of wives and families.
Centre of an admiring group all after-
noon was George Jasper Thynne being
displayed to Wills’ view for the first
time by proud parents Reg and Muriel
Venning. Congratulations, Reg and
Muriel.
• "Picnic” Tennis.
Port Noarlunga was again the mecca
for tennis enthusiasts and much "form”
was shown both on the court and on
the beach. Transport difficulties were
overcome this year by the generosity of
those owning cars, and even if those
who were fortunate enough to get a lift
in Alex Driver’s "Suzy” had to get out
and push that last mile or so over Tap-
leys, at least they were getting a cheap
ride —or walk, so they say it was worth
it.
For those who found the net on the
court too high to hit over there was
tennis on the beach where the absence
of a net overcame all such difficulties.
Fay Mawby and Pauline Harvey were
two who took advantage of such condi-
tions to play their tennis.
Merv Cotton pushed the existing
champion Male Hall in some closely
fought games and others to show good
form were Max Linn and Peter Hardy,
to mention just a few. Of the female
section Janet McPherson was at her usual
best.
In all quite a combination of sun, sea
and sport was enjoyed by all.
Windburn introduced quite a new
complexion on people’s outlooks on
Monday morning.
# Chop Picnic.
Brownhill Creek was the setting for a
moonlight gathering for some of the
clan of 83-91 the other night, in what
was a new venture for the Social Club —
a Chop Picnic. Once again our luck
held in regard to the weather, for al-
though it had been showery all day and
right up until 7.30 p.m., the heavier
clouds rolled away and presented us
with quite a decent evening—a trifle
dark perhaps with no moon in the offing
but no deterrent to enjoyment.
The earlier part of the evening was
spent in gathering wood, and then we
were entertained by our own Joan Caw-
ley, who is a very accomplished piano
accordionist —Good work, Joan, and
many thanks.
Then came the fire lighting, and once
under way it was noticeable that it was
mainly the men who held away as far
as the cooking was concerned.
Proving himself a good chef was
Derek Adams. If Derek had eaten as
many chops and sausages as he cooked
that night he would have rivalled Billy
Bunter.
Another "highlight” of the evening
was Dave Winfield’s involuntary swim
in the creek—Dave went across the creek
to get some wood, and on the way back
tried a few fancy steps mid-stream and
finished up well in the swim. Spence
McPherson came to light with a dry


pair of trousers, proving once again that
a friend in need is a friend indeed.
Seems Spence was once a Boy Scout, or
perhaps he’s been on chop picnics before.
The evening was voted a great success
by all.
SALES BRANCH, BRISBANE
9 Engagement.
A recent issue of the "Courier-Mail”
carried a notice of the engagement of
Ken Connell to Miss Clark, and we ex-
tend to them our best wishes.
9 Birth.
Congratulations to Jack and Mrs.
Bates on the birth of a son, lan. Mother,
father and baby are all doing well.
9 Staff Presentations.
A presentation of a coffee service on
behalf of the staff was made to Miss
Peggy Taylor by Mr. Marshall prior to
her leaving to be married. Miss Taylor,
who was formerly Mr. Marshall’s con-
fidential typiste, was married to Mr. Noel
Hillhouse on 22nd March at the Kelvin
Grove Methodist Church. In making the
presentation, Mr. Marshall thanked Miss
Taylor for her assistance over the past
years.
A presentation was also made to Miss
Elwyn Moody, who was leaving on an
overseas trip. Miss Moody sailed on the
Italian luxury vessel "Roma” on 28th
March for Naples. She anticipates mak-
ing an extensive tour of Europe and all
members of the staff join in wishing her
"bon voyage.”
9 Social Club.
The annual meeting of the Social Club
was held on 26th February and the
President, Mr. D. Proudfoot, occupied
the Chair. The main items of discussion
were the report of the previous year,
the election of officers and two alterations
to the constitution. The Secretary’s re-
port listed the activities which were con-
ducted by the Social Club during the
year. These consisted of a staff ball,
two dances, a children’s picnic, table
tennis tournament and a number of
Christmas functions. The election of
officers resulted as follows:
Chairman, D. R. Proudfoot (re-
elected) .
Treasurer, I. G. McDonald (re-
elected) .
Secretary, Miss D. Parry.
Assistant Secretary, Miss L. Timms.
Theatre Secretary, H. Wilson.
Sports Secretary, J. Dreghorn.
Soft Drinks, etc., Secretary, D. Pennel.
Librarian, Mrs. M. Stacey.
Committee: B. McPherson, L. Cooksley,
Miss M. Duthie.
It was decided, in order to lessen the
work, that Sub-Committee Secretaries
should be appointed to control the
various activities of the Social Club.
Plans are already in hand for the
annual Staff Cricket Match and for the
Staff Ball, which will be held at Lennon’s
Hotel on 20th June.
Congratulations to Miss Ruth Carter
and Stan Freemantle on winning £lOO
in the last Mammoth Golden Casket.
9 Sport.
Alec Mclntosh is having an extremely
successful year in "A” Grade Junior
Division Cricket, having broken the re-
cord for the number of wickets taken
by one bowler. Alec had hoped to reach
100 this season, but the last few matches
have not been up to expectations and
at present his record stands at 73.
SALES BRANCH, PERTH
• Picnic.
23rd February last found members of
the Social Club and families heading for
Yanchep for the Annual Picnic. Perfect
weather, excellent catering and an in-
teresting Sports programme all helped
to make the day a most enjoyable one,
whilst once again we must express our
appreciation to President Tom Klein and
his Social Club Committee for their sterl-
ing effort. Despatch Department proved
its athletic quality by taking the honours
in all the men’s running events, includ-
ing the Relay Race, whilst Sales Depart-
ment evened the score somewhat when
Harry Heyhoe won the Swimming Cham-
pionship, and the Sales team the Swim-
ming Relay. Alec Kinnaird, of Despatch
Department, won both the handicap
running events, whilst Aub. Wilson car-
ried off the Capstan Championship, the
principal event on the programme. Tea
was served at the Gloucester Lodge, after
which Mr. A. W. Pearson thanked the
Social Club Committee and then pre-
sented Trophies won during the day.
9 Holidays.
The following fortunate people have
been holidaying recently whilst we in
harness have experienced heat wave con-
ditions:—
Jack Power to Mandurah, Gordon
York and family to Bunbury, Laurie
Arnold and family to Albany, Marcus
Clark and family to Rottnest Island. All
reported excellent beach weather, whilst
fishing results were spasmodic. Marcus
Clark’s 45 lb. Dhufish caught off Rott-
nest has taken top honours from our
staff anglers this summer.
George Henderson from Assembly De-
partment is busy arranging Taxation
clearances, etc., in preparation for his
six-month tour to England and the Con-
tinent, sailing early in April. Bon Voy-
age, George, we shall be looking forward
to an article or two on your return,
giving us a young man’s impression of
England to-day.
9 Welcome.
We would like to take this opportunity
of welcoming the following new mem-
bers to the staff:—Miss Margaret Robert-
son, Len Thomas, Phil Green, Phillip
Prytherch, Ron Markham and Ken
Hardy.
George Taylor, former Smoke Sig-
nals’ correspondent, is now Company
representative on the Eastern Goldfields,
residing in Kalgoorlie. Early reports
from George indicate that he and his
family have now settled in and are
enjoying a mild and rare Kalgoorlie
summer.
• Sport.
Congratulations to Mr. A. W. Pearson,
who has succeeded in reaching the Final
of the Summer Knock-Out at the Cottes-
loe Golf Club.
Mr. C. Kilgour is also intent on handi-
cap reduction and is to be seen proudly
displaying a silver mug, result of his
latest Golf victory.
Robin Brennan, daughter of Francis
Brennan our City representative, has
completed a most successful season in
Women’s Athletics. Gaining second place
in the Open High Jump at the Aus-
tralian Athletic Championships in Mel-
bourne, Robin returned home to take
the Senior and Junior Women’s High
Jump titles and bettered both records at
the W.A. Championships. Congratula-
tions, Robin and Francis.
Dene Rouvray, star batsman from the
Capstan Cricket Club, with an average
to date of 80, should once again capture
the Club batting honours for the Season.
• Visitors.
The following visitors were welcomed
during recent weeks:—Mr. G. D. McKay
on a brief visit from Melbourne. Tobacco
buyers Norm Emery and John Heath
called before returning East, following
a visit to Manjimup. Mr. F. Gallagher
from 8.A.T., Sydney, over in the West
on long service leave, came in to see us
and was pleased to receive the latest
issue of Smoke Signals. We trust that
he is enjoying our prolonged summer
weather.
Our Melbourne friends will be inter-
ested to hear that Mr. Jim Martin, late
of Melbourne Sales Branch, is enjoying
excellent health and is busily engaged
on extensive renovation to his home at
Claremont.
S. T. LEIGH & CO. PTY. LTD.
9 Engagements.
Congratulations to the following people
on the recent announcement of their en-
gagements.
Beryl Mortimer (Cigarette Paper) to
Frank Ellison.
Pat Gannon (Cigarette Paper) to
Bernie Montgomery.
9 Weddings.
Best wishes for future happiness are
extended to the following, who have re-
cently entered the married ranks: —
James Colmer (Canister Works De-
livery) and Patricia McGuire—l9th
January at Wesley Chapel.


More Gossip
from the Branches
Allen Pauch (Engineers) and Betty
Blakeney—2nd February at Rockdale
Methodist Church.
Our best wishes are also extended to
Betty Bannister (Office) who marries
Jack Muir at Holy Trinity Church of
England, Kingsford, on 3rd May.
0 Births.
Congratulations to the following on
recent additions to their families:—•
Keith and Mrs. Smith (Engineers), a
daughter—Marie Heather.
Alf and Mrs. Battams (Letterpress),
a daughter—Kerry.
Rus and Mrs. Freeman (Office), a
daughter—Christine Anne.
0 Long Service Leave.
Enjoying their long service leave are
Harry Howe (Tube) and Bob Wadley
(Engineers). We hope that they benefit
from their leave and feel refreshed when
they return to work.
Ron Dean (Tube) has just returned
from his leave looking very fit.
George Henson (Factory Manager) is
nearly at the end of the second leg of
his long service leave. He did a little
mountaineering on the heights of
Katoomba; a little fishing in the deeps of
Ettalong; and some painting—house, not
landscape. Out of some of these activities
he managed to develop a very painful
poisoned hand. Fortunately this is on the
mend and he expects to be fit for his
return at the end of April.
0 Bereavements.
Our deepest sympathy is extended to
Mrs. Joan Duncan (Cigarette Paper)
and Miss Esme Forsythe on their recent
family bereavements.
0 Sick List.
As we go to press we note that Johnnie
Carley (Letterpress) is in hospital re-
covering from an operation. We hope
that his recovery will be speedy.
We are pleased to welcome back Miss
Timmins (Office) after her long illness.
Also Doug Martin and Frank Down
(Letterpress) are both back at work after
their illnesses.
0 General.
Brian "Humphrey” Kemp (Litho) re-
cently attained his majority and cele-
brated it with a party at Sammy Lees.
Congratulations, Brian!
Norm Hardy (Cutting) is following
Scottie Dixon and is building at Kings-
grove under Scottie’s watchful eye.
0 Golf Club.
On 2nd February the club played its
first game for 1952 at Riverwood. A
"four ball best ball” game was played
for the first time by the club, the victors
being Jack Henson and Fred Pascall.
An additional match was played at
Riverwood on the 7th March, Neville
Fisher taking Ist prize, with Dick Christie
second. Excitement was added to the
day by the gymnastics of one of the
players who successfully drove a ball
from the top of a tree stump.
TOBACCO BRANCH, SYDNEY
9 Engagement.
Sandra Matson (No. 2 Stemmery) to
Sam Britten.
9 Marriages.
Gwen Kirby (No. 2 Stemmery) to
Barry Ryan on 2nd February, 1952, at
St. Jude’s Church, Randwick. Pat Kruger
and Pat Galloway (both No. 2 Stem-
mery) were bridesmaids.
Phyllis Barrett (No. 1 Packing) to
Alan Worsley on 16th February, 1952,
at Holy Trinity Church, Kingsford.
Patricia O’Brien (No. 1 Packing) to
Alan West on 23rd February, at St.
Felix Church, Bankstown.
Patricia Nielson (No. 1 Packing) to
John Fountain, on 21st March, 1952, at
Marrickville.
Shirley Ebsworth (No. 1 Packing) to
Harry Aldred, on 29th March, 1952, at
Penshurst Church of England.
Robert Adinnall (No. 1 Packing) to
Nola Barter, on 29th March, 1952, at
Bondi Methodist Church.
9 Get Well Soon.
Billy Long (No. 2 Stemmery) is in
St. Vincent’s Hospital. We all wish you
a speedy recovery, Billy.
O Welcome.
Selma Anderson (No. 1 Stemmery)
and Stella Holmes (No. 2 Stemmery)
are both back with their friends after
illness, and we are glad to have them
with us again.
SALES BRANCH, SYDNEY
On Sunday, 20th January, 1952, Sales
Branch cricket team played Routley &
Sons in a return match at Centennial
Park. Forced to field a weakened side,
we managed to inflict a narrow and
exciting defeat on our opponents. Rout-
ley 6C Sons won the toss and batted,
being dismissed for 177. Our best bowlers
were Lance Ryan (two wickets) and Daryl
Jones (one wicket from 14 overs). Daryl
economically tied an end up while John
Cantrall, "Monty” Montgomery, Ken
Flecknoe and Peter Simmons each took
a wicket. Ken Flecknoe brilliantly threw
the wicket down to end the innings and
prevent Arthur Cantrall joining the
rank of successful bowlers.
Peter Simmons and John Warton
opened the innings and started badly,
Peter being out L.B.W. without scoring
and John soon after for 13. Lance Ryan
followed the openers in—and out —for
six and at 3 for 28 it looked like our
opponents avenging their previous de-
feat. We were in real trouble when John
Pedrana was "out” to a doubtful run-
out decision—however our sporting
friends agreed he was not out and called
him back. John welcomed his reprieve
and partnered by Monty (who was lucky
to be selected) proceeded to delight us
all with some big hitting. Monty’s power
was obvious in his driving and he even
looked like a batsman. These two were
together when the 177 goal was passed,
Monty retiring at 88 and John at 69.
The value of this partnership was evident
when, after the retirement of our two
"stars,” the following batsmen were
quickly dismissed —Daryl Jones for one,
Ken Flecknoe 0, John Cantrall 4 and
Arthur Cantrall 5.
SCORES:
Routley dc Sons 177
Wills’ Sales Branch 190
Val Pauline and Tony Hughes were
both elated at their success in the Leav-
ing Certificate Examination. Tony grins
as he claims he "just made it,” but Val,
who took six months’ leave to make sure,
scratched through with A’s in English,
Economics, French and Latin and a B
in Ancient History. Jock Aldridge was
as eager for the results to be announced
as either of them. His daughter, Bar-
bara, captain of Sydney High, culmin-
ated a brilliant career at school with a
"possible,” consisting of Ist class honours
in French, Latin and Maths. I. and A’s
in English and Maths. 11. Jock is a
very proud father. Noel Harris, who has
just joined our Shipping Department,
was also successful in this examination,
securing an A in Chemistry and B’s in
History, English, General Maths., Latin
and Physics.
Bushes and wet bags took the place
of "green” prawns and soggy dough in
Vince O’Callaghan’s hands during his
recent holidays. Used to hearing long
stories of "the one that got away” we
were amazed to hear Vince admit he’d
had a fishless holiday. The cause—bush-
fires! We believe he was of great assist-
ance when the fires in the Georges River
district threatened a number of houses.
Keith Cox and Eric Pinfold recently
returned eager for duty after long ser-
vice leave. Keith toured the southern
States the "Pioneer Way”—checking up
on the stock control in Adelaide and
Melbourne on the way. Eric went further
afield for his holiday jaunt—to Port
Moresby. He also spent some of his
leave on the North Coast, a favourite
haunt of all our fishermen, it seems. Alan
Jackson is laying claim to some fantastic
"catches” up there—grown up garfish
probably. Ken Whitehead is after black-
fish at Forster for a month or two, so
his lads in the Despatch can expect some
of his catch "by passo”—freight "on.”
Marj. Gossage was a busy bee for a
few days as she conducted a poll which
resulted in the familiar blue uniforms of
the office being voted out. We believe
they’re to be replaced by a new, more
attractively designed green uniform when


discarded. Put away your needles and
patches, girls, and let’s see the "New
Look.”
Popular Vi Mara recently resigned in
order to spend more time being a house-
wife. In her ten years in the Ledger
Dept. Vi made many friends, all of
whom wish her good luck and hope she
will bring her little troubles in to see us.
Barbara Dale, of our Service Dept.,
was first amongst our anxious lassies to
use Leap Year to catch a fiance. Barbara
popped the question on Ist January and,
after much persuasion, Gordon Brown
succumbed and said "yes” on the 12th.
Barbara proudly displays her solitaire
diamond which, she claims, will be lonely
for two years —while she learns to cook!
Barbara also celebrated her coming
of age at a party held at "Delvena,”
Chatswood, on 22nd January. We hear
the engagement was to have been an-
nounced at this party —she couldn’t wait.
Weddings will be popular and numer-
ous this year as most of the engaged
lassies on the staff have their men pinned
down to a definite date in 1952.
Elaine Stewart wed Alan Harvey on
22nd February, the staff being present
in force. Those present were Marj. Gos-
sage, Audrey Paris, Barbara Brophy,
Doreen Gibson, Peg Ford, Pat Haldane,
Frank Morgan and Bob Cohen. Elaine
wore a frock of cream brocade, hat and
gloves of the same tone with black suede
accessories. The reception (in the form
of a cocktail party) was held at the
bridegroom’s home in Pymble and the
honeymoon was spent at Bowral.
On the Bth March at St. Stephens’,
Bellevue Hill, Lorna Wayland married
Dick Johns. Lorna said "yes” in a frock
of blue crepe. The reception was held at
the bride’s home. Audrey Paris and Jean
Rowlands were present at the wedding
and the happy "two” honeymooned at
Cronulla.
Peg Ford and Bob Cohen (of Central
Sales) became man and wife on the 15th
March at St. Stephens, Macquarie Street.
Doreen Gibson attended Peg as brides-
maid. The bride wore a gown of white
brocade and her attendant one of pink
Brocade. The reception was held at the
Pickwick Club, Audrey Paris, Elaine
Harvey, "Jackie” Lawson and John War-
ton attending the wedding.
Tom Wilson of the Packing Floor
returned from holidays with the news of
the arrival of his second son. No sooner
were congratulations over than Tom was
laid low with a poisoned hand—more
time to become acquainted with the
little fellow, Tom?
Clive Peters of the Service Department
is also to be congratulated on the ar-
rival of a son. Two girls and a boy—
nice family, Clive!
Our sincere sympathy is extended to
John Gorman who recently lost his
mother.
8.A.T., SYDNEY
9 Engagements.
Hearty congratulations to the follow-
ing couples who have announced their
engagements —
Lorna Moncrieff (Stemmery) to Tom
Sullivan, Tempe.
Dawn Sweeney (Packing) to John
Hamilton, Tempe.
Reeba Owen (Packing) to Billy Long-
hurst, Newtown.
John Saunders (Packing) to Laeline
McFarlane (Cgtte. Packing).
9 On the Sick List.
Cheerios to Joan Billin (Stemmery),
John Titterton (Press Room), Bill New-
ham (Champion Bond) and Ted O’Con-
nor (Press Room), who have been absent
for some time owing to ill health. Your
friends at the Park wish you all a speedy
recovery.
We are all pleased to see Alma Fitz-
patrick (Stemmery) and George Twiss
(Press Room) back again after their
long absences.
9 Long Service Leave.
During her Long Service Leave, Eva
Fox (Stemmery) will be touring in the
North and South Islands of New Zea-
land, when she will visit her home town,
Auckland.
Also on Long Service Leave is Bill
Gray (Staff) trying his hand at tennis
coaching. Centre of attraction is young
son, Neville, who Bill says shows
promise.
No definite information can be ob-
tained as to how Guy Vowles (Office) is
spending his Long Service Leave. Latest
report is that he is still at home perfectly
well and having a good rest.
9 Presentation.
The girls of the Stemmery who came
to know Mrs. Clare Cook so well during
her 10 years’ service gave her a farewell
party when she left on 15th February,
and presented her with a picture.
9 Sport.
Ron Heffernan (Cutting Room) is to
be congratulated on his fine effort in
winning the Illawarra B. Grade Men’s
Singles Tennis Championship.
9 Correction.
Apologies to Rose Brenton, whose name
was incorrectly spelt in last issue of
"Smoke Signals.”
9 Mr. T. K. Stephen.
Although still walking with the aid
of a stick, our Accountant, Mr. T. K.
Stephen, is back again in the Office. For
the first time for many years, he is a
spectator in the Inter-Ffouse Bowls Com-
petition.
9 Retirement.
It was with regret that fellow-workers
heard of the retirement of Harry Stur-
gess, owing to ill health. Harry had
been in the tobacco industry for the
past 38 years, during which time he had
worked in Champion Bond and the
Domestic Leaf Shed. We all hope, with
the treatment he is receiving and an out-
of-door life, he will improve in health
and strength.
Aldus of Venice
A LDUS of Venice in 1495 was printing his first classic,
Aristotle,” with type cut to his design, with ink made on
the premises and with papers” hand work, made of pure linen
and hempen rags beaten in pieces by dint of wood and made
stiff with glue gotten from boiled hides.”
That paper has perpetuated his work, but think of the
difficulties it presented to Aldus. No two sheets were alike
in formation. The surfaces differed. The colour varied. The
laid and chain marks were in evidence. The ink absorption
was uncertain. Small ivonder he exclaimed, 1 have chosen,
in place of a life of ease and freedom, an anxious and toilsome
career.


“IT’S DOGGED
AS DOES IT.”
There are still those with us who "do
good by stealth and blush to find it
fame” and it was after considerable
c . xt. T r
enquiry we found Miss L. Olive of
B.A.T. Stemmery, Sydney. She told us
itr. ' i . _
a story which tor patient and persistent
effort would be hard to beat.
Back in 1920 Matron Hood of B.A.T.
conceived the idea of endowing a cot
at Renwick Hospital and she enlisted
the efforts of Miss Olive to carry on the
wor '
Miss Rowles, of Wills Tobacco Branch
packing room, has only come into the
picture comparatively recently— a mere
17 years ago, but she is just as enthu-
siastic as her colleague.
The recent payment of £9O has com-
pleted the necessary sum and now the
brass plate is being made, "Endowed in
perpetuity by B.A.T. and W.T.B. Raleigh
Park employees 1951.”
x V7 , . r ,
We were shown a picture of the
■ • , , . , , . .
? ngmal COt gaining a bright looking
but very juvenile gentleman who is now
tj
32 yearS ° ld
In addition to the necessary £5OO
endowment fund, the sum of £3O an-
nually has also been paid in to make a
total of £B6O.
xhese two girls are g j uttons for
punishment. They are now starting off
on a J on S £rek to endow two more cots,
£or B--AT- and one for Wills
Tobacco Branch.
A most admirable piece of work and
we trust that B.A.T. and W.T.B. em-
ployees will give every support to the
new effort. There could be no better
cause to enlist their sympathy and prac-
tical help.
OUR COVER
The front cover, which was designed
by H. L. Greening from refer-
ence kindly supplied by the Royal
Australian Historical Society, depicts
Circular Quay as it appeared in 1852.
The photograph of Circular Quay in
1952 which appears on the back cover
was taken from about the same spot by
Fred Pring (S. T. Leigh & Co.
photographer).
Correspondents:
Sydney:
B.A.T Miss R. Ewington
W.T.B Mrs. Y. Weatherson
W.C.B Miss M. Thorpe
S.T.L J. Burgess
Sales Branch J. O’Conor
Melbourne:
B.A.T. 1 Miss j. Barton
States Co. J
Sales Branch: Miss W. A. Adam &
Mr. H. F. Dwyer
Carreras Ltd Miss Gay
Adelaide:
Sales Branch A. Driver
Perth:
Sales Branch E. B. Moore
Brisbane:
Sales Branch H. Widdup
Editor:
H. L. Greening.
Assistant Editor:
Geo. O. Ingledew.
Personal News Editor:
Miss C. L. Jones.
Photograph Editor:
V. K. Vincent.
Editorial Address:
"Smoke Signals,”
C/- Miss C. L. Jones,
Box 145, G.P.0., Sydney.
Published for the Employees of British Tobacco Co. (Aust.) Ltd., and its Associated Companies.


GARDENING
NOTES
By Vic Archer.
0 Spring Blooming.
Flowers for spring blooming not al-
ready sown should be put in without
delay. Seedlings previously raised should
be planted out as soon as large enough.
They then become established before the
ground becomes cold. Choose dull
weather and damp ground around roots
thoroughly before planting.
Early sown Sweet Peas will now be
throwing out their tendrils and should
be supported by bushy twigs until they
reach the wire-netting or other main
support.
0 Roses and Shrubs.
This is an ideal time for planting
Roses, also evergreen shrubs, citrus trees,
Strawberries and Violets. Nasturtium
seed should be sown direct in the per-
manent position; they flower best in a
fairly poor soil. Perennial climbers will
have ceased growing and may be trimmed
lightly for shape, etc. Tuberous Be-
gonias will be dying off now. When
ready, lift the bulbs and store in dry
sand in a cool place under cover.
As your seedlings in the nursery bed
grow up, transplant them wider apart
if necessary before putting them out in
the permanent position. Plenty of light
and air is necessary to make sturdy plants.
The humid weather has caused a lot
of mildew, especially on Roses, Zinnias,
and Dahlias. Sweet Peas will also be
affected by this pale bluish spore-bearing
disease this winter, so get busy with
flower of sulphur as soon as it appears.
Do the dusting in the early morning,
while the dew is still on the plants. In
this way a gas is formed that will quickly
eradicate the mildew. A hand duster is
best for the job, but if you don’t happen
to have one, put some flowers of sulphur
into an old stocking and by tapping it
with a stick, a fine dust will fall and
adhere to the plants. The hand duster
is the best because you can get under the
leaves.
0 Leaf Miner in Cineraria.
This pest is caused by flies laying their
eggs on the underside of the leaves. The
small maggot that is hatched enters the
leaves and works its way through the leaf
between the surfaces, leaving them very
unsightly and unable to carry on their
work of preparing plant food. It is use-
less to spray after the maggot has entered
the leaf, therefore prevention is im-
portant. Spray at last once a week from
the planting time with D.D.T. or Black
Leaf 40, and be sure to spray under the
leaves. In this way the fly will be turned
away from laying its eggs, and the
cineraria can be kept clean and healthy
until the end of flowering. Cinerarias
are very shallow rooted, and it is advis-
able to provide some support at planting
time if wind is likely to reach them. If
you have a fairly rich bed under the
shade of high branching trees, then a
good show can be made. They prefer a
little lime added to the soil for best re-
sults. Cinerarias look best when massed
at about 15 to 16 inches between plants.
An edging of Polyanthus or Primula
Malacoides will improve their appearance.
This is also a very good annual to grow
in between Azaleas, and adds greatly to
the colour range of that border. They
will flower at the same time, but don’t use
lime, or the Azaleas will die.
0 Lime.
Very few home gardeners know the
value of lime for a lawn. A good dusting
during March or April will bring back
the sweetness into the soil, especially if
you have used other fertilisers, like sul-
phate of ammonia, during the year.
Don’t use the lime at the same time as
the sulphate of ammonia, or one will
neutralise the other.
Raleigh Park
Social Club
0 Concert Party Dinner.
The dining room at Raleigh Park on
the evening of 7th March, was the scene
of a dinner tendered as a mark of
appreciation of the splendid work done
by all concerned with the last show of
"Spangles.”
Thanks are due to the dining room
staff for the excellent service on that
occasion.
The toast of the evening to Peggy
Harris, the producer, was ably handled
by Secretary N. Blake. He warmly
praised that lady’s efforts and stressed
the fact that her personality and tact
were largely responsible for the harmony
and minimum of friction which attended
the preparation and rehearsals.
Jack Eyles paid a glowing tribute to
President Alf. Stewart, Treasurer Jack
Davies and Norm. Blake, for the zeal
displayed in carrying out their duties
and the time which they give to for-
warding the objects of the Club.
Jenny Davison, wardrobe mistress,
Bessie Fuller, her assistant, Peggy Harris,
Joyce Stevens and "Auntie Mary” all
came in for a mead of praise for their
good work in making the costumes for
the show.
Mr. Robertson, in proposing the toast
of the Concert Party, commented on the
manner in which everyone concerned had
worked together as a team. The long
grinding weeks of rehearsal do place a
severe strain on nerves and temper and
it was most gratifying to see the way
that all had pulled together. He par-
ticularly mentioned the girls of the ballet
in this regard.
Mention was made also of the sterling
effort of Tommy Quaver the pianist,
who, although a very sick man, played
through the two performances in the
true trouper tradition.
The period after dinner saw some
dancing to the spirited music of Brian
and Paul Powell with Ted O’Reilly.
Bessie Fuller, Lorna Strickland and Keith
Gabriel supplied the vocal entertainment.
• Frank Down.
Our best wishes for a speedy recovery
to our "evergreen” Deputy Presi-
dent, Frank Down, who is convalescing
after an operation at Yaralla Hospital.
Frank is one of our best workers and
is badly missed. From all his friends in
the Social Club "Good Health” and
"Best of Luck.”
• Ballet.
The Raleigh Park ballet has been asked
to provide the floor show at a Ball to
be given at the Grace Bros. Auditorium
on 28th March by the Royal Industrial
Blind Institute in aid of their "Miss
Australia” candidate.
This is a very pleasing tribute to the
popularity of these girls and their trainer
Peggy Harris.
0 Christmas Tree.
Work has already commenced on the
Xmas Tree for 1952. Few people realise
what a tremendous job it is to organise
a party for 800 kiddies and 1,000 adults.
A surplus of £lBO/19/2 from last year’s
"function” is held in a special Xmas
Tree account to which has been added
a donation of £7/8/1 from the Raleigh
Park Horticultural Society.
A meeting of all interested people
will be held in the near future to discuss
arrangements for this year’s party.
0 Annual Ball.
Our sth Annual Ball is to be held
at Grace Auditorium on 31st May.
Tickets are 21/- each and may be pur-
chased on our lay-by system. Supper,
floor show, novelties and prizes will en-
sure to all attending a joyous evening.
Proceeds are in aid of the Helen Keller
Hostel for Blind Women.


Vice Regal
Sports Clubs
The Vice Regal Swimming Club Team which
represented N.S.W. in the Soden Cup and the
T. W. White Shield for the Royal Life Saving
Association.
E. Hope, Instructress, W. Hodgsen, J. and L.
McCallum, A. Ryan.
The Swimming Club finished its 1951-
52 Season with a Carnival on Saturday
morning, Ist March. Although some
spectators apparently had difficulty in
leaving their beds, the competitors en-
joyed the warmth of the sunshine be-
tween events. All the Championships
were closely contested and we again con-
gratulate Cigarette Branch on retaining
the Point Score Shield. Some of the boys,
who have been competing for a number
of years, were agreeably surprised to find
how good their times were. The Com-
mittee again did a grand job of work
and greatly contributed to the smooth
running of the races.
Results of the Carnival are given
below.
Alma Ryan won all the Club’s Point
Score Trophies and has been most con-
sistent in her swimming and diving
throughout the season. Alma has also
done excellent work as Captain, helping
newcomers, assisting in judging the races
and in various other ways.
More Royal Life Saving Awards were
gained by the girls.
E. Hope, Bronze Medallion, Bronze
Cross and Award of Merit.
A. Ryan, Intermediate Star.
W. Hodgson, Intermediate Star.
L. McCallum, Intermediate Star.
J. McCallum, Intermediate Star.
We also congratulate the Five mem-
bers of the Club who represented N.S.W.
in the T. W. White Shield and the Soden
Shield. They were Edna Hope, Instruct-
ress, A. Ryan, J. and L. McCallum and
W. Hodgson. Unfortunately, Edna has
now joined the Women’s Army and the
team will have to find a new instructress.
We all wish her luck in her new sphere.
• Vigoro Club.
The Summer Season finished with the
Vice-Regal team lower than usual in the
Point Score, but the club is determined
that the team for the Winter Competi-
tion will be more successful. The Bowling
Average was won by Alice Sailes and
the Batting, Fielding and Catching
Averages by Marie Arnold, both of
whom thoroughly deserve their success.
9 Winter Sports.
Basketball, Vigoro, Hockey and
Physical Culture are all starting in April
and all newcomers will be welcomed.
Beginners will be coached in the various
sports.
Basketball and Vigoro are played on
Saturday afternoons, Hockey on Satur-
day morning, whilst Physical Culture
classes are held on Monday evenings
after work.
VICE REGAL AMATEUR SWIMMING ASSOCIATION CARNIVAL.
Ist MARCH, 1952.
Event No. I. —Girls’ Diving Cham-
pionship: A. Ryan (Tob.), 1; R. Hill
(Tob.), 2; J. Robinson (Cig.), 3.
Event No. lA.—Girls’ Diving Handi-
cap: J. Mountain (8.A.T.), 1; E. All-
mond (Tob.), 2; J. McCallum (8.A.T.),
3.
Event No. 2.—Men’s Diving Cham-
pionship: N. Emery (8.A.T.), 1; O.
Randall-Smith (Cig.), 2.
Event No. 3. —Girls’ 50 Metres Free-
style Championship: J. Robinson (Cig.),
1; W. Hodgson (Cig.), 2; A. Ryan
(Tob.), 3. Time, 38 2/ss.
Event No. 4.—Men’s 50 Metres Free-
style Championship: R. Tibbits (Cig.),
1; J. Gollan (8.A.T.), 2; O. Randall-
Smith (Cig.), 3. Time 28 4/ss.
Event No. 5. —Girls’ 50 Metres Free-
style Handicap: E. Allmond (Tob.), 1;
J. McCallum (8.A.T.), 2; J. Robinson
(Cig.), 3. Time 47 2/ss.
Event No. 6. —132 yds. Men’s Brace
Relay Handicap: L. McPherson and B.
E. Marris (8.A.T.), 1.
Event No. 7.— Girls’ 33 yds. Freestyle
Handicap: B. Sunderland (Tob.), 1;
J- Mountain (8.A.T.), 2; A. Scott
(Tob.), 3. Time 30 1/5,
Event No. 8.—50 Metres Girls’ Back-
stroke Championship: W. Hodgson
(Cig.), 1; A. Ryan (Tob.), 2; E. All-
mond (Tob.), 3. Time 48 3/ss.
Event No. 9.— Men’s 50 Metres Free-
style Handicap: W. Crofts (8.A.T.), 1;
T. F. Penrose (Sales), 2. Time 30s.
Event No. 10.-Girls’ 396 yds. Raleigh
Park Interhouse Relay Race: Cigarette
Branch, 1; Tobacco Branch, 2; 8.A.T.,
3. Time 5m 295.
Event No. 11. —Men’s 396 yds.
Raleigh Park Interhouse Relay Race:
Cigarette Branch, 1; 8.A.T., 2; Sales
Branch, 3. Time 4m. 2 2/ss.
Event No. 12.—Girls’ 50 Metres
Breaststroke Championship: W. Hodg-
son (Cig.), 1; A. Ryan (Tob.), 2; J.
McCallum (8.A.T.), 3. Time 48 l/ss.
Event No. 13. —Girls’ 33 yds. Breast-
stroke Handicap: J. Mounain (8.A.T.),
1; E. Allmond (Tob.), 2; J. Hunter
(Cig.), 3. Time 41s.
Event No. 14. —Girls’ 198 yds. Inter-
house Medley Relay Race: Cigarette
Branch, 1; Tobacco Branch, 2; 8.A.T.,
3. Time 2m. 455.
Event No. 15. —Men’s 100 yds. Free-
style Handicap: R. Tibbits (Cig.), 1;
L. McPherson (8.A.T.), 2. Time 68 3/ss.
Event No. 16. —Girls’ 33 yds. Back-
stroke Handicap: J. Mountain (8.A.T.),
1; R. Seery (Tob.), 2. Time 42 3/ss.
Event No. 17.—Interhouse 396 yds.
Relay Race—3 men and 3 girls: Cigar-
ette Branch, 1; 8.A.T., 2; Tobacco
Branch, 3. Time 4m. 37 4/ss.
Point Score Shield—lnterhouse:
Cigarette Branch, 30 points, 1; Tobacco
Branch, 16 points, 2; 8.A.T., 12 points, 3.
PRINTED AND PUBLISHED BY S. T. LEIGH a CO. PTY. LTD., RALEIGH PARK, SYDNEY, AUSTRALIA.


Swimming
Earning
RELAY TEAMS (W.C.B.): Girls, J. Hunter,
P. Cheetham, W. Hodgson, J. Robinson,
L. Spring Men, O. Randall-Smith, E
Anderton, A. Forbes, N. Anderton,
R. Tibbits.
W.C.B. RELAY TEAM
(3 Men .and 3 Girls)
Back row, E. Anderton, R. Tibbits,
O. Randall-Smith.
Front row, J. Robinson, W. Hodgson
W. GOLLAN.
2nd in 55 yds. Freestyle Championship for
Men.
PLACE-GETTERS IN BACKSTROKE CHAMPIONSHIP
Back row, W. Hodgson (Cig.) 1, A. Ryan (Tob.) 2,
E. Allmond (Tob.) 3.
PLACE-GETTERS IN BACKSTROKE HANDICAP
Front row 1 Mountain (B.AT.) 1, R. Seery (Tob.) 2
W. CROFTS, winner of 55 yds. Handicap
WINNERS OF 100 YARDS BRACE RELAY HANDICAP,
B. E. Marris and L McPherson (B.A.T.)
DIVING CHAMPIONSHIP PLACE-GETTERS.
Girls, A. Ryan (Tob.) 1, J. Robinson (Cig.) 2
Men, N. Emery (B.A.T.) 1, O. Randall-Smith (Cig.) 2.


SYDNEY SKYLINE, 1952
