

JA F
f3iv
SAILORS AND SOLDIERS’ MEMORIAL CHURCH OF
ST. LUKE, CLOVELLY.
M. A. PAYTEN, Th.L, J.P., Rector.
dhLh
MEMORIAL SERVICE AND DEDICATION
of a
STAINED GLASS WINDOW
in Loving Memory of
Colonel William Kenneth Seaforth Mackenzie, D. 5.0., V.D.,
19th Battalion, A.I.F.
Sunday, 26th April, 1953
at 3 p.m.
The Memorial Window is a token of esteem and affection from members of
the 19th Battalion.
The motif of fhe window is "Knight of St. George," surmounted by the crest of the
Mackenzie family, with its inscription, "Luceo Non Uro" (I shine but do not burn),
included at toot of window are the Regimental Colours of the 19th Battalion, A.I.F.
Brig. H. B. TAYLOR, M.C. and Bar, V.D., President.
A. W. MINOTT, Hon. Secretary.
19th BATTALION A.I.F. ASSOCIATION.


ORDER OF SERVICE
THE PROCESSIONAL HYMN.
saints on earth and those above
But one communion make ;
One army of the living God,
To His command we bow ;
Joined to their Lord in bonds of love,
And of His grace partake.
Part of His host have crossed the flood,
And part are crossing now .
One family we dwell in Him ;
One Church above, beneath :
Lo ! thousands to their endless home
Are swiftly borne away :
Though now divided by the stream,
The narrow stream of death.
And we are to the margin come
And soon must launch as they.
Lord jesu, be our constant Guide ;
Then, when the word is given,
Bid death’s cold flood its waves divide,
And land us safe in Heaven. Amen.
THE CALL TO WORSHIP.
The Procession will proceed to the allocation of seats to special visitors in the Sanctuary
or Choir, after which the Rector will say these Sentences :
Priest: Our help is in the Name of the Lord.
People : Who hath made Heaven and Earth.
Priest: Blessed be the Name of the Lord,
People : Henceforth world without end.
Priest: Glory and worship are before Him,
People : Power and honour are in His Sanctuary.
Priest: We wait for Thy loving kindness, O God,
People : In the midst of Thy Temple.
Priest: O Lord, hear our prayer,
People : And let our cry come unto Thee.
Priest: The Lord be with you,
People : And with Thy Spirit.
Let us pray.
Lord, have mercy upon us ;
Christ, have mercy upon us ;
Lord, have mercy upon us.
THE LORD’S PRAYER.
THE INVOCATION.
O GOD our Father, Who hallowest the places upon which Thou hast set Thy Name, and
Who through our Lord Jesus Christ hast promised that where two or three are gathered
together in His Name there He will be, so grant us by Thy Holy Spirit the reality of
Thy Presence and the full assurance of Thy merciful aid in all our undertaking in this
Thy House to-day—wherein we would do honour to our Fallen Comrade and former
champion of our cause, and a worthy leader among us—so may this Thy House continue
to be a place of refuge for Thy faithful people and a shrine of remembrance of our loved
ones, who with the Saints and Martyrs of old fought the good fight of faith ; and may
ever be examples before us, stirring us to live and work for the glory and praise of Thy
Holy Name, now and always. Amen.
Then shall be read —
THE LESSON ; Ecclesiasticus 44, vv. 1-15.
Read by Mr. A. W. Minott.
WORDS OF INSTRUCTION.


THE PILGRIMAGE HYMN.
(During the first two verses the Clergy and Lay Party will move to the pews before the
Memorial Window for the Act of Unveiling and Dedication.)
J AM a stranger here,
Heaven is my Home ;
Earth is a desert drear,
Heaven is my Home ;
Danger and sorrow stand
Round me on every hand ;
Heaven is my Fatherland,
Heaven is my Home.
What though the tempest rage,
Heaven is my Home ;
Short is my pilgrimage,
Heaven is my Home ;
And time’s wild wintry blast
Soon will be overpassed ;
1 shall reach Home at last,
Heaven is my Home ;
The Unveiling of the Memorial Window in memory of Colonel W. K. S. Mackenzie willl be
performed by Brigadier H. B. Taylor, on behalf of members of the 19hh Battalion.
THE DEDICATION.
Prayers will be said by the Rector.
THE SENTENCE.
Priest : The light of the city was like unto a stone most precious ;
People : Even like a jasper stone, clear as crystal
Let us pray.
r\ ALMIGHTY FATHER, Lord of Heaven and earth, the entrance of Whose Word giveth
light : Vouchsafe, we beseech Thee, to accept this Window at our hands, for the adorn-
ment of Thy House, and to consecrate this our gift to Thy glory, for Jesus Christ’s sake.
Amen.
The Dedication Prayer :
TN the Faith of Jesus Christ we dedicate this Memorial Window to the Glory of God and
in memory of His servant, COLONEL W. K. S. MACKENZIE, in the Name of the
Father, and of the Son, arid of the Holy Ghost. Amen.
Memorial Prayer :
GOD of the spirits of all flesh, we praise and magnify Thy Holy Name for all Thy
servants who have finished their course in Thy faith and fear (especially Thy servant
Colonel W. K. S. Mackenzie) ; and we beseech Thee that, encouraged by their examples
and strengthened by their fellowship, we also may be found to be partakers of the
inheritance of the Saints in Light ; throng 1 - 'he merits of Thy Son Jesus Chrits our Lord.
Amen.
The remaining two verses of the Pilgrim Hymn will he sung as the procession returns
from the unveiling ceremony.
There at my Saviour’s, side —
Heaven is my Home —
1 shall be glorified,
Heaven is my Home ;
There are the good and b’e t,
Those I love most and best ;
And there 1 too shall rest,
Heaven is my Home.
Therefore I murmur not,
Heaven is my Home ;
Whate’er my earthly lot,
Heaven is my Home ;
And I shall surely stand
There at my Lord’s right hand ;
Heaven is my Fatherland,
Heaven is my Home. Amen.


ADDRESS.
By A. E. DENT, V.D. (19th Battn.)
THE OFFERTORY HYMN.
(During the singing of this hymn the offertory will be received by four members of the
19th Battalion for the Memorial Church of St. Luke.)
M Y _ hope is built on nothing less
Than Jesus’ Blood and Righteousness
I dare not trust the sweetest frame,
But wholly lean on Jesus’ Name.
On Christ, the solid Rock, I stand
All other ground is sinking sand.
When darkness seems to veil His Face
1 rest on His unchanging grace ;
In every high and stormy gale
My anchor holds within the vail.
On Christ, the solid Rock, I stand ;
All other ground is sinking sand.
His Oath, His Covenant, and Blood,
Support me in the ’whelming flood ;
When all around my soul gives way,
He then is all my hope and stay.
On Christ, the solid Rock, I stand ;
All other ground is sinking sand.
And when 1 hear the trumpet sound,
Oh, may I then in Him be found,
Clothed in His righteousness alone,
Faultless to stand before His Throne.
On Christ, the solid Rock, I stand :
All other ground is sinking sand. Amen
CLOSING PRAYER AND BENEDICTION.
Rev. R. F. C. BRADLEY (19th Battn.)
NATIONAL ANTHEM.
RECESSIONAL HYMN.
QNWARD, Christian soldiers,
Marching as to war,
With the Cross of Jesus
Crowns and thrones may perish,
Kingdoms rise and wane,
But the Church of Jesus
Constant will remain ;
Going on before.
Christ the Royal Master,
Leads against the foe,
Forward into battle,
Gates of hell can never
’Gainst that Church prevail ;
We have Christ’s own promise
And that cannot fail.
See, His banners go.
Onward, Christian soldiers,
Onward, Christian soldiers, etc.
Marching as to war,
With the Cross of Jesus
Going on before.
Onward, then, ye people,
join our happy throng,
Blend with ours your voices
Like a mighty army
Moves the Church of God ;
In the triumph-song ;
Glory, laud, and honour
Unto Christ the King,
This through countless ages
Men and Angels sing.
Onward, Christian soldiers, etc.
Brothers, we are treading
Where the Saints have trod ;
We are not divided,
All one body we,
One in hope, and doctrine,
One in charity.
Onward, Christian soldiers, etc.
Amen
{St. Luke's Women's Guild kindly invite all present at the service to
reireshments in the Hall alter the Service .)


