





'SslHl VL-
SAILING
DIRECTIONS
FOR THE
INNER ROUTE
T O
TOR R E S STRA I T .
y ROM
BREAK - SEA SPIT to BOOBY ISLAND.
( For Private distribution,)
1843.
BY
PHILLIP PARKER KING.
CATTA IX, R.N.


SAILING
DIRECTIONS
FOR THE
INNER R O U T E
TO
TORRES STRAIT.
FROM
BREAK - SEA SPIT to BOOBY ISLAND
Printed by the Author at port Stephens for ships usirg the
Passage within the Great Barrier Reef.
( For Private distribution. )
1843.
BY
PHILLIP PARKER KING.
Captain, R.N.


INTRODUCTION.
Frequent applications having lately been made nw for
information relative to the passage to Torres Strait, which
has usually been named the “ Inner Route ”, I have been
induced to print off a few copies of Sailing Directions for
the use of ships about to take that track. They were printed
in the Post - Office Directory for the year 1836, with a de-
tailed account of the coast, but at that period the prejudice
was so great, that the generality of the masters of ships,
bound through Torres Strait, preferred the risk and anxieties
of the “ Outer passage” to the safer and far more agreeable
one within the Barrier Reef; supposing that one or two days
in the length of the run might be saved, thus placing life
and property in jeopardy, for the sake of an advantage,
which, even at best, is very questionable: for the shortest
passage from Sydney to Booby IsLnd, that has come wi.hin
my knowledge, was made by H.M.S. Rattlesnake and two
merchant ships, which cleared Booby Island on the twelfth
day from leaving Sydney.
Another objection that has been made to the Inner
Route, and it is the only tangible one, is the ‘ £ trouble of
anchoring every night”! but even this, with attention and
common experience, and by following either of my two outer
tracks, may be lessened; for no'ship need be anchored until
she arrives at Cape Grafton: particularly if the passage be
made between the first and last quarters of the moon. The
anchor will then have to be dropped four or five, or at most,
six times; but in smooth water, under the lee of islands or
reefs on a muddy bottom, and in no way exposed, until the
track joins that taken by ships entering the “Barrier”; and
in which they have to anchor at least twice: the first time


being in deep water, and exposed both to a strong wind and
a swell, which never happens in the “ Inner Route ”, for in
most cases, between Cape Grafton and the junction of the
two tracks, a light anchor may be used with the necessary
precaution of keeping a Bower anchor ready to let go, if the
wind should freshen so much as to require it. •
The prejudice was so strong against the Inner Route that,
finding it useless to press the importance of it any longer,
for several papers had been published by me at the time in
its favor in the periodical press, I did not re-publish the
Sailing Directions: so that they have been for some lime out
of print. The tide however, which has been so long running
counter to my wishes, seems at last to be slacking, and every
year a greater number of ships following that route, I have
been induced again to press the matter upon the attention of
Masters of ships bound through Torres Strait: particularly of
those carrying passengers, stock, or troops.
The season for making this passage has been considered
not to commence until the Ist. April, and to end with the
middle of September: for my own part, I should not hesitate
to leave Sydney, if time were an object, in the middle of
March, and to leave it, if necessary, even as late as the end
of September. With the east coast the monsoon has nothing
to do; the south-east trade, I believe, blows up the coast all
the year round, from S.E. in the -morning to E.S.E. in the
afternoon.
In the directions little has been said upon the subject of
the current. As a general rule, it should be calculated that
a current of variable strength from half, to one and a half
mile an hour, runs throughout the route. In some parts, pro-
bably, none will be felt; the force depends upon local causes:
being stronger when the openings in the Barrier are more
numerous and large, and the reverse. The tide will also make
a considerable difference: the flood setting northwards will


of course increase, whilst the ebb will decrease its rate. The
state o t the tide, independent of other data, may be observed
in passing the islets and reefs. High water takes place, at
hull and Change, between 10 o’ clock and noon, along the
whole range of Coast: the flood comes from the South; but
there are parts where the set of the flood is altered by local
•ttircLunstanges, such as the form of reefs, indentations of the
coast, and openings in the Barrier Reef. When the tide is
high more caution in running should be obseived, because
the reefs are then mostly covered; but at low water there
are very few which do not show in parts. On the chart
several reefs are described to be covered, which was the case
when I passed; but it is probable that, at low-water, almost
all have portions of them visible above water; and in the
same way, many reefs which are distinguished upon the
chart as being “covered” will scarcely be visible to the eye
at high water, and must therefore be cautiously passed.
At the end of the directions (p. 14) 1 have noticed the
time when the monsoons change on the north Coast of
New Holland.
I do not think that the passage through Torres Strait to
the eastward, during the westerly monsoon, will ever be
used with advantage for sailing vessels. In the year 1821
the ship Lalla Ilookh made the voyage to Sydney by this
route, but nearly paid dear for the attempt. She got on
shore upon the reefs within Booby Island, and repaired the
damage she sustained at Port Lihou, on the north side of
Endeavour Strait. The ship eventually succeeded in making
her voyage, but the delay of beating up against the south-
east trade, between New Caledonia and the Barrier Reef,
more than counterbalanced any advantage that could have
been anticipated. The practicability therefore of this route is
not doubted, but the advantage to be derived from it is at
least a very questionable one; particularly when the space,
which may be called the “Coral Sea”, is studded with coral
reefs, of which, it is not unreasonable to suppose, many are


yet unknown.
Of the extent and limits of the Great Barrier Reef very
little is as yet ascertained. Some portions of it in the neigh-
bourhood of the Percy Isles were examined by Captain
Flinders (vol. ij 82 - 104), and in the appendix (vol. 1 app.
xvi) there are some notices respecting it. Ihe voyage ot
Captain Blackwood, however, now in progress, will render
an important benefit, by facilitating the navigation of the
outer route, as well as by adding to the knowledge of that,
of which the following directions are descriptive.
It merely remains to add, that the bearings and courses are
by compass, unless otherwise described; and that the current
is described as setting towards the bearing noted. No lati-
tudes nor longitudes have been given, because the scale on
which the Chart is drawn is sufficiently large to take them
from it, if they are required. The coast from Breaksea Spit
to the Northumberland Islands is delineated in Captain
Flinders’ Atlas (East Coast Sheet 3), and in this space I
have merely described such places as are prominent features
and have not been noticed by him. Sheets 1,2, and 3, of my,
Australian Atlas, contain the coast from the Northumbeiland
Islands to Cape York. The fourth sheet of the Atlas may also
be referred to in the run to the westward of Booby Island.
Phillip P- King.
Captain R.N.
Port Stephens, June Ist. 1843.


SAILING DIRECTIONS.
In proceeding to the northward from Sydney, it does
not seem necessary to lay down any particular direc-
ti ms, until the ship has entered tin reefs at Breaksea
Spit; because, the winds being variable, the navigator
will use his discretion, and the coast
danger need be feared.. Captain Flinders's charts will
be a sufficient guide.
Sydney to
Break-sea
Spit.
r '
Having hauled round Breaksea Spit, if in the evening,
it would be imprudent to steer on through the night:
after running therefore to the W.N.W. for 5 or fiGpn-
to until daylight: but if the day be not far
advanced steer N 70° \V 33 leagues: the ship will
then be about 20 miles from Cape Capricorn: on which
route she should pass about 3 mdes within Lady Elliot
Island, and inside Bunker Group. The current here sets
to the westward at one mile an hour. The passages be-
tween these isles are free from any known danger. After
passing the cape, steer parallel to the coast, at a mode-
rate distance from the shore, between the 2d and 3d
Northumberland Islands, and avoiding a low rock ( bear-
ing from the latter N 8° E 5§ miles ), pass inside the
Percy Group, by steering N.W. from the 3d island.
In thick weather it would, perhaps, be prudent to bring
to under ea ;y sail until daylight. The best ship anchor-
age hereabouts is on the west side of the 2d-Percy,
abreast the south end of the Pine Islets in, 10 fathoms;
but the bottun being rocky in places, the anchorage
Current,
Percy Isles.
Anchorage.


. c
ought ftet to be resorted to Wt 11 cases of emergency.
Wood and water are plentiful, and fish may be procur-
ed, by a seine.
In most cases about this part - of tlie coast, tnere will
be no necessity for anchoring, since convenient spots
may be selected to stand oft 1 and on through the night
shculd the weather not be favourable for running.
There are several high hills in this neighbourhood
of which the most conspicuous are the High Peak*,
behind Cape Manifold, and Mount Westall to the
north west of Port 13owen. llie islands are of pleasing
appearance, being of moderate heght, and crowned
w’tli pines.
Percy Itlcs.
The flood tide sets to the south and the ebb to the
north. The tide rises 13 or 14 feet. High water takes
place about two hours before the moon’s passage, or
XI hours at Full and change
Tides.
The variation here is about 7° E, and gradually de-
cre- ses in proceeding to the north.
Variation.
As the route within the Cumberland Isles througn
Whitsunday Passage is not to be recommended because,
the breeze being unsteady, the delay would be conside-
rable, it will be more advisable to follow either of the
two outer tracks; * and, passing by the three islands
k. kl, and k*2., steer to the eastward of 12. from
whence there is a clear run along the eastern side ol
Cumberland
Man is.
*Thc t.vo outer tracks viz the Mermaid’s 1820, (■ ) and the
Bathurst’s 1821 ( particularly the latter, were uninterruftfid
b/ digressio.is frjm the course or the purposes ot the survey


the Cumberland Islands, the most of which are high
and thickly wooded; 12. however, and the small rocky
isles to the N.E. of Pentecost Id. are exceptions.
Among them arc several remaikable peaks: of these
Shaw’s 1600 feet, Pentecost Id. 1140 feet, and the
s immit of the largest island, 1504 feet above the level
of the sea, are the most conspicuous. The rocky out-
lying islets extend nearly 8 miles from the land, but
are not dangeious to pass.
Cumberland
Islands.
The northern extreme of the Cumberland Islands
being bold to, may b ■ rounded pretty close; whence
by steering N 73° W for 65 miles, the ship will be
about 7 miles to the no -th of Cape Upstart, having
pj ssed 4 miles within ilolborne Island.* From Cape
Upstart, found by-the Bcaglo-to-be-an-idand} to Cape
Bowling-green the c urso is unimpeded; but the
l M Ing very to be approached with great
caution; at night coming no nearer to it than II fms.
An indraught also, which sets into tie b ly, must be
provided against
Capes
Upstart,
and Bowling
-green.
$ Asa matter of prudence it would be better not to
puss this cape before day- lawn, since the character of
the shore renders its nembb jurhood suspicious.
Upon approachii g Ca; e Cleveland, open the south
extreme of Magn tieal Id. to avoid the reef which
extends for 3 miles to the eastward of the cape. There
is good anchorage under the 7 ee of the cape, off a long
G Cleveland.
• H'M.S. Beagle gassed (o the north of Holborne Id. but it is pre-
ferable to pass within it.


flat that fronts the sandy beach, and dries at J ebb for
a mile from the shore. Wood is abundant close to the
beach and may bo embarked with facility: the best
place is at the north end of the can ride
afl oaFnearme shore for the protection of the wooding
party. The most convenient watering place is near the
centre of the beach, over which 2 or 3 streams fall into
the sea.
C. Cleveland.
Wood.
Water.
Mount Elliot, a remarkable hill of round backed
form with a peak at its south end, may be seen at the
distance of 25 leagues. The sharp peak of Magnetical
Island although not so high is equally conspicuous.
Magnetical
Island.
From Cape Cleveland steer at a short distanceout-
side the Pidn)lslands, amongst and to the westward
of whieirthere is good anchorage; and thence direct
/\ ™
the course to Cape Sandwich, passing Point Hillock
and the remarkable range, called by Captain Cook
Mount Hinchinbrook; behind which is Rockingham
Bay, 'where there is excellent anchorage if required
Proceed outside and near to Brooke’s Islands,* towards
Barnard Group, and thence either within or outside of
Frankland’s Islands to Fitzroy Island; between which
and Double Point the shore is formed by a succession
of sandy bays and projecting rocky points backed by
the high land of Bellenden Iter’s Hills. Frankland’s
C. Sandwich.
Islands being, comparatively speaking, low must be
passed, if at night, with caution, but by day all the
danger# are visible.
Frankland’s
islands.
* The situation of the reef on which the San Antonio struck is not
satisfactorily known. Keep near the Palm Islands to avoid it,


Tims far a ship may proceed without the necessity
of anchoring; but as the Barrier reefs approach the
coast the passages between the reefs near the shore
become narrower; the sea is perfectly smooth, and
the anchor may be dropped at sunset in almost any
part of the channel; or, should the breeze be strong, un-
der the lee ( the north west side) of any of the islets or
reefs that are at hand, at from Jto J a mile off. The
ship may pass either between the Cape and Fitzroy Is-
land, or without them; the latter is the better course.
C. Grafton,
rp S*
The anchorage under the. the extremity
bearing S.E. is a convenient one; but if water be re-
quired it is to be procured more readily at Fitzroy
Island, where the anchorage is in 9 fms. J mile off
the coral beach on its inner side. Both Fitzroy Id. and
the cape are readily to be distinguished at a distance:
the land makes as it were three lofty islands, of which
the outermost, 550 feet high, is the island; and the
middle one, on which are two small but remarkable
peaks, the summit of the cape.
Anchorage,
The reefs to the eastward of Barnard’s Group, on
one of which the Prince Regent schooner grounded,
and the other she saw, were not noticed by me; they
are laid down at the Hydrographical Office from other
authorities: as are also the reefs to the eastward of the
outer track between Point Cooper and Fitzroy Island,
with the exception of the sandy islet, bearing E | S
(mag ) 8 miles from the latter, which islet was seen
and placed by me.
R ee f s i n the
From Cape Grafton a N. W.-JN. course for 35
miles, oyer a depth of 17, 18 and 19 fathoms, will


carry a ship over the outer tracks to within a league
of the Low Isles. Should it be night, come no nearer
to them than 14 fathoms, and be careful in not going
to the eastward of t e course to avoid the long line
of reefs seen by H.M.S Tamar in 1824, which are
possibly fringed by detached reefs; on one of these
H.M.S. Imogene struck; the position whereof according
to the Log of that ship is to the eastward of the
outermost track or about 7 miles E.S.E. from the
easternmost islet of the Low Isles. Another account
places it about 5 or 6 miles S.E.b.E.jE. from the
islet; this is also to the eastward of my outer track.
Trinity Bay.
Imogene
Itock.
Xhe shoal sounding of 4£ down upon my
track, from some authority, 1111 k icwn to me, probably
intended for the Imogene could not be found by
U yj g Beagle. I do not believe it exists.there- fep-4he
hat depth wuTl6 fat-honiu un an even bottom ofmadv
From the Low Isles steNNW, and pass within
5 miles of Cape avoid the suppos-
ed position of some xeefs, which have been reported to
have been seen in Lat. 15° 51 r whe»ee the courcj may
parallel with the coast. The better route will
p e within the western Hope; and along its reef at the
distance of f mile, by which you will avoid reef a.
When you are abreast of its north end, a N b. W
westerly course, for 28 miles, will carry you to Cape
Bedford, which may be rounded at from 1 to 3 or 4
miles. You will see in your way, at 3± miles from the
north end of the Hope reef, reef b; and at 15 miles
from it you will be abreast of e; and 5 miles farther on
you will pass Captain Cook’s Turtle Reef, which has
a dry sand at its north extremity.
C S
/rH+4 .
Cape
Tribulation.
Hope isles.


The reefs a, b and c will be to the eastward of the
course. The current sets to the N.W. , so that your
course must be directed accordingly.
Endeavour
In coasting along the shore, you will discern the
summits which are marked on the chart. The high
conical hill, on the south side of the entrance of
Endeavour River, is Mount Cook; bearings of which,
crossed with the summit of Cape Bedford, or any other
of the particularized summits or points, will give the
vessel's place; by which the effects of the current will
be ascertained: on one occasion we found a current in
the space between the Endeavour Reef and Turtle
Reef, of two miles an hour to the N.W.; generally,
however, its rate is about one mile.
Being off Cape Bedford, and steering to the
the Three Isles* Mill he seen ahead; pass between
them and the low wooded island, and direct the course
round Cape Flattery and Look-out Point, in order to
anchor under the Turtle Group; unless there be time
before dark to reach the islands 4,5, or 6, of Howick’s
Group, under which anchorage may be found. In
rounding Look-out Point, do not come within 24 miles
of it, to avoid a reef that is on Captain Cook’s chart,
which however we did not see; it is supposed to be
14 mile north from the peaked hill at the extremity of
the point. Pass on either side of the Turtle Group, or
between Lizard Island and Eagle Island, but the latter
C. Bedford,
Turtle Group
♦Look out for a Shoal reported by H.M.S. Victor, but could not be
found by H.M.S. Beagle: nor did the Beagle see a Shoal marked on
thy chart to the south of the Low wooded island.


covrse is not to be recommended; first, because the
wind is generally fresher as the distance from the shore
is increased, and, secondly, because the run is 10 or 12
miles longer. There is good anchorage under the north
west side of the Peak on Lizard Island.
Lizard id.
From the Turtle Group, steer until
the hillock at the south-east end of No. 1 of Ho wick’s
Group is visible: pass inside it, ai d within a mile of
2 and 3, and between islet 4 and Cole’s Islands: off
the latter the water is shoal for some distance, keep,
therefore, nearer to 4; also pass in shore of 6, and of
the dry sands s, t, and u. The Mermaid’s track will
direct the course to Cape Melville. If the day be ad-
vanced when abreast of G, of Ilcwick’s Group, anchor-
age had better be secured under it, as there is none to
be recommended, should the weather be unsettled,
between it and Cape Flinders.
Ho wick’s
G roup.
Upon rounding Cape Melville, the Islands of
Flinders's Group will be seen; and as sxm as you have
passed between the stony reef that projects off the
Cape (the extremity of which bears from it by com-
pass N.W.b.N., and from Pipon’s Island S.W.b.W
nearly ), and the reef that surrounds Pipon Island,
direct the course for the extremity of the islands to the
westward, which is Cape Flinders; the course and
distance to it is W.f S. nearly 13 miles, leaving a low
woody island on the starboard hand.
C. Melville,
to
C. Flinders.
His Majesty’s Sloop Satellite, in 1822, grounded
upon a small reef, a, bearing N.b.E ( easterly ) from
the extremity of the cape, distant about two miles. By
attending to the following directions, this danger may
Reef a.


be avoided. On passing the low woody island, should
the cape’s extreme bear to the southward of W.f S.,
haul up to the southward, until it bears W.-J S. and
pass close round it, and avoid the shoal ground which
extends for two cable’s lengths to the westward of the
extremity. If intending to stop the night, haul up and
anchor under the flat-topped hill, at f of a mile from
the shore, in 10 fathoms, muddy bottom.
c * Flinders
If daylight will allow of time to run fifteen miles
further, the ship may proceed to the anchorage under
reef d ; in this neighbourhood, however, anchorage
may be obtained under any of the reefs or islets as
convenient, for the bottom is universally of mud; and
by anchoring with the body of a reef, bearing S.E.,
the vessel is sufficiently sheltered from the sea, which
is generally smuoth.
On leaving Cape Flinders, steer W.f N. for about
23 miles, leaving the reefs c and g to seaward, and
d, e, and f, to the southward of the course; then
haul up about N.W.f N., and steer within the reef 1
and Pelican Island, and to seaward of the Claremont
Islands 1 and 2, which are low and woody The
passage is quite clear to the south of d, e and f.
Claremont,
Islands.
When abreast of island 2, the south-west end of
the reef m will be seen, which should be passed at
from one to two miles, and the course will
carry you to islands 4 and 5, which you may pass on
either side of; or between them. If you take the latter
course, steer north, within the reef o, and then close
within 6, to avoid a low rock that covers with the tide.
Having passed this rock, which is marked on the


chart, steer for, and pass within one mile of 7, to avoid
the shoals that extend off Cape Sidmouth. Hence the
course is N.N.W. towards Night Island; and, when
abreast of it, steer N.|\V. until near the covered
shoal v, when the course may be directed within
Sherrard’s Islets and reef 10 ( on which there is a
sandy islet covered with some bushes ); and then steer
round Cape Direction. In passing the cape keep well
to the eastward of the track, to avoid the shoal water
which extends off it, upon which by inattention some
ships have grounded. Haul close round (within) 10,
and steer N.JW. until abreast of the cape: then bear
away for Restoration Island on, about, a N.N.W.JW.
course, which will carry the ship within the reefs y, z,
a, b, and c; and without the rocky islet that lies off*
Restoration Island: continuing this course for about
five miles beyond Cape Restoration, you will see the
long reef e; then steer N.W. along its edge, which
extends to abreast of Fair Cape, where it terminates in
a very nairow point. Thence steer N.W.JN., and pass
between the two easternmost Piper's Islands and the
reefs h, i, and k; then on either side of 1 and
m, * inshore of Ilaggerston’s Island, and round
the outermost of Sir Everard Home’s Group.
Cape
Sidmoutli.
C. Directi or.
Cape
Restoration.
Piper’s Isles.
The anchorages between Cape Flinders and this are
so numerous as not to require particular mention: the
north-west end of every reef will afford shelter; but
the anchor should not be dropped too near to them,
because the tide sweeps round the edge with greater
Anchorage.
* The reef, named on the chart Young Island, was so called because it
formerly had a Tree growing upon it. Being now without this indication
to mark its position, caution should be used in passing it.




strength than it does at half a mile off, and the bottom
is generally deeper. If the day be advanced and the
breeze fresh, Night Island should not be passed: be-
cause the anchorages between it and Piper’s Islands
are rather 'exoosed; and a vessel ffettino; underweiMi
from Night Island at daylight will easily reach Piper’s
Islands, or Margaret Bay, before dark.
Anchorages.
Margaret Bay is round Cape Grenville; the anchor-
age being fronted by Sunday Island, is well, sheltered:
it is a safe place to stop at. Anchor in G fathoms, with
the island bearing S.E.
Margaret
Bay.
In passing round Sir Everard Home’s Islands, steer
wide from them, to avoid the tide drifting you towards
the group; for it sets to the N.W. across the course.
Idle course is then about N.W.JW. to the Bird Isles,
and thence, to the reef v, about N.W.b.N. ; the better
and more direct plan is to pass within v and w ,
(there is, however, a safe channel between them, ) and
when abreast of the west end of the latter, the course
and distance to Caimcross Island is N.b.W. JW. about
18 miles. In anchoring here get the body of the island
to bear S.E. the depth will be about 15 fathoms
Binl rsles -
Caimcross i.
Leaving Cairncro-s Island, steer until
abreast of Escape River, when look out for reef x :
steer within it about N.W.b.N , which will take you
inside the covered reef z . Your course then must be
round the Albany Islands, and hence N.Wb.N. for( a\
which is, a rocky islet that may be seen from abreast
the Albany Isles.
There not being any very good anchorage between
Albany Isles.


Caimcross Island and Mount Adolphus, it would be
perhaps better to anchor in Blackwood Bay, or a
night’s shelter may be had under the lee of Cape
York. The bay under Mount Adolphus, first noticed by
11.M.5. Tamar in 18*24, and subsequently described by
other authorities, affords good anchorage on its south
side, just within and near the south head. It was after-
wards surveyed by Captain b. Blackwood of H M &•
Hyacinth and called Blackwood Bay. The anchorage
i 3 with Mount Adolphus bearing from NEbE to
E.N.E and the outermost Albany Island just shut in
with Point Dickey, the south point of the Bay.
Blackwood
Bay, under
Mount
Adolphus.
After passing round Cape York there are two modes
of clearing Torres’ Strait, either by rounding Wednes-
day and Hammond Islands, the one usually adopted;
or by going through Endeavour Strait; which, by the
channel that had formerly been used, has been hitherto
thought too shcal for large ships. Captain Stokes
however has communicated to me the discovery of a
channel through it by which ships may more readily
get through than by the northern route. To go through
Endeavour Strait then, pass through the Possession
Isles and steer for Wallis Isles, and when they beai
south, distant two miles, steer Wj S, and there will
not be less than 6 fathoms. To use the northern route
after leaving Cape \ oik steer lor reef (a), and when
abreast of it Wednesday Island will be in sight. In
steering towards the island avoid standing too close to
the rocky islet that is abreast of the strait between it
and Horned Hill, as some sunken rocks stretch off it
for about a quarter of a mile: steer round the north
point of Wednesday Island at half a mile, then a
Wb S JS. course will carry you to the northward of
Cape York.
Endeavour
Strait.
Round
Wednesday
Island.




the rock off Hammond’s Island. From this rock steer
S.W.b.W.; and when abreast of the south-west end of
Hammond’s Island, haul towards a reef, to the south-
ward of the course, on which you will see some dry
rocks, which you may pass within half a mile of: by
so doing you will avoid reef(d), which is generally, if
not always, covered: the fair way of this channel is
seven and eight fathoms deep.
Passage
round
Wednesday
Island.
When the summit of Good’s Island bears S.W.b.W.
steer W.b.S. southerly for Booby Island, by. which
1 ynn will Bank, an4 whon you have-
passed it you are-clear of the strait. Hence, you may
steer W.f S. through the night, on which course ymtr
-w+H very gradually deeperu/tho ■water. To the north-
ward of the two tracks to the westward of Booby
Island are some coial reefs, the position of which are
not correctly ascertained. At Booby Island ships gene-
rally kttd for the purpose their safety in
the book that w&s deposited there for by
Goloncl Hanson-of- Madrcur; and if it be worth while
i
to wait for nig it a few Turtle may be taken on small
sandy nooks on either side of the island.
Booby
Island.
The variation in Torres Strait, and off Booby Island,
in 1820, was Easterly; but, in proceeding to the
westward it gradually decreases. Abreast of Cape
it was 2£o E., and off New Year’s Island
H° E. ; off Cape Van Diemen the variation was not
perceptible, nor was it worth noticing in shaping the
course from that cape to Timor.
From Booby Island to the Strait of Rottee, the
course is West (true) and the distance 1106 miles:
Variation.


the intermediate — from Booby Island
to Cape Wessel 300 miles: thence to New Year’s
Island 220 miles: and from that island to Cape
Van Diemen 150 miles. The coast being very low, no
part of it will be seen, nor indeed are the places above
mentioned visible from a greater distance than five
leagues: but the land of Timor is mountainous, and
the higher parts, towards the south-west end of the
inland, will probably.be iMti. if the weather be
100 miles off. The current sets at about one mile per
hour with the wind.
From Booby
Island to
Timor.
The monsoons blow with great regularity, but with
variable strength. The easterly one commences between
the 20th. March and Ist. April; at first with light and
increasing airs, but finally ■ Eottloo rato a fresh winch
during the months of May, June, and July it is at its
full strength: in August it is interrupted, occasionally,
by light winds and -sometimes by calm4-wcather; but
generally the wind is sufficiently steady to insure a
ship a rapid run to the Off Timor the
westerly monsoon commences the latter end of
October, or the beginning of the follow,mg mon#t; and
is attended with squally weather. This is the rainy sea-
son on the north coast; and in the open sea the weather
is *
Change of
Monsoon?.




