

SAILING DIRECTIONS
FOR THE
ARAFURA SEA;
bOMPILBi)
FROM THE NARRATIVES OF LIEUTS. KOLFF AND MODERA,
OF THE DUTCH NAVY,
BY
GEORGE WINDSOR EARL.
:*<
*> V
, /
RE-PRINTED AT THE AUSTRALIAN OFFICE, GEORGE-STREET.
1839.
Zonfton t
PUBLISHED BY THE HYDROGRAPHIC OFFICE.




SAILING DIRECTIONS
FOR THE
A RAFURA SEA.




INTRODUCTION.
Lieutenant Kolff, of the Dutch Navy,
was employed during the years 1825 and
1826 in examining the several groups of
Islands which lie to the eastward of Timor;
and in 1828 the Triton corvette, com-
manded by Captain Steenboom, proceeded
to the western coast of New Guinea, in
order to establish a colony at Fort Dubus,
in Triton Bay. Narratives of these ex-
peditions have been published in Holland;
the former by its commander, M. Kolff,
and the latter by M. Modera, who had
been a lieutenant on board the Triton.
They both contain much interesting mat-
ter, . which, if translated into English,
would benotonlyavaluable addition to our
geographic knowledge, but exceedingly
useful to all those whose commercial
activity leads them amongst the numerous
islands of that .hitherto unfrequented re-
gions.
The following tract consists of such
parts of those two works as are more
especially nautical. They have been
selected and put together by Mr G. W.
Earl, who was well qualified for the task
by the experience he had obtained in his
former intercourse with the Malay ports
and islands, and by his acquaintance with
the Bughis, who are the principal native
mariners of the Indian Archipelago.
Much pains appear to have been taken
by the Dutch officers in determining the
latitudes and longitudes of the various
places at which they touched, and they
have thus been able to introduce several
important corrections in the relative posi-
tions of the islands. They have also
marked many new channels between the
islands, as well as anchoring roads and
dangers ; and they have laid down a con


siderable part of the New Guinea coast,
which was previously unknown. From
these and other materials Mr Earl has
also prepared a chart which cannot fail
to be a valuable acquisition to the navi-
gator. and which, therefore, has been
published by this office. Extending from
Timor to New Guinea, and from Ceram
to North Australia, it includes alLthe
Hydrographic Office, Nov. 22, 1837.
places mentioned in these Directions ,
and, as the major part of the natives
within those limits appear from their lan-
guage and customs to belong to the great
parent tribe of the Arafuras in New
Guinea, he has thought it advisable to
distinguish this portion of the vast Eastern
Archipelago by the name of the Arafura
Sea.
EaT All the Bearings are Magnetic ; and the Distances are given in Nautio
Miles of Si.rfg to a Degree. ,


SAILING DIRECTIONS
FOR THE
ARAFURA SEA.
WINDS AND CURRENTS.
In the sea lying between New Guinea and
Timor, the easterly monsoon commences in April
and continues until the beginning of October,
when, after a few weeks of variable winds, the
westerly monsoon sets in and continues without
intermission until the beginning of March. In
the southern part of the Indian Archipelago,
generally, the easterly monsoon is attended with
fine weather, but on the S. W. coast of New
Guinea, and among Che islands to the westward,
as far as the east coast of Celebes, frequently
squalls, with heavy rain, are experienced at this
season, often accompanied with considerable
swell from the southward, while/ during the
remainder of the year, the weather is fine. This
rule, however, does not extend farther to the
westward, for from Celebes to the western ex-
tremity of the Archipelago, and also on the
north coast of Australia, the westerly is the
rainy monsoon.* The monsoons, when at their
height, usually blow in an E. S. E. and W. N. W.
direction ; but towards the change they draw
round more to the southward, sometimes con-
tinuing several days at S. W.
During the easteily monsoon, the current sets
to the N. W. along the western coast of New
Guinea and between the Ki and Arru islands,
and thence eastward along the south coast of
Ceram, at the rate of a mile or a mile and a half
an hour, according to the strength of the wind,
the velocity being greatest along the coast of
* It is difficult to account for this fact,, unless
we suppose that the clouds brought from the
Indian Ocean by the westerly monsoon are'
stopped and emptied of their contents by the
ishteds on the western limits of the Archipelago;
and that, in like manner, the easterly monsoon
brings the clouds from the Pacific, which break
qver the islands to the eastward. The south
part of Timor, and the north coast of Australia,
where the seasons are similar to those at the
opposite extremity of the eastern seas, lie open
to the westerly winds from the Indian Ocean.
New Guinea. At this period an easterly current
prevails on the north side of the-islands, extending
from Timor to Timor-Laut, so that a moderately
fast vessel would experience no difficulty there in
beating up against that monsoon. In the westerly
monsoon the current in these seas usually sets
with the wind, but its velocity is not so great as
during the other season.
NEW GUINEA.
Frederic Henry Island, on the S. W. coast of
New Guinea, was supposed to be part of the
main land until 1835, when Lieut. Kool, of the
Dutch Navy, passed through the strait which
separates it. The island is about 100 miles in
length E. and W., and 58 miles in breadth. The
land is everywhere low, apparently marshy, and
covered with a dense forest. A number of
natives were seen on the N. W. side of the
island, by Lieut. Kolff, in 1826; but they
shunned all intercourse witbins people.
Cape Yalsche, or False Cape, the S. W. ex-
tremity of Frederic Henry Island, is, according
to Jjieut. Kolff, in lat, 8 ? 22’ S., long. 137 0
4l*E. The*!and about the Cape, and the entire
south coast of Frederic Henry Island, is fronted
by a mud-bank, extending about 8 miles out to
sea, having 3 fathoms on its verge, from which
the depth rapidly increases to 9, 14, and 27
fathoms. About 50 miles to the N. E. of Cape
Valsche the mud-bank begins to decrease in
breadth, so that vessels are enabled to approach
the shore.
Dourga Strait was first entered by Lieut.
Kolff, in 1826, who supposed it to be a large
river, and in 1828 the Tr\*on penetrated about
40 miles from its western entrance; but it was
not determined to be a strait until 18X5, when
two DutchGovernmentachoonersparsed through..
The IS. W. entrance is about 12 miles wide, the
western point being in lat. 7 ° 27’ S., long,
138 0 46’ E., and the eastern point in lat. 7 °
22’ S., long. 138 0 55' E, The soundings at
this entrance are from 6to 9 fathoms mud,
which increase to 13, 15, and 18 fathoms while


proceeding up the strait, the last being the dtpth
in mid-channel at the part from which the Triton
returned. The shores tray be approached to
within a mile, in-soundings of from 5 to 8
fathoms, No danger was discovered ty the
Triton, though she b at up the strait against the
S. E. monsoon. The position of the south
entrance has not yet been determined. This
strait is of little importance to seamen at present,
except that it leads to the possibility that the
portions of laud which are seen by vessels
pas8 } ng through Torres Strait, and which were*
supposed to be parts of New Guinea, ere, in
fact, a series of islands ; and if so, some chan-
nel may be discovered, by means of which the
dangers attending the navigation of Torres Strait
may be avoided.
On the north side of the strait, about 5 miles
within the entrance, is a c.eek, in which the
water is fresh at 3 ebb ; but a vessel would find
difficulty in watering there. The upper part of
the creek is inhabited ty Fspuas, or Oriental
Negroes, the aborigines of the coasts of New
Guinea, who possess small canoes, and are armed
with bows and arrows, and spears. A number
of them catne down on the beach and communi-
cated with the people of the Trlon , bartering
their arms and ornaments for cloth and empty
bottles ; but after a friendly Intercourse had sub-
sisted for nearly an hour, a difference occurred,
in which three of the natives were killed and se-
veral of the Dutch wounded.
The coast from the entrance of Dourga Strait
extends in a N. N. westerly direction, to the
False Utanata River, in lat. 4 ° 48* S. The
land is low and covered with forest, and a mud-
bank, which lines the shore, prevents vessels
forn approaching nearer than from 4 to 6 miles.
This part of the coast is thickly populous, but
the natives are inhospitable to strangers.
The Triton Sand Bank, the south side of
whichisin lat. C° 2* S,, long. 138° 4* E,,
was discovered by the Triton. It lies about 18
miles off shrre, with 10 fathoms mud imme-
diately to the southward.
Providential Bank, in lat. 5 ° 38* S., long.
137 ° 67* E. ? has 4, (J, and 7 fathoms imme-
diately to the south of it, and 12 fathoms about
two miles from its western end.' It lies 10 miles
from the main.
False Utanaia River, in lat. 4 ° 48* S., long,
136'° 57* E., is of considerable size, but a bar
of sand extends across the mouth, on which,
during the S. E. monsoon, there is a heavy suif.
A vessel may anchor in 13 fathoms to the west-
ward of the bar; but a strong swell from the
southward, and the reefs, which lie to the north-
west, render this anchorage unsafe during the
S. E. monsoon. False Wakia River, 7 or 8
miles to the northward, is of a similar descrip-
tion. The shores of these rivers are thickly
peopled, but no intercourse could be obtained
with them. The natives of Ceram visit this
coast during the N. W. monsoon with a number
of prahut (proas), and carry on a brisk trade.
The coast to the northward of the False Ufa-
rmta forms a deep bight, terminating in Cape
Steenboom, lat. 4 ° 43’ S., long. 136° 23 1 E.,
across which, in a line between the Cape and tho
piver, extends a chain of shoals.
Ulanata River, lat. 4° 32* S., long. I3G°-
10* E., is about 2 miles wide at its mouth, and
is fronted by a bar, on which there is rather
mote than a fathom at low water. The best an-
chorage is a little to the westward of the mouth
Of the river, about 3 miles from the west point,
in from 6 to 8 fathoms mud. The Tritun lay
here 11 days, and completed her water, in which
the crew were assisted by the natives, who uni-
formly behaved in a friendly manner ; probably
having become more civilized than those to the
southward, from their having had more commu-
nication with the Ceramese and Macassar tra-
ders. Plantains, cocoa nuts, limes, papyas,
bread-fruit, nutmegs, and turtleshell, were
brought off by the natives in their canoes, and
exchanged for calico, looking-glasses, chopping
knives, and beads, but the former is most in de-
mand ; pigs abound, but the natives do not like
to dhpo*e of them.
To the northward of the Utanata lies the
Wamukn River, in lat, 4 ® 29* S., long. 136 °
6* E, It is rather smaller than the former, and,
like it, is covered by a bar.
Cape Buro, in lat. 4 0 V S.,long, 135 °9' E.,
is a steep promontory, visible at a distance of
j.bout 30 mih s, [with no soundings, 4 miles out-
side. A range of mountains stretches from
thence fo the eastward into the interior, wilh 3
table-bills on it, which are visible from off the
False Utanata River.
Lakahia Island, lat. 4° 2’ S,, long,
134 ° 53* E., is moderately elevated. May,
1826, the brig Dourga anchored in 5 fathoms,
with the island W. S. W. distant 4 miles, and
obtained water and refreshments, but owing to
some of the boat’s crew having attempted to cut
down a cocoa nut tree, the natives attacked them
and killed one of the men. There is a bight in
the main land to the northward of the island,
which has not been examined.
Triton Bay is an inlet, extending 6 miles
N. E. into the main land of New Guinea. The
coast is here fronted by a chain of small islands,
the shores of which are steep to. The best en-
trance to the bay is by a strait 3£ miles wide,
between the island Semieuw, lat. '3° 48* S.,
long. 134° 12’ E.; and the west point of
Aiduma, lat. 3° 51’ S., long: 134 ° 14* E.
A chain of five small islands stretches 4 miles
W. S. W. from the west point of Aiduma, and
the fair channel lies between the outermost of
these and Semieuw.
Fort Dubus, a settlement of the Dutch, has
been placed at the bead of a small cove on the
north side of Triton Bay,in lat. 3 ° 42* S, long.
134° 15* 41’* E. This cove is 2 miles deep,
and 1 mile wide, having at the entrance a depth
of 32 fathoms, which decreases to 5 fathoms
mud at its head, where a vessel may moor a
cable’s length from the shore. The channel
into the cove is close along the SAY. side, as a
mud-bank nearly dry at low water extends from
the N.E. side, three quarters of the width of the
cove. High water at full and change, Ih Bm,
rise and fall 7 feet. This settlement was
founded by the Dutch in 1828. The garrison
consists of about a dozen European and forty
native soldiers. Water and refreshments may
be obtained there.


Iris Strait, the channel by which the Triton
entered Triton Bay, is formed by the Island
Aiduraa to the S, and by Dramaai Island and
the main land of New Guinea to (be N. and
east. The south entrance of the strait, which is
2 miles wide, is in lat. 3 ° 54* S., long. 134 °
22* E, From thence the strait stretches N. W.
by \V., about 6 miles, having a breadth of from
1 to 2 miles throughout, but having no sound*
ings in mid-channel with 90 fathoms of line.
A vessel may anchor in a bight on the N. G.
side of Aiduraa in 25 fathoms, at a cable’s
length from the shore, and opposite to a fertile
valley, in which there is a native village, where
refreshments may be obtained,
Naraatotte Island, lat. 3 ° 44* S., long,
134° 1* E., was the western limit of the
Triton’s survey. A group of high islands ex-
tend* from this westward, the extremity of which
is Cape Katomun, abcut lat. 4 9 00* S., long.
133 ° 3* E. This Cape rises into a high moun-
tain, and there is no ground with 100 fathoms,
4 miles to the westward of it.
Pulo Adi, or Weasel Island, which extends
N. W. and S. E., about 25 miles, lies 30 miles
to the S. W. of the entrance of Triton Bay.
The S. E. point of the island is in lat. 4 ° 19’S.,
long. 133° 57* E.; and W. S. W. of this point,
about 9 miles distance, lies Gird Island, which
is encompassed by a reef. Bottom cannot be
found with 100 fathoms to the westward of the
reef, though between the island and Pulo Adi
there are soundings of 14 to 25 fathoms. To
the S. E. of the west point there is a small bay,
in which anchorage may be had in 10 fathoms.
THE ARRU ISLANDS.
The northern islands of this extensive group
are most frequented by the native traders of the
Indian Archipelago, and are better known to
them than the southern portion, which have not
yet been explored by Europeans, and tbe natives
of which are bel eved to be much less civilized.
On their eastern side they are enclosed by a
great coral reef, which reaches to several miles
from the shore, and the outer limit of which
_has not yet been ascertained. Tbe whole chain
o< these islands extends more than ,100 miles
from its southern extreme, in lat. 7 ® 6* S,,
long, about 134 ° 20* E., * and terminates in
30* S., long. 134° 10” to 135° E.
A ship bound to the Arm Islands, if coming
from the southward, should pass to the westward
the S. W. part of the group, at a distance of 5
or 6 leagues from the land, as tbe soundings
from thence in shore are very irregular, and it is
possible that reefs may exist theie. When in
* 11l s is the position assigned to it by Lieut.
KolfF, though Captain Barnes of the AJinstrei,
who saw the south extieme of the Arrus in 1822,
places it in lat. 7 ® 0* S,, long, 133° 36* E,
Hursburgh, on the authority of Mr Barnes, lays
down a town, which he calls Niagona, near the
S, W. extremity of Arrus, in lat. 6 ° 38* S. long,
1.34° 4* E.; but by the Triton’s observations,
she sailed over that spot without even seeing the
land, when passing to the southward between
thp Ki and'the Ami Islands.
the parallel of 6 ® S., she may haul up to the
north-eastward, and, passing round the east
point of Babi (lat. 5 ° 57* S.i long, 134 ° B*E.)
should run to tbe E. N. eastwards, towards the
village of Waola, on theN. W. point of Wama
island, which is about 10 miles distant from the
east point of Babi, and off which she may come
to an anchor, about a cannon shot from the
shore. Should it be intended to remain at the
islands any time, a native pilot may be obtained
there to take the vessel into Dobbo Harbour.
As the north-western part of the group is better
known, a vessel coming from the northward may
proceed with more confidence. She should
make the N. W. end of Wassia, the north-west-
ernmost of the group, and passing aleng the west
coast, might haul in and come to an anchor in
the strait between that island and Wadia, or
proceed to the southward along the west coast of
Wokan to Dobbo. If a vessel comes here to
trade, it would be advisable to have a native
pilot on board, who will be found of great as-
sistance in communicating with the natives.
Bughis, and other natives, who are well ac-
quainted with these hlands, may always be ob-
tained at Singapore, Macassar, or the Moluccas.
Dobbo Harbour lies on the west side of tbe
Arru Islands, and affords good anchorage, in
which a vessel may He securely in both monsoons.
It is formed by the Island Wokan on the north,
and Wama On the south, the entrance, which is
about 2 miles wide, being in lat. 5 ° 49’ S.,
long. 134 ° 26’ E. Both sides of the entrance
are lined by coral banks, steep to, and dry at
low water, which leave, a narrow channel of 8
to 10 fathoms into the harbour. The reef ex-
ten s farther from Wokan than from Wama, so
that the fair way is rather to the southward of a
mid-channel line, A ship wishing to enter tbe
harbour should take a pilot on board from Wanla,
and it would, perhaps, be necessary to warp
in during the S.E, monsoon.
The town of Dobbo, which is the chief resort
of'the traders, stands about 5 miles within the
harbour, on a tongue of land which stretches
out N.E. from the Island of Wama, to within 1
mile of Wokan. In the S.E. monsoon vessels
anchor to the westward of this tongue, and on
the opposite side during the other monsoon.
Tbe trade appears to be considerable ; for when
Lieut. Kolff was there in Aptil 1826, a brig from
Sourabaya and-between 30 and 40 large Bughi
prabus were lying in this harbour, while a num-
ber of others were trading among the islands.
The chief products are pearls, pearl shell, tor-
toiseshell, trepang, nutmegs, and various other
"Valuable articles; and the goods given in ex-
change are European and Indian calicoes, coarse
cutlery, chopping knives, muskets, gunpowder,
chinawure, elephants* teeth, &c. &c. Tobacco
and aniseed should always be taken as presents,
to the chiefs, and it will be prudent to offer
some stationery to the schoomasters, as, from
the influence they possess, they should be con-
ciliated. Fowls, hogs, and all sorts of tropical
fruits may he obtained there, but no cattle.
The natives of Dobbo, together with nearly
all the population of Wama, and of the more
extensive islands of Wokan and Maykor, are


Christians, and many are also scattered through
the remainder of the group, where they have
been converted by native Missionaries and school-
masters from Amboyna. The inhabitants of
Wadia and Wassia are Mahommedaos, but the
remainder of the population of the group, espe-
cially those of the southern parts, are Fagans,
and are both far more savage than the Christians.
The people of Dobbo are hospitable to strangers,
enterprising, and well accustomed to commerce,
but they must not be treated with indignity, for, ■
like all the natives of the Archipelago, they deeply
feel and will long resent a premeditated insult.
Ceramese pirate prahus may sometimes be met
with near these islands, as well as in other parts
of the Archipelago ; tut vessels are secure from
then attacks while at anchor in any of the har-
bours.
Wassia Island, the N.W. point of which-is
in lat. 5 s 26’ S., long. 134° 21’E, is the
north-westernmost of the group. There is good
anchorage in the strait, which separates it from
Wadia.
The town of Wadia, which is the chief resort
of the traders from Ceram, is on the north side
of the island of that name, a short distance
within the above-mentioned strait. The na-
tives, who are Mohammedan converts of the
Ceramese, ore veiy inferior in moral character
to the other natives, and are the chief peace-
disturbers of this little Archipelago, frequently
making predatory attacks on their neighbours,
and being protected in their aggressions by the
Ceramese. • Their numbers, however, are not
very considerable,
Wokan, lying between Wadia and Wama, is
a large island, and numerous villages are scat-
tered over it. The western coast must not be
made free with, as it is fronted by a coral reef.
It will be unnecessary to enumerate the other
islands. Vorkay, at the southern extremity of
the group, may hereafter be of importance,
from the extensive pearl and trepang banks
which lie in its vicinity ; but i' is not known
whether there is good anchorage near it for large
vessels.
KI ISLANDS.
The Ki Islands lie to the westward of the
Arms, the N.E. point of the Great Ki bearing
W.JN. from the N.W. point of Wassia, dis-
tant 50 miles. It is in lat. 5 v 22’ S., long.
133° 33’ E, The channel between.tha two
groups is dc£p, and is supposed to be clear of
all danger; but neither it nor the islands have
been well explored. The natives are remarkable
for lhe>r peaceable deposition and ihcirinduatry.
Hi, a village near the N. E. point of the Great
Ki, is' famous for its potteries, the earths nware
manufactured there being highly valued all over
this part of the Archipelago. Dola, a town.,
situated in a bay on the north side of the
southernmost Ki, is the chief trading place, and
prahus from Macas:?ar and Handa frequently
visit it for commercial purposes. Many prahus
are bulk theie by the naiiveK out of the excellent
limber with which parts of the islands are covered,
a quantity of which is also exported. These
prahus are sold to the natives of the other
islands, and scarcely any others are used by tha
Banda traders.
An irregular chain of islands, which are called
the Nusa Tello, and are all imperfectly known,
extends to the westward from the Ki islands
about 1.1 leagues; and from thence they turn N.
and N. W. towards the S. E. extremity of Ceram,
where two islands, called Great and Little
Keffing, are almost united to it by a coral reef.
Lieut. Kolff places the east point of the Keffing
Islands in lat. 3° 50’ S., long. 130° 45* E.,
which differs only 5 miles from the position as-
signed to it in the first edition of Horsburgh’s
Directory, while in the later editions, and also in
his chart of the Eastern passages to China, it is
placed 25 miles farther to the eastward. Yet it
is also stated in those later editions (11., p. C3fi)
that Banda bears from that point S. 47° W,,
distant 1R leagues, which agrees with the position
of M. Kolff; and as the latter anked here
direct from Banda, and remained in the neigh-
bourhood several days, it is not probable that his
observations should be far wrong.
The Keffing Islands-must not be made free
with, as the coral bank, which stretches from the
south side of Ceram, surrounds them, and pro-
jects from the south side about 5, and from the
. east about 2 miles.
There is a channel between the Keffings and
Ghissa, an island a;out 6 miles east of them, or
half-way towards Cerara-Laut; there are from
30 to 50 fathoms m the mid-channel, in whicli
care must be taken to keep, as reefs run out from
both islands.
The Ceram-Laut Islands, the largest of which
is in lat. 3 ° £o’ S.,long. 130 ° 5T E.,are also
inclosed by a coral reef, which is steep to on the
north side. The large island is hilly, but the
others are low. There is anchorage on the N.W.
side of Kilwari, the westernmost of this group,
about gun-shot from the shore, but the bottom
is bad ; and thereds said to be a safe but narrow
channel between this island and Ghissa. The
natives of these islands, and also those of Goram,
carry on a considerable trade with New Guinea,
where they obtain slaves, turtleshell, edible birds’-
nests, &c.,in exchange for calicoes and fire-arms,
which are brought from Singapore by the Bugh(
prahus. The slaves are carried to Bali and
Lombok, where they are sold to the native in-
habitants. English whalers occasionally stop at
these islands to trade; but the natives, like the
Mohammedan inhabitants of Ceram, are a bad.
set, and must not be trusted.
To the S. E. of the Ceram-Laut Islands, lie
three others of considerable size, Salavako, Ma-
novolko, ai.J Goiatn, the channel between the
two groups being piobably safe. Goram, the
chief of them, lies nearly west, distant more
than 20 leagues from Cape Katomun on New
Guinea, the eastern point being in lat. 4 ° 3’ S.,
long. 131 ° 50’ E. Anchorage is laid down in
Horsbu gh’s • charts, eff the east side of the
island. This island canits on a considerable
trade with the western parts of Ntw Guinea,
and a ship going there on a trading voyage
should call at Goram, to take a native on bo trd
eccpiaintcd with the coast, and with the various
Papua chiefs.


The Matabclla Islands lie 20 miles S. E. from
the Goram group, the channel between being safe
and rapacious ; and 6 miles farther to the south-
ward lie three more, but smaller islands. When
the Triton corvette returned from New Guinea in
1828, she found a safe and wide channel between
the two groups; which may be easily dis-
tinguished from' each other, as the southern ex-
treme of the Matabellas is a small table.hill,
ftnd the whole of that group is hilly, while these
islets are small and low. The north-easternmost
of them is in lat. 4 9 32’5., long. 132 °s* E.,
but hitherto they have not been noticed in any
p.hart, Which shows the necessity of vessels
keeping a good look out when passing through
these long chains of islands. Next comes the
island of Tehor or Taw, and then 5 or (i islands
extending upwards of 20 miles to the southward;
hut none of these are well known* The channels
between them are, however, said to be sa e, and
the Triton passed thiough them on h*-r voyage to
New Guinea. The natives, who resemble those
of the Ki islands, are simp’e and industrious,
And they produce rice and Indian corn, which
are sold to the people of Banda and New Guinea.
The Timor Laut or Tenimber Islands form
the largest group in this sea, and lie nearest to
the north coast of Australia. The north-eas-
ternmost of them, Yordate and Larrat, the in-
habitants of which are more civilized and indus-
trious than the others, are the chief resort of
traders. A cluster of numerous small low is-
lands (ronts the N. \V, side of the Great Island,
extending from Mulo to within 15 miles of Serra,
and as an etlensive coral reef lies outside of
them, the limits of which are not well known,
they should not be approached without the
greatest care. There is no channel for largo
vessels within this cluster, The Great Island
is moderately elevated and covored with forests,
abounding in wild cattle ; and its inhabitants,
praticulaily those of the southern part, are very
barbarous, and iil-disporsd to strangers. In
1823, an English brig, supposed to be the Lady
Ac sii«, anchored off Luora, on the east coast, to
obtain refreahmtnts, and while half the crew
were ashore, the natives boarded the vessel, and
killed the lernainder, with the exception of two
youths, who were still theie when Lieutenant'
Kolff visited Yordate in 1825 and 1820. The
south point of Timor-Laut is placed by Kolff in
Ut. 8° 17’ S., long. 1319 V E. ; but Cap-
tain Cook, when passing in the Endiuvour, gave
it in the same latitude, though 43’ greater east-
ing; and Captain Barnes, of the Minsvel, who
saw it in in 1822, assumes its lat. 8 9 27’ S.,
and its long. 130 ° 5U’ E.*
Some small islands lie off the south point of
Timor-Li>ut, which should not be approached
nearer than 5 or 6 miles, as the edge of the great
coral bank which girts the eastern side of the is-
land has not been well ascertained.
* The;e appears to have been an error in his
chronometers of about 1 minute and 20 seconds,
for the N. E. point of the Great Ki is given by
him more than a third of a degree farther west
than it was found to be by the Triton , and the
same error appears in his longitude of the south
point of the Arms.
Yordate Island extends about 15 miles to thfl
north-east point, which is in lat. 7 ° 50’ S.,
long. 132 ° 18* K.; and is separated fro a Lar-
rat Island by a narrow strait, which is supposed
to be unnavigable, owing to coral reefs, as is
also the strait between Larrat and Timor-Laut
A ship bound to these islands during the eastern
ftonsoon, if coming from the eastward, should
make the N. E. point of Yordate, which may
easily be distinguished from the others, as the
hills are jagged like a cock’s comb, while Larrat
and Timor-Laut, though high, have a more level
appearance. After hauling round the point, and
giving a berth to a rock, which lies about a mile
out from the point, she may run along the edge
of the reef, which lines the west coast of Yordate
a short distance from the shore, and an 1 hor ia
from 10 to 30 fathoms sand, close undt rthe land,
between the town of Sebeano and a reef extend-
ing from the S. W, point of the Island. She
will lie there secure during the S. E. monsoon,
as the wind blows off the land, but the anchorage
would probably be unsafe during the other mon-
soon. The trading prahus, which only visit the
island during the westerly or fine weather mon-
soon, lie within the north-western entrance of
the strait, which divides Larrat from Yordate,
where they are well sheltered. The entrance is
narrow, even for a small vessel, and she would
require'a leading wind and a person on hoard
acquainted with the channel; but too much con-
fidence must not be placed in the native pilots,
here or elsewhe e, among these islands, as they
are accustomed to prahus only.
A vessel bound to the northern parts of
Timor-Laut, coming from the westward, must
not attempt to pass through the Mulo Islands,
but should pass round its north end, and then
steer to the south-eastward for .Yordate. If
obliged to beat up, she must not bring Mulo to
the eastward of north, on account of the reef
stretching between that island and the north
point of Timor-Laut.
The inhabitants of Yordate and Larrat appear,
from Lieutenant Kolff*s account, to be a supe-
rior race of people ; he was received there, as
indeed at most of the islands which he visited in
those seas, in the most friendly manner Both
of those islands are well cultivated, and rice, In-
dian corn, cattle, and other refreshmedts may be
obtained in abundance. The trade carried on
by prahus from Banda, Maccassar, Goiam, and
many of the neighbouring islands, is consider-
able, the productions, and the articles given in
exchange, being similar to those of the Arm
Islands. Gold coin will pass there, which the
natives work up into ornaments, but cotton ma-
nufactures and iron-ware are more desired, and
the people spare no efforts to purchase them.
Serra, an island in lat. 7 ° 35* S , and 7
miles distant frem the west coast of Timor-
Laut, is almost entirely under cultivation, and
is another good trading station. There is pro-
bably good anchorage round the S. E; point of
the island, between it and Timor-Laut, but the
north , part of the strait is supposed to be
shallow.
Between Timor-Laut and Banda He Serua
and Bird Islands. Serua is in lat. fi° 20’ S.,
long. 130° 38’ E, The natives are few in


number.; but at the change of the monsoons
they carry hogs and goats to Banda for sale.
Bird Island is in lat. 5 ° 29' S., long.
130 ° 1* E., according to the observations of
the Triton . Both this island and Serua are
placed very much out of their true position in
most of the charts, even Horsburgh laying the
former down 13 miles too far to the north-
ward, and 14 miles too far east. Bird Island is
high, and uninhabited, but in the westerly mon-
soon, the natives of the Ceram and other
islands visit it to obtain sulphur, with which
it abounds.
SBRWATTY ISLANDS.
The Serwatty Islands form a very numerous
chain which stretches from the east end of Timer
to Baba, near Timor. Laut, and do not appear to
be inferior to the Arms in the richness of their
products, while, the inhabitants are generally
more civilized than those of Timor-Laut. To
the. southern islands of this chain the above
name has been usually applied, though for what
reason does not appear; yet, as it is given in
previous charts, it .will be as well to retain and
extend it to them all.
Kissa, the westernmost, and one of the
smallest, but the most important of this group,
lies E. by S. from Sau, a town in the island of
Wetta, and 55 miles distant." It appears low
from a distance, owing to the top being flat, but
it is considerably elevated, and the sides are
very steep. There are two anchoring places
in the island, one on the west, and the other
on the south side. A vessel intending to call at
the western port, during the S, E. monsoons,
should stand close, in to the S. W. end of the
island, and then run along the shore to the
northward. She may haul in and come to an
anchor on a patch of rocks and sand, with very
irregular depths, close round the S. W. point of
the bay; but it would be prudent to send a boat
B*head to pick out a sandy spot, and a chain
cable should only be used. Kissa is the chief
emporium of the Serwatty Islands ; the inhab-
itants are mostly protestant Christians, and
carry on a considerable commerce. The chief
articles of trade are sandalwood, bees’-war, tor-
toiseshell, and trepang; and tame cattle, rice,
Indian corn, yams, aod cabbages, with a great
variety of fruits, may be obtained at a very
cheap rate. There is a small'village on the
shore of this West bay, bnt about 2 miles
inland, there is a small walled town, containing
a capacious and well built church. West Bay is
in Ut. 8 ® 14* long. 127 °B’ E.
Roma, which lies N. N. E. of Kissa, about
23 miles, is high and hilly, with several small
islands round it. It is less thickly inhabited
than Kissa, and the natives are less civilized.
There is good anchorage, during the S. E. mon-
soon, in 7 fathoms, on a bank of sand, extend-
ing half a mile towards Roma from the north
side of a little island called Nusa Midta ; but in
the N.‘ W. monsoon, the best anchorage is
under the lee of Roma, opposite to Nusa Midta,
where there is a small river, at which wood and
WHter may he obtained with facility. There is
Rsol said lo be good anchorage in a bay on the
N. W. side of Roma, but the coast there is
very thinly peopled.
Letti, K. S. E, of Kissa, about 28 miles, is
hilly, but with level land near the sea, and reefs
of rocks liue the north and west sides of the
island, at a distance of half a mile from the
shore. The best anchorage during the S. E.
monsoon is off the village of Tombra on the
N. W. side of the island, in lat. 8 ° 20 f S.,
long. 127° 46* E ; there being immediately
opposite the village an opening in the reef
500 feet wide, with from 6 to 9 fathoms sand,
but bounded on each side by reefs, which are
exposed at low water. A ship intending to put
in there should anchor off the mouth of that
opening, in order to warp in, and she should
then moor bead aod stern. The landing place
is at the bead of the opening, on a fine sandy
beach, covered with cocoa-nut trees. During
the westerly monsoon, the best anchorage is on
the east side of the island, off the village of
Batu Mean, in the strait between Letti and Moa,
which is said to be perfectly safe, though it is
not known that any ship has passed through it.
As at Kissa and Moa, many of the natives are _
Christians, and hospitable to strangers. The
produce of these islands resembles that of Kissa
and Wetta.
Moa, the next island lo the eastward of Letti,
is of considerable size, with a high mountain
called Buffalo Peak, near its N. E. cape,, which
bears some resemblance to the Peak of Teneriffe,
but its elevation is not more than half as great.
The cattle with which this island abounds are
considered the best in this part of the Indian
Archipelago, Vessels trading with Moa, anchor
in the strait between it and Letti, off the village
of Batu Mean.
Lakor, between which and Moa there is %
narrow unexplored strait, is low, having the
appearance of a coral bank, about 20 feet above
the level of the sea. It is neither so populous
nor so productive as the former islands, and de-
rives its chief importance from its trepang and
tortoiseshell. There is anchorage during the
S.E. monsoon opposite to the westernmost of
two villages, which lie on the north side of the
island, in 7 fathoms sand and stones. It would
be advisable to cany a warp to the shore, to
render the vessel more secure, as the bank
deepens suddenly, so that if she drives she will
be in deep water before there is time to let go
another anchor. There is said to be good
anchorage during the westerly monsoon in the
strait between Lakor and Moa, off the village of
Mowei. There are no wells on Lakor, so that it
is not adapted for a vessel in want of water.
There is a deep bay on the south side of the
island, which has not been explored, but thera
is probably no good anchorage on any part of
the south side of this southern chain of is’ands,
as in both monsoons the wind often hangs far
to the southward.
Luan, in lat. 8 ® UPS., long. 128 ® 50’E..
is a high island visible at a long distance, with a
number of smaller islands round it, at a distance
of from 4 to 12 miles, and the entire group is
encircled by a coral reef, which can only be
crossed by small vessels. It is not known whe-


Iher there is any anchorage for large vessels in
the vicinity, but a ship trading among these
islands should not pass without endeavouring to
find one, as trepsng, turtle, and edible birds 1 -
nests can be obtained here in greater quantities
than at any other of the islands, and the inhabit-
ants are a kind and friendly people.
Sermatta, the extremity of this southern
chain, is about 15 miles in length, with a range
of mountains extending from east to west. The
inhabitants are very much uncivilized, and the
island is seldom visited; but its products are
sent to Luan. The eastern extreme is about
lat. 8 ° 25* S„ long. 129 ° 37’ E.
N.N.W. from Sermatta, distant about 75
miles, stands the island Damma, with several
smaller islands off its S. and S.W. sides. A
Volcano rises from its north-eastern peninsula,
at the foot of which there are some hot springs.
Kulewatte Bay, in lat. 7° 4’ S., long. 128 ° 47*
E., on the eastern side of Damma, is about 4
miles deep, and its shores are so steep to, that
no soundings cm be had till close to them. A
ship, nevertheless, should not enter it during the
night, as it contains several rocks, which may
be easily avoided during the day. At the head
of the bay there is a small cove, within the
north point of which there is good anchorage,
close to the shore. It is sometimes difficult to
get out of this bay. in the S.E, monsoon, but
there is generally a light air from the land in the
early part of the morning. The productions
and the inhabitants resemble those of Kissa,
but there are comparatively few Christians among
them. There is a bay on the north side of the
island called Wilhelm Bay, but the anchorage
is not secure, as a swell often tumbles in at all
seasons of the year, and the bottom is bad.
Horsburgh states that some Dutchmen generally
reside there, which was the case half a century
ago, but when Lieutenant Kolff visited the
island in 1825, the natives had not seen an
European for 30 years. It appears that formerly
small parties of Dutch soldiers were stationed on
many of the islands in the Arafura Sea, for the
purposes of destroying the spice-trees, and of
preventing any traffic with the natives, but they
were withdrawn when the Dutch empire in the
Moluccas began to decay, and when it was found
that spices could be elsewhere obtained. For
several years previous to M. KolfTs voyages, a
worthy Dutch missionary, the late M. Le Bruin,
occasionally visited Wetta, Kissa, and some
others of the southern islands, and the effects
of his labours are apparent, in the superior in-
telligence and comfort of the natives.
Teon, or Tauw Island, E. by N. of Damma,
distant 35 nqiles, is moderately high and unin-
habited, but it is visited by the inhabitants of
Damma, by whom a vast quantity of the shells
of turtles is collected there annually.
Twenty miles N.E, by E. from Teon will be
seen the high island of Nila, inhabited by a few
poor natives, who carry provisions to Banda, at
the change of the monsoons. There is said to
be anchorage on the north side.
Between Teon and Nila it is believed that
there are several reefs, for which reason that
channel should not be attempted, except in the
%
day time, and with a leading wind ; and twd
other extensive shoals are laid down in the old
Dutch charts, about 10 miles to the northward
of Nila.
Baba, about 60 miles west of Timor-Laut, is
high and covered with forest. The best anchor-
ing place during the south-easterly monsoon is
opposite to the town of Tepa, fti lat. 7 ° 52’ S.,
long. 129° 58’ E.; where a vessel may lie se-
curely in 16 fathoms, though great caution will
be required in beating up to the anchorage, as
the wind frequently conies off the high land in
sudden squalls. In the westerly monsoon there
is good anchorage under Wetang Island, which
is better cultivated, and is inhabited by rather
better disposed people than Baba. Refreshments,
and many articles of trade, may be obtained
there, but still great caution is necessary in all
intercourse with the natives, more particularly
those on the south-eastern side, who are more
barbarous than the generality of their neighbours.
When Lieut. Kolff visited Tepa, in July, 1825,
the inhabitants were very shy, and deserted the
village on his landing, which conduct, so different
from what he had experienced in most of the
other islands, convinced him that something
wrong had been done, or was intended. It ap-
peared that, some months previously, an English
brig, manned by about a dozen Europeans, had
anchored off Aluta, on the S. E. coast of Baba,
and had engaged in some barter with the natives,
who were on board in great numbers, and who,
taking the opportunity of five men being ashore
in the boat for water, attacked and killed the
people on board, as well as those in the boat
when they returned. This case, together with
that before-mentioned as having occurred on the
S. E. side of Timor, would not, in all proba-
bility, have taken place, but for the total want
of precaution on the part of the crews, for the
inhabitants of all these islands have such a dread
of fire-arms, that they would scarcely have at-
tempted those atrocious acts, if any resistance
had been expected. English vessels visiting
Baba hereafter must be doubly cautious, for it
does not appear that the natives received the
slightest reproof from Lieut. Kolff for hiving
cut off that -English brig.
Four moderately sized islands lie off the north
and south.east sides of Baba, at a distance of
.from 10 to 15 miles. They are thinly inhabited,
and are not frequented by traders.
These brief notices of the islands in the
Arafura Sea may be concluded with a short
account of Wetta, which lies beyond its western
limits, and close to the northward of Timor.
Wetta is steep to on all sides, and even at a
very few miles distance there is no ground with
100 fathoms ; near its N. W. point stands Dog
Island, in lat. 7° 40'S., long.’l2s° 57’E,,
and two other high islands, Babi, or Hog Island,
. and Cambing, or Goat Island, severally stretch
out from its S.W. point, all the channels between
them being considered as perfectly safe. The
south side only of this great island is frequented,
as the inhabitants of the other parts of its coast
are said to be wild, and inhospitable to strangers.
The town of Sau, the chief resort of traders, is
situated in a small bay on the south coast, in


Ut. 8° 5’ S., long; 12(1° 13* W.; where a
vessel may anchor off the town in 50 fathoms, at
only a cable’s length from the shore. She will
be tolerably well sheltered there from the S, E.
winds by the point,of the bay; but in the
western monsoon the anchorage is more secure,
as the wind is then off the land. The chief
productions of thisjdace are sandalwood, bees’-
wax, rice, Indian corn, buffaloes, bogs, and
fowls, all of which may be obtained at a very
cheap rate, in exchange for Calicoes, &c., but not
in very large quantities. Water can be procured
from a small creek to the eastward of the town.
The inhabitants of the interior belorig to the
great Arafura tribe, which has spread from New
Guinea through all the islands of this -Archipe-
lago ; here they are a mild and peaceful people,
and are tributary to the town, the population of
which is not numerous, though it is said to con-
tain several Christians.
As there is a probability of the British soon
taking possession of the north coast of Australia,
it should be understood that any settlement there,
is likely to become the emporium of the AvchU
1 pelago of Arafura, while the inexhaustible trepang
banks along that coast will nourish a tbr.ving
trade with China also. It may not, therefore,
be out of place here to give a short notice of the
best tracks to be pursued to and from those .
countries, among which it will be divided. The
trade in trepang [or sea.slug, which gives em-
ployment to 80 or 100 of the Bugbi prahus, on
the north coast of Australia alone, and the entire
produce of which is taken to China, far exceeds
in value the fur-trade, carried on between the
N. W. coast of America and China.
PASSAGES'BETWEEN THE NORTH COAST OP
AUSTRALIA AND CHINA.
A ship proceeding from the north coast of
Australia to China, from April to September,
when the S. £. monsoon prevails to the south-
ward, and the S k W. monsoon to the northward
of the equator, should pass to the southward of
Timor and Sandalwood Island, and through the
straits of Allas or Lombok into the Java Sea;
and from thence through the Carimata Passage,
and up the China Sea to Canton, by which course
she will have a stronger monsoon and a clearer
sea than by passing to the northward of Timor,
and through the Fiores Sea; or than by run.
ning at once to the northward,, through the
Molucca passages. By this latter route, instead
of a fair and steady wind all the voyage, difficulty
would be experienced in passing between Borneo
and Palawan into the China Sea, from the
variable winds, and from the numerous shoals
which lie to the westward of the Balabak pas-
sage. The passage by the north of Palawan to
China is also often attended with difficulty
during the S. W. monsoon; and an additional
inconvenience of these routes Is,'that the navi-
gation of the Molucca Sea will be performed
during the bad monsoon.
Ships returning from China to the north coast
of Australia during this season, should pursue
the track usually adopted by ships bound to
Europe—namely by standing to the eastward,
round the north end of the Phillippines into the
Pacific, and bo to tie southward towards Nev#
Guinea, When past the parallel of 5 0 N.*
S. E. and S. S. E. winds, with a strong current
to the westward, will probably be felt, by which
she may easily pass through l)ampier Strait, or
the Jilolo Passage, into the Molucca Sea, She
may then pass between Ceram and Buro, and
across the Banda Sea to Wetta, when no diffi-
culty will be found in getting to the eastward
along the north side of the Serwatty Islands, as
the current there seta to the eastward during the
S. E. monsoon. When off Baba, she may
stand to the southward for, the Coast of Aus-
tralia, and if she should fall to leeward of her
port, she may easily gain her easting by taking
advantage of the land and sea breezes.
Again, if a vessel is bound from the north
coast of Australia to China, from October to
March, when the western monsoon prevails to
• the southward of the equator, and the N. E.
monsoon in the China Sea, she should, oa
leaving the coast, keep close to the wind, and as
the monsoon often blows S. \V. and even S.
S. W. between Australia and Timor, she may be
enabled to pass between Timor and the Serwatty
Islands and through Pitt Passage into the Pacific,
and thus pursue'the eastern route to China
adopted by ships at this season. If unable to
get far enough to windard to pass between
Ceram and Baro, she may run at once to the
northward, between Ceram and Ceram Lauc,
and from thence into the Pacific by Pitt op
t)ampier Straits. The only difficulty that aa
indifferent ship would be likely to encounter in
this route would be on the passage between
Ceram Laut and the N. W. end of New Guinea,
where the winds would probably be from the
N. W., but even then she would have the
advantage of fine weather. The route from the
north coast of Australia, through the Flores and
Java Seas, and up the China Sea to Canton,
would be impracticable at this season, even for
a fast sailing vessel, as she would have a dead
beat and a lee current the whole way.
A ship returning from China during this
season, may steer a direct course through the
Mindore Sea, and thence by the Molucca Pas-
sage, and past the N. E. end of Timor to the
north coast of Australia.
PASSAGES BETWEEN TIIE NORTH COAST 0?
AUSTRALIA AND SINGAPORE.
A vessel bound to Singapore from April to
September, may pursue the route recommended
above for ships bound to China at that season—
namely, to the southward of Timor, through the
straits of Allas and Carituafa. 'and thence
through .Rhio Strait to Singapore. The return
voyage at that season, through the Java Sea,
against the S. E. monsoon, would be tedious •
and difficult, even for a smart ship ; it would,
therefore, be most advisable to run across the
China Sea, and round the north end of Borneo,
where she would probably have the advantage of
S. W, and S. S. W. winds, to traverse the
Sooloo Archipelago. When near the Molucca
passage, though the winds will be mostly from
the southward, yet but little difficulty will be
experienced in passing through it, if the diree


fions given by Horsburghbe followed ; and when
through, the rou:e to the north coast of Aus-
tralia, already recommended for vessels returning
Irom China at this season, should be adopted.
From October to March, the passage to Sin-
gapore through the Java Sea, against the N. W.
monsoon, would be tedious and difficult; a ship
bound there during that season should therefore
proceed to the northward by the Molucca or
Jilolo passage, where she would have the advan-
tage of fine weather, and, when to the northward
of Jilolo, the wind would probably come from
the northward and eastward, with a westerly
current, which would enable her to proceed
round the north end of Borneo, and so with the
N. E. jnonsoon, down the China Sea to Singa-
pore. A ship returning at this season should
pass through the Carimata Passage, through the
Java and Flores Seas, and then to the south-
ward of Wetta, and between Timor and the
Serwatty Islands, to the north coast of Aus-
tralia. It would be unadvisable to proceed
through the strait of Allas, and to the south-
ward of Timor, as light airs and calms, with
squalls from the S. and S. S. W.. are often
encountered to the southward of the islands east
of Java, while in the Flores Sea the N. W.
monsoon blows steadily.
Our colonies in the southern parts of Australia
are also likely to participate in this commeice,
and some merchants of Sydney have already en-
gaged in the trepaog fishery* though under great
disadvantages, foreseeing the benefit they would"
derive from carrying some saleable goods to
China, wherewith to obtain tea and other China
produce, which are in such great demand in the
colony, and the purchase of which has hitherto
acted as a constant drain on its specie. New
South Wales produces nothing that is saleable
in China, while many articles are manufactured
there, which could be advantageously disposed
of throughout the Arafura Archipelago in ex-
change for articles for which there is a constant
demand in Canton, The passage from. Sydney,
Van Diemen’s Land,and the Gu'f of St. Vincent,
to the northern coasts of Australia, may be made
with facility at alljseasons. From April to Sep-
tember the route through Torres Straits would
be pursued, while, during the remainder of the
year, ships should run to the westward round
Cape Lieuwen, and then across the S. E. trade,
to the parallel of about 10 c N., when the wes-
terly monsoon would carry them to their destina-
tion.
