

ST. DOMINIG
AND
ST. THOMAS AQUINAS.








SAINT DOMINIC
AND
SAINT THOMAS AQUINAS.
[Tha Copyright is reserved.]




SAINT DOMINIC
AND
SAINT THOMAS AQUINAS,
PATRONS OF ROSARIANS,
AND OF “ANGELIC WARFARE."
BY
FATHER R. RODOLPH SUFFIELD, O.S.D.
WITH
ABSTRACT OF RULES AND INDULGENCES
OF THE CONFRATERNITY OF THE
ANGELIC WARFARE.
Ikrnwssa: ISupmoram.
* \/
LONDON:
THOMAS RICHARDSON AND SON,'
26, PATERNOSTER ROW; 9, CAPER STREET,
DUBLIN; AND DERBY,
JXDCCCRXYI.




ST. DOMINIC,
PATRON OF ROSARIANS.
As the Dominicans will in a few weeks be
coming to settle in Newcastle, after an
absence of three hundred years, and before
the end of July I shall be resigning into their
hands the pastoral charge of my parish,* it
will be interesting to you to hear something
about an order thus appearing again amidst
the ruins of the past.
The history of the Dominican Order in-
volves a period of nearly seven hundred
years; how meagre therefore must be the
feeble sketch given in a lecture, limited
rather by the clock than even by your kind
indulgence. My omissions will be more
transparent than my statements. Even to
point out a few of the fine traits in one
“ order,” without alluding to circumstances
equally worthy of admiration in that robe girt
about with variety that encircles the Holy
* This lecture was delivered four months before
entering the Dominican Order. 4


Catholic Church, seems an omission almost
implying an error. For instance, if I allude
to the martyrs, missionaries, theologians, or
confessors in the Dominican order, and name
not spiritual glories of the same kind in the
secular priesthood, in the hierarchy, or in the
grand ancient histories of the Augustinians,
Benedictines, Carmelites, Cistercians, and
Franciscans; or in the Jesuit, the Oratorian,
and the Yincentian Congregations, illustrating
by sanctity and learning, the next era; or in
the Eedemptorists, Passionists, Conceptionists,
Marists, and others reviving in later modifi-
cations the same sublime history ; it seems as
if silence itself was an error; however, it is an
error of necessity; and how grand must be the
aggregate history of the Church, when one of
her orders, not the most ancient, presents a
history like the history of the Friar Preachers.
You all know a quiet court behind Charlotte
Square, called the Friary, a quiet old-fashioned
spot, Monk Street runs up to it, and then
there is Low Friar Street, and High Friar
Street—the name holds on when the reality
is gone—a pleasant name, for Friar means
brother, and those old-fashioned streets
put us in mind of an idea, old, but never
worn out, that it is a beautiful thing for
brothers to live together in unity, and that
the fragrance of such a life is as the fragrance


of the ointment that flowed over the counte-
nance and the garments of Aaron. The Friary
was the old Dominican monastery. It was
founded exactly six hundred years ago, in the
year 1260. Sir Peter Scott, the first Mayor
of Newcastle, introduced into the town the
“ Friar Preachers,” The site was given by
three sisters, their names are forgotten on
eaith, but remembered in heaven. At the
dissolution of the monasteries, under Henry
YIII., the community consisted of a Prior and
twelve Friars. His Majesty sold the property
(which did not happen to belong to him) to
the corporation for £53. 7s, 6d., but reserved
to himself the lead, iron, bells, and gutters;
he was of the earth, earthly, and though he
sacrificed the religion, he retained the gutters
—there was lead in them—and the royal
founder of the State Church did not object to
deal in marine stores. So the corporation got
£2. 19s. 6d., the annual rental; the king got
the gutters and appurtenances; nine trades
got rooms to dine in once a year; and the
town lost a community of whom nothing but
good is known, who maintained and taught a
public school, who preached in the parish
churches, who transcribed and wrote many
holy and learned books, who produced and
trained many eminent men, who planted a
pleasant garden by the border wall, who at


their own cost erected a fine aqueduct to bring
pure water into the town for public use, who
elevated the poor in relieving them, and
gently humbled kings and great nobles in
entertaining them. Truly the king need not
have coveted the vineyard of Naboth. We
do not repine that men who sought poverty by
vow, and the cross by choice, found the former
more entire than they expected, the latter
more trying than they hoped. They flourished
for three hundred years.—they have disappear-
ed for three hundred years —they appear
again. What is human in the man, or in the
order, or in the Church, perishes. What is
divine, endures. It may be buried, but it
rises again. There may be a delay—the
Church, nay, even its orders can afford to
•wait—they abide their time and re-appear.
Enter that old Friary by the quaint arch-
way, and look to your right, that building
somewhat dilapidated, now used as a room for
the company of smiths to meet in, was once
the chapel of the Dominican monastery. For
three hundred years the Holy Sacrifice was
offered up there, for three hundred years the
Divine Office was sung there—Communions,
—Confessions, —as you gaze on its walls and
muse, you almost seem to see again issue forth
the goodly procession from that old portal, to
visit our Lady’s well, near the garden wall.


In that chapel, Baliol, King of Scotland, did
homage to King Edward. It must have been
an important place in that time, but the old
things have passed away, and yet not all.
There have been troublous times since the
last Mass was said in that old chapel. And
yet now again there are more Catholics in
Newcastle than in the days when kings knelt
before the altar of the Friar Preachers. You
see by the date that the order was introduced
into Newcastle about forty years after the
death of St. Dominic. Let us now turn to
the origin of the Friar Preachers.
You will find no originality in my remarks,
I simply quote to you a few facts, and my
ideas will often run in the very words of
the sources from which I have derived them.
What was passing in Europe when St.
Dominic was born in the 12th century?
Then the same as now, the Church presented
the contest of right against might, the Pope,
Vicar at the same time of God and of the
noblest sentiments of humanity, his right ana
reposing upon Jesus Christ, his left on Rome,
displayed the constant but magnificent struggle
of weakness supernaturally strong against
power preternaturally weak. Faith, reason, and
justice surrounding then as now the pedestal
of the Papal throne, were hated then as now
by those whom pride, tyranny, lust, injustice,


or impiety made the enemies of the human
race.
Nations wild and rough, recently brought
under the empire of the Church, spread by
conquest over the fairest regions of the south,
might be expected to present many scandals
even amidst the ardour of their young
allegiance to*the Church. It is a mistake to
suppose that no heresies existed in that age.
11l regulated desires, disappointed ambition,
presumptuous speculation, exist in the cor-
rupt, heart—from such sources heresies arise.
Valdo, a native of Lyons, in the year 1160,
■commenced the heresy of the Yaudois. The
spiritual citadel of Rome was attacked from
that illustrious town, whose inhabitants now
erect at their own cost, as an offering to the
Pope, the fortresses of a pontifical city. Valdo,
with more virtue and more genius, might
have been a Dominic or Francis of Assisi—
he preferred himself to God, and became an
Heresiarch.
The Manichean heresy, of Eastern origin,
■was at the same time flourishing through
Germany, Italy, and southern France; sup-
ported by its secret societies, it defied for a
long period of time the censure of Pontiffs,
who compelled emperors and princes to respect
the majesty of the D'.vine law. Raymond,
Count of Toulouse, was at the head of the


French Manichees,commonly called Albigenses,
great-grandson of the famous Raymond, who,
with Godfrey of Bouillon, immortalized him-
self in the first crusade; he abdicated an in-
heritance of glory and virtue to become the
subtle maintainer of an heresy, and the
deceitful scourge of the Church. In an age
when the European nations were thus being
formed out of a chaos, the Popes resisted with
prodigies of virtues the dangers of their times,
foiled the evil designs of emperors, animated
the nations, condemned error, guarded purity
of doctrine, and with greater or less success,
created a public opinion, subordinate, or at
least allied to faith. Jesus Christ required
that the Popes should be aided in this mag-
nificent struggle, “ He looked upon His hands
and His feet, pierced by the sins of His
people, and from that look of love sprang two
men, the most wonderful in a remarkable age,
St. Dominic, and St. Francis of Assisi.
It seems hardly right to speak of the glory
of one without at the same time publishing
the praises of the other. Living in the same
age, entering on the same career, each the
founder of a wonderful order, they met and
embraced in Rome, and that kiss of charity
has never been forgotten by their descendants.
They had both been seen in a vision, which
displayed them as being presented by Mury, to


Jesus, as the two men who were to reconcile
the world to God.
And a friendship still fresh unites the Friar
Preachers and the Friar Minors; they have
met for the same work at the same places, a
thousand times their blood has mingled in the
same martyrdom; they have won and shared
together the love of nations, like twin-brothers
who knew no jealousy. Year by year when
the feast of St. Dominic comes round at Rome,
the General of the Dominicans sends carriages
to the Franciscan monastery to bring the
General of the Franciscans, who comes
accompanied by many of his Friars, and then
in two parallel lines they repair to the high
altar of the Dominican church, where the
Franciscan Friars celebrate the office of St.
Dominic. Afterwards seated at the same
table, they break together the bread which has
never failed them for six hundred years.”
The grey habit of the Friar Minors, and the
white scapular of the Friar Preachers, have
often covered all on earth that was the most
heroic and the most generous.
However we must confine our remarks to
St. Dominic.
Of a Spanish family, named Gusman, his
ancestors, the most illustrious in old Castile,
his nobility of birth has been eclipsed by
nobility of grace. Dorn in the year 1170,


living only to the age of fifty-one, discovering
his vocation to the priesthood when twenty-
five, then for nine years in a community of secu-
lar priests, the few remaining years of his life
produced an order which became as a buttress
to the spiritual power of the Church, which
spread through the Old World and evangelised
the New ; which, illustrious by its saints, its
doctors, its martyrs, and its virgins, still after
the lapse of nearly seven hundred years,
flourishes throughout the world, and cherishes
the ancient tradition that it is to endure in its
integrity to the end of the world. Iho
mother’s influence is powerful for evil or for
good; Joanna, the mother of St. Dominic, is
beatified, her eldest son became a secular
priest, distributed all his property to the
poor, and retired to an hospital to serve the
sick; her second son entered the religious
order founded by his younger brother, and is
beatified. Her third son was Dominic, the
founder of the Friar Preachers. Before his
birth she beheld the vision of a dog, the
emblem of fidelity and vigilance, bearing in
his mouth a flaming torch, the emblem of that
divine charity with which the order of St.
Dominic should enkindle the nations of the
earth. When the child was brought to the
baptismal font, a radiant star glistened upon
the brow of the baptized; traces of its mild


lustre ever remained upon his countenance,
and caused a spiritual beauty which fixed
upon him the affection of all the clean of
heart. The font at which he was christened
has been removed to Madrid, and many of the
kings of Spain have at it received the gift of
regeneration. It is recorded of the saint in
his childhood, that witli the most thoughtful
vigilance his parents shielded him from what-
ever was unchaste or untrue. He evaded
their vigilance, not to seek what might be-
come the incentive of sin, but obtain the
means of penance which in his earliest boy-
hood he desired. They would, however, dis-
cover him taking his repose upon the hard
boards, or distributing to the poor the indul-
gences which he had received from others.
Whilst still very young he was placed under
the charge of a priest, his uncle. The same
traits that marked his early childhood, seemed
to increase with the advance of years. When
fifteen years old he was removed to the great
Spanish university of Palencia, where he re-
mained ten years. Removed from the control
and the simpler pleasures of an innocent
country life, he was only anxious that his
vigilance, his spirit of prayer, and his penances
should keep pace with the increased dangers of
his position. The son of an illustrious house,
he was courted by many whose intimacy


would have been the ruin of his virtue; with
a constant firmness he repelled their insidious
advances, he detected the dangers of sin under
circumstances which would have been sought
with avidity by one less anxious to make sure
of his eternity. At the same time that joyous
and affectionate generosity, which imparts such
a grace to youth and to virtue, appeared in him
in all its sweetness, and in drawing to him the
hearts of true friends, drew them at the same
time to virtue and to Grod. Whilst at the
University a famine broke out in the town,
causing wide-spread suffering; to relieve the
poor he sold his books and clothes, reseiving
nothing but the absolute necessaries of
life. When astonishment was expressed that
he should deprive himself of the means of
study, he answered in words, the first of his
that have been put on record, “ How could I
study from the dead while the living are
perishing?’’ Already had the youth found
the heart of the apostle. The professors and
students of the university hastened to imitate
his example. Another incident is recorded of
his university life; seeing a woman weep
bitterly because her brother was in captivity
amongst the Moors, he endeavoured _ to sell
himself as a slave to ransom the captive, but
God reserved him to ransom souls, himself
bearing a nobler yoke. During the ten years


of his university life, amidst the austerities he
imposed upon himself, was a resolution he
faithfully observed, that of abstaining entirely
from all intoxicating drink. At twenty-five
years of age he determined to embrace the
ecclesiastical state. Seeing in the community-
life the beauty of the Christian family in its
highest perfection, where the sentiments of
the brother and the son are elevated into the
heroic by their union with poverty, patience,
and penance, he sought the spiritual aids
which it confers, and joined a community of
priests, called the Canons Regular, living in
obedience to the Bishop of Osma. He pre-
sented himself to the bishop, Don Diego, the
prior of the little community. Diego found
in his new disciple a generous soul that asked
nothing from heaven or earth, except a great
cause to be served with unceasing devotedness.
In early youth generosity and self-sacrifice is
too often but a beautiful emotion which
appears and passes away ; if happily it endures
it becomes a principle, then that love that
conquers all things begins to exist in the full-
ness of its spiritual power, such was the heart
of St. Dominic. A contemporary tells us
what was his outward appearance, the descrip-
tion rather reminds one of the north than of
the south. Auburn hair, blue eyes, com-
plexion fair, a joyous smile, often changed into


an expression of tender sadness, eyes beaming
with lustre, but often suffused with tears.
Such was the man who is called by Protestant
historians the gloomy and bloodthirsty Domi-
nic.* For nine years he continued to announce
to the people the word of God, in Osma and
the adjacent villages. Accustomed to holy
discipline, to poverty, to fatigue, and to the
exercise of prayer, which places the power of
heaven at the disposal of man; he was now
prepared by Divine Providence for the next
era of his eventful life.
Innocent HI., at that time filled the chair of
St. Peter. He saw with deep sorrow the
frightful heresy which was devastating the
fairest portions of Europe. He sent three
legates apostolic of the Cistercian Order to
endeavour to bring back the people to the
faith, but their efforts, though accompanied
by learning and zeal, were utterly without
* On account of the foolish invention of those writers
who have made history merely a conspiracy against truth,
and who have pretended that St. Dominic commenced
the Inquisition, with which he was in fact utterly uncon-
nected, and who have also pretended that the Friar
preachers were compromised to the severities of the
nqmsition when it became a political engine in the
i.uu s of the bpanish government, the Dominicans, being
y express edict excluded from that partial connexion
ni i it, which ior a time they possessed as theologians,
t tough never as judges, or accusers, never being engaged
either in condemning or in punishing.


success. The Spanish bishop, Diego, happened
at that time, along with St. Dominic, to pass
through the Province of Toulouse, where the
legates were preaching, a conference was held
to consider what more could be done for the
service of God. The two Spaniards advised
that they should all adopt the austerities of
the most apostolic life. Men of noble mind
receive advice, and if for good, embrace it.
The legates followed the advice and the ex-
ample given by Diego and Dominic. They
resumed labours, which God blessed the more
for the sacrifice which had been made; but
even this success was little better than a
diminution of failure. Two years more ex-
pired, and the legates, discouraged and dis-
appointed, left a country which they had
moistened with their sweat. About the same
time Diego, the holy bishop and prior of Osma,
died—Dominic remained alone, but God was
with him, and eternity was before him. He
beheld the country of Toulouse still teeming
with heresy, governed by the clever and here-
tical Count Raymond, the Catholic churches
mostly desecrated by the enemies of religion,
sometimes more terribly desecrated by the
scandals, the cowardice, or the indifference of
Catholics lay and ecclesiastic; far from his home,
far from his friends, the heart of the saint did
not sink. The Church was his home, and his


friends were with God. Commiserating the
fate of the Catholic girls, both of the higher
and the humbler classes, brought up in the
midst of families more or less infected with
the errors and vices of the time, he established
in Prouille, a village, near Montreal, at the foot
of the Pyrenees, a convent of religious women
for the education of the young, and a sanctuary
for the souls aspiring after perfection. It may
be reckoned the beginning of the Dominican
Order. In the midst of the fearful scenes of
the Albigensian war, that little sanctuary of
our Lady remained intact. He who shelters
from the tempest the blade of corn, watches
over the cradle of great things. Before the
Apostles evangelized the world, there was the
Blessed Virgin in her home at Nazareth.
Before this order of Apostles, the Friar
Preachers, re-evangelized the world, there
was the sanctuary of virgins in the village of
Prouille.
During the fearful scenes of the civil war
in the country of Toulouse, called the
Albigensian Crusade, St. Dominic hardly
appears, but whenever he does appear, it is to
infuse mercy into the hearts of the conquerors
or consolation into the hearts of the suffering.
According to every testimony, his only arms
were prayer, patience, penance, and instruction.
Seven years more thus passed over the head of


St. Dominic. In the meanwhile several zeal-
ous priests had associated themselves to him
in his arduous labours. God now inspired
him to give unity and permanence to their
efforts. He determined to found an apostolic
order to defend the Church, by preaching and
learning ; an order in which the life of the
priest and the monk should be combined. St.
Augustine and St. Benedict, the great
patriarchs of the religious orders of the west,
had founded great communities in which
learning, choral duties, and manual labour
should °divide the time. Zeal and the exigen-
cies of the times often made their disciples
evangelists, but such was not the design of the
founders. It remained for St. Dominic to
institute an order in which the great idea
should be the apostolate of Jesus Christ, but
in which there should be combined the
austerities of the monastic rule, perpetual
abstinence, frequent fasts, the nightly vigil,
the choral duties, along with the triple bond
of perfection, poverty, chastity, and obedience.
It was an arduous design, but what is there
great and heroic, which the human heart,
supported by God, has been unwilling to
intend, or unable to accomplish?
Dominic went to Rome to make known his
project to the Sovereign Pontiff. At first
sanction and approbation were refused. In


the silence of the night God displayed to the
Pope a vision. The church of St. John
Lateran, the cathedral church of the world,
seemed on the point of falling, and Dominic
supporting it, restored the tottering walls.
The Pope in the morning sent for the man of
God, enjoined him to settle the details of his
rule, and gave him his benediction.
“ Go and teach,’’ said Jesus Christ to His
apostles. “Go and teach/’ repeated St.
Dominic to his disciples.
In many other respects does the order of
the Friar Preachers take its character from
the great features of the Catholic Church;
like the Church, it is governed by one head,
the Master-General at Rome. The world is
divided into provinces, governed by a Friar
Provincial, and each monastery by a Friar
Conventual. The mode of electing and con-
firming the superiors, the prudence with
which their authority is at once maintained
and counter-balanced by the chapters of the
monastery, province, or entire order, has been
considered by statesmen as presenting some of
the grandest ideas for a constitution calculated
to unite Christian liberty with Christian
authority. Thousands of persons scattered
over the entire earth have lived under this
sa%red rule for above six hundred years, peace-
ful and united, the freest, the most obedient,


the most laborious, and the most happy of
men. No change of circumstances or of
place has ever caused the order to be divided,
it continues always one, and an ancient tradi-
tion says that beneath the shadow of the
Catholic Church it shall flourish till the end of
time. Of the Fiiar Preachers it is truly
said, every coast bears a trace of their blood,
the echoes of every shore have been wakened
by their voice. The Indian, hunted like a
wild beast, has found shelter behind their
habit; the negro still bears upon his neck the
sign of their embrace; the Chinese have sat
down to listen to those wondrous strangers;
the Ganges has seen them communicate the
divine wisdom to Pariahs; the ruins of
Babylon have lent them a stone to rest on for
a moment, and think on the ancient days.
What lands or forests have they not
explored? what tongue have they not spoken?
what wounded soul or body has not felt their
healing hands? and while they made again
and again the circuit of the world under every
flag, their brethren argued in the councils and
assemblies of Europe, and blending genius
with piety and taste, took in hand the pencil
or the pen, the chisel of the sculptor, and the
compass of the architect, they elevated to God
both humanity and art.
In the first age of the Church all priests


were apostles, it was the necessity of the time.
The faithful formed —the pastoral ministry
arose in its peaceful power. The Dominican
order was to revive the Apostolate; but to
make it come forth from and retire to the
holy discipline of the monastery. Who h s
not sometimes in the midst of tempestuous
years gone by, pictured to himself, and
tenanted in spirit, those spiritual fortresses
which have stilled so many passions, and
protected so many heroic resolutions? The
court-yard and the cloister surrounded by a
portico, in the middle of the court the well
emblematic of the living water, the sacred
inscriptions around the walls, the sacristy,
refectory, library, and church, communicating
with the cloister. Up a flight of stairs the
long corridor hung with its old pictures,
simple memorials of heaven and of earth.
The symmetrical range of doors all opening
into the corridor. At the sound of a bell all
these doors open with a kind of sweetness and
respect. Old men with white hair, serene, for
their hearts are ever compassionate, and young
men of early maturity, youths in whom youth
and penance blend into a shade of beauty,
unknown to the world, every season of life
appears the same under the same sacred garb.
Each cell is poor, sufficiently large to contain
a mattress, a table, and chair, while a crucifix


and some pious pictures are the only orna-
ments. From this home of peace and holy
discipline the religious passes to immortality.
But even in death he suffers comparatively
little separation from his friends living or
departed; clad in his habit, his mortal remains
repose in that consecrated ground where were
made the vows of his youthful fervour, his
dust mingling with that of his monastic
ancestors, while the praises of the Lord sung
by his co-temporaries and descendants of the
cloister, thrills whatever is capable of the
sweetest and holiest emotions.
“ I envy them, those monks of old, —
Their books they read and their beads they told,
To human folly dead and cold,
. And all life’s vanity.
They lived like angels upon earth,
Freed from the penalties of birth ;
Nor let one feeling venture forth but charity.
Peaceful they lived, peaceful they died,
And when each brother vanished from their side,
No bond it broke, no discord of the heart it woke;
The tomb to them was not a place
To blot out each fond memory’s trace
In dull oblivion.
To them it was the resting place
To ease the aching human heart;
They looked with envy on the dead,
And not with agony.”
In the year 1216, on the 22nd of December,
the Order of the Friar Preachers was solemnly
approved in the palace of St. Sabina, by Pope


Honorius 111. In that Bull the Sovereign
Pontiff says, “ The brethren of your order
shall be the champions of the faith, and the
true light of the world.”
The first Dominican monastery was founded
in the centre of that city of Toulouse, which
was the very focus and strength of the
Albigensian heresy.
When the Pope approved the order, St.
Dominic had but sixteen fellow-labourers —
eight Frenchmen, seven Spaniards, one
Englishman. But after that approval, in two
years he founded sixty convents. He had
reached the heart of the age. How could
speech flow coldly from the lips of men whom
the one idea of the ancient apostolate had
inspired and brought together? Was it
likely that the youth of the universities, who,
without looking back, flung itself into this
chivalry of the Gospel, would lose under the
white habit the ardent generosity of its years,
or the impetuosity of its strong convictions?
Everything in the Holy Order they embraced
was calculated to inspire such sentiments.
The monastic character of the order, the
Divine Office sung at midnight in choir, the
solemn yet cheerful seclusion of the interior
of their monasteiies, the brotherly and
paternal spirit infused by the rules into every
grade, from the lay-brother to the master-


general, the confidence in the Divine protection
felt by those who had received their habit
from our Lady, their blessing from St. Peter,
their Rule from heaven, through St. AugUstine
and St. Dominic—such would all tend to
inspire that holy repose, which, if it might
occasionally fall into a peaceful and harmless
inactivity, would never stoop to artifice or
design, or heat itself with the turbulence of
ambition. Whilst, on the other side, the
apostolic character of the order was ever
encouraging them to walk in the footsteps of
the apostles and the martyrs.
Within their monasteries, a penitential
discipline, requiring fasts, perpetual abstinence,
the nightly vigil, frequent silence, fraternal
correction, seclusion, and obedience, yet all
gently tempered by the power of dispensation
in the hands of the superior whenever needed
for health or for the service of souls. With-
out the monastery, all the restrictions as to
diet and vigils, removed, which could
embarrass them in the discharge of duties, or
inconvenience the hospitable who entertained
them as travellers in their houses. The order
has ever been characteiized by a largeness of
heart, a spirit of brotherly cheerfulness, an
open-hearted mode of action, an absence of
design, concealment, or management, a straight-
forward way of aiming at great objects, with-


out petty jealousies, or regret at seeing others
do a work which might have been done by
themselves. Thus amongst the later Con-
stitutions of the Dominican Order is an
injunction to the Friars to hold in high
esteem and affection the Fathers the
Society of Jesus, on account of the eminent
services rendered to religion by that illustrious
Society.
The order has ever remembered the tradi-
tion taught it by the Pope’s vision. That it
is an auxiliary to help the Church and the
hierarchy; a buttress to prop its battlements;
but that it is not the Church itself. A.
religious order which should, from motives
however good, endeavour to overtop the
hierarchy, or to supersede or throw into
shade that pastoral and parochial government
of the Church instituted by God, might
obtain from the ignorant, or from partizans, a
commendation for zeal and for prudence, but
would, in fact, be taking away with one hand
the benefit conferred with the other.
The secular clergy engaged in the pastoral
office of the Church, and the Friar Preachers
engaged in the apostolic office of the Church,
have ever been closely allied in co-operation,
in sympathy, and in affection. The Friars
depend for their usefulness to souls on the
confidence reposed in them by the clergy, who


invoke their aid in their parishes. Whilst, on
the other hand, vast numbers of the clergy
enrol themselves in the third order of St.
Dominic, Secretly wear the white habit, and
submit with filial affection to as much of his
sacred rule as consists with their high office in
the Church.
One religious order alone holds, and has
ever since the time when St. Dominic
expounded the Sacred Scriptures before the
Pope, held a very high and responsible office
in the Pope’s palace. A Dominican Friar is
always appointed to the office of “Master of
the Sacred Palace,” as such he is the Pope’s
theologian, he is the preacher and doctor of
the Vatican—he is the universal censor of
books—he alone can confer the degree of
doctor in the Roman university-—he selects
the priests who preach before the Holy Father
on solemn occasions. It is now the 7th
century since the Dominican Order have
enjoyed that high privilege, but never have
we read or heard even an imputation of
narrowness, or of littleness, or of ambition, or
of jealousy. One or more of the cardinals
are generally selected from the Dominican
Older; that, and the office of master of the
sacred palace, causes the white habit of our
Lady to be ever around the Holy Father.
And yet never do we find that such has


excited even the faintest murmur of
jealousy.
I have called the habit of St. Donrnie the
habit of our Lady, let me name to you the
circumstances under which that white
scapular, or habit, was given to the order in
the person of the Blessed Reginald.
At first Dominic and his companions wore
the white tunic, with black cappa, to which
he had been accustomed when in the commu-
nity of Regular Canons, under the rule of St.
Augustine at Osrna.
In 1218, Reginald, a Frenchman, a
celebrated doctor of the Canon law, came to
Rome to visit the tombs of the apostles, God
inspired him with the desire of leaving all
things, that he might preach the Holy Gospel;
he prepared himself for that sacred ministry
without knowing in what way to exercise it,
for he was not aware of the existence of the
“ Order of Preachers.’’ A Roman cardinal,
to whom he opened his heart, directed him to
St. Dominic; the saint, won by his appearance
and conversation, resolved at once to admit
him into the order; but obstacles, the touch-
stone of holy purposes, were not slow to
embarrass his. He was attacked with a
grievous illness, and was given over by all the
physicians, as being on the point of death.
The saint grieved to lose a sou whom he had


begun to love, but not to possess, went and
prayed for him. Whilst St. Dominic prayed,
the Blessed Virgin appeared to Reginald,
accompanied b}' two of heavenly beauty. She
said, “ Ask of me what you will, and I shall
give it to you.” As he deliberated one of the
heavenly companions said, “ Ask nothing, but
abandon yourself to the Queen of Mercy.”
She then anointed Reginald on all his senses,
accompanying each anointing with appropriate
words. Anointing his feet, she said, “I
anoint thy feet for the preaching of the Gospel
of peace. Be girt about,” said she, “ with a
girdle of chastity,” and then presenting to
him a white scapular, she said, “ This is the
habit of my order.”
Reginald was restored immediately to health,
but the same miraculous action was repeated
upon him afterwards by our Blessed Lady,
before several witnesses.
Thus the order of St. Dominic received
from our Blessed Lady the white habit, token
of that purity of heart which unveils God to
the soul. She gave the Order the Rosary, as
the jewel of a spiritual sovereignty,—the
anointing as an emblem of fortitude and love,
and afterwards the girdle to them through St,
Thomas, to engage them in an “ angelic
Warfare. ”
From that time the Friar Preachers wore


over their white tunic, a white woollen
scapular, for the scapular is the emblem of
purity, falling like a veil over the heart of
man. Over the scapular, they, when out of
doors, wear a black cappa, from which they
were popularly called “ Black Friars.’’ The
colour of the cappa signifies detachment from
the world.
But the Order of St. Dominic was to strike
its roots deeper, and to spread its branches
wider. It was not merely virgins in the
cloister, and fiiars in the monastery and the
pulpit, who were to rejoice and to edify under
that holy rule.
There are myriads of generous souls who
strive in the midst of the world to live under
holy discipline. For without holy discipline,
without rule, without method, without
thought, without unceasing vigilance, without
the works of mercy, without the helps to
remind of the sacraments of holy instruction
and of God, who can secure their immor-
tality?
Generous souls feel they must aim high or
all is lost. They know that every one,
whether married or single, whether bond or
free, whether rich or poor, whether parent or
child, whether cleric or lay, whether in trade,
art, or Avar, is bound to aim at and to practise
the spirit of poverty, the spirit of chastity,


the spirit of obedience. The religious is
bound not only to aim at these in spirit, but
to practise them in outward act in their
fulness and by vow. The outward act is to
all men a counsel—to the religious an obliga-
tion. The inward spirit is an obligation upon
the man in the world as much as upon the
monk in the cloister, if he be determined to
secure heaven.
If the man in the world cannot, on account
of the ties of family, or even absence of voca-
tion, embrace the outward state which con-
stitutes the counsels of perfection, he will,
according to his earnestness, strive even in
outward act to help on the inward spirit of
perfection as much as possible. He joins
certain pious sodalities, such as the Holy
Rosary, and the Conference of St. Vincent de
Paul. Still he desires more distinctly to aim
at the three virtues which counteract and
oppose the world, the flesh, and the devil.—
To oppose the world with poverty, the flesh
with chastity, the devil with obedience.
Then he wishes to draw near to those
religious armies which are bound by vow to
the fulness of these virtues, even in the
external state. He cannot embrace that state
himself, but he can place himself under the
mantle of its protection. He joins the third
Order of St. Dominic. lie will seek that the


purest order of affection, and the most touch-
ing sympathy may bind him to those who
embrace the three-fold vow. He receives
their habit, it is worn secretly, but it has
encircled his entire soul. He joins to a
degree in their prayers, fasts, and religious
solemnities. Their saints are his fathers,
brothers, and sisters. The freshness and
beauty, the hopefulness and purity of the
monastic spirit, has breathed into his soul, and
into his household. Religion has set its
beautiful maik upon the very rooms of his
now peaceful home. Then, if the death of
wife, of husband, or of child, breaks up that
home, there is another family to which he is
joined, another home prepared for him.
Health and circumstances permitting, he
perhaps passes from the Third Order into the
first, just as youth passes into age. Or
perhaps he enters one of those communities
where the members of the Third Order are,
though with less austerities, assimilated to the
first.
The history of the Third Order of St.
Dominic, is one of the most delightful things
that can be read. It has, and does embrace,
young and old, married and single, men and
women, the warrior and the tradesman, popes,
kings, queens, bishops, priests, and students.
Its saints have been innumerable; six to
3


eight days of every month being commemora-
tive leasts of this Order.
The Third Order of St. Dominic, called
generally the Order of Penance, was originally
known under the appellation of the Wilitia of
Jesus Christ. It spread through every rank,
and leagued together numbers throughout the
world, bound to the exercise of the works of
mercy, to the maintenance of the Holy
Catholic Paith, and the spirit of poverty,
chastity, and obedience. St. Dominic called
forth monks from the cloister and made them
apostles. He now carried the habit and the
virtues of religion into the family and the
army. He placed it beneath the white
cassock of the pontiff, beneath the rochette of
the bishop, beneath the cassock of the priest,
beneath the purple of the sovereign. The
Son or daughter living beneath the parents
roof wore, in private, the habit and exercised
everywhere the virtues of holy religion: the
retired room in the house became the cell
which was a sanctuary to every thought the
most pure and the most heroic. The vener-
able Olier, founder of the Sulpician seminaries,
said, in the chapel of St. Sulpice, with lively
emotion, that “he owed every grace he had
received to the Order of St. Dominic, to
whose Third Order he belonged.
Hut all are not to join the Third Order;


though the Church always risks much, she
does not wish that those join who would seem
to promise no stability, who are perhaps
merely attracted by its great indulgences, by
the sublime poetry of its history, or by a
holy envy of an Order so fruitful in sanctity.
—Such motives are good, but not sufficient;
there must be as a motive superior to all
these, the determined desire and intention to
live, if in the world, at least above the world.
The habit of the Third Order is not seen, but
its virtues should. Mercy, penance, vigilant
modesty, undaunted faith, simplicity of life,
though without eccentricity, should shine
forth through that hidden white scapular of
the Militia of Jesus Christ.*
St. Dominic was inspired by our Blessed
Lady to establish the devotion of the holy
Rosary, and thus arose the great Society of
the Holy Rosary, which every one, without
exception, can join—a confraternity which
has become in fact as universal as the Church
i.tself. The condition of reciting the entire
Rosary (that is the chaplet thrice over) once in
the course of the week can embarrass no one
who wishes to pray at all, and of all prayers,
* For Rules and Explanation of Third Order, and full
calendar of the Blessed, see “Dominican Tertiary’s
Guide. (Richardson and Son, London, Dublin, and
Derby,) See note on page 54,


what so Christian as the holy Rosary, farming
as it does a continued meditation on the
Incarnation, Life, and Passion of our Lord?
Who that has heard the solemn recital of that
devotion in alternate choirs of the people in
foreign countries or our own; or met on the
high ways the traveller, beguiling the weary
road with the recital of the beads, or seen the
peasant boys in the sultry noon, telling their
beads beneath the shade of the trees, but has
felt that a great necessity of the soul was
provided for by that devotion.
Whilst speaking of the Third Order of St.
Dominic, and of the great Dominican Con-
fraternity of the Rosary, it may be well just
to allude to two other ancient confraternities
of the order.
The Confraternity of Jesus, instituted to
suppress cursing, swearing, and blasphemy;
and having as its special devotions, the Rosaiy
of Jesus, or Crown of Jesus, the Office of the
holy Name of Jesus, the Litany of Jesus, and
the hymn “Jesus the only thought of Ihee.”
I may mention that, with the sanction of
Cardinal Wiseman, and the Bishop of Hexham,
as well as of several other Irish and English
Bishops, the Provincial of the Dominicans,
and of other religious orders, I am preparing
for the press at Richardsons’ of Derby, a
Prayer Book for general use, to be culled the


"Crown of Jesus, ’’ which will also contain
mention of the Dominican devotions.
The other Confraternity wearing the girdle
of St. Thomas, called the Confraternity of the
Angelic Warfare. When St. Thomas Aquinas
was a youth, and wished to dedicate himself to
follow the Counsels of Perfection in the
Order of St. Dominic, some of his relations
endeavoured to impede his pious resolution;
having tried persuasion, fear, and force, they
next tried seduction; they thought if they
could make him dally with an impure tempta-
tion, the chivalry of his soul would perish,
and his sacred energies enfeebled, he would
sink into the common herd. They sent one
to tempt him; no vanity, no human respect,
no self-confidence, no curiosity, no feebleness
of purpose, made him dally one moment. He
seized a burning brand, drove the tempter
from the room, and then with the extinguished
torch, made a cross upon the wall, before
which he knelt down and prayed. It was the
rubicon of his spiritual life. Hell, or the
crown of the beatified hung upon that mo-
ment. The Christian hero conquered, and as
he lay down wearied with the battle, angels
appeared to him in heavenly beauty, and girt
him with the girdle of a chastity which
henceforth should not even know a tempta-
tion.


That linen girdle, with its fifteen knots, in
honour of the fifteen mysteries of the Rosary,
lias since been the distinctive mark of those
engaged in the angelic warfare.
Father Camillo Quadro, a Jesuit Father,
says that “if he were to tell the graces
received by the faithful wearing the girdle
of St. Thomas, he would have to fill whole
volumes.”
There is something very striking in the
way in which St. Dominic scattered his Order,
and moreover flung his friars into positions
not apparently suited for maintaining the
monastic spirit.
In the first bull approving of the Order,
the Pope decrees, “you shall provide for the
service of the parish churches which may
belong to you, by choosing and presenting to
the bishop of the diocese, priests worthy to
receive from him the care of souls, and who
shall be responsible to him in spiritual matters,
to you (the general) in temporal.” In the
same bull the Pope gave to the Order, the
pastoral charge of a parish in Toulouse, of the
parish of Pronille, and another; and in accord-
ance with this and succeeding bulls, the Order
has always held a few parishes; one parish in
Rome is now, and has always been held by
Dominicans. In London, Blackfriars was held
by the same Order, the prior exercising very


extensive jurisdiction, temporal as well as
spiritual, over that parish.
Sc. Dominic had sixteen friars when that
bull was issued. It was expected that he
would retain them in seclusion till they in-
creased in number and strength. Instead of
doing so he dispersed them through Europe.
With sixteen men he colonized Home,
Toulouse, Paris, Bologna, and Prouille. He
thus selected the place that was the cradle of
that great Order of Dominican Nuns—the
Second Order, which was destined to send so
many virgins and beatified to heaven. He
chose Toulouse, the place that saw the rise of
the First Order, and which was the focus of
heresy and worldliness; he chose, moreover,
the three cities that governed Europe: Rome
governing through her Pontiff, Paris and
Bologna through their universities. Next he
sends three friars to Spain. Two are enough
to make the apostolate commence in the
greatest capital in Europe. Three or four to
make it flourish in a kingdom.
Thus an order founded expressly to preach
the Word of God, to evangelize, to revive the
apostolate, was, at its very commencement, by
the ordinance of its founder, and by the decree
of the Pope, enjoined to assume in certain
cities the •pastoral office; just as the secular
clergy appointed by divine Providence for


the pastoral office, are also frequently commis-
sioned to unite with that or even to supersede
it with the apostolic office.
And again, though the Friar Preachers were
instituted to discharge the episcopal function
of instruction, of maintaining by such instruc-
tion, the Faith in its integrity; they have
been also called frequently to exercise the
other episcopal function of governing, inas-
much as the Order has, besides those in its
Third Order, produced 4 Popes, 46 arch-
bishops, and 2,142 bishops.
If time allowed, we could fill hours with
the grand or the touching incidents of the life
of St. Dominic, how at St. Sixtus at Rome, he
raised the dead; how he banished temptations,
cheered the dejected, saw thoughts. How
heavenly visions appeared to him, as when the
Blessed Virgin with St. Cecilia and St,
Catherine, came to him and told him that
when the friars, singing the Salve Eegina,
“ Hail Holy Queen,” in their chapels of an
evening, say the words “ Eia ergo advocata
nostra,” “ Turn then most gracious advocate,”
that she prostrates herself before her Son for
the preservation of this Older. And how
again, when she showed to him a number of
religious in heaven surrounding her, and he
wef t because he did not behold amongst them
any of his Order, but our Lord re-assured


him, saying, “ I have handed over your Order
to My mother;’’ and then asking him whether
he would like to see his order, the cope round
the shoulders of our Lady seemed to expand
so as to embrace a great portion of the
heavenly country, and beneath it a multitude
of his brethren.
Or again, the beautiful incidents which
accompanied the vocation of some of his
disciples, as with Stephen of Spain, who says,
“ Whilst I was studying at Bologna, Friar
Dominic came and preached there to tire
students. I went to confession to him, and I
thought I observed that he loyed me. One
evening as I was going to supper with my
companions, he sent two of his brothers to me
saying, ‘ Friar Dominic wants youl answered,
* I will go as soon as I have supped/ They
replied that he expected me immediately. I
therefore got up, left everything, and went to
him; J found him surrounded by the friars,
he said to them, ‘ show him how the prostra-
tion is made,’ I prostrated myself with
docility, and he gave me the habit, saying, ‘ I
wish to supply you with arms which will
enable you to combat the demon all the days
of your life.’ ” And again, of another for
whom he prayed a whole night that he might
obtain a vocation to the perfect life, and in
tlm morning as the friars sung the hymn at


prime, the youth entered the church, and
prostrating himself, asked the habit of holy
religion, which he received from the hands of
the saint who afterwards tenderly loved him,
and called him his own son.
Those who would see many more of such
incidents, should read “ St. Dominic and the
Dominicans,” or “ Fr. Lacordaire’s Memorial,”
which I have so freely used and quoted in
this lecture.
When at the beginning of August, in the
fifty-first year of his age, death overtook him
at Bologna, he was still the “ Brother
Preacher,” for after our Lady had appeared to
him and assured him that she would ever
protect his order, and his spiritual children
surrounded the father whom they loved with
a tenderness that cleaved to their inmost heart,
and watched Rodolph gently wiping the death
sweat from his forehead, whilst Father
Ventura, to whom he had just made his
general confession, said, “ Dear Father, you
leave us desolate and afflicted, remember us
and pray for us to God,” and then the dying
saint, raising his eyes and hands to heaven,
exclaimed, in a clear voice, “ Holy Father,
since by Thy mercy I have fulfilled Thy will,
and have kept and preserved those whom
Thou hast given me, now I recommend them
to Thee. Du Thou keep them; do Thou


preserve them.” And then, with great
tenderness, turning to his children, he said,
“ Do not weep my children, I shall be more
useful to you where I am now going than I
have ever been in this life.” Afterwards he
said, “ Thanks be to God, whose mercy has
preserved me in perfect virginity until this
day; if you would keep chastity, guard your-
self from all dangerous conversations, and
watch over your own hearts;” and then
turning to his confessor he said, “ father, I
fear that I have sinned in speaking of this
grace before our brethren.’’
Having received all the last sacraments,
they then began at his request, the commenda-
tion of a departing spirit, and raising his arms
to heaven, his pure and generous soul ascended
there, whilst they recited the words, “ come
to his assistance, ye saints of God; meet him,
ye angels of the Lord, receiving his soul and
offering it in the sight of the Most High.”
St. Dominic seems to live in his successors,
the spirit of Christian chivalry, truthfulness,
cheerfulness, and tenderness. One Pope calls
it the “Order of Truth;” another Pope calls
them “ the true champions of Christ;” another
Pope calls them “ the warriors of Jesus
Christ.”
Another Pope said, that “ heaven and earth
rejoiced as it spread.” Artists have, during


six centuries, made us familiar with those
Dominican countenances, so gracious, so
joyous, so full of feeling and of truth, each
seems like the picture of a youth who had
joined whilst “ life itself was new, and the
heart promised what the fancy drew.’* They
seem to have caught the radiance of that star-
lit brow, and to declare, by their very look,
that to them at least, “ goodness is more than
a name, and happiness more than a dream. ’’
There is a picturesque simplicity in innumer-
able incidents recorded of their greatest
intellects. Savonarola, that wonderful Dumb
nican who, in the midst of the brilliant and
fascinating corruption of Florence, under
Lorenzo de Medici, entranced thousands with
the love of virtue more than this revived
Paganism of the age could entrance them with
the love of pleasure, would sit beneath the
shade of the fig-trees and carve fancy orna-
ments out of the bark, for the children who
gathered around him.
iEven their deaths seem to breathe of joy;
the passion of their life was charity for souls;
their white habit told them of a mother’s care.
How could they be sorrowful when they died ?
they had given up all things for Jesus Christ;
He in return gave all to them. Of many it
is said they died singing; to others, the
oyening of the day was the evening of life,


and they died calmly in the choir, as the
friars chanted the “ Salve Regina.’
The Order has been always distinguished
for its singular devotion to the Blessed Sacra-
ment, and to our Blessed Lady. St. Dominic
wrote in defence ot the Immaculate Concep-
tion. St. Thomas Aquinas, the great Domini-
can philosopher and theologian, whose ‘•Summa
Theological laid on the table of the Council
of Trent along with the Sacred Scriptures and
the pontifical decrees, was the special doctor of
the Blessed Sacrament. The Confraternities
of the Blessed Sacrament originated amongst
the Friar Preachers, Of the Dominican
Order, an innumerable number have been
beatified; besides St. Dominic twelve of the
Dominican saints have been canonized.
St. Hyacinth, who evangelized through
Poland, Bohemia, Russia, Livonia, Sweden,
Denmark, the Archipelago, and the coasts ot
Asia Minor.
St. Vincent Ferrer, whose old picture at St.
Andrew’s is not unknown to you, the angelic
preacher who carried the doctrine and the
miracles of Christ through Spain, France,
Italy, Germany, England, Scotland, and
Ireland; who decided the succession to the
throne of Arragon, and was invited by a
special deputation to the Council of Con-
stance.


St. Raymond Pennafort, who founded col-
leges, and even was reckoned the second
founder of a great Order of Mercy, which
sprung up under the tutelage of the Domini-
cans.
St. Peter of Verona, the martyr, who after
a long apostolic career, fell beneath the swords
of assassins, W’hilst with his blood he wrote on
the sands the first words of the Apostles*
Creed. St, Thomas Aquinas, the founder of
the scholastic theology. St. Antoninus, the
model of bishops. St. Pius V,, the illustrious
pontiff, patron of his present holiness. St.
Louis Bertrand who evangelized South
America, St, Catherine of Sienna, model of
nuns, doctress of the Church, and bearer of
the Stigmata. St. Rose of Lima, the great
sister saint of the new world. St. Agnes of
Monte Pulciano, at fifteen model of every
virtue; and St. Catherine Ricci, her soul
elevated by intensest bodily sufferings, and
who communed miraculously with St. Philip
Neri. *
Who could record the blessed, or the learned,
or the gifted of the three orders of St.
Dominic in the new world and the old?
From the time when a Dominican Fjiar sung
the first High Mass in the new world, with
what devoted zeal did the order evangelize
those countries; —a Dominican forwarded the


means of its discovery; a Dominican, Bar-
tholomew de las Casas, inheriting that noble
love of freedom and of justice that has
characterized the order, was the first of that
noble band of Friars who were the protectors
of the Indians. Whole volumes have been
written of the lives of the painters, architects,
engineers, and sculptors of the Dominican
Order. There are lives of the nuns of the
Second and Third Orders, who were engaged in
different departments of the fine arts. I hose
men, when they emulated the deeds of the
saints, or when their hearts burned with love
of Jesus and His Mother, took the brush in
their hands, and there breathed forth upon
the canvass a beautiful vision of their own
soul of purity. No branch of literature or
of art but the Friars have touched, have
elevated, have beautified, have immortalized.
What Catholic family does not preserve, even
in the smallest collection of spiritual books,
the works of Friar Louis de Granada?
What reader of works of mystic piety but
has learned divine wisdom in the pathetic
words of Suso, or divine charity from the
majestic inspirations of Thauler?
Urged by some distinguished Englishmen,
the Dominicans were sent to England by St.
Dominic himself, and by the request of the
archbishop established themselves in the uni-


Versify of Oxford, and at the dissolution of
the monasteries fifty-four convents of the order
were swept away. It numbered many illustri-
ous names, and so popular were they as preach-
ers, that they were accustomed to use portable
pulpits which were erected in public places.
Amongst illustrious Englishmen who joined
the order was Walter Maclerk, who had been
regent of the kingdom under Henry 111,, and
also filled England with surprise by resign-
ing the highest dignities and greatest wealth,
and becoming a novice amongst the Friar
Preachers. Then there was Robert Bacon,
who in his old age joined the order, drawn
to it by his love to St. Dominic; and his
bosom friend, Richard Fishacre, constant as-
sociates in their life, associates also in their
death.
In the time of St. Dominic, Ireland also
received the Friars. Father Ronald came
over and was created archbishop of Armagh,
whilst the order rapidly spread throughout
every county of the island. In the Dublin
Review of September, 1845, will be found an
interesting account of the Dominican schools
in Ireland. They founded the university of
Dublin. In the times of persecution they
faithfully maintained their ground, and so
affectionate was the love and reverence the
Irish people entertained for the order, that by


a special privilege to the Irish province, the
faithful were allowed to receive the white
scapular of the Friar Preachers, a privilege
afterwards extended to England. In the
reign of that talented, but infamous woman.
Queen Elizabeth, who is called in the In-
troduction to the Protestant Bible, “ the
bright occidental star,” her government caused
the most barbarous cruelties to be exercised.
On one occasion a ship into which a number
of the Friars had been compelled to enter, was
sent out to sea with private orders to throw
them all overboard ; this was executed, but
as there was an uproar caused by the event
becoming public, she pretended to be
and put them into prison for a very short
time, and then quietly let them out and gave
them the convent lands of the people they
had assassinated. When Father Barry, the
prior of Cashel, was seized, he was offered
pardon if he would renounce the habit of St.
Dominic, and enter the military service of the
government. He replied with dignity, “ These
garments are the livery of Christ, and repre-
sent to me His Passion, they are the banners
of my military service to Him ; I have worn
them happily from my youth till now—l will
not surrender them in my age.”
When. Father O’Ferrall, of Longford, was
being hung the scaffold, he, to the amaze-
-4


merit of all, moved his right hand from be-
neath his scapular, drawing from his breast a
small cross which he waved aloft in the air, as
a sign of his faith and his victory.
Many of you will know the Dominican
church in Denmark Street, Dublin, with its
congregation so vast and so fervent, and the
last and present superiors, models of every
priestly grace. And you will at least have
heard with joy of that grand church ofSt.
Saviour, now rapidly approaching completion.
In England, during the times of persecu-
tion, the fathers never entirely quitted the
kingdom. It was related of Friar Arm-
strong, that when in prison, and the day for
his martyrdom approaching, he was unex-
pectedly reprieved. A news that over-
whelmed him with grief; he had lost the
crown of martyrdom, and was never observed
to smile again. In the reign ot Queen Eli-
zabeth, Father Howard,* brother to the Duke
of Norfolk, purchased a house in Belgium,
joined the Dominican Order, and was made
prior of that convent, which continued to sup*
ply Friars to the English province till it was
partially broken up by the French invasion of
Belgium, in 1794. It Avas transferred to
* See Life of Father Thomas Philip Cardinal Howard,
of Norfolk, by Fr. Raymond Palmer.


Hinckley, Leicestershire, a.d. 3824. The sis-
ter of Cardinal Howard became the foundress
and prioress of a convent of Dominican nuns
at Velforde, afterwards moved to Brussels,
and then at the period of the French Revolu-
tion, to England ; they are now at Hurst-
green, near Stonyhurst, Lancashire.*
The Dominicans in England have now a
school for .boys, postulants for the order, at
Hinckley, in Leicestershire; they have a fine
monastery and noviciate built at Woodches-
ter, a. n. 1854. They have a priory-house at
Leicester, and have the pastoral charge of all
that town; they also hold three or four small
parishes; they have flourishing convents,
moreover, of the second and third orders; the
name of Mother Margaret, superioress of so
many of the English convents of the third
order, will be familiar to you all. The mem-
bers of the third order, living in the world,
form in England a small but very edifying
body; in France, since the re-establishment of
the order, the third order has spread with
great devotion, and in Ireland numbers thou-
sands of both sexes leading a life of wonderful
spirit of prayer and of penance.
We must hasten to conclude. Your atten-
* Soon to be removed to a convent in the Isle of
Wight, erecting by a noble benefactress.


tion and your encouragement must not make
me forget that there is a limit, if not to your
good will, at least to our time. Such a lecture
as this on the Dominicans, is like dotting down
with chalk a few of the stars of the firma-
ment. It has been but a meagre glance at a
few points of a majestic spiritual history;
we have glanced at the saintly founder with
his torch of divine charity, and with the lily
o 1 his chastity. We have glanced into the in-
terior of the monastery, and envied for an
instant its virtues and its joys. We have met
in spirit the Dominican missionary, learned,
patient, and adventurous, bearing on his
person the stamp of a man who has seen every-
thing that can be seen regarding God, and
everything regarding man. We have glanced
at the philosopher and the theologian ; we
have heard the last accents of faith and hope
rise from the scaffold of martyrdom; we have
glanced at that wonderful order of which St.
Theresa prophecied, that though it was some-
what obscured in her age and the next, should
arise again for the confounding of heresy and
of sin. We have seen how in its least majes-
tic era it had still its widely spread works of
mercy, its teachers, saints, and martyrs; even
in our own latest remembrance, even in the
gloomiest period of the last century, the star
of St. Dominic never set, the Dominican order


was carrying on, almost alone, some of the
most dangerous and arduous missions in the
east.
The object of our order, says Marchese,
is to infuse new life into hearts that have been
weakened by the corrupt influences of'the
times, to consecrate our energies to the amelio-
ration of the people, and to prove that reli-
gion, however unflinchingly opposed to a false
and spuiious progress, is nevertheless the
truest protectress of sound knowledge. Nor
should we forget the ans, for it lies on us to
inspire them with noble and sublime senti-
ments, and to associate them with all that is
sanctified by religion. Let him, therefoie,
who cannot speak from the pulpit or the pro-
fessor’s chair, speak with the chisel, or the
pencil, but let us all speak a noble and a holy
language. Never let us forget that we saved the
arts in the days of barbaric devastation, and
that we sheltered and cherished them in the
times of the renaissance. Never let us forget
that we warmed them with the breath of our
hearts, and that we educated them for the
honour and glory of Christianity. Thus shall
we convince men that we comprehend the full
sublimity of our vocation ; and for every be-
nefit we bestow on the people we shall receive
the benediction of their piety and their gra-
titude.


According to your prayers, my Catholic
friends, this great work will prosper. The
last words of St. Dominic promised that those
prayers and efforts should be aided by his
own. Therefore let us close in the words of
our Holy Mother the Church, “ Blessed Do-
minic, thou didst promise that after death
thou wouldst be helpful to thy brethren.
Fulfil, holy Father, what thou hast said, and
assist us evermore by thy prayers.”
Newcastle-on- Tyne ,
Whit Monday, 1860.
(Note referred to on page 35.)
Of the Dominican Tertiaries of Penance, Father Faber
Bays at p. 658, of his work on the Blessed Sacrament,
“ The' Third Order of St. Dominic is a mystical garden
of delights to the Heavenly Spouse, and it is not one of
the least blessings for which English Catholics have had
to thank the infinite compassion of their Lord during
the last few years, that we possess now the Third Order
of St. Dominic in England. Those who are conversant,
indeed who find the strength and consolation of their
lives, in the acts of the Saints, well know that there is
not a nook of the mystical paradise of our heavenly
Spouse, where the flowers grow thicker or smell more
fragrantly than this Order of multitudinous Childlike
Saints. Nowhere in the Church does the Incarnate
Word show this ‘ delight at being with the children of
men ’ in more touching simplicity, with more unearthly
sweetness, or more spouselike familiarity, than in this
the youngest family of St. Dominic.”
“ The Third Order of Penance of St. Dominic flourishes,
even down to our times, under the most solemn sanctions


of the Church. Besides the strict conventual branch,
two other classes of Tertiaries (as the members are
called) have sprung up ; one in which the Tertiaries in
the world profess the rule openly, have an elected pror,
and hold regular chapters; the other in which they wear
the habit in secret, and practise the rule in the bosom
of their families or in the secular college. The first of
these classes is numerously spread throughout Ireland,
the second chiefly prevails in England, and both are the
comfort and support of the parochial clergy, and the
edification of the Faithful. The obligations of the
Third Order are very simple. Those who profess it in
private and do not attend chapter, have to say the Little
Office of the Blessed Virgin daily, as the Paters and
Aves first set down were only for those who could not
read; to say the Office of the dead monthly; and to
offer up three Masses or communions for the same
intention yearly; and to fast on all Fridays. At first,
there was abstinence on every Monday, Wednesday and
Saturday ; but, in several general chapters, it has been
decreed, that this abstinence is not binding on Tertiaries
when a feast of the Order falls on those days; and, in
consequence of the great number of ihe Dominican
Blessed, such abstinence happens scarcely twice a month.
Any of these obligations may be commuted. These
Tertiaries wear in secret either the white scapular or the
leathern belt of the Order. Walking in the footsteps of
the saints, they gain immense spiritual privileges and bless-
ings, as they fully share in the merits of the whole Order,
and, by saying their office, are joined with the prayer of
the Church. In its threefold spirit of prayer, penance and
works of mercy, the Third Order has been looked on, even
by the greatest Saints, as one of the most powerful means
to forward holiness of life in the world. None can decry
it without falling under the direct censures of the Church,
and despising the judgment of those, who are the holiest
and ablest masters .of spiritual life. The present state
of the Third Order in these countries is very consoling,
at a time when such an institution is so much needed,
and so powerfully calls to mind the maxima of Christian
perfection,"


ST. THOMAS AQUINAS,
PATRON OF STUDENTS,OF YOUTH,AND OF
THE CONFRATERNITY OF ANGELIC
WARFARE.
We have a great theme. We consider one
perfect as a man, perfect as a religious, perfect
as a priest, admirable as a philosopher, unsur-
passed as a divine. Youth, chastity, learning,
and truth all claim him as a patron. Each of
Ins varied gifts would supply matter for many
lectures. History calls him “ the angel of
the schools;” religion invokes him as “the
angel of the angelic warfare;’’ heresy
reproaches him with a magnificent praise, and
in the person of Bucer says, “ Tolle Thomam
et dissipabo ecclesiam”—“ Remove Thomas,
and I will destroy your Church.” All who
love the truth claim his authority, and invoke
his arguments to their help. He fought
against Paganism, Infidelity, Mahomedanism,
and Heresy. Six centuries have passed since
he wrote and taught, but no theological or
philosophical writings, no teaching is recog


nized as sound unless St. Thomas presides
over it and guides it. Revolutions banished
him from many countries, that, religion
returning, might reinstate him in his spiritual
sovereignty. The Bishops of Spain have
recently restored his theology to their
seminaries as the only aegis of the Church
against modern errors. Seven editions of
his works have, during this century, been
published in Italy alone. When the last
general council of the Church was held at
Trent, one work alone, besides the Sacred
Scriptuies and the decrees of councils, was
laid upon the tables of the conclave, and that
was the Summa Theologies of St. Thomas.
The universal Church, speaking to God in
prayer, says, “Oh God, who enlightenest Thy
Church with the marvellous erudition of tire
Blessed Thomas Thy confessor, and renders
her fruitful by his holy help; grant unto us
that the things which he has taught we may
comprehend in oixr intellect, and the things
which he has done we may accomplish in our
practice.” St. Thomas is both the patron of
theology and the patron of popular piety.
The hymns the dearest to the Christian
heart, namely, those sung at the Benediction
of the Most Holy Sacrament, were composed
by him, and he is the special patron of that
noble band of Christian youth who, in honour


of our Lady of the Rosary, and of St.
Thomas, wear the girdle of the “ angelic
warfare” instituted by the miracle of his
sanctity. St. Thomas is also preeminently
the Christian teacher, or, in the language of
the Gospel and of the Church, the Doctor of
Truth, As truth has descended from heaven
without arms, it can only be defended by
those who suffer and by those who teach.
The world defends itself by shedding others*
blood; truth defends by shedding her own
blood. The world surrounds itself with
soldiers; the Church enshrines herself amidst
her martyrs. Truth must have ceased to be
truth when for it none are willing to die;
therefore truth suffers and becomes a martyr
that it may be a witness to eternal truth.
But truth must also teach, and such is the
office of the apostle and of the doctor. The
apostle teaches in the highways and the byways
of the world; the doctor teaches in the
schools. Jesus Christ, the Apostle of man-
kind, was also the universal Doctor. He
trained the college of the apostles; He inspires
and He instructs the heart and the mind of
the whole human race. The doctor of Chris-
tian truth need not wander the painful
journeys of the apostle, or display the bloody
witness of the martyr, or the peaceful toils of
the pastor, but, like Christ, he must have


knowledge and mercy to enlighten and to
teach. He does not create truth, but he sees
it in God; therefore he must in his degree be
like the “Angelic Doctor.” Mahomed said,
“ Go, and conquer,” Christ said, “ Go, and
teach;’’ and the conqueror failed and the
teacher conquered. The teacher must have
an extended knowledge, a faith tranquil and
firm. How few have been the peaceful
possessors of the secrets of God and imparted
them to the human intellect and to the human
heart with a power worthy of our soul and of
God. Such was St. Thomas. He resembles
those ancient pyramids which stand in the
East —simple, like everything that is great,
solemn, grand, immovable, and they last for
ever. St. Thomas was born in the year 1226,
639 years ago, in the district called the Happy
Country. He was of royal blood, nephew of
the Emperor Barbarossa, first cousin of the
Emperor Henry the Sixth, and second cousin
of the Emperor Frederick the Second; he
was descended from the old Norman chiefs
Guiscard, Tancred, Bohemond, the warriors of
the crusades. He cast aside the diadem and
the possessions of earth; he gathered around
his youth the white folds of the robes of
purity, he received poverty as his possession,
and from the hands of Jesus Christ the
sceptre of meekness and the throne of


humility, and calmly possessed himself of the
empire of thought. God, choosing the most
splendid of the architects of the temple of
truth, chose him of royal blood. Fishermen
have been made popes; tenimakers, apostles;
shepherds have become saints; sinners, the
personal friends of Jesus Christ; but the
prince of thought should be the child of
kings. He fled from the castle of his
ancestors, cast away the diadems of earth, left
his wealth to be squandered by others, clothed
himself as a simple friar in the white wool of
St. Dominic—emblem of purity and our
Lady’s love—and sought the peaceful and
joyous solitude of the Dominican priory.
Solitude is the dwelling-place of thought
solitude has inspired poets, created artists,
animated genius. The poet who chiefly
chaunted the prophecies of Christ to come
dwelt in the sacred cleft of Carmel. St.
Thomas, as a child, dwelt in the Benedictine
cloister of Caserno; as a boy, a youth, a man,
in the calm heaven-inspired solitudes of our
Lady of St. Dominic, in cloisters wherein
angels have not refused to wander. But a hea-
venly solitude must have two inseparable com-
panions, poverty and chastity—that cell whose
simple walls have never heard any sound but
the voice of prayer, or the whispered accents
of a brother’s charity—that cell, the Carmel


of the religious, guarded by solitude, obedi-
ence, poverty and chastity. From such pro-
ceed the heroes of thought. Such was the
life of St. Thomas.
But the doctor must first have obeyed.
The mind as well as the body must have
a father. .The Blessed Albert, called the
Great, was the master of St. Thomas. He
taught a pupil who should one day surpass
him in glory. His pupil was that prince, that
simple monk and priest, St. Ihomas, who,
mounted the throne of divine knowledge, and
has reigned there without a rival. The child
is father of the man. Simple incidents in the
childhood of St. Thomas prefigured future
events of his wonderful career. He would
often ask with earnestness, “ What is God?”
and the Ave Maria uttered by him in his ear-
liest infancy befitted well the simple days of
the devout client of our Lady of the Rosary,
the Queen of Heaven. Artists might beau-
tifully picture him, the author of the “ Adoro
Te devote,” and the “ Tantum Ergo” receiving
his first Communion, and piety delights to
contemplate his grave meditations, his visits
to the church, his silence, mercy, and purity.
In early youth he was sent to the University
of Naples, and when still a boy, received the
''•race of the priestly and the religious vocation,
v impelled to return to his father’s castle, the


most noble of sacrifices received all its heroism.
Witnessing domestic life in princely state, his
great soul decides with full knowledge he
chooses the cloister, the penance, the poverty,
the chastity of Jesus Christ. In the freshness
of an unsullied youth, in which he had never
betrayed his master, he abandons the world,
which he is fur ever to instruct, to edify, and
to elevate. lie who had from childhood,
practised the martyrdom of chastity and the
martyrdom of penance, now practises the mar-
tyrdom of affection, and as the noblest hearts
love the most, to them the sacrifice is the
giealest, for without the martyrdom of the
soul, sanctity is never created. He tore him-
self from the embraces of his mother and the
endearments of his family, and flung himself
into the anus of Jesus Christ, in a new family
of perfection. That boy who had already
suffered was to become the grandest human
type of the divine wisdom; calm, gentle, se-
rene, compassionate, mantled with chastity,
and marked with the wounds of penance, all
nations and all times have seated themselves
at the feet of that angelic master. In some
genius seems born, in others it is created ; in
►St. Thomas it was created by chastity.
Amidst the polished and talented students in
the school of the Blessed Albert, Thomas
Aquinas was ridiculed bath for his provincial


accent, his simplicity, stupidity, and silence.
He was called the “ dumb ox;” but his mas-
ter, worthy of such a pupil, exclaimed on a
certain occasion, “ That ox will one day bellow
with a voice that will amaze the Of
the Blessed Albert it is recorded that in the
commencement of his studies he began to
ponder within himself, and to consider how so
many learned men had fallen away and per-
ished through pride, while the simple were
saved in their simplicity: and, whilst hesitat-
ing whether to renounce for ever the pursuit
of knowledge, Almighty God revealed to him
that before entering the kingdom of heaven he
should, whilst possessing all learning, be per-
fected by childlike simplicity and tried in the
school of humility. He flung himself into the
pursuits of learning, became a doctor so illus-
trious that he would have been recorded as
unrivalled unless he had trained a pupil
greater than himself. That pupil he outlived
by many years; but friendship is the memory
of the heart, and never forgets those to whom
it has imparted, or those from whom it has
received. Some years after the death of St.
Thomas his doctrine was bitterly assailed, and
the Blessed Albert, covered with glory and
with years, travelled a lengthy journey, and
the aged man of 84 appeared in the schools to
defend the doctrine of his pupil and his


friend. On the Blessed Albert at length the
band of God’s warning fell whilst add.essing
the crowd of disciples who filled the cathedral
banging upon the words of his wisdom. Sud-
denly his memory failed, his learning passed
away; simple as a child, conscious, and, yet
without knowledge, he returned to his mo.
nastic cloister and prepared himself for the
end he saw approaching. On a certain oc-
casion the Prince Archbishop of Cologne,
coming to visit him, knocked at his door,'’ex-
claiming, “Great Albert, open your cell to a
triend. A tremulous but not mournful voice
rephed, “ The Great Albert no longer lives
here. Ihe archbishop burst into tears, and
as sorrowfully he departed, said to the bro-
thers, “It is true; he lives in heaven.” Such
was the master of St. Thomas. St. Thomas,
during his youth was distinguished chiefly by
his angelic modesty. When a child in the
monastic school, when as a youth in the uni-
vei sity of Naples, when spending his vacations
with his parents in the castle of Elcastro,
when attending afterwards the lectures of the
Albert, every word and action and
ins entire deportment was ever simple and
unaffected, ever retiring, unassuming and
modest, and displaying that perfection of pu-
rity which is crowned with the aureola of
mo esty. hen his companions in the uni-


versity invited him to share in dangerous or
doubtful amusements, he used cheerfully to
decline, and often to bring them along with
himself to spend that very evening in one or
other of the churches before the most holy
Sacrament. It has always been a remarkable
feature of the history of Ireland that her
children have been scattered over many na-
tions devoted to the pursuits of philosophy,
of theology, and of industry. In the medieval
history, whether of learning, or sanctity, we in
a most remarkable degree continually find some
illustrious Irish name intermixed in the narra-
tive. The same we find in the life of St.
Thomas; his master in philosophy was Peter
of Hibernia, one of the most learned men of
his age; his master in theology was the Blessed
Albert, of whom we have spoken. Remarkable
for his modesty and for his charity, he was by
no means remarkable for youthful talent. At
the public lectures he toiled with indefatigable
industry and exemplary humility and patience;
but his difficulty in learning, his want of
quickness in apprehension, and his clumsy
mode of speech, gradually changed into a
genius the most wonderful, and comprehension
and learning the most profound. In charity
towards others he never failed; even his
worldly friends were amazed to witness the
charms of judgment, the quickness of appre-
-5


hension, the strength of memory, the ardent
and untiring zeal displayed by him from his
very childhood in his thoughtful charities to-
wards others. Before he was twelve years
old he was already supporting orphans whom
he had discovered. When in the university
the hours he could spare from study and
which were not claimed by prayer were de-
voted to the teaching of poor boys, to collect-
ing alms for the support of the orphans, or to
visits to poor and aged persons, who, struck
by the angelic modesty of that student who, in
in the reverence that he paid to age showed
the most graceful of the generosities of youth:
ignorant of the name of the illustrious visitor
who was wont to visit them simply clad, and
with his hands filled with baskets of presents
for their use, for want of a name they called
him “ The Angel of the university.” Thus
did sorrow and poverty with prophetic in-
stinct, give the same name to him, already
baptized in the baptism of charity, which was
to be renewed afterwards, when baptized in
the baptism of divine science, he should be
hailed by the universal Church as “The A-
ngel of the Schools.” Thus charity and chastity,
each perfect and each generous, prepared him
for whatever greatness God might destine for
him. He who was to become at once the
example and patron of youth and of study,


must himself exhibit most perfectly, charity,
chastity, and truth. Already perfected in
charity and in chastity, it only remained that
these, inspiring and strengthening that love
of truth already so untainted in his heart,
should raise that truth to its highest perfec-
tion of divine science. It was then just twen-
ty-two years'since the great St. Dominic had
gone to heaven, having left behind him on
the earth a new family in the Church, styled
by the Pope the Order of Truth, professing,
according to the rule of its founder, the charity
of the apostolate and the maintenance of di-
vine truth, and clothed with that white sca-
pular miraculously given by the Immaculate
Queen of Heaven. Such seemed naturally to
invite to its bosom that youth so generous
and so noble, who saw nothing greater on
earth to seek and to desire than charity, chas-
tity, and truth. Instantly, without waiting
for those cautious questionings which befit
only the undecided, he presented himself at
the Dominican Priory at Naples, in the year
1243, being then 16 years old, and so ear-
nestly besought the holy habit, and so reso-
lutely declared that nothing but force should
remove him from the sacred cloister, that,
recognizing the voice of God, the Prior received
him without further hesitation. As soon as
his relations heard of ‘he step he had taken,


they used every means of artifice and of power
to withdraw him and to destroy his vocation.
To be saved from their violence he was, at his
own request, removed first to the convent of
St. Sabina, at Rome, and afterwards to the
convent at Paris. On his journey thither his
brothers, with a small band of soldiers, came
and seized him; they tried to tear the sacred
habit from his shoulders, but his resistance
conquered their violence. However, he was
dragged to the castle of Kocca Lecca, where
his parents were then residing, and where
after every effort had been made to shake his
resolution, he was at length kept in imprison-
ment for eighteen months in the apartments
of one of the turrets. Until the remonstrance
of Pope Innocent IY. and the Emperor Frede-
rick caused his mother to relent, she connived
at his escape, though still pretending to op-
pose. He was let down in a basket from
the top of the tower, and received beneath by
some of the Dominican brothers, who accom-
panied him back to Naples, where he made his
solemn profession amidst the joy of all. He
always spoke of that day of his profession as
the happiest day of his life—that day on which
he had sacrificed his liberty that he might
receive the freedom which only God can be-
stow. It was during the time of that impri-
sonment he received the singular favour from


Almighty God which caused afterwards the
foundation of the Confraternity of the Angelic
Warfare.* Violence and temptations having
proved unavailing, it was resolved to shake
his constancy by efforts of domestic kindness
and affection—holy and beautiful when used
in the service of God, but as criminal as vio-
lence and more seductive than vice when used
artfully against the holy will of God. This
sudden temptation St. Thomas understood
and resisted. His sister spoke to him of
the grandeur of the world, the high position
of his family, and the greatness of his future
prospects. St. Thomas listened to them, and
then spoke of the grandeur of heaven, the
greatness of the service of Jesus Christ, and
the magnificence of the eternal rewards.
The resolution of St. Thomas was not
shaken, but his sisters renounced the vani-
ties of the world and the elder embraced
the religious state. If the reverse had oc-
curred Thomas Aquinas would perhaps have
been a great Italian prince, would have flitted
from court to court, from camp to camp,
have patronized religion and the arts, have
helped many souls to hell, would have
occupied another vault in the burial-place
in the castle of Belcastro, would have been
• Explained at p. 37 and p. 75.


forgotten, or remembered only by those who
would have had curses for his selfishness, his
worldliness, and his profligacy. He generously
conquered all temptations. He with sincerity
sought to be hidden and unknown; he
persevered as the simple religious in the
peaceful seclusion of the Dominican cloister.
Enlightened according to the degree of his
charity and of his chastity, he became, like
Jesus Christ, the doctor of kings and nations.
As generations passed along, his name became
a power, and now 600 years have passed by,
and everywhere throughout the world the
Christian priesthood is trained in his philoso-
phy and in his theology. He has become the
angel of the schools and the doctor of the
universal Church. After his profession his
relations again interfered, remonstrating with
many reasons, entreaties, and tears, urged that
to embrace such an order against the advice of
his parents could never be the call of heaven.
Influenced by their repeated representations,
Pope Innocent IY. consented to see the youth
alone, and to examine him regarding his
religious vocation. The result of the inter-
view more than ever confirmed him in his
vocation, and the Pope expressed himself
profoundly edified by his fervour, humility,
and courage, and from that period his family
left him unmolested. His eldest sister died


Abbess of St. Mary’s Convent at Capua; the
younger, discovering that she had not a
religious vocation, lived with great virtue in
domestic life. His mother died a true peni-
tent. The two brothers who had so sacrilegi-
ously seized him, after some years fell into
disgrace at court. One was burned to death
amidst the flames of the Castle of Aquinas,
destroyed by the Emperor; the other died in
exile; but it would appear that before his
end he made his peace with God. St.
Thomas pursued his studies at Cologne and
at Paris, where he resided in the Domini-
can Priory of St. James. When with his
companions they approached Paris and beheld
that city, even then so fair and beautiful, one
asked him, “ How would you like to be king
of such a city?” He answered, “I would
rather have St. Chrysostom on Matthew.”
Royalty for royalty, and the royalty he sought
has suffered less than the royalty he spurned.
His life thus presented the characteristics of
that Holy Rosary he loved so much and used
so unceasingly. That devotion which is
intended for mankind must represent and
contain all the human life, as in those three
chaplets of joy, sorrow, and hope. The rest
of his life, though so mighty in its influence
on the world, contains but few incidents to
record. The duties of the monastic priest,


the lectures in the schools, the long hours of
retirement in his cell, the books filled with
heavenly doctrine, these present much of
heaven, much for the benefit of mankind, but
little for the biographer to record. He
invariably refused every ecclesiastical dignity,
and confined himself to the simple duties of
writing and teaching both in the school and in
the church. He preached in most of the
chief towns in Italy, and it is stated that his
sermons were chiefly remarkable for pathetic
and affecting unction, and the discourses were
often interrupted by the tears of the people
and of the preacher. On May 12, 1263, at
Dlackfriars in London, the general chapter of
the Dominican Order was held ; St. Thomas
presided as vicar; but he shortly afterwards
obtained permission to withdraw from every
office even of his order, confining himself
entirely to writing, to preaching, and private
conferences with heretics and Catholics who
continually sought his counsel. The writings
of St. Thomas embrace all the departments of
philosophy and theology, commentaries on the
Sacred Scriptures, and spiritual treatises. He
turned the ancient Pagan philosophy to the
service of Christian truth. He defended the
chief mysteries of Christianity against the
assaults of ancient and later heretics and the
Saracen philosophers. He wrote treatises


refuting the errors of Paganism and Judaism;
•was called on to defend Catholic unity against
the Greek schism ; composed the office of the
Blessed Sacrament and the hymns still used at
Benediction and the Corpus Christi proces-
sions. He received from our Lord a miracu-
lous voice, saying to him, “ Thou hast written
well of Me, Thomas ; what recompense dost
thou desire?” and replied, in words which
described his entire life, “No other than
Thyself, oh Lord.” At length, in a mature
middle age, illuminated by a science so vast
that heaven and earth seemed to have no more
secrets from him, he fell ill at the house of
his niece when travelling, and died on March
7th, 1274, in his native land, near the castle
of his ancestors and the scenes of his youth.
But another family claimed the heritage both
of his virtues, his learning, and his holiness.
In January, 1869, his relics were removed
from the Cistercian Monastery, where they
were first interred, and conveyed to Toulouse,
attended by 150,000 persons, amongst whom
were several of the most illustrious princes in
Christendom. Shortly before his death he
showed to his confessor his person girt with
the miraculous cincture of the angelic war-
fare, after which, having confessed, he begged
to be moved from his bed and laid upon
the floor, that he might receive the most


Holy Communion. When he saw the sacred
Host, he said, “ I firmly believe that Jesus
Christ, true God and true Man, is present in
this august sacrament. I adore my God and
my Redeemer; I receive Thee, Price of my
Redemption, Viaticum of my pilgrimage, for
whose honour I have studied, laboured, preach-
ed, and taught. I hope I never advanced any
tenet of Thy Word which I have not learned
from Thee. If through ignorance I have done
otherwise I revoke it all, and submit all my
writings to the judgment of the Holy Roman
Church.” He had the privilege of preserving
to his last breath that earnestness of purpose,
that generosity of soul, that strength of af-
fection, that simplicity of heart which often
are reserved to the first dawn of youth. That
mysterious girdle with which angels girt him
was multiplied amongst thousands, especially
amongst the youth; to whose most brilliant
aspirations nothing was absent in St. Thomas.
Inebriated with a chaste and holy love they
cast themselves into the great heart of Jesus
Christ, and, like St. Thomas, their patron,
they found there more than they had lost.
Old age in him might seem to have no model,
though we can picture to ourselves what
would have been the serene close of a life in
which the very childhood was wisdom. Yet
St. Thomas had likewise his old age; old age


gathers around it solemn lessons, the listening
hearts of the pure and the young. And now
the great doctor, St. Thomas, in the cloistered
schools of his ancient religious family, gathers
around him hearts ardent and pure, souls
which have often known little of the world,
save to have trembled at it, to have spurned
it, and abandoned it for ever; and surely,
amidst this generous band of youth, destined
to be the chaste generation, serving at once
God and man, St. Thomas reigns like a father,
while still he speaks his solemn lessons as a
priest, and as a brother, wearing that triple
aureola so revered by youth, of charity, of
chastity, and of truth.
Priory of the Annunciation,
Woodchester, Gloucestershire,
Feast of the Angelic Warfare, 1866.
CONFRATERNITY
OF
THE ANGELIC WARFARE;
OR OF
The Brindle of St.Thomas Aquinas
St. Thomas Aquinas is the special Patron of Youth,
of Students, of Chastity, of Learning, and of Devotion
to the M ost Holy Sacrament. He is also a special
Patron of Vocations to the Priesthood, and to the


Religious State, he having, in his sixteenth year, heroi-
cally conquered a terrific temptation planned against
his virtue by those who fruitlessly tried to make him
abandon his design of being professed in the holy order
of St, Dominic.
“ How beautiful is the chaste generation with glory :
for the memory thereof is immortal: because it is known
both with God and with men. When it is present they
imitate it: and they desire it when it hath withdrawn
itself, and it triumpheth crowned for ever winning the
reward of undefiled conflicts.” —Wisdom iv.
The Girdle is of white linen, with fifteen knots deno-
ting the fifteen Mysteries of the holy Rosary, to which
the Saint was very devout.
So many graces were granted by God, especially in fa-
vour of purity, by the intercession of St. Thomas, and
the touch of this sacred Girdle, that thousands of devout
persons made for themselves Girdles of the same fashion,
to wear around their waists. Father Camillo Quadrio,
of the Company of Jesus, writes, “ that if he had wished
to tell all the graces received by the Faithful by means
of the Girdle of St. Thomas he would have filled whole
volumes.” St. Aloysius Gonzaga used to exhort his
companions to a devotion to the ' sacred Girdle. St.
Joseph Calasanctius did-the same, and so did many other
Saints. Many Popes confirmed the Confraternity of
those who had a devotion to St. Thomas and to his
Girdle, under the name of the Angelic Warfare.
Benedict XIII. assigned for the Feast of the Angelic
Warfare the 28th of January, the day consecrated to the
memory of the Translation of the body of St. Thomas,
and confirmed the following Indulgences granted by
Gregory XIII., Sixtus V., and other Popes. Finally,
Pius VII. granted some others by an Apostolic Decree
dated Rimini, May 8, 1814,
INDULGENCES GRANTED TO THOSE WHO ARE
ENROLLED IN THE ANGELIC WARFARE.
A Plenary Indulgence.—-1, On the day on which they


shall be enrolled in the Angelio Warfare, if, with con-
fession and communion, they propose to preserve the
virtue of chastity, according to the condition of their
own state. , .
2. On the 28th of January, the Feast of the Angelic
Warfare, if, with confession and communion, they visit
the Church where their Confraternity is erected, and
pray according to the intention of the Pope.
3. For saying every day, lor the space of a month, the
prayer, Chosen Lily,_ &c., a plenary indulgence once a
month, with confession and communion.
4. At the point of death, if with a penitent heart they
invoke the Most Holy Name of Jesus, with their heart,
if they cannot with their tongue.
A partial indulgence of seven f years and seven
quarantines, if with confession and communion, they
visit the Church on the Feasts of Christmas, Easter, and
Pentecost; of the Nativity, Presentation and Assump-
tion of the Blessed Virgin ; on All Saints, the Conversion
of St. Paul, and the Feasts of St. Gregory, St. Ambrose,
St. Augustine, St. Jerome, St. Dominic, St. Peter
Martyr, St, Vincent Ferrer, and St. Mary Magdalen, and
in the Octave of All Souls.
An Indulgence of one hundred days for every time
that they shall say the prayer, Chosen Lily, &c.
An Indulgence of sixty days —l. For accompanying the
Holy Viaticum, and if they are unable to do so, for say-
inw one Our Father, and one Hail Mary brethren
oflhe Confraternity who have died, or one Our Father
and one Hail Alary for the sick member. _
2. For every time that they shall reconcile those who
are at variance, and for any other work of mercy.
3. For any work of piety done according to the
Institution of the Angelic Warfare, as to assist at
Masses, Office, Meetings of the Confraternity, to say
fifteen Hail Marys, in veneration of the fifteen mysteries
of the Rosary, or the prayers given below. .
4. For those who shall be present at the Conclusions
and Theological Disputations according to the Doctrine
of St. Thomas, maintained by those youths who are en-
rolled in the Angelic Warfare.


Counsels that are proposed to all those who are
Enrolled In the Angelic Warfare,
t Custody of the eyes, readiness in driving away evil
thoughts, and in avoiding all occasions of sin, of which
the Saint had such a horror, that he used to say that
he would choose more willingly to remain in the pains
of _ hell for ever, than commit a single venial sin with
deliberate intention.
2. Not to suffer that in their presence unchaste words
should be uttered, or wicked books read, or improper
songs sung : but to warn the offender when possible, to
inspire them with a love of chastity, and to exhort them
to be enroHed in the Angelic Warfare of St. Thomas.
3. Prayer: especially in temptation, to invoke the
Most Holy Names of Jesus and Mary; to meditate often
on the Passion of Jesus Christ, and so to imitate the
Saint who day and night studied in the book of his
Crucifix.
_d- Devotion to the ever-blessed Virgin Mary, which St,
Thomas loved exceedingly to propagate. He preached at
Naples for a whole Lent on the Sail Mary.
5. Humility: St. Thomas teaches us that God fre-
quently permits falls into sins of impurity in chastise-
ment of pride. Besides, it was by humbling himself be-
fore God habitually, that the saint obtained the gift
of so perfect a humility that he never felt the stings of
pride, as the Pope’s Bulls assure us.
6. To frequent ..the Holy Sacraments, with regularity
and devotion.
7. Occasionally to say the two following prayers, as
also sometimes to offer Holy Communion and the Holy
Rosary for the members of the Confraternity, and for
the virtues proposed.
PRAYER OF ST. THOMAS AQUINAS,
Said by him prostrate before the Cross that he had him-
self marked upon the wall with the burning brand, with
which he repelled the last attack on his virginal purity ;
after which the Angels girded him with the Girdle of
perpetual Chastity, a favour which his humility conceal-
ed until the approach of death, when he showed his con-
fessor what had happened to him,


Dearest Jesus ! I know well that every perfect gift and
above all others that of Chastity, depends upon the most
powerful assistance of Thy Providence, and that without
Thee a creature can do nothing. Therefore I pray Thee
to defend with Thy grace, Chastity and Purity in my
soul as well as in my body. And if I have ever received
the impression of any thing sensible that can stain my
Chastity and Purity, do Thou, who art the Supreme
Lord of all my powers, take it from me, that I may with
an immaculate heart advance in Thy love and service,
offering myself chaste all the days of my life on the most
pure Altar of Thy Divinity.—Amen.
PRAYER TO ST. THOMAS AQUINAS.
Chosen lily of innocence, purest St. Thomas, to thee
who didst preserve ever fair thy Baptismal robe, to thee
who, being girded by two Angels, wast a true Angel in
the flesh, to thee do I pray to recommend me to Jesus
the Immaculate Lamb, and to Mary the Queen of Vir-
gins, that I also, who bear about me thy sacred Girdle,
may receive the gift of thy Purity, and thus imitating
thee upon the earth, I may be one day crowned with
thee, O great guardian of my Purity, amongst the Angels
in Paradise.
, Our Father, Hail Mary , Glory he to the Father.
V. Pray for us, St. Thomas.
E. That we may be made worthy of the promises of
Christ.
Let us pray.
O God, who hast vouchsafed to defend with the Blessed
Girdle of St. Thomas, us who are engaged in the terrible
conflict of Chastity, grant to us Thy suppliants, so by his
help happily to overcome in this warfare the terrible ene-
my of our bodies and souls, that being crowned with the
lily of perpetual purity, we may deserve to receive from
Thee, amongst the chaste bands of the Angels, the palm
of bliss. Through Christ our Lord. Amen.
©
Gird me, O Lord, with the Girdle of purity ; and by
the merits of St. Thomas extinguish within me every
evil desire, so that I may remain continent and chaste
until death. Amen. ©


All the young, particularly those who serve the altar
or are students, would do well to join the “ Angelic’
Warfare, and to preserve the devotion their entire life.
To be admitted it is necessary to send the name to a'
Dominican Father to be registered, and to wear the
Blessed Girdle. There are no obligations beyond the
sincere desire of practising the virtues proposed.
VIRTUES OF THE MOST HOLY ROSARY.
Recommended to the daily piayers of the Members 'of
the Confraternity of the Angelic Warfare.
Joyful Mysteries-Spirit of Holy Joy.
1. Annunciation Humility.'
2. Visitation ... Fraternal Charity, i.e. Works
of Mercy.
8. Nativity Spirit of Poverty, i.e, as op-
posed to avarice.
4. Presentation .. .. Obedience.
5. Jesus with the Doctors Love of Jesus and of His holy
Service.
Sorrowful Mysteries-Spirit of Compassion.
1. Agony ... Fervour in prayer.
2. Scourging .. .. Penance, ie. as opposed to
. dissipation, gluttony, intern*
perance and impurity.
8. Crowning with Thorns Moral Courage, i.e. as opposed
. to the fear of man.
4. Carnage of Cross .. Patience.
5. Crucifixion Self-sacrifice for God and our
neighbour.
Glorious Mysteries-Spirit of Reverence.
1. Resurrection Faith.
2. Ascension Hope.
3. Descent of Holy Ghost Zeal for souls.
4. Assumption .. .. Filial devotion to Mary.
6. Coronation of B. V. M, Perseverance.
N. B, For full explanation of the Rosary and Rosary
Confraternity and Perpetual Rosary, with benefits,
obligations, indulgences, and mode of obtaining admis-
s“ n '® ee . Complete Rosary Book ,” Id. (Richardson and
Son, Derby, London, and Dublin,)
FEINTED BIT EICHAEDSON AND SON, DEE BY.






